
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                     
                        IOANNES FLORIVS AVGVSTAE ANNAE ANGL: SCOT: FRANC: ET HIB: REGINAE PRAELECTOR LING: ITALICAE
                        CHI SI CONTENTA GODE
                        portrait of John Florio
                        AET: 58. A.D. 1611
                        
                           In virtute suâ contentus, nobilis arte,
                           Italus ore, Anglus pectore, vter
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               opere
                           Floret adhuc. et adhuc florebit: floreat vltra
                           
                              FLORIVS, hâc specie floridus, optat amans.
                        
                        Gul: Hole sculp:
                        Tam foelix vtinam.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  ESSAYES WRITTEN IN French By MICHAEL Lord of Montaigne, Knight of the Order of S. Michael, Gentleman of the French Kings Chamber: DONE INTO ENGLISH, according to the laſt French edition, by IOHN FLORIO Reader of the Jtalian tongue vnto the Soueraigne Maieſtie of ANNA, Queene of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, &c. And one of the Gentlemen of hir Royall Priuie chamber.
                  
                  LONDON: Printed by MELCH. BRADVVOOD for EDVVARD BLOVNT and WILLIAM BARRET.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE MOST ROYAL AND RENOVMED MAIESTIE of the High-borne Princeſſe ANNA of DENMARKE, by the Grace of God QVEENE of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, &c.
                  Imperiall and Incomparable Maieſtie,
                  
                     SEeing with me, all of me, is in your Royall poſſeſsion, and whatſoeuer pieces of mine haue heeretofore, vnder other ſtarres paſſed the publike view, come now of right to be vnder the predomination of a Power, that both contain's all their perfections, and hath influences of a more ſublime nature, I could not but alſo take in this part (wherof time had worn-out the edition) which the world hath long ſince had of mine, and lay it at your Sacred feet, as a memoriall of my deuoted dutie, and to ſhew that where I am, I muſt be all I am, and can not ſtand diſperſed in my obſeruance, being wholly (and therein happy)
                  
                     Your ſacred MAIESTIES most humble and loyall ſeruant
IOHN FLORIO.
                  
               
               
                  
                  ALL' AVGVSTA MAESTA DI ANNA, Seren.ma
                        ▪
                      REGINA d' Inghilterra, di Scotia, di Francia, & d' Irlanda, &c.
                  
                     C
                  
                  
                     He ſi può dir di VOI, ſomma REGINA,
                     
                     Che non ſia detto delle più lodate
                     Di Magnanimità, Ʋirtù, Beltate,
                     Incomparabile, Sopra-diuina?
                     Anzi, che ſtile tanto ſi raffina,
                     Che non ſia vinto dalla Maeſtate,
                     L' Altezza, la Chiarezza, la Bontate,
                     Alla qual' ogni cuor di-cuor s' inchina?
                     La qual di tutti honori'l ſpecchio mostra,
                     La qual' il pregio Sour a tutte tiene;
                     
                        ANNA, l' anello della Gioia nostra.
                     La nostra ſicurtà, la nostra ſpene;
                     
                        VIEN DALL' ECCELSO LA GRANDEZZA voſtra;
                     Dalla GRANDEZZA vostra'l nostro bene.
                  
                  
                     Il Candido
                  
               
               
                  
                  TO THE READER.
                  
                     ENough, if not too much, hath been ſayd of this Tranſlation. If the faults found euen by my ſelfe in the firſt impreſſion, be now by the Printer corrected, as he was directed, the worke is much amended: If not, know, that through mine attendance on hir Maieſtie, I could not intend-it; and blame not Neptune for thy ſecond ſhipwracke. Let me conclude with this worthie mans daughter of alliance: Que t'en ſemble donc lecteur?
                  
                  
                     Still reſolute IOHN FLORIO.
                  
               
               
                  To my deare brother and friend M. IOHN FLORIO, one of the Gentlemen of hir Maieſties most Royall Priuie Chamber.
                  
                  
                     
                        BOoks, like ſuperfluous humors bred with eaſe,
                     So ſtuffe the world, as it becomes opprest
                     With taking more than it can well digeſt;
                     And now are turnd to be a great diſeaſe.
                  
                  
                     For by this ouer charging we confound
                     The appetite of skill they had before:
                     There be'ng no end of words, nor any bound
                     Set to conceit the Ocean without ſhore.
                     As if man laboured with himſelfe to be
                     As infinite in writing, as intents;
                     And draw his manifold vncertaintie
                     In any ſhape that paſsion repreſents:
                     That theſe innumerable images
                     And figures of opinion and diſcourſe
                     Draw'n out in leaves, may be the witneſſes
                     Of our defects much rather than our force.
                     And this proud frame of our preſumption,
                     
                        This Babel of our skill, this Towre of wit,
                     Seemes only checkt with the confuſion
                     Of our miſtakings that diſſolueth it.
                     And well may make vs of our knowledge doubt,
                     Seeing what vncertainties wee build vpon,
                     To be as weake within booke as without;
                     Or els that truth hath other ſhapes then one.
                  
                  
                     But yet although wee labor with this ſtore
                     And with the preſſe of writings ſeeme oppreſt,
                     And have to many bookes, yet want wee more,
                     Feeling great dearth and ſcarſeneſſe of the bell;
                     Which caſt in choiſer ſhapes haue bin produc'd,
                     To giue the beſt proportions to the minde
                     Of our confuſion, and haue introduc'd
                     The likelieſt images frailtie can finde.
                     And wherein moſt the skill-deſiring ſoule
                     Takes her delight, the beſt of all delight,
                     And where her motions eveneſt come to rowle
                     About this doubtfull center of the right.
                     
                  
                  
                     Which to diſcouer this great Potentate,
                     This Prince Montaigne (if he be not more)
                     Hath more aduentur'd of his owne eſtate
                     Then euer man did of himſelfe before:
                     And hath made ſuch bolde ſallies out vpon
                     
                        Cuſtome, the mightie tyrant of the earth,
                     In whoſe Seraglio of ſubiection
                     Wee all ſeeme bred-vp, from our tender birth;
                     As I admire his powres, and out of loue,
                     Here at his gate do ſtand, and glad I ſtand
                     So neere to him whom I do ſo much loue,
                     T'applaude his happie ſetling in our land:
                     And ſafe tranſpaſſage by his ſtudious care
                     Who both of him and vs doth merit much,
                     Having as ſumptuouſly, as he is rare
                     Plac'd him in the beſt lodging of our ſpeach.
                     And made him now as free, as if borne here,
                     And as well ours as theirs, who may be proud
                     That he is theirs, though he be euery where
                     To haue the franchiſe of his worth allow'd.
                  
                  
                     It be'ing the proportion of a happie Pen,
                     Not to b'invaſſal'd to one Monarchie,
                     But dwell with all the better world of men
                     Whoſe ſpirits all are of one communitie,
                     Whom neither Ocean, Deſarts, Rockes nor Sands
                     Can keepe from th'intertraffique of the minde,
                     But that it vents her treaſure in all lands,
                     And doth a moſt ſecure commercement finde.
                  
                  
                     Wrap Excellencie vp neuer ſo much,
                     In Hierogliphicques, Ciphers, Caracters,
                     
                        And let her ſpeake neuer ſo ſtrange a ſpeach,
                     Her Genius yet finds apt diſcipherers:
                     And neuer was ſhe borne to dye obſcure,
                     But guided by the ſtarres of her owne grace,
                     Makes her owne fortune, and is ever ſure
                     In mans beſt hold, to hold the ſtrongeſt place.
                  
                  
                     And let the Critick ſay the worſt he can,
                     He cannot ſay but that Montaigne yet,
                     Yeeldes moſt rich pieces and extracts of man;
                     Though in a troubled frame confus'dly ſet.
                     Which yet h'is bleſt that he hath euer ſeene,
                     And therefore as a gueſt in gratefulneſſe,
                     For the great good the houſe yeelds him within
                     Might ſpare to taxe th'vnapt conuayances.
                     But this breath hurts not, for both worke and frame,
                     Whilſt England Engliſh ſpeakes, is of that ſtore
                     And that choyſe ſtuffe, as that without the ſame
                     The richeſt librarie can be but poore.
                     And they vnbleſt who letters doe profeſſe
                     And have him not: whoſe owne fate beates their want
                     With more ſound blowes, then Alcibiades
                     
                     Did his Pedante that did Homer want.
                  
                  By SAM. DANIEL one of the Gentlemen
extraordinarie of her Maieſties moſt
royall priuie Chamber.
               
               
                  Concerning the honor of bookes.
                  
                     
                        SInce Honor from the Honorer proceeds.
                     How well do they deſerve that memorie
                     And leave in bookes for all poſterities
                     The names of worthyes, and their vertuous deedes
                     When all their glorie els, like water weedes
                     Without their element, preſently dyes,
                     And all their greatnes quite forgotten lyes:
                     And when, and how they floriſht no man heedes
                     How poore remembrances, are ſtatutes Toomes
                     And other monuments that men erect
                     To Princes, which remaine in cloſed roomes
                     Where but a few behold them; in reſpect
                     Of Bookes, that to the vniverſall eye
                     Shew how they liu'd, the other where they lye.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     A Table of the Chapters of the Firſt Booke.
                     
                        1 BY diuers meanes men come to a like end. 1
                        2 Of ſadneſſe or ſorrow. 3
                        3 Our affections are tranſported beyond our ſelves. 5
                        4 How the ſoule diſchargeth hir paſſions vpon falſe obiects, when the true faile it. 9
                        5 Whether the captain of a place beſieged ought to ſallic forth to parlie. 10
                        6 That the houres of parlies are dangerous. 12
                        7 That our intention iudgeth our actions. 13
                        8 Of idleneſſe. 14
                        9 Of lyers. 15
                        10 Of readi
                              •
                            or ſlow ſpeech. 18
                        11 Of Prognoſtications. 19
                        12 Of Constancie. 21
                        13 Of ceremonies in the enterview of Kings. 23
                        14 Men are puniſhed by too-much opiniating theſelves in a place without reaſon. 23
                        15 Of the puniſhment of cowardiſe. 24
                        16 A trioke of certaine Ambaſſadors. 25
                        17 Of Feare. 27
                        18 That we ſhould not iudge of our happineſſe, vntill after our death. 28
                        19 That to Philoſophize, is to learn how to die. 30
                        20 Of the force of imagination. 39
                        21 The profit of one man is the damage of another. 46
                        22 Of Cuſtome, and how a received Law ſhould not eaſily be changed. 46
                        23 Divers euents from one ſelfe ſame counſell. 55
                        24 Of Pedantiſme. 60
                        25 Of the inſtitution and education of children: to the Lady Diana of Foix. 67
                        26 It is follie to referre Trueth or Falſhood to our ſufficiencie. 87
                        27 Of friendſhip. 89
                        28 Nine & twenty ſonnets of Steven de Boetie, to the Ladie of Grammont. 97
                        29 Of moderation. 97
                        30 Of the Cannibals. 100
                        31 That a man ought ſoberly to meddle with 
                              ••
                           dging of divine lawes. 107
                        32 To avoid voluptuouſnes in regard of life. 108
                        33 That fortune is often times met withall in purſute of reaſon. 109
                        34 Of a defect in our policies. 111
                        35 Of the vſe of apparell. 111
                        36 Of Cato the yoonger. 113
                        37 How we weepe and laugh at one ſelfe-ſame thing. 116
                        38 Of ſolitarineſſe. 118
                        39 A conſideration vpon Cicero. 124
                        40 That the taſte of goods or euils doth greatly depend on the opinion we haue of them. 127
                        41 That a man ſhould not communicate his glory. 137
                        42 Of the inequalitie that is betweene vs. 139
                        43 Of ſumptuary lawes, or lawes for moderating of expences. 145
                        44 Of ſleeping. 146
                        45 Of the battell of Dreux. 148
                        46 Of names. 148
                        47 Of the vncertainty of our i
                              •
                           gement. 151
                        48 Of ſteeds, called in French, Defiriers. 155
                        49 Of ancient cuſtomes. 160
                        50 Of Democritus and Herachtus. 163
                        51 Of the vanitie of words. 165
                        52 Of the parcimony of our fore-fathers. 167
                        53 Of a ſaying of Caeſar. 168
                        54 Of vaine ſubtilties, or ſubtile devices. 169
                        55 Of ſmels and odors. 170
                        56 Of prayers and oriſons. 172
                        57 Of age. 177
                     
                  
                  
                     A Table of the Chapters of the Second Booke.
                     
                        1 OF the inconſtancy of our actions. 183
                        2 Of Drunkenneſſe. 187
                        3 A Cuſtome of the Ile of Cea. 193
                        4 Tomorrow is a new day. 200
                        5 Of Conſcience. 202
                        6 Of exerciſe or practiſe. 204
                        7 Of the recompences or rewards of honor. 210
                        8 Of the affection of fathers to their children. 212
                        9 
                              〈…〉
                            213
                        10 
                              〈…〉
                            
                           
                              〈…〉
                           
                        
                        11 Of Crueltie. 233
                        12 An Apologie of Raymond Sebond. 242
                        13 Of iudging of others death. 342
                        14 How that our ſpirit hindreth it ſelfe. 345
                        15 That our deſires are increaſed by difficultie. 346
                        16 Of Glorie. 349
                        17 Of Preſumption. 357
                        18 Of giving the Lie. 374
                        19 
                              〈…〉
                            376
                        20 
                              〈…〉
                            
                           
                              〈…〉
                           
                        
                        
                           21 Against idleneſſe, or doing nothing. 380
                        22 Of running Posts, or Curriers. 382
                        23 Of bad meanes employed to a good end. 383
                        24 Of the Roman greatneſſe. 385
                        25 How a man ſhould not counterfet to be ſicke. 386
                        26 Of Thumbs. 387
                        27 Cowardize the mother of crueltie. 388
                        28 All things have their ſeaſon. 393
                        29 Of Ʋertue. 395
                        30 Of amonstrou
                              •
                            child
                              •
                           . 399
                        31 Of anger and choller. 399
                        32 A defence of Seneca and Plutarch. 404
                        33 The historie of Spurina. 407
                        34 Obſervations concerning the means to warre after the maner of Iulius Caeſar. 411
                        35 Of three good women. 416
                        36 Of the worthieſt and moſt excellent men. 420
                        37 Of the reſemblance betweene children & fathers. 424
                     
                  
                  
                     A Table of the Chapters of the Third Booke.
                     
                        1 OF profit and honestie. 435
                        2 Of repenting. 451
                        3 Of three commerces or ſocieties. 558
                        4 Of diverting or diverſion. 465
                        5 Vpon ſome verſer of Virgil. 471
                        6 Of Coaches. 504
                        7 Of the incommoditie of greatneſſe. 515
                        8 Of the Arte of conferring. 518
                        9 Of Vanitie. 531
                        10 How one ought to gouerne his will. 566
                        11 Of the Lame or Cripple. 578
                        12 Of Phiſiognomie. 584
                        13 Of Experience. 599
                     
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  THE AVTHOVR TO THE Reader.
                  
                  
                     REader, loe-heere a well-meaning Booke. It doth at the firſt entrance fore-warne thee, that in contriving the ſame, I have propoſed vnto my ſelfe no other than a familiar and private end▪ I have no reſpect or conſideration at all, either to thy ſervice, or to my glory: my forces are not capable of any ſuch deſſeigne. I have vowed the ſame to the particular commodity of my kinsfolks and friends: to the end, that loſing me (which they are likely to do ere long) they may therein finde ſome lineaments of my conditions and humours, and by that meanes reſerve more whole, and more lively foſter the knowledge and acquaintance they have had of me. Had my intention been to foreſtall and purchaſe the worlds opinion and favour, I would ſurely have adorned my ſelfe more quaintly, or kept a more grave and ſolemne march. I deſire therein to be delineated in mine owne genuine, ſimple and ordinarie faſhion, without contention, arte or ſtudie, for it is my ſelfe I pourtray. My imperfections ſhall therein be read to the life, and my naturall forme diſcerned, ſo farre-forth as publike reverence hath permitted me. For if my fortune had been to have lived among thoſe nations, which yet are ſayd to live vnder the ſweet libertie of Natures firſt and vncorrupted lawes, I aſſure thee, I would moſt willingly have pourtrayed my ſelfe fully and naked. Thus gentle Reader my ſelfe am the ground-worke of my booke: It is then no reaſon thou ſhouldeſt employ thy time about ſo frivolous and vaine a ſubject. Therefore farewell. From Montaigne, the firſt of March. 1580.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  THE ESSAYES OF MICHAEL Lord of Montaigne.
                  
                  
                     The firſt Booke.
                     
                        The firſt Chapter.
                        
                           By diuerſe meanes men come vnto a like end.
                        
                        
                           THE moſt vſuall waie to appeaſe thoſe minds we have offended when revenge lies in their hands, and that we ſtand at their mercie, is by ſubmiſſion to move them to commiſeration and pitty: Nouertheleſſe, courage, conſtancie, and reſolution (meanes altogether oppoſite) have ſometimes wrought the ſame effect. Edward the blacke Prince of Wales (who ſo long governed our Countrie of Guienne, a man whoſe conditions and fortune were accompanied with many notable parts of worth and magnanimity) having bin grievouſly offended by the Limoſins, though he by main forcetooke & entred their Citie, could by no means be appeaſed, nor by the wailefull out▪ cries of all ſorts of people (as of men, women, and children) be moved to any pittie, they proſtrating themſelues to the common ſlaughter, crying for mercie, and humbly ſubmitting themſelues at his feete, vntill ſuch time as in triumphant manner paſſing through their citie, he perceiued three French gentlemen, who alone, with an incredible & vndaunted boldnes gainſtood the enraged violence, and made head againſt the furie of his victorious army. The conſideration and reſpect of ſo notable a vertue, did firſt abate the dint of his wrath, and from thoſe three began to relent, and ſhew mercie to all the other inhabitants of the ſaid towne. Scanderbeg. Prince of Epirus, following one of his ſoldiers, with purpoſe to kill him, who by all means of humilitie, & ſubmiſſe entreatie, had firſt aſſaied to pacifie him, in ſuch an vnavoidable extremity, reſolved at laſt, reſolutely to encounter him with his ſword in his hand. This reſolution did immediatly ſtay his Captaines fury, who ſeeing him vndertake ſo honorable an attempt, not only forgave, but received him into grace & favour. This example may happily, of ſuch as have not knowne the prodigious force, and matchleſſe valor of the ſaid Prince, admit an other interpretation. The Emperor Courad
                                 ••
                              
                              ▪
                            third of that name; having beſieged G
                                 •
                              elphe, Duke of Bavaria, what vile or baſe ſatisfaction ſoever was offred him, would yeeld to no other milder conditions, but only to ſuffer ſuch gentle women as were with the Duke in the citie (their honors ſafe) to iſſue out of the towne a
                              •
                           oot, with ſuch things as they could carry about them. The 
                              〈…〉
                            an vnrelenting courage, adviſed and reſolved themſelves (neglecting all other riches or jewels) to carrie their husbands, their children, and the Duke himſelfe, on their backes: The Emperor perceiving the quaintnes of their deviſe, tooke ſo great pleaſure at it, that he wept for joy, & forthwith converted that former inexorable rage, & mortall hatred he bare the Duke, into ſo milde a relenting and gentle 
                              〈…〉
                           
                           
ther of theſe waies might eaſily perſwade me: for I am much inclined to mercie, and affected to mildneſſe. So it is, that in mine opinion, I ſhould more naturally ſtoop vnto compaſſion, than bend to eſtimation. Yet is pitie held a vicious paſſion among the Stoickes. They would have vs aide the afflicted, but not to faint, and coſuffer with them. Theſe examples ſeeme fitteſt for mee, forſomuch as theſe mindes are ſeene to be aſſaulted and environed by theſe two meanes, in vndauntedly ſuffering the one, and ſtooping vnder the other. It may peraduentvre be ſaid, that to yeelde ones heart vnto commiſeration, is an effect of facilitie, tenderneſſe, and meekeneſſe: whence it proceedeth, that the weakeſt natures, as of women, children, and the vulgar ſort are more ſubject vnto it. But (having contemned teares and wailings) to yeeld vnto the onely reverence of the ſacred Image of vertue, is the effect of a couragious and imployable minde, holding a maſculine and conſtant vigor, in honour and affection. Notwithſtanding amazement and admiration may in leſſe generous mindes worke the like effect. Witneſſe the Thebanes, who having accuſed and indited their captaines, as of a capitall crime, forſomuch as they had continued their charge, beyond the time preſcribed them, abſolved and quit Pelopidas of all puniſhment, becauſe he ſubmiſſiuely yeelded vnder the burden of ſuch objections, and to ſave himſelfe, imployed no other meanes, but ſuing-requeſts, and demiſſe entreaties; where on the contrary, Epaminondas, boldely relating the exploits atchieved by him, and with a fierce and arrogant manner, vpbraiding the people with them, had not the heart ſo much as to take their lots into his hands, but went his way, and was freely abſolved: the aſſembly much commending the ſtoutneſſe of his courage. Dionyſius the elder, after long-lingering and extreame difficulties, having taken the Citie of Reggio, and in it the Captaine Phyton (a worthy honeſt man) who had ſo obſtinately defended the ſame, would needes ſhew a tragicall example of revenge. Firſt, he tolde him, how the day before, he had cauſed his ſonne, and all his kinsfolkes to be drowned. To whom Phy
                                 •
                              on, ſtoutly out-ſtaring him anſwered nothing, but that they were more happy than himſelfe, by the ſpace of one day. Afterward hee cauſed him to be ſtripped, and by his executioners to be taken and dragged through the Citie, moſt ignominiouſly, and cruelly whipping him, charging him beſides, with outragious and contumel
                              •
                           ous ſpeeches. All which notwithſtanding, as one no whit diſmaied, hee ever ſhewed a conſtant and reſolute heart. And with a cheerefull and bold countenance went on ſtill, lowdly recounting the honourable and glorious cauſe of his death, which was, that hee would never conſent to yeeld his Countrie into the handes of a cruell tyrant, menacing him with an imminent puniſhment of the Gods. Dionyſius plainely reading in his Souldiers lookes, that in liew of animating them with braving his conquered enemie, they in contempt of him, and skorne of his triumph, ſeemed by the aſtoniſhment of ſo rare a vertue, to be mooved with compaſſion, and enclined to mutinie, yea, and to free Phy
                                 •
                              on from out the hands of his Sergean
                                 •
                              s or Guard, cauſed his torture to ceaſe, and ſecretly ſent him to be drowned in the Sea. Surely, man is a wonderfull, vain, diuerſe, and wavering ſubject: it is very hard to ground any directly-conſtant and vniforme judgement vpon him. Behold Pompey who freely pardoned all the Citie of the Mamertines, againſt which hee was grievouſly enraged, for the love of the magnanimitie, and conſidederation of the exceeding vertue of Zeno, one of their fellow-citizens, who tooke the publike fault wholy vpon himſelfe, and deſired no other favor, but alone to beare the puniſhment thereof; whereas Syllaes hoſte having vſed the like vertue in the Citie of Perugia, obtained nothing, neither for himſelfe, nor for others. And directly againſt my firſt example, the hardieſt amongſt men, and ſo gracious to the vanquiſhed, Alexander the great, after many ſtrange difficulties, forcing the Citie of Gaza, encountred by chaunce with Betis, that commanded therein, of whoſe valour (during the ſiege) hee had felt woonderfull and ſtrange exploites, beeing then alone, forſaken of all his followers, his armes all-broken, all-beſmeared with blood and wounds, fighting amongſt a number of Macedonians, who pell-mell laid ſtill vpon him; provoked by ſo deere a victorie (for among other miſhappes hee had newly received two hurts in his body) ſaid thus vnto him; 
                           Betis, thou ſhalt not die as thou wouldest: for make account thou muſt indure all the torments may poſſibly bee deviſed or inflicted vpon a caitife wretch, as thou art. But he, for all his enemies threates, without ſpeaking one word, returned onely an aſſured, ſterne, and diſdainefull countenance vpon him; which ſilent obſtinacie Alexander
                           
noting, ſaid thus vnto himſelfe: What? would hee not bend his knee? could he not vtter one ſuppliant voyce? I will aſſuredly vanquiſh his ſilence, and if I can not wreſt a word from him, I will at leaſt make him to ſobbe or groane. And converting his anger into rage, commanded his heeles to bee through-pierced, and ſo all alive with a cord through them, to be torne, ma
                              •
                           gled, and diſmembred at a carts taile. May it be, the force of his courage, was ſo naturall and peculiar vnto him, that becauſe he would no-whit admire him, he reſpected him the leſſe? or deemed he it ſo proper vnto himſelfe, that in his height, he could not without the ſpight of an envious paſſion, endure to ſee it in an other? or was the naturall violence of his rage incapable of any oppoſition? ſurely, had it received any reſtraint, it may be ſuppoſed, that in the ranſacking and deſolation of the Citie of Thebes, it ſhould have felt the ſame; in ſeeing ſo many Worthies loſt, and valiant men put to the ſword, as having no meanes of publike defence; for aboue ſix thouſand were ſlaine and maſſacred, of which not one was ſeene, either to runne away, or beg for grace. But on the contrary, ſome here and there ſeeking to affront, and endevouring to check their victorious enemies, vrging and provoking them to force them die an honourable death. Not one was ſeene to yeelde, and that to his laſt gaſpe did not attempt to revenge himſelfe, and with all weapons of diſpaire, with the death of ſome enemie, comfort and ſweeten his owne miſerie. Yet could not the affliction of their vertue find any ruth or pitie, nor might one day ſu
                              ••
                           ice to glut or aſſwage his revengefull wrath. This burcherous ſlaughter continued vnto the laſt drop of any remaining blood; where none were ſpared but the vnarmed and naked, the aged and impotent, the women and children; that ſo from amongſt them, they might get thirtie thouſand ſlaves.
                     
                     
                        The ſecond Chapter.
                        
                           Of Sadneſſe or Sorrowe.
                        
                        NO man is more free from this paſſion than I, for I neither love nor regard it: albeit the world hath vndertaken, as it were vpon covenant, to grace it with a particular favour. Therewith they adorne age, vertue, and conſcience. Oh fooliſh and baſe ornament! The Italians have more properly with it's name entitled malignitie: for, it is a qualitie ever hurtfull, ever ſottiſ
                              •
                           ; and as ever baſe and coward, the Stoikes inhibit their Elders and Sages to be therewith tainted, or have any feeling of it. But the Storie ſaith; that Pſamne
                                 •
                              icus king of Aegypt, hauing been defeated and taken by Cambiſes king of Perſia, ſeeing his owne daughter paſſe before him in baſe and vile aray, being ſent to draw water from a well, his friends weeping & wailing about him (he with his eies fixed on the ground, could not be mooved to vtter one word) and ſhortly after beholding his ſonne led to execution, held ſtill the ſame vndaunted countenance: but perceiving a familiar friend of his haled amongſt the captives, he began to beat his head, and burſt forth into extreame ſorrow. This might well be compared to that which one of our Princes was lately ſeene to doe, who being at Trent, and receiving newes of his elder brothers death; but ſuch a brother as on him lay all the burthen and honour of his houſe; and ſhortly after tidings of his yonger brothers deceaſe, who was his ſecond hope; and having with an vnmatched countenance and exemplar conſtancie endured theſe two affronts; it fortuned not long after, that one of his ſervants dying, he by this latter accident ſuffered himſelfe to be ſo far tranſported, that quitting and forgetting his former reſolution, he ſo abandoned himſelfe to all maner of ſorrow and griefe, that ſome argued, only this laſt miſchance had toucht him to the quicke: but verily the reaſon was, that being otherwiſe full, and over plunged in ſorrow, the leaſt ſurcharge brake the bounds and barres of patience. The like might (I ſay) be judged of our ſtorie, were it not it followeth, that Cambiſes inquiring of Pſamneticus, why he was nothing diſtempered at the misfortune of his ſonne and daughter, he did ſo impatiently beare the diſaſter of his friend: It is, anſwered he, Becauſe this laſt diſpleaſure may be manifeſted by weeping, whereas the two former exceede by much, all meanes and compaſſe to bee expreſſed by teares. The invention of that ancient Painter might happily fitte this purpoſe, who in the ſacrifice of Iphigenia, being to repreſent the griefe of the by-ſtanders,

 according to the qualitie and intereſt each one bare for the death of ſo faire, ſo yong and innocent a Lady, having ranſacked the vtmoſt skill and effects of his art, when he came to the Virgins father, as if no countenance were able to repreſent that degree of ſorrow, he drew him with availe over his face. And that is the reaſon why our Poets faine miſerable Niobe, who firſt having loſt ſeaven ſonnes, and immediately as many daughters, as one over-burthened with their loſſes, to have beene transformed into a ſtone;
                        Diriguiſſe malis:
                        
                           And grew as hard as ſtone,Ouid. M
                                    •
                                 tam. lib. 6. 303.
                           
                           By miſerie and moane.
                        
                        Thereby to expreſſe this mournfull ſilent ſtupiditie, which ſo doth pierce vs, when accidents ſurpaſſing our ſtrength orewhelme vs. Verily the violence of a griefe, being extreame, muſt needs aſtonie the mind, & hinder the liberty of her actions. As it hapneth at the ſudden alarum of ſome bad tidings, when wee ſhall feele ourſelves ſurpriſed, benummed, and as it were deprived of al motion, ſo that the ſoule burſting afterward forth into teares and complaints, ſeemeth at more eaſe and libertie, to looſe, to cleare and dilate it ſelfe.
                        Et via vix tandem voci laxata dolore est,
                        
                           And ſcarſe at laſt for ſpeach,Virg. A
                                    •
                                 n. l. 11. 151.
                           
                           By griefe was made a breach.
                        
                        In the warres which king Ferdinando made againſt the widow of Iohn king of Hungaria, about Buda; a man at armes was particularly noted of all men, forſomuch as in a certaine skirmiſh he had ſhewed exceeding proweſſe of his body, and though vnknowne, beeing ſlaine, was highly commended and much bemoaned of all: but yet of none ſo greatly as of a Germane Lord, called Raiſciac, as he that was amaſed at ſo rare vertue: his body being recovered and had off, this Lord, led by a common curioſitie, drew neere vnto it, to ſee who it might be, and having cauſed him to be diſarmed, perceived him to be his owne ſonne; which knowne, did greatly augment the compaſſion of all the camp: he only without framing word, or cloſing his eyes, but earneſtly viewing the dead body of his ſonne, ſtood ſtill vpright, till the vehemencie of his ſad ſorrow, having ſuppreſſed and choaked his vitall ſpirits, fell'd him ſtarke dead to the ground.
                        Chipuo dir com'egli arde è in pi
                              •
                           ci
                              •
                           l f
                              •
                           ōco,
                        
                           He that can ſay how he doth frie,Pe
                                    •
                                 . p. 1. S
                                    •
                                 n. 140.
                           
                           In pettie-gentle flames doth lie,
                        
                        ſay thoſe Lovers that would liuely repreſent an into lerable paſſion.
                        
                           miſero quod omnes
                           Eripit ſenſus mihi; Nam ſimulte
                                 
                                    •
                                 at
                                    •
                                 l. Epig. 48. 5.
                           
                           Lesbia aſpexi, nihil eſt ſuper mî
                        
                        
                           Quod loquar amens.
                           Lingua ſed torpet, tenuis ſub art
                                 •
                              s
                           Flamma dimana
                                 •
                              , ſo
                                 •••
                              u ſuopte
                           Tinniunt aures, gemina teguntur,
                           Lumina 
                                 •
                              octe.
                        
                        
                           miſerably from me,
                           This bereaves all ſenſe: for I can no ſooner
                           Eie thee my ſweet heart, but I wot not one word
                        
                        
                           to ſpeake amazed.
                           Tongue-tide as in trance, while a ſprightly thin flame
                           Flowes in all my ioynts, with a ſelfe-reſounding
                           Both my eares tingle, with a night redoubled
                           Both mine eies are veild.
                        
                        Nor is it in the livelieſt, and moſt ardent heat of the fit, that wee are able to diſplay our plaints and perſwaſions, the ſoule being then aggravated with heavie thoughts, and the body ſuppreſſed and languiſhing for love. And thence is ſometimes engendered that caſuall faintnes, which ſo vnſeaſonably ſurpriſeth paſſionate Lovers, and that chilneſſe, which by the power of an extreame heate doth ſeize on them in the verie midſt of their joy and enjoying. All paſſions that may be taſted and digeſted, are but meane and ſlight.
                        
                           
                           Curae leues loquuntur, ingentes ſtupent.S
                                    •
                                 n Hip. act. 2. Scena 2.
                           
                        
                        
                           Light cares can freely ſpeake,
                           Great cares heart rather breake.
                        
                        The ſurprize of an vnexpected pleaſure aſtonieth vs alike.
                        
                           Vt me conſpexit venientem, & Troia circùmVirg. Aenead. lib. 3. 306.
                           
                           Arma amens vidit, magnis exterrita monſtris,
                           Diriguit viſu in medio, calor oſſa reliquit,
                           Labitur, & longo vix tandem tempore fatur.
                        
                        
                           When ſhe beheld me come, and round about
                           Senſel eſſe ſaw Troian armes, ſhe ſtood afraid
                           Stone-ſtill at ſo ſtrange ſights: life heat flew out:
                           She faints: at laſt, with long pauſe thus ſhe ſaid.
                        
                        Beſides the Romane Ladie, that died for joy to ſee her ſonne returne alive from the battell of Cannae Sophocles and Dionyſius the Tyrant, who deceaſed through over-gladnes: and Talua, who died in Corſica, reading the newes of the honours the Roman Senate had conferred vpon him: It is reported that in our age, Pope Leo the tenth, having received advertiſement of the taking of the Citie of Millane, which he had ſo exceedingly deſired, entred into ſuch exceſſe of joy, that he fell into an ague, whereof he ſhortly died. And for a more authenticall teſtimonie of humane imbecillitie, it is noted by our Ancients, that Diodorus the Logician, beeing ſurprized with an extreame paſſion or apprehenſion of ſhame, fell downe ſtarke dead, becauſe neither in his Schoole, nor in publique, he had been able to reſolve an argument propounded vnto him. I am little ſubject to theſe violent paſſions. I have naturally a hard apprehenſion, which by diſcourſe I daily harden more and more.
                     
                     
                        The third Chapter.
                        
                           Our affections are tranſported beyond our ſelves.
                        
                        THoſe which ſtill accuſe men for ever gaping after future things, and go about to teach vs, to take hold of preſent fortunes, and ſettle our ſelves vpon them, as having no hold of that which is to come; yea much leſſe than we have of that which is already paſt, touch and are ever harping vpon the commoneſt humane error, if they dare call that an error, to which Nature hir ſelfe, for the ſervice of the continuation of hir worke, doth addreſſe vs, imprinting (as it doth many others) this falſe imagination in vs, as more jealous of our actions, than of our knowledge. We are never in our ſelves, but beyond. Feare, deſire, and hope, draw vs ever towards that which is to come, and remove our ſenſe and conſideration from that which is, to amuſe vs on that which ſhall be, yea when we ſhall be no more. Calamitoſus eſt animus futuri anxius. A minde in ſuſpenſe what is to come, is in a pittifull caſe.
                           Sen. epi. 98.
                        
                        This notable precept is often all eaged in Plato. 
                           
                              Follow thy buſineſſe and know thy ſelfe; Each of theſe two members, doth generally imply all our duty; and likewiſe enfolds his companion. He that ſhould do his buſineſſe, might perceive that his firſt leſſon is, to know what he is, and what is convenient for him. And he that knoweth himſelfe, takes no more anothers matters for his owne, but above all other things, loveth and correcteth himſelfe, rejecteth ſuperfluous occupations, idle imaginations, and vnprofitable propoſitions. As if you grant follie what it deſireth, it will no-whit be ſatisfied; ſo is wiſedome content with that which is preſent, and never diſpleaſed with it ſelfe. Epicurus doth diſpenſe with his age touching the foreſight and care of what ſhall inſue. Amongſt the lawes that regard the deceaſed, that which ties the actions of Princes to be examined when they are dead, ſeemes to me verie ſolide. They are companions, if not maſters of the lawes: That which juſtice could not work on their heads, it is reaſon it effect vpon their reputation, and goods of their ſucceſſors: things wee many times preferre before our lives. It is a cuſtome brings many ſingular commodities vnto nations that obſerve it, and to be deſired of all good Princes: who have cauſe to complaine that the memorie of the wicked is vſed as theirs. Wee owe a

like obedience and ſubjection to all Kings; for it reſpects their office: but eſtimation and affection, wee owe it only to their vertue. If they be unworthie, wee are to endure them patiently, to conceale their vices, and to aid their indifferent actions with our commendations, as long as their authoritie hath need of our aſſiſtance, and that ought to be aſcribed unto politike order. But our commerce with them being ended, there is no reaſon we ſhould refuſe the unfolding of our felt wrongs vnto juſtice and our libertie. And ſpecially to refuſe good ſubjects, the glory to have reverently and faithfully ſerved a maſter, whoſe imperfections were ſo well knowne unto them: exempting poſteritie from ſo profitable an example. And ſuch as for the reſpect of ſome private benefite or intereſt do wickedly imbrace the memorie of an vnwoorthie Prince, doe particular juſtice at the charge of publike juſtice. Titus Liuius ſpeaketh truely, where he ſaith, that the ſpeech of men brought up under a royaltie is ever full of vaine oſtentations, and falſe witneſſes: every man indifferently extolling the king, to the furtheſt ſtraine of valour and Soveraigne greatneſſe. The magnanimitie of thoſe two Souldiers, may bee reproved, one of which being demaunded of Nero, why he hated him, anſwered him to his teeth; I loved thee whileſt thou waſt worthie of love, but ſince thou becameſt a parricide, a fir-brand, a juglar, a player, and a Coach-man, I hate thee, as thou deſerveſt. The other being asked, wherefore he ſought to kill him; anſwered, Becauſe I find no other courſe to hinder thy unceſſant outrages and impious deedes. But can any man, that hath his ſenſes about him, juſtly reproove the publike and generall teſtimonies, that ſince his death, have bin given, and ſo ſnall be for ever, both againſt him and all ſuch like reprobates, of his tyrannicall and wicked demeanors? I am ſorie that in ſo ſacred a pollicie as the Lacedemonian was, ſo fained and fond a ceremonie at the death of their kings was ever deviſed and brought in uſe. All their confederates and neighbours, all the ſlave-Heotes, men and women pell-mell, for a teſtimonie of their griefe and ſorrow did mangle and gaſh their foreheads; and in their out-cries, and lamentations, exclaimed, that their deceaſed king, howſoever he had lived, was and had bin the beſt Prince that ever they had, aſcribing in order the commendations due unto deſert, and to the laſt and latter ranke, what belongs unto the firſt merite. Ariſtotle that hath an oare in every water, and medleth with all things, makes a queſtion, about Solons ſpeech, who ſaith, that no man can truely be counted happy before his death, Whether he that lived and died according to his wiſh may be named happy, Whether his renowne be good or ill, and whether his poſteritie be miſerable or no. Whileſt we ſtirre and remove, we tranſport our ſelves by preoccupation whereſoever we liſt: But no ſooner are we out of being, but we have no communication at all with that which is. And it were better to tell Solon, that never man is happy then, ſince he never is ſo, but when he is no more.
                        
                           —Quiſquam
                           
                           Vix radicitus è vita ſe tollit, & eijcit:Lucret. 
                                    •••
                                 . 
                                    •••
                                 . lib. 3. 912.
                           
                           Sed facit eſſe ſuiquiddam ſuper inſcius ipſe,
                           Nec remouet ſatis à proiecto corpore ſeſe, &
                           Vindicat—
                        
                        
                           Scarſe any rids himſelfe of life ſo cleere,
                           But leaves vnwitting ſome part of him heere:
                           Nor frees or quits himſelfe ſufficiently
                           From that his body which forlorne doth lie.
                        
                        
                           Bertrand of Gelſquin died at the ſiege of the caſtle of Rancon, neere vnto Puy in Auergne: the beſieged yeelding afterward, were forced to carrie the keies of the Caſtle, vpon the deceaſed body of the Captaine. Bartholomew of Alviano, Generall of the Venetian forces dying in their ſervice and wars about Breſcia, and his body being to be tranſported to Venice, through the territorie of Verona, which then was enemie vnto them, the greateſt part of the armie thought it expedient to demand a ſafe conduct for their paſſage of thoſe of Verona, to which Theodoro Trivulcio ſtoutly oppoſed himſelfe, and choſe rather to paſſe it by maine force, and to hazard the day, ſaying it was not convenient, that he who in his life time had never apprehended feare of his enemies ſhould now being dead, ſeeme to feare them. Verily in like matters, by the lawes of Greece, he that required a dead bodie of his enemies, with intent to burie the ſame, renounced the victory, and might no more erect any trophie of it: and he who was ſo required, purchaſed the title of honour and gaine. So did Nicias
                           
looſe the advantage he had clearely gained of the Corinthians; and contrariwiſe, Ageſilaus, aſſured that, he doubtfully had gotten of the Boetians. Theſe actions might be deemed ſtrange, if in all ages it were not a common-received opinion, not only to extend the care of our ſelves, beyond this life, but alſo to believe, that heavenly favours to often accompanie vs vnto our grave, and continue in our poſteritie. Whereof there are ſo many examples (leaving our moderne a part) that I need not wade farre into it.
                        
                           Edward the firſt king of England, in the long warres he had with Robert King of Scotland, having by triall found how greatly his preſence advantaged the ſucceſſe of his affaires, and how he was ever victorious in any enterpriſe he vndertooke in his owne perſon; when he died, bound his ſonne by ſolemne oth, that being dead he ſhould cauſe his body to be boiled, vntill the fleſh fell from the bones, which he ſhould cauſe to be enterred, and carefully keeping the bones, ever carrie them about him, whenſoever he ſhould happen to have wars with the Scots: As if deſtenie had fatally annexed the victorie vnto his limmes. Iohn Ziſca; who for the defenſe of Wickliffs opinions ſo much troubled the ſtate of Bohemia, commanded that after his death his body ſhould be flead, and a drum made of his skin, to be carried and ſounded in all the wars againſt his enemies: deeming the ſound of it would be a meanes to continue the advantages, which in his former warres he had obtained of them. Certaine Indians did likewiſe carry the bones of one of their Captaines in the skirmiſhes they had with the Spaniards, in regard of the good ſucceſſe he had, whileſt he lived, had againſt them: And other nations of that new-found world, do likewiſe carrie the bodies of ſuch worthie and fortunate men with them, as have died in their battels, to ſerve them in ſtead of good fortune and encouragement. The firſt examples reſerve nothing elſe in their tombes, but the reputation acquired by their former atchievements: but theſe will alſo adjoine unto it the power of working. The act of Captaine Bayart is of better compoſition, who perceiving himſelfe deadly wounded by a ſhot received in his body, being by his men perſwaded to come off and retire himſelfe from out the throng, anſwered, he would not now ſo neere his end, begin to turne his face from his enemie: and having ſtowtly foughten ſo long as he could ſtand, feeling himſelfe to faint and ſtagger from his horſe, commanded his ſteward to lay him againſt a tree, but in ſuch ſort, that he might die with his face toward the enemie; as indeed he did. I may not omit this other example, as remarkeable for this conſideration, as any of the precedent. The Emperour Maximilian, great grand-father to Phillip, now King of Spaine, was a Prince highly endowed with many notable qualities, and amongſt others with a well-nigh matchleſſe beautie and comelineſſe of body; but with other cuſtomes of his, he had this one much contrarie to other Princes, who to diſpatch their waightieſt affaires make often their cloſe ſtoole, their regale Throne or Councel-chamber, which was, that he would not permit any groome of his chamber (were he never ſo neere about him) to ſee him in his inner-chamber, who if he had occaſion but to make water, wold as nicely and as religiouſly withdraw himſelfe as any maiden, and never ſuffer ſo much as a Phyſitian, much leſſe any other whatſoever, to ſee thoſe privie parts that all in modeſtie ſeeke to keepe ſecret and vnſeene. My ſelfe, that am ſo broad-mouthed and laviſh in ſpeaches, am notwithſtanding naturally touched with that baſhfulneſſe. And vnleſſe it be by the motion of neceſſitie or of voluptuouſneſſe, I never willingly imparted thoſe actions and parts (which cuſtome willeth to be concealed) to the view of any creature. I endure more compulſion, then I deeme befitting a man, eſpecially of my profeſſion. But he grew to ſuch ſuperſtition, that by expreſſe words in his laſt will and teſtament, he commanded, that being dead, he ſhould have linnen-ſlops put about them. He ſhould by codicile have anexed vnto it, that he who ſhould put them on, might have his eies hood-winckt. The inſtruction which Cyrus giveth his children, that neither they nor any other ſhould either ſee or touch his body, after the breath were once out of it; I aſcribe it unto ſome motive of devotion in him. For both his hiſtorian and himſelfe, amongſt many other notable qualities they are endued with, have throughout all the courſe of their life ſeemed to have a ſingular reſpect and awfull reverence vnto religion. That ſtorie diſpleaſed me very much, which a noble man told me of a kinſman of mine (a man very famous & well knowne both in peace and warre) which is, that dying verie aged in his court, being much tormented with extreame pangs of the ſtone, he with an earneſt and vnwearied care, emploied all his laſt houres, to diſpoſe the honor and ceremonie of his funerals, and ſummoned all the nobilitie

that came to viſit him to give him aſſured promiſe to be as aſſiſtants, and to convay him to his laſt reſting place. To the very ſame Prince, who was with him at his laſt gaſp, he made verie earneſt ſute, he would command all his houſhold to wait vpon him at his interrement, enforcing many reaſons, and all eaging divers examples, to prove that it was a thing very convenient, and fitting a man of his qualitie: which aſſured promiſe when he had obtained, & had at his pleaſure marſhalled the order how they ſhould march, he ſeemed quietly and contentedly to yeeld vp the ghoſt. I have ſeldome ſeene a vanitie continue ſo long. This other curioſitie meere oppoſite vnto it (which to prove I need not labor for home-examples) ſeemeth in my opinion coſin-german to this that is, when one is ever readie to breathe his laſt, carefully and paſſionately to endevor, how to reduce the convoy of his obſequies vnto ſome particular & vnwonted parcimonie, to one ſervant and to one lanterne: I heare the humor and appointment of Marcus Aemilius Lepidus commended, who expreſly forbade his heires to vſe thoſe ceremonies about his interrement, which in ſuch caſes were formerly accuſtomed: Is it temperance and frugalitie, to avoid charge and voluptuouſnes, the vſe and knowledge of which is inperceptable vnto vs? Lo here an eaſie reformation and of ſmall coſt. Were it requiſite to appoint any, I would be of opinion, that as well in that, as in all other actions of mans life, every man ſhould referre the rule of it to the qualitie of his fortune. And the Philoſopher Lycon did wiſely appoint his friends to place his body, where they ſhould thinke it fitteſt and for the beſt: and for his obſequies, they ſhould neither be ſuperfluous and over-coſtly, nor baſe and ſparing. For my part, I would wholy relie on cuſtome, which ſhould diſpoſe this ceremonie, and would yeeld my ſelfe to the diſcretion of the firſt or next, into whoſe hands I might chance to fall. Totus hic locus eſt contemnendus in nobis, non negligendus in noſtris. All this matter ſhould be deſpiſed of vs, but not neglected of ours. And religiouſly ſaid a holy man: Curatio funeris,
                              
                                 Iuſtini. ci
                                       •
                                     dei. l. 1. c. 12. verb. apoſt. ſer. 32. 
                              conditio ſepulturae, pompa exequiarum, magis ſunt vivorum ſolatia, quam ſubſidia mortuorum. The procuration of funerals, the manner of buriall, the pomp of obſequies, are rather comforts to the living, than helpes to the dead.
                            Therefore Socrates anſwered Criton, who at the houre of his death, aſked him, how he would be buried: Even as you pleaſe, ſaid he: were I to meddle further with this ſubject, I would deeme it more gallant, to imitate thoſe who yet living and breathing, vndertake to enjoy the order and honour of their ſepulchres, and that pleaſe themſelves to behold their dead countenance in Marble. Happy they that can rejoyce and gratifie their ſenſes with inſenſibilitie, and live by their death! A little thing would make me conceive an inexpiable hatred againſt all popular domination; although it ſeeme moſt naturall and juſt vnto me: when I call to minde that inhumane injuſtice of the Athenians, who without further triall or remiſſion, yea without ſuffering them ſo much as to reply or anſwere for themſelves, condemned thoſe noble and worthy captaines, that returned victoriouſly from the ſea-battell, which they (neere the Iles Arginuſae) had gained of the Lacedemonians; the moſt conteſted, bloudie, and greateſt fight the Graecians ever obtained by ſea with their owne forces: forſomuch as after the victorie, they had rather followed thoſe occaſions, which the law of warre preſented vnto them, for their availe, than to their prejudice ſtaid to gather and burie their dead men. And the ſucceſſe of Diomedon makes their ruthleſſe execution more hatefull, who beeing a man of notable and exemplar vertue, both militarie and politike, and of them ſo cruelly condemned; after he had heard the bloudie ſentence, advauncing himſelfe forward to ſpeake, having fit opportunitie and plauſible audience; he, I ſay, in ſtead of excuſing himſelfe, or endevouring to juſtifie his cauſe, or to exaſperate the evident iniquitie of ſo cruell a doome, expreſſed but a care of the Iudges preſervation, earneſtly beſeeching the Gods to turne that judgement to their good, praying that for want of not ſatisfying the vowes, which he and his companions had vowed in acknowledgement and thankſgiving for ſo famous a victorie, and honourable fortune, they might not draw the wrath and revenge of the Gods vpon them, declaring what their vowes were. And without more words, or vrging further reaſons, couragiouſly addreſſed himſelfe to his execution. But fortune ſome yeares after puniſhed him alike, and made him taſte of the very ſame ſauce. For Chabrias, Captaine Generall of their ſea-fleet, having afterward obtained a famous victorie of Pollis, Admirall of Sparta, in the Ile of Naxos, loſt abſolutely the benefit of it, and only contented with the day (a matter of great conſequence for their affaires) fearing to incurre the miſchiefe of this example, and to ſave a few dead carcaſſes of his friends, that floated vp and downe the ſea, gave leaſure to an infinite number of his

living enemies, whom he might eaſily haue ſurprized, to ſaile away in ſafetie, who afterward made them to purchaſe their importunate ſuperſtition, at a deere-deere rate.
                        
                           Quaeris, quo 
                                 •
                              ac
                                 •
                              as, poſt obitum, loco?S
                                    ••
                                 . Tr
                                    •
                                 as. chor. 2. 30.
                           
                           Quo non nata iacent.
                        
                        
                           Where ſhall you lie when you are dead?
                           Where they lie that were neuer bred:
                        
                        This other reſtores the ſenſe of reſt vnto a bodie without a ſoule.Cic. Tuſc. qu. lib. 1. E
                                 •••
                              .
                        
                        
                           Neque ſepulchrum, quo recipiat, habeat portum corporis:
                           Vbi, remiſſa humana vita, corpus requieſcat à malis.
                        
                        
                           To turne in, as a hav'n, have he no grave,
                           Where life left, from all griefe he reſt may have.
                        
                        Even as Nature makes vs to ſee, that many dead things, have yet certaine ſecret relations vnto life. Wine doth alter and change in ſellers, according to the changes and alterations of the ſeaſons of it's vineyard. And the fleſh of wilde beaſtes and veniſon doth change qualitie and taſte in the powdering-tubbes, according to the nature of living fleſh, as ſome ſay that have obſerved it.
                     
                     
                        The fourth Chapter.
                        
                           How the ſoule diſchargeth her paſſions vpon falſe obiects, when the true faile it.
                        
                        A Gentleman of ours exceedingly ſubject to the gowt, being inſtantly ſolicited by his Phyſitions, to leave all manner of ſalt-meates, was woont to anſwer pleaſantly, that when the fittes or pangs of the diſeaſe tooke him, hee would have ſome body to quarell with; and that crying and curſing, now againſt Bolonie-ſauſege, and ſometimes by railing againſt ſalt neats-tongues, and gammons of bakon, he found ſome eaſe. But in good earineſt even as the arme being lifted vp to ſtrike, if the ſtroke hit not, but fall voide, wee feele ſome paine in it, and many times ſtrike it out of joynt; and that to yeeld our ſight pleaſant, 
                              •
                            muſt not be loſt and diſpierſed in the vaſt ayre, but ought rather to have a limited bound to ſuſtaine it by a reaſonable diſtance.
                        
                           Venius vt amittit vires, niſi robore denſaeLuca
                                    •
                                 . lib. 3. 362.
                           
                           Occurrant ſiluae, ſpatio diffuſus inani.
                        
                        
                           As windes in emptie ayre diffus'd, ſtrength loſe,
                           Vnleſſe thick-old-growne woods of their ſtrength oppoſe.
                        
                        So ſeemes it that the ſoule moved and toſſed, if ſhe have not ſome hold to take, looſeth it ſelfe in it ſelfe, and muſt ever be ſtored with ſome obiect, on which it may light and worke. Plutarch ſaith fitly of thoſe who affectionate themſelves to Monkies and little Dogges, that the loving part which is in vs, for want of a lawfull hold, rather than it will be idle, doth forge a falſe and frivolous hold vnto it ſelfe. And wee ſee that the ſoule in her paſſions doth rather deceive itſelfe, by framing a falſe and fantaſticall ſubiect vnto itſelfe, yea againſt her owne conceit, than not to worke vpon ſomething. So doth their owne rage tranſport beaſtes, to ſet vpon the ſtone or weapon that hath hurt them; yea and ſometimes with irefull teeth to revenge themſelves againſt themſelues, for the hurt or ſmart they feele.
                        
                           Pannonis haud aliter poſt ictum ſaeuior vrſaLuca
                                    •
                                  lib 6. 2
                                    •
                                 0.
                           
                           Cui iaculum parua Lybis amentauit babena,
                           Se rotat in vulnus, telúmque irat a receptum
                           Impedit, & ſecum fugientem circuit haſtam.
                        
                        
                           Even ſo the wound-enraged Auſtrian beare,
                           On whom a Moore hath thir'ld his ſlinged ſpeare,
                           Wheeles on her wound, and raging bites the dart,
                           Circling that flies with her, and can not part.
                        
                        
                           What cauſes doe wee not invent, for the croſſes that happen vnto vs? bee it right, or wrong: what take we not hold of, to have ſomething to ſtrive withall? It is not the golden locks thou teareſt, nor the whiteneſſe of the breaſt, which thou through vexation ſo cruelly doſt ſmite, that have by meanes of an vnluckie bullet, loſt thy deere-beloved brother: on ſomething elſe ſhouldeſt thou wreake thy ſelfe. Liuius ſpeaking of the Romane army inLiu. di
                                 •
                              . 3. lib. 5. 
                           Spaine, after the loſſe of two great Captaines that were brethren. Flere omnes repente, & offenſare capita: They all wept and often beat their heades. It is an ordinarie cuſtome: And the Philoſopher Byon, was very pleaſant with the king, that for griefe tore his haire, when he ſaid, Doth this man thinke, that baldneſſe will aſſwage his griefe? who hath not ſeene ſome to chew and ſwallow cardes, and wel-nigh choake themſelves with bales of dice, only to be revenged for the loſſe of ſome money? Xerxes whipped the Sea, and writ a cartell of defiance to the hill Athos: And Cyrus for many daies together ammuſed his whole armie to be revenged of the river Gyndus, for the feare he tooke paſſing over the ſame: And Caligula cauſed a verie faire houſe to be defaced, for the pleaſure his mother had received in the ſame. When I was yong, my countrimen were wont to ſay, That one of our neighbour-Kings, hauing received a blow at Gods hand, ſware to be revenged on him, and ordained, that for tenne yeares ſpace no man ſhould pray vnto him, nor ſpeake of him, not ſo long as he were in authoritie, believe in him. By which report, they do not ſo much publiſh the ſottiſhneſſe, as the ambitious glorie, peculiar vnto that nation of whom it was ſpoken. They are vices that ever goe togither: But in truth ſuch actions encline rather vnto ſelfe-conceit, than to fondnes. Auguſtus Caeſar having been beaten by a tempeſt on the ſea, defied the God Neptune, and in the celebration of the Circenſian games, that ſo he might be avenged on him, he cauſed his image to be remooved fromout the place, where it ſtood amongſt the other Gods; wherein he is alſo leſſe excuſable, than the former, and leſſe than hee was afterward, when having loſt a battell, vnder Quintilius Varus in Germanie, all in a rage and deſperate, he went vp and downe beating his head againſt the walls, mainly crying out: Oh! Varus, reſtore me my Souldiers againe: For, thoſe exceede all follie, (forſomuch as impietie is joyned vnto it) that will wreake themſelves againſt God, or fortune, as if ſhe had eares ſubject to our batterie: In imitation of the Thracians, who when it lightens or thunders, begin with a Titanian revenge to ſhoote againſt heaven, thinking by ſhooting of arrowes to draw God to ſome reaſon. Now, as ſaith that ancient Poet in Plutarch.
                        
                        
                           Point ne ſe faut corroucer aux affaires,Plutar.
                           
                           Il ne leur chaut de toutes noz choleres.
                           We ought not angry be at what God dooth,
                           For he cares not who beares an angry tooth.
                        
                        But we ſhall never raile inough againſt the diſorder and vnrulineſſe of our minde.
                     
                     
                        The fifth Chapter.
                        
                           Whether the Captaine of a place beſieged ought to ſallie forth to parlie.
                        
                        
                           LƲcius Marcius Legate of the Romans, in the warre againſt Perſeus King of Macedon, deſirous to get ſo much time, as he wanted to prepare his army, gave out ſome motives of accord, wherewith the King inveagled, yeelded vnto a truce for certaine daies: by which meanes he furniſhed his enemie with opportunitie & leaſure to arme himſelfe: whereof proceeded the Kings laſt ruine and ouer-throw. Yet is it, that the elders of the Senate, mindfull of their fore-fathers cuſtomes, condemned this practiſe as an enemie to their ancient proceedings, which was, ſaid they▪ to fight with vertue, and not with craft, nor by ſurpriſes, or ſtratagems by night, nor by ſet-flights, and vnlookt-for approches, never vndertaking a warre, but after it was proclaimed, yea many times after the appointed houre and place of the battell. With this conſcience did they ſend backe to Pirrhus his traitorous Phyſitian, and

to the Phaliſ
                                 •
                              i their diſloiall ſchoole-maſter. Theſe were true Romane proceedings, and not Grecian pollicies, nor Punike wiles, with whom to vanquiſh by force is leſſe glorious than to conquer by trecherie. To deceive may ſerve for the inſtant, but hee onely is judged to be overcome, that knowes he was not vanquiſhed by craft or deceit, nor by fortune or chance, but by meere valour, betweene troupe and troupe, in an overt and juſt warre. It appeareth manifeſtly by the ſpeech of theſe good men, they had not yet received this ſentence.
                        —Dolus, an virtus, quis in hoste requirat?Virg Aeneid. lib. 2. 390.
                        
                        Deceit, or vertue, either, in foes, it skill's not whether.
                        The Achaians, ſaith Polibius, deteſted all manner of deceit in their warres, deeming that no victorie, where their enemies courages were not quelled. Eam vir ſanctus, & ſapiens ſciat eſſe victoriam veram, quae ſalua fide, & integra dignitate parabitur. A wiſe and religious man will know that is victorie indeed, which ſhall be attained with credit vnimpeached, and dignitie vntainted, ſaith another.
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Ʋos ne velit, an me regnare hera, quid-veferat fors,Cic Offic. lib. 1. ex Enn. de Pyrrh.
                           
                           
                              Ʋirtute experiamur.
                        
                        
                           If fortune will have you to raigne, or me,
                           And what chance bring's, let vertues triall be.
                        
                        In the Kingdome of Ternates, among thoſe nations, which wee ſo full-mouthed, call Barbarous, the cuſtome beareth, that they never vndertake a warre, before the ſame be denounced; thereunto adding an ample declaration of the meanes they have to employ therein, what manner, and how many men, what munition, and what Armes either offenſive or defenſive: which done, they alſo eſtabliſh as a law, that without reproch or imputation, it ſhall be lawfull for any man, in their warres, to vſe what advantage ſoever, may in any ſort further or helpe them to vanquiſh. The ancient Florentines were ſo far from deſiring any advantage of their enemies by ſudden ſurpriſes, that a moneth before they could bring their Armie into the field, they would give them warning, by the continuall ſound of their common bell, which they called Mar
                                 ••
                              nella. As for vs, who are leſſe ſuperſtitious, and deeme him to have the honour of the warre, that hath the profit of it, and according to Liſander, ſay, that Where the Lions-skinne will not ſuffice, wee muſt adde a ſcantling of the Foxes; the moſt ordinarie occaſions of ſurpriſes are drawne from this practiſe, and as wee ſay, there is no time, wherein a Captaine ought to be more warie and circumſpect to looke about him, than that of parlies, and treaties of accord: And therefore is it a common rule in the mouth of all our modern men of warre, that the Gouernour or Commaunder of a beſieged place, ought never to ſallie forth himſelfe to parlie. In the time of our forefathers, the ſame was caſt in the teeth, (as a reproach) vnto the Lord of Montmor
                                 •
                              
                            and Aſſigni, who defended Mou
                                 •••
                              , againſt the Earle of Nanſeaw. Yet in this caſe it were excuſable in him, that ſhould ſo ſallie out, that the aſſurance and advantage, might ſtill be on his ſide. As did the Earle Gu
                                 ••
                              o R
                                 •
                              ngom in the Citie of Reggio (if credit may be given to Bellay: for Guicci
                                 ••••
                              
                            affirmeth, that it was himſelfe) when as the Lord of Eſcute, comming to parlie made his approaches vnto it; for he did ſo little forſake his fort that whileſt they were in parlie, a commotion being raiſed, the Lord of Eſcute and the troupes which came with him, in that tumult found himſelfe to be the weakeſt, ſo that Alexander Trivultio was there ſlaine, and hee deeming it the ſafeſt way, was forced to follow the Earle, and on his word to yeeld himſelfe to the mercie and ſhelter of blowes, into the Citie. Eumenes in the Citie of Nora, being vrged by Antigonus, that beſieged him, to ſallie forth to parlie, alleaging that there was reaſon he ſhould come to him, ſith he was the better man, and the ſtronger: after he had made this noble anſwere, I will never thinke any man better than my ſelfe, ſo long as I can hold or rule my ſword; nor did he ever yeeld vntill Antigonus had delivered him Ptolomey, his owne nephew for a pledge, whom he required. Yet ſhall wee ſee ſome to have proſpered well in ſallying foorth of their holdes to parlie, vpon the word and honor of the aſſailant; witnes Henrie of Vaulx, a knight of Champaigne, who being beleagred by the Engliſh-men in the Caſtle of Commercie, and Bartholmew of Bones, who at that ſiege commaunded as Chiefe, having cauſed the greateſt part of the Caſtle to be vndermined, ſo that there wanted nothing but the giving of fire, vtterly to ſubvert the ſame, vnder the ruines of it, ſummoned the ſaid Henrie to iſſue out, and for his owne good to parlie with him, which he did, accompanied

but with three more, who manifeſtly ſeeing the evident ruine, wherein he was vndoubtedly like to fall, acknowledged himſelf infinitely beholding to his enemie, vnto whoſe diſcretion, after he had yeelded togither with his troup, and that fire was given to the Mine, the maine props of the Caſtle failing, it was vtterly overthrowne and carried away. I am eaſily perſwaded to yeeld to other mens words and faith, but hardly would I do it, when I ſhould give other men cauſe to imagine, that I had rather done it through diſpaire and want of courage, than of a free and voluntary choiſe, and confidence in his honeſtie and well-meaning.
                     
                     
                        The ſixth Chapter.
                        
                           That the houre of parlies is dangerous.
                        
                        NOtwithſtanding I ſaw lately, that thoſe of Muſidan, a place not farre from mee, who with others of their partie, were by our forces compelled to diſlodge thence, exclaimed, they were betraid, becauſe during the ſpeech of accord, and the treatie yet continuing, they had beene ſurprized and defeated; which thing might happily, in other ages have had ſome apparence of truth; but, as I ſay, our manner of proceeding in ſuch caſes, is altogether differing from theſe rules, and no man ought to expect performance of promiſe from an enemie, except the laſt ſeale of bond be fully annexed thereunto, wherein notwithſtanding is then much care and vigilancie required, and much adoe ſhall be found. And it was ever a dangerous counſell to truſt the performance of word or othe given vnto a Citie, that yeelds vnto gentle and favourable compoſition, and in that furie to give the needie, bloodthirſtie, and pray-greedy Souldier free entrance into it, vnto the free choiſe and licence of a victorious armie. Lucius Aemilius Regillus a Romane Praetor, having loſt his time in attempting by force to take the Citie of the Phocens by reaſon of the ſingular proweſſe, which the inhabitants ſhewed, in ſtoutly defending themſelves, covenanted to receive them as friends vnto the people of Rome, and to enter their Citie as a place confederate, remooving all feare of hoſtile-action from them. But to the end hee might appeare more glorious, and dreadfull, having cauſed his armie to enter with him, do what he might, he could not bridle the rage of his Souldiers; and with his owne eies ſaw moſt part of the Citie ranſacked and ſpoiled: the rights of covetouſneſſe and revenge ſupplanting thoſe of his authoritie and militarie diſcipline. (Cleomenes was woont to ſay, that What hurt ſoever a man might doe his enemies in time of warre, was beyond iuſtice, and not ſubiect vnto it, as well towards the Gods as towards men:
                            who for ſeaven dayes having made truce with thoſe of Argos, the third night, whileſt they were all aſleepe miſtruſting no harme, hee charged and overthrew them, alleaging for his excuſe, that in the truce no mention had bin made of nights.) But the Gods left not his perfidious policie vnrevenged: For during their enter-parlie and buſineſſe about taking hoſtages, the Citie of Caſilinum was by ſurpriſe taken from him: which happened in the times of the juſteſt Captaines, and of the moſt perfect Romane diſcipline: For it is not ſaid, that time and place ſerving, wee muſt not make vſe and take advantage of our enemies fooliſh overſight, as we do of their cowardiſe. And verily warre hath naturally many reaſonable priviledges to the prejudice of reaſon. And here failes the rule. Neminem id agere, vt ex alterins praedetur inſcitia. That no man ſhould indeuour to
                              Cic. Offic. lib 3. 
                              pray vpon another mans ignorance.
                            But I wonder of the ſcope that Xenophon allowes them, both by his diſcourſe, and by diverſe exploits of his perfect Emperour: an Author of wonderfull conſequence in ſuch things, as a great Captaine and a Philoſopher, and one of Socrates chiefeſt Diſciples, nor do I altogether yeeld vnto the meaſure of his diſpenſation. The Lord of Aubigny beſieging Capua, after he had given it a furious batterie, the Lord Fabritius Colonna, Captaine of the towne, having from vnder a baſ
                              •
                           ion or skonce begunne to parlie, and his men growing negligent and careleſſe in their offices and guarde, our men did ſuddenly take the advantage offered them, entered the towne, over-ranne it, and put all to the ſworde. But to come to later examples, yea in our memorie, the Lord Iulio Romero at

                           Yvoy, having committed this overſight to iſſue out of his holde, to parlie with the Conſtable of France, at his returne found the Towne taken, and himſelfe jack-out-of-doores. But that wee may not paſſe vnrevenged, the Marques of Peſcara beleagering Genova, where Duke Octavian Fregoſo, commanded vnder our protection, and an accord between them having ſo long been treated, and earneſtly ſolicited, that it was held as ratified, and vpon the point of concluſion, the Spaniards being entred the Towne, and ſeeing themſelves the ſtronger, tooke their opportunitie, and vſed it as a full and compleate victorie: and ſince at Lygny in Barroe, where the Earle of Brienne commanded, the Emperour having beſieged him in perſon, and Bartholemy Lieutenant to the ſaide Earle being come foorth of his hold to parlie, was no ſooner out, whileſt they were diſputing, but the Towne was ſurpriſed, and he excluded, They ſay,
                        
                           Fu il vincer ſempre mai laudabil coſa,Ariſt. cant 15. ſtan. 1.
                           
                           Vincaſi per fortuna ô per ingegno.
                        
                        
                           To be victorious, evermore was glorious,
                           Be we by fortune or by wit victorious.
                        
                        But the Philoſopher Chryſippus would not have beene of that opinion; nor I neither, for he was woont to ſay, That thoſe who runne for the masterie may well employ all their ſtrength to make ſpeede, but it is not lawfull for them to lay handes on their adverſaries, to ſtay him, or to croſſe legges, to make him trip or fall. And more generouſly anſwered Alexander the great, at what time Polypercon perſwaded him to vſe the benefit of the advantage which the darkeneſſe of the night afforded him, to charge Darius; No no, ſaid hee, it fittes not mee to
                           Curt. lib. 4. 
                           hunt after night-ſtolne victories: Malo me fortunae poeniteat, quàm victoriae pudeat. I had rather repent me of my fortune, than be aſhamed of my victorie.
                        
                        
                           Atque idem fugientem haud est dignatus OrodemVirg. Aen. lib. 10. 732. Mezent.
                           
                           Sternere, nec 
                                 •
                              actacaecum dare cuſpide vulnus:
                           Obuius aduerſóque occurrit, ſéque viro vir
                           Contulit, haud fur to meliôr, ſed fortibus armis.
                        
                        
                           He deign'd not to ſtrike downe Orodes flying,
                           Or with his throwne-launce blindely-wound him running:
                           But man to man afront himſelfe applying,
                           Met him, as more eſteem'd for ſtrength then cunning.
                        
                     
                     
                        The ſeuenth Chapter.
                        
                           That our intention iudgeth our actions.
                        
                        THE common ſaying is, that Death acquits vs of all our bondes. I know ſome that have taken it in another ſence. Henry the ſeventh, King of England made a compoſition with Philip ſonne to Maximilian the Emperour, or to give him a more honorable title, father to the Emperour Charles the fift, that the ſaid Philip ſhould deliver into his hands, the Duke of Suffolke, his mortall enemie, who was fled out of England, and ſaved himſelfe in the Low countries, alwaies provided the King ſhould attempt nothing againſt the Dukes life; which promiſe notwithſtanding, being neere his end, he expreſly by will and teſtament commanded his ſucceeding-ſonne, that immediately after his deceaſe, he ſhould cauſe him to be put to death. In the late tragedie, which the Duke of Alva preſented vs withall at Bruſſels, on the Earles of Horne and Egmond, were many remarkeable things, and woorthie to be noted: and amongſt others, that the ſaid Count Egmond, vpon whoſe faithfull word and aſſurance, the Earle of Horne was come in & yeelded himſelfe to the Duke of Alva, required verie inſtantly to be firſt put to death, to the end his death might acquit and free him of the word and bond, which he ought and was engaged for, to the ſaide Earle of Horne. It ſeemeth that death hath no whit diſcharged the former of his worde giuen, and that the ſecond,

without dying, was quit of it. We cannot be tied beyond our ſtrength, and meanes. The reaſon is, becauſe the effects and executions, are not any way in our power, and except our will, nothing is truely in our power: on it onely are all the rules of mans dutie grounded and eſtabliſhed by neceſſitie. And therefore Count Egmond, deeming his minde and will indebted to his promiſe, howbeit the power to effect it, lay not in his hands, was no doubt cleerely abſolved of his debt and dutie, although he had ſurvived the Count Horne. But the King of England failing of his word by his intention, cannot be excuſed, though hee delaide the execution of his diſloyaltie vntill after his death. No more then Herodotus his Maſon who during his naturall life, having faithfully kept the ſecret of his Maſter the King of Aegypts treaſure when he died, diſcovered the ſame vnto his children. I have in my daies ſeene many convicted by their owne conſcience, for detaining other mens goods, yet by their laſt will and teſtament to diſpoſe themſelves, after their deceaſe to make ſatisfaction. This is nothing to the purpoſe. Neither to take time for a matter ſo vrgent, nor with ſo ſmall intereſt or ſhew of feeling, to goe about to eſtabliſh an injurie. They are indebted ſomewhat more. And by how much more they pay incommodiouſly and chargeably, ſo much the more juſt and meritorious is their ſatisfaction. Penitence ought to charge, yet doe they worſe, who reſerve the revealing of ſome heinous conceit or affection towards their neighbour, to their laſt will and affection, having whileſt they lived ever kept it ſecret. And ſeeme to have little regard of their owne honour, by provoking the partie offended againſt their owne memory, and leſſe of their conſcience, ſince they could never for the reſpect of death cancell their ill-grudging affection, and in extending life beyond theirs. Oh wicked and vngodly judges, which referre the judgement of a cauſe to ſuch time as they have no more knowledge of cauſes! I will as neere as I can prevent, that my death reveale or vtter any thing, my life hath not firſt publikely ſpoken.
                     
                     
                        The eight Chapter.
                        
                           Of Idleneſſe.
                        
                        
                           AS we ſee ſome idle-fallow grounds, if they be fat and fertile, to bring foorth ſtore & ſundrie roots of wilde and vnprofitable weedes, and that to keepe them in vrewe muſt ſubject and imploy them with certaine ſeedes for our vſe and ſervice. And as wee ſee ſome women, though ſingle and alone, often to bring foorth lumps of ſhapeleſſe fleſh, whereas to produce a perfect and naturall generation, they muſt be manured with another kinde of ſeede: So is it of mindes, which except they be buſied about ſome ſubject, that may bridle and keepe them vnder, they will here and there wildely ſcatter themſelves through the vaſte field of imaginations.
                        
                        
                           Sicut aquae tremulum labris vbi lumen ahenisV
                                    •
                                 g A
                                    •
                                 n. lib. 8. 22.
                           
                           Sole repercuſſum, aut radiantis imagine L
                                 •
                              nae,
                           Omnia peruolit at latè loca, iámque ſub auras
                           Erigitur, ſummique ferit laquearia tecti.
                        
                        
                           As trembling light reflected from the Sunne,
                           Or radiant Moone on water-fild braſſe lavers,
                           Flies over all, in aire vnpraiſed ſoone,
                           Strikes houſe-top beames, betwixt both ſtrangely wavers.
                        
                        And there is no folly, or extravagant raving, they produce not in that agitation.Hor. art. po
                                 •
                              t. 7.
                        
                        
                           —veluti agriſomnia, van
                                 •
                               Finguntur ſpecies.
                        
                        
                           Like ſicke mens dreames, that faigne
                           Imaginations vaine.
                        
                        The minde that hath no fixed bound, will eaſily looſe it ſelfe: For, as we ſay, To be everie where, is to be no where.
                        
                        
                           Quiſquis vbique habitat, Maxime, 
                                 ••
                              ſquam habitat.
                           Mars. lib. 7. 
                                 •
                              pi. 72. 6.
                        
                        
                           
                           Good ſir, he that dwels every where,
                           No where can ſay, that he dwels there.
                        
                        It is not long ſince I retired my ſelfe unto mine owne houſe, with full purpoſe, as much as lay in me, not to trouble my ſelfe with any buſineſſe, but ſolitarily, and quietly to weare out the remainder of my well-nigh-ſpent life; where me thought I could doe my ſpirit no greater favour, than to give him the full ſcope of idleneſſe, and entertaine him as he beſt pleaſed, and withall, to ſettle him-ſelfe as he beſt liked: which I hoped he might now, being by time become more ſetled and ripe, accompliſh very eaſily: but I finde,
                        
                           Variam ſemper dant otia mentem.
                           Luca. lib. 4. 704
                        
                        
                           Evermore idleneſſe,
                           Doth wavering mindes addreſſe.
                        
                        That contrariwiſe playing the skittiſh and looſe-broken jade, he takes a hundred times more cariere and libertie unto himſelfe, than hee did for others, and begets in me ſo many extravagant Chimeraes, and fantaſticall monſters, ſo orderleſſe, and without any reaſon, one hudling upon an other, that at-leaſure to view the fooliſhneſſe and monſtrous ſtrangeneſſe of them, I have begun to keepe a regiſter of them, hoping, if I liue, one day to make him aſhamed, and bluſh at himſelfe.
                     
                     
                        The ninth Chapter.
                        
                           Of Lyers.
                        
                        THere is no man living, whom it may leſſe beſeeme to ſpeake of memorie, than myſelfe, for to ſay truth, I have none at all: and am fully perſwaded that no-mans can-be ſo weake and forgetfull as mine. All other parts are in me common and vile, but touching memorie, I thinke to carrie the priſe from all-other, that have it weakeſt, nay and to gaine the reputation of it, beſides the naturall want I endure (for truely conſidering the neceſſitie of it, Plato hath reaſon to name it A great and mighty Goddeſſe) In my countrie, if a man will imply that one hath no ſenſe, he will ſay, ſuch a one hath no memorie: and when I complaine of mine, they reprove me & will not beleeve me, as if I accuſed my-ſelfe to be mad & ſenceleſſe. They make no difference betweene memorie & wit; which is an empairing of my market: But they doe me wrong, for contrariwiſe, it is commonly ſeene by experience, that excellent memories do rather accompany weake judgements. Moreover they wrong me in this (who can do nothing ſo well as to be a perfect friend) that the ſame words which accuſe my infirmitie, repreſent ingratitude. From my affection they take hold of my memorie, & of a naturall defect, they infer a want of judgement or conſcience. Some wil ſay, he hath forgotten this entreaty, or requeſt, or that promiſe, he is not mindfull of his old friends, he never remembred to ſay, or doe, or conceale this or that, for my ſake. Verily I may eaſily forget, but to neglect the charge my friend hath committed to my truſt, I never do it. Let them beare with my infirmitie, and not conclude it to be a kind of malice; which is ſo contrarie an enemie to my humor. Yet am I ſomewhat comforted. Firſt, becauſe it is an evill, from which I have chieflie drawne the reaſon to correct a worſe miſchiefe, that would eaſily have growen vpon me: that is to ſay, ambition; which defect is intolerable in them that meddlewith wordly negotiations. For as divers like examples of natures progreſſe, ſay, ſhe hath happily ſtrengthned other faculties in me, according as it hath growne weaker and weaker in me, and I ſhould eaſily lay downe and wire-draw my minde and judgement, upon other mens traces, without exerciſing their proper forces, if by the benefit of memorie, forren inventions & ſtrange opinions were preſent with me. That my ſpeech is thereby ſhorter: For the Magazin of Memorie, is peradventure more ſtored with matter, than is the ſtore-houſe of Invention. Had it held out with me, I had ere this wearied all my friends with pratling: the ſubjects rouzing the meane facultie I have to manage and imploy them, ſtrengthning and wreſting my diſcourſes. It is pitie; I have aſſaied by the trial of ſom of my private friends: according as their memory hath miniſtred them a whole and perfect matter, who recoile their narration ſo farre-backe, and

ſtuff-it with ſo many vaine circumſtances, that if the ſtory be good, they ſmoother the goodneſſe of it: if bad, you muſt needs either curſe the good fortune of their memorie, or blame the misfortune of their judgement. And it is no eaſie matter, being in the midſt of the cariere of a diſcourſe, to ſtop cunningly, to make a ſudden period, and to cut-it-off. And there is nothing whereby the cleane ſtrength of a horſe is more knowne, than to make a readie and cleane ſtop. Among the skilfull I ſee ſome, that ſtrive, but can not ſtay their race. Whileſt they labour to finde the point to ſtop their courſe, they ſtagger and falter, as men that faint through weakeneſſe. Above all, old men are dangerous, who have onely the memorie of things paſt left them, and have loſt the remembrance of their repetitions. I have heard ſome very pleaſant reports become moſt irkeſome and tedious in the mouth of a certaine Lord, forſomuch as all the by-ſtanders had many times beene cloyed with them. Secondly, (as ſaid an ancient Writer) that, I doe not ſo much remember iniuries receiued. I had need have a prompter as Darius had, who not to forget the wrong he had received of the Athenians, whenſoever he ſate downe at his table, cauſed a page to ſing unto him, Sir, remember the Athenians, and that the places or bookes which I read-over, do ever ſmile upon me, with ſome new noveltie. It is not without reaſon, menſay, that he who hath not a good and readie memorie, ſhould never meddle with telling of lies, and feare to become a liar.
                            I am not ignorant how the Grammarians make a difference betweene ſpeaking vntrue and lying; and ſay that to ſpeake vntruly, is to ſpeake that which is falſe, but was reputed true; and that the definition of the Latin word, mentiri, whence the French word, mentir, is derived, which in Engliſh is to lie, implieth and meaneth to go againſt ones conſcience: and by conſequence it concerneth onely thoſe, who ſpeake contrary to that which they know, of whom I ſpeake. Now theſe, either invent, ſeale, ſtampe and all, or elſe they diſguiſe and change a true ground. When they diſguiſe or change, if they be often put to the repetition of one thing, it is hard for them to keepe ſtill in one path, and very ſtrange if they loſe not themſelves: becauſe the thing, as it is, having firſt taken vp her ſtand in the memory, and there by the way of knowledge and witting, imprinted it-ſelfe, it were hard it ſhould not repreſent itſelfe to the imagination, diſplacing and ſupplanting falſhood, which therein can have no ſuch footing, or ſetled faſtneſſe: and that the circumſtances of the firſt learning, ſtill diving into the minde, ſhould not cauſe it to diſperſe the remembrance of all falſe or baſtardizing parts gotten together. Where they altogether invent, forſomuch as there is no certaine impreſſion, to front their falſhood, they ſeeme to have ſo much the leſſer feare to miſtake or forget themſelves, which alſo notwithſtanding being an airie bodie, and without hold-faſt may eaſily eſcape the memorie, except it be well aſſured: whereof I have often (to my no ſmall pleaſure) ſeene the experience, at the coſt of thoſe, who profeſſe never to frame their ſpeech, but as beſt ſhall fit the affaires they negotiate, and as beſt ſhall pleaſe the great men they ſpeake vnto. For the circumſtances to which they will ſubject their credit and conſcience, being ſubject to many changes, their ſpeech muſt likewiſe diverſifie and change with them, whence it followeth that of one ſelfe-ſame ſubject they ſpeak diverſly, as now yellow, now gray, to one man thus, and thus to another. And if peradventure theſe kind of men hoard-up their ſo contrarie inſtructions, what becomes of this goodly arte? Who beſides, often moſt fooliſhly forget themſelves, and runne at randon: For, what memorie ſhall ſuffice them, to remember ſo many different formes they have framed to one ſame ſubject? I have in my daies ſeene divers that have envied the reputation of this woorthy kind of wiſedome, who perceive not, that if there be a reputation, there can be no effect. Verily, lying is an ill and deteſtablevice. Nothing makes vs men, & no other meanes, keeps vs bound one to another, but our word; knew we but the horror and waight of it, we would with fire and ſword purſue and hate the ſame, and more juſtly than any other crime. I ſee all men generally buſied (and that verie improperly) to puniſh certaine innocent errours in children, which have neither impreſſion nor conſequence, and chaſtice and vex them for raſh and fond actions. Onely lying, and ſtubborneſſe ſomewhat more, are the faults whoſe birth and progreſſe I would have ſeverely puniſhed and cut off; for they grow and encreaſe with them: and if the tongue have once gotten this ill habit, good Lord how hard, nay how impoſſible it is to make her leave it? whereby it enſueth, that we ſee many very honeſt men in other matters, to be ſubject and enthralled to that fault. I have a good lad to my tailour, whom I never heard ſpeak a truth;

no not when it might ſtand him in ſtead of profit. If a lie had no more faces but one, as truth hath; we ſhould be in farre better termes then we are: For, whatſoever a li
                              •
                           r ſhould ſay, we would take 
                              •••
                            in a contrarie ſenſe. But the oppoſite of truth hath many many ſhapes, and an vnd
                              •••
                           nite field. The Pythagoreans make good to be certaine and 
                              ••
                           nite, and evill to be 
                              〈◊〉
                            and vncertaine. A thouſand by-waies miſſe the marke, one onely hits the-ſame. Surely I can never aſſure my ſelfe to come to a good end, to warrant an extreame and evident danger, by a ſhameleſſe and ſolemnelie.
                        An ancient Father ſaith, We are better in the companie of a knowne dogge, 
                           
                              than in a mans ſocietie, whoſe ſpeech is vnknowne to vs. Ʋ
                                 
                                    •
                                  externus al
                                    •
                                 ono non ſi
                                    •
                                  hominis vice. A ſtranger to a
                              P
                                    ••
                                 n. 
                                    •
                                 a
                                    •
                                 . hiſt. l 7. c. 1. 
                              ſtra
                                    •
                                 g
                                    〈…〉
                                  not 
                                    •
                                 ake a man. And how much is a falſe ſpeech leſſe ſociable than ſilence? King Francis the firſt, vaunted himſelfe to have by this meanes brought Francis Taverna, Ambaſſador to Francis S
                                 •
                              orz
                                 •
                              , Duke of Millane to a non plus; a man very famous for his rare eloquence, and facilitie in ſpeech, who had beene diſpatched to excuſe his maſter, toward his Majeſtie, of a matter of great importance, which was this. The King to keepe ever ſome intelligence in Italy, whence he had lately beene expelled, but eſpecially in the Dukedome of M
                                 ••
                              ane, thought it expedient to entertaine a Gentleman of his about the Duke; in effect as his Ambaſſador, but in apparance as a private man; who ſhould make ſhew to reſide there about his particular affaires, forſomuch as the Duke, who depended much more of the Emperour (chiefely then that he was treating a mariage with his niece, daughter of the King of Denmarke, who is at this day Dowager of Loraine) could not without great prejudice vnto himſelfe diſcover to have any correſpondencie and conference with vs. For which commiſſion and purpoſe a Gentleman of Millane, named Merveille, then ſerving the King in place of one of the Quiers of his Quierie, was deemed 
                              •
                           t. This man being diſpached with ſecret letters of credence, and inſtructions of an Ambaſſador, together with other letters of commendation to the Duke in ſavour of his particular affaires, as a maske and pretence of his proceedings, continued ſo long about the Duke, that the Emperour began to have ſome ſuſpition of him; which as we ſuppoſe was cauſe of what enſued, which was, that vnder colour of a murther committed, the Duke one night cauſed the ſ
                              ••
                           d Merveille to be beheaded, having ended his proceſſe in two daies. Maſter Francis b
                              ••
                           ng come to the Court, fraught with a long counterfet deduction of this ſ
                              •
                           orie (for the King had addreſſed himſelfe to all the Princes of Chriſtendome, yea and to the Duke himſelfe for juſtice, for ſuch an outrage committed vpon his ſervant) had one morning audience in the Kings councell-chamber: who for the foundation of his cauſe having eſtabliſhed and to that end projected many goodly and colourable apparences of the fact: namely, that the Duke his maſter, had never taken Merveille for other then a private gentleman, and his owne ſubject, and who was come thither about his private buſines, where he had never lived vnder other name, proteſting he had never knowne him to be one of the Kings houſhold, nor never heard of him, much leſſe taken him for his Majeſties Agent. But the King vrging him with divers objections and demands, and charging him on every ſide, pr
                              •
                           ſt 
                              •
                           im ſo farre with the execution done by night, and as it were by ſtealth, that the 
                              •
                           eely man, being much entangled and ſuddenly ſurpriſed, as if he would ſet an innocent face on the matter, anſwered, that for the love and reſpect of his Majeſtie, the Duke his Maſter, would have beene very loth that ſuch an execution ſhould have beene done by day. Heere every man may gueſſe whether he were taken ſhort or no, having tripped before ſo goodly a
                              〈…〉
                            as was that of our King Francis the firſt. Pope Iulius the ſecond, having ſent an Ambaſſador to the King of England to animate him againſt our foreſaid King: the Ambaſſador having had audience touching his charge, and the King in his anſwer vrging and inſiſting vpon the difficultie he found & foreſaw in levying ſuch convenient forces, as ſhould be required to withſtand ſo mightie, and ſet vpon ſo puiſant a King, and alleaging certaine pe
                              ••
                           ment reaſons: The Ambaſſador fondly and vn
                              •
                           itly replied, that him-ſelfe had long before maturely conſidered them, and had told the Pope of them. By which anſwer ſo farre from his propoſition (which was with all ſpeed, & without more circumſtances to vndertake and vngergoe a dangerous warre) the King of England tooke hold of the firſt argument which in effect he afterward found true, which was, that the ſaid Ambaſſador, in his owne particular intent, was more affected to the French ſide, whereof advertiſing his maſter, his goods were all con
                              •
                           iſcate, himſelfe diſgraced, and he very hardly eſcaped with life.
                     
                     
                        
                        The tenth Chapter.
                        
                           Of readie or ſlowe ſpeech.
                        
                        
                           One ne furent à tous toutes graces donnes.
                        
                        All Gods good graces are not gone To all, or of all any one.
                        So doe we ſee that in the gift of eloquence, ſome have ſuch a facility and promptitude, and that which we call vtterance, ſo eaſie and at command, that at all aſſaies, and vpon everie occaſion, they are ready and provided; and others more ſlow, never ſpeake any thing except much laboured and premeditated. As Ladies and daintie Dames are taught rules to take recreations and bodily exerciſes, according to the advantage of what they have faireſt about them. If I were to give the like counſel, in thoſe two different advantages of eloquence whereof Preachers and pleading lawiers of our age ſeeme to make profeſſion; the ſlowe ſpeaker in mine opinion ſhould be the better preacher, and the other the better lawier. For ſomuch as charge of the firſt allowes-him as much leiſure as he pleaſeth to prepare him-ſelfe; moreover his cariere continueth ſtill in one kinde without interruption: whereas the Lawyers occaſions vrging him ſtill vpon any accident to be ready to enter the liſts: and the vnexpected replies & anſwers of his advers partie, do often divert him from his purpoſe, where he is enforced to take a new courſe. Yet is-it, that at the laſt enter-view which was at Marſeilles betweene Pope Clemens the ſeventh, and Francis the firſt, our King, it hapned cleane-contrarie, where Monſieur Poyet, a man of chiefe reputation & all daies of his life brought vp to plead at the bar, whoſe charge being to make an Oration before the Pope, and having long time before premeditated and con'd the ſame by roat, yea, & as ſome report, brought it with him ready-penned from Paris; the very ſame day it ſhould have beene pronounced; the Pope ſuſpecting he might happily ſpeake ſomething, might offend the other Princes Ambaſſadors, that were about him, ſent the argument, which he at that time and place thought fitteſt to be treated of, to the king, but by fortune cleane contrarie to that which Poyet, had ſo much ſtudied for: So that his Oration was altogether fruſtrate, and he muſt preſently frame another. But he perceiving himſelfe vnable for-it, the Cardinall Bellay was faineto ſupply his place and take that charge vpon him. The Lawyers charge is much harder than the Preachers: (yet in mine opinion) ſhall we find more paſſable Lawyers then commendable Preachers at leaſt in France. It ſeemeth to be more proper to the mind, to have her operation ready & ſudden, and more incident to the judgement, to have it ſlow and conſiderate. But who remaineth mute, if he have no leiſure to prepare himſelfe, and he likewiſe to whom leiſure giveth no advantage to ſay better, are both in one ſelfe degree of ſtrangeneſſe. It is reported that Seuerus Caſſius ſpake better extempore, and without premeditation. That he was more beholding to fortune, then to his diligence; that to be interrupted in his ſpeech redounded to his profit: & that his adverſaries feared to vrge-him, leſt his ſudden anger ſhould redouble his eloquence. I know this condition of nature by experience, which can-not abide a vehement and laborious premeditation: except it hold a free, a voluntarie, and ſelfe-pleaſing courſe, it can never come to a good end. We commonly ſay of ſome compoſitions, that they ſmell of the oile, & of the lampe, by reaſon of a certaine harſhneſſe, and rudeneſſe, which long plodding labour imprints in them that be much elaborated. But beſides the care of well-doing, and the contention of the minde, over-ſtretched to her enterpriſe, doth breake and impeach the-ſame; even as it hapneth vnto water, which being cloſely pent-in, through it's owne violence and abundance, can not finde iſſue at an open gullet. In this condition of nature, whereof I now ſpeake, this alſo is ioyned vnto it, that it deſireth not to be pricked forward by theſe ſtrong paſſions, as the anger of Caſſius (for that motion would be over-rude) it ought not to be violently ſhaken, but yeeldingly ſolicited: it deſireth to be rouzed and prickt forward by ſtrange occaſions, both preſent and caſuall. If it goe all-alone, it doth but languiſh and loyter behinde: agitation is her life and grace. I cannot well containe my ſelfe in mine owne poſſeſſion and diſpoſition, chaunce hath more intereſt in it than my ſelfe; occaſion, company, yea the change of my voice, drawes more from my minde than I can finde therein, when by my ſelfe I ſecond and endevor to employ the ſame. My words likewiſe are better

than my writings, if choiſe may be had in ſo woorthleſſe things. This alſo hapneth vnto me, that where I ſeeke my ſelfe, I finde not my ſelfe: and I finde my ſelfe more by chaunce, than by the ſearch of mine owne judgement. I ſhall perhaps have caſt-foorth ſome ſuttletie in writing, happily dull and harſh for another, but ſinooth and curious for my ſelfe. Let vs leave all theſe complements and quaintneſſe. That is ſpoken by everie man, according to his owne ſtrength. I have ſo loſt it, that I wot not what I would have ſaid, and ſtrangers have ſometimes found it before me. Had I alwaies a razor about me, where that hapneth, I ſhould cleane raze my ſelfe out. Fortune may at ſome other time make the light thereof appeare brighter vnto me, than that of mid-day, and will make mee woonder at mine owne faltring or ſticking in the myre.
                     
                     
                        The eleuenth Chapter.
                        
                           Of Prognostications.
                        
                        As touching Oracles it is very certaine, that long before the comming of our Sauiour Ieſus Christ, they had begun to looſe their credit: for we ſee that Cicero labourethCi
                                 •
                              . diuin. lib. 2. to finde the cauſe of their declination: and theſe be his words: Cur isto modo iam oracula Delphis non eduntur non modo noſtra aetate, ſediamdiu, vt nihil poſſit eſſe contemptius? Why in like ſort are not Oracles now vttered, not onely in our times, but a good while ſince, ſo as now nothing can be more contemptible? But as for other Prognoſtikes, that were drawne from the anatomie of beaſts in ſacrifice,
                            to which Plato doth in ſome ſort aſcribe the naturall conſtitution of the internall members of them, of the ſcraping of chickins, of the flght of birds, Aues quaſdamId. nat. deo
                                    •
                                 . rerum augurandarum cauſa natas eſſe putamus. We are of opinion, certain birds were even bred to prognoſticate ſome things; of thunders, of turnings and backe-recourſe of rivers. Multa cernuntId. ib. l. 
                                    •
                                 . aruſpices: multa augures provident: multa oraculis declarantur: multa vaticinationibus: multa ſ
                                 ••
                              nnijs: multa portentis. Soothſayers ſee much: bird-prophets foore-ſee as much: much is foretold by Oracles; much by propheſies; much by dreames; much by portentuous ſignes, and others, vpon which antiquitie grounded moſt of their enterpriſes, as well publike as private: our religion hath aboliſhed them.
                            And albeit there remaine yet amongſt vs ſome meanes of divination in the ſtarres, in ſpirits, in ſhapes of the body, in dreames, and elſewhere a notable example of the mad and found curioſitie of our nature, ammuſing it ſelfe to preoccupate future things, as if it had not enough to doe to digeſt the preſent.Luca
                                 •
                              . lib. 2. 4.
                        
                        
                           —cur hanc tibirector Olympi
                           
                           Sollicitis viſum mort alibus addere curam,
                           Noſcant ventur as vt dira per omnia clades?
                           Sit ſubitum quodcunque paras, ſit caeca futuri14.
                           
                           Mens heminum fati, liceat ſperare timenti.
                        
                        
                           Why pleas'd it thee, thou ruler of the ſpheares,
                           To adde this care to mortals care-clog'd minde,
                           That they their miſerie know, ere it appeares?
                           Let thy drifts ſudden come; let men be blinde
                           T'wards future fate: oh let him hope that feares.
                        
                        
                           Ne vtile quidem est ſcire quid futurum ſit: Miſerum est enim nihil preficientem angi. 
                           It is notCic. nat. Deor. lib. 3. ſo much as profitable for vs, to know what is to come, for it is a miſerable thing, a man ſhould fret and be vexed, and do no good. Yet is it of much leſſe authoritie, loe here wherefore the example of Francis Marquis of Saluzzo hath ſeemed remarkeable vnto me: who being Lieutenant Generall vnto Francis our King, and over all his forces, which he then had beyond the Mountaines in Italie, a man highly favoured in al our court, and otherwiſe infinitly beholding to the King for that very Marquiſate, which his brother had forfeited: and having no occaſion to doe it, yea and his minde and affections contradicting the ſame, ſuffered himſelfe to be frighted and deluded (as it hath ſince been manifeſtly prooved) by the fond prognoſtications, which then throughout all Europe were given out to the advantage of the

Emperor Charles the fift, and to our prejudice and diſadvantage (but ſpecially in Italy, where theſe fooliſh praedictions had ſo much poſſeſſed the Italians, that in Rome were laid great wagers, and much money given out vpon the exchange, that we ſhould vtterly be overthrowne) that after he had much condoled, yea and complained with his ſecret friends, the vnavoidable miſeries, which he foreſaw prepared by the fates againſt the Crowne of France, and the many friends he had there, he vnkindly revolted, and became a turne-cote on the Emperors 
                              ••
                           de, to his intolerable loſſe and deſtruction, notwithſtanding all the conſtellations then raigning. But was drawne vnto it as a man encompaſſed and beſet by divers paſſions; for having both ſtrong caſtles, and all maner of munition and ſtrength in his own hands, the enemies armie vnder Antonio L
                                 •
                              va about three paces from him, and we nothing miſtruſting him, it was in his power to do worſe than he did. For notwithſtanding his treaſon we loſt neither man nor towne, except Foſſan: which long after was by vs ſtoutly conteſted and defended.
                        
                           Prudens futuri temporis exitumHor. li. 3. 
                                    •
                                 d. 2
                                    •
                                 . 29.
                           
                           Caliginosâ nocte premit Deus,
                           Ridétque, ſi mortalis vltra.
                           Fas trepida.—
                        
                        
                           Ourwiſe God hides in pitch darke night
                           Of future time th'event decreed,
                           And laughes at man, if man affright
                           Feare more, than he to feare hathneed.
                        
                        
                           Ille potens ſui
                           Laetúſque deget, cuilicet in diem
                           Dixiſſe, vixi, cras vel atrâ41.
                           
                           Nube pol
                                 •
                              m pater occupato,
                           Vel ſole puro.
                        
                        
                           He of himſelfe lives merily,
                           Who each day, I have li'd, can ſay,
                           To morow let God charge the skie
                           With darke clouds, or faire ſun-ſhine-ray.
                        
                        
                           Laetus in praeſens animus, quod vltra eſt,
                           Oderit curare.Ib. 2. od. 16. 25.
                           
                           For preſent time a mery mind
                           Hates to reſpect what is behind.
                        
                        And thoſe which take this word in a contrary ſenſe are in the wrong. Iſta ſic reciprocantur,Cic. divi. l. 1. 
                                    •
                                 . vt & ſi diuinatio ſit, dij ſint: & dij ſint, ſit diuinatio. This conſequence is ſo reciprocall, as if there be any divination, there are Goddes: and if there be Gods, there is divination. Much more wiſely Pacuvius.
                        
                        
                           Nam iſt is qui linguam anium intelligunt,Ib. 
                                    •
                                 . Pac.
                           
                           Plúſque ex alieno i
                                 •
                              cere ſapiunt, quàm ex ſuo,
                           Magis audiendum, quàm auſcult andum cenſeo.
                        
                        
                           Who vnderſtand what language birdes expreſſe,
                           By their owne, then beaſtes-livers knowing leſſe,
                           They may be heard, not hearkned-to, I gueſſe.
                        
                        This ſo famous arte of divination of the Tuskanes grew thus. A husband-man digging very deepe into the ground, with his plough-ſhare, ſaw Tages, a demy-God appeare out of it, with an infantine face, yet fraught with an aged-like wiſedome. All men ranne to ſee-him, and both his words and knowledge were for many ages-after remembred, and collected, containing the principles and meanes of this arte. An of-ſpring ſutable to her progreſſe. I would rather direct affaires by the chance of dice, then by ſuch frivolous dreames. And truely in all common-wealthes, men have ever aſcribed much authoritie vnto lot. Plate in the policie which he imagineth by diſcretion, aſcribeth the deciding of many important effects vnto it, and amongſt other things would have marriages betweene the good to be contrived by lot. And giveth ſo large priviledges vnto this caſuall election, that he appoints the children proceeding from them to be brought vp in the countrie; and thoſe borne of the bad to be baniſhed and ſent abroad. Notwithſtanding if any of thoſe ſo exiled

ſhall by fortune happen, whileſt he is growing, to ſhew ſome good hope of him-ſelfe, that he may be revoked and ſent-for backe, and ſuch amongſt the firſt as ſhall in their youth give ſmall hope of future good to be baniſhed. I ſee ſome that ſtudie, plod, and gloſſe their Almanackes, and in all accidents alleage their authoritie. A man were as good to ſay, they muſt needs ſpeake truth and lies. Quis eſt enim qui totum diem iaculans, non aliquando conlineet?Cic. diu. lib. 2. For who is he that ſhooting all day, ſometimes hits not the white? I thinke not the better of them,
                            though what they ſay proove ſometimes true. It were more certaine, if there were either a rule or a truth to lie ever. Seeing no man recordeth their fables, becauſe they are ordinarie and infinit; and their praedictions are made to be of credit, becauſe they are rare, incredible and prodigious. So anſwered Diagoras ſurnamed the Atheiſt (being in Samothrace) to him, who in ſhewing him divers vowes and offrings hanging in the Temple, brought thither by ſuch as had eſcaped ſhipwracke, ſaid thus vnto him: You that thinke the Gods to have no care of humane things, what ſay you by ſo many men ſaved by their grace and helpe? Thus is it done, anſwered he: Thoſe which were drowned farre exceeding their number, are not here ſet-forth. Cicero ſaith, That amongst all other Philoſophers that have avowed & acknowledged the Gods, only Xenophanes, the Colophonian hath gone about to root out all maner of divination. It is ſo much the leſſe to bewondred at, if at any time we have ſeene ſome of our Princes mindes to their great damage, relie vpon ſuch like vanities. I would to God, I had with mine owne eies ſeene thoſe two wonders, mentioned in the booke of Ioachin the Abbat of Calabria, who foretold all the Popes that ſhould enſue, together with their names and ſhapes: And that of Leo the Emperor, who fore-ſpake all the Emperors and Patriarkes of Greece. This have I ſeene with mine owne eies, that in publike confuſions, men amazed at their owne fortune, give themſelves head-long, as it were to all maner of ſuperſtition, to ſearch in heaven the cauſes and ancient threats of their ill-lucke; and in my time are ſo ſtrangely ſucceſſefull therein, as they have perſwaded me, that it is an ammuſing of ſharpe and idle wits, that ſuch as are inured to this ſubtletie, by folding and vnfolding them, may in all other writings be capable to finde out what they ſeeke-after. But above all, their darke, ambiguous, fantaſticall, and propheticall gibriſh, mends the matter much, to which their authors never give a plaine ſenſe, that poſterity may apply what meaning and conſtruction it ſhall pleaſe vnto it. The Daemon of Socrates was peradventure a certaine impulſion or will, which without the advice of his diſcourſe preſented it ſelfe vnto him. In a minde ſo well purified, and by continuall exerciſe of wiſedome and vertue ſo wel prepared, as his was, it is likely, his inclinations (though raſh and inconſiderate) were ever of great moment, and woorthie to be followed. Every man feeleth in himſelfe ſome image of ſuch agitations, of a prompt, vehement and caſuall opinion. It is in me to give them ſome authoritie, that affoord ſo little to our wiſedome. And I have had ſome, equally weake in reaſon, and violent in perſwaſion and diſſwaſion (which was more ordinarie to Socrates) by which I have ſo happily and ſo profitably ſuffred my ſelfe to be tranſported, as they might perhaps be thought to containe ſome matter of divine inſpiration.
                     
                     
                        The twelfth Chapter.
                        
                           Of Constancie.
                        
                        The law of reſolution and conſtancie implieth not, we ſhould not, as-much as lieth in our power ſhelter our ſelves from the miſchiefes and inconveniences that threaten-vs, nor by conſequence feare, they ſhould ſurpriſe-vs. Contrariwiſe, all honeſt meanes for a man to warrant him-ſelfe from evils, are not onely tolerable, but commendable. And the part of conſtancie is chiefly acted, in firmely bearing the inconveniences, againſt which no remedie is to be ſound. So that, there is no nimbleneſſe of bodie, nor wealding of handweapons, that we will reject, if it may in any ſort defend-vs from the blow, meant at-vs. Many moſt warlike nations in their conflicts and fights, vſed retreating and flight as a principall advantage, and ſhewed their backs to their enemie much more dangerouſly than their faces. The Turkes at this day retaine ſomething of that humour. And Socrates in Plato doth mocke at Laches, becauſe he had defined fortitude, to keepe her-ſelfe ſteadie in

her rancke againſt her enemies; What, ſaith hee, were it then cowardiſe to beate them in giving them place? And alleadgeth Homer againſt him, who commendeth in Aencas his skill in flying and giving ground. And becauſe Laches being better adviſed, avoweth that cuſtome to be amongſt the Scithians, and generally amongſt all horſemen, he alleageth further unto him the example of the Lacedemonian footmen (a nation above all other vſed to fight on foote) who in the battell of Plateae, unable to open and to put to rowt the Perſian Phalanx, adviſed themſelves to ſcatter and put themſelves backe, that ſo by the opinion of their flght, they might if they ſhould purſue them, ruſh in upon them, and put that ſo combined-maſſe to rout. By which meanes they gained the victorie. Touching the Scithians, it is reported, that when Darius went to ſubdue them, he ſent their King many reprochfull ſpeeches, for ſo much as hee ever ſaw him retire and giue ground before him, and to avoide the maine battell. To whom Indathirſez (for ſo was his name) anſwered, that, They did it not for feare of him, nor any other man living, but that it was the faſhion of his nation to march thus: as having neither cities, nor houſes, nor manured land to defend, or to feare their enemies ſhould reape any commoditie by them. But if hee had ſo great a deſire to feede on them, he might draw neerer to view the place of their ancient Sepulchers, and there hee ſhould meete with whom to ſpeake his belly-full. Notwithſtanding when a man is once within reach of cannon-ſhot, and as it were point-blancke before them, as the fortune of warre doth diverſe times bring men unto, it ill beſeemeth a reſolute minde to ſtart-aſide, or be daunted, at the threat of a ſhot, becauſe by the violence and ſuddenneſſe thereof wee deeme it inevitable: and there are ſome, who by lifting up of a hand, or ſtooping their head, have ſometimes given their fellowes cauſe of laughter: yet have we ſeene, that in the voyage, the Emperour Charles the fifth made againſt us in Provence, the Marquis of Guaſto, being gone out to ſurvay the citie of Arles, and ſhewne himſelfe out of a winde-mill, vnder colour of which he was come ſomewhat neere the Towne, he was diſcovered by the Lord of Bonevall, and the Seneſhall of Agenois, who were walking upon the Theatre Aux arenes (ſo called in French becauſe it is full of ſand) who ſhewing him to the Lord of Villiers, Commiſſarie of the Artillerie, he mounted a culvérin ſo levell, that had not the Marquis perceived the fire, and ſo ſtarted aſide, it was conſtantly affirmed, hee had beene ſhot through the body. Likewiſe not many yeeres before, Lorence of Medicis, Duke of 
                              Ʋrbin, and father to the Queene-mother of France, beſieging Mondolphe, a place in Italie, in the province name Vicariate, ſeeing fire given to a piece that ſtood upright upon him, ſtooped his head, and well befell him that he plaide the ducke, for otherwiſe the bullet, which went right over, and within a litle of his head, had doubtleſſe ſhot him through the paunch. But to ſay truth, I will never thinke theſe motions were made with diſcourſe, for what judgement can you give of an aime, either high or low in a matter ſo ſudden? It may rather be thought that fortune favoured their feare: and which an other time might as well bee a meane to make them fall into the cannons-mouth, as to avoid the ſame. I cannot chuſe, if the cracke of a musket doe ſuddenly ſtreeke mine eares, in a place where I leaſt looke for it, but I muſt needs ſtart at-it: which I have ſeene happen to men of better ſort than my ſelfe. Nor doe the Stoickes meane, that the Soule of their wiſeſt man in any ſort reſiſt the firſt viſions and ſudden fantaſies, that ſurpriſe the ſame: but rather conſent that, as it were unto a naturall ſubjection, he yeelds and ſhrinks unto the loud clattering and roare of heaven, or of ſome violent downefall; for example-ſake, unto paleneſſe, and contraction. So likewiſe in other paſſions, alwaies provided, his opinion remaines ſafe and whole, and the ſituation of his reaſon, admit no tainting or alteration whatſoever: and hee no whit conſent to his fright and ſufferance. Touching the firſt part; the ſame hapneth to him, that is not wiſe, but farre otherwiſe concerning the ſecond. For the impreſſion of paſſions doth not remaine ſuperficiall in him: but rather penetrates even into the ſecret of reaſon, infecting and corrupting the ſame. He judgeth according to them, and conformeth himſelfe to them. Conſider preciſely the ſtate of the wiſe Stoicke:
                        Mens immota manet, lachrymae volvuntur inanes.Virg. A
                                 •
                              n. lib. 4. 449.
                        
                        
                           His minde doth firme remaine,
                           Teares are diſtill'd in vaine.
                        
                        The wiſe Peripatetike doth not exempt himſelfe from perturbations of the mind, but doth moderate them.
                     
                     
                        
                        The thirteenth Chapter.
                        
                           Of Ceremonies in the enterview of Kings.
                        
                        THere is no ſubject ſo vaine, that deſerveth not a place in this rapſodie. It were a notable diſcourteſie vnto our common rules, both towards an equall, but more toward a great perſon, not to meete with you in your houſe, if he have once warned you that he will come: And Margaret Queene of Navarre, was woont to ſay to this purpoſe, That it was a kinde of incivilitie in a gentleman, to depart from his houſe, as the faſhion is, to meete with him that is comming to him, how worthy ſoever he be: and that it more agreeth with civilitie and reſpect, to ſtay for him at home, and there to entertaine him: except it were for feare the ſtranger ſhould miſſe his way: and that it ſuffioeth to companie and waite vpon him, when he is going away againe. As for me, I oftentimes forget both theſe vaine offices; as one that endevoureth to aboliſh all maner of ceremonies in my houſe. Some will bee offended at it, what can I doe withall? I had rather offend a ſtranger once, then my ſelfe everie day; for it were a continuall ſubjection. To what end doe men avoid the ſervitude of Courts, and entertaine the ſame in their owne houſes? Moreover it is a common rule in all aſſemblies, that hee who is the meaner man, commeth firſt to the place appointed, forſomuch as it belongs to the better man to be ſtaid-for, and waited vpon by the other. Nevertheleſſe we ſaw that at the enterview, prepared at Merceilles betweene Pope Clement the ſeventh, and Francis the firſt, King of France, the King having appointed all neceſſatie preparations, went him-ſelfe out of the Towne, and gave the Pope two or three dayes-leaſure, to make his entrie into it, and to refreſh himſelfe, before he would come to meete him there. Likewiſe at the meeting of the ſaid Pope with the Emperour at Bologna, the Emperour gave the Pope advantage and leaſure to be firſt there, and afterward came himſelfe. It is (ſay they) an ordinarie ceremonie at enterparlies betweene ſuch Princes, that the better man ſhould ever come firſt to the place appointed; yea before him in whoſe countrey the aſſembly is: and they take it in this ſence, that it is, becauſe this complement ſhould teſtifie, he is the better man, whom the meaner goeth to ſeeke, and that hee ſueth vnto him. Not only ech countrey, but every Citie, yea and every vocation hath his owne particular decorum. I have every carefully beene brought vp in mine infancie, and have lived in verie good company, becauſe I would not be ignorant of the good maners of our countrey of France, and I am perſwaded I might keepe a ſcoole of them. I love to follow them, but not ſo cowardly, as my life remaine thereby in ſubjection. They have ſome painefull formes in them, which if a man forget by diſcretion, and not by errour, he ſhall no whit be diſgraced. I have often ſeene men proove vnmanerly by too much maners, and importunate by over-much curteſie. The knowledge of entertainment is otherwiſe a profitable knowledge. It is, as grace and beautie are, the reconciler of the firſt accoaſtings of ſociety and familiarity: and by conſequence, it openeth the entrance to inſtruct vs by the example of others, and to exploit and produce our example, if it have any inſtructing or communicable thing in it.
                     
                     
                        The fourteenth Chapter.
                        
                           Men are puniſhed by too-much opiniating themſelves in a place without reaſon.
                        
                        VAlour hath his limites, as other vertues have: which if a man out-go, he ſhall find himſelfe in the traine of vice: in ſuch ſort, that vnleſſe a man know their right bounds, which in truth are not on a ſudden, eaſily hit vpon, he may fall into raſhneſſe, obſtinacie,

and folly. For this conſideration grew the cuſtome wee hold in warres, to puniſh, and that with death, thoſe who wilfully opiniate themſelves to defend a place, which by the rules of warre, cannot be kept. Otherwiſe vpon hope of impunitie, there ſhould be no cotage, that might not entertaine an Armie. The Lord Conſtable Momorancie at the ſiege of Pavia, having beene appointed to paſſe over the river T
                                 •
                              ſi
                                 •
                              e, and to quarter himſelfe in the ſuburbs of Saint Antonie, being impeached by a tower, that ſtood at the end of the bridge, and which obſtinately would needes hold out, yea and to be battered, cauſed all thoſe that were with-in it, to be hanged. The ſame man afterward, accompanying my Lord the Dolphin of France in his journey beyond the Alpes, having by force taken the caſtle of Villane, and all thoſe that were within the ſame, having by the 
                              •
                           urie of the Souldiers bin put to the ſword, except the Captaine, and his Ancient, for the ſame reaſon, cauſed them both to be hanged and ſtrangled: As did alſo, Captaine Martin du Bellay, the Governour of Turin, in the ſame countrey, the Captaine of Saint Bony: all the reſt of his men having beene maſſacred at the taking of the place. But for ſomuch as the judgement of the ſtrength or weakeneſſe of the place, is taken by the eſtimate and counterpoiſe of the forces that aſſaile it (for ſom man might juſtly opinionate himſelfe againſt two culverins, that wold play the mad-man to expect thirtie cannons) where alſo the greatneſſe of the Prince conquering muſt be conſidered, his reputation, and the reſpect that is due vnto him: there is danger a man ſhould ſomewhat bend the ballance on that ſide. By which termes it hapneth, that ſome have ſo great an opinion of themſelves, and their meanes, and deeming it vnreaſonable, any thing ſhould be woorthie to make head againſt them, that ſo long as their fortune continueth, they overpaſſe what hill or difficultie ſoever they finde to withſtand or reſiſt them: As is ſeene by the formes of ſommonings, and challenges, that the Princes of the Eaſt, and their ſucceſſors yet remaining have in vſe, ſo fierce, ſo haughtie, and ſo full of a barbarous kinde of commandement. And in thoſe places where the Portugales abated the pride of the Indians, they found ſome ſtates obſerving this vniuerſall and inviolable law, that what enemie ſoever he be, that is overcome by the King in perſon, or by his Lieutenant, is exempted from all compoſition of ranſome or mercie. So above all, a man who is able ſhould take heed, leſt he fall into the hands of an enemie-judge, that is victorious and armed.
                     
                     
                        The fifteenth Chapter.
                        
                           Of the puniſhment of cowardiſe
                        
                        I Have heretofore heard a Prince, who was a very great Captaine, hold opinion, that a ſouldier might not for cowardiſe of heart be condemned to death: who ſitting at his table heard report of the Lord of Veruins ſentence, who for yeelding vp of Bollein, was doomed to looſe his head. Verily there is reaſon a man ſhould make a difference betweene faultes proceeding from our weakeneſſe, and thoſe that grow from our malice. For in the latter we are directly bandied againſt the rules of reaſon, which nature hath imprinted in vs; and in the former it ſeemeth, we may call the ſame nature, as a warrant, becauſe it hath left-vs in ſuch imperfection and defect. So as divers nations have judged, that no man ſhould blame vs for any thing we doe againſt our conſcience. And the opinion of thoſe which condemne heretikes and miſcreants vnto capitall puniſhments, is partly grounded vpon this rule: and the ſame which eſtabliſheth, that a Iudge or an advocate may not be called to account for any matter committed in their charge through overſight or ignorance. But touching cowardiſe, it is certain, the common faſhion is, to puniſh the ſame with ignominie and ſhame. And ſome hold that this rule was firſt put in practiſe by the Law-giver Charondas, and that before him the lawes of Greece were woont to puniſh thoſe with death, who for feare did runne away from a Battell: where he onely ordained, that for three daies together, clad in womens attire, they ſhould be made to ſit in the market-place: hoping yet to have ſome ſervice at their hands, and by meanes of this reproch, they might recover their courage againe.

                           Suffundere malis hominis ſanguinem quàm effundere: Rather moove a mans bloud to bluſh in his face, than remoove it by bleeding from his body.
                        
                        It appeareth alſo that the Romane lawes did in former times puniſh ſuch as had runaway, by death. For Animianus Marcellinus reporteth, that Iulian the Emperor condemned tenne of his Souldiers, who in a charge againſt the Parthians, had but turned their backes from it; firſt to be degraded, & then to ſuffer death, as he ſaith according to the ancient lawes, who nevertheleſſe, condemneth others for a like fault, vnder the enſigne of bag and baggage to be kept amongſt the common priſoners. The ſharp puniſhment of the Romanes againſt thoſe Souldiers that eſcaped from Cannae: and in the ſame warre, againſt thoſe that accompanied Ca. Fuluius in his defeate, reached not vnto death, yet may a man feare, ſuch open ſhame may make them diſpaire, and not only prove faint and cold friends, but cruell and ſharp enemies. In the time of our forefathers, the Lord of Franget, Whilom Lieutenant of the Marſhall of Chastillions companie, having by the Marſhall of Chabanes been placed Governor of Fontarabie, inſtead of the Earle of Lude, and having yeelded the ſame vnto the Spaniards, was condemned to be degraded of all Nobilitie, and not only himſelfe, but all his ſucceding poſteritie declared villains and clownes, taxable and incapable to beare armes; which ſeuere ſentence was put in execution at Lyons. The like puniſhment did afterward al the Gentlemen ſuffer, that were within Guiſe, when the Earle of Nanſaw entred the town: and others ſince. Neuertheleſſe if there were ſo groſſe an ignorance, and ſo apparant cowardiſe, as that it ſhould exceede all ordinarie, it were reaſon it ſhould be taken for a ſufficient proofe of inexcuſable treacherie, and knaverie, and for ſuch to be puniſhed.
                     
                     
                        The ſixteenth Chapter.
                        
                           A tricke of certaine Ambaſſadors.
                        
                        IN all my trauels I did ever obſerve this cuſtome, that is, alwaies to learne ſomething by the communication of others (which is one of the beſts ſchooles that may be) to reduce thoſe I confer withall, to ſpeake of that wherein they are moſt converſant and skilfull.
                        
                           Baſti al nochiero ragionar de'venti,Idem Propert. l. 2. d. 1. 43.
                           
                           Albifolco de'
                                 •
                              ori, & leſue piaghe
                           Conti il guerrier, conti il paſtor gl' armenti.
                        
                        
                           Sailers of windes plow-men of beaſtes take keep,
                           Let Souldiers count their wounds, ſheepheards their ſheep.
                        
                        For commonly we ſee the contrary, that many chuſe rather to diſcourſe of any other trade than their own; ſuppoſing it to be ſo much new reputation gotten: witnes the quip Archidamus gaue Periander ſaying that he forſooke the credit of a good Phiſitian, to become a paltry Poet. Note but how Caeſar diſplaieth his invention at large, when he would have vs conceive his inventions how to build bridges, and deviſes, how to frame other war-like engins; and in reſpect of that how cloſe and ſuccinct he writes, when he ſpeaketh of the offices belonging to his profeſſion, of his valour, and of the conduct of his warre-fare. His exploits prove him a moſt excellent Captain, but he would be known for a skilfull Ingenier, a qualitie ſomewhat ſtrange in him. Dionyſius the elder was a very great chieftaine and Leader in warre, as a thing beſt ſitting his fortune: but he greatly labored, by meanes of Poetrie, to aſſume high commendation vnto himſelfe, howbeit he had but little skill in it. A certain Lawier was not long ſince brought to ſee a ſtudie, ſtored with all manner of bookes, both of his owne, and of all other faculties, wherein he found no occaſion to entertaine himſelfe withall, but like a fond cunning clarke earneſtly buſied himſelfe to gloſſe and cenſure a fence or barricado, placed over the ſcrew of the ſtudie, which a hundred Captaines and Souldiers ſee every day, without obſerving, or taking offence at them.
                        Optat ephippia b
                              •
                           s piger, optat arare caballus.Hor. lib. 1. epiſt. 14. 43.
                        
                        
                           The Oxe would trappings weare,
                           The Horſe, ploughs-yoake would beare.
                        
                        
                           By this courſe you never come to perfection, or bring any thing to good paſſe. Thus muſt a man indevor to induce the Architect, the Painter, the Shoomaker to ſpeake of their owne trade, and ſo of the reſt, everie man in his vocation. And to this purpoſe am I wont, in reading of hiſtories (which is the ſubject of moſt men) to conſider who are the writers: If they be ſuch as profeſſe nothing but bare learning, the chiefe thing I learne in them, is their ſtile, and language: if Phiſitians: I believe them in whatſoever they ſhall report concerning the temperateneſſe of the aire, the health and complexion of Princes, or of hurts and infirmities: If Lawiers, we ſhould obſerve the controverſies of rights, titles, and pretenſes of lawes and cuſtomes, the eſtabliſhments of policies, and ſuch like things: If Divines, we may note the affaires of the Church, the Eccleſiaſticall cenſures, diſpenſations, caſes of conſcience, and marriages: If Courtiers, maners, complements, ceremonies, and entertainements: if Warriors, what belongs vnto their charge, but chiefly the managing and conduct of the atchievements or exploits wherein they have bin themſelves in perſon: If Ambaſſadors, the negotiations, intelligences, practiſes, pollicies, and maner how to direct, complot, and conduct them. And therefore, what in an other Writer I ſhould peradventure have curſorie paſſed over, I have with ſome adviſedneſſe conſidered and marked the ſame in the hiſtorie of the Lord of Langey, a man moſt expert, and intelligent in ſuch matters: which is, that after he had exactly ſet downe and declared thoſe glorious, and farre-fetcht remonſtrances of the Emperour Charles the fifth made in the conſiſtorie of Rome, in the preſence of the Biſhop of Maſcon, and the Lord of Velly, our Ambaſſadors; wherein he entermixed many bitter and outragious words againſt vs; and amongſt others, that if his Captaines and Souldiers were not of much more faithfulneſſe, and ſufficiencie in the arte of warre, then our Kings, he would forthwith tie a rope about his neck, and go aske him mercie: whereof hee ſeemed to believe ſome thing: for afterward whileſt he lived, he chanced twice or thrice to vtter the verie ſame words. Moreover, that he had challenged the king to fight with him, man to man in his ſhirt, with Rapier and Dagger in a boat. The ſaid Lord of Langey, following his ſtorie, addeth that the ſaid Ambaſſadors making a diſpatch of what had paſſed vnto the king, diſſembled the chiefeſt part vnto him, yea and concealed the two precedent articles from him. Now me thought it very ſtrange, that it ſhould lie in the power of an Ambaſſadour to diſpence with any point, concerning the advertiſements he ſhould give vnto his Maſter, namely of ſuch conſequence, comming from ſuch a perſon, and ſpoken in ſo great an aſſembly, whereas me ſeemed it ſhould have beene the office of a truſtie ſervant, truely and exactly to ſet downe things as they were, and in what manner they had ſucceeded: to the end the libertie of diſpoſing, judging and chuſing, might wholie lie in the maſter. For, to alter and conceale the truth from him, for feare he ſhould conſter and take it otherwiſe than he ought, and le
                              •
                           t that might provoke him to ſome bad reſolution; and in the meane while to ſuffer him to be ignorant of his owne affaires, me thought ſhould rather have appertained to him, that giveth the law, than to him that receiveth the ſame; to the Maſter or over-ſeer of the ſchoole, and not to him who ſhould thinke himſelfe inferior, as well in authoritie, as in wiſedome and good counſell. Howſoever it were, I would be loath to be ſo vſed in mine owne ſmall and particular buſines, we do ſo willingly vpon every ſlight occaſion and pretence neglect and forgo commandement, and are ſo farre from obeying, that we rather vſurp a kind of maſterie, and free power: every man doth ſo naturally aſpire vnto libertie and authoritie, that no profit ought to be ſo deare vnto a ſuperiour, proceeding from thoſe that ſerve him, as their ſimple and naturall obedience. Whoſoever obeieth by diſcretion, and not by ſubjection, corrupteth and abuſeth the office of commanding. And P. Craſſus he whom the Romans deemed five times happy, when he was Conſull in Aſia, having ſent a Graecian Inginer, to bring the greateſt of two ſhip-maſts before him, which he had ſeene in Athens, therewith to frame an engine of batterie: This man vnder colour of his skill, preſumed to do otherwiſe than he was bidden, and brought the leſſer of the two maſts which according to his artes reaſon he deemed the fitteſt. Craſſus having patiently heard his reaſons and allegations, cauſed him to be well whipped; preferring the intereſt of true diſcipline, before that of the worke. On the other ſide a man might alſo conſider, that this ſo ſtrict obedience, belongs but to preciſe and prefixed commandements. Ambaſſadors have a more ſcopefull and free charge, which in manie points dependeth chiefly of their diſpoſition. They do not meerely execute, but frame and direct by their owne adviſe and councell,

the will of their Maſter. I have in my daies ſeene ſome perſons of commandement, checked and found fa
                              •
                           lt withall, becauſe they had rather obeied the literall ſenſe, and bare words of the Kings letters, than the occaſions of the affaires they had in hand. Men of vnderſtanding and experience do yet at this day condemne the cuſtome of the Kings of Perſia, which was to mince the inſtructions given to their Agents, and Lieutenants ſo ſmall, that in the leaſt accident they might have recourſe to their directions and ordinances: This delay, in ſo farre-reaching a ſcope of domination, having often brought great prejudice, and notable damage vnto their affaires. And Craſſus writing vnto a man of that profeſſion, and advertiſing him of the vſe whereto he purpoſed the foreſaid maſt; ſeemeth he not to enter into conference with him concerning his determination, and wiſh him to enterpoſe his cenſure or adviſe of it.
                     
                     
                        The ſeventeenth Chapter.
                        
                           Of feare.
                        
                        Obſtupui, ſteterùntque comae, & vox faucibus haeſit.
                        Virg. A
                              •
                           n. lib. 
                              •
                           . 77
                              •
                           .
                        
                           I ſtood agaſt, my haire on end,
                           My jaw-tide tongue no ſpeach would lend.
                        
                        I Am no good Naturaliſt (as they ſay) and I know not well by what ſprings feare doth worke in vs: but well I wot it is a ſtrange paſſion: and as Phyſitians ſay, there is none doth ſooner tranſport our judgement out of his due ſeat. Verily I have ſeene divers become madde and ſenſeleſſe for feare: yea and in him, who is moſt ſetled, and beſt reſolved, it is certaine that whileſt his fitte continueth, it begetteth many ſtrange dazelings, and terrible amazements in him. I omit to ſpeake of the vulgar ſort, to whom it ſometimes repreſenteth ſtrange apparitions, as their fathers and grandfathers ghoſts, riſen out of their graves, and in their winding ſheetes: and to others it ſomtimes ſheweth Larves, Hobgoblins Robbingood-fellowes, and ſuch other Bug-beares and Chimeraes. But even amongſt Souldiers, with whom it ought to have no credit at all, how often hath ſhe changed a flocke of ſheep into a troupe of armed men? Buſhes and ſhrubbes into men-at-armes and Lanciers? our friends into our enemies? and a red croſſe into a white? At what time the Duke of Bourbon tooke Rome, an Ancient that kept ſentinell, in the borough Saint Peter, was at the firſt alarum ſurpriſed with ſuch terror, that with his colours in his hand, he ſodainly threw himſelfe through the hole of a breach out of the Citie, and fell juſt in the middeſt of his enemies, ſuppoſing the way to go ſtraight in the hart of the Citie: but in the end, he no ſooner perceived the Duke of Burbons troupes, advancing to withſtand him, imagining it to be ſome ſallie the Citizens made that way, he better be-thinking him-ſelfe, turned head, and the very ſame way, he came out, he went into the town againe, which was more than three hundred paces diſtance towards the fields. The like happened, but not ſo ſucceſſefully vnto Captaine Iulius-his enſigne-bearer at what time Saint Paul was taken from vs by the Earle of Bures, and the Lord of Reu, who was ſo frighted with feare, that going about to caſt himſelfe over the towne wals, with his Ancient in his hand, or to creepe through a ſpike-hole, he was cut in pieces by the aſſailants. At which ſiege likewiſe, that horror and feare is verie memorable, which ſo did choake, ſeize vpon, and freeze the hart of a gentleman, that having received no hurt at all, he fell downe ſtarke-dead vpon the ground before the breach. The like paſſion rage doth ſometimes poſſeſſe a whole multitude. In one of the encounters that Germanicus had with the Germanes, two mightie troupes were at one inſtant ſo frighted with feare, that both betooke themſelves to their heeles, and ranne away two contrary waies, the one right to that place whence the other fled. It ſometimes addeth wings vnto our heeles, as vnto the firſt named, and other times it takes the vſe of feete from vs: as we may reade if Theophilus the Emperour, who in a battell he loſt againſt the Agarenes, was

ſo amazed and aſtonied, that he could not reſolve to ſcape away by flight: adeò pavor etiam auxilia formidat: Feare is ſo afraide even of that ſhould help. Vntill ſuch time as Manuel, one of the chiefe leaders in his armie, having rouzed and ſhaken him, as it were out of a dead ſleepe, ſaid vnto him, Sir, if you will not preſently follow me, I will ſurely kill you, for better were it you ſhould looſe your life, than being taken priſoner, looſe your Empire and all. Then doth ſhe ſhew the vtmoſt of her power, when for her own ſervice, ſhe caſts vs off vnto valour, which it hath exacted from our duty and honor. In the firſt ſet battell, the Romans loſt againſt Hanibal, vnder the Conſul Sempronius, a troupe of wel-nigh tenne thouſand footemen, was ſo ſurpriſed with feare, that ſeeing no other way to take, nor by what other courſe to give their baſenes free paſſage, they headlong bent their flight toward the thickeſt and ſtrongeſt ſquadron of their enemies, which with ſuch furie it rowted and brake through, as it diſranked, and ſlew a great number of the Carthaginians: purchaſing a reprochfull and diſgracefull flight, at the ſame rate it might have gained a moſt glorious victorie. It is feare I ſtand moſt in feare of. For, in ſharpneſſe it ſurmounteth all other accidents. What affection can be more violent and juſt than that of Pompeyes friends, who in his owne ſhip were ſpectators of that horrible maſſacre? yet is it, that the feare of the Aegyptian ſailes, which began to approach them, did in ſuch ſort daunt and skare them, that ſome have noted, they only buſied themſelves to haſten the marriners, to make what ſpeed they could, and by maine ſtrength of oares to ſave themſelves, vntill ſuch time, as being arived at Tyre, and that they were free from feare, they had leaſure to bethinke themſelves, of their late loſſe, and give their plaints and teares free paſſage, which this other ſtronger paſſion had ſuſpended and hindred.
                        Tum pavor ſapientiam omnem mihi ex animo expectorat.
                        1. Ci
                                 •
                              . Tuſc. q. li. 4. ex E
                                 ••
                              . de Orat. l. 3.
                        
                           Feare then vnbreaſts all wit,
                           That in my minde did 
                                 •
                              it.
                        
                        Thoſe who in any skir
                              •
                           iſh or ſudden bickering of warre have been throughly skared, ſore-hurt, wounded, and gored as they be, are many times the next day after, brought to charge againe. But ſuch as have conceived a true feare of their enemies, it is hard for you to make them looke them in the face againe. Such as are in continuall feare to looſe their goods, to be baniſhed, or to beſubdued, live in vnceſſant agonie and languor; and thereby often looſe both their drinking, their eating, and their reſt. Whereas the poore, the baniſhed, and ſeely ſervants, live often as careleſſely and as pleaſantly as the other. And ſo many men, who by the impatience and vrging of feare, have hanged, drowned, and head long tumbled downe from ſome rocke, have plainely taught vs, that feare is more importunate and intolerable then death. The Graecians acknowledge an other kinde of it, which is beyond the error of our diſcourſe: proceeding, as they ſay, without any apparant cauſe, and from an heavenly impulſion. Whole Nations and Armies are often ſeene ſurpriſed with it. Such was that, which brought ſo wonderfull a deſolation to Carthage, where nothing was heard but lamentable out-cries, and frightfull exclamations: the inhabitants were ſeene deſperately to runne out of their houſes, as to a ſudden alarum, and furiouſly to charge, hurt, and ent
                              ••
                           
                           ▪kill one another; as if they had beene enemies come to vſurpe and poſſeſſe their Citie. All things were there in a diſordered confuſion, and in a confuſed furie, vntill ſuch time as by praiers and ſacrifices, they had appeaſed the wrath of their Gods. They call it to this day, the Panike terror.
                              
                                 
                                    ••
                                 aſ. chil. 2. cent. 10. ad. 19. chil. 3. ce
                                    •
                                 . 7. ad. 3.
                        
                     
                     
                        The eighteenth Chapter.
                        
                           That we ſhould not iudge of our happineſſe, vntill after our death.
                        
                        
                           —ſcilicet vltima ſemper
                           
                           Expectanda dies homini eſt, dicique beatusO
                                    •
                                 id. M
                                    ••
                                 . lib. 3. 235.
                           
                           Ante obitum nemo, ſupremáqué funera deb
                                 •
                              t.
                        
                        
                           We muſt expect of man the lateſt day,
                           Nor er'e he die, he's happie, can we ſay.
                        
                        
                           THe very children are acquainted with the ſtorie of Croeſus to this purpoſe: who being taken by Cyrus, & by him condemned to die, vpon the point of his execution, cried out aloude: Oh Solon, Solon! which words of his, being reported to Cyrus, who inquiring what he meant by them, tolde him, hee now at his owne coſt verified the advertiſement Solon had before times given him: which was, that no man, what cheerefull & blandiſhing countenance ſoever fortune ſhewed them, may rightly deeme himſelfe happie, till ſuch time as he have paſſed the laſt day of his life, by reaſon of the vncertaintie and viciſſitude of humane things, which by a very light motive, and ſlight occaſion, are often changed from one to another cleane contrary ſtate and degree. And therefore Ageſilaus anſwered one that counted the King of Perſia happy, becauſe being very yong, he had gotten the garland of ſo mightie and great a dominion: yea but ſaid he, Priame at the ſame age was not vnhappy. Of the Kings of Macedon, that ſucceeded Alexander the great, ſome were afterward ſeene to become Ioyners and Scriveners at Rome: and of Tirants of Sicilie, Schoolemaſters at Corinth: One that had conquered halfe the world, and been Emperour over ſo many Armies, became an humble, and miſerable ſuter to the raskally officers of a king of Aegypt: At ſo high a rate did that great Pompey purchaſe the irkeſome prolonging of his life but for five or ſix moneths. And in our fathers daies, Lodowicke Sforce, tenth Duke of Millane, vnder whom the ſtate of Italie had ſo long beene turmoiled and ſhaken, was ſeene to die a wretched priſoner at Loches in France, but not till he had lived and lingered ten yeares in thraldome, which was the worſt of his bargaine. The faireſt Queene, wife to the greateſt King of Chriſtendome, was ſhe not lately ſeene to die by the hands of an executioner? Oh vnworthie and barbarous crueltie! And a thouſand ſuch examples. For, it ſeemeth that as the ſea-billowes and ſurging waves, rage and ſtorme againſt the ſurly pride, and ſtubborne height of our buildings. So is there above, certain ſpirits that envie the riſing proſperities and greatneſſe heere below.
                        
                           Vſque adeò res humanas res abdita quaedamL
                                    ••
                                 ret. lib. 5. 12. 43.
                           
                           Obterit, & pulchros faſces ſaváſque ſecures
                           Proculcare, ac ludibrio ſibi habere videtur.
                        
                        
                           A hidden power ſo mens ſtates hath out worne
                           Faire ſwordes, fierce ſcepters, ſignes of honours borne,
                           It ſeemes to trample and deride in ſcorne.
                        
                        And it ſeemeth Fortune doth ſometimes narrowly watch the laſt day of our life, thereby to ſhew her power, and in one moment to overthrow, what for many yeares together ſhe had beene erecting, and makes vs crie after Laberius, Nimirum hac die vna plus vixi, mihi quàm vivendum fuit. Thus it is, I have lived longer by this one day, than I ſhould. So may that good adviſe of Solon be taken with reaſon. But for ſomuch as hee is a Philoſopher, with whom the favours or disfavours of fortune, and good or ill lucke have no place, and are not regarded by him; and puiſſances and greatneſſes, and accidents of qualitie, are well nigh indifferent: I deeme it very likely he had a further reach, and meant that the ſame good fortune of our life, which dependeth of the tranquilitie and contentment of a welborne minde, and of the reſolution and aſſurance of a well ordered ſoule, ſhould never be aſcribed vnto man, vntill he have beene ſeene play the laſt act of his comedie, and without doubt the hardeſt. In all the reſt there may beſome maske: either theſe ſophiſticall diſcourſes of Philoſophie are not in vs but by countenance, or accidents that never touch vs to the quick, give vs alwaies leaſure to keep our countenance ſetled. But when that laſt part of death, and of our ſelves comes to be acted, then no diſſembling will availe, then is it high time to ſpeake plaine engliſh, and put off all vizards: then whatſoever the pot containeth muſt be ſhewne, be it good or bad, foule or cleane, wine or water.
                        
                           Nam verae voces tum demum pectore ab imoL
                                    ••
                                 res. lib. 3. 57.
                           
                           Eijciuntur, & eripitur perſona, manet res.
                        
                        
                           For then are ſent true ſpeeches from the heart,
                           We are our ſelves, we leave to play a part.
                        
                        Loe heere, why at this laſt caſt, all our lives other actions muſt be tride and touched. It is the maſter-day, the day that judgeth all others: it is the day, ſaith an auncient Writer,

that muſt judge of all my forepaſſed yeares. To death do I referre the eſſay of my ſtudies fruit. There ſhall wee ſee whether my diſcourſe proceede from my heart, or from my mouth. I have ſeene divers, by their death, either in good or evill, give reputation, to all their forepaſſed life. Scipio, father in law to Pompey, in well dying, repaired the ill opinion, which vntill that houre men had ever held of him. Epaminondas being demanded, which of the three he eſteemed moſt, either Chabrias, or Iphicrates, or himſelfe; It is neceſſary, ſaid he, that we be ſeene to die, before your queſtion may well be reſolved. Verily we ſhould ſteale much from him, if he ſhould be weighed without the honour and greatneſſe of his end. God hath willed it, as he pleaſed: but in my time three of the moſt execrable perſons, that ever I knew in all abomination of life, and the moſt infamous, have beene ſeen to die very orderly and quietly, and in every circumſtance compoſed even vnto perfection. There are ſome brave and fortunate deaths. I have ſeene her cut the twine of ſome mans life, with a progreſſe of wonderfull advancement, and with ſo worthie an end, even in the flowre of his growth, and ſpring of his youth, that in mine opinion, his ambitious and haughtie couragious deſignes, thought nothing ſo high, as might interrupt them: who without going to the place where he pretended, arived there more gloriouſly and worthily, than either his deſire or hope aimed at. And by his fall fore-went the power and name, whether by his courſe he aſpired. When I judge of other mens lives, I ever reſpect, how they have behaved themſelves in their end; and my chiefeſt ſtudy is, I may well demeane my ſelfe at my laſt gaſpe, that is to ſay, quietly, and conſtantly.
                     
                     
                        The nineteenth Chapter.
                        
                           That to Philoſophie, is to learne how to die.
                        
                        
                           CIcero ſaith, that to Philoſophie is no other thing, than for a man to prepare himſelfe to death: which is the reaſon, that ſtudie and contemplation doth in ſome ſort withdraw our ſoule from vs, and ſeverally employ it from the body, which is a kind of apprentiſage and reſemblance of death; or elſe it is, that all the wiſedome and diſcourſe of the world, doth in the end reſolve vpon this point, to teach vs, not to feare to die. Truely either reaſon mockes vs, or it only aimeth at our contentment, and in fine, bends all her trauell to make vs live wel, and as the holy Scripture ſaith, at our eaſe. All the opinions of the world conclude, that pleaſure is our end, how be it they take divers meanes vnto, and for it, elſe would men reject them at their firſt comming. For; who would giue eare vnto him, that for it's end would eſtabliſh our paine and diſturbance? The diſſentions of philoſophicall ſects in this caſe, are verball: Tranſcurramus ſolertiſſimas nugas: Let vs runne over ſuch over-fine fooleries, and ſubtill trifles. There is more wilfulneſſe and wrangling among them, than pertaines to a ſacred profeſſion▪ But what perſon a man vndertakes to act, he doth ever therewithall perſonate his owne. Although they ſay, that in vertue it ſelfe, the laſt ſcope of our aime is voluptuouſnes. It pleaſeth me to importune their eares ſtill with this word, which ſo much offends their hearing: And if it imply any chiefe pleaſure or exceeding contentments, it is rather due to the aſſiſtance of vertue, than to any other ſupply, voluptuouſnes being more ſtrong, ſinnowie; ſturdie, and manly, is but more ſeriouſly voluptuous. And we ſhould give it the name of pleaſure, more favorable, ſweeter, and more naturall; and not terme it vigor, from which it hath his denomination. Should this baſer ſenſuality deſerue this faire name, it ſhould be by competencie, and not by privilege. I finde it leſſe voide of incommodities and croſſes, than vertue. And beſides that, her taſte is more fleeting, momentarie, and fading, ſhe hath her faſts, her eves, and her travels, and both ſweate and blood. Furthermore ſhe hath perticularly ſo many wounding paſſions and of ſo ſeverall ſorts, and ſo filthie and lothſome a ſocietie waiting vpon her, that ſhee is equivalent to penitencie. Wee are in the wrong, to thinke her incommodities ſerve her as a provocation, & ſeaſoning to her ſweetnes, as in nature one contrarie is vivified by another contrarie: and to ſay, when we come to vertue, that like ſucceſſes and difficulties over-whelme it, and yeeld it auſtere and inacceſſible. Where as much more

properly then vnto voluptuouſnes, they ennobled, ſharpen, animate, and raiſe that divine and perfect pleaſure, which it mediates and procureth vs. Truly he is verie vnworthie her acquaintance, that counter-ballanceth her coſt to his fruit, and knowes neither the graces nor vſe of it. Thoſe who go about to inſtruct vs; how her purſuite is very hard and laborious, and her joviſance well pleaſing and delightfull: what elſe tell they vs, but that ſhee is ever vnpleaſant and irkſome? For, what humane meane did ever attaine vnto an abſolute enjoying of it? The perfecteſt have beene content but to aſpire and approach her, without ever poſſeſſing her. But they are deceived; ſeeing that of all the pleaſures we know, the purſute of them is pleaſant. The enterpriſe is perceived by the qualitie of the thing, which it hath regard vnto: for it is a good portion of the effect, and conſubſtantiall. That happines and felicitie, which ſhineth in vertue, repleniſheth her approaches and appurtenances, even vnto the firſt entrance and vtmoſt barre. Now of all the benefits of vertue, the contempt of death is the chiefeſt, a meane that furniſheth our life with an eaſe-full tranquillitie, and giues vs a pure and amiable taſte of it: without which every other voluptuouſnes is extinguiſhed. Loe, here the reaſons why all rules encounter and agree with this article. And albeit they all leade vs with a common accord to deſpiſe griefe, povertie, and other accidentall croſſes, to which mans life is ſubject, it is not with an equall care: as well becauſe accidents are not of ſuch a neceſſitie, for moſt men paſſe their whole life without feeling any want or povertie, and other-ſome without feeling any griefe or ſicknes, as Xenophilus the muſitian, who lived a hundred and ſixe yeares in perfect and continuall health: as alſo if the worſt happen, death may at all times, and whenſoever it ſhall pleaſe vs, cut off all other inconveniences, and croſſes. But as for death, it is inevitable.
                        
                           Omnes eodem cogimur, omniumHor. lib. 3. 
                                    ••
                                 . 3. 25.
                           
                           Verſatur vrna, ſerius, ocyus
                           Sors exitura, & nos inaeter-
                           num exitium impoſitura cymbae.
                        
                        
                           All to one place are driv'n, of all
                           Shak't is the lot-pot, where-hence ſhall
                           Sooner or later drawne lots fall,
                           And to deaths boat for aye enthrall.
                        
                        And by conſequence, if ſhe make vs affeard, it is a continuall ſubject of torment, and which can no way be eaſed. There is no ſtarting-hole will hide vs from her, ſhe will finde vs whereſoever we are, we may as in a ſuſpected countrie ſtarte and turne heere and there: qua quaſi
                           Cic. fin. lib. 1. 
                           ſaxum Tantalo ſemper impendet: Which evermore hangs like the ſtone over the head of Tantalus: Our lawes doe often condemne and ſend malefactors to be executed in the ſame place where the crime was committed: to which whileſt they are going, leade them along the faireſt houſes, or entertaine them with the beſt cheere you can,
                        
                           non Siculae dapesHor. l. 3. od. 1. 18.
                           
                           Dulcem elaborabunt ſaporem:
                           Non avium, cithaerae
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               cantus
                           Somnum reducent.
                        
                        
                           Not all King Denys daintie fare,
                           Can pleaſing taſte for them prepare:
                           No ſong of birds, no muſikes ſound
                           Can lullabie to ſleepe profound.
                        
                        Doe you thinke they can take any pleaſure in it? or be any thing delighted? and that the finall intent of their voiage being ſtill before their eies, hath not altered and altogether diſtracted their taſte from all theſe commodities and allurements?
                        
                           Audit iter, numer átque dies, ſpatióque viarumClaud in Ruff. 1. 2. 1. 137.
                           
                           Metitur vitam, torquetur peſte futura.
                        
                        
                           He heares his iorney, count's his daies, ſo meaſures he
                           His life by his waies length, vex't with the ill ſhall-be.
                        
                        The end of our cariere is death, it is the neceſſarie object of our aime: if it affright vs, how is it poſſible we ſhould ſtep one foote further without an ague? The remedie of the vulgar ſort is, not to thinke on it. But from what brutall ſtupiditie may ſo groſſe a blindneſſe come vpon him? he muſt be made to bridle his Aſſe by the taile,
                        
                           
                           Qui capite ipſe ſuo inſtituit veſt igia retro.
                        
                        
                           Who doth a courſe contrarie runne
                           With his head to his courſe begunne.
                        
                        It is no marvell if he be ſo often taken tripping; ſome doe no ſooner heare the name of death ſpoken of, but they are afraid, yea the moſt part will croſſe themſelves, as if they heard the Divell named. And becauſe mention is made of it in mens wils and teſtaments, I warrant you there is none will ſet his hand to them, till the Phyſitian have given his laſt doome, and vtterly forſaken him. And God knowes, being then betweene ſuch paine and feare, with what ſound judgement they indure him. For ſo much as this ſillable ſounded ſo vnpleaſantly in their eares, and this voice ſeemed ſo ill-boding and vnluckie, the Romans had learned to allay and dilate the ſame by a Periphraſis. In liew of ſaying, he is dead, or he hath ended his daies, they would ſay, he hath lived. So it be life, be it paſt or no, they are comforted: from whom we have borowed our phraſes quondam, alias, or late ſuch a one. It may happily be, as the common ſaying is, the time we live, is worth the mony we pay for it. I was borne betweene eleven of the clocke and noone, the laſt of Februarie 1533. according to our computation, the yeare beginning the firſt of Ianuarie. It is but a fortnight ſince I was 39. yeares old. I want at leaſt as much more. If in the mean time I ſhould trouble my thoughts with a matter ſo farre from me, it were but folly. But what? we ſee both young and olde to leave their life after one ſelfe-ſame condition. No man departs otherwiſe from it, than if he but now came to it, ſeeing there is no man ſo crazed, bedrell, or decrepite, ſo long as he remembers Met huſalem, but thinkes he may yet live twentie yeares. Moreover, ſeely creature as thou art, who hath limited the end of thy daies? Happily thou preſumeſt vpon Phyſitians reports. Rather conſider the effect and experience. By the common courſe of things, long ſince thou liveſt by extraordinarie favour. Thou haſt alreadie over-paſt the ordinarie tearmes of common life: And to prove it, remember but thy acquaintances and tell me how many more of them have died before they came to thy age, than have either attained or outgone the ſame: yea and of thoſe that through renoune have ennobled their life, if thou but regiſter them, I will lay a wager, I will finde more that have died before they came to five and thirty yeares, than after. It is conſonant with reaſon and pietie, to take example by the humanity of Ieſus Chriſt, who ended his humane life at three and thirtie yeares. The greateſt man that ever was being no more than a man, I meane Alexander the great, ended his dayes, and died alſo of that age. How many ſeverall meanes and waies hath death to ſurpriſe vs.
                        
                           Quid quiſque vitet, nunquum homini ſatisHor. lib. 2. od. 13. 13.
                           
                           Cautum est in horas.
                        
                        
                           A man can never take good heede,
                           Hourely what he may ſhun and ſpeede.
                        
                        Iomit to ſpeake of agues and pleuriſies; who would ever have imagined, that a Duke of Brittanie ſhould have beene ſtifled to death in a throng of people, as Whilome was a neighbour of mine at Lyons, when Pope Clement made his entrance there? Haſt thou not ſeene one of our late Kings ſlaine in the middeſt of his ſportes? and one of his anceſtors die miſerably by the chocke of an hog? Eſchilus fore-threatned by the fall of an houſe, when he ſtood moſt vpon his guard, ſtrucken dead by the fall of a Tortoiſe ſhell, which fell out of the tallans of an Eagle flying in the aire? and another choaked with the kernell of a grape? And an Emperour die by the ſcratch of a combe, whileſt he was combing his head: And Aemylius Lepidus with hitting his foote againſt a doore-ſeele? And Aufidius with ſtumbling againſt the Conſull-Chamber doore as he was going in thereat? And Cornelius Gallus the Praetor, Tigillinus Captaine of the Romane watch, Lodowike ſonne of Guido Gonzaga, Marquis of Mantua, end their daies betweene womens thighs? And of a farre worſe example Speuſippus the Plantonian Philoſopher and one of our Popes? Poore Bebius a judge whileſt he demurreth the ſute of a plaintife but for eight daies, behold his laſt expired; And Caius Iulius a Phyſitian, whileſt he was annointing the eies of one of his patients, to have his owneſight cloſed for ever by death. And if amongſt theſe examples, I may adde one of a brother of mine, called Captaine Saint Martin, a man of three and twentie yeares of age, who had alreadie given good teſtimonie of his worth and forward valor, playing at tennis, received a blow with a ball, that hit him a little above the right care, without apparance of

any contuſion, bruſe, or hurt, and never ſitting or reſting vpon it, died within ſix houres after of an Apoplexie, which the blow of the ball cauſed in him. Theſe ſo frequent and ordinary examples, hapning, and being ſtill before our eies, how is it poſſible for man to forgo or forget the remembrance of death? and why ſhould it not continually ſeeme vnto vs, that ſhee is ſtill ready at hand to take vs by the throat? What matter is it, will you ſay vnto me, how and in what manner it is, ſo long as a man do not trouble and vex himſelfe therewith? I am of this opinion, that howſoeuer a man may ſhrowd or hide himſelfe from her dart, yea were it vnder an oxe-hide, I am not the man would ſhrinke backe: it ſufficeth me to live at my eaſe; and the beſt recreation I can have, that do I evertake; in other matters, as little vainglorious, and exemplare as you liſt.
                        
                           —praetulerim delirus inérſque videri,
                              Id. 2. epi. 2. 126.
                           
                           Dum mea delectent mala me, vel denique fallant,
                           Quàm ſapere & ringi.
                        
                        
                           A dotard I had rather ſeeme, and dull,
                           So me my faults may pleaſe make me a gull,
                           Than to be wiſe, and beat my vexed ſcull.
                        
                        But it is folly to thinke that way to come vnto it. They come, they goe, they trot, they daunce: but no ſpeech of death. All that is good ſport. But if ſhe be once come, and on a ſudden and openly ſurpriſe, either them, their wiues, their children, or their friends, what torments, what out-cries, what rage, and what diſpaire doth then overwhelme them? ſaw you ever any thing ſo drooping, ſo changed, and ſo diſtracted? A man muſt looke to it, and in better times fore-ſee it. And might that brutiſh careleſſeneſſe lodge in the minde of a man of vnderſtanding (which I find altogether impoſſible) ſhe ſels vs her ware at an over deere rate: were ſhe an enemie by mans wit to be auoided, I would adviſe men to borrow the weapons of cowardlineſſe: but ſince it may not be: and that be you either a coward or a runaway, an honeſt or valiant man, ſhe overtakes you,
                        
                           Nempe & ſugacemperſequitur virum,Id. 3 
                                    •
                                 d. 2. 14.
                           
                           Nec parcit imbellis inuenta
                           Poplitibus, timidóque tergo.
                        
                        
                           Shee perſecutes the man that flies,
                           Shee ſpares not weake youth to ſurpriſe,
                           But on their hammes and backe turn'd plies.
                        
                        And that no temper of cuirace may ſhield or defend you,
                        
                           Ille licet ferro cautus ſe condat & aere,Propat. l. 3. & 17. 25.
                           
                           Mors tamen incluſum protrahet inde caput.
                        
                        
                           Though he with yron and braſſe his head empale,
                           Yet death his head encloſed thence will hale.
                        
                        Let vs learne to ſtand, and combate her with a reſolute minde. And begin to take the greateſt advantage ſhe hath vpon vs from her, let vs take a cleane contrary way from the common, let vs remove her ſtrangeneſſe from her, let vs converſe, frequent, and acquaint our ſelves with her, let vs have nothing ſo much in minde as death, let vs at all times and ſeaſons, and in the vglieſt manner that may be, yea with all faces ſhapen and repreſent the ſame vnto our imagination. At the ſtumbling of a horſe, at the fall of a ſtone, at the leaſt prick with a pinne, let vs preſently ruminate and ſay with our ſelves, what if it were death itſelfe? and thereupon let vs take heart of grace, and call our wits together to confront her. A middeſt our bankets, ſeaſts, and pleaſures, let vs ever have this reſtraint or object before vs, that is, the remembrance of our condition, and let not pleaſure ſo much miſlead or tranſport vs, that we altogether neglect or forget, how many waies, our joyes, or our feaſtings, be ſubject vnto death, and by how many hold-faſts ſhee threatens vs and them. So did the Aegyptians, who in the middeſt of their banquetings, and in the full of their greateſt cheere, cauſed the anatomie of a dead man to be brought before them, as a memorandum and warning to their gueſts.
                        
                           Omnem crede diem tibi diluxiſſe ſupremum,Hor. lib. 1. epi. 4. 13.
                           
                           Grata ſuperveniet, quae non ſperabitur hora.
                        
                        
                           Thinke every day ſhines on thee as thy laſt,
                           Welcome it will come, whereof hope was paſt.
                        
                        
                           It is vncertaine where death looks for vs; let vs expect hir everie where: the premeditation of death, is a fore-thinking of libertie. He who hath learned to die, hath vnlearned to ſerve. There is no evill in life, for him that hath well conceived, how the privation of life, is no evill. To know how to die, doth freevs from all ſubjection and conſtraint. Paulus Aem
                                 ••
                              us anſwered one, whom that miſerable king of Macedon his priſoner ſent to entreate him, he would not leade him in triumph, let him make that requeſt vnto himſelfe. Verily, if Nature afforde not ſome helpe, in all things, it is very hard that arte and induſtrie ſhould goe farre before. Of my ſelfe, I am not much given to melancholy, but rather to dreaming and ſluggiſhnes. There is nothing wherewith I have ever more entertained my ſelfe, than with the imaginations of death, yea in the moſt licentious times of my age.
                        Iucundum, cùm aetas florida ver ageret.Catul. 
                                 •
                              leg. 4. 16
                        
                        
                           When my age flouriſhing
                           Did ſpend it's pleaſant ſpring.
                        
                        Being amongſt faire Ladies, and in earneſt play, ſome have thought me buſied, or muſing with my ſelfe, how to digeſt ſome jealouſie, or meditating on the vncertaintie of ſome conceived hope, when God he knowes, I was entertaining my ſelfe with the remembrance of ſome one or other, that but few daies before was taken with a burning feuer, and of his ſodaine end, comming from ſuch a feaſt or meeting where I was my ſelfe, and with his head full of idle conceits, of love, and merry glee; ſuppoſing the ſame, either ſicknes or end to be as neere me as him.
                        Iam fuerit, nec poſt, vnquam revocare licebit.Lucr, lib. 3. 947
                        
                        
                           Now time would be, no more
                           You can this time reſtore.
                        
                        I did no more trouble my ſelfe or frowne at ſuch a conceit, then at any other. It is impoſſible, we ſhould not apprehend or feele ſome motions or ſtartings at ſuch imaginations at the firſt, and comming ſodainely vpon vs: but doubtleſſe, he that ſhall manage and meditate vpon them with an impartiall eye, they will aſſuredly, in tract of time, become familiar to him: Otherwiſe for my part, I ſhould be in continuall feare and agonie; for no man did evermore diſtruſt his life, nor make leſſe account of his continuance: Neither can health, which hitherto I have ſo long enjoied, and which ſo ſeldome hath bin crazed, lengthen my hopes, nor any ſickneſſe ſhorten them of it. At every minute me thinkes I make an eſcape. And I vnceſſantly record vnto my ſelfe, that whatſoever may be done another day, may be effected this day. Truely hazards and dangers do little or nothing approach vs at our end: And if we conſider, how many more there remaine, beſides this accident, which in number more than millions ſeeme to threaten vs, and hang over vs; we ſhall find, that be we ſound or ſicke, luſtie or weake, at ſea or at land, abroad or at home, fighting or at reſt, in the middeſt of a battell or in our beds, ſhe is ever alike neere vnto vs. Nemo altero fragilior est, nemo in craſtinum ſui certior. No man is meaker then other; none ſurer of himſelfe (to live) till to morrow.
                            Whatſoever I have to do before death, all leaſure to end the ſame, ſeemeth ſhort vnto me, yea were it but of one houre. Some body, not long ſince turning over my writing tables, found by chance a memoriall of ſomething I would have done after my death: I told him (as indeed it was true,) that being but a mile from my houſe, and in perfect health and luſtie, I had made haſt to write it, becauſe I could not aſſure my ſelfe I ſhould ever come home in ſafety; As one that am ever hatching of mine owne thoughts, and place them in my ſelfe: I am ever prepared about that which I may be: nor can death (come when ſhe pleaſe) put me in mind of any new thing. A man ſhould ever, as much as in him lieth, be ready booted to take his journey, and above all things, looke he have then nothing to do but with himſelfe.
                        Quid brevifortes iaculamur aevoHor. l. 2. 
                                 •
                              d. 16. Multa?
                        
                           To aime why are we ever bold,
                           At many things in ſo ſhort hold?
                        
                        For then we ſhall have worke ſufficient, without any more accreaſe. Some man complaineth more that death doth hinder him from the aſſured courſe of an hoped for victorie, than of death itſelf; another cries out, he ſhould give place to her, before he have married his daughter, or directed the courſe of his childrens bringing vp; another bewaileth he muſt

forgo his wives company: another moaneth the loſſe of his children the chiefeſt commodities of his being. I am now, by meanes of the mercie of God, in ſuch a taking, that without regret or grieving at any worldly matter, I am prepared to diſlodge, whenſoever he ſhall pleaſe to call me: I am everie where free: my farewell is ſoone taken of all my friends except of my ſelfe. No man did ever prepare himſelfe to quit the world more ſimply, and fully, or more generally ſpake of all thoughts of it, then I am fully aſſured I ſhall do. The deadeſt deaths are the beſt.
                        —Miſer ô miſer (aiunt) omnia ademit,
                           Lucr. lib. 3. 942 Vna dies infeſta mihi tot praemia vitae:
                        
                           O wretch, O wretch, (friends cry) one day,
                           All ioies of life hath ta'ne away:
                        
                        And the builder,
                        —maneant (ſaith he) opera interrupta, minae
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                              
                           
                           Virg. A
                                 •
                              n. lib. 4. 88. Murorumingentes.
                        
                           The workes vnfiniſht lie,
                           And walles that threatned hie.
                        
                        A man ſhould deſigne nothing ſo long afore hand, or at leaſt with ſuch an intent, as to paſſionate himſelfe to ſee the end of it; we are all borne to be doing.
                        Cùm moriar, medium ſoluar & inter opus.Ouid. am. lib. 2. 
                                 •
                              l. 10. 36.
                        
                        
                           When dying I my ſelfe ſhall ſpend.
                           Ere halfe by buſineſſe come to end.
                        
                        I would have a man to be doing, and to prolong his lives offices, as much as lieth in him, and let death ſeize vpon me, whileſt I am ſetting my cabiges, careleſſe of her dart, but more of my vnperfect garden. I ſaw one die, who being at his laſt gaſpe, vnceſſantly complained againſt his deſtenie, and that death ſhould ſo vnkindly cut him off in the middeſt of an hiſtorie which he had in hand, and was now come to the fifteenth or ſixteenth of our Kings.
                        
                           Illud in his rebus non addunt, nec tibi earum,L
                                    •
                                 cr. lib. 3. 944
                           
                           Iam deſiderium rerum ſuper inſidet vna.
                        
                        
                           Friends adde not that in this caſe, now no more
                           Shalt thou deſire, or want things wiſht before.
                        
                        A man ſhould rid himſelfe of theſe vulgar and hurtfull humours. Even as Churchyards were firſt placed adjoyning vnto churches, and in the moſt frequented places of the Citie, to enure (as Lycurgus ſaid) the common people, women and children, not to be skared at the ſight of a dead man, and to the end that continuall ſpectacle of bones, ſculs, tombes, graves; and burials, ſhould forewarne vs of our condition, and fatall end.
                        
                           Quin etiam exhilarare viris convivia caedeSyl. 
                                    ••
                                 a
                                    •
                                 . l. 11. 51.
                           
                           Mos olim, & miſcere epulis ſpectacula dira.
                           Certantum ferro, ſaepe & ſuper ipſa cadentum
                           Pocula, reſper ſis non parco ſanguine menſis.
                        
                        
                           Nay more, the manner was to welcome gueſts,
                           And with dire ſhewes of ſlaughter to mix feaſts.
                           Of them that fought at ſharpe, and with bords tainted
                           Of them with much bloud, who o're full cups fainted.
                        
                        And even as the Aegyptians after their feaſtings and carowſings, cauſed a great image of death to be brought in and ſhewed to the gueſts and by-ſtanders, by one that cried aloud, Drinke and be mery, for ſuch ſhalt thou be when thou art dead: So have I learned this cuſtome or leſſon, to have alwaies death, not only in my imagination, but continually in my mouth. And there is nothing I deſire more to be informed of, than of the death of men: that is to ſay, what words, what countenance, and what face they ſhew at their death; and in reading of hiſtories, which I ſo attentively obſerve. It appeareth by the ſhuffling and hudling vp of my examples, I affect no ſubject ſo particularly as this. Were I a compoſer of bookes, I would keepe a regiſter, commented of the diverſe deaths, which in teaching men to die, ſhould after teach them to live. Dicearcus made one of that title, but of an other and leſſe profitable end. Some man will ſay to me, the effect exceedes the thought ſo farre, that there is no fence ſo ſure, or cunning ſo certaine, but a man ſhall either looſe or forget,

if he come once to that point; let them ſay what they liſt: to premeditate on it, giveth no doubt a great advantage: and is it nothing, at the leaſt to go eſo farre without diſmay or alteration, or without an ague? There belongs more to it: Nature herſelfe lends her hand, and gives vs courage. If it be a ſhort and violent death, we have no leaſure to feare it; if otherwiſe, I perceive that according as I engage my ſelfe in ſickneſſe, I do naturally fall into ſome diſdaine and contempt of life. I find that I have more ado to diſgeſt this reſolution, that I ſhall die when I am in health, than I have, when I am troubled with a feaver: forſomuch as I have no more ſuch faſt hold on the commodities of life, whereof I begin to looſe the vſe and pleaſure, and view death in the face with a leſſe vndanted looke, which makes me hope, that the further I go from that, and the neerer I approch to this, ſo much more eaſily do I enter in compoſition, for their exchange, Even as I have tried in many other occurrences, which Caeſar affirmed, that often ſomethings ſeeme greater, being farre from vs, than if they be neere at hand: I have found that being in perfect health, I have much more beene frighted with ſickneſſe, than when I have felt it. The jollitie wherein I live, the pleaſure and the ſtrength, make the other ſeeme ſo diſproportionable from that, that by imagination I amplifie theſe commodities by one moitie, and apprehended them much more heauie and burthenſome, then I feele them when I have them vpon my ſhoulders. The ſame I hope will happen to me of death. Conſider we by the ordinary mutations, and daily declinations, which we ſuffer, how Nature deprives vs of the night of our loſſe and empairing: what hath an aged man left him of his youths vigor, and of his forepaſt life?
                        Heu ſenibus vitae portio quanta manet!Cor. Gal. lib. 1. 16.
                        
                        
                           Alas to men in yeares, how ſmall
                           A part of life is left in all?
                        
                        
                           Caeſar to a tired and crazed Souldier of his guard, who in the open ſtreete came to him, to beg leave, he might cauſe himſelfe to be put to death; viewing his decrepit behauiour, anſwered pleaſantly: Doeſt thou thinke to be alive then? Were man all at once to fall into it, I do not thinke we ſhould be able to beare ſuch a change, but being faire and gently led on by her hand, in a ſlow, and as it were vnperceived deſcent, by little and little, and ſtep by ſtep, ſhe roules vs into that miſerable ſtate, and day by day ſeekes to acquaint vs with it. So that when youth failes in vs, we feele, nay we perceive no ſhaking or tranſchange at all in our ſelves: which in eſſence and veritie is a harder death, then that of a languiſhing and irkeſome life, or that of age. Forſomuch as the leap from an ill being, vnto a not being, is not ſo dangerous or ſteeple; as it is from a delightfull and flowriſhing being, unto a painfull and ſorrowfull condition. A weake bending, and faint ſtooping bodie hath leſſe ſtrength to beare and vndergo a heauie burden: So hath our ſoule. She muſt be rouzed and raiſed againſt the violence and force of this adverſarie. For, as 
                              〈…〉
                           s impoſſible, ſhee ſhould take any reſt whileſt ſhee feareth: whereof if ſhe be aſſured (which is a thing exceeding humane condition) ſhe may boaſt that it is impoſſible, vnquietneſſe, torment, and feare, much leſſe the leaſt diſpleaſure ſhould lodge in her.
                        
                           Non vulius instantis tyranniHor. lib. 3. 
                                    •
                                 d. 3.
                           
                           Mente quatit ſolida, neque Auſter,
                           Dux inquieti turbidus Adriae,
                           Nec fulminantis magna Iovis manus.
                        
                        
                           No vrging tyrants threatning face,
                           Where minde is ſound can it diſplace,
                           No troublous wind the rough ſeas Maſter,
                           Nor Ioves great hand the thunder-caſter.
                        
                        She is made Miſtris of her paſſions, and concupiſcence, Lady of indulgence, of ſhame of povertie, and of all fortunes injuries. Let him that can, attaine to this advantage: Herein conſiſts the true and Soveraigne libertie, that affords vs meanes wherewith to jeaſt and make a ſcorne of force and in juſtice, and to deride impriſonment, gives, or fetters.
                        
                           —in manicis, &
                              Li. 1. epi. 16. 76.
                           
                           Compedibus, ſaevo te ſub cuſtode tenebo▪
                           
                           Ipſe Deus ſimul atque volam, me ſolvet: opinor,
                           Hoc ſensit moriar, mor
                                 •
                               vltima linearerum eſt.
                        
                        
                           
                           In gyves and fetters I will hamper thee,
                           Vnder a Iayler that ſhall cruell be:
                           Yet, when I will, God me deliver ſhall,
                           He thinkes, I ſhall die: death is end of all.
                        
                        Our religion hath had no ſurer humane foundation, then the contempt of life. Diſcourſe of reaſon doth not onely call and ſummon vs vnto it. For why ſhould we feare to looſe a thing, which being loſt, cannot be moaned? but alſo, ſince we are threatned by ſo many kinds of death, there is no more inconvenience to feare them all, than to endure one: what matter is it when it commeth, ſince it is vnavoidable? Socrates anſwered one that told him, The thirty Tyrants have condemned thee to death; And Nature them, ſaid he. What fondneſſe is it to carke and care ſo much, at that inſtant and paſſage from all exemption of paine and care? As our birth brought vs the birth of all things, ſo ſhall our death the end of all things. Therefore is it as great follie to weepe, we ſhall not live a hundred yeeres hence, as to waile we lived not a hundred yeeres agoe. Death is the beginning of another life. So wept we, and ſo much did it coſt vs to enter into this life; and ſo did we ſpoile vs of our ancient vaile in entring into it. Nothing can be grievous that is but once. Is it reaſon ſo long to feare, a thing of ſo ſhort time? Long life or ſhort life is made all one by death. For long or ſhort is not in things that are no more. Aristotle ſaith, there are certaine litle beaſts alongſt the river Hyſpanis, that live but one day; ſhe which dies at 8. a clocke in the morning, dies in her youth, & ſhe that dies at 5. in the afternoon, dies in her decrepitude, who of vs doth not laugh, when we ſhall ſee this ſhort moment of continuance to be had in conſideration of good or ill fortune? The moſt & the leaſt in ours, if we compare it with eternitie, or equall it to the laſting of mountaines, rivers, ſtars, and trees, or any other living creature, is no leſſe ridiculous. But nature compels vs to it. Depart ſaith ſhe, out of this world, even as you came into it. The ſame way you came from death, to life returne without paſſion or amazement, from life to death: your death is but a peece of the worlds order, and but a parcell of the worlds life.
                        
                        —inter ſe mortales mutua vivunt,Lucr. 2. 74. 77. Et quaſi curſores vitai lampada tradunt.
                        
                           Mortall men live by mutuall entercourſe:
                           And yeeld their life-torch, as men in a courſe.
                        
                        Shal I not change this goodly contexture of things for you? It is the condition of your creation: death is a part of your ſelves: you flie from your ſelves. The being you enjoy, is equally ſhared between life and death. The firſt day of your birth doth aſwell addreſſe you to-die, as to live.
                        Prima quae vitam dedit, hora carpſit.Sen. Her. f
                                 •
                              r. ch
                                 •
                              r. 3.
                        
                        
                           The firſt houre, that to men
                           Gave life, ſtrait, cropt it then.
                        
                        Naſcentes morimur, finiſque ab origine pendet:Manil. aſ
                                 •••
                              li. 4
                        
                        
                           As we are borne we die; the end
                           Doth of th'originall depend.
                        
                        All the time you liue, you ſteale it from death: it is at her charge. The continuall work of your life, is to contrive death; you are in death, during the time you continue in life: for, you are after death, when you are no longer living. Or if you had rather have it ſo, you are dead after life: but during life, you are ſtill dying: & death doth more rudely touch the dying, then the dead, and more lively and eſſentially. If you haue profited by life, you haue alſo beene fed thereby, depart then ſatisfied.
                        Cur non vt plenus vitae conviva recedis?Lucr. l. 3 982.
                        
                        
                           Why like a full-fed gueſt,
                           Depart you not to reſt?
                        
                        If you have not knowne how to make vſe of it: if it were vnprofitable to you, what neede you care to have loſt it? to what end would you enioy it longer?
                        —cur amplius addere quarisLucr. l. 3. 985. Rurſum quod pereat malè, & ingratum occidat omne?
                        
                           Why ſeeke you more to gaine, what muſt againe
                           All periſh ill, and paſſe with griefe or paine?
                        
                        Life in it ſelfe is neither good nor euill: it is the place of good or evill, according as you prepare it for them. And if you have liued one day, you have ſeene all: one day is equal to

all other daies: There is no other light, there is no other night. This Sunne, this Moone, theſe Starres, and this diſpoſition, is the very ſame, which your forefathers enjoyed, and which ſhall alſo entertaine your poſteritie.
                        
                           Non alium 
                                 •
                              id
                                 •
                              re patres: aliúmue nepotes
                           Aſpicient.
                        
                        
                           No other ſaw our Sires of old,
                           No other ſhall their ſonnes behold.
                        
                        And if the worſt happen, the diſtribution and varietie of all the acts of my comedie, is performed in one yeare. If you have obſerved the courſe of my foure ſeaſons; they containe the infancie, the youth, the virilitie, & the old age of the world. He hath plaied his part: he knowes no other wilineſſe belonging to it, but to begin againe, it will ever be the ſame, and no other,
                        —Verſamur ibidem, atque inſumus vſque,
                        3.
                        
                           We ſtill in one place turne about,
                           Still there we are, now in, now out.
                        
                        Atque inſe ſua per veſtigia volvitur annus.
                        
                           
                              •
                           . 2.
                        
                           The yeare into it ſelfe is caſt
                           By thoſe ſame ſteps, that it hath paſt.
                        
                        I am not purpoſed to deviſe you other new ſports.
                        
                           Nam tibi praeterea quod machiner, inveniámque
                                 
                                    •
                                 . 2. 978.
                           
                           Quod placeat, nihil eſt, eadem ſunt omnia ſemper.
                        
                        
                           Elſe nothing, that I can deviſe or frame,
                           Can pleaſe thee, for all things are ſtill the ſame.
                        
                        
                           Make roome for others, as others have done for you. Equalitie is the chiefe ground-worke of equitie, who can complaine to be comprehended where all are contained? So may you live longenough, you ſhall never diminiſh any thing from the time you have to die: it is booteleſſe; ſo long ſhall you continue in that ſtate, which you feare, as if you had died being in your ſwathing-clothes, and when you were ſucking.
                        
                           —licet, quot vis, vivendo vincere ſecla, Mors aeterna tamen, nihil ominus illa manebit.
                        
                        
                           Though yeares you live, as many as you will,
                           Death is eternall, death remaineth ſtill.
                        
                        And I will ſo pleaſe you, that you ſhall have no diſcontent.
                        
                           In vera neſcis nullum fore morte alium te,
                           Qui poſſit vivus tibi te lugere peremptum,
                           Stánſque iacnetem.
                        
                        
                           Thou know'ſt no there ſhall be not other thou,
                           When thou art dead indeede, that can tell how
                           Alive to waile thee dying,
                           Standing to waile thee lying.
                        
                        Nor ſhall you wiſh for life, which you ſo much deſire.
                        
                           Nec ſibi enim quiſquam tum ſe vitámque requirit,
                           Nec deſiderium noſtri nos afficit vllum.
                        
                        
                           For then none for himſelfe himſelfe or life requires:9
                                    ••
                                 .
                           
                           Nor are we of our ſelves affected with deſires.
                        
                        Death is leſſe to be feared than nothing, if there were any thing leſſe, than nothing.
                        —multo mortem minus ad nos eſſe putandum, Si minus eſſe poteſt quám quod nihil eſſe videmus.
                        
                           Death is much leſſe to vs, we ought eſteeme,970.
                           
                           If leſſe may be, then what doth nothing ſeeme.
                        
                        Nor alive, nor dead, it doth concerne you nothing. Alive, becauſe you are: Dead, becauſe you are no more. Moreover, no man dies before his houre. The time you leave behinde was no more yours, then that which was before your birth, and concerneth you no more.
                        
                           Reſpice enim quàm nil ad nos anteacta vetuſtas1016.
                           
                           Temporis aeterni fuerit,
                        
                        
                           For marke, how all antiquitie fore-gone
                           Of all time e're we were, to vs was none.
                        
                        
                           Whereſoever your life endeth, there is it all. The profit of life conſiſtes not in the ſpace, but rather in the vſe. Some man hath lived long, that hath had a ſhort life. Follow it whileſt you have time. It conſiſts not in number of yeeres, but in your will, that you have lived long enough. Did you thinke you ſhould never come to the place, where you were ſtill going? There is no way but hath an end. And if company may ſolace you, doth not the whole world walke the ſame path?
                        —Omnia te vita perfuncta ſequenter.
                        1012.
                        
                           Life paſt, all things at laſt
                           Shall follow thee as thou haſt paſt.
                        
                        Doe not all things moove as you doe, or keepe your courſe? Is there any thing grows not old togither with your ſelfe? A thouſand men, a thouſand beaſts, and a thouſand other creatures die in the very inſtance that you die.
                        
                           Nam nox nulla diem, neque noctem aurora ſequuta eſt,lib. 2. 587.
                           
                           Quae non audierit miſtos vagitibus aegris
                           Ploratus mortis comites & funeris atri.
                        
                        
                           No night enſued day light: no morning followed night
                           Which heard not moaning mixt with ſick-mens groaning
                           With deaths and funerals joyned was that moaning.
                        
                        To what end recoile you from it, if you cannot goe backe? You have ſeene many who have found good in death, ending thereby many many miſeries. But have you ſeene any that hath received hurt thereby? Therefore is it meere ſimplicitie to condemne a thing you never prooved, neither by your ſelfe nor any other. Why doeſt thou complaine of me and of deſtinie? Doe we offer thee any wrong? is it for thee to direct vs, or for vs to governe thee? Although thy age be not come to her period, thy life is. A little man, is a whole man, as well as a great man. Neither men nor their lives are meaſured by the Ell. Chiron refuſed immortalitie, being informed of the conditions thereof, even by the God of time and of continuance, Saturne his father. Imagine truely how much an ever during life would be leſſe tollerable and more painefull to a man, then is the life which I have given him: Had you not death, you would then vnceſſantly curſe, and cry out againſt me, that I had deprived you of it. I have of purpoſe and wittingly blended ſome bitternes amongſt it, that ſo ſeeing the commoditie of it's vſe, I might hinder you from over greedily embracing, or indiſcreetly calling for it. To continue in this moderation, that is neither to flie from life, nor to run to death (which I require of you) I have tempered both the one and other betweene ſweetenes & ſowrenes. I firſt taught Thales the chiefeſt of your Sages and Wiſe men, that to live & die, were indifferent, which made him anſwer one very wiſely, who asked him, wherefore he died not; Becauſe, ſaith he, it is indifferent. The water, the earth, the aire, the fire, and other members of this my vniverſe, are no more the inſtruments of thy life, then of thy death. Why fearest thou thy laſt day? He is no more guiltie, and conferreth no more to thy death, then any of the others. It is not the last ſtep that cauſeth wearineſſe: it onely declares it. All daies march towards death, onely the laſt comes to it. Behold heere the good precepts of our vniverſall mother Nature. I have oftentimes bethought my ſelfe whence it proceedeth, that in times of warre, the viſage of death (whether wee ſee it in vs or in others) ſeemeth without all compariſon much leſſe dreadfull and terrible vnto vs, then in our houſes, or in our beds, otherwiſe it ſhould be an armie of Phiſitians and whiners, and ſhe ever being one, there muſt needes bee much more aſſurance amongſt contrie-people and of baſe condition, then in others. I verily beleeve, theſe fearefull lookes, and aſtoniſhing countenances wherewith we encompaſſe it, are thoſe that more amaze and terrifie vs then death: a new forme of life: the out-cries of mothers; the wailing of women and children; the viſitation of diſmaid and ſwouning friends: the aſſiſtance of a number of pale-looking, diſtracted, and whining ſervants; a darke chamber: tapers burning round about; our couch beſet round with Phiſitians and Preachers; and to conclude, nothing but horror and aſtoniſhment on every ſide of vs: are wee not alreadie dead and buried? The very children are afraid of their friends, when they ſee them masked; and ſo are we: The maske muſt as well be taken from things, as from men, which being remooved, we ſhall finde nothing hid vnder it, but the very ſame death, that a ſeely varlet, or a ſimple maide-ſervant, did lately ſuffer without amazement or feare. Happie is that death, which takes all leaſure from the preparations of ſuch an equipage.
                     
                     
                        
                        The twentieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of the force of Imagination.
                        
                        
                           FOrtis imaginatio generat caſum: A ſtrong imagination begetteth chance, ſay learned clearkes. I am one of thoſe that feele a very great conflict and power of imagination. All men are ſhockt therewith, and ſome overthrowne by it. The impreſſion of it pierceth me, and for want of ſtrength to reſiſt her, my endevour is to avoid it. I could live with the only aſſiſtance of holy and mery hearted men. The ſight of others anguiſhes doth ſenſibly drive me into anguiſh; and my ſenſe hath often vſurped the ſenſe of a third man. If one cough continually, he provokes my lungs and throate. I am more vnwilling to viſite the ſicke dutie doth engage me vnto, than thoſe to whom I am little beholding, and regard leaſt. I apprehend the evill which I ſtudie, and place it in me. I deeme it not ſtrange that ſhe brings both agues and death to ſuch as give her ſcope to worke her will, and applaude her. Simon Thomas was a great Phiſitian in his daies. I remember vpon a time comming by chance to viſit a rich old man that dwelt in Tholouſe, and who was troubled with the cough of the lungs, who diſcourſing with the ſaid Simon Thomas of the meanes of his recoverie, he told him, that one of the beſt was, to give me occaſion to be delighted in his companie, and that fixing his eyes vpon the livelines and freſhnes of my face, and ſetting his thoughts vpon the jolitie and vigor, wherewith my youthfull age did then flouriſh, and filling all his ſenſes with my floriſhing eſtate, his habitude might thereby be amended, and his health recovered. But he forgot to ſay, that mine might alſo be empaired and infected. Gallus Vibius did ſo well enure his minde to comprehend the eſſence and motions of folly, that he ſo tranſported his judgement from out his ſeate, as he could never afterward bring it to his right place againe: and might rightly boaſt, to have become a ſoole through wiſdome. Some there are, that through feare anticipate the hang-mans hand; as he did, whoſe friends having obtained his pardon, and putting away the cloth wherewith he was hood-winkt, that he might heare it read, was found ſtarke dead vpon the ſcaffold, wounded onely by the ſtroke of imagination. Wee ſweate, we ſhake, we grow pale, and we bluſh at the motions of our imaginations; and wallowing in our beds we feele our bodies agitated and turmoiled at their apprehenſions, yea in ſuch manner, as ſometimes we are ready to yeeld vp the ſpirit. And burning youth (although aſleepe) is often therewith ſo poſſeſſed and enfoulded, that dreaming it doth ſatisfie and enjoy her amorous deſires.
                        
                           Vt quaſi tranſactis ſaepe omnibu'rebu' profundant
                           Fluminis ingentes fluctus, veſt émque cruentent.Lucr. li. 4. 1027
                           
                        
                        
                           And if all things were done, they powre foorth ſtreames,
                           And bloodie their night-garment in their dreames.
                        
                        And although it be not ſtrange to ſee ſome men have hornes growing vpon their head in one night, that had none when they went to bed: notwithſtanding the fortune or ſucceſſe of Cyppus King of Italie is memorable, who becauſe the day before he had with earneſt affection, aſſiſted and beene attentive at a bul-ba
                              •
                           ting, and having all night long dreamed of hornes in his head, by the very force of imagination brought them foorth the next morning in his forehead. An earneſt paſſion gave the ſon of Croeſus his voice, which nature had denied him. And Antiochus got an ague, by the excellent beautie of Stratonic
                                 •
                              
                            ſo deepely imprinted in his minde. Plinie reporteth to have ſeene Lucius Coſſitius vpon his marriage day to have beene transformed from a woman to a man. Pontanus and others recount the like Metamorphoſies to have hapned in Italie theſe ages paſt: And through a vehement deſire of him and his mother,
                        
                           V
                                 •
                              tapuer ſolvit, quae foemina voverat Iphis.
                           
                              Iphis a boy, the vowes then paid,Guid. M
                                    •
                                 tam. lib. 9. 
                                    •
                                 94.
                           
                           Which he vow'd when he was a maid.
                        
                        My ſelfe traveling on a time by Vitry in France, hapned to ſee a man, whom the Biſhop

of S
                                 •
                              iſſ
                                 •••
                              
                            had in confirmation, named Germane, and all the inhabitants there about have both knowne and ſeene to be a woman childe, vntill ſhe was two and twentie yeares of age, called by the name of Marie. He was, when I ſaw him, of good yeares, and had a long beard, and was yet vnmarried. He ſaith, that vpon a time leaping, and ſtraining himſelfe to over leape an other, he wot not how, but where before he was a woman, he ſuddenly felt the inſtrument of a man to come out of him; and to this day the maidens of that towne and countrie have a 
                              •
                           ong in vſe, by which they warne one another, when they are leaping, not to ſtraine themſelves overmuch, or open their legs to wide, for feare they ſhould bee turned to boies, as Marie Germane was. It is no great woonder, that ſuch accidents doe often happen, for if imagination have power in ſuch things, it is ſo continually annexed, and ſo forcibly faſtened to this ſubject, that leaſt ſhe ſhould ſo often fall into the relaps of the ſame thought, and ſharpeneſſe of deſire, it is better one time for all, to incorporate this virile part vnto wenches. Some will not ſticke to aſcribe the ſcarres of King Dagobert, or the cicatrices of Saint Francis vnto the power of Imagination. Otherſome will ſay, that by the force of it, bodies are ſometimes remooved from their places. And Celſus reports of a Prieſt, whoſe ſoule was raviſhed into ſuch an extaſie, that for a long time the body remained voide of all reſpiration and ſenſe. Saint Auguſtine ſpeaketh of an other, who if hee but heard any lamentable and wailefull cries, would ſuddenly fall into a ſwone, and bee ſo forcibly carried from himſelfe, that did any chide and braule never ſo loud, pinch and thumpe him never ſo much, he could not be made to ſtirre, vntill hee came to himſelfe againe. Then would he ſay, he had heard ſundry ſtrange voyces, comming as it were from a farre, and perceiving his pinches and bruſes, woondered at them. And that it was not an obſtinate conceit, or wilfull humour in him, or againſt his feeling ſenſe, it plainely appeared by this, becauſe during his extaſie, he ſeemed to have neither pulſe nor breath. It is very likely that the principall credit of viſions, of enchantments, and ſuch extraordinary effects, proceedeth from the power of imaginations, working eſpecially in the mindes of the vulgar ſort, as the weakeſt and ſ
                              ••
                           lieſt, whoſe conceit and beliefe is ſo ſeized vpon, that they imagine to ſee what they ſee not. I am yet in doubt, theſe pleaſant bonds, wherewith our world is ſo fettered, and France ſo peſtered, that nothing elſe is ſpoken of, are happily but the impreſſions of apprehenſion, and effects of feare. For I know by experience, that ſomeone, for whom I may as well anſwer as for my ſelfe, and in whom no maner of ſuſpition either of weakeneſſe or enchantment might fall, hearing a companion of his make report of an extraordinary faint ſowning, wherein he was fallen, at ſuch a time, as he leaſt looked for it, and wrought him no ſmall ſhame, whereupon the horrour of his report did ſo ſtrongly ſtrike his imagination, as he ranne the ſame fortune, and fell into a like drooping: And was thence forward ſubject to fall into like fits: So did the paſſionate remembrance of his inconvenience poſſeſſe and tyrannize him; but his fond doting was in time remedied by an other kinde of 
                              •
                           aving. For himſelfe avowing and publiſhing aforehand the infirmitie he was ſubject vnto, the contention of his ſoule was ſolaced vpon this, that bearing his euill as expected, his dutie thereby diminiſhed, and he grieved leſſe thereat. And when at his choice, he hath had law and power (his thought being cleered and vnmasked, his body finding it ſelfe in his right due and place) to make the ſame to be felt, ſeized vpon, and apprehended by others knowledge: he hath fully and perfectly recovered himſelfe. If a man have once beene capable, he cannot afterward be incapable, except by a juſt and abſolute weakeneſſe. Such a michiefe is not to be feared, but in the enterpriſes, where our minde is beyond all meaſure bent with deſire and reſpect; and chiefely where opportunitie comes vnexpected and requires a ſudden diſpàtch. There is no meanes for a man to recover himſelfe from this trouble; I know ſome, who have found to come vnto it with their bodies as it were halfe glutted elſe-where, thereby to ſtupifie or allay the heat of that furie, and who through age, finde themſelves leſſe vnable, by how much more they be leſſe able: And another, who hath alſo found good, in that a friend of his aſſured him to bee provided with a counter-battery of forcible enchantments, to preſerue him in any ſuch conflict: It is not amiſſe I relate how it was. An Earle of very good place, with whom I was familiarly acquainted, being married to a very faire Lady, who had long beene ſolicited for loue, by one aſſiſting at the wedding, did greatly trouble his friends; but moſt of all an old Lady his kinſ-woman, who was chiefe at the marriage, and in whoſe houſe it was ſolemnized,

as ſhe that much feared ſuch ſorceries and witchcrats: which ſhee gave mee to vnderſtand, I comforted her as well as I could, and deſired her to relie vpon me: I had by chance a peece of golden plate in my trunke, wherein were ingraven certaine celeſtiall figures, good againſt the Sunne-beames, and for the head-ach, being fitly laide vpon the ſuture of the head: and that it might the better be kept there, it was ſewed to a riband, to be faſtened vnder the chinne. A fond doting conceit, and coſin-germane to that wee now ſpeake of▪ 
                           Iames Peletier had whileſt he lived in my houſe, beſtowed that ſingular gift vpon mee; I adviſed my ſelfe to put it to ſomevſe, and told the Earle, he might happily be in danger, and come to ſome misfortune as others had done, the rather becauſe ſome were preſent, that would not ſticke to procure him ſome ill lucke, and which was woorſe, ſome ſpitefull ſhame▪ but nevertheleſſe I willed him boldly to goe to bed: For I would ſhew him the part of a true friend, and in his need, ſpare not for his good to employ a miracle, which was in my power; alwaies provided, that on his honour he would promiſe me faithfully to keepe it very ſecret; which was onely, that when about mid-night he ſhould have his caudle brought him, if he had had no good ſucceſſe in his buſineſſe, he ſhould make ſuch and ſuch a ſigne to me. It fel out, his mind was ſo quailed, and his eares ſo dulled, that by reaſon of the bond wherewith the trouble of his imagination had tied him, hee could not runne on poſte: and at the houre appointed, made the ſigne agreed vpon betweene vs, I came and whiſpered him in the eare, that vnder pretence to putvs all out of his chamber, he ſhould riſe out of his bed, and in jeſting manner take my night-gowne which I had on, and put it vpon himſelfe (which he might well doe, becauſe wee were much of one ſtature) and keepe it on till he had performed my appointment, which was, that when we ſhould be gone out of the Chamber, he ſhould with-draw himſelfe to make water, and vſing certaine jeſtures, I had ſhewed him, ſpeake ſuch words thrice over. And every time hee ſpake them he ſhould girt the ribband, which I put into his handes, and very carefully place the plate thereto faſtned, juſt vpon his kidneyes, and the whole figure, in ſuch a poſture. All which when he had accordingly done, and the laſt time ſo faſtened the ribband, that it might neither be vntide nor ſtirred from his place, he ſhould then boldely and confidently returne to his charge, and not forget to ſpread my night-gowne vpon his bed, but ſo as it might cover them both. Theſe fopperies are the chiefe of the effect. Our thought being vnable ſo to free it ſelfe, but ſome ſtrange meanes will proceed from ſome abſtruſe learning: Their inaniti
                              •
                            gives them weight and credite. To conclude, it is moſt certaine, my Characters prooved more venerian than ſolare, more in action, than in prohibition. It was a ready and curious humour drew me to this effect, farre from my nature. I am an enemie to craftie and fained actions, and hate all ſuttletie in my handes, not onely recreative, but alſo profitable. If the action be not vicious, the courſe vnto it, is faultie. Amaſis king of Aegypt, tooke to wife Laodice, a very beauteous yong virgine of Greece, and he that before had in every other place found and ſhewed himſelfe a luſtie gallant, found himſelfe ſo ſi ort, when he came to grapple with her, that he threatned to kill her, ſuppoſing it had beene ſome charme or ſorcerie. As in all things that conſiſt in the fantaſie, ſhe addreſt him to devotion. And having made his vowes and promiſes to Venus, he found himſelfe divinely freed, even from the firſt night of his oblations and ſacrifices. Now they wrong vs, to receive and admit vs with their wanton, ſqueamiſh, quarellous countenances, which ſetting vs a fire, extinguiſh vs.
                        
                           Pythagoras his neece was wont to ſay, That a woman which lies with a man, ought, together with her petie-coate, leave off all baſhfulneſſe, and with her petie-coate, take the ſame againe. The minde of the aſſailant moleſted with ſundry different alarums, is eaſily diſmaid. And he whom imagination hath once made to ſuffer this ſhame (and ſhe hath cauſed the ſame to be felt but in the firſt acquaintances; becauſe they are then burning and violent, and in the firſt acquaintance and comming together, or triall a man gives of himſelfe, he is much more afraid and quaint to miſſe the marke he ſhootes at) having begun ill he fals into an ague or ſpite of this accident, which afterward continueth in ſucceeding occaſions. Married men, becauſe time is at their command, and they may go to it when they liſt, ought never to preſſe or importune their enterpriſe, vnleſſe they be readie. And it is better vndecently to faile in hanſeling the nuptiall bed, full of agitation and fits, by waiting for ſome or other fitter occaſion, and more private opportunitie, leſt ſudden and alarmed, then to fall into a

perpetuall miſerie, by apprehending an aſtoniſhment and deſperation of the firſt refuſall. Before poſſeſſion taken, a patient ought by ſallies, and divers times, lightly aſſay and offer himſelfe without vexing or opiniating himſelfe, definitively to convince himſelfe. Such as know their members docile and tractable by nature, let them onely endevour to countercoſin their fantaſie. Men haue reaſon to checke the indocile libertie of this member, for ſo importunately inſinuating himſelfe when we have no neede of him, and ſo importunately, or as I may ſay impertinently failing, at what time we have moſt neede of him; and ſo imperiouſly conteſting by his authority, with ou
                              •
                            will, refuſing with ſuch fiercenes and obſtinacie our ſol
                              •
                           citations both mentall and manuall. Nevertheleſſe if a man inaſmuch as he doth gormandize and devour his rebellion, and drawes a triall by his condemnation, would pay me for to plead his cauſe▪ I would peradventure make other of our members to be ſuſpected to have (in envy of his importance, and ſweetneſſe of his vſe) deviſed this impoſture, and framed this ſet quarrell againſt him, and by ſome malicious complot armed the world againſt him, enviouſly charging him alone with a fault common to them all. For I referre it to your thought, whether there be any one particular part of our body, that doth not ſometimes refuſe hir particular operation to our will and wiſh, and that doth not often exerciſe and practiſe againſt our will▪ All of them have their proper paſſions, which without any leave of ours doe either awaken or lull them aſleepe. How often doe the forced motions and changes of our faces, witneſſe the ſecreteſt and moſt lurking thoughts we have, and bewray them to by-ſtanders? The ſame cauſe that doth animate this member, doth alſo, vnwitting to vs, embolden our heart, our lungs, and our pulſes. The ſight of a pleaſing object, reflecting imperceptibly on vs, the flame of a contagious or aguiſh emotion. Is there nought beſides theſe muſcles and veines, that riſe and fall without the conſent, not onely of our will, but alſo of our thought? We cannot command our haire to ſtande an end, nor our skinne to ſtartle for deſire or feare. Our hands are often carried where we direct them not. Our tongue and voice are ſometimes to ſeeke of their faculties, the one looſeth her ſpeech, the other her nimbleneſſe. Even when we have nothing to feede vpon, we would willingly forbid it: the appetites to eate, or liſt to drinke, doe not leave to moove the parts ſubject to them, even as this other appetite, and ſo, though it be out of ſeaſon, forſaketh vs, when he thinks good. Thoſe inſtruments that ſerve to diſcharge the belly, have their proper compreſſions and dilatations, beſides our intent, & againſt our meaning, as theſe are deſtined to diſcharge the kidneis. And that which, the better to authorize our willes power, Saint Auguſtin alleadgeth, to have ſeene one, who could at all times command his poſterior, to let as many ſ
                              •
                           apes as he would, and which Vives endeareth by the example of an other in his daies, who could let tunable and organized ones, following the tune of any voice propounded vnto his eares, inferreth the pure obedience of that member: than which▪ none is commonly more indiſ
                              •
                           re
                              •
                           t and tumul
                              ••
                           ous. Seeing my ſelfe know one ſo skittiſh and mutinous, that theſe fortie yeeres keepes his maſter in ſuch awe, that will he, or nill he, he will with a continuall breath, conſtant and vnintermitted cuſtome breake winde at his pleaſure, and ſo brings him to his grave. And would to God I knew it but by Hiſtories, how that many times our belly, being reſtrained thereof, brings vs even to the gates of a pining and languiſhing death: And that the Emperour, who gave vs free leave to vent at all times, and every where, had alſo given vs the power to doe it. But our will, by whoſe priviledge we advance this reproch, how much more likely, and conſonant to trueth may we taxe it of rebellion, and accuſe it of ſedition, by reaſon of its vnrulineſſe and diſobedience? Will ſhee at all times doe that, which we would have her willingly to doe? Is ſhee not often willing to effect that, which we forbid her to deſire? and that to our manifeſt prejudice and damage? Doth ſhe ſuffer her ſelfe to be directed by the concluſions of our reaſon? To conclude, I would vrge in defence of my client, that it would pleaſe the Iudges to conſider, that concerning this matter, his cauſe being inſeperably conjoyned to a conſort, and indiſtinctly: yet will not a man addreſſe himſelfe but to him, both by the arguments and charges, which can no way appertaine to his ſaid conſort. For, his effect is indeed ſometime importunately to invite, but to refuſe never: and alſo to invite ſilently and quietly. Therefore is the ſaw
                              •
                           ineſſe and illegalitie of the accuſers ſeene. Howſoever it be, proteſting that advocates and judges may wrangle, contend, and give ſentence, what, and how they pleaſe, Nature will in the meane time follow her courſe: who, had ſhe endued this member with any

particular priviledge, yet had ſhe done but right, and ſhewed but reaſon. Author of the onely immortall worke, of mortall men. Divine worke according to Socrates; and love, deſire of immortalitie, and immortall Daemon himſelfe. Some man peradventure, by the effects of imagination, leaveth the pox or Kings evill heere, which his companion carrieth into Spaine againe: loe heere why in ſuch caſes men are accuſtomed to require a prepared minde, wherefore doe Phiſitians labour and practiſe before hand the conceit and credence of their patients, with ſo many falſe promiſes of their recoverie and health, vnleſſe it be that the effect of imagination may ſupple and prepare the impoſture of their decoction? They knew that one of their trades-maſter hath left written, how ſome men have been found, in whom the onely ſight of a potion hath wrought his due operation: All which humor or caprice is now come into my minde, vpon the report which an Apothecarie, whilome a ſervant in my fathers houſe, was woont to tell me, a man by knowledge ſimple, and by birth a Switzer▪ a nation little vaine-glorious, and not much given to lying, which was, that for a long time he had knowne a marchant in Tholouſe, ſickiſh, and much troubled with the ſtone, and who often had need of gliſters, who according to the 
                              ••
                           ts and occurrences of his evill, cauſed them diverſly to be preſcribed by Phiſitians. Which being brought him, no accuſtomed forme to them belonging was omitted, and would often taſte whether they were too hot, and view them well, and lying along vpon his bedde, on his bell
                              •
                           e, and all complements performed, only injection excepted, which ceremony ended, the Apothecarie gone, and the patient lying in his bed, even as if he had received a gliſter indeed, he found and felt the very ſame effect, which they doe that have effectually taken them. And if the Phyſitian ſaw it had not wrought ſufficiently, he would accordingly give him two or three more in the ſame manner. My witneſſe proteſteth, that the ſicke mans wife, to ſave charges (for he paide for them as if he had received them) having ſometimes aſſaide to make them onely with luke warme water, the effect diſcovered the craft, and being found not to worke at all, they were forced to returne to the former, and vſe the Apothecarie. A woman ſuppoſing 
                              •
                           o have ſwallowed a pinne with her bread, cried and vexed herſelfe, even as if ſhe had felt an intolerable paine in her throat, where ſhe imagined the ſame to ſticke; but becauſe there appeared n
                              ••
                           ther ſwelling or alteration, a skilfull man deeming it to be but a fantaſie conceived, or opinion, apprehended by eating of ſome gretty piece of bread, which happily night pricke her in the ſwallow, made her to vomite, and vnknowne to her, caſt a pinne in that which ſhe had vomited. Which the woman perceiving, & imagining ſhe had caſt the ſame, was preſently eaſed of her paine. I have knowne a Gentleman, who having feaſted a company of very honeſt Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, in his owne houſe, by way of ſport, and in jeaſt, boaſted two or three daies after (for there was no ſuch thing) that he had made them ea
                              •
                           e of a baked Cat; whereat the Gentlewoman of the companie apprehended ſuch horror, that falling into a violent ague and diſtemper of her ſtomacke, ſhe could by no meanes be recovered. Even brute beaſts, as well as we, are ſeene to be ſubject to the power of imagination; witneſſe ſome Dogs, who for ſorrow of their Maſters death are ſeene to die, and whom we ordinarily ſee to ſtartle and barke in their ſleep, and horſes to neigh and ſtruggle. But all this may be referred to the narrow ſuture of the Spirit and the body, entercommunicating their fortunes one vnto another. It is another thing, that imagination doth ſomtimes worke, not onely againſt her owne body, but alſo againſt that of others. And even as one body ejecteth a diſeaſe to his neighbour, as doth evidently appeare by the plague, pox, or ſore eies, that goe from one to another.
                        
                           Dum ſpectant oculi 
                                 ••
                              ſos, 
                                 •
                              aeduntur & ipſi:
                                 
                                    •
                                 uid. am. lib. 2. 219.
                           
                           Multáque corporibus tranſitione nocent.
                        
                        
                           Eies become ſore, while they looke on ſore eies:
                           By paſſage many ills our limmes ſurpriſe.
                        
                        Likewiſe the imagination mooved and toſſed by ſome vehemence, doth caſt ſome da
                              ••
                           , that may offend a ſtrange object. Antiquitie hath held, that certaine women of Scithia, being provoked and vexed againſt ſome men, had the power to kill them, onely with their looke. The Tortoiſes and the Eſtriges hatch the
                              ••
                            egges with their looks onely, a ſigne that they have ſome ejaculative vertue. And concerning witches they are ſaid to have offenſive and harme working eies.
                              Virg. buc. 
                                    •••
                                 . 3▪ 
                              
                                 •
                              03.
                        
                        Neſcio quis teneros oculus mi
                              •
                           i faſcinat agnos.
                        
                           
                              My tender Lambs I cannot ſee,
                           By what bad eie, bewitched be.
                        
                        Magitians are but ill reſpondents for me. So it is, that by experience wee ſee women to transferre divers markes of their fantaſies, vnto children they beare in their wombes: witnes ſhe that brought foorth a Blacke-a-more. There was alſo preſented vnto Charles king of Bohemia, an Emperour, a young girle, borne about Piſa, all ſhagd and hairy over and over, which her mother ſaid, to have beene conceived ſo, by reaſon of an image of Saint Iohn Baptiſt, that was ſo painted, & hung over her bed. That the like is in beaſtes, is witneſſed by Iacobs ſheepe, and alſo by partriges and hares▪ that grow white by the ſnow vpon mountaines. There was lately ſeene a cat about my owne houſe, ſo earneſtly eyeing a bird, ſitting vpon a tree, that he ſeeing the Cat, they both ſo wiſtly fixed their looks one vpon another, ſo long, that at laſt, the bird tell downe as dead in the Cats pawes, either drunken by his owne ſtrong imagination, or drawne by ſome attractiue power of the Cat. Thoſe that love hawking, have happily heard the Falkners tale, who earneſtly fixing his ſight vpon a Kite in the aire, laide a wager that with the onely force of his looke, he would make it come ſtooping downe to the ground, and as ſome report did it many times. The Hiſtories I borrow, I referre to the conſciences of thoſe I take them from. The diſcourſes are mine, and holde together by the proofe of reaſon, not of experiences: each man may adde his example to them: and who hath none, conſidering the number and varietie of accidents, let him not leave to think, there are ſtore of them. If I come not well for my ſelfe, let another come for me. So in the ſtudie wherein I treat of our manners and motions, the fabulous teſtimonies, alwaies provided they be likely and poſſible, may ſerve to the purpoſe, as well as the true, whether it hapned or no, be it at Rome, or at Paris, to Iohn or Peter, it is alwaies a tricke of humane capacitie, of which I am profitably adviſed by this report. I ſee it and reape profit by it, as well in ſhadow as in bodie. And in divers leſſons that often hiſtories affoord, I commonly make vſe of that, which is moſt rare and memorable. Some writers there are, whoſe end is but to relate the events. Mine, if I could attaine to it, ſhould be to declare, what may come to paſſe, touching the ſame. It is juſtly allowed in ſchooles, to ſuppoſe ſimilitudes, when they have none. Yet do not I ſo, and concerning that point, in ſuperſtitious religion, I exceed all hiſtoricall credit. To the examples I here ſet down, of what I have read, heard, done, or ſeene, I have ſorbid my ſelfe ſo much as to dare to change the leaſt, or alter the idleſt circumſtances. My conſcience doth not falſifie the leaſt iot. I wot not whether my inſight doth. Concerning this ſubject I doe ſometimes enter into conceit, that it may well become a Divine, a Philoſopher, or rather men of exquiſite conſcience, and exact wiſdome, to write hiſtories. How can they otherwiſe engage their credit vpon a popular reputation? How can they anſwer for the thoughts of vnknowne perſons? And make their bare conjectures paſſe for currant paiment? Of the actions of divers members, acted in their preſence, they would refuſe to beare witnes of them, if by a judge they were put to their corporall oath. And there is no man ſo familiarly knowne to them, of whoſe inward intention they would vndertake to anſwer at full I hold it le
                              ••
                           e hazardous to write of things paſt, then preſent; foraſmuch as the writer is not bound to give account but of a borrowed trueth. Some perſwade mee to write the affaires of my time, imagining, I can ſee them with a ſight leſſe blinded with paſſion, then other men, and perhaps neerer, by reaſon of the acceſſe which fortune hath given me to the chiefeſt of divers factions. But they will not ſay, how for the glory of Saluſt, I would not take the paines; as one that am a vowed enemie to obſervance, to aſſiduitie, and to conſtancie, and that there is nothing ſo contrarie to my ſtile, as a continued narration. I doe ſo often for want of breath breake off and interrupt my ſelfe. I have neither compoſition nor explication of any woorth. I am as ignorant as a childe of the phraſes and vowels belonging to common things. And therefore have I attempted to ſay what I can, accommodating the matter to my power. Should I take any man for a guid, my meaſure might differ from his. For, my libertie being ſo farre, I might happily publiſh judgements, agreeing with me, and conſonant to reaſon, yet vnlawfull and puniſhable. Plutarke would peradventure tell vs of that which he hath written, that it is the worke of others, that his examples are in all and everiewhere true, that they are profitable to poſteritie, and preſented with a luſtre, that lights and directs vs vnto vertue, and that is his worke. It is not dangerous, as in a medicinable drugge, whether in an old tale or report, be it thus or thus, ſo or ſo.
                     
                     
                        
                        The one and twentieth Chapter.
                        
                           The profit of one man is the d
                                 •
                              mage of an other.
                        
                        
                           DEmades the Athenian condemned a man of the Citie, whoſe trade was to ſell ſuch neceſſaries as belonged to burials, vnder colour, hee asked too much profit for them: and that ſuch profit could not come vnto him without the death of many people. This judgement ſeemeth to be ill taken, becauſe no man profiteth but by the loſſe of others: by which reaſon a man ſhould condemne all maner of gaine. The Marchant thrives not but by the licentiouſneſſe of youth; the Husband man by dearth of corne; the Architect but by the ruine of houſes; the Lawyer by ſutes and controverſies betweene men: Honour it ſelfe, and practiſe of religious Miniſters, is drawne from our death and vices. No Phiſitian delighteth in the health of his owne friend, ſaith the auncient Greeke Comike: nor no Souldier is pleaſed with the peace of his Cittie and ſo of the reſt. And which is worſe, let every man ſound his owne conſcience, hee ſhall finde, that our inward deſires are for the moſt part nouriſhed and bred in vs by the loſſe and hurt of others; which when I conſidered, I began to thinke, how Nature doth not gaineſay herſelfe in this, concerning her generall policie: for Phiſitians hold, that The birth, increaſe, and augmentation of every thing, is the alteration and corruption of another.
                        
                        
                           Nam quodcunque ſuis mutatum finibus exit,Lucr li. 687. 813. li. 2. 762. li. 3. 536.
                           
                           Continuo hoc mors est illius, quod fuit ante.
                        
                        
                           What ever from it's bounds doth changed paſſe,
                           That ſtrait is death of that, which erſt it was.
                        
                     
                     
                        The two and twentieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of custome, and how a receiued law ſhould not eaſily be changed.
                        
                        MY opinion is, that hee conveied aright of the force of cuſtome, that firſt invented this tale; how a countrey woman having enured herſelfe to cheriſh and beare a yoong calfe in her armes▪ which continuing, ſhee got ſuch a cuſtome, that when he grew to be a great oxe, ſhee carried him ſtill in her armes. For truely, Cuſtome is a violent and deceiving ſchoole miſtris.
                            She by little and little, and as it were by ſtealth, eſtabliſheth the foote of her authoritie in vs; by which milde and gentle beginning, if once by the aide of time, it have ſetled and planted the ſame in vs, it will ſoone diſcouer a furious and tyrannicall countenance vnto vs, againſt which we have no more the libertie to lift ſo much as our eies: weePllu. epiſ. 20. may plainly ſee her vpon every occaſion to force the rules of Nature: Vſus efficaciſſimus rerū omnium magister. Ʋſe is the most effectuall master of all things. I beleeve Platoes den mentioned in his common wealth, and the Phiſitians that ſo often quit their artes reaſon by authoritie; and the ſame King who by meanes of her, ranged his ſtomacke to be nouriſhed with poyſon; and the mayden that Albert mentioneth to have accuſtomed herſelfe to live vpon ſpiders: and now in the new found world of the Indians, there were found diverſe populous nations, in farre differing climates, that lived vpon them; made proviſion of them, and carefully fed them; as alſo of graſſe-hoppers, piſſemires, lizards, and night-bats; and a toade was ſolde for ſix crownes in a time that all ſuch meates were ſcarſe amongſt them, which they boyle, roſte, bake, and dreſſe with divers kindes of ſawces. Others have beene found to whom our vſuall fleſh and other meates were mortall and venemous. Conſuetudinis
                           
                              Cic. Tuſc. q
                                    •
                                 . 2▪
                            
                           magna est vis, Perno
                                 •
                              tant venatores in nive, in montibus vri ſe patiuntur: Pugiles caestibus
                           
                           contuſi, ne ingemiſcunt quidem. Great is the force of cuſtome: Huntſmen wilwatch all night inſnow, and endure to bee ſcorched on the hils: Fencers bruſed with (and-bags or 
                                 •
                              udgels, do not ſo much as groaue. Theſe forraine examples are not ſtrange, if wee but conſider what we ordinarily finde by travell, and how cuſtome quaileth and weakeneth our cuſtomary ſences. We neede not goe ſeeke what our neighbours report of the Cataractes of Nile; and what Phyl
                              •
                           ſophers deeme of the celeſtiall muſicke, which is, that the bodies of it's circles, being ſolid ſmooth, and in their rowling motion, touching and rubbing one againſt another, muſt of neceſſitie produce a wonderfull harmonie: by the changes and entercaprings of which, the revolutions, motions, cadences, and carrols of the aſters and planets are cauſed and tranſported. But that vniverſally the hearing ſenſes of theſe low worlds creatures, dizzied and lulled a ſleepe, as thoſe of the Aegyptians are, by the continuation of that ſound, how loud and great ſoeuer it be, can not ſen
                              •
                           ibly perceive or diſtinguiſh the ſame. Smiths, M
                              •
                           llers, Forgers, Armorers, and ſuch other, could not poſſibly endure the noiſe that commonly rings in their eares, if it did pierce them as it doth vs. My perfumed Ierkin ſerveth for my noſe to ſmell vnto, but after I have worne it three or foure daies together, not I, but others have the benefite of it. This is more ſtrange, that notwithſtanding long intermiſſions, cuſtome may joyne and eſtabliſh the effect of her impreſſion vpon our ſenſes; as they proove that dwell neere to bells or ſteeples. I have my lodging neere vnto a tower▪ where both evening and morning a very great bell doth chime Ave marie and Cover-f
                                 •
                              w, which jangling doth even make the tower to ſhake; at firſt it troubled me much, but I was ſoone acquainted with it, ſo that now I am nothing offended with it, and many times it can not waken me out of my ſleepe. Plato did once chide a child for playing with nuts, who anſwered him. Thou chid
                                 •
                              ſt me for a ſmall matter. Cuſtome replied Plato, is no ſmall matter. I finde that our greateſt vices, make their fitſt habitein vs, from our infancie, and that our chiefe government and education, lieth in our nurſes hands. Some mothers thinke it good ſport to ſee a childe wring off a chickius-necke, and ſtrive to beate a dog or cat. And ſome fathers are ſo fond fooliſh, that they will conſter as a good Augur or fore-boding of a martiall minde to ſee their ſonnes miſuſe a poore peaſant, or tug a lackey, that doth not defend himſelfe; and impute it to a ready wit, when by ſome wily diſloyaltie, or crafty deceit, they ſee them couſine and over-reach their fellowes: yet are they the trew ſeeds, or rootes of cruelty, of tyranny, and of treaſon. In youth they bud, and afterward grow to ſtrength, and come to perfection by meanes of cuſtome.
                        And it is a very dangerous inſtitution, to excuſe ſo baſe and vile inclinations, with the weakeneſſe of age, and lightneſſe of the ſubiect. Firſt it is nature that ſpeaketh, whoſe voice is then 
                              •
                           hriller, purer, and more natiue, when it is tender, newer, and youngeſt. Secondlie, the deformity of the crime conſiſteth not in the difference betweene crownes and pinnes; it depends of it ſelfe. I finde it more juſt to conclude thus. Why ſhould not hee as well deceive one of a crowne, as he doth of a pinne? Then as commonly ſome doe, ſaying, alas, it is but a pinne. I warrant you, he will not doe ſo with crownes. A man would carefully teach children to hate vices of their owne genuity, and ſo diſtinguiſh the deſormity of them, that they may not onely eſchew them in their actions, but above all, hate them in their hearts: and what colourſoeuer they beare, the very conceit may ſeeme odious vnto them. I know well, that becauſe in my youth, I have ever accuſtomed my ſelfe to treade a plaine beaten path; and have ever hated to entermeddle any manner of deceipt of couſoning-craft, even in my childith ſportes (for truely it is to be noted, that Childrens playes are not ſports, and ſhould be deemed as their moſt ſerious actions.) There is no paſtime ſo ſlight, that inwardlie I haue not a naturall propenſion, and ſerious care, yea extreame contradiction, not to vſe any deceipt. I ſhuffle and handle the cardes, as earneſtly for counters, and keepe as ſtrict an accompt, as if they were double duckets, when playing with my wife or children, it is indifferent to mee whether I winne or looſe, as I doe when I play in good earneſt. How and whereſoeuer it be, mine owne eies will ſuffice to keepe me in office; none elſe doe watch mee ſo narrowly; nor that I reſpect more. It is not long ſince in mine owne houſe, I ſaw a little man, who at Na
                                 •••
                              s, was borne without armes, and hath ſo well faſhioned his feete to thoſe ſervices, his hands ſhould have done him, that in truth they have almoſt forgotten their naturall office. In all his diſcourſes he nameth them his hands, he carveth any meate, he chargeth and ſhoots off a piſtole, he threds a needle, he ſoweth, he writeth, puttes off his cappe,

combeth his head, plaieth at cards and dice; ſhuffleth and handleth them with a great dexteritie as any other man that hath the perfect vſe of his hands: the monie I have ſometimes given him, he hath caried away with his feete, as well as any other could doe with his hands. I ſaw another, being a Childe, that with the bending and winding of his necke, (becauſe hee had no hands) would brandiſh a two-hand-Sword, & mannage a Holbard, as nimbly as any man could doe with his hands: he would caſt them in the aire, then receive them againe, he would throw a Dagger, and make a whip to yarke and laſh, as cunningly as any Carter in France. But her effects are much better diſcovered in the ſtrange impreſſions, which it worketh in our mindes where it meetes not ſo much reſiſtance. What cannot ſhe bring to paſſe in our judgements, and in our conceits? Is there any opinion ſo fantaſtical, or conceit ſo extravagant (I omit to ſpeake of the groſe impoſture of religions, wherwith ſo many great nations and ſo many woorthy & ſufficient men have bin beſotted, and drunken: For, being a thing beyond the compaſſe of our humane reaſon, it is more excuſable if a man that is not extraordinarily illuminated thereunto by divine favour, do looſe & miſ-carrie himſelfe therin) or of other opinions, is there any ſo ſtrange, that cuſtome hath not planted and eſtabliſhed by lawes in what regions ſoever it hath thought good? And this auncient exclamation is moſt juſt: Non pudet phyſicum, id est ſpeculatorem venatorémque naturae, ab animis conſuetudine imbutis quaerere teſtimonium veritatis? Is it not a ſhame for a naturall Philoſopher, that is the
                           Cic. Nat De. l. 1. 
                           watch-man and huntſ-man of nature, to ſeeke the teſtimonie of truth, from mindes endued and double dide with cuſtome? I am of opinion, that no fantaſie ſo mad can fall into humane imagination, that meetes not with the example of ſome publike cuſtome, and by conſequence that our reaſon doth not ground and bring to a ſtay. There are certaine people, that turne their backs towards thoſe they ſalute, and never looke him in the face whom they would honour or worſhip. There are others, who when the King ſpitteth, the moſt favoured Ladie in his court ſtretched forth her hand; and in an other countrey, where the nobleſt about him, ſtoupe to the ground to gather his ordure in ſome fine linnen cloth: Let vs here by the way inſert a tale. A French Gentleman was ever woont to blow his noſe in his hand, (a thing much againſt our faſhion) maintaining his ſo doing; and who in wittie jeaſting was very famous. He asked me on a time, what priviledge this filthie excrement had, that wee ſhould have a daintie linnen cloth or handkercher to receive the ſame; and which is woorſe, ſo carefully folde it vp, and keepe the ſame about vs, which ſhould be more loathſome to ones ſtomacke, than to ſee it caſt away, as wee doe all our other excrements and filth. Mee thought he ſpake not altogether without reaſon: and cuſtome had taken from me the diſcerning of this ſtrangeneſſe, which being reported of an other countrie we deeme ſo hideous. Miracles are according to the ignorance wherein we are by nature, and not according to natures eſſence; vſe brings the 
                              •
                           ight of our judgement a ſleepe. The barbarous heathen are nothing more ſtrange to vs, then we are to them: nor with more occaſion, as every man would avow, if after he had traveiled through theſe farre-fetcht examples, hee could ſtay himſelfe vpon the diſcourſes, and ſoundly conferre them. Humane reaſon is a tincture in like waight and meaſure, infuſed into all our opinions and cuſtomes, what form ſoever they be of: infinite in matter: infinite in diverſitie. But I will returne to my theame. There are certaine people, where, except his wife and children, no man ſpeaketh to the King, but through a trunke. Another nation, where virgines ſhew their ſecret parts openly, and married women diligently hide and cover them. To which cuſtome, this faſhion vſed in other places, hath ſome relation: where chaſtitie is nothing regarded but for marriage ſake; and maidens may at their pleaſure lie with whom they liſt; and being with childe, they may without feare of accuſation, ſpoyle and caſt their children, with certaine medicaments, which they haue onely for that purpoſe. And in another country, if a Marchant chance to marrie, all other Marchants that are bidden to the wedding, are bound to lie with the bride before her husband, and the more they are in number, the more honor and commendation is hers, for conſtancie and capacitie: the like if a gentleman or an officer marrie; and ſo of all others: except it be a day-labourer, or ſome other of baſe condition; for then muſt the Lord or Prince lie with the bride; amongſt whom (notwithſtanding this abuſive cuſtome) loyaltie in married women is highly regarded, and held in ſpeciall account, during the time they are married. Others there are, where publike brothelhouſes of men are kept, and where open marte of marriages are ever to be had: where women

goe to the warres with their husbands, and have place, not onely in fight, but alſo in commaund, where they doe not onely weare jewels at their noſes, in their lips, and cheekes, and in their toes, but alſo big wedges of golde through their pappes and buttocks, where when they eate, they wipe their fingers on their thighs, on the bladder of their genitories, and the ſoles of their feet, where not children, but brethren and nephewes inherite; and in ſome places, the nephewes onely, except in the ſucceſſion of the Prince. Where to order the communitie of goods, which amongſt them is religiouſly obſerved, certaine Soveraigne Magiſtrates have the generall charge of husbandry and telling of the lands, and of the diſtribution of the fruites, according to every mans neede, where they howle and weepe at their childrens deaths, and joy and feaſt at their olde mens deceaſe. Where ten or twelve men lie all in one bed with all their wives, where ſuch women as looſe their huſbands, by any violent death, may marrie againe, others not: where the condition of women is ſo deteſted, that they kill all the maiden children, ſo ſoone as they are borne, and to ſupply their naturall neede, they buy women of their neighbours. Where men may at their pleaſure, without alledging any cauſe put away their wives, but they (what juſt reaſon ſoever they have) can never put away their husbands. Where husbands may lawfully ſell their wives, if they be barren. Where they cauſe dead bodies firſt to be boyled, and then to be brayed in a morter, ſo long till it come to a kind of pap, which afterward they mingle with their wine, and ſo drinke it. Where the moſt deſired ſepulcher that ſome wiſh for, is to be devoured of dogges, and in ſome places of birds. Where ſome thinke, that bleſſed ſoules live in all liberty, in certaine pleaſant fields ſtored with all commodities, and that from them proceedes that Echo, which we heare. Where they fight in the water, and ſhute exceeding true with their bowes as they are ſwimming. Where in ſigne of ſubjection men muſt raiſe their ſhoulders, and ſtoope with their heads, and put off their ſhooes when they enter their kings houſes. Where Eunuches that have religious women in keeping, becauſe they ſhall not be loved, have alſo their noſes and lips cut off. And Prieſts that they may the better acquaint themſelves with their Demons, and take their Oracles, put out their eyes▪ Where euery man makes himſelfe a God of what he pleaſeth: the hunter of a Lion or a Fox; the fiſher, of a certaine kinde of Fiſh; and frame themſelves Idols of every humane action or paſſion: the Sunne, the Moone, and the earth are their chiefeſt Gods: the forme of ſwearing is, to touch the ground, looking vpon the Sunne, and where they eate both fleſh and fiſh raw. Where th
                              •
                            greateſt oath is to ſweare by the name of ſome deceaſed man, that hath lived in good reputat on in the countrie, touching his grave with the hand. Where the new-yeares gifts that Kings ſend vnto Princes their vaſſals euery yeare, is ſome fire, which when it is brought, all the old fire is cleane put out: of which new fire all the neighbouring people are bound vpon paine laeſae mateſtatis, to fetch for their vſes. Where, when the King (which often commeth to paſſe) wholy to give himſelfe vnto devotion, giveth over his charge, his next ſucceſſor is bound to doe like, and convaieth the right of the kingdome vnto the third heire. Where they diverſifie the forme of policie, according as their affaires ſeeme to require: and where they depoſe their Kings, when they thinke good, and appoint them certaine ancient grave men to vndertake and wealde the kingdoms government, which ſometimes is alſo committed to the communaltie, Where both men and women are equally circumciſed, and alike baptiſed. Where the Souldier, that in one or divers combate hath preſented his King with ſeven enemies heads, is made noble. Where ſomelive vnder that ſo ra
                              •
                           e and vnſociable opinion of the mortalitie of ſoules. Where women are brought a bed without paine of griefe. Where women on both their legs weare greavs of Copper: and if a louſe bite them, they are bound by duty of magnanimitie to bite it againe: and no maide dare marrie, except ſhe have firſt made offer of her Virginitie to the King. Where they ſalute one another laying the forefinger on the ground, and then lifting it vp toward heaven: where all men beare burthens vpon their head, and women on their ſhoulders. Where women piſſe ſtanding, and men cowring. Where in ſigne of true friendſhippe they ſend one another ſome of their owne bloud, and offer inſenſe to men which they intend to honour, as they doe to their Gods: where not onely kindred and conſanguinitie in the fourth degree, but in any furtheſt off, can by no meanes be tolerated in marriages: where children ſucke till they be foure, and ſometimes twelve yeares olde, in which place they deme it a diſmall thing to give a childe ſucke the firſt day of his birth Where fathers have the charge to

puniſh their male-children, and mothers only maide-children, and whoſe puniſhment is to hang them vp by the feete, and ſo to ſmoke them. Where women are circumciſed; where they eat all manner of hearbes, without other diſtinction, but to refuſe thoſe that have ill ſavour: where all things are open, and how faire and rich ſoever their houſes be, they have neither doores nor windowes, nor any cheſts to locke; yet are all theeves much more ſeverely puniſhed there, than any where elſe; where, as monkies doe, they kill lice with their teeth, and thinke it a horrible matter to ſee them cruſht between their na
                              •
                           les; where men ſo long as they live never cut their haire, nor paire their nales: another place where they only paire the nailes of their right hand, and thoſe of the left are never cut, but very curiouſly maintained: where they indevour to cheriſh all the haire growing on the right ſide, as long as it wil grow: and very often ſhave away that of the left ſide: where in ſome Provinces neere vnto vs, ſome women cheriſh their haire before, and otherſome that behinde, and ſhave the contrarie: where fathers lend their children, and husbands their wives to their gueſts, ſo that they pay ready mony: where men may lawfully get their mothers with childe: where fathers may lie with their daughters, and with their ſonnes: where, in ſolemne aſſemblies and banquets, without any diſtinction of bloud or alliance, men will lend one another their children. In ſome places men feede vpon humane fleſh, and in others, where it is deemed an office of pietie in children to kill their fathers at a certaine age: in other places fathers appoint what children ſhall live, and be preſerved, and which die and be caſt out, whileſt they are yet in their mothers wombe: where old husbands lend their wives to yong men, for what vſe ſoever they pleaſe: In other places, where all women are common without ſinne or offence: yea in ſome places, where for a badge of honour, they weare as many frienged taſ
                              •
                           els, faſtened to the skirt of their garment as they have laine with ſeverall men. Hath not cuſtome alſo made a ſeverall commonwealth of women? hath it not taught them to manage Armes? to leavie Armies, to marſhall men, and to deliver battles? And that which ſtrickt-ſearching Philoſophie could never perſwade the wiſeſt, doth ſhe not of her owne naturall inſtinct teach it to the grofeſt headed vulgare? For we know whole nations, where death is not only condemned, but cheriſhed; where children of ſeven yeares of age, without changing of countenance, or ſhewing any 
                              •
                           igne of diſmay endured to be whipped to death; where riches and worldly pelfe was ſo deſpiſed and holden ſo contemptible, that the miſerableſt and need eſt wretch of a Citie would have ſcorned to ſtoope for a purſefull of gold. Have we not heard of divers moſt fertile regions, plenteouſly yeelding al maner of neceſſary victuals, where nevertheleſſe the moſt ordinary cates and daintieſt diſhes, were but bread, water-creſſes, & water? Did not cuſtome worke this wonder in Chios, that during the ſpace of ſeven hundred yeres it was never found or heard of, that any woman or maiden had her honor or honeſtie called in queſtion? And to conclude, there is nothing in mine opinion, that either ſhe doth not, or can not: and with reaſon doth Pindarus, as I have heard ſay, Call her the Queene and Empreſſe of all the world. He that was met beating of his father, anſwered, It was the cuſtome of his houſe; that his father had ſo beaten his grandfather, and he his great-grandfather; and pointing to his ſonne, ſaid, this child ſhall alſo beate mee, when he ſhall come to my age. And the father, whom the ſonne haled and dragged through thicke and thinne in the ſtreete, commanded him to ſtay at a certaine doore, for himſelfe had dragged his father no further: which were the bounds of the hereditarie and iniurious demeanours the children of that family were wont to ſhew their fathers. By cuſtome, ſaith Ariſtotle, as often as by ſickneſſe, doe we ſee women tug and teare their haires, bite their nailes, and eate cole and earth: and more by cuſtome then by nature doe men meddle and abuſe themſelves with men. The lawes of conſcience, which we ſay to proceede from nature, riſe and proceede of cuſtome: every man holding in ſpeciall regard, and inward veneration the opinions approved, and cuſtomes received about him, can not without remorſe leave them, nor without applauſe applie himſelfe vnto them: when thoſe of Creete would informer ages curſe any man, they beſought the Gods to engage him in ſome bad cuſtome. But the chiefeſt effect of her power is to ſeize vpon vs, and ſo to entangle vs, that it ſhall hardly lie in vs, to free our ſelves from her holde-faſt, and come into our wits againe, to diſcourſe and reaſon of her ordinances; verily, becauſe wee ſucke them with the milke of our birth, and foraſmuch as the worldes viſage preſents it ſelfe in that eſtate vnto our firſt view, it ſeemeth we are borne with a condition to follow that courſe. And the common imaginations we finde in credite about vs, and by our fathers ſeede infuſed in our ſoule, ſeeme

to be the generall and naturall. Whereupon it followeth, that whatſoever is beyond the compaſſe of cuſtome, wee deeme likewiſe to be beyond the compaſſe of reaſon. God knowes how for the moſt part, vnreaſonably. If as we, who ſtudy our ſelves, have learned to doe, every man that heareth a juſt ſentence, would preſently conſider, how it may in any ſort belonging vnto his private ſtate, each man ſhould finde, that this is not ſo much a good word, as a good blow to the ordinary ſottiſhneſſe of his judgement. But men receive the admonitions of truth and her precepts, as directed to the vulgare, & never to themſelves; and in liew of applying them to their maners, moſt men moſt fooliſhly and vnprofitably apply them to their memorie. But let vs returne to cuſtomes ſoveraignety, ſuch as are brought vp to libertie, and to commaund themſelves, eſteeme all other forme of pollicie, as monſtrous and againſt nature. Thoſe that are enured to Monarchie doe the like. And what facilitie ſoever fortune affoordeth them to change, even when with great difficultie they have ſhaken off the importunitie of a tutor, they runne to plant a new one with ſemblable difficulties, becauſe they can not reſolve themſelves to hate tutorſhip. It is by the meditation of cuſtome, that every man is contented with the place, where nature hath ſetled, him: and the ſavage people of Scotland have nought to doe with Touraine, nor the Scithians with Theſſalie. Darius demanded of certaine Graecians, For what they would take vpon them the Indians cuſtome, to eate their diſeaſed fathers. (For ſuch was their maner, thinking they could not poſſibly give them a more noble and favourable tombe, than in their owne bowels) they anſwered him, That nothing in the world ſhould ever bring them to embrace ſo inhumane a cuſtome: But having alſo attempted to perſwade the Indians to leave their faſhion, and take the Graecians, which was to burne their corpes, they were much more aſtonied thereat. Every man doth ſo, forſomuch as cuſtome doth ſo bleare vs that we can not diſtinguiſh the true viſage of things.
                        
                           Nil adeo magnum, nec tam mirabile quicquamLuc. l. x. 1037.
                           
                           Principio, quod no
                                 •
                               minuant mirarier omnes
                           Paulatim.
                        
                        
                           Nothing at firſt ſo wonderous is, ſo great,
                           But all, t'admire, by little ſlake their heate.
                        
                        Having other times gone about to endeare, and make ſome one of our obſervations to be of force, and which was with reſolute auctoritie received in moſt parts about vs, and not deſiring, as moſt men doe, only to eſtabliſh the ſame by the force of lawes and examples, but having ever bin from her beginning, I found the foundation of it ſo weake, that my ſelfe, who was to confirme it in others, had much adoe to keepe my countenance. This is the receipt by which Plato vndertaketh to baniſh the vnnaturall and prepoſterous loves of his time; and which hee eſteemeth Soveraigne and principall. To wit, that publike opinion may condemne them; that Poets, and all men elſe may tell horrible tales of them. A receit by meanes whereof the faireſt Daughters winne no more the love of their fathers, nor brethren moſt excellent in beautie, the love of their ſiſters. The very fables of Thyestes, of Oedipus and of Macareus, hauing with the pleaſure of their ſongs infuſed this profitable opinion, in the tender conceit of children. Certes, chaftitie is an excellent vertue, the commoditie whereof is very well knowne: but to vſe it, and according to nature to prevaile with it, is as hard as it is caſie, to endeare it and to prevaile with it according to cuſtome, to lawes and precepts. The firſt and vniverſall reaſons are of a hard perſcutation. And our Maſters paſſe them over in gleaning, or in not daring ſo much as to taſte them, at firſt ſight caſt themſelves head-long into the libertie or ſanctuarie of cuſtome. Thoſe that will not ſuffer themſelves to be drawne out of his originall ſource, do alſo commit a greater error, and ſubmit themſelves to ſavage opinions, witneſſe Chryſippus; who in ſo many ſeverall places of his compoſitions, inſerted the ſmall accompt he made of conjunctions, how inceſtuous ſoever they were. Hee that will free himſelfe from this violent prejudice of cuſtome, ſhall find divers things received with an vndoubted reſolution, that have no other anker but the hoarie head and frowning wrimples of cuſtome, which ever attends them: which maske being pulled off, & referring all matters to truth and reaſon, he ſhall perceive his judgement, as it were over-turned, and placed in a much ſurer ſtate. As for example, I will then aske him, what thing can be more ſtrange than to ſee a people bound to follow lawes, he never vnderſtood? Being in all his domeſticall affaires, as marriages, donations, teſtaments, purchaſes, and ſales, neceſſarily bound to coſto?mary

rules, which forſomuch as they were never written nor publiſhed in his owne tongue, he cannot vnderſtand, and whereof he muſt of neceſſity purchaſe the interpretation and vſe. Not according to the ingenious opinion of Iſocrates, who counſelleth his King to make the Trafikes and negotiations of his ſubiests, free, enfranchized and gainefull, and their debates, centroverſies, and quarrels burthen-ſome, and charged with great ſubſidies, and impoſitions: But according to a prodigious opinion, to make open ſale, and trafficke of reaſon it ſelfe, and to give lawes a courſe of marchandize, is very ſtrange. I commend fortune, for that (as our Hiſtorians reporte) it was a Gentleman of Gaskonie, and my Countriman, that firſt oppoſed himſelf againſt Charles the great, at what time he went about to eſtabliſh the Latine and Imperiall lawes amongeſt vs. What is more barbarous than to ſee a nation, where by lawfull cuſtome the charge of judging is ſold, and judgements are paid for with readie money; and where juſtice is lawfully denied him, that hath not wherewithall to paie for it; and that this marchandize hath ſo great credite, that in a politicall government there ſhould be ſet vp a fourth eſtate of Lawyers, breath-ſellers, and pettifoggers, and joyned to the three ancient ſtates, to wit, the Clergie, the Nobility, and the Communaltie; which fourth ſtate having the charge of lawes, and ſometimes auctoritie of goods and lives, ſhould make a body, apart, and ſeverall from that of Nobilitie, whence double Lawes muſt follow; thoſe of honour, and thoſe of juſtice; in many things very contrarie do thoſe as rigorouſly condemne a lie pocketed vp, as theſe a lie revenged: by the law and right of armes he that putteth vp an injurie ſhalbe degraded of honour and nobilitie; and he that revengeth himſelfe of it, ſhall by the civill Lawe incurre a capitall puniſhment? Hee that ſhall addreſſe himſelfe to the Lawes to have reaſon for ſome offence done vnto his honour, diſhonoreth himſelfe. And who doth not ſo, is by the Lawes puniſhed and chaſtiſed. And of theſe ſo different parts, both nevertheleſſe having reference to one head; thoſe having peace, theſe war committed to their charge; thoſe having the gaine, theſe the honor: thoſe knowledge, theſe vertue: thoſe reaſon, theſe ſtrength: thoſe the word, theſe action: thoſe juſtice, the ſevalour: thoſe reaſon theſe force: thoſe a long gowne, & theſe a ſhort coat, in partage and ſhare. Touching indifferent things, as clothes and garments, whoſoever will reduce them to their true end, which is the ſervice and commodity of the bodie, whence dependeth their originall grace and comlines, for the moſt fantaſticall to my humour that may be imagined, amongſt others I will give them our ſquare caps; that long hood of plaited velvet, that hangs over our womens heads, with his parti-coloured traile and that vaine & vnprofitable modell of a member, which we may not ſo much as name with modeſtie, wherof notwithſtanding we make publike ſhew, and open demonſtration. Theſe conſiderations do nevertheleſſe never diſtract a man of vnderſtanding from following the common guiſe? Rather on the contrary, me ſeemeth, that all ſeverall, ſtrange, and particular faſhions proceede rather of follie, or ambitious effectation, than of true reaſon: and that a wiſe man ought inwardly to retire his minde from the common preſſe, and hold the ſame liberty and power to judge freely of all things, but for outward matters, he ought abſolutely to follow the faſhions and forme cuſtomarily received. Publicke ſocietie hath nought to do with our thoughts; but for other things, as our actions, our travel, our fortune, and our life, that muſt be accommodated and left to it's ſervice and common opinions: as that good and great Socrates, who refuſed to ſave his life by diſobeying the magiſtrate, yea a magiſtrate moſt wicked and vnjuſt. For that is the rule of rules, and generall law of lawes, for every man to obſerve thoſe of the place wherein he liveth.
                        
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           
                           Gnom. Grac. 
                                 •
                              .
                        
                        
                           Lawes of the the native place,
                           To follow, is a grace.
                        
                        Loe here ſome of another kind. There riſeth a great doubt, whether any ſo evident profite may be found in the change of a received law, of what nature ſoever, as there is hurt in removing the ſame; forſomuch as a well ſetled pollicie, may be compared to a frame or building of diuers parts joyned together with ſuch a ligament as it is impoſſible to ſtirre or diſplace one, but the whole body muſt needes be ſhaken, and ſhew a feeling of it. The Thurians Law-giver inſtituted, that, whoſoever would goe about, either to aboliſh any one of the olde Lawes, or attempt to eſtabliſh a new, ſhould preſent himſelfe before the people with a roape about his necke, to the end, that if his invention were not approved of all men, he ſhould preſently be ſtrangled. And he of Lacedaemon laboured all his life to get an aſſured promiſe of his citizens that they

would never inſringe any one of his ordinances. That Ephore or Tribune, who ſo rudely cut off the two ſtrings, that Phrin
                                 •
                              s had added vnto muſicke, reſpecteth not whether muſicke be better or no with them, or whether the accords of it be better filled, he hath ſufficient reaſon to condemne them, becauſe it is an alteration of the old forme. It is that which the old ruſtie ſwoord of juſtice of Marſ
                                 •
                              ille did ſignifie. I am diſtaſted with noveltie, what countenance ſoever it ſhew: and I have reaſon ſo to be, for I have ſeene very hurtfull effects follow the ſame. That which ſo many yeares ſince doth ſo preſſevs, hath not yet exploited all But ſome may alledge with apparance, that by accident, it hath produced and engendred all, yea both the miſchiefes and ruines, that ſince are committed without and againſt it: it is that a man ſhould blame and finde fault with.
                        Heu pati
                              •
                           r telis vulnera facta meis,Ovid. epiſt. Phyl. 48.
                        
                        
                           A las I ſuffer ſmart
                           Procur'd by mine one dart.
                        
                        Thoſe which attempt to ſhake an Eſtate, are commonly the firſt overthrowne by the fall of it: he that is firſt moover of the ſame, reapeth not alwaies the fruite of ſuch troubles; he beates and troubleth the water for others to fiſh in. The contexture and combining of this monarchie, and great building, having bin diſmiſt and diſolved by it, namely in her old yeares, giveth as much overture and entrance as a man will to like injuries. Royall Majeſtie doth more hardly fall from the top to the middle, then it tumbleth downe from the middle to the bottom. But if the inventors are more damageable, the imitators are more vicious, to caſt themſelves into examples, of which they have both felt and puniſhed the horror and miſchiefe. And if there be any degree of honour, euen in ill doing, theſe are indebted to others for the glory of the invention, and courage of the firſt attempt. All ſortes of new licentiouſneſſe doe happily draw out of this originall and frutefull ſource, the images and patterns to trouble our common-wealth. We may reade in our very lawes, made for the remedie of the firſt evill, the apprentiſage and excuſe of all ſortes of wicked enterpriſes: And in favour of publikevices, they are named with new and more pleaſing words for their excuſes, baſtardizing & allaying their true titles: yet it is to reforme our conſciences and our conceites, Honeſt a oratio eſt. It is an honeſt ſpeech and well ſaid. But the beſt pretence of innovationTeren. And. act. 1. ſce. 1. or noveltie is moſt dangerous: Adeò nihil motum ex antiquo probabile eſt. So nothing moved cut of the firſt place is allowable: Yet me ſeemeth (if I may ſpeake boldely) that it argueth a great ſelfe-love and preſumption, for a man to eſteeme his opinions ſo far, that for to eſtabliſh them, a man muſt be faine to ſubvert a publike peace, and introduce ſo many inevitable miſchiefes, and ſo horrible a corruption of manners, as civill warres, and alterations of a ſtate bring with them, in matters of ſuch conſequence, and to bring them into his owne countrie. It is not ill husbanded to advance ſo many certaine and knowne vices, for to combate conteſted and debatable errors? Is there any worſe kinde of vices, than thoſe which ſhocke a mans owne conſcience and naturall knowledge? The Senate durſt give this defeate in payment about the controverſies betweene it and the people for the myſterie of their religion: Ad deos, id magis quàm ad ſe pertinere: ipſos viſuros, ne ſacra ſuapolluantur: That that did rather belong to the Gods than to them, and the Gods ſhould looke to it, that their due rites were not polluted. A greeing with that, which the Oracle anſwered thoſe of Delphos▪
                            in the Median warre, fearing the inuaſions of the Perſians. They demaunded of that God what they ſhould doe with the treaſures conſecrated to his Temple, whether hide, or cary them away: who anſwered them, that they ſhould remove nothing, but take care of themſelves, for he was able to provide for all things that were fit for him. Chriſtian religion hath all the markes of extreame juſtice & profit, but none more apparant then the exact commendation of obedience due vnto magiſtrates, and manutention of policies: what wonderfull example hath divine wiſedome left vs, which to eſtabliſh the well-fare of humane kinde, and to conduct this glorious victorie of hers againſt death and ſinne, would not do it but at the mercy of our politik order, and hath ſubmitted the progreſſe of it, and the conduct of ſo high and worthie effect, to the blindneſſe and injuſtice of our obſervations and cuſtomes, ſuffering the innocentbloud of ſo many her favored elect to runne, and allowing a long loſſe of yeares for the ripening of this ineſtimable fruit? There is much difference betweene the cauſe of him that followeth the formes and lawes of his countrie, and him that vndertaketh to governe and change them. The firſt alleageth for his excuſe, ſimplicitie, obedience, and example; whatſoever

he doth cannot be malice, at the moſt it is but ill lucke. Quis eſt enim, quem non moue at
                           Ci
                                 •
                              . di
                                 •
                              . l. 1. 
                           clariſſimis monument is teſtata conſignata
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               antiquita? For who is he whom antiquitie will not move, being witneſſed & ſigned with former monuments? Beſides that which Iſocrates ſaith, that defect hath more part in moderation, then hath exceſſe. The other is in much worſe caſe. For he that medleth with chuſing and changing, vſurpeth the authoritie of judging: and muſt reſolve himſelfe, to ſee the fault of what he hunteth for, and the good of what he bringeth in. This ſo vulgar conſideration hath confirmed me in my ſtate, and reſtrained my youth, that was more raſh, from burthening my ſhoulders with ſo filthie a burthen, as to make my ſelfe reſpondent of ſo important a ſcience. And in this to dare, what in ſound judgement I durſt not in the eaſieſt of thoſe wherein I had beene inſtructed, and wherein the raſhnes of judging is of no prejudice. Seeming moſt impious to me, to goe about to ſubmit publike conſtitutions and vnmoveable obſervances, to the inſtabilitie of a private fantaſie (private reaſon is but a private juriſdiction) and to vndertake that on devine-lawes, which no policie would tolerate in civill law. Wherein although mans reaſon have much more commerce, yet are they ſoverainly judges of their judges: and their extreame ſufficiencie, ſerveth to expound cuſtome and extend the vſe, that of them is received, and not to divert and innovate the ſame. If at any time devine providence hath gone beyond the rules, to which it hath neceſſary conſtrained vs, it is not to give vs a diſpenſation from them. They are blowes of lier divine hand, which we ought not imitate, but admire: as extraordinarie examples, markes of an expreſſe and particular avowing of the ſeverall kinds of wonders, which for a teſtimonie of hir omnipotencie it offereth vs, beyond our orders and forces, which it is follie and impictie to goe about to repreſent, and which we ought not follow but contemplate with admiration, and meditate with aſtoniſhment. Acts of hir perſonage, and not of ours. Co
                                 •
                              ta proteſteth very opportunely. Quum de religione agitur, T. Coruncanum, P. Seipionem, P. Scaeuolam, Pontifices
                           Ci
                                 •
                              . De Nat. l. 3 p. 
                           maximos, non Zenonem, aut Cleanthem, aut Chryſippum, ſequor. When we talke of religion, I follow Titus Coruncanus, Publius Scipio, P. Scaeuola, and the profeſſors of religion, not Zeno, Cleanthes. or Chryſippus.
                        
                        May God know it in our preſent quarell, wherein are a hundred articles, yea, great and deepe articles, to be removed and altered, although many there are, who may boaſt to have exactly ſurvaid the reaſons and foundations of one and other faction. It is a number, if it be a number, that ſhould have no great meane to trouble vs. But whither goeth all this other throng? Vnder what colours doth it quarter it ſelfe? It followeth of theirs, as of other weake and ill applied medicines, the humors, that it would have purged in vs, it hath enflamed exaſperated, and ſharpned, by hir conflict, and ſtill do remaine in our bodies. It could not by reaſon of hir weakneſſe purge vs, but hath rather weakned vs; ſo that we cannot now, voide it, and by her operation we reap nothing but long, continuall, and inteſtine griefes and aches, yet is it, that fortune, ever reſerving hir authoritie above our diſcourſes, doth ſomtimes preſent vs the vrgent neceſſitie, that lawes muſt needes yeeld hir ſome place: And when a man reſiſteth the increaſe of an innovation, brought in by violence, to keepe himſelfe eachwhere and altogether in rule and bridle againſt thoſe that have the keyes of fields, to whom all things are lawfull, that may in any ſort advance their deſſeigne, that have not law, nor order, but to follow their advantage, it is a dangerous obligation and prejudiciall inequalitie.
                        Aditum nocendi perfido praeſtat fides.Sen. Oed. Act. 3. ſe
                                 •
                              . 1.
                        
                        
                           Truſt in th'vntruſtie, may
                           To hurt make open way.
                        
                        For ſo much as the ordinarie diſcipline of an eſtate, that hath his perfect health, doth not provide for theſe extraordinarie accidents, it preſuppoſeth a bodie holding it ſelfe in his principall members and offices, and a common conſent to obſerve and obey it. Lawfull proceeding, is a cold, dull, heauie, and forced proceeding: and is not like to hold out againſt a licentious and vnbridled proceeding. It is yet as all men know, a reproch to thoſe two great perſonages, Octavius and Cato, in their civill warres; the one of Scilla, the other of Caeſar, becauſe they rather ſuffered their countrie to incur all extremities, then by hir lawes to aide hir, or to innovate any thing. For truely in theſe laſt neceſſities, where nothing is left to take hould by, it were peradventure better, to ſhrug the ſhoulders, ſtoope the head, and ſomewhat yeeld to the ſtrooke, then beyond poſſibilitie to make head and reſiſt, and be nothing

the better, and give violence occaſion to trample all vnder-foote: and better were it to force the lawes to deſire but what they may, ſince they may not what they would. So did he that ordained them to ſleep foure and twentie houres: And he who for a time removed one day from the Calender: And another who of the moneth of Iune made a ſecond May. The Lacedemonians themſelues, ſo ſtrict obſeruers of their countries ordinances, being vrged by their Lawes, which preciſely forbad and inhibited to chuſe one man twice to be their Admirall, and on the other ſide their affaires neceſſarily requiring, that Lyſander ſhould once more take that charge vpon him, they created one Aracus Admirall, but inſtituted Lyſander ſuperintendent of all maritine cauſes. And with the ſame ſutteltie, one of their Ambaſſadors being ſent to the Athenians for to obtaine the change of ſome ordinance, Pericles alleadging, that it was expreſly forbid to remove the table, wherein a law had once beene ſet downe, perſwaded him but to turne it, for that was not forbidden. It is that whereof Plutarke commendeth Philopaemen, who being borne to commaund, could not onely commaund according to the lawes, but the lawes themſelues, whenſoever publike neceſſitie required it.
                     
                     
                        The three and twentieth Chapter.
                        
                           Diuers events from one ſelfe ſame counſell.
                        
                        I Ames Amiot, great Almoner of France, did once tell me this ſtorie, to the honour of one of our Princes. (And ſo he was indeed by very good tokens, albeit by ofspring he were a ſtranger) that during our firſt troubles, at the ſiege of Roane, the ſaid Prince being advertiſed by the Queene-mother of a conſpiracie and enterpriſe, that ſhould be attempted againſt his life, and by letters particularly informed him of the partie that ſhould performe it, who was a gentle-man of An
                                 •
                              ow, or Manſe, and who to that purpoſe did ordinarily frequent the ſaid Princes court; he never imparted that ſecret or communicated that warning to any man, but the next morrow walking vpon Saint Catherins hill, whence our batterie played againſt the towne (for it was, at what time we laid ſiege to Roane) with the ſaid Lord great Almoner: and another Biſhop by his ſide, he chanced to deſcrie the ſaid gentleman, whom the Queene-mother had deſcribed vnto him, and cauſed him to be called, who being come before his preſence, ſaid thus vnto him, perceaving him alreadie to waxe pale, and tremble at the alarums of his conſcience: Maiſter, ſuch a one, I am fully perſwaded you foreimagine what I will charge you with, and your countenance doth plainly ſhow it, you can conceale nothing from me: for I am ſo well inſtructed of your buſineſſe, that would you goe about to hide it, you ſhould but marre all you have perfect knowledge of this and this thing, (which were the chiefeſt props and deviſes of the ſecreteſt drifts of his complot and conſpiracie) faile not therefore as you tender your life, to confeſſe the trueth of all your purpoſe. When the ſilly man ſaw himſelfe ſo ſurprized and convicted (for the whole matter had beene diſcovered vnto the Queene by one of the complices) he had no other way, but to lift vp his handes, and begge for grace and mercie at the Princes handes, at whoſe feete he would have proſtrated himſelfe, but that he would not let him: thus following his diſcourſe. Come hither my friend, ſaid he, Did I ever doe you any diſpleaſure? Have I ever through any particular hatred, wronged or offended any friend of yours? It is not yet three weekes ſince I knew you, what reaſon might move you to conſpire and enterpriſe my death? The Gentleman with a faint-trembling voyce, and ſelfe-accuſing looke anſwered him, that no particular occaſion had ever moved him to that, but the intereſt of the generall cauſe of his faction, and that ſome of them had perſwaded him, that to roote out, and in what maner ſoever, to make away ſo great an enemy of their religion, would be an execution full of pietie, and a worke of ſupererogation. Then ſaid the Prince, I will ſhew you how much the religion which I profeſſe is more milde, than that whereof you make profeſſion: yours hath perſwaded you to kill me, without hearing me, having never been offended by me: and mine, commaundes me to pardon you, convicted as you are, that you would ſo treacherouſly and without cauſe have killed me. Goe your way, withdraw your ſelfe, let mee never ſee you heere againe, and if you be wiſe, hence-forward in your enterpriſes take boneſter men for
                           
                           your counſellers, than thoſe of your religion. The Emperour Auguſtus being in Gaule, received certaine advertiſement of a conſpiracie, that L. Cinna complotted againſt him, whereof he purpoſed to be avenged, and for that purpoſe ſent to all his friends againſt the next morrow for adviſe and counſell, but paſſed the fore-going night with great anxietie and vnreſt, conſidering that following his intent, he ſhould bring a yong Gentleman, well borne, of a noble houſe, and great Pompeyes nephew, to his death: which perplexitie produced divers ſtrange diſcourſes and conſideration in him. What? ſaid he vnto himſelfe, Shall it ever bee reported, that I doe live in feare, and ſuffer mine enemie to walke at his pleaſure and libertie? Shall he then goe free, that hath attempted and reſolved to deprive me of my life, which both by ſea and land I have ſaved from ſo many civill warres, and from ſo many battels? And now that I have eſtabliſhed an vniverſall peace in the world, ſhall he be abſolved and goe vnpuniſhed, that hath, not only determined to murther, but to ſacrifice me? (For, the complot of the conſpiracie was to murther him, when he ſhould be at ſacrifice.) After that, having taken ſome reſt with himſelfe, he with a lowder voice beganne to exclaime and cry out againſt himſelfe, ſaying, Why liveſt thou, if the lives of ſo many depend on thy death? Shall thy vengeance and cruelties never have an end? Is thy life of that worth, as it may counter vaile the ſundry miſchiefes that are like to enſue, if it be preſerved? Livia his wife being in bed with him, perceiving his agonie, and hearing his ſpeeches, ſaid thus vnto him: And may not womens counſels be admitted? Doe as Phyſitians are woont, who when their ordinarie receipts will not worke, have recourſe to the contrarie. Hitherto thou couldeſt never doe any good with ſeveritie: Lepidus hath followed Savidienus, Murena Lepidus, Coepio Murena, Egnatius Scoepio, beginne now to proove what good lenitie and clemencie will doe thee. Cinna is convicted, pardon him: To annoy or hurt thee now, he is not able, and thou ſhalt thereby encreaſe thy glory. Auguſtus ſeemed very glad to have found an Advocate of his humour, and having thanked his wife, and countermaunded his friends, whom he had ſummoned to the Counſell, commaunded Cinna to be brought before him alone. Then ſending all men out of his chamber, and a chaire prepared for Cinna to ſit in, he thus beſpake him: Firſt Cinna, I require to have gentle audience, and that thou wilt not interrupt my ſpeech, which ended, I will give thee time and leaſure to anſwer me: Thou knoweſt (oh Cinna) that when I had taken thee priſoner in mine enemies campe, who wast not only become, but borne my foe; I ſaved thee, then put thee in quiet poſſeſſion of thy goods, and at last, have ſo enriched thee, and placed thee in ſo high a degree, that even the conquerours are become envious over the conquered. The Prieſtes office, which thou beggedst at my hands, I freely beſtowed on thee, having firſt refuſed the ſame to others, whoſe fathers and friendes had in many battels ſhead their bloud for me: After all which benefites, and that I had in dutie tied thee ſo fast vnto me, thou haſt notwithſtanding vndertaken to kill me. To whom Cinna replied, crying alowde, That he had never ſo much as conceived ſo wicked a thought, much leſſe entertained the ſame. Oh Cinna, this is not according to thy promiſe, anſwered then Auguſtus, which was, that thou wouldeſt not interrupt me: What I ſay, is true, thou haſt vndertaken to murther me, in ſuch a place, on ſuch a day, in ſuch a company, and in ſuch manner: and ſeeing him ſo amazed in heart, and by his evidence ſtrucken dombe, moved thereunto, not by the condition of his promiſe, but by the guilt of his ſelfe-accuſing conſcience; why wouldeſt thou doe it, replied he, is it becauſe thou wouldeſt be Emperour? Truely the common-wealth is but in hard condition, if none but my ſelfe hinder thee from the Empire. The
                                 •
                               canſt not ſo much as defend thine owne houſe, and didſt but lately looſe a proceſſe, only by the favor of aſeely libertine. What? haſt thou no meane or power in any other matter, but to attempt Caeſars life? I quit it, if there be no man but my ſelfe to impeach thy hopes. Suppoſeſt thou that Paulus, that Fabius, that the Coſſenians or the Servillianes will ever permit thee? And ſo great a troupe of noble men, noble, not onely in name, but ſuch as by their vertues honour their nobilitie, will ever ſuffer it? After many other ſuch like diſcourſes (for he talked with him more than two houres) he ſaid vnto him; Away, oh Cinna, that life which once I gave thee, as to an enemie, I now give thee againe, as to a traitour, and a patricide: let a true friendſhip from this day forward begin betwene vs, let vs ſtrive together, which of vs two with a better faith ſhall out-goe the other, and whether I have given thy life, or thou haſt received the ſame with great confidence: and ſo left him. Shortly after he gave him the Conſulſhip, blaming him that he durſt not aske it of him. And ever after held him as his deere friend, and made him alone, heire and executor of his goodes. Now after this accident, which hapned to Augustus in the xl. yeare of his age, there was never any conſpiracie or enterpriſe attempted againſt him; and he received a juſt reward

for his ſo great clemency. But the like ſucceeded not to our Prince, for his mildneſſe and lenitie, could not ſo warrant him, but that afterward he fell into the ſnares of the like treaſon: ſo vaine and frivolous a thing is humane wiſedome: and contrary to al projects, deviſes, counſels, & precautions, fortune doth ever keepe a full ſway and poſſeſſion of all events. We count thoſe Phiſitians happy and ſucceſſefull, that ſucceſſefully end a deſperate cure, or come to a good iſſue: as if there were no other arte but theirs, that could not ſubſiſt of it ſelfe, and whoſe foundations were too feeble, to ſtand and relie vpon her owne ſtrength: and as if there were none but it, that ſtandes in neede of fortunes helpe-affoording hand, for the effecting of her operations. My conceit of it, is both the worſt and the beſt a man may imagine: for thankes be to God, there is no commerce betweene vs: I am contrary to others; for I ever deſpiſe it, and when I am ſick, in ſtead of entring into league or compoſition with it, I then beginne to hate and feare it moſt: and anſwere ſuch as vrge mee to take Phyſicke, that at leaſt they will tarie till ſuch time as I have recovered my health and ſtrength againe; that then I may the better be enabled to endure the violence and hazard of their potions. I let nature worke, and preſuppoſe vnto my ſelfe, that ſhe hath provided her ſelfe, both of teeth and clawes, to defend her ſelf from ſuch aſſaults as ſhal beſet her, and to maintaine this contexture or frame, whoſe diſſolution it ſo much hateth. In liew of bringing helpe vnto her, when ſhee moſt ſtriveth, and is combated by ſickeneſſe, I greatly feare leſt I bring ſuccor vnto her adverſarie, and ſurcharge her with new enemies. Now I conclude, that not onely in Phiſicke, but likewiſe in ſundry more certaine artes, fortune hath great ſhare in them. The Poeticall furies, which raviſh and tranſport their Author beyond himſelfe, why ſhall we not aſcribe them to his good fortune, ſince himſelfe confeſſeth, that they exceede his ſtrength and ſufficiencie, and acknowledgeth to proceede from elſewhere, than from himſelfe, and that they are not in his power, no more than Orators ſay to have thoſe ſtrange motions and extraordinary agitations, that in their arte tranſport them beyond their purpoſe? The like wee ſee to bee in painting, for ſometimes the Painters hand ſhall draw certaine lines or draughts, ſo farre exceeding his conception or skill, that himſelfe is forced to enter into admiration and amazement. But fortune yet doth much more evidently ſhewe, the ſhare ſhee hath in all their workes, by the graces and beauties that often are found in them, not only beyond the intent, but beſides the very knowledge of the workman. A heedy Reader ſhall often diſcover in other mens compoſitions, perfections farre-differing from the Authors meaning, and ſuch as haply he never dreamed of, and illuſtrateth them with richer ſenſes, and more excellent conſtructions. As for military enterpriſes, no man is ſo blinde but ſeeth what ſhare fortune hath in them: even in our counſels and deliberations, ſome chance or good lucke muſt needs be joyned to them, for whatſoever our wiſedome can effect, is no great matter. The ſharper and quicker it is, more weakeneſſe findes it in itſelfe, and ſo much the more doth it diſtruſt itſelfe. I am of Sillaes opinion: and when I neareſt conſider the moſt glorious exploites of warre, me thinkes I ſee, that thoſe who have the conduct of them, employ neyther counſell nor deliberation about them, but for faſhion-ſake, and leave the beſt part of the enterpriſe to fortune, and on the confidence they have in her ayde, they ſtill go beyond the limits of all diſcourſe. Caſuall rejoycings, and ſtrange furies enſue among their deliberations, which for the moſt induce them to take the counſell leaſt grounded vpon apparance or reaſon, and which quaile their courage beyond reaſon; whence it hath ſucceeded vnto diverſe great Captaines, by giving credite to ſuch raſh counſels, and aleaging to their ſouldiers, that by ſome divine inſpiration, and other ſignes and prognoſtications, they were encouraged to ſuch and ſuch enterpriſes. Loe here wherefore in this vncertainty and perplexitie, which the impuiſſances and inabilitie doth bring vs to ſee and chuſe what is moſt commodious, for the difficulties which the divers accidents and circumſtances of everie thing drawe with them: the ſureſt way, if other conſiderations did not invite vs thereto, is, in my conceit, to follow the partie, wherein is moſt honeſtie and juſtice; and ſince a man doubteth of the neareſt way, ever to keepe the right. As in theſe two examples I have lately mentioned, there is no doubt, but that it was more commendable and generous in him, who had received the offence, to remit and pardon the ſame, than to have done otherwiſe. If the firſt had but ill ſucceſſe, his good intent is not to be blamed; and no man knoweth, had he taken the contrary way, whether he ſhould have eſcaped the end, to which his deſtinie called him; and then had he loſt the glorie and commendations, of ſo ſeld-ſeene humanitie. Sundrie

men poſſeſſed with this feare, are read-of in auncient Hiſtories; the greateſt part of which have followed the way of fore-running the conſpiracies, which were complotted againſt them, by revenge or tortures, but I ſee very few, that by this remedy have received any good; witneſſe ſo many Romane Emperours. Hee that perceiveth himſelfe to be in this danger, ought not much to relie vpon his power, or hope in his vigilancie. For, how hard a matter is it, for a man to warrant and ſafegard himſelfe from an enemie, that masks vnder the viſage of the moſt officious and heartie-ſeeming friend we have? And to knowe the inward thoughts and minde-concealed meanings of ſuch as daily attend, and are continually with vs? It will little availe him to have forraine nations to his guard, and ever to be encircled about with troupes of Armed men; whoſoever he be that reſolveth to condemne his owne life, may at any time become maſter of other mens lives.
                        Moreover that continuall ſuſpition, which makes the Prince to miſtruſt every body, ſhould be a wonderfull vexation to his minde. And therefore when Dion was advertiſed that Callippus watched to kill him, could never finde in his heart to informe himſelfe of it: affirming; He had rather die once, than ever live in feare and miſerie, and to garde himſelfe not only from his enemies, but from his very friends. Which thing Alexander preſented more lively and vndantedly by effect, who by a letter of Parme
                                 ••
                              o having received advertiſement, that Phillip his neereſt and beſt regarded Phiſitian, had with money beene ſubborned and corrupted by Darius, to poiſon him, who at the very inſtant that he gave Phillip the letter to reade, ſwallowed downe a potion he had given him: was it not to expreſſe his reſolution, that if his friends would kill him, he would not ſhunne them, but conſent to their treachery? This Prince is the Soveraigne patterne of hazardous attempts: yet know I not whether in all his life, he ſhewed an act of more reſolute conſtancie, than this, nor an ornament ſo many waies famous. Thoſe which daily preach and buzze in Princes eares, vnder colour of their ſafetie a hee
                              •
                           y diffidence and ever-warie diſtruſtfulneſſe, doe nought but tell them of their ruine, and further their ſhame and downefall. No noble act is atchived without danger. I know one by his owne complexion of a right martiall courage, and ready for any reſolution, whoſe good and hopefull fortune is dayly corrupted by ſuch verball perſwaſions; as firſt to keepe cloſe with his friends; never to liſten to any reconciliation with his olde enemies: to ſtand vpon his owne guarde; never to commit himſelfe to any ſtronger then himſelfe, what faire promſe ſoever they make him, or whatſoever apparant profit they ſeeme to containe. I alſo know another, who becauſe he did ever follow the contrarie counſell, and would never liſten to ſuch ſchoole-reaſons, hath beyond all hope raiſed his fortune above the common reach. That boldeneſſe wherewith they ſo greedily gape after glory, is alwaies at hand, when ever neede ſhall be, as gloriouſly in a dublet as in an armor; in a cabinet as in a campe; the arme held downe, as lifted vp. A wiſedome ſo tenderly-preciſe, and ſo preciſely-circumſpect, is a mortall enemie to haughty executions. Scipio, to ſound the depth of Siphax intent, and to diſcover his minde; leaving his armie, and abandoning the yet vnſetled country of Spaine, which vnder his new conqueſt of it, was likely to be ſuſpected, he I ſay, could paſſe into Affrike only with two ſimple ſhips or ſmall barkes, to commit himſelfe in a ſtrange and foe countrie, to engage his perſon, vnder the power of a barbarous King, vnder an vnknowne faith, without either hoſtage, or letters of credence, yea without any body, but onely vpon the aſſurance of the greatneſſe of his courage, of his ſucceſſefull good fortune, and of the promiſe of his high-raiſed hopes. Habita fides ipſam plerumque fidem obligat. Moſt commonly truſting obligeth truſtineſſe. To an ambicious and fameaſpiring minde, contrariwiſe, a man muſt yeeld little, and cary a hard hand againſt ſuſpitions: Feare and diſtruſt draw on offences and allure them. The moſt miſtruſtfull of our Kings eſtabliſhed his affaires, and ſetled his eſtate, eſpecially becauſe he had voluntarily given over, abandoned and committed his life and libertie, to the hands and mercy of his enemies: Seeming to put his whole confidence in them, that ſo they might likewiſe conceive an vndoubted affiance in him. Caeſar did onely confront his mutinous legions, and oppoſe his hardly-ruled Armies, with the minde-quelling authoritie of his countenance, and awemooving fierceneſſe of his wordes: and did ſo much truſt himſelfe and his fortune, that he no whit feared to abandon and commit himſelfe to a ſeditious and rebellious Armie.
                        
                           —ſtetit aggere ful
                                 ••
                              
                              Lucan. li. 5. 296.
                           
                           Caſpitis, intrepitus vultu, meruitque timeri
                           
                              Nil metuens.
                           He on arampart ſtood of turfe vprear'd,
                           Feareleſſe, and fearing none was to be fear'd.
                        
                        True it is, that this vndaunted aſſurance can not ſo fully and lively be repreſented, but by thoſe in whom the imagination or apprehenſion of death, and of the worſt that may happen, can ſtrike no amazement at all: for, to repreſent it fearefully-trembling, doubtfull and vncertaine, for the ſervice of an important reconciliation, is to effect no great matter: It is an excellent motive to gaine the heart and good will of others, for a man to go and ſubmit himſelfe to them, provided it be done freely, and without conſtraint of any neceſſitie, and in ſuch ſort, that a man bring a pure and vnſpotted confidence with him, and at leaſt his countenance void of all ſcruple. Being yet a child, I ſaw a gentleman, who had the command of a great Citie, and by a commotion of a ſeditiouſly-furious people greatly put to his plunges, who to ſuppreſſe the riſing-fire of this tumult, reſolved to ſally out from a ſtrongly-aſſured place, where he was ſafe, and yeeld himſelfe to that many-headed monſter mutinous rowt; thrived ſo ill by it, that he was miſerably ſlaine amongſt them: yet deeme I not his overſight to have beene ſo great an iſſuing out, his memorie being of moſt men condemned, as becauſe he tooke a way of ſubmiſſion, and remiſſeneſſe, and attempted to extinguiſh that rage and hurly-burly, rather by way of following, than of guiding, and by requiring ſute, than by demonſtrative reſolution: and I deeme a gratiouſly-milde ſeveritie, with a militarie commandement, full of confidence and ſecuritie, beſeeming his ranke, and the dignitie of his charge, had better availed him, had beene more ſucceſſefull, at leaſt with more honour, and well ſeeming comlineſſe. There is nothing leſſe to bee expected or hoped for at the hands of this monſtrous-faced-multitude, thus agitated by furie, then humanitie and gentleneſſe; it will much ſooner receive reverence, and admit feare. I might alſo blame him, that having vndertaken a reſolution (in my judgement, rather brave then raſh) to caſt himſelfe inconſiderately, weake and vnarmed, amidſt a tempeſtuous Ocean of ſenceleſſe and mad men, he ſhould have gone through-ſtitch with it, and not leave the perſon he repreſented in the briers, whereas, after he had perceived the danger at hand, he chanced to bleede at the noſe; and then to change that demiſſe and flattering countenance he had vndertaken, into a diſmaide and drooping looke, filling both voice and eyes with aſtoniſhment and repentance: and ſeeking to ſquat himſelfe, hee the more enflamed, and called them vpon him. It was determined, there ſhould be a generall muſter made of divers troupes of armed men (a place fitteſt for ſecret revenges, and where they may ſafeſt be atchieved) there were moſt apparant reaſons, that the place was very vnſure, or at leaſt, to be ſuſpected, by ſuch as were to have the principall and neceſſary charge to ſurvey them. Divers counſels were propoſed, ſundry opinions heard, as in a ſubject of great difficultie, and on which depended ſo many weightie conſequences. My adviſe was, they ſhould carefully avoide to give any teſtimonie of ſuſpition, or ſhew of doubt, and that our troupes ſhould be as full as might be, and the Fyles orderly ranked, and every Souldier ſhew an vndanted carriage, and vndiſmaied countenance, and in ſtead of keeping ſome of our forces backe (which thing moſt opinions aimed at) all Captaines ſhould be put in minde to admoniſh their Souldiers to make their ſallies as orderly and as ſtrong as might be, in honour of the aſſiſtance; and ſpare no powder, which would ſerve as a gratification toward theſe ſuſpectfull troupes, which afterward cauſed a mutuall and profitable confidence. I finde the courſe that Iu
                                 •••
                              s Caeſar held to be the beſt a man may take: Firſt he aſſeved by clemencie to purchaſe the love of his very enemies, contenting himſelfe in the conſpiracies that were diſcovered vnto him, ſimply to ſhew they were not vnknowen to him, but had perfect notice of them. That done, he tooke a moſt noble reſolution, which was, without dread or diſmay, or any care-taking, to attend whatſoever might betide him, wholy abandoning and remitting himſelfe into the hands of the Gods and of fortune. For certainely, it is the ſtate wherein he was, when he was murthered in the Senate. A ſtranger having publiſhed every where, that he could teach Dionyſius the tyrant of Siracuſa away to vnderſtand and diſcover the very certaintie of all the practiſes, his ſubjects or any elſe ſhould practiſe againſt him, if he would beſtow a good ſumme of money vpon him: Dionyſius being thereof advertiſed, ſent for him, to diſcover the ſecret and vnderſtand the truth of ſo neceſſarie an arte for his preſervation: the ſtranger tolde him, there was no other skill in his arte, but that

he ſhould deliver him a talent, and then boaſt hee had learned the vſe of ſo vnvaluable a ſecret of him. Dionyſius allowed of his invention, and forthwith cauſed ſix hundred crownes to be delivered him. It is not likely that ever he would have given ſo great a ſumme of mony to an vnknowne man, but in reward of a moſt profitable inſtruction; for by way of this reputaion he kept his enemies ſtill in awe. And therefore doe Princes wiſely publiſh ſuch advertiſements as they receive of the plots conſpired, and treaſons, practiſed againſt their lives and ſtates, thereby to make men beleeve, that nothing can be attempted againſt them, but they ſhall have knowledge of it. The Duke of Athens committed many fond overſights in the eſtabliſhing of his late tyrannie vpon the Florentines, but this the chiefeſt, that having received the firſt advertiſement of the Monopolies and Complots the Florentines contrived againſt him, by Mathew, ſurnamed Morozo, one of the complices, thinking to ſuppreſſe this warning, and conceale that any in the Citie were offended at him, or grudged at his rule, cauſed him immediatly to be put to death. I remember to have heretofore read the ſtorie of a Romane (a man of ſpeciall dignitie) who flying the tyrannie of the Triumuirate, had many times by the ſutteltie of his invention, eſcaped thoſe who purſued him. It fortuned vpon a day, that a troupe of horſe-men, who had the charge to apprehend him, paſſing alongſt a hedge, vnder which he lay lurking, had well nigh diſcovered him; which he perceiving, and conſidering the dangers and difficulties he had ſo long endured, thinking, to ſave himſelfe from the continuall and daily ſearches that every where were made after him, and calling to minde the ſmall pleaſure he might hope of ſuch a life, and how much better it were for him to die once, than live in ſuch continuall feare and agonie, himſelfe called them, and voluntarily diſcovered his lurking hole, and that he might ridde them and himſelfe from further purſuite and care, did willingly yeeld vnto their crueltie. For a man to call his enemies to aid him, is a counſell ſomewhat raſh, yet thinke I, it were better to embrace it, than remaine ſtill in the continuall fit of ſuch a feaver that hath no remedie. But ſince the proviſions of man may apply vnto it, are full of vnquietneſſe and vncertaintie, much better is it with a full aſſurance to prepare himſelfe patiently to endure whatſoever may happen, and draw ſome comfort from that, which a man is never ſure ſhall come to paſſe.
                     
                     
                        The foure and twentieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of Pedantiſme.
                        
                        I Have in my youth oftentimes beene vexed, to ſee a Pedant brought in, in moſt of Italian comedies, for a vice or ſporte-maker, and the nicke-name of Magiſter to be of no better ſignification amongſt vs. For, my ſelfe being committed to their tuition, how could I chuſe but be ſomewhat jealous of their reputation? In deed I ſought to excuſe them by reaſon of the naturall diſproportion, that is betweene the vulgar ſort, and rate and excellent men, both in judgement and knowledge: forſomuch as they take a cleane contrarie courſe one from another. But when I conſidered, the choyſeſt men were they, that moſt contemned them, I was far to ſeeke, and as it were loſt my ſelfe, witneſſe our good Bellaye:
                        
                        Mais ie hay par ſur tout vnſcauoir pedanteſque.
                        Bellay.
                        
                           A pedant knowledge, I
                           Deteſt out of all cry.
                        
                        Yet is this cuſtome very ancient; for Plutarch ſaith, that Greeke and Scholer, were amongeſt the Romans, words of reproach and imputation. And comming afterwards to yeares of more diſcretion, I have found they had great reaſon, and that, magis magnos clericos, non ſunt magis magnos ſapientes. The moſt greateſt Clarkes is not the moſt wiſeſt men. But whence it may proceed, that a minde rich in knowledge, and of ſo many things, becommeth thereby never livelier nor more quicke-ſighted; and a groſe-headed, and vulgare ſpirit, may without amendment, containe the diſcourſe and judgement of the moſt excellent wits, the world ever produced, I ſtill remaine doubtfull. To receive ſo many, ſo ſtrange, yea and ſo great wits, it muſt needs follow (ſaid once a Lady vnto me, yea one of our chiefeſt Princeſſes, ſpeaking of ſome body)

                           that a mans owne wit, force, droope, and as it were diminiſh it ſelfe, to make roome for others. I might ſay, that as plants are choked by over-much moiſture, and lamps dammed with too much oyle, ſo are the actions of the mind over-whelmed by over-aboundance of matter and ſtudie: which occupied and intangled with ſo great a diverſitie of things, looſeth the mean to ſpread and cleare it ſelfe; and that ſurcharge keepeth it low-drooping and faint. But it is otherwiſe, for our mind ſtretcheth the more by how much more it is repleniſhed. And in examples of former times, the contrary is ſeene, of ſufficient men in the managing of publike affaires, of great Captaines, and notable Counſellers in matters of eſtate, to have been therewithall excellently wiſe. And concerning Philoſophers, retired from all publike negotiations, they have indeed ſometimes been vilified, by the comike libertie of their times, then opinions and demeanors yeelding them ridiculous. Will you make them judges of the right of a proceſſe, or of the actions of a man? They are readie for it. They enquire whether there be any life yet remaining, whether any motion. Whether man be any thing but an Oxe, what working or ſuffering is; what ſtrange beaſts law and juſtice are. Speake they of the Magiſtrate, or ſpeake they vnto him? They do it with an vnreverent and vncivill libertie. Heare they a Prince or a King commended? Hee is but a ſhepheard to them, as idle as a Swaine buſied about milking of his cattell, or ſhearing of his ſheepe: but yet more rudely. Eſteeme you any man the greater for poſſeſſing two hundred acres of land? They ſcoffe at him, as men accuſtomed to embrace all the world, as their poſſeſſion. Do you boaſt of your Nobilitie, becauſe you can blazon your deſcent of ſeaven or eight rich Grandfathers? They will but little regard you, as men that conceive not the vniverſall image of nature, and how many predeceſſors every one of vs hath had, both rich and poore, kings and groomes, Greekes and Barbarians. And were you lineally deſcended in the fiftieth degree from Hercules, they deeme it a vanitie to vaunt or alleadge this gift of fortune. So did the vulgare ſort diſdaine them as ignorant of the firſt and common things, and as preſumptuous and inſolent. But this Platonicall luſtre is far from that which our men ſtand in need of. They were envied as being beyond the common ſort, as deſpiſing publike actions, as having propoſed vnto themſelves a particular and inimitable life, aiming and directed at certaine high diſcourſes, and from the common vſe: theſe are diſdained as men beyond the ordinary faſhion, as incapable of publike charges, as leading an vnſociable life, and profeſſing baſe and abject cuſtomes, after the vulgar kind. Odi homines ignavos opera, Philoſophos ſententia.
                           Pac
                                 ••
                              i
                                 •
                              s Lip
                                 •
                              . l. 1. c. 10. 
                           I hate men that are fooles in working, and Philoſophers in ſpeaking. As for thoſe Philoſophers, I ſay, that as they were great in knowledge, ſo were they greater in all action. And even as they report of that Syracuſan Geometrician, who being taken from his bookiſh contemplation, to ſhew ſome practiſe of his skill, for the defence of his countrie, reared ſodainly certain terror-moving engines, and ſhewed effects farre exceeding all mens conceit, himſelfe notwithſtanding diſdaining all this his handie-worke, ſuppoſing he had thereby corrupted the dignitie of his arte; his engines and manuall works being but the apprentiſhips, and trials of his skill in ſport. So they, if at any time they have been put to the triall of any action, they have been ſeen to flie ſo high a pitch, and with ſo loftie a flight, that men might apparantly ſee their minds and ſpirits were through the intelligence of things, become wonderfully rich and great. But ſome perceiving the ſeat of politike government poſſeſſed by vnworthy and incapable men, have withdrawne themſelves from it. And hee who demaunded of Crates, how long men ſhould Philoſophize, received this anſwere, vntill ſuch time as they who have the conduct of our Armies be no longer blockiſh aſſes. Heraclitus reſigned the roialtie vnto his brother. And to the Epheſians, who reproved him for ſpending his time in playing with children before the temple: hee anſwered, And is it not better to doe ſo, then to governe the publike affaires in your companie? Others having their imagination placed beyond fortune and the world, found the ſeat of juſtice, and the thrones of Kings, to be but baſe and vile. And Empedocles refuſed the royaltie, which the Agrigentines offered him. Thales ſometimes accuſing the carke and care men tooke about good husbandry, and how to grow rich; ſome replied vnto him, that he did as the Fox, becauſe he could not attaine vnto it himſelfe: which hearing, by way of ſport he would needs ſhew by experience how he could at his pleaſure become both thriftie and rich; and bending his wits to gaine and profit, erected a traffike, which within one yeare brought him ſuch riches, as the skilfulleſt in the trade of thriving, could hardly in all their life deviſe how to get the like. That

which Ariſtotle reporteth of ſome, who called both him, and Anaxagoras, and ſuch like men, wiſe, and not prudent, becauſe they cared not for things more profitable: beſides, I do not verie well digeſt this nice difference of words, that ſerveth my find-fault people for no excuſe: and to ſee the baſe and needie fortune, wherewith they are content, we might rather have juſt cauſe to pronounce them, neither wiſe nor prudent. I quit this firſt reaſon, and thinke it better to ſay, that this evill proceedeth from the bad courſe they take to follow ſciences; and that reſpecting the manner we are inſtructed in them, it is no wonder if neither Schollers nor Maſters, howbeit they proove more learned, become no whit more ſufficient. Verily the daily care, and continuall charges of our fathers, aymeth at nothing ſo much, as to ſtore our heads with knowledge and learning; as for judgement and vertue, that is never ſpoken of. If a man paſſe by, crie out to our people; Oh what a wiſe man goeth yonder? And of another: Oh what a good man is yonder? He will not faile to caſt his eyes and reſpect toward the former. A third crier were needfull, to ſay, Oh what blocke-heads are thoſe! We are ever readie to aske, Hath he any skill in the Greeke and Latine tongue? can he write well? doth hee write in proſe or verſe? But whether hee be growne better or wiſer, which ſhould be the chiefeſt of his drift, that is never ſpoken of, we ſhould rather enquire who is better wiſe, then who is more wiſe. We labour, and toyle, and plod to fill the memorie, and leave both vnderſtanding and conſcience emptie. Even as birds flutter and skip from field to field to pecke vp corne, or any graine, and without taſting the ſame, carrie it in their bils, therewith to feed their little ones; ſo do our pedants gleane and picke learning from bookes, and never lodge it further then their lips, onely to degorge and caſt-it to the wind. It is ſtrange how fitly ſottiſnneſſe takes hold of mine example. Is not that which I doe in the greateſt part of this compoſition, all one and ſelfe ſame thing? I am ever heer and there picking and culling, from this and that booke, the ſentences that pleaſe me, not to keepe them (for I have no ſtore-houſe to reſerve them in) but to tranſport them into this: where, to ſay truth, they are no more mine, then in their firſt place: we are (in mine opinion) never wiſe, but by preſent learning, not by that which is paſt, and as little by that which is to come. But which is worſe, their Schollers, and their little ones are never a whit the more fed or better nouriſhed: but paſſeth from hand to hand, to this end onely, thereby to make a glorious ſhew, therewith to entertaine others, and with it's helpe to frame ſome quaint ſtories, or prettie tales, as of a light and counterfeit coyne, vnprofitable for any vſe or imployment, but to reckon and caſt acompts. Apud alios loqui didicerunt, non ipſi ſecum. Non
                           Se
                                 •
                              . epiſt. 108. 
                           eſt loquendum, ſed gubernandum. They have learned to ſpeake with others, not with themſelves, ſpeaking is not ſo requiſite as governement. Nature, to ſhew that nothing is ſavage in whatſoever ſhe produceth, cauſeth oftentimes, even in rudeſt and moſt vnarted nations, productions of ſpirits to ariſe, that confront and wreſtle with the moſt artiſt productions. As concerning my diſcourſe, is not the Gaskonie proverbe, drawne from a bag-pipe, prettie and quaint? Bouha prou bouha, mas à remuda lous dits quèm. You may blow long enough, but if once you ſtirre your fingers, you may go ſeeke. Wee can talke and prate, Cicero ſaith thus, Theſe are Platoes cuſtomes, Theſe are the verie words of Aristotle; but what ſay we our ſelves? what do we? what judge we? A Peroquet would ſay as much. This faſhion puts me in mind of that rich Romane, who to his exceeding great charge had beene verie induſtrious to finde out the moſt ſufficient men in all ſciences, which he continually kept about him, that if at any time, occaſion ſhould bee moved amongſt his friends to ſpeake of any matter pertaining to Schollerſhip, they might ſupplie his place, and be readie to aſſiſt him: ſome with diſcourſe, ſome with a verſe of Homer, otherſome with a ſentence, eachone according to his skill or profeſſion; who perſwaded himſelfe that all ſuch learning was his owne, becauſe it was contained in his ſervants minds. As they doe whoſe ſufficiencie is placed in their ſumptuous libraries. I know ſome, whom if I aske what he knoweth, hee will require a booke to demonſtrate the ſame, and durſt not dare to tell me that his poſteriors are ſeabious, except he turne over his Lexicon to ſee what poſteriors and ſcabious is, wee take the opinions and knowledge of others into our protection, and that is all: I tell you they muſt be enfeoffed in vs, and made our owne. Wee may verie well be compared vnto him, who having neede of fire, ſhould goe fetch ſome at his neighbours chimney, where finding a good fire, ſhould there ſtay to warme himſelfe, forgetting to carrie ſome home, what availes it vs to have our bellies full of meat, if it be not digeſted? if it bee not

tranſchanged in vs? except it nouriſh, augment, and ſtrengthen vs? May we imagine that Lucullus, whom learning made and framed ſo great a Captaine without experience, would have taken it after our manner? We relie ſo much vpon other mens armes, that we diſanull our owne ſtrength. Will I arme my ſelfe againſt the feare of death? it is at Senecaes coſt: will I draw comfort either for my ſelfe, or any other? I borrow the ſame of Cicero. I would have taken-it in my ſelfe, had I been exerciſed vnto it, I love not this relative and begd-for ſufficiencie. Suppoſe we may be learned by other mens learning. Sure I am, we can never be wiſe, but by our owne wiſedome.
                        
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           .
                        Proverb 
                              •
                           amb.
                        
                           That wiſe man I cannot abide,
                           That for himſelfe cannot provide,
                        
                        
                           Ex quo Ennius: Nequidquam ſapere ſapientem, qui ipſi ſibi prodeſſe non quiret. WhereuponEnnius. ſaith Ennius. That wiſe man is vainly wiſe, who could not profit himſelfe.
                        
                        —ſi cupidus, ſiIuvenal Sat. 8. 14. 
                           Ʋanus, & Euganeâ quantumvis vilior agnâ.
                        
                           If covetous, if vaine (not wiſe)
                           Then any lambe more baſe, more nice.
                        
                        
                           Non enim paranda nobis ſolùm, ſed fruenda ſapientia eſt. For, wee muſt not onely purchaſe wiſedome,
                           Cic. Finib. lib. 1. p. 
                           but enioy and employ the ſame. Dionyſius ſcoffeth at thoſe Gramarians, who ploddingly labour to know the miſeries of 
                              Ʋlyſſes, and are ignorant of their owne; mocketh thoſe Muſitians, that ſo attentively tune their inſtruments, and neuer accord their manners; derideth thoſe Orators, that ſtudie to ſpeake of juſtice, and never put it in execution. Except our mind be the better, vnleſſe our judgement be the ſounder, I had rather my ſcholler had emploied his time in playingat Tennis; I am ſure his bodie would be the nimbler. See but one of theſe our vniverſitie men or bookiſh ſchollers returne from ſchoole, after he hath there ſpent ten or twelve yeares vnder a Pedants charge: who is ſo vnapt for any matter? who ſo vnfit for any companie? who ſo to ſeeke if he come into the world? all the advantage you diſcover in him, is, that his Latine and Greeke, have made him more ſottiſh, more ſtupide, and more preſumptuous, then before he went from home. Whereas he ſhould returne with a mindfull-fraught, he returnes with a wind-puft conceit: in ſtead of plum-feeding the ſame, he hath onely ſpunged it vp with vanitie. Theſe Maſters, as Plato ſpeaketh of Sophiſters (their coſin germanes) of all men, are thoſe, that promiſe to be moſt profitable vnto men, and alone, amongſt all, that not onely amend not what is committed to their charge, as doth a carpenter or a maſon, but empaire and deſtroy the ſame, and yet they muſt full dearely be paied. If the law which Protagoras propoſed to his diſciples, were followed, which was, that either they ſhould pay-him according to his word, or ſweare in the temple, how much they eſteemed the profit they had received by his diſcipline, and accordingly ſatisfie him for his paines, my Pedagogues would be aground, eſpecially if they would ſtand to the oath of my experience. My vulgar Perigordin-ſpeech doth verie pleaſantly terme ſuch ſelfe-conceited wiſards, Letter-ferits, as if they would ſay letter ſtrucken men, to whom (as the common ſaying is) letters have given a blow with a mallet. Verily for the moſt part they ſeeme to be diſtracted even from common ſenſe. Note but the plaine husbandman, or the vnwilie ſhoomaker, and you ſee them ſimply and naturally plod on their courſe, ſpeaking onely of what they know, and no further; whereas theſe letter-puft pedants, becauſe they would faine raiſe themſelves aloft, and with their litterall doctrine which floteth vp and downe the ſuperficies of their braine, arme themſelves beyond other men, they vnceſſantly intricate and entangle themſelves: they vtter loftie words, and ſpeake golden ſentences, but ſo that another man doth place, fit, and applie them. They are acquainted with Galen, but know not the diſeaſe. They will ſtuffe your head with lawes, when God wot they have not yet conceived the ground of the caſe. They know the Theorike of all things, but you muſt ſeeke who ſhall put it in practiſe. I have ſeene a friend of mine, in mine owne houſe, who by way of ſport talking with one of theſe pedanticall gulls, counterfeited a kind of fuſtian tongue, and ſpake a certaine gibriſh, without rime or reaſon, ſans head or foote, a hotch-pot of diverſe things, but that he did often enterlace it with inke-pot termes, incident to their diſputations, to ammuſe the bookiſh ſot for a whole day long with debating and contending; ever thinking he anſwered the Objections made vnto him; yet was he a man of

letters, and reputation, a graduate, and wore a goodly formall long gowne.
                        
                           
                              Ʋos ô patritius ſanguis quos vivere par eſtPerſ. ſat. 1. 61.
                           
                           Occipiticaeco, poſticae occurrite ſannae.
                        
                        
                           You noble bloods, who with a noddle blind,
                           Should live, meet with the mocke that's made behind.
                        
                        Whoſover ſhall narrowly looke into this kind of people, which far and wide hath ſpred it ſelfe, he ſhall find (as I have done,) that for the moſt part, they neither vnderſtand themſelves, nor others, and that their memorie is many times ſufficiently full fraught, but their judgement ever hollow & emptie: except their naturall inclination have of it ſelfe otherwiſe faſhioned them. As I have ſeene Adrianus Turnebus, who having never profeſſed any thing but ſtudie and letters, wherein he was, in mine opinion, the worthieſt man that lived theſe thouſand yeares, and who notwithſtanding had no Pedanticall thing about him, but the wearing of his gowne, and ſome externall faſhions, that could not well be reduced, and incivilized to the courtiers cut; things of no conſequence. And I naturally hate our people, that will more hardly endure a long roabe vncuriouſly worne, then a croſſe skittiſh mind: & that obſerve what leg, or reverence he makes, note his garbe or demeanor, view his boots, or his hat, and marke what maner of man he is. For his inward parts, I deeme him to have been one of the moſt vnſpotted and truly honeſt minds that ever was. I have ſundry times of purpoſe vrged him to ſpeake of matters furth eſt from his ſtudy, wherein he was ſo cleare-ſighted, and could with ſo quicke an apprehenſion conceive, and with ſo ſound a judgement diſtinguiſh them, that he ſeemed never to have profeſſed or ſtudied other facultie then warre, and matters of ſtate. Such ſpirits, ſuch natures may be termed worthy, goodly, and ſolide.
                        —queis arte benignaIuven ſat. 14. 34. Et meliore luto fi
                              •
                           xit praecordia Titan,
                        
                           Whoſe bowels heavens-bright-Sunne compoſed
                           Of better 
                                 •
                               old, art wel-diſpoſed,
                        
                        That maintaine themſelves againſt any bad inſtitution. Now it ſufficeth not that our inſtitution marre vs not, it muſt change vs to the better. There are ſome of our Pa
                              •
                           haments and Courts, who when they are to admit of any officers, doe only examine them of their learning; others, that by preſenting them the judgement of ſome law caſes, endevour to ſound their vnderſtanding. Me thinks the latter keep the better ſtile: And albeit theſe two parts are neceſſarie, and both ought to concur in one, yet truely ſhould that of learning be leſſe prized then judgement, this may well be without the other, and not the other without this. For as the Greeke verſe ſaith.
                        
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           .
                        
                           Com
                                 ••
                               Gr
                                 ••
                              . 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           .
                        
                           Learning nought worth doth lie,
                           Be not diſcretion by.
                        
                        Whereto ſerveth learning, if vnderſtanding be not joyned to it? Oh would to God, that for the good of our juſtice, the ſocieties of Lawyers were as well ſtored with judgement, diſcretion, and conſcience, as they are with learning and wit. Non vitae, ſed ſcholae diſcimus. We
                           
                              
                                 ••
                              n epiſt. 106. f. 
                           learne not for our life, but for the ſchoole. It is not enough to joyne learning and knowledge to the minde, it ſhould be incorporated vnto it: it muſt not be ſprinckled, but dyed with it; and if it change not and better hir eſtate (which is imperfect) it were much better to leave it. It is a dangerous Sword, and which hindreth and offendeth hir maſter, if it be in a weake hand, and which hath not the skill to manage the ſame: Vt fuerit melius non didiciſſe: So as it were better that we had not learned. It is peradventure the cauſe, that neither we, nor divinitie require not much learning in women; and that Francis Duke of Britannie, ſonne to Iohn the fifth, when he was ſpoken vnto for a marriage betweene him and Iſabel a daughter of Scotland; and ſome told him ſhe was but meanly brought vp, and without any inſtruction of learning, anſwered, hee loved hir the better for it, and that a woman was wiſe enough, if ſhe could but make a difference betweene the ſhirt and dublet of hir husbands. It is alſo no ſuch wonder (as ſome ſay) that our aunceſters did never make any great accompt of Letters, and that even at this day (except it be by chaunce) they are not often found in our Kings or Princes chiefeſt councels and conſultations: And if the end to grow rich by them, which now-adaies is altogether propoſed vnto vs by the ſtudie of Law, of Phiſicke, of Pedantiſme, and of Divinitie; did not keep them in credit, without doubt you ſhould ſee them

as beggarly and needy, and as much vilified as ever they were. And what hurt I pray you, ſince they neither teach vs to think well, nor do well? Postquam docti prodiderunt, boni deſunt.
                              Se
                                    •
                                 . epiſt. 95. 
                              Since men became learned, good men failed. Each other ſcience is prejudiciall vnto him, that hath not the ſcience of goodneſſe. But may not the reaſon I whilome ſought for, alſo proceed thence? That our ſtudie in France, having as it were no other aime but profit, but thoſe leſſe whom nature hath produced to more generous offices, then lucrative, giving themſelves vnto learning, or ſo briefely (before they have apprehended any liking of them, retired vnto a profeſſion that hath no communitie with bookes) there are then none left, altogether to engage themſelves to ſtudie and Bookes, but the meaner kind of people, and ſuch as are borne to baſe fortune, and who by learning and letters ſeek ſome meane to live, and enrich themſelves. The minds of which people being both by naturall inclination, by example, and familiar inſtitution, of the baſeſt ſtampe, do falſely reap the fruit of learning. For it is not in hir power to give light vnto the mind, that hath none, nor to make a blind man to ſee. The myſterie of it is not to affoord him ſight, but to direct it for him, to addreſſe his goings, alwaies provided he have feet of his owne, and good, ſtraite, and capable legs. Knowledge is an excellent drug, but no drug is ſufficiently ſtrong to preſerve it ſelfe without alteration or corruption, according to the fault of the veſſell, that containes it. Some man hath a cleare ſight, that is not right-ſighted; and by conſequence ſeeth what good is, and doth not follow it; and ſeeketh knowledge, but makes no vſe of it. The chiefeſt ordinance of Plato in his common wealth is, to give vnto his Citizens their charge, according to their nature. Nature can do all, and doth all. The crookt backt, or deformed, are vnfit for any exerciſe of the bodie, and crooked and miſhappen minds vnproper for exerciſes of the minde. The baſtard and vulgar ſort are vnworthy of Philoſophie. When we ſee a man ill ſhod, if he chaunce to be a Shoomaker, wee ſay it is no wonder, for commonly none goes worſe ſhod then they. Even ſo it ſeemes, that experience doth often ſhew vs, a Phiſitian leſſe healthy, a Divine leſſe reformed, and moſt commonly a Wiſeman leſſe ſufficient then an other. Ariſto Chius had heeretofore reaſon to ſay, that Philoſophers did much hurt to their auditors, foraſmuch as the greateſt number of minds are not apt to profit by ſuch inſtructions, which, if they take not a good, they will follow a bad courſe: 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            
                           Ariſtippi, acerbos ex Zenonis ſchola
                           Cic. Nat. Deor. li. 3. 
                           exire. They proceed licentious out of the Schoole of Ariſtippus, but bitter out of the Schoole of Zeno. In that excellent inſtitution which Zenophon giveth the Perſians, wee find, that as other Nations teach their children Letters, ſo they taught theirs vertue. Plato ſaid the eldeſt borne ſonne, in their royall ſucceſſion, was thus taught. As ſoone as he was borne, he was delivered, not to women, but to ſuch Eunuches, as by reaſon of their vertue were in chiefeſt authoritie about the King. Their ſpeciall charge was firſt to ſhapen his limmes and bodie, goodly, and healthy; and at ſeaven yeares of age, they inſtructed and inured him to ſit on horſebacke, and to ride a hunting: when he came to the age of fourteene, they delivered him into the hands of foure men, that is to ſay, the wiſeſt, the juſteſt, the moſt temperate, and the moſt valiant of all the nation. The firſt taught him religion; the ſecond, to be ever vpright and true; the third, to become Maſter of his owne deſires; and the fourth, to feare nothing. It is a thing worthy great conſideration, that in that excellent, and as I may terme it, matchleſſe pollicie of Lycurgus,
                            and in truth, by reaſon of her perfection, monſtrous, yet notwithſtanding, ſo carefull for the education of children, as of her principall charge, and even in the Muſes boſome and reſting-place, there is ſo little mention made of learning: as if that generous youth diſdaining all other yokes but of vertue, ought onely be furniſhed, in liew of tutors of learning, with maſters of volour, of juſtice, of wiſedome, and of temperance. An example which Plato hath imitated in his Lawes. The manner of their diſcipline was, to propound queſtions vnto them, teaching the judgement of men and of their actions: and if by way of reaſon or diſcourſe, they condemned or praiſed, either this man, or that deede, they muſt be told the trueth and beſt: by which meanes at once they ſharpned their wits, and learned the right. Af
                                 ••
                              ages in Zenophon calleth Cyrus to an accompt of his laſt leſſon: It is (ſaith he) that a great lad in our Schoole, having a little coate, gave it to one of his fellowes, that was of leſſer ſtature than himſelfe, and tooke his coate from him, which was too big for him: our Maſter having made me judge of that difference, I judged that things muſt be left in the ſtate they were in, and that both ſeemed to be better fitted as they were; whereupon he ſhewed me, I had done ill; becauſe I had not onely conſidered the

comelineſſe, where I ſhould chiefly have reſpected juſtice, which required, that none ſhould be forced in any thing which properly belonged to him, and ſaid, he was whi
                              •
                           t for it, as we are in our countrie-townes, when we have forgotten the firſt preterperfect tenſe or A
                                 •
                              
                              riſt
                                 •
                              e of 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           . My Regent might long enough make me a prolixe and cunning Oration in genere demonſtrativo, in the oratorie kind of praiſe or diſpraiſe, before ever hee ſhould perſwade me his Schoole is worth that. They have gone about to make the way ſhorter: and ſince Sciences (even when they are right taken) can teach vs nothing but wiſedome, honeſtie, integritie, and reſolution; they have at firſt ſight, attempted to put their children to the proper of effects, and inſtruct them, not by heare-ſay, but by aſſay of action, lively modelling and framing them, not onely by precepts and wordes, but principally by examples and works, that it might not be a Science in their mind, but rather his complexion and habitude; not a purchaſe, but a naturall inheritance.
                        To this purpoſe when Ageſilaus was demaunded, what his opinion was, children ſhould learne: anſwered, What they ſhould doe being men. It is no marvell, if ſuch an inſtitution have produced ſo admirable effects. Some ſay, that in other Cities of Greece they went to ſeeke for Rhetoricians, for Painters, and for Muſicians▪ whereas in L
                                 •••
                              d
                                 •
                              m
                                 ••
                              , they fought for Law-givers, for Magiſtrates, and Generals of a
                              〈…〉
                           s: In A44Span
                                 ••
                              s men learn'd to ſay well, but heere, to doe well: there to reſolve a ſophiſticall argument, and to confound the impoſture and amphibologie of words, captiouſly enterlaced together; heere to ſhake off the allurements of voluptuouſneſſe, and with an vndanted courage to contemne the threats of fortune, and reject the menaces of death: thoſe buſied and laboured themſelves about idle wordes, theſe after martiall things: there the tongue was ever in continuall exerciſe of ſpeaking, heere the minde in an vnceſſant practiſe of well-doing. And therefore was it not ſtrange, if Antipater requiring fiftie of their children for hoſtages, they anſwered cleane contrarie to that we would doe, that they would rather deliver him twice ſo many men; ſo much did they value and eſteeme the loſſe of their countries education. When Ageſilau
                                 •
                              
                            inv
                              •
                           t
                              ••
                           h Xenophon to ſend his children to Sparta, there to be brought vp; it is not, becauſe they ſhould learne Rhetorike, or Logike, but, as himſelfe ſaith, to the end they may learne the worthieſt and beſt ſcience that may bee 
                                 ••
                              o wit, the knowledge how to obey, and the skill how to commaund. It is a ſport to ſee Socrates, after his blunt manner, to mocke Hippias, who reporteth vnto him, what great ſummes of money he had gained, eſpecially in certaine little Cities, and ſmall townes of Sicily, by keeping ſchoole, and teaching letters, and that at Sparta he could not get a ſhilling. That they were but Idiots and fooliſh people, who can neither meaſure nor eſteeme; nor make no accompt of Grammer, or of Rythmes; and who onely ammuſe themſelves to know the ſucceſſion of Kings, the eſtabliſhing and declination of eſtates, and ſuch like traſh of flim-flam tales. Which done, Socrates forcing him particularly to allow the excellencie of their forme of publike government, the happineſſe and vertue of their private life, remits vnto him to gueſſe the concluſion of the vnprofitableneſſe of his artes. Examples teach vs both in this martiall policie, and in all ſuch like, that the ſtudie of ſciences doth more weaken and eſteminate mens minds, then corroborate and adapt them to warre. The mightieſt, yea the beſt ſetled eſtate, that is now in the world, is that of the Turkes, a nation equally inſtructed to the eſteeme of armes, and diſeſteeme of letters. I find Rome to have beene moſt valiant, when it was leaſt learned. The moſt warlike nations of our daies, are the rudeſt and moſt ignorant. The Scithians, the Parthians, and Tamburlane, ſerve to verifie my ſaying. When the Gothes over-ran and ravaged Greece; that which ſaved all their Libraries from the fire, was, that one among them, ſcattered this opinion, that ſuch traſh of bookes and papers muſt be left vntoucht and whole for their enemies, as the only meane, and proper inſtrument to divert them from all militarie exerciſes, and ammuſe them to idle, ſecure, and ſedentarie occupations. When our King Charles the eight, in a manner without vnſheathing his ſword, ſaw himſelfe abſolute Lord of the whole kingdome of Naples, and of a great part of Thuſcanie, the Princes and Lords of his traine, aſcribed this ſodaine, and vnhoped for victorie, and facilitie of ſo noble and prodigious a conqueſt, only to this, that moſt of the Princes and nobilitie of Italie ammuſed themſelves rather to become ingenious and wiſe by learning, then vigorous and warriers by militarie exerciſes.
                     
                     
                        
                        The fiue and twentieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of the inſtitution and education of Children; to the Ladie Diana of Foix, Counteſſe of Gurſon.
                        
                        I Never knew father, how crooked and deformed ſoever his ſonne were, that would either altogether caſt him off, or not acknowledge him for his owne: and yet (vnleſſe he be meerely beſotted or blinded in his affection) it may not be ſaid, but he plainly perceiveth his defects, and hath a feeling of his imperfections. But ſo it is, he is his owne. So is it in my ſelfe. I ſee better then any man elſe, that what I have ſet downe, is nought but the fond imaginations of him, who in his youth hath taſted nothing but the par
                              •
                           ng, and ſeen but the ſuperficies of true learning: whereof he hath retained but a generall and ſhapeleſſe forme: a ſmacke of every thing in generall, but nothing to the purpoſe in particular: After the French manner. To be ſhort, I know there is an arte of Phiſicke; a courſe of lawes; foure parts of the Mathematikes; and I am not altogether ignorant, what they tend vnto. And perhaps I alſo know the ſcope and drift of Sciences in generall, to be for the ſervice of our life. But to wade further, or that ever I tired my ſelfe with plodding vpon Aristotle (the Monarch of our moderne doctrine) or obſtinately continued in the ſearch of any one ſcience: I confeſſe I never did it. Nor is there any one arte, whereof I am able ſo much as to draw the firſt lineaments. And there is no ſcholler (be he of the loweſt forme) that may not repute himſelfe wiſer then I, who am not able to appoſe him in his firſt leſſon: and if I be forced to it, I am conſtrained verie impertinently to draw in matter from ſome generall diſcourſe, whereby I examine, and give a gueſſe at his naturall judgement: a leſſon as much vnknowne to them, as theirs is 
                              〈…〉
                           . I 
                              ••
                           ve not dealt or had commerce with any excellent booke, except Plutarke or Sene
                                 ••
                              , from whom (as the Dan
                                 •
                              ïdes) I draw my water, vnceſſantly filling, and as faſt emptying: ſome thing whereof I faſten to this paper, but to my ſelfe nothing at all. And touching bookes: Hiſtorie is my chiefe ſtudi
                              •
                           , Poeſie my onely delight, to which I am particularly affected: 
                              •
                           or as Cl
                                 〈…〉
                              s ſaid, that as the voice being forciblie pent in the narrow g
                              〈…〉
                           t of a trumpet, at laſt iſſueth forth more ſtrong and ſhriller, ſome ſeemes, that a ſentence cunningly and cloſely couched in meaſure-keeping Poſie, darts it ſelfe forth more furiouſly, and 
                              •
                           ou
                              •
                           ds me even to the quicke. And concerning the naturall faculties that are in me, (whereof behold heere an eſſay) I perceive them to faint vnder their owne burthen; my conceits, and my judgement march but vncertaine, and as it were groaping, ſtraggering, and ſtumbling at every ruſh: And when I have gone as far as I can, I have no whit pleaſed my ſelfe: for the further I ſaile, the more land I deſcrie, and that ſo dimmed with fogges, and over-caſt with cloudes, that my ſight is ſo weakned, I cannot diſtinguiſh the ſame. And then vndertaking to ſpeake indifferently of all that preſents it ſelfe vnto my fantaſie, and having nothing but mine owne naturall meanes to imploy therein, if it be my hap (as commonly it is) among good Authors, to light vpon thoſe verie places which I haue vndertaken to treat off, as even now I did in Plutarke, reading his diſcourſe of the power of imagination, wherein in regard of thoſe wiſe men, I acknowledge my ſelfe ſo weake, and ſo poore, ſo dull and groſe-headed, as I am forced both to pittie and diſdaine my ſelfe, yet am I pleaſed with this, that my opinions have often the grace to jumpe with theirs, and that I follow them a loofe off, and thereby poſſeſſe at leaſt, that which all other men have not; which is, that I know the vtmoſt difference betweene them and my ſelfe: all which notwithſtanding I ſuffer my inventions to run abroad, as weake and faint, as I have produced them, without bungling and botching the faults, which this compariſon hath diſcovered to me in them. A man had need have a ſtrong backe, to vndertake to march foote to foote with theſe kind of men. The indiſcreet writers of our age, amidſt their triviall compoſitions, intermingle and wreſt in whole ſentences taken from ancient Authors, ſuppoſing by ſuch filching-theft to purchaſe honour and reputation to themſelves, doe cleane contrarie. For, this infinite varietie and diſſemblance of luſtres, makes a face, ſo wan, ſo il-favored, and ſo vglie, in reſpect of theirs, that they looſe much more then gaine thereby. Theſe were two contrarie

humours: The Philoſopher Chriſippus was wont to foiſt-in amongſt his bookes, not onely whole ſentences, and other long long diſcourſes, but whole bookes of other Authors, as in one, he brought in Euripides his Medea. And Appollodorus was wont to ſay of him, that if one ſhould draw from out his bookes, what he had ſtolne from others, his paper would remaine blanke. Where as Epicurus cleane contrarie to him in three hundred volumes, he left behind him, had not made vſe of one allegation. It was my fortune not long ſince to light vpon ſuch a place: I had languiſhingly traced after ſome French words, ſo naked and ſhallow, and ſo void either of ſence or matter, that at laſt I found them to be nought but meere French words; and after a tedious and weariſome travell, I chanced to ſtumble vpon an high, rich, and even to the clouds-raiſed piece, the deſcent whereof had it been ſomewhat more pleaſant or eaſie, or the aſcent reaching a little further, it had been excuſable, and to be borne-withall; but it was ſuch a ſteepie downe-fall, and by meere ſtrength hewen out of the maine rocke, that by reading of the firſt ſixe words, me thought I was carried into another world: whereby I perceive the bottome whence I came to be ſo low and deep, as I durſt never more adventure to go through it; for, if I did ſtuffe any one of my diſcourſes with thoſe rich ſpoiles, it would manifeſtly cauſe the ſottiſhneſſe of others to appeare. To reprove mine owne faults in others, ſeemes to me no more vnſufferable, then to reprehend (as I doe often) thoſe of others in my ſelfe. They ought to be accuſed everywhere, and have all places of Sanctuarie taken from them: yet do I know how over-boldly, at all times I adventure to equall my ſelfe vnto my filchings, and to march hand in hand with them; not without a fond-hardie hope, that I may perhaps be able to bleare the eyes of the judges from diſcerning them. But it is as much for the benefit of my application, as for the good of mine invention and force. And I doe not furiouſly front, and bodie to bodie wreſtle with thoſe old champions: it is but by ſleights, advantages, and falſe-offers I ſeek to come within them, and if I can, to give them a fall. I do not raſhly take them about the necke, I do but touch them, nor do I go ſo far as by my bargaine I would ſeeme to doe; could I but keepe even with them, I ſhould then be an honeſt man; for I ſeeke not to venture on them, but where they are ſtrongeſt. To doe as I have ſeen ſome, that is, to ſhroud themſelves vnder others armes, not daring ſo much as to ſhow their fingers ends vnarmed, and to botch vp all their works (as it is an eaſie matter in a common ſubiect, namely for the wiſer ſort) with ancient inventions, heere and there hudled-vp together. And in thoſe who endevored to hide what they have filched from others, and make it their owne, it is firſt a manifeſt note of injuſtice, then a plaine argument of cowardlineſſe; who having nothing of any worth in themſelves to make ſhow of, will yet vnder the countenance of others ſufficiencie goe about to make a faire offer: Moreover (oh great fooliſhneſſe) to ſeek by ſuch coſening tricks to foreſtall the ignorant approbation of the common ſort, nothing fearing to diſcover their ignorance to men of vnderſtanding (whoſe praiſe onely is of value) who will ſoone trace out ſuch borrowed ware. As for me, there is nothing I will doe leſſe. I never ſpake of others, but that I may the more ſpeake of my ſelfe. This concerneth not thoſe mingle-mangles of many kinds of ſtuffe, or as the Grecians call them Rapſodies, that for ſuch are publiſhed, of which kind I have (ſince I came to yeares of diſcretion) ſeen divers moſt ingenious and wittie; amongſt others, one vnder the name of Capilupus; beſides many of the ancient ſtampe. Theſe are wits of ſuch excellence, as both here and elſewhere they will ſoone be perceived, as our late famous writer Lipſius, in his learned and laborious work of the Polit
                              •
                           kes: yet whatſoever come of it, for ſo much as they are but follies, my intent is not to ſmother them, no more then a bald and hoarie picture of mine, where a Painter hath drawne not a perfect viſage, but mine owne. For, howſoever, theſe are but my humors and opinions, and I deliver them but to ſhow what my conceit is, and not what ought to be beleeved. Wherein I ayme at nothing but to diſplay my ſelfe, who peradventure (if a new prentiſhip change me) ſhall be an other to morrow. I have no authoritie to purchaſe beliefe, neither do I de
                              •
                           ire it; knowing well that I am not ſufficiently taught to inſtruct others. Some having read my precedent Chapter, told me not long ſince in mine owne houſe, I ſhould ſomewhat more have extended my ſelfe in the diſcourſe concerning the inſtitution of children. Now (Madam) if there were any ſufficiencie in me, touching that ſubiect, I could not better imploy the ſame, then to beſtow it as a preſent vpon that little lad, which ere long threatneth to make a happie iſſue from out your honorable wombe: for (Madame) you are too generous to begin

with other then a man childe. And having had ſo great a part in the conduct of your ſucceſſefull marriage, I may challenge ſome right and intereſt in the greatneſſe and proſperitie of all that ſhall proceed from it: moreover, the ancient and rightfull poſſeſſion, which you from time to time have ever had, and ſtill have over my ſervice, vrgeth me with more then ordinarie reſpects, to wiſh all honour, well-fare and advantage to whatſoever may in any ſort concerne you and yours. And truely, my meaning is, but to ſhew, that the greateſt difficultie, and importing all humane knowledge, ſeemeth to be in this point, where the nurture and inſtitution of young children is in queſtion. For, as in matters of husbandrie the labor that muſt be vſed before ſowing, ſetting, and planting, yea in planting it ſelfe, is moſt certaine and eaſie. But when that which was ſowen, ſet, and planted, commeth to take life; before it come to ripeneſſe, much adoe, and great varietie of proceeding belongeth to it. So in men, it is no great matter to get them, but being borne, what continuall cares, what diligent attendance, what doubts and feares, doe daily waite on their parents and tutors, before they can be nurtured and brought to any good? The fore-ſhew of their inclination whileſt they are young is ſo vncertaine, their humours ſo variable, their promiſes ſo changing, their hopes ſo falſe, and their proceedings ſo doubtfull, that it is very hard, (yea for the wiſeſt) to ground any certaine judgement, or aſſured ſucceſſe vpon them. Behold Cymon, view Th
                                 •••
                              iſtocles, and a thouſand others, how they have differed, and fallen to better from themſelves, and deceive the expectation of ſuch as knew them. The young whelps both of Dogges and Beares, at firſt ſight ſhew their naturall diſpoſition, but men headlong imbracing this cuſtome or faſhion, following that humor or opinion, admitting this or that paſſion, allowing of that of this law, are eaſily changed, and ſoone diſguiſed; yet is it hard to force the naturall propenſion or readineſſe of the mind, whereby it followeth, that for want of heedie fore-ſight in thoſe that could not guide their courſe well, they often employ much time in vaine, to addreſſe young children in thoſe matters, whereunto they are not naturally addicted. All which difficulties notwithſtanding, mine opinion is, to bring them vp in the beſt and pro
                              ••
                           a
                              •••
                           ſt ſtudies, and that a man ſhould ſlightly paſſe-over thoſe fond preſages, and deceiving prognoſtikes, which we over-preciſely gather in their infancie. And (without offence be it ſaid) me thinks, that Plato in his common-wealth alloweth them too▪too much authoritie.
                        Madame, Learning joyned with true knowledge is an eſpeciall and gracefull ornament, and an implement of wonderfull vſe and conſequence, namely in perſons raiſed to that degree of fortune, wherein you are. And in good trueth, learning hath not her owne true forme, nor can ſhe make ſhew of her beauteous lineaments, if ſhe fall into the hands of baſe and vile perſons. [For, as famous Torquato Taſſo ſaith; Philoſōphie being a rich and noble Queene, and knowing her owne worth, graciouſly ſmileth vpon, and lovingly embraceth Princes and noble men, if they become ſuters to her, admitting them as her minions, and gently affoording them all the favours ſhe can; whereas vpon the contrarie, if ſhe be wooed, and ſued vnto by clownes, mechanicall fellowes, and ſuch baſe kind of people, ſhe holds hir ſelfe diſparaged and diſgraced, as holding no proportion with them. And therfore ſee we by experience, that if a true Gentleman, or nobleman follow hir with any attention, and wooed her with importunitie, he ſhall learne and know more of hir, and proove a better ſcholler in one yeare, then an vngentle, or baſe fellow ſhal in ſeaven, though he purſue hir never ſo attentively.] She is much more readie and fierce to lend hir furtherance and direction in the conduct of a warre, to attempt honorable actions, to command a people, to treat a peace with a prince of forraine nation, then ſhe is to forme an argument in Logick, to deviſe a Syllogiſine, to canvaſe a caſe at the barre, or to preſcribe a receit of pills. So (noble Ladie) forſomuch as I cannot perſwade my ſelfe, that you will either forget or neglect this point, concerning the inſtitution of yours, eſpecially having taſted the ſweetneſſe thereof, and being deſcended of ſo noble and learned a race. For we yet poſſeſſe the learned compoſitions of the ancient and noble Earles of Foix, from out whoſe heroicke loynes your husband and you take your of-ſpring. And Francis Lord of Candale your worthie vnckle, doth daily bring forth ſuch fruits thereof, as the knowledge of the matchleſſe qualitie of your houſe ſhall hereafter extend it ſelfe to many ages; I will therefore make you acquainted with one conceit of mine, which contrarie to the common vſe I hold, and that is all I am able to affoord you, concerning that matter. The charge of the Tutor, which you ſhall appoint your ſonne, in the choice of whom conſiſteth the whole ſubſtance of his education and

bringing-vp; on which are many branches depending, which (foraſmuch as I can adde nothing of any moment to it) I will not touch at all. And for that point, wherein I preſume to adviſe him, he may ſo far forth give credite vnto it, as he ſhall ſee juſt cauſe. To a gentleman borne of noble parentage, and heire of a houſe, that aymeth at true learning, and in it would be diſciplined, not ſo much for gaine or commoditie to himſelfe (becauſe ſo abject an end is far vnworthie the grace and favour of the Muſes, and beſides, hath a regard or dependencie of others) nor for externall ſhew and ornament, but to adorne and enrich his inward minde, deſiring rather to ſhape and inſtitute an able and ſufficient man, then a bare learned man. My deſire is therefore, that the parents or overſeers of ſuch a gentleman be very circumſpect, and carefull in chuſing his director, whom I would rather commend for having a well compoſed and temperate braine, then a full ſtuft head, yet both will doe well. And I would rather prefer wiſedome, judgement, civill cuſtomes, and modeſt behaviour, then bare and meere litterall learning; and that in his charge he hold a new courſe. Some never ceaſe brawling in their ſchollers eares (as if they were ſtill po
                              •
                           ring in a tonell) to follow their booke, yet is their charge nothing elſe, but to repeat, what hath beene told them before. I would have a tutor to correct this part, and that at firſt entrance, according to the capacitie of the wit he hath in hand, he ſhould begin to make ſhew of it, making him to have a ſmacke of all things, and how to chuſe and diſtinguiſh them, without helpe of others, ſometimes opening him the way, other times leaving him to open-it by himſelfe. I would not have him to invent and ſpeake alone, but ſuffer his diſciple to ſpeake when his turne commeth. Socrates, and after him Arc
                                 •
                              ſilaus, made their ſchollers to ſpeak firſt, and then would ſpeake them-ſelves. Obest plerumque ijs qui diſcere volunt, auctoritas eorum, qui docent. Moſt
                           
                              
                                 ••
                              c. D
                                 •
                               Nat. lib. 1. 
                           commonly the authoritie of them that teach, hinders them that would learn
                                 •
                              .
                        
                        It is therefore meet, that he make him firſt trot-on before him, whereby he may the better judge of his pace, and ſo gueſſe how long he will hold out, that accordingly he may fit his ſtrength: for want of which proportion, we often marre-all. And to know how to make a good choice, and how far forth one may proceed (ſtill keeping a due meaſure) is one of the hardeſt labours I know. It is a ſigne of a noble, and effect of an vnd
                              •
                           nted ſpirit, to know how to ſecond, and how far forth he ſhall condeſcend to his childiſh proceedings, and how to guide them. As for my ſelfe, I can better and with more ſtrength walke vp, then downe a 
                              •
                           ill. Thoſe which according to our common faſhion, vndertake with one ſelfe-ſame leſſon, and like maner of education, to direct many ſpirits of diverſe formes and different humours, it is no marvell if among a multitude of children, they ſcarſe meet with two or three, that reap any good fruit by their diſcipline, or that come to any perfection. I would not onely have him to demaund an accompt of the words contained in his leſſon, but of the ſenſe and ſubſtance thereof, and judge of the profit he hath made of-it, not by the teſtimonie of his memorie, but by the witneſſe of his life. That what he lately learned, he cauſe him to ſet forth and pourtray the ſame into ſundrie ſhapes, and then to accommodate-it to as many different and ſeverall ſubiects; whereby he ſhall perceive, whether he have yet apprehended the ſame, and therein enfeoffed him-ſelfe, at due times taking his inſtruction from the inſtitution given by Plato. It is a ſigne of cruditie and indigeſtion for a man to yeeld vp his meat, even as he ſwallowed the ſame: the ſtomacke hath not wrought his full operation, vnleſſe it have changed forme, and altered faſhion of that which was given him to boyle and concoct.
                        [We ſee men gape after no reputation but learning, and when they ſay, ſuch a one is a learned man, they thinke they have ſaid enough;] Our minde doth move at others pleaſure, as tyed and forced to ſerue the fantaſies of others, being brought vnder by authoritie, and forced to ſtoope to the lure of their bare leſſon; wee have beene ſo ſubjected to harpe vpon one ſtring; that we have no way left-vs to deſcant vpon voluntarie: our vigor and libertie is cleane extinct. Nunquam tutelae ſuae fiunt. They never come to their owne tuition. It was my hap to bee familiarlie acquainted with an honeſt man at Piſa, but ſuch an Aristotelian, as he held this infallible poſition; that a conformitie to Aristotles doctrine was the true touchſtone and ſquire of all ſolide imaginations, and perfect veritie; for, whatſoever had no coherencie with-it, was but fond Chimeraes, and idle humours; in aſmuch as he had knowne-all, ſeen-all, and ſaid-all. This propoſition of his, being ſomewhat over-amply and iniuriouſly interpreted by ſome, made him a long time after to be troubled in the inquiſition of Rome, I would have him make his ſcholler narrowly

to ſift all things with diſcretion, and harbour nothing in his head by meere authoritie, or vpon truſt. Aristotles principles ſhall be no more axiomes vnto him, then the Stoikes or Epicurians. Let this diverſitie of judgements be propoſed vnto him, if he can, he ſhall be able to diſtinguiſh the truth from falſehood, if not, he will remaine doubtfull.
                        Che non men che ſaper dubbiar m'aggrada.Dant inferno, Can
                                 •
                              . 12. 48.
                        
                        
                           No leſſe it pleaſeth me,
                           To doubt, then wiſe to be.
                        
                        For if by his owne diſcourſe he embrace the opinions of Xenophon, or of Plato, they ſhall be no longer theirs, but his. He that meerely followeth another, traceth nothing, and ſeeketh nothing: Non ſumus ſub Rege, fibi quiſque ſe vindicet. We are not vnder a Kings commaund,
                           S
                                 ••
                              . epiſt. 33. 
                           every one may challenge himſelfe, for let him at leaſt know that he knoweth. It is requiſite he indevor as much to feed himſelfe with their conceits, as labour to learne their precepts; which, ſo he know how to applie, let him hardly forget, where, or whence he had them. Truth and reaſon are common to all, and are no more proper vnto him that ſpake them heretofore, than vnto him that ſhall ſpeake them hereafter. And it is no more according to Platoes opinion, than to mine, ſince both he and I vnderſtand and ſee alike. The Be
                              •
                           s do heer and there ſucke this, and cull that flower, but afterward they produce the hony, which is peculiarly their owne, then is it no more Thyme or Majoram. So of peeces borrowed of others, he may lawfully alter, transforme, and confound them, to ſhape out of them a perfect peece of worke, altogether his owne; alwaies provided, his judgement, his travell, ſtudie, and inſtitution tend to nothing, but to frame the ſame perfect. Let him hardly conceal, where, or whence he hath had any helpe, and make no ſhew of any thing, but of that which he hath made himſelfe. Pirates, filchers, and borrowers, make a ſhew of their purchaces and buildings, but not of that which they have taken from others: you ſee not the ſecret fees o
                              •
                            bribes Lawyers take of their Clients, but you ſhall manifeſtly diſcover the alliances they make, the honours they get for their children, and the goodly houſes they build. No man makes open ſhew of his receit
                              •
                           , but every one of his gettings. The good that comes of ſtudie (or at leaſt ſhould come) is to prove better, wiſer, and honeſter. It is the vnderſtanding power (ſaid Epicharmus) that ſeeth and heareth, it is it, that profiteth all, and diſpoſeth all, that moveth, ſwayeth, and ruleth all: all things elſe are but blind, ſenceleſſe, and without ſpirit. And truely in barring him of libertie to doe any thing of himſelfe, we make him thereby more ſervile and more coward. Who would ever enquire of his ſcholler what he thinketh of Rethorike, of Grammar, of this, or of that ſentence of Cicero? Which things throughly fethered (as if they were oracles) are let flie into our memorie; in which both letters and ſillables are ſubſtantiall parts of the ſubject. To know by roat is no perfect knowledge, but to keep what one hath committed to his memories charge, is commendable: what a man directly knoweth, that will he diſpoſe-of, without turning ſtill to his booke, or looking to his pattern. A meere bookiſh ſufficiencie is vnpleaſant. All I expect of it, is an imbelliſhing of my actions, and not a foundation of them, according to Platoes mind, who ſaith, conſtancie, faith, and ſinceritie, are true Philoſophie; as for other Sciences, and tending elſe-where, they are but gariſh paintings. I would faine have Paluel or P
                                 •
                              mpey, thoſe two excellent dauncers of our time, with all their nimbleneſſe, teach any man to doe their loftie tricks, and high capers, onely with ſeeing them done, and without ſtirring out of his place, as ſome Pedanticall fellowes would inſtruct our minds without mooving or putting it in practiſe. And glad would I be to find-one, that would teach vs how to manage a horſe, to toſſe a pike, to ſhoote-off a peece, to play vpon the l
                              •
                           te, or to warble with the voice, without any exerciſe, as theſe kind of men would teach vs to judge, and how to ſpeake well, without any exerciſe of ſpeaking or judging. In which kind of life, or as I may terme it, Prentiſhip, what action or object ſoever preſents it-ſelfe vnto our eies, may ſerve-vs inſtead of a ſufficient booke. A prettie pranke of a boy, a knaviſh tricke of a page, a fooliſh part of a lackey, an idle tale or any diſcourſe-elſe, ſpoken either in jeaſt or earneſt, at the table or in companie, are even as new ſubjects for-vs to worke-vpon: for furtherance whereof, commerce or common ſocietie among men, viſiting of fortaine countries, and obſerving of ſtrange faſhions, are verie neceſſary, not only to be able (after the maner of our young gallants of France) to report how many paces the Church of S
                                 ••
                              ta Rotonda is in length or breadth, or what rich garments the curtezan Sig
                                 •
                              ora Livia wea
                              •
                           eth, and the worth of her hoſen; or as ſome do, nicely to diſpute

how much longer or broader the face of Nero is, which they have ſeene in ſome olde ruines of Italie, then that which is made for him in other olde monuments elſe-where. But they ſhould principally obſerve, and be able to make certaine relation of the humours and faſhions of thoſe countries they have ſeene, that they may the better know, how to correct and prepare their wits by thoſe of others. I would therefore have him begin even from his infancie to travell abroad; and firſt, that at one ſhoote he may hit two markes, he ſhould ſee neighbour-countries, namely where languages are moſt different from ours; for, vnleſſe a mans tongue be faſhioned vnto them in his youth, he ſhall never attaine to the true pronuntiation of them, if he once grow in yeares. Moreouer, we ſee it received as a common opinion of the wiſer ſort, that it agreeth not with reaſon, that a childe be alwaies nuzled, cockered, dandled, and brought vp in his parents lap or ſight; forſomuch as their naturall kindneſſe, or as I may call it tender fondneſſe cauſeth often, even the wiſeſt, to proove ſo idle, ſo over-nice, and ſo baſe-minded. For parents are not capable, neither can they find in their hearts to ſee them checkt, corrected, or chaſtiſed, nor indure to ſee them brought vp ſo meanly, and ſo far from daintineſſe, and many times ſo dangerouſly, as they muſt needs be. And it would grieve them to ſee their children come home from thoſe exerciſes, that a Gentleman muſt neceſſarily acquaint himſelfe with, ſometimes all wet and bemyred, other times ſweatie, and full of duſt, and to drinke being either extreame hote, or exceeding cold; and it would trouble them to ſee him ride a rough-vntamed horſe, or with his weapon furiouſly incounter a skilfull Fencer, or to handle and ſhoote-off a musket; againſt which there is no remedy, if he will make him proove a ſufficient, compleat, or honeſt man: he muſt not be ſpared in his youth; and it will come to paſſe, that he ſhall many times have occaſion and be forced to ſhocke the rules of Phyſicke.
                        Vitam
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            ſub dio & trepidis agatH
                                 •
                              r. li. 1. od. 2. 4. 
                           In rebus.—
                        
                           Leade he his life in open aire,
                           And in affaires full of deſpaire.
                        
                        It is not ſufficient to make his minde ſtrong, his muskles muſt alſo be ſtrengthned: the minde is over-borne if it be not ſeconded: and it is too much for hi
                              •
                            alone to diſcharge two offices. I have a feeling how mine panteth, being joined to ſo tender and ſenſible a bodie, and that lyeth ſo heavie vpon it. And in my lecture, I often perceive how my Authors in their writings ſometimes commend examples for magnanimitie and force, that rather proceed from a thicke skin and hardnes of the bones. I have knowne men, women and children borne of ſo hard a conſtitution, that a blow with a cudgell would leſſe hurt them, then a filip would doe me, and ſo dull and blockiſh, that they will neither ſtir tongue nor eiebrowes, beat them never ſo much. When wreſtlers goe about to counterfeit the Philoſophers patience, they rather ſhew the vigor of their ſinnewes, then of their hart. For the cuſtome to beare travell, is to tolerate griefe: Labor callum obducit dolori. Labour worketh a
                           Cic. Tuſ. qu li. 2 
                           hardneſſe vpon ſorrow. Hee muſt be endured to ſuffer the paine and hardneſſe of exerciſes, that ſo he may be induced to endure the paine of the colicke, of cauterie, of fals, of ſprains, and other diſeaſes incident to mans bodie: yea, if need require, patiently to beare impriſonment, and other tortures, by which ſufferance he ſhall come to be had in more eſteeme and accompt: for according to time and place, the good as well as the bad man may happily fall into them; we have ſeen it by experience. Whoſoever ſtriveth againſt the lawes, threats good men with miſchiefe and extortion. Moreover, the authoritie of the Tutor (who ſhould be ſoveraigne over him) is by the cockering and preſence of the parents, hindred and interrupted: beſides the awe and reſpect, which the houſhould beares him, and the knowledge of the meanes, poſſibilities, and greatneſſe of his houſe, are in my judgement, no ſmall lets in a yong Gentleman. In this ſchoole of commerce, and ſocietie among men, I have often noted this vice, that in lieu of taking acquaintance of others, we onely indevor to make our ſelves knowne to them: and we are more ready to vtter ſuch marchandize as we have, then to ingroſſe & purchaſe new commodities. Silence and modeſtie are qualities verie conuenient to civil converſation. It is alſo neceſſary, that a yong man be rather taught to be diſcrectly-ſparing, and cloſe-handed, then prodigally-waſtfull and laviſh in his expences, and moderate in husbanding his wealth when he ſhall come to poſſeſſe it. And not to take pepper in the noſe for every fooliſh tale that ſhal be ſpoken in his preſence, becauſe it is an vncivill importunity,

to contradict, whatſoever is not agreeing to our humour: let him be pleaſed to correct himſelfe. And let-him not ſeeme to blame that in others, which he refuſeth to doe himſelfe, nor goe about to withſtand common faſhions. Licet ſapere ſine pompa, ſine invidia. A man may be
                              Sen. ipiſt. 103 f. 
                              wiſe without ostentation, without envie. Let him avoid thoſe imperious images of the world, thoſe vncivill behaviours, and childiſh ambition, wherewith God-wot, too-too many are poſſeſt: that is, to make a faire ſhew of that, which is not in him: endevouring to be reputed other then indeed he is; and as if reprehenſion and new deviſes were hard to come by, he would by that meane acquire vnto himſelfe, the name of ſome peculiar vertue. As it pertaineth but to great Poets to vſe the libertie of artes; ſo is-it tollerable but in noble minds, and great ſpirits to have a preheminence above ordinarie faſhions. Si quid Socrates & Ariſtippus
                           Cic. Off. lib 1. 
                           contra morem & conſuetudinem fecerunt, idem ſibi ne arbitretur licere: Magis enim illi & divinis bonis hanc licentiam aſſequebantur. If Socrates and Ariſtippus have done ought againſt cuſtome or good manner, let not a man thinke he may doe the ſame: for they obtained this licence by their great and excellent good parts: He ſhall be taught, not to enter raſhly into diſcourſe or conteſting, but when he ſhall encounter with a Champion, worthie his ſtrength; And then would I not have him imploy all the tricks that may fit his turne, but only ſuch as may ſtand him in moſt ſtead. That he be taught to be curious in making choice of his reaſons, loving pertinency, and by conſequence brevitie. That above all, he be inſtructed to yeeld, yea to quit his weapons vnto truth, as ſoone as he ſhall diſcerne the ſame, whether it proceed from his adverſarie, or vpon better advice from himſelfe; for, he ſhall not be preferred to any place of eminencie above others, for repeating of a preſcript pa
                              •
                           t; and he is not engaged to defend any cauſe, further then he may approove it; nor ſhall he be of that trade, where the libertie for a man to repent and re-adviſe himſelfe is ſold for readie money. Neque, vt omnia,
                           Cic. Acad. q
                                 •
                              . lib. 4. 
                           que praeſcripta & imperata ſint, defendat, neceſsitate vlla cogitur. Nor is he inforced by any neceſſitie to defend and make good all that is preſcribed and commaunded him. If his tutor agree with my humour, he ſhall frame his affection, to be a moſt loyall and true ſubject to his Prince, and a moſt affectionate and couragious Gentleman, in all that may concerne the honor of his Soveraigne, or the good of his countrie. And endevour to ſuppreſſe in him all maner of affection to vndertake any action, otherwiſe then for a publike good and dutie. Beſides many inconveniences, which greatly prejudice our libertie, by reaſon of theſe particular bonds; the judgement of a man that is waged and bought, either it is leſſe free and honeſt, or elſe it is blemiſht with overſight and ingratitude. A meere and preciſe Courtier, can neither have law nor will to ſpeake or thinke, otherwiſe then favourablie of his Maſter, who among ſo many thouſands of his ſubjects, hath made choice of him alone, to inſtitute and bring himvp with his owne hand. Theſe favours, with the commodities that follow minion Courttiers, corrupt (not without ſome colour of reaſon) his libertie, and dazle his judgement. It is therefore commonly ſeene, that the Courtiers-language differs from other mens, in the ſame ſtate, and to be of no great credite in ſūch matters. Let therefore his conſcience and vertue ſhine in his ſpeach, and reaſon be his chiefe direction. Let him be taught to confeſſe ſuch faults as he ſhall diſcover in his owne diſcourſes, albeit none other perceive them but himſelfe; for it is an evident ſhew of judgement, and effect of ſinceritie, which are the chiefeſt qualities he aymeth at. That wilfully to ſtrive, and obſtinately to conteſt in words, are common qualities, moſt apparant in baſeſt mindes: That to re-adviſe and correct himſelfe, and when one is moſt earneſt, to leave an ill opinion; are rare, noble, and philoſophicall conditions. Being in companie, he ſhall be put in minde, to caſt his eyes round about, and every-where: For I note, that the chiefe places are vſually ſeazed vpon by the moſt vnworthie, and leſſe capable; and that height of fortune is ſeldome joyned with ſufficiencie. I have ſeene, that whilſt they at the vpper end of a board were buſie entertaining themſelves, with talking of the beautie of the hangings about a chamber, or of the taſte of ſome good cup of wine, many good diſcourſes at the lower end, have vtterly been loſt. He ſhall weigh the carriage of every man in his calling, a Heardsman, a Maſon, a Stranger, or a traveller; all muſt be imployed; every one according to his worth; for all helps to make-vp houſhold; yea, the follie and the ſimplicitie of others, ſhall be as inſtructions to him. By controlling the graces and maners of others, he ſhall acquire vnto himſelfe envie of the good, and contempt of the bad. Let him hardly be poſſeſt with an honeſt curioſitie to ſearch out the nature and cauſes of all things: let him ſurvay what ſoever is rare and ſingulare

about him; a building, a fountaine, a man, a place where any battell hath been fought, or the paſſages of Caeſar or Charlemaint.
                        
                        
                           Quae tellus ſit l
                                 ••
                              ta gelu, quae putris ab aeſtu,Prop▪ 
                                 
                                    •
                                 i. 4 
                                    ••
                                 . 3. 39.
                           
                           Ventus in Italiam quis bene vela ferat.
                        
                        
                           What land is parcht with heat, what clog'd with froſt,
                           What wind drives kindly to th'Italian coaſt.
                        
                        He ſhall endevour to be familiarly acquainted with the cuſtomes, with the meanes, with the ſtate, with the dependances and alliances of all Princes; they are things ſoone and pleaſant to be learned, and moſt profitable to be knowne. In this acquaintance of men, my meaning is, that hee chiefely comprehend them, that live but by the memorie of bookes. He ſhall, by the help of Hiſtories, informe himſelfe of the worthieſt minds that were in the beſt ages. It is a frivolous ſtudie, if a man liſt, but of vnvaluable worth, to ſuch as can make vſe of it. And as Plato ſaith, the onely ſtudie the Lacedemon
                              •
                           ans reſ
                              ••
                           ved for themſelves. What profit ſhall he not reap, touching this point, reading the lives of our Plutarke? Alwaies conditioned, the maſter bethinke himſelfe whereto his charge tendeth, and that he imprint not ſo much in his ſchollers mind the date of the ru
                              ••
                           e of Carthage, as the manners of H
                                 •
                              nniball and Scipio, nor ſo much where Marc
                                 •
                              llus died, as becauſe he was vnworthy of his devoire he died there: that he teach him not ſomuch to know Hiſtories, as to judge of them. It is, amongſt things that beſt agree with my humour, the ſubject to which our ſpirits doe moſt diverſly applie themſelves. I have read in T
                                 〈…〉
                               Livi
                                 •
                              s a number of things, which peradventure others never read, in whom Plutarke happly read a hundred 
                              •
                           ore, then ever I could read, and which perhaps the author himſelfe did never intend to 
                              ••
                           t downe. To ſome kind of men, it is a meere gramaticall ſtudie, but to others a perfect anatomie of Philoſophie; by meanes whereof, the ſecreteſt part of our nature is ſearched-into. There are in Plutarke many ample diſcourſes moſt worthy to be knowne: for in my judgement▪ he is the chiefe work-maſter of ſuch works, whereof there are a thouſand, whereat he hath but ſlightly glanced; for with his finger he doth but point vs out a way to walke in, if we liſt; and is ſometimes pleaſed to give but a touch at the quickeſt and maine point of a diſcourſe, from whence they are by diligent ſtudie to be drawne, and ſo brought into open marke
                              •
                           . As that ſaying of his. That the inhabitants of Aſia, ſerved but one alone, becauſe they could not pronounce one onely ſillable, which is Non gave perhaps both ſubject and occaſion to my friend Beotie to compoſe his booke of voluntarie ſervitude. If it were no more but to ſee Plutarke wreſt a ſlight action to mans life; or a word that ſeemeth to beare no ſuch ſence, it will ſerve for a whole diſcourſe. It is p
                              〈…〉
                           en of vnderſtanding ſhould ſo much love brevitie, without doubt their reputation is thereby better, but we the worſe▪ 
                           Plutarke had rather we ſhould commend him for his judgement, then for his knowledge, he loveth better to leave a kind of longing-deſire in vs of him, then a ſacietie. He knew verie well, that even in good things, too much may be ſaid: and that Alexandridas did juſtly reprove him, who ſpake verie good ſentences to the Ephores, but they were overtedious. Oh ſtranger, quoth he, thou ſpeakeſt what thou oughteſt, otherwiſe then thou ſhouldeſt. Thoſe that have leane and thin bodies ſtuffe them vp with bumbaſting. And ſuch as have but poore matter, will puffe-it vp with loftie words. There is a marvelous cleereneſſe, or as I may terme-it an enlightning of mans judgement drawne from the commerce of men, and by frequenting abroad in the world: we are all ſo contrived and compact in ourſelves, that our ſight is made ſhorter by the length of our noſe. When Socrates was demaunded whence he was, he anſwered, not of Athens, but of the world; for he, who had his imagination more full, and farther ſtretching, embraced all the world for his native Citie, and extended his acquaintance, his ſocietie, and affections to all man-kind: and not as we-do, that looke no further then our feet. If the froſt chance to n
                              •
                           p the vines about my village, my Prieſt doth preſently argue, that the wrath of God hangs over our head, and threatneth all mankind▪ and judgeth that the Pippe is alreadie 
                              •
                           al
                              •
                           e vpon the Canibals.
                        In viewing theſe inteſtine and civill broiles of ours, who doth not exclaime, that this worlds vaſt-frame is neere vnto a diſſolution, and that the day of judgement is readie to fall on vs? never remembring that many worſe revolutions have been ſeene, and that whileſt we are plunged in griefe, and overwhelmed in ſorrow, a thouſand other parts of the worldbeſides, are bleſſed with all happineſſe, and wallow in pleaſures, and never thinke on vs?

whereas, when I behold our lives, our licence, and impunitie, I wonder to ſee them ſo milde and eaſie. He on whoſe head it haileth, thinks all the Hemiſpheare beſides to be in a ſtorme and tempeſt. And as that dull-pated Savoyard ſaid, that if the ſeelie king of France could cunningly have managed his fortune, he might verie well have made himſelfe chiefe Steward of his Lords houſhold, whoſe imagination conceived no other greatneſſe than his Maſters; we are all inſenſible of this kind of errour: an errour of great conſequence and prejudice. But whoſoever ſhall preſent vnto his inward eyes, as it were in a Table, the Idea of the great image of our vniverſall-mother Nature, attired in her richeſt roabes, ſitting in the throne of her Majeſtie, and in her viſage ſhall read, ſo generall, and ſo conſtant a varietie; he that therein ſhall view himſelfe, not himſelfe alone, but a whole kingdome, to be in reſpect of a great circle; but the ſmalleſt point that can be imagined, he onely can value things according to their eſſentiall greatneſſe and proportion. This great vniverſe (which ſome multiplie as Species vnder one Genus) is the true looking-glaſſe wherein we muſt looke, if we will know whether we be of a good ſtamp, or in the right byaſe. To conclude, I would have this worlds-frame to be my Schollers choiſe-booke: So many ſtrange humours, ſundrie ſects, varying judgements, diverſe opinions, different lawes, and fantaſticall cuſtomes teach-vs to judge rightly of ours, and inſtruct our judgement to acknowledge his imperfections and naturall weakneſſe, which is no eaſie an apprentiſhip: So many innovations of eſtates, ſo many fals of Princes, and changes of publike fortune, may, and ought to teach vs, not to make ſo great accompt of ou
                              •
                           s: So many names, ſo many victories, and ſo many conqueſts buried in darke oblivion, makes the hope to perpetuate our names, but ridiculous, by the ſurpriſing of 
                              •
                           en Argo lettiers, or of a ſmall cottage, which is knowne but by his fall. The pride and fierceneſſe of ſo many ſtrange and gorgeous ſhewes: the pride-puft majeſtie of ſo many courts, and of their greatneſſe, ought to confirme and aſ
                              •
                           ure our ſight, vndauntedly to beare the affronts and thunder-claps of ours, without ſeeling our eyes: So many thouſands of men, low-laide in their graves afore-vs, may encourage-vs, not to feare, or be 
                              •
                           iſ
                              •
                           aied to go meet ſo good companie in the other world; and ſo of all things elſe. Our life (ſaid Pithagoras) drawes-neare vnto the great and populous aſſemblies of the Olympike games, wherein ſome, to get the glorie, and to win the goale of the games, exerciſe their bodies with all induſtrie; others, for greedineſſe of gaine, bring thither marchand ſe to ſell: others there are (and thoſe be not the worſt) that ſeek after no other good, but to marke, how, wherefore, and to what end, all things are done: and to be ſpectators or obſervers of other mens lives and actions, that ſo they may the better judge and direct their owne. Vnto examples may all the moſt profitable Diſcourſes of Philoſophie be ſorted, which ought to be the touch-ſtone of humane actions, and a rule to ſquare them by, to whom may be ſaid,
                        
                           —quid fas optare, quid asper
                              Perſ. ſat. 3. 69.
                           
                           
                              Ʋ
                              
                                 ••
                              le 
                                 •
                              ummus habet, patriae chariſque propinquis
                           Quantum elargiri deceat, quem te Deus eſſe
                           Iuſſis, & humana qua parte locatus es in re,
                           Quid ſumus, aut quidnam victuri gignimur:—
                        
                        
                           What thou maieſt wiſh, what profit may come cleare,67.
                           
                           From new-ſtampt coyne, to friends and countrie deare,
                           What thou ought'ſt give: whom God would have thee bee,
                           And in what part mongſt men he placed thee.
                           What we are, and wherefore,
                           To live heer we were bore.
                        
                        What it is to know, and not to know (which ought to be the ſcope of ſtudie) what valour, what temperance, and what juſtice-is: what difference there-is betweene ambition and avarice, bondage and freedome, ſubjection and libertie, by which markes a man may diſtinguiſh true and perfect contentment, and how far-forth one ought to feare or apprehend death, griefe, or ſhame.
                        Et quo quemque modo fugiátque ferátque laborem.Virg A
                                 •
                              n. lib. 
                                 •
                               853.
                        
                        
                           How ev'ry labour he may plie,
                           And beare, or ev'ry labour flie.
                        
                        What wards or ſprings move-vs, and the cauſes of ſo many motions in-vs: For me ſeemeth▪
                           
that the firſt diſcourſes, wherewith his conceit ſhould be ſprinkled, ought to be thoſe, that rule his manners, and direct his ſenſe; which will both teach him to know himſelfe, and how to live, and how to die-well. Among the liberall Sciences, let vs begin with that which makes-vs free: Indeed, they may all in ſome ſort ſtead-vs, as an inſtruction to our life, and vſe of-it; as all other things-elſe ſerve the ſame to ſome purpoſe or other. But let vs make eſpeciall choice of that; which may directly and pertinently ſerve the ſame. If we could reſtraine and adapt the appurtenances of our life to their right byaſe and naturall limits, we ſhould find the beſt part of the Sciences that now are in vſe, cleane out of faſhion with vs: yea, and in thoſe that are moſt in vſe, there are certaine by-waies and deep-
                              •
                           lows moſt profitable, which we ſhould do-well to leave, and according to the inſtitution of Socrates, limit the courſe of our ſtudies in thoſe where profit is wanting▪
                        
                        
                           —ſapere aude,
                           
                           Incipe: vivendi qui rectè prorogat 
                                 •
                              oram,Hor. lib. 1. epiſt. 2. 40.
                           
                           Ruſticus expectat dum defluat amnis, at ille
                           Labitur, & lab
                                 •
                              tur in omne volubilis aevum.
                        
                        
                           Be bold to be wiſe: to begin, be ſtrong,
                           He that to live well doth the time prolong,
                           Clowne-like expects, till downe the ſtreame be run;
                           That runs, and will run, till the world be done.
                        
                        It is more ſimplicitie to teach our children.
                        
                           Quid moveant Piſces, animoſáque ſigna Leonis,
                           Lotus & Heſperia quid Capricornus aq
                                 ••
                              .Prop. li. 4. 
                                    ••
                                  1. 85.
                           
                        
                        
                           What Piſces move, or hot-breath'd L
                                    •
                                 os beames,
                           Or Capricornus bath'd in weſterne ſtreames.
                        
                        The knowledge of the ſtarres, and the motion of the eightſpheare, before their owne.
                        
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           
                        
                        
                           What longs it to the ſeaven ſtars, and me,
                           Or thoſe about Boôtes be.
                        
                        
                           Anaximenes writing to Pithagoras, ſaith, with what ſence can I ammuſe my ſelfe to the ſecrets of the Starres, having continually 
                                 •
                              eath or bondage before mine eies? For at that time the Kings of Perſia were making preparations to war againſt his Countrie. All men ought to ſay ſo. Being beaten, with ambition, with avarice, with raſhneſſe, and with ſuperſtition, and having ſuch other enemies vnto life within him. Wherefore ſhall I ſtudy and take care about the mobility and variation of the world? When hee is once taught what is fit to make him better and wiſer, he ſhalbe entertained with Logicke, naturall Philoſophy, Geometry, and Rhetoricke, then having ſetled his judgement, looke what 
                              •
                           cience he doth moſt addict himſelfe vnto, he ſhall in ſhort time attaine to the perfection of it. His lecture ſhall be ſomtimes by way of talke and ſomtimes by booke: his tutor may now & then ſupply him with the ſame Author, as an end & motiue of his inſtitution: ſometimes giuing him the pith & ſubſtance of it ready chewed. And if of himſelfe he be not ſo throughly acquainted with bookes, that hee may readily find ſo many notable diſcourſes as are in them to effect his purpoſe, it ſhall not be amiſſe, that ſome learned man being appointed to keepe him company, who at any time of neede, may furniſh him with ſuch munition, as hee ſhall ſtand in neede of; that hee may afterward diſtribute and diſpenſe them to his beſt vſe. And that this kinde of leſſon be more eaſie and naturall then that of Gaza, who will make queſtion? Thoſe are but harſh, thornie, and vnpleaſant precepts; vaine▪ idle & immateriall words, on which ſmall hold may be taken; wherin is nothing to quicken the minde. In this, the ſpirit findeth ſubſtance to bide and feed vpon. A fruit without all compariſon much better, and that will ſoone bee ripe. It is a thing worthy conſideration, to ſee what ſtate things are brought vnto in this our age; and how Philoſophie, even to the wiſeſt, and men of beſt vnderſtanding, is but an idle, vaine and fantaſticall name, of ſmall vſe, and leſſe worth, both in opinion and effect. I thinke theſe Sophiſtries are the cauſe of it, which have foreſtalled the waies to come vnto it: They doe very ill, that goe about to make it ſeeme as it were inacceſſible for children to come vnto, ſetting it foorth with a wrimpled, gaſtlie, and frowning viſage; who hath 
                              •
                           asked her with ſo counterfet, pale, and hideous a countenance? There is nothing more beauteous, nothing more delightfull, nothing more gameſome; and as I may ſay, nothing more fondly wanton:

for ſhe preſenteth nothing to our eyes, and preacheth nothing to our eares, but ſport and paſtime. A ſad and lowring looke plainly declareth, that that is not hir haunt. Demetrius the Gramarian, finding a companie of Philoſophers ſitting cloſe together in the Temple of Delphos, ſaid vnto them, Either I am deceived, or by your plauſible and pleaſant lookes, you are not in any ſerious and carneſt diſcourſe amongst your ſelves; to whom one of them named Heracleon the Megarian anſwered, That belongeth to them, who buſie themſelves in ſeeking, whether the future tenſe of the verbe 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            
                           hath a double 
                                 •
                              , or that labour to find the derivation of the comparatives, 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            
                           and of the ſuperlatives 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            
                           it is they, that muſt chafe in intertaining themſelves with their ſcience: as for diſcourſes of Philoſophie they are wont to glad, reioyce, and not to vexe and moleſt thoſe that vſe them.
                        
                        
                           Deprendas animi torment a latentis in aegroI
                                    ••••
                                  ſa
                                    •
                                 . 9 18.
                           
                           Corpore, deprendas & gaudia, ſumit v
                                 •
                              rumqu
                                 •
                              
                           
                           Inde 
                                 •
                              abitum facies.
                        
                        
                           You may perceive the torments of the mind,
                           Hid in ſicke bodie, you the joyes may find,
                           The face ſuch habite takes in either kind.
                        
                        That mind which harboureth Philoſophie, ought by reaſon of hir ſound health, make that bodie alſo ſound and healthie: it ought to make hir contentment to through-ſhine in all exteriour parts: it ought to ſhapen and modell all outward demeanours to the modell of it: and by conſequence arme him that doth poſſeſſe it, with a gracious ſtoutneſſe, and lively audac
                              •
                           tie, with an active and pleaſing geſture, and with a ſetled and cheerefull countenance. The moſt evident token, and apparant ſigne of true wiſedome, is a conſtant, and vnconſtrained rejoicing, whoſe eſtate is like vnto all things above the Moone, that is, ever cleare, alwaies bright. It is Baroco and Baralip
                                 •
                              on, that makes their followers proove ſo baſe and idle, and not Philoſophie; they know hi
                              •
                           not, but by heare-ſay; what? Is it not ſhee, that cleereth all ſtormes of the mind? And teacheth miſerie, ſamine, and ſickneſſe to laugh? Not by reaſon of ſome imaginarie Epicicles, but by naturall and palpable reaſons. Shee aymeth at nothing but vertue: it is vertue ſhee ſeekes after; which as the ſchoole ſaith, is not pitcht on the top of an high, ſteepie, or inacceſſible hill; for they that have come vnto hir, affirme, that cleane-contrarie, ſhee keeps hir ſtand, and holds hir manſion, in a faire, flouriſhing, and pleaſant plaine, whence as from an high watch tower, ſhe ſurvaieth all things, to be ſubject vnto hir, to whom any man may with great ſacilitie come; if he but know the way or entrance to hir pallace: for, the pathes that lead vnto hir, are certaine freſh, and ſhadie greene allies, ſweet and flow
                              ••
                           e waies, whoſe aſcent is even, eaſie, and nothing weariſome, like vnto that of heavens-vaults. Forſomuch as they have not frequented this vertue, who gloriouſly, as in a throne of Majeſtie ſits ſoveraigne, goodly, triumphant, lovely, equally delicious, and couragious, proteſting her-ſelfe to be a profeſſed and irreconciliable enemie to all ſharpneſſe, auſteritie, feare, and compulſion; having nature for hir guide, fortune and voluptuouſneſſe for hir companions; they according to their weakneſſe have imaginarily fained hir, to have a fooliſh, ſad, grim, quarelous, ſpitefull, threatning, and diſdainfull viſage, with an horride and vnpleaſant looke; and have placed hir, vpon a craggie, ſharpe, and vnfrequented rocke, amidſt deſert cliffes, and vncouth crags, as a skar-crow, or bug-beare, to affright the common people with. Now the tutour, which ought to know, that he ſhould rather ſeek to fill the mind, and ſtore the will of his diſciple, as much, or rather more, with love and affection, then with awe, and reverence vnto vertue, may ſhew and tell him, that Poets follow common humours, making him plainly to perceive, and as it were palpably to feele, that the Gods have rather placed labour and ſweat at the entrances, which lead to 
                              Ʋ
                              
                                 •
                              nus chambers, then at the doores, that direct to Pallas cabinets.
                        And when he ſhall perceive his ſcholler to have a ſenſible feeling of himſelfe, preſenting Bradamant, or Angelica before him, as a Miſtreſſe to enjoy, embeliſhed with a natural, active, generous, and vnſpotted beautie, not vglie, or Giant-like, but blithe and livelie, in reſpect of a wanton, ſoft, affected, and artificiall-flaring beautie; the one attired like vnto a yong man, coyfed with a bright-ſhining helmet, the other diſguiſed and dreſt about the head like vnto an impudent harlot, with embroyderies, frizelings, and carcanets of pearles: he will no doubt deeme his owne love to be a man and no woman, if in his choice he differ from that effeminate ſhepheard of Phrigia. In this new kind of leſſon, he ſhall declare vnto him, that the

prize, the glorie, and height of true vertue, conſiſteth in the facilitie, profit, & pleaſure of his exerciſes: ſo far from difficultie, and incumbrances, that children as well as men, the ſimple as ſoone as the wiſe, may come vnto hir. Diſcretion and temperance, not force or way-wardneſſe are the inſtruments to bring him vnto hir. Socrates (vertues chiefe favorite) that he might the better walke in the pleaſant, naturall, and open path, of hir progreſies, doth voluntarily and in good earneſt, quit all compulſion. Shee is the nurſe and ſofter-mother of all humane pleaſures, who in making them juſt and vpright, ſhe alſo makes them ſure and ſincere. By moderating them, ſhe keepeth them in vre and breath. In limiting and cutting them off, whom ſhe refuſeth; ſhe whets-vs-on toward thoſe ſhe leaveth vnto vs; and plenteouſlie leaves-vs them, which Nature pleaſeth, and like a kind mother giveth vs over vnto ſacietie, if not vnto weariſomneſſe, vnleſſe we will peradventure ſay, that the rule and bridle, which ſtayeth the drunkard before drunkenneſſe, the glutton before ſurfetting, and the let
                              •
                           her before the looſing of his haire, be the enemies of our pleaſures. If common fortune faile-hir, it cleerely ſcapes hir; or ſhe cares not for hir, or ſhe frames another vnto hir-ſelfe, altogether hir owne, not ſo fleeting, nor ſo rowling. She knoweth the way how to be rich, mightie and wiſe, and how to lie in ſweet-perfumed beds. She loveth life; ſhe delights in beautie, in glorie, and in health. But hir proper and particular office is, firſt to know how to vſe ſuch goods temperately, and how to looſe them conſtantly. An office much more noble, then ſevere, without which, all courſe of life is vnnaturall, turbulent, and deformed, to which one may lawfully joyne thoſe rocks, thoſe incumbrances, and thoſe hideous monſters. If ſo it happen, that his Diſciple proove of ſo different a condition, that he rather love to give▪eare to an idle fable, then to the report of ſome noble voiage, or other notable and wiſe diſcourſe, when he ſhall heare it; that at the found of a Drum, or clang of a Trumpet, which are wont to rowze and arme the youthly heat of his companions, turneth to another that calleth him to ſee a play, tumbling, jugling tricks, or other idle looſe-time ſports; and who for pleaſuresſake doth not deeme it more delightſome to returne all ſweatie and wearie from a victorious combate, from wreſtling, or riding of a horſe, than from a Tennis-court, or dancing ſchoole, with the prize or honour of ſuch exerciſes; The beſt remedie I know for ſuch a one, is, to put him prentiſe to ſome baſe occupation, in ſome good towne or other, yea, were he the ſonne of a Duke; according to Platoes rule, who ſaith, That children muſt be placed, not according to their fathers conditions, but the faculties of their mind. Since it is Philoſophie that teacheth vs to live, and that infancie as well as other ages, may plainly read hir leſſons in the ſame, why ſhould it not be imparted vnto yoong Schollers?
                        
                           
                              Ʋdum & molle lutum eſt, nunc nunc properandus, & acriPerſ. ſa
                                    •
                                 . 
                                    ••
                                 23.
                           
                           Fingendus fine fine rota.
                        
                        
                           He's moiſt and ſoft mould, and muſt by and by
                           Be caſt, made vp, while wheele whirl's readily.
                        
                        We are taught to live, when our life is well-nigh ſpent. Many ſchollers have been infected with that loathſome and marrow-waſting diſeaſe, before ever they came to read Aristotles treatiſe of Temperance. Cicero was wont to ſay, That could be out-live the lives of two men, he ſhould never find leaſure to ſtudie the Lyrike Poets. And I find theſe Sophiſters both worſe and more vnprofitable. Our childe is engaged in greater matters; And but the firſt fifteene or ſixteene yeares of his life, are due vnto Pedantiſme, the reſt vnto action: let vs therefore imploy ſo ſhort time, as we have to live in more neceſſarie inſtructions. It is an abuſe; remove theſe thornie quiddities of Logike, whereby our life can no whit be amended, and betake our ſelves to the ſimple diſcourſes of Philoſophie; know how to chuſe and fitlie to make vſe of them: they are much more eaſie to be conceived then one of Becace his tales. A childe comming from nurſe is more capeable of them, then he is to learne to read or write. Philoſophie hath diſcourſes, whereof infancie as well as decaying old-age may make good vſe. I am of Plutarkes mind, which is, that Ariſtotle did not ſo much ammuſe his great Diſciple about the arts how to frame Sillogiſmes, or the principles of Geometrie, as he endevoured to inſtruct-him with good precepts, concerning valour, proweſſe, magnanimitie, and temperance, and an vndanted aſſurance not to feare any thing; and with ſuch munition he ſent him, being yet verie yoong, to ſubdue the Empire of the world, onely with 30000. footemen, 4000. horſemen, and 42000. Crownes in monie. As for other artes and ſciences▪ he ſaith Alexander honored them, and commended their excellencie and comlineſſe;

but for any pleaſure he tooke in them, his affection could not eaſilie be drawne to exerciſe them.
                        —petite hinc invenéſque ſenéſqueS
                                 •
                              t. 5.64. Finem animo certum, miſerîſque viatica canis.
                        
                           Young men and old, draw hence (in your affaires)
                           Your minds ſet marke, proviſion for graire haires.
                        
                        It is that which Epicurus ſaid in the beginning of his letter to Meniceus: Neither let the youngeſt ſhunne, nor the oldeſt wearie himſelfe in philoſophying, for who doth otherwiſe ſeemeth to ſay, that either the ſeaſon to live happily is not yet come, or is alreadie paſt. Yet would I not have this yoong gentleman pent-vp, nor careleſly caſt-off to the heedleſſe choller, or meſancholie humour of the haſtie Schoole-maſter. I would not have his budding ſpirit corrupted with keeping-him faſt-tied, and as it were labouring foureteene or fifteene houres a day poaring on his booke, as ſome doe, as if he were a day-labouring man; neither doe I thinkeit fit, if at any time, by reaſon of ſome ſolitarie or melancholie complexion, he ſhould be ſeene with an over-indiſcreet application given to his booke, it ſhould be cheriſhed in him; for, that doth often make-him both vnapt for civill converſation, and diſtracts him from better imployments: How many have I ſeene in my daies, by an over-greedie deſire of knowledge, become as it were fooliſh? Carneades was ſo deeply plunged, and as I may ſay beſotted in it, that he could never have leaſure to cut his haire, or pare his nailes: nor would I have his noble maners obſcured by the incivilitie and barbariſine of others. The French wiſedome hath long ſince proverbially been ſpoken-of, as verie apt to conceive ſtudie in hir youth, but moſt vnapt to keepe it long. In good truth, we ſee at this day, that there is nothing lovelier to behold, then the young children of France; but for the moſt part, they deceive the hope which was fore-apprehended of them: for when they once become men, there-is no excellencie at all in them. I have heard men of vnderſtanding hold this opinion, that the Colledges to which they are ſent (of which there are ſtore) doe thus beſot-them: whereas to our ſcholler, a cabinet, a gardin, the table, the bed, a ſolitarineſſe, a companie, morning and evening, and all houres ſhall be alike vnto him, all places ſhall be a ſtudie for him: for Philoſophie (as a former of judgements, and modeler of cuſtomes) ſhall be his principall leſſon, having the priviledge to entermedle hir ſelfe with all things, and in all places. Iſocrates the Orator, being once requeſted at a great banket to ſpeake of his arte, when all thought he had reaſon to anſwere, ſaid, It is not now time to doe what I can, and what ſhould now be done, I cannot doe it; For, to preſent orations, or to enter into diſputation of Rhetorike, before a companie aſſembled together to be merrie, and make good cheere, would be but a medlie of harſn and jarring muſicke. The like may be ſaid of all other Sciences. But touching Philoſophie, namely in that point where it treateth of man, and of his duties, and offices, it hath been the common judgement of the wiſeſt, that in regard of the pl
                              •
                           aſantneſſe of hir converſation, ſhe ought not to be rejected, neither at banquets, nor at ſportes. And Plato having invited hir to his ſolemne feaſt, we ſee how kindly ſhe entertaineth the companie with a milde behaviour, fitly ſuting hir ſelfe to time and place, notwithſtanding it be one of his learned'ſt and profitable diſcourſes.
                        
                           Aequè pauperibus prodeſt, loc
                                 •
                              pletibus aequè,Hor. lib. 1 epiſ
                                    •
                                 . 125.
                           
                           Et neglecta aequè pueris ſenibúſque nocebit.
                        
                        
                           Poore men alike, alike rich men it eaſeth,
                           Alike it ſcorned, old and yoong diſpleaſeth.
                        
                        So doubtleſſe he ſhall leſſe be idle then others; for even as the paces we beſtow walking in a gallerie, although they be twice as many more, wearie-vs not ſo much as thoſe we ſpend in going a ſet journey: So our leſſon being paſt over, as it were, by chance, or way of encounter, without ſtrict obſervance of time or place, being applied to all our actions, ſhall be digeſted, and never felt. All ſports and exerciſes ſhall be a part of his ſtudie; running, wreſtling, muſicke, dancing, hunting, and managing of armes, and horſes. I would have the exterior demeanor or decencie, and the diſpolition of his perſon to be faſhioned together with his mind: for, it is not a mind, it is not a bodie that we erect, but it is a man, and we muſt not make two parts of him. And as Plato ſaith, They muſt not be erected one without another, but equally be directed, no otherwiſe then a couple of horſes matched to draw in one ſelfe-ſame 
                                 •
                              eem
                                 •
                              . And to heare-him, doth he not ſeeme to imploy more time and care in the exerciſes

of his bodie: and to thinke that the mind is together with the ſame exerciſed, and not the contrarie? As for other matters, this inſtitution ought to be directed by a ſweet-ſevere mildneſſe; Not as ſome doe, who in liew of gently-bidding children to the banquet of letters, preſent them with nothing but horror and crueltie. Let me have this violence and compulſion removed, there is nothing that, in my ſeeming, doth more baſtardiſe and dizzie a wel-borne, and gentle nature: If you would have him ſtand in awe of ſhame and puniſhment, doe not ſo much enure him to-it: accuſtome him patiently to endure ſweat and cold, the ſharpneſſe of the wind, the heat of the ſunne, and how to deſpiſe all hazards. Remove from him all niceneſſe and quaintneſſe in clothing, in lying, in eating, and in drinking: faſhion him to all things; that he prove not a faire and wanton-puling boy, but a luſtie and vigorous boy: When I was a child, being a man, and now am old, I have ever judged & believed the ſame. But amongſt other things, I could never away with this kind of diſcipline vſed in moſt of our Colledges. It had peradventure been leſſe-hurtfull, if they had ſomewhat inclined to mildneſſe, or gentle intreatie. It is a verie priſon of captivated youth, and proves diſſolute, in puniſhing it before it be ſo. Come vpon them when they are going to their leſſon, and you heare nothing but whipping and brawling, both of children tormented, and maſters beſotted with anger and chafing. How wide are they, which go about to allure a childs mind to go to his booke, being yet but tender and fearefull, with a ſtearne-frowning countenance, and with hands-full of rods? Oh wicked and pernicious manner of teaching! which Quintillian hath verie well noted, that this imperious kind of authoritie, namely, this way of puniſhing of children, drawes many dangerous inconveniences with-in. How much more decent were it, to ſee their ſchool-houſes and formes ſtrewed with greene boughes and flowers, then with bloodie burchen-twigs? If it lay in me, I would do as the Philoſopher Speuſippus did, who cauſed the pictures of Gladneſſe and Ioy, of Flora, and of the Graces, to be ſet-vp round about his ſchool-houſe. Where their profit lieth, there ſhould alſo be their recreation. Thoſe meats ought to be ſugred-over, that are healthfull for childrens ſtomakes, and thoſe made bitter that are hurtfull for them. It is ſtrange to ſee how carefull Plato ſheweth himſelfe in framing of his lawes about the recreation & paſtime of the youth of his Citie, and how far he extends himſelfe about their exerciſes, ſports, ſongs, leaping, and dancing, wherof he faith, that ſevere antiquitie gave the conduct and patronage vnto the Gods themſelves, namely, to Apollo, to the Muſes, and to Munerva. Marke but how far-forth he endevoreth to give a thouſand precepts to be kept in his places of exerciſes both of bodie and mind. As for learned Sciences, he ſtands not much vpon them, and ſeemeth in particular to commend Poeſie, but for Muſickes-ſake. All ſtrangeneſſe and ſelfe particularitie in our manners, and conditions, is to be ſhunned, as an enemie to ſocietie and civill converſation. Who would not be aſtoniſhed at Demophons complexion, chiefe ſteward of Alexanders houſhold, who was wont to ſweat in the ſhadow, and quiver for cold in the ſunne? I have ſeene ſome to ſtartle at the ſmell of an apple, more then at the ſhot of a peece; ſome to be frighted with a mouſe, ſome readie to caſt their gorge at the ſight of a meſſe of creame, and others to be ſcared with ſeeing a fetherbed ſhaken: as Germanicus, who could not abide to ſee a cock, or heare his crowing. There may happily be ſome hidden propertie of nature, which in my judgement might eaſilie be removed, if it were taken in time. Inſtitution hath gotten this vpon me (I muſt confeſſe with much a doe) for, except beere, all things elſe that are mans foode agree indifferently with my taſte. The bodie being yet ſouple, ought to be accommodated to all faſhions and cuſtomes; and (alwaies provided, his appetites & deſires be kept vnder) let a yong man boldly be made fit for all Nations and companies-yea, if need be, for all diſorders and ſorfetings; let him acquaint himſelfe with all faſhions; That he may be able to doe all things, and love to do none but thoſe that are commendable. Some ſtrict Philoſophers commend not, but rather blame Caliſthenes, for looſing the good favour of his Maſter Alexander, only becauſe he would not pledge him as much as he had drunke to him. He ſhall laugh, jeſt, dallie, and debauch himſelfe with his Prince. And in his debauching, I would have him out-go all his fellowes in vigor and conſtancie, and that he omit not to doe evill, neither for want of ſtrength or knowledge, but for lacke of will. Multum intereſt, vtrum peccare quis nolit, aut neſctat. There is a great difference, whether one have no will, or no wit to do amiſſe. I thought to have honored a gentleman (as great a ſtranger, & as far from ſuch riotous diſorders as any is in France) by enquiring of him in verie good companie, how many times in all his life he had bin drunke in Germanie,
                           
during the time of his abode there, about the neceſſarie affaires of our King; who tooke it even as I ment it, and anſwered three times, telling the time and manner how. I know ſome, who for want of that qualitie, have been much perplexed when they have hadHo. epiſt. 17. 23. occaſion to converſe with that nation. I have often noted with great admiration, that wonderfull nature of Alcibiades, to ſee how eaſilie he could ſute himſelfe to ſo divers faſhions, and different humors, without prejudice vnto his health; ſometimes exceeding the ſumptuouſneſſe and pompe of the Perſians, and now and then ſurpaſſing the auſteritie and frugalitie of the Lacedemonians, as reformed in Sparta, as voluptuous in Icnia.
                        
                        Omnis Ariſtippum decuit color, & ſtatus, & res.
                        25.
                        
                           All colours, ſtates, and things are fit
                           For courtly Ariſtippus wit.
                        
                        Such a one would I frame my Diſciple,
                        —quem duplici panno patientia velat.29. Mirabor, vitae via ſi converſa decebit,
                        
                           Whom patience clothes with ſutes of double kind,
                           I muſe, if he another way will find.
                        
                        Perſonamque feret non inconcinnus vtramque.
                        
                           He not vnfitly may,
                           Both parts and perſons play.
                        
                        Loe-heer my leſſons, wherein he that acteth them, profiteth more, then he that but knoweth them, whom if you ſee, you heare, and if you heare him, you ſee him. God forbid, ſaith ſome bodie in Plato, that to Philoſophize, be to learne many things, and to exerciſe the artes. Hanc ampliſſimam omnium artium bcne vivendi diſciplinam, vita magis quàm litter is perſequuti
                           Ci
                                 •
                              . Tuſc. q
                                 •
                              . lib. 4. 
                           ſunt. This diſcipline of living well, which is the amplest of all other artes, they followed rather in their lives, then in their learning or writing. Leo Prince of the Phliaſians, enquiring of Heraclides Ponticus, what arte he profeſſed, he anſwered. Sir, I profeſſe neither art nor ſcience; but I am a Philoſopher. Some reproved Diogenes, that being an ignorant man, he did nevertheleſſe meddle with Philoſophie, to whom he replied, ſo much the more reaſon have I, and to greater purpoſe doc I meddle with-it. Hegeſias praid him vpon a time to reade ſome booke vnto him; You are a merry man, ſaid he: As you chuſe naturall and not painted, right and not counterfeit figges to eate, why doe you not likewiſe chuſe, not the painted and written, but the true and naturall exerciſes? He ſhall not ſo much repeat, as act his leſſon. In his actions ſhall he make repetition of the ſame. We muſt obſerve, whether there be wiſedome in his enterpriſes, integritie in his demeanor, modeſtie in his jeſtures, juſtice in his actions, judgement and grace in his ſpeech, courage in his ſickneſſe, moderation in his ſports, temperance in his pleaſures, order in the government of his houſe, and indifferencie in his taſte, whether it be fleſh, fiſh, wine, or water, or whatſoever he feedeth vpon. Qui diſciplinam
                           Ci
                                 •
                              . ib. lib. 2. 
                           ſuam non oſt entationem ſcientiae, ſed legem vitae putet: quique obtemperet ipſe ſibi, & aecretis pareat. Who thinks his learning not an oſtentation of knowledge, but a law of life, and himſelfe obayes himſelfe, and doth what is decreed.
                        
                        The true mirror of our diſcourſes, is the courſe of our lives. Xeuxidamus anſwered one that demaunded of him, why the Lacedemonians did not draw into a booke, the ordinances of proweſſe, that ſo their yong men might read them; it is, ſaith he, becauſe they would rather accuſtome them to deeds and actions, then to bookes and writings, Compare at the end of fifteene or ſixteene yeares one of theſe collegiall Latinizers, who hath imployed all that while onely in learning how to ſpeake, to ſuch a one as I meane. The world is nothing but babling and words, and I never ſaw man, that doth not rather ſpeake more than he ought, then leſſe. Notwithſtanding halfe our age is conſumed that way. We are kept foure or five yeares learning to vnderſtand bare words, and to joine them into clauſes, then as long in proportioning a great bodie extended into foure or five parts; and five more at leaſt, ere we can ſuccinctly know how to mingle, joine, & interlace them handſomly into a ſubtil faſhion, and into one coherent orbe. Let-vs leave-it to thoſe, whoſe profeſſion is to doe nothing elſe. Being once on my journey toward Orleans, it was my chance to meet vpon that plaine that lieth on this ſide Clery, with two Maſters of Arts, traveling toward Burdeaux, about fiftie paces one from another far-off behind them, I deſcride a troupe of horſemen, their Maſter riding formoſt, who was the Earle of Rochefocault; one of my ſervants enquiring

of the firſt of thoſe Maſters of artes, what Gentleman he was that followed him; ſuppoſing my ſervant had meant his fellow-ſcholler, for he had not yet ſeen the Earles traine, anſwered pleaſantly, He is no gentleman Sir, but a Gramarian, and I am a Logitian. Now, we that contrariwiſe ſeek not to frame a Gramarian, nor a Logitian, but a compleat gentleman, let vs give them leave to miſpend their time; we have elſe-where, and ſomewhat elſe of more import to doe. So that our Diſciple be well and ſufficiently ſtored with matter; words will follow apace, and if they will not follow gently, he ſhall hale them-on perforce. I heare ſome excuſe themſelves, that they cannot expreſſe their meaning, and make a ſemblance that their heads are ſo full-ſtuft with many goodly things, but for want of eloquence they can neither vtter nor make ſhew of them. It is a meere fopperie. And will you know what? in my ſeeming, the cauſe is, They are ſhadows and Chimeraes, proceeding of ſome formeleſſe conceptions, which they cannot diſtinguiſh or reſolve within, and by conſequence are not able to produce them, in aſmuch as they vnderſtand not themſelves: And if you but marke their earneſtneſſe, and how they ſtammer & labour at the point of their deliverie, you would deeme, that what they go withall, is but a conceiving, and therefore nothing neere downelying; and that they doe but licke that imperfect and ſhapeleſſe lump of matter, As for me, I am of opinion and Socrates would have it ſo, that he who hath a cleare and lively imagination in his mind, may eaſilie produce and vtter the ſame, although it be in Bergamask, or Welſh, and if he be dombe, by ſignes and tokens.
                        
                           Ʋertáque praeviſam rem non invita ſequentur.Hor. art. poet. 311.
                        
                        
                           When matter we fore-know,
                           Words voluntarie flow.
                        
                        As one ſaid, as poetically in his proſe, Cùm res animum occupavere, verba ambiunt. When
                           Sen. contr
                                 •
                              u. lib. 7. proae. 
                           matter hath poſſeſt their minds, they hunt after words: and another: Ipſae res verba rapiunt. Things themſelves will catch and carry words: He knowes neither Ablative, Conjunctive, Subſtantive, nor Gramar, no more doth his Lackey, nor any Oyſter wife about the ſtreets, and yet if you have a mind to it, he will intertaine you your fill, and peradventure ſtumble as litle and as ſeldome againſt the rules of his tongue, as the beſt Maſter of artes in France. He hath no skill in Rhetoricke, nor can he with a preface fore-ſtall and captivate the Gentle Readers good will: nor careth he greatly to know it. In good ſooth, all this gariſh painting is eaſilie defaced, by the luſtre of an in-bred, and ſimple truth; for theſe dainties and quaint deviſes, ſerve but to ammuſe the vulgare ſort, vnapt and incapable to taſte the moſt ſolide, and firme meat: as Afer verie plainly declareth in Cornelius Tacitus. The Ambaſſadours of Samos being come to Cleomenes King of Sparta, prepared with a long prolixe Oration, to ſtir him vp to war againſt the tyrant Policrates, after he had liſtned a good while vnto them, his anſwere was: Touching your Exordium or beginning I have forgotten it; the middle I remember not; and for your concluſion I will do nothing in it. A fit, and (to my thinking) a verie good anſwere; and the Orators were put to ſuch a ſhift, as they knew not what to replie. And what ſaid another? the Athenians from out two of their cunning Architects, were to chuſe one to erect a notable great frame: the one of them more affected and ſelfe-preſuming, preſented himſelfe before them, with a ſmooth fore-premeditated diſcourſe, about the ſubject of that piece of worke, and thereby drew the judgements of the common people vnto his liking; but the other in few words, ſpake thus: Lords of Athens, what this man hath ſaid, I will performe. In the greateſt earneſtneſſe of Ciceroes eloquence many were drawne into a kind of admiration; But Cato jeaſting at it, ſaid, Have we not a pleaſant Conſull? A quicke cunning Argument, and a wittie ſaying, whether it go before, or come after, it is never out of ſeaſon. If it have no coherence with that which goeth before, nor with what commeth after; it is good and commendable in itſelfe. I am none of thoſe that thinke a good Ryme, to make a good Poeme; let him hardly (if ſo he pleaſe) make a ſhort ſillable long, it is no great matter: if the invention be rare and good, and his wit and judgement have cunningly plaied their part. I will ſay to ſuch a one; he is a good Poet, but an ill Verſifier.
                        Emunctae naris, durus componere verſus.
                              
                                 ••
                              r. lib 1. Cat. 4. 8. Lucil.
                        
                        
                           A man whoſe ſenſe could finely pearce,
                           But harſh and hard to make a verſe.
                        
                        Let a man (ſaith Horace) make his worke looſe all ſeames, meaſures, and ioynts.
                        
                           Tempora certa modóſque, & quod prius ordine verbum eſt,58.
                           
                           
                              
                              Poſterius facias, praeponens vltima primis:
                              62.
                           
                           Invenias etiam diſiecti membra Poetae.
                        
                        
                           Set times and moods, make you the firſt word laſt,
                           The laſt word firſt, as if they were new caſt:
                           Yet find th'unjoynted Poets joints ſtand faſt.
                        
                        He ſhall for all that, nothing gain-ſay himſelfe, every piece will make a good ſhew. To this purpoſe anſwered Menander thoſe that chid him, the day being at hand, in which he had promiſed a Comedy, and had not begun the ſame, Tut-tut, ſaid he, it is alreadie fi
                                 •
                              iſhed, there wanteth nothing but to adde the verſe vnto-it: for, having ranged and caſt the plot in his mind, he made ſmall accompt of feete, of meaſures, or cadences of verſes, which indeed are but of ſmall import in regard of the reſt. Since great Ronzarde and learned Bellay, have raiſed our French Poeſie vnto that height of honour, where it now-is: I ſee not one of theſe petty-ballad-makers, or prentiſe-dogrell rymers, that doth not bumbaſt his labours with high ſwelling and heaven-diſimbowelling words, and that doth not marſhall his cadences verie neere as they doe. Plus ſonat quàm valet. The ſound is more then the weight or worth. AndSen. epiſt. 40. for the vulgar ſort, there were never ſo many Poets, and ſo few good: but as it hath been eaſie for them to repreſent their rymes, ſo come they far ſhort in imitating the rich deſcriptions of the one, and rare inventions of the other. But what ſhall he doe, if he be vrged with ſophiſticall ſubtilt
                              •
                           es about a Sillogiſme? A gammon of Bacon makes a man drinke, drinking quencheth a mans thirſt, Ergo, a gammon of bacon quencheth a mans thirſt. Let him mock at-it, it is more wittie to be mockt at, then to be anſwered. Let him borrow this pleaſant counter-craft of Ariſtippus; Why ſhall I vnbind that, which being bound doth ſo much trouble me? Some one propoſed certaine Logicall quiddities againſt Cleanthes, to whom Chriſippus ſaid; vſe ſuch jugling tricks to plaie with children, and divert not the ſerious thoughts of an aged man to ſuch idle matters. If ſuch fooliſh wiles, Contorta & aculeata ſophiſmata,
                           Ci
                                 •
                              . Acad. qu. lib. 4. 
                           Intricate and fiinged ſophiſmes, muſt perſwade a lie, it is dangerous; but if they proove void of any effect, and moove him but to laughter, I ſee not why he ſhall beware of them. Some there are ſo fooliſh that will go a quarter of a mile out of the way to hunt after a quaint new word, if they once get in chace; Aut qui non verba rebus aptant, ſedres extrinſecus arceſſunt, quibus verba conveniant. Or ſuch as fit not words to matter, but fetch matter from abroad, whereto words be fitted. And another, Qui a
                                 •
                              icuius verbi decore placentis, vocentur ad id quod non propoſuerunt
                           Sen. epiſt. 59. 
                           ſcribere. Who are allured by the grace of ſome pleaſing word, to write that they intended not to write. I doe more willingly winde vp a wittie notable ſentence, that ſo I may ſew-it vpon me, then vnwinde my thread to goe fetch it. Contrariwiſe, it is for words to ſerve and waite vpon the matter, and not for matter to attend vpon words, and if the French tongue cannot reach vnto-it, let the Gaskonie, or any other. I would have the matters to ſurmount, and ſo fill the imagination of him that harkneth, that he have no remembrance at all of the words. It is a naturall, ſimple, and vnaffected ſpeach that I love, ſo written as it is ſpoken, and ſuch vpon the paper, as it is in the mouth, a pithie, ſinnowie, full, ſtrong, compendious, and materiall ſpeach, not ſo delicate and affected, as vehement and piercing.
                        Haec demum ſapiet dictio, quae feriet.Epitaph. L
                                 •
                              
                              ca
                                 •
                              . 6.
                        
                        
                           In fine, that word is wiſely fit,
                           Which ſtrikes the ſence, the marke doth hit.
                        
                        Rather difficult then tedious, void of affection, free, looſe and bold, that every member of-it ſeeme to make a bodie; not Pedanticall, nor Frier-like, nor Lawyer-like, but rather downe-right, Souldier-like. As Suetonius calleth that of Iulius Caeſar, which I ſee no reaſon wherefore he calleth it. I have ſometimes pleaſed my ſelfe in imitating that licenciouſneſſe or wanton humour of our youths, in wearing of their garments; as careleſly to let their cloaks hang downe over one ſhoulder; to weare their cloakes ſcarfe or bawdrikewiſe, and their ſtockings looſe-hanging about their legs. It repreſents a kind of diſdainfull fierceneſſe of theſe forraine embelliſhings, and neglect careleſneſſe of arte: But I commend it more being imployed in the courſe and forme of ſpeech. All manner of affectation, namely in the livelineſſe and libertie of France, is vnſeemely in a Courtier. And in a Monarchie every Gentleman ought to addreſſe himſelfe vnto a Courtiers carriage. Therefore do we well ſomewhat to encline to a native and careleſſe behaviour. I like not a contexture, where the ſeames and pieces may be ſeene: As in a well compact bodie, what

need a man diſtinguiſh and number all the bones and veines ſeverally? Quae veritati operam
                           Sen. epiſt. 40. m 75. p. 
                           dat oratio, incompoſita ſit & ſimplex. Quis accuratè loquitur, niſi qui vult putidè l
                                 •
                              qui? The ſpeach that intendeth truth muſt be plaine and vnpolliſht: Who ſpeaketh elaborately, but he that meanes to ſpeake vnſavouredly? That eloquence offereth injurie vnto things, which altogether drawes-vs to obſerve-it. As in apparell, it is a ſigne of puſillanimitie for one to marke himſelfe, in ſome particular and vnuſuall faſhion: ſo likewiſe in common ſpeach, for one to hunt after new phraſes, and vnaccuſtomed-quaint words, proceedeth of a ſcholaſticall and childiſh ambition. Let me vſe none other then are ſpoken in the hals of Paris. Ariſtophanes the Gramarian was ſomewhat out of the way, when he reproved Epicurus, for the ſimplicitie of his words, and the end of his arte oratorie, which was onely perſpicuitie in ſpeach. The imitation of ſpeach, by reaſon of the facilitie of it, followeth preſently a whole nation. The imitation of judging and inventing, comes more ſlow. The greater number of Readers, becauſe they have found one ſelfe-ſame kind of gowne, ſuppoſe moſt falſly to holde one like bodie. Outward garments and cloakes may be borrowed, but never the ſinews and ſtrength of the bodie. Moſt of thoſe that converſe with me, ſpeake like vnto theſe Eſſayes; but I know not whether they thinke alike. The Athenians (as Plato averreth) have for their part great care to be fluent and eloquent in their ſpeach; The Lacedemonians endevour to be ſhort and compendious; And thoſe of Creet labour more to be plentifull in conceits, then in language. And theſe are the beſt. Zeno was wont to ſay, That he had two ſorts of diſciples; the one he called 
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                              , curious to learne things, and thoſe were his darlings, the other he termed 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , who reſpected nothing more then the language. Yet can no man ſay, but that to ſpeake well, is moſt gracious and commendable, but not ſo excellent as ſome make it: and I am grieved to ſee how we imploy moſt part of our time about that onely. I would firſt know mine owne tongue perfectly, then my neighbours with whom I have moſt commerce. I muſt needs acknowledge, that the Greeke and Latine tongues, are great ornaments in a gentleman, but they are purchaſed at over-high a rate. Vſe-it who liſt, I will tell you how they may be gotten better cheape, and much ſooner then is ordinarily vſed, which was tried in my ſelfe. My late father, having by all the meanes and induſtrie, that is poſſible for man, ſought amongſt the wiſeſt, and men of beſt vnderſtanding, to find a moſt exquiſite and readie way of teaching, being adviſed of the inconveniences then in vſe; was given to vnderſtand, that the lingring while, and beſt part of our youth, that we imploy in learning the tongues, which coſt them nothing, is the only cauſe we can never attaine to that abſolute perfection of skill and knowledge, of the Greekes, and Romanes. I doe not believe that to be the onely cauſe. But ſo it-is, the expedient my father found-out, was this; that being yet at nurſe, and before the firſt looſing of my tongue, I was delivered to a Germaine (who died ſince, a moſt excellent Phiſitian in France) he being then altogether ignorant of the French tongue, but exquiſitely readie and skilfull in the Latine. This man, whom my Father had ſent-for of purpoſe, and to whom he gave verie great intertainment, had me continually in his armes, and was mine onely overſeer. There were alſo iojned vnto him two of his countrimen, but not ſo learned; whoſe charge was to attend, and now and then, to play with me; and all theſe together did never intertaine me with other then the Latine tongue. As for others of his houſhold, it was an inviolable rule, that neither himſelfe, nor my mother, nor man, nor maide-ſervant, were ſuffered to ſpeake one word in my companie, except ſuch Latine words, as every one had learned to chat and prattle with me, It were ſtrange to tell how euery one in the houſe profited therein. My Father and my Mother learned ſo much Latine, that for a neede they could vnderſtand-it, when they heard-it ſpoken, even ſo did all the houſhold ſervants, namely ſuch as were neereſt and moſt about-me. To be ſhort, we were all ſo Latinized, that the townes round about vs had their ſhare of-it; inſomuch as even at this day, many Latine names both of workmen and of their tooles, are yet in vſe among them. And as for my ſelfe, I was about ſix yeares old, and could vnderſtand no more French or Perigordine, then Arabike, and that without arte, without bookes, rules, or gramer, without whipping or whining. I had gotten as pure a Latine tongue as my Maſter could ſpeake; the rather becauſe I could neither mingle or confound the ſame with other tongues. If for an Eſſay they would give me a Theame, whereas the faſhion in Colledges is, to give it in French, I had it in bad Latine, to reduce the ſame into good. And Nicholas Grucchi,
                           
who hath written, De comitijs Romanorum, Williám G
                                 •
                              erenti, who hath commented Ariſtotle: George Buchanan, that famous Scottiſh Poet, and Marke-Antonie Muret, whom (while he lived) both France and Italie to this day, acknowledge to haue been the beſt Orator: all which have beene my familiar tutors, have often tolde me, that in mine infancie I had the Latine tongue ſo readie and ſo perfect, that themſelves feared to take me in hand. And Buchanan, who afterward I ſaw attending on the Marſhall of Briſſacke, told me, he was about to write a treatiſe of the inſtitution of children, and that he tooke the model and patterne from mine: for, at that time he had the charge and bringing vp of the yong Earle of Briſſack, whom ſince we have ſeene proove ſo woorthy and ſo valiant a captaine. As for the Greeke, wherein I have but ſmall vnderſtanding, my father purpoſed to make me learne-it by arte; But by new and vncuſtomed meanes, that is, by way of recreation and exerciſe. We did toſſe our declinations, and conjugations to and fro, as they do, who by way of a certaine game at tables learne both Arithmetike and Geometrie. For, amongſt other things he had eſpecially beene perſwaded to make me taſte and apprehend the fruits of dutie and ſcience by an vnforced kinde of will, and of mine owne choice; and without any compulſion or rigor to bring me vp in all mildeneſſe and libertie: yea with ſuch kinde of ſuperſtition, that, whereas ſome are of opinion, that ſuddenly to awaken yoong children, and as it were by violence to ſtartle and fright them out of their dead ſleepe in a morning (wherein they are more heavie and deeper plunged then we) doth greatly trouble and diſtemper their braines, he would every morning cauſe me to be awakened by the ſound of ſome inſtrument; and I was never without a ſervant; Who to that purpoſe attended vpon me. This example may ſerve to judge of the reſt; as alſo to commend the judgement and tender affection of ſo carefull and loving a father: who is not to be blamed, though hee reaped not the fruites anſwerable to his exquiſite toyle, and painefull manuring. Two things hindered the ſame; firſt the barrenneſſe and vnfit ſoyle: for howbeit I were of a 
                              •
                           ound and ſtrong conſtitution, and of a tractable and yeelding condition, yet was I ſo heavie, ſo ſluggiſh, and ſo dull, that I could not be rouzed (yea were-it to goe to play) from-out mine idle drowzineſſe. What I ſaw, I ſaw it perfectly; and vnder this heavy, and as it were Lethe-complexion did I breed hardie imaginations, and opinions farre-above my yeares. My ſpirit was very ſlow, and would goe no further then it was led by others; my apprehenſion blockiſh, my invention poore; and beſides, I had a marvelous defect in my weake memorie: it is therefore no woonder, if my father could never bring me to any perfection. Secondly, as thoſe that in ſome dangerous ſickneſſe, moved with a kind of hope-full & greedie deſire of perfect health againe, give eare to every Leache or Emperike, and follow all counſels, the good-man being exceedingly fearefull to commit any overſight, in a matter he tooke ſo to heart, ſuffered himſelfe at laſt to be led away by the common opinion, which like vnto the Cranes, followeth ever thoſe that go before, and yeelded to cuſtome: Having thoſe no longer about him, that had given him his firſt directions, and which they had brought out of Italie. Being but ſix yeeres old I was ſent to the Colledge of Guienne, then moſt flouriſhing and reputed the beſt in France, where it is impoſſible to adde any thing to the great care he had, both to chuſe the beſt and moſt ſufficient Maſters, that could be found, to reade vnto me, as alſo for all other circumſtances pertaining to my education; wherein contrary to vſuall cuſtomes of Colledges, he obſerved many particular rules. But ſo it is, it was ever a Colledge. My Latin tongue was forthwith corrupted, whereof by reaſon of diſcontinuance, I afterward loſt all manner of vſe: which new kind of inſtitution, ſtood me in no other ſtead, but that at my firſt admittance, it made me to ouer-skip ſome of the lower formes, and to be placed in the higheſt. For at thirteene yeares of age, that I left the Colledge, I had read over the whole courſe of Philoſophie (as they call it) but with ſo ſmall profit, that I can now make no account of it. The firſt taſte or feeling I had of bookes, was of the pleaſure I tooke in reading the fables of Ovids Metamorphoſies; for, being but ſeaven or eight yeares old, I would ſteale and ſequeſter my ſelfe from all other delights, onely to reade them: Forſomuch as the tongue wherein they were written was to me naturall; and it was the eaſieſt booke I knew, and by reaſon of the matter therein contained, moſt agreeing with my yoong age. For of King Arthur, of Lancelot du Lake, of Amadis, of Huon of Burdeaux, and ſuch idle time-conſuming, and wit-beſotting traſh of bookes wherein youth doth commonly ammuſe it ſelfe, I was not ſo much as acquainted with their

names, and to this day know not their bodies, nor what they containe: So exact was my diſcipline. Wherby I became more careleſſe to ſtudie my other preſcript leſſons. And well did it fall out for my purpoſe, that I had to deale with a very diſcreet Maſter, who out of his judgement could with ſuch dexteritie winke▪ at, and ſecond my vntowardlineſſe, and ſuch other faults that were in me. For by that meanes, I read-over Virgils Aeneades, Terence, Plautus, and other Italian Comedies, allured thereunto by the pleaſantneſſe of their ſeverall ſubjects: Had he beene ſo fooliſhly-ſevere, or ſo ſverely froward as to croſſe this courſe of mine, I think verily I had never brought any thing from the Colledge, but the hate and contempt of Bookes, as doth the greateſt part of our Nobilitie. Such was his diſcretion, and ſo warily did he behave himſelfe, that he ſaw and would not ſee: hee would foſter and encreaſe my longing: ſuffering me but by ſtealth, and by ſnatches to glut my ſelfe with thoſe Bookes; holding ever a gentle hand over me, concerning other regular ſtudies. For, the chiefeſt thing my father required at their hands (vnto whoſe charge he had committed me) was a kinde of well-conditioned mildeneſſe, and facilitie of complexion. And, to ſay truth, mine had no other fault, but a certaine dull-languiſhing, and heavie ſlothfulneſſe. The danger was not, I ſhould do-ill, but that I ſhould doe nothing.
                        No man did ever ſuſpect, I would prove a bad, but an vnprofitable man: foreſeeing in me rather a kind of idleneſſe, than a voluntary craftineſſe. I am not ſo ſelfe-conceited but I perceive what hath followed. The complaints that are daily buzzed in mine eares are theſe; that I am idle, colde, and negligent in offices of friendſhip, and dutie to my parents, and kinsfolkes; and touching publike offices, that I am over-ſingular and diſdainefull. And thoſe that are moſt iniurious cannot aske, wherefore I have taken, and why I have not paied? but may rather demand, why I doe not quit, and wherefore I doe not give? I would take it as a favour, they ſhould wiſh ſuch effects of ſupererogation in me. But they are vnjuſt and over-partiall, that will goe about to exact that from me, which I owe not, with more rigor than they will exact from themſelves that which they owe; wherein if they condemne me, they vtterly cancell, both the gratifying of the action, and the gratitude, which thereby would be due to me. Whereas the active well-doing ſhould be of more conſequence, proceeding from my hand, in regard I have no paſſive at all. Wherefore I may ſo much the more freely diſpoſe of my fortune, by how much more it is mine, and of my ſelfe that am moſt mine owne. Notwithſtanding, if I were a great blazoner of mine owne actions, I might peradventure barre ſuch reproches, and juſtly vpbraid ſome, that they are not ſo much offended, becauſe I doe not enough, as for that I may, and it lies in my power to doe much more then I doe. Yet my minde ceaſed not at the ſame time to have peculiar vnto it ſelfe well-ſetled motions, true and open judgements, concerning the objects, which it knew; which alone, and without any helpe or communication it would digeſt. And amongſt other things I verily beleeue, it would have proved altogether incapable, and vnfit to yeeld vnto force, or ſtoope vnto violence. Shall I account or relate this qualitie of my infancie, which was, a kinde of boldeneſſe in my lookes, and gentle ſoftneſſe in my voice, and affabilitie in my geſtures, and a dexteritie in conforming my ſelfe to the parts I vndertooke? for before the age of the
                        Alter ab undecimo tum me vix ceperat annus:Virg. Buc. 
                                 •
                              cl. 8. 39.
                        
                        
                           Yeares had I (to make even.)
                           Scarſe two above eleven.
                        
                        I have vnde-rgone and repreſented the chiefeſt parts in the Latin Tragedies of Buchanan, Guerenti, and of Muret; which in great ſtate were acted and plaid in our colledge of Guienne: wherein Andreas Goveanus our Rector principall; who as in all other parts belonging to his charge, was without compariſon the chiefeſt Rector of France, and my ſelfe (without oſtentation be it ſpoken) was reputed, if not a chiefe maſter, yet a principall Actor in them. It is an excerciſe I rather commend than diſalow in yong gentlemen: and have ſeene ſome of our Princes (in imitation of ſome of former ages) both commendably and honeſtly, in their proper perſons acte and play ſome parts in Tragedies. It hath heeretofore been eſteemed a lawfull exerciſe, and a tollerable profeſſion in men of honor, namely in Greece. Ariſtoni tragico actori rem aperit: huic & genus & fortuna honeſta erant: nec ars quia nihil tale apud Graecos
                           Lib dec. 3. l. 4. 
                           pudori eſt, ea deformaebat. He imparts the matter to Ariſton a Player of tragedies, whoſe progenie
                           
                           and fortune were both honeſt; nor did his profeſſion diſgrace them, becauſe no ſuch matter is a diſparagement amongſt the Graecians.
                        
                        And I have ever accuſed them of impertinencie, that condemne and diſalow ſuch kindes of recreations, and blamed thoſe of injuſtice, that refuſe good and honeſt Comedians, (or as we call them) Players, to enter our good townes, and grudge the common people ſuch publike ſports. Politike and wel-ordered commonwealths, endevor rather carefully to vnite and aſſemble their Citizens together; as in ſerious offices of devotion, ſo in honeſt exerciſes of recreation. Common ſocietie and loving friendſhip is thereby cheriſhed and increaſed. And beſides, they cannot have more formall and regular paſtimes allowed them, then ſuch as are acted and repreſented in open view of all, and in the preſence of the magiſtrates themſelves: And if I might beare ſway, I would thinke it reaſonable, that Princes ſhould ſometimes, at their proper charges, gratifie the common people with them, as an argument of a fatherly affection, and loving goodneſſe towards them: and that in populous and frequented cities, there ſhould be Theatres & places appointed for ſuch ſpectacles; as a diverting of worſe inconveniences, and ſecret actions. But to come to my intended purpoſe, there is no better way then to allure the affection, and to entice the appetite: otherwiſe a man ſhall breede but aſſes laden with Bookes. With jerkes of roddes they have their ſatchels full of learning given them to keepe. Which to do well, one muſt not onely harbor in him-ſelfe, but wed and mary the ſame with his minde.
                     
                     
                        The ſix and twentieth Chapter.
                        
                           It is follie to referre Truth or Falſehood to our ſufficiencie.
                        
                        IT is not peradventure without reaſon, that we aſcribe the facilitie of beleeving and eaſines of perſwaſion, vnto ſimpl
                              •
                            c
                              •
                           tie and ignorance: For me ſemeth to have learn theretofore, that beliefe was, as it were an impreſſion conceiued in our minde, and according as the ſame was found either more ſoft, or of leue reſiſtance, it was eaſier to imprint any thing therein. 
                              Ʋeneceſſe eſt lancem in libra po
                                 •
                              deribus impoſitis deprimi: ſic animum perſpicuis cedere. As it is
                           Cic. Acad. qu. l. 4 
                           neceſſarie a ſcale muſt goe downe the balla
                                 ••
                              c when weights are put into it, ſo muſt a minde yeelde to things that are manifeſt. Foraſmuch therefore, as the minde being moſt emptie and without counterpoize, ſo much the more eaſily doth it yeeld vnder the burthen of the firſt perſwaſion. And that's the reaſon why children, thoſe of the common ſort, women, and ſickefolks, are ſo ſubject to be n
                              •
                           is-led, and ſo eaſie to ſwallow gudgeons. Yet on the other ſide it is a ſottiſh preſumption to diſdaine and condemn that for falſe, which vnto vs ſeemeth to beare no ſhew of likelihood or truth: which is an ordinarie fault in thoſe who perſwade themſelves to be of more ſufficienc
                              •
                           e than the vulgar ſort. So was I ſometimes wont to doe, and if I heard any body ſpeake, either of ghoſts walking, of foretelling future things, of enchantments, of witchcrafts, or any other thing reported, which I could not well conceive, or that was beyond my reach,
                        
                           Somnia, terrores magicos, miracula, ſagas,Hor. lib. 2. ep. 2. 208.
                           
                           Nocturnos lemures, portentáque Theſſali-
                        
                        
                           Dreames, magike terrors, witches, vncouth-wonders,
                           Night-walking ſprites, Theſſalian conjur'd thunders.
                        
                        I could not but feele a kinde of compaſſion to ſee the poore and ſeely people abuſed with ſuch follies. And now I perceive, that I was as much to be moaned my-ſelfe: Not that experience hath ſince made me to diſcerne any thing beyond my former opinions: yet was not my curioſitie the cauſe of it, but reaſon hath taught me, that ſo reſolutely to condemne a thing for falſe, and impoſſible, is to aſſume vnto himſelfe the advantage, to have the bounds and limits of Gods will, and of the power of our common mother Nature tied to his ſleeue: And that there is no greater folly in the world, then to reduce them to the meaſure of our capacitie▪ and bounds of our ſufficiencie▪ If we terme thoſe things monſters or miracles to

which our reaſon cannot attaine, how many ſuch doe daily preſent themſelves vnto our ſight? Let vs conſider through what clowdes, and how blinde-folde we are led to the knowledge of moſt things, that paſſe our hands: verily we ſhall finde, it is rather cuſtome, than ſcience that remooveth the ſtrangeneſſe of them from-vs:
                        —iam nemo feſſus ſaturúſque viden
                              •
                           i,Lucr. li. 2. Suſpicere in caeli dignatur lucida templa.
                        
                           Now no man tir'd with glut of contemplation
                           Deignes to have heav'ns bright Church in admiration.
                        
                        And that thoſe things, were they newly preſented vnto vs, wee ſhould doubtleſſe deeme them, as much, or more vnlikely, and incredible, then any other.
                        
                           —ſi nunc primùm mortalibus adſint
                              1042:
                           
                           Ex improviſo, ceu ſint obiecta repentè,
                           Nil magis his rebus poterat mirabile dici,
                           Aut minus antè quod auderent fore credere gentes.
                        
                        
                           If now firſt on a ſudden they were here
                           Mongſt mortal men, object to eie or care,
                           Nothing, than theſe things, would more wondrous bee,
                           Or that, men durſt leſſe thinke, ever to ſee.
                        
                        He who had never ſeene a river before, the firſt he ſaw, he thought it to be the Ocean: and things that are the greateſt in our knowledge, we judge them to be the extreameſt that nature worketh in that kinde.
                        
                           Scilicet & fluvius qui non eſt maximus, ei eſtLib. 6. 671.
                           
                           Qui non antè aliquem maior em vidit, & ingens
                           Arbor homóque videtur, & omnia de genere omni
                           Maxima quae vidit quiſque, haec ingentia fingit.
                        
                        
                           A ſtreame none of the greateſt, may ſo ſeeme
                           To him, that never ſaw a greater ſtreame.
                           Trees, men, ſeeme huge, and all things of all ſorts,
                           The greateſt one hath ſeene, he huge reports.
                        
                        
                           Conſuetudine oculorum aſſueſcunt animi, neque admirantur, neque requirunt rationes carum
                           Cic. Nat. D
                                 •
                              . l. 2 
                           rerum, quas ſemper vident. Mindes are acquainted by cuſt
                                 •
                              me of their eies, nor doe they admire, or enquire the reaſon of thoſe things, which they continually behold. The noveltie of things doth more incite vs to ſearch-out the cauſes, than their greatneſſe: we muſt judge of this infinit power of nature, with more reverence, and with more acknowledgement of our owne ignorance and weakeneſſe. How many things of ſmall likelihood are there, witneſſed by men, woorthie of credit, whereof if we cannot be perſwaded, we ſhould at leaſt leave them inſuſpence? For, to deeme them impoſſible, is by raſh preſumption to preſume and know how farre poſſibilitie reacheth. If a man did well vnderſtand, what difference there is betweene impoſſibilitie, and that which is vnwonted, and betweene that which is againſt the courſe of nature, and the common opinion of men, in not beleeving raſhly, and in not disbeleeving eaſily; the rule of Nothing too-much, commanded by Chilon, ſhould be obſerved. When we finde in Froyſard, that the Earle of Foix, (being in Bearn▪
                           ) had knowledge of the defeature at Iuberoth, of king Iohn of Caſtile, the morrow next it hapned, and the meanes he alleageth for it, a man may well laugh at it: And of that which our Annales report, that Pope Honorius, the very ſame day, that King Philip Auguſtus died at Mantes, cauſed his publike funerals to be ſolemnized, and commanded them to be celebrated throughout all Italie. For, the authoritie of the witneſſes hath peradventure no ſufficient warrant to reſtraine vs. But what? if Plutarke, beſides divers examples which he alleageth of antiquitie, ſaith to have certainely knowne, that in Domitians time, the newes of the battle loſt by Antonius in Germanis many daies iourneies thence, was publiſhed at Rome, and divulged through the world, the very ſame day it ſucceeded: And if Caeſar holdes, that it hath many times happened, that report hath foregone the accident: Shall we not ſay, that thoſe ſimple people have ſuffered themſelves to be couſoned and ſeduced by the vulgar ſort, becauſe they were not as cleare-ſighted as we? Is there any thing more daintie, more vnſpotted, and more lively then Plinies judgement, whenſoever it pleaſeth him to make ſhewe of it? Is there any farther from vanitie? I omit the excellencie of his learning and knowledge, whereof I make but ſmall reckoning:

in which of thoſe two parts doe we exceed him? Yet there is no ſcholer ſo meanely learned, but will convince him of lying, & read a lecture of contradiction againſt him vpon the progreſſe of natures workes. When wee reade in Bouchet the myracles wrought by the reliques of Saint Hillarie, his credit is not ſufficient to barre vs the libertie of contradicting him: yet at randon to condemne all ſuch like hiſtories, ſeemeth to me a notable impudencie. That famous man Saint Auguſtine, witneſſeth to have ſeene a blinde childe, to recover his ſight, over the reliques of Saint Gervaſe and Protaiſe at Milene: and a woman at Carthage, to have beene cured of a canker, by the ſigne of the holy Croſſe, which a woman newly baptized made vnto her: and Heſperius a familiar friend of his, to have expelled certaine ſpirits, that moleſted his houſe, with a little of the earth of our Saviors ſepulcher; which earth being afterwards tranſported into a church, a Paralitike man was immediately therwith cured: and a woman going in proceſſion, having as ſhe paſt-by with a noſe-gaie toucht the caſe wherein Saint Stevens bones were, and with the ſame afterward rubbed her eies, ſhe recovered her ſight, which long before ſhe had vtterly loſt: & divers other examples, where he affirmeth to have bin an aſſiſtant himſelfe. What ſhall we accuſe him of, and two other holy Biſhops, Aurelius and Maximinus, whom he calleth for his witneſſes? Shal it be of ignorance, of ſimplicity, of malice, of facility, or of impoſture? Is any man living ſo impudent, that thinks he may be compared to them, whether it be in vertue or piety, in knowledge or judgement, in wiſdome or ſufficiency? Qui vi rationem nullam afferrent, ipſa autoritate me frangerent: Who
                           Cic▪ Di
                                 •
                              . li. 1. 
                           though they alleadged no reaſon, yet might ſubdue me with their very authoritie. It is a dangerous fond hardineſſe, and of conſequence, beſides the abſurd temerity it drawes with it, to deſpiſe what we conceive not. For, after that according to your beſt vnderſtanding, you have eſtabliſhed the limits of truth, and bounds of falſehood, and that it is found, you muſt neceſſarily beleeve things, wherein is more ſtrangeneſſe, then in thoſe you deny; you have alreadie bound your ſelfe to abandon them. Now that which me thinkes brings as much diſorder in our conſciences, namely in theſe troubles of religion wherin we are, is the diſpenſation Catholikes make of their beliefe. They ſuppoſe to ſhew themſelves very moderate and skilfull, when they yeeld their adverſaries any of thoſe articles now in queſtion. But beſides that, they perceive not what an advantage it is for him that chargeth you, if you but once begin to yeeld & give them ground; and how much that encorageth him to purſue his point: thoſe articles which they chuſe for the lighteſt, are oftentimes moſt important. Either a man muſt wholy ſubmit himſelfe to the authoritie of our Eccleſiaſticall pollicie, or altogether diſpence himſelfe from it: It is not for vs to determine what part of obedience we owe vnto it. And moreover, I may ſay it, becauſe I have made triall of it, having ſometimes vſed this libertie of my choice, and particular election, not regarding certaine points of the obſeruance of our Church, which ſeeme to beare a face, either more vaine, or more ſtrange; comming to communicate them with wiſemen, I have found that thoſe things have a moſt ſolide and ſteadie foundation, and that it is but fooliſhneſſe and ignorance, makes vs receiue them with leſſe reſpect and reverence then the reſt. Why remember we not, what, and how many contradictions we finde and feele even in our owne judgement? How many things ſerved vs but yeſterday as articles of faith, which to day we deeme but fables? Glory and curioſitie are the ſcourges of our ſoules. The latter induceth vs to have an oare in every ſhip, and the former forbids vs to leave any thing vnreſolved or vndecided.
                     
                     
                        The ſeauen and twentieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of Friendſhip.
                        
                        COnſidering the proceeding of a Painters worke I have; a deſire hath poſſeſſed mee to imitate him: He maketh choiſe of the moſt convenient place and middle of everie wall, there to place a picture, laboured with all his skill and ſufficiencie; and all void places about it he filleth vp with antike Boſcage or Crotesko works; which are fantaſtical pictures, having no grace, but in the variety and ſtrangeneſſe of them. And what are theſe my compoſitions

in truth, other than antike workes, and monſtrous bodies, patched and hudled vp together of divers members, without any certaine or well ordered figure, having neither order, dependencie, or proportion, but caſuall and framed by chance?
                        Deſinit in piſcem mulier formoſa ſupernè.Hor. art. poe. 4.
                        
                        
                           A woman faire for parts ſuperior,
                           Endes in a fiſh for parts inferior.
                        
                        Touching this ſecond point I goe as farre as my Painter, but for the other and better part I am farre behinde: for my ſufficiency reacheth not ſo farre, as that I dare vndertake, a rich, a polliſhed, and according to true skill, and arte-like table. I have adviſed my ſelfe to borrow one of Steven de la Boitie, who with this kinde of worke ſhall honour all the world. It is a diſcourſe he entitled, Voluntary Servitude, but thoſe who have not knowen him, have ſince very properly rebaptized the ſame. The againſt one. In his firſt youth he writ, by way of Eſſaie, in honour of libertie againſt Tyrants. It hath long ſince beene diſperſed amongſt men of vnderſtanding, not without great and well deſerved commendations: for it is full of wit, and containeth as much learning as may be: yet doth it differ much from the beſt he can do. And if in the age I knew-him in, he would have vndergone my deſſigne, to ſet his fantaſies downe in writing, we ſhould doubtleſſe ſee many rare things, and which would very neerely approch the honour of antiquity: for eſpecially touching that part of natures gifts, I know none may be compared to him. But it was not long of him, that ever this Treatize, came to mans view, and I believe he never ſawe it ſince it firſt eſcaped his hands: with certaine other notes concerning the edict of Ianuarie, famous by reaſon of our inteſtine warre, which haply may in other places finde their deſerved praiſe. It is all I could ever recover of his reliques (whom when death ſeized, he by his laſt will and teſtament, left with ſo kinde remembrance, heire and executor of his librarie and writings) beſides the little booke, I ſince cauſed to be publiſhed: To which his pamphlet I am particularly moſt bounden, for ſo much as it was the inſtrumentall meane of our firſt acquaintance. For it was ſhowed me long time before I ſawe him; and gave me the firſt knowledge of his name, addreſſing, and thus nouriſhing that vnſpotted friendſhip, which we (ſo long as it pleaſed God) have ſo ſincerely, ſo entire and inviolably maintained betweene vs, that truely a man ſhall not commonly heare of the like; and amongſt our moderne men no ſigne of any ſuch is ſeene. So many partes are required to the erecting of ſuch a one, that it may be counted a wonder, if fortunce once in three ages contract the like. There is nothing to which Nature hath more addreſſed vs than to ſocietie. And Ariſtotle ſaith, that perfect Law-givers have had more regardfull care of friendſhip then of iuſtice. And the vtmoſt drift of it's perfection is this. For generally, all thoſe amities which are forged and nouriſhed by voluptuouſneſſe or profit, publike or private neede, are thereby ſo much the leſſe faire and generous, and ſo much the leſſe true amities, in that they intermeddle other cauſes, ſcope, and fruit with friendſhip, then it ſelfe alone: Nor doe thoſe foure auncient kindes of friendſhips; Naturall, ſociall, hoſpitable, and venerian, either particularly or conjointly beſeeme the ſame. That from children to parents may rather be termed reſpect: Friendſhip is nouriſhed by communication, which by reaſon of the over-great diſparitie cannot bee found in them, and would happly offend the duties of nature: for neither all the ſecret thoughts of parents can be communicated vnto children, leſt it might engender an vnbeſeeming familiaritie betweene them, nor the admonitions and corrections (which are the chiefeſt offices of friendſhip) could be exerciſed from children to parents. There have nations beene found, where, by cuſtome, children killed their parents, and others, where parents ſlew their children, thereby to avoide the hindrance of enter-bearing one another in after times: for naturally one dependeth from the ruine of another. There have Philoſophers beene found diſdaining this naturall conjunction, witneſſe Ariſtippus, who being vrged with the affection he ought his children, as proceeding from his loynes, began to ſpit, ſaying, That alſo that excrement proceeded from him, and that alſo we engendred wormes and lice. And that other man, whom Plutarke would have perſwaded to agree with his brother, anſwered, I care not a ſtraw the more for him, though he came out of the ſame wombe I did. Verily the name of Brother is a glorious name, and ful of loving kindneſſe, and therefore did he and I terme one another ſworne brother: but this commixture, dividence, and ſharing of goods, this joyning wealth to wealth, and that the riches of one ſhall be the povertie of another, doth exceedingly diſtemper and diſtract all brotherly

aliance, and lovely conjunction: If brothers ſhould conduct the progreſſe of their advancement and thrift in one ſame path and courſe, they muſt neceſſarily oftentimes hinder and croſſe one another. Moreover, the correſpondencie and relation that begetteth theſe true and mutually-perfect amities, why ſhall it be found in theſe? The father and the ſonne may very well be of a farre differing complexion, and ſo many brothers: He is my ſonne, he is my kinſman; but he may be a foole, a bad, or a peeviſh-minded man. And then according as they are friendſhips, which the law and dutie of nature doth command-vs, ſo much the leſſe of our owne voluntarie choice and libertie is there required vnto it: And our genuine libertie hath no production more properly her owne, then that of affection and amitie. Sure I am, that concerning the ſame I have aſſaied all that might be, having had the beſt and moſt indulgent father that ever was, even to his extreameſt age, and who from father to ſonne was deſcended of a famous houſe, and touching this rare-ſeene vertue of brotherly concord very exemplare:
                        —& ipſeHor. l. 2. od. 2. 6. Notus in fratres animi paterni,
                        
                           To his brothers knowne ſo kinde,
                           As to beare a fathers minde.
                        
                        To compare the affection toward women vnto it, although it iproceed from our owne free choiſe, a man cannot, nor may it be placed in this ranke: Her fire, I confeſſe it
                        (—neque enim eſt de
                                 •
                               neſcta noſtri Quae dulcem curis miſcet amaritiem.)
                        
                           (Nor is that Goddeſſe ignorant of me,
                           Whoſe bitter ſweetes with my cares mixed be.)
                        
                        to be more active, more fervent, and more ſharpe. But it is a raſh and wavering fire, waving and diverſe: the fire of an ague ſubject to fits and ſtints, and that hath but ſlender hold-faſt of vs. In true friendſhip, it is a generall & vniverſall heat, and equally tempered, a conſtant and ſetled heat, all pleaſure and ſmoothnes, that hath no pricking or ſtinging in it, which the more it is in luſtfull love, the more is it but a ranging and mad deſire in following that which flies vs,
                        
                           Come ſegue la lepre il cacciatoreAriof. can. 10. 
                                    ••
                                 . 7.
                           
                           Al freddo, al caldo, alla montagna, al lito,
                           Ne piu l'eſtima poiche preſa vede,
                           E ſol dietro a chi ſugge affrettail piede.
                        
                        
                           Ev'n as the huntſman doth the hare purſue,
                           In cold, in heate, on mountaines, on the ſhore,
                           But cares no more, when he her tan'e eſpies,
                           Speeding his pace, onely at that which flies.
                        
                        As ſoone as it creepeth into the termes of friendſhip, that is to ſay, in the agreement of wils, it languiſheth and vaniſheth away: enioying doth looſe it, as having a corporall end, and ſubject to ſacietie. On the other ſide, friendſhip is enjoyed according as it is deſired, it is neither bred, nor nouriſhed, nor encreaſeth but in joviſſance, as being ſpirituall, and the minde being refined by vſe and cuſtome. Vnder this chiefe amitie, theſe fading affections have ſometimes found place in me, leſt I ſhould ſpeake of him, who in his verſes ſpeakes but too much of it. So are theſe two paſſions entred into me in knowledge one of another, but in compariſon never: the firſt flying a high, and keeping a proud pitch, diſdainfully beholding the other to paſſe her points farre vnder it. Concerning marriage, beſides that it is a covenant which hath nothing free but the entrance, the continuance being forced and conſtrained, depending elſe-where then from our will, & a match ordinarily concluded to other ends: A thouſand ſtrange knots are there in commonly to be vnknit, able to break the web, & trouble the whole courſe of a lively affection; whereas in friendſhip, there is no commerce or buſines depending on the ſame, but it ſelfe. Seeing (to ſpeake truly) that the ordinary ſufficiency of women, cannot anſwer this conference & communication, the nurſe of this ſacred bond: nor ſeeme their mindes ſtrong enough to endure the pulling of a knot ſo hard, ſo faſt, and durable. And truely, if without that, ſuch a genuine and voluntarie acquaintance might be contracted, where not onely mindes had this entire joviſſance, but alſo bodies, a ſhare of the aliance, and where a man might wholy be engaged: It is certaine, that friendſhip would

thereby be more compleate and full: But this ſex could never yet by any example attaine vnto it, and is by ancient ſchooles rejected thence. And this other Greeke licence is juſtly abhorred by our cuſtomes, which notwithſtanding, becauſe according to vſe it had ſo neceſſarie a diſparitie of ages, and difference of offices betweene lovers, did no more ſufficiently anſwer the perfect vnion and agreement, which heere we require: Quis eſt enim iste amor
                           Cic. Tuſc. que. 4. 
                           amicitiae? curneque deformem adoleſcentem quiſquam amat, neque for moſum ſenem? For, what love is this of friendſhip? why doth no man loue either a deformed yong man, or abeantifull old man? For even the picture the Academic makes of it, will not (as I ſuppoſe) diſavowe mee, to ſay thus in her behalfe: That the firſt furie, enſpired by the ſon of Venus in the lovers hart, vpon the object of tender youths-flower, to which they allow all inſolent and paſſionate violences, an immoderate heate may produce, was ſimply grounded vpon an externall beauty; a falſe image of corpor all generation: for in the ſpirit it had no power, the ſight whereof was yet concealed, which was but in his infancie, and before the age of budding. For, if this furie did ſeize vpon a baſe minded courage, the meanes of it's purſute, where riches, gifts, favour to the advancement of dignities, and ſuch like vile marchandize, which they reproove. If it fell into a moſt generous minde, the interpoſitions were likewiſe generous: Philoſophicall inſtructions, documents to reverence religion, to obey the lawes, to die for the good of his countrie: examples of valor, wiſedome and juſtice. The lover endevoring and ſtudying to make himſelfe acceptable by the good grace and beauty of his minde (that of his body being long ſince decayed) hoping by this mentall ſocietie to eſtabliſh a more firme and permanent bargaine. When this purſute attained the effect in dueſeaſon, (for by not requiring in a lover, he ſhould bring leaſure and diſcretion in his enterpriſe, they require it exactly in the beloved; for aſ much as he was to judge of an internall beauty, of a difficile knowledge, & abſtruſe diſcovery) then by the interpoſition of a ſpirituall beauty was the deſire of a ſpiritual conception engendred in the beloved. The latter was heere chiefeſt; the corporall, accidentall and ſecond, altogether contrarie to the lover. And therefore do they preferre the beloved, and verifie that the gods likewiſe preferre the ſame: and greatly blame the Poet Aeſchylus, who in the love between Achilles and Patroclus aſcribeth the lovers part vnto Achilles, who was in the firſt and beardleſſe youth of his adoleſcency, and the faireſt of the Graecians. After this generall communitie, the miſtris and worthieſt part of it, predominant & exerciſing her offices (they ſay the moſt availeful commodity did therby redound both to the private & publike) That it was the force of countries received the vſe of it, and the principall defence of equitie and libertie: witneſſe the comfortable loves of Hermodiu and Ariſtogiton. Therefore name they it ſacred and divine, and it concerns not them whether the violence of tyrants, or the demiſneſſe of the people be againſt them: To conclude, all can be alleaged in favour of the Academy, is to ſay, that it was a love ending in friendſhip, a thing which hath no bad reference vnto the Stoical definition of love: Amorem conatum eſſe amicitiae facienda ex
                           Cic. ibid. 
                           pulehritudinis ſpecie. That love is an endevor of making frendſhip by the ſhew of beautie. I returne to my deſcription in a more equitable & equall maner. Omnino amicitiae corroboratis iam confirmatiſ
                                 •
                              
                           
                           Cic. Ami
                                 •
                              . 
                           ingenijs & aetatibus indicandae ſunt. Clearely friendſhips are to be indge by wits, and ages already ſtrengthened and confirmed. As for the reſt, thoſe we ordinarily call friendes and amities, are but acquaintances and familiarities, tied together by ſome occaſion or commodities, by meanes whereof our mindes are entertained. In the amitie I ſpeake of, they entermixe and confound themſelves one in the other, with ſo vniuerſall a commixture, that they weare out, and can no more finde the ſeame that hath conjoyned them together. If a man vrge me to tell wherefore I loved him, I feele it cannot be expreſſed, but by anſwering; Becauſe it was he, becauſe it was my ſelfe. There is beyond all my diſcourſe, and beſides what I can particularly report of it, I know not what inexplicable and fatall power, a meane and Mediatrix of this indiſſoluble vnion. Wee ſought one another, before we had ſeene one another, and by the reports we heard one of another; which wrought a greater violence in vs, than the reaſon of reports may well beare: I thinke by ſome ſecret ordinance of the heavens, we embraced one another by our names. And at our firſt meeting, which was by chance at a great feaſt, and ſolemne meeting of a whole towneſhip, we found ourſelves ſo ſurprized, ſo knowne, ſo acquainted, and ſo combinedly bound together, that from thence forward, nothing was ſo neere vnto vs, as one vnto another. He writ an excellent Latine Satyre; ſince publiſhed; by which he excuſeth and expoundeth the precipitation

of our acquaintance, ſo ſuddenly come to her perfection; Sithence it muſt continue ſo ſhort a time, and begun ſo late (for we were both growne men, and he ſome yeeres older than myſelfe) there was no time to be loſt. And it was not to bee modelled or directed by the paterne of regular and remiſſe friendſhip, wherein ſo many precautions of a long and preallable converſation are required. This hath no other Idea than of it ſelfe, and can have no reference but to it ſelfe. It is not one eſpeciall conſideration, nor two, nor three, nor foure, nor a thouſand: It is I wot not what kinde of quinteſſence, of all this commixture, which having ſeized all my will, induced the ſame to plunge and looſe it ſelfe in his, which likewiſe having ſeized all his will, brought it to looſe and plunge it ſelfe in mine, with a mutuall greedineſſe, and with a ſemblable concurrance. I may truely ſay, looſe, reſerving nothing vnto vs, that might properly be called our owne, nor that was either his, or mine. When Lelius in the preſence of the Romane Conſuls, who after the condemnation of Tiberius Gracchus, purſued all thoſe that had beene of his acquaintance, came to enquire of Caius Bloſius (who was one of his chiefeſt friends) what he would have done for him, and that he anſwered: All things, What? All things? replied he: And what if he had willed thee to burne our Temples? Bloſius anſwered, He would never have commanded ſuch a thing. But what if he had done it? replied Lelius: The other anſwered, I would have obeyed him: If hee were ſo perfect a friend to Gracchus, as Hiſtories report, he needed not offend the Conſuls with this laſt and bolde confeſſion, and ſhould not have departed from the aſſurance hee had of Gracchus his minde. But yet thoſe, who accuſe this anſwer as ſeditious, vnderſtand not well this myſterie: and doe not preſuppoſe in what termes he ſtood, and that he held Gracchus his will in his ſleeve, both by power and knowledge. They were rather friends than Cittizens, rather friends than enemies of their countrey, or friends of ambition and trouble. Having abſolutely committed themſelves one to another, they perfecty held the reines of one anothers inclination: and let this yoke be guided by vertue and conduct of reaſon (becauſe without them it is altogether impoſſible to combine and proportion the ſame.) The anſwer of Bloſius was ſuch as it ſhould be. If their affections miſcarried, according to my meaning, they were neither friendes one to other, nor friends to themſelves. As for the reſt, this anſwer ſoundes no more than mine would doe, to him that would in ſuch ſort enquire of me; if your will ſhould commaund you to kill your daughter, would you doe it? and that I ſhould conſent vnto it: for, that beareth no witneſſe of conſent to do it: becauſe I am not in doubt of my will, and as little of ſuch a friends will. It is not in the power of the worlds diſcourſe to remove me from the certaintie I have of his intentions and judgements of mine: no one of it's actions might be preſented vnto me, vnder what ſhape ſoever, but I would preſently finde the ſpring and motion of it. Our mindes have jumped ſo vnitedly together, they have with ſo fervent an aflection conſidered of each other, and with like affection ſo diſcovered and ſounded, even to the very bottome of ech others heart and entrails, that I did not onely know his, as well as mine owne, but I would (verily) rather have truſted him concerning any matter of mine, than my ſelfe. Let no man compare any of the other common friendſhips to this. I have as much knowledge of them as another, yea of the perfecteſt of their kinde: yet will I not perſwade any man to confound their rules, for ſo a man might be deceived. In theſe other ſtrict friendſhips a man muſt march with the bridle of wiſdome and precaution in his hand: the bond is not ſo ſtrictly tied, but a man may in ſome ſort diſtruſt the ſame. Love him (ſaide Chilon) as if you ſhould one day hate him againe. Hate him as if you ſhould love him againe. This precept, ſo abhominable in this ſoveraigne and miſtris Amitie, is neceſſarie and wholeſome in the vſe of vulgar and cuſtomarie frendſhips: toward which a man muſt employ the ſaying Ariſtotle was woont ſo often to repeat, Oh you my friends, there is no perfect friend.
                        
                        In this noble commerce, offices and benefits (nurſes of other amities) deſerve not ſo much as to bee accounted of: this confuſion ſo full of our willes is cauſe of it: for euen as the friendſhip I beare vnto my ſelfe, admits no accreaſe, by any ſuccour I give my ſelfe in any time of neede, whatſoever the Stoickes alleadge; and as I acknowledge no thanks vnto my ſelfe for any ſervice I doe vnto my ſelfe, ſo the vnion of ſuch friends, being truely perfect, makes them looſe the feeling of ſuch duties, and hate, and expell from one another theſe words of diviſion, and difference; benefit, good deed, dutie, obligation, acknowledgement, prayer, thanks, and ſuch their like. All things being by effect common betweene

them; wils, thoughts, judgements, goods, wives, children, honour, and life; and their mutuall agreement, being no other than one ſoule in two bodies, according to the fit definition of Ariſtotle, they can neither lend or give ought to each other. See here the reaſon why Law-makers, to honour marriage with ſome imaginary reſemblance of this divine bond, inhibite donations betweene husband and wife; meaning thereby to inferre, that all things ſhould peculiarly bee proper to each of them, and that they have nothing to divide and ſhare together. If in the friendſhip wherof I ſpeake, one might give vnto another, the receiver of the benefit ſhould binde his fellow. For, each ſeeking more than any other thing, to doe each other good, he who yeelds both matter and occaſion, is the man ſheweth himſelfe liberall, giving his friend that contentment, to effect towards him what he deſireth moſt. When the Philoſopher Diogenes wanted money, he was wont to ſay; That he re-demanded the ſame of his friends, and not that he demanded it: And to ſhew how that is practiſed by effect, I will relate an auncient ſingular example. Eudamidas the Corinthian had two friends. Charixenus a Sycionian, and Aretheus a Corinthian; being vpon his death-bed, and very poore, and his two friends very rich, thus made his laſt will and teſtament. To Aretheus, I bequeath the keeping of my mother, and to maintaine her when ſhe ſhall be 
                                 •
                              lde: To Charixenus the marrying of my daughter, and to give her as great a dowry as he may: and in caſe one of them ſhall chance to die before, I appoint the ſurviver to ſubſtitute his charge, and ſupply his place. Thoſe that firſt ſaw this teſtament, laughed and mocked at the ſame; but his heires being advertiſed thereof, were very well pleaſed, and received it with ſingular contentment. And Charixenus one of them, dying five daies after Eudamidas, the ſubſtitution being declared in favour of Aretheus, he carefully and very kindly kept and maintained his mother, and of five talents that he was worth, he gave two & a halfe in mariage to one only daughter he had, and the other two & a halfe to the daughter of Eudamidas, whom he maried both in one day. This example is very ample, if one thing were not, which is the multitude of friends: For, this perfect amity I ſpeake-of, is indiviſible; each man doth ſo wholy give himſelfe vnto his friend, that he hath nothing left him to divide elſe-where: moreover he is grieved that he is double, triple, or quadruple, and hath not many ſoules, or ſundry wils, that he might conferre them all vpon this ſubject. Common friendſhips may bee divided; a man may love beautie in one, facilitie of behaviour in another, liberalitie in one, and wiſedome in another, paternity in this, fraternity in that man, & ſo forth: but this amitie which poſſeſſeth the ſoul, and ſwaies it in all ſoveraigntie, it is impoſſible it ſhould be double. If two at one inſtant ſhould require helpe, to which would you runne? Should they crave contrary off
                              •
                           ces of you, what order would you follow? Should one commit a matter to your ſilence, which if the other knew would greatly profit him, what courſe would you take? Or how would you diſcharge your ſelfe? A ſingular and principall friendſhip diſſolveth all other duties, & freeth all other obligations. The ſecret I have ſworne not to reveale to another, I may without periurie impart it vnto him, who is no other but my ſelfe. It is a great and ſtrange woonder for a man to double himſelfe; & thoſe that talk of tripling, know not, nor cannot reach vnto the height of it. Nothing is extreame, that hath his like. And he who ſhall preſuppoſe, that of two I love the one as well as the other, and that they enter-love one another, and love me as much as I loue them: he multiplieth in brother-hood, a thing moſt ſingular, and alonely one, and then which one alone is alſo the rareſt to be found in the world. The remainder of this hiſtory agreeth very wel with what I ſaid; for, Eudamidas giveth as a grace & fauor to his friends to employ them in his need: he leaveth them as his heires of his liberality, which conſiſteth in putting the meanes into their hands, to doe him good. And doubtleſſe, the force of friendſhip is much more richly ſhewen in his deed, then in Aretheus. To conclude, they are imaginable effects, to him that hath not taſted them; and which makes me woonderfully to honor the anſwer of that yong Souldier to Cyrus, who enquiring of him, what he would take for a horſe, with which he had lately gained the prize of a race, and whether he would change him for a Kingdome? No ſurely my Liege (ſaid he) yet would I willingly forgoe him to gaine a true friend, could I but finde a man worthy of ſo precious an alliance. He ſaid not ill, in ſaying, could I but finde. For, a man ſhall eaſily finde men fit for a ſuperficiall acquaintance; but in this, wherein men negotiate from the very centre of their harts, and make no ſpare of any thing, it is moſt requiſite, all the wardes and ſprings be ſincerely wrought, and perfectly true. In confederacie
                              •
                           , which hold but by one end, men have nothing to provide

for, but for the imperfections, which particularly doe intereſt and concerne that end and reſpect. It is no great matter what religion my Phyſician and Lawyer is of: this conſideration hath nothing common with the offices of that friendſhip they owe-mee. So doe I in the familiar acquaintances, that thoſe who ſerve-me contract with me. I am nothing inquiſitive whether a Lackey be chaſte or no, but whether he be diligent: I feare not a gaming Muletier, ſo much as if he be weake; nor a hot ſwearing Cooke, as one that is ignorant and vnskilfull; I never meddle with ſaying what a man ſhould do in the world; there are over many others that do it; but what my ſelfe do in the world.
                        Mihi ſic vſus eſt: Tibi, vt opus eſt facto, face.
                        Ter. Heau. act. 
                              •
                            ſcen. 1. 28.
                        
                           So is it requiſite for me;
                           Doe thou as needfull is for thee.
                        
                        Concerning familiar table-talke, I rather acquaint my ſelfe with, and follow a merry conceited humour, than a wiſe man: And in bed I rather prefer beauty, then goodneſſe; and in ſociety or coverſation of familiar diſcourſe, I reſpect rather ſufficiency, though without Preua' hommie, and ſo of all things elſe. Even as he that was found riding vpon an hobby-horſe, playing with his children, beſought him, who thus ſurprized him, not to ſpeake of-it, vntil he were a father himſelf, ſuppoſing the tender fondneſſe, and fatherly paſſion, which then would poſſeſſe his minde, ſhould make him an impartiall iudge of ſuch an action. So would I wiſh to ſpeake to ſuch as had tried what I ſpeake of: but knowing how far ſuch an amitie is from the common vſe, & how ſeld ſeene and rarely found, I looke not to finde a competent judge. For, even the diſcourſes, which ſterne antiquitie hath left vs concerning this ſubject, ſeeme to me but faint and forceleſſe in reſpect of the feeling I have of▪it: And in that point the effects exceed the very precepts of Philoſophie.
                        Nil ego contul
                              •
                           rim iucundo ſanus amico.
                        Hor. li. 1. Sat. 5. 44.
                        
                           For me, be I well in my wit,
                           Nought, as a merry friend, ſo fit.
                        
                        Ancient Menander accounted him happy, that had but met the ſhadow of a true friend: verily he had reaſon to ſay ſo, eſpecially if he had taſted of any: for truely, if I compare all the reſt of my forepaſſed life, which although I have by the meere mercy of God, paſt at reſt and eaſe, and except the loſſe of ſo deare a friend, free from all grievous affliction, with an ever-quietneſſe of minde, as one that have taken my naturall and originall commodities in good payment, without ſearching any others: if, as I ſay, I compare-it all vnto the foure yeares, I ſo happily enjoied the ſweet company, and deare-deare ſociety of that worthy man, it is nought but a vapour, nought but a darke and yrkeſome light. Since the time I loſt him,
                        
                           quem ſemper acerbum,Virg. Aen. 5. 49.
                           
                           Semper honoratum (ſic Di
                                 •
                               voluiſtis) habebo,
                        
                        
                           Which I ſhall ever hold a bitter day,
                           Yet ever honor'd (ſo my God t'obey)
                        
                        I doe but languiſh, I doe but ſorrow: and even thoſe pleaſures, all things preſent-me with, in ſtead of yeelding me comfort, doe but redouble the griefe of his loſſe. We were copartners in all things. All things were with vs at halfe; me thinkes I have ſtolne his part from him.
                        —Nec fas eſſe v
                              ••
                           a me voluptate hîc fruiTer Heau. act. 1. ſcen 1. 97. D
                              •
                           crevi, tantiſper dum ille abeſt meus particeps.
                        
                           I have ſet downe, no joy enjoy I may,
                           As long as he my partner is away.
                        
                        I was ſo accuſtomed to be ever two, and ſo enured to be never ſingle, that me thinks I am but halfe my ſelfe.Hor. li. 2. 
                                 •
                              d. 17. 5.
                        
                        
                           Illam me
                                 •
                               ſi partem animae tulit,
                           Maturior vis, quid moror altera,
                           Nec charits aequè nec ſuperſtes,
                           Integer? Ille dies vtramque
                           Duxit ruinam.
                        
                        
                           Since that part of my ſoule riper fate reft me,
                           Why ſtay I heere the other part he left me?
                           
                              Nor ſo deere, nor entire, while heere I reſt:
                           That day hath in one ruine both oppreſt.
                        
                        There is no action can betide me, or imagination poſſeſſe me, but I heare him ſaying, as indeed he would have done to me: for even as he did excell me by an infinite diſtance in all other ſufficiencies and vertues, ſo did he in all offices and duties of friendſhip.
                        
                           Quis deſiderio ſit pudor aut modus,Lib. 1. 
                                    •
                                 d. 24. 1.
                           
                           Tam chari capitis?
                        
                        
                           What modeſty or meaſure may I beare,
                           In want and wiſh of him that was ſo deare?
                        
                        
                           O miſero frater adempte mihi!Catul. ele. 4. 20. 92. 23. 95.
                           
                           Omnia tecumv
                                 •
                               àperierunt gaudia noſtra,
                           Quae tuus in vita dulcis alebat amor.
                           Tu mea, tu moriens fregiſti commoda frater,21 94
                           
                           Tecum vnà tota eſt noſtra ſepulta anima,
                           Cuius ego interitu tota de mente fugaui
                           Haec ſtudia, atque omnes delicias animi.25
                           
                           Alloquar? audiero nunquam tua verba loquentem?
                           Nunquam ego te vita frater amabili
                                 •
                              r,
                           Aſpiciam poſt hac? at certè ſemper amabo.El. 1. 9.
                           
                        
                        
                           O brother reft from miſerable me,
                           All our delight's are periſhed with thee,
                           Which thy ſweete love did nouriſh in my breath▪
                           
                           Thou all my good haſt ſpoiled in thy death:
                           With thee my ſoule is all and whole enſhrinde,
                           At whoſe death I have caſt out of minde
                           All my mindes ſweete-meates, ſtudies of this kinde;
                           Never ſhall I, heare thee ſpeake, ſpeake with thee?
                           Thee brother, then life dearer, never ſee?
                           Yet ſhalt thou ever be belou'd of mee.
                        
                        but let-vs a little heare this yong man ſpeake, being but ſixteene yeares of age.
                        Becauſe I have found this worke to have ſince bin publiſhed (and to an ill end) by ſuch as ſeeke to trouble and ſubvert the ſtate of our common-wealth, nor caring whether they ſhall reforme it or no; which they have fondly inſerted among other writings of their invention, I have revoked my intent, which was to place-it here. And leſt the Authors memory ſhould any way be intereſſed with thoſe that could not thoroughly know his opinions and actions, they ſhall vnderſtand, that this ſubject was by him treated of in his infancie, onely by way of exerciſe, as a ſubject, common, bare-worne, and wyer-drawne in a thouſand bookes. I will never doubt but he beleeved what he writ, and writ as he thought: for hee was ſo conſcientious, that no lie did ever paſſe his lips, yea were it but in matters of ſport or play: and I know, that had it bin in his choyce, he would rather have bin borne at 
                              Ʋenice, than at Sarlac; and good reaſon why: But he had an other maxime deepely imprinted in his minde, which was, carefully to obey, and religiouſly to ſubmit himſelfe to the lawes, vnder which he was borne. There was never a better Citizen, nor more affected to the welfare and quietneſſe of his countrie, nor a ſharper enemie of the changes, innovations, newfangles, and hurly-burlies of his time: He would more willingly have imployed the vtmoſt of his endevours to extinguiſh and ſuppreſſe, then to favour or further them: His minde was modelled to the patterne of other beſt ages. But yet in exchange of his ſerious treatiſe, I will here ſet you downe another, more pithie, materiall, and of more conſequence, by him likewiſe produced in that tender age.
                     
                     
                        
                        The eight and twentieth Chapter.
                        
                           Nine and twentie Sonnets of Steven de la Boetie, to the Ladie of Grammont, Counteſſe of Guiſſen.
                        
                        MAdame, I preſent you with nothing that is mine, either becauſe it is already yours, or becauſe I finde nothing therein woorthy of you. But whereſoever theſe verſes ſhall be ſeene, for the honor which thereby ſhall redound to them, by having this glorious Coriſand
                                 •
                              
                            of Andoms for their guide, I thought it good to adorne them with your woorthie name. I have deemed this preſent fit for your Ladiſhip, forſomuch as there are few Ladies in France, that either can better judge of Poeſie, or fitter apply the vſe of it, then your woorthy ſelfe: and ſince in theſe her drooping daies, none can give it more life, or vigorous ſpirit, than you, by thoſe rich and high-tuned accords, wherewith amongſt a million of other rar
                              •
                            beauties, nature hath richly graced you. Madame, theſe verſes deſerve to be cheriſhed by you: and I am perſwaded you will be of mine opinion, which is, that none have come out of Gaskonie, that either had more wit, or better inuention, and that witneſſe to have proceeded from a richer vaine. And let no jealouſie poſſeſſe you, inaſmuch as you have but the remainder of that, which whilome I cauſed to be printed vnder the name of my Lord of Foix, your woorthy, noble and deare kinſman: For truely, theſe have a kinde of livelineſſe, and more piercing Emphaſis than any other, and which I can not well expreſſe: as hee that made them in his Aprils youth, and when he was enflamed with a noble-glorious flame, as I will one day tell your honour in your care. The other were afterward made by him in favour of his wife, at what time he wooed and ſolicited her for mariage, and began to feele I wot not what martiall-chilneſſe, and husbands-coldneſſe. And I am one of thoſe, whoſe opinion is, that divine Poeſie doth no where fadge ſo well, and ſo effectually applaudeth, as in a youthfull, wanton, and vnbridled ſubject. The above-mentioned nine and twentie Sonnes of Boetie, and that in the former impreſſions of this booke were heere ſet downe, have ſince beene printed with his other works.
                     
                     
                        The nine and twentieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of Moderation.
                        
                        AS if our ſenſe of feeling were infected, wee corrupt by our touching, things that in themſelves are faire and good. We may ſo ſeize on vertue, that if we embrace it with an over greedie and violent deſire, it may become vitious. Thoſe who ſay, There is never exceſſe in vertue, becauſe it is no longer vertue if any exceſſe be in it, doe but jeaſt at words.
                        
                           Inſani ſapiens nomen ferat, aequus iniqui,Hor. lib. 1. epi. 6. 25.
                           
                           Vltra quàm ſatis eſt, virtut em ſi pet at ipſam.
                        
                        
                           A wiſe man mad, juſt vnjuſt, may I name,
                           More then is meet, ev'n vertue if he claime.
                        
                        Philoſophie is a ſubtile conſideration. A man may love vertue too much, and exceſſively demeane himſelfe in a good action. Gods holy word doth apply it ſelfe to this byaſe. Be not wiſer then you ſhould, and be ſoberly wiſe. I have ſeene ſome great men, blemiſh the reputation of their religion, by ſhewing themſelves religious beyond the example of men of their qualitie. I love temperate and indifferent natures. Immoderation towards good, if it offend me not, it amazeth, and troubleth me how I ſhould call it. Neither Pauſanias his mother, who gave the firſt inſtruction, and for her ſonnes death brought the firſt ſtone: Not Poſthumius the Dictator, that brought his owne ſonne to his end, whom the heate and forwardneſſe

of youth, had haply before his ranke, made to charge his enemies, ſeeme ſo juſt as ſtrange vnto me. And I neither love to perſwade or follow ſo ſavage and ſo deare a vertue. The Archer that overſhootes his marke, doth no otherwiſe than he that ſhooteth ſhort. Mine eies trouble me as much in climbing vp toward a great light, as to goe downe in the darke. Caliscles in Plato ſaith, The extremitie of Philoſophie to bee hurtfull: and perſwades no man to wade further into it, then the bounds of profit: And that taken with moderation, it is pleaſant and commodious, but in the end it makes a man wilde and vicious, diſdainfull of religion and of common lawes: an enemie of civill converſation: a foe to humane ſenſualitie, and worldly pleaſures: incapable of all politike adminiſtration; and vnfit to aſſiſt others or to helpe himſelfe: apt to be without revenge buffeted, and baſſled. He ſaith true: for in her exceſſe, ſhe enthralleth our naturall libertie, and by an importunate wile, diverts vs from the faire and plaine path, which nature traceth out for vs. The love we beare to women, is very lawfull; yet doth Divinitie bridle and reſtraine the ſame. I remember to have read in Saint Thomas, in a place where he condemneth marriages of kinsfolkes in forbidden degrees, this one reaſon amongſt others: that the love a man beareth to ſuch a woman may be immoderate; for, if the wedlocke, or husband-like affection be ſound and perfect, as it ought to be, and alſo ſurcharged with that a man oweth to alliance and kindred, there is no doubt, but that ſurcreaſe may eaſily tranſport a husband beyond the bounds of reaſon. Thoſe Sciences that direct the maners of men, as Divinitie and Philoſophie, medleth with all things. There is no action ſo private and ſecret may be concealed from their knowledge and juriſdiction. Well doe they learne that ſearch and cenſure their libertie. It is women communicate their partes as much as a man liſt to wantonize with them: but to phiſicke them baſhfulneſſe forbids them. I will then in their behalfe teach husbands this, if there be any too much fleſht vpon them: which is, that the verie pleaſures they have by the familiaritie of their wives, except moderately vſed; they are reprooved: and not onely in that, but in any other vnlawfull ſubjects, a man may treſpaſſe in licentiouſneſſe and offend in exceſſe. Thoſe ſhameleſſe endearings, which the firſt heate ſuggeſts vnto vs in that ſportfull delight, are not onely vndecently, but hurtfully employed towards our wives. Let them at leaſt learne impudencie from another hand. They are ever broad-waking when wee neede them. I have vſed no meanes but naturall and ſimple inſtruction. Marriage is a religious and devout bond: and that is the reaſon the pleaſure a man hath of it, ſhould be a moderate, ſtaied, and ſerious pleaſure, and mixed with ſeveritie, it ought to bee a voluptuouſneſſe ſomewhat circumſpect and conſcientious. And becauſe it is the chiefeſt of generation, there are that make a queſtion, whether it be lawfull to require them of copulation, as well when we have no hope of children, as when they are over-aged, or bigge with childe. It is an homicide, according to Plato. Certaine nations (and amongſt others, the Mahometane) abhorre Conjunction with women great with childe. Many alſo with thoſe that have their monethly diſeaſe. Zenobia received her husband but for one charge; which done, al the time of her conception, ſhe let him goe at randon, and that paſt, ſhe gave him leave to begin againe: a notable and generous example of marriage.
                        
                           Plato borroweth the narration (of ſome needy and hunger-ſtarven Poet) of this ſport. That Iupiter one day gave his wife ſo hot a charge, impatient to ſtay till ſhe came to bed, hee laide her along vpon the floore, and by the vehemence of his pleaſure forgot the vrgent and weighty reſolutions lately concluded vpon with the other gods of his caeleſtiall court; boaſting he found it as ſweet at that time, as he had done, when firſt he ſpoiled her of her virginitie, by ſtealth and vnknowne to their parents. The Kings of Perſia, called for their wives, when they went to any ſolemne feaſt, but when much drinking and wine began to heate them in good earneſt they ſent them to their chambers, ſeeing they could no longer refrain, but muſt needs yeeld to ſenſual tie, leſt they ſhould be partakers of their immoderate luſt; and in their ſteade ſent for other women, whom this duty of reſpect might not concerne. All pleaſures and gratifications are not well placed in all ſortes of people. Epaminondas had cauſed a diſſolute yoong man to be impriſoned: Pelopidas entreated him, that for his ſake he would ſet him at libertie, but he refuſed him, and yeelded to free him at the requeſt of an harlot of his, which likewiſe ſued for his enlargement; ſaying, it was a gratification due vnto a Courtizan, and not to a Captaine. Sophocles being partner with Pericles in the Pretorſhip, ſeeing by chance a faire boy to paſſe by: Oh what a beauteous boy goeth yonder! ſaid he to Pericles: That
                           
                           ſpeech were more fitting another then a Pretor, anſwered Pericles, who ought not onely to haue chaſte handes, but alſo vnpolluted eies. Aelius Verus the Emperour, his wife complaining that he followed the love of other women, anſwered he did it for conſcience ſake, for ſo much as mariage was a name of honour, and dignity, and not of fooliſh and laſcivious luſt. And our Eccleſiaſticall Hiſtorie, hath with honour preſerved the memorie of that wife, which ſued to be devorced from her husband, becauſe ſhe would not ſecond and conſent to his over-inſolent and lewde embracements. To conclude, there is no voluptuouſneſſe ſo juſt, wherein exceſſe and intemperance is not reprochfull vnto vs. But to ſpeake in good ſooth, is not a man a miſerable creature? He is ſcarce come to his owne ſtrength by his naturall conditions, to taſte one onely compleate, entire and pure pleaſure, but he laboreth by diſcourſe to cut it off: he is not wretched enough, except by arte and ſtudy he augment his miſerie.
                        Fortunae miſeras auximus arte vias.Propert. li. 3. cl. 6.32.
                        
                        
                           Fortunes vnhappie ill,
                           We amplifie by skill.
                        
                        Humane wiſedome doth fooliſhly ſeeke to be ingenious in exerciſing her-ſelfe to abate the number, and diminiſh the pleaſure of ſenſualities, that pertaine to vs: as it doth favorably and induſtriouſly in employing her deviſes, to paint and ſet a luſter on evils, before our eies, and therewith to recreate our ſenſe. Had I beene chiefe of a faction, I would have followed a more naturall courſe, which to ſay true, is both commodious and ſacred, and ſhould peradventure have made my ſelfe ſtrong enough to limite the ſame. Although our ſpirituall and corporall Phyſitians: as by covenant agreed vpon betweene them, finde no way of recoverie, nor remedies for diſeaſes of bodie and minde, but by torment, griefe and paine, watching, faſting, haire-ſhirts, farre and ſolitarie exile, perpetuall priſon, roddes and other afflictions, have therefore beene invented: But ſo, that they be truely afflictions, and that there be ſome ſtinging ſharpeneſſe in them: And that the ſucceſſe be not as Gallios was, who having beene confined to the ile of Lesbos, newes came to Rome, that there he lived a merry life; and what the Senate had laide vpon him for a puniſhment, redounded to his commodity: wherevpon they agreed to revoke him home to his owne houſe and wife, ſtrictly enjoyning him to keepe the ſame, thereby to accommodate their puniſhment to his ſenſe and feeling. For he to whom faſting ſhould procure health and a merrie heart, or he to whom poiſon ſhould be more healthie then meate, it would be no longer a wholeſome receipt, no more then drugs in other medicines, are of no effect to him that takes them with appetite and pleaſure. Bitterneſſe and difficultie are circumſtances fitting their operat on. That nature which ſhould take Reubarbe as familiar, ſhould no doubt corrupt the vſe of it; it muſt be a thing that hurts the ſtomacke, if it ſhal cure it: and heere the common rule failes, that infirmities are cured by their contraries: for one ill cureth another. This impreſſion hath ſome reference to this other ſo ancient, where ſome thinke they gratifie both heaven and earth by killing and maſſacring themſelves, which was vniverſally embraced in all religions. Even in our fathers age; Amurath at the taking of Iſth
                                 •
                              us, ſacrificed ſix hundred yoong Graecians to his fathers ſoule: to the end their blood might ſerve as a propitiation to expiate the ſinnes of the deceaſed. And in the new countries diſcovered in our daies yet vncorrupted, and virgins, in regard of ours, it is a cuſtome well nigh received everiewhere. All their idolles are ſprinkled with humane blood, not without divers examples of horrible crueltie. Some are burnt alive, and halfe roaſted drawn from the fire, that ſo they may pull out their harts and entrails; otherſome, yea women are fleade quicke, and with their yet-bleeding skins, they inveſt and cover others. And no leſſe of examples of conſtant reſolution. For theſe wretched ſacrifiable people, old men, women and children, ſome daies before, goe themſelves begging their almes, for the offering of their ſacrifice, and all of full glee, ſinging, and dancing with the reſt, they preſent themſelves to the ſlaughter. The Ambaſſadours of the Kings of Mexico, in declaring and magnifying the greatneſſe of their Maſter to Fernando Cortez, after they had tolde him, that he had thirtie vaſſals, whereof each one was able to levie a hundred thouſand combatants, and that he had his reſidence in the faireſt and ſtrongeſt Citie vnder heaven, added moreover, that he had fifty thouſand to ſacrifice for every yeere: verily ſome affirme that they maintaine continuall warres with certaine mightie neighbouring Nations, not ſo much for the exerciſe and training of their youth, as that they may have ſtore of priſoners taken in warre to ſupply their ſacrifices. In another province, to welcome the ſaide Cortez,
                           
they ſacrificed fiftie men at one clap. I will tell this one ſtorie more: Some of thoſe people having beene beaten by him, ſent to know him, and to intreat him of friendſhip. The meſſengers preſented him with three kinds of preſents, in this manner: Lord, if thou be a fierce God, that loveſt to feed on fleſh and bloud, here are five ſlaves, eate them, and we will bring thee more: if thou be a gentlie milde God, heere is incenſe and feathers; but if thou be a man, take theſe birdes and fruites, that heere we preſent and offer vnto thee.
                        
                     
                     
                        The thirtieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of the Caniballes.
                        
                        AT what time King Pirrhus came into Italie, after he had ſurvaide the marſhalling of the Armie, which the Romanes ſent againſt him: I w
                                 ••
                               not, ſaid he, what barbarous men theſe are (for ſo were the Graecians wont to call all ſtrange nations) but the diſpoſition of this Armie, which I ſee, is nothing barbarous. So ſaid the Graecians of that which Flaminius ſent into their countrie: And Phillip viewing from a Tower the order and diſtribution of the Romane campe, in his kingdome vnder Publius Sulpitius Galba. Loe how a man ought to take heede, leſt he over-weeningly follow vulgar opinions, which ſhould be meaſured by the rule of reaſon, and not by the common report. I have had long time dwelling with me a man, who for the ſpace of ten or twelve yeeres had dwelt in that other world, which in our age was lately diſcovered in thoſe parts where Villegaignon firſt landed, and ſurnamed Antartike France. This diſcoverie of ſo infinite and vaſte a countrie, ſeemeth woorthy great conſideration. I wot not whether I can warrant my ſelfe, that ſome other be not diſcovered heereafter, ſithence ſo many worthie men, and better learned then we are, have ſo many ages beene deceived in this. I feare me our eies be greater then our bellies, and that we have more curioſitie then capacitie. We embrace all, but we faſten nothing but winde. Plate maketh Solon to report, that he had learn't of the Prieſts of the citie of Says in Aegypt, that whilom, and before the generall Deluge, there was a great Iland called Atlantis, ſituated at thePlat. Time. mouth of the ſtraite of Gibraltar, which contained more firme land then Affrike and Aſia together. And that the Kings of that countrie, who did not onely poſſeſſe that Iland, but had ſo farre entred into the maine land, that of the bredth of Affrike, they held as farre as Aegypt; and of Europes length, as farre as Tuſ
                                 •
                              ame: and that they vndertooke to invade Aſia, and to ſubdue all the nations that compaſſe the Mediterranean Sea, to the gulfe of Mare-Maggiore, and to that end they traverſed all Spaine, France and Italie, ſo farre as Greece, where the Athenians made head againſt them; but that a while after, both the Athenians themſelves, and that great Iland, were ſwallowed vp by the Deluge. It is very likely this extreame ruine of waters wrought ſtrange alterations in the habitations of the earth: as ſome hold that the Sea hath divided Sicilie from Italie,
                        
                        
                           Haecloca vi quondam, & vaſta convulſa ruinaVirg. A
                                    •
                                 n. lib. 3. 414. 416.
                           
                           Diſſiluiſſe ferunt, cùm protinus vtr aque tellus
                           Vna foret.
                        
                        
                           Men ſay, ſometimes this land by that forſaken,
                           And that by this, were ſplit, and ruine-ſhaken,
                           Whereas till then both lands as one were taken.
                        
                        
                           Cypres from Soria, the Iland of Negroponte from the maine land of Be
                                 •
                              tia, and in other places joyned landes that were ſundred by the Sea, filling with mudde and ſand the chanels betweene them.
                        —ſteriliſque diu palus apt áqueremisHor. art. Poet. 65. Vi
                              •
                           inas vrbes alit, & grave ſentit aratrum.
                        
                           The fenne long barren, to be row'd in, now
                           Both feedes the neighbour townes, and feeles the plow.
                        
                        But there is no great apparance, the ſaid Iland ſhould be the new world we have lately diſcovered; for, it well-nigh touched Spaine, and it were an incredible effect of inundation,

to have remooved the ſame more then twelve hundred leagues, as we ſee it is. Beſides, our moderne Navigations have now almoſt diſcovered, that it is not an Iland, but rather firme land, and a continent, with the Eaſt Indias on one ſide, and the countries lying vnder the two Poles on the other; from which if it be divided, it is with ſo narrow a ſtraite, and intervalle, that it no way deſerveth to be named an Iland: For, it ſeemeth there are certaine motions in theſe vaſt bodies, ſome naturall, and other ſome febricitant, as well as in ours. When I conſider the impreſſion my river of Dordoigne worketh in my time, toward the right ſhoare of her diſcent, and how much it hath gained in twentie yeares, and how many foundations of divers houſes it hath overwhelmed and violently carried away; I confeſſe it to be an extraordinarie agitation: for, ſhould it alwaies keepe one courſe, or had it euer kept the ſame, the figure of the world had ere this beene overthrowne: But they are ſubject to changes and alterations. Sometimes they overflow and ſpread themſelves on one ſide, ſometimes on another; and other times they containe themſelves in their naturall beds or chanels. I ſpeak not of ſudden 
                              ••
                           undations, whereof we now treat the cauſes. In Modoc alongſt the Seacoaſt, my brother the Lord of Arſacke, may ſee a towne of his buried vnder the ſands, which the Sea caſteth vp before it: The toppes of ſome buildings are yet to be diſcerned. His Rents and Demaines have been changed into barren paſtures. The inhabitants thereabouts affirme, that ſome yeeres ſince, the Sea encrocheth ſo much vpon them, that they have loſt foure leagues of firme land: Theſe ſandes are her fore-runners. And we ſee great hillokes of gravell mooving which march halfe a league before it, and vſurpe on the firme land. The other teſtimonie of antiquitie, to which ſome will referre this diſcoverie, as in Ariſtotle (if at leaſt that little booke of vnheard of woonders be his) where he reporteth that certaine Carthaginians having ſailed ad
                              •
                           wart the Atlant
                                 •••
                              
                            Sea, without the ſtrait of Gibraltar, after long time, they at laſt diſcovered a great fertill Iland; all repleniſhed with goodly woods, and watred with great and deepe rivers, farre diſtant from all land, and that both they and others, allured by the goodnes and fertility of the ſoile, went thither with their wives, children, and houſhold, and there began to enhabite and ſettle themſelves. The Lords of Carthage ſeeing their countrie by little and little to be diſpeopled, made a lawe and expreſſe inhibition, that vpon paine of death no more men ſhould goe thither, and baniſhed all that were gone thither to dwell, fearing (as they ſaid) that in ſucceſſe of time, they would ſo mu tiply as they might one day ſupplant them, and overthrow their owne eſtate. This narration of Ariſtotle, hath no reference vnto our new found countries. This ſervant I had, was a ſimple and rough-hewen fellow: a condition fit to yeeld a true teſtimonie. For, ſubtile people may indeed marke more curiouſly, and obſerve things more exactly, but they amplifie and gloſe them: and the better to perſwade, and make their interpretations of more validity, they cannot chuſe but ſomewhat alter the ſtorie. They never repreſent things truely, but faſhion and maske them according to the viſage they ſaw them in; and to purchaſe credit to their judgement, and draw you on to beleeve them, they commonly adorne, enlarge, yea, and Hyperboliſe the matter. Wherein is required either a moſt ſincere Reporter, or a man ſo ſimple, that he may have no invention to build vpon, and to give a true likelihood vnto falſe deviſes, and be not wedded to his owne will. Such a one was my man; who beſides his owne report, hath many times ſhewed me divers Mariners, and Marchants, whom hee had knowne in that vovage. So am I pleaſed with his information, that I never enquire what Coſmographers ſay of it. We had need of Topographers to make vs particular narrations of the places they have beene in. For ſome of them, if they have the advantage of vs, that they have ſeene Paleſtine, will challenge a priviledge, to tell vs newes of all the world beſides. I would have every man write what he knowes, and no more: not onely in that, but in all other ſubjects. For one may have particular knowledge of the nature of one river, and experience of the qualitie of one fountaine, that in other things knowes no more then another man: who nevertheleſſe to publiſh this little ſcantling, will vndertake to write of all the Phiſickes. From which vice proceed divers great inconveniences. Now (to returne to my purpoſe) I finde (as farre as I have beene informed) there is nothing in that nation, that is either barbarous or ſavage, vnleſſe men call that barbariſme which is not common to them. As indeed, we have no other ayme of truth and reaſon, then the example and Idea of the opinions and cuſtomes of the countrie we live in. There is ever perfect religion, perfect policie, perfect and compleat vſe of all things. They are even ſavage, as we call thoſe

fruites wilde, which nature of hir ſelfe, and of hir ordinarie progreſſe hath produced: where as indeede, they are thoſe which our ſelves have altered by our artificiall diviſes, and diver ted from their common order, we ſhould rather terme ſavage. In thoſe are the true and moſt profitable vertues, and naturall properties moſt lively and vigorous, which in theſe we have baſtardized, applying them to the pleaſure of our corrupted taſte. And if notwithſtanding, in divers fruites of thoſe countries that were never tilled, we ſhall finde, that in reſpect of ours they are moſt excellent, and as delicate vnto our taſte; there is no reaſon, arte ſhould gaine the point of honour of our great and puiſſant mother Nature. We have ſo much by our inventions, ſurcharged the beauties and riches of her workes, that we have altogether over-choaked her: yet where ever her puritie ſhineth, ſhe makes our vaine, and frivolous enterpriſes woonderfully aſhamed.
                        
                           Et veniunt hederae ſponte ſua melius,Propert. l. 1. cl. 2. 10.
                           
                           Surgit & in ſolis formoſior arbutus antris,
                           Et volucres nulla duleius arte canunt.
                        
                        
                           Ivies ſpring better of their owne accord,
                           Vnhanted plots much fairer trees afford,
                           Birdes by no arte much ſweeter notes record.
                        
                        All our endevous or wit, cannot ſo much as reach to repreſent the neſt of the leaſt birdlet, it's contexture, beautie, profit and vſe, no nor the webbe of a ſeelie ſpider. All things (ſaith Plato) are produced, either by nature, by fortune, or by arte. The greateſt and faireſt by one or other of the two firſt, the leaſt and imperfect by the laſt. Thoſe nations ſeeme therefore ſo barbarous vnto me, becauſe they have received very little faſhion from humane wit, and are yet neere their originall naturalitie. The lawes of nature doe yet command them, which are but little baſtardized by ours, And that with ſuch puritie, as I am ſometimes grieved the knowledge of it came no ſooner to light, at what time there were men, that better than we could have judged of it. I am ſorie, Lycurgus & Plato had it not▪ for me ſeemeth that what in thoſe nations we ſee by experience, doth not onely exceed all the pictures wherewith licentious Poeſie hath proudly imbelliſhed the golden age, & al hir quaint inventions to faine a happie condition of man, but alſo the conception & deſire of Philoſophie. They could not imagine a genuitie ſo pure and ſimple, as we ſ
                              •
                           e 
                              •
                           by experience; nor ever beleeve our ſocietie might be maintained with ſo little arte and humane combination. It is a nation, would I anſwer Plato, that hath no kinde of traffike, no knowledge of Letters, no intelligence of numbers, no name of magiſtrate, nor of politike ſuperioritie; no vſe of ſervice, of riches or of povertie; no contracts, no ſucceſſions, no partitions, no occupation but idle; no reſpect of kinred, but common, no apparell but naturall, no manuring of lands, no vſe of wine, corne, or mettle. The very words that import lying, fal
                              •
                           hood, treaſon, diſſimulations, covetouſnes, envie, detraction, and pardon, were never heard of amongſt them. How diſſonant would hee finde his imaginarie common-weath from this perfection?
                        Hos natura modes primùm dedit.
                        
                           Nature at firſt vpriſe,
                           Theſe manners did deviſe.
                        
                        Furthermore, they live in a country of ſo exceeding pleaſant and temperate ſituation, that as my teſtimonies have tolde me, it is very rare to ſee a ſicke body amongſt them; and they have further aſſured me, they never ſaw any man there, either ſhaking with the palſie, toothleſſe, with eies dropping, or crooked and ſtooping through age. They are ſeated alongſt the ſea-coaſt, encompaſſed toward the land with huge and ſteepie mountaines, having betweene both, a hundred leagues or thereabout of open and champaine ground. They have great abundance of fiſh and fleſh, that have no reſemblance at all with ours, and eate them without any ſawces, or skill of Cookerie, but plaine boiled or broiled. The firſt man that brought a horſe thither, although he had in many other voyages converſed with them, bred ſo great a horror in the land, that before they could take notice of him, they ſlew him with arrowes. Their buildings are very long, and able to containe two or three hundred ſoules, covered with barkes of great trees, faſtned in the ground at one end, enterlaced and ioyned cloſe together by the tops, after the maner of ſome of our Granges; the covering whereof hangs downe to the ground, and ſteadeth them as a flancke. They have a kinde of woode ſo hard, that ryving and cleaving the ſame, they make blades, ſwords, and grid-irons to broile

their meate with. Their beds are of a kinde of cotten cloth, faſtned to the houſe-roofe, as our ſhip-cabbanes: everic one hath his ſeverall cowch; for the women lie from their huſbands. They riſe with the Sunne, and feed for all day, as ſoone as they are vp: and make no more meales after that. They drinke not at meate, as Suidas reporteth of ſome other people of the Eaſt, which dranke after meales, but drinke many times a day, and are much given to pledge carowſes. Their drinke is made of a certaine roote, and of the colour of our Claret wines, which laſteth but two or three daies; they drinke it warme: It hath ſomewhat ſharpe taſte, wholſome for the ſtomack, nothing heady, but laxative for ſuch as are not vſed vnto it, yet verie pleaſing to ſuch as are accuſtomed vnto it. Inſtead of bread, they vſe a certain white compoſition, like vnto Corianders confected. I have eaten ſome, the taſte whereof is ſomewhat ſweete and wallowiſh. They ſpend the whole day in dauncing. Their yoong men goe a hunting after wilde beaſtes with bowes and arrowes. Their women buſie themſelves therewhil'ſt with warming of their drinke, which is their chiefeſt office. Some of their old men, in the morning before they goe to eating, preach in common to all the houſhold, walking from one end of the houſe to the other, repeating one ſelfe-ſame ſentence many times, till he have ended his turn
                              •
                            (for their buildings are a hundred paces in length) he commends but two things vnto his auditorie, Firſt, valour against their enemies, then lovingneſſe vnto their wiues. They never miſſe (for their reſtraint) to put men in minde of this dutie, that it is their wives which keepe their drinke luke-warme, and well-ſeaſoned. The forme of their beds, cordes, ſwordes, blades, and woodden bracelets, wherewith they cover their handwriſts when they fight, and great Canes open at one end, by the ſound of which they keepe time and cadence in their dauncing, are in many places to be ſeene, and namely in mine own houſe. They are ſhaven all-over, much more cloſe and cleaner than wee are, with no other Razors than of wood or ſtone. They beleeve their ſoules to be eternall, and thoſe that have deſerved well of their Gods, to be placed in that part of heaven where the Sunne riſeth, and the curſed toward the Weſt in oppoſition. They have certaine Prophets and Prieſts, which commonly abide in the mountaines, & very ſeldome ſhew themſelves vnto the people; but when they come downe, there is a great feaſt prepared, and a ſolemne aſſemblie of manie towneſhips together (each Grange as I have deſcribed maketh a village, and they are about a French league one from another.) The Prophet ſpeakes to the people in publike, exhorting them to embrace vertue, and follow their dutie. All their morall diſcipline containeth but theſe two articles; firſt an vndiſmaied reſolution to warre, then an inviolable affection to their wiues. Hee doth alſo Prognoſticate of things to come, and what ſucceſſe they ſhall hope for in their enterpriſes: hee either perſwadeth or diſſwadeth them from warre; but if he chance to miſſe of his divination, and that it ſucceed otherwiſe than hee foretolde them, if hee be taken, he is hewen in a thouſand peeces, and condemned for a falſe Prophet. And therefore he that hath once miſreckoned himſelfe is never ſeene againe. Divination is the gift of God; the abuſing wherof ſhould be a puniſhable impoſture. When the Divines amongſt the Scithians had foretold an vntruth, they were couched along vpon hurdles full of heath or bruſhwood, drawne by oxen, and ſo manicled hand and foote, burned to death. Thoſe which manage matters ſubject to the conduct of mans ſufficiencie, are excuſable, although they ſhew the vtmoſt of their skill. But thoſe that gull and conicatch vs with the aſſurance of an extraordinarie facultie, & which is beyond our knowledge, ought to be double puniſhed; firſt becauſe they performe not the effect of their promiſe, then for the raſhneſſe of their impoſture and vnadviſedneſſe of their fraud. They warre againſt the nations, that lie beyond their mountaines, to which they go naked, having no other weapons then bowes, or wodden ſwords, ſharpe at one end, as our broaches are. It is an admirable thing to ſee the conſtant reſolutuion of their combates, which never end but by effuſion of blood & murther: for they know not what feare or rowts are. Every Victor brings home the head of the enemie he hath ſlaine as a Trophey of his victorie, and faſtneth the ſame at the entrance of his dwelling place. After they have long time vſed and entreated their priſoners well, and with all commodities they can deviſe, he that is the Maſter of them; ſummoning a great aſſembly of his acquaintance; tieth a corde to one of the priſoners armes, by the end whereof he holdes him faſt, with ſome diſtance from him, for feare he might offend him, and giveth the other arme, bound in like maner, to the deareſt friend he hath, and both in the preſence of all the aſſemblie kill him with ſwordes: which done, they roſte, and then eare

him in common, and ſend ſome ſlices of him to ſuch of their friends as are abſent. It is not as ſome imagine, to nouriſh themſelves with it, (as anciently the Scithians wont to do,) but to repreſent an extreame, and inexpiable revenge. Which we proove thus; ſome of them perceiving the Portugales, who had confederated themſelves with their adverſaries, to v
                              •
                           e another kinde of death, when they tooke them priſoners; which was, to burie them vp to the middle, and againſt the vpper part of the body to ſhoote arrowes, and then being almoſt dead, to hang them vp; they ſuppoſed, that theſe people of the other world (as they who had ſowed the knowledge of many vices amongſt their neighbours, and were much more cunning in all kindes of evils and miſchiefe then they) vnder-tooke not this maner of revenge without cauſe, and that conſequently it was more ſmartfull, and cruell then theirs, and therevpon began to leave their old faſhion to follow this. I am not ſorie we note the barbarous horror of ſuch an action, but grieved, that prying ſo narrowly into their faults we are ſo blinded in ours. I thinke there is more barbariſme in eating men alive, then to feed vpon them being dead; to mangle by tortures and torments a body full of lively ſenſe, to roaſt him in peeces, to make dogges and ſwine to gnawe and teare him in mammockes (as wee have not onely read, but ſeene very lately, yea and in our owne memorie, not amongſt ancient enemies, but our neighbours and fellow-citizens; and which is woorſe, vnder pretence of pietie and religion) then to roaſt and eate him after he is dead. Chryſippus and Zeno, arch pillers of the Stoicke ſect, have ſuppoſed that it was no hurte at all, in time of need, and to what end ſoever, to make vſe of our carrion bodies, and to ſeed vpon them, as did our forefathers, who being beſieged by Caeſar in the Citie of Alexia, reſolved to ſuſtaine the famine of the ſiege, with the bodies of old men, women, & other perſons vnſerviceable and vnfit to fight.
                        
                           Vaſcones (fama est) alimentis talibus vſi
                                 
                                    •
                                 ure ſat. 15 93
                           
                           Produxere animas.
                        
                        
                           
                              Gaſcoynes (as ſame reports)
                           Liu'd with meates of ſuch ſorts.
                        
                        And Phiſitians feare not, in all kindes of compoſitions availefull to our health, to make vſe of it, be it for outward or inward applications: But there was never any opinion found ſo vnnaturall and immodeſt, that would excuſe treaſon, treacherie, diſloialty, tyrannie, crueltie, and ſuch like, which are our ordinarie faults. We may then well call them barbarous, in regard of reaſons rules, but not in reſpect of v
                              •••
                            at exceed them in all kinde of barbariſme. Their warres are noble and generous, and have as much excuſe and beautie, as this humane infirmitie may admit: they ayme at nought ſo much, and have no other foundation amongſt them, but the meere jelouſie of vertue. They contend not for the gaining of new landes; for to this day they yet enjoy that naturall vbertie and fruiteſulneſſe, which without labouring toyle, doth in ſuch plenteous aboundance furniſh them with all neceſſary things, that they neede not enlarge their limits. They are yet in that happy eſtate, as they deſire no more, then what their naturall neceſſities direct them: whatſoever is beyond it, is to them fuperfluous. Thoſe that are much about one age, doe generally enter-call one another brethren, and ſuch as are yoonger, they call children, and the aged are eſteemed as fathers to all the reſt. Theſe leave this full poſſeſſion of goods in common, and without diviſion to their heires, without other claime or title, but that which nature doth plainely impart vnto all creatures, even as ſhee brings them into the world. If their neighbours chance to come over the mountaines to aſſaile or invade them, and that they get the victory over them, the Victors conqueſt is glorie, and the advantage to be and remaine ſuperior in valour and vertue: elſe have they nothing to doe with the goods and ſpoyles of the vanquiſhed, and ſo returne into their countrie, where they neither want any neceſſarie thing, nor lacke this great port on, to know how to enioy their condition happily, and are contented with what nature affoord
                              •
                           th them. So doe theſe when their turne commeth. They require no other ranſome of their priſoners, but an acknowledgement and confeſſion that they are vanquiſhed. And in a whole age, a man ſhall not finde one, that doth not rather embrace death, then either by word or countenance remiſſely to yeeld one jot of an invincible courage. There is none ſeene that would not rather be ſlaine and devoured, then ſue for life, or ſhew any feare: They vſe their priſoners with all libertie, that they may ſo much the more holde their lives deare and precious, and commonly entertaine them with threats of future death, with the torments they ſhall endure, with the preparations intended for

that purpoſe, with mangling and ſlicing of their members, and with the feaſt that ſhall be kept at their charge. All which is done, to wreſt ſome remiſſe, and exact ſome faint-yeelding ſpeech of ſubmiſſion from them, or to poſſeſſe them with a deſire to eſcape or runne away; that ſo they may have the advantage to have danted and made them afraid, and to have forced their conſtancie. For certainly true victory conſiſteth in that onely point.
                        —Victoria nulla eſt
                              
                                 〈…〉
                              
                            Quàm quae confeſſos animo quoque ſubingat hoſtes.
                        
                           No conqueſt ſuch, as to ſuppreſſe
                           Foes hearts, the conqueſt to confeſſe.
                        
                        The Hungarians, a moſt warre-like nation, were whilome woont to purſue their pray no longer then they had forced their enemie to yeeld vnto their mercie. For, having wreſted this confeſſion from-him, they ſet him at libertie without offence or ranſome, except it were to make him ſweare, never after to beare armes againſt them. Wee get many advantages of our enemies, that are but borrowed and not ours: It is the qualitie of porterly-raſcall, and not of vertue, to have ſtronger armes, and ſturdier legs: Diſpoſition is a dead and corporall qualitie. It is a tricke of fortune to make our enemie ſtoope, and to bleare his eies with the Sunnes-light: It is a pranke of skill and knowledge to be cunning in the arte of fencing, and which may happen vnto a baſe and woorthleſſe man. The reputation and woorth of a man conſiſteth in his heart and will: therein conſiſts true honor: Conſtancie is valour, not of armes and legs, but of minde and courage? it conſiſteth not in the ſpirit and courage of our horſe, nor of our armes, but in ours. He that obſtinately faileth in his courage, Si ſucciderit, de genu pugnat, If hee ſlip or fall, he fights vpon his knee. He that in danger of imminent death, is no whit danted in his aſſuredneſſe; he that in yeelding vp his ghoſt be holding his enemie with a ſcornefull and fierce looke, he is vanquiſhed, not by vs, but by fortune: he is ſlaine, but not conquered. The moſt valiant, are often the moſt vnfortunate. So are there triumphant loſſes in envie of victories. Not thoſe foure-ſiſter-victories, the faireſt that ever the Sunne beheld with his all-ſeeing eie, of Salamis, of Plateae, of Micale, and of Sicilia, durſt ever dare to oppoſe all their glorie together, to the glory of the King L
                                 •
                              onidas his diſcomſiture and of his men, at the paſſage of Thermopylae: what man did ever runne with ſo glorious an envie, or more ambitious deſire to the goale of a combat, then Captaine Iſcholas to an evident loſſe and overthrow? who ſo ingeniouſly or more politikely did ever aſſure him-ſelfe of his welfare, then he of his ruine? He was appointed to defend a certaine paſſage of Peloponeſus againſt the Arcadians, which finding himſelfe altogether vnable to performe, ſeeing the nature of the place, and inequalitie of the forces, and reſolving, that whatſoever ſhould preſent it ſelfe vnto his enemic, muſt neceſſarily be vtterly defeated: On the other ſide, deeming it vnwoorthy both his vertue and magnanimitie, and the Lacedemonian name, to 
                              •
                           a
                              •
                           le or faint in his charge, betweene theſe two extremities he reſolved vpon a meane and indifferent courſe, which was this. The yoongoſt and beſt diſpoſed of his troupe, he reſerved for the ſervice and defence of their countrie, to which hee ſent them backe; and with thoſe whoſe loſſe was leaſt, and who might beſt be ſpared, hee determined to maintaine that paſſage, and by their death to force the enemie, to purchaſe the entrance of it as deare as poſſibly he could; as indeed it followed. For being ſuddenly environed round by the Arcadians: After a great ſlaughter made of them, both himſelfe and all his were put to the ſword. Is any Trophey aſſigned for conquerours, that is not more duly due vnto theſe conquered? A true conqueſt reſpecteth rather an vndanted reſolution: and honourable end, then a faire eſcape, and the honour of vertue doth more conſiſt in combating then in beating. But to returne to our hiſtorie, theſe priſoners, howſoever they are dealt withall, are ſo farre from yeelding, that contrariwiſe during two or three moneths that they are kept, they ever carry a cheerefull countenace, and vrge their keepers to haſten their triall, they outragiouſly defic, and injure them. They vpbraid them with their cowardlineſſe, and with the number of battels, they have loſt againe theirs. I have a ſong made by a priſoner, wherein is this clauſe, Let them boldly come altogether, and flocke in multitudes, to feed on him; for with him they ſhall feed vpon their fathers, and grandfathers, that heeretoſore have ſerved his bodie for food and nouriſhment: Theſe muſcles, (ſaith he) this fleſh, and theſe veines, are your owne; fond men as you are, know you not that the ſubſtance of your forefathers limbes is yet tied vnto ours? Taſte them well, for in

them ſhall you finde the reliſh of your owne fleſh: An invention, that hath no ſhew of barbariſme, Thoſe that paint them dying, and that repreſent this action, when they are put to execution, delineate the priſoners ſpitting in their executioners faces, and making mowes at them. Verily, ſo long as breath is in their bodie, they never ceaſe to brave and defie them, both in ſpeech and countenance. Surely, in reſpect of vs theſe are very ſavage men: for either they muſt be ſo in good ſooth, or we muſt be ſo indeed: There is a woondrous diſtance betweene their forme and ours. Their men have many wives, and by how much more they are reputed valiant, ſo much the greater is their number. The maner and beautie in their marriages is woondrous ſtrange and remarkable: For, the ſame jealouſie our wives have to keepe vs from the love and affection of other women, the ſame have theirs to procure it. Being more carefull for their husbands honour and content, then of any thing elſe: They endevour and apply all their induſtrie, to have as many rivals as poſſibly they can, foraſmuch as it is a teſtimonie of their husbands vertue. Our women would count it a woonder, but it is not ſo: It is vertue properly Matrimoniall; but of the higheſt kinde. And in the Bible, Lea, Rachell, Sara, and Iacobs wives, brought their faireſt maiden ſervants vnto their husbands beds. And Livia ſeconded the luſtfull appetites of Auguſtus to her great prejudice. And Stratonica the wife of king Dei
                                 •
                              tarus did not onely bring a moſt beauteous chamber-maide, that ſerved her, to her husbands bed, but very carefully broughtvp the children he begot on her, and by all poſſible meanes aided and furthered them to ſucceed in their fathers roialtie. And leaſt a man ſhould thinke, that all this is done by a ſimple, and ſervile, or awefull dutie vnto their cuſtome, and by the impreſſion of their ancient cuſtomes authoritie, without diſcourſe or judgement, and becauſe they are ſo blockiſh, and dull-ſpirited, that they can take no other reſolution, it is not amiſſe, wee alleadge ſome evidence of their ſufficiencie. Beſides what I have ſaid of one of their warlike ſongs, I have another amorous canzonet, which beginneth in this ſence: Adder ſtay, ſtay good adder, that my ſiſter may by the patterne of thy partie-coloured coate drawe the faſhion and worke of a rich lace, for me to giue vnto my love; ſo may thy beautie, thy nimbleneſſe or diſpoſition be ever preferred before all other ſerpents. The firſt couplet is the burthen of the ſong. I am ſo converſant with Poeſie, that I amy judge, this invention hath no barbariſme at all in it, but is altogether Anacreontike. Their language is a kinde of pleaſant ſpeech, and 
                              •
                           ath a pleaſing ſound, and ſome affinitie with the Greeke terminations. Three of that nation, ignorant how deare the knowledge of our corruptions will one day coſt their repoſe, ſecuritie, and happineſſe, and how their ruine ſhall proceed from this commerce, which I imagine is already well advanced, (miſerable as they are to have ſuffered themſelves to be ſo coſoned by a deſire of new-fangled novelties, and to have quit the calmeneſſe of their climate, to come and ſee ours) were at Roane in the time of our late King Charles the ninth, who talked with them a great while. They were ſhewed our faſhions, our pompe, and the forme of a faire Citie; afterward ſome demanded their adviſe, and would needes know of them what things of note and admirable they had obſerved amongſt vs: they anſwered three things, the laſt of which I have forgotten, and am very ſorie for it, the other two I yet remember. They ſaide, Firſt, they found it very ſtrange, that ſo many tall men with long beards, ſtrong and well armed, as it were about the Kings perſen (it is very likely they 
                                 •
                              ent the Switzers of his guard) would ſubmit themſelues to obey a beardleſſe childe, and that we did not rather obuſe one amongſt them to command the reſt. Secondly (they have a maner of phraſe whereby they call men but a moytie one of another.) They had perceived, there were men amongst vs f
                                 •
                              ll gorged with all ſortes of commodities, and others which hunger-ſtarved, and bare with neede and povertie, begged at their gates: and found it ſtrange, theſe moyties ſo needie could endure ſuch an iniuſtice, and that they tooke not the others by the throte, or ſet fire on their houſes. I talked a good while with one of them, but I had ſo bad an interpreter, and who did ſo ill apprehend my meaning, and who through his fooliſhneſſe was ſo troubled to conceive my imaginations, that I could draw no great matter from him. Touching that point, wherein I demaunded of him, what good he received by the ſuperioritie he had amongſt his countriemen (for he was a Captaine and our Marriners called him King) he told me, it was to march formoſt in any charge of warre: further, I asked him, how many men did follow him, hee ſhewed me a diſtance of place, to ſignifie they were as many as might be contained in ſo much ground, which I gueſſed to be about 4. or 5. thouſand men: moreover I demanded,

if when warres were ended, all his authoritie expired; he anſwered, that hee had onely this left him, which was, that when he went on progreſſe, and viſited the villages depending of him, the inhabitants prepared paths and high-waies athwart the hedges of their woods, for him to paſſe through at eaſe. All that is not very ill; but what of that? They weare no kinde of breeches nor hoſen.
                     
                     
                        The one and thirtieth Chapter.
                        
                           That a man ought ſoberly to meddle with iudging of divine lawes.
                        
                        THings vnknowne are the true ſcope of impoſture, and ſubject of Legerdemaine: foraſmuch as ſtrangeneſſe it ſelfe doth firſt giue credite vnto matters, and not being ſubject to our ordinarie diſcourſes, they deprive vs of meanes to withſtand them. To this purpoſe, ſaid Plato▪ it is an eaſie matter to pleaſe, ſpeaking of the nature of the Gods, then of mens: For the Auditors ignorance lends a faire and large cariere, and free libertie, to the handling of ſecret hidden matters. Whence it followeth, that nothing is ſo firmly beleeued, as that which a man knoweth leaſt; nor are there people more aſſured in their reports, then ſuch as tell vs fables, as Al
                              •
                           humiſts, Prognoſticators, Fortune-tellers, Palmeſters, Phiſitians, idgenus omne, and ſuch like. To which, if I durſt, I would joyne a rable of men; that are ordinarie interpreters and controulers of Gods ſecret deſſeignes, preſuming to finde out the cauſes of every accident, and to prie into the ſecrets of Gods divine will, the incomprehenſible motives of his works. And howbeit, the continuall varietie and diſcordance of events drive them from one corner to another, and from Eaſt to Weſt, they will not leave to follow their bowle, and with one ſmall pen
                              •
                           ill drawe both white and blacke. There is this commendable obſervance in a certaine Indian nation, who if they chance to be diſcomfited in any skirmiſh or battle, they publikely beg pardon of the Sunne, who is their God, as for an vnjuſt action, referring their good or ill fortune to divine reaſon, ſubmitting their judgement and diſcourſes vnto it. It ſuffiſeth a Chriſtian to beleeve, that all things come from God, to receive them from his divine, and inſcrutable wiſedome with thankſgiving, and in what manner ſoever they are ſent him, to take them in good part. But I vtterly diſalow a common cuſtome amongſt vs, which is to ground and eſtabliſh our religion vpon the proſperitie of our enterpriſes. Our beleefe hath other ſufficient foundations, and need not be authorized by events. For the people accuſtomed to theſe plauſible arguments, & agreeing with his taſte, when events ſort contrarie and diſadvantageous to their expectation, they are in hazard to waver in their faith: As in the civill warres, wherein we are now for religions ſake, thoſe which got the advantage, at the conflict of Roch
                                 •
                              labe
                                 •
                              lle, making great ioy and bone-fires for that accident, and vſing that fortune, as an aſſured approbation of their faction: when afterward they come to excuſe their diſaſter of Mort-contour and Iarnac, which are ſcourges and fatherly chaſtiſements: if they have not a people wholy at their mercy, they will eaſily make him perceive, what it is to take two kinds of corne out of one ſa
                              •
                           ke: & from one and the ſame mouth to blow both hot and cold. It were better to entertaine it with the true foundations of veritie. It was a notable Seabattle, which was lately gained againſt the Turkes, vnder the conduct of Don Iohn of Auſtria. But it hath pleaſed God to make vs at other times both ſee and feele othe
                              •
                            ſuch, to our no ſmall loſſe and detriment. To conclude, it is no eaſie matter to reduce divine things vnto our ballance, ſo they ſuffer no impeachment: And he that would yeeld a reaſon, why Arrius and Leo his Pope, chiefe Principals, and maine ſupporters of this here
                              •
                           ie, died both at ſeverall times, of ſo ſemblable and ſo ſtrange deaths (for being forced through a violent bellie-ach to goe from their diſputations to their cloſe-ſtoole, both ſuddenly yeelded vp their ghoſts on them) & exaggerate that divine vengeance by the circumſtance of the place, might alſo adde the death of Hel
                                 •
                              ogabalus vnto it, who likewiſe was ſlaine vpon a privie. But what? Ireneus is found to be engaged in like fortune: Gods intent being to teach vs, that the good have ſome thing elſe to hope for, and the wicked ſomewhat elſe to feare, then the good

or bad fortune of this world: He manageth and applieth them according to his ſecret diſpoſition: and depriveth vs of the meanes, thereby fooliſhly to make our profit. And thoſe, that according to humane reaſon will thereby prevaile, doe but mocke themſelves. They never give one touch of it, that they receive not two for it. S. Auguſtine giveth a notable triall of it vpon his adverſaries. It is a conflict, no more decided by the armes of memorie, than by the weapons of reaſon. A man ſhould be ſatisfied with the light, which it pleaſeth the Sunne to communicate vnto vs by vertue of his beames; and he that ſhal lift vp his eies to take a greater within his bodie, let him not thinke it ſtrange, if for a reward of his over-weening and arrogancie he looſeth his ſight. Quis hominum poteſt ſcire conſilium De
                                 ••
                              
                           
                           Wiſd. 9. 13. 
                           aut quis poterit cogitare, quid velit dominus? Who amongst men can know Gods counſell, or who can thinke what God will doe?
                        
                     
                     
                        The two and thirtieth Chapter.
                        
                           To avoide voluptuouſneſſe in regard of life.
                        
                        I Have noted the greateſt part of ancient opinions to agree in this: That when our life affords more evill than good, it is then time to die: and to preſerve our life to our torment and incommoditie, is to ſpurre and ſhocke the very rules of nature: as ſay the old rules.
                        
                           
                              
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                              .G
                                    •
                                 om. Graec. 0.
                           
                           Or live without diſtreſſe,
                           Or die with happineſſe.
                           
                              
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                              .Ib.
                           
                           T'is good for them to die,
                           Whom life bring's infamie.
                           
                              
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                              .Soph. S
                                    ••
                                 b. 
                                    •
                                 er. 118.
                           
                           T'is better not to live,
                           Then whetchedly not thrive.
                        
                        But to drive off the contempt of death to ſuch a degree, as to imploy it to diſtract, and remoov
                              •
                            himſelfe from honours, riches, greatneſſe, and other goods and favours, which wee call the goods of fortune: as if reaſon had not enough to doe, to perſwade vs to forgoe and leave them, without adding this new ſurcharge vnto it, I had neither ſeene the ſame commanded nor practiſed vntill ſuch time as one place of Seneca came to my hands, wherein counſelling Lucilius (a man mightie and in great authoritie about the Emperour) to change this voluptuous and pompous life, and to withdraw himſelfe from this ambition of the world, to ſome ſolitarie, quiet and philoſophicall life: about which Lucilius alleaged ſome difficulties: My adviſe is (ſaith he) that either thou leave and quit that life, or thy life altogether: But I perſwade thee to follow the gentler way, and rather to vntie than breake what thou haſt ſo ill 
                                 ••
                              it: alwaies provided thou breake it, if thou canſt not otherwiſe vntie the ſame. There is no man ſo baſe minded, that loveth not rather to fall once, then ever to remaine in feare of falling. I ſhould have deemed this counſel agreeing with the Stoickes 
                              •
                           udenes: But it is more ſtrange it ſhould be borrowed of Epicurus, who to that purpoſe writeth this conſonant vnto Idomeneus. Yet thinke I to have noted ſome ſuch like thing amongſt our owne people, but with chriſtian moderation. Saint Hilarie Biſhop of Poitiers, a famous enemie of the Arrian hereſie, being in Syria, was advertiſed that Abra his onely daughter whom hee had left athome with her mother, was by the greateſt Lords of the countrie ſolicited and ſued vnto for marriage, as a damoſell very well brought vp, faire, rich, and in the prime of her age: he writ vnto her (as we ſee) that ſhe ſhould remoove her affections, from all the pleaſures and advantages might be preſented her: for, in his voyage he had found a greater and worthier match or husband of far higher power and magnificence, who ſhould preſent and endowe hir with roabes and jewels of vnvaluable price. His purpoſe was to make hir looſe the appetite and vſe of worldly pleaſures, and wholie to wed hir vnto God. To which, deeming his daughters death, the ſhorteſt and moſt aſſured way, he never ceaſed by vowes, prayers,

and oriſons, humbly to beſeech God to take her out of this world, and to call her to his mercie, as it came to paſſe; for 
                              ••
                           ee deceaſed ſoone after his returne: whereof he ſhewed manifeſt tokens of ſingular gladneſſe. This man ſeemeth to endeere himſelfe above others, in that at firſt 
                              •
                           ight he addreſſeth himſelfe to this meane, which they never embrace but ſubſidiarily, and ſithence it is towards his onely daughter. But I will omit the ſucceſſe of this ſtorie, although it be not to my purpoſe. Saint Hilaries wife, having vnderſtood by him, how her daughters death ſucceeded with his intent and will, and how much more happy it was for hir to be diſlodged from out this world, then ſtill to abide therein, conceived ſo lively an apprehenſion of the eternall and heavenly bleſſedneſſe, that with importunate inſtancie ſhe ſolicited her husband, to do as much for her. And God, at their earneſt entreatie, and joynt-common prayers, having ſoone after taken her vnto himſelfe: it was a death embraced with ſingular and mutuall contentment to both.
                     
                     
                        The three and thirtieth Chapter.
                        
                           That fortune is oftentimes met withall in purſuite of reaſon.
                        
                        THe inconſtancie of Fortunes diverſe wavering, is the cauſe ſhee ſhould preſent vs with all ſortes of viſages. Is there any action of juſtice more manifeſt then this? Caeſar Bor
                              
                                 •••
                              
                            Duke of Val
                                 •
                              ntino
                                 •
                              s, having reſolved to poiſon Adrian Cardinall of Cornetto, with whom Pope Alexander the 
                              ••
                           xt, his father and he were to ſup that night in Vaticane, ſent certaine bottles of empoyſoned wine before, and gave his Butler great charge to have a ſpecial care of it. The Pope comming thither before his ſonne, and calling for ſome drinke; the butler ſuppoſing the Wine had been ſo carefully commended vnto him for the goodneſſe of it, immediately preſented ſome vnto the Pope, who whileſt he was drinking, his ſonne came in and never imagining his bottles had beene toucht, tooke the cup and pledged his father, ſo that the Pope died preſently; and the ſonne, after he had long time beene tormented with ſickneſſe, recovered to another woorſe fortune. It ſomtimes ſeemeth, that when we leaſt think on her, ſhee is pleaſed to ſporte with vs. The Lord of Eſtree, the guidon to the Lord of 
                              Ʋand
                                 •
                              ſme, and the Lord of Liques, Lieutenant to the Duke of Aſcot, both ſervants to the Lord of Foungueſell
                                 •
                              s ſiſter, albeit of contrarie factions (as it happneth among neighboring bordurers) the Lord of Liques got her to wife: But even vpon his wedding day, and which is woorſe, before his going to bed, the bridegroome deſiring to breake a ſtaffe in favour of his new Bride and Miſtris, went out to skirmiſh neere to Saint Omer, where the Lord of Eſtree being the ſtronger tooke him priſoner, and to endeare his advantage, the Lady her ſelfe was faine,
                        
                           Coni
                                 •
                              gis ant
                                 •
                               
                              
                                 ••
                              actan
                                 •
                              vi dimittere collum,Catul. 
                                    •
                                 l
                                    •
                                 . 4. 81
                           
                           Quàm veniens vna atque altera rurſus hyems
                           Noctibus in longis auidum ſaturaſſet amorem,
                        
                        
                           Her new feeres necke for'ſt was ſhe to forgoe,
                           Ere winters one and two returning ſloe,
                           In long nights had ful-fil'd
                           Her love ſo eager wil'd.
                        
                        in courteſie, to ſue vnto him for the deliverie of his priſoner, which he granted; the French Nobilitie never refuſing Ladies any kindneſſe. Seemeth ſhe not to be a right artiſt? Conſtantine the ſonne of H
                                 •
                              len 
                           
                              •
                           ounded the Empire of Constantinople, and ſo, many ages after, Conſtantin
                                 •
                              
                            the ſonne of H
                                 •
                              len ended the ſame. She is ſometimes pleaſed to envie our miracles: we hold an opinion, that King Clovis beſieging A
                                 •
                              gouleſme, the wals by a divine favour 
                              •
                           e
                              •
                           l of themſelves. And Bouchet borroweth of ſome author, that King Robert beleagring a Citie, and having ſecretly ſtolne away from the ſiege to Orleans, there to ſolemnize the feaſts of Saint Aignan, as he was in his earneſt devotion, vpon a certaine paſſage of the Maſſe, the walles of the towne beſieged, without any batterie, fell flat to the ground. She did altogether contrarie in our warres of Millane: For, Captaine Renſ
                                 •
                              , beleagring the Citie of

                           Eronna for vs, and having cauſed a forcible mine to be wrought vnder a great curtine of the walles, by force whereof, it being violently flowne vp from out the ground, did notwithſtanding, whole and vnbroken, fall ſo right into his foundation againe, that the beſieged found no inconvenience at all by it. She ſometimes playeth the Phiſitian. Iaſon Therius being vtterly forſaken of all Phiſitians, by reaſon of an impoſtume he had'm his breaſt, and deſirous to be rid of it, though it were by death, as one of the forlorne hope, ruſht into a battel amongſt the thickeſt thro
                              •
                           g of his enemies, where he was ſo rightly wounded acroſſe the bodie, that his impoſtume brake, and he was cured. Did ſhee not exceed the Painter Protogenes in the skill of his trade? who having perfected the image of a wearie and panting dog, and in all parts over-tired, to his content, but being vnable, as he deſired, hvely to repreſent the drivel or ſlaver of his mouth vexed againſt his owne worke, took his ſpunge, and moiſt as it was with divers colours, thr
                              ••
                            
                           
                              •
                           t at the picture, with purpoſe to blot and deface all hee had done: fortune did ſo fitly and rightly carrie the ſame toward the dogs chaps, that there it perfectly finiſhed, what his arte could never attaine vnto. Doth ſhe not ſometimes addreſſe and correct our counſels? Iſahell Queene of England, being to repaſſe from Zeland into her kingdome with an armie, in favour of her ſonne againſt her husband, had vtterly beene caſt away, had ſhe come vnto the Port intended, being there expected by her enemies: But fortune againſt her will, brought her to another place, where ſhee ſafely landed. And that ancient fellow, who hurling a ſtone at a dog, miſst him, and there withall hit and ſlew his ſtepdame, had ſhe not reaſon to pronounce this verſe,
                        
                           T
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                              
                           
                           Chance of it ſelfe, than wee,
                           Doth better ſay and ſee?
                        
                        Fortune hath better adviſe then wee. Icetes had practiſed and ſubor
                              •
                           ed two ſouldiers to kill 
                              
                                 •
                              smole
                                 •
                              n, then reſiding at Adra
                                 ••
                              
                            in S
                                 •
                              e
                                 •
                              ly. They appointed a time to doe, as he ſhould be aſſiſting at ſome ſacrifice; and ſcattering then ſelves amongſt the multitude, as they were winking one vpon another, to ſhew how they had a verie 
                              •
                           t opportunitie to doe the deede: Loe heere a third man, that with a huge blow of a ſword, ſtriketh one of them over the head and fels him dead to the ground and ſo runnes away. His fellow ſuppoting himſelfe diſ
                              ••
                           
                           vered, and vndone, runs to the altar, ſuing for ſanctuarie, with promiſe to confeſſe the truth; Even as he was declaring the conſpiracie, behold the third man, who had likewiſe beene taken, whom as a murtherer the people tugged and haled through the throng toward 
                              
                                 •••
                              oleon and the chiefeſt of the aſſembly, where he humbly calleth for mercie, alleadging that he had juſtly murthered the murtherer of his father, whom his good chance was to 
                              ••
                           de there, averring by good witneſſes, before them all, that in the Citie of the Leontines, his father had beene proditoriouſly ſlaine by him, on whom he had now revenged himſelfe. In meede whereof, becauſe he had beene ſo fortunate (in ſeeking to right his fathers vntimely death) to ſave the common-father of the S
                              •
                           cilians fro
                              •
                            ſo imminent a danger, he had ten Attike mines awarded him. This fortune in her directions exceedeth all the rules of humane wiſedome. But to conclude, is not an expreſſe application of hir favour, goodneſſe, and ſingular pietie manifeſtly diſcovered in this action? Ignat
                                 •
                              us the Father and the Sonne, both baniſhed by proſcription by the Triumvirs of Rome reſolved on this generous act, to yeeld their lives one into anothers hands, and therby fruſtrate the Tyrants cruelty. They furiouſly with their keen rapiers drawne, ran one againſt another: Fortune ſo directed their points, that each received his mortall ſtroke; adding to the honor of ſeld-ſeene an amity, that they had juſt ſo much ſtrength left them, to draw their armed and bloody hands from out their goared wounds, in that plight, ſo faſt to embrace, and ſo hard to claſpe one another, that the hangmen were forced, at one ſtroke, and togither, to cut off both their heads; leaving their bodies for ever tied in ſo honorable a knot, and their wounds ſo joyned, that they lovingly drew and ſuckt each others blood, breath, and life.
                     
                     
                        
                        The foure and thirtieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of a defect in our policies.
                        
                        MY whilome-father, a man who had no helpe but from experience, and his owne nature, yet of an vnſpotted iudgement, hath heer-tofore told me, that he much deſi
                              •
                           ed to bring in this cuſtome, which is, that in all cities there ſhould be a certain appointed place, to which, whoſoever ſhould have need of any thing, might come and cauſe his buſineſſe to be regiſtred by ſome officer appointed for that purpoſe: As for example, if one have pearles to ſell, he ſhould ſay, I ſeeke to ſell ſome pearls: and another, I ſecke to buy ſome pearls: Such a man would faine have companie to travell to Paris; Such a one enquireth for a ſervant of this or that qual
                              •
                           ties; Such a one ſeeketh for a Maſter; another a work-man; Some this; ſome that; every man as he needed. And it ſeemeth that this meanes of enter-warning one another; would b
                              •
                           ing no ſmall co
                              ••
                           oditie vnto common commerce & ſocietie; For there are ever 
                              •
                           onditions that enter-ſeeke one another, and becauſe they vnderſtand not one another, they leave men in great n
                              ••
                           eſ
                              ••
                           tie. I vnderſtand, to the infamous reproach of our age, that even in our ſight, two 
                              •
                           oſt excellent men in knowledge, have miſerably periſhed for want of food and other neceſſaries: L
                                 •
                              lius Gregorius Giraldus in Italy, and Sebaſt
                                 •
                              an
                                 ••
                               Caſtalio in Germa
                                 •
                              ie: And I verily beleeve there are many thouſands, who had they knowne or vnderſtood their wants, would either have ſent for them, and with large ſtipends entertained them, or would have convaide them ſuccour, where ever they had beene. The world is not ſo generally corrupted, but I know ſome, that would earneſtly wiſh, and with harty affections deſire, the goods which their forefathers have left them, might, ſo long as it ſhal pleaſe fortune they may enjoy them, be emploied for the reliefe of rare, and ſupply of excellent mens neceſſitie, & ſuch as for any kind of worth and vertue are remarkable; many of which are daily ſeene to be purſued by ill fortune even to the vtmoſt extremitie, and that would take ſuch order for them, as had they not their eaſe and content, it might onely be imputed to their want of reaſon or lacke of diſcretion. In this Oeconomicke or houſhold order my father had this order, which I can commend, but no way follow: which was, that beſides the day booke of houſehold affaires, wherin are reg
                              •
                           ſtred at leaſt expences, paiments, gi
                              •
                           ts, bargains & ſales, that require not a Nota
                              ••
                           es hand to them, which booke a receiver had the keeping of: he appointed another journall-booke to one of his ſervants, who was h
                              •
                           s clarke, wherein he ſhould inſert & orderly ſet downe all accidents worthy the noting, & day by day regiſter the memories of the hiſtorie of 
                              •
                           as houſe: A thing very pleaſant to reade, when time began to weare out the remembrance of them, and fit for vs to paſſe the time withall, and to reſolve ſome doubts: when ſuch a worke was begunne, when ended, what way or courſe was taken, what accidents hapned, how long it continued; all our voyages; where, and how long we were from home; our marriages, who died, and when; the receiving of good or bad tidings, who came, who went, changing or remooving of houſhold officers, taking of new, or diſcharging of old ſervants, and ſuch like matters. An ancient cuſtome, and which I would have all men vſe and bring into faſhion againe in their ſeverall homes: and I repent my ſelfe, I have ſo fooliſhly neglected the ſame.
                     
                     
                        The five and thirtieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of the vſe of Apparell.
                        
                        WHatſoever I ayme at, I muſt needes force ſome of cuſtomes contradictions, ſo carefully hath ſhe barred all our entrances. I was deviſing in this chil-cold ſeaſon, whether

the faſhion of theſe late diſcovered Nations to go naked, be a cuſtome forced by the hote temperature of the ayre, as we ſay of the Indians and Moores, or whether it be an originall manner of manking. Men of vnderſtanding, foraſmuch as whatſoever is contained vnder heaven (as ſaith the holie Writ) is ſubject to the ſame lawes, are wont in ſuch-like conſiderations, where naturall lawes are to be diſtinguiſhed from thoſe invented by man, to have recourſe to the generall policie of the world, where nothing that is counterfet can be admitted. Now all things being exactly furniſhed elſe-whence with all neceſſaries to maintaine this being, it is not to be imagined that we alone ſhould be produced in a defective and indigent eſtate, yea, and in ſuch a one, as can not be maintained without forraine help. My opinion is, that even as all plants, trees, living creatures, and whatſoever hath life, is naturally ſeene furniſhed with ſufficient furniture to defend it ſelfe from the injurie of all wethers:
                        
                           Proptereáque ferè res omnes, aut corio ſunt,Lucr. lib. 4. 932.
                           
                           Aut ſeta, aut conchis, aut callo, aut cortice tectae.
                        
                        
                           Therefore all things almoſt we cover'd marke,
                           With hide, or haire, or ſhels, or brawne, or barke.
                        
                        Even ſo were we: But as thoſe who by an artificiall light extinguiſh the brightneſſe of the day, we have quenched our propermeanes, by ſuch as wee have borrowed. And wee may eaſily diſcerne, that only cuſtome makes that ſeeme impoſſible vnto vs, which is not ſo: For of thoſe nations that haue no knowledge of clothes, ſome are found ſituated vnder the ſame heaven, and climate, or paralell, that we are-in, and more cold and ſ
                              •
                           arper the
                              •
                           ours. Moreover, the tendereſt parts of vs are ever bare and naked, as our eyes, face, mouth, noſe, and eares; and our countrie-ſwaines (as our forefathers wont) moſt of them at this day goe bare-breaſted downe to the navill. Had we beene borne needing petti-coats and breeches, there-is no doubt, but nature would have armed that which ſhe hath left to the batterie of ſeaſons and furie of wethers, with ſome thicker skin or hide, as ſhee hath done our fingers ends, and the ſoales of our feet. Why ſeemes this hard to be believed? Betweene my faſhion of apparell, and that of one of my countrie-clownes, I find much more difference betweene him and me, then betweene his faſhion, and that of a man who is cloathed but with his bare skin. How many men (eſpecially in Turkie,) go ever naked for devotions ſake? A certaine man demaunded of one of our loytring rogues, whom in the deep of froſtie Winter, he ſaw wandring vp and downe with nothing but his ſhirt about-him, and yet as blithe and luſtie as an other that keepes himſelfe muffled and wrapt in warme furres vp to the eares; how he could have patience to go ſo. And have not y
                                 ••
                              , good ſir,) anſwered he) your face all bare? Imagine I am all face. The Italians report (as far as I remember) of the Duke of Florence his foole, who when his Lord asked him, how being ſo ill clad, he could endure the cold, which he hardly was able to doe himſelfe; To whom the foole replied; Maſter, vſe but my receipt, and put all the cloathes you have vpon you, as I dee all mine; you ſhall feel no more cold then I doe. King Maſſiniſſa, even in his oldeſt daies, were-it never ſo cold, ſo froſtie, ſo ſtormie, or ſharpe wether, could never be induced, to put ſome thing on his head, but went alwaies bareheaded. The like is reported of the Emperor S
                                 •
                              verus. In the battels that paſt betweene the Aegyptians, and the Perſians, Herodotus ſaith, that both himſelfe and divers others tooke ſpeciall notice, that of ſuch as lay ſlaine on the ground, the Aegyptians ſculs were without compariſon much harder then the Perſians: by reaſon that theſe go ever with their heads covered with coifs and turbants, and thoſe from their infancie ever ſhaven and bare-headed. And King Ageſilaus, even in his decrepite age, was ever wont to weare his clothes both winter and Summer alike. Suetonius affirmeth, that Caeſar did ever march for moſt before his troupes, and moſt commonly bare-headed, and on foote, whether the ſunne ſhone, or it rained. The like is reported of Hanniball,
                        
                        —tum vertice nudo,Syl. Ital. 250. Excipere inſanos imbres, coel
                              •
                           que ruinam.
                        
                           Bare-headed then he did endure,
                           Heav'ns ruine and mad-raging ſhowre.
                        
                        A Venetian that hath long dwelt amongſt them, and who is but lately returned thence, writteth, that in the Kingdome of Pegu, both men and women, having all other parts clad, goe ever bare-footed, yea, and on horſe-backe alſo. And Plato for the better health and preſervation

of the body doth earneſtly perſwade, that no man ſhould ever give the feet and the head other cover, then Nature hath allotted them. He whom the Polonians chuſe for their king next to ours, who may worthily be eſteemed one of the greateſt princes of our age, doth never weare gloves, nor what wether ſoeuer it be, winter or ſummer, other bonnet a broad than in the warme houſe. As I cannot endure to goe vnbuttoned or vntruſſed, ſo the huſband-men neighbouring about me, would be, & feele themſelves as fettred or hand-bound, with going ſo. Varro is of opinion, that when we were appointed to ſtand bare-headed before the gods, or in preſence of the Magiſtrates, it was rather done for our health, and to enure and arme-vs againſt iniuries of the wether, than in reſpect of reverence. And ſince wee are ſpeaking of cold, and are French-men, accuſtomed ſo ſtrangely array our ſelves in party-coloured ſutes (not I', becauſe I ſeldome weare any other then blacke or white, in imitation of my father) let-vs adde this one thing more, which Captaine Martyn du Bellay relateth in the voyage of Luxemburg, where hee ſaieth to have ſeene ſo harde froſts, that their munition-wines were faine to be cut and broken with hatchets and wedges, and ſhared vnto the Souldiers by weight, which they caried a way in baskets; and Ovid.
                        
                        
                           Nudáque conſiſtunt formam ſervantia teſtaeOvid Triſt. l 3. el. 10. 23.
                           
                           Vina, nec hauſta meri, ſed data fruſta bibunt.
                        
                        
                           Bare wines, ſtill keeping forme of caske, ſtand faſt,
                           Not gulpes, but gobbets their wine they taſte.
                        
                        The froſts are ſo hard and ſharpe in the emboguing of the Meotis fennes, that in the very place where Mithridates Lieutenant had delivered a battle to his enemies, on hard ground, and drie-footed, and there defeated them; the next ſummer, he there obtained another ſea-battle againſt them. The Romanes ſuffered a great diſadvantage in the fight they had with the Carthaginians nere vnto Placentia, for ſo much as they went to their charge with their blood congealed, and limbes benummed, through extreame colde: whereas Hanniball, had cauſed many fires to be made through-out his campe, to warme his ſouldiers by, and a quantitie of oile to be diſtributed amongſt them, that therwith annointing themſelves, they might make their ſinewes more ſupple and nimble, and harden their pores againſt the bitter blaſts of colde winde, which then blewe, and nipping piercing of the ayre. The Graecians retreate from Babilon into their countrie, is renowmed, by reaſon of the many difficulties and encombrances they encountred withall, and were to ſurmount: whereof this was one, that in the mountaines of Armenia, being ſurpriſed and encircled with ſo horrible and great quantitie of ſnow, that they loſt both the knowledge of the countrie, aud the wayes: wherewith they were ſo ſtraitely beſet, that they continued a day and a night without eating or drinking; and moſt of their horſes and cattell died: of their men a great number alſo deceaſed; many with the glittring and whiteneſſe of the ſnow, were ſtrucken blinde: diverſe through the extremitie were lamed, and their limbes ſhrunken vp, many ſtarke ſtiffe, and frozen with colde, although their ſenſes were yet whole. Alexander ſaw a nation, where in winter they burie their fruite-bearing trees vnder the ground, to defend them from the froſt: a thing alſo vſed amongſt ſome of our neighbours. Touching the ſubject of apparell: the King of Mexico was wont to change and ſhift his clothes foure times a day, and never wore them againe, employing his leavings and caſt-ſutes for his continuall liberalities and rewardes; as alſo neither pot nor diſh, nor any implement of his kitchin or table were twice brought before him.
                     
                     
                        The ſix and thirtieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of Cato the yonger.
                        
                        IAm not poſſeſſed with this common errour, to judge of others according to what I am my ſelfe. I am eaſie to beleeve things differing from my ſelfe. Though I be engaged to one forme, I do not tie the world vnto it, as every man doth? And I beleeve and conceive a thouſand maners of life, contrary to the common ſorte: I more eaſily admit and receive difference

then reſemblance in vs. I diſcharge as much as a man will, another being of my conditions and principles, and ſimply conſider of it in my ſelfe, without relation, framing it vpon it's owne modell. Though my ſelfe be not continent, yet do I ſincerely commend and allow the continencie of the Capuchines, and Theatines, and highly praiſe their courſe of life. I doe by imagination, inſinuate my ſelfe into their place: and by how much more they be other then my ſelfe, ſo much the more doe I loue and honour them. I would gladly haue every man iudged apart, and not be drawne my ſelfe in conſequence by others examples. My weakeneſſe doth no way alter the opinions I ſhould have of the force and vigor of thoſe that deſerve it. Sunt, qui nihil ſuadent, quàm quod ſe imitari poſſe confidunt. There bee
                           Cic. Orat. ad Br. 
                           ſuch as adviſe to nothing, but what they trust themſelves can imitate. Crawling on the face of the earth, I ceaſe not to marke, even into the clouds, the inimitable height of ſome heroicke mindes. It is much for me to have a formall and preſcript iudgement, if the effects be not ſo, and at leaſt to maintaine the chiefe part exempted from corruption. It is ſomething to have a good minde, when my forces faile me. The age we live in (at leaſt our climate) is ſo dull and leaden, that not onely the execution, but the very imagination of vertue is farre to ſeeke, and ſeemes to be no other thing than a Colledge ſuppoſition, and a gibriſh-word.
                        —virtutem verba putant, vt Lucum ligna:
                        Hor. ep. 6. l. 1. 31.
                        
                           Vertue ſeemes wordes to theſe,
                           As trees are wood, or woods are tree.
                        
                        
                           Quam vereri d
                                 •
                              berent, etiam ſi percipere non poſſent. Which yet they ſhould reverence, though they could not reach vnto. It is an eare-ring or pendent to hang in a cabinet, or at the tongues end, as well as at an eare for an ornament. There are no more vertuous actions knowne; thoſe that beare a ſhew of vertue, have no eſſence of it: for profit, glorie, cuſtome, feare, and other like ſtrange cauſes direct vs to produce them. Iuſtice, valour, integritie, which we then exerciſe, may by others conſideration, and by the countenance they publikely beare, be termed ſo: but with the true workeman, it is no vertue at all. There is another end propoſed; another efficient cauſe. Vertue alloweth of nothing, but what is done by her, and for hir alone. In that great battell at Potidaea which the Graecians vnder Pauſanias gained of Mardonius and the Perſians, the victors following their cuſtome, comming to ſhare the glorie and priſe of the victory betweene them, aſcribed the pre-excellencie of valor in that conflict to the Spartane nation. The Spartanes imparciall judges of vertue, when they came to decide, to what particular man of their countrie, the honor to have done beſt in that day, ſhuld of right belong; they found that Ariſtodemus had moſt couragiouſly engaged and hazarded himſelfe: Yet gave him not the priſe of honour of it, becauſe his vertue had beene thereunto incited, by an earneſt deſire to purge himſelfe from the reproch and infamie, which hee had incurred in the action at Thermopyles, and from all daring ambition to die couragiouſlie, thereby to warrant his former imputation. Our judgements are yet ſicke, and follow the depravations of our cuſtomes. I ſee the greateſt part of our ſpirits to affect wit, and to ſhew themſelves ingenious, by obſcuring and detracting from the glorie of famous and generall ancient actions, giving them ſome baſe and malicious interpretation, fondly and enviouſly charging them with vaine cauſes, and frivolous occaſions. A ſubtill invention no doubt. Let any man preſent me, with the moſt excellent and blameleſſe action, and I will oppoſe it with fiftie vicious and bad intentions, all which ſhall carrie a face of likeli-hood. God knowes (to him that will extend them) what diverſitie of images our internall will doth ſuffer: They doe not ſo maliciouſly as groſely and rudely endeuour to be ingenious with all their railing and detraction. The ſame paine a man taketh to detract from theſe noble & famous names, and the verie ſame libertie, would I as willingly take to lend them my ſhoulders to extoll and magnifie them. I would endevour to charge theſe rare and choiſe-figures, ſelected by the conſent of wiſe men, for the worlds example, as much, and as high, as my invention would give me leaue with honour, in a plauſible interpretation, and favourable circumſtance. And a man muſt thinke, that the diligent labours of our invention, are farre beyond their merit. It is the part of honeſt minded men to pourtray vertue, as faire as poſſible faire may be. A thing which would no whit be miſ-ſeeming or vndecent, if paſſion ſhould tranſport vs to the favour and purſuite of ſo ſacred formes, what theſe doe contrarie, they either doe it through malice or knaverie, with purpoſe to reduce and ſute their beliefe to

their capacitie, where of I lately ſpake: or rather as I thinke, becauſe their ſight is not of ſufficient power or clearnes, nor addreſſed to conceive or apprehend the farre-ſhining brightnes of vertue in naturall and genuine purity: As Plutarke ſaith, that in his time, ſome imputed the cauſe of Cato the yongers death to the feare he had conceived of Ceſar: whereat he hath ſome reaſon to be moved: by which a man may iudge, how much more he would have beene offended with thoſe that have aſcribed the ſame vnto ambition. Oh fooliſh people! Hee would no doubt have performed a faire action, ſo generous and ſo iuſt, rather with ignominie, then for glorie. This man was truely a patterne, whom nature choſe to ſhew how farre humane vertue may reach, and mans conſtancie attaine-vnto. But my purpoſe is not here to treate this rich argument: I will onely confront together the ſayings of five Latin Poets vpon Catoes commendacions, and for the intereſt of Cato, and by incidencie for theirs alſo. Now ought a gentleman well-bred, in reſpect of others, finde the two former ſomewhat languiſhing. The third more vigorous, but ſuppreſſed by the extravagancie of force. He will iudge there were yet place for one or two degrees of invention, to reach vnto the fourth, in conſideration of which he will through admiration ioyne handes for the laſt (yet firſt in ſome degree and ſpace, but which ſpace he will ſweare can by no humane ſpirit be filled-vp) he wil be much amazed, he will be much amated. Loe here are wonders, we haue more Poets than iudges and interpreters of poeſie. It is an eaſier matter to frame it; then to knowe-it: Being baſe and humble, it may be iudged by the precepts and art of it: But the good & loftie, the ſupreme & divine, is beyond rules, and aboue reaſon. Whoſoeuer diſcerneth hir beauty, with a conſtant, quicke-ſeeing, and ſetled looke, he can no more ſee and comprehend the ſame then the ſplendor of a lightning flaſh. It hath no community with our iudgement; but ranſacketh and raviſheth the ſame. The furie which prickes and moves him that can penetrate hir, doth alſo ſtricke and wound a third man, if he heare-it either handled or recited, as the Adamant ſtone drawes, not only a needle, but infuſeth ſome of hir faculty in the ſame to drawe others: And it is more apparently ſeene in theaters, that the ſacred inſpiration of the Muſes, having firſt ſtirred vp the Poet with a kinde of agitation vnto choler, vnto griefe, vnto hatred, yea and beyond him ſelf, whether and how ſoever they pleaſe, doth alſo by the Poet ſtrike & enter into the Actor, and conſequently by the Actor, a whole auditorie or multitude. It is the ligament of our ſences depending one of another. Even from my infancie, Poeſie hath had the vertue to tranſpierce and tranſport me. But that lively and feeling-mouing that is naturally in me, hath diverſly beene handled, by the diverſitie of formes, not ſo much higher or lower (for they were ever the higheſt in every kind) as different in colour. Firſt a blithe and ingenious fluidity, then a quaint-witie, and loftie conceit. To conclude, a ripe and conſtant force. Ovid, Lucan, and Virgill, will better declare it. But here our Gallants are in their full cariere.
                        Sit Cato dum viuit ſanè vel Caeſare maior.
                        Mart. lib. epig. 32. 5.
                        
                           Let Cato Junior, while he
                           doth live, greater than Caeſar be.
                        
                        Saith one.
                        —& inuictum devictâ morte Catonem,
                        Manil. aſtr. lib. 4. 87.
                        
                           Cato vnconquered, death being vanquiſhed.
                        Saith another: And the third ſpeaking of the civill warres betweene Caeſar and Pompey.
                        
                        Victrix cauſa dijs placuit, ſed victa Catoni.
                        Lucan. bel. ciu. lib. 1. 127.
                        
                           The cauſe that overcame with Gods was greater;
                           But the cauſe overcome pleaſd Cato better.
                        
                        And the fourth vpon Caeſars commendations:
                        
                           Et cuncta terrarum ſubacta,Hor. lib. 2. ad 1. 23.
                           
                           Praeter atrocem animum Catonis.
                        
                        
                           Of all the earth all parts inthralled,
                           
                              Catoes minde onely vnappalled.
                        
                        And the hartes-maſter, after he hath enſtalled the names of the greateſt Romanes in his picture, endeth thus:
                        —his dantem iura Catonem.
                        
                           Chiefe juſtice Cato doe decreeVir. Aen. lib. 8. 670.
                           
                           Lawes that for righteous ſoules ſhould be.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        The ſeven and thirtieth Chapter.
                        
                           How we weepe and laugh at one ſelfe-ſame thing.
                        
                        WHen we reade in Hiſtories, that Antigonus was highly diſpleaſed with his ſonne, atPlut. vit. Pyrth f. what time he preſented vnto him the head of King Pirrhus his enemie, ſlaine but a little before in fight againſt him; which he no ſooner ſaw, but hee burſt foorth a weeping. And that Renate Duke of Loraine, wept for the death of Charles Duke of Burgundie, whom hee had eftſoones diſcomfired, and was as an aſſiſtant mourner at his funeralles: And that in the battel of Auroy (which the Earle of Montfort had gained againſt the faction of Charles de Blois, for the Dutchie of Britanie) the victorious conqueror met with the bodie of his enemie deceaſed, mourned very grievouſly for him; a man muſt not ſuddenly exclaime.
                        
                           Ecoſi auvien', che l'animo ciaſeuna
                           Sua paſſion, ſotto contrarie manto
                           Ricuopre, con la viſta hor chiara, hor bruna.
                        
                        
                           So happens it, the minde covers each paſſion
                           Vnder a cloake of colours oppoſite,
                           To ſight now cleare, now darke, in divers faſhion.
                        
                        When Caeſar was preſented with Pompeis head, Hiſtories report that he turn'd his looks aſide, as from a ghaſtly and vnpleaſing ſpectacle. There hath beene ſo long a correſpondencie and ſocietie in the managing of publike affaires, mutually betweene them, ſuch a communitie of fortunes, ſo many reciprocall offices and bondes of alliance, that a man cannot think his countenance to have beene forced, falſe, and w
                              •
                           ly, as this other ſuppoſeth.
                        —tutúmque putauit I am bonus eſſe ſocer, lacrymas non ſponte cadentesLucan. lib. 9. 1040. Effudit gemitúſque expreſſit pectore laeto.
                        
                           Now to be kinde indeed he did not doubt
                           Father in lawe, teares, which came hardly out
                           He ſhed, and grones expreſt
                           From inward pleaſed breſt.
                        
                        For certainly, howbeit the greateſt number of our actions bee but masked and painted over with diſſimulation, and that it may ſometimes be true,
                        Haredis fletus ſub perſona riſus est.
                        Aul. Gell. noct. Att. li. 17. c. 14.
                        The weeping of an heire, is laughing vnder a viſard or diſguiſe.
                        Yet muſt a man conſider, by judging of his accidents, how our mindes are often agitated by divers paſſions; For (as they ſay) there is a certaine aſſembly of divers humors in our bodies, whereof ſhe is ſoveraigne miſtris, who moſt ordinarily, according to our complexions doth command vs: ſo in our minde, although it containe ſeverall motions that agitate the ſame, yet muſt one chiefly be predominant. But it is not with ſo full an advantage, but for the volubilitie and ſuppleneſſe of our minde, the weakeſt may by occaſion reobtaine the place againe, and when their turne commeth, make a new charge, whence we ſee, not onely children, who ſimplie and naturally follow nature, often to weepe and laugh at one ſelfe-ſame thing; but none of vs all can vaunt himſelfe, what wiſhed for, or pleaſant voyage ſoever he vndertake, but that taking leave of his family and friends, he ſhall feele a chilling and panting of the heart, and if he ſhed not teares, at leaſt he puts his foote in the ſtirrop with a ſad and heavie cheere. And what gentle flame ſoever doth warme the heart of yong virgines, yet are they hardly drawne to leave and forgo their mothers, to betake them to their husbands: whatſoever this good fellow ſay;
                        
                           Eſt ne nouis nuptis odio Ʋenus, únnê parentumCatul. eleg. 2. 15
                           
                           Fruſtrantur falſis gaudia lacrymulis,
                           Vbertim thalami quas intra limina fundunt?
                           Non, it a me diui, veragemunt, uiverint.
                        
                        
                           
                           Doe yoong Birdes hate indeed freſh Venus toyes,
                           Or with falſe teares delude their parents joyes,
                           Which in their chambers they powre out amaine?
                           So helpe me God, they do not true complaine.
                        
                        So is it not ſtrange to mourne for him dead, whom a man by no meanes would have alive againe. When I chide my boy, I doe it with the beſt heart I have: They are true and not fained imprecations: but that fit paſt over, let him have need of me, I will gladly doe him all the good I can, and by and by I turne ouer another leafe. If I chance to call one knaue or aſſe, my purpoſe is not, for ever to enfeoffe him with thoſe nick-names; nor doe I thinke to ſay, tong thou lieſt, if immediately after I call him an honeſt man. No qualitie doth embrace vs purely and vniverſally. If it were not the countenance of a foole to ſpeake alone, or to him ſelfe, there would ſcarſe be day, or houre, wherein ſome-body ſhould not heare me mutter and grumble to my ſelfe, and againſt my ſelfe. A ( ) in the fooles teeth, yet do not I thinke it to be my definition. He that ſeeth me ſometimes to caſt a frowning looke vpon my wife, or ſometimes a loving countenance, and thinkes, that either of them is but fained, he is a foole. Nero taking leave of his mother, whom hee ſent to be drowned, felt notwithſtanding the emotion of that motherly farewell, and at one inſtant was ſtrucken with horror & pitie. It is ſaid, that the Sunnes-light, is not of one continued piece, but that it ſo vnceſſantly, and without intermiſſion doth caſt ſo thicke new raies, one in the necke of another vpon vs, that wee cannot perceive the ſpace betweene them.Lucr. l 5. 281.
                        
                        
                           Largus enim liquidi fons luminis aethereus ſol
                           Inrigat aſſiduè caelum candore recenti,
                           Suppedit átque nouo confeſtim lumine lumen.
                        
                        
                           Heav'ns Sunne the plenteous ſpring of liquid light
                           Still heav'n bedewes with ſplendor freſh and bright,
                           Still light ſupplies with light of freſher ſight.
                        
                        So doth our minde caſt her points diverſly and imperceptibly. Artabanus ſurpriſed Xerxes his nephew, and chid him for the ſudden changing of his countenance. He was to conſider the vnmeaſurable greatneſſe of his forces at the paſſage of Helleſpont, for the enterpriſe of Greece. Firſt he was ſuddenly aſſailed by an exceſſive joy, to ſee ſo many thouſands of men at his ſervice, and witneſſed the ſame by the alacritie and cheerefulnes of his countenance: And immediately at that very moment, his thoughts ſuggeſting, how ſo many lives were to be conſumed, and ſhould come to nothing (at the furtheſt, within one age) he gan to frowne his browes, and grew ſo penſive, that he wept. We have with a reſolute and inexorable minde purſued the revenge of an injurie, and felt a ſingular content for the victorie; yet vpon better advice doe we weepe: it is not that we weepe for: the thing is as it was, there is nothing changed: But that our minde beholdes the thing with another eie, and vnder an other ſhape it preſents it ſelfe vnto vs. For every thing hath divers faces, ſundry byaſes, and ſeverall Iuſtres. Aliance, kinred, old acquaintances, and long friendſhip ſeize on our imagination, and at that inſtant, paſſionate the ſame according to their qualitie; but the turne or change of it, is ſo violent, that it eſcapes-vs
                        
                           Nil adeo fieri celeriratione videtur,L. 3. 183.
                           
                           Quàm ſi mens fieri proponit & inchoat ipſa.
                           Ocius ergo animus quàm res ſe perciet vlla,
                           Ante oculos quarum in promptu natura videtur.
                        
                        
                           Nothing in ſo quicke ſort ſeemes to be done,
                           As minde ſet on a thing, and once begun,
                           The minde that ſwifter ſtirres before our eies,
                           Then any thing, whoſe forme we ſoone comprize.
                        
                        And therefore, intending to continue one body of all this purſuite, we deceive our ſelves. When Timoleon weepeth the murther he hath perpetrated with ſo mature and generous a determination, he weepeth not for the liberty reſtored to his countrie, nor the tyrant, but he weepeth for his brother. One part of his dutie is acted, let vs permit him to play the other.
                     
                     
                        
                        The eight and thirtieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of Solitarineſſe.
                        
                        LEt vs leave apart this outworne compariſon, betweene a ſolitarie and an active life: And touching that goodly ſaying vnder which ambition and avarice ſhroud themſelves; that we are not borne for our particular, but for the publike good: Let vs boldly refer our ſelves to thoſe that are engaged; and let them beate their conſcience, if on the contrarie, the ſtates, the charges, and this traſh of the world, are not rather ſought and ſued for to draw a private commoditie from the publike. The bad and indirect meanes wherethrough in our age men canvaſe and toyle to attaine the ſame, do manifeſtly declare the end thereof to be of no great conſequence. Let vs anſwer ambition, that her-ſelfe gives vs the taſte of ſolitarineſſe. For what doth ſhe ſhunne ſo much as company? What ſeeketh ſhee more then elbow-roome? There is no place, but there are meanes and waies to doe well or ill▪ Nevertheleſſe if the ſaying of Bias be true; That the woorſt part is the greateſt: Or that which Eccleſiaſtes ſaith, That of a thouſand there is not one good.
                        
                        
                           Rari quippe boni numero vix ſunt totidem, quotI
                                    •••
                                 . ſat. 13. 26
                           
                           The
                                 •
                              arum portae, vel divit
                                 •
                              s oſtia Nili:
                        
                        
                           Good men are rare, ſo many ſcarſe (I feare)
                           As gates of Thebes, mouths of rich Nilus were.
                        
                        Contagion is very dangerous in a throng. A man muſt imitate the vicious, or hate them: both are dangerous: for to reſemble them is perilous, becauſe they are many, and to hate many is hazardous, becauſe they are diſſemblable, and Marchants that travell by ſea, have reaſon to take heede, that thoſe which goe in the ſame ſhip, be not diſſolute, blaſphemers, and wicked, iudging ſuch company vnfortunate. Therefore Bias ſayd pleſantly to thoſe, that together with him paſſt the danger of a great ſtorme, & called to the Gods, for helpe: Peace my maiſters, leſt they ſhould heare, that you are here with me. And of a more militarie example, Albuberque Viecroy in India for Emanuel King of Portugall, in an extreame danger of a ſeatempeſt, tooke a yong boy vpon his ſhoulders, for this only end, that in the common perill his innocencie might be his warrant, and recommending to Gods favour, to ſet him on ſhore: yet may a wiſe man live every where contented, yea and alone, in the throng of a Pallace: but if he may chuſe, he will (ſaith he) Avoide the ſight of it. If neede require, he will endure the firſt: but if he may have his choiſe, he will chuſe the latter. He thinks he hath not ſufficiently rid himſelfe from vices, if he muſt alſo conteſt with other mens faults. Charondas puniſhed thoſe for wicked, that were convicted to have frequented 
                              •
                           ewd companies. There is nothing ſo diſ-ſociable and ſociable as man the one for his vice the other for his nature, And I think Antiſthenes did not ſatisfie him that vpbraided him with his converſation with the wicked, ſaying, That Phyſitians liue amon
                                 •
                              ſt the ſicke. Who if they ſteade ſicke-mens healths, they empaire their owne, by the infection, continuall viſiting, touching and frequenting of diſeaſes. Now (as I ſuppoſe) the end is both one, thereby to live more at leaſure, and better at eaſe. But man doth not alwaies ſeeke the beſt way to come vnto it, who often ſuppoſeth to have quit affaires, when he hath but changed them. There is not much leſſe vexation in the governement of a private family, than in the managing of an entire ſtate: whereſoever the minde is buſied, there it is al. And though domeſtical occupations be leſſe important, they are as importunate. Moreover, though we have freed our ſelves from the court, and from the market, we are not free from the principal torments of our life.
                        —ratio & prudentia curas,Hor. li. 1. epiſt. 11. 25. Non locus eff
                              •
                           ſi latè maris arbiter aufert.
                        
                           Reaſon and wiſedome may ſet cares aſide,
                           Not place the Arbiter of ſeas ſo wide.
                        
                        Shift we, or change we places never ſo often, ambition, avarice, irreſolution, feare and concupiſcences never leave vs.
                        
                           
                           Et paſt equitem ſedet atra cura.Ho. l. 3. od. 1. 39
                           
                        
                        
                           Care looking grim and blacke, doth ſit
                           Behinde his backe that rides from it.
                        
                        They often follow vs, even into immured cloiſters, and into ſchooles of Philoſophie; nor doe hollow rocks, nor wearing of haire-ſhirts, nor continuall faſtings rid vs from them.
                        hoeret laterilethalis arundo.
                        
                           The ſhaft that death implideVir. Aen. l. 4. 73
                           
                           Sticks by the flying ſide.
                        
                        It was tolde Socrates, that one was no whit amended by his travell: I beleeve it well (ſaide he) for he carried himſelfe with him.
                        
                        
                           Quid terras alio calentesHor. li. 2. od. 16. 18.
                           
                           Sole mutamus? patriâ quis ex
                                 •
                              l
                           Se quoque fugit?
                        
                        
                           Why change we ſoyles warm'd with another Sunne?
                           Who from whom baniſht hath himſelfe out-runne?
                        
                        If a man doe not firſt diſcharge both himſelfe and his minde from the burthen that preſſeth her, remooving from place to place will ſtirre and preſſe her the more; as in a ſhip, wares well ſtowed, and cloſely piled, take vp leaſt roome, you doe a ſicke-man more hurt than good, to make him change place, you ſettle an evill in remooving the ſame; as ſtakes or poles, the more they are ſtirred and ſhaken, the faſter they ſticke, and ſinke deeper into the ground. Therefore is it not enough, for a man to have ſequeſtred himſelfe from the concourſe of people: it is not ſufficient to ſhift place, a man muſt alſo ſevere himſelfe from the popular conditions, that are in vs. A man muſt ſequeſter and recover himſelfe from himſelfe.
                        —rupiiam vincula, dicas, Nam luctata canis nodum arripit, attamen illaPerſ. ſat. 5. 158 Cùm fugit, à collo trahitur pars longa catenae.
                        
                           You will ſay haply I my bonds have quit,
                           Why ſo the ſtriving dog the knot hath bit;
                           Yet when he flies, much chaine doth follow it.
                        
                        We carry our fetters with vs: is it not an abſolute libertie; we ſtill caſt backe our lookes towards that we have left behinde: our minde doth ſtill runne on it; our fanſie is full of it.
                        —niſi purgatum est pectus, quae praelia nobis
                              
                                 ••
                              cr. lib. 5. 44 Atque pericula tunc ingratis inſ
                              •••
                           andum? Quantae conſcindunt hominem cuppe
                              •
                           inis acres Sollicitum curae, quantîque perinde timores? Quidve ſuperbia, ſpurcitia, ac petulantia, quantas Effi
                              •
                           iu
                              •
                           t clades▪ quid luxus deſid
                              •
                           éſque?
                        
                           Vnleſſe our breaſt be purg'd, what warres muſt wee
                           What per
                                 •
                              ls then, though much diſpleaſed, ſee▪
                           
                           How great feares, how great cares of ſharpe deſire
                           Doe carefull man d
                                 •
                              ſtract, torment, enfire?
                           Vncleaneneſſe, wantonneſſe, ſloth, r
                                 •
                              ot, pride,
                           How great calamities have theſe implide?
                        
                        Our evill is rooted in our mide: and it cannot ſcape from it ſelfe.
                        In culpa eſt animus, qui ſe non effugit vnquam,
                              Hor. l. 1. epiſt. 14▪ 15▪
                           
                        
                        
                           The minde is greateſt fault muſt lie,
                           Which from it ſelfe can never flie,
                        
                        Therefore muſt it be reduced and brought into it ſelfe: It is the true ſolitarineſſe, and which may be enjoyed even in the frequencie of peopled Cities, and Kings courts: but it is more commodiouſly enjoied apart. Now ſithence wee vndertake to live ſolitarie, and without companie, let vs cauſe our contentment to depend of our ſelves: Let vs ſhake off all bondes that tie vs vnto others: Gaine we that victorie over vs, that in good earneſt we may live ſolitarie, and therein live at our eaſe. Stilphon having eſcaped the combuſtion of his Citie, wherein he had loſt, both wife, and children, and all his goods; Demetrius Polsorcetes ſeeing him in ſo great a ruine of his Countrie, with an vnaffrighted countenance, demaunded

of him, whether he had received any loſſe; He anſwered, Not and that (thanks given to God) he had loſt nothing of his owne. It is that, which Antiſthenes the Philoſopher ſaid verie pleaſantly, That man ought to provide himſelfe with munitions, that might float vpon the water, and by ſwimming eſcape the danger of ſhipwarcke with him. Verily, a man of vnderſtanding hath loſt nothing, if he yet have himſelfe. When the Citie of Nola was over-run by the Barbarians, Paulinus Biſhop thereof, having loſt all he had there, and being their priſoner, prayed thus vnto God: Oh Lord deliver me from feeling of this loſſe: for thou knoweſt as yet they have toucht nothing that is mine. The riches that made him rich, and the goods which made him good, were yet abſolutely whole. Behold what it is to chuſe treaſures well, that may be freed from injurie; and to hide them in a place, where no man may enter, and which can not be betraied but by our ſelves. A man that is able, may have wives, children, goods, and chiefly health, but not ſo tie himſelfe vnto them, that his felicitie depend on them. We ſhould reſerve a ſtore-houſe for our ſelves, what need ſoever chance; altogether ours, and wholy free, wherein we may hoard-vp, and eſtabliſh our true libertie, and principall retreit and ſolita
                              ••
                           neſſe, wherein we muſt go alone to our ſelves, take out ordinarie entertainment, and ſo privatelie, that no acquaintance or communication of any ſtrange thing may therein 
                              •
                           ind place: there to diſcourſe, to mediate and laugh, as, without wife, without children, and goods, without traine, or ſeruants; that if by any occaſion they be loſt, it ſeeme not ſtrange to vs to paſſe it over; we have a mind moving and turning in it ſelfe; it may keep it ſelfe companie; it hath wherewith to offend and defend, wherewith to receive, & wherewith to give. Let vs not feare that we ſhal faint and droop through tedious and mind-tyring idleneſſe in this ſolitarineſſe.
                        In ſolis ſis tibi turba locis.
                        
                           Be thou, when with thee is not any,
                           As good vnto thy ſelfe as many.
                        
                        Vertue is contented with it ſelfe, without diſcipline, without words, & without effects. In our accuſtomed actions, of a thouſand there is not one found that regards vs: he whom thou ſeeſt ſo furiouſly, and as it were beſides himſelfe, to clamber or crawle vp the citie wals, or breach, as a point-blank to a whole volie of ſhot, and another all wounded & skarred, crazed and faint, & wel-nie hunger-ſtarven, reſolved rather to die, then to open his enemie the gate, and give him entrance; doeſt thou think he is there for himſelfe? No verilie, It is peradventure for ſuch a one, whom neither he, nor ſo many of his fellowes ever ſaw, and who happly takes no care at all for them; but is there-whilſt wallowing vp to the eares in ſenſualitie, ſlouth, and all maner of carnall delights. This man whom about mid-night, when others take their reſt, thou ſeeſt come out of his ſtudie meagre-looking, with eyes-trilling, flegmatike, ſqualide, and ſpauling, doeſt thou thinke, that plodding on his books he doth ſeek how he ſhall become an honeſter man; or more wiſe, or more content? There is no ſuch matter. He will either die in his purſuite, or teach poſteritie the meaſure of Plautus verſes, and the true Orthographie of a Latine word. Who doth not willingly chop and counterchange his health, his eaſe, yea, and his life for glorie, and for reputation? The moſt vnprofitable, vaine, and counterfet coine, that is in vſe with vs. Our death is not ſufficient to make vs afraid, let vs alſo charge our ſelves with that of our wives, of our children, and of our friends, and people. Our owne affaires doe not ſufficientlie trouble and vexe vs; Let vs alſo drudge, toile, vex, and torment our ſelves with our neighbours and friends matters.
                        
                           
                              Ʋah quemquámne hominem in animum inſtituere, autT
                                    •
                                 r. Ad
                                    •
                                 l. act. 1 
                                    ••••
                                 . 1. 13.
                           
                           Parare, quod ſit charius, quàm ipſe est ſibi?
                        
                        
                           Fie, that a man ſhould caſt, that aught, then he
                           Himſelfe of himſelfe more belov'd ſhould be.
                        
                        Solitarineſſe mee ſeemeth hath more apparance and reaſon in thoſe which have given their moſt active and flouriſhing age vnto the world, in imitation of Thales. We have lived long enough for others, live we the remainder of our life vnto our ſelves: let vs bring home our cogitations and inventions vnto our ſelves, and vnto our eaſe. It is no eaſie matter to make a ſafe retreit: it doth over-much trouble vs with joyning other enterpriſes vnto-it. Since God gives vs leaſure to diſpoſe of our diſlodging. Let-vs prepare our ſelves vnto-it, packe wee vp our baggage. Let vs betimes bid our companie farewell. Shake we off theſe violent hold-faſts, which elſe-where engage vs, and eſtrange vs from our ſelves. Theſe ſo ſtrong bonds muſt be vntied, and a man may eſt-ſoones love this or that, but wed nothing

but himſelfe, That is to ſay, let the reſt be our owne: yet not ſo combined and glued together, that it may not be ſundred, without fleaing-vs, and therewithall, pull away ſome piece of our owne. The greateſt thing of the world, is for a man to know how to be his owne. It is high time to ſhake-off ſocietie, ſince we can bring nothing to it. And he that cannot lend, let him take heed of borrowing. Our forces faile-vs: retire we them, and ſhut them vp into our ſelves. He that can ſuppreſſe and confound in himſelfe the offices of ſo many amities, and of the companie, let him doe it. In this fall, which makes vs, inutile, irkſome, and importunate to others; let him take heed he be not importunate, irkſome, and vnprofitable to himſelfe. Let him flatter, court and cheriſh himſelfe, and above all, let him governe himſelfe, reſpecting his reaſon, and fearing his conſcience, ſo that he may not without ſhame ſtumble or trip in their preſence. Rarum eſt enim, vt ſatis ſe quiſ
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               vereatur. For it is a rare matter, that every man ſufficiently ſhould ſtand in awe and reuerence of himſelfe. Socrates ſaith, That yong men ought to be inſtructed, and men exerciſed in well doing; and old men withdraw themſelves from all civill and militarie negotiations, living at their owne diſcretion, without obligation to any certaine office. There are ſome complexions, more proper for theſe precepts of retreit than others. Thoſe which have a tender and demiſſe apprehenſion, a ſqueamiſh affection, a delicate will, and which can not eaſilie ſubject or imploy it ſelfe (of which both by naturall condition and propenſe diſcourſe, I am one) will better apply themſelves vnto this counſell▪ then active minds, and buſie ſpirits; which embrace all, every where engage, and in all things paſſionate themſelves; that offer, that preſent, and yeeld themſelves to all occaſions. A man muſt make vſe of all theſe accidentall commodities, and which are without vs, ſo long as they be pleaſing to vs; but not make them our principall foundation: It is not ſo, nor reaſon, nor nature permit-it. Why ſhould we againſt their lawes ſubject our contentment to the power of others? Moreover, to anticipate the accidents of fortune; for a man to deprive himſelfe of the commodities he hath in poſſeſſion, as many have done for devotion, and ſome Philoſophers by diſcourſe; to ſerve themſelves, to lie vpon the hard ground, to pull out their owne eyes, to caſt their riches into the Sea, to ſeek for paine and ſmart (ſome by tormenting this life, for the happineſſe of another; otherſome placing themſelves on the loweſt ſtep, thereby to warrant themſelves from a new fall) is the action of an exceſſive vertue. Let ſtern
                              •
                           r and more vigorous complexions make their lurking glorious and exemplar.
                        —tuta & parvula laudo,Hor lib. 1. epiſt. 15. 42. Cùm res deficiunt, ſatis inter vilia for tis: Verùm vbi quid melius contingit & vnctius, idem Hos ſapere, & ſolos aio benè vivere, quorum Conſpicitur ni
                              ••
                           dis fundata pecunia villis.
                        
                           When riches faile, I praiſe the ſafe eſtate,
                           Though ſmall; baſe things doe not high thoughts abate.
                           But when t's better, finer with me, I
                           They onely live well, and are wiſe, doe crie,
                           Whoſe coine in faire farmes doth well-grounded lie.
                        
                        There is worke enough for me to doe without going ſo far. It ſufficeth me vnder fortunes favour, to prepare my ſelfe for her disfavour; and being at eaſe, as 
                              •
                           ar as imagination may attaine vnto, to repreſent the evill to come vnto my ſelfe: Even as we enure our ſelves to Tilts and Tourneyes, and counterfeit warre in time of peace. I eſteeme not Arceſilaus the Philoſopher leſſe reformed, becauſe I know him to have vſed houſhold implements of gold and ſilver, according as the condition of his fortune gave him leave, I rather value him the more, then if he had not done-it, forſomuch as he both moderately and liberally made vſe of them. I know vnto what limits naturall neceſſitie goeth; and I conſider the poore almes-man begging at my dore, to be often more plumb-checkt, in better health and liking then I am: Then doe I enter into his eſtate, and aſſay to frame and ſute my mind vnto his byaſe. And ſo over-running other examples, albeit I imagine death, povertie, contempt, and ſickneſſe to be at my heeles, I eaſilie reſolve my ſelfe, not to apprehend any feare of that, which one of leſſe worth then my ſelfe doth tolerate and vndergoe with ſuch patience: And I can not beleeve, that the baſeneſſe or ſhallowneſſe of vnderſtanding, can doe more then vigor and far-ſeeing, or that the effects and reaſon of diſcretion, can not reach to the effects of cuſtome and vſ
                              •
                           . And knowing what ſlender hold-faſt theſe acceſſorie

commodities have, I omit not in full jovyſſance of them, humbly to beſeech God of his mercie (as a ſoveraigne requeſt) to make me contented with my ſelfe, and with the goods proceeding from me. I ſee ſome gallantly-diſpoſed yong men, who notwithſtanding their faire-ſeeming ſhew, have many boxes-full of pils in their coffers at home, to take when the rhume ſhall aſſaile them; which ſo much the leſſe they feare, when they thinke the remedie to be at hand. So muſt a man doe: as alſo if he feel himſelfe ſubject to ſome greater infirmitie, to ſtore himſelfe with medicaments that may aſſwage, ſupple, and ſtupifie the part grieved. The occupation a man ſhould chuſe for ſuch a life, muſt neither be painfull nor tedious, otherwiſe, in vaine ſhould we accompt to have ſought our abiding there, which depends from the particular taſte of every man. Mine doth no way accommodate it ſelfe to husbandrie. Thoſe that love it, muſt with moderation applie themſelves vnto it.
                        Conentur ſibi res, non ſe ſubmittere rebus.
                        
                           Endevour they things to them to ſubmit,Epiſt. 1. 19.
                           
                           Not them to things (if they have Horace wit)
                        
                        Husbandrie is otherwiſe a ſervile office, as Saluſt termeth it: It hath more excuſable parts, as the care of gardening, which Xenophon aſcribeth to Cyrus: A meane or mediocritie may be found, betweene this baſe and vile carking care, extended and full of toiling labor, which we ſee in men that wholie plunge themſelves therein, and that profound and extreame retchleſneſſe to let all things go at ſix and ſeaven, which is ſeen in others.
                        —Democriti pecus edit agellosEpiſt. 12. 12. Cultáque, dum peregrè est animus ſine corpore velox.
                        
                           Cattle deſtroyde Democritus-his ſets,
                           While his mind bodileſſe vagaries fets.
                        
                        But let-vs heare the counſell, which Plinie the yonger giveth to his friend Cornelius Ruſus, touching this point of Solitarineſſe: I perſwade thee in this full-gorged and fat retreit, wherein thou art, to remit this baſe and abiect care of husbandrie vnto thy ſervants, and give thy ſelfe to the ſtudie of letters, whence thou maiſt gather ſomething, that may altogether be thine owne. He meaneth reputation: like vnto Ciceroes humor, who ſaith, That he will imploy his ſolitarineſſe and reſidence from publike affaires, to purchaſe vnto himſelfe by his writings an immortall life.
                        
                        —vſque adeónePerſ. ſa
                                 •
                              . 1. 27. Scire tuum nihil eſt, niſi te ſcire hoc ſciat alter?
                        
                           Is it then nothing-worth that thou dooſt know,
                           Vnleſſe what thou dooſt know, thou others ſnow?
                        
                        It ſeemeth to be reaſon, when a man ſpeaketh to withdraw himſelfe from the world, that one ſhould looke beyond him. Theſe do-it but by halfes. Indeed they ſet their match againſt the time they ſhall be no more: but pretend to reap the fruit of their deſſignes, when they ſhall be abſent from the world, by a ridiculous contradiction. The imagination of thoſe, who through devotion ſeeke ſolitarineſſe, filling their minds with the certaintie of heavenly promiſes, in the other life, is much more ſoundly conſorted. They propoſe God as an object infinite in goodneſſe, and incomprehenſible in power, vnto themſelves. The ſoule hath therein, in all free libertie, wherewith to glut her-ſelfe. Afflictions and ſorrowes, redound to their profit, being imployed for the purchaſe and attaining of health, and eternall gladneſſe. Death, according to ones wiſh, is a paſſage to ſo perfect an eſtate. The ſharpneſſe of their rules, is preſently made ſmooth and eaſie by cuſtome; and carnall concupiſcences, rejected, abated, and 
                              •
                           ulled a ſleep by refuſing them; for nothing entertaineth them but vſe and exerciſe. This onely end of another life, bleſſedly immortall, doth rightly merite we ſhould abandon the pleaſures and commodities of this our life. And he that can enlighten his ſoule with the flame of a lively faith and hope, really and conſtantly, in his ſolitarineſſe, 
                                 •
                              th build vnto himſelfe a voluptuous and delicious life, far ſurmounting all other lives. Therefore doth neither the end nor middle of this counſell pleaſe me. We are ever falling into a relaps, from an ague to a burning feaver. This plodding occupation of bookes, is as painfull as any other, and as great an enemie vnto health, which ought principally to be conſidered. And a man ſhould not ſuffer himſelfe to be inveagled by the pleaſure he takes in them: It is the ſame pleaſure, that looſeth the thriving husband-man, the greedy-covetous, the ſinning-voluptuous, and the puft-vp ambitious. The wiſeſt men teach vs ſufficiently to beware and thield-vs from the treaſons of our appetites, and to diſcerne true and perfect pleaſures, from

delights blended and entermingled with more paine. For, moſt pleaſures, (ſay they) tickle, fawne vpon, and embrace-vs, with purpoſe to ſtrangle-vs, as did the theeves whom the Aegyptians termed Phili
                                 ••
                              as: And if the head-ach would ſeize vpon vs before drunkenneſſe, we would then beware of too much drinking: but ſenſualitie the better to entrap-vs, marcheth before, and hideth her tracke from-vs. Bookes are delightfull; but if by continuall frequenting them, we in the end looſe both health and cheerefulneſſe (our beſt parts (let vs leave them. I am one of thoſe who thinke their fruit can no way countervaile this loſſe. As men that have long time ſelt themſelves enfeebled through ſome indiſpoſition, doe in the end yeeld to the mercie of Phyſicke, and by arte have certaine rules of life preſcribed them, which they will not tranſgreſſe: So he that with-drawes himſelfe, as diſtaſted and over-tired with the common life, ought likewiſe to frame and preſcribe this vnto the rules of reaſon; direct and range the ſame by premeditation, and diſcourſe. He muſt bid all manner of travell farewell, what ſhew ſoever it beare; and in generall ſhun all paſſions that any way empeach the tranquilitie of mind and bodie, and follow the courſe beſt agreeing with his humour.
                        
                           Ʋnuſquiſque ſua noverit ire via.Proport. lib. 2. el. 25. 
                                 •
                              8.
                        
                        
                           His owne way every man
                           Tread-out directly can.
                        
                        A man muſt give to thriving-husbandrie, to laborious ſtudie, to toileſome hunting, and to every other exerciſe, the vtmoſt bounds of pleaſure; and beware he engage himſelfe no further, if once paine begin to intermeddle it ſelfe with hir; we ſhould reſerve buſineſſe and negotiations, onely for ſo much as is behoofefull to keep vs in breath, and to warrant vs from the inconveniences which the other extremitie of a baſe, faint-harted idleneſſe drawes after it. There are certaine barren and thornie ſciences, which for the moſt part are forged for the multitude: they ſhould be left for thoſe, who are for the ſervice of the world. As for my ſelfe, I love no books, but ſuch as are pleaſant, and eaſie, and which tickle me, or ſuch as comfort and counſell me, to direct my life and death.
                        —tacitum ſylvas inter reptare ſalubresHordib. 1. epiſt. 4. 4. Curantem quidquid dignum ſapiente bonóque eſt.
                        
                           Silently creeping midſt the wholeſome wood
                           With care what's for a wiſe-man and a good.
                        
                        The wiſer ſort of men, having a ſtrong and vigorous mind may frame vnto themſelves an altogether ſpirituall life. But mine being common, I muſt help to vphold my ſelfe by corporall commodities: And age having eſtſoones diſpoiled me of thoſe that were moſt ſutable to my fantaſie. I inſtruct and ſharpen my appetite to thoſe remaining, moſt ſortable this other ſeaſon. We muſt tooth-and naile retaine the vſe of this lives pleaſures, which our yeares ſnatch from vs, one after another:
                        
                           Carpamus dulcia, noſtrum eſt,Perſ. ſat. 5. 155
                           
                           Quod vivis, cinis & maenes & fabula fies.
                        
                        
                           Plucke we ſweet pleaſures: we thy life give thee.
                           Thou ſhalt a tale, a ghoſt, and aſhes be.
                        
                        Now concerning the end of glorie, which Plinie, and Cicero propoſe vnto vs, it is far from my diſcourſe: The moſt oppoſit humour to ſolitarie retiring, is ambition. Glorie and reſt, are things, that cannot ſquat in one ſame forme: as far as I ſee, theſe have nought but their armes and legs out of the throng, their mind and intent is further and more engaged in them then ever it was.
                        Tun▪ vetule auriculis alienis colligis eſcas?Perſ. ſat. 1. 22.
                        
                        
                           Gatherſt thou dotard theſe yeares,
                           Freſh baites, fine foode, for others eares?
                        
                        They have gone-backe that they might leap the better, and with a ſtronger motion make a nimbler offer amidſt the multitude. Will you ſee how they ſhoot-ſhort by a cornes breadth? let vs but counterpoiſe the adviſe of two Philoſophers, and of two moſt different ſects: The one writing to Idomeneus, the other to Lucilius their friends, to divert them from the managing of affaires and greatneſſe, vnto a ſolitarie kind of life. You have (ſay they) lived hither to ſwimming and floating adrift, come and die in the haven; you have given the paſt of your life 
                                 •••
                              o light, give the remainder vnto darkneſſe. It is impoſſible to give-over occupations, if you doe
                           
                           not alſo give-over the fruits of them: Therefore cleare your ſelfe from all care and glorie. There is great danger, leſt the glittering of your fore-paſſed actions ſhould over-much dazle you, yea, and follow you even to your den. Together with other concupiſcences, ſhake off that which commeth from the approbation of others. And touching your knowledge and ſufficiencie, take you no care of them, they will looſe no whit of their effect; if your ſelfe be any thing the better for them. Remember but him, who being demanded, to what purpoſe he toyled ſo much about an Arte, which could by no meanes come to the knowledge of many. Few are enow for me; one will ſufi
                              •
                           ce, yea, leſſe than one will content me, anſwered he. He ſaid true: you and another are a ſufficient theatre one for another; or you to your ſelfe alone. Let the people be one vnto you, and one 
                              •
                           e all the people to you: It is a baſe ambition to go about to draw glorie from ones idleneſſe, and from ones lurking-hole. A man muſt doe as ſome wilde beaſts, which at the entrance of their caves, will have no manner of footing ſeene. You muſt no longer ſeeke, what the world ſaith of you, but how you muſt ſpeake vnto your-ſelfe: withdraw your ſelfe into your ſelfe; but firſt prepare yourſelfe to receive your ſelfe: it were follie to truſt to your ſelfe, if you cannot governe your ſelfe. A man may as well faile in ſolitarineſſe, as in companie, there are waies for-it, vntill ſuch time as you have framed your ſelfe ſuch, that you dare not halt before yourſelfe, and that you ſhall be aſhamed of, and beare a kind of reſpect vnto your ſelfe, Obverſentur
                              Cic. Tuſc. qu. lib. 2. 
                              ſpecies honeſtae animo: Let honeſt Ideaes ſtill repreſent themſelves before your mind: Ever preſent Cato,
                            
                           Phocion, and Ariſtides vnto your imagination, in whoſe preſence even foolesSen
                                 •
                              c. epiſt. 11. would hide their faults, and eſtabliſh them as controulers of all your intentions. If they be diſordered and vntuned, their reverence will order and tune them againe: they will containe you in a way, to be contented with your ſelfe; to borrow nothing but from your ſelfe, to ſettle and ſtay your mind in aſſured and limited cogitations, wherein it may beſt pleaſe it ſelfe, and having gotten knowledge of true felicities, which according to the meaſure a man vnderſtands them, he ſhall accordingly injoy, and with them reſt ſatisfied, without wiſhing a further continuance, either of life or name. Loe heere the counſell of truly-pure, and purely-true philoſophie, not of a vaine-glorious, boaſting, and prating philoſophie, as is that of the two firſt.
                     
                     
                        The nine and thirtieth Chapter.
                        
                           A conſideration vpon Cicero.
                        
                        ONe word more in compariſon of theſe two. There are gathered out of Ciceroes writing
                              •
                            and from Plinies, (in mine opinion litle agreeing with his vnckle) infinit teſtimonies of a nature beyond meaſure ambitious. Amongſt others, that they openly ſolicite the Hiſtorians of their times, not to forget them in their writings: and fortune, as it were in ſpight▪ hath made the vanitie of their requeſt to continue even to our daies, and long ſince the hiſtories were loſt. But this exceedeth all hearts-baſeneſſe in perſons of that ſ
                              •
                           ampe, to have gone about to draw ſome principall glorie from prating and ſpeaking, even to imploy their private Epiſtles written to their friends; in ſuch ſort, as ſome miſſing the opportunitie to be ſent, they notwithſtanding cauſe them to be publiſhed, with this worthie excuſe, that they would not looſe their travell and lucubrations. Is it not a ſeemly thing in two Romane Conſuls, chiefe magiſtrates of the common-wealth, Empreſſe of the world, to ſpend their time in wittily deviſing, and cloſely hudling-vp of a quaint miſſive or wittie epiſtle, therby to attaine the reputation, that they perfectly vnderſtand their mother-tongue? What could a ſeelie School-maſter, who gets his living by ſuch traſh, do worſe? If the acts of Xenophon, or of Caeſar had not by much exceeded their eloquence, I can not beleeve, they would ever have written them. They have endevored to recommend vnto poſteritie, not their ſayings, but their doings. And if the perfection of well-ſpeaking might bring any glorie ſutable vnto a great perſonage, Scipio and Le
                                 •
                              ius would never have reſigned the honor of their Comedies, and the elegancies, and ſmooth-ſportfull conceits of the Latin tongue, vnto an Affrican ſervant: For, to prove this labor to be theirs, the exquiſit eloquence, & excellent invention therof

doth ſufficiently declare it: and Terence himſelfe doth avouch it-: And I could hardly be removed from this opinion. It is a kind of mockerie and iniurie, to raiſe a man to worth, by qualities miſ-ſeeming his place, and vnfittting his calling, although for ſome other reſpects praiſe-worthie; and alſo by qualities that ought not to be his principall object. As he that would commend a King to be a cunning Painter, or a skilfull Architect, or an excellent Harquibuzier, or a never miſſing runner at the Ring. Theſe commendations acquire a man no honour, if they be not preſented altogether with thoſe that are proper and convenient vnto him, that is to ſay, juſtice, and the skill to governe, and knowledge to direct his people both in peace & warre. In this ſort doth Agriculture honour Cyrus, and Eloquence Charlemaine, together with his knowledge in good letters. I have in my time ſeen ſome, who by writing did earneſtly get both their titles and living, to diſavow their aprentiſſage, mar their pen, and affect the ignorance of ſo vulgar a qualitie; and which our people holds, to be ſeldome found amongſt wiſe-men, endevouring to be commended for better qualities. Demoſthenes his companions in their ambaſſage to Philip, praiſed their Prince to be faire, eloquent, and a good quaffer. Demoſtenes ſaid, they were commendations rather fitting a woman, an advocate, and a ſpunge, then a King.
                        
                        
                           Imperet bellante prior, iacentemHor. car. ſecul. 51.
                           
                           Lenis in hoſtem.
                        
                        
                           Better he rule, who mercifull will rue
                           His foe ſubdued, then he that can ſubdue.
                        
                        It is not his profeſſion to know, either how to hunt cunningly, or to dance nimbly.
                        
                           Orabunt cauſas alij, coelique meatusVirg Aen. lib. 6. 850.
                           
                           Deſcribent radio, & fulgentia ſider a dicent;
                           Hic regere imperio populos ſciat.—
                        
                        
                           Others ſhall cauſes plead, deſcribe the skies
                           Motion by inſtrument, ſay how ſtars riſe?
                           But let him know to rule (juſt, valiant, wiſe.)
                        
                        
                           Plutarke ſaith moreover, That to appeare ſo abſolutely excellent in theſe leſſe-neceſſarie parts, is to produce a witneſſe againſt himſelfe, to have ill ſpent his houres, and fondly beſtowed his ſtudie, which might better have been imployed to more behoofefull and profitable vſe. So that Philip King of Macedon, having heard great Alexander his ſonne ſing at a feaſt a vie with the beſt Muſitians: Art thou not aſhamed (ſaid he vnto him) to ſing ſo well? And to the ſame Philip, ſaid a Muſitian, gainſt whom he contended about his Art, God forbid, my Soveraigne, that ever ſo much hurt ſhould befall you, that you ſhould vnderſtand theſe things better than my ſelfe. A King ought to be able to anſere, as Ipicrates did the Orator who in his invective vrged him in this manner: And what art thou thou ſhouldſt ſo brave-it? Art thou a man at Armes? Art thou an Archer? Art thou a Pike-man? I am none of all thoſe, but I am he who commaund all thoſe. And Antiſthenes made-it as an argument of little valour in Iſm
                                 •
                              nias, when ſome commended him to be an excellent Flutiſt. Well I wot, that when I heare ſome give themſelves to imitate the phraſe of my Eſſayes, I would rather have them hold their peace: They doe not ſo much raiſe the words, as depreſſe the ſenſe; ſo much the more ſharply, by how much more obliquely. Yet am I deceived if ſome others take not more hold on the matter; and how well or ill ſoever, if any writer hath ſcattered the ſame, either more materiall, or at leaſt thicker on his paper: That I may collect the more, I doe but huddle vp the arguments or chiefe heads. Let me but adde what followes them, I ſhal dailie increaſe this volume. And how many ſtories have I glanced-at therein, that ſpeake not a word, which whoſoever ſhall vnfold, may from them draw infinite Eſſayes? Nor they, nor my allegations doe ever ſerve ſimply for examples, authoritie, or ornament. I doe not onely reſpect them for the vſe I draw from them. They often (beyond my purpoſe) produce the ſeed of a richer ſubject, and bolder matter, and often collaterally, a more harmonious tune, both for me, that will expreſſe no more in this place, and for them that ſhall hit vpon my tune.
                        But returning to vertue, I find no great choice, betweene him that can ſpeake nothing but evill,
                           Sen. epiſt. 115. p. 
                           and one that can talke nothing but to talke well. Non est ornamentum vir
                                 •
                              le concinnitas. Fineneſſe is no great grace for a man. Wiſe men ſay, that in reſpect of knowledge, there is nothing but Philoſophie, and in regard of effects, but Vertue; which is generally fit for all degrees, and for all orders. Something there is alike in theſe two other Philoſophers; for they alſo promiſe eternitie to

the Epiſtles, they write to their friends. But after another faſhion, and to a good purpoſe, accommodating themſelves to others vanitie; For they ſend them word, that if care to make themſelves knowen vnto future ages, and reſpect of renowne, doth yet retaine them in the managing of affaires, and makes them feare ſolitarineſſe, and a retired life, to which they would cal them, that they take no more paines for it: foraſmuch as they have ſufficient credit with poſteritie, by anſwering them; and were it but by the Epiſtles they write vnto them, they will make their name as famous, and as farre-knowen, as all their publike actions might doe. Beſides this difference, they are notfrivolous, idle, and triviall Epiſtles, and onely compact and held together with exquiſite choiſe words, hudled-vp and ranged to a juſt ſmoothe cadence, but ſtufft and ful of notable ſayings, and wiſe ſentences; by which a man doth not only become more eloquent, but more wiſe, and that teach vs, not to ſay well, but to doe well. Fie on that eloquence, which leaves vs with a deſire of it, and not of things: vnleſſe a man will ſay, that Ciceroes being ſo exceedingly perfect, doth frame it ſelfe a body of perfection. I will further allegea ſtorie, which to this purpoſe we reade of him, to make vs palpably feele his naturall condition. He was to make an Oration in publike, and being vrged b
                              •
                           t
                              •
                           mes to prepare himſelfe for it, Eros one of his ſervants came to tell him, the Auditorie was deferred till the morrow next; he was ſo glad of it, that for ſo good newes he gave him his libertie. Touching this ſubject of Epiſtles, thus much I will ſay; It is a worke wherin my friends are of opinion I can doe ſomething: And ſhould more willingly have vndertaken to publiſh my gifts, had I had who to ſpeake vnto. It had beene requiſite (as I have had other times) to have had a certaine commerce to draw me on, to encorage me, and to vphold me. For, to go about to catch the winde in a net, as others doe, I cannot; and it is but a dreame. I am a ſworne enemie to all falſifications. I ſhould have bin more attentive, and more aſſured, having a friendly and ſtrong direction, than to behold the divers images of a whole multitude: and I am deceived, if it had not better ſucceeded with me. I have naturally a comicall and familiar ſtile: But after a maner peculiar vnto my ſelfe, inept to all publike Negotiations, anſwering my ſpeech, which is altogether cloſe, broken, and particular: I have no skill in ceremonious letters, which have no other ſubſtance, but a faire contexture of complemental phraſes and curteous words. I have no taſte nor faculty of theſe tedious offers of ſer
                              •
                           ice and affection. I believe not ſo much as is ſaid, and am nothing pleaſed to ſay more than I believe. It is farre from that which is vſed now adaies: For, there was never ſo abject and ſervile a proſtitution of preſentations; life, ſoule, devotion, adoration, ſervant, ſlave; all theſe words are ſo generally vſed, that when they would expreſſe a more emphaticall intent and reſpective will, they have no meanes left them to expreſſe it. I deadly hate to heare a flatterer: which is the cauſe I naturally affect a pithy, ſinnowie, drie, round, and harſh kind of ſpeach; which, of ſuch as have no further acquaintance with me, is judged to encline to diſdaine. I honor them moſt, whom I ſeeme to regard leaſt: And where my mind marcheth moſt cheerefully, I often forget the ſteps of gravitie: And I offer my ſelfe but ſaintly and rudely to thoſe whoſe I am indeed, and preſent my ſelfe leaſt, to ſuch as I have moſt given my ſelfe. M
                              •
                            thinkes they ſhould read it in my heart, and that the expreſſion of my words, wrongeth my conception. To welcome, to take leave, to bid farewell, to give thanks, to ſalute, to preſent my ſervice, and ſuch verball complements of the ceremoniall lawes of our civilitie, I know no man ſo ſottiſhly-barren of ſpeach, as my ſelfe. And I was never imployed to indite Letters of favour or commendatorie, but he for whom they were, judged them drie, barren, and faint. The Italians are great Printers of Epiſtles, where of I thinke I have a hundred ſeverall Volumes. I deeme thoſe of Hanniball Caro to be the beſt. If all the paper I have heeretofore ſcribled for Ladies were extant, at what time my hand was truly tranſported by my paſſion, a man ſhould haply find ſome page worthy to be communicated vnto idle and fond-doting youth, embabuinized with this furie. I ever write my letters in poſthaſt, and ſo raſhly-head long, that howbeit I write intolerablie ill, I had rather write with mine owne hand, than imploy another: for I find none that can follow me, and I never copie them over againe. I have accuſtomed thoſe great perſons that know me, to endure blots, blurs, daſhes, and botches, in my letters, and a ſheete without folding or margine. Thoſe that coſt me, either moſt labour or ſtudie, are they that are leaſt worth. When I once begin to traile them, it is a ſigne my mind is not vpon them. I commonly begin without project: the firſt word begets the ſecond. Our moderne letters are more fraught with borders,

and prefaces, than with matter, as I had rather write two, then fold and make vp one, which charge I commonly reſigne to others: So likewiſe when the matter is ended, I would willingly give another the charge, to adde theſe long orations, offers, praiers, and imprecations, which we place at the end of them, and wiſh hartily, ſome new faſhion would diſcharge vs of them. As alſo to ſuperſcribe them with a legend of qualities, titles, and callings, wherein, leſt I might have tripped, I have often times omitted writing, eſpecially to men of Iuſtice, Lawyers, and Financiers. So many innovations of offices, ſo difficult a diſpenſation and ordinance of divers names and titles of honour, which being ſo dearely bought, can neither be exchanged or forgotten without offence. I likewiſe find-it graceleſſe and idly-fond, to charge the front and inſcription of the many bookes and pamphlets, which we daily cauſe to be imprinted with them.
                     
                     
                        The fortieth Chapter.
                        
                           That the taste of goods or evils doth greatly depend on the opinion we have of them.
                        
                        
                           MEn (ſaith an ancient Greeke ſentence) are tormented by the opinions they have of things, and not by things themſelves. It were a great conqueſt for the eaſe of our miſerable humane condition, if any man could eſtabliſh every where this true propoſition. For if evils have no entrance into-vs, but by our judgement, it ſeemeth that it lieth in our power, either to contemne or turne them to our good. If things yeeld themſelves vnto our mercie, why ſhould we not have the fruition of them, or applie them to our advantage? If that which we call evill & torment, be neither torment, nor evill, but that our fancie only gives it that quatie, it is in vs to change-it: and having the choice of it, if none compell-vs, we are verie fooles, to bandie for that partie, which is irkeſome vnto vs: and to give infirmities, indigence and contempt, a ſharpe and ill taſte, if we may give them a good: And if fortune ſimplie affoord-vs the matter, it lieth in vs to give-it the forme. Now that that which we terme evill, is not ſo of it ſelfe, or at leaſt, ſuch as it is, that it depends of vs to give-it another taſte, and another countenance (for all comes to one) let vs ſee whether it can be maintained. If the originall-being of thoſe things we feare, had the credite of it's owne authoritie to lodge it ſelfe in vs, alike and ſemblable would it lodge in all: For men be all of one kind, and except the moſt or leaſt, they are furniſhed with like meanes to judge, and inſtruments to conceive. But the diverſitie of opinions, which we have of thoſe things, doth evidently ſhew, that but by compoſition they never enter into-vs. Some one peradventure doth lodge them in himſelfe, as they are in eſſence, but a thouſand others give them a new being, and a contrarie. We accompt of death, of povertie, and of ſorrow, as of our chiefeſt parts. Now death, which ſome of all horrible things call the moſt horrible, who knowes not, how others call it, the onely haven of this lives-torments? the ſoveraigne good of nature? the onely ſta
                              •
                           e of our libertie? and the readie and common receit of our evils? And as ſome doe, fearefully-trembling, and ſenſleſly-affrighted, expect her comming, others endure it more eaſilie then life: And one complaineth of her facilitie;
                        
                           Mors vt inam pavidos vitae ſubducere nolles,
                                 
                                    ••
                                 can. lib. 4. 580.
                           
                           Sed virtus to ſola daret!
                        
                        
                           O death! I would thou would'ſt let cowards live,
                           That reſolv'd valour might thee only give!
                        
                        But let vs leave theſe glorious minds: Theodorus anſwered Lyſimachus, who threatned to kill him: Thou ſhalt doe a great exploit to come to the ſtrength of a Cantharides. The greateſt number of Philoſophers are found to have either by deſigne prevented, or haſtned and furthered their deaths. How many popular perſons are ſeen brought vnto death, and not to a ſimple death, but entermixt with ſhame, & ſometimes with grievous torments, to embrace it with ſuch an vndaunted aſſurance; ſome through ſtubborne wilfulneſſe, other-ſome through a naturall ſimplicitie, in whom is nothing ſeene changed from their ordinarie condition; ſetling

their domeſticall affaires, recommending themſelves vnto their friends, preaching, ſinging, and entertaining the people: yea, and ſometimes vttering words of 
                              •
                           eſting and laughter, and drinking to their acquaintance, as well as Socrates? One who was ledde to the gallowes, deſired it might not be thorow ſuch a ſtreet, for feare a Merchant ſhould ſet a Ser
                              •
                           ant on his backe, for an old debt. Another wiſhed the hang-man not to touch his throat, leſt hee ſhould make him ſwowne with laughing, becauſe hee was ſo tickliſh. Another anſwered his confeſſour, who promiſed him he ſhould ſuppe that night with our Saviour in heaven, Goe thither your ſelfe to ſupper, for I vſe to faſt a nights. Another vpon the Gibbet calling for drinke, and the hang-man drinking firſt, ſaid, hee would not drinke after him, for feare hee ſhould take the poxe of him. Everie man hath heard the tale of the Piccard, who being vpon the ladder ready to be throwen downe, there was a wench preſented vnto him, with this offer (as in ſome caſes our law doth ſometimes tolerate) that if hee would marry her, his life ſhould be ſaued, who after he had a while beheld her, & perceving that ſhe halted, ſaid haſtily, Away, away, good bang-man, make an end of thy buſines, ſhe limps. The like is reported of a man in Denmarke, who being adiudged to haue his head cut off, and being vpon the ſcaffold, had the like condition offered him, but refuſed it, becauſe the wench offered him was jaw-falne, long che
                              •
                           kt, and ſharpe-noſed. A yoong ladde at Tholous, being accuſed of here
                              •
                           ie, in all points touching his beleefe, referred himſelfe wholly to his Maſters faith, (a yong ſcholar that was in priſon with him) and rather choſe to die, than hee would be perſwaded his Maſter could erre. We reade of thoſe of the Towne of Arras, at what time king Lewis the eleventh tooke it, that amongſt the common people many were found, who rather than they would ſay, God ſave the King, ſuffered themſelves to be hanged. And of thoſe baſe-minded jeſters or buffons, ſome have bin ſeene, that even at the point of death, would never leave their jeſting and ſcoffing. He whom the headſ-man threw off from the Gallowes, cried out, Rowe the Gally, which was his ordinary by-word. Another, who being at his laſt gaſpe, his friends had laid him vpon a pallet alongeſt the fire-ſide, there to breathe his laſt, the Phyſitian demanding where his griefe pained him? Anſwered, betweene the bench and the fire: And the Prieſt to give him the laſt vnction, ſeeking for his feet, which by reaſon of his ſickeneſſe were ſhruncken vp, he told him, My good friend you ſhall finde them at my legges ends, if you looke wel. To another that exhorted him to recommend himſelf to God, he asked, who is going to him? And the follow anſwering, your ſelfe ſhortly: If it be his good pleaſure, I would to God it might be to morrow night, replied he: Recommend but your ſelfe to him, ſaid the other, and you ſhall quickly be there: It is beſt then, anſwered he, that my ſelfe carry mine owne commendations to him. In the Kingdome of Narſinga, even at this day their Prieſts wives are buried alive with the bodies of their dead husbands. All other wives are burnt at their husbands funerals, not only conſtantly, but cheerfully. When their king dieth, his wives, his concubines, his minions, together with all his officers and ſervants, which make a whole people, preſent themſelves ſo merrily vnto the fire, wherein his bodie is burned, that they manifeſtly ſeem
                              •
                            to eſteeme-it as a great honour, to accompanie their deceaſed maſter to his aſhes. During our laſt warres of Millaine, and ſo many takings, loſſes, miſeries, and calamities of that Citie, the people impatient of ſo manie changes of fortune, tooke ſuch a reſolution vnto death, that I have heard my father ſay; he kept accompt of five and twentie chiefe houſholders, that in one weeke made them-ſelves away: An accident which hath ſome affinitie with that of the Xanthians, who being beſieged by Brutus, did pell-mell-headlong, men, women, and children precipitate them-ſelues into ſo furious a deſire of death, that nothing can be performed to avoid death, which theſe did not accompliſh to avoid life: So that Brutus had much adoe, to ſave a verie ſmall number of-them. Euery opinion is of ſufficient power to take hold of a man in reſpect of life. The firſt Article of that couragious oath, which the Countrie of Greece did ſweare, and keep, in the Median warre, was, that every particular man ſhould rather change his life vnto death, than the Perſian lawes for theirs. What a world of people are daily ſeene in the Turkiſh warres, and the Graecians, more willing to embrace a ſharpe, a bitter, and violent death, then to be vncircumcized and baptized? An example whereof no religion is incapable. The Kings of Castile having baniſhed the Iewes out of their Countrie, king Iohn of Portugall for eight crownes a man, ſold them a retreit in his dominion, for a certaine time, vpon condition (the time expired) they ſhould avoid, and he find them ſhips to tranſport them into Affrike. The day of their departure

come, which paſt, it was expreſſed, that ſuch as had not obeyed, ſhould for-ever remaine bond-ſlaves; ſhippes were provided them, but very ſcarſe and ſparingly: And thoſe which were imbarked, were ſo rudely, churliſhly, and villainouſly vſed, by the paſſengers and marriners; who beſides infinit other indignites, loitred ſo long on the ſeas, now forward, now backward, that in the end, they had conſumed all their victuals, and were forced, if they would keepe themſelves alive, to purchaſe ſome of them, at ſo exceſſive a rate, and ſo long, that they were never ſet a ſhore, til they had brought them ſo bare, that they had nothing l
                              ••
                           t them but their ſhirts. The newes of this barbarous inhumanity being reported to thoſe that were yet on land, moſt of them reſolved to yeeld and continue bound-ſlaves: whereof ſome made a ſemblance to change their religion. Emanuel that immediately ſucceeded Iohn, being come to the Crowne, firſt ſet them at libertie, then changing his minde, commanded them to depart out of his dominions, and for their paſſages aſſigned them three ports. He hoped, as Biſhop Oſorius reporteth, (a Latine Hiſtorian of our ages, not to be deſpiſed) that the favor of the libertie, to which he had reſtored them, having failed to convert them vnto Chriſtianity, the difficultie to commit themſelves vnto marriners and pyrates robberies, to leave a Country where they were ſetled with great riches, for to go ſeeke vnknowen and ſtrange regions, would bring them into Portugall againe. But ſeeing all his hopes fruſtrate, & that they purpoſed to paſſe away, hee cut off two of the three ports he had promiſed them, that ſo the tedious diſtance and incommoditie of the paſſage might retaine ſome, or rather that he might have the meane to aſſemble them all together in one place, for a fitter opportunitie of the execution he intended, which was this. Hee appointed that all their children vnder fourteene yeeres of age, ſhould be taken from out the handes of their parents, and remooved from their ſight and converſation, to ſome place where they might be brought-vp, and inſtructed in our religion. He ſaith that this effect cauſed an horrible ſpectacle: The naturall affection betweene the fathers and the children; moreover the zeale vnto their ancient faith, ſtriving againſt this violent ordinance. Diverſe fathers and mothers were ordinarily ſeene to kill themſelues, and with a more cruell example through compaſſion and love, to throw their yong children into pittes and welles, thereby to ſhunne the Law. The terme, which he had prefixed them being expired, for want of other meanes, they yeelded vnto thraldome. Some became Chriſtians, from whoſe faith and race, even at this day (for it is a hundred yeares ſince) few Portugalles aſſure themſelves; although cuſtome, and length of time be much more forcible counſellors vnto ſuch mutations, that any other compulſion. In the Towne of Castelnaw Darry, more then fifty Albigeois, all heretikes, at one time, with a determined courage, ſuffred themſelves to be burned alive, all in one ſame fire, before they would recant & diſavow their opinions. Quoties non modò ductores nostri, ſed vniverſi etiam exercitus, ad non dubiam mortem concurrerunt? How often have, not only our Leader (ſaith Tully)C
                                 ••
                              , Tuſ
                                 •
                              . qu l. 
                                 •
                              
                            
                           but alſo our whole armies run roundly together to an vndoubted death? I have ſeene one of my ſamiliar friends runne furiouſly on death, with ſuch, and ſo deepely in his heart rooted affection, by diverſe viſages of diſcourſe, which I could never ſuppreſſe in him, and to the firſt that offered it ſelfe masked with a luſtre of honour, without apprehending any ſharpe or violent end, therein to precipitate himſefe. We have many examples in our daies: yea in very children of ſuch as for feare of ſome ſlight incómodity have yeelded vnto death. And to this purpoſe ſaith an ancient Writer, what ſhall we not feare, if we feare that, which cowardiſe it ſelfe hath choſen for her retrait? Heere to huddle vp a long bead-rowle of thoſe of all ſexes, conditions, ſects, in moſt happie ages, which either have expected death moſt conſtantly, or ſought for it voluntarily, and not onely ſought to avoid the evils of this life, but ſome, onely to ſhun the ſacietie of living any longer: and ſome; for the hope of a better condition elſewhere, I ſhould never have done. The number is ſo infinite, that verily it would be an eaſier matter for me to reckon vp thoſe that have feared the ſame. Onely this more. Pirro the philoſopher, finding himſelfe vpon a very tempeſtuous day in a boat, ſhewed them whom he perceived to be moſt affrighted through feare, and encouraged them by the example of an hog, that was amongſt them, and ſeemed to take no care at all for the ſtorme: Shall wee then dare to ſay, that the advantage of reaſon, whereat we ſeeme ſo much to rejoyce, and for whoſe reſpect we account our ſelves Lords and Emperours of all other creatures, hath beene infuſed into vs for our torment? What availeth the knowledge of things, if through them we become more demiſſe? If thereby wee looſe the reſt and tranquilitie wherein

we ſhould be without them? and if it makes vs of worſe condition then was Pirrhos hog? Shall we employ the intelligence, heaven hath beſtowed vpon vs for our greateſt good, to our ruine? repugning natures deſſeigne and the vniverſall order and viciſſitude of things, which implieth that every man ſhould vſe his inſtruments and meanes for his owne commoditie? Wel (will ſome tel me) let your rule fit you againſt death; but what will you ſay of indigence and neceſſitie? what will you alſo ſay of minde-grieving ſorrow, which Ariſtippus, Hieronimus, and moſt of the wiſeſt have judged the laſt evill? and thoſe which denied the ſame in words, confeſſed the ſame in effect? Poſſidonius being extreamely tormented with a ſharpe and painefull ſickeneſſe, Pompey came to ſee him, and excuſed himſelfe he had choſen ſo vnfit an houre to heare him diſcourſe of Philoſophie: God forbid (anſwered Poſſidonius) that over paine ſhould ſo farre vſurpe vpon me, as to hinder me from diſcourſing of ſo woorthy a ſubiect. And thereupon began to ſpeake of the contempt of paine. But there whilſt ſhe plaied her part, and vnceſſantly pinched and vrged him; gainſt whom hee exclaimed: Paine, doe what thou liſt, I ſhall never be drawne to ſay, that thou art an evill. That ſaying, which they would make of ſuch conſequence, what doth it inferre againſt the contempt of paine it contends but for the word. And if the pangs thereof moove him not there whilſt, why breakes he off his diſcourſe for it? Why thinks he to worke a great exploit, not to call it an evill? All doth not conſiſt in imagination. Heere we judge of the reſt. It is aſſured learning that here doth play her part, our owne ſenſes are judges of it?
                        Qui niſi ſunt veri; ratio quoque falſa ſit omnis.Luor
                                 •
                              . 4. 487.
                        
                        
                           Which ſences if they be not true,
                           All reaſon's falſe, it muſt enſue.
                        
                        Shall we make our skin beleeue, the ſtripes of a whip doe tickle it? and perſwade our taſte, that Aloes be wine of Graves? Pirrhos hog is here in our predicament. He is nothing danted at death, but if you beate him, he will grunt, crie and torment himſelfe. Shall wee force the generall law of nature, which in all living creatures vnder heaven is ſeene to tremble at paine? The very trees ſeeme to groane at offences. Death is but felt by diſcourſe, becauſe it is the motion of an inſtant.
                        Aut fuit, aut veniet, nihil eſt praeſentis in illa.
                        
                           Death hath come, or it will not miſſe;
                           But in it nothing preſent is.
                        
                        Mórſque minus poenae, quàm mor a mortis habet.Orid. epiſ. Ariad. 82.
                        
                        
                           Deaths pain's leſſe, roundly acted,
                           Then when death is protracted.
                        
                        A thouſand beaſts, a thouſand men, are ſooner dead then threatned. Beſides, what wee principally call feare in death, it is paine her cuſtomary fore-runner. Nevertheleſſe if we muſt give credit to an ancient father, Malam mortem non facit, niſi quod ſequitur mortem. Nothing, 
                           
                              but what follows death, makes death to be evill. And I might more truly ſay, that neither that which goeth before, no
                              •
                            that which commeth after, is no appurtenance of death, we falſely excuſe our ſelves. And I find by experience, that it is rather the impatience of the imagination of death, that makes vs impatient of the paine, & that we feele it two-fold grievous, foraſmuch as it threats vs to die. But reaſon accuſing our weakeneſſe, to feare ſo ſudden a thing, ſo vnavoidable, ſo inſenſible; we take this other more excuſable pretence. All evils that have no other danger, but of the evill, we count them dangerleſſe. The tooth-
                              •
                           ch, the paine of the gowt, how grievous ſoever, becauſe they kill not, who reckoneth them in the number of maladies? Well, ſuppoſe that in death wee eſpecially regard the paine: As alſo, povertie hath nothing to be feared for, but what ſhe caſteth vpon vs through famine, thirſt, colde, heate, and other miſeries, it makes vs feele and endure. So have we nothing to do but with paine. I will willingly grant them, that it is the woorſt accident of our being. For, I am the man that hate and ſhunne it as much as poſſible may be; becauſe hitherto (thanks be vnto God) I have no commerce or dealing with her: But it is in our power, if not to diſſanull, at leaſt to diminiſh the ſame, through patience: And though the body ſhould be mooved thereat, yet to keepe the minde and reaſon in good temper. And if it were not ſo, who then hath brought vertue, valour, force, magnanimitie, and reſolution into credit, Where ſhall they play their part, if there be no more paine defied? Avida eſt periculi virtus,
                           Sen. quar. von. cap. 4. 
                           Vertue is deſirous of danger. If a man muſt not lie on the hard ground, armed at all aſſaies, to

endure the heat of the ſcorching Sunne, to feed hungerly vpon a horſe, or an aſſe, to ſee himſelfe mangled and cut in peeces, to have a bullet pluckt out of his bones, to ſuffer inciſions, his fleſh to be ſtitcht-vp, cauterized, and ſearched, all incident to a martiall man; how ſhall we purchaſe the advantage and preheminence, which we ſo greedily ſeek-after, over the vulgar ſort? It is far from avoiding the evill and paines of it, as wiſe men ſay, that of actions equally good, one ſhould moſt be wiſhed to be done, wherein is moſt paine and griefe. Non enim hilaritate nec laſcivia riſu aut ioco comite levitatis, ſed ſaepe etiam triſtes firmitate &
                           Cic. de fin. lib. 2. 
                           conſtantia ſunt beati. For men are not happy by mirthfulneſſe, or wantonneſſe, or laughing, or ieſting, which is the companion of lightneſſe; but often, even thoſe that are ſorrowfull, through their ſtrong heart and conſtancie. And therefore was it impoſſible to perſwade our fathers, that conqueſts atchieved by maine force, in the hazard of warre were not more available and advantageous, then thoſe obtained in all ſecuritie by practiſes and ſtratagems.
                        Laetius est, quoties magno ſibi conſtat honeſtum.Luca. 
                                 ••
                               9. 40.
                        
                        
                           Honeſtie makes chiefeſt cheare,
                           When it doth coſt it ſelfe moſt deare.
                        
                        Moreover, this ought to comfort vs, that naturally, if paine be violent, it is alſo ſhort; ifCic. de fin. lib. 2. Epic. long, it is eaſie: Si gravis, br
                                 •
                              vis; ſi longus, levis. If it be grievous, it is ſhort; if it be long, it is light. Thou ſhalt not feel-it over long; if thou feel-it over much, it will either end it ſelfe, or end thee: All comes to one: If thou beare not it, it will beare thee away▪ 
                           Memineris maximos morte finiri, parvos multa habere intervalla requietis; mediocrium nos eſſe dominos: vt ſi tolerabiles
                           Lib. 1. 
                           ſint, feram
                                 •
                              s: ſin minus, è vita, quum ea non placeat, tanquàm è theatro exeamus. Remember the greateſt are ended with death, the leſſer have many pauſes of reſt; we are maſters of the meane ones: ſo as if they be tolerable, we may beare them; if not, we may make an Exit from our life which doth not pleaſe, as from a ſtage. That which makes vs endure paine with ſuch impatience, is, that we are not accuſtomed to take our chiefe contentment in the ſoule, and that we do not ſufficiently relie on hir; who is the onely, and ſoveraigne miſtris of our condition. The bodie hath (except the leaſt or moſt) but one courſe, and one by aſe. The ſoule is variable in all maner of formes, and rangeth to her ſelfe, and to her eſtate, whatſoever it be, the ſenſes of the bodie, and all other accidents. Therefore muſt ſhe be ſtudied, enquired, and ſought-after: and her powerfull ſprings and wardes ſhould be rowzed vp. There is neither reaſon, nor preſcription, nor force can availe againſt her inclination and cho
                              •
                           ſe. Of ſo infinit byaſes, that ſhe hath in her diſpoſition, let vs allow hir one ſutable and fit to our reſt and preſervation: Then ſhall we not onely be ſheltered from all offence, but if it pleaſe her, alſo gratified and flattered of all grievances and evils. She indifferently makes profit of all; even errours and dreames, doe profitably beſtead her, as a loyall matter, to bring-vs vnto ſafetie and contentment. It may eaſilie be ſeen, that the point of our ſpirit, is that which ſharpneth both paine and pleaſure in vs. Beaſts wanting the ſame, leave their free and naturall ſenſes vnto their bodies: and by conſequence, ſingle well nigh in every kind, as they ſhew by the ſemblable application of their movings. If in our members we did not trouble the juriſdiction, which in that belongs vnto them; it may be thought, we ſhould be the better for-it, and that nature hath given them a juſt and moderate temperature toward pleaſure and toward paine. And it can not chuſe but be good and juſt, being equall and common. But ſince we have freed and alienated our ſelves from her rules, to abandon our ſelves vnto the vagabond libertie of our fantaſies: let vs at leaſt help to bend them to the moſt agreeing ſide. Plato feareth our ſharp engaging vnto paine and voluptuouſneſſe, forſomuch as he over-ſtrictly tieth and bindeth the ſoule vnto the bodie: I am rather oppoſite vnto him, becauſe it is ſundred and looſed from it. Even as an enemie becommeth more furious when we flie from him, ſo doth paine grow more prowd if it ſee-vs tremble vnder it. It will ſtoope and yeeld vpon better compoſitions to him that ſhall make head againſt-it. A man muſt oppoſe and bandie againſt it. In recoyling and giving ground, we call and draw on, the ruine threatning-vs. Even as the bodie is more ſteadie and ſtronge to a charge, if it ſtand ſtiffely to it, ſo is the ſoule. But let vs come to examples properly belonging vnto weak-backt men, as I am, where we ſhall find, that it is with paine, as with ſtones, which take either a higher or deeper colour, according to the foyle that is laide vnder them, and holdeth no other place in vs then we give-it. Tantum doluerunt, quantum doloribus ſe inſeruerunt.
                           Auguſt. 
                           So much they grieved, as they intereſſed themſelves in griefes. We feel a daſh of a chirurgions

razor more then ten blews with a ſword in the heat of fight. The painfull throwes of childbearing, deemed both by Phiſitians, and by the word of God to be ver
                              •
                           e great, and which our women paſſe with ſo many ceremonies, there are whole Nations that make no reckoning of them. I omit to ſpeake of the Lacedemonian women; but come we to the Swizzers of our Infanterie, what change doe you perceive in them? But that trudging and trotting after their husbands, to day you ſee them carrie the child about their necke, which but yeſterday they bare in their wombe. And thoſe counterfet roging Gyptians, whereof ſo many are daily ſeene amongſt vs, doe they not waſh their children ſo ſoone as they are borne? And in the next river that comes to hand? Beſides ſo many harlots, which daily ſteal their children in the deliverie as in the conception. The heauteous and noble Ladie of Sabinus a Roman Patritian, for the intereſt of others, did alone, without any bodies help or aſſiſtance, and without noiſe or groning endure the bearing, and deliverie of two twins. A ſimple lad of Lacedemon, having ſtolne a Foxe (for they more feared the ſhame of their fooliſhneſſe in ſtealing, then we feare the paine or puniſhment of miſ deeds) and hiding the ſame vnder his cloake, endured rather to have his guts gnawne out by hir, then to diſcover himſelfe. An other who offering incenſe at a ſacrifice, ſuffered his fleſh to burne to the bone, by a coale falne into his ſleeve, rather then he would trouble that ſacred myſteri
                              •
                           . And a great number have been ſeen, for the onely eſſay of vertue, following their inſtitution, that at the age of ſeaven yeares, without ſo much as changing their countenance, have indured to be whipped to death. And Cicero hath ſeen whole troups, to beat one a
                              •
                            other ſo long,Cic Tuſe quaeſt. lib. 5. with their 
                              ••
                           ſts, with their feet, and with their teeth, till they have fainted and falne downe halfe dead, before ever they would confeſſe to be overcome. Nunquam 
                                 〈◊〉
                               m
                                 •
                              s vi
                                 •
                              ceret, eſt enim ea ſemper invicta, ſed nos vmbris, deli
                                 •
                              ijs, otio, languore, deſid
                                 ••
                              , animum infecimus: opinionibus malóque more delinitum mollivimus. Cuſtome ſhould never overcome nature, for ſhe is ſtill invincible: but we have infected our mind with ſhadowes, daintineſſe, idleneſſe, faint▪ hartedneſſe, ſloughtfulneſſe, and have effeminated it, inveagled with opinions, and evill cuſtome. Every man knowes the ſtorie of S
                                 ••
                              vola, who being entred the enemies campe, with a full reſolution to kill their Chieftaine, and having miſſed of his purpoſe, to checke his effect with a ſtranger invention, and to cleare his countrie, confeſſed vnto Proſenna, (who was the King he intended to kill) not onely his deſſigne, but added more-over, that in his campe there were a great many Romanes, who had vndertaken and ſworne the verie ſame enterpriſe, and were confederates with him. And to make ſhew of his dread leſſe magnanimitie, having cauſed a pan of burning coales to be brought, he ſaw and ſuffred his right arme (in penance that it had not effected his project) to be par
                              •
                           hed and wel-nigh roſted off: vntill ſuch time as his enemie himſelfe, feeling a kind of remorce full horror, commaunded the fire to be caried away. What ſhall we ſay of him, that would not vouchſafe to leave, or ſo much as to interrupt the reading of his booke, whil'ſt he had an inciſion made into him? And of him who reſolved to skoffe and laugh, even in ſpight and contempt of the tortures, which were inflicted vpon him, ſo that the raging crueltie of the hangmen, that held him, and all the inventions of torments that could be deviſed, being redoubled vpon him, one in the necke of another, gave him over? But he was a Philoſopher. What? of one of Caeſars gladiators, who with a cheerefull and ſmiling countenance endured his wounds to be ſlit and ſounded? Quis mediocris gladiator ingemuit? Quis vultum mutavit vnquam? Quis non modò ſtet
                                 ••
                              , verùm
                           Cic. Tuſe quaeſt. lib. 2. 
                           etiam decubuit turpiter? Quis 
                                 •
                              ùm decubuiſſet, ferrum recipere 
                                 ••
                              ſſus, collum contraxit? What meane Fencer hath once gro
                                 •
                              ed? Which of them hath once changed his countenance? Which of them not onely hath ſ
                                 •
                              ood vp, but even falne with ſhame? Which of them when he was downe, and was willed to take his death, did once ſhrinke-in his necke? But let vs joyne ſome women vnto them. Who hath not heard of hir at Paris, which onely to get a freſher hew of a new skin, endured to have hir face flead all over? There are ſome, who being 
                              •
                           ound, and in perfit health, have had ſome teeth puld-out, thereby to frame a daintier and more pleaſing voyce, or to ſet them in better order. How many examples of contempt of paine or ſmart have we of that kind and ſex? What can they not doe? What will they not doe? What feare they to doe? So they may but hope for ſome amendment of their beautie?
                        
                           
                              Ʋellere queis cura eſt albos à ſtirpe capillos,Tibul. lib. 
                                    •
                                 . 
                                    •
                                 l. 
                                    •
                                 . 43.
                           
                           Et faci
                                 •
                              m dempta pelle r
                                 •
                              ferre novam.
                        
                        
                           
                           Who take great care to roote out their gray haire,
                           And skinne fleade off a new face to repaire.
                        
                        I haue ſeene ſome ſwallow gravell, aſhes, coles, duſt, tallow, candles, and for the no
                              •
                           ce, labour and toyle themſelves to ſpoile their ſtomacke, onely to get a pale bleake colour. To become ſlender in waſt, and to have a ſtraight ſpagnolized body, what pinching, what guirding, what cingling will they not indure; Yea ſometimes with yron-plates, with whalebones, and other ſuch traſh, that their very skinne, and quicke fleſh is eaten-in and conſumed to the bones; Whereby they ſometimes worke their owne death. It is common to divers nations of our times, to hurte and gaſh themſelves in good earneſt, to give credit to their words. And our king reporteth ſundrie examples, of what himſelfe ſawe in Poloni
                                 •
                              , and towards himſelfe, But beſides what I know to have by ſome been imitated in France; when I came from the famous Parliament of Blois; I had a little before ſeene a wench in Picardi
                                 •
                              
                            to witnes the vehemencie of hir promiſes, and alſo hir conſtancie, with the bodkin ſhe wore in hir haire, to give hir-ſelfe foure or five thruſts in hir arme, which made hir skinne to crack and guſh out blood. The Turkes are wont to wound and ſcarre themſelves for their Ladies ſakes, and that the marke may the better appeare, and continue the longer, they wil preſently lay fire vpon the cuttes; and to ſtanch the blood, and better to forme the cicatrice, they will keepe-it on, an incredible while. Honeſt men that have ſeene it, have written the ſame, and ſworne it vnto me. And for ten Aſpers you ſhall dayly finde ſome amongſt them, that will give themſelves a deepe gaſh with a Scimitarie, either in their armes or thighes. I am very glad witneſſes are ſo readie at hand; where we have moſt need of them: For, Chriſtendome affordeth many. And after the example of our holy guide, there have beene divers, who for devotion would needes beare the croſſe. We learne by a worthy teſtimonie of relig
                              •
                           on, that Saint Lewes the King wore a haire-ſhirt, vntill ſuch time as he was ſo aged, that his confeſſor gave him a diſpenſation for-it; and that every friday he cauſed his prieſts to beate his ſhoulders with five little yron chaines, which to that purpoſe were ever caried with his nightgeare. William our laſt duke of Guienne, father to that Eleonore, who transferred that Dutchie vnto the houſes of France and England, the laſt ten or twelve yeares of his life, for penanceſake wore continually a cor
                              •
                           elet, vnder a religious habit. Foulkes Earle of A
                              ••
                           ou went to Ieruſalem, there with a rope about his necke, to be whiped by two of his ſervants, before our Saviours ſepulchre. Do we not vpon every good-friday, in ſundrie places, ſee a great number of men and women, ſcourge and beate themſelves ſo long till they bruſe and teare their fleſh, even to the bones; I have often ſeene it my ſelfe, and that without enchantment, And ſome ſay (for they are masked) there were ſome amongſt them, who for monie would vndertake thereby to warrant other mens religion, by a contempt of ſmart full paine, ſo much the greater, by how much the ſtings of devotion are of more force, th
                              •
                            thoſe of covetouſnes. Q. Maximus buried his ſon who had beene Conſul: Marcus Ca
                                 •
                              o his being elected Pretor and L. Paulus both his, within few daies, with ſo cheerefull and ſetled a countenance, and with out any ſhew of ſorrowe. I have ſometimes by way of 
                              •
                           eſting tolde one, that he had confronted divine iuſtice: For, the violent death of three tall children of his, comming vnto his cares all vpon one day, and ſent-him, as it may be imagined, as a great ſcourge: he was ſo farre from mourning, that he rather tooke it as a favour and ſingular gratification at Gods hande. I doe not follow theſe monſtrous humors. Yet have I loſt two or three my ſelfe, whilſt they were yong and at nurce, if not without apprehenſion of ſorrow; yet without continuance of griefe. And there is no accident woundeth men ac
                                    •
                                 p
                                    •
                                 r, or goeth ſo neere the heart, as the loſſe of children. I ſee divers other common occaſions of affliction, which were I aſſailed by them, I ſhould ſcarcely feele. And I have contemned and neglected ſome, when it hath pleaſed God to viſit me with them, on which the world ſetteth ſo vglie and balefull a countenance, that I hardly dare boaſt of them without bluſhing. Ex quo intelligitur, non in natura,
                           Cic. ib. l 3. 
                           ſed in opinione eſſe aegretudinem. 
                           
                              Whereby it is vnderſtood, that griefe conſisteth not in nature, but opinion. Opinion is a power full, boold, and vnmeaſurable party. Who doth ever ſo greedily ſearch after reſt full eaſe and quietnes, as Alexander and Caeſar have done after difficulties & vnquietneſ
                                 •
                              e? Terez, the father of Sitalcez, was woont to ſay, that when he had no 
                                    •
                                 arres, hee
                            
                           thought there was no difference betweene him and his horſe-keeper. Cato the Conſull, to aſſure himſelfe of certaine townes in Spaine, having onely interdicted ſome of their inhabitants to wea
                              •
                           e armes, many of them killed themſelves: Ferox gens nullam vitam rat
                                 •
                               ſine arm
                                 •
                              s 
                                 •
                              ſſe. A
                           
                           fierce kinde of people, that thought there was no life without armes. How many knowe wee who have abandoned and forſaken the pleaſure of an eaſe-full and quiet life in their houſes, and to live with their friends & acquaintance; to follow the toyling-horror of vnfrequented deſerts, and that yeelded and caſt themſelves vnto the abiectneſſe, contempt and vilifying of the world, wherewith they have ſo pleaſed themſelves, as nothing more; Cardinall Boreme
                                 •
                              s, who died lately at Milane, in the midſt of the pleaſures and debawches to which his Nobility, and the great riches he poſſeſſed, enticed him, and the ayre of Italy afforded him, and his youth allured him, did ever keep himſelf in ſo an auſtere forme of life, that the ſame gown which ſerved him in Summer he wore in winter. He never lay but vpon ſtrawe; the houres which he might conveniently ſpare from his charge; he beſtowed in continuall ſtudy, ever kneeling, and having a ſmal quantitie of bread and water by his bookes ſide, which was all the proviſion for his repaſt, and time he employed in ſtudy. I know ſome who wittingly have drawne both profit and preferment from cuckoldrie, the only name wherof is ſo yrkeſome & bail-ful to ſo many men. If ſight be not the moſt neceſſary of our cenſes, at laſt is it the moſt pleaſing: the moſt plauſible and profitable of our members, ſeeme thoſe thatſerve to beget vs: not withſtanding divers have mortaly hated them, only becauſe they were over mucham
                              •
                           able, and for their worthsſake have reiected them. So thought he of his e
                              •
                           es, that voluntarily put them out. The moſt common and 
                              •
                           oundeſt part of men, holdeth multitude of children to be a ſigne of great happineſſe and comfort; So doe I, and many others, the want of them. And when Thales was demaunded Wherefore he did not marie, he anſwered, becauſe he would leave no iſſue or line of himſelfe behinde him. That our opinon endeareth and encreaſeth the price of things, it is ſeene in a great number of them, which we doe not regard to eſteeme them; but for our vſe. And we neither conſider their qualities nor vtilities, but only our coſt to recover and attaine them: as if it were a part of their ſubſtance; and we call that worth in them, not what they bring-vs, but what we bring to them. According as it weigheth, and is of conſequence, ſo it ſerveth. Whervpon I perceive, we are thriftie husbands of what we lay out. Our opinion never ſuffers-it to runne a falſe gallop. The price giveth a Diamond his title, difficultie to vertue, paine vnto devotion, and ſharpeneſſe vnto phiſicke. Such a one to come vnto povertie, caſt thoſe fewe crownes he had into the ſame ſea, wherein ſo many others, with ſuch carke, danger, and care, on all parts ſeeke to fiſh for riches. Epicurus ſaith, that to be rich is no 
                                 •
                              aſe, but a charge of affaires. Verily, it is not want, but rather plenty that cauſeth avarice. I will ſpeake of mine owne experience, concerning this ſubiect. I have lived in three kinds of condition, ſince I came out of my infancie. The firſt time, which continued well-nigh twenty yeeres, I have paſſt-it over, as one who had no other means but caſuall, and depending from the direction and helpe of others; without any certaine maintenance, or regular preſcription. My expences were ſo much the more careleſſely layed-out, and laviſhly employed, by how much more they wholy depended on fortunes raſhneſſe and exhibition. I never lived ſo well at caſe: my fortune was never to finde my friends purſe ſ
                              •
                           utte: beſides which, I was to frame my ſelfe to all neceſſities: the care I tooke to pay every man at his prefixed day, which a thouſand times they have prolonged, ſeeing the care I tooke to ſatisfie them. So that I had gotten vnto my ſelfe the credite of a thriftie kind of good husbandry, though it were ſomthing ſhifting and deceiptful. I do naturally feele a kinde of pleaſing contentment in paying of my debts, as if I ridde my ſelfe of a burthenous weight, and free my ſelfe from the yoake of bondage and ingratitude. Beſides, me-thinks I feele a kind of delight, that tickleth me to the quick, in performing a lawfully-iuſt action, & contenting of others. I except payments that require delayes, covenants, & after reckonings: for, if I 
                              •••
                           d any body that will vndertake them, I bluſningly and iniuriouſly deferre them as long as I can, for feare of that altercation or wrangling, to which my humor and maner of ſpeach is altogether incompatible. There is nothing I hate more then driving of bargaines: It is a meere commerce of dodging and impudencie. After an houres debating and paltring, both parties will goe from their wordes and oathes for the getting or ſaving of a ſhilling: yet did I borrow with great diſadvantage. For, having no heart to borrow before others, or by word of mouth, I would adventure it vpon a piece of paper, which with ſome hath no great power to move or force to perſwade, and which greatly helps to refuſe, I was wont to commit the ſucceſle of my wants more freely and more careleſſely vnto fortune, then I have done ſince vnto my wit and providence. Moſt good-husbands thinke-it ſtrange and horrible to live on ſuch vncertainties

but they remember not, that moſt men in the world live ſo. How many good and well-borne men have heeretofore, and are dayly ſeene to neglect and leave at ſix and ſeaven, their patrimonies and certaine goods, to follow and ſeeke after court holy water, and wavering-favours of Princes and of fortune; Caeſar engaged and endebted himſelfe aboue a million of gold, more then he was worth to become Caeſar. And how many marchants and poore beginners, ſet-vp and beginne their traffike by the ſale of their farmes or cottages which they venter to the Indias▪
                           
                        
                        Tot per impotentia freta;Catul. epig. 4. 18
                        
                        In ſo greate ſcarſitie of devotion, we have thouſands of Colledges, which paſſe the time very conveniently, dayly gaping and expecting from the liberalitie of the heavens, what they muſt dine withall to morrow. Secondly; they conſider not, that this certaintie on which they ground themſelves; is not much leſſe vncertain and hazardous, then hazad it-ſelfe. I ſee miſerie as neere beyond two thouſand crownesrent, as if it were hard at hand▪ for, beſides that fortune hath many-many meanes to open a hundred gaps for poverty to enter-at, even through the thickeſt of our riches, and that often there is no meane betwene the high eſt and loweſt fortune.
                        Fortuna 
                              •
                           itrea eſt: tum▪ quum ſplendet, frangitur.Pr
                                 ••
                               Sene
                                 •
                              f▪
                           
                        
                        
                           Fortune is glaſſe-like, brittle as t'is bright:
                           Light-gon, Light-broken, when it lends beſt light.
                        
                        And to turne all our defences, and raiſings of high walles topſie-turvie: I find that want and neceſſitie is by diverſe or different cauſes, as ordinarily ſeene to accompany and follow thoſe that are rich in goods, as thoſe that have none at all: & that peradventure it is ſomwhat leſſe incommodious, when it is alone, then when it meeteth with riches: They rather come from order, then from receite: Faber eſt ſuae quiſque fortunae. Ever, man is the forger of his
                           
                              Eraſ. chil 2. cent. 4. 
                                 
                                    •
                                 id. 63. 
                           owne fortune. And me thinkes that a rich man, who is needie, full of buſineſſe, carke and toyle, and troubled in minde, is more miſerable, then he that is ſimply poore. In div
                                 ••
                              ijs inopes, 
                           Sen. epiſt. 74. P. 
                           quod▪ genus egeſtatis graviſſium eſt. In their aboundance indigent, which is the moſt grievous kinde of indigence. The richeſt and greateſt princes are ordinarily vrged by povertie and neede vnto extreame neceſſities. For, can any be more extreame, then thereby to become Tirants, and vniuſt vſurpers of their ſubiects goods, My ſecond manner of life hath beene to have mony; which when I had once fingred, according to my condition I ſought to hoord vp ſome againſt a raignie day; eſteeming that it was no having, vnleſſe a man had-ever ſome what beſides his ordinary expences in poſſeſſion: & that a man ſhould not truſt that good, which he muſt live in hope to receive; and that, be his hope never ſo likely, hee may many wayes be prevented. For, I would ſay vnto my ſelfe; what if I ſhould be ſurpriſed by this chance, o
                              •
                            that accident? What ſhould I do then? And in purſuite of theſe vaine and vicious imaginations, I endevoured by hooke or crooke, and by wi
                              •
                           e or wit to provide by this ſuperfluous ſparing for all inconveniences that might happen: And I could anſwere him, that would alleadge the number of inconveniences to be ouer-infinite? which if they followed not all men, they accompanied ſome, and happily the greateſt number. An apprehenſion which I did not paſſe with out ſome painefull care. I kept the matter ſecret, and I (that dare ſay ſo much of myſelfe) would never ſpeake of my money but falſely; as others doe, who being rich, would ſeeme to be poore, or beeing poore would appeare rich: and diſpence with their conſcience, never to witneſſe ſincerelie what they are worth. Oh ridiculous and ſhamefull prudence. Did I travell any where? me thought I was never ſufficiently provided; and the more I had laden my ſelfe with coine, the more I had alſo burthened myſelfe with feare: ſometimes of my wayes-ſafetie, othertimes of their truſt that had the charge of my ſumpters and baggage, whereof as ſome others that I know, me thought I was never throughly aſſured, except it were ſtill in my ſight. Left I my keyes or my purſe behind me? how many ſuſpitions and thornie imaginations, and which is worſe, incommunicable did vnceſſantly haunt-me? My minde was ever on my halfepenney; my thoughts ever that way. The ſumme being rightly caſt, there is ever more paine in keeping, then in getting of mony. If I did not altogether ſo much as I ſay, I at the leaſt endevoured to do-it. Of commodity I had little or nothing. To have more meanes of expences, is ever to have encreaſe of ſorrow. For (as ſaid Bion) The hairy man doth grieve as much a
                                 •
                               the bald, if he have his haire
                           
                           pulld out. And after you are once accuſtomed, and have fixed your thoughts vpon a heape of money, it is no longer at your ſervice? you dare not diminiſh-it? it is a building, which if you touch or take any part from-it, you will thinke it will all fall. Neceſſitie muſt firſt pinch you by the throate, and touch you neere, before you will lay handes on it. And I ſhould ſooner pawne my clothes, or ſell my horſe, with leſſe care and compulſion, then make a breach into that beloved purſe, which I kept in ſtore. But the danger was, that a man can hardly prefix any certaine limits vnto his deſire (they are hard to be found in things a man deemeth good) and continue at one ſtay in ſparing: A man ſhall ever encreaſe this heape, and augment-it from one number to another; yea ſo long, til he baſely and niggardly deprive himſelfe of the enioying of his owne goods, and wholy fix-it on the ſafe-keeping of them, and never vſe them. According to this kind of vſage, thoſe are the richeſt people of the world, that have the charge of keeping the gates and walles of a rich Cittie. Every monied man is covetous, according to mine opinion. Plato marſhalleth this humane or corporall goods; health, beautie, ſtrength, riches: And riches, ſaith he, are not blind, but cleere-ſeeing, if they be illuminated by wiſedome. Dionyſius the yonger, plaide a notable parte; who being advertiſed, that one of his Siracuſans, had hidden a certayn treaſure vnder the ground, commanded him to bring it vnto him, which he did, reſerving ſecretly one part of it vnto himſelfe, with which hee removed his dwelling vnto another Citie, where having loſt the humor of hoarding-vp of treaſure, beganne to live a ſpending and riotous kinde of life: which Dionyſius hearing, commanded the remainder of his treaſure, and which he had taken from him, to be reſtored vnto him; ſaying, That ſit hence he had learned how to make vſe of it, hee did most willingly redeliver the ſame vnto him. I was ſome yeares of the ſame humour: I wot not what good Demon did moſt profitably remoove me from it, like to the Siracuſan, and made me to neglect my ſparing. The pleaſure I apprehended of a farre and chargeable journey, having overthrowne this fooliſh imagination in me; From which I am falne into a third kinde of life (I ſpeake what I thinke of it) aſſuredly much more pleaſing and formall: which is, that I meaſure my garment according to my cloth, and let my expences goe together with my comming in; ſometimes the one, other-whilſt the other exceedes: But they are never farre a ſunder. I live from hand to mouth, from day to day, and have I but to ſupply my preſent and ordinarie needes, I am ſatisfied: As for extraordinarie wants, all the proviſions of the world will not ſuffice them. And it is folly to expect that fortune will ever ſufficiently arme vs againſt her-ſelfe. It is with our owne weapons that we muſt combate her. Caſuall armes will betray vs, when we ſhall have moſt need of them. If I lay vp any thing, it is for the hope of ſome imployment at hand, and not to purchaſe landes, whereof I have no neede, but pleaſure and delight. Non eſſe cupidum, pecunia eſt: non eſſe emacem, vectigal est. It is currant coine, not to be covetous: it is a thriftie income, not to
                           Cis. Parad. 
                                 •
                              ls. 
                           be ſtill buying. I am neither poſſeſſed with feare, that my goods ſhall faile me, nor with deſire they ſhould encreaſe and multiplie. Divitiarum fructus eſt in copia: copiam declarat ſatietas. The fruite of riches is in plentie: ſacietie content with enough approoves that plentie. And I ſingularlyIbid. gratifie my ſelfe this correction came vpon me in an age naturally enclined to covetouſneſſe, and that I am free from that folly ſo common and peculiar to old men, and the moſt ridiculous of all humane follies. Feraulez who had paſſed through both fortunes, & found, that encreaſe of goods, was no accreaſe of appetite, to drinke, to eate, to ſleepe, or to embrace his wife; and who on the other ſide felt heavily on his ſhoulders, the importunitie of ordering and directing his O
                              •
                           conomicall affaires, as it doth on mine, determine with himſelfe to content a poore yoong man, his faithfull friend, greedily gaping after riches, and frankely made him a preſent donation of all his great and exceſſive riches; as alſo of thoſe, he was likely everie day to get by the liberalitie and bountie of his good maſter Cyrus, and by warre: alwayes provided, hee ſhould vndertake to entertaine and finde-him honeſtly, and in good ſort, as his gueſt and friend. In which eſtate they lived afterward moſt happily, and mutually content with the change of their condition.
                        Loe heare a part, I could willingly find in my heart to imitate. And I much commend the fortune of an olde prelate, whom I ſee, to have ſo clearely given-over his purſe, his receites, and his expences, now to one of his choſen ſervants, and now to another, that he hath lived many yeares as ignorant of his houſholde affaires, as any ſtranger. The confidence in others honeſtie, is no light teſtimonie of ones owne integritie: therfore doth God willingly favourit.

And for his regard, I ſee no houſhould order, neither more worthily directed, nor more conſtantly managed then his. Happie is that man, that hath ſo proportionably directed his eſtate, as his riches may diſcharge and ſupply the ſame, without care or encombrance to himſelfe; and that neither their conſultation or meetings may in any ſorte interrupt other affaires or diſturbe other occupations, which he followeth, more convenient, more quier, and better agreeing with his heart. Therefore doth eaſe and indigencie depend from every mans owne opinion; and wealth and riches no more then glorie or health, have either more preheminence or pleaſure, then he who poſſeſſeth them, lendeth them. Every man is either well or ill, according as he findes himſelfe. Not he whom another thinkes content, but he is content indeede, that thinkes he is ſo himſelfe: And onely in that, opinion giveth it ſelfe eſſence and veritie. Fortune doth vs neither good nor ill: She onely offereth-vs the ſeede and matter of it, which our minde more powerfull then ſhe, turneth and applieth as beſt it pleaſeth: as the efficient cauſe and miſtris of condition, whether happie or vnhappie. Externall acceſſions take both ſavor and color from the internall conſtitution: As garments do notwarme-vs by their heate, but by ours, which they are fit to cover, and nouriſh: he that with clothes ſhould cover a cold body, ſhould draw the very ſame ſervice from them by cold. So is ſnow and yce kept in ſummmer. Verily as vnto an idle and lazie body, ſtudie is but a torment; abſtinence from wine to a drunkard, is a vexation; frugalitie is a harts ſorrowe to the luxurious; and exerciſe moleſteth an effeminate body: ſo is it of all things elſe. Things are not of themſelves ſo irkſome, nor ſo hard, but our baſenes, and weakeneſſe maketh them ſuch. To iudge of high land great matters, a high and great minde is required; otherwiſe we atribute that vice vnto them, which indeede is ours. A ſtraight oare being vnder water ſeemeth to be crooked. It is no matter to ſee a thing, but the matter is how a man dooth ſee the ſame. Well, of ſo many diſcourſes, which diverſly perſwade men to contemne death, and patiently to endure paine, why ſhall we not finde ſome on to make for our purpoſe; And of ſo ſeverall and many kinds of imagnations, that have perſwaded the ſame vnto others why doth not every man apply one vnto himſelfe, that is moſt agreeing with his humor; If he cannot digeſt a ſtrong and abſterſive drugge, for to remove his evill, let him at leaſt take a lenitive pill to 
                              •
                           aſe the ſame. Opinio eſt quaedum effoeminata ac lev
                                 •
                              s: nec in dolore magis, quam
                           Cic. Tuſe. quest lib. 2. 
                           eadem in voluptate: quâ, quum liqueſcimus flu
                                 •
                              m
                                 •
                              ſque mollitia, apis aculeum fiue clamore ferre non poſſumus. Totum in eo eſt, vt tibi imperes. There is a certaine effeminate and light opinion, and that no more in ſorrow, then it is in pleaſure, where by when we melt and runne over in daintie tendernes, we cannot abide to be ſtung of a Bee, but muſt rore and crie out. This is the totall ſumme of all, that you be maiſter of your ſelfe. Moreouer, a man doth not eſcape from Philoſophie, by making the ſharpnes of paines, and humane weakeneſſe to prevaile ſo far beyond meaſure: for, ſhe is compelled to caſt hirſelfe over againe vnto theſe in vincible replication. If it be bad to live in neceſſitie, at leaſt there is no neceſſitie, to live inneceſſitie. No man is long time ill, but by his owne fault. He that hath not the heart to endure neither life nor death, and that will nither reſiſt nor runne away, what ſhall a man doe to him;
                     
                     
                        The one and fortieth Chapter.
                        
                           That a man ſhould not communicate his glorie.
                        
                        OF all the follies of the world, the moſt vniverſall, and of moſt men received is the care of reputation, and ſtudie of glorie, to which we are ſo wedded, that we neglect, and caſtoff riches, friends, repoſe, life and health (goods effectuall and ſubſtantiall) to follow that vaine image, and idlie-ſimple voice, which hath neither bodie, nor hold-faſt.
                        
                           Lafama, ch
                                 •
                              inuaghiſce à vn dolce ſuon
                                 •
                              
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 aſſ. G
                                    ••
                                 r. can. 14.
                           
                           Gliſuperbi mortali, & par ſi bella,
                           Evn echo, vn ſogno, anzid vn ſogn
                                 •
                               vn o
                                 •
                              bra,
                           Ch
                                 •
                              dogn
                                 •
                               vent
                                 •
                               ſi dilegua & ſg
                                 •
                              mbra,
                        
                        
                           
                           Fame that enveagl's high aſpiring men
                           With hir harmonious ſound, and ſeemes ſo faire,
                           An Eccho is, a dreame, dreames ſhadow rather
                           Which flies and fleetes as any winde doth gather.
                        
                        And of mens vnreaſonable humors, it ſeemeth, that the beſt philoſophers doe moſt ſlowly, and more vnwillingly cleare themſelves of this, then of another: it is the moſt peeviſh the moſt froward, and the moſt opinative. Quia etiam bene proficientes animos tentare non ceſſat.
                           Cic. pro. Arc. po. 
                           Becauſe it ceaſeth not to tempt even thoſe Mindes that profite beſt. There are not many whereof reaſon doth ſo evidently condemne vanitie, but it is ſo deeply rooted in vs, as I wot not whether any man could ever clearely diſcharge himſelfe of it. When you have alleaged all the reaſons you can, and believed all to diſavowe and reiect hir, ſhe produceth contrary to your diſcourſes, ſo inteſtine inclination, that you have ſmall hold againſt hir. For (as Cicero ſaith,) Even thoſe that oppugne hir, will nevertheleſſe have the bookes they write againſt hir, to beare their names vpon their fronts, endevoring to make themſelves glorious by diſpiſi
                                 •
                              g of glory. Al other things fall within the compaſſe of commerce: we lend our goods, we employ our lives, if our friends ſtand in need of-vs: But ſeldome ſhall we ſee a man communicate his honor, ſhare his reputation, and imparte his glory vnto others. Catulus Luctatius in the warres againſt the Cymbres, having done the vtmoſt of his endevours to ſtay his ſouldiers that fled before their enemies, put-himſelfe amongeſt the runne-awaies, and diſſembled to bee a coward, that ſo they might rather ſeeme to follow their Captaine, then flie from the enemie: This was a neglecting and leaving off his reputation, to conceale the ſhame and reproach of other. When Charles the fift paſſed into Provence, the yeare a thouſand five hundred thirty ſeaven, ſome are of opnion, that Anthony de Leva, ſeeing the emperor his maſter reſolutely obſtinate to vndertake that voyage, & deeming it wonderfully glorious, maintained nevertheleſſe the contrary, and diſcouncelled him from-it, to the end all the honour and glory of this counſell might be attributed vnto his Maiſter; and that it might be ſaid, his good adviſe and fore-ſight to have been ſuch, that contrary to al mens opinions, he had atchieved ſo glorious an enterpriſe: Which was, to honor and magnifie him at his owne charges. The Thracian Ambaſſadors comforting Achileonida the Mother of Braſidas, for the death of hir ſon, and highly extolling and commending him, ſaid, he had not left his equall behind him. She refuſed this private commendation, and particular praiſe, aſſigne-it to the publike ſtate. Do not tell me that (quoth ſhe,) For I knowe the Citty of Sparta hath many greater, and more valiant Citizens then he was. At the battaile of Creey, Edward the blacke Prince of Wales, being yet very yoong, had the leading of the vant-gard: The greateſt and chiefe violence of the fight, was in his quarter: The Lordes and Captains that accompanied him, perceiving the great danger, ſent vnto King Edward the princes father, to come and help them: which when he hard, he enquired what plight his ſonne was-in, and how he did, and hearing that he was living, and on horſe-backe; I ſhould (quoth he) offer him great wrong to goe now, and deprive him of the honor of this combates, victory, which he already hath ſo long ſustained; what danger ſoever there be in-it, it ſhall wholy be his: and would neither goe nor ſend vnto him: knowing, that if he had gone, or ſent, it would have beene ſaid, that without his ayd all had beene loſt, and that the advantage of this exployt would have beene aſcribed vnto him. Semper enim quod poſtremum adiectum eſt, id rem totam videtur traxiſſe. For, ever more that which was laſt added, ſeemes to have drawne on the whole matter. In Rome many thought, and it was commonly ſpoken, that the chiefeſt glorious deeds of Scipio, were partely due vnto Lalius, who notwithſtanding did ever advance the greatneſſe, further the glory, and ſecond the renowne of Scipio, without any reſpect of his owne. And Theopompus King of Sparta, to one who tolde him that the common-wealth ſhould ſubſiſt and continue ſtill, forſomuch as he could command ſo well: No, ſaid he, it is rather, becauſe the people know ſo well how to obey. As the women that ſucceeded in the Peere-domes of France, had (notwithſtanding their ſex
                              •
                           ) right to aſſiſt, and priviledge to plead in caſes appertaining to the iuridictions, of Peeres. So the Eccleſiaſticall Peeres, notwithſtanding their profeſſion and function, were bound to aſſiſt our Kings in their warres, not onely with hir friends, ſervants, and tenants, but in their owne perſon. The Biſhop of Beauvais, being with Philip Auguſtus in the battell of Bovines, did very couragiouſly take part with him in the effect; but thought hee ſhould not be partaker of the fruite and glory of that bloody and violent exerciſe. He overcame, and forced

that day many of the enimies to yeeld, whom he delivered vnto the firſt gentleman hee met withall, to rifle, to take them priſoners, or at their pleaſure to diſpoſe of them. Which he alſo did with William Earle of Salisbury, whom he delivered vnto the Lord Iohn of Neſte, with a ſemblable ſubtletie of conſcience, vnto this other. He deſired to fell and ſtrike down a man, but not to wound or hurt him: and therefore never ſought but with a great clubbe. A man in my time being accuſed to the King, to have laide violent hands vpon a Prieſt, denied it very ſtoutly, forſomuch as he had onely thumped and trampled him with his feete.
                     
                     
                        The two and fortieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of the inequalitie that is betweene vs.
                        
                        
                           PLutarke ſaith in ſome place, That he findes no ſuch great difference betweene beast and beaſt, as he findeth diverſitie betweene man and man. He ſpeaketh of the ſufficiencie of the minde, and of internall qualities. Verily I finde Epaminondas ſo farre (taking him as I ſuppoſe him) from ſome that I know (I meane capable of common ſenſe) as I could finde in my heart to endeare vpon Plutarke; and ſay there is more difference betweene ſuch and ſuch a man, than there is diverſitie betweene ſuch a man, and ſuch a beaſt.
                        Hem vir viro quid praeſtat!T
                                 •
                              r. Ph
                                 •
                              r. act. 5. ſc. 3.
                        
                        
                           O Sir, how much hath one,
                           An other man out-gone?
                        
                        And that there be ſo many degrees of ſpirits, as there are ſteps betweene heaven and earth, and as innumerable. But concerning the eſtimation of men, it is marvell, that except our ſelves, no one thing is eſteemed but for i'ts proper qualities. We commend a horſe, becauſe he is ſtrong and nimble,I
                                 ••
                              en. ſat. 8. 57
                        
                        
                           —volucrem
                           Sic laudamus equum, facili cui plurima palma
                           Fervet, & exultat rauco victoria circo.
                        
                        
                           We praiſe the horſe, that beares moſt belles with flying,
                           And triumphs moſt in races, hoarce with crying,
                        
                        and not for his furniture: a graie-hound for his ſwiftneſſe, not for his choller: a hawke for hir wing, not for hir cranes or belles. Why doe we not likewiſe eſteeme a man for that which is his owne? He hath a goodly traine of men following him, a ſtately pallace to dwell in, ſo great credit amongſt men; and ſo much rent comming in: Alas, all that is about him, and not in him. No man will buy a pig in a poke. If you cheapen a horſe, you wil take his ſaddle and clothes from him, you will ſee him bare and abroade: or if he be covered as in old times they wont to preſent them vnto Princes to be ſold, it is onely his leaſt neceſſary parts, leſt you ſhould ammuſe your ſelfe to conſider his colour, or breadth of his crupper; but chiefly to view his legges, his head, his eyes, and his foote, which are the moſt remarkable parts, and above all to be conſidered and required in him,
                        
                           Regibus hic mos est, vbi equos mercantur, apertosHo l. 1. ſat 
                                    •
                                 . 86
                           
                           Inſpiciunt, ne ſi facies, vt ſaepe, decora
                           Molli ful
                                 •
                              a pede eſt, emptorem inducat hiantem,
                           Quòd pulchrae clunes, breve quòd caput, ardua cervix.
                        
                        
                           This is Kings maner, when they horſes buy,
                           They ſee them bare, leſt if, as oft we try,
                           Faire face have ſoft hoofes, gull'd the buyer be,
                           They buttockes round, ſhort head, high creſt may ſee.
                        
                        When you will eſteeme a man, why ſhould you ſurvey him all wrapt, and envellopped? He then but ſheweth vs thoſe parts, which are no whit his owne: and hideth thoſe from vs, by which alone his woorth is to be judged. It is the goodneſſe of the ſworde you ſeeke after, and not the worth of the ſcabbard; for which peradventure you would not give a farthing,

if it want his lyning. A man ſhould be iudged by himſelfe, and not by his complements. And as an ancient ſaith very pleaſantly: Doe you know wherefore you eſteeme him tall. You account the height of his pattens: The Baſe is no part of his ſtature: Meaſure him without his ſtiltes. Let him lay aſide his riches and externall honors, and ſhew himſelfe in his ſhirt. Hath he a body proper to his functions, ſound and cheerefull? What minde hath he? Is it faire, capable and vnpolluted, and happily provided with all hir neceſſarie parts? Is ſhee rich of hir owne, or of others goods? Hath fortune nothing of hirs to ſurvay therein? If broade-waking ſhe will looke vpon a naked ſword: If ſhee care not which way hir life goeth from hir, whether by the mouth or by the throte; whether it be ſetled, equable, and contented: It is that a man muſt ſee and conſider, and thereby judge the extreame differences that are betweene vs: Is he
                        
                           —ſapiens, ſibique imperioſus,
                           Quem neque pauperies, neque mors, neque vin
                                 •
                              ula terrent,Li. 2. ſat. 7. 83.
                           
                           Reſponſare cupidinibus, contemnere honores
                           Fortis, & in ſ
                                 •
                              ipſo totus teres atque rotundus,
                           Externi ne quid valeat per l
                                 •
                              ue morari,
                           In quem manca ruit ſemper fortuna?—
                        
                        
                           A wiſe man, of himſelfe commander high,
                           Whom want, nor death, nor bands can terrifie,
                           Reſol
                                 •
                              d t'affront deſires, honors to skorne,
                           All in himſelfe, cloſe, round and neately-borne,
                           As nothing outward on his ſmooth can ſtay,
                           Gainſt whom ſtill fortune makes a lame aſſay.
                        
                        Such a man is five hundred degrees beyond kingdomes and principalities: Himſelfe is a kingdome vnto himſelfe.
                        Sapiens polipſe ſingit fortunam ſibi.Plan. Tr
                                 •
                              n. act. 2. ſcen. 2.
                        
                        
                           Truſt me, who beares a wiſe mans name,
                           His fortune to himſelfe may frame.
                        
                        What is there elſe for him to wiſh for?
                        
                           —nónne videmusLu
                                    •
                                 r. li. 2. 15.
                           
                           Nil aliud ſibi naturam latrare, niſi vt quoi
                           Corpore ſeiunctus dolor abſit, mente fruatur,
                           Iucundo ſenſu cura ſe
                                 •
                              otus metúque?
                        
                        
                           See we not nature nothing elſe doth barke
                           Vnto hir-ſelfe, but he, whoſe bodies barke
                           Is free from paines-touch, ſhould his minde enjoy,
                           Remo'd from care and feare, with ſenſe of joy?
                        
                        Compare the vulgar troupes of our men vnto him, ſtupide, baſe, ſervile, wavering, and continually floting on the tempeſtuous Ocean of divers paſſions, which toſſe and retoſſe the ſame, wholy depending of others: There is more difference, then is betweene heaven and earth, and yet ſuch is the blindneſſe of our cuſtome, that we make little or no account of it. Whereas, if we conſider a Cottager & a King, a noble and a handy-crafts man, a magiſtrate and a private man, a rich man and a poore; an extreame diſparitie doth immediatly preſent it ſelf vnto our eies, which, as a man may ſay, differ in nothing, but in their clothes. In Thrace. the King was after a pleaſant maner diſtinguiſhed from his people, and which was much endeared: He had a religion apart: a God ſeverall vnto himſelfe, whom his ſubjects might no waies adore: It was Mercurie: And he diſdained their gods, which were Mars, Bacchus, and Diana; yet are they but pictures, which make no eſſential diſſemblance. For, as enterludeplaiers, you ſhall now ſee them on the ſtage, play a King, an Emperor, or a Duke, but they are no ſoner off the ſtage, but they are baſe raſcals, vagabond abjects, and porterly hirelings, which is their naturall and originall condition: Even ſo the Emperor, whoſe glorious pomp doth ſo dazle you in publike:
                        
                           Scilicet & grandes viridi cum luc
                                 •
                               ſ
                                 ••
                              aragdiLuer. li▪ 4. 117.
                           
                           Auro includuntur, teritúrque Thalaſſina veſtis
                           Aſſidué, & Ʋeneris ſudorem exercita potat.
                        
                        
                           Great emerald's with their graſſe-greene-light in gold
                           
                              Are clos'd, nor long can marriage linnen holde,
                           But worne with vſe and heate
                           of Venerie drink's the ſweate.
                        
                        View him behinde the curtaine, and you ſee but an ordinarie man, and peradventure more vile, and more ſeely, then the leaſt of his ſubiects. Ille beatus introrſum eſt; iſtius bracteata f
                                 •
                              
                              licit
                           S
                                 ••
                              . 
                                 •
                              pi
                                 ••
                              . 115. 
                           as eſt. One is inwardly happy: an others f
                                 •
                              licitie is plated and guilt-over. Cowardiſe, irreſolution, ambition, ſpight, anger, and envie, moove and worke in him as in another:
                        
                           Non enim gazae, neque conſularisH
                                    •
                                 . l. 2. 
                                    ••
                                 . 16. 9
                           
                           Summou
                                 •
                              t lictor, miſeros tumltus
                           Mentis & curas laqueata circum
                           —Tecta voluntas:
                        
                        
                           Nor treaſures, nor Maires officers remoove
                           The miſerable tumults of the minde,
                           Or cares that lie about, or flie above
                           Their high-roof't houſes with huge beames combinde.
                        
                        And feare, and care, and ſuſpect, haunt and follow him, even in the middeſt of his armed troupes.
                        
                           Reveráque met us hominum, curae
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               ſequaces,Lu
                                    ••
                                 . l. 2. 46.
                           
                           Nec metuunt ſonitus armorum, nec fera tela,
                           Audactérque inter reges, rerúmque potentes
                           Verſantur, neque fulgorem reverentur ab aur
                                 •
                              .
                        
                        
                           Indeed mens ſtill-attending cares and feare,
                           Nor armor's claſhing, nor fierce weapons feare,
                           With Kings converſe they boldly, and kings peeres,
                           Fearing no lightning that from golde appeeres.
                        
                        Doth the ague, the megrim, or the gout ſpare him more then vs? When age ſhall once ſeize on his ſhoulders, can then the tall yeomen of his guarde diſcharge him of it? When the terror of ruthles-balefull death ſhall aſſaile him, can he be comforted by the aſſiſtance of the gentlemen of his chamber? If he chance to be jealous or capricious, will our lowtingcurtzies, or putting off of hattes, bring him in tune againe? His bedſtead enchaſed all with gold and pearles hath no vertue to allay the pinching pangues of the cholike.
                        
                           Nec calidae citius decedunt corpore febres,Id. ib. 34.
                           
                           Tex
                                 •
                              ilibus ſi in picturis oſtróque rubenti
                           Iacteris, quàm ſi plebeia in veſte cubandum est.
                        
                        
                           Feavers no ſooner from thy bodie flie
                           If thou on arras or red ſcarlet lie
                           Toſſing, then if thou reſt
                           On coverlets home-dreſt.
                        
                        The flatterers of Alexander the great, made him beleeve, that he was the ſonne of Iupiter; but being one day ſore-hurt, and ſeeing the blood guſh out of his wounds: And what thinke you of this? (Said he vnto them) Is not this blood of a lively red hew, and meerely humane? Me thinkes, it is not of that temper, which Homer faineth to trill from the gods wounds. Hermodorus the Poet made certaine verſes in honour of Antigonus, in which he called him the ſonne of Phoebus; to whom he replied; My friend, He that emptieth my cloſe-ſtoole knoweth well, there is no ſuch matter. He is but a man at all aſſaies: And if of himſelfe he be a man ill borne, the Empire of the whole world cannot reſtore him.
                        —puellaPerſ. ſat. 2. 37. Hunc rapiant, quicquid calcaverit, hic roſa fiat.
                        
                           Wenches muſt raviſh him, what ever he
                           Shall treade vpon, eftſoones a roſe muſt be.
                        
                        What of that? If he be of a groſe, ſtupide, and ſenſeles minde: voluptuouſneſſe and good fortune it ſelfe, are not perceived without vigor, wit, and livelineſſe.
                        
                           Haec peri
                                 •
                              de ſunt, vt illius animus qui ea poſſidet,Ter. Heaut. act. 1. ſc
                                    •
                                 n. 2. 21.
                           
                           Qui vti ſcit, ei bona, illi qui non vtitur rectè, mala.
                        
                        
                           Theſe things are ſuch, as the poſſeſſors minde,
                           Good, if well vs'd; if ill, them ill we finde.
                        
                        
                           Whatſoever the goods of fortune are, a man muſt have a proper ſenſe to favour them: It is the enioying, and not the poſſeſſing of them, that makes vs happy.
                        
                           Non domus & fundus, non aeris aceruus & a
                                 •
                              ri,
                           Aegroto domini deduxit corpore febres,Ho
                                    •
                                 . 1. 
                                    •
                                 p. 2. 47
                           
                           Non animo curas, valeat poſſeſſor oportet,
                           Qui comportatis rebus benè cogitat vti.
                           Qui cupit, aut metuit, invat illum ſic domus aut res,
                           Vt lippum pictae tabulae, fomenta podagram.
                        
                        
                           Not houſe and land, and heapes of coine and gold
                           Rid agues, which their ſicke Lords body hold,
                           Or cares from minde: th'owner muſt be in health,
                           That well doth thinke to vſe his hoarded wealth.
                           Him that deſires or feares, houſe, goods, delight,
                           As foments doe the gout, pictures ſore-ſight.
                        
                        He is a foole, his taſte is wallowiſh and diſtracted, he enjoyeth it more, then one that hath a great colde, doth the ſweeteneſſe of Greeke wine, or a horſe the riches of a coſtlyfaire furniture, wherewith he is trapped. Even as Plato ſaith, That health, beautie, ſtrength, riches, and all things elſe he calleth good, are equally as ill to the vniuſt, as good to the iuſt; and the euill contrariwiſe. And then▪ where the body and the ſoule are in ill plight, what neede theſe externall commodities? Seeing the leaſt pricke of a needle, and paſſion of the mind is able to deprive vs of the pleaſure of the worlds Monarchie. The firſt fit of an ague, or the firſt gu
                              •
                           rd that the gout gives him, what availes his goodly titles of Majeſtie?
                        Totus & argento conflatus, totus & auro.
                        
                           All made of ſilver fine,Tibul. 1. El. 7. 71.
                           
                           All gold pure from the mine.
                        
                        doth he not foorthwith looſe the remembrance of his pallaces and ſtates? If he be angrie or vexed, can his principalitie keepe him from bluſhing, from growing pale, from gnaſ
                              •
                           ing his teeth like a Bedlam? Now if it be a man of woorth, and well borne, his royaltie, and his glorious titles will adde but little vnto his good fortune.
                        
                           Si ventri bene, si lateri eſt pedibúſque tuis, nilHor. l. 1. 
                                    •
                                 p. 12. 5
                           
                           Diviti
                                 •
                               poterunt regales addere ma
                                 •
                              us.
                        
                        
                           If it be well with belly, feete, and ſides,
                           A Kings eſtate no greater good provides.
                        
                        He ſeeth they are but illuſions, and vaine deceit
                              •
                           . He may happily be of King Seleucus his adviſe: That he who fore-knew the weight of a ſcepter, ſhould he finde-it lying on the ground, he would not daine to take-it vp. This he ſaid, by reaſon of the w
                              ••
                           ghtie, irkſome and painefull charges, that are incident vnto a good King. Truely, it is no ſmall matter to governe others, ſince ſo many croſſ
                              •
                           s and difficulties offer themſelves, if we will governe our ſelves well. Touching commanding of others, which in ſhew ſeemeth to be ſo ſweete, conſidering the imbecilitie of mans iudgement, and the difficultie of choice in new and doubtfull things. I am confidently of this opinion, that it is much more eaſie and plauſible to follow, then to guide: and that it is a great ſetling of the minde, to be tied but to one beaten▪path, and to anſwer but for himſelfe.
                        
                           
                              Ʋt ſatiùs multo iam ſit, parere quietum,
                                 
                                    •••
                                 . li. 5. 11 37.
                           
                           Quàm regere imperio resv
                                 •
                              lle.—
                        
                        
                           Much better t'is, in quiet to obey,
                           Then to deſire with Kings▪power all to ſway.
                        
                        Seeing Ciru
                                 •
                              
                            ſaide, That it belongs not to a man to command, that is not of more woorth, then thoſe whom he commandeth. But King Hieron in Xenophon addeth moreover, That in truelyenioying of carnall ſenſualities, they are of much woorſe condition, then private men; foraſmuch as eaſe and facilitie, depriveth them of that ſowre-ſwee
                                 •
                              e tickling, which w
                                 •
                               finde in them.
                        
                        
                           Pingu
                                 •
                              s amor nimiúmque potens, in toedia nobisOrid. am. li. 2. el. 19▪ 25.
                           
                           Vertitur, & ſtomacho dulcis vt eſca noc
                                 •
                              t.
                        
                        
                           
                           Fat over-powerfull love doth loathſome grow,
                           As fulſome ſweete-meates ſtomackes overthrow.
                        
                        Thinke wee, that high-minded men take great pleaſure in muſicke? The ſatietie thereof makes it rather tedious vnto them. Feaſts, banquets, revels, dancings, masks and turneys, rejoyce them that but ſeldome ſee them, and that have much deſired to ſee them: the taſte of which-becommeth cloyſome and vnpleaſing to thoſe that daily ſee, and ordinarily have them: Nor doe Ladies tickle thoſe, that at pleaſure and without ſuſpect may be glutted with them. He that cannot ſtay till he be thirſtie, can take no pleaſure in drinking. Enterludes and commedies rejoyce and make vs merry, but to players they are tedious and taſteleſſe. Which to proove, we ſee, it is a delight for Princes, and a recreation for them, ſometimes to diſguiſe themſelves, and to take vpon them a baſe and popular kinde of life.
                        
                           Plerumque gratae principibus vices,Hor. li. 3. 
                                    •
                                 d 29. 13.
                           
                           Mundaeque parvo ſub lare pauperum
                           Coe
                                 •
                              ae ſine aulaeis & oſtro,
                           Solicitam explicuere front 
                                 •
                              m.
                        
                        
                           Princes doe commonly like enterchange,
                           And cleanely meales where poore-men poorely houſe,
                           Without all tapiſtry or carpets ſtrange,
                           Vnwrinkled have their care-knit, thought-bent browes.
                        
                        Nothing doth ſooner breed a diſtaſte or ſatietie, then plentie. What long-ing luſt would not beealaide, to ſee three hundred women at his diſpoſe and pleaſure, as hath the Grand Turke in his Seraille? And what a deſire and ſhew of hawking had he reſerved to himſelfe from his anceſtors, that never went abroad without ſeuen thouſand falkners at leaſt? Beſides which, I thinke, the luſter of greatneſſe, brings no ſmall incommodities to the enjoying of ſweeter pleaſures: they lie too open, and are too much in ſight. And I wo
                              •
                            not why a man ſhould longer deſire them to conceale or hide their fault: For, what in vs is indiſ
                              •
                           retion, the people judgeth to be tyrannie, contempt, and diſdaine of the lawes in them: And beſides the ready inclination vnto vice, it ſeemeth they alſo adde vnto it the pleaſure of gourmandizing, and to proſtrate publike obſervances vnder their feete. Verily Plato in his Gorgias, defineth him to be a tyrant, that in a Citie hath leave and power to doe what ever he list. And therefore often, the ſhew and publication of their vice hurteth more then the ſinne in ſelfe. Everie man feareth to be ſpied and controlled; which they are even in their countenances and thoughts: All the people eſteeming to have right and intereſt to judge of them. And we ſee that blemiſhes grow either leſſer or bigger, according to the eminence, and light of the place, where they are ſet, and that a mole or a wart in ones forehead is more apparently perceived, then a ſcarre in another place. And that is the reaſon why Poets faine Iupiters loves to have beene effected vnder other countenances, than his owne; And of ſo many amorous-ſhifts, and love practiſes, they impute to him, there is but one (as farre as▪ I remember) where he is to be ſeene in his greatneſſe and majeſtie. But returne we to Hieron
                                 •
                              
                              ▪
                            he alſo relateth, how many incommodities he findeth in his royaltie, being ſo barred, that he cannot at his libertie travell to goe whether he pleaſeth, being as it were a priſoner within the limits of his country; and that in all his actions he is encircled and hemd-in with an importunate and tedious mult
                              •
                           tude. Truely, to ſee our Princes all alone, ſitting at their meate, beleagred-round with ſo many talkers, whiſperers, and gazing beholders, vnknowne what they are or whence they come, I have often rather pittied then envied them. King Alphonſus was wont to ſay, that burthen-bearing aſſes were in that; in farre better condition than Kings; for, their maſters ſuffer them to feede at their eaſe, whereas Kings cannot obtaine that priviledge of their ſervants. And it could never fall into my minde, that it might be any ſpeciall commoditie to the life of a man of vnderſtanding, to have a ſcore of find-faults, pickethanks, and controlers about his cloſe-ſtoole, nor that the ſervice of a man, that hath a thouſand pound rent a yeere, or that hath taken Caſal, or defended Sienna, is more commodious or acceptable to him, then that of a ſufficient, and well-experienced groome▪ Princelike advantages, are in a maner but imaginarie preheminences. Every degree of fortune, hath ſome image of Principalitie. Caeſar termeth all the Lords, which in his time had juſtice in France, to be Kinglets, or petie Kings. And truely, except the name of Sire, we goe very farre with our Kings. Looke but in the Provinces remote and farre from the

court: As for example, in Britanie, the attending traine, the flocking ſubjects, the number of officers, the many affaires, the diligent ſervice, the obſequious ceremonies of a Lord, that liveth retired, and in his owne houſe, brought vp amongſt his owne ſervants, tenants, and followers: And note alſo the high pitch of his imaginations, and humours, there is no greater royaltie can be ſeene: He heareth no more talke of his maſter, then of the Perſian king, and happily but once a yeare: And knowes but ſome farre-fetcht, and old kindred or pedigree, which his Secretarie findes or keepes vpon ſome ancient record or evidence. Verily our lawes are very free, and the burthen of ſoveraigntie, doth ſcarſly concerne a gentleman of France twice in his whole life. Eſſentiall and effectuall ſubjection amongſt vs doth not reſpect any, but ſuch as allure themſelves vnto it, and that affect to honour, and love to enrich themſelues by ſuch ſervice: For he that can ſhrowd and retire himſelfe in his owne home, and can manage and direct his houſe without ſutes in law, or quarrell with his neighbours, or domeſticall encombrances, is as free as the Duke of Venice. Paucos ſervitus, plures
                           Senec. epiſt. 2 2. 
                           ſervitutem tenent. Service holds few, but many hold ſervice. But above all things Hieron ſeemeth to complaine, that he perceiveth himſelfe deprived of all mutuall friendſhip, reciprocall ſocietie, and familiar converſation, wherein conſiſteth the moſt perfect and ſweeteſt fruite of humane life. For, what vndoubted teſtimonie of affection and good will, can I expect or exact from him, that will-he, or nill he, oweth me all he hath, all he can? Can I make account of his humble ſpeech, of his low-lowting curtzie, or of his curteous offers, ſince it lieth not in his power to refuſe them me? The honour we receive of thoſe which feare and ſtand in awe of vs, is no true honour. Such reſpects are rather due to royaltie, to majeſtie, then to me.
                        
                           —maximum hoc regni bonum eſt,
                              S
                                    •
                                 n Thyeſt. act. 2. ſcen. 1.
                           
                           Quòd facta domini cogitur populus ſui
                           Quâm ferre, tam laudare.
                        
                        
                           This is chiefe good of Princes dominations,
                           Subjects are forc't their ſov'raignes actes and faſhions
                           To beare with patience, paſſe with commendations.
                        
                        Doe I not ſee, that both the badde and the good King are ſerved alike? That hee who is hated, and he that is beloved are both courted alike? And the one as much fawned vpon as the other? My predeceſſor was ſerved with the ſame apparances, and waited vpon with the like ceremonies, and ſo ſhall my ſucceſſor be. If my ſubjects offend me not, it is no teſtimony of any good affection. Wherefore ſhall I take it in that ſenſe, ſithence they cannot, if they would? No man followeth me for any friendſhip that is between him and me: inaſmuch as no firme friendſhip can be contracted, where is ſo ſmall relation, ſo ſlender correſpondencie, & ſuch diſparity. My high degree hath excluded me from the commerce of men. There is too great an inequalitie, and diſtant diſproportion. They follow for countenance, and of cuſtome, or rather my fortune then my ſelfe: hoping therby to encreaſe theirs. Whatſoever they ſay, all they doe vnto me, is but a gloſſe, and but diſſimulation, their liberty being every where brideled, and checked by the great power I have over them. I ſee nothing about me, but inſcrutable hearts, hollow mindes, fained lookes, diſſembled ſpeeches, and counterfet actions. His Courtiers one day commended Iulian the Emperour for miniſtring of right, and doing of juſtice; I ſhould eaſily grow proud (ſaid he) for theſe praiſes▪ if they came from ſuch as durſt either accuſe or diſcommend my contrary actions, ſhould I commit any. All the true commodities that Princes have, are common vnto them with men of meane fortune. It is for Gods to mount winged horſes, and to feed on Ambroſia. They have no other ſleepe, nor no other appetite then ours. Their ſteele is of no better temper, then that wherewith we arme our ſelves. Their crowne, their diademe can neither hide them from the Sun, or ſhelter them from the raine. Diocleſian that wore one ſo much reverenced, and ſo fortunate, did voluntarily reſigne the ſame, to withdraw himſelfe vnto the pleaſure of a private life; but a while after, the vrgent neceſſitie of publike affaires requiring his preſence, and that he ſhould return to re-aſſume his charge againe, he anſwered thoſe that ſolicited him vnto it; you would never vndertake to perſwade me to that, had you but ſeene the goodly rankes of trees, which myſelfe have planted in mine Orchard, or the faire muske-melo
                              •
                           s, I have ſet in my garden. According to Anacharſis his opinion, The happieſt eſtate of a well-ordered common wealth ſhould be, where all other things being equally common, precedencie ſhould be meaſured, and preferments
                           
                           ſuted according to vertue and deſert, and the contrarie according to vice. At what time King Pirrhus vndertooke to paſſe into Italy, Cyneas his wiſe and truſtie counſellor, going about to make him perceive the vanitie of his ambition, one day beſpake him thus. My good ſir, (ſaid he) To what end do you prepare for ſo great an enterpriſe? He anſwered ſodainly, To make my ſelfe lord of Italic. That done, what will you doe then? (replied Cyneas) I will then paſſe (ſaid Pirrhus) into Gaule, and then into Spayne: And what afterwards? I will then invade Affrike, and ſubdue the ſame, and at laſt, when I ſhall have brought all the world vnder my ſubiection, I will then take my reſt, and live contented at mine eaſe. Now, for Gods ſake Sir, (replied Cynoas) Tell me, what hinders you, that you be not now, if ſo you pleaſe, in that eſtate? Wherefore doe you not now place your ſelfe, where you meane to aſpire, and ſave ſo much danger, ſo many hazards, and ſo great troubles as you enterpoſe betweene both?
                        
                        
                           Nimirum quia non bene norat quae eſſet habendiLucr. lib. 5. 14. 43.
                           
                           Finis, & omnino quoad creſcat vera voluptas
                        
                        
                           The cauſe forſooth, he knew not what ſhould be the end
                           Of having, nor how far true pleaſure ſhould extend.
                        
                        I will conclude and ſhut vp this treatiſe with an ancient verſe, which I ſingularly applaud, and deeme fit to this purpoſe.
                        Mores cuique ſui fingunt fortunam.Cic. Parad. 5. cor. Nep.
                        
                        
                           Ev'ry mans maners and his mind,
                           His fortune to him frame and find.
                        
                     
                     
                        The three and fortieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of ſumptuarie Lawes, or Lawes for moderating of expences.
                        
                        THE maner wherewith our Lawes aſſay to moderate the fooliſh and vaine expences of table-cheare and apparell, ſeemeth contrarie to it's end. The beſt courſe were to beget in men a contempt of gold and ſilk-wearing, as of vaine and vnprofitable things, whereas we encreaſe their credite and price: A moſt indirect courſe to withdraw men from them. As for example, to let none but Princes eate dainties, or weare velvets, and clothes of Tiſſew, and interdict the people to do-it, what is-it but to give reputation vnto thoſe things, and to encreaſe their longing to vſe them? Let Kings boldly quit thoſe badges of honour; They have many other beſides: Such exceſſe is more excuſable in other men, then in Princes. We may, by the examples of divers Nations, learne ſundry better faſhions to diſtinguiſh our ſelves and our degrees (which truely I eſteeme requiſite in an eſtate,) without nouriſhing to that purpoſe, this ſo manifeſt corruption and apparant inconvenience. It is ſtrange how cuſtome in theſe indifferent things doth eaſilie encroch and ſodainly eſtabliſh the footing of hir authoritie. We had ſcarce worne cloth one whole yeare at the Court, what time we mourned for our King Henry the ſecond, but certainly in every mans opinion, all maner of ſilkes were alreadie become ſo vile and abject, that was any man ſeene to weare them, he was preſently judged to be ſome countrie fellow, or mechanicall man. They were left only for Chyrurgians and Phyſitians. And albeit moſt men were apparreled a-like, yet were there other ſufficient apparant diſtinctions of mens qualities. How ſoone doe plaine chamoy-jerkins, and greaſie canvaſe doublets creepe into faſhion and credite amongſt our ſouldiers, if they lie in the field? And the gariſhneſſe, neatneſſe, and riches of ſilken garments grow in contempt and ſcorne? Let Kings firſt begin to leave theſe ſuperfluous expences, we ſhall all follow; and within a moneth, without edicts, ordinances, proclamations, and acts of Parliament, it will be obſerved as a law. The ſtatutes ſhould ſpeake contrarie, as thus. That no man or woman, of what qualitie ſoever, ſhall, vpon paine of great forfeitures, weare any maner of ſilke, of skarlet, or any gold-ſmiths worke, except only Enterlude-players, Harlots, and Curtizans- With ſuch an invention did Zaleucus whilome correct the corrupted maners of the Locrines. His ordinances were ſuch Be it enacted that 
                              •
                           o woman of free condition ſhall

have any more then one maid-ſervant to follow her when ſhe goeth abroad, except when ſhe ſhall be drunken: And further, that ſhe may not goe out of the Citie by night, nor weare any jewels of gold, or precious ſtones about hir, nor any gowne beſet with gold-ſmiths work, or imbroiderie, except ſhe be a publike-profeſſed whore: and moreover, that except panders and bawdes, it ſhall not be lawfull for any man to weare any gold-rings on his fingers, nor any rich garments, as are ſuch of cloth made in the Citie of Miletum. So did he by theſe reprochfull exceptions ingeniouſly drive his Citizens from vaine ſuperfluities, and pernicious dainties. It was a moſt profitable courſe, by honor and ambition to allure men vnto their dutie and obedience. Our Kings have the power to addreſſe all theſe externall reformations. Their inclination ſerveth them as a law. Quicquid Principes faciunt, praecipere videntur. Whatſoever Princes doe, that, they ſeeme to commaund. The reſt of France takes the modell of the court, as a rule vnto it ſelfe to follow. Let Courtiers firſt begin to leave-off and loath theſe filthy and apiſh breeches, that ſo openly ſhew our ſecret parts; the bumbaſting of long peaſe-cod-bellied doublets, which makes vs ſeeme ſo far from what we are, and which are ſo comberſome to arme: Theſe long, effeminate, and daugling locks: That fond cuſtome to kiſſe what we preſent to others, and Beſolas manos in ſaluting of our friends: (a ceremonie heretofore onely due vnto Princes;) And for a gentleman to come to any place of reſpect, without his rapier by his ſide, all vnbraced, all vntruſt, as if he came from his cloſe-ſtoole: And that, againſt our forefathers maner, and the particular libertie of our French nobilitie, we ſhould ſtand bare-headed, aloofe-off from them, whereſoever they be, and as about them, about many others: So many petty-kings, and petty-petty-kinglets have we now adayes: And ſo of others like new-fangled and vicious introductions: They ſhall ſoone be ſeene to vaniſh and be left. Although but ſuperficiall faults, yet are they of evill preſages. And we are warned, that the foundation or maine ſummers of our houſes faile and ſhrinke, when we ſee the quarters bend, or wals to breake. Plato in his Lawes, thinkes there is no worſe plague, or more pernicious in his Citie, then to ſuffer youth, to have the reines of libertie in her owne hand, to change in their attires, in their geſtures, dances, exerciſes, and ſongs, from one forme to an other: And to remove their judgement, now to this, now to that place; following new-fangled deviſes, and regarding their inventors: By which, old cuſtomes are corrupted, and ancient inſtitutions deſpiſed. In all things, except the wicked, mutation is to be feared; yea, even the alteration of ſeaſons, of winds, of livings, and of humours. And no lawes are in perfect credite, but thoſe to which God hath given ſome ancient continuance: So that no man know their of-ſpring, nor that ever they were other then they are.
                     
                     
                        The foure and fortieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of Sleeping.
                        
                        REaſon doth appoint-vs ever to walke in one path, but not alwaies to keep one place: And that a wiſe-man ſhould not permit humane paſſions to ſtray from the right carrier; he may (without prejudice vnto his dutie) alſo leave-it vnto them either to haſten or to ſlow his pace, and not place himſelfe as an immoveable and impaſſible Coloſſus. Were vertue herſelfe corporeall and incarnate, I think her pulſe would beat and worke ſtronger, marching to an aſſault, then going to dinner: For, it is neceſſarie that ſhe heat and move herſelfe. I have therefore mark't-it as a rare thing; to ſee great perſonages ſometimes, even in their weightieſt enterpriſes, and moſt important affaires, hold themſelves ſo reſolutelyaſſured in their ſtate, that they doe not ſo much as breake their ſleepe for them. Alexander the great, on the day appointed for that furious-bloodie battle againſt Darius, ſlept ſo ſoundly and ſo long that morning, that Parmenion was faine to enter his chamber, & approching neere vnto his bed, twice or thrice to call him by his name, to awaken him, the houre of the battle being at hand, and vrging him. Otho the Emperour having determined to kill himſelfe, the very ſame night, after he had given order for his domeſticall affaires, ſhared his

monie amongſt his ſervans, and whetted the edge of a ſword, wherewith he intended to wound himſelfe, expecting no other thing, but to know whether all his friends were gone to reſt, fell into ſo ſound a ſleepe, that the groomes of his chamber heard him ſnort in another roome. This Emperours death hath many parts ſemblable vnto that of great Cato, and namely this: For, Cato being prepared to defeat himſelfe, whileſt he expected to heare newes, whether the Senators, whom he cauſed to retire, were lanched out from the haven of Vtica, fell ſo faſt aſleep, that he was heard to ſnort into the next chamber: And he whom he had ſent toward the port, having awaked him, to tell him, the ſtorme was ſo rough, that the Senators could not conveniently put out to ſea, he ſent another, and lying downe a new, fell aſleep againe, vntill the laſt meſſenger aſſured him, they were gone. We may alſo compare him vnto Alexander, in that great and dangerous ſtorme, which threatned him, by the ſedition of Metellus the Tribune, who laboured to publiſh the decree of Pompeys re-appeal into the Citie, together with his armie, at what time the commotion of Catiline was on foote: againſt which decree onely Cato did inſiſt, and to that purpoſe had Metellus and he had many injurious ſpeeches, and menaced one another in the Senate-houſe: And it was the next day, they were like to come to the execution in the market-place, where Metellus, beſides the favour of the common people, and of Caeſar then conſpiring and complotting for the aduancement of Pompey, ſhould come, accompanied with a multitude of ſtrange and fortaine ſlaves and fencers, to doe their vtmoſt: And Cato ſtrengthened with his onely conſtancie, and with an vnmated reſolve: So that his kinſmen, his familiars, and many honeſt men tooke great care, and were in heavie anxietie and penſiveneſſe for him: of which many never left him all night, but ſate vp together, without reſt, eating, or drinking, by reaſon of the danger they ſaw prepared for him; yea, his wife and ſiſters did nought but weep and waile, and for his ſake torment themſelves in their houſe, whereas contrariwiſe he alone comforted every bodie, and blamed them, for their demiſſeneſſe: And after he had ſupped, (as he was wont) he went quietly to his bed, and ſlept verie ſoundly vntill the next morning, that one of his copartners in the Tribune-ſhip, came to call him, to goe to the skirmiſh. The knowledge we have of this mans vnmated-haughtie heart, by thereſt of his life; may make vs judge with all ſecuritie, that it onely proceeded from a ſpirit, ſo far elevated above ſuch accidents, that he dained not ſo much as to trouble his mind with them, no more then with ordinarie chances. In the ſea-fight, which Auguſtus gained againſt Sextus Pompeius in Sicilie, even at the inſtant he ſhould go to fight, was ſurpriſed with ſo heavie a ſleep, that his friends were compelled to awaken-him, to give the ſignall of the battell; which afterward gave occaſion vnto Marcus Antonius, to charge him with this imputation, that he had not dared with open eyes to ſurvay the marſhalling of his armie, and that his heart would not ſuffice him, to preſent himſelfe vnto his ſouldiers, vntill ſuch time that Agrippa brought him newes of the victorie he had obtained of his enemies. But concerning yong Marius, who committed a greater errour (for on the day of his laſt battel againſt Sylla, after he had marſhalled his armie, and given the word or ſignall of the battell) he lay downe in the ſhadow vnder a tree, a while to reſt himſelfe, and fell ſo faſt aſleep, that he could hardly be awaked with the rout and flight of his men, having ſeen no part of the fight, they ſay, it was becauſe he was ſo exceedingly aggravated with travell, and over-tired with wearineſſe, and want of ſleep, that nature was overcome, and could no longer endure. And touching this point, Phiſitians may conſider; whether ſleep be ſo neceſſarie, that our life muſt needs depend of-it: For we find that Perſeus King of Macedon, priſoner at Rome, being kept from ſleep, was made to die; but Plinie aleadgeth, that ſome have lived a long time without any ſleep at all. And Herodotus reporteth, There are Nations, where men ſleep and wake by halfe yeares. And thoſe that write the life of Epimenides the wiſe, affirme, that he ſlept the continuall ſpace of ſeaven and fiftie yeares.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        The five and fortieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of the battell of Dreux.
                        
                        THere hapned divers rare accidents, and remarkable chances in our battell of Dreux: but thoſe who do not greatly favour the reputation of the Duke of Guiſe, doe boldly aledge, that he cannot be excuſed, to have made a ſtand, and temporiſed with the forces he commaunded, whilſt the Lord Conſtable of France, Generall of the Armie, was engaged and ſuppreſſed with the enemies Artillerie, and that it had been better for him, to hazard himſelfe, to charge the enemie flankwiſe, then by expecting any aduantage, to have him come behind him, to ſuffer ſo reprochfull an overthrow, and ſo ſhamefull a loſſe. But omitting what the event thereof witneſſed, he that ſhall without paſſion debate the matter, ſhall eaſilie (in my conceit) confeſſe, that the ayme and drift, not onely of a Captaine, but of every particular Souldier, ought chiefly to reſpect a victorie in great: And that no particular occurrences, of what conſequence ſoever, or what intereſt may depend on them, ſhould never divert-him from that point. Philopoemen in an encounter with Machanidas, having ſent before, a ſtrong troupe of Archers, and good marke men, to begin the skirmiſh: and the enemie, after he had put them to route and diſ-ranked them, ammuſing himſelfe in mainly purſuing them, and following the victorie alongſt the maine battell, where Philopoemen was, although his ſouldiers were much moved and offended to ſee their fellowes put to the worſt, he could not be induced to bouge from his place, nor make head againſt his enemie, to ſuccour his men; but rather, having ſuffered them to be defeated, and cut in pieces before his face, began then to charge his enemies in the battalion of their Infanterie, when he perceived them forſaken of their horſemen: And albeit they were Lacedemonians, foraſmuch as he charged them, at what time (ſuppoſing to have gained the day) they began to diſorder themſelves, he eaſilie overcame them; which done, he purſued Machanidas. This caſe, is couſin-german vnto that of the Duke of Guiſe. In that ſharpe-bloodie battell of Ageſilaus againſt the Boeotians, which Xenophon (who was there preſent) ſaith, To have beene the whotteſt and rudeſt, that ever he had ſeene: Ageſilaus refuſed the advantage, which fortune preſented him, to let the battalion of the Boeotians paſſe, and to charge them behind, what certaine victorie ſoever he ſaw likely to follow the ſame, eſteeming that it were rather skill then valour, and to ſhew his proweſſe, and matchleſſe-haughtie courage, choſe rather to charge them in the front of their forces: But what followed? He was well beaten, and himſelfe ſore-hurt, and in the end compelled to leave his enterpriſe, and embrace the reſolution, which in the beginning he had refuſed, cauſing his men to open themſelves, to give paſſage vnto that torrent of the Boeotians; who when they were paſtthrough, perceiving them to march in diſaray, as they who perſwaded themſelves to be out of all danger, he purſued them, and charged them flank-wiſe. All which notwithſtanding, he could never put to route, or force them run-away, for they, orderly, and faire and ſoftly made their retreit, ever ſhewing their face, vntill ſuch time as they got ſafely into their houlds and trenches.
                     
                     
                        The ſixe and fortieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of Names.
                        
                        WHat diverſitie ſoever there-be in hearbs, all are ſhuffled-vp together vnder the name of a ſallade. Even ſo, vpon the conſideration of names, I will heer huddlevpa gallymafrie of diverſe articles. Every ſeverall nation hath ſome names, which, I wot not how

are ſometimes taken in ill part, as with vs Iacke, Hodge, Tom, Will, Bat, Benet, and ſo forth. Item, it ſeemeth that in the genealogies of Princes, there are certaine names fatally affected; as Ptolomeus with the Aegyptians, Henries in England, Charles in France, Baldwins in Flanders, and Williams in our ancient Aqustanie, whence ſome ſay came the name of Gui
                                 •
                              nne; which is but a cold invention: As if in Plato himſelfe there were not ſome as harſh and ill-founding. Item, it is an idle matter, yet nevertheleſſe, by reaſon of the ſtrangeneſſe, worthie the memorie, and recorded by an oculare witneſſe, that Henrie Duke of Normandie ſonne to Henrie the ſecond King of England, making a great feaſt in France, the aſſemblie of the Nobilitie was ſo great, that for paſtimes ſake, being, by the reſemblance of their names, divided into ſeverall companies: in the firſt were found a hundred and ten Kinghts ſitting at one table, and all called Williams; beſides private Gentlemen and ſervants. It is as pleaſant to diſtribute the tables by the names of the aſſiſtants, as it was vnto Geta the Emperor, who would have all his meſſes or diſhes ſerved-in at his table orderly according to the firſt letters of their names; As for example, thoſe that began with P. as pig, pie, pike, puddings, pouts, porke, pancakes, &c. were all ſerved in together; and ſo of all the reſt. Item, it is a common ſaying, That it is good to have a good name: As much to ſay, good credit, or good reputation. Yet verely it is verie commodious to have a well-ſounding and ſmooth name, and which is eaſie to be pronounced, and facile to be remembred: For, Kings, Princes, Lords, and Magiſtrates know and remember vs the better by them, and will not ſo ſoone forget-vs. Marke but of thoſe that ſerve and follow-vs, whether we doe not more ordinarily commaund, and ſooner employ ſuch, whoſe names come readier to our tongue, or memorie. I have ſeene our King Henrie the ſecond, who could never 
                              •
                            it on the right name of a Gentleman of Gaſcoigne; and did ever call a Ladie waiting on the Queene, by the generall ſurname of hir houſe, becauſe that of hir father was ſo harſh, and hard to be remembred. And Socrates ſaith, It ought to be a fathers ſpeciall care, to give his children good and eaſie-ſounding names. Item, it is reported, that the foundation of our Ladie the great at Poitiers had this beginning; A licentious yoong man having his dwelling houſe where the Church now ſtandeth, had one night gotten a wench to lie with him, who ſo ſoone as ſhe came to bed, he demaunded hir name, who anſwered, Marie: The yong man hearing that name, was ſodainly ſo ſtrucken with a motive of religion, and an awefull reſpect vnto that ſacred name, of the virgin Marie, the bleſſed mother of our Saviour and Redeemer, that he did not only preſently put hir away from him, but reformed all the remainder of his ſucceeding life: And that in conſideration of this miracle, there was firſt erected a Chappell in the place where this yong mans houſe ſtood, conſecrated vnto that holy name, and afterward the faire great church, which yet continueth. This vocale and auricular correction, and ſo full of devotion, ſtrucke right vnto his ſoule. This other following, of the ſame kind, inſinuated itſelfe by the corporall ſences. Pythagoras being in companie with two yong men, whom he heard complot and conſult (being ſomewhat heated with feaſting and drinking) to go and raviſh a chaſt-houſe, commaunded immediatly the minſtrels to change their tune; and ſo by a ſolemne, grave, ſevere, and ſpondaicall kind of muſicke, did ſweetly inchaunt allay, and in-trance their raſhviolent▪ and lawleſſe luſt. Item, ſhall nor ſucceeding poſteritie ſay, that our moderne reformation hath been exact and delicate, to have not onely oppugned and reſiſted errors and vices, and filled the world with devotion, humilitie, obedience, peace, and every other kind of vertue, but even to have combated their ancient names of baptiſme, Charles, Lewis, Francis, to people the world with Methuſalem, Ezechiel, Malachie, much better feeling of a lively faith? A Gentleman my neighbour, eſteeming the commodities of ancient times in regard of our daies, forgot not to aledge the fierceneſſe and magnificence of the names of the Nobilitie of thoſe times, as Don Grumedan▪ Quedragan, and Ageſilan: And that, but to heare them ſounded, a man might eaſilie perceive; they had been other manner of men; then Peter, Gui
                                 ••
                              o
                                 •
                              , or Michell. Item; I commend and am much beholding to Iames Amiot; in the courſe of a French oration of his to have ſtill kept the full ancient Latin names, without diſguiſing or changing them, to give them a new-French cadence. At the firſt they ſeemed ſomewhat harſh vnto the Reader; but now, by reaſon of the credit, which his Plutarke hath deſervedly gotten amongſt-vs, cuſtome hath removed all ſtrangeneſſe from-vs. I have often wiſhed that thoſe who write hiſtories in Latin, would leave-vs our names whole, and ſuch as they are: For, altering Va
                                 •
                              demont, to Vallemontanus, and metamorphoſing them, by ſuring them to the

Graecian or Latin tongue, we know not what to make of them, and are often at a non-plus. To conclude my diſcourſe; It is an ill cuſtome, and of exceeding bad conſequence in our countrie of France, to call every man by the name of his Towne, Mannor, Hamlet, or Lordſhip, as the thing that doth moſt confound houſes, and bring ſur-names out of knowledge. A cadet or yonger-brother of a good houſe, having had for his appanage a Lordſhip, by whoſe name he hath beene knowne and honored, cannot well forſake and leave the ſame ten yeares after his death; His Lord-ſhip commeth vnto a ſtranger, who doth the like: Gheſſe then where we are, and how we ſhall doe to come to the perfect knowledge of theſe men. Wee need not goe far for other examples, but looke into our Royall houſe, where ſo many partages, ſo many ſur-names, and ſo many ſeverall titles have ſo encumbred-vs, that the originall of the ſtocke is vtterly loſt. There is ſo much libertie in theſe mutations, that even in my time, I have ſeen no man nor woman advanced by fortune vnto ſome extraordinarie preferment, that hath not immediatly had adjoyned vnto him or hir Genealogicall titles, new and vnknowne to their fathers, and that hath not beene engraffed into ſome noble ſtocke or familie. And as good lucke ſerveth, the baſeſt vpſtart, and moſt obſcure houſes are moſt apt vnto adulteration, and falſification. How many privat Gentlemen have 
                              •
                           e in France, which according to their accompt, and blazoning of their gentrie, are of the royall blood or race? I beleeve more then others. Was it not pretilie ſaid, and with a good grace, by one of my friends? There was a great companie bandied together about a quarell which a Gentleman had with another, who in verie truth had ſome prerogative of titles, honours, and alliances aboue the common ſort of Nobilitie; vpon which word of his prerogative, every one ſeeking to equall himſelfe vnto him, alledged, ſome one of ſpring, ſome another, ſome the reſemblance of his name, ſome of his armes, otherſome an old far-fetcht pedigree, and the meaneſt of them to be the great grand-child of ſome King beyond the Seas. When they came all to dinner, this man whom hitherto they had all followed, in liew of taking his wonted place, making low-lowting reverences, went to the loweſt end of the board, entreating the companie to hold him excuſed, that through raſh-vnadviſedneſſe he had hitherto lived with them companion-like, but now being lately enformed of their right qualities, he began to know them according to their ancient degrees, and that it did not duly belong vnto him to ſit above ſo many Princes. And after he had acted his play, he began to raile vpon them with a thouſand injuries; ſaying thus vnto them. For the love of God content your ſelves, with what your forefathers have been contented, and with the ſtate whereto God hath called-vs: we have ſufficient if we can maintaine it well, let-vs not diſparage the fortune and condition of our predeceſſors; and reject-we theſe fond imaginations, which can not faile any man, whatſoever he be, that is ſo impudent as to alledge them. Creſts, Armes, and Coates have no more certaintie then ſurnames. I beare Azure ſemè of trefoiles, a Lions Paw in faece, Or, armed Gules. What priviledge hath this Coate, that it ſhould for ever continue particularly to my houſe? A ſonne in law will transferre the ſame into an other familie: Some ſilly-vpſtart purchaſer of Armes will make it his chiefe coate. There is nothing wherein meet ſo many alterations, and ſo much confuſion.
                        But this conſideration draweth me perforce vnto an other field. Let vs ſomewhat narrowly ſearch-into, and for Gods ſake conſider, on what foundation we ground this glorie and reputation, for which the world is turned topſie-turvie. On what doe we eſtabliſh this tranſitorie renowne, which with ſo great mind-poſſeſſing toyle, and induſtrie we ſeeke and gape-after? In fine, it is Peter or William, that beareth the ſame (marke-it well Reader) and to whom it belongeth. Is not hope a couragious facultie, which in a mortall ſubject, and in a moment, ſeekes to vſurp infinite, and immenſitie, and to repleniſh his maſters indigence with the poſſeſſion of al things he can imagine or deſire, before it would? Nature hath given vs a pleaſant joy to play withall in that. Is it Peter or William. And what is that but a word for all mouths? or three or foure daſhes of a pen, firſt, ſo eaſie to be varied, as I would willingly aske thoſe, whom the honour of ſo many victories concerneth, or whether Gueſquin, or Gleſquin, or Gueaquin? yet were there more apparance heer, then in Lucian that Ϲ. did ſue T. for,
                        —non levia aut ludicra petunturVirg. Ae
                                 •
                              . lib. 12. 
                                 •
                              64. Pr
                              •
                           mia:
                        
                           No light prize, no reward in jeſt
                           Is hunted after as the beſt.
                        
                        
                           The wager goeth deepe: The queſtion is, which letter muſt be paide with ſo many ſieges, battels, hurts, empriſonments, and ſervices done vnto the Crowne of France by hir ever-renowmed Conſtable. Nicholas Deniſ
                                 •
                              t hath had no care but of the letters of his name, and hath changed all the contexture of them, there-out to frame the Earle of Alſinois, whom he hath honored and preſented with the glorie of his Poeſie and Painting. And Su
                                 •
                              tonius the Hiſtorian hath loved but the ſenſe of his owne, and having taken away Lènis, which was his fathers ſurname, hath left Tranquillus ſucceſſor of his compoſitions reputation. Who would believe, Captaine Bayard hath no honor, but that which he hath borrowed from the acts of Peter Terraill? And that Antonio Eſcalin (even before his eies) ſuffered Captaine P
                                 ••
                              lin, and the Baron of La Garde▪
                            to ſteal ſo many Navigations, voyages, and attempts, both by ſea and land from him? Secondarily, they are daſhes, and trickes of the pen, common vnto a thouſand men. How many are there in all races or families both of one name and ſurname? And how many in divers families, races, ages, and countries? Hiſtorie hath knowne three Socrates, five Platoes, eight Aristotles, ſeaven Xenophons, twenty Demetrius, twenty Theodores: beſides which, imagine how many came not to her knowledge. Who letteth my horſe boy to call himſelfe Pompey the Great? But after all, what meanes, what deviſes, are there that annex vnto my horſe keeper deceaſed, or to that other who had his head cut-off in Aegypt, or that joyne vnto them this glorified, and far-renowmed word, and theſe pendaſhes, ſo much honored, that they may thereby advantage themſelves?
                        Id cinerem & manes credis curare ſepult
                              •
                           s?
                        Lib. 4. 3
                              •
                           .
                        
                           Thinke you, ghoſt's buried, aſhes dead,
                           Care much how we alive are ſped?
                        
                        What feeling motion of revenge have the two companions in chiefe valor amongſt men; Epaminondas of that glorious verſe, which ſo many ages ſince is ſo common in our mouthes for him?
                        Conſilijs noſtris laus eſt a
                              •
                           trita Laco
                              •
                           um.
                        C
                              ••
                           . Tuſ
                              •
                           . q
                              •
                           . 
                              ••
                           . 5.
                        
                           By our complots the haught-renowne.
                           Of Spartan Gallants was brought downe.
                        
                        And Affrican
                                 ••
                              
                            of that other:
                        
                           A ſole exoriente, ſupra Ma
                                 •
                              tis paludesIbid.
                           
                           Nemo eſt, qui factis me 
                                 •
                              q
                                 •
                              iparare qu
                                 •
                              at?
                        
                        
                           From Sun-riſe to the Scythian-lake, of fame
                           None in exploits can equalize my name.
                        
                        Thoſe that ſurvive are tickled with the pleaſure of theſe words, and by them ſolicited with jelouſie and deſire, doe preſently without conſideration tranſmit by fantaſie this their proper motion of revenge vnto the deceaſed; and with a fond-deceiving hope perſwade themſelves, when their turne commeth to be capable of-it. God he knowes-it, nevertheleſſe,
                        
                           —adhaec ſe
                              Iuven ſat. 10. 137.
                           
                           Romanus Graiúſque & Barbarus Induperator
                           Erexit, cauſas diſcriminis atque labori
                                 •
                              
                           
                           Inde habuit, tanto maior fame ſitis eſt, quàm
                           Virtutis.
                        
                        
                           Heerto himſelfe the Romane Generall,
                           The Graecian, the Barbarian, rouz'd and rais'd▪
                           
                           He
                                 •
                              re hence drew cauſe of perils, travailes all:
                           So more, then to be good, thirſt to be prais'd.
                        
                     
                     
                        The ſeven and fortieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of the vncertainti
                                 •
                               of our iudgement.
                        
                        IT is even as, that verſe ſaith,
                        
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Of words on either ſide,
                           A large doale they divide.
                        
                        There is law ſufficient to ſpeake every where, both pro and contra; As for example:
                        
                           
                              Ʋinſe Hannibal, & non ſeppe vſar'poiPet. Par. 1. ſon. 86. 1.
                           
                           Ben la vitt
                                 •
                              rioſa ſua ventura.
                           
                              Hanniball conquer'd, but he knew not after
                           To vſe well his victorious good fortune.
                        
                        He that ſhall take this part, and with our men go about, to make that over-ſight prevaile, that we did not lately purſue our fortune at Montcontour: Or he that ſhall accuſe the King of Spaine, who could not vſe the advantage he had againſt-vs at Saint Quintin, may ſay this fault to have proceeded from a mind drunken with his good fortune, and from a courage ful-gorged with the beginning of good lucke; looſeth the taſte how to encreaſe-it, being already hindred from digeſting what he hath conceived of-it: He hath his hands full, and can not take hold any more: Vnworthie that ever fortune ſhould caſt ſo great a good into his lap: For, what profit hath he of-
                              •
                           t, if notwithſtanding, he give his enemie leaſure and meanes to recover himſelfe? What hope may one have, that he will once more adventure to charge theſe re-enforced and re-united forces, and new armed with deſpite and vengeance, that durſt-not, or knew-not how to purſue them being diſmaied and put to rout?
                        Dum fortuna calet, dum conficit omnia terror.
                        Lu
                              •
                           an. l. 7. 734.
                        
                           While fortune is at height in heat,
                           And terror worketh all by great.
                        
                        But to conclude, what can he expect better, then what he hath lately loſt? It is not, as at Fence, where the number of venies given, gets the victorie: So long as the enemie is on foote, a man is newly to begin. It is no victorie, except it end the warre. In that conflict where Caeſar had the worſe, neer 
                              •
                           he Citie of Oricum, he reprochfully ſaid vnto Pompeis Souldiers, That he had vtterly been overthrowne, had their Captaine knowne how to conquer: and paide him home after another faſhion when it came to his turne. But why may not a man alſo hold the contrarie? That 
                              •
                           t is the effect of an inſatiate and raſh-headlong minde, not to know how to limit or periode his covetouſneſſe: That it is an abuſing of Gods favours, to go about to make them looſe the meaſure he hath preſcribed them, and that a-new to caſt himſelfe into danger after the victory, is once 
                              •
                           ore to remit the ſame vnto the mercie of fortune: That one of the chiefeſt policies in militarie profeſſion, is, not to drive his enemie vnto diſpaire. Sill
                                 •
                              
                            and Marius in the ſociall warre, having diſcomfited the Marſians, ſeeing one ſquadron of them yet on foote, which through diſpaire, like furious beaſts were deſperately comming vpon them, could not be induced to ſtay or make head againſt them. If the fervor of Monſieur de Foix had not drewne-him over raſhly and moodily to purſue the ſtraglers of the victorie at Rave
                                 •
                              na, he had not blemiſhed the ſame with his vntimely death; yet did the freſh-bleeding memory of his example ſerve to preſerve the Lord of A
                                 •
                              gusen from the like inconvenience, at Seriſoles. It is dangerous to aſſaile a man, whom you have bereaved of all other meanes to eſcape or ſhift for himſelfe, but by his weapons: for, neceſſitie is a violent ſchool-miſtris, and which teacheth ſtrange leſſons: Graviſſimi ſunt m
                                 •
                              rſu
                                 •
                               irritatae neceſſicatis. No biting ſo grievous, as that of neceſſitie provoked and enraged.
                        
                        
                           Ʋincuur haud gratis ingula qui prov
                              ••
                           at host
                              •
                           m.
                        Lu
                              ••
                           n. l. 4. 278.
                        
                           For nought you over-come him not,
                           Who bids his foe come cut his throat.
                        
                        And that is the reaſon, why 
                              
                                 〈◊〉
                              
                            empeached the King of Lacedemo
                                 •
                              
                            who came from gaining of a victory againſt the Mantinaeans, from going to charge a thouſand Argians, that were eſcaped whole from the diſcom
                              •
                           ture; but rather to let them paſſe with al libertie, leſt he ſhould come to make triall of provoked & deſpited vertue, through and by ill fortune. Clodomire king of Aquitaine, after his victorie, purſuing Gondemar king of B
                                 •
                              rgundie, vanquiſhed and running away, forced him to make a ſtand, and make head againe, but his vnadviſed wilfulneſſe deprived him of the fruit of the victorie, for he dyed in the action. Likewiſe he that ſhould chuſe, whether it were beſt to keep his ſouldiers richly and ſumptuouſly armed, or only for neceſſitie, ſhould ſeeme to yeeld in favour of the firſt, whereof was Sertorious, Philopoemen. Brutus, Caeſar, and others, vrging that it is ever a ſpur to 
                              •••••
                            and glorie, for a ſouldier to ſee himſelf gorgiouſly attired, and richly armed, & an occaſion to yeeld himſelfe more

obſtinate to ſight, having the care to ſave his armes, as his goods and inheritance. A reaſon (ſaith Xenophon) why the Aſiatikes carried with them, when they went to warres their wives and Concubines, with all their jewels and chiefeſt wealth. And might alſo encline to the other ſide, which is, that a man ſhould rather remoove from his ſouldier, all care to preſerve himſelfe, than to encreaſe-it vnto him▪ for, by that meanes he ſhall doubly feare to hazard or engage himſelfe, ſeeing theſe rich ſpoiles do rather encreaſe an earneſt deſire of victorie in the enemie: and it hath been obſerved, that the ſaid reſpect hath ſometimes wonderfully encouraged the Romans againſt the Samnites. Antiochus ſhewing the Armie, he prepared againſt them, gorgeouſly accountred with all pompe and ſtatelineſſe, vnto Hanniball, and demanding of him, whether the Romanes would be contented with-it: yea verily, anſwered the other, they will be verie well pleaſed with-it: They muſt needs be ſo, were they never ſo covetous. Licurgus forbad his Souldiers, not only all maner of ſumptuouſneſſe, in their equipage, but alſo to vncaſe or ſtrip their enemies, when they overcame them, willing, as he ſaid, that frugalitie & povertie ſhould ſhine with the reſt of the battell. Both at ſieges, and elſe-where, where occaſion brings vs neere the enemie, we freely give our ſouldiers libertie, to brave, to diſdaine, and injurie him with all maner of reproaches: And not without apparance of reaſon; for, it is no ſmall matter, to take from them all hope of grace and compoſition, in preſenting vnto them, that there is no way left to expect-it, from-him, whom they have ſo egregiouſly outraged, and that there is no remedy left but from victorie. Yet had 
                              Ʋitelluis but bad ſucceſſe in that; for, having to deale with Otho, weaker in his Souldiers valour, and oflong diſaccuſtomed from warre, and effeminated through the delights and pleaſures of the Citie, himſelfe in the end ſet them ſo on fire with his reproachſull and injurious words, vpbrayding them with their puſilanimitie and faint-hartedneſſe, and with the regret of their Ladies, banquettings and ſenſualities, which they had left at Rome, that he put them into hart againe, which no perſwaſions or other means could do before; and thereby drew them, whom nought could have driven, to fight, and fall vpon him. And verilie, when they are injuries that touch a man to the quicke, they ſhall eaſilie vrge him, who was verie backward to fight for his Kings quarrell, to be verie forward in his owne cauſe or intereſt. If a man but conſider of what conſequence the preſervation, and importance, the ſafetie of a generall is in an Armie, and how the enemies chiefeſt ayme, is at the faireſt marke, which is the head, from which all other depend, it ſeemeth that that counſell can not be doubted of, which by ſundrie great Chieftaines we have ſeene put in practiſe, which is, in the beginning of the fight, or in the furie of the battell, to diſguiſe themſelves. Notwithſtanding the inconvenience a man may by this meanes incurre, is no leſſe then that miſchiefe, which a man ſeeketh to avoid: For the Captaine being vnſeene and vnknowne of his Souldiers, the courage they take by his example, and the hart they keep by his preſence, is therewithall empaired and diminiſhed; and looſing the knowne enſignes, and accuſtomed markes of their Leader, they either deeme him dead, or diſpairing of any good ſucceſſe, to be fled. And touching experience, we ſometimes ſee-it to favour the one, and ſometimes the other partie. The accident of Pirrhus in the battell he had againſt the Conſull Levinus in Italie, ſerveth vs for both vſes: For, by concealing himſelfe vnder the armes of Demogacles, and arming him with his owne, indeed he ſaved his life, but was in great danger to fall into the other miſchiefe, and looſe the day. Alexander, Caeſar, Lueullus, loved (at what time they were to enter fight) to arme and attire themſelves with the richeſt armes, and gariſh clothes they had, and of particular bright-ſhining colours. Agis, Ageſilaus, and that great G
                                 •
                              lippus, contrarie, would ever goe to warres meanly accou
                              •
                           red, and without any imperiall ornament. Among other reproaches, that Pompey is charged withall in the battell of Pharſalia, this is one ſpeciall, that he idlely lingred with his Armie, expecting what his enemie would attempt; foraſmuch as that (I will heare borrow the verie words of Plutarke, which are of more conſequence then mine) weakneth the violence, that running giveth the firſt blowes, and therewithall remooveth the charging of the Combattants one againſt another, which more, then any other thing is wont to fill them with furie and impetuoſitie, when with vehemence they come to enter-ſhocke one another, augmenting their courage by the crie and running; and in a maner alayeth and quaileth the heat of the Souldiers: Loe-here what he ſaith concerning this. But had Caeſar loſt, who might not alſo have ſaid, that contrariwiſe the ſtrongeſt and firmeſt ſituation, is that, wherein a man keeps his ſtand without budging, and that who is ſettled in his

march, cloſing, and againſt any time of need, ſparing his ſtrength in himſelfe, hath a great advantage againſt him, that is in motion and diſordered, and that running hath alreadie conſumed part of his breath? Moreover, that an armie being a bodie compoſed of ſo many ſeverall parts, it is impoſſible it ſhould in ſuch furie advance it ſelfe with ſo juſt a march, and proportioned a motion, and not breake and diſ-ranke, or at leaſt alter hir ordinance, and that the nimbleſt be not grapling before his fellowes may help-him. In that drearie battell of the two Perſian brethren, Clearchus the Lacedemonian, who commanded the Graecians that followed Cycus his faction, led them faire and gently without any haſt-making to their charges; but when he came within fiſtie paces of his enemies, he bad them with all ſpeed to run vnto it; hoping by the ſhortneſſe of the diſtance to manage their order and direct their breath; in the meane time giving them the advantage of the impetuoſitie, both for their bodies, and for their ſhooting-armes. Others have ordered this doubt in their armie after this maner: If your enemies headlong run vpon you, ſtay for them and bouge not: If they without ſtirring ſtay for you, run with furie vpon them.
                        In the paſſage which the Emperour Charles the fift made into Provence, our king Francis the firſt, ſtood a good while vpon this choice; whether it were beſt, by way of prevention, to go and meet with him in Italie, or to ſtay his comming into France: and albeit he conſidered what an advantage it is, for one to preſerve his houſe from the troubles and miſchiefes that warre brings with it, to the end that poſſeſſing hir whole ſtrength, it may continually in all times of need, ſtore him with money, and ſupplie him with all other helps; and conſidering how the neceſſitie of direfull warre, doth dailie enforce a Generall to make ſpoile of goods, and waſte the Countrie, which cannot well be done in our own goods & countrie: and if the countriman doth not as patiently indure this ravage at his friends hands, as at his enemies, ſo as ſeditions may enſue amongſt our owne factions, and troubles among our friends: That licence to rob and ſpoile, which in his Countrie may not be tolerated, is a great furtherauce in a Souldier, and makes him the more willing, to endure the miſeries and toylings that follow warre: And what a hard matter it is to keep the Souldier in office and hart, who hath no other hope of profit, but his bare pay, and is ſo neere his wife, his children, his friends, and his home: That he who layeth the cloth, is ever put to the greateſt charges: That there is more pleaſure in aſſailing than in defending: And that the apprehenſion of a battell-loſt in our owne home and entrailes, is ſo violent, that it may eaſily ſnake the whole frame, and diſtemper the whole bodie. Seeing there is no paſſion ſo contagious, as that of feare, nor ſo eaſie apprehended and taken a-truſt, or doth more furiouſly poſſeſſe all parts of man: And that the Cities or Townes, which have either heard the buſtling noiſe of the Tempeſt, or ſeene the ſparkles of this all conſuming fire at their gates, or have perhaps received their captaines wounded, their Citizens purſued, and their Souldiers ſpoiled, and all out of breath, if they be not more then obſtinately-conſtant, it is a thouſand to one, if in that brunt of furie, they do not headlong caſt themſelves into ſome deſperate reſolution: yet did he conclude and choſe this reſolve for the beſt. Firſt to revoke his forces, he had beyond the Mountaines in Italie, and to ſtay his enemies approches. For, he might on the contrarie part imagine, that being in his owne Countrie, and amidſt good friends, he had the better leaſure to re-enforce his decayed forces, and more oportunitie, to ſtrengthen Townes, to munite Caſtles, to ſtore Rivers with all neceſſaries they wanted, and to keep all paſſages at his devotion, which done, all the waies ſhould be open for him, and might by them have all maner of victuals, money, and other hab
                              •
                           lements of warre brought-him, in ſafety, and without convoy: that he ſhould have his ſubjects ſo much the more affectionate vnto him, by how much nearer they ſhould ſee the danger: That having ſo many Cities, Townes, Houlds, Caſtles, and Barres for his ſecuritie, he might at all times, according to apportunitie and advantage, appoint and give law vnto the fight: And if he were pleaſed to temporize, whileſt he tooke his eaſe, kept his forces whole, and maintained himſelfe in ſafety, he might ſee his enemie conſume & waſte himſelfe, by the difficulties which daily muſt neceſſarily aſſault, environ and combate-him, as he who ſhould be engaged in an enemie-countrie and foe-land; Where he ſhould have nothing, nor meet with any thing, either before, or behind him, or of any ſide; that did not offer him continuall warre: no way nor meanes to refreſh, to eaſe or give his armie elbow-roome, if any ſickneſſe or contagion ſhould come amongſt his men; nor ſhelter to lodge his hurt and maymed Souldiers: where neither monie, munition, nor victuals might come vnto him, but

at the ſwords point; where he ſhould never have leaſure to take any reſt, or breath; where he ſhould have no knowledge of places, paſſages, woods, foords, rivers, or countrie, that might defend him from ambuſcados, or ſurpriſes: And if he ſhould vnfortunately chance to looſe a battell, no hope to ſave, or meanes to re-unite the reliques of his forces. And there want not examples to ſtrengthen both ſides. Scipio found-it better for him to invade his enemies countrie of Affrica, then to defend his owne, and fight with him in Italie, where he was, wherein he had good ſucceſſe. But contrariwiſe, Hanniball, in the ſame warre wrought his owne overthrow, by leaving the conqueſt of a forraine countrie, for to go and defend his owne. The Athenians having left the enemie in their owne land, for to paſſe into Sicilie, had verie ill ſucceſſe, and were much contraried by fortune: whereas Agathocles King of Siracuſa proſpered and was favoured by her, what time he paſſed into Affrica, and left the warre on ſoote in his owne countrie. And we are accuſtomed to ſay with ſome ſhew of reaſon, that eſpecially in matters of warre, the events depend (for the greateſt part) on fortune; which ſeldome will yeeld, or never ſubject her-ſelfe vnto our diſcourſe or wiſedome, as ſay theſe enſuing verſes.
                        
                           Et malè conſultis pretium eſt, prudentia fallax,Manil. aſtr. lib. 4. 95.
                           
                           Nec fortuna probat cauſas ſequitúrque merentes:
                           Sed vaga per cunctos nullo diſcrimine fertur:
                           Scilicet eſt aliud quod nos cogátque regátque
                           Maius, & in proprias ducat mortalia leges.
                        
                        
                           Tis beſt for ill-adviſ'd, wiſedome may faile,
                           Fortune proves not the cauſe that ſhould prevaile,
                           But here and there without reſpect doth ſaile,
                           A higher power forſooth vs over-drawes,
                           And mortall ſtates guides with immortall lawes.
                        
                        But if it be well taken, it ſeemeth that our counſels and deliberations, doe as much depend of her; and that fortune doth alſo engage our diſcourſes and conſultations in her trouble and vncertaintie. We reaſon raſhly, and diſcourſe at randon, ſaith Timeus in Plato: For, even as we, ſo have our diſcourſes great participation with the temeritie of hazard.
                        
                     
                     
                        The eight and fortieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of Steedes, called in French Deſtriers.
                        
                        BEhold, I am now become a Gramarian, I, who never learn't tongue but by way of roat, and that yet know knot what either Adjective, Conjunctive, or Ablative meaneth. As far as I remember, I have ſometimes heard-ſay, that the Romanes had certaine horſes, which they called Funales, or Dextrarios, which on the right hand were led-by as ſpare horſes, to take them freſh at any time of need: And thence it commeth, that we call horſes of ſervice Deſtriers. And our ancient Romanes doe ordinarily ſay, to Adexter, in ſteed of, to accompanie. They alſo called Deſultorios equos, certaine horſes that were ſo taught, that mainly-running with all the ſpeede they had, joyning ſides to one another, without either bridle or ſaddle, the Roman gentlemen armed at all aſſayes, in the middeſt of their running-race, would caſt and recaſt themſelves from one to an other horſe. The Numidian men at armes, were wont to have a ſecond ſpare-horſe led by hand, that in the greateſt furie of the battell, they might ſhift and change horſe: Quibus, deſultorum in modum, binos
                           Liv bel pun. dec. 3. l. 3. 
                           trahentibus equos, inter acerrimam ſoepe pugnam in recentem equum ex feſſo armatis tranſultare, mos erat. Tanta velocitas ipſis, támque docile equorum genus. Whoſe maner was, as if they had been vaulters, leading two horſes with them in armour to leap from their tired horſe to the freſhone, even in the hotteſt of the fight. So great agilitie was in themſelves, and ſo apt to be taught was the race of their horſes. There are many horſes found, that are taught to helpe their maſter, to run vpon any man ſhall offer to draw a naked ſword vpon them; furiouſly to leap vpon any man, both with feete to ſtrike, and with teeth to bite, that ſhall affront them; but that for the moſt part they rather hurt their friends then their enemies. Conſidering

alſo, that if they once be grapled, you can not eaſilie take them-off, and you muſt needs ſtand to the mercie of their combat. Artibius, Generall of the Perſian armie had verie ill lucke to be mounted vpon a horſe faſhioned in this ſchoole, at what time he ſought man to man againſt Oneſilus King of Salamis; for, he was the cauſe of his death, by reaſon the ſhield-bearer or ſquire of Oneſilus cut him with a faulchon betweene the two ſhoulders, even as he was leaping vpon his maſter. And if that, which the Italians report be true, that in the battell of Fornovo. King Charles his horſe with kicking, winching, and flying, rid both his maſter and himſelfe from the enemies that encompaſt-him, to diſmount or kill him, and without that, he had beene loſt: He committed himſelfe to a great hazard, and ſcap't a narrow ſcowring. The Mammalukes boaſt, that they have the nimbleſt and readieſt horſes of any men at armes in the world. That both by nature they are inſtructed to diſcerne, and by cuſtome taught to diſtinguiſh their enemie, on whom they muſt leap and wince with feet, and bite with teeth, according to the voice their maſter ſpeaketh, or rider giveth them. And are likewiſe taught to take vp from the ground, lances, darts, or any other weapons with their mouths, and as he commandeth to preſent them to their rider. It is ſaid of Caſar, and of Pompey the Great, that amongſt their many other excellent qualities, they were alſo moſt cunning and perfect horſemen; and namely of Caeſar, that in his youth being mounted vpon a horſe, and without any bridle, he made him run a full cariere, make a ſodaine ſtop, and with his hands behind his backe performe what ever can be expected of an excellent readie horſe. And even as nature was pleaſed to make both him and Alexander two matchleſſe miracles in militarie profeſſion, ſo would you ſay, ſhe hath alſo endevoured, yea, enforced herſelfe to arme them extraordinarily; For, all men know, that Alexanders horſe called Bucephalus, had a head ſhaped like vnto that of a bull; that he ſuffered no man to get-on and ſit-him, but his maſter; that none could wealde and manage him but he; what honours were done him after his death, all know, for he had a Citie erected in his name. Caeſar likewiſe had another, who had his fore-feet like vnto a mans, with hoofes cloven in forme of fingers, who could never be handled, dreſt, or mounted but by Caeſar, who when he died, dedicated his image to the Goddeſſe Venus. If I be once on horſe-backe, I alight verie vnwillingly; for, it is the ſeat I like beſt, whether I be ſound or ſicke. Plato commendeth-it to be availefu
                                 •
                               for health: And Plinie affirmeth the ſame to be healthfull for the ſlomacke, and for the ioynts And ſithence we be falne into this ſubject, let vs a little ſollow-it I pray you. We read of a law in Xenophon, by which all men that either had or were able to keep a horſe, were expreſly forbidden to travell and goe a foote. Trogus and Iuſt
                                 ••
                              us report, that the Parthians were not onely accuſtomed to warre on horſe-backe, but alſo to diſpatch all their buſineſſe, and negotiate their affaires both publike and private; as to batgaine, to buy, to ſell, to parlie, to meet▪ to entertaine one another, and to converſe and walke together; and that the chiefeſt difference betweene free men and ſervants amongſt them, is, that the firſt ever ride, and the other goe alwaies on-foote. An inſtitution firſt deviſed by King Cyrus. There are many examples in the Romane hiſtories (and Suetonius doth more particularly note it in Caeſar) of Captaines that commanded their horſemen to alight, whenſoever, by occaſion, they ſhould be vrged vnto it, thereby to remove all maner of hope from their Souldiers to ſave themſelves by flight, and for the advantage they hoped-for in this maner of fight: Quo haud dubiè ſuperat Romanus Wherein vndantedly the Romanes
                           
                              Liv. dee. 1. li. 3. & 7. 
                           is ſuperiour to all ſaith Titus Livius: yet ſhall we ſee, that the firſt proviſion, and chiefe meanes they vſed to bridle rebellion amongſt their new conquered nations, was to deprive them of all armes and horſes. Therefore find we ſo often in Caeſar; Arma proferri, i
                                 •
                              menta
                           Caſ. comment. lib. 7. 
                           produci, obſides dari iubet: He commands all their armour ſhould be brought forth, all their cattell ſhould be driven out, and hoſtages ſhould be delivered. The great Turke doth not permit at this day any Chriſtian or Iew, to have or keepe any horſe for himſelfe, throughout all his large Empire. Our anceſtors, and eſpecially at what time we had warres with the Engliſh, in all ſolemne combats, or ſet battels, would (for the moſt part) alight from their horſes, and fight on foote, becauſe they would not adventure to hazard ſo precious a thing as their honour and life, but on the truſt of their owne proper ſtrength, and vigour of their vndanted courage, and confidence of their limbes. Let Chriſanthes in Xenephon ſay what he pleaſeth: whoſoever fighteth on horſe-backe, engageth his valour, and hazardeth his fortune on that of his horſe; his hurts, his ſtumbling, his death, drawes your life and fortune

into conſequence, if he chance to ſtartle or be afraide, then are you induced to doubt or feare: if to leape forward, then to become raſh and fond-hardie: if he want a good mouth or a timely ſpurre, your honour is bound to anſwer for-it. And therefore do not I finde-it ſtrange, that thoſe combats were more firme and furious, then thoſe which now we ſee foughten on horſe▪ backe.
                        —cedebant pariter, paritérque ruebantVirg. Aen. l. 
                                 •
                              . 756. Victores, victique, neque his fuga nota, neque illis.
                        
                           The victors and the vanquiſht both together
                           Gave backe, came on: the flight was knowne in neither.
                        
                        Their battels are ſeene much better compact and contrived: They are now but bickerings and routs: primus clamor atque impetus rem decernit. The firſt ſhoute and ſhocke makes an end of the matter. And the thing we call to helpe vs, and keepe vs company in ſo great and hazardous an adventure, ought as much as poſſible may be, lie ſtill in our diſpoſition and abſolute power. A I would counſell a gentleman to chuſe the ſhorteſt weapons, and ſuch as he may beſt aſſure himſelfe-of. It is moſt apparant, that a man may better aſſure himſelfe of a ſworde he holdeth in his hand, then of a bullet ſhot out of a piſtoll, to which belong ſo many ſeverall parts, as powder, ſtone, locke, ſnap-hanſe, barrell, ſtoke, ſcowring-piece, and many others, whereof if the leaſt faile, or chance to breake, and be diſtempered, it is able to overthrow, to hazard, or miſcarry your fortune. Seldome doth that blow come or light on the marke it is aymed-at, which the ayre doth carry.
                        
                           Et quò ferre velint permittere vulnera a ventis,Lucan. l 8. 384.
                           
                           Enſis habet vires, & gens quaecunque virorum eſt,
                           Bellae gerit gladij.
                        
                        
                           Giving windes leave to give wounds as they liſt,
                           But ſwords have ſtrength, and right men never miſt
                           With ſword t'aſſalt, and with ſword to reſiſt.
                        
                        But concerning that weapon, I ſhall more amplie ſpeake of-it, where I will make a compariſon betweene ancient and moderne armes: And except the aſtoniſhment and frighting of the eare, which nowadaies is growne ſo familiar amongeſt men, that none doth greatly feare-it; I thinke it to be a weapon of ſmall effect, and hope to ſee the vſe of-it aboliſhed. That wherewith the Italians were wont to throw, with ſire in-it, was more frightfull and terrour-moving. They were accuſtomed to name a kinde of 
                              •
                           avelin, Phalarica, armed at one end with an yron pike of three foote long, that it might pierce an armed man-through, which lying in the field they vſed to lanch or hurle with the hand, and ſometimes to ſhoote out of certaine eng
                              •
                           nes, for to defend beſieged places: the ſtaffe whereof being wreath'd about with hempor flax, all pitched and oiled over, flying in theayre, would ſoone be ſet-afre, and lighting vpon any body or target, deprived the partie 
                              ••
                           t therewith, of all vſe of weapons or limbes: Me thinkes nevertheleſſe, that comming to graple, it might aſwell hind
                              ••
                            the aſſailant, as trouble the aſſailed, and that the ground ſtrewed with ſuch burning truncheons, might in a pell-mell-conſuſion produce a common incommoditie
                        —mag
                              •
                           um ſtridens contorta phalarica venitVirg. Aen. l. 9. 705. Fulminis acta modo.
                        
                           With monſtrous buzzing came a fire-dart thirled.
                           As if a thunder-bolt had there beene whirled.
                        
                        They had alſo other meanes, to the vſe of which, cuſtome enured them, and that be reaſon of inexperience ſeeme incredible to-vs; wherewith they ſupplied the defect of our powder and bullets. They with ſuch fury darted their Piles, and with ſuch force hurled their iavelins, that they often pierced two targets and two armed men through, as it were with a ſpit. They hit as ſure and as farre with their ſlings, as with any other ſhot: Saxis globoſis funda,
                           Liu. dec. 4. l. 8. 
                           mare apertum inceſſentes: coronas modici circuli magno ex intervallo loci aſſueti traijcere: non capita modò hoſtium vulnerabant, ſed quem locum deſtinaſſent. While they were boyes, with round ſtones in a ſling, making ducks and drakes vpon the ſea, they accuſtomed to caſt through round marks of ſmall compaſſe a great diſtance off: whereby they, not onely hit and hurt the heads of their enemies, but would ſtrike any place they aymed-at. Their battering or murthering pieces repreſented, as well the effect, as the clattering and thundering noiſe of ours: ad ictus moenium cum terribili ſonitu editos, pavor & trepidatio coepit. At the batterie of the walles made wilk a terrible noiſe,
                           
                           feare and trembling beganne to attach them within. The Gaules our ancient forefathers in Aſia, hated mortally ſuch treacherous and flying weapons, as they that were taught to fight hand to hand, and with more courage. Non tam patentibus plagis moventur, vbila
                                 •
                              gior quam
                           Liv. dec. 4. l. 8. 
                           altior plaga eſt, etiam glorioſius ſe pugnare putant; i
                                 •
                              demquum acul
                                 •
                              us ſagitiae aut glandis abdit
                                 •
                               introrſus tenui vulnere in ſpeciem vri
                                 ••
                              tum in rabiem & p
                                 ••
                              dorem tam paruae periment is peſtis verſi, proſternunt corpora humi. They are not ſo much moued with wide gaſhes, where the wound is more broad then it is deepe, there they thinke, that they fight with more ravery; but when the ſ
                                 •
                              ing of an arrow or a bullet, with a ſmall wound to ſhew gals them inwardly, then falling into rage and ſhame that ſo ſlight a hurt ſhould kill them, they caſt their bodies on the ground.
                        
                        A modell or picture very neere vnto an harquebuſada. The ten thouſand Graecians in their long-lingring, and farre-famous retreate, encountered with a certaine nation, that exceedingly much endomaged them with ſtiffe ſtrong and great blowes, and ſo long arrowes, that taking them-vp, they might throw them after the maner of a dart, & with them pierce a target and an armed man through and through. The engines which Dionyſius invented in Siracuſa, to ſhoote and caſt mightie big arrowes, or rather timber-pieces, & huge-great ſtones, ſo farre and with ſuch force, did greatly repreſent, and come very neere our moderne inventions. We may not alſo forget, the pleaſant ſeate, which one named maſter Peter Pol, doctor in divinitie vſed to ſit vpon his mule, who as Monſtrelet reporteth, was wont to ride vp and downe the ſtreetes of Paris, ever ſitting ſideling, as women vſe. He alſo ſaith in another place, that the Gaſcoines had certaine horſes ſo fiece and terrible, taught to turne and ſtop ſodainely in running, whereat the French, the Piccards, the Flemmings, and Brabantins (as they who were never accuſtomed to ſee the like) were greatly amazed, and thought it a wonder: I vſe his very words. Caelar ſpeaking of thoſe of Swethen, ſaith, In any skirmiſh or fight on horſe-backe, they often alight to combate on foote, having ſo trayned and taught their horſes, that ſo long as the fight laſteth, they never bouge from their maſters ſide, that if neede require, they may ſodainely mount-vp againe: and according to their naturall cuſtome, there is nothing accounted more baſe or vile, then to vſe ſaddles or bardels, and they greatly contemne and ſcorne ſuch as vſe them: So that a few of them feare not to encounter with a troupe farre exceeding them in number. That which I have other times wondered-at, to ſee a horſe 
                              •
                           a
                              •••
                           ioned and taught, that a man having but a wande in his hand, and his bridle looſe hanging over his eares, might at his pleaſure manage, and make him turne, ſtop, runne, cariere, trot gallop, and what ever elſe may be expected of an excellent ready horſe, was common amongſt the Maſſilians, who never vſed either bridle or ſadle.
                        
                           Et gens quae nudo reſidens Maſſilia dor
                                 •
                              o,L
                                    •
                                 ca
                                    •
                                 . li. 4. 681
                           
                           Or a leu
                                 •
                              flectit fraenorum n
                                 ••
                              cia. virga.
                        
                        
                           
                              Maſſilian horſemen on bare horſe-backe-ſit
                           Manage with light rod, without reynes or bit.
                           Et Numid
                                 •
                               infr
                                 •
                              nt cingunt.Vir. Aen. l. 4. 41
                           
                           
                              Numidians who their horſes ride
                           Without bit, round about vs bide.
                        
                        
                           Equiſine fraenis, deformis ipſe curſus, rigida ceruice & extent
                                 •
                               capite currentium: The horſes being without bridles, their courſe is ill fauoured, they running with a ſtiffe necke, and out-ſtretch't head (like a roaſted Pigg:) Alphonſus King of Spaine, that firſt eſtabliſhed the order of Knights, called the order of the Bend or skarfe, amongſt other rules deviſed this one that none of them, vpon paine to forfait a marke of ſilver, for every time offending, ſhould ever ride either mule or mulet; as I lately read in Guevaras epiſtles, of which whoſoever called them his golden epiſtles, gave a iudgement farre different from mine. The Courtier ſaith, That before his time, it was counted a great ſhame in a gentleman to be ſeene riding vpon a mule: Whereas the Abyſſines are of a contrary opinion, who accordingly as they are advanced, to places of honor, or dignitie, about their Prince, called Preſter-Iohn, ſo doe they more and more affect in ſigne of pompe and ſtate, to ride vpon large-great mules. Xenophon reporteth, that the Aſſirians were ever wont to keepe their horſes faſt-tied in fetters or gyves and ever in the ſtable, they were ſo wilde and furious. And for that they required ſo much time to vnſhackle, and to harniſh them, (leaſt protracting of ſo long time, might, if they ſhould chance at vnawares, and being vnreadie, to be ſurpriſed by their enemies, endomage them) they never tooke vp their quarter in any place, except it were wel dyked & intrenched:

His Cirus, whom he maketh ſo cunning in horſemanſhip, did alwaies keepe his horſes at a certaine ſtint, and would never ſuffer them to haue any meate before they had deſerved the ſame by the ſweate of ſome exerciſe. If the Scithians in time of warre chanced to be brought to any neceſſitie of victuals, the readieſt remedie they had, was to let their horſes blood, and there with all quenched their thirſt, and nouriſhed themſelves.
                        Venit & epoto Sarmata paſtus equoMart ſpectat. 3 4.
                        
                        
                           The Scithian alſo came, who ſtrangely feedes
                           On drinking-out his horſe (or that hee bleedes)
                        
                        Thoſe of Crotta being hardly beſieged by Metellus, were reduced to ſo hard a pinch, and ſtrait neceſſitie of all maner of other beverage, that they were forced to drinke the ſtale or vrine of their horſes. To verifie how much better cheape the Turkes doe both levie, conduct, and maintaine their armies, then we Chriſtans doe; They report, that beſides their ſouldiers never drinke any thing but water, and feede on nothing but rice, and drie-ſalt fleſh, which they reduce into a kinde of powder (whereof every private man doth commonly cary ſo much about him, as will ſerve for a moneths proviſion) and for a ſhift, will live a long time with the blood of their horſes; wherein they vſe to put a certain quantitie of ſalt, as the Tartares and Moskovites doe. Theſe new diſcovered people of the Indies, when the Spaniardes came firſt amongſt them, eſteemed that aſwell men as horſes, were eyther gods, or creatures far beyond, and excelling their nature in nobilitie. Some of which, after they were vanquiſhed by them, comming to ſue for peace and beg pardon at their handes, to whom they brought preſents of gold, and ſuch viands as their country yeelded; omitted not to bring the ſame, and as much vnto their horſes, and with as ſolemne Oration as they had made vnto men, taking their neighings, as a language of truce and compoſition. In the hether Indies, the chiefe and royalleſt honour was anciently wont to be, to ride vpon an Elephant; the ſecond to goe in Coaches drawne with foure horſes; the third, to ride vppon a Camell; the laſt and baſeſt, was to be carried or drawne by one horſe alone. Some of our moderne Writers report, to have ſeene ſome Countries in that climate, where the people ride oxen, with packe-ſaddles, ſtirrops, and bridles, by which they were carried very eaſily Quintus Fabius Maximus Rutilianus, warring againſt the Samnites, and ſeeing that his horſemen, in three or foure charges they gave, had miſſed to breake and runne through his enemies battalion, at laſt reſolved thus, that they ſhould all vnbridle their horſes, and with maine force of ſharpe ſpurres pricke and broach them; which done, the horſes as enraged, tooke ſuch a running, thorow, and athwart the enemies campe, armes and men, that nought was able to reſiſt them; and with ſuch a fury, that by opening, ſhouldring, and overthrowing, the battallion, they made way for his Infanterie, which there committed a moſt bloody ſlaughter, and obtained a notable victorie. The like was commaunded and effected by Quintus Fulvius Flaccus againſt the Celtiberians: Id cum maiore vi equorum faciet is, ſi eff: oenatos
                           Liv. d
                                 ••
                              . 4. l. 1
                                 •
                              . 
                           in hoctes equos immittitis; quod ſaepe Remanos equites cumlaude feciſſe memoriae prod
                                 ••
                              um eſt. Detractiſque fraenis bis vltrò curo
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               cum magna ſtrage hostium, infractis omnibus haſt is, tranſcurrerunt. That ſhall you doe with more violence of horſe, if you force your horſe vnbridled on the enemie; which it is recorded, the Roman horſemen have often perfourmed with great proofe and praiſe. So pulling of the bridles, they twice ranne through forward, and backe againe with great ſlaughter of the enemie, all their launces broken.
                        
                        The duke of Moſcovie did anciently owe this reverence vnto the Tartares, at what time ſoever they ſent any Ambaſſadors to him, that he muſt goe meete them on foote, and preſent them with a goblet full of mares-milke (a drinke counted very delicious amongſt them which whilſt they were drinking, if any drop chaunced to be ſpilt vpon their horſes haires, he was, by duty, bound to licke the ſame vp with his toung. The army which the Emperor Baiazeth had ſent into Ruſſia, was overwhelmd by ſo horrible a tempeſt of ſnow, that to find ſome ſhelter & to ſave themſelves from the extremitie of the cold, many adviſed to kil and vnpanch their horſes, and enter into their panches, to enioy and finde ſome eaſe by that vitall heate. Baiazeth after that bloody and tragicall conflict wherein he was overthrowne by the Scithian Tamburlane, in ſeeking to eſcape, had no doubt ſaved himſelfe, by the ſwiftneſſe of an Arabian mare, on which he was mounted that day, if vnluckily he had not beene forced to let her drinke her fill in paſſing over a river, which made her ſo faint and foundred, that he was eaſily overtaken and apprehended by thoſe that purſued him. The common ſaying

is, that to let a horſe ſtale after a full cariere, doth take downe his ſpeede, but I would never have thought that drinking had done it, but rather ſtrengthened and heartned him.
                        
                           Croeſus paſſing alongſt the city of Sardis, found certaine thickets, wherin were great ſtore of ſnakes and ſerpents, on which his horſes fed very hungerly, which thing as Herodotus ſaith was an ill-boding-prodigie vnto his affaires. We call him an entire horſe, that hath his full mane, and whole eares, and which in ſhew, or at a muſter, doth not exceed others. The Lacedemonians having defeated the Athenians in Sicilte, returning in great pompe and glory from the victorie, into the City of Siracuſa, among other Bravadoes of theirs, cauſed ſuch horſes as they had taken from their enemies to be ſhorne all over, and ſo led them in triumph. Alexander fought with a nation called Da
                                 •
                              as, where they went to warre two and two, all armed vpon one horſe, but when they came to combate, one muſt alight, and ſo ſucceſſively one fought on foote, and the other on horſe backe, each in his turne one after another. I am perſwaded that in reſpect of ſufficiencie, of comlineſſe, & of grace on horſeback, no Nation goeth beyond vs. A good horſe-man, (ſpeaking according to our phraſe) ſeemeth rather to reſpect an vndiſmayed courage, then an affected cleane ſeate. The man moſt skillfull, beſt and ſureſt-ſitting comelieſt-graced, and nimbleſt-handed, to ſit, to ride, and mannage a horſe conningly, that ever I knew, & that beſt pleaſed my humor, was Monſieur de Carnavalet, who was Maſter of the horſe vnto our King Henry the ſecond. I have ſeene a man take his full cariere, ſtanding boult-vp-right on both his feet in the ſaddle, leap downe to the ground from-it, and turning backe take-off the ſaddle, and preſently ſet-it on againe as faſt as ever it was, and then leap into it againe, and all this did he whilſt his horſe was running as faſt as might be with his bridle on his necke. I have alſo ſeene him ride over a bonet or cap, and being gone a good diſtance from it, with his bowſhooting backward, to ſtick many arrows in the ſame; then ſitting ſtill in the ſaddle to take vp any thing from the ground: To ſet one foote to the ground, and keepe the other in the ſtirrop, and continnally running doe a thouſand ſuch tumbling and apiſh tricks, wherewith he got his living. There have in my time two men beene ſeene in Conſtantinople, both at once vpon one horſe, and who in his ſpeedieſt running, would by turns, firſt one, and then another, leap downe to the ground, and then into the ſaddle againe, the one ſtill taking the others place. And another, who only with teeth, and without the helpe of any hand, would bridle, curry, rubbe, dreſſe, ſaddle, guirt, and harniſh his horſe. Another that betweene two horſes, and both ſadled, ſtanding vp-right, with one foote in the one, and the ſecond in the other, did beare another man on his armes, ſtanding vp-right, runne a full ſpeedy courſe, and the vppermoſt to ſhoote and hitte any marke with his arrows. Divers have bin ſeene, who ſtanding on their heads, and with their legs out-ſtretched-aloft, having many ſharp-pointed cimitaries faſtned round about the ſaddle, to gallop a full ſpeed. While I was a yoong lad, I ſaw the Prince of Sul
                                 ••
                              on
                                 •
                              
                            at Naples, manage a yoong, a rough, and fierce horſe, and ſhew all maner of horſ-man-ſhip; To holde teſtons or realles vnder his knees, and toes, ſo faſt, as if they had beene nayled there, and all to ſhew his ſure, ſteedy, and vnmovable ſitting.
                     
                     
                        The nine and fortieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of ancient customes,
                        
                        I Would willingly excuſe our people for having no other patterne or rule of perfection, but his owne cuſtomes, his owne faſhions: For, it is a common vice, not onely in the vulgar ſorte, but as it were in all men, to bend their ayme, and frame their thoughts vnto the faſhons, wherein they were borne. I am pleaſed when he ſhall ſee Fabricius or Laelius, who becauſe they are neither attired nor faſhioned according to our manner, that he condemne their countenance to be ſtrange, and their cariage barbarous. But I bewaile his particular indiſcretion, in that he ſuffereth him ſelfe to be ſo blinded, and deceived by the authoritie of preſent cuſtome, and that if cuſtome pleaſeth, he is readie to change opinion, and varie adviſe,

every moneth, nay every day, and judgeth ſo diverſly of himſelfe. When he wore ſhortwaſted doublets, and but little lower then his breaſt, he would maintaine by militant reaſons, that the waſte was in his right place: but when not long after he came to weare them ſo longwaſted, yea almoſt ſo low as his privities, then began he to condemne the former faſhion, as fond, intollerable and deformed; and to commend the latter, as comely, handſome, and commendable. A new faſhion of apparell creepeth no ſooner into vſe, but preſently he blameth and diſpraiſeth the old, and that with ſo earneſt a reſolution, and vniverſall a conſent, that you would ſay, it is ſome kind of madneſſe, or ſelfe-fond humor, that giddieth his vnderſtanding.
                        And for aſmuch as our changing or altering of faſhions, is ſo ſudden and new-fangled, that the inventions, and new deviſes of all the tailors in the world, cannot ſo faſt invent novelties, it muſt neceſſarily follow that neglected, and ſtale reiected faſhions doe often come into credite and vſe againe: And the lateſt and neweſt, within a while-after come to be outcaſt and deſpiſed, and that one ſelfe ſame judgement within the ſpace of fifteene or twenty yeares admitteth, not onely two or three different, but alſo cleane contrary opinions, with ſo light and incredible inconſtancie, that any man would wonder at it. There is no man ſo ſuttle-crafty amongſt vs, that ſuffreth not himſelfe to be enveigled and over-reached by this contradiction, and that is not inſenſibly dazeled, both with his inward and externall eies. I will heere huddle-vp ſome few ancient faſhions that I remember: Some of them like vnto ours, other-ſome farre differing from them: To the end, that having ever this continual variation of humane things in our minde, we may the better enlighten and confirme our tranſported judgement. That maner of fight which we vſe now adaies with rapier and cloke,Caeſ Bel. ci
                                 •
                              . l. 1. was alſo vſed among the Romans, as ſaith Caeſar. Siniſtris ſagos involvunt, gladioſque diſtringnnt: They wrap their left armes in their clokes, and draw their ſwordes. We may to this day obſerve this vice to be amongſt vs, and which we haue taken from them, that is, to ſtay ſuch paſſengers as we meete by the way, and force them to tell vs, who they are, whence they come, whither they goe, and to count it as an injurie, and cauſe of quarrell, if they refuſe to anſwer our demand. In Baths, which our forefathers vſed daily before meales, as ordinarily as we vſe water to waſh our hands, when firſt they came into them, they waſhed but their armes and legges, but afterward (which cuſtome laſted many after-ages; and to this day continueth amongſt divers nations of the world) their whole body over, with compounded and perfumed waters, in ſuch ſort as they held it as a great teſtimonie of ſimplicitie, to waſh themſelves in pure and vncompounded water: Such as were moſt delicate, and effeminate, were wont to perfume their whole bodies over and over, three or foure times every day▪ And often (as our French women have lately taken vp) to picke and ſnip out the haires of their forehead, ſo they of all their body.
                        Quod pectus, quod cruratibi, quodbrachia vellis.Mart. lib. 2. epi. 62. 1.
                        
                        
                           That you from breaſt, legges, armes, the haire
                           Neately pull off (to make them faire.)
                        
                        Although they had choiſe of ointments fit for that purpoſe.
                        Pſilotro nitet, aut arida latet abdita creta.Lib. 6. epi. 93. 9.
                        
                        
                           She ſhines with ointments that make haire to fall,
                           Or with dry chalke ſhe over-covers all.
                        
                        They loved to lie ſoft, and on fine downe-beds, alleaging lying on hard matreſſes as a ſigne of patience. They fed lying on their beds, neere after the maner of the Turkes nowadaies.
                        Inde thoro pater Aeneas ſic orſus ab alto.Virg. Aen. l. 2. 2
                        
                        
                           Father Aeneas thus gan ſay,
                           From ſtately couch where then he lay.
                        
                        And it is reported of Cato Iunior, that after the battell of Pharſalia, and that he began to mourne and bewaile the miſerable ſtate of the common-wealth, and ill condition of publike affaires, he ever eate ſitting on the ground, folowing an auſtere, and obſerving a ſtrict kinde of life. The Beſolas manos was vſed as a ſigne of honor and humilitie, onely toward great perſons. If friends met, after friendly ſalutations, they vſed to kiſſe one another, as the Venetians doe at this day.
                        
                           Gratatúſque darem cum dulcibus oſculaverbis.O
                                    •
                                 id. Pont. l. 4. 
                                    〈…〉
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Give hir I would with greetings graced,
                           Kiſſes with ſweete words enterlaced.
                        
                        And in ſaluting or ſuing to any great man, they touched his knees. Paſicles the Philoſopher, brother vnto Crates, comming to ſalute one, whereas he ſhould have caried his hand to his knee, caried the ſame vnto his genitories. The partie ſaluted, having rudely puſh't him away; What? quoth he, is not that part yours as well as the other? Their manner of ſeeding was as ours, their fruit laſt. They were wont to wipe their tailes (this vaine ſuperſtition of wordes muſt bee left vnto women) with a ſponge, and that's the reaſon why Spongia in Latine is counted an obſcene word: which ſponge was ever tied to the end of a ſtaffe, as witneſſeth the ſtorie of him, that was carried to be devoured of the wild beaſts before the people, who deſiring leave to goe to a privie before his death, and having no other meanes to kil himſelfe, thruſt downe the ſponge and ſtaffe, hee found in the privie, into his throte, wherewith he choked himſelfe. Having ended the delights of nature, they were wont to wipe their privities with perfumed wooll.
                        At 
                              •••
                           i nil faciam, ſed lot â mentula land.Mart. li. 11. 
                                 •
                              . pig. 52. 11.
                        
                        
                           To thee no ſuch thing will I bring,
                           But with waſh't wooll another thing.
                        
                        In every ſtreete of Rome were placed tubs, and ſuch veſſels for paſſengers to make water-in.
                        
                           Puſi ſaepe lacum propter, ſe ac dolia curtaLu
                                    •
                                 r. l. 4. 1018.
                           
                           Somno deiuncti credunt extollere veſlem.
                        
                        
                           Children aſleepe oft thinke they take vp all
                           Neere to ſome piſſing tub, ſome lake (ſome wall.)
                        
                        They vſed to breake their faſt, and nonchion betweene meales, and all ſummer time, had men that ſolde ſnowe vp and downe the ſtreetes, wherewith they refreſhed their wines; of whom ſome were ſo daintie, that all winter long they vſed to put ſnow into their wine, not deeming it colde enough. Principall, and noble men had their cup-bearers, taſters, carvers and buffons to make them merrie. In Winter their viandes were brought and ſet on the boord vpon arches, as we vſe chafing diſnes; and had portable kitchins (of which I have ſeene ſome) wherein might be drawne, whereſoever one liſt, a whole ſervice and meſſe of meate.
                        
                           Has vobis epulas habete lauti,
                           Nos offendimur ambulante caena.Mart. l. 7. 
                                    •
                                  pig. 47. 5.
                           
                        
                        
                           Take you daintie-mouth'd ſuch ſtirring feaſts;
                           With walking meales we are offended gueſts.
                        
                        And in ſummer they often cauſed cold water (being carried through pipes) to drill vpon them as they ſate in their dining-chambers, or lowe parlers, wherein ceſterns, they kept ſtore of fiſh alive, which the by-ſtanders might at their pleaſure, chuſe and take with their hands, and have-it dreſt every man according to his fantaſie. Fiſh hath ever had this priviledge, as at this day it hath; that chiefe Gentlemen, are pleaſed, and have skill to dreſſ-it beſt: And to ſay truth, the taſte of fiſh is much more delicate and exquiſit, then that of fleſh at leaſt in mine. But in all manner of magnificence, delitiouſnes, riotous gluttonie, inventions of voluptuouſnes, wantonnes, and ſumptuoſitie, we truly endevor, as much as may be, to equall and come neere them: For, our will and taſte is as much corrupted as theirs, but our skill and ſufficiencie is farre ſhort of them: Our wit is no more capable, and our ſtrength no more able to approach and match them in theſe vitious and blame-worthie parts, then in vertuous and commendable actions: For, both proceede from a vigor of ſpirit, and farre-reaching witte; which, without compariſon, was much greater in them, then now in vs. And mindes, by how much more ſtrong and excellent they are, ſo much leſſe facultie and meanes have they, to doe, either excellently well, or notoriouſly ill. The chiefeſt aime amongſt them was a meane or mediocrity. The Foremoſt or Laſt, in writing or ſpeaking, had no ſignification of preheminence or greatnes, as may evidently appeare by their writings. They would as familiarly and as ſoone ſay. Oppius and Caeſar, as Caeſar and Oppius; and as indifferently, I and thou, as thou and I. And that's the reaſon why I have heretofore noted in the life of Flaminius, in our French Plutarke, a place, where it ſeemeth that the Author, ſpeaking of the iealouſie of glorie, that was betweene the Aetolians and the Romanes, for the gaine of a battell, which they had obtained in common, maketh for the purpoſe, that in Greeke ſongs the Aetolians

were named before the Romans, except there bee ſome Amphibologie in the French words: for, in that toong I reade-it. When Ladies came vnto ſlooves or hot-houſes, they made-it not daintie to admit men into their companie, and to be waſhed, rubbed, chafed and annointed by the hands of their groomes and pages.
                        
                           Inguina ſuccinctus nigrà tibi ſervus alut à
                           —Stat, quoties calidis nuda foveris aquis.
                              
                                 Epig▪
                                  
                                 
                                    •
                                 
                                 ▪ 
                                 
                                    〈…〉
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           Your man, whoſe loynes blacke lether guird's, ſtand's-by,
                           Whilſt in warme water you ſtarke-naked lie.
                        
                        They alſo vſed to ſprinkle themſelves all ouer with certaine powders, thereby to alay and repreſſe all maner of filth or ſweate. The ancient Gaules (ſaith Sidonius Apollinaris) wore their haire long before, and all the hinder part of their head ſhauen, a faſhion that our wanton youths and effeminate gallants, have lately renued, and in this new-fangled and fond-doting age, brought vp againe, with wearing of long-dangling locks before. The ancient Romans, paid the water-men their fare or due ſo ſoone as they came into the boate, whereas we pay-it when they ſet vs on ſhore.
                        —dum as exigitur, dum mula ligatur,Hor. l. 1. ſat. 5. 13. Tota abit hora.
                        
                           While they call for their fare, tie drawe-mule to,
                           There runn's away, a full houre, if not two.
                        
                        Women were wont to lie on the vtmoſt ſide of the bed, and therefore was Caeſar called Suet Iul. Ca
                                 •
                               Sponda Regis Nicomedis: King Nicomedes his beds ſide: They tooke breath while they were c. 49. drinking and vſed to baptiſe, or put water in their wines.
                        —quis puer ociusHor. l. 2. 
                                 •
                              d. 1
                                 •
                              
                              ▪ 18. Reſtinguet ardentis falerni pocula praetereunte limphâ?
                        
                           What boy of mine or thine
                           Shall coole our cup of wine
                           With running water fine?
                        
                        Thoſe couſening and minde-deceiving countenances of lake is were alſo amongſt them
                        
                           O Iane, à tergo quem nulla ciconia pinſitPerſ. ſat. 1. 58.
                           
                           Nec manus auriculas imitata eſt mobilis albas,
                           Nec linguae quantum ſitiet canis Apula tantum.
                           
                              O Ianus, whom behinde no Storks-bill doth deride,
                           Nor nimble hand reſembling mak's eares white and wide,
                           Nor ſo much tongue lil'd out as dogges with thirſt ore-dride
                        
                        The Argian and Romane Ladies, mourned in white, as our dames wont to doe; and if I might be credited, and beare-ſway amongſt them, they ſhould continue it ſtill. But becauſe there are many bookes, that treate of this argument I will ſay no more of-it.
                     
                     
                        The fiftieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of Democritus and Heraclitus.
                        
                        IVdgement is an inſtrument for all ſubiects, and medleth every where. And therefore in the Eſſayes I make of it, there is no maner of occaſion, I ſeeke not to employ therein. If it be a ſubiect I vnderſtand not my ſelfe, therein I make triall of it, ſounding afarre off the depth of the ford, and finding the ſame over deepe for my reach, I keepe my ſelfe on the ſhoare. And to acknowledge not to be able to wade through, is a part of it's effect, yea of ſuch whereof he vanteth moſt. If I light vpon a vaine and idle ſubiect, I aſſay to trie, and endevor to ſee, whether I may find a good ground to worke vpon, and matter to frame a body, and wherewith to builde and vnder-lay-it. Sometimes I addreſſe my judgement and contrive-it to a noble and out-worne ſubject, wherein is nothing found ſubſiſting of it ſelfe, the high way to

it, being ſo bare-trodden, that it cannot march, but in other ſteps. There he pleaſeth himſelf in chuſing the courſe he thinkes beſt, and a thouſand paths ſometimes he ſaith, this or that was beſt choſen. I take my firſt Argument of fortune: All are alike vnto me: And I never purpoſe to handle them throughly: For, there is nothing wherein I can perceive the full perfection: Which they doe not that promiſe to ſhew it-vs. Of a hundred partes and viſages that everie thing hath, I take one, which ſometimes I ſlightly runne-over, and other times but curſorily glance-at. And yet other whilſt I pinch it to the quicke. And give it a Stockado, not the wideſt, but the deepeſt I can. And for the moſt part I love to ſeize vpon them by ſome vnwonted luſtre. I would adventure to treate and diſcourſe of ſome matter to the depth; knew I my ſelfe leſſe, or where I deceived in mine owne impuiſſance; Scattering here one and there another worde: Scantlings taken from their maine ground-work, diſorderly diſperſed, without any well-grounded deſigne and promiſe. I am not bound to make it good, nor without varying to keepe my ſelfe cloſe tied vnto-it; whenſoever it ſhall pleaſe me to yeeld my ſelfe to doubt, to vncertaintie, and to my Miſtris forme, which is ignorance. Ech motion ſheweth and diſcouereth what we are. The very ſame minde of Caeſar, we ſee in directing, marſhalling, and ſetting the battel of Pharſalia, is likewiſe ſeene to order, diſpoſe, and contrive, idle, trifling and amorous deviſes. We iudge of a horſe, not onely by ſeeing him ridden, and cunningly managed, but alſo by ſeeing him trot, or pace; yea, if we but looke vpon him as he ſtands in the ſtable. Amongſt the functions of the ſoule, ſome are but meane and baſe. He that ſeeth hir no further, can never know hir thorowly. And he that ſeeth hir march hir naturall and ſimple pace, doth peradventure obſerve hir beſt. The winds of paſſions take hir moſt in her higheſt pitch, ſeeing ſhe entirely coucheth hirſelfe vpon every matter, and wholy therein exerciſeth hirſelfe: and handleth but one at once; not according to-it, but according to hirſelfe. Things ſeverall in themſelves have peradventure, weight, meaſure, and condition: But inwardly, in vs, ſhe cuttes-it out for them, as ſhe vnderſtandeth the ſame hirſelfe. Death is fearefull and vgly vnto Cicero; wiſhed-for and deſired of Cato: and indifferent vnto Socrates. Health, well-fare, conſcience, authoritie, riches, glory, beauty, and their contraries are diſpoyled at the entrance, and receive a new veſture at the ſoules hand. Yea, and what coulour ſhe pleaſeth; browne, bright greene, ſadde, or any hew elſe: ſharpe or ſweete, deepe or ſuperficiall, and what each of them pleaſeth. For, none of them did ever verifie their ſtiles, their rules, or formes in common; each on ſeverally is a Queene in hir owne eſtate. Therefore let vs take no more excuſes from externall qualites of things. To vs it belongeth to give our ſelves accoumpt of it. Our good, and our evill hath no dependancy, but from our ſelves. Let vs offer our vowes and offerings vnto it; and not to fortune. She hath no power over our maners. Why ſhall I not iudge of Alexander, as I am ſitting and drinking at Table, and talking in good company? Or if hee were playing at Cheſſe, what ſtring of his witte doth not touch or harpe on this fond-childiſh, and time-conſuming play? I lothe and ſhunne-it, only becauſe there is not ſport inough in it, and that in his recreation, he is over ſerious with vs, being aſhamed I muſt apply that attention thervnto, as might be imployed on ſome good ſubiect. He was no more buſied in levying his forces and preparing for his glorious paſſage into India; nor this other in diſintangling and diſcovering of a paſſage, whence dependeth the wel-fare and ſafety of mankind. See how much our mind troubleth this ridiculous ammuzing, if all hir ſinnewes bandy not. How amply ſhe giveth every one Law in that, to know and directly to iudge of himſelfe. I doe not more vniverſally view and feele my ſelfe in any other poſture. What paſſion doth not exerciſe vs thervnto? Choller, ſpight, hatred, impatience, and vehement ambition to overcome, in a matter wherein it were haply more excuſable to be ambitious for to be vanquiſhed. For, a rare pre-excellency, and beyond the common reach, in ſo frivolous a thing, is much miſ-ſeeming a man of honor. What I ſay of this example, may be ſpoken of all others. Every parcell, every occupation of a man, accuſ th, and ſheweth him equal vnto another. Democritus and Heraclitus were two Philoſophers, the firſt of which, finding and deeming humane condition to be vaine and ridiculous, did never walke abroad, but with a laughing, ſcornefull and mocking countenance: Whereas Heraclitus taking pitie and compaſſion of the very ſame condition of ours, was continuallie ſeene with a ſadde, mournefull, and heavy cheere, and with teares trickling downe his blubbered eyes.Iuuen. Sa
                                 •
                              . 10. 28.
                        
                        
                           —Alter
                           
                           Ridebat quoties à limine moverat vnum
                           
                              Protuleratque pedem, fl bat contrarius alter.
                        
                        
                           One from his dore, his foote no ſooner paſt,
                           But ſtraight he laught; the other wept as faſt.
                        
                        I like the firſt humor beſt, not becauſe it is more pleaſing to laugh, then to weepe; but for it is more diſdainefull, and doth more condemne vs then the other. And me thinkes we can never bee ſufficiently deſpiſed, according to our merite. Bewailing and commiſeration, are commixed with ſome eſtimation of the thing moaned and wailed. Things ſcorned and contemned, are thought to be of no worth. I cannot be perſwaded, there can be ſo much ill lucke in vs, as there is apparant vanitie, nor ſo much malice, as ſottiſhneſſe. We are not ſo full of evill, as of voydneſſe and inanitie. We are not ſo miſerable, as baſe and abject. Even ſo Diogenes, who did nothing but triflle, toy, and dally with himſelfe, in rumbling and rowling of his tub, and flurting at Alexander, accoumpting vs but flies, and bladders puft with winde, was a more ſharp, a more bitter, and a more ſtinging judge, and by conſequence, more juſ
                              •
                            and fitting my humor, then Timon, ſurnamed the hater of all mankinde. For looke what a man hateth, the ſame thing he takes to hart. Timon wiſht all evill might light on-vs; He was paſſionate in deſiring our ruine. He ſhunned and loathed our converſation as dangerous and wicked; and of a depraved nature: Whereas the other ſo little regarded vs, that wee could neither trouble nor alter him by our contagion; forſooke our company, not for feare, but for diſdaine of our commerce: He never thought vs capable or ſufficient to doe either good or evill. Of the ſame ſtampe was the anſwere of Statilius to whom Bru
                                 •
                              us ſpake to winne him to take parte, and adhere to the conſpiracy againſt Caeſar: He allowed the enterprize to be very juſt, but diſalowed of the men that ſhould perform the ſame, as vnworthy that any man ſhould put him ſelfe in any adventure for them: Conformable to diſcipline of Hegeſias, who ſaide, That a wiſe man ought never to doe any thing but for himſelfe; foraſmuch as he alone is worthy to have any action performed for him: and to that of Theodorus, who thought it an iniustice, that a wiſe man ſhould in any caſe hazard himſelfe for the good and benefit of his country, or to indanger his wiſedome for fooles. Our owne condition is as ridiculous as riſible as much to be laught at as able to laugh.
                     
                     
                        The one and fiftieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of the vanitie of Wordes.
                        
                        ARethorician of ancient times, ſaid, that his trade was, to make ſmall things appeare and ſeeme great. It is a ſhooemaker, that can make great ſhooes for a little foote. Had hee lived in Sparta, he had doubtleſſe beene well whipped, for profeſſing a falſe, a couzening and deceitfull arte. And I thinke, Archidamus King of that Citie did not without aſtoniſhment liſten vnto the anſwer of Thucydides, of whom he demaunded, whether he, or Pericles, was the ſtrongeſt and nimbleſt wreſtler; whoſe anſwer was this, Your quection Sir, is very hard to be decided; for if in wrestling with him, I giue him a fall, with his faire words he perſwadeth thoſe that ſaw him on the ground, that he never fell, and ſo gets the victorie. Thoſe that maske & paint women, commit not ſo foule a fault, for it is no great loſſe, though a man ſee them not, as they were naturally borne and vnpainted: Whereas theſe profeſſe to deceiue and beguile, not our eies, but our iudgement; and to baſtardize and corrupt the eſſence of things. Thoſe common-wealths, that haue maintained themſelves in a regular, formall, and well governd eſtate, as that of Creete and Lacedemon, did never make any great eſteeme of Orators. Ariſton did wiſely define Rhetorike to be a Science, to perſwade the vulgare people: Socrates and Plato, to be an Art to deceiue and flatter. And thoſe which deny it in the generall deſcription, doe every where in their precepts verifie the ſame. The Mahometanes, by reaſon of it's invtilitie, forbid the teaching of it to their children. And the Athenians, perceiving how pernicious the profeſſion and vſe thereof was, and of what credite in their Citie, ordained, that their principall part, which is to moove affections, ſhould be diſmiſſed and taken away, together with all exordiums and perorations. It is an inſtrument deviſed, to buſie, to manage,

and to agitate a vulgar and diſordered multitude; and is an implement imployed, but about diſtempered and ſicke mindes, as Phyſicke is about crazed bodies. And thoſe where either the vulgar, the ignorant, or the generalitie have had all power, as that of Rhodes, thoſe of Athens, and that of Rome, and where things have ever beene in continuall diſturbance and vproare, thither haue Orators and the profeſſors of that Arte flocked. And verily, if it be well looked into, you ſhall finde very few men in thoſe common-wealths, that without helpe of eloquence have attamed to any woorthy eſtimation and credite: `Pompey, Caeſar, Craſſus, Lucullus, Lentulus Metellus, have thence taken their greateſt ſtay and furtherance, whereby they have aſcended vnto that height and greatneſſe of authoritie, wherevnto they at laſt attained, and againſt the opinion of better times have more prevailed with words than with armes. For, L. Ʋolumnius ſpeaking publikely in favour of the election, which ſome had made of Quintus Fabius, and Publius Decius, to be Conſuls; ſaith thus; They are men borne vnto warre, of high ſpirits, of great performance, and able to effect any thing, but rude, ſimple, and vnarted in the combate of talking; mindes truly Conſulare. They only are good Pretors, to do
                                 •
                               iuſtice in the Citie (ſaith he) that are ſubtile, cauteleus, well-ſpoken, wily and lippe-wiſe. Eloquence hath chiefely flouriſhed in Rome when the common-wealths affaires have beene in worſt eſtate, and that the devouring Tempeſt of civill broyles, and inteſtine warres did moſt agitate and turmoyle them. Even as a rancke, free and vntamed ſoyle, beareth the ranck eſt and ſtrongeſt weeds, whereby it ſeemeth that thoſe common-weales, which depend of an abſolute Monarch, have leſſe neede of-it then others: For, that fooliſhneſſe and facilitie, which is found in the common multitude, & which doth ſubject the ſame, to be managed, perſwaded, and led by the eares, by the ſweet alluring and ſenſe-entrancing ſound of this harmony, without duely weighing, knowing, or conſidering the trueth of things by the force of reaſon: This facility and eaſy yeelding, I ſay, is not ſo eaſily found in one only ruler, and it is more eaſie to warrant him from the impreſſion of this poyſon, by good inſtitution and ſound counſell, There was never ſeene any notable or farre-renowmed Orator to come out of Macedon or Perſia. What I have ſpoken of-it, hath beene vpon the ſubiect of an Italian, whom I have lately entertained into my ſervice. Who during the life of the whilom cardinal Caraffa ſerved him in the place of ſteward of his houſe. Enquiring of his charge, and particular quality, he tolde me, a long, formall, and eloquent diſcourſe of the ſcience or skill of epicuriſme and gluttony, with ſuch an Oratory-gravitie, and Magiſtrale countenaunc, as if he had diſcourſed of ſome high myſterious point of divinitie, wherein he hath very methodically decifred and diſtinguiſhed ſundry differences of appetites: Firſt of that which a man hath faſting, then of that men have after the firſt, the ſecond, and third ſervice. The ſeverall means how ſometimes to pleaſe-it ſimply, and other times to ſharpen and provoke the ſame; the policy and rare invention of his ſawces: Firſt, in generall terms, then part cularizing the qualities and ſeverall operations of the ingredients, and their effects: The differences of ſalades according to their diſtinct ſeaſons, which muſt be ſerved in warme, and which cold: The maner how to dreſſe, how to adorne, and embelliſh them, to make them more pleaſing to the ſight. After that, he entred into a large and farre-fetcht narration, touching the true order, and due methode of ſervice, full of goodly and important conſiderations.
                        —Nec minimo ſanè diſcrimine refert,Sat. 5. 127. Quo geſlu lepores, & quo gallina ſecetur.
                        
                           What grace we vſe, it makes ſmall diff'rence, when
                           We carue a Hare, or elſe breake vp a Hen.
                        
                        And all that filled vp and ſtuffed with rich magnificent words, well couched phraſes, oratorie figures, and patheticall metaphors; yea ſuch as learned men vſe and imploy in ſpeaking of the Government of an Empire, which made me remember my man.
                        
                           Hoc ſalſum eſt, hoc aduſtum eſt, hoc lautum est parum,Ter. Adel. act. 3. ſat. 4. 62.
                           
                           Illudrectè, iterum ſic memento, ſedulò,
                           Moneo quae poſſum pro mea ſapientia.
                           Postremò tanquam in ſpeculum, in patinas, Demea,
                           Inſpicere iubeo, & moneo quid facto vſus ſit.
                        
                        
                           This diſh is ſalt, this burnt, this not ſo fine,
                           That is well done, doe ſo againe; Thus I
                           As my beſt wiſedome ſerves, all things aſſigne.
                           
                              Laſtly Sir, I commaund, they neatly prie,
                           On diſhes, as a glaſſe,
                           And ſhew what needfull was.
                        
                        Yet did thoſe ſtrict Graecians commend the order and diſpoſition, which Paulus Ae
                                 ••••
                              
                              us obſerved in the banquet he made them at his returne from Macedon: But heere I ſpeake not of the effects, but of the words. I know not whether they worke that in others, which they doe in mee. But when I heare our Architects mouth-out thoſe bigge and ratling words of Pilaſters, Architraves, Cornixes, Frogtiſpices, Corinthian, and Dorike workes and ſuch-like fuſtian-termes of theirs, I cannot let my wandering imagination from a ſodaine apprehenſion of Apollidonius his pallace, and I finde by effect, that they are the ſeelie, and decayed peeces of my Kitchin-doore. Doe but heare one pronounce Metonymia Metaphore, Allegory, Etimologie, and other ſuch traſh-names of Grammer, would you not thinke, they meant ſome forme of a rare and ſtrange language; They are titles and words that concerne your chamber-maides tittle-tattle. It is a foppery and cheating tricke, couſin-Germane vnto this, to call the offices of our eſtate by the proud titles of the ancient Romans, though they have no reſemblance at al of charge, and leſſe of authoritie and power. And this likewiſe, which in mine opinion will one day remaine as a reproch vnto our age, vnworthily and vndeſervedly to beſtow on whom we liſt the moſt glorious Surnames and loftieſt titles, wherewith antiquitie in many long-continued ages honoured but one or two perſons. Plato hath by ſuch an vniuerſall conſent borne-away the ſurname of Divine, that no man did ever attempt to envie him for it. And the Italians, which vaunt (and indeed with ſome reaſon) to have generally more lively, and farre reaching wits, and their diſcourſe more ſound and ſinnowy, then other nations of their times, have lately therewith embelliſhed Peter Aretine; in whom except it be an high-raiſed, proudly-pufft, mind-moving, and heart-danting maner of ſpeech, yet in good ſooth more than ordinarie, wittie and ingenious; But ſo new fangled, ſo extravagant, ſo fantaſticall, ſo deep-labored; & to conclude, beſides the eloquence, which be it as it may be, I cannot perceive any thing in it, beyond or exceeding that of many other writers of his age, much leſſe that it in any ſort approacheth that ancient divinitie. And the ſurname Great, we attribute and faſten the ſame on Princes, that have nothing in them exceeding popular greatneſſe.
                     
                     
                        The two and fiftieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of the parcimony of our Forefathers.
                        
                        
                           ATtilius Regulus, Generall of the Romanes armie in Affrike, in the middeſt of his glory and victorie againſt the Carthaginians, writ vnto the common-wealth, that a hyne or plough-boy whom he had left alone to overſee and husband his land (which in all was but ſeuen acres of ground) was run away from his charge, & had ſtolne from him all his implements & tools, belonging to his husbandry, craving leave to be diſcharged, & that he might come home to looke to his buſineſſe, for feare his wife and children ſhould thereby be endomaged: the Senate tooke order for him, and appointed another man to looke to his land and buſineſſe, and made that good vnto him, which the other had ſtolne from him, & appointed his wife & children to be maintained at the common-wealths charge. Cato the elder returning Conſul from Spaine, ſold his horſe of ſervice, to ſave the monie he ſhould haue ſpent for his tranſport by ſea into Italy: And being chiefe governor in Sardinia, went al his viſitations a foot, having no other traine, but one officer of the common-welth, who caried his gown, and a veſſell to do ſacrifice in, and for the moſt part carried his male himſelfe. He boaſted that he neuer woare gowne, that coſt him more then tenne crowns, nor ſent morethen one ſmilling ſterling to the market for one whole daies proviſion, & had no Countrie houſe rough-caſt or painted over. Scipio Aemilianus after he had triumphed twice, and twice been Conſull, went on a ſolemne Legation, accompanied and attended-on onely with ſeven ſervants. It is reported that Homer had neuer any more then one ſervant. Plato three, and

                           Zeno chiefe of the Stoikes ſect, none at al. Tiberius Gracchus, being then one of the principal men amongſt the Romanes and ſent in commiſſion about weightie matters of the common-wealth was allotted but ſix-pence halfe-penie a day for his charges.
                     
                     
                        The three and fiftieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of a ſaying of Caeſar.
                        
                        IF we ſhall ſometimes ammuſe our ſelves and conſider our eſtate, and the time we ſpend in controlling others, and to know the things that are without vs; would we but emploie the ſame in ſounding our ſelves throughly, we ſhould eaſily perceive how all this our contexture is built of weake and decaying pieces. It is not an eſpeciall teſtimonie of imperfection, that we cannot ſettle our contentment on any one thing, and that even of our owne deſire and imagination, it is beyond our power to chuſe what we ſtande in neede of? Whereof the diſputation that hath ever beene amongſt Philoſophers beareth ſufficient witnes, to finde out the chiefe felicitie or ſummum bonum of man, and which yet doth, and ſhall eternally laſt without reſolution or agreement.
                        —àum abeſt quod avemus, id exuperare videturIuer. li. 3. 25. Caet era, poſt aliud cùm contigit illud avemus, Et ſitis aequatenet.
                        
                           While that is abſent which we wiſh, the reſt
                           That ſeemes to paſſe, when ought elſe is addreſt,
                           That we deſire, with equall thirſt oppreſt.
                        
                        Whatſoever it be that falleth into our knowledge and joviſſance, we finde, it doth not ſatisfie vs, and we ſtill follow and gape after future, vncertaine, and vnknowne things, becauſe the preſent and vnknowne pleaſe vs not, and doe not ſatisfie vs. Nor (as I thinke) becauſe they have not ſufficiently wherewith to ſatiate and pleaſe vs, but the reaſon is, that we apprehend and ſeize on them with an vnruly, diſordered, and diſeaſed taſte and hold-faſt.
                        
                           Nam cùm vidit hic ad vſum quae flagitat vſus,Luer. lib. 9.
                           
                           Omnia iam fermè mortalibus eſſe parata,
                           Diuitijs homines & honore & laude potentes
                           Affluere, atque bonâ natorum excellere famâ,
                           Nec minus eſſe domi, cuiquam tamen anxia corda,
                           Atque animum infestis cogi ſeruire querelis:
                           Intellexit ibi vitium va
                                 •
                               facere ipſum,
                           Omniáque illius vitio corrumpier in
                                 •
                              us
                           Quae collata foris & commoda quaeque venirent.
                        
                        
                           For when the wiſeman ſaw, that all almoſt,
                           That vſe requires, for men prepared was,
                           That men enriches, honors, praiſes boaſt,
                           In good report of children others paſſe,
                           Yet none at home did beare leſſe penſive heart,
                           But that the minde was forſt to ſerve complaint,
                           He knew, that fault the veſſell did empart,
                           That all was marr'd within by veſſels taint,
                           What ever good was wrought by any art.
                        
                        Our appetite is irreſolute, and vncertaine; it can neither holde nor enjoy any thing handſomly and after a good faſhion. Man ſuppoſing it is the vice & fault of things he poſſeſſeth, feedeth and filleth himſelfe with other things, which he neither knoweth, nor hath vnderſtanding of, whereto he applyeth both his deſires and hopes, and taketh them as an honor and reverence to himſelf; as ſaith Ceſar, Communs fit vitio naturae, vt inviſis, latit antibus atque in
                           Caſ. b
                                 •
                              l. civ. li. 2. 
                           cognitis rebus magis confidamus, vehementiùſque exterreamur. It hapneth by the common fault of nature, that both wee are more confident, and more terrified by things vnſeene, things hidden, and vnknowne.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        The foure and fiftieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of vaine Subtilties, or ſubtill Deviſes.
                        
                        THere are certaine frivolus and vaine inventions, or as ſome call them, ſubtilties of wit, by meanes of which, ſome men doe often endevor to get credit and reputation: as divers Poets, that frame whole volumes with verſes beginning with one letter: we ſee Egges, Wings, Hatchets, Croſſes, Globes, Columnes, & divers other ſuch-like figures anciently faſhioned by the Graecians, with the meaſure and proportion of their verſes, ſpreading, lengthning, and ſhortning them, in ſuch ſort as they juſtly repreſent ſuch and ſuch a figure. Such was the ſcience and profeſſion of him, who long time buſied himſelfe, to number how many ſeverall waies the letters of the Alphabet might be ranged, and found-out that incredible number mentioned by Plutarke. I allow of his opinion, who having one brought before him, that was taught with ſuch induſtrie, and ſo curiouſly to caſt a graine of Millet with his hand, that without ever miſſing, he would every time make-it goe through a needles-eye; and being entreated to beſtow ſome thing vpon him, (as a reward for ſo rare a skill,) verie pleaſantly and worthily, commaunded, that this cunning workman ſhould have two or thee peckes of Millet delivered him, to the end his rare arte and wittie labour might not remaine without da lie exerciſe. It is a wonderfull teſtimonie of our judgements imbecilitie, that it ſhould commend and allow of things, either for their rareneſſe, or noveltie, or for their difficultie, though neither goodneſſe or profit be joyned vnto them. We come but now from my houſe, where we have a while recreated our ſelves, with deviſing who could find out moſt things, that held by both extreame endes; As for example, Sire, is in our tongue a title onely given to the moſt imminent perſon of our ſtate, which is the King, and yet is commonly given to ſome of the vulgar ſort, as vnto Marchants and Pedlers, and nothing concerneth thoſe of the middle ſort, and that are betweene both. Women of chiefeſt calling and qualitie are called Dames, the meane ſort Damoiſels, and thoſe of the baſeſt ranke, are alſo entitled `Dames. The clothes of eſtate, which we ſee ſet over tables and chaires, are onely allowed in Princes houſes, yet we ſee them vſed in Tavernes. Democritus was wont to ſay, That Gods and beaſts, had quicker ſenſes and ſharper wi
                                 •
                              s then men, who are of the middle ranke. The Romanes vſed to weare one ſelfe ſame garment on mourning and on feſtivall daies. It is moſt certaine, that both an extreame feare, and an exceeding heat of courage, do equally trouble and diſtemper the belly. The nick-name of Iremblam, wherewith Zanchi
                                 •
                              
                            the twelſt King of Navarre was ſurnamed, teacheth, that boldneſſe, aſwell as feare, engender a ſtartling and ſhaking of the limbs. Thoſe which armed, either him, or any other of like nature, whoſe skin would quiver, aſſa ed to re-aſſure him, by diminiſhing the danger wherein he was like to fall; you have no perfect knowledge of me (ſaid he,) for if my fleſh knew how far my courage will ere-long carrie-it, it would preſently fall into a flat ſwoune. That chilneſſe, or as I may terme it, faintneſſe, which we feel after the exerciſes of 
                              Ʋenus, the ſame doth alſo proceede of an over vehement appetite and diſordred heat. Exceſſive heat and extreame cold doe both hoile and roſt. Aristotle ſaith, That leaden veſſels doc as well melt and conſume away by an exceſſive cold and rigor of winter, as by a vehement heat. Both deſire and ſati
                              •
                           tie fill the ſeats with ſorow, both aboue and vnder voluptuouſneſſe. Follie and wiſedome meet in one point of feeling and reſolution, about the ſuffering of humane accidents. The wiſer ſort doth gourmandiſe and command evill, and others know it not. The latter, (as a man would ſay) ſhort of accidents, the other, beyond. Who after they have well weighed and conſidered their qualities, and dulie meaſured, and rightly judged what they are, over-leap them by the power of a vigorous courage. They diſdaine and tread them vnder foote, as having a ſtrong and ſolide mind, againſt which, if fortunes darts chance to light, they muſt of neceſſitie be blunted and abated, meeting with ſo reſiſting a bodie, as they cannot pierce, or make

any impreſſion therein. The ordinarie and meane condition of men abideth betweene theſe two extremities; which are thoſe that perceive and have a feeling of michiefes, but can not endure them. Both infancie and decrepitude meet with weakneſſe of the braine. Covetiſe and profuſion in a like deſire to acquire and hoard-vp. It may with likelyhoode be ſpoken, that there is a kind of Abecedarie ignorance, preceding ſcience: an other doctorall, following ſcience: an ignorance, which ſcience doth beget: even as it ſpoileth the firſt. Of ſimple, leſſe-curious, and leaſt-inſtructed ſpirits are made good chriſtians, who ſimplie beleeve through reverence and obedience, and are kept in awe of the lawes. In the meane vigor of ſpirits, and ſlender capacitie is engendred the error of opinions: They follow the apparance of the firſt ſenſe; and have ſome title to interpret-it fooliſhneſſe and ſottiſhneſſe, that we are confirmed in ancient waies, reſpecting vs, that are nothing therein inſtructed by ſtudie. The beſt, moſt-ſetled, and cleareſt-ſeeing ſpirits, make another ſort of well-beleevers, who by long and religious inveſtigation, penetrate a more profound, and find-out a more abſtruſe light in ſcriptures, and diſcover the miſterious and divine ſecrets of our eccleſiaſticall pollicie. And therefore ſee we ſome of them, that have reached vnto this laſt ranke, by the ſecond, with wonderfull fruit and confirmation; as vnto the furtheſt bounds of chriſtian intelligence: and injoy their victorie with comfort, thanſ-giving, reformation of manners, and great modeſtie. In which ranke, my purpoſe is not to place theſe others, who to purge themſelves from the ſuſpicion of their forepaſſed errors, and the better to aſſure vs of them, become extreame, indiſcreet, and vnjuſt in the conduct of our cauſe, and taxe and taint the ſame with infinit reproches of violence. The ſimple peaſants are honeſt men; ſo are Philoſophers, (or as our time nameth them, ſtrong and cleare natures) enriched with a large inſtruction of profitable ſciences. The mongrell ſort of husband-men, who have diſdained the firſt forme of ignorance of letters, and could never reach vnto the other (as they that ſit betweene two ſtooles, of which beſides ſo many others I am one) are dangerous, peeviſh, fooliſh, and importunate, and they which trouble the world moſt. Therefore do I (as much as lieth in me) with-draw my ſelfe into the firſt and naturall ſeat, whence I never aſſaied to depart. Popular and meerely naturall Poeſie, hath certaine graces, and in-bred livelineſſe, whereby it concurreth and compareth it ſelfe vnto the principall beautie of perfect and artificiall Poeſie, as may plainly be ſeene in the Villannelles, homely gigs, and countrie ſongs of Gaſconie, which are brought vnto vs from Nations, that have no knowledge at all, either of any learning, or ſo much as of writing. Meane and indifferent Poeſie, and that conſiſteth betweene both, is skorned, and contemned, and paſſeth without honour or eſteeme. But foraſmuch as ſince the paſſage hath been opened vnto the ſpirit, I have found (as it commonly hapneth) that we had apprehended that which is neither ſo nor ſo for a difficult exerciſe, and of a rare ſubject; And that ſince our invention hath been ſet on fire, it diſcovereth an infinit number of like examples; I will onely adde this one: That if theſe Eſſayes were worthie to be judged-of, it might in mine opinion happen, that they would not greatly pleaſe the common and vulgar ſpirits, and as little the ſingular and excellent. The firſt will vnderſtand but little of them, the latter over-much; they might perhaps live and rub out in the middle region.
                     
                     
                        The five and fiftieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of Smels and Odors.
                        
                        IT is reported of ſome, namely of Alexander, that their ſweat, through ſome rare and extraordinarie complexion, yeelded a ſweet-ſmelling ſavour; whereof Plutarke and others ſeeke to find out the cauſe. But the common ſort of bodies are cleane contrarie, and the beſt qualitie they have, is to be cleare of any ſmel at all. The ſweetneſſe of the pureſt breaths hath nothing more perfect in them, then to be without ſavour, that may offend-vs: as are thoſe of healthy-ſound children. And therefore ſaith Plautus;
                        
                        
                           
                           Mulier tum benè, olet, vbi nihil olet.Pla
                                    •
                                 . Moſtel. act. 1. ſc. 3.
                           
                        
                        
                           Then ſmel's a woman purely well,
                           When ſhe of nothing elſe doth ſmell.
                        
                        The moſt exquiſit and ſweeteſt ſavour of a woman, it is to ſmell of nothing; and ſweet, well-ſmelling, ſtrange ſavours, may rightly be held ſuſpicious in ſuch as vſe them; and a man may lawfully thinke, that who vſeth them, doth-it to cover ſome naturall defect: whence proceede theſe ancient Poeticall ſayings.
                        
                           To ſmell ſweet, is to ſtinke,
                           Rides nos Coracine nil olentes,Mart. li. 6. epig. 55. 4
                           
                           Malo quàm benè olere, nil olere,
                        
                        
                           You laugh at vs that we of nothing ſavour,
                           Rather ſmell ſo, then ſweeter (by your ſavour.) And elſe where.
                        
                        Poſt hume non benè olet, qui benè ſemper olet.Li. 2. epig. 12. 4.
                        
                        
                           Good fir, he ſmels not ever ſweet,
                           Who ſmels ſtill ſweeter then is meet.
                        
                        Yet love I greatly to be entertained with ſweet ſmels, and hate exceedingly all maner of ſowre and ill ſavours, which I ſhall ſooner ſmell, then any other.
                        
                           —Namque ſagacius vnus odoror,
                              Hor. epod. 12. 4.
                           
                           Polypus, an gravis hirſutis cubet hircus in alis,
                           Quàm canis acer vbi lateat ſut.
                        
                        
                           Sooner ſmell I, whether a cancred noſe,
                           Or ranke gote-ſmell in hairie arme-pits lie,
                           Then ſharpeſt hounds, where rowting bores repoſe.
                        
                        The ſimpleſt and meerely-naturall ſmels, are moſt pleaſing vnto me; which care ought chiefly to concerne women. In the verie heart of Barbarie, the Scithian women, after they had waſhed themſelves, did ſprinkle, dawbe, and powder all their bodies and faces over, with a certaine odoriferous drug, that groweth in their Countrie: which duſt and dawbing being taken away, when they come neere men, or their husbands, they remaine verie cleane, and with a verie ſweet-ſavouring perfume. What odor ſoever it be, it is ſtrange to ſee, what hold it will take on-me, and how apt my skin is to receive it. He that complaineth againſt nature, that ſhe hath not created man with a fit inſtument, to carrie ſweet ſmels faſt-tied to his noſe, is much to blame: for, they carrie themſelves. As for me in particular, my moſtachoes, which are verie thicke, ſerve me for that purpoſe. Let me but approach my gloves or my hand-kercher to them, their ſmell will ſticke vpon them a whole day. They manifeſt the place I come from. The cloſe-ſmacking, ſweetneſſe-moving, love-alluring, and greediſmirking kiſſes of youth, were heretofore wont to ſticke on them many houres after; yet am I little ſubject to thoſe popular diſeaſes, that are taken by converſation, and bred by the contagion of the ayre: And I have eſcaped thoſe of my time, of which there hath been many and ſeverall kinds, both in the Townes about me, and in our Armie. We read of Socrates, that during the time of many plagues and relapſes of the peſtilence, which ſo often infeſted the Citie of Athens, he never forſooke or went out of the Towne: yet was he the onely man, that was never infected, or that felt any ſickneſſe. Phiſitians might (in mine opinion) draw more vſe and good from odours, then they doe. For, my ſelfe have often perceived, that according vnto their ſtrength and qualitie, they change and alter, and move my ſpirits, and worke ſtrange effects in me: which makes me approve the common ſaying, that the invention of incenſe and perfumes in Churches, ſo ancient and ſo far-diſperſed throughout all nations and religions, had an eſpeciall regard to rejoyce, to comfort, to quicken, to rowze, and to purifie our ſenſes, that ſo we might be the apter and readier vnto contemplation. And the better to judge of it, I would I had my part of the skill, which ſome Cookes have, who can ſo curiouſly ſeaſon and temper ſtrange odors with the ſavour and relliſh of their meats. As it was eſpecially obſerved in the ſervice of the King of Tunes, who in our dayes landed at Naples, to meete and enter-parly with the Emperour Charles the fifth. His viands were ſo exquiſitely farced, and ſo ſumptuouſly ſeaſoned with ſweet odoriferous drugs, and aromaticall ſpices, that it was found vpon his booke of accompt, the dreſſing of one peacocke, and two feſants amounted to one hundred duckets; which was their ordinarie maner of cooking his meates. And when they were carved-vp, not onely the dining chambers, but all the roomes of his pallace, and the ſtreets round about-it were repleniſhed with an exceeding

odoriferous and aromaticall vapour, which continued a long time after. The principall care I take, whereſoever I am lodged, is to avoid, and be far from all maner of filthy, foggy, ill-ſavouring, and vnwholſome aires. Theſe goodly Cities of ſtrangely-ſeated 
                              Ʋenice, and huge-built Paris, by reaſon of the muddie, ſharp, and offending ſavors, which they yeeld; the one by her fennie and mariſh ſcituation, the other by her du
                              •
                           tie vncleanneſſe, and continuall mire, doe greatly alter and diminiſh the favour which I beare them.
                     
                     
                        The ſixe and fiftieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of Praiers and Oriſons.
                        
                        I Propoſe certaine formeleſſe and irreſolute fantaſies, as do thoſe ſchollers, who in ſchooles publiſh doubtfull and ſophiſticall queſtions to be diſputed and canvaſed: not to eſtabliſh the truth, but to find-it out: which I ſubmit to their judgements, to whom the ordering and directing, not onely of my actions and compoſitions, but alſo of my thoughts, belongeth. The condemnation, as well as the approbation of them, will be equally acceptable and profitable vnto me, deeming-it abſurde and impious, if any thing be, either ignorantly, or vnadviſedly ſet downe in this rapſodie, contrarie vnto the ſacred reſolutions, and repugnant to the holie preſcriptions of the Catholike, Apoſtolike, and Romane Church, wherein I was borne, and out of which I purpoſe not to die. And therefore alwaies referring my ſelfe vnto their cenſures that have all power over me, do I meddle ſo raſhly, to write of all manner of purpoſes and diſcourſes, as I do here. I wot not whether I be deceived, but ſithence, by an eſpeciall and ſingular favour of Gods divine bountie, a certaine forme of Praier, hath, by the verie mouth of God, word by word been preſcribed & directed vnto vs, I have ever thought the vſe of-it, ſhould be more ordinarie with vs, then it is. And might I be believed, both riſing and going to bed, ſitting downe and riſing from boorde, and going about any particular action or buſineſſe, I would have all good Chriſtians, to ſay the Pater noſter, and if no other praier, at leaſt not to omit that. The Church may extend, amplifie, and diverſifie praiers according to the need of our inſtruction: For, I know it is alwaies the ſame ſubſtance, and the ſame thing. But that one ſhould ever have this priviledge, that all manner of people, ſhould at all times, and vpon every occaſion have it in their mouth: For, it is moſt certaine, that onely it containeth whatſoever we want, and is moſt fit, and effectuall in all events. It is the onely praier I vſe in every place, at all times, and vpon every accident; and in ſtead of changing, I vſe often repetition of it: whence it commeth to paſſe, that I remember none ſo well as that one. I was even now conſidering, whence this generall errour commeth, that in all our deſſeignes and enterpriſes, of what nature ſoever, we immediatly have recourſe vnto God, and in every neceſſitie, we call vpon his holie name: And at what time ſoever we ſtand in need of any help, and that our weakneſſe wanteth aſſiſtance, we onely invoke him, without conſidering whether the occaſion be juſt or vnjuſt; and what eſtate or action we be in, or go about, be it never ſo vicious or vnlawfull, we call vpon his name and power. Indeed, he is our onely protector, and of power to affoord-vs all maner of help and comfort; but although he vouchſafe to honour vs with this joy-bringing fatherly adoption, yet is he as juſt as he is good; and as good and juſt, as he is mightie: But oftner vſeth his juſtice than his might, and favoureth vs according to the reaſon of the ſame, and not according to our requeſts. Plato in his lawes maketh three ſorts of injurious beliefe in the Gods: Firſt, that there is none at all; Secondly, that they meddle not with our affaires; Thirdly, that they never refuſe any thing vnto our vowes, offrings, and ſacrifices. The firſt errour, according to his opinion, did never continue immutable in man, even from his firſt infancie vnto his latter age. The two ſucceeding may admit ſome conſtancie. His juſtice and power are inſeparable. It is but in vaine to implore his power in a bad cauſe. Man muſt have an vnpolluted

ſoule when he praieth (at leaſt in that moment he addreſſeth himſelfe to pray) and abſolutely free from all vicious paſſions; otherwiſe we our ſelves preſent him the rods to ſcourge vs withall. In liew of redreſſing our fault, we redouble the ſame, by preſenting him with an affection fraught with irreverence, ſinne, and hatred, to whom onely we ſhould ſue for grace and forgiveneſſe. Loe-heere, why I doe not willingly commend thoſe Phariſaicall humours, whom I ſo often behold, and more then ordinarie, to pray vnto God, except their actions immediately preceding or ſucceeding their praiers witneſſe ſome ſhew of reformation or hope of amendment.
                        —Si nocturnus adulterIuven. ſat. 8. 144. Tempora ſanctonico velas adoperta cucullo.
                        
                           If in a cape-cloake-hood befrenchifide
                           Thou a night-whore-munger thy head dooſt hide.
                        
                        And the ſtate of a man that commixeth devotion vnto an execrable life, ſeemeth in ſome ſort to be more condemnable, then that of one, that is conformable vnto himſelfe, and euery way diſſolute. Therefore doth our Church continually refuſe, the favour of hir enterance and ſocietie, vnto cuſtomes and manners, wilfully-obſtinate on ſome egregious villanie. We onely pray by cuſtome and vſe, and for faſhion-ſake, or to ſay better, we but reade and pronounce our prayers: To conclude, it is nothing but a ſhew of formalitie, and a formall ſhew. And it greeveth me to ſee many men, who at grace before and after meat, will with great ſhew of devotion, croſſe themſelves three or foure times, (and it vexeth me ſo much the more, when I call to mind, that it is a ſigne I greatly reverence, and have in continuall vſe, yea, if I be but gaping) and there-whilſt, ſhall you ſee them beſtow all other houres of the day in all maner of hatred, malice, covetouſneſſe, and injuſtice. Many houres ſpend they about vice, but one to God, and that as it were by way of recompence and compoſition. It it wonderous to ſee, ſo far different and divers actions, continue with ſo even a tenor, that no interruption or alteration at all can be perceived, either about their confines, or paſſage from one vnto another. What prodigious conſcience can be at any harts-caſe, foſtring, and feeding with ſo mutuall, quiet, and agreeing ſociety in one ſelfe ſame manſion, both crime and judge? A man whoſe Paillardize and Iuxurie, doth vnceſſantly ſway and rule the head, and who judgeth the ſame ab hominable and moſt hatefull in the ſight of God; what ſaith he vnto his all-ſeeing Majeſtie, when he openeth his lips, either of mouth or hart, to ſpeake to him of-it? He reclaimeth himſelfe, but falleth ſodainly againe. If the obiect of his divine iustice, and his preſence ſhould ſtrike, (as he ſaith) and chastice his ſoule, how ſhort-ſoever the penitence were; feare it ſelfe would ſo often caſt his thought on-it, that he would preſently perceive himſelfe maſter of thoſe vices, which are habituated▪ in-bred, ſetled, and enfleſhed in him. But what of thoſe, which ground a whole life vpon the fruit and benefite of that ſinne, they know to be mortall? How many trades, profeſſions, occupations, and vacations, have we dailie and continually vſed, frequented, and allowed amongeſt vs, whoſe eſſence is vicious and moſt pernicious? And he that would needs confeſſe himſelfe vnto me, and of his owne accord told me, that for feare of looſing his credite, and to keep the honour of his offices; he had for a whole age, made ſhew and profeſſion, and acted the effects of a religion, which in his owne ſelfe-accuſing conſcience, he judged damnable, and cleane contrarie vnto that he had in his hart: How could he admit and foſter ſo contradictorie and impious a diſcourſe in his hart? With what language entertaine they divine juſtice concerning this ſubject? Their repentance, conſiſting in viſible amends, and manageable reparation; they looſe both towards God and vs, the meanes to alleage the ſame. Are they ſo malapart and fond-hardie as to crave pardon without ſatiſfaction, and ſans repentance? I think it goeth with the firſt, as with theſe laſt: But obſtinacie is not herein ſo eaſie to be vanquiſhed. This ſo ſuddaine contrarietie, and violent volubilitie of opinion, which they faine-vnto-vs, ſeemeth to me a miracle. They preſent-vs with the ſtate of an indigeſtible agonie. How ſantaſticall ſeemed their imagination vnto me, who theſe latter yeares had taken vp a faſhion, to checke and reproove all men, that profeſſed the Catholike Religion, in whom ſhined any extraordinarie brightneſſe of ſpirit, ſaying, that it was but fained: and to doe him honour, held, that whatſoever he ſaid in apparance, he could not inwardly chuſe but have his beliefe reformed according to their byaſe. It is a peeviſh infirmitie, for a man to thinke himſelfe ſo firmely grounded, as to perſwade himſelfe, that the contrarie may not be believed: And more peeviſh alſo, to be perſwaded by ſuch a ſpirit, that

preferreth I wot not what diſparitie of fortune, before the hopes and threats of eternall life, They may beleeve me: If any thing could have attempted my youth, the ambition of the hazard, and difficultie, which followed this late-moderne enterprize, ſhould have had good part therein. It is not without great reaſon, in my poore judgement, that the Church forbiddeth the confuſed, raſh and indiſcreet vſe of the ſacred and divine ſongs, which the holie ſpirit hath indited vnto David. God ought not to be commixed in our actions, but with awfull reverence, and an attention full of honour and reſpect. The word or voice is too divine, having no other vſe but to exerciſe our lungs, and to pleaſe our eares. It is from the conſcience and not from the tongue that it muſt proceed. It is not conſonant vnto reaſon, that a prentiſe or ſhop-keeping boy, amiddeſt his idle, vaine, and frivolous conceits, ſhould be ſuffered to entertaine himſelfe, and play therewith. Nor is it ſeemely, or toollerable, to ſee the ſacred booke of our beliefes-Myſteries, toſſed vp and downe and plaid withall, in a ſhop, or a hall, or a kitchin. They have heretofore been accompted myſteries, but through the abuſe of times, they are now held as ſports and recreations. So ſerious, and venerable a ſtudie ſhould not, by way of paſtime, and tumultuarie be handled. It ought to be a fixed, a purpoſed, and ſetled action, to which this preface of our office ſurſum corda ſhould ever be adioyned; and the verie exterior parts of the bodie, ſhould with ſuch a countenance, be referred vnto it, that to all mens eyes it may witneſſe a particular attention and duteous reſpect. It is not a a ſtudie fitting all men, but onely ſuch as have vowed themſelves vnto-it, and whom God hath, of his infinit mercie, called thereto. The wicked, the vngodly, and the ignorant are thereby empaired. It is no hiſtorie to be fabulouſly reported, but a hiſtorie to be dutifully reverenced, awfully feared, and religiouſly adored. Are they not pleaſantly conceited, who becauſe they have reduced the ſame into the vulgar tongues, and that all men may vnderſtand-it, perſwade themſelves, that the people ſhall the better conceive and digeſt the ſame? Conſiſteth-it but in the words, that they vnderſtand not all they find written? Shall I ſay more? By approaching thus little vnto it, they goe backe from it. Meere ignorance, and wholy relying on others, was verily more profitable and wiſer, then is this verball, and vaine knowledge, the nurſe of preſumption, and ſourſe of temeritie. Moreover, I am of opinion, that the vncontrouled libertie, that all men have to wreſt, diſſipate, and wyre-draw a word ſo religious, and important, to ſo many ſeverall idiomes, hath much more danger then profit following-it. The Iewes, the Mahometans, and well-nigh all other nations, are wedded vnto, and reverence the language, wherein their myſteries and religion had originally been conceived; and any change or tranſlation hath not without apparance of reaſon been directly forbidden. Know we whether there be Iudges enow in Baſque and in Brittanie to eſtabliſh this tranſlation made in their tongue? The vniverſall Church hath no more difficult and ſolemne judgement to make. Both in ſpeaking and preaching the interpretation is wandring, free, and mutable, and of one parcell; ſo is it not alike. One of our Graecian Hiſtorians, doth juſtly accuſe his age, for aſ much as the ſecrets of Chriſtian religion were diſperſed in all publike places, and even amongſt the baſeſt artificers; and that every man might, at his pleaſure, diſpute of it, and at randon ſpeake his mind of the ſame. And it ſhould be a great ſhame for vs, who by the vnſpeakable grace of God injoy the pure and ſacred myſteries of pietie, to ſuffer the ſame to be profaned in the mouthes of ignorant and popular people, ſeeing the verie Gentiles interdicted Socraetes and Plato, and the wiſeſt, to meddle, enquire or ſpeake of things committed vnto the Prieſtes of Delphos. Saying moreover, That the factions of Princes, touching the ſubiect of Divinitie, are armed, not with Zeale, but with anger. That zeale dependeth of divine reaſon and iuſtice, holding an orderly and moderate courſe, but that it changeth into hatred and envie, and in ſteed of corne and grape, it produceth nettles and darnell, if it be directed by humane paſſion. And juſtly ſaith this other, who counſelling the Emperour Theodoſius, affirmed that diſputations, did not ſo much appeaſe and 
                                 •
                              ull aſleep the ſchiſmes of the Church, as ſtir vp and cauſe horeſies. And therefore it behooved, to avoide all contentions, controverſies, and logicall arguings, and wholy and ſincerely refer himſelfe vnto the preſcriptions and orders of faith, eſtabliſhed by our forfathers. And Andronicus the Emperour, finding by chance in his pallace, certaine principall men verie carneſtly diſputing againſt Lapodius, about one of our points of great importance, taunted & rated them verie bitterly, and threatned if they gave not over, he would cauſe them to be caſt into the river. Children and women doe now-adaies governe and ſway the oldeſt and moſt experienced men concerning

Eccleſiaſticall Lawes: whereas the firſt that Plato made, forbiddeth them to enquire after the reaſon of civill Lawes, and which ought to ſtand in place of divine ordinances. Allowing aged men to communicate the ſame amongeſt themſelves, and with the Magiſtrate, adding more-over, alwaies provided it be not in the preſence of yoong men, and before proſane perſons. A notable Biſhop hath left written, that in the other end of the world, there is an Iland called of our predeceſſours Dioſcorida, verie commodious, and fertile of all ſorts of fruits and trees, and of a pure and wholeſome ayre; whoſe people are Chriſtians, and have Churches and Altars; adorned with nothing elſe but croſſes, without other images; great obſervers of faſtings and holy daies; exact payers of their prieſts tithes; and ſo chaſte, that none of them may lawfully all his life long know any more then one wife. And in all other matters ſo well pleaſed with their fortune, that being ſeated in the middeſt of the ſea, they have and know no vſe of ſhips: and ſo ſimple, that of their religion, which they ſo diligently and awfully obſerve, they know not, nor vnderſtand ſo much as one onely word. A thing incredible, to him that know not how the Pagans, who are ſo devout and zealous idolaters, know nothing of their Gods, but onely their bare names and ſtatues. The ancient beginning of Menalippe, a tragedie of Euripides, importeth thus.Eurip.
                        
                        
                           O Iupiter, car de toy rien ſinon,
                           Ie ne cogn
                                 •
                              is ſeulement que le nom.
                        
                        
                           O Iupiter, for vnto me,
                           Onely the name is knowne of thee.
                        
                        I have alſo in my time heard certaine writings complained-of, forſomuch as they are meerly humane and Philoſophicall, without medling with divinitie. He that ſhould ſay to the contrarie (which a man might doe with reaſon) that heavenly doctrine, as a Queene and governeſſe doth better keep hir ranke apart; that ſhe ought to be chiefe ruler and principall head every where, and not ſuffragant and ſubſidiarie. And that peradventure examples in Grammer, Rethorike, and Logike, might more fitly and ſortably be taken from elſewhere, then from ſo ſacred and holie a ſubject, as alſo the arguments of theatres, plots of plaies, and grounds of publike ſpectacles. That myſteriouſly-divine reaſons are more venerably and reverently conſidered alone, and in their native ſtile, then joyned and compared to humane diſcourſe. That this fault is oftner ſeene, which is, that Divines write too humanely, then this other, that humaniſts write not Theologically enough. Philoſophie, ſaith S. Chryſoſtome, is long ſince baeniſhed from ſacred ſchooles, as an vnprofitable ſervant, and deemed vnworthie to behold, but in paſſing by the entrie, or the veſtrie of the ſacred treaſures of heavenly doctrine. That the formes of humane ſpeech, are more baſe, and ought by no meanes to make any vſe of the dignitie, majeſtie, and preheminence of divine ſpeech. As for my part, I give it leave to ſay, Verbis indiſciplinatis, with vndiſciplined words, Fortune, deſtinie, chance, accident, fate, good lucke, ill lucke, the Gods, and other phraſes, as beſt it pleaſeth. I propoſe humane fantaſies and mine owne, ſimply as humane conceits, and ſeverally conſidered; not as ſetled, concluded, and directed by celeſtiall ordinance, incapable of any doubt or alteration. A matter of opinion, and not of faith. What I diſcourſe according to my ſelfe, not what I beleeve according vnto God, with a laicall faſhion, and not a clericall manner; yet ever moſt religious. As children propoſe their eſſayes, inſtructable, not inſtructing. And might not a man alſo ſay without apparance, that the inſtitution, which willeth, no man ſhall dare to write of Religion, but ſparingly, and reſervedly, except ſuch as make expreſſe profeſſion of it, would not want ſome ſhew of profit and juſtice; and happily to me to be ſilent. It hath bin told me, that even thoſe which are not of our conſent, do flatly inhibite amongſt themſelves the vſe of the ſacred name of God in all their vulgar and familiar diſcourſes. They would have no man vſe it as an interjection, or exclamation, nor to be alleaged as a witneſſe, or compariton; wherein I find they have reaſon. And howſoever it be, that we call God to our commerce and ſocietie, it ſhould be zealouſly, ſeriouſly, and religiouſly. There is (as far as I remember) ſuch a like diſcourſe in Xenophon, wherein he declareth, That we ſhould more rarely pray vnto God: for aſmuch as it is not eaſie, we ſhould ſo often ſettle our minds in ſo regular, ſo reformed, and ſo devout a ſeat, where indeed it ought to be, to pray aright and effectually: otherwiſe our praiers are, not onely vaine and vnprofitable, but vicious. Forgive vs (ſay we) our offences, as we forgive them that treſpaſſe againſt vs. What elſe inferre we by that petition, but that we offer him our ſoule void of all revenge and free from all rancour? We nevertheleſſe

invoke God and call on his aide, even in the complot of our grievouſeſt faults, and deſire his aſſiſtance in all maner of injuſtice and iniquitie.
                        Quae niſi ſeductis nequeas committere divis.
                        Perſ. ſat. 2. 4.
                        
                           Which you to Saints not drawne aſide,
                           Would thinke vnfit to be applide.
                        
                        The couetous man ſueth and praieth vnto him for the vaine increaſe and ſuperfluous preſervation of his wrong-gotten treaſure. The ambitious, he importuneth God for the conduct of his fortune, and that he may have the victorie of all his deſſeignes. The theefe, the pirate, the murtherer, yea and the traitor, all call vpon him, all implore his aide, & all ſolicite him, to give them courage in their attempts, conſtancie in their reſolutions, to remove all lets and difficulties, that in any ſort may withſtand their wicked executions, and impious actions; or give him thanks, if they have had good ſucceſſe; the one if he have met with a good bootie, the other if he returne home rich, the third if no man have ſeen him kill his enemie, and the laſt, though he have cauſed any execrable miſchiefe. The Souldier, if he but go to beſiege a cottage, to ſcale a Caſtle, to rob a Church, to pettard a gate, to force a religious houſe, or any villanous act, before he attempt-it, praieth to God for his aſſiſtance, though his intents and hopes be full-fraught with crueltie, murther, covetiſe, luxurie, ſacri-ledge, and all iniquitie.
                        
                           Hoc ipſum quo in Iovis aurem impellere tentas,
                           Dic agedum, Staio, proh Iuppiter, ô bone, clamet,21.
                           
                           Iuppiter, at ſeſe non clamet Iuppiter ipſe.
                        
                        
                           Go-to then, ſay the ſame to ſome bad fellow,
                           Which thou prepar'ſt for Gods eares: let him bellow,
                           O God, good God; ſo God,
                           On himſelfe would not plod.
                        
                        
                           Margaret Queene of Navarre, maketh mention of a yong Prince (whom although ſhe name not expreſly, yet his greatneſſe hath made him ſufficiently knowne) who going about an amorous aſſignation, and to lie with an Advocates wife of Paris, his way lying alongſt a Church, he did never paſſe by ſo holie a place, whether it were in going or comming from his lecherie, and cukolding-labour, but would make his praiers vnto God, to be his help and furtherance. I would faine have any impartiall man tell me, to what purpoſe this Prince invoked and called on God for his divine favour, having his mind onely bent to ſinne, and his thoughts ſet on luxurie: Yet doth ſhe alleage him for a ſpeciall teſtimonie of ſingular devotion. But it is not onely by this example, a man might verifie, that women are not verie fit to manage or treat matters of Religion and Divinitie. A true and hartie praier, and an vnfained religious reconciliation from vs vnto God, cannot likely fall into a wicked and impure ſoule, eſpecially when Sathan ſwaieth the ſame. He that calleth vpon God for his aſsiſtance, whilſt he is engulphed and wallowing in filthie ſinne, doth as the cut-purſe, that ſhould call for juſtice vnto his ayde, or thoſe that produce God in witneſſe of a lie.
                        —tacito mala vota ſuſurroLucan. li. 5. 94. Concipimu
                              •
                           .
                        
                           With ſilent whiſpering we,
                           For ill things ſuppliants be.
                        
                        There are few men, that would dare to publiſh the ſecret requeſts they make to God.
                        
                           Haud cuivis promptum est, murmúrque humiléſque ſuſurrosPerſ. ſat. 2. 6.
                           
                           Tollere de Templis, & aperto vivere voto.
                        
                        
                           From Church low-whiſpering murmurs to expell,
                           T'is not for all, or with knowne vowes live well.
                        
                        And that's the reaſon, why the Pithagorians would have them publike, that all might heare them, that no man ſhould abuſively call on God, and require any vndecent or vnjuſt thing of him, as that man;
                        
                           —clarè cùm dixit, Apollo,
                              Hor. lib. 1. epiſt. 16. 59.
                           
                           Labra movet metuens audiri: pulchra Laverna
                           Da mihi fallere, da iustum ſanctúmque videri.
                           Noctem peccatis, & fraudibus 
                                 •
                              bijce nubem.
                        
                        
                           When he alowd hath ſaid, Apollo heare,
                           Loth to be heard, Goddeſſe of theeves, ſaid he,
                           
                              Grant me to couſen, and yet juſt appeare,
                           My faults in night, my fraud's in clouds let be.
                        
                        The Gods did grievouſly puniſh the impious vowes of Oedipus, by granting them vnto him. His praier was, that his children might betweene themſelves decide in armes the ſucceſſion of his eſtate; he was ſo miſerable, as to be taken at his word. A man ſhould not requeſt that all things follow our will, but that it may follow wiſedome. Verily, it ſeemeth, that we make no other vſe of our praiers, then of a companie of gibriſh phraſes: And as thoſe who employ holie and ſacred words about witchcraft and magicall effects; and that we imagine their effect dependeth of the contexture, or ſound, or ſucceſſion of words, or from our countenance. For, our ſoule, being full-fraught with concupiſcence, and all manner of vngodly thoughts, nothing touched with repentance, nor moved with new reconciliation towards God, we headlong preſent vnto him thoſe heedleſſe words, which memorie affoordeth our tongue, by which we hope to obtaine an expiation and remiſſion of our offences. There is nothing ſo eaſie, ſo ſweet, ſo comfortable and favourable, as the law of God; ſhe (of his infinit mercie) calleth vs vnto him, how faultie and deteſtable ſoever we be; ſhe gently ſtretcheth forth hir armes vnto vs, and mildely receiveth vs into hir lap, how guiltie, polluted, and ſinfull ſoever we are, and may be in after-times. But in recompence of ſo boundleſſe and vnſpeakable a favour, ſhe muſt be thankfully accepted, and cheerfully regarded: and ſo gracious a pardon muſt be received with a gratitude of the ſoule, and at leaſt, in that inſtant, that we addreſſe our ſelves vnto hir preſence; to have our ſoule grieved for hir faults, penitent of hir ſinnes, hating thoſe paſſions and affections, that have cauſed or provoked vs to tranſgreſſe his lawes, to offend his Majeſtie, and to breake his commaundments. Plato ſaith, That neither the Gods, nor honeſt men will ever accept the offring of a wicked man.
                        
                        
                           Immunis aram ſi tetigit manus,Li. 3. od. 23. 17.
                           
                           Non ſumptuoſa blandior hoſtia
                           Mollivit averſos Penates,
                           Farre pio & ſaliente mica.
                        
                        
                           If guiltleſſe hand the Altar tuch,
                           No offring, coſt it ne're ſo much,
                           Shall better pleaſe our God offended,
                           Then corne with crackling-corne-ſalt blended.
                        
                     
                     
                        The ſeven and fiftieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of Age.
                        
                        I Cannot receive that manner, whereby we eſtabliſh the continuance of our life. I ſee that ſome of the wiſer ſort doe greatly ſhorten the ſame, in reſpect of the common opinion. What ſaid Cato Iunior, to thoſe who ſought to hinder him from killing him-ſelfe? Doe I now live the age, wherein I may iuſtly be reproved to leave my life too ſoone? Yet was he but eight and fortie yeares old. He thought that age verie ripe, yea, and well advanced, conſidering how few men come vnto-it. And ſuch as entertaine themſelves with, I wot not what kind of courſe, which they call naturall, promiſeth ſome few yeares beyond, might do-it, had they a priviledge that could exempt them from ſo great a number of accidents, vnto which each one of vs ſtands ſubject by a naturall ſubjection, and which may interrupt the ſaid courſe, they propoſe vnto themſelves. What fondneſſe is-it, for a man to thinke he ſhall die, for, and through, a failing and defect of ſtrength, which extreame age draweth with-it, and to propoſe that terme vnto our life, ſeeing it is the rareſt kind of all deaths, and leaſt in vſe? We onely call it naturall, as if it were againſt nature to ſee a man breake his necke with a fall; to be drowned by ſhipwracke; to be ſurpriſed with a peſtilence, or pleuriſie, and as if our ordinarie

condition did not preſent theſe inconveniences vnto vs all. Let vs not flatter ourſelves with theſe fond-goodly woords; a man may peradventure rather call that naturall, which is generall, common and vniverſall. To die of age, is a rare, ſingular, and extraordinarie death, and ſo much leſſe naturall then others: It is the laſt and extreameſt kind of dying: The further it is from vs, ſo much the leſſe is it to be hoped for: Indeed it is the limit, beyond which we ſhall not paſſe, and which the law of nature hath preſcribed vnto vs, as that which ſhould not be outgon by any; but it is a rare priviledge peculiar vnto hir ſelfe, to make vs continue vnto-it. It is an exemption, which through ſome particular favour ſhe beſtoweth on ſome one man, in the ſpace of two or three ages, diſcharging him from the croſſes, troubles, and difficulties, ſhe hath enterpoſed betweene both, in this long cariere and pilgrimage. Therefore my opinion is, to conſider, that the age vnto which we are come, is an age whereto few arive: ſince men come not vnto it by any ordinarie courſe, it is a ſigne we are verie forward. And ſince we have paſt the accuſtomed bounds, which is the true meaſure of our life, we muſt not hope, that we ſhall goe much further. Having eſcaped ſo many occaſions of death, wherein we ſee the world to fall, we muſt acknowledge that ſuch an extraordinarie fortune, as that is, which maintaineth vs, and is beyond the common vſe, is not likely to continue long. It is a fault of the verie lawes, to have this falſe imagination: They allow not a man to be capable and of diſcretion, to manage and diſpoſe of his owne goods, vntill he be five and twentie yeares old, yet ſhall he hardly preſerve the ſtate of his life ſo long. Augustus abridged five yeares of the ancient Romane Lawes, and declared, that for any man that ſhould take vpon him the charge of judgement, it ſufficed to be thirtie yeares old. Servius Tullius diſpenſed with the Knights, who were ſeaven and fortie yeares of age, from all voluntarie ſervices of warre. Augustus brought them to fortie and five. To ſend men to their place of ſojourning before they be five and fiftie or three ſcore yeares of age, me ſeemeth, carrieth no great apparance with-it. My advice would be, that our vacation, and employment ſhould be extended as far as might be for the publike commoditie; but I blame ſome, and condemne moſt, that we begin not ſoone enough to employ our ſelves. The ſame Augustus had been vniverſall and ſupreame judge of the world, when he was but nineteene yeares old, and would have another to be thirtie, before he ſhall bee made a competent judge of a cottage or farme. As for my part, I thinke our minds are as full growne and perfectly joynted at twentie yeares, as they ſhould be, and promiſe as much as they can. A mind which at that age hath not given ſome evident token or earneſt of hir ſufficiencie, ſhall hardly give-it afterward; put hir to what triall you liſt. Naturall qualities and vertues, if they have any vigorous or beauteous thing in them, will produce and ſhow the ſame within that time, or never. They ſay in Daulphiné,
                        
                           Si l'eſpine nou picque quand nai,French. prov.
                           
                           A peine que picque iamai.
                        
                        
                           A thorne, vnleſſe at firſt it pricke,
                           Will hardly ever pearce to th' quicke.
                        
                        Of all humane honorable and glorious actions, that ever came vnto my knowledge, of what nature ſoever they be, I am perſwaded, I ſhould have a harder taske, to number thoſe, which both in ancient times, and in ours, have been produced and atchieved before the age of thirtie yeares, then ſuch as were performed after: yea, often in the life of the ſame men. May not I boldly ſpeak it of thoſe of Hanniball, and Scipio his great adverſarie? They lived the better part of their life with the glorie which they had gotten in their youth: And though afterward they were great men, in reſpect of all others, yet were they but meane in regard of themſelves. As for my particular, I am verily perſwaded, that ſince that age, both my ſpirit and my bodie, have more decreaſed then encreaſed, more recoyled then advanced. It may be, that knowledge and experience ſhall encreaſe in them, together with life, that beſtow their time well: but vivacitie, promptitude, conſtancie, and other parts much more our owne, more important and more eſſentiall, they droope, they languiſh, and they faint.
                        
                           —vbi iam validis quaſſatum eſt viribus aevi
                              Lucr. li. 3. 457.
                           
                           Corpus, & obtuſis ceciderunt viribus artus,
                           Claudicat ingenium, delirat linguáquè ménſque.
                        
                        
                           
                           Whence once the bodie by ſhrewd ſtrength of yeares
                           Is ſhak't, and limmes drawne-downe from ſtrength that weares,
                           Wit halts, both tongue and mind
                           Doe dailie doat, we find.
                        
                        It is the bodie, which ſometimes yeeldeth firſt vnto age; and other times the mind: and I have ſeene many, that have had their braines weakned before their ſtomake or legges. And foraſmuch, as it is a diſeaſe, little or nothing ſenſible vnto him that endureth-it, and maketh no great ſhew, it is ſo much the more dangerous. Here I exclaime againſt our Lawes, not becauſe they leave vs ſo long, and late in working and employment, but that they ſet vs a worke no ſooner, and it is ſo late before we be employed. Me thinkes that conſidering the weakneſſe of our life, and ſeeing the infinite number of ordinarie rockes, and naturall dangers it is ſubject vnto, we ſhould not ſo ſoone as we come into the world, alot ſo great a ſhare thereof vnto vnprofitable wantonneſſe in youth, il-breeding idleneſſe, and ſlow-learning prentiſſage.
                     
                     The end of the firſt Booke.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE ESSAYES OR MORAL, POLITIKE AND MILITARIE Diſcourſes Of LO. MICHAEL de Montaigne, Knight Of the noble Order of St. MICHAEL, and one of the Gentlemen in Ordinarie of the French king HENRY the Third his Chamber.
                  
                  THE SECOND BOOKE.
                  1613.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE ESSAYES OF MICHAEL LORD OF MONTAIGNE.
                  
                     The ſecond Booke.
                     
                        The first Chapter.
                        
                           Of the inconstancie of our actions.
                        
                        
                           THoſe which exerciſe themſelves in controuling humane actions, finde no ſuch let in any one part, as to peece them together, and bring them to one ſame luſtre: For, they commonly contradict one an other ſo ſtrangely, as it ſeemeth impoſſible they ſhould be parcels of one Warehouſe. Young Marius▪
                            is ſometimes found to be the ſonne of Mars, and other times the childe of 
                              Ʋenus. Pope Bonifae
                                 •
                              
                            the Eight, is reported to have entred into his charge, as a Fox; to have carried himſelfe therein, as a Lion; and to have died like a dog. And who would thinke it was Nero, that lively image of cruelty, who being required to ſigne (as the cuſtome was) the ſentence of a criminall offendor, that had beene condemned to die, that ever he ſhould anſwer? Oh would to God I could never have written! So neare was his heart grieved to doome a man to death. The world is ſo full of ſuch examples, that every man may ſtore himſelfe; and I wonder to ſee men of vnderſtanding trouble themſelves with ſorting theſe parcels: Sithence (me ſeemeth) irreſolution is the moſt apparant and common vice of our nature; as witneſſeth that famous verſe of Publius the Comoedian:
                        Malum conſilium est, quod mutari non potest.
                        
                           The counſell is but bad,Pub. Mi
                                    •
                                 .
                           
                           Whoſe change may not be had.
                        
                        There is ſome apparance to judge a man by the moſt common conditions of his life; but ſeeing the naturall inſtability of our cuſtomes and opinions; I have often thought, that even good Authors doe ill, and take a wrong courſe, wilfully to opinionate themſelves about framing a conſtant and ſolide contexture of vs. They chuſe an vniverſall ayre, and following that image, range and interpret all a mans actions; which if they cannot wreſt ſufficiently, they remit them vnto diſſimulation. Augustus hath eſcaped their hands; for there is ſo apparant, ſo ſudden and continuall a variety of actions found in him, through the courſe of his life, that even the boldeſt judges and ſtricteſt cenſurers, have beene faine to give him over, and leave him vndecided. There is nothing I ſo hardly beleeve to be in man, as constancy, and nothing ſo eaſie to be found in him, as inconſtancy. He that ſhould diſtinctly and part by part, judge of him, ſhould often jumpe to ſpeake truth. View all antiquity over, and you ſhall finde it a

hard matter, to chuſe out a dozen of men, that have directed their life vnto one certaine, ſetled, and aſſured courſe; which is the ſureſt drift of wiſedome. For, to comprehend all in one word, ſaith an ancient writer, and to embrace all the rules of our life into one, it is at all times to will, and not to will one ſame thing. I would not vouchſafe, (ſaith he) to adde anything; alwaies provided the will be juſt: for, if it be vnjuſt, it is impoſſible it ſhould ever continue one. Verily, I have heeretofore learned, that vice is nothing but a diſorder, and want of meaſure, and by conſequence, it is impoſſible to faſten conſtancy vnto it. It is a ſaying of Demoſthenes, (as ſome report,) That conſultation and deliberation, is the beginning of all vertue; and constancy, the end and perfection. If by reaſon or diſcourſe we ſhould take a certaine way, we ſhould then take the faireſt: but no man hath thought on it.
                        
                           Quod petijt, ſper
                                 ••
                              , repetit quod nuper omiſit,Hor. l. 1. epiſt. 1. 98.
                           
                           Astuat, & vitae diſconvenit or dine toto.
                        
                        
                           He ſcorn's that which he ſought, ſeek's that he ſcorn'd of late,
                           He flowes, ebbes, diſagrees in his lifes whole eſtate.
                        
                        Our ordinary manner is to follow the inclination of our appetite, this way and that way; on the left, and on the right hand; vpward and downe-ward, according as the winde of occaſions doth tranſport vs: we never thinke on what we would have, but at the inſtant we would have it: and change as that beaſt that takes the colour of the place wherein it is laid. What we even now purpoſed, we alter by and by, and preſently returne to our former biaſe: all is but changing, motion, and inconſtancy:
                        Ducimur vt nervis alienis mobile lignum.
                              
                                 〈◊〉
                              . ſat. 7. 82.
                        
                        
                           So are we drawne, as wood is ſhooved,
                           By others ſinnewes each way mooved.
                        
                        We goe not, but we are carried: as things that flote, now gliding gently, now hulling violently; according as the water is, either ſtormy or calme.
                        
                           —nónne videmus
                           
                           Quid ſibi quiſque velit neſcire & quaerere ſemper,Luer. l. 3▪ 1100
                           
                           Commutare locum quaſi onus deponere poſſit?
                        
                        
                           See we not, every man in his thoughts height
                           Knowes not what he would have, yet ſeekes he ſtraight
                           To change place, as he could lay downe his weight?
                        
                        Every day new toies, each houre new fantaſies, and our humours moove and fleete with the fleetings and movings of time.
                        
                           Tales ſunt hominum mentes, quali Pater ipſeCic. Fr
                                    •
                                 g
                                    •
                                 .
                           
                           Iuppiter auctifero luſtravit lumine terras.
                        
                        
                           Such are mens mindes, as that great God of might
                           Survaies the earth with encreaſe bearing light.
                        
                        We floate and waver betweene divers opinions: we will nothing freely, nothing abſolutely, nothing conſtantly. Had any man preſcribed certaine Lawes, or eſtabliſhed aſſured policies in his owne head; in his life ſhould we daily ſee, to ſhine an equality of cuſtomes, an aſſured order, and an infallible relation from one thing to another (Empedocles noted this deformity to be amongſt the Agrigentines, that they gave themſelves ſo over vnto delights, as if they ſhould die tomorrow next, and built as if they ſhould never die) the diſcourſe thereof were eaſie to be made. As is ſeene in yoong Cato: He that toucht but one ſtep of it, hath touched all. It is an harmony of well according tunes and which cannot contradict it ſelf. With vs it is cleane contrary, ſo many actions, ſo many particular judgements are there requir'd. The ſureſt way (in mine opinion) were to refer them vnto the next circumſtances, without entering into further ſearch, and without concluding any other conſequence of them. During the late tumultuous broiles of our mangled eſtate, it was told me, that a yoong woman, not farre from mee, had head-long caſt hir ſelfe out of a high window, with intent to kill hirſelfe, onely to avoide the raviſhment of a raſcaly-baſe ſouldier, that lay in hir houſe, who offred to force hir: and perceiving that with the fall ſhe had not killed hirſelfe, to make an end of hir enterprize, ſhe would have cutte hir owne throate with a knife, but that ſhe was hindered by ſome that came-into her: Nevertheleſſe having ſore wounded hirſelfe, ſhe voluntarily confeſſed, that the Souldier had yet but vrged hir with importunate requeſts, ſuing-ſolicitations, and golden bribes▪ but ſhe feared he would in the end have obtained his purpoſe by compulſion:

by whoſe earneſt ſpeaches, reſolute countenance, and gored bloud (a true teſtimony of hir chaſte vertue) ſhe might appeare to be the lively paterne of an other Lucrece, yet know I certainly, that both before that time, and afterward, ſhe had beene enjoyed of others vpon eaſier compoſition. And as the common ſaying is; Faire and ſoft, as ſquemiſh-honeſt as ſhe ſeemes, although you miſſe of your intent, conclude not raſhly an inviolable chaſtitie to be in your Miſtreſſe; For, a groome or a horſe-keeper may find an houre to thrive in; and a dog hath a day. Antigonus having taken vppon him to favour a Souldier of his, by reaſon of his vertue and valour, commaunded his Phiſicians to have great care of him, and ſee whether they could recover him of a lingring and inward diſeaſe, which had long tormented him, who being perfectly cured, he afterward perceived him to be nothing ſo earneſt and diligent in his affaires, demaunded of him, how he was ſo changed from himſelfe, and become ſo ocwardiſh: your ſelfe good ſir (anſwered he) have made me ſo, by ridding me of thoſe in firmities, which ſo did grive me, that I made no accompt of my life. A Souldier of Lucullus, having by his enemies been robbed of all he had, to revenge himſelf vndertooke a notable and deſperat atempt vpon them; and having recovered his loſſes, Lucullus conceived a very good opinion of him, and with the greateſt ſhewes of aſſured truſt and loving kindneſſe he could bethinke himſelfe, made eſpeciall accompt of him, and in any daungerous enterprize ſeemed to truſt and employ him onely:
                        
                           Ʋerbis quae timido quoque poſſent addere mentem:Hor. l. 2. epiſt. 2. 34.
                        
                        
                           With words, which to a coward might
                           Adde courage, had he any ſpright.
                        
                        Imploy (ſaid he vnto him) ſome wretch-ſtripped and robbed ſouldier
                        —(quantumvis ruſticus ibit,39. Ibit eò, quo vis, qui zonam perdidit, inquit.)
                        
                           (None is, ſaith he, ſo clowniſh, but will-on,
                           Where you will have him, if his purſe be gone)
                        
                        and abſolutely refuſed to obey him. When we reade that Mahomet, having outragiouſlie rated Chaſan, chiefe leader of his Ianizers, becauſe he ſaw his troup wel-nigh defeated by the Hungarians, and hee to behave himſelfe but faintly in the fight, Chaſan without making other reply, alone as he was, and without more adoe, with his weapon in his hand ruſhed furiouſly in the thickeſt throng of his enemies that the firſt mette withall, of whom hee was inſtantly ſlaine: This may haply be deemed, rather a raſh conceit, than a juſtification; and a new ſpight, then a naturall p
                              •
                           owes. He whom you ſaw yeſterday ſo boldly-venturous, wonder not if you ſee him a daſtardly meacoke to morrow next: for either anger or neceſſitie, company or wine, a ſodaine fury or the clang of a trumpet, might rowze-vp his hart, and ſtir vp his courage. It is no hart nor courage ſo framed by diſcourſe or deliberation: Theſe circumſtances haue ſetled the ſame in him: Therefore is it no marvell if by other contrary circumſtance he become a craven and change coppy. This ſupple variation, and eaſie yeelding contradiction, which is ſeene in vs, hath made ſome to imagine, that wee had two ſoules and others, two faculties; whereof every one as beſt ſhe pleaſeth, accompanieth and doth agitate-vs; the one towards good, the other towards evil. For ſomuch as ſuch a rough diverſitie cannot wel ſort and agree in one ſimple ſubject. The blaſt of accidents, doth not only remove me according to his inclination; for beſides, I remove and trouble my ſelfe by the inſtability of my poſture, and whoſoever looketh narrowly about himſelfe, ſhall hardly ſee himſelfe twiſe in one ſame ſtate. Somtimes I give my ſoule one viſage, and ſometimes another, according vnto the poſture or ſide I lay hir in. If I ſpeake diverſly of my ſelfe, it is becauſe I looke diverſly vpon my ſelfe. All contrarieties are found in hir, according to ſome turne or remooving, and in ſome faſhion or other. Shamefaſt, baſhfull, inſolent, chaſte, luxurious, peeviſh, pratling, ſilent, fond, doting, labourious, nice, delicate, ingenious, ſlowe, dull, froward, humorous, debonaire, wiſe, ignorant, falſe in wordes, true ſpeaking, both liberall, co, vetous, and prodigall. All theſe I perceive in ſome meaſure or other to bee in mee, accorning as I ſtirre or turne my ſelfe; And whoſoever ſhall heedefully ſurvay and conſider him ſelfe, ſhall finde this volubilitie and diſcordance to be in himſelfe, yea and in his very judgement. I have nothing to ſay entirely, ſimply, and with ſoliditie of my ſelfe, without confuſion, diſorder, blending, mingling; and in one word, Diſtinguo is the moſt vniverſall part of my logike. Although I ever purpoſe to ſpeake good of good, and rather to enterprete thoſe

things, that will beare it, vnto a good ſenſe; yet is it that, the ſtrangenes of our condition admitteth that we are often vrged to doe wel by vice it ſelfe, if wel doing were not judged by the intention only. Therefore may not a couragious acte conclude a man to be valiant. He that is ſo, when juſt occaſion ſerveth, ſhall ever be ſo, and vpon all occaſions. If it were an habitude of vertue, and not a ſodaine humour, it would make a man equally reſolute at all aſſayes, in all accidents: Such alone, as in company; ſuch in a ſingle combate, as in a ſet battell; For, whatſoever ſome ſay, valour is all alike, and not one in the ſtreet or towne, and another in the campe or field. As couragiouſly ſhould a man beare a ſickenes in his bed, as a hurt in the field and feare death no more at home in his houſe, then abroad in an aſſault. We ſhould not then ſee one ſame man enter the breach, or charge his enemie with an aſſured and vndouted fierceneſſe, and afterward having eſcaped that, to vexe, to grive and torment himſelfe like vnto a ſeely woman, or faint-hearted milke-ſoppe for the loſſe of a ſute, or death of a childe. If one chance to be careleſly baſe-minded in his infancie, and conſtantly-reſolute in povertie; if he be timorouſly-fearefull at ſight of a Barbers razor, and afterward ſtowtlyvndiſmayed againſt his enemies ſwordes: The action is commendable, but not the man. Divers Graecians (ſaith Cicero) can not endure to looke their enemy in the face, yet are they moſt conſtant in their ſickeneſſes; whereas the Cimbrians, and Celtiberians, are meere contrary. Nihil enim poteſt eſſe aequabile, quod non à certa ratione proficiſcatur: For nothing can beare
                           Cic. Tuſc. qu. l. 2. f. 
                           it ſelfe even, which proceedeth not from reſolved reaſon. There is no valor more extreame in his kinde, than that of Alexander; yet is it but in ſpecies, nor every where ſufficiently full and vniverſall. As incomparable as it is, it hath his blemiſhes, which is the reaſon that in the idleeſt ſuſpitions, he apprehendeth at the conſpiracies of his followers againſt his life, we ſee him ſo earneſtly to vex, and ſo deſperately to trouble himſelfe: In ſearch and purſuite whereof he demeaneth himſelfe with ſo vehement and indiſcreet an injuſtice, and with ſuch a demiſſe feare, that even his naturall reaſon is thereby ſubverted. Alſo the ſuperſtition, wherewith he is ſo throughly tainted, beareth ſome ſhew of puſilanimitie. And the vnlimited exceſſe of the repentance he ſhewed for the murther of Clitus, is alſo a witneſſe of the inequalitie of his courage. Our matters are but parcels hudled-vp, and peeces patched together, and we endevour to acquire honour by falſe meanes, and vntrue tokens. Vertue will not bee followed, but by her-ſelfe: And if at any time wee borrow her maske, vpon ſome other occaſion, ſhe will as ſoone pull-it from our face. It is a lively hew, and ſtrong die, if the ſoule be once dyed with the ſame perfectly, and which will never fade or be gone, except it carry the skinne away with-it. Therefore to judge a man, we muſt a long time follow, and very curiouſly marke his ſteppes; whether conſtancie doe wholy ſubſiſt and continue vpon hir owne foundation in him, Cui vivendi via conſider at a atque proviſa est, who hath forecast and conſidered the way of life; whether the variety of occurrences make him change his pace (I meane hisCic. parad. 5. way, for his pace may either be haſtened or ſlowed) let him runne on: ſuch a one (as ſayeth the impreaſe of our good Talbot) goeth before the winde. It is no marvell (ſaith an olde writer) that hazard hath ſuch power over-vs, ſince wee live by hazard. It is impoſſible for him to diſpoſe of his particular actions, that hath not in groſe directed his life vnto one certaine end. It is impoſſible for him to range all pieces in order, that hath not a plot or forme of the totall frame in his head. What avayleth the proviſion of all ſorts of colours vnto one that knowes not what he is to draw? No man makes any certaine deſigne of his life, and we deliberate of it but by parcels. A skilfull archer ought firſt to know the marke he aimeth at, and then apply his hand, his bow, his ſtring, his arrow and his motion accordingly. Our counſels goe a ſtray, becauſe they are not rightly addreſſed, and have no fixed end. No winde makes for him, that hath no intended port to ſaile-vnto. As for me, I allow not greatly of that iudgement, which ſome made of Sophocles, and to have concluded him ſufficient in the managing of domeſticall matters, againſt the accuſation of his owne Sonne, only by the ſight of one of his tragedies. Nor do I commend the conjecture of the Parians, ſent to reforme the Mileſians, as ſufficient to the conſequence they drew thence. In viſiting and ſurveying the Ile, they marked the Landes that were beſt husbanded, and obſerved the country houſes that were beſt governed. And having regiſtred the names of their owners; and afterward made an aſſemblie of the Towneſ-men of the Citie, they named and inſtituted thoſe owners as new governours and magiſtrates, judging and concluding, that beeing good husbands and carefull of their houſhold affaires, they muſt conſequently be ſo of publike matters. We are

all framed of flaps and patches and of ſo ſhapeleſſe and diverſe a contexture, that every piece and every moment plaieth his part. And there is as much difference found betweene vs and our ſelves, as there is betweene our ſelves and other. Magnam rem puta, vnum hominem agere. Esteeme it a great matter, to play but one man.
                        
                        Since ambition may teach men both valour, temperance, liberality, yea and juſtice: Sith covetouſneſſe may ſettle in the minde of a Shop-prentiſe-boy, broughtvp in eaſe and idleneſſe, a dreadleſſe aſſurance to leave his home-bred eaſe, and forgoe his place of education, and in a ſmall barke to yeeld himſelfe vnto the mercy of bluſtring waves, mercileſſe windes and wrathfull Neptune; and that it alſo teacheth diſcretion and wiſedome; And that 
                              Ʋenus hirſelf miniſtreth reſolution and hardineſſe vnto tender youth as yet ſubject to the diſcipline of the rod, and teacheth the ruthleſſe Souldier, the ſoft and tenderly effeminate heart of women in their mothers lappes.
                        
                           Hac duce custodes furtim tranſgreſſa iacentes,Tib. l. 2. el. 1. 75.
                           
                           —Ad invenem tenebris ſola puella venit.
                           
                        
                        
                           The wench by ſtealeh hir lodg'd guards having ſtript,
                           By this guide, ſole, i'th darke, to'th yonker skipt.
                        
                        
                           It is no part of a well-grounded iudgement, ſimply to iudge our ſelves by our exteriour actions: A man muſt throughl ſound himſelfe, and dive into his heart, and there ſee by what wards or ſprings the motions ſtirre. But foraſmuch as it is a hazardous and high enrerpriſe, I would not have ſo many to meddle with it as doe.
                     
                     
                        The ſecond Chapter.
                        
                           Of Drunkenneſſe.
                        
                        
                           THe world is nothing but variety, and diſſemblance. Vices are all alike, in aſmuch as they are all vices: And ſo doe happily the Stoikes meane it. But though they are equally vices, they are not equall vices; And that hee who hath ſtarted a hundred ſteps beyond the limites
                        Quos vltra citráque nequit conſistere rectum,Hor. l. 1. ſat. 1. 107.
                        
                        
                           On this ſide, or beyond the which
                           No man can hold a right true pitch.
                        
                        is not of worſe condition, then he that is ten ſteps ſhort of it, is no whit credible: and that ſacriledge is not worſe then the ſtealing of a Colewort out of a Garden.
                        
                           Nec vincet ratio, tantandem vt peccet, inémque,Sat. 3. 115.
                           
                           Quiteneros caules alieni fregerit horti,
                           Et qui nocturnus divûm ſacra legerit.—
                        
                        
                           No reaſon can evict, as great or ſame ſinnetaints
                           Him that breakes in an others Garden tender plants,
                           And him that ſteales by night things conſecrate to Saints.
                        
                        There is as much diverſity in that as in any other thing. The confuſion of order and meaſure of crimes, is dangerous: Murtherers, Traitors and Tyrants, have too much gaine by it: it is no reaſon their conſcience ſhould be eaſed, in that ſome is either idle or laſcivious, or leſſe aſſiduous vnto devotion. Every man poiſeth vpon his fellowes ſinne, and elevates his owne. Even teachers doe often range it ill in my conceit. As Socrates ſaid, that the chiefeſt office of wiſedome, was to diſtinguiſh goods and evils. We others, to whom the beſt is ever in vice, ſhould ſay the like of knowledge, to diſtinguiſh vices. Without which, and that very exact, both vertuous and wicked men remaine confounded and vnknowen. Now drunkenneſſe amongſt others, appeareth to mee a groſe and brutiſh vice. The minde hath more part elſe where; and ſome vices there are, which (if it may lawfully be ſpoken) have a kinde of I wot not what generoſity in them. Some there are, that have learning, diligence, valour, prudence, wit, cunning, dexterity, and ſubtlety joyned with them; whereas this is meerely corporall, and terreſtriall. And the groſeſt and rudeſt nation,

that liveth amonſt vs at this day, is onely that which keepeth it in credite. Other vices but alter and diſtract the vnderſtanding, whereas this vtterly ſubverteth the ſame, and aſtonieth the body.
                        
                           —cùm vini vis penetravit,
                              Luer. l. 3. 479.
                           
                           Conſequitur gravitas membrorum, praepediuntur
                           Crur a vacillanti, tardeſcit lingua, madet mens,
                           Nant oculi, clamor, ſingultus, inrgia gliſcunt
                        
                        
                           When once the force of wine hath inly pierſt,
                           Limbes-heavineſſe is next, legs faine would goe,
                           But reeling can not, tongue drawles, mindes diſperſt,
                           Eyes ſwimme, cries, hickups, brables grow.
                        
                        The worſt eſtate of man, is where he looſeth the knowledge and governemen of himſelfe. And amongſt other things, it is ſaid, that as muſt wine boyling and working in a veſſell, workes and ſends vpward what ever it containeth in the bottome, ſo doth wine cauſe thoſe that drinke exceſſively of it, worke vp, and breake out their moſt concealed ſecrets.
                        
                           —tu ſapientium
                              Hor. l. 3. 
                                    •
                                 d. 21. 14.
                           
                           Curas, & arcanum iocoſo
                           Conſilium retegis Lyaeo.
                        
                        
                           Thou (wine-cup) doeſt by wine reveale
                           The cares, which wiſe men would conceale,
                           And cloſe drifts, at a merry meale.
                        
                        
                           Ioſephus reporteth, that by making an Ambaſſador to tipple-ſquare, whome his enemies had ſent vnto him, he wreſted all his ſecrets out of him. Nevertheleſſe Augustus having truſted Lucius Piſo, that conquered Thrace, with the ſecreteſt affaires he had in hand, had never cauſe to be diſcontented with him; Nor Tiberius with Coſſus, to whom he imparted all his ſeriouſeſt counſels, although we know them both to have ſo given themſelves to drinking of wine, that they were often faine to be carried from the Senat, and both were reputed notable drunkards.
                        —Hesterno inflatum venas de more Lyaeo.
                           Vir. luc. 
                                 •
                              c. 6. 15. 
                                 •
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           Veines pufft vp, as is vſed alway,
                           By wine which was drunke yeſterday.
                        
                        And as faithfully as the complot and purpoſe to kill Caeſar committed vnto Cimber, who would daily be drunke with quaffing of wine, as vnto Caſſius, that drunke nothing but water wherevpon he anſwered very pleaſantly. What? ſhall I beare a Tyrant, that am not able to beare wine? We ſee our carowſing toſpot German ſouldiers, when they are moſt plunged in their cups, and as drunke as Rats, to have perfect remembrance of their quarter, of the watch word, and of their files.
                        —nec facilis victoria de madidis, &
                           Ivue. ſat. 15. 47 
                           Blaeſis, atque mero titubantibus.—
                        
                           Nor is the conqueſt eaſie of men ſow'ſt,
                           Liſping and reeling with wine they carow'ſt.
                        
                        I would never have believed ſo ſound, ſo deepe and ſo exceſſive drunkenneſſe, had I not read in Hiſtories, that Attalus having envited to ſup with him (with intent to doe him ſome notable indignity) the ſame Pauſanias, who for the ſame cauſe killed afterward Philip King of Macedon, (a King who by the eminent faire qualities that were in him, bore a teſtimony of the education he had learned in the houſe and company of Epaminondas) made him ſo dead-drunke, that inſenſibly and without feeling, he might proſtitute his beauty as the body of a common hedge-harlot, to Mulettiers, Groomes and many of the abject ſervants of his houſe. And what a Lady (whom I much honour and highly eſteeme) told mee, proteſting, that neere Burdeaux, towards Caſtres, where hir houſe is, a widdow Country-woman, reputed very chaſte and honeſt, ſuſpecting hirſelfe to be with childe, told hir neighbours, tha had ſhe a husband, ſhe ſhould verily thinke ſhe were with childe. But the occaſion of this ſuſpition encreaſing more and more, and perceiving hirſelfe ſo big-bellied, that ſhee could no longer conceale it, ſhe reſolved to make the Parriſh-prieſt acquainted with it, whom ſhe entreated to publiſh in the Church, that whoſoever hee were, that was guilty of the fact, and would avow it, ſhee would freely forgive him, and if hee were ſo pleaſed, take

him to her husband. A certaine ſwaine or hyne-boy of hers, emboldned by this proclamation, declared, how that having one holliday found her well-tippled with wine, and ſo ſound aſleepe by the chimnie ſide, lying ſo fit and ready for him, that without a waking her he had the full vſe of her body. Whom ſhe accepted for her husband, and both live together at this day. It is aſſured that antiquitie hath not greatly deſcribed this vice. The compoſitions of diverſe Philoſophers ſpeake but ſparingly of it. Yea, and ſome of the Stoikes deeme-it not amiſſe for man ſometimes to take his liquor roundly, and drinke drunke thereby to recreate his ſpirites.
                        
                           Hoc quoque virtutum quondam certamine magnumCor. Gal. el. 1.
                           
                           Socratem palmam promeruiſſe ferunt.
                        
                        
                           They ſay, in this too, Socrates the wiſe,
                           
                           And graet in vertues combats, bare the prize.
                        
                        
                           Cato that ſtrict cenſurer, aud ſevere corrector of others, hath beene reproved for much drinking,
                        
                           Narratur & priſci CatonisHor. l. 3. od. 21. 11.
                           
                           Saepe mero caluiſſe virtus.
                        
                        
                           T'is ſaide, by vſe of wine repeated,
                           Old Catoes vertue oft was heated.
                        
                        
                           Cyrus that ſo far-renowned King, amongſt his other commendations, meaning to preferre himſelfe before his brother Artaxerxes, and get the ſtart of him, aleageth, that he could drinke better, and tipple more then he. And amongſt the beſt policed and formaleſt nations, the cuſtome of drinking, and pleadging of healths was much in vſe. I have heard Silvius, that excellent Phiſitian of Paris affirme that to preſerve the vigor of our ſtomake from empairing, it is not amiſſe once a moneth to rowze vp the ſame by this exceſſe of drinking; and leſt it ſhould grow dull and ſtupide thereby to ſtirre it vp. And it is written, that the Perſians, after they had well tippled, were wont to conſult of their chiefeſt affaires. My taſte, my relliſh and my complexion, are ſharper enemies vnto this vice, then my diſcourſe: For, beſides that I captivate more eaſily my conceits vnder the auctoritie of ancient opinions, indeede I finde-it to be a fond, a ſtupide and a baſe kinde of vice, but leſſe malicious and hurtfull then others; all which ſhocke, and with a ſharper edge wound publike ſocietie. And if we cannot give our ſelves any pleaſure, except (as they ſay) it coſt-vs ſomething; I finde this vice to be leſſe chargeable vnto our conſcience then others; beſides, it is not hard to be prepared, difficult to be found; a conſideration not to be deſpiſed. A man well advanced in yeares and dignitie, amongſt three principall commodities he told me to have remaining in life, counted this: and where ſhall a man more rightly finde-it, then amongſt the naturall? But he tooke-it ill, delicateneſſe, and the choiſe of wines is therein to be avoided. If you prepare your voluptuouſnes to drinke it with pleaſure and daintily neate, you tie your ſelfe vnto an inconvenience to drinke-it other then is allwayes to be had. A man muſt have a milder, a looſe and a freer taſte. To be a true drinker, a man ſhould not have ſo tender and ſqueamiſh a palat. The Germans doe in a maner drinke aqually of all ſorts of wine with like pleaſure. Their end is rather to gulpe it downe freely, then to taſte it kindely. And to ſay truth they have it better cheape. Their voluptuouſneſſe is more plenteous and fuller. Secondarily, to drinke after the French maner, as two draughts and moderatly, is over-much to reſtraine the favours of that God. There is more time and conſtancie required therevnto. Our forefathers were wont to ſpend whole nights in that exerciſe, yea often times they joyned whole long dayes vnto them. And a man muſt proportion his ordinarie more large and firme. I have in my dayes ſeene a principall Lord; a man of great employment and enterpriſes, and famous for good ſucceſſe, who without ſtraining himſelfe, and eating but an ordinary meales-meat, was wont to drinke litle leſſe then five pottles of wine, yet at his riſing ſeemed to be nothing diſtempered, but rather as we have found to our no ſmall coſt in managing of our affaires, over-wiſe and conſiderate. The pleaſure of that, whereof we would make account in the courſe of our life ought to be employed longer ſpace. It were neceſſary, as ſhop-boyes or labouring people, that we ſhould refuſe no occaſion to drinke▪ and continually to have this deſire in our minde. It ſeemeth that wee dayly ſhorten the vſe of this: and that in our houſes, (as I have ſeene in mine infancie) breakefaſts, nunchions, and beavers ſhould be more frequent and often vſed, then now adayes they are. And ſhould wee thereby in any ſorte proceede towards amendment? Noverily. But it may be, that we have

much more given our ſelves over vnto paillardiſe and all maner of luxurie then our fathers were. They are two occupations, that enter-hinder one another, in their vigor. On the one ſide, it hath empaired and weakned our ſtomake, and on the other, ſobrietie ſerveth to make vs more jolly-quaint, luſty, and wanton for the exerciſe of love matters. It is a wonder to thinke on the ſtrange tales I have heard my father report, of the chaſtitie of his times. He might well ſpeake of it, as he that was both by art and nature proper for the vſe and ſolace of Ladies. He ſpake little and well, few words, but to the purpoſe, and was ever wont to entermixe ſome ornament taken from vulgar bookes, and above all, Spaniſh, amongſt his common ſpeeches: And of all Spaniſh authors, none was more familiar vnto him then Marcous Aurelius. His demeanour and carriage was ever milde, meeke, gentle, and very modeſt, and above all, grave and ſtately. There is nothing he ſeemed to be more carefull▪ of, then of his honeſty, and obſerve a kinde of decencie of his perſon, and orderly decorum in his habites, were it on foote or on hoſebacke. He was exceeding nice in performing his word or promiſe; And ſo ſtrictly conſcientious and obſequous in religion, that generally he ſeemed rather to encline toward ſuperſtition, then the contrary. Though he were but a little man, his courage and vigor was great: he was of an vpright, and well proportioned ſtature, of a pleaſing, cheerefull-looking countenance, of a ſwarthy hue, nimbly addicted, and exquiſitely nimble vnto all noble and gentleman▪ like exerciſes. I have ſeene ſome hollow ſtaves of his filled with lead, which hee wont to vſe and exerciſe his armes withall, the better to enable him-ſelfe to pitch to barre, to throw the ſledge, the caſt the pole and to play at fence: and ſhooes with leaden ſoles, which he wore to enure himſelfe, to leape, to vault and to run. I may without bluſhing ſay, that in memory of himſelfe, he hath left certain pety miracles amongſt vs. I have ſeene him when hee was paſt three-ſcore yeeres of age mocke at all our ſports, and out-countenance our youthfull paſtimes, with a heavy furr'd Gowne about him to leap into his ſaddle; to make the pommada round about a Table vpon his thumb; and ſeldom to aſcend any ſtaires without skipping three or foure ſteppes at once. And concerning my diſcourſe, hee was wont to ſay, that in a whole Province there was ſcarſe any woman of qualitie, that had an ill name. Hee would often report ſtrange familiarities, namely of his owne, with very honeſt women, without any ſuſpicion at all. And proteſted verie religiouſlie, that when he was married, he was yet a pure Virgine; yet had he long time followed the warres beyond the Mountaines, and therein ſerved long, whereof hee hath left a Iournall-Booke of his owne collecting, wherein hee hath particularly noted, whatſoever happened day by day worthy the obſervation, ſo long as he ſerved, both for the publike and his particular vſe. And he was well ſtrucken in yeeres, when he tooke a wife. For returning out of Italie, in the yeere of our Lord, one thouſand five hundred eight and twenty, and being ful three and thirty yeeres olde, by the way hee choſe himſelfe a wife. But come we to our drinking againe. The incommodities of age, which neede ſome helpe and refreſhing, might with ſome reaſon beget in me a deſire or longing of this faculty: for, it is in a man the laſt pleaſure, which the courſe of our yeers ſtealeth vpon vs. Good fellowes ſay, that naturall heate is firſt taken in our feete: That properly belongeth to infancie. From thence it aſcendeth vnto the middle region, where it is ſetled and continueth a long time: and in mine opinion, there produceth the onely true, and mooving pleaſures of this corporall life. Other delight and ſenſualities in reſpect of that, doe but ſleepe▪ in the end, like vnto a vapour, which by little and little exhaleth, and mounteth aloft, it comes vnto the throate, and there makes hir laſt bode. Yet could I never conceive, how any man may either encreaſe or prolong the pleaſure of drinking beyond thirſt, and in his imagination frame an artificiall appetite, and againſt nature. My ſtomacke could not well reach ſo farre: it is very much troubled to come to an end of that which it takes for his neede. My conſtitution is, to make an accompt of drinking, but to ſucceed meate, and therefore doe I ever make my laſt draught the greateſt. And foraſmuch as in age, we have the roofe of our mouthes commonly furred with rhume, or diſtempered, diſtaſted and altered through ſome other evill conſtitution, wine ſeemeth better vnto vs and of a quicker reliſh, according as our pores be either more or leſſe open and waſhed. At leaſt I ſeldome reliſh the ſame very well, except it be the firſt draught I take. Anacharſis wondered to ſee the Graecians drinke in greater glaſſes at the end of their meales, then in the beginning. It was (as I imagine) for the very ſame reaſon, that the Germans doe-it, who never begin to carouſe, but when they have well fed. Plato forbiddeth children to drinke any

wine, before they be eighteene yeeres of age, and to be druncke before they come to forty. But to ſuch as have once attained the age of fortie▪ he is content to pardon them, if they chaunce to delight themſelves with it, and alloweth them ſomwhat largely to blend the influence of Dioniſius in their banquets, that good God, who beſtoweth cheerefulneſſe vpon men, and youth vnto aged men, who layeth and aſwageth the paſſions of the minde, even as yron is made flexible by the fire: and in his profitable lawes drinking-meetings or quaffing companies as neceſſary and commendable (alwaies provided there be a chiefe leader amongſt them to containe and order them) drunkeneſſe being a good and certaine tryall of everie mans nature; and therewithall proper to give aged men the courage to make merry in dancing and in muſicke; things alowable and profitable, and ſuch as they dare not vndertake being ſober and ſetled. That wine is capable to ſupply the mind with temperance, and the bodie with health. Notwithſtanding, theſe reſtrictions, partely barrowed of the Carthaginians, pleaſe him well. Let thoſe forebeare it that are going about any expedition of warre. Let every magiſtrate, and all judges abſtain from▪ it at what time they are to execute their charge, and to conſult of publike affaires▪ Let none beſtow the day in drinking, as the time that is due vnto more ſerious negotiations, nor the nights wherein a man intendeth to get children. It is reported, that Stilpo the Philoſopher, finding himſelfe ſurcharged with age, did purpoſely haſten his end, by drinking of pure wine. The like cauſe (though not wittingly) did alſo ſuffocat the vital forces, crazed through old age of the Philoſopher Arceſilaus. But it is an old and pleaſant queſtion, whether a wiſemans mind were like to yeelde vnto the force of wine.
                        Si munitae adhibet vim ſapientiae.Od. 28. 4.
                        
                        
                           If vnreſiſted force it bends,
                           Gainſt wiſedome which it ſelfe defends.
                        
                        Vnto what vanity doth the good opinion we have of our ſelves provoke-vs? The moſt temperate and perfecteſt minde of the world, findes it too great a taske to keep hirſelfe vpright, leſt ſhe fall by hir owne weakeneſſe. Of a thouſand there is not one perfectly righteous and ſetled but one inſtant of her life, and queſtion might be made, whether according to her naturall condition ſhe might at any time be ſo. But to joyne conſtancie vnto it, in her laſt perfection: I meane if nothing ſhould ſhocke her: which a thouſand accidents may do. Lucretius that famous Poet, may philoſophie and bandie at his pleaſure: Loe where he lieth ſenſleſſe of an amorous potion. Thinkes any man, that an Apoplexie cannot as ſoone aſtoniſh Socrates, as a poore labouring man? Some of them have by the force of a ſickneſſe, forgot their owne names, and a ſlight hurt hath overthrowne the judgement of others. Let him be as wiſe as he can, in the end he is but a man; what is more fraile, more miſerable, or more vaine? Wiſedome forceth not our naturall conditions.
                        
                           Sudores itaque & pallorem exiſtere totoLucr. l. 3. 155.
                           
                           Corpore, & infringi linguam vocémque aboriri
                           Caligare oculos, ſonare aures, ſuccidere artus,
                           Denique concidere ex anîmi terrore videmus.
                        
                        
                           We ſee therefore, paleneſſe and ſweats ore▪ grow,
                           Our bodies, tongues doe falter, voyce doth breake,
                           Eyes dazle, eares buzze, joints doe ſhrincke below,
                           Laſtly we ſwone by hart-fright, terrours weake.
                        
                        He muſt feele his eyes againſt the blow that threatneth him, being neere the brimme of a precipiſe, he muſt cry out like a child. Nature having purpoſed to reſerve theſe light markes of her aucthoritie vnto herſelfe, in expugnable vnto our reaſon, and to the Stoicke vertue: to teach him his mortalitie, and our inſipiditie. He waxeth pale for feare, he bluſheth for ſhame he groaneth feeling the cholike, if not with a deſperate and lowd-roaring voyce, yet with a lowe, ſmothered and hoarſe-ſounding noyſe.
                        Humani à ſe nihil alienum putat,Ter. Heau
                                 •
                              . act. 1. ſce. 1. 25
                        
                        
                           He thinkes, that nothing ſtrange be can,
                           To him, that longs to any man.
                        
                        Giddie-headed Poets, that faine what they liſt, dare not ſo much as diſcharge their Heroes
                           Virg. Aeu. l. 6. 
                                 •
                              
                            from teares.
                        Sic fatur lachrymans, claſſi
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            immittit habenas.
                        
                           So ſaid he weeping, and ſo ſaide,
                           Himſelfe hand to the ſteerage laide.
                        
                        
                           Let it ſuffice him to bridle his affections, and moderate his inclinations; for, it is not in him to beare them away. Plutarke himſelfe, who is ſo perfect and excellent a judge of humane actions, ſeeing Brutus and Torquatus to kill their owne children, remaineth doubtfull, whither vertue could reach ſo farre, and whether ſuch men were not rather moved by ſome other paſſion. All actions beyond the ordinarie limits, are ſubiect to ſome ſiniſter interpretation: Foraſmuch as our taſte doth no more come vnto that which is above it, then to that which is vnder it. Let vs omit that other ſect, which maketh open profeſſion of fiercenes. But when in the very ſame ſect, which is eſteemed the moſt demiſſe, we heare the bragges of Metrodorus: Occupavite, Fortuna, at
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               cepi: omnéſque aditus tuos intercluſi vt ad me aſpirare non
                           Metr. Cic. Tuſc. qu
                                 •
                              ſt. l. 5. 
                           poſſes. Fortune, I have prevented, caught, and overtaken thee: I have mured and ramd vppe all thy paſſages, whereby thou mighteſt attaine vnto me. When Anaxarcus, by the appointment of Nicocreon, the tyrant of Cipres, being laid along in a trough of ſtone, and ſmoten with yron ſledges, ceaſeth not to crie out, ſtreeke, ſmite, and breake; it is not Anaxarchus, it is but his vaile you martyr ſo. When we heare our martyrs, in the middeſt of a flame crie a loude vnto the Tyrant, this ſide is roſted enough, chop-it, eat it, it is full roſted, now begin on the other. When in Ioſephus we heare a childe all to rent with biting ſnippers, and pierced with the breath of Antiochus, to defie him to death, crie with a lowde-aſſured and vndiſmaid voyce; Tyrant thou looſeſt time, loe I am ſtill at mine eaſe; where is that ſmarting paine, where are thoſe torments, wherewith whilom thou didſt ſo threaten me? My conſtancie doth more trouble thee, then I have feeling of thy crueltie: Oh faint-hearted varlet, doeſt thou yeelde when I gather ſtrength? Make me to fainte or ſhrinke, cauſe me to moane or lament, force me to yeeld and ſue for grace if thou canſt; encourage thy ſatellities, harten thy executioners; loe how they droope, and have no more power; arme them, ſtrengthen them, fleſh them. Verely we muſt needes confeſſe there is ſome alteration, and ſome furie (how holy ſoever) in thoſe mindes. When we come vnto theſe Stoick evaſions; I had rather be furious then voluptuous: the ſaying of Antiſthenes. 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , Rather would I be mad, then
                           Antiſt. Diogen. L
                                 ••
                              rs. l. 6. c. 1. 
                           merry. When Sextu
                                 •
                              s telleth vs, he had rather be ſurpriſed with paine, then ſenſuality; when Epicurus vndertakes to have the goute, to wantonize and faune vpon him, and refuſing eaſe and health, with a hearty cheerefulneſſe defie all evils, and ſcornefully deſpiſing leſſe ſharpe griefes, diſdayning to grapple with them, he blithely deſireth and calleth for ſharper, more forcible, and worthy of him:
                        
                           Spumantémque dari pecora inter inerei
                                 •
                               votis
                           Optat aprum, aut fulvum deſcendere monte leonem:Virg. Ae
                                    •
                                 . l 4. 158.
                           
                        
                        
                           He wiſht, mongſt hartleſſe beaſts ſome foming Bore,
                           Or mountaine-Lyon would come downe and rore.
                        
                        Who would not judge them to be prankes of a courage remooved from his wonted ſeate? Our minde cannot out of hir place attaine ſo high. She muſt quit it and raiſe hir ſelfe a loft, and taking the bridle in hir teeth, carry and tranſport hir man ſo farre, that afterward hee wonder at himſelfe, and reſt amazed at his actions. As in exploites of warre, the heat and earneſtneſſe of the fight doth often provoke the noble-minded-ſouldiers, to adventure on ſo dangerous paſſages, that afterward being better adviſed, they are the firſt to wonder at it. As alſo Poets, are often ſurpriſed and rapt with admiration at their owne labours, and forget the trace, by which they paſt ſo happy a career. It is that, which ſome terme a fury or madneſſe in them. And as Plato ſaith, that a ſetled and repoſed man, doth in vaine knocke at Poeſies gate. Ariſtotle likewiſe ſaith, that no excellent minde is freely exempted from ſome or other entermixture of folly. And he hath reaſon, to call any ſtarting or extraordinarie conceit (how commendable ſoever) and which exceedeth our judgement and diſcourſe, folly. Forſomuch as wiſedome, is an orderly and regular managing of the minde, and which ſhe addreſſeth with meaſure, and conducteth with proportion; And take hir owne word for-it. Plato diſputeth thus; that the facultie of propheſiyng and divination is far above-vs, and that when wee treate it, we muſt be beſides our ſelves: our wiſdome muſt be darkened and ouer ſhadowed by ſleepe, by ſickeneſſe, or by drowzineſſe; or by ſome celeſtiall fury, raviſhed from hir owne ſeat.
                     
                     
                        
                        The third Chapter.
                        
                           A cuſtome of the Ile of Cea.
                        
                        IF, as ſome ſay, to philoſophate be to doubt; with much more reaſon, to rave and fantaſtiquize, as I doe, muſt neceſſarily be to doubt: For, to enquire and debate, belongeth to a ſcholler, and to reſolve appertaines to a cathedrall maſter. But know, my cathedrall, it is the authoritie of Gods divine will, that without any contradiction doth ſway-vs, and hath hir ranke beyond theſe humane and vaine conteſtations. Philip being with an armed hand entred the Countrie of Peloponneſus, ſome one told Damidas, the Lacedemonians were like to endure much, if they ſought not to reobtaine his loſt favour. Oh varlet as thou art (anſwered he.) And what can they ſuffer, who have no feare at all of death? Agis being demanded, how a man might do to live free, anſwered; Deſpiſing and contemning to die. Theſe and a thouſand like propoſitions, which concurre in this purpoſe, do evidently inferre ſome thing beyond the patient expecting of death it ſelfe, to be ſuffered in this life: witneſſe the Lacedemonian child, taken by Antigonus, and ſold for a ſlave, who vrged by his maſter, to performe ſome abject ſervice; Thou ſhalt ſee (ſaid he) whom thou haſt bought; for, it were a ſhame for me to ſerve, having libertie ſo neere at hand, and therewithall threw himſelfe headlong downe from the top of the houſe. Antipater, ſharply threatning the Lacedemonians, to make them yeeld to a certaine requeſt of his; they anſwered, ſhouldeſt thou menace vs worſe then death, we will rather die. And to Philip, who having written vnto them, that he would hinder all their enterpriſes; What? (ſay they) wilt thou alſo hinder vs from dying? That is the reaſon, why ſome ſay, that the wiſeman liveth as long as he ought, and not ſo long as he can. And that the favourableſt gift, nature hath bequeathed-vs, and which removeth all meanes from-vs to complaine of our condition, is, that ſhe hath left-vs the key of the fieldes. She hath appointed but one entrance vnto life, but many a thouſand wayes out of it: Well may we want ground to live vpon, but never ground to die in. As Boiocatus anſwered the Romanes. Why dooſt thou complaine againſt this world? It doth not containe thee: If thou liveſt in paine and ſorrow, thy baſe courage is the cauſe of-it, To die there wanteth but will.
                        
                           
                              Ʋbique mors est: optimè hoc cavit Deus,Sen. Theb. Act. 1. ſce. 1.
                           
                           Eripere vitam nemo non homini poteſt:
                           At nemo mortem: mille ad hanc aditus patent.
                        
                        
                           Each where death is: God did this well purvay,
                           No man but can from man life take away,
                           But none barr's death, to it lies many'a way.
                        
                        And it is not a receipt to one maladie alone; Death is a remedie againſt all evils: It is a moſt aſſured haven, never to be feared, and often to be ſought: All comes to one period, whether man make an end of himſelfe, or whether he endure▪ it; whether he run before his day, or whether he expect▪ it: whence ſoever it come, it is ever his owne, where ever the threed be broken, it is all there, it's the end of the web. The voluntarieſt death, is the faireſt. Life dependeth on the will of others, death on ours. In nothing ſhould we ſo much accommodate our ſelves to our humors, as in that. Reputation doth nothing concerne ſuch an enterpriſe, it is follie to have any reſpect vnto it. To live is to ſerve, if the libertie to die be wanting. The common courſe of curing any infirmitie, is ever directed at the charge of life: we have inciſions made into vs, we are cauterized, we have limbes cut and mangled, we are let blood, we are di
                              •
                           ted. Go we but one ſtep further, we need no more phiſicke, we are perfectly whole. Why is not our jugular or throat veine as much at our commaund as the mediane? To extreame ſickneſſes, extreame remedies. Servius the Gramarian being troubled with the gowt, found no better meanes to be rid of it, then to applie poiſon to mortifie his legs. He cared not whether they were Podagrees or no, ſo they were inſenſible. God giveth vs ſufficient priviledge, when he placeth vs in ſuch an eſtate, as life is worſe then death vnto vs. It is weakneſſe to yeeld to evils, but follie to foſter them. The Stoikes ſay, it is a convenient naturall life, for a

wiſeman, to forgoe life, although he abound in all happineſſe; if he do it opportunely: And for a foole to prolong his life, albeit he be moſt miſerable, provided he be in moſt part of things, which they ſay to be according vnto nature. As I offend not the lawes made againſt theeves, when I cut mine owne purſe, and carrie away mine owne goods; nor of deſtroyers when I burne mine owne wood: ſo am I nothing tied vnto lawes made againſt murtherers, if I deprive my ſelfe of mine owne life. Hegeſias was wont to ſay, that even as the condition of life, ſo ſhould the qualitie of death depend on our election. And Diogenes meeting with the Philoſopher Speufippus, long time afflicted with the dropſie, and therefore carried in a litter, who cried out vnto him; All haile Diogenes: And to thee no health at all, (replied Diogenes) that endureſt to live in ſo wretched an eſtate. True it is, that a while after, Speuſippus as overtired with ſo languiſhing a condition of life, compaſſed his owne death. But this goeth not without ſome contradiction: For, many are of opinion, that without the expreſſe commandement of him, that hath placed vs in this world, we may by no meanes forſake the garriſon of it, and that it is in the hands of God onely, who therein hath placed-vs, not for our ſelves alone, but for his glorie, and others ſervice, when ever it ſhall pleaſe him to diſcharge vs hence, and not for vs to take leave: That we are not borne for our ſelves, but for our Countrie: The Lawes for their owne intereſt require an accompt at our hands for our ſelves, and have a juſt action of murther againſt-vs. Elſe as forſakers of our owne charge, we are puniſhed in the other world.
                        
                           Proxima deinde tenent moeſtiloca, qui ſibi let humVirg. Aen. li. 6. 434.
                           
                           Inſontes p
                                 •
                              perere manu, lucémque peroſi
                           Proi
                                 •
                              cere animas.—
                        
                        
                           Next place they lamentable hold in hell,
                           Whoſe hand their death caus'd cauſeleſſe, (but not well)
                           And hating life did thence their ſoules expell.
                        
                        There is more conſtancie in vſing the chaine that holds-vs, then in breaking the ſame; and more triall of ſtedfaſtneſſe in Regulus, then in Cato. It is indiſcretion and impatience that haſtneth our way. No accidents can force a man to turne his backe from lively vertue: She ſeeketh-out evils and ſorrowes as her nouriſhment. The threats of fell tyrants, tortures and torments; executioners and torturers, doe animate and quicken her.
                        
                           Duris vt ilex t
                                 •
                              nſa bipennibus
                                 
                                    •••
                                 . l. 4. o
                                    •
                                 . 4. 57.
                           
                           Nigrae feraci frondis in Algid
                                 •
                              
                           
                           Per damna, per caedes, ab ipſo
                           Ducit opes animúmque ferro.
                        
                        
                           As holme-tree doth with hard axe lopt
                           On hils with many holme-trees topt,
                           From loſſe, from cuttings it doth feel,
                           Courage and ſtore riſe ev'n from ſteel.
                        
                        And as the other ſaith.
                        
                           Non est vt put as virtus, pater,Sen. Theb. Act. 1. ſc
                                    •
                                 . 1.
                           
                           Timere vitam, ſed magis ingentibus
                           Obſtare, nec ſe vertere ac retro dare.
                        
                        
                           Sir, ti's not vertue, as you vnderſtand,
                           To feare life, but groſſe miſchiefe to withſtand,
                           Not to retire, turne backe, at any hand.
                        
                        
                           Rebus in adverſis facile est contemnere mortem.M
                                    ••
                                 t. li. 11. 
                                    •
                                 pi. 57. 15.
                           
                           Fortius ille facit, qui miſer eſſe poteſt.
                        
                        
                           T'is eaſie in croſſe chance death to deſpiſe:
                           He that can wretched be, doth ſtronger riſe.
                        
                        It is the part of cowardlineſſe, and not of vertue, to ſeek to ſquat it ſelfe in ſome hollowlurking hole, or to hide her ſelfe vnder ſome maſſie tombe, thereby to ſhun the ſtrokes of fortune. She never forſakes her courſe, nor leaves her way, what ſtormie weather ſoever croſſe-her.
                        
                           Si fractus illabatur orbis,
                           Impavidam ferient ruina.
                                 
                                    ••
                                 r. 
                                    •
                                 . 3. 
                                    •
                                 d. 
                                    •
                                 . 7.
                           
                        
                        
                           If the world broken ſhould vpon her fall,
                           
                              The ruines may her ſtrike, but not appall,
                        
                        The avoyding of other inconveniences doth moſt commonly drive vs into this, yea, ſometimes the ſhunning of death, makes vs to run into it.Mart. li. 2. 
                                 •
                              pig. 80. 2.
                        
                        Hic, rogo, non furor est, 
                              ••
                            moriare, mori?
                        
                           Madneſſe is't not, ſay I,
                           To die, leſt you ſhould die?
                        
                        As thoſe who for feare of a break-necke down-fall, doe headlong caſt themſelves into-it.
                        
                           —multos in ſumma pericula miſitLucan. l. 7. 104.
                           
                           
                              Ʋ
                              
                                 ••
                              turi timor ipſe mali: fortiſſimus ille est,
                           Qui promptus metuenda pati, ſi cominus inſtent,
                           Et differre poteſt.
                        
                        
                           The verie feare of ils to come, hath ſent
                           Many to mightie dangers: ſtrongeſt they,
                           Who fearfull things t'endure are readie bent,
                           If they confront them, yet can them delay.
                        
                        
                           —vſque adeo mortis formidine, vitaeL
                                    •
                                 cr. l. 3. 79.
                           
                           Percipit humanos odium, luc
                                 •
                              ſque videndae,
                           Vt ſibi conſciſcant moerenti pectore let hum,
                           Ob
                                 •
                              i
                                 •
                              i fontem curarum hunc eſſe timorem.
                        
                        
                           So far by feare of death, the hate of life,
                           And ſeeing-light, doth men as men poſſeſſe,
                           They grieving kill themſelves to end the ſtrife,
                           Forgetting, feare is ſpring of their diſtreſſe.
                        
                        
                           Plato in his lawes, alots him that hath deprived his neereſt and deereſt friend of life (that is to ſay, himſelfe) and abridged him of the deſtinies courſe, not conſtrained by any publike judgement, nor by any lewde and inevitable accident of fortune, nor by any intolerable ſhame or infamie, but through baſeneſſe of minde, and weakneſſe of a faint-fearfull courage, to have a moſt ignominious, and ever-reproachfull buriall. And the opinion which diſdaineth our life, is rediculous: For, in fine it is our being. It is our all in all. Things that have a nobler and richer being, may accuſe ours: But it is againſt nature, we ſhould deſpiſe, and careleſly ſet our ſelves at naught: It is a particular infirmitie, and which is not ſeen in any other creature, to hate and diſdaine himſelfe. It is of like vanitie, that we deſire to be other, then we are. The fruit of ſuch a deſire doth not concerne-vs, foraſmuch as it contradicteth and hindereth it ſelfe in it ſelfe. He that deſireth to be made of a man an Angell, doth nothing for himſelfe: He ſhould be nothing the better by it: And being no more, who ſhall rejoice or conceive any gladneſſe of this change or amendment for him?
                        
                           Debet enim miſ
                                 •
                              rè fortè aegréque futurum eſt,
                                 
                                    •
                                 b. 905.
                           
                           Ipſe quoque eſſe in eo tum tempore, cùm male poſſit
                           Accidere,
                        
                        
                           For he, who ſhall perchance proove miſerable,
                           And ſpeed but ill, ſhould then himſelfe be able
                           To be himſelfe, when ills may chance vnſtable.
                        
                        The ſecuritie, indolencie, impaſſibilitie, and privation of this lives-evils, which we purchaſe at the price of death, bring vs no commoditie at all. In vaine doth be avoide warre, that can not inioy peace; and boot
                                 •
                              leſſe doth 
                                 ••
                               ſhun paine, that hath no meanes to feel rest. Amongſt thoſe of the firſt opinion, great queſtioning hath been, to know what occaſions are ſufficiently juſt and lawfull to make a man vndertake the killing of himſelfe, they call that 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            
                           a reaſonable orderly out-let. For, although they ſay, a man muſt often dieAlex. Aphr
                                 •
                              d. for ſlight cauſes, ſince theſe that keep vs alive, are not verie ſtrong; yet is ſome meaſure required in them. There are certaine fantaſticall and braine-ſicke humors, which have not only provoked particular men, but whole Nations to defeat themſelves. I have heretofore alleaged ſome examples of them: And moreover we read of certaine Mi
                              ••
                           ſian virgins, who vpon a ſurious conſpiracie hanged themſelves one after an other, vntill ſuch time as the Magiſtrate provided for it, appointing that ſuch as ſhould be found ſo hanged, ſhould with their owne halters be dragged naked through the ſtreets of the Citie. When Threicion perſwadeth Cleom
                                 •
                              nes to kill himſelfe, by reaſon of the bad and deſperate eſtate his affaires ſtood

in, and having eſcaped a more honourable death in the battell which he had lately loſt, moveth him to accept of this other, which is ſecond to him in honour, and give the conqueror no leiſure to make him endure, either another death, or elſe a ſhamefull life. Cleomenes with a Lacedemonian and Stoike courage, refuſeth this counſell as baſe and effeminate: It is a receipt, (ſaith he) which can never faile me, and whereof a man ſhould make no vſe, ſo long as there remaineth but one inch of hope: That to live, is ſometimes conſtancie and valour; That he will have his verie death ſerve his Countrie, and by it, ſhew an act of honour and of vertue. Threicion then believed, and killed himſelfe. Cleomenes did afterwards as much, but not before he had tried and aſſayed the vtmoſt power of fortune. All inconveniences are not ſo much worth, that a man ſhould die to eſchue them. Moreover, there being ſo many ſuddaine changes, and violent alterations in humane things, it is hard to judge in what ſtate or point we are juſtly at the end of our hope:
                        
                           Sperat & in ſ
                                 •
                              va victus gladiator arena,
                           —Sit licet infeſto pollice turba minax.
                        
                        
                           The Fencer hopes, though downe in liſts he lie,
                           And people with turn'd hand threat's he muſt die.
                        
                        All things, ſaith an ancient Proverb, may a man hope-for, ſo long as he liveth: yea, but, anſwereth Seneca, wherefore ſhall I rather have that in minde; that fortune can do all things for him that is living, then this; that fortune hath no power at all over him, who knoweth how to die? Ioſeph is ſeen engaged in ſo an apparant-approaching danger, with a whole nation againſt him, that according to humane reaſon, there was no way for him to eſcape; notwithſtanding being (as he ſaith) counſelled by a friend of his, at that inſtant, to kill himſelfe, it fell out well for him to opinionate himſelfe yet in hope: for fortune, beyond all mans diſcourſe, did ſo turne and change that accident, that without any inconvenience at all, he ſaw himſelfe delivered: whereas on the contrarie Brutus and Caſſius, by reaſon of the down-fall and raſhneſſe, wherewith before due time and occaſion, they killed themſelves; did vtterly looſe the reliques of the Roman libertie, whereof they were protectors. The Lord of Ang
                                 ••••
                              
                            in the battell of Seriſolles, as one deſperate of the combates ſucceſſe, which on his ſide went to wracke, attempted twiſe to run himſelfe through the throat with his rapier, and thought by precipitation to bereave himſelfe of the enjoying of ſo notable a victorie. I have ſeen a hundred Hares ſave themſelves even in the Gray-hounds jawes: Aliquis carni
                                 •
                              ics ſuo ſuperſtes
                           S
                                 ••
                              . epiſt. 13. 
                           ſuit. Some man hath out-lived his Hang-man.
                        
                        
                           Multa dies variúſque labor mutabilis eviVirg. Ae
                                    •
                                 . li. 11. 416.
                           
                           Rettulit in melius, multos alterna reviſens
                           Luſit, & in ſolido rurſus fortuna locavit.
                        
                        
                           Time, and of turning age the divers ſtraine,
                           Hath much to better brought, fortunes turn'd traine,
                           Hath many mock't, and ſet them faſt againe.
                        
                        
                           Plinie ſaith, there are but three ſorts of ſickneſſes, which to avoide, a man may have ſome colour of reaſon to kill himſelfe. The ſharpeſt of all is the ſtone in the bladder, when the vrine is there ſtopped. Seneca, thoſe onely, which for long time diſturbe and diſtract the offices of the minde. To avoide a worſe death, ſome are of opinion, a man ſhould take it at his owne pleaſure. Democritus chiefe of the Aetolians, being led captive to Rome, found meanes to eſcape by night: but being purſued by his keepers, rather then he would be taken againe, ran himſelfe through with his Sword. Antinoüs and Theodotus, their Citie of Epirus being by the Romans reduced vnto great extreamitie, concluded, and perſwaded all the people to kill themſelves. But the counſell, rather to yeeld, having prevailed: they went to ſeeke their owne death, and ruſhed amidſt the thickeſt of their enemies, with an intention, rather to ſtrike, than to warde themſelves. The Iland of Goſa, being ſome yeares ſince ſurpriſed and over run by the Turkes, a certaine Sicilian therein dwelling, having two faire daughters readie to be married, killed them both with his owne hands, together with their mother, that came in to help them. That done, running out into the ſtreets, with a croſſebow in one hand, and a caliver in the other, at two ſhoots, ſlew the two firſt Turks that came next to his gates, then reſolutely drawing his Sword, ran furiouſly among them; by whom he was ſuddainly hewen in peeces: Thus did he ſave himſelfe from ſlaviſh bondage, having firſt delivered his owne from-it. The Iewiſh women, after they had cauſed their children to

be circumcized, to avoide the crueltie of Antiochus, did headlong precipitate themſelves and them vnto death. I have heard-it crediblie reported, that a gentleman of good qualitie, being priſoner in one of our Gaoles, and his parents advertized that he ſhould aſſuredly be condemned, to avoide the infamie of ſo reproachfull a death, appointed a Prieſt to tell him, that the beſt remedie for his deliverie, was to recommend himſelfe to ſuch a Saint, with ſuch and ſuch a vow, and to continue eight daies without taking any ſuſtenance, what faintneſſe or weakneſſe ſoever he ſhould feel in himſelfe. He believed them, and ſo without thinking on it, was delivered both of life and danger. Scribonia perſwading L
                                 •
                              bo his nephew to kill himſelfe, rather then to expect the ſtroke of juſtice, told him, that for a man to preſerve his owne life, to put it into the hands of ſuch as three or foure dayes after ſhould come and ſeek it, was even to diſpatch another mans buſineſſe, and that it was no other, then for one to ſerve his enemies, to preſerve his blood, therewith to make food. We read in the Bible, that Nicanor the perſecutor of Gods Law, having ſent his Satellites to apprehend the good old man Raſi
                                 •
                              s, for the honour of his vertue, ſurnamed the father of the Iewes; when that good man ſaw no other meanes left him, his gate being burned, and his enemies readie to lay hold on him, choſe, rather then to fall into the hands of ſuch villaines, and be ſo baſely abuſed, againſt the honour of his place to die noblie, and ſo ſmote himſelfe with his owne ſword; but by reaſon of his haſte, having not throughly ſlaine himſelfe, he ran to throw himſelfe downe from an high wall, amongſt the throng of people, which making him roome, he fell right vpon his head. All which notwithſtanding, perceiving life to remaine in him, he tooke heart againe; and getting vp on his feet, all goared with bloud, and loaden with ſtrokes, making way through the preaſe, came to a craggie and downe-ſteepie rocke, where vnable to goe any further, by one of his wounds, with both his hands he pulled out his guts, and tearing and breaking them, caſt them amongſt ſuch as purſued him, calling and atteſting the vengeance of God to light vpon them. Of all violences committed againſt conſcience, the moſt in mine opinion to be avoyded, is that which is offred againſt the chaſtitie of women, foraſmuch as there is naturally ſome corporall pleaſure commixt with it: And therefore the diſſent cannot fully enough be joyned thereunto: And it ſeemeth, that force is in ſome ſort, intermixed with ſome will. The eccleſiaſticall Storie hath in eſpeciall reverence, ſundrie ſuch examples of devout perſons, who called for death to warrant them from the out-rages which ſome tyrants prepared againſt their religion and conſciences. Pe
                                 •
                              agia and Sophron
                                 •
                              a, both canonized; the firſt, together with her mother and ſiſters, to eſcape the outragious rapes of ſome ſouldiers, threw her ſelfe into a river; the other, to ſhun the force of Maxentius the Emperour, ſlew her ſelfe. It ſhall peradventure redound to our honour in future ages, that a wiſe Author of theſe daies, and namely a Pariſian, doth labour to perſwade the Ladies of our times, rather to hazard vpon any reſolution, than to embrace ſo horrible a counſell of ſuch deſperation. I am ſorie, that to put amongſt his diſcourſes, he knew not the good ſaying I learnt of a woman at Tholouſe, who had paſſed through the hands of ſome ſoldiers: God be praiſed (ſaid ſhe) that once in my life, I have had my belly-full without ſinne. Verily theſe cruelties are not worthy of the French curteſie. And God be thanked, ſince this good advertiſement; our ayre is infinitely purged of them. Let it ſuffice, that in doing it, they ſay, No, and take it, following the rule of Marot. The hiſtorie is verie full of ſuch, who a thouſand waies have changed a lingering-toylſome life with death. Lucius Aruntius killed himſelfe (as he ſaid) to avoide what was paſt, and eſchew what was to come. Granius Sylvanus, and Statius Proximus, after they had been pardoned by Nero, killed themſelves, either becauſe they ſcorned to live by the favour of ſo wicked a man, or becauſe they would not another time be in danger of a ſecond pardon, ſeeing his ſo eaſie-yeelding vnto ſuſpicious and accuſations againſt honeſt men. Spargapiſes ſonne vnto Queene T
                                 •
                              miris, priſoner by the law of warre vnto Cyrus, employed the firſt favour that Cyrus did him, by ſetting him free, to kill himſelfe, as he who never pretended to reap other fruit by his libertie, then to revenge the infamie of his taking vpon himſelfe. Boges a Governour for king Xerxes in the countrie of Ionia, being beſieged by the Athenians army vnder the conduct of Cymon, refuſed the compoſition, to returne ſafely, together with his goods and treaſure into Aſia, as one impatient to ſurvive the loſſe of what his Maſter had given him in charge; and after he had ſtoutly-and even to the laſt extremitie, defended the Towne, having no manner of victuals left him; firſt he caſt all the gold, and treaſure, with whatſoever he imagined the enemie might reap

any commoditie by, into the river Strimon; Then having cauſed a great pile of wood to be ſet on fire, and made all women, children, concubines and ſervants to be ſtripped, & throwne into the flames, afterward ran-in himſelfe, where all were burned. Ninache
                                 •
                              uen a Lord in the Eaſt Indies, having had an inkling of the king of Portugales Viceroyes deliberation to diſpoſſeſſe him, without any apparant cauſe, of the charge he had in Mala
                                 •
                              a, for to give it vnto the king of Campar; of himſelfe reſolved vpon this reſolution. Firſt he cauſed an high ſcaffold to be ſet vp, ſomewhat longer then broad, vnderpropped with pillars, all gorgeouſly hanged with rich tapiſtrie, ſtrewed with flowers, and adorned with pretious perfumes: Then hauing put-on a ſumptuous long roab of cloth of gold, richly beſet with ſtore of pretious ſtones of ineſtimable worth, he came out of the pallace into the ſtreet, and by certaine ſteps aſcended the ſcaffold, in one of the corners whereof, was a pile of aromaticall wood ſet afire. All the people of the Citie were flocked together, to ſee what the meaning of ſuch vnaccuſtomed preparation might tend vnto. Ninache
                                 •
                              uen with an vndanted-bold, yet ſeeming-diſcontented countenance, declared the manifold obligations, which the Portugal Nation was endebted vnto him for; expoſtulated how faithfully and truely he had dealt in his charge; that having ſo often witneſſed, armed at all aſſayes for others; that his honour was much dearer vnto him then life, he was not to forſake the care of it for himſelfe; that fortune refuſing him all meanes to oppoſe himſelfe againſt the injurie intended againſt him, his courage, at the leaſt willed him to remoove the feeling thereof, and not become a laughing ſtocke vnto the people, and a triumph to men of leſſe worth then himſelfe: which words as he was ſpeaking, he caſt himſelfe into the fire. Sextilia the wife of Scaurus and Praxea wife vnto Labeo, to encourage their husbands, to avoid the dangers, which preſſed them, wherein they had no ſhare (but in regard of the intereſt of their conjugal affection) voluntarily engaged their life, in this extreame neceſſitie, to ſerve them, as an example to imitate, and company to regard. What they performed for their husbands; Cocceius Nerva acted for his countrie, and though leſſe profitable, yet equall in true-love. That famous interpreter of the lawes, abounding in riches, in reputation, in credit, and flouriſhing in health about the Emperour, had no other cauſe to rid himſelfe of life, but the compaſſion of the miſerable eſtate, wherein he ſaw the Romane common-wealth. There is nothing can be added vnto the daintineſſe of Fulvius wives death, who was ſo inward with Augustus. Augustus perceiving he had blabbed a certaine ſecret of importance, which he on-truſt had revealed vnto him; one morning comming to viſit him, he ſeemed to frownevpon him for-it; whereupon as guiltie, he returneth home, as one full of deſpaire, and in pitteous ſort told his wife, that ſithence he was falne into ſuch a miſchiefe, he was reſolved to kill himſelfe; ſhee as one no whit diſmaide, replide vnto him; Thou ſhalt do but right, ſince having ſo often experienced the incontinence of my tongue, thou haſt not learnt to beware of it, yet give me leave to kill my ſelfe firſt, and without more adoe, ran her ſelfe through with a ſword. 
                              Ʋibius Virius diſpairing of his Cities ſafetie, beſieged by the Romans, and miſtruſting their mercie; in their Senates laſt conſultation, after many remonſtrances employed to that end, concluded, that the beſt and faireſt way, was to eſcape fortune by their owne hands. The verie enemies ſhould have them in more honour, and Hanniball might perceive what faithfull friends he had forſaken: Enviting thoſe that ſhould allow of his adviſe, to come, and take a good ſupper, which was prepared in his houſe, where after great cheere, they ſhould drinke together whatſoever ſhould be preſented vnto him: a drinke that ſhall deliver our bodies from torments, free our minds from injuries, and releaſe our eyes and eares from ſeeing and hearing ſo many horrible miſchiefes, which the conquered muſt endure at the hands of moſt cruell and offended conquerors: I have (quoth he) taken order, that men fit for that purpoſe ſhall be readie, when we ſhall be expired, to caſt vs into a great burning pile of wood. Diverſe approved of his high reſolution, but few did imitate the ſame. Seaven and twentie Senators followed him; who after they had attempted to ſtifle ſo irkeſome, and ſuppreſſe ſo terror-mooving a thought, with quaffing and ſwilling of wine, they ended their repaſt by this deadly meſſe: and entre-embracing one another, after they had in common deplored and bewailed their countries miſfortunes; ſome went home to their owne houſes, otherſome ſtaied there, to be entombed with 
                              Ʋibius in his owne fire; whoſe death was ſo long and lingring, forſomuch as the vapor of the wine having poſſeſſed their veines, and ſlowed the effect and operation of the poyſon, that ſome lived an houre after they had ſeene their enemies enter Capua, which they caried

the next day after, and incurred the miſeries, and ſaw the calamities, which at ſo high a rate they had ſought to eſchew. Taurea Iubellius, another citizen there, the Conſul Fulvius returning from that ſhamefull ſlaughter, which he had committed of 225. Senators, called him churliſhly by his name, and having areſted him; Command (quoth he) vnto him, that I al
                              •
                           o be maſſacred after ſo many others, that ſo thou maiſt brag to have murthered a much more valiant man then ever thou waſt. Fulvius, as one enraged, diſdaining him; foraſmuch as he had newly received letters from Rome contrarie to the inhumanitie of his execution, which inhibited him to proceed any further; Iubellius continuing his ſpeach, ſaid; ſithence my Countrie is taken, my friends butchered, & having with mine owne hands ſlaine my wife and children, as the only meane to free them from the deſolation of this ruine; I may not die the death of my fellow-citizens, let vs borrow the vengeance of this hatefull life from vertue: And drawing a blade, he had hidden vnder his garments, therwith ran himſelfe through, and falling on his face, died at the Conſuls feet. Alexander beſieged a citie in India▪
                            the inhabitants whereof, perceiving themſelves brought to a very narrow pinch, reſolved obſtinately to deprive him of the pleaſure he might get of his victorie, and together with their citie, in deſpite of his humanitie, ſet both the Towne & themſelves on a light fire, and ſo were all conſumed. A new kind of warring, where the enemies did all they could, and fought to ſave them, they to looſe themſelves, and to be aſſured of their death, did all a man can poſſible effect to warrant his life. Aſtapa a Citie in Spaine, being very weake of wals, and other defences, to withſtand the Romanes that beſieged the ſame; the inhabitants drew all their riches, and wealth into the market-place, whereof having made a heap, and on the top of it placed their wives and children, and encompaſſed and covered the ſame with drie bruſh wood, that it might burne the eaſier, and having appointed fiftie luſty yong men of theirs for the performance of their reſolution, made a ſallie, where following their determined vow, ſeeing they could not vanquiſt, ſuffered themſelves to be flame every mothers childe. The fiftie, after they had maſſacred every living ſoule remaining in the Citie, and ſet fire to the heap, joyfully leaped there-into, ending their generous libertie in a ſtate rather inſenſible, then dolorous and reprochfull; ſhewing their enemies, that if fortune had been ſo pleaſed, they ſhould aſwell have had the courage to bereave them of the victorie, as they had to yeeld it them both vaine and hideous, yea, and mortall to thoſe, who allured by the glittering of the gold, that moulten ran from out the flame, thicke and three-fold approching greedily vnto it, were therein ſmothered & burned, the formoſt being vnable to give backe, by reaſon of the throng that followed them. The Abideans preſſed by Philip, reſolved vpon the verie ſame, but being prevented, the King whoſe heart yerned and abhorred to ſee the fond-raſh precipitation of ſuch an execution (having firſt ſeized-vpon and ſaved the treaſure, and moveables, which they had diverſly condemned to the flames and vtter ſpoyle) retiring all the Souldiers, granting them the full ſpace of three daies to make themſelves away, that ſo they might do it with more order and leaſure: which three daies they repleniſhed with blood and murther beyond all hoſtile crueltie: And which is ſtrange, there was no one perſon ſaved, that had power vpon himſelfe. There are infinite examples of ſuch-like popular concluſions, which ſeeme more violent, by how much more the effect of them is more vniverſall. They are leſſe then ſeverall, what diſcourſe would not doe in every one, it doth in all: The vehemence of ſocietie, raviſhing particular judgements. Such as were condemned to die in the time of Tiberius, and delaide their execution any while, loſt their goods, and could not be buried; but ſuch as prevented the ſame, in killing themſelves, were ſolemnly enterred, & might at their pleaſure, bequeath ſuch goods as they had to whom they liſt. But a man doth alſo ſometimes deſire death, in hope of a greater good. I deſire (ſaith Saint Paul) to be out of this world, that I may be with Ieſus Christ: and who ſhall releaſe me out of theſe bonds? Cleombrotus Ambraciota having read Platoes Phaedon, was ſo poſſeſſed with a deſire and longing for an after-life, that without other occaſion or more adoe, he went and headlong caſt himſelfe into the ſea. Whereby it appeareth how improperly we call this voluntarie diſſolution, diſpaire; vnto which the violence of hope doth often tranſport-vs, and as often a peacefull & ſetled inclination of judgement. Iaques du Caſtell Biſhop of Soiſſons, in the voyage which Saint Lewes vndertooke beyond the Seas, ſeeing the King & all his Armie readie to returne into France, and leave the affaires of Religion imperfect, reſolved with himſelf rather to go to heaven; And having bidden his friends farewell, in the open view of all men, ruſhed alone into the enemies troops of

whom he was forthwith hewen in pieces. In a certaine kingdome of theſe late-diſcovered Indies, vpon the day of a ſolemne proceſſion, in which the Idols they adore, are publikely caried vp and downe, vpon a chariot of exceeding greatneſſe: beſides that, there are many ſeen to cut and ſlice great mammocks of their quicke fleſh, to offer the ſaid Idols; there are numbers of others ſeen, who proſtrating themſelves alongſt vpon the ground, endure verie patiently to be mouldred and cruſhed to death, vnder the Chariots wheeles, thinking thereby to purchaſe after their death, a veneration of holineſſe, of which they are not defrauded. The death of this Biſhop, armed as we have ſaid, argueth more generoſitie, and leſſe ſence: the heat of the combate ammuſing one part of it. Some common-wealths there are, that have gone about to ſway the juſtice, and direct the opportunitie of voluntarie deaths. In our Citie of Marſeille, they were wont in former ages, ever to keep ſome poiſon in ſtore, prepared and compounded with hemlocke, at the Cities charge, for ſuch as would vpon any occaſion ſhorten their daies, having firſt approved the reaſons of their enterpriſe vnto the ſix hundred Elders of the Towne, which was their Senate: For, otherwiſe it was vnlawfull for any bodie, except by the Magiſtrates permiſſion, and for verie lawfully-vrgent occaſions, to lay violent hands vpon himſelfe. The verie ſame law was likewiſe vſed in other places. Sextus Pompeius going into Aſia, paſſed through the Iland of Cea, belonging to Negropont; it fortuned whilſt he abode there, (as one reporteth that was in his companie) that a woman of great authoritie, having firſt yeelded an accompt vnto her Citizens, and ſhewed good reaſons why ſhe was reſolved to end her life, earneſtly entreated Pompey to be an aſſiſtant at her death, that ſo it might be eſteemed more honourable, which he aſſented vnto; and having long time in vaine ſought, by vertue of his eloquence (wherein he was exceeding ready) and force of perſwaſion, to alter her intent, and remove her from her purpoſe, in the end yeelded to her requeſt. She had lived foure ſcore and ten yeares in a moſt happie eſtate of minde and bodie, but then lying on her bed, better adorned then before ſhe was accuſtomed to have-it, and leaning on her elbow, thus ſhe beſpake: The Gods, Oh Sextus Pompeius and rather thoſe I forgo, then thoſe I go vnto, reward and appay thee, for that thou haſt vouchſafed to be both a counſeller of my life, and a witneſſe of my death. As for my part, having hitherto ever taſted the favourable viſage of fortune, for feare the deſire of living overlong ſhould make me taſte of her frownes, with an happie an ſucceſſefull end, I will now depart, and licence the remainder of my ſoule, leaving behind me two daughters of mine, with a legion of grand-children and nephewes. That done, having preached vnto, and exhorted all her people and kinsfolks to an vnitie and peace, and divided her goods amongſt them, and recommended her houſhold Gods vnto her eldeſt daughter, with an aſſuredly-ſtaide hand ſhe tooke the cup, wherein the poyſon was, and having made her vowes vnto Mercurie, and praiers, to conduct her vnto ſome happie place in the other world, roundly ſwallowed that mortall potion; which done, ſhe intertained the companie with the progreſſe of her behaviour, and as the parts of her bodie were one after another poſſeſſed with the cold operation of that venome; vntill ſuch time as ſhee ſaid, ſhee felt-it worke at the heart and in her entrals, ſhee called her daughter to doe her the laſt office, and cloſe her eyes. Plinie reporteth of a certaine Hiperborean nation, wherein, by reaſon of the milde temperature of the aire, the inhabitants thereof, commonly never die, but when they pleaſe to make themſelves away, and that being wearie and tired with living, they are accuſtomed at the end of a longlong age; having firſt made merrie and good cheare with their friends, from the top of an heigh-ſteedie rocke, appointed for that purpoſe, to caſt themſelves headlong into the Sea. Grieving-ſmart, and a worſe death ſeeme to me the moſt excuſable incitations.
                     
                     
                        The fourth Chapter.
                        
                           To Morrow is a new day.
                        
                        I Doe with ſome reaſon, as me ſeemeth, give pricke and praiſe vnto Iaques Amiot above all our French writers, not only for his naturall puritie, and pure elegancy of the tongue, wherin

he excelleth all others, nor for his indefatigable conſtancie of ſo long and toyle-ſome a labour, nor for the vnſearchable depth of his knowledge, having ſo ſucceſſefully-happy been able to explaine an Authour ſo cloſe and thornie, and vnfold a writer ſo myſterious and entangled (for, let any man tell me what he liſt; I have no skill of the Greeke, but I ſee through out all his tranſlation a ſenſe ſo cloſely-joynted, and ſo pithily-continued, that either he hath aſſuredly vnderſtood and inned the verie imagination, and the true conceit of the Authour, or having through a long and continuall converſion, lively planted in his minde a generall Idea of that of Plutarke, he hath at leaſt lent him nothing that doth be
                              ••
                           e him, or miſ ſeeme him) but aboue all, I kon him thanks that he hath had the hap to chuſe, and knowledge to cull out ſo worthy a worke, and a booke ſo fit to the purpoſe, therewith to make ſo vnvaluable a preſent vnto his Countrie. We that are in the number of the ignorant had been vtterly confounded, had not his booke raiſed vs from out the duſt of ignorance: God-a-mercy his endevours we dare not both ſpeak and write: Even Ladies are therewith able to confront Maſters of arts: It is our breviarie. If ſo good a man chance to live, I bequeath Xenophon vnto him, to doe as much. It is an eaſier piece of worke, and ſo much the more agreeing with his age. Moreover, I wot not how me ſeemeth, although he roundly and clearly diſin
                              •
                           angle himſelfe from hard paſſages, that notwithſtanding his ſtile is more cloſe and neerer it ſelfe, when it is not laboured and wreſted, and that it glideth ſmoothly at his pleaſure. I was even now reading of that place, where Plutarke ſpeaketh of himſelfe, that Rusticus being preſent at a declamation of his in Rome, received a packet from the Emperour, which he temporized to open vntill he had made an end: wherein (ſaith he) all the aſſiſtants did ſingularly commend the gravitie of the man. Verily, being on the inſtance of curioſitie, and on the greedie and inſatiate paſſion of newes, which with ſuch indiſcreet impatience, and impatient indiſcretion, induceth vs to neglect all things, for to entertaine a new-come gueſt, and forget all reſpect and countenance, whereſoever we be, ſuddainly to break-vp ſuch letters as are brought-vs; he had reaſon to commend the gravitie of Rusticus: to which he might alſo have added the commendation of his civilitie and curteſie, for that he would not interrupt the courſe of his declamation; But I make a queſtion, whether he might be commended for his wiſedome: for, receiving vnexpected letters, and eſpecially from an Emperour, it might verie well have fortuned, that his deferring to read them, might have cauſed ſome notable inconvenience. Rechleſneſſe is the vice contrarie vnto curioſitie; towards which I am naturally enclined, and wherein I have ſeen many men ſo extreamly plunged, that three or foure daies after the receiving of letters, which hath been ſent them, they have been found in their pockets yet vnopened. I never opened any, not onely of ſuch as had been committed to my keeping, but of ſuch as by any fortune came to my hands. And I make a conſcience, ſtanding neare ſome great perſon, if mine eyes chance, at vnwares, to ſteal ſome knowledge of any letters of importance that he readeth. Never was man leſſe inquiſitive, or pryed leſſe into other mens affaires, then I. In our fathers time; the Lord of Bo
                                 ••
                              ieres was like to have loſt Turwin, forſomuch as being one night at ſupper in verie good companie, he deferred the reading of an advertiſement, which was delivered him of the treaſons that were practiſed and complotted againſt that Citie, where he commanded. And Plutarke himſelfe hath taught me, that Iulius Caeſar had eſcaped death, if going to the Senate-houſe, that day wherein he was murthered by the Conſpirators, he had read a memoriall which was preſented vnto him. Who likewiſe reporteth the ſtorie of Archias, the Tyrant of Thebes, how the night fore-going the execution of the enterpriſe that Pelopidas had complotted to kill him, thereby to ſet his Countrie at libertie: another Archias of Athens writ him a letter, wherein he particularly related vnto him all that was conſpired and complotted againſt him; which letter being delivered him whilſt he 
                              •
                           ate at ſupper, he deferred the opening of it, pronouncing this by-word: To morrow is a new day, which afterward was turned to a Proverb in Greece. A wiſe man may, in mine opinion, for the intereſt of others, as not vnmannerly to breake companie, like vnto Rusticus, or not to diſcontinue ſome other affaire of importance, remit and defer to vnderſtand ſuch newes as are brought him: but for his owne private intereſt or particular pleaſure, namely, if he be a man having publike charge, if he regard his dinner ſo much, that he will not break-it off, or his ſleepe, that he will not interrupt-it: to doe it, is inexcuſable. And in former ages was the Conſulare-place in Rome, which they named the moſt honourable at the table, becauſe it was more free and more acceſſible for ſuch as might caſually come in, to

entertaine him that ſhould be there placed. Witneſſe, that though they were ſitting at the board, they neither omitted nor gave over the managing of other affaires, and following of other accidents. But when all is ſaid, it is verie hard, chiefely in humane actions, to preſcribe ſo exact rules by diſcourſe of reaſon, that fortune do not ſway, and keepe her right in them.
                     
                     
                        The fifth Chapter.
                        
                           Of Conſcience.
                        
                        MY brother the Lord of Bronze and my ſelfe, during the time of our civill wars, travelling one day together, we fortuned to meet vpon the way with a Gentleman, in outward ſemblance, of good demeanour: He was of our contrarie faction, but foraſmuch as he counterfaited himſelfe otherwiſe; I knew it not. And the worſt of theſe tumultuous inteſtine broyles, is, that the cards are ſo ſhuffled (your enemie being neither by language nor by faſhion, nor by any other apparant marke diſtinguiſhed from you; nay, which is more, brought vp vnder the ſame lawes and cuſtomes, and breathing the ſame ayre) that it is a verie hard matter to avoide confuſion and ſhun diſorder. Which conſideration, made me not a little fearfull to meet with our troopes, eſpecially where I was not knowne, leſt I ſhould be vrged to tell my name, and happly doe worſe. As other times before it had befalne me; for, by ſuch a chance, or rather miſtaking, I fortuned once to looſe all my men and horſes, and hardly eſcaped my ſelfe: and amongeſt other my loſſes, and ſervants that were ſlaine, the thing that moſt grieved me, was the vntimely and miſerable death of a yoong Italian Gentleman, whom I kept as my Page, and verie carefully brought-vp, with whom dyed, as forward, as budding and as hopefull a youth as ever I ſaw. But this man ſeemed ſo fearfully-diſmaid, and at every encounter of horſemen, and paſſage, by, or through any Towne that held for the King, I obſerved him to be ſo ſtrangely diſtracted, that in the end I perceived, and gheſſed they were but guiltie alarums that his conſcience gave him. It ſeemed vnto this ſeely man, that all might apparantly, both through his bluſhing ſelfe-accuſing countenance, and by the croſſes he wore vpon his vpper garments, read the 
                              〈◊〉
                            intentions of his faint-hart. Of ſuch marvailous-working power is the ſting of conſcience: which often induceth vs to bewray, to accuſe, and to combate our ſelves; and for want of other evidences ſhee produceth our ſelves againſt our ſelves,
                        Occultum quatsente anim
                              •
                            tortore flagellum.Iuven. Sat. 13. 195.
                        
                        
                           Their minde, the tormentor of ſinne,
                           Shaking an vnſeen whip within.
                        
                        The ſtorie of Beſſus the Poenian is ſo common, that even children have it in their mo
                              •
                           ths, who being found fault withall, that in mirth he had beaten-downe a neaſt of yong Sparrowes, and then killed them, anſwered, he had great reaſon to do-it, forſomuch as thoſe yong birds ceaſed not 
                              •
                           alſely to accuſe him to have m
                              •
                           rthered his father, which parricide was never ſuſpected to have been committed by him; and vntill that day had layen ſecret; but the revengefull ſuries of the conſcience, made the ſame partie to reveal it, that by all right was to doe penance for ſo hatefull and vnnaturall a murther. Heſiodus correcteth the ſaying of Plato. That puniſhment doth commonly ſucceed the guilt, and follow ſinne at hand: for, he affirmeth, that it rather is borne at the inſtant, and together with ſinne it ſelfe, and they are as twinnes borne at one birth together. Whoſoever expects puniſhment, ſuffereth the ſame, and whoſoever deferveth it, he doth expect▪ it. Imp
                                 •
                              e
                                 •
                              se doth invent, and iniquitie dooth frame torments againſt it ſelfe.
                        
                        Malum conſilium conſultori peſſimum.Eraſ. chil. 1. cent. 2. ad 14.
                        
                        Bad counſell is worſt for the counceller that gives the counſell.
                        Even as the Waſpe ſtingeth and offendeth others, but hir ſelfe much more; for, in hurting others, ſhe looſeth hir force and ſting for ever.
                        —vitáſque in vulnere ponunt.
                           Virg. Georg. li 4. 238.
                        
                        
                           
                              They, while they others ſting,
                           Death to themſelves doe bring.
                        
                        The Can
                                 •
                              harides have ſome part in them, which by a contrarietie of nature ſerveth as an antidot or counterpoiſon againſt their poiſon: ſo likewiſe, as one taketh pleaſure in vice, there is a certaine contrarie diſpleaſure engendred in the conſcience, which by ſundrie irkſome and painfull imaginations, perplexeth and tormenteth vs, both waking and aſleep.
                        
                           Quippe vbi ſe multi per ſomnia ſaepe loquentes,Luer. l. 5. 1168.
                           
                           Aut morbo delirantes procraxe ferantur,
                           Et celata diu in medium peccata dediſſe.
                        
                        
                           Many in dreames oft ſpeaking, or vnhealed,
                           In ſickneſſe raving have themſelves revealed,
                           And brought to light their ſinnes long time concealed.
                        
                        
                           Apollodorus dreamed he ſaw himſelfe firſt flead by the Scythians, and then boyled in a pot, and that his owne heart murmured, ſaying; I onely have cauſed this miſchiefe to light vpon thee. Epicurus was wont to ſay, that no lurking hole can ſhroud the wicked; for, they can never aſſure themſelves to be ſufficiently hidden, ſithence conſcience is ever readie to diſcloſe them to themſelves.
                        —prima eſt haec vl
                              •
                           io, quód ſeIuven. Sat. 13. 
                                 •
                              
                            Iudice nemo n
                              •
                           cens abſolvitur.
                        
                           This is the firſt revenge, no guiltie mind
                           Is quitted, though it ſelfe be judge aſſign'd.
                        
                        Which as it doth fill vs with feare and doubt, ſo doth it ſtore vs with aſſurance and truſt. And I may boldly ſay, that I have waded through many dangerous hazards, with a more vntired pace, onely in conſideration of the ſecret knowledge I had of mine owne will, and innocencie of my deſſeignes.
                        
                           Conſcia mens vt cuique ſua eſt, ita concipit intraOuid. 
                                    •
                                 ast. l
                                    •
                                 b. 1. 485.
                           
                           —Pectora pro facto ſpèmque metúmque ſuo.
                           
                        
                        
                           As each mans minde is guiltie, ſo doth he
                           Inlie breed hope and feare, as his deeds be.
                        
                        Of examples, there are thouſands; It ſhall ſuffice vs to alleage three onely, and all of one man. Scipio being one day accuſed before the Romane people, of an vrgent and capitall accuſation; in ſtead of excuſing himſelfe, or flattering the Iudges; turning to them, he ſaid. It will well beſeeme you to vndertake to judge of his head, by whoſe meanes you have authoritie to judge of all the world. The ſame man, another time, being vehemently vrged by a Tribune of the people, who charged him with ſundrie imputations, in liew of pleading or excuſing his cauſe gave him this ſodaine and ſhort anſwere. Let vs goe (quoth he) my good Cit
                              •
                           zens; let-vs forthwith goe (I ſay) to give hartie thankes vnto the Gods for the victorie, which even vpon ſuch a day as this is, they gave me againſt the Carthaginians. And therewith advancing h
                              ••
                            ſelfe to march before the people, all the aſſemblie, and even his accuſer him ſelfe did vndelayedly follow him towards the Temple. After that, Pe
                                 ••
                              lius having been a
                              ••
                           mated and ſtirred vp by C
                                 •••
                              
                            to ſolicite and demaund a ſtrict accompt of him, of the money 
                              〈◊〉
                            had 
                              ••
                           auaged, and which was committed to his truſt, whilſt he was in the Province of 
                              
                                 〈◊〉
                              ; Scipio being come into the Senate-houſe, of purpoſe to anſwer for himſelfe, pull
                              •
                           ng ou
                              •
                            the booke of his accompts from vnder his gowne, told them all, that that booke contained truely, both the receipt and laying out thereof; and being required to deliver the ſame vnto a Clarke to regiſter it, he refuſed to doe-it, ſaying, he would not doe himſelfe that wrong or indignitie; and therevpon with his owne hands, in preſence of all the Senate, tore the booke in pieces. I cannot apprehend or beleeve, that a guiltie-cauterized conſcience could poſſil lie diſſemble or cou
                              •
                           terfet ſuch an vndiſmaied aſſurance: His heart was naturally too great, and enured to overhigh fortune (ſaith T
                                 •
                              tus Livi
                                 •
                              s) to know how to be a criminall offender, and ſtoopingly to yeeld himſelfe to the baſeneſſe, to defend his innocencie. Torture and racking are dangerous inventions, and ſeeme rather to be trials of patience then Eſſayes of truth. And both he that can, and he that cannot endure them, conceal the truth. For, wherefore ſhall paine or ſmart, rather compell me to confeſſe that, which is ſo indeed, then force me to tell that which is not? And contrariwiſe, if he who hath not done that whereof he is accuſed, is ſufficiently patient to endure thoſe torments; why ſhall not he

be able to tolerate them, who hath done it, and is guiltie indeed; ſo deare and worthie a reward as life being propoſed vnto him? I am of opinion, that the ground of his invention, proceedeth from the conſideration of the power and facultie of the conſcience. For, to the guiltie, it ſeemeth to give a kind of furtherance to the torture, to make him confeſſe his fault, and weakneth and diſmayeth him: and on the other part, it encourageth and ſtrengthneth the innocent againſt torture. To ſay truth, it is a meane full of vncertaintie and danger. What would not a man ſay; nay, what not doe, to avoide ſo grievous paines, and ſhun ſuch torments?
                        Etiam innocentes cogit mentiri dolor.Sen. prover.
                        
                        
                           Torment to lie ſometimes will drive,
                           Ev'n the moſt innocent alive.
                        
                        Whence it followeth, that he whom the Iudge hath tortured, becauſe he ſhall not die an innocent, he ſhall bring him to his death, both innocent and tortured. Many thouſands have thereby charged their heads with falſe confeſſions. Amongſt which I may well place Phylotas, conſidering the circumſtances of the end
                              •
                           ctment that Alexander framed againſt him, and the progreſſe of his torture. But ſo it is, that (as men ſay) it is the leaſt evill humane weakneſſe could invent: though, in my conceit, verie in humanely, and therewith all moſt vnprofitablie. Many Nations leſſe barbarous in that, then the Grae
                              •
                           ian, or the Romane, who terme them ſo, judge it a horrible and cruell thing, to racke and torment a man for a fault whereof you are yet in doubt. Is your ignorance long of him? What can he doe withall? Are not you vnjuſt, who becauſe you will not put him to death without ſome cauſe, you doe worſe then kill him? And that it is ſo, conſider but how often he rather chuſeth to die guiltleſſe, then paſſe by this information, much more painfull, then the puniſhment or torment; and who many times, by reaſon of the ſherpneſſe of it, preventeth, furthereth, yea, and executeth the puniſhment. I wot not whence I heard this ſtorie, but it exactly hath reference vnto the conſcience of our Iuſtice. A countrie woman accuſed a ſouldier before his Generall, being a moſt ſevere Iuſtic
                              •
                           r, that he, with violence, had ſnatched from out hir poore childrens hands, the ſmal
                              •
                            remainder of ſome pappe or water gruell, which ſhee had onely left to ſuſtaine them, forſomuch as the Armie had ravaged and waſted all. The poore woman, had neither witneſſe nor proofe of it; It was but hir yea, and his no; which the Generall perceiving, after he had ſummoned hir to be well adviſed what thee ſpake, and that ſhee ſhould not accuſe him wrongfully; for, if ſhee ſpake an vntruth, ſhee ſhould then be culpable of his accuſation: But ſhee conſtantly perſiſting to charge him, he forthwith, to diſcover the truth, and to be throughly reſolved, cauſed the accuſed Souldiers belly to be ripped, who was found faultie, and the poore woman to have ſaid true; whereupon ſhee was diſcharged. A condemnation inſtructive to others.
                     
                     
                        The ſixt Chapter.
                        
                           Of Exerciſe or Practiſe.
                        
                        IT is a hard matter (although our conceit doe willingly applie it ſelfe vnto it) that Diſcourſe and Inſtruction, ſhould ſufficiently be powerful, to direct vs to action, and addreſſe vs to performance, if over and beſides that, we doe not by experience exerciſe and frame our mind, to the traine whereunto we will range-it: otherwiſe, when we ſhall be on the point of the effects, it will doubtleſſe find it ſelfe much engaged and empeached. And that is the reaſon why amongſt Philoſophers, thoſe that have willed to attaine to ſome greater excellence, have not been content, at home, and at reſt to expect the rigors of fortune, for feare ſhe ſhould ſurpriſe them vnexperienced and find them novices, if ſhe ſhould chance to enter fight with them; but have rather gone to meet and front hir before, and witting-earneſtly caſt themſelves to the triall of the hardeſt difficulties. Some have thereby voluntarily forſaken great riches, onely to practiſe a voluntarie povertie: others have willingly found out labour, and an auſteritie of a toyleſome life, thereby to harden and envre themſelves

to evill, and travell: otherſome have frankly deprived themſelves of the deareſt and beſt parts of their body, as of their eyes, and members of generation, leſt their over-pleaſing, and too-too wanton ſervice, might in any ſort mollifie and diſtract the conſtant reſolution of their minde. But to die, which is the greateſt worke we have to doe, exerciſe can nothing availe vs therevnto. A man may, by cuſtome and experience, fortifie himſelfe againſt griefe, ſorrow, ſhame, want, and ſuch like accidents: But concerning death, we can but once feele and trie the ſame. We are all novices, and new to learne when we come vnto it. There have, in former times, beene found men ſo good husbands and thriftie of time, that even in death they have aſſayde to taſt and ſavour it; and bent their minde to obſerve and ſee, what manner of thing that paſſage of death was; but none did ever yet come backe againe to tell vs tidings of-it.
                        —nemo expergi
                              •
                           us extatLu
                                 •
                              r. 3. 973. Frigida quem ſemel eſt vit aipauſaſequut
                              •
                           .
                        
                           No man doth ever-ofter wake,
                           Whom once his lifes cold reſt doth take.
                        
                        
                           Canius Iulius, a noble Romane, a man of ſingular vertue and conſtancie, having beene condemned to death by that lewdly-miſchievous monſter of men, Caligula: beſides many marvelous evident aſſurances he gave of his matchleſſe reſolution, when he was even in the nicke to endure the laſt ſtroke of the executioner; a Philoſopher, being his friend, interrupted him with this queſtion, ſaying: Canius, in what ſtate is your ſoule now; what doth ſhe; what thoughts poſſeſſe you now; I thought (anſwered he) to keep me readie and prepared with all my force, to-ſee whether in this inſtant of death, ſo ſhort and ſo neere at hand, I might perceive ſome diſlodging or diſtraction of the ſoule, and whether it will ſhew ſome feeling of hir ſudden departure; that (if I apprehend or learne anything of hir) I may afterward, if I can, returne, and give advertiſement therof vnto my friends. Loe-here a Philoſopher, not onely vntil death, but even in death it ſelfe: what aſſurance was it, and what fiercenes of courage, to will that his owne death ſhould ſerve him as a leſſon, and have leaſure to thinke elſewhere in a matter of ſuch conſequence;
                        —it is hoc animi morientis habebat.
                           Lucan. l. 
                                 •
                              . 63
                                 •
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           This power of minde had he,
                           When it from him did flee.
                        
                        Me ſeemeth nevertheleſſe, that in ſome ſort there is a meane to familiarize our ſelves with it, and to aſſay-it. We may have ſome experience of it, if not whole and perfect, at leaſt ſuch as may not altogether be vnprofitable, and which may yeelde vs better fortified and more aſſured. If we cannot attaine vnto it, we may at leaſt approch-it, and diſcerne the ſame: And if we cannot enter hir ſort, yet ſhall we ſee and frequent the approches vnto-it. It is not with out reaſon we are taught to take notice of our ſleepe, for the reſemblance it hath with death. How eaſily we paſſe from waking to ſleeping; with how little intereſt we looſe the knowledge of light, and of ourſelves. The facultie of ſleepe might happily ſeeme vnprofitable, and againſt nature, ſithence it depriveth vs of all actions, and barreth vs of all ſenſe, were it not that nature doth thereby inſtruct vs, that ſhe hath equally made vs, as wel to live, as to die; and by life preſenteth the eternall ſtate vnto vs, which ſhe after the ſame reſerveth for vs, ſo to accuſtome vs thereunto, and remove the feare of it from vs. But ſuch as by ſome violent accident are falne into a faintnes of heart, and have loſt all ſenſes, they, in mine opinion, have well-nigh beene, where they might beholde hir true and naturall viſage: For, touching the inſtant or moment of the paſſage, it is not to be feared, it ſhould bring any travell or diſpleaſure with-it, foraſmuch as we can have, nor ſenſe, nor feeling without leaſure. Our ſufferances have neede of time, which is ſo ſhort, and plunged in death, that neceſſarily it muſt be inſenſible. It is the approches that lead vnto it we ſhould feare; and thoſe may fall within the compaſſe of mans experience. Many things ſeeme greater by imagination, then by effect. I have paſſed over a good part of my age in ſound and perfect health. I ſay, not onely ſound, but blithe and wantonly-luſtfull. That ſtate full of luſt, of prime and mirth, made me deeme the conſideration of ſickneſſes ſo yrkeſome and horrible, that when I came to the experience of them, I have found their fittes but weake, and their aſſaultes but faint, in reſpect of my apprehended feare. Lo here what I daily proove. Let me be vnder a roofe, in a good chamber, warme-clad, and well at eaſe in ſome tempeſtuous and ſtormy

night. I am exceedingly perplexed, and much grieved for ſuch as are abroade, and have no ſhelter: But let me be in the ſtorme my ſelfe, I doe not ſo much as deſire to be elſe-where. Onely to be continually pent vp in a chamber, ſeemed in tollerable to me. I have now enured my ſelfe to live a whole weeke, yea a moneth in my chamber full of care, trouble, alteration and weakenes; and have found, that in the time of my beſt health I moaned ſuch as were ſicke, much more, then I can well moane my ſelfe when I am ill at eaſe: and that the power of my apprehenſion did well-nigh halfe endeare the eſſence and truth of the thing it ſelfe. I am in good hope the like will happen to me of death: and that it is not worth the labor I take for ſo many preparations as I prepare againſt hir; and ſo many helpes as I call 
                              •
                           oſuſtaine, and aſſemble to endure the 
                              ••
                           ocke and violence of it. But hab ornab we can never take too much advantage of it. During our ſecond or third troubles (I doe not well remember which) I fortuned one day, for recreation-ſake, to goe forth and take the ayre, about a league from my houſe, who am ſeated even in the bowels of all troubles of our civill wars of France, ſuppoſing to be moſt ſafe, ſo neere mine owne ho
                              •
                           e and petreite, that I had no neede of better attendance or equipage. I was mounted vpon a very eaſie-going nagge, but not very ſure. At my returning home againe, a ſudden occaſion being offered me, to make vſe of this nagge in a peece of ſervice, whereto he was neither trained not accuſtomed, one of my men (a-ſtrong ſturdie fellow) mounted vpon a yong ſtrong-headed horſe, and that had a deſperate hard mouth, freſh, luſtie and in breath; to ſhew his courage, and to out-goe his fewoes, fortuned with might and maine to ſet ſpurres vnto him, and giving him the bridle, to come right into the path where I was, and as a Coloſſus with his weight riding over me and my nagge, that were both very little, he overthrew vs both, and made vs fall with our heeles vpward: ſo that the nagge lay along aſtonied in one place, and I in a trance groveling on the ground ten or twelfe paces wide of him; my face all torne and bruſed, my ſword which I had in my hand a good way from me, my girdle broken, with no more motion or ſenſe in me then a ſtocke. It is the onely ſwowning that ever I felt yet. Thoſe that were with me, after thy had aſſayed all poſſible meanes to bring me to my ſelfe againe, ſuppoſing me dead, tooke me in their armes, and with much adoe were carying me home to my-houſe, which was about halfe a french league thence: vpon the way, & after I had for two houres ſpace, by all, bin ſuppoſed dead and paſt all recoverie, I began to ſtir and breathe: for, ſo great aboundance of blood was falne into my ſtomake, that to diſcharge it, nature was forced to roweze vp hir ſpirits. I was imediately ſet vpon my feete, and bending forward, I preſently caſt vp, n quantitie as much clottie pure blood, as abucket will hold, and by the way was conſtra
                              •
                           
                           ned to doe the like divers times before I could get home, whereby I begane to recover 
                              ••
                           ttle life, but it was by little and little, and ſo long adoing, that my chiefe ſenſes were much more enclining to death then to life.
                        
                           Per che dubbioſa ancor del ſuo riterne
                           Nons' aſſicura at tonita la mente.
                        
                        
                           For yet the minde doubtfull it's returne
                           Is not aſſured, but aſtoniſhed.
                        
                        The remenbrance whereof (which yet I beare deepely imprinted in my minde) repreſenting me hir viſage and Idea ſo livele and ſo naturally, doth in ſome ſort reconcile me vnto hir. And when I began to ſee, it was with ſo dim, ſo weake and ſo troubled a ſight, that I could not diſcrene any thing of the light,
                        —come quel 
                              •
                           'hor'aepre, hor chiude Gliocchij, mezzo tral ſonno el eſſer deſto.
                        
                           As he that ſometimes opens, ſometimes ſhuts
                           His eyes, betweene ſleepe and awake.
                        
                        Touching the function of the ſoule, they ſtarted vp and came in the ſame progreſſe as thoſe of the body. I perceived my ſelfe all bloodie; for my doublet was all ſullied with the blood I had caſt. The firſt conceit I apprehended, was, that I had received ſome ſhot in my head; and in truth, at the ſame inſtant, there were divers that ſhot round about vs. Me thought, my ſelfe had no other hold of me, but of my lippes-ends. I cloſed mine eyes, to helpe (as me ſeemed) to ſend it forth, and tooke a kind of pleaſure to linger and languiſhingly to let my ſelfe goe from my ſelfe. It was an imagination ſwimming ſuperficially in my minde, as weake and as tender as all the reſt: but in truth, not onely exempted from diſpleaſure,

but rather commixt with that pleaſant ſweeteneſſe, which they feele that ſuffer themſelves to fall into a ſoft-ſlumbring and ſenſe-entrancing ſleepe. I beleeve it is the ſame ſtate, they find themſelves in, whom in the agonie of death we ſee to droop and faint thorow weakneſſe: and am of opinion, we plaine and moane them without cauſe, eſteeming that either they are agitated with grieveous pangs, or that their ſoule is preſſed with painfull cogitations. It was ever my conceite, againſt the opinion of many, yea and againſt that of Stephanus la Boetie, that thoſe whom we ſee, ſo overwhelmed, and faintly-drooping at the approches of their end, or vtterly caſt downe with the lingring tediouſnes of their deſeaſes, or by accident of ſome apoplexie, or falling-evill,
                        
                           —(vi morbi ſaepe 
                                    •
                                 oactus
                              Luer. li. 3. 490.
                           
                           Ante oculos aliquis nostros vt fulminis ictu.
                           Concidit, & ſpumas agit, ingemit, & fremit artus,
                           Deſipit, extent at neruos, torquetur, anhelat,
                           Inconstanter & in iactando membra fatigat)
                        
                        
                           (Some man by force of ſickneſſe driu'n doth fall,
                           As if by thunder ſtroke, before our eyes;
                           He fomes, he grones, he trembles over all,
                           He raves, he ſtretches, he's vext, panting lyes,
                           He tyr's his limmes by toſſing,
                           Now this now that way croſſing.)
                        
                        or hurt in the head, whom we heare throb and rattle, and ſend forth grones and gaſpes, although we gather ſome tokens from them, whereby it ſeemeth, they have yet ſome knowledge left and certain motions we ſee them make with their body: I ſay, I have ever thought, they had their ſoule and body buried and a ſleepe.
                        
                           Viuat & est vitae neſcius ipſe ſuae.
                           Ovid. triſt. lib. 1. el. 3. 12.
                        
                        
                           He lives yet knowes not he,
                           That he alive ſhould be.
                        
                        And I could not beleeve, that at ſo great an aſtoniſhment of members, and deffailance of ſenſes, the ſoule could maintaine any force within, to know hirſelfe; and therefore had no manner of diſcourſe tormenting them, which might make them judge and feele the miſery of their condition, and that conſequently they were not greatly to be moaned. As for my ſelfe, I imagine no ſtate ſo intolerable nor condition ſo horrible, as to have a feelingly-afflicted ſoule, voide of meanes to disburthen and declare hir-ſelfe: As I would ſay of thoſe we ſend to execution, having firſt cauſed their tongne to be cut out, were it not that in this manner of death, the moſt dumbe ſeemes vnto me the fitteſt, namely if it be accompanied with a reſolute and grave countenance. And as thoſe miſerable priſoners which light in the hands of thoſe hard-harted and villenous Souldiers of theſe times, of whom they are tormented with all manner of cruell entreatie, by compulſion to drawe them vnto ſome exceſſive and vnpoſſible ranſome, keeping them all that while in ſo hard a condition and place, that they have no way left them to vtter their thoughts and expreſſe their miſerie. The Poets have fained, there were ſome Gods, that fauoured the releaſe of ſuch as ſufferd ſo languiſhing deaths. —hunc ego DitiVirg. Aen. lib. 4. 703. 
                                    •
                                 r
                                    •
                                 . Sacrumiuſſa fero, téque iſto corpore ſoluo.
                        
                        
                           This to death ſacred, I, as was my charge,
                           Doe beare, and from this body thee enlarge.
                        
                        And the faltering ſpeeches and vncertaine anſweres, that by continuall ringing in their eares and inceſſantvrging them are ſomtimes by force wreſted from them or by the motions which ſeeme to have ſome ſimpathie with that whereof they are examined, is notwithſtanding no witnes, that they live at leaſt a perfect ſound life. We doe alſo in yawning, before fleep fully ſeize vpon vs, apprehend as it were in a ſlumber, what is done about vs, and with a troubled and vncertain hearing, follow the voyces, which ſeeme to ſound but on the outward limits of our ſoule; and frame anſwers according to the laſt words we heard, which taſte more of chance then of ſenſe: which thing now I have proved by experience, I 
                              •
                           ake no doubt, but hitherto, I have well judged of it. For, firſt lying as in a trance, I labo
                              ••
                           ed even with my na les to open my doublet (for I was vnarmed) and well I wot, that in 
                              ••
                           y imagination I felt nothing did hurt me. For, there are ſeveral motions in vs, which preceed not of our free wil▪
                        
                        Sem
                              •
                           animéſque micant digiti▪ ferrúmque retractant.
                        lib. 10. 396.
                        
                        
                           The halfe-dead fingers ſtirre, and feele,
                           (Though it they cannot ſtirre) for ſteele.
                        
                        Thoſe that fall, doe commonly by a naturall impulſion caſt their armes abroade before their falling, which ſheweth, that our members have certaine offices, which they lend one to another, and poſſeſſe certain agitations, apart from our diſcourſe:
                        
                           Falciferos memorant currus abſcindere membra,Leur. li. 3.
                           
                           Vt tremere in terra videatur ab artubus, id quod
                           Decidit abſciſſum, cùm mens tamen atque hominis vis
                           Mobilitate mali non quit ſentire dolorem.
                        
                        
                           They ſay, ſith-bearing chariots limbes bereave,
                           So as on earth, that which cut-off they leave,
                           Doth ſeeme to quake, when yet mans force and minde
                           Doth not the paine, through ſo quicke motion, finde.
                        
                        My ſtomacke was ſurcharged with clotted blood, my hands of themſelves were ſtill running to it, as often they are wont (yea againſt the knowledg of our will) where we feele it to itch. There are many creatures, yea and ſome men, in whom after they are dead, we may ſee their muskles to cloſe and ſtirre. All men know by experience, there be ſome partes of our bodies, which often without any conſent of ours, doe ſtirre, ſtand and lie downe againe. Now theſe paſſions, which but exteriourly touch vs, can not properly be termed ours; For, to make them ours, a man muſt wholy be engaged vnto them: And the paines that our feete or handes feele whileſt we ſleepe, are not ours. When I came neere my houſe, where the tidings of my fall was alreadie come, and thoſe of my houſholde met me, with ſuch outcries as are vſed in like times, I did not onely anſwere ſome words, to what I was demanded, but ſome tell me, I had the memory to commaund my men to give my wife a horſe, whom I perceived to be over-tired, and labouring in the way, which is very hilly, fowle, and rugged. It ſeemeth this conſideration proceeded from a vigilant ſoule: yet was I cleane diſtracted from-it, they were but vaine conceits, and as in a cloud, onely moved by the ſenſe of the eyes and eares: They came not from my ſelfe. All which notwithſtanding, I knew neither whence I came, nor whither I went, nor could I vnderſtand or conſider what was ſpoken vnto me. They were but light effects, that my ſenſes produced of themſelves, as it were of cuſtome. Whatſoever the ſoule did aſſiſt-it with, was but a dreame, being lightly touched, and only ſprinkled by the ſoft impreſſion of the ſenſes. In the meane time my ſtate was verily moſt pleaſant and eaſefull. I felt no maner of care or affliction, nither for my ſelfe nor others. It was a ſlumbering, languſhing and extreame weakneſſe, without anie paine at all. I ſaw mine owne houſe and knew it not; when I was laide in my bedde, I felt great eaſe in my reſt, For I had beene vilely hurred and haled by thoſe poore men, which had taken the paines to carry me vpon their armes a long and wearyſome way, and to ſay truth, they had all beene wearied twice or thrice over, and were faine to ſhift ſeverall times. Many remedies were preſently offerd me, but I tooke none, ſuppoſing verily I had beene deadly hurt in the head. To ſay truth, it had beene a very happy death: For, the weakeneſſe of my diſcourſe hinderd me from judging of it, and the feeblenes of my body from feeling the ſame. Me-thought I was yeelding vp the ghoſt ſo gently, and after ſo eaſie and indolent a maner, that I feele no other action leſſe burthenſome then that was. But when I beganne to come to life againe and recover my former ſtrength,
                        Vt tandem ſenſus convaluere mei,
                        Ovid. Triſt. li. 1 
                              •
                           l. 3. 14.
                        
                           At laſt when all the ſprites I beare,
                           Recall'd and recollected were,
                        
                        which was within two or three houres after, I preſently felt my ſelfe full of aches and paines all my body over; for, each part thereof was with the violence of the fall much bruſed and tainted; and for two or three nights after I found my ſelfe ſo ill, that I verily ſuppoſed I ſhould have had another fit of death: But that a more lively, and ſenſible one: (and to ſpeak plaine) I feel my bru
                              •••
                            yet, and feare me ſhall doe while I live: I will not forget to tell you, that the laſt thing I could rightly fall into againe, was the remembrance of this accident, and I made my men many times to repeat me over and over againe, whither I was going, whence I came, and at what houre that chance befell me, before I could throughly conceive it. Concerning the maner of my falling they in favor of him who had bin the cauſe of it, concealed the truth

from me, and told me other flim flam tales. But a while after, and the morrow next when my memorie beganne to come to it ſelfe againe, and repreſent the ſtate vnto me, wherein I was at the inſtant, when I perceived the horſe riding over me (for being at my heeles, I chanced to eſpie him, and helde my ſelfe for dead; yet was the conceite ſo ſodaine, that feare had no leaſure to enter my thoughts) me ſeemed it was a flaſhing or lightning, that ſmote my ſoule with ſhaking, and that I came from another world. This diſcourſe of ſo ſlight an accident, is but vaine and frivolous, were not the inſtructions I have drawne from thence, for my vſe: For truly, for a man to acquaint himſelfe with death, I finde no better way, then to approch vnto it. Now as Plinie ſaith, every man is a good diſcipline vnto himſelfe alwayes provided he be able to prie into himſelfe. This is not my doctrine, it is but my ſtudie; And not another mans leſſon, but mine owne. Yet ought no man to blame me if I impart the ſame. What ſerves my turne, may happily ſerve another mans; otherwiſe I marre nothing, what I make vſe of, is mine owne. And if I play the foole, it is at mine owne coſt, and without any other bodies intereſt. For it is but a kind of folly, that dies in me, and hath no traine. We have notice but of two or three former ancients, that have trodden this path; yet can we not ſay, whether altogether like vnto this of mine, for we know but their names. No man ſince hath followed their ſteppes: it is a thorny and crabbed enterpriſe, and more then it makes ſhew of, to follow ſo ſtrange and vagabond a path, as that of our ſpirit: to penetrate the ſhady, and enter the thicke-covered depths of theſe internall winding crankes; To chuſe ſo many, and ſettle ſo ſeverall aires of his agitations: And tis a new extraordinary ammuſing, that diſtracts vs from the common occupation of the world, yea and from the moſt recommended: Many yeares are paſt ſince I have no other aime, whereto my thoughts bend, but my ſelfe, and that I controule and ſtudy nothing but my ſelfe. And if I ſtudy any thing elſe, it is imediatly to place it vpon, or to ſay better, in my ſelfe. And me thinkes I erre not, as commonly men doe in other ſciences, without all compariſon leſſe profitable. I impart what I have learn't by this, although I greatly con
                              •
                           ent not my ſelfe with the progreſſe I have made therein. There is no deſcription ſo hard, nor ſo profitable, as is the deſcription of a mans owne life. Yet muſt a man handſomely trimme vp, yea and diſpoſe and range himſelfe to appeare on the Theatre of this world. Now I continually tricke vp my ſelfe; for I vnceſſantly deſcribe my ſelfe. Cuſtome hath made a mans ſpeech of himſelfe, vicious. And obſtinately forbids it in hatred of boaſting, which ever ſeemeth cloſely to follow ones ſelfe witneſſes, whereas a man ſhould wipe a childes noſe, that is now called to vn noſe himſelfe.
                        In vicium ducis culpae fuga.
                        Her. art poet. 31
                        
                           Some ſhunning of ſome ſinne,
                           Doe draw ſome further in.
                        
                        I finde more evill then good by this remedie: But ſuppoſe it were true, that for a man to entertaine the company with talking of himſelfe, were neceſſarily preſumption: I ought not following my generall intent, to refuſe an action, that publiſheth this crazed quality, ſince I have it in my ſelfe: and I ſhould not conceale this fault, which I have not onely in vſe, but in profeſſion. Nevertheleſſe to ſpeake my opinion of it, this cuſtome to condemne wine is much to blame, becauſe many are therewith made drunke. Onely good things may be abvſed. And I believe this rule hath onely regard to popular defects: They are ſnaffles wherewith neither Saints, nor Philoſophers, nor Devines, whom we heare ſo gloriouſly to ſpeake of then ſulves, will in any ſort be bridled. No more doe I, though I be no more the one then other. If they write purpoſely or directly of it, yet when occaſion doth conveniently leade them vnto it, faine they not, headlong to caſt themſelves into the liſtes? Whereof doth Scraetes treate more at large, then of himſelfe? To what doth he more often direct his Diſciples diſcourſes, then to ſpeake of themſelves, not for their bookes leſſon, but of the eſſence and mooving of their ſoule? We religiouſly ſhriue our ſelves to God and our confeſſour as our neighbours to all the people. But will ſome anſwere me, we reporte but accuſation; wee then reporte all: For, even our vertue it ſelfe is faultie and repentable; My arte and profeſſion, is to live. Who forbids me to ſpeake of it, according to my ſenſe, experience, and cuſtome; Let him appoint the Architect to ſpeake of buildings, not according to himſelfe, but his neighbours, according to anothers skill, and not his owne. If it be a glory, for a man to publiſh his owne worth himſelfe, why doth not Cicero prefer the eloquence of Hortenſius, and Hortenſius that of Ciceror. Some may peradventure ſuppoſe that by deedes and effects

and not ſimply by words, I witneſſe of my ſelfe. I principally ſet forth my cogitations; a ſhapeletle ſubject, and which cannot fall within the compaſſe of a worke-manlike production: with much adoe can I ſet it downe in this ayrie body of the voice. Wiſer men, and more learned and devout, have lived avoyding all apparant effects. Effects would ſpeake more of fortune, then of me. They witneſſe their part, and not mine; vnleſſe it be conjecturally and vncertainly: Parcels of a particular ſhew: I wholy ſet forth and expoſe my ſelfe: It is a Sceletos; where at firſt ſight appeare all the veines, muskles, griſtles, ſinnewes, and tendons, each ſeverall part in his due place. The effect of the cough produceth one part, that of paleneſſe ot panting of the heart another, and that doubtfully. I write not my geſts, but my ſelfe and my eſſence. I am of opinion that a man muſt be very wiſe to eſteeme himſelfe, and equally conſciencious to give teſtimony of it: be it low, be it high indifferently. If I did abſolutely ſeeme good and wiſe vnto my ſelfe, I would boldly declare it. To ſpeake leſſe of himſelfe then he poſſeſſeth, is folly and not modeſty. To pay himſelfe for leſſe then he is worth, is baſeneſſe and puſilanimity, ſaith Aristotle. No vertue aides it ſelfe with falſe-hood; and truth is never a matter of errour. And yet for a man to ſay more of himſelfe, then he can well prove, is not ever preſumption, though often ſottiſhneſſe. For a man to over-weene, and pleaſe himſelfe exceedingly with what he is, and fall into indifereet love with himſelfe, is in my conceit, the ſubſtance of this vice. The beſt remedy to cure him, is to doe cleane contrary to that which thoſe appoint, who inforbidding men to ſpeake of themſelves, doe conſequently alſo inhibite more to thinke of themſelves. Pride conſisteth in conceit: The tongue can have no great ſhare in it. For one to ammuſe on himſelfe, is in their imagination to pleaſe himſelfe: And for a man to frequent and practiſe himſelfe, is at an over-deare rate to pleaſe himſelfe. But this exceſſe doth onely breed in them, that but ſuperficially feele and ſearch themſelves, that are ſeene to follow their affaires, which call idleneſſe and fondneſſe, for a man to entertaine, to applaud and to endeare himſelfe, and frame Chimeraes, or build Caſtles in the ayre; deeming themſelves as a third perſon and ſtrangers to themſelves. If any be beſotted with his owne knowledge, looking vpon himſelfe, let him caſt his eyes towards former ages, his pride ſhall be abated, his ambition ſhall be quailed; for there ſhall he finde many thouſands of ſpirits, that will cleane ſuppreſſe and treade him vnder. If he fortune to enter into any ſelfe-preſumption of his owne worth, let him but call to remembrance the lives of Scipio and Epaminondas; ſo many armies, and ſo many Nations, which leave him ſo far behind them. No particular quality ſhall make him proud, that therewith ſhall reckon ſo many imperfect and weake qualities that are in him and at laſt, the nullity of humane condition. Forſomuch as Socrates had truely onely nibled on the precept of his God, to know himſelfe, and by that ſtudy had learned to contemne himſelfe, he alone was eſteemed worthy of the name of Wiſe. Whoſoever ſhall ſo know himſelfe, let him boldly make himſelfe knowen by his owne mouth:
                     
                     
                        The ſeuenth Chapter.
                        
                           Of the recompences or rewards of Honour.
                        
                        THoſe which write the life of Augustus Caeſar, note this in his military diſcipline, that he was exceeding liberall and lauiſh in his gifts to ſuch as were of any deſert; but as ſparing and ſtrait-handed in meere recompences of honour. Yet is it that himſelfe had been liberally gratified by his Vnckle with militarie rewards, before euer he went to warres. It hath beene a wittie inuention, and receiued in moſt parts of the worlds Common-wealths, to eſtabliſh and ordaine certaine vaine and worthles markes, therewith to honor and recompence vertue: As are the wreathes of Lawrell, the Chaplets of Oake, and the Garlands of Myrtle, the forme of a certaine peculiar garment; the priuiledge to ride in Coch through the Citie; or by night to haue a Torch carried before one: Some particular place to ſit-in in common aſſemblies; the prerogatives of certaine ſurnames and titles, and proper additions in armes, and ſuch like things; the vſe wherof hath beene diuerſly receiued according to the

opinions of Nations, which continueth to this day. We have for our part, together with divers of our neighbour-Nation, the orders of Knight-hood, which only were eſtabliſhed to this purpoſe. Verily it is a moſt laudable vſe, and profitable cuſtome, to find meanes to reward the worth, and acknowledge the valour of rare and excellent men, to ſatisfie and content them with ſuch payments, as in no ſort charge the common wealth, and put the Prince to no coſt at all. And that which was ever knowne by ancient experience, and at other times we have plainely perceived amongſt ourſelves, that men of qualitie, were ever more jealous of ſuch recompences, then of others, wherein was both gaine and profit: which was not without reaſon and great apparance. If to the prize, which ought ſimply to be of honour, there be other commodities and riches joyned, this kinde of commixing, in ſtead of encreaſing the eſtimation thereof, doeth empaire, diſſipate, and abridge-it. The order of the Knights of Saint Michaell in France, which of ſo long continuance hath bin in credite amongſt vs, had no greater commoditie then that it had no manner of communication with any other advantage or profite, which hath hecretofore beene the cauſe, that there was no charge or ſtate of what quality ſoever, whereto the nobilitie pretended with ſo much deſire, or aſpired with more affection, as it did to obtaine that order; nor calling, that was followed with more reſpect or greatnes. Vertue embracing with more ambition, and more willingly aſpiring after a recompence, that is meerly and ſimply her owne, and which is rather glorious, then profitable. For, to ſay truth, other giftes have novſe ſo worthy; maſmuch, as they are imployed to all manner of occaſions. With riches a man doeth reward the ſervice of a groome, the diligence of a meſſenger, the hopping of a dancer, the tricks of a vaulter, the breath of a lawyer, and the baſeſt offices a man may receive; yea, with the ſame paultry pelfe mony, vice is payed and ſinne requited, as flattery, murther, treaſon, Maqu
                                 •
                              relage, and what not? It is then no marvell, if vertue doth leſſe willingly deſire this kinde of common traſh, mony, then that which is only proper and peculiar to h
                              •
                           rſelfe, and is altogether noble and generous. Auguctus had therefore reaſon, to be much more niggardly and ſparing of this laſt, then of the former, foraſmuch has honour is a priviledge which drawes his principall eſſence from rareneſſe: And ſo doth vertue it ſelfe.
                        Cu
                              •
                            malus eſt nemo, quis bonus eſſe poteſt?Mart. l. 12. epig. 82. 2.
                        
                        
                           To him who good can ſeeme,
                           Who doth none bad eſteeme?
                        
                        We ſhall not ſee a man highly regarded, or extraordinarily commended, that is curiouſlie carefull to have his children well nurtured, becauſe it is a common action, how juſt and worthy praiſe ſoever it be: no more then one great tree, where the forreſt is full of ſuch. I doe not thinke that any Spartane Citizen did boaſtingly glorifie himſelfe for his valor, becauſe it was a popular vertue in that Nation: And as little for his fidelitie, and contempt of riches. There is no recompence fals vnto vertue, how great ſoever it be, if it once have paſt into cuſtome: And I wot not whether we might call it great, being common. Since then the rewardes of honor, have no other prize and eſtimation then that few enjoy it, there is no way to diſannull them, but to make a largeſſe of them. Were there now more men found deſerving the ſame then in former ages, yet ſhould not the reputation of it be corrupted. And it may eaſilie happen that more deſerve-it: For, there is no vertue, doeth ſo eaſilie ſpread it ſelfe as military valian
                              ••
                           e. There is another, true, perfect, and Philoſophical, wherof I ſpeake not (I vſe this word according to our cuſtome) farre greater and more full then this, which is a force and aſſurance of the ſoule, equally contemning all manner of contrarie accidents, vpright, vn
                              •
                           forme, and conſtant, wherof ours is but an eaſie and glimmering raie. Cuſtome, inſtitution, example and faſhion, may effect what ever they liſt in the eſtabliſhing of that I ſpeak-of, and eaſily make it vulgare, as may plainely bee ſeene by the experience our civill warts give-vs of-it, And whoſoever could now joyne vs together, and eagerly fleſh al our people to a common enterpriſe, we ſhould make our ancient military name and chivalrous credit to flouriſh againe. It is moſt certaine that the recompence of our order did not in former times onely concerne prowis, and reſpect valour; it had a further aime. It was never the reward or payment of a valiant ſouldier; but of a famous Captaine. The skill to obey could not deſerve ſo honorable an hire: for, caſt we backe our eyes to antiquity, we ſhall perceive, that for the woorthy obtayning thereof, there was required more vniuerſall warre like experineſſe, and which might imbrace the greateſt part, and moſt parts of a military

man; Neque enim eadem militares & imperatoriae artes ſunt; for the ſame artes and partes belong not to a generall and common Souldier; and who beſides that, ſhould alſo bee of a fit and accommodable condition for ſuch a dignitie. But I ſay, that if more men ſhould now adaies be found worthy of it, then have bin heretofore, yet ſhould not our Princes be more liberall of it: and it had bin much better, not to beſtow it vpon all them to whom it was due, then for ever to looſe, (as of late we have done) the vſe of ſo profitable an invention. No man of courage vouch
                                 •
                              afeth to advantage himſelfe of that which is common vnto many. And thoſe which in our dayes, have leaſt merited that honourable recompence, ſeeme, in all apparance, moſt to diſdaine it, by that meanes to place themſelves in the ranke of thoſe to whom the wrong is offred by vnworthy beſtowing and vilifying of that badge, which particularly was due vnto them. Now by defacing and aboliſhing this to ſuppoſe, ſuddenly to be able to bring into cridite, and renue a ſemblable cuſtome, is no convenient enterpriſe, in ſo licentious, ſo corrupted, and ſo declining an age, as is this wherein we now live. And it will come to paſſe that the laſt ſhall even from her birth incur the incommodities, which haue lately ruined and ouerthrowne the other. The rules of this new orders-diſpenſation had need to be otherwiſe wreſted and conſtrained, for to giue it authority: and this tumultuous ſeaſon is not capable of a ſhort and ordered bridle. Beſides, before a man is able to giue credit vnto it, it is requiſite a man looſe the memory of the firſt, and of the contempt whereinto it is fallen. This place might admitte ſome diſcourſe vpon the conſideration of valour, and difference betweene this vertue and others: But Plutarch hauing often ſpoken of this matter, it were in vaine heere for mee to repeat what he ſayes of it. This is worthy to be conſidered, that our nation giveth the chiefe preheminence of all vertue vnto valiancy, as the Etymology of the word ſheweth, which commeth of valour, or worth: and that according to our receiued cuſtome, when after the phraſe of our court and nobility we ſpeake of a worthy man, or of an honeſt man, we thereby inferre no other thing than a valiant man; after the vſuall Roman faſhion. For, the generall denomination of vertue doth amongſt them take her Etymology, of force or might. The only proper and eſſential forme of our nobility in France, is military vocation. It is very likely, that the firſt vertue that ever appeared amongſt men, and which to ſome hath given preheminence over others, hath bin this by which the ſtrongeſt and more couragious have become maſters over the weakeſt, and purchaſed a particular rancke and reputation to themſelues: Whereby this honour and dignity of ſpeech is left vnto it: or elſe theſe nations being very war-like, haue giuen the price vnto that of vertues, which was the worthieſt and more familiar vnto them. Even as our paſſion, and this heartpanting, and mind-vexing carefull diligence, and diligent carefulneſſe, which we continually apprehend about womens chaſtity, cauſeth; alſo that a good woman, an honeſt woman, a woman of honor and vertue, doth in effect and ſubſtance, ſignifie no other thing vnto vs, than a chaſte wife or woman; as if to bind them to this duty, we did neglect all others, and gaue them free liberty to commit any other fault, to covenant with them, neuer to quit or forſake this one.
                     
                     
                        The eight Chapter.
                        
                           Of the affection of fathers to their children. To the Ladie of Eſtiſſac.
                           
                        
                        MAdame, if ſtrangeneſſe doe not ſave, or novelty ſhielde mee, which are wont to give things reputation, I ſhall never, with honeſtie, quit my ſelfe of this enterpriſe; yet is it ſo fantaſticall, and beares a ſhew ſo different from common cuſtome, that that may haply purchaſe-it free paſſage. It is a melancholy humor, and conſequently a hatefull enemy to my naturall complexion, bredde by the anxietie, and produced by the anguiſh of carking care, whereinto ſome yeares ſince I caſt my ſelfe, that firſt put this humorous conceipt of writing into my head. And finding my ſelfe afterward wholy vnprovided of ſubject, and voyde of other matter. I have preſented my ſelfe vnto my ſelfe for a ſubject to write, and argument

to deſcant vpon. It is the onely booke in the world of this kinde, and of a wilde extravagant deſigne. Moreover, there is nothing in it worth
                              •
                           e the marking but this fantaſticalneſſe. For, to ſo vaine a ground and baſe a ſubject, the worldes beſt workeman, could never have given a faſhion deſerving to be accompted-of. Now (woorthy Lady) ſithence I muſt pourtray my ſelfe to the life, I ſhould have forgotten a part of importance, if therewithall I had not repreſented the honour I have ever yeeleed to your deſerts, which I have eſpecially beene willing to declare in the forefront of this Chapter; For aſmuch as amongſt your other good parts, and commendable qualities, that of loving amity, which you have ſhewen to your children, holdeth one of the firſt ranckes. Whoſoever ſhall vnderſtand and know the age, wherein your late husband the Lord of Eſtiſſac left you a Widdow, the great and honorable matches haue been offered you (as worthy and as many as to any other Lady in France of your condition) the conſtant reſolution, and reſolute conſtancy, wherewith ſo many yeeres you have ſuſtained, and even in ſpight, or a thwart ſo manifold thorny difficulties; the charge and conduct of their affaires, which have toſſed, turmoyled and remooved you in all corners of France, and ſtill hold you beſieged; the happy and ſucceſſefull forwardneſſe you, which only through your wiſdome or good fortune have given them, he will eaſily ſay with mee, that in our age we haue no patterne of motherly affection more exemplare; than yours. I praiſe God (Madam) it hath beene ſo well employed: For, the good hopes, which the yoong Lord of Estiſſac, your ſonne giveth of himſelfe, fore-ſhew an vndoubted aſſurance, that when he ſhall come to yeeres of diſcretion, you ſhall reape the obedience of a noble, and find the acknowledgement of a good childe. But becauſe, by reaſon of his childhood, he could not take notice of the exceeding kindneſſe and many-fold offices he hath received from you, my meaning is, that if ever theſe my compoſitions ſhall happly one day come into his hands (when peradventure I ſhall neither have mouth nor ſpeach to declare it vnto him) he receive this teſtimonie in all veritie from me; which ſhall alſo more lively be teſtified vnto him by the good effects, (whereof, if ſo it pleaſe God, he ſhall have a ſenſible feeling) that there is no Gentleman in France, more endebted to his mother, then he; and that hereafter he cannot yeeld a more certaine proofe of his goodneſſe, and teſtimonie of his vertue, then in acknowledging and confeſſing you for ſuch. If there be any truely-naturall law, that is to ſay, any inſtinct, vniverſally and perpetually imprinted, both in beaſts and vs, (which is not without controverſie) I may, according to mine opinion, ſay, that next to the care, which each living creature hath to his preſervation, and to flie what doth hurt him; the affection which the engenderer beareth his off-ſpring, holds the ſecond place in this ranke. And foraſmuch as nature ſeemeth to have recommended the ſame vnto-vs, ayming to extend, encreaſe, and advance, the ſucceſſive parts or parcels of this hir frame. It is no woonder if back▪againe it is not ſo great from children vnto fathers. This other Ariſtotelian conſideration remembred: That hee who doth benefit another, loveth him better than hee is beloved of him againe: And hee to whom a debt is owing, loveth better, than hee that oweth: And every workeman loveth his worke better, than hee ſhould bee beloved of it againe, if it had ſenſe or feeling. Foraſmuch as we love to be; and being conſiſteth in moving and action. Therefore is every man, in ſome ſort or other in his owne workmanſhip. Whoſoever doth a good deed, exerciſeth a faire and honeſt action: Whoſoever receiveth, exerciſeth onely a profitable action. And profite is nothing ſo much to be eſteemed or loved as honeſtie. Honeſtie is firme and permanent, affording him that did it, a conſtant gratification. Profite is verie ſlipperie, and eaſilie loſt, nor is the memorie of it ſo ſweet, or ſo freſh. Such things are deareſt vnto vs, that have coſt vs moſt: And to give, is of more coſt then to take. Since it hath pleaſed God to endow-vs with ſome capacitie of diſcourſe, that as beaſts we ſhould not ſervily be ſubjected to common lawes, but rather with judgement and voluntarie libertie applie our ſelves vnto them; we ought ſomewhat to yeeld vnto the ſimple aucthoritie of Nature: but not ſuffer hir tyrannically to carrie-vs away: only reaſon ought to have the conduct of our inclinations. As for me, my taſte is ſtrangely diſtaſted to it's propenſions, which in vs are produced without the ordinance and direction of our judgement. As vpon this ſubject I ſpeak-of, I cannot receive this paſſion, wherewith ſome embrace children ſcarſly borne, having neither motion in the ſoule, nor forme well to be diſtinguiſhed in the bodie, whereby they might make themſelves lovely or amiable. And I could never well endure to have them brought vp or nurſed neere about me. A true and wel ordred affection,

ought to be borne and augmented, with the knowledge they give vs of themſelves; and then, if they deſerve-it (naturall inclination marching hand in hand with reaſon) to cheriſh and make much of them, with a perfect fatherly love and loving friendſhip, and conformably to judge of them if they be otherwiſe, alwaies yeelding our ſelves vnto reaſon, notwithſtanding naturll power. For the moſt part; it goeth cleane contrary, and commonly feele our ſelves more mooved with the ſports, idleneſſe, wantonneſſe, and infant-trifles of our children, than afterward we doe with all their actions, when they bee men: As if we had loved them for our paſtimes, as we doe apes, monkies, or perokitoes, and not as men. And ſome that liberally furniſh them with ſporting bables while they be children, will miſerably pinch it in the leaſt expence for neceſſaries when they grow men. Nay, it ſeemeth that the jelouſie we have to ſee them appeare into, and injoy the world, when we are ready to leave them, makes vs more ſparing and cloſe-handed toward them. It vexeth and grieveth vs when we ſee them following vs at our heeles, ſuppoſing they ſolicite vs to be gone hence: And if we were to feare that ſince the order of things beareth, that they cannot indeede, neither be, nor live, but by our being and life, we ſhould not meddle to be fathers. As for mee, I deeme it a kind of cruelty and injuſtice, not to receive them into the ſhare and ſociety of our goods, and to admit them as Partners in the vnderſtanding of our domeſticall affaires (if they be once capable of it) and not to cut off and ſhut- vp our commodities to provide for theirs, ſince we have engendred them to that purpoſe. It is meere injuſtice to ſee an old, crazed, ſinnow-ſhronken, and nigh dead father ſitting alone in a Chimny-corner, to enjoy ſo many goods as would ſuffice for the preferment and entertainment of many children, and in the meane while, for want of meanes, to ſuffer them to looſe their beſt daies and yeares, without thruſting them into publike ſervice and knowledge of men; whereby they are often caſt into diſpaire, to ſeeke, by ſome way how vnlawfull ſoever to provide for their neceſſaries. And in my daies, I have ſeene divers yong-men, of good, houſes ſo given to ſtealing and filching, that no correction could divert them from it. I know one very well alied, to whom, at the inſtance of a brother of his (a moſt honeſt, gallant, and vertuous Gentleman) I ſpake to that purpoſe, who boldly anſwered and confeſſed vnto me, that onely by the rigor and covetiſe of his father he had beene forced and driuen to fall into ſuch lewdneſſe and wickedneſſe. And even at that time he came from ſtealing certaine jewels from a Lady, in whoſe bed-chamber he fortuned to come with certaine other Gentlemen when ſhe was riſing, and had almoſt beene taken. He made me remember a tale I had heard of an other Gentleman, from his youth ſo faſhioned and inclined to this goodly trade of pilfering, that comming afterward to be heire and Lord of his owne goods, reſolved to giue over that manner of life, could notwithſtanding (if he chanced to come neere a ſhop, where he ſaw any thing he ſtood in neede of) not chuſe but ſteale the ſame, though afterward he would ever ſend mony and pay for it. And I have ſeene diverſe ſo inured to that vice, that amongſt their companions, they would ordinarily ſteale ſuch things, as they would reſtore againe. I am a Gaſcoine, and there is no vice wherein I have leſſe skill: I hate it ſomewhat more by complexion, then I accuſe it by diſcourſe. I doe not ſo much as deſire another mans goods.
                        And although my Country-men be indeed ſomewhat more taxed with this fault, then other Provinces of France, yet have we ſeene of late daies, and that ſundry times men well borne and of good parentaeg in other parts of France in the hands of juſtice, and lawfully convicted of many moſt horrible robberies. I am of opinion that in regard of theſe debauches and lewd actions, fathers may, in ſome ſort, be blamed, and that it is onely long of them. And if any ſhall anſwer mee, as did once a Gentleman of good worth and vnderſtanding, that he thriftily endevored to hoard vp riches, to no other purpoſe, nor to have any vſe and commodity of them, then to be honoured, reſpected and ſuingly ſought vnto by his friends and kinsfolkes, and that age having bereaved him of all other forces, it was the onely remedy he had left to maintaine himſelfe in authority with his houſhold, and keepe him from falling into contempt and diſdaine of all the world. (And truely according to Ariſtotle, not onely old-age, but each imbecility, is the promoter, and motive of couetouſneſſe. That is ſomething, but it is a remedie for an evill, whereof the birth ſhould have beene hindered, and breeding a voyded. That father may truely be ſaid miſerable, that holdeth the affection of his children tied vnto him by no other meanes, then by the neede they have of his helpe, or want of his aſſiſtance, if that may be termed affection: A man ſhould yeeld himſelfe
                           
                           reſpectable by vertue and ſufficiency, and amiable by his goodneſſe, and gentleneſſe of maners. The very cinders of ſo rich a matter, have their value: ſo have the bones and reliques of honourable men, whom we hold in reſpect and reverence. No age can be ſo crazed and drooping in a man that hath lived honourably, but muſt needes prove venerable, and eſpecially vnto his children, whoſe mindes ought ſo to be directed by the parents, that reaſon and wiſedome, not neceſſity and neede, nor rudeneſſe and compulſion, may make them know and performe their duty.
                        
                           —& errat longè, mea quidem ſententia,
                              Ter. Adel
                                    ••
                                 . act. 1. ſee. 1. 39
                           
                           Qui imperium credat eſſe gravius aut ſtabilius,
                           Vi quod fit, quàm illud quod amicitia adiungitur;
                        
                        
                           In mine opinion he doth much miſtake,
                           Who, that command more graue, more firme doth take,
                           Which force doth get, then that which friendſhips make.
                        
                        I vtterly condemne all maner of violence in the education of a yong ſpirit, brought vp to honour and liberty. There is a kinde of ſlaviſhneſſe in churliſh-rigor, and ſervility in compulſion; and I hold, that that which can not be compaeſſed by reaſon, wiſedome and diſcretion, can never be attained by 
                                 •
                              orce and conſtraint. So was I brought vp: they tell mee, that in all my youth, I never felt rod but twice, and that very lightly. And what education I have had my ſelfe, the ſame have I given my children. But ſuch is my ill hap, that they die all very yong: yet hath Leonora my onely daughter eſcaped this misfortune, and attained to the age of ſix yeares, and ſomewhat more: for the conduct of whoſe youth, and puniſhment of hir childiſn faults (the indulgence of hir mother applying it ſelfe very mildely vnto it) was never other meanes vſed but gentle words. And were my deſire fruſtrate, there are diverſe other cauſes to take hold-of, without reproving my diſcipline, which I know to be juſt and naturall. I would alſo have beene much more religious in that towards male-children, not borne to ſerve as women, and of a freer condition. I ſhould have loved to have ſtored their minde with ingenuity and liberty. I have ſeene no other effects in rods, but to make childrens mindes more remiſ
                              •
                           e, or more maliciouſly head-ſtrong. Deſire we to be loved of our children? Will we remove all occaſions from them to wiſh our death? (although no occaſion of ſo horrible and vnnaturall wiſhes, can either be juſt or excuſable) nullum ſcelus rationem habet, no ill deede hath a good reaſon.
                        Let vs reaſonably accommodate their life, with ſuch things as are in our power. And therfore ſhould not we marry ſo yoong, that our age doe in a maner confound it ſelfe with theirs. For, this inconvenience doth vnavoidably caſt vs into many difficulties, and encombrances. This I ſpeake, chiefly vnto Nobility, which is of an idle diſpoſition, or lo
                              •
                           tering condition, and which (as we ſay) liveth onely by hir lands or rents: for elſe, where life ſtandeth vpon gaine; plurality and company of children is an eaſefull furtherance of husbandry. They are as many new implements to thrive, and inſtruments to grow rich. I was married at thirty yeeres of age, and commend the opinion of thirty-five, which is ſaid to be Aristotles. Plato would have no man married before thirty, and hath good reaſon to ſcoffe at them that will defer it till after fifty-five, and then marry; and condemneth their breed as vnworthy of life and ſuſtenance. Thales appointed the beſt limites, who by his mother, being inſtantly vrged to marry whileſt he was yong, anſwered that it was not yet time; and when he came to be old he ſaid it was no more time. A man muſt refuſe opportunity to every importunate action. The ancient Gaules deemed it a thamefull reproach, to have the acquaintance of a woman before the age of twenty yeares, and did eſpecially recommend vnto men that ſought to be trained vp in warres, the carefull preſeruation of their maiden-head, vntill they were of good yeeres, forſomuch as by looſing it in youth, courages are thereby much weakened and greatly empaired, and by copulation with women, diverted from all vertuous action.
                        
                           Mahor cogiunto à gi
                                 •
                               vinetta ſpoſa,
                           Lieto hemat de'figl
                                 •
                               era invilito
                           Ne gli affetti di padre & di marito.
                        
                        
                           But now conjoyn'd to a freſh-ſpringing ſpouſe,
                           Ioy'd in his children, he was thought▪ abaſed,
                           In paſſions twixt a Sire, and husband placed.
                        
                        
                           Muleaſſes King of Thunes, he whom the Emperour Charles the fifth reſtored vnto his

owne ſtate againe, was wont to vpbraid his fathers memorie, for ſo diſſolutely-frequenting of women, terming him a ſloven, effeminate, and a luſtfull engenderer of children. The Greeke ſtorie doth note Iecus the Tarentine, Chryſo, Aſtylus, Diopomus and others, who to keepe their bodies tough and ſtrong for the ſervice of the Olympicke courſes, wreſtlings and ſuch bodily exerciſes, they did, as long as they were poſſeſſed with that care, heedefully abſtaine from all venerian actes, and thouching of women. In a certaine country of the Spaniſh Indies, no man was ſuffered to take a wife, before he were fortie yeares olde, and women might marry at tenne yeares of age. There is no reaſon, neither is it convenient, that a Gentleman of five and thirtie yeares, ſhould give place to his ſonne, that is but twenty: For then is the father as ſeemely, and may aſwell appeare, and ſet himſelfe forward, in all manner of voyages of warres, aſwell by land as ſea, and doe his Prince as good ſervice, in court, or elſe where, as his ſonne: He hath neede of all his parts, and ought truly to impart them, but ſo, that he forget not himſelfe for others: And to ſuch may juſtly that anſwere ſerve, which fathers have commonly in their mouthes: I will not put off my clothes before I be readie to goe to bed. But a father over-burthend with yeares, and crazed through ſickeneſſe, and by reaſon of weakeneſſe and want of health, barred from the common ſocietie of men, doth both wrong himſelfe, injure his, idely and to no vſe to hoorde vp, and keepe cloſe a great heape of riches, and deale of pelfe. He is in ſtate good enough, if he be wiſe to have a deſire to put off his clothes to goe to bed. I will not ſay to his ſpirt, but to a good warme night gowne, As for other pompe and traſh whereof hee hath no longer vſe or neede; hee ought willingly to diſtribute and beſtow them amongſt thoſe, to whom by naturall decree they ought to belong. It is reaſon he ſhould have the vſe, and bequeath the fruition of them, ſince nature doth alſo deprive him of them, otherwiſe without doubt there is both envy and malice ſtirring. The worthieſt action, that ever the Emperour Charles the fifth performed was this, in imitation of ſome ancients of his quality, that he had the diſcretion to know, that reaſon commanded vs, to ſtrip or ſhift our ſelves when our cloathes trouble and are too heavie for vs, and that it is high time to goe to bed, when our legges faile vs. He reſigned his meanes, his greatneſſe and Kingdome to his Sonne, at what time he found his former vndanted reſolution to decay, and force to conduct his aſlaires, to droope in himſelfe, together with the glory he had thereby acquired.
                        
                           Solue ſeneſcentem mature ſe
                                 ••
                              s equum, neMor. 1. 
                                    •
                                 ep. 1. 8.
                           
                           Peccet ad extremum ridendus, & ilia ducat,
                        
                        
                           If you be wiſe, the horſe growne▪ old be times caſt off,
                           Leaſt he at laſt fall lame, ſoulter, and breed a skoffe.
                        
                        This fault, for a man not to be able to know himſelfe betimes, and not to feele the impuiſſance and extreame alteration, that age doth naturally bring, both to the body and the minde (which in mine opinion is equall, if the minde have but one halfe) hath loſt the reputation of the moſt part of the greateſt men in the world. I have in my daies both ſeene and fam
                              •
                           liarly knowen ſome men of great authority, whom a man might eaſily deſcerne, to be ſtrangely fallen from that ancient ſufficiency, which I know by the reputation they had thereby attained▪ vnto in their beſt yeares. I could willingly for their honors ſake have wiſ
                              •
                           t them at home about their owne buſineſſe, diſcharged from all negotiations of the commonwealth and employments of war, that were no longer fit for them. I have ſometimes been familiar in a Gentlemans houſe, who was both an old man and a widdower, yet luſty of his age. This man had many daughters 
                              •
                           ariageable, and a ſonne growne to mans ſtate, and readie to appeare in the world, a thing that drew▪ on, and was the cauſe of great charges, and many viſitations, wherein he tooke but little pleaſure, not onely for the continuall care hee had to ſave, but more by reaſon of his age, hee had betaken him-ſelfe to a manner of life farre different from ours. I chanced one day to tell him ſomewhat boldly (as my cuſtome is) that it would better beſeeme him to give vs place, and reſigne his chiefe houſe to his ſon (for he had no other mannor-houſe conveniently well furniſhed) and quietly retire himſelfe to ſome farme of his, where no man might trouble him, or diſturbe his reſt, ſince he could not otherwiſe avoide our importunitie, ſeeing the condition of his children; who afterward followed my counſell, and found great eaſe by it. It is not to be ſaid, that they have any thing given them by ſuch a way of obligation, which a man may not recall againe: I, that am readie to play ſuch a part, would give over vnto them the full poſſeſſion of my

houſe, and enjoying of my goods, but with ſuch libertie and limited condition, as if they ſhould give me occaſion, I might repent my ſelfe of my gift, and revoke my deede. I would leave the vſe and fruition of all vnto them, the rather becauſe it were no longer fit for me to weald the ſame. And touching the diſpoſing of all matters in groſſe, I would reſerve what I pleaſed vnto my ſelfe. Having ever judged, that it muſt be a great contentment to an aged father, himſelfe to direct his children in the government of his houſhold-affaires, and to be able whilſt himſelfe liveth, to checke and controule the demeanors: ſtoring them with inſtruction and adviſed counſel according to the experience he hath had of them, and himſelf to addreſſe the ancient honour and order of his houſe in the handes of his ſucceſſours, and that way warrant himſelfe of the hopes hee may conceive of their future conduct and after ſucceſſe. And to this effect, I would not ſhunne their company. I would not be far from them, but as much as the condition of my age would permit, enjoy and be a partner of their ſports, mirths, and feaſts. If I did not continually live amongſt them (as I could not wel without offending their meetings and hindering their recreation, by reaſon of the peeviſh frowardneſſe of my age, and the trouble of my infirmities, and alſo without forcing their rules, and reſiſting the forme of life, I ſhould then follow) I would at leaſt live neere them, in ſome corner of my houſe, not the beſt and faireſt in ſhew, but the moſt eaſefull and commodious. And not as ſome yeeres ſince, I ſaw a Deane of S. Hillarie of Poictiers, reduced by reaſon and the incommoditie of his melancholy to ſuch a continuall ſolitarineſſe, that when I entered into his chamber he had never remooved one ſtep out of it in two and twenty yeares before: yet had all his faculties free and eaſie, onely a rheume excepted that fell into his ſtomake. Scarſe once a weeke would he ſuffer any body to come and ſee him. Hee would ever be ſhut vp in his chamber all alone, where no man ſhould come, except a boy, who once a day brought him meate, and who might not tarrie there, but as ſoone as he was in, muſt goe out againe. All his exerciſe was ſometimes to walke vp and downe his chamber, and now and then reade on ſome booke (for he had ſome vnderſtanding of letters) but obſtinately reſolved to live and die in that courſe, as he did ſhortly after. I would endevour by a kinde of civill demeanour and milde converſation, to breede and ſettle in my children a trueharty-loving friendſhip, and vnfained good will towards me. A thing eaſily obtained amongſt well-borne mindes: For, if they proove, or be ſuch ſurly-furious beaſtes, or given to churliſh diſobedience, as our age bringeth forth thouſands, they muſt as beaſtes be hated, as churls neglected, and as degenerate avoided. I hate this cuſtome, to forbid children to call their fathers father, and to teach them another ſtrange name, as of more reverence: As if nature had not ſufficiently provided for our authoritie. We call God-almightie by the name of father, and diſdaine our children ſhould call vs ſo. I have reformed this fault in mine owne houſholde. It is alſo follie and injuſtice to deprive children, eſpecially being of competent age, of their fathers familiaritie, and ever to ſnew them a ſurly, auſtere, grim, and diſdainefull countenance, hoping thereby to keepe them in awefull feare and duteous obedience. For, it is a very vnprofitable proceeding, and which maketh fathers yrkeſome vnto children; and which is worſe, ridiculous. They have youth and ſtrength in their hands, and conſequently, the breath and favour of the worlde; and doe with mockerie and contempt receive theſe churliſh fierce, and tyrannicall countenaunces, from a man that hath no luſty bloud left him, neither in his heart, nor in his veines; meere bugge-beares, and ſcar-crowes, to ſcare birdes with all. If it lay in my power to make my ſelfe feared, I had rather make my ſelfe beloved. There are ſo many ſortes of defects in age, and ſo much impuiſſance: It is ſo ſubject to contempt, that the beſt purchaſe it can make, is the good will, love and affection of hers. Commandement and feare are no longer her weapons. I have knowen one whoſe youth had bin very imperious and rough, but when he came to mans age, although hee live in as good plight and health as may be, yet he chaſeth, he ſcoldeth, he brawleth, he fighteth, he ſweareth, and biteth, as the moſt boiſtrous and tempeſtuous maſter of France, he frets and conſumes himſelfe with ca
                              •
                           ke and care and vigilancy (all which is but a juglin & ground for his familier to play vpon, and cozen him the more) as for his goods, his garners, his cellers, his coffers, yea his purſe, whileſt himſelfe keepes the keyes of them, cloſe in his boſome and vnder his boulſter, as charily as he doth his e
                              •
                           es, other enjoy and commaund the better part of them; whileſt he pleaſeth and fla
                              •
                           tereth himſelfe, with the 
                              ••
                           ggardly ſparing of his table, all goeth to wracke, and is laviſhly waſted in diverſe corners of his houſe, in play, in riotous

ſpending, and in ſoothingly entertaining the accompts or tales of his vaine chafing, foreſight and providing. Every man watcheth and keepeth ſentinell againſt him, if any ſilly or needleſſe ſervant doe by fortune apply himſelfe vnto it, he is preſently made to ſuſpect him: A quality on which age doth immediately bite of itſelfe. How many times hath he vaunted and applauding himſelfe told me of the ſtrict orders of his houſe, of his good husbandry, of the awe he kept his houſhold in, and of the exact obedience, and regardfull reverence he received of all his family, and how cleare-ſighted he was in his owne buſineſſe:
                        Ille ſolus neſcit omnia.
                        Ter. Adel. áct. 4. ſcen. 2. 9.
                        
                           Of all things none but he,
                           Moſt ignorant muſt be.
                        
                        I know no man that could produce more parts, both naturall and artificiall, fit to preſerve his maiſterie, and to maintaine his abſoluteneſſe, than he doth; yet is hee cleane falne from them like a childe. Therefore have I made choice of him, amongſt many ſuch conditions that I know, as moſt exemplare. It were a matter beſeeming a ſcholaſticall queſtion, whether it be better ſo, or otherwiſe. In his preſence all things give place vnto him. This vaine courſe is ever left vnto his authority, that he is never gaine-ſaid. He is had in awe, he is feared, he is beleeved, he is reſpected his belly-full. Doth he diſcharge any boy or ſervant? he preſently truſſeth vp his packe, then is he gone; but whether? onely out of his ſight, not out of his houſe. The ſteps of age are follow, the ſenſes ſo troubled, the minde ſo diſtracted, that he ſhall live and doe his office, a whole yeere in one ſame houſe, and never be perceived. And when fit time or occaſion ſerveth, Letters are produced from farre places, humbly ſuing, and pittifully complayning, with promiſes to doe better, and to amend, by which he is brought into favour and office againe. Doth the maſter make any bargaine, or diſpatch that pleaſeth not? it is immediately ſmothered and ſuppreſſed, ſoone after forging cauſes, and deviſing colourable excuſes, to excuſe the want of execution or anſwer. No forraine Letters being firſt preſented vnto him, he ſeeth but ſuch as are fit for his knowledge. If peradventure they come vnto his hands, as he that truſteth ſome one of his men to reade them vnto him, he will preſently deviſe what he thinketh good, whereby they often invent, that ſuch a one ſeemeth to aske him forgiveneſſe, that wrongeth him by his Letter. To conclude, he never lookes into his owne buſineſſe, but by a diſpoſed, deſigned and as much as may be pleaſing image, ſo contrived by ſuch as are about him, becauſe they will not ſtirre vp his choler, moove his impatience, and exaſperate his frowardneſſe. I have ſeene vnder different formes, many long and conſtant, and of like effect oeconomies. It is ever proper vnto women, to be read
                              •
                           ly bent to contradict and croſſe their husbands. They will with might and maine hand-over head, take hold of any colour to thwart and withſtand them: the firſt excuſe they meete with, ſerves them as a plenary juſtification. I have ſeene ſome, that would in groſſe ſteale from their husbands, to the end (as they tolde their Confeſſors) they might give the greater almes. Truſt you to ſuch religious diſpenſations. They thinke no liberty to have, or managing to poſſeſſe ſufficient authority, if it come from their husbands conſent: They muſt neceſſarily vſurpe it, either by wily craft or maine force, and ever injuriouſly, thereby to give it more grace and authority. As in my Diſcourſe, when it is againſt a poore old man, and for children, then take they hold of this Title, and therewith gloriouſly ſerve their turne and paſſion, and as in a common ſervitude, eaſily vſurpe and monopolize againſt his government and domination. If they be men-children, tall, of good ſpirit and forward, then they preſently ſuborne, either by threats, force or favour, both Steward, Bail
                              •
                           ffe, Clarke, Receiver, and all the Fathers Officers, and Servants. Such as have neither wife nor children, doe more hardly fall into this miſchiefe: but yet more cruelly and vnworthily. Old Cato was wont to ſay, So many ſervants, ſo many enemies. Note whether according to the diſtance, that was betweene the purity of his age, and the corruption of our times, he did not fore-warne vs, that Wives, Children, and Servants are to vs ſo many enemies. Well fittes it decrepitude to ſtore vs with the ſweet benefite of ignorance and vnperceiving facility wherewith we are deceived.
                        If we did yeeld vnto it, what would become of vs? Doe we not ſee that even then, if we have any ſuites in law or matters to be decided before judges, both Lawyers and Iudges, will commonly take part with, and favour our childrens cauſes againſt vs, as men intereſſed in the ſame? And if I chance not to ſpie, or plainely perceive how I am cheated, cozoned and

beguiled. I muſt of neceſſitie diſcover in the end, how I am ſubject and may be cheated, beguiled, and cozoned. And ſhall the tongue of man ever bee able to expreſſe the vnvaluable worth of a frend, in compariſon of theſe civill bondes? The lively image and Idea whereof; I perceive to be amongſt beaſts ſo vnſpotted. Oh with what religion doe I reſpect and obſerve the ſame! If others deceive me, yet do I not deceive my ſelfe, to eſteeme my ſelfe capable, and of power to looke vnto my ſelfe, nor to trouble my braines to yeeld my ſelfe vnto it. I doe beware and keepe my ſelfe from ſuch treaſons, and cunny-catching in mine owne boſome, not by an vnquiet, and tumultuary curioſity, but rather by a diverſion and reſolution. When I heare the ſtate of any one reported or diſcourſed of, I ammuſe not my ſelfe on him, but preſently caſt mine eyes on my ſelfe, and all my wits together, to ſee in what ſtate I am, and how it goeth with me. Whatſoever concerneth him, the ſame hath relation to me. His fortunes forewarne me, and ſummon vp my ſpirites that way. There is no day nor houre, but we ſpeake that of others, we might properly ſpeake of our ſelves, could we as well enfold, as we can vnfould our conſideration. And many Authours doe in this maner wound the protection of their cauſe, by over-raſnly running againſt that, which they take hold-of, thirling ſuch darts at their enemies, that might with much more advantage be caſt at them. The Lord of Monluc, late one of the Lord Marſhals of France, having loſt his ſonne, who died in the Iland of Madera, a worthy, forward and gallant yoong gentleman, and truely of good hope; amongſt other his griefes and regrets, did greatly moove me to condole, the infinite diſpleaſure and heartes-ſorrow that he felt, in aſmuch as he had never communicated and opened himſelfe vnto him: for, with his auſtere humour and continuall endevoring to hold a grimme-ſternfatherly gravity over him, he had loſt the meanes, perfectly to finde and throughly to know his ſonne, and ſo to manifeſt vnto him, the extreame affection he bare him, and the worthy judgement he made of his vertue. Alas (was he wont to ſay) the poore lad, ſaw never any thing in me, but a ſevere-ſurly-countenance, full of diſdaine, and happily was poſſeſſed with this conceit, that I could neither love nor eſteeme him according to his merits. Ay-me, to whom did I reſerve, to diſcover that ſingular and loving affection, which in my ſoule I bare vnto him? Was it not he that ſhould have had all the pleaſure and acknowledgement thereof? I have forced and tormented my ſelfe to maintaine this vaine maske, and have vtterly loſt the pleaſure of his converſation, and therwithal his good will, which ſurely was but faintly cold towards me, forſomuch as he never received but rude entertainement of mee, and never felt but a tyrannicall proceeding in me towards him. I am of opinion, his complaint was reaſonable and well grounded. For, as I know by certaine experience, there is no comfort ſo ſweete in the loſſe of friends, as that our owne knowledge or conſcience tels vs, we never omitted to tell them every thing, and expoſtulate all matters vnto them, and to have had a perfect and free communication with them. Tell me my good friend, am I the better or the worſe by having a taſte of it? Surely I am much the better. His griefe doth both comfort and honour mee. Is it not a religious and pleaſing office of my life, for ever to make the obſequies thereof? Can there be any pleaſure worth this privation? I doe vnfold and open my ſelfe as much as I can to mine owne people, and willigly declare the ſtate of my will and judgment toward them, as commonly I doe towards all men: I make haſte to produce and preſent my ſelfe, for I would have no man miſtake me, in what part ſoever. Amongſt other particular cuſtomes, which our ancient Gaules had, (as Caeſar affirmeth) this was one, that children never came before their fathers, nor were in any publicke aſſembly ſeene in their company, but when they began to beare armes; as if they would infer, that then was the time, fathers ſhould admit them to their acquaintance and familiarity. I have alſo obſerved another kinde of indiſcretion in ſome fathers of our times, who during their owne life, would never be induced to acquaint or impart vnto their children, that ſhare or portion, which by the Law of Nature, they were to have in their fortunes: Nay, ſome there are, who after their death bequeath and commit the ſame aucthority, over them and their goods, vnto their wives, with full power and law to diſpoſe of them at their pleaſure. And my ſelfe have knowen a Gentleman, a chiefe officer of our crowne, that by right and hope of ſucceſſion (had he lived vnto it) was to inherite above fifty thouſand crownes a yeere good land, who at the age of more then fifty yeeres fell into ſuch neceſſity and want, and was run ſo farre in debt, that he had nothing left him, and as it is ſuppoſed died for very neede; whileſt his mother in hir extreame decrepitude, enjoyed all his lands and poſſeſſed all his goods, by vertue

of his fathers will and teſtament, who had lived very neere foure-ſcore yeares. A thing (in my conceite) no way to be commended, but rather blamed. Therefore doe I thinke, that a man but little advantaged or bettered in eſtate, who is able to liue of himſelfe, and is out of debt, eſpecially if he have children, and goeth about to marry a wife, that muſt have a great joynter out of his lands, aſſuredly there is no other debt, that brings more ruine vnto houſes then that. My predeceſſours have commonly followed this counſell, and ſo have I, and all have found good by it. But thoſe that diſſwade vs from marrying of riche wives, leſt they might proove over diſdainefull and peeviſh, or leſſe tractable and loving, are alſo deceived to make vs neglect and for-goe a reall commoditie, for ſo frivolous a conjecture. To an vnreaſonable women, it is all one coſt to hir, whether they paſſe vnder one reaſon, or vnder another. They love to be where they are most wronged. Injuſtice doeth allure them; as the honour of their vertuous actions enticeth the good. And by how much richer they are, ſo much more milde and gentle are they: as more willingly and gloriouſly chaſt, by how much fairer they are. Some colour of reaſon there is, men ſhould leave the adminiſtration of their goods and affaires vnto mothers, whilſt their children are not of competent age, or fit according to the lawes to manage the charge of them: And il hath their father brought them vp, if he cannot hope, theſe comming to yeares of diſcretion, they ſhal have no more wit, reaſon, and ſufficiencie, then his wife, conſidering the weakneſſe of their ſexe. Yet truly were it as much againſt nature, ſo to order things, that mothers muſt wholy depend of their childrens deſcretion. They ought largely and competently to be provided, wherewith to maintaine their eſtate, according to the quality of their houſe and age: becauſe neede and want is much more vnſeemely and hard to be indured in women, than in men: And children rather then mothers ought to be charged therewith. In generall, my opinion is, that the beſt diſtribution of goods, is when we die, to diſtribute them according to the cuſtome of the Country. The Lawes have better thought vpon them then we: And better it is to let them erre in their election, then for vs raſhly to hazard to faile in ours. They are not properly our owne, ſince without vs, and by a civill preſcription, they are appointed to certaine ſucceſſours. And albeit we have ſome further liberty, I thinke it ſhould be a great and moſt apparant cauſe to induce vs to take from one, and barre him from that, which Fortune hath allotted him, and the common Lawes and Iuſtice hath called him vnto: And that againſt reaſon wee abuſe this liberty, by ſuting the ſame vnto our priuate humours and frivolous fantaſies. My fortune hath beene good, inaſmuch as yet it never preſented mee with any occaſions, that might tempt or divert my affections from the common and lawfull ordinance. I ſee ſome, towards whom it is but labour loſt, carefully to endevour to doe any good offices. A word il taken defaceth the merite of tenne yeeres. Happy he, that at this laſt paſſage is ready to ſooth and applaud their will. The next action tranſporteth him; not the beſt and moſt frequent offices, but the freſheſt and preſent worke the deede. They are people that play with their wils and teſtaments, as with apples and rods, to gratifie or chaſtize every action of thoſe who pretend any intereſt therevnto. It is a matter of over-long purſute, and of exceeding conſequence, at every inſtance to be thus dilated, and wherein the wiſer ſort eſtabliſh themſelves once for all, chiefely reſpecting reaſon, and publike obſervance. We ſomewhat over-much take theſe maſculine ſubſtitutions to hart, and propoſe a ridiculous eternity vnto our names. We alſo over-weight ſuch vaine future conjectures, which infant-ſpirits give-vs. It might peradventure have beene deemed injuſtice, to diſplace me from out my rancke, becauſe I was the dulleſt, the ſloweſt, the vnwillingeſt, and moſt leaden-pated to learne my leſſon o any good, that ever was, not onely of all my brethren, but of all the children in my Countrie; were the leſſon concerning any exerciſe of the minde or body. It is follie to trie anie extraordinarie concluſions vpon the truſt of their divinations, wherein we are ſo often deceived. If this rule may be contradicted, and the deſtinies corrected, in the choiſe they have made of our heires, with ſo much more apparance, may it be done in conſideration of ſome remarkable and enormous corporall deformitie; a conſtant and incorrigible vice; and according to vs great eſteemers of beautie; a matter of important prejudice. The pleaſant dialogue of Plato the law-giver, with his citizens, will much honor this paſſage. Why then (ſay they) perceiving their ende to approch, ſhall we not diſpoſe of that which is our owne, to whom and according as we pleaſe? Oh Gods what cruelty is this? That it ſhall not be lawfull for vs, to give or bequeath more or leſſe according to our fantaſies, to ſuch as have

ſerved vs, and taken paines with vs in our ſickeneſſes, in our age, and in our buſines? To whom the Law-giver anſwereth in this manner; my frends (ſaith he) who doubtles ſhall ſhortly die it is a hard matter for you, both to know your ſelves, and what is yours, according to the Delphike in ſcription: As for me, who am the maker of your lawes, I am of opinion that neither your ſelves are your owne, nor that which you enjoy. And both you and your goods, paſt and to come, belong to your familie; and moreover both your families and your goods are the common wealths: Wherfore, leaſt any flatterer, either in your age, or in time of ſickenes, or any other paſſion, ſhould vnadviſedly induce you to make any vnlawfull convayance or vnjuſt will and teſtament, I will looke to you and keepe you from-it. But having an eſpeciall reſpect both to the vniverſall intereſt of your Citie, and particular ſtate of your houſes, I will eſtabliſh lawes, and by reaſon make you perceive and confeſſe, that a particular commoditie ought to yeelde to a publike benefit. Followe that courſe meerely, whereto humaine neceſſitie doth call you. To me it belongeth, who have no more regarde to one thing, then to another, and who as much as I can, take care for the general, to have a regardfull reſpect of that which you leave behind you. But to returne to my former diſcourſe, me thinkes, we ſeldome ſee that woman borne, to whom the ſuperioritie or majeſtie over men is due, except the motherly and naturall; vnles it be for the chaſtiſement of ſuch, as by ſome fond-febricitant humor have voluntarily ſubmitted themſelves vnto them: But that doth nothing concerne old women, of whom we ſpeake here. It is the apparance of this conſideration, hath made vs to frame, and willingly to eſtabliſh this law (never ſeene elſe where) that barreth women from the ſucceſſion of this crowne, and there are few principalities in the world, where it is not aleaged, aſwel as here, by a likely and apparant reaſon, which authoriſeth the ſame. But fortune hath given more credit vnto-it in ſome places, then in other ſome. It is dangerous to leave the diſpenſation of our ſucceſſion vnto their judgement, according to the choyſe they ſhall make of their children, which is moſt commonly vnjuſt and fantaſticall. For, the ſame vnrulie appetite, and diſtaſted reliſh, or ſtrange longings, which they have when they are great with child, the ſame have they a
                              •
                            al times in their minds. They are commonly ſeene to affect the weakeſt, the ſimpleſt and moſt abject, or ſuch (if they have any) that had more neede to ſucke. For, wanting reaſonable diſcourſe to chuſe, and embrace what they ought, they rather ſuffer themſelves to be directed, where natures impreſſions are moſt ſingle, as other creatures, which take no longer knowledge of their yong-ones, then they are ſucking. Moreover, experience doth manifeſtly ſnew vnto vs, that the ſame naturall affection, to which we aſcribe ſo much authoritie, hath but a weake foundation. For a very ſmall gaine, we daily take mothers owne children from them and induce them to take charge of ours; Doe we not often procure them to bequeath their children to ſome fond, filthie, ſluttiſh, and vnhealthie nurce, to whom we would be very loth to commit ours, or to ſome brutiſh Goate, not onely forbidding them to nurce and feede their owne children (what danger ſoever may betide them) but alſo to have any care of them, to the end they may the more diligently follow, and carefully attend the ſervice of ours? Whereby wee ſoone ſee through cuſtome a certaine kinde of baſtard-affection to be engendred in them, more vehement then the naturall, and to be much more tender and carefull for the well fare and preſervation of other mens children, then for their owne. And the reaſon why I have made mention of Goates, is, becauſe it is an ordinarie thing round about me where I dwell, to ſee the countrie women, when they have not milke enough to feed their infants with their owne breaſts, to call for Goates to helpe them. And my ſelfe have now two lacke is wayting vpon me, who except it were eight daies never ſuck't other milke then Goates; They are preſently to come at call, and give yong infants ſucke, and become ſo well acquainted with their voice, that when they heare them crie; they runne forthwith vnto them. And if by chance they have any other child put to their teates, then their nurſeling, they refuſe and reject him, and ſo doth the childe a ſtrange Goate. My ſelfe ſaw that one not long ſince, from whom the father tooke a Goate, which he had ſucked two or three daies, becauſe he had but borrowed it of one his neighbours, who could never be induced to ſucke any other, whereby he ſhortly died; and as I verely thinke, of meere hunger. Beaſts as well as we doe ſoone alter, and eaſily baſtardize their naturall affection. I beleeve, that in that, which Hero dotus reporteth of a certaine province of Libia, there often followeth great error and miſtaking. He ſaith, that men doe indifferently vſe, and as it were in common frequent women;

And that the childe as ſoone as he is able to goe, comming to any ſolemne meetings and great aſſemblies, led by a naturall inſtinct findeth out his owne father: where being turned looſe in the middeſt of the multitude, looke what man the childe doth firſt addreſſe his ſteps vnto, and then goe to him, the ſame is ever afterward reputed to be his right father. Now if we ſhal duely conſider this ſimple occaſion of loving our children, becauſe we have begotten them, for which we call them our other ſelves. It ſeemes there is another production comming from vs, and which is of no leſſe recommendation and conſequence. For what we engender by the minde, the fruites of our courage, ſufficiencie, or ſpirite, are brought forth by a far more noble part, then the corporall, and are more, our owne. We are both father and mother together in this generation: ſuch fruites coſt vs much dearer, and bring vs more honour, and chiefly if they have any good or rare thing in them. For, the value of our other children, is much more theire, then ours. The ſhare we have in them is but little; but of theſe all the beautie, all the grace, and all the worth is ours. And therefore doe they repreſent, and reſemble vs much more lively then others. Plate addeth moreover, that theſe are immortall iſſues, and immortalize their fathers, yea and deifie them, as Licurgus, Solen, and Minos. All hiſtories being full of examples of this mutuall friendſhip of fathers toward their children, I have not thought it amiſſe to ſet downe ſome choiſe one of this kinde. Heliodorus that good Biſhop of Tricea, loved rather to looſe the dignity, profit and devotion of ſo venerable a Prelateſhip, then to for-goe his daughter, a yong woman to this day commended for hir beautie, but happily ſomewhat more curiouſly and wantonly pranked-vp then beſeemed the daughter of a churchman and a Biſhop, and of over-amorous behavior. There was one Labienus in Rome, a man of great worth and authority, and an ongſt other commendable qualities, moſt excellent in all maner of learning, who (as I think) was the ſonne of that great Labienus, cheife of all the captaines that followed and were vnder Caeſar in the warres againe the Gaules, and who afterward taking great Pompeys part, behaved himſelfe ſo valiantly and ſo conſtantly, that he never forſooke him vntill Caeſar defeated him in Spaine. This Labienus of whom I ſpake, had many that envied his vertues; But aboue all (as it is likely) courtiers, and ſuch as in his time were favored of the Emperors, who hated his franknes, his fatherly humors, and diſtaſte he bare ſtill againſt tyrannie, wherewith it may be ſuppoſed he had ſtuffed his bookes and compoſitions. His adverſaries vehemently purſued him before the Magiſtrate of Rome, and prevailed ſo farre, that many of his works which he had publiſhed were condemned to be burned. He was the firſt on whom this new example of puniſhment was put in practiſe, which after continued long in Rome, and was executed on divers others, to puniſh learning, ſtudies, and writings with death and conſuming fire. There were neither meanes enough, or matter ſufficient of crueltie, vnleſſe we had entermingled amongſt them things, which nature hath exempted from all ſenſe and ſufferance, as reputation, and the inventions of our minde: and except we communicated corporall miſchiefes vnto diſciplines and monuments of the Muſes. Which loſſe Labienus could not endure, nor brooke to ſurvive thoſe his deare, and highly-eſteemed iſſues: And therefore cauſed himſelfe to be carried, and ſhut vp alive within his aunceſtors monument, where, with a dreadleſſe reſolution, he at once provided, both to kill himſelfe and be buried together. It is hard to ſhew any more vehement fatherly affection, than that. Caſſius Severus, a moſt eloquent man, and his familiar friend, ſeeing his Bookes burnt, exclamed, that by the ſame ſentence hee ſhould therewithall be condemned to be burned alive, for hee ſtill bare and kept in minde, what they contained in them. A like accident happened to Geruntius Cord
                                 ••
                              s, who was accuſed to have commended Brutus and Caſſius in his Bookes. That baſe, ſervile, and corrupted Senate, and worthie of a farre worſe maiſter then Tiberius, adjudged his writings to be conſumed by fire And he was pleaſed to accompany them in their death; for, he pined away by abſtaining from all manner of meat. That notable man Lucane, being adjudged by that lewd varlet Nero to death; at the latter end of his life, when al his bloud was well nigh ſpent from out the veines of his arme, which by his Phiſitian he had cauſed to be opened, to haſten his death, and that a chilling cold began to ſeize the vttermoſt parts of his limbes, and approch his vitale ſpirits, the laſt thing he had in memory, was ſome of his owne verſes, written in his booke of the Pharſalian warres, which with a diſtinct voice hee repeated, and ſo yeelded vp the ghoſt, having thoſe laſt words in his mouth. What was that but a kinde, tender, and fatherly farwell which he tooke of his children? repreſenting the

laſt adewes, and parting imbracements, which at our death we give vnto our deereſt iſſues? And an effect of that naturall inclination, which in that laſt extremity puts vs in minde of thoſe things, which in our life-time we have held deareſt and moſt precious? Shall we imagine that Ep
                                 •
                              curus, who (as himſelfe ſaid) dying tormented with the extreame paine of the chollike, had all his comfort in the beauty of the doctrine, which he left behinde him in the world, would have received as much contentment of a number of well-borne, and betterbred children (if he had had any) as he did of the production of his rich compoſitions? And if it had beene in his choiſe, to leave behind him, either a counterfeit, deformed, or ill-borne childe, or a fooliſh, triviall, and idle booke, not onely he, but all men in the world beſides of like learning and ſufficiency, would much rather have choſen, to incurre the former then the latter miſchiefe. It might peradventure be deemed impiety, in Saint Augustine (for example-ſake) if on the one part one ſhould propoſe vnto him, to bury all his bookes, whence our religion receiveth ſo much good, or to interre his children (if in caſe he had any) that he would not rather chuſe to bury his children; or the iſſue of his loynes, then the fruits of of his minde. And I wot not well, whether my ſelfe ſhould not much rather deſire to beget and produce a perfectly-well-ſhaped, and excellently-qualited infant, by the acquaintance of the Muſes, then by the copulation of my wife. Whatſoever I give to this, let the world allow of it as it pleaſe, I give it as purely and irrevocable, as any man can give to his corporal children. That little good which I have done him, is no longer in my diſpoſition. He may know many things, that my ſelfe know no longer, and hold of me what I could not hold my ſelfe: and which (if neede ſhould require) I muſt borrow of him as of a ſtranger. If I be wiſer then he, he is richer then I. There are few men given vnto Poeſie, that would not eſteeme it for a greater honour, to be the fathers of 
                              Ʋirgils Aeneidos, then of the goodlieſt boy in Rome, and that would not rather endure the loſſe of the one then the periſhing of the other. For, according to Ariſtotle, Of all workemen, the Poet is principally the moſt amorous of his productions and conceited of his Labours. It is not eaſie to be believed, that Epaminondas, who vanted to leave ſome daughters behind him, which vnto all poſterity, ſhould one day highly honour their father (they were the two famous victories, which he had gained of the Lacedemonians) would ever have given his free conſent, to change them, with the beſt-borne, moſt gorgeous, and goodlieſt damſels of all Greece: or that Alexander, and Caeſar, did ever wiſh to be deprived of the greatneſſe of their glorious deedes of warre, for the commodity to have children and heires of their owne bodies, how abſolutely-perfect, and well accompliſhed ſo ever they might be. Nay, I make a great queſtion, whether Phidtas or any other excellent ſtatuary, would as highly eſteeme, and dearely love the preſervation, and ſucceſſefull continuance of his naturall children, as he would an exquiſite and match-leſſe-wrought Image, that with long ſtudy, and diligent care he had perfected according vnto arte. And as concerning thoſe vicious and furious paſſions, which ſometimes have inflamed ſome fathers to the love of their daughters, or mothers towards their ſonnes; the very ſame, and more partially-earneſt is alſo found in this other kinde of childe-bearing and aliance. Witneſſe that which is reported of Pigmalion, who having curiouſly framed a goodly ſtatue, of a moſt ſingularly-beauteous woman, was ſo ſtrange-fondly, and paſſionately ſurpriſed with the luſtfull love of his owne workmanſhip, that the Gods through his raging importunity were faine in favour of him to give it life.
                        
                           Tentatum molleſcit ebur, poſito
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               rigoreOrid. Metá
                                    •
                                 . lib. 10. 283.
                           
                           Subſidit digitis▪
                           
                        
                        
                           As he aſſaid it, th'yvorie ſoftned much,
                           And (hardneſſe left) did yeeld to fingers touch.
                        
                     
                     
                        The ninth Chapter.
                        
                           Of the Parthians Armes.
                        
                        IT is a vitious fond faſhion of the Nobility and gentry of our age, and full of nice-tenderneſſe, never to betake themſelves to armes, except vpon ſome vrgent and extreame neceſſity:

and to quit them as ſoone as they perceive the leaſt hope or apparance, that the danger is paſt: Whence enſue many diſorders, and inconveniences: For, every one running and calling for his armes when the alarum is given, ſome have not yet buckled their cuirace, when their fellowes are already defeated. Indeede our forefathers would have their Caske, Lance, Gantlets, and Shields carried, but ſo long as the ſervice laſted, themſelves would never leave-off their other pieces. Our troopes are now all confounded and diſordered, by reaſon of bag and baggage, of carriages, of lackies, and foote-boies, which becauſe of their maſters armes they carry, can never leave them. Titus Livius; ſpeaking of the French, ſaith, Intolerantiſſima laboris corpora vix arma humer is gerebant. Their bodies most impatient of labour
                           Liv. d
                                 ••
                              . 1. l. 10 
                           could hardly beare armour on their backes. Divers Nations, as they did in former times, ſo yet at this day, are ſeene to goe to the warres, without any thing about them, or if they had, it was of no defence; but were all naked and bare.
                        Tegmina queis capitum raptus de ſubere cortex.
                        Virg. Aen. lib. 742.
                        
                           Whoſe caske to cover all their head.
                           Was made of barke from Corke-tree flea'd.
                        
                        
                           Alexander the moſt daring and hazardous Captain that ever was, did very ſeldome arme himſelfe: And thoſe which amongſt vs neglect them, doe not thereby much empaire their reputation. If any man chance to be ſlaine for want of an armour, there are as many more that miſcary with the over-heavy burthen of their armes, and by them are engaged, and by a counterbuffe are bruſed, or otherwiſe defeated. For in truth to ſee the vnweildy weight of our and their thickneſſe, it ſeemeth we but endevour to defend our ſelves, and we are rather charged then covered by them. We have enough to doe, to endure the burthen of them, and are ſo engived and ſhackled in them, as if we were to fight but with the ſhocke or brunt of our armes: And as if we were as much bound to defend them, as they to ſhield vs. Cornelius Facitus doth pleaſantly quip and jeſt at the men of war of our ancient Gaules, ſo armed, only to maintaine themſelves, as they that have no meane, either to offend or to be offended, or to raiſe themſelves being overthrowne. Lucullus ſeeing certaine Median men at armes, which were in the front of Tigranes Army, heavily and vnweildely armed, as in an yron-priſon, apprehended thereby an opinion, that he might eaſily defeat them, and began to charge them firſt, and got the victory. And now that our Muskettiers, are in ſuch credite, I thinke we ſhall haue ſome invention found to immure vs vp, that ſo we may be warranted from them, and to traine vs to the warres in Skonces and Baſtions, as thoſe which our fathers cauſed to be carried by Elephants. A humour farre different from that of Scipio the yoonger, who ſharply reprooved his ſouldiers, becauſe they had ſcattered certaine Calthrops vnder the water alongſt a dike, by which thoſe of the Towne that he beſieged might ſally out vpon him, ſaying; that thoſe which aſſailed, ſhould reſolve to enterpriſe and not to feare: And had ſome reaſon to feare, that this proviſion might ſecure and lull their vigilancy aſleepe to guard themſelves. Moreover he ſaid to a yoong man, that ſhewed him a faire ſhield he had; Indeed good youth, it is a faire one, but a Roman ſouldier ought to have more confidence in his right hand, than in his left. It is onely cuſtome that makes the burthen of our armes intolerable vnto vs.
                        
                           L'uſberg
                                 •
                               in doſſo haveano, & l'elmo intesta,
                           Due di quells guerrier de i quali io canto.
                           Ne notte o di depo ch'entrar
                                 •
                               inquestaArieſt
                                    •
                                  Orl, 
                                    •
                                 an. 12. ſtan. 30
                           
                           Stanza, gl' havean m
                                 ••
                               meſſi da cant
                                 •
                              ;
                           Che facile â portar come la vesta
                           Eralor, perche in vſo l'havean tanto.
                        
                        
                           Cuiraſſe on backe did thoſe two warriors beare,
                           And caske on head, of whom I make report,
                           Nor day, nor night, after they entred there,
                           Had they them laide aſide from their ſupport:
                           They could with eaſe them as a garment weare,
                           For long time had they vſde them in ſuch ſort.
                        
                        The Emperour Caracalla in leading of his Army was ever wont to march a foot armed at all aſſaies. The Roman footmen caried not their morions, ſword and target only, as for other armes (ſaith Cicero) they were ſo accuſtomed to weare them continually, that they hindered

them no more then their limbs: Arma enim, membra militis eſſe dicunt: for they ſay armor and weapon, are a ſoldiers limbs. But there withal ſuch victuals as they ſhould need for a fortnight and a certaine number of ſtakes, to make their rampards or paliſadoes with; ſo much as weighed threeſcore pound weight. And Marius his ſouldiers thus loden, marching in battelarray, were taught to march five leagues in five houres, yea ſix if need required. Their military diſcipline was much more laborſome then ours: So did it produce far different effects. Scipto the yonger, reforming his army in Spaine, appointed his ſouldiers to eate no meate but ſtanding, and nothing ſodden or roſted. It is worth the remembrance how a Lacedemonian ſouldier being in an expedition of warre, was much noted and blamed, becauſe hee was once ſeene to ſeeke for ſhelter vnder a houſe: They were ſo hardened to enduree all manner of labour and toyle, that it was counted a reprechfull infamy for a ſouldier to be ſeene vnder any other roofe then that of heavens-vault, in what weather ſoever: Were we to doe ſo, we ſhould never leade our men far. Marcellinus a man well trained in the Roman wars, doth curiouſly obſerve the manner which the Parthians vſed to arme themſelves, and noteth it ſo much the more, by how much it was far different from the Romans. They had (ſaith he) certaine armes ſo curiouſly enter-wrought as they ſeemed to be made like feathers, which nothing hindered the ſtirring of their bodies, and yet ſo ſtrong, that our darts hitting them, did rather rebound, or glance by, then hurt them (they be the ſcales our anceſtors were ſo much wont to vſe.) In another place, they had (ſaith he) their horſes ſtiffe and ſtrong, couered with thicke hides, and themſelves armed from head to foote, with maſſie yron plates ſo artificially contrived, that where the joynts are, there they furthered the motion, and helped the ſtirring. A man would have ſaid, they had been men made of yron: For they had peeces ſo handſomly fitted and ſo lively repreſenting the forme and parts of the face; that there was no way to wound them, but at certaine little holes before their eyes, which ſerved to give them ſome light, and by certaine chinckes about their noſtrils, by which they hardly drew breath
                        
                           Flexilis inductis hamatur lamina membris,Glaud. in Ruff. l. 2. 358.
                           
                           Horribilis viſu, credas ſimulacr a moveri
                           Ferrea, cognato
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               viros ſpirare metallo.
                           Par Vestitus equis, ferrata fronte minantur,
                           Ferratóſ
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               mevent ſecurs vulneris armos.
                        
                        
                           The bending plate is hook't on limbes ore-ſpread,
                           Fearefull to ſight, ſteele images ſeem'd ledde,
                           And men to breath in mettall with them bredde.
                           Like furniture for horſe, with ſteeled head,
                           They threat, and ſafe from wound,
                           With barr'd limbs tread the ground,
                        
                        Loc-heere a deſcription, much reſembling the equipage of a compleat French-manat armes, with all his bardes. Plutarke reporteth that Demetrius cauſed two Armours to be made, each one weighing ſix ſcore pounds, the one for himſelfe, the other for Alcinus, the chiefe man of war, that was next to him, whereas all common Armours weighed but threeſcore.
                     
                     
                        The tenth Chapter.
                        
                           Of Bookes.
                        
                        I Make no doubt but it ſhall often be fall me to ſpeake of things, which are better, and with more truth handled by ſuch as are their crafts-maſters. Here is ſimply an Eſſay of my naturall faculties, and no whit of thoſe I have acquired. And he that ſhall tax me with ignorance, ſhall have no great victory at my hands; for hardly could I give others reaſon for my diſcourſes, that give none vnto my ſelfe, and am not well ſatisfied with them. He that ſhall make ſerch after knowledge, let him ſeeke it where it is: there is nothing I profeſſe leſſe.

Theſe are but my fantaſies, by which I endevour not to make things knowen, but myſelfe. They may haply one day be knowen vnto me, or have bin at other times, according as fortune hath brought me where they were declared or manifeſted. But I remember them no more. And if I be a man of ſome reading, yet I am a man of no remembring, I conceive no certainty, except it bee to give notice, how farre the knowledge I have of it, dooth now reach. Let no man buſie himſelfe about the matters, but on the faſhion I give them. Let that which I borrow be ſurvaid, and then tell me whether I have made good choice of ornaments, to beautifie and ſet foorth the invention, which ever comes from mee. For, I make others to relate (not after mine owne fantaſie, but as it beſt falleth out) what I can not ſo well expreſſe, either through vnskill of language, or want of judgement. I number not my borrowings, but I weigh them. And if I would have made their number to prevaile, I would have had twice as many. They are all, or almoſt all of ſo famous and ancient names, that me thinks they ſufficiently name themſelves without mee. If in reaſons, compariſons and arguments, I tranſplant any into my ſoile, or confound them with mine owne, I purpoſely conceale the Authour, thereby to bridle the raſhneſſe of theſe haſtie cenſures, that are ſo headlong caſt vpon all manner of compoſitions, namely yoong writings, of men yet living; and in vulgare, that admitte all the worlde to talke of them, and which ſeemeth to convince the conception and publike deſigne alike. I will have them to give Plutarch a bobbe vpon mine owne lippes, and vex themſelves, in wronging Seneca in mee. My weakeneſſe muſt be hidden vnder ſuch great credites. I will love him that ſhall trace, or vnfeather me; I meane through cleareneſſe of judgement, and by the onely diſtinction of the force and beautie of my Diſcourſes. For my ſelfe, who for want of memorie, am ever to ſeeke, how to trie and refine them, by the knowledge of their country, knowe perfectly, by meaſuring mine owne ſtrength, that my ſoyle is no way capable, of ſome over-pretious flowers, that therin I find ſet, and that all the fruites of my encreaſe could not make it amendes. This am I bound to anſwer-for, if I hinder my ſelfe, if there be either vanitie, or fault in my Diſcourſes, that I perceive not or am not able to diſcerne, if they be ſhewed me. For, many faults doe often eſcape our eyes; but the infirmitie of judgement conſiſteth in not being able to perceive them, when another diſcovereth them vnto vs. Knowledge and truth may be in vs without judgement, and we may have judgement without them: Yea, the acknowledgement of ignorance, is one of the beſt and ſureſt teſtimonies of judgement that I can finde. I have no other Sergeant of band to marſhall my rapſodies, than fortune. And looke how my humours or conceites preſent them-ſelves, ſo I ſhuffle them vp. Sometimes they preaſe out thicke and thee-folde, and other times they come out languiſhing one by one. I will have my naturall and ordinarie pace ſeene as looſe, and as ſhuffling as it is. As I am, ſo I goe on plodding. And beſides, theſe are matters, that a man may not be ignorant of, and raſhly and caſually to ſpeake of them. I would wiſh to have a more perfect vnderſtanding of things, but I will not purchaſe it ſo deare, as it coſt. My intention is to paſſe the remainder of my life quietly, and not laboriouſly, in reſt, and not in care. There is nothing I will trouble or vex my ſelfe about, no not for Science it ſelfe, what eſteeme ſoever it be-of. I doe not ſearch and toſſe over Books, but for an honeſter recreation to pleaſe, and paſtime to delight my ſelfe: or if I ſtudie, I onely endevour to find out the knowledge that teacheth or handleth the knowledge of my ſelfe, and which may inſtruct me how to die well, and how to live well.
                        Has meus ad metas ſudet oportet equus.
                              
                                 ••
                              opert. l. 4. 
                                 •
                              l. 1. 70.
                        
                        
                           My horſe muſt ſweating runne,
                           That this goale may be wonne.
                        
                        If in reading I fortune to meete with any difficult points, I fret not my ſelfe about them, but after I have giuen them a charge or two, I leave them as I found them. Should I earneſtly plod vpon them I ſhould looſe both time and my ſelfe; for I have a skipping wit. What I ſee not at the firſt view, I ſhall leſſe ſee it, if I opinionate my ſelfe vpon it. I doe nothing without blithneſſe▪ and an over obſtinate continuation and plodding contention, doth dazle, dul and weary the ſame: My ſight is thereby confounded and diminiſhed. I muſt therefore withdraw-it, and at fittes goe to it againe. Even as to judge well of the luſtre of ſcarlet we are taught to caſt our eyes ouer it, in running it over by divers glances, ſodaine glimpſes, and reiterated repriſings. If one booke ſeeme tedious vnto me, I take another, which I follow not

with any earneſtnes, except it be at ſuch houres as I am idle, or that I am wearie with doing nothing. I am not greatly affected to new books, becauſe ancient Authors are in my judgement more full and pithie: nor am I much addicted to Greeke books, foraſmuch as my vnderſtanding can well rid his worke with a childiſh and apprentiſe intelligence. Amongſt moderne bookes meerly pleaſant. I eſteeme Bocace his Decameron, Rabelais, and the kiſſes of Iohn the ſecond (if they may be placed vnder this title) worth the paines-taking to reade them. As for Amadis and ſuch like traſh of writings, they had never the credit ſo much as to allure my youth to delight in them. This I will ſay more, either boldly or raſhly, that this old and heavie-paſed mind of mine, will no more be pleaſed with Ariſtotle, or tickled with good Ovid: his facilitie, and quaint inventions, which heretofore have ſo raviſhed me, they can now adaies ſcarcely entertaine me. I ſpeake my minde freely of all things, yea of ſuch as peradventure exceede my ſufficiencie, and that no-way I hold to be of my juriſdiction. What my conceit is of them, is alſo to manifeſt the proportion of my inſight, and not the meaſure of things. If at any time I find my ſelfe diſtaſted of Platoes Axiochus, as of a forceles worke, due regarde had to ſuch an Author, my judgement doth nothing beleeve it ſelfe: It is not ſo fond-hardy, or ſelfe-conceited, as it durſt dare to oppoſe it ſelfe againſt the authority of ſo many other famous ancient judgements, which he reputeth his regents and maiſters, and with whome hee had rather erre. He chafeth with, and condemneth himſelfe, either to rely on the ſuperficiall ſenſe, being vnable to pierce into the centre, or to view the thing by ſome falce luſtre. He is pleaſed onely to warrant himſelfe from trouble and vnrulines: As for weaknes he acknowledgeth and ingeniouſly auoweth the ſame. He thinkes to give a juſt interpetation to the apparances which his conception preſents vnto him, but they are ſhallow and imperfect. Moſt of Aeſopes fables have divers ſenſes, and ſeverall interpretations: Thoſe which Mythologize them, chuſe ſome kinde of color well-ſuting with the fable; but for the moſt part, it is no other then the firſt and ſuperficiall gloſſe: There are others more quicke, more ſinnowie, more eſſential and more internal, into which they could never penetrate; and thus thinke I with them. But to follow my courſe; I have ever deemed that in Poeſie, Virgil, Lucretius, Catullus, and Horace, doe doubtles by far hold the firſt ranke: and eſpecially Virgil in his Georgiks, which I eſteeme to be the moſt accompliſhed piece of worke of Poeſie: In compariſon of which one may eaſily diſcerne, that there are ſome paſſages in the Aeneidos, to which the Author (had he lived) would no doubt have given ſome review or correction: The fift booke whereof is (in my mind) the moſt abſolutely perfect. I alſo love Lucan, and willingly read him, not ſo much for his ſtile, as for his owne worth, and truth of his opinion and judgement. As for good Terence, I allow the quaintnes and grace of his Latin tongue, and judge him wonderfull conceited and apt, lively to repreſent the motions and paſhions of the minde, and the condition of our manners: our actions make me often remember him. I can never reade him ſo often, but ſtill I diſcover ſome new grace and beautie in him. Thoſe that lived about Virgils time, complained that ſome would compare Lucretius vnto him. I am of opinion, that verily it is an vnequall compariſon; yet can I hardly aſſure my ſelfe in this opinion whenſoever I find my ſelfe entangled in ſome notable paſſage of Lucretius. If they were moved at this compariſon, what would they ſay now of the fond, hardie and barbarous ſtupiditie of thoſe which now adaies compare Arioſto vnto him? Nay what would Artoſto ſay of it himſelfe?
                        O ſeclum inſipiens & infac
                              •
                           tumCatul. epig. 40. 8.
                        
                        
                           O age that hath no wit,
                           And ſmall conceit in it.
                        
                        I thinke our anceſtors had alſo more reaſon to cry out againſt thoſe that bluſhed not to equall Plautus vnto Terence (who makes more ſhew to be a Gentleman) then Lucretius vnto Virgil. This one thing doth greatly advantage the eſtimation and preferring of Terence, that the father of the Roman eloquence, of men of his quality doth ſo often make mention of him; and the cenſure, which the chiefe judge of the Roman Poets giveth of his companion. It hath often come vnto my minde, how ſuch as in our daies giue themſelues to compoſing of comedes (as the Italians who are very happie in them) employ three or foure arguments of Terence and Plautus to make vp one of theirs. In one onely comedie they will huddle vp five or ſix of Bocaces tales. That which makes them ſo to charge themſelves with matter, is the diſtruſt they have of their owne ſufficiency, and that they are not able to vndergoe

ſo heavie a burthen with their owne ſtrength. They are forced to finde a body on which they may rely and leane themſelves: and wanting matter of their owne wherewith to pleaſe vs, they will have the ſtory or tale to buſie and ammuſe vs: where as in my Authors it is cleane contrary: The elegancies, the perfections and ornaments of his manner of ſpeech, make vs neglect and looſe the longing for his ſubiect. His quaintneſſe and grace doe ſtill retaine vs to him. He is every where pleaſantly conceited,
                        Liquidus puroque ſimillimus amni,Hor. li 2. epiſt. 2. 120.
                        
                        
                           So clearely-neate, ſo neately-cleare,
                           As he a fine-pure Riuer were.
                        
                        and doth ſo repleniſh our minde with his graces, that we forget thoſe of the fable. The ſame conſideration drawes me ſomewhat further. I perceive that good and ancient Poets have ſhunned the affectation and enqueſt, not onely of fantaſticall, new fangled, Spagniolized, and Petrarchiſticall elevations, but alſo of more ſweet and ſparing inventions, which are the ornament of all the Poeticall workes of ſucceeding ages. Yet is there no competent judge, that findeth them wanting in thoſe ancient ones, and that doth not much more admire that ſmoothly equall neatneſſe, continued ſweetneſſe, and floriſhing comelineſſe of Catullus his Epigrams, then all the ſharpe quippes, and witty girds, wherewith Martiall doth whet and embelliſh the concluſions of his. It is the ſame reaſon I ſpake of erewhile, as Martiall of himſelfe. Minus illi ingenio laborandum fuit, in cuius locum materia ſucceſſerat. He needed the
                           Mart. praef l. 8. 
                           leſſe worke with his wit, in place whereof matter came in ſupply; The former without being moved or pricked cauſe themſelves to be heard lowd enough: they have matter to laugh at every where, and neede not tickle themſelves; where as theſe muſt have forraine helpe: according as they have leſſe ſpirit, they muſt have more body. They leape on horſe-backe: becauſe they are not ſufficiently ſtrong in their legges to march on foot. Even as in our dances, thoſe baſe conditioned men that keepe dancing-ſchooles, becauſe they are vnfit to repreſent the porte and decency of our nobility, endevour to get commendation by dangerous lofty trickes, and other ſtrange tumbler-like friskes and motions. And ſome Ladies make a better ſhew of their countenances in thoſe dances, wherein are divers changes, cuttings, turnings, and agitations of the body, then in ſome dances of ſtate and gravity, where they neede but ſimply to tread a natural meaſure, repreſent an vnaffected cariage, and their ordinary grace; And as I have alſo ſeene ſome excellent Lourdans, or Clownes attired in their ordinary worky-day clothes, and with a common homely countenance, affoord vs all the pleaſure that may be had from their arte: Prentiſes and learners that are not of ſo high a forme, to beſmeare their faces, to diſguiſe themſelves, and in motions to counterfeit ſtrange viſages, and antickes, to enduce vs to laughter. This my conception is no where better diſcerned, then in the compariſon betweene 
                              Ʋirgils Aeneidos, and Orlando Furioſ
                                 •
                              . The firſt is ſeene to ſoare aloft with full-ſpread wings, and with ſo high and ſtrong a pitch, ever following his point; the other faintly to hover and flutter from tale to tale, and as it were skipping from bough to bough, alwaies diſtruſting his owne wings, except it be for ſome ſhort flight, and for feare his ſtrength and breath ſhould faile him, to ſit downe at every fields-end.
                        Excurſúſque breves tent atVirg. Aen. lib. 4. 194.
                        
                        
                           Out-lopes ſometimes he doth aſſay,
                           But very ſhort, and as he may.
                        
                        Loe-here then, concerning this kind of ſubjects, what Authors pleaſe me beſt: As for my other leſſon, which ſomewhat more mixeth profite with pleaſure, whereby I learne to range my opinions, and addreſſe my conditions; the Bookes that ſerve me thereunto, are Plutarke (ſince he ſpake French,) and Seneca; Both have this excellent commodity for my humour, that the knowledge I ſeeke in them, is there ſo ſcatteringly and looſely handled, that whoſoever readeth them is not tied to plod long vpon them, whereof I am vncapable. And ſo are Plutarkes little workes, and Senecaes Epiſtles; which are the beſt and moſt profitable partes of their writings. It is no great matter to draw mee to them, and I leave them where I liſt. For, they ſucceed not, and depend not one of another. Both jumpe and ſuite together, in moſt true and profitable opinions: And fortune brought them both into the world in one age. Both were Tutors vnto two Roman Emperours: Both were ſtrangers, and came from farre Countries; both rich and mighty in the common-wealth, and in credite with their maſters. Their inſtruction is the prime and

creame of Philoſophie, and preſented with a plaine, vnaffected, and pertinent faſhion. Plutarke is more vniforme and conſtant; Seneca more waving and diverſe. This doth labour, force, and extend himſelfe, to arme and ſtrengthen vertue againſt weakneſſe, feare, and vitious deſires; the other ſeemeth nothing ſo much to feare their force or attempt, and in a maner ſcorneth to haſten or change his pace about them, and to put himſelfe vpon his guarde. Plutarkes opinions are Platonicall, gentle and accommodable vnto civill ſocietie: Senacaes Stoicall and Epicurian, further from common vſe, but in my conceit, more proper particular, and more ſolide. It appeareth in Seneca, that he ſomewhat inclineth and yeeldeth to the tyrannie of the Emperors which were in his daies; for, I verily beleeve, it is with a forced judgement, he condemneth the cauſe of thoſe noblie-minded murtherers of Caeſar: Plutarke is every where free and open-hearted; Seneca, full-fraught with points and ſallies, Plutarke ſtuft with matters. The former doth moove and enflame you more; the latter, content, pleaſe, and pay you better: This doth guide you, the other drive you on. As for Cicero, of all his works, thoſe that treat of Philoſophie (namely morall) are they which beſt ſerve my turne, and ſquare with my intent. But boldly to confeſſe the trueth, (For, Since the bars of impudencie were broken downe, all curbing is taken away) his maner of writing ſeemeth verie tedious vnto me, as doth all ſuch-like ſtuffe. For, his prefaces, definitions, diviſions, and Etymologies, conſume the greateſt part of his Works; whatſoever quicke, wittie, and pithie conceit is in him, is ſurcharged, and confounded by thoſe his long and far-fetcht preambles. If I beſtow but one houre in reading him, which is much for me; and let me call to minde what ſubſtance, or juice I have drawne from him, for the moſt part, I find nothing but winde & oſtentation in him: for he is not yet come to the arguments, which make for his purpoſe, and reaſons that properly concerne the knot or pith I ſeek-after. Theſe Logicall and Ariſtotelian ordinances are not availfull for me, who onely endevour to become more wiſe and ſufficient, and not more wittie or eloquent. I would have one begin with the laſt point: I vnderſtand ſufficiently what death and voluptuouſneſſe are: let not a man buſie himſelfe to anatomize them. At the firſt reading of a Booke, I ſeeke for good and ſolide reaſons, that may inſtruct me how to ſuſtaine their aſſaults. It is nether gramaticall ſubtilties, nor logicall quiddities, nor the wittie contexture of choiſe words, or arguments, and ſyllogiſmes, that will ſerve my turne. I like thoſe diſcourſes that give the firſt charge to the ſtrongeſt, part of the doubt; his are but flouriſhes, and languiſh every where. They are good for Schooles, at the barre, or for Orators and Preachers, where we may ſlumber: and though we wake a quarter of an houre after, we may find and trace him ſoone enough. Such a maner of ſpeech is fit for thoſe Iudges, that a man would corrupt by hooke or crooke, by right or wrong, or for children and the common people, vnto whom a man muſt tell all, and ſee what the event will be. I would not have a man go about, and labour by circumlocutions, to induce and win me to attention, and that (as our Herolds or Criers do) they ſhall ring out their words. Now heare me, now liſten, or 
                              •
                           o
                              •
                           yes. The Romanes in their Religion were wont to ſay, Hoc age; which in ours we ſay, Surſum corda. There are ſo many loſt words for me. I come readie prepared from my houſe. I need no allurement nor ſawce; my ſtomacke is good enough to digeſt raw meat: And whereas with theſe preparatives and flouriſhes, or preambles, they thinke to ſharpen my taſte, or ſtir my ſtomacke, they cloy and make it wallowiſh. Shall the priviledge of times excuſe me from this ſacrilegious boldneſſe, to deeme Platoes Dialogiſmes to be as languiſhing, by over-filling and ſtuffing his matter? And to bewaile the time that a man, who had ſo many thouſands of things to vtter, ſpends about ſo many, ſo long, ſo vaine, and idle interloquutions, and preparatives? My ignorance ſhall better excuſe me, in that I ſee nothing in the beautie of his language. I generally enquire after Bookes, that vſe ſciences, and not after ſuch as inſtitute them. The two firſt, and Plinie, with others of their ranke, have no Hoc age in them, they will have to doe with men, that have forewarned themſelves; or if they have, it is a materiall and ſubſtantiall Hoc age, and that hath his bodie apart. I likewiſe love to read the Epiſtles and ad Atticum, not onely becauſe they containe a moſt ample inſtruction of the Hiſtorie, and affaires of his times, but much more becauſe in them I deſcrie his private humours. For, (as I have ſaid elſewhere (I am wonderfull curious, to diſcover and know, the minde, the ſoule, the genuine diſpoſition, and naturall judgement of my Authors. A man ought to judge their ſufficiencie, and not their cuſtomes, nor them by the ſhew of their writings. Which they ſet

forth on this worlds Theatre. I have ſorrowed a thouſand times, that ever we loſt the booke, that Brutus writ of Virtue. Oh it is a goodly thing to learne the Theorike of ſuch as vnderſtand the practiſe well. But forſomuch as the Sermon is one thing, and the Preacher an other: I love as much to ſee Brutus in Plutarke, as in himſelfe, I would rather make choiſe to know certainly, what talke he had in his Tent with ſome of his familiar friends, the night fore-going the battell, then the ſpeach he made the morrow after to his Armie: and what he did in his chamber or cloſet, then what in the Senate or market place. As for Cicero, I am of the common judgement, that beſides learning, there was no exquiſite excellencie in him: He was a good Citizen, of an honeſt-gentle nature, as are commonly fat and burly men; for ſo was he: But to ſpeake truely of him, full of ambitious vanitie and remiſſe niceneſſe. And I know not well how to excuſe him, in that he deemed his Poeſie worthy to be publiſhed. It is no great imperfection, to make bad verſes, but it is an imperfection in him, that he never perceived how vnworthy they were of the glorie of his name. Concerning his eloquence, it is beyond all compariſon, and I verily beleeve, that none ſhall ever equall it. Cicero the yoonger, who reſembled his father in nothing, but in name, commaunding in Aſia, chanced one day to have many ſtrangers at his board, and amongſt others, one Castius ſitting at the lower end, as the maner is to thruſt-in at great mens tables: Cicero inquired of one of his men what he was, who told him his name, but he dreaming on other matters, and having forgotten what anſwere his man made him, asked him his name twice or thrice more: the ſervant, becauſe he would not be troubled to tell him one thing ſo often, and by ſome circumſtance make him to know him better. It is, ſaid he, the ſame Castius, to whom ſome have told you, that in reſpect of his owne, maketh no accompt of your fathers eloquence: Cicero being ſuddainly, mooved, commaunded the ſaid poore Castius, to be preſently taken from the table, and well whipt in his preſence: Lo-heere an vncivill and barbarous hoſt. Even amongſt thoſe, which (all things conſidered) have deemed his eloquence matchleſſe and incomparable others there have been, who have not ſpared to note ſome faults in it: As great Brutus ſaid, that it was an eloquence, broken, halting, and disjoynted, fractam & elumbem: Incoherent and ſinnowleſſe. Thoſe Orators that lived about his age, reprooved alſo in him the curious care he had of a certaine long cadence, at the end of his clauſes, and noted theſe words, Eſſe videatur, which he ſo often vſeth. As for me, I rather like a cadence that falleth ſhorter, cut like I am bikes: yet doth he ſometimes confound his numbers; but it is ſeldome: I have eſpecially obſerved this one place. Ego verò me minus diu ſenem eſſe mallem, quàm eſſe ſeuem,
                           Ci
                                 •
                              . d
                                 •
                               Senect. 
                           antequam eſſem. But I had rather, not be an old man ſo long as I might be, than to be old before I ſhould be. Hiſtorians are my right hand; for they are pleaſant and eaſie: and therewithall, the man with whom I deſire generally to be acquainted, may more lively and perfectly be diſcovered in them, than in any other compoſition: the varietie and truth of his inward conditions, in groſſe and by retale: the diverſitie of the meanes of his collection and compoſing, and of the accidents that threaten him. Now, thoſe that write of mens lives, foraſmuch as they ammuſe and buſie themſelves more about counſels than events, more about that which commeth from within, than that which appeareth outward; they are fitteſt for me: And that's the reaſon why Plutarke above all in that kind, doth beſt pleaſe me. Indeed I am not a little grieved that we have not a dozen of Laer
                                 •
                              ij, or that he is not more knowne, or better vnderſtood: for, I am no leſſe curious to know the fortunes and lives of theſe great maſters of the world, than to vnderſtand the diverſitie of their decrees and conceits. In this kind of ſtudie of Hiſtorie, a man muſt, without diſtinction, toſſe and turne over all ſorts of Authors, both old and new, both French and others, if he will learne the things they ſo diverſly treat-of. But me thinks that Caeſar above all doth ſingularly deſerve to be ſtudied, not onely for the vnderſtanding of the Hiſtorie, as of himſelfe; ſo much perfection and excellencie is there in him more than in others, although Salust be reckoned one of the number. Verily I read that Author with a little more reverence and reſpect, than commonly men reade profane and humane Workes: ſometimes conſidering him by his actions, and wonders of his greatneſſe, and other times waighing the puritie and inimitable poliſhing and elegancie of his tongue, which (as Cicero ſaith) hath not onely exceeded all Hiſtorians, but happly Cicero himſelfe: with ſuch ſinceritie in his judgement. Speaking of his enemies, that except the falſe colours, wherewith he goeth about to cloake his bad cauſe, and the corruption and filthineſſe of his peſtilent ambition. I am perſwaded there is nothing in him to

be found fault-with: and that he hath been over-ſparing to ſpeake of himſelfe: for, ſo many notable and great things could never be executed by him, vnleſſe he had put more of his owne vnto them, than he ſetteth downe. I love thoſe Hiſtorians that are either verie ſimple, or moſt excellent. The ſimple who have nothing of their owne to adde vnto the ſtorie, and have but the care and diligence to collect whatſoever come vnto their knowledge, and ſincerely and faithfully to regiſter all things, without choice or culling, by the naked truth leave our judgement more entire, and better ſatisfied.
                        Such amongſt others (for example ſake) plaine and well-meaning Froiſard, who in his enter prize, hath marched with ſo free and genuine a puritie, that having committed ſome overſight; he is neither aſhamed to acknowledge, nor afraide to correct the ſame, whereſoever he hath either notice or warning of it: and who repreſenteth vnto vs the diverſitie of the newes then currant, and the different reports, that were made vnto him. The ſubject of an hiſtorie ſhould be naked, bare, and formeleſſe; each man according to his capacitie or vnderſtanding may reap commoditie out of it. The curious and moſt excellent have the ſufficiencie to cull and chuſe that, which is worthie to be knowne, and may ſelect of two relations, that which is moſt likely: of the condition of Princes, and of their humors, therby they conclude their counſels, and attribute convenient words vnto them: they have reaſon to aſſume authoritie vnto them, to direct and ſhapen our beliefe vnto theirs. But truely that belongs not to many. Such as are betweene both (which is the moſt common faſhion) it is they that ſpoile all; they will needs chew our meat for vs, and take vpon them a law to judge, and by conſequence to ſquare and encline the ſtorie according to their fantaſie; for, where the judgement bendeth one way, a man cannot chuſe but wreſt and turne his narration that way. They vndertake to chuſe things worthy to be knowne, and now and then conceal either a word, or a ſecret action from vs, which would much better inſtruct vs: omitting ſuch things as they vnderſtand not, as incredible: and happily ſuch matters, as they know not how to declare, either in good Latin, or tollerable French. Let them boldly enſtall their eloquence, and diſcourſe: Let them cenſure at their pleaſure, but let them alſo give vs leave to judge after them: And let them neither alter nor diſpence by their abridgements and choiſe, any thing belonging to the ſubſtance of the matter; but let them rather ſend it pure and entire with all hir dimenſions vnto vs. Moſt commonly (as chiefly in our age) this charge of writing hiſtories is committed vnto baſe, ignorant, and mechanicall kind of people, only for this conſideration that they can ſpeak well; as if we ſought to learne the Grammer of them; and they have ſome reaſon, being only hyred to that end, and publiſhing nothing but their tittle-tattle to aime at nothing elſe ſo much. Thus with ſtore of choiſe and quaint words, and wyre-drawne phraſes they huddle vp, and make a hodge-pot of a laboured contexture of the reports, which they gather in the market-places, or ſuch other aſſemblies. The only good hiſtories are thoſe that are written by ſuch as commanded, or were imploid themſelves in weighty affaires, or that were partners in the conduct of them, or that at leaſt have had the fortune to manage others of like qualitie. Such in a maner are all the Graecians and Romans. For, many eye-witneſſes hauing written of one ſame ſubject (as it hapned in thoſe times, when Greatneſſe and Knowledge did commonly meet) if any fault or over-ſight have paſt them, it muſt be deemed exceeding light, and vpon ſome doubtfull accident. What may a man expect at a Phiſitions hand, that diſcourſeth of warre, or of a bare Scholler, treating of Princes ſecret deſignes? If we ſhall but note the religion, which the Romans had in that, we need no other example: Aſinius Polio found ſome miſtaking or overſight in Caeſars Commentaries, whereinto he was falne, only becauſe he could not poſſiblie overſee all things with his owne eyes, that hapned in his Armie, but was faine to relie on the reports of particular men, who often related vntruths vnto him; or elſe becauſe he had not been curiouſly advertiſed, and diſtinctly enformed by his Lieutenants and Captaines, of ſuch matters as they in his abſence had managed or effected. Whereby may be ſeen, that nothing is ſo hard, or ſo vncertaine to be found-out, as the certaintie of a Truth, ſithence no man can put any aſſured confidence concerning the truth of a battel, neither in the knowledge of him, that was Generall, or commanded over it, nor in the ſoldiers that fought, of any thing, that hath hapned amongſt them; except after the maner of a ſtrict point of law, the ſeverall witneſſes are brought and examined face to face, and that all matters be nicely and thorowly ſifted by the objects and trials of the ſucceſſe of every accident. Verily the knowledge we have of our own affaires is much more barren and feeble. But this hath ſufficiently

been handled by Bodine, and agreeing with my conception. Somewhat to aide the weakneſſe of my memorie, and to aſſiſt her great defects; for it hath often been my chance to light vpon bookes, which I ſuppoſed to be new, and never to have read, which I had not vnderſtanding diligently read and run-over many yeares before, and all beſcribled with my notes: I have a while ſince accuſtomed my ſelfe, to note at the end of my booke (I meane ſuch as I purpoſe to read but once) the time I made an end to read it, and to ſet downe what cenſure or judgement I gave of it; that ſo, it may at leaſt, at another time repreſent vnto my mind, the aire and generall Idea, I had conceived of the Author in reading him. I will here ſet downe the Coppie of ſome of mine annotations, and eſpecially what I noted vpon my Guicciardine about ten yeares ſince: (For what language ſoever my bookes ſpeake vnto me, I ſpeake vnto them in mine owne.) He is a diligent Hiſtoriographer, and from whom in my conceit, a man may as exactly learne the truth of ſuch affaires as paſſed in his time, as of any other writer whatſoever: and the rather becauſe himſelfe hath been an Actor of moſt part of them, and in verie honourable place. There is no ſigne or apparance, that ever he diſguiſed or coloured any matter, either through hatred, malice, favour, or vanitie; whereof the free and imparciall judgements he giveth of great men, and namely of thoſe by whom he had been advanced or imployed in his important charges, as of Pope Clement the ſeaventh, beareth vndoubted teſtimonie. Concerning the parts wherewith he moſt goeth about to prevaile, which are his digreſſions and diſcourſes, many of them are verie excellent, and enriched with faire ornaments, but he hath too much pleaſed himſelfe in them: for, endevouring to omit nothing that might be ſpoken, having ſo full and large a ſubject, and almoſt infinite, he proveth ſomewhat languiſhing, and giveth a taſte of a kind of ſcholaſticall tedious babling. Moreover, I have noted this, that of ſo ſeverall and divers armes, ſucceſſes, and effects he judgeth of; of ſo many and variable motives, alterations, and counſels, that he relateth, he never referreth any one vnto vertue, religion, or conſcience: as if they were all extinguiſhed and baniſhed the world: and of all actions, how glorious ſoever in apparance they be of themſelves, he doth ever impute the cauſe of them, to ſome vicious and blame-worthie occaſion, or to ſome commoditie and profit. It is impoſſible to imagine, that amongſt ſo infinite a number of actions, whereof he judgeth, ſome one have not been produced and compaſſed by way of reaſon. No corruption could ever poſſeſſe men ſo vniverſally, but that ſome one muſt of neceſſity eſcape the contagion; which makes me to feare, he hath had ſome diſtaſte or blame in his paſſion, and it hath haply fortuned, that he hath judged or eſteemed of others according to himſelfe. In my Philip de Comines, there is this: In him you ſhall find a pleaſing-ſweet, and gently-gliding ſpeach, fraught with a purely-ſincere ſimplicitie, his narration pure and vnaffected, and wherein the Authours vnſpotted-good meaning doth evidently appeare, void of all maner of vanitie or oſtentation ſpeaking of himſelfe, and free from all affection or envie ſpeaking of others: his diſcourſes and perſwaſions, accompanied more with a wellmeaning zeale, and meere veritie, then with any laboured and exquiſit ſufficiencie, and allthrough, with gravitie and authoritie, repreſenting a man well-borne, and brought vp in high negotiations. Vpon the memories and hiſtorie of Monſieur du Bellay: It is ever a well-pleaſing thing, to ſee matters writen by thoſe, that have aſſaide how, & in what maner they ought to be directed and managed: yet can it not be denied, but that in both theſe Lords, there will manifeſtly appeare a great declination from a free libertie of writing, which clearely ſhineth in ancient writers of their kind: as in the Lord of Ionuille, familiar vnto Saint Lewis, Eginard, Chancellor vnto Charlemaine; and of more freſh memorie in Philip de Comines. This is rather a declamation or pleading for king Francis againſt the Emperour Charles the fifth, then an Hiſtorie. I will not believe, they have altered or changed any thing concerning the generalitie of matters, but rather to wreſt and turne the judgement of the events, many times againſt reaſon, to our advantage, and to omit whatſoever they ſuppoſed, to be doubtfull or tickliſh in their maſters life: they have made profeſſion of it witneſſe the recoylings of the Lords of Momorancy and Byron, which therein are forgotten; and which is more, you ſhall not ſo much as find the name of the Ladie of Eſtampes mentioned at all. A man may ſometimes colour, and happily hide ſecret actions, but abſolutely to conceal that, which all the world knoweth, and eſpecially ſuch things as have drawne-on publike effects, and of ſuch conſequence, it is an inexcuſable defect, or as I may ſay vnpardonable overſight. To conclude, whoſoever deſireth to have perfect information and knowledge of King Fraucis
                           
the firſt, and of the things hapned in his time, let him addreſſe himſelfe elſewhere, if he will give any credite vnto me. The profite he may reap heer, is by the particular deſtruction of the battels and exploits of warre, wherein theſe Gentlemen were preſent; ſome privie conferences, ſpeaches, or ſecret actions of ſome Princes, that then lived, and the practiſes managed, or negotiations directed by the Lord of Langeay, in whom doubtleſſe are verie many things, well-worthie to be knowne, and diverſe diſcourſes not vulgare.
                     
                     
                        The eleaventh Chapter.
                        
                           Of Crueltie.
                        
                        ME thinks vertue is another manner of thing, and much more noble than the inclinations vnto goodneſſe, which in vs are ingendered. Mindes well borne, and directed by themſelves, follow one ſame path, and in their actions repreſent the ſame viſage, that the vertuous doe. But vertue importeth, and ſoundeth ſomewhat I wot not what greater and more active, then by an happy complexion, gently and peaceably, to ſuffer it ſelfe to be led or drawne, to follow reaſon. He that through a naturall facilitie, and genuine mildneſſe, ſhould neglect or contemne injuries received, ſhould no doubt performe a rare action, and worthy commendation: But he who being toucht and ſtung to the quicke, with any wrong or offence received, ſhould arme himſelfe with reaſon againſt this furiouſly-blind deſire of revenge, and in the end after a great conflict, yeeld himſelfe maſter over-it, ſhould doubtleſſe doe much more. The firſt ſhould doe well, the other vertuouſly: the one action might be termed goodneſſe, the other vertue. For, It ſeemeth, that the verie name of vertue preſuppoſeth difficultie, and inferreth reſiſtance, and cannot well exerciſe it ſelfe without an enemie. It is peradventure the reaſon why we call God good, mightie, liberall, and juſt, but we terme him not vertuous. His workes are all voluntarie, vnforced, and without compulſion. Of Philoſophers, not onely Stoicks, but alſo Epicurians (which endearing I borrow of the common received opinion, which is falſe) whatſoever the nimble ſaying or wittie quipping of Arſeſilaus implieth, who anſwered the man that vpbraided him, how divers men went from his ſchoole to the Epicurian, but none came from thence to him: I eaſily beleeve-it (ſaid he) for, Of cocks are many capons made, but no man could ever yet make a cocke of a capon. For truly, in conſtancie, and rigor of opinions, and ſtrictneſſe of precepts, the Epicurian Sect doth in no ſort yeeld to the Stoicke. And a Stoicke acknowledging a better faith, then thoſe diſputers, who to contend with Epicurus, and make ſport with him, make him to infer and ſay what he never ment, wreſting and wyre drawing his words to a contrarie ſenſe, arguing and ſilogizing by the Grammarians priviledge, another meaning, by the maner of his ſpeach, and another opinion, then that they know he had, either in his minde, or maners, ſaith, that he left to be an Epicurian, for this one conſideration amongſt others, that he findeth their pitch to be overhigh and inacceſſible: Et ij qui 
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                               vocantur, ſunt 
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                               & 
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                               omnéſque virtutes
                           Sen. epiſt. 13. 
                           & colunt & retinent. And thoſe that are called lovers of pleaſure, are lovers of honeſtie and iuſtice, and doe both reverence and retaine all ſorts of vertue. Of Stoicke and Epicurian Philoſophers, I ſay, there are divers, who have judged, that it was not ſufficient to have the minde well placed, well ordered, and well diſpoſed vnto vertue; it was not enough to have our reſolutions and diſcourſe beyond all the affronts and checks of fortune; but that moreover, it was verie requiſite, to ſeeke for occaſions, whereby a man might come to the triall of it: They will diligently queſt and ſeek out for paine, ſmart, neceſſitie, want, and contempt, that ſo they may combate them, and keep their minde in breath: Multum ſibi adijcit virtus laceſſita. Ʋertue provoked addes much to it ſelfe. It is one of the reaſons why Epaminondas (who was of a third ſect) by a verie lawfull way refuſeth ſome riches, fortune had put into his hands, to the end (as he ſaith) he might have cauſe to ſtrive and reſiſt povertie, in which want and extremitie he ever continued after.
                        
                           Socrates did in my minde more vndantedly enure himſelfe to this humor, maintaining for his exerciſe the peeviſh frowardneſſe of his wife, then which no eſſay can be more vex-full,

and is a continuall fighting at the ſharpe. Metellus of all the Romane Senators (he onely having vndertaken with the power of vertue, to endure the violence of Saturninus Tribune of the people in Rome, who by maine force went about, to have a moſt vnjuſt law paſſe in favor of the Communaltie: by which oppoſition, having incurred all the capital paines, that Saturninus had impoſed on ſuch as ſhould refuſe it) intertained thoſe that led him to the place of execution, with ſuch ſpeeches: That to doe evill was a thing verie eaſie, and too demiſſely baſe: and to doe well where was no danger, was a common thing; but to doe well, where was both perill and oppoſition, was the peculiar office of a man of vertue. Theſe words of Metellus doe clearely repreſent vnto vs, what I would have verified; which is, that vertue reiecteth facilitie to be hir companion: And that an eaſefull, pleaſant, and declining way, by which the regular ſteps of a good inclination of nature, are directed, is not the way of true vertue. She requireth a craggie, rough, and thornie way; She would either have ſtrange difficulties to wreſtle withall (as that of Metellus) by whoſe meanes fortune hir ſelfe is pleaſed to breake the roughneſſe of his courſe; or inward encombrances, as the diſordinate appetites and imperfections of our condition bring vnto hir. Hitherto I have come at good eaſe; but at the end of this diſcourſe, one thing commeth into my minde, which is, that the ſoule of Socrates, which is abſolute the perfecteſt that ever came to my knowledge, would, according to my accompt, prove a ſoule deſerving but little commendation: For, I can perceive no maner of violence or vicious concupiſence in him: I can imagine no maner of difficultie or compulſion in the whole courſe of his vertue. I know his reaſon ſo powerfull, and ſo abſolute miſtreſſe over him, that ſhe can never give him way to any vicious deſire, and will not ſuffer it ſo much as to breed in him. To a vertue ſo exquiſit, and ſo high-raiſed as his is, I can perſwade nothing. Me thinkes I ſee it march with a victorious and triumphant pace, in pompe, and at eaſe, without let or diſturbance. If vertue cannot ſhine but by reſiſting contrarie appetites, ſhall we then ſay, it cannot paſſe without the aſſiſtance of vice, and oweth him this, that by his meanes it attaineth to honour and credit? What ſhould alſo betide of that glorious and generous Epicurian voluptuouſneſſe, that makes accompt, effeminately to pamper vertue in hir lap, and there wantonly to entertaine it, allowing it for hir recreation, ſhame, reproch, agues, povertie, death, and tortures? If I preſuppoſe, that perfect vertue is knowne by combating ſorrow, and patiently vnder-going paine, by tollerating the fits and agonies of the gout, without ſtirring out of his place; if for a neceſſarie object, I appoint hir ſharpneſſe and difficultie; what ſhall become of that vertue, which hath attained ſo high a degree, as it doth not onely deſpiſe all maner of paine, but rather rejoyceth at-it, and when a ſtrong fit of the collike ſhall aſſaile-it, to cauſe it ſelfe to be tickled; as that is, which the Epicurians have eſtabliſhed, and whereof divers amongſt them, have by their actions left moſt certaine proofes vnto-vs? As alſo others have, whom in effect I finde to have exceeded the verie rules of their diſcipline; witneſſe Cato the yonger; when I ſee him die, tearing and mangling his entrails; I cannot ſimply content my ſelfe to beleeve, that at that time, he had his ſoule wholy exempted from all trouble, or free from vexation: I cannot imagine, he did onely maintaine himſelfe in this march or courſe, which the rules of the Stoike ſect had ordained vnto him, ſetled, without ſome alteration or motion, and impaſſibilitie. There was, in my conceit, in this mans vertue overmuch cheerefulneſſe, and youthfulneſſe to ſtay there. I verily beleeve, he felt a kind of pleaſure and ſenſualitie in ſo noble an action, and that therein he more pleaſed himſelfe, then in any other, he ever performed in his life. Sic abijt è vita, vt cauſam moriendi
                           Cic. Tuſe. q
                                 •
                              . lib. 1. 
                           nactum ſe eſſe gauderet. So departed he his life, that he reioyced to have found an occaſion of death. I doe ſo conſtantly beleeve-it, that I make a doubt, whether he would have had the occaſion of ſo noble an exploit taken from him. And if the goodneſſe which induced him to embrace publike commodities more then his owne, did not bridle me, I ſhould eaſily fall into this opinion, that he thought himſelfe greatly beholding vnto fortune, to have put his vertue vnto ſo noble a triall, and to have favoured that robber, to tread the ancient libertie of his Countrie vnder foote. In which action me thinks I read a kinde of vnſpeakable joy in his minde, and a motion of extraordinarie pleaſure, joyned to a manlike voluptuouſneſſe, at what time it beheld the worthineſſe, and conſidered the generoſitie and haughtineſſe of his enterpriſe,
                        Deliberat a morte feroci
                              •
                           r.Hor. li. 1. od. 27. 29. Cleopatra.
                        
                        
                           Then moſt in fierceneſſe did he paſſe,
                           When he of death reſolved was.
                        
                        
                           not vrged or ſet-on by any hope of glorie, as the popular and effeminate judgements have judged: For, that conſideration is over baſe, to touch ſo generous, ſo haughtie, and ſo conſtant a heart; but for the beautie of the thing it ſelfe in it ſelfe, which he, who managed all the ſprings, and directed all the wards thereof, ſaw much more clearer, and in it's perfection, then we can doe. Philoſophie hath done me a pleaſure to judge, that ſo honorable an action, had been vndecently placed in any other life, then in Catoes, and that onely vnto his it appertained to make ſuch an end. Therefore did he with reaſon perſwade both his ſonne, and the Senators that accompanied him, to provide otherwiſe for themſelves. Catoni quum incredibilem natura tribuiſſet gravitatem, eámque ipſe perpetua conſtantia roboraviſſet, ſempérque in propoſito conſilio permanſiſſet: moriendum potius quàm tyranni vultus aſpiciendus erat. Whereas nature had affoorded Cato an incredible gravitie, and he had ſtrengthned it by continuall conſtancie, and ever had ſtood firme in his purpoſed deſſeignes, rather to die then behold the Tyrants face. Each death ſhould be ſuch as the life hath been. By dying we become no other then we were. I ever interpret a mans death by his life. And if a man ſhall tell me of any one vndanted in apparance, joyned vnto a weake life; I imagine it to proceed of ſome weake cauſe, and ſutable to his life. The eaſe therefore of his death, and the facilitie he had acquired by the vigor of his minde, ſhall we ſay, it ought to abate ſomething of the luſtre of his vertue? And which of thoſe, that have their ſpirites touched, be it-never ſo little, with the true tincture of Philoſophie, can content himſelfe to imagine Socrates, onely, free from feare and paſſion, in the accident of his impriſonment, of his fetters, and of his condemnation? And who doth not perceive in him, not onely conſtancie and reſolution (which were ever his ordinarie qualities) but alſo a kinde of I wot not what new contentment, and careleſſe rejoycing in his laſt behaviour, and diſcourſes? By the ſtartling at the pleaſure, which he feeleth in clawing of his legges, after his fetters were taken-off; doth he not manifeſtly declare an equall glee and joy in his ſoule, for being rid of his former incommodities, and entring into the knowledge of things to come? Cato ſhall pardon me (if he pleaſe) his death is more tragicall, and further extended, whereas this in a certaine manner is more faire and glorious. Ariſtippus anſwered thoſe, that bewailed the ſame; when I die, I pray the Gods ſend me ſuch a death. A man ſhall plainly perceive in the minds of theſe two men, and of ſuch as imitate them (for I make a queſtion whether ever they could be matched) ſo perfect an habitude vnto vertue, that it was even converted into their complexion. It is no longer a painfull vertue, nor by the ordinances of reaſon, for the maintaining of which, their minde muſt be ſtrengthned: It is the verie eſſence of their ſoule; it is hir naturall and ordinarie habite. They have made it ſuch, by a long exerciſe and obſerving the rules and precepts of Philoſophie, having lighted vpon a fa
                              ••
                           e and rich nature. Thoſe vicious paſſions, which breed in vs, finde no entrance in them. The vigor and conſtancie of their ſoules, doth ſuppreſſe and extinguiſh all manner of concupiſences, ſo ſoone as they but begin to move. Now that it be not more glorious, by an vndaunted and divine reſolution, to hinder the growth of temptations, & for a man to frame himſelfe to vertue, ſo that the verie ſeeds of vice be cleane rooted out; then by maine force to hinder their progreſſe; and having ſuffred himſelfe to be ſurpriſed by the firſt aſſaults of paſſions, to arme and bandie himſelfe, to ſtay their courſe and to ſuppreſſe them: And that this ſecond effect be not alſo much fairer, then to be ſimply ſtored with a facile and gentle nature, and of it ſelfe diſtaſted and in diſlike with licenciouſneſſe and vice, I am perſwaded there is no doubt. For, this third and laſt manner, ſeemeth in ſome ſort, to make a man innocent, but not vertuous: free from doing ill, but not ſufficiently apt to doe well. Seeing this condition is ſo neere vnto imperfection and weakneſſe, that I know not well how to cleare their confines and diſtinctions. The verie names of goodneſſe and innocencie, are for this reſpect in ſome ſort names of contempt. I ſee that many vertues, as chaſtitie, ſobrietie, and temperance, may come vnto vs by meanes of corporall defects and imbecilitie. Conſtancie in dangers (if it may be termed conſtancie) contempt of death, patiencie in misfortunes, may happen, and are often ſeen in men, for want of good judgement in ſuch accidents, and that they are not apprehended for ſuch as they are indeed. Lacke of apprehenſion and ſtupiditie, doe ſometimes counterfet vertuous effects. As I have often ſeen come to paſſe, that ſome men are commended, for things they rather deſerve to be blamed. An Italian gentleman did once hold this poſition in my preſence, to the prejudice & diſadvantage of his nation; That the ſubtiltie of the Italians, and the vivacitie of their conceptions

was ſo great, that they foreſaw ſuch dangers and accidents as might betide them ſo faroff, that it was not to be deemed ſtrange, if in times of warre, they were often ſeene to provide for their ſafetie, yea, before they had perceived the danger: That we and the Spaniards, who were not ſo warie and ſubtill, went further; and that before we could be frighted with any perill, we muſt be induced to ſee it with our eyes, and feel it with our hands, and that even then we had no more hold: But that the Germanes and Switzers, more ſhallow and leaden-headed, had ſcarce the ſenſe and wit to re-adviſe themſelves, at what time they were even overwhelmed with miſerie, and the axe readie to fall on their heades. It was peradventure but in jeſt, that he ſpake-it, yet is it moſt true, that in the arte of warre-fare, new trained Souldiers, and ſuch as are but novices in the trade, doe often headlong, and hand over head caſt themſelves into dangers, with more inconſideration, then afterward when they have ſeene and endured the firſt ſhocke, and are better trained in the ſchoole of perils.
                        —haud ignarus, quantùm nova gloria in armis, Et praedulce decus primo certamine poſſit.
                        
                           Not ignorant, how much in armes new praiſe,
                           And ſweeteſt honour, in firſt conflict weighes.
                        
                        Lo heer the reaſon why when we judge of a particular action, we muſt firſt conſider many circumſtances, and throughly obſerve the man, that hath produced the ſame before we name and cenſure it. But to ſpeake a word of my ſelfe: I have ſometimes noted my friends to terme that wiſedome in me, which was but meere fortune; and to deeme that advantage of courage and patience, that was advantage of judgement and opinion: and to attribute one title for another vnto me, ſometimes to my profit, and now and then to my loſſe. As for the reſt, I am ſo far from attaining vnto that chiefe and moſt perfect degree of excellencie, where a habitude is made of vertue, that even of the ſecond, I have made no great triall. I have not greatly ſtrived to bridle the deſires, wherewith I have found my ſelfe vrged and preſſed. My vertue, is a vertue, or to ſay better innocencie, accidentall and caſuall. Had I been borne with a leſſe regular complexion, I imagine my ſtate had been verie pittyfull, and it would have gon hard with me: for, I could never perceive any great conſtancie in my ſoule, to reſiſt and vndergoe paſſions, had they been any thing violent. I cannot foſter quarels, or endure contentions in my houſe. So am I not greatly beholding vnto my ſelfe, in that I am exempted from many vices:
                        
                           —ſi vitijs mediocribus, & mea paucis
                              Hor. li. 8. ſat. 6. 65.
                           
                           Mendoſa eſt natura, alioquirecta velut ſi
                           Egregio inſperſos reprehendas corpore naeuos.
                        
                        
                           If in a few more fault's my nature faile,
                           Right otherwiſe: as if that you would raile
                           On prettie moles well placed,
                           On bodie ſeemely graced.
                        
                        I am more endebted to my fortune, then to my reaſon for it: Shee hath made me to be borne of a race famous for integritie and honeſtie, and of a verie good father. I wot not well whether any part of his humors have deſcended into me, or whether the domeſtike examples, and good inſtitution of my infancie have inſenſibly ſet their helping hand vnto it; or whether I were otherwiſe ſo borne:
                        
                           Seu Libra, ſeu me Scorpius aſpicitHor. li. 2. od. 17. 17.
                           
                           Formidoloſus, pars violentior
                           Natalis horae, ſeu tyrannus
                           Heſperiae Capricornus vndae.
                        
                        
                           Whither the chiefe part of my birth-houre were
                           Aſcendent Libra, or Scorpius full of feare,
                           Or in my Horoſcope were Capricorne,
                           
                           Whoſe tyrannie neere weſterne Seas is borne.
                        
                        But ſo it is, that naturally of my ſelfe, I abhorre and deteſt all maner of vices. The anſwere of Antiſthenes to one, that demanded of him, which was the beſt thing to be learned: To vnlearne evill, ſeemed to be fixed on this image, or to have an ayme at this. I abhorre them (I ſay) with ſo naturall, and ſo innated an opinion, that the very ſame inſtinct and impreſſion, which I ſuckt from my nurſe, I have ſo kept, that no occaſions could ever make me alter

the ſame: No, not mine owne diſcourſes, which becauſe they have been ſomewhat laviſh in noting or taxing ſomething of the common courſe, could eaſily induce me to ſome actions, which this my naturall inclination makes me to hate. I will tell you a wonder, I will tell it you indeed: I thereby find in many things, more ſtay and order in my maners, then in my opinion: and my concupiſcence leſſe debauched, then my reaſon. Ariſtippus eſtabliſhed certaine opinions ſo bold, in favour of voluptuouſneſſe & riches, that he made all Philoſophie to mutinie againſt him. But concerning his maners, Dionyſius the tyrant, having preſented him with three faire yong Wenches, that he might chuſe the faireſt; he anſwered he would chuſe them all three, and that Paris had verie ill ſucceſſe, forſomuch as he had preferred one above hir fellowes. But they being brought to his owne houſe, he ſent them backe againe, without taſting them. His ſervant one day carrying ſtore of money after him, and being ſo over-charged with the weight of it, that he complained, his Maſter commanded him, to caſt ſo much thereof away, as troubled him. And Epicurus, whoſe poſitions are irreligious and delicate, demeaned himſelfe in his life verie laboriouſly, and devoutly. He wrote to a friend of his, that he lived but with browne bread and water, and entreated him to ſend him a piece of cheefe, againſt the time he was to make a ſolemne feaſt. May it be true, that to be perfectly good, we muſt be ſo by an hidden, naturall, and vniverſall proprietie, without law, reaſon, and example? The diſorders and exceſſes, wherein I have found my ſelfe engaged, are not (God be thanked) of the worſt. I have rejected and condemned them in my ſelfe, according to their worth; for, my judgement was never found to be infected by them. And on the other ſide, I accuſe them more rigorouſly in my ſelfe, then in an other. But that is all: as for the reſt, I applie but little reſiſtance vnto them, and ſuffer my ſelfe over-eaſily to encline to the other ſide of the Ballance, except it be to order and empeach them from being commixt with others, which (if a man take not good heed vnto himſelfe) for the moſt part entertaine and enterchaine themſelves the one with the other. As for mine, I have as much as it hath laine in my power, abridged them, and kept them as ſingle, and as alone as I could:
                        —nec vltra
                           Iuv. ſat. 
                                 •
                              . 164. 
                           Errorom foveo.—
                        
                           Nor doe I cheriſh any more,
                           The error which I bred before.
                        
                        For, as touching the Stoickes opinion, who ſay, that when the wiſe man worketh, he worketh with all his vertues together; howbeit, according to the nature of the action, there be one more apparant than others (to which purpoſe the ſimilitude of mans bodie might, in ſome ſort, ſerve their turne; for, the action of choller cannot exerciſe it ſelfe, except all the humours ſet-to their helping-hand, although choller be praedominant) if thence they will draw alike conſequence, that when the offender treſpaſſeth, he doth it with all the vices together. I doe not ſo eaſily beleeve them, or elſe I vnderſtand them not; for, in effect, I feel the contrarie. They are ſharpe-wittie ſubtilties, and without ſubſtance, about which Philoſophie doth often buſie it ſelfe. Some vices I ſhun; but otherſome I eſchew as much as any Saint can doe. The Peripatetikes doe alſo diſavow this connexitie, and indiſſoluble knitting together. And Aristotle is of opinion, That a wiſe and iust man may be both intemperate and incontinent. Socrates avowed vnto them, who in his Phiſiognomie perceived ſome inclination vnto vice, that indeed it was his naturall propenſion, but that by diſcipline he had corrected the ſame. And the familiar friends of the Philoſopher Stilpo were wont to ſay, that being borne ſubject vnto wine and women, he had, by ſtudie, brought himſelfe to abſtaine from both. On the otherſide, what good I have, I have it by the lot of my birth: I have it neither by law nor preſcription, nor by any apprentiſhip. The innocencie that is in me, is a kinde of ſimple-plaine innocencie, without vigor or arte. Amongſt all other vices, there is none I hate more, then crueltie, both by nature and judgement, as the extreameſt of all vices. But it is with ſuch an yearning and faint-hartedneſſe, that if I ſee but a chickins necke puld off, or a pigge ſtickt, I cannot chuſe but grieve, and I cannot well endure a ſeelie dew-bedabled hare to groane, when ſhe is ſeized vpon by the boundes; although hunting be a violent ſport. Thoſe that are to withſtand voluptuouſneſſe, doe willingly vſe this argument, to ſhew, it is altogether vicious and vnreaſonable: That where ſhe is in her greateſt prime and chiefe ſtrength, ſhe doth ſo over-ſway vs, that reaſon can have no acceſſe vnto vs, and for a further triall, alleage the experience we feel and have

of it, in our acquaintance or copulation with women.
                        —cùm iam praeſagit gaudia corpusL
                                 ••
                              r. lib. 4. 1097. Atque in eo eſt Ʋenus, vt muliebria conſerat arva.
                        
                           When now the bodie doth light-joyes fore-know,
                           And 
                                 Ʋenus ſet the womans fields to ſow.
                        
                        Where they thinke pleaſure doth ſo far tranſport vs beyond our ſelves, that our Diſcourſe, then altogether overwhelmed, and our reaſon wholie raviſhed in the gulfe of ſenſualitie, cannot by any meanes diſcharge her function. I know it may be otherwiſe: And if a man but pleaſe, he may ſometimes, even vpon the verie inſtant, caſt his mind on other conceits. But ſhe muſt be ſtrained to a higher key, and heedfully purſued: I know a man may gourmandize the earneſt and thought-confounding violence of that pleaſure: for I may with ſome experience ſpeake of it; and I have not found 
                              Ʋenus to be ſo imperious a goddeſſe, as many, and more reformed than my ſelfe witneſſe her to be, I thinke it not a woonder, as doth the Queene of Navarre, in one of the Tales of her Heptameron (which reſpecting the ſubject it treateth-of, is a verie prettie booke) nor doe I deeme it a matter of extreame difficultie, for a man to weare-out a whole night, in all opportunitie and libertie, in companie of a faire Miſtreſſe, long time before ſued-vnto, and by him deſired; religiouſly keeping his word, if he have engaged himſelfe, to be contented with ſimple kiſſes and plaine touching. I am of opinion, that the example of the ſport in hunting would more fit the ſame: wherein as there is leſſe pleaſure, ſo there is more diſtraction and ſurpriſing, whereby our reaſon being amazed, looſeth the leaſure to prepare her ſelfe againſt it: when as after a long queſting and beating for ſome game, the beaſt doth ſuddainly ſtart, or rowze vp before vs, and happily in ſuch a place, where we leaſt expected the ſame. That ſuddaine motion, and riding, and the earneſtneſſe of ſhowting, jubeting and hallowing, ſtill ringing in our eares, would make it verie hard for thoſe, who love that kind of cloſe or chamber-hunting, at that verie inſtant, to withdraw their thoughts elſe-where. And Poets make Diana victoriouſly to triumph both over the firebrand and arrowes of Cupid.
                        
                        
                           Quis non malarum quas amor curas habetHor. epod. 2. 37.
                           
                           Haec inter obliviſcitur?
                        
                        
                           While this is doing, who doth not forget
                           The wicked cares wherewith Loves heart doth fret?
                        
                        But to returne to my former diſcourſe, I have a verie feeling and tender compaſſion of other mens afflictions, and ſhould more eaſily weep for companie ſake, if poſſiblie for any occaſion whatſoever, I could ſhed teares. There is nothing ſooner mooveth teares in me, then to ſee others weepe, not onely fainedly, but howſoever, whether truely or forcedly. I do not greatly waile for the dead, but rather envie them. Yet doe I much waile and moane the dying. The Canibales and ſavage people do not ſo much offend me with roaſting and eating of dead bodies, as thoſe, which torment and perſecute the living. Let any man be executed by law, how deſervedly ſoever, I cannot endure to behold the execution with an vnrelenting eye. Some one going about to witneſſe the clemencie of Iulius Caeſar; He was (ſaith he) tractable & milde in matters of revenge. Having compelled the Pirates to yeeld themſelves vnto him, who had before taken him priſoner, and put him to ranſome, foraſmuch as he had threatned to have them all crucified, he condemned them to that kind of death, but it was after he had cauſed them to be ſtrangled. Philomon his ſecretarie, who would have poyſoned him, had no ſharper puniſhment of him, then an ordinarie death. Without mencioning the Latin Author, who for a teſtimonie of clemencie dareth to alleage, the onely killing of thoſe, by whom a man hath been offended, it may eaſily be gheſſed, that he is tainted with vile and horrible examples of crueltie, ſuch as Romane Tyrants brought into faſhion. As for me, even in matters of juſtice, Whatſoever is beyond a ſimple death, I deeme it to be meere crueltie: And eſpecially amongſt vs, who ought to have a regardfull reſpect, that their ſoules ſhould be ſent to heaven, which cannot be, having firſt by intollerable tortures agitated, and as it were brought them to diſpaire. A Souldier, not long ſince, being a priſoner, and perceiving from a loft a Tower, where he was kept, that ſtore of people flocked together on a greene, and Carpenters were buſie at worke to erect a skaffold, ſuppoſing the ſame to be for him, as one deſperat, reſolved to kill himſelfe, and ſearching vp and downe for ſome thing to make himſelfe away, found nothing but an old ruſtie cart-naile, which fortune preſented

him with; he tooke it, and therewithall, with all the ſtrength he had, ſtrooke and wounded himſelfe twice in the throat, but ſeeing it would not rid him of life, he then thruſt it into his bellie vp to the head, where he left it faſt-ſticking. Shortly after, one of his keepers comming-in vnto him, and yet living, finding him in that miſerable plight, but weltring in his goare-blood, and readie to gaſpe his laſt, told the Magiſtrates of it, which, to prevent time before he ſhould die, haſtned to pronounce ſentence againſt him: which when he heard, and that he was onely condemned to have his head cut-off, he ſeemed to take heart of grace againe, and to be ſorie for what he had done, and tooke ſome comfortable drinks, which before he had refuſed, greatly thanking the Iudges for his vnhoped gentle condemnation: And told them, that for feare of a more ſharply-cruell, and intollerable death by law, he had reſolved to prevent-it by ſome violent manner of death, having by the preparations he had ſeen the Carpenters make, and by gathering of people together, conceived an opinion, that they would torture him with ſome horrible torment, and ſeemed to be delivered from death, onely by the change of it. Were I worthie to give counſell, I would have theſe examples of rigor, by which ſuperior powers goe about to keep the common people in awe, to be onely exerciſed on the bodies of criminall malefactors: For, to ſee them deprived of chriſtian buriall, to ſee them haled, disbowelled, parboyled, and quartered, might happly touch the common ſort as much, as the paines, they make the living to endure: howbeit in effect it be little or nothing, as ſaith God, Qui corpus occidunt, & poſtea non habent quod faciant.
                           Luke 12. 4. 
                           Thoſe that kill the bodie, but have afterwards no more to doe: And Poets make the horror of this picture greatly to prevaile, yea, and above death,Ci
                                 •
                              . Tuſc. qu. lib. 1.
                        
                        
                           Hen reliquias ſemiaſſi Regis, denudatis oſſibus,
                           Per terram ſanie delibutas foede divexarier.
                        
                        
                           O that the reliques of an halfe-burn't King, bones bared,
                           On earth beſmear'd with filth, ſhould be ſo fouly marred.
                        
                        It was my fortune to be at Rome, vpon a day that one Catena, a notorious high-way theeſe, was executed: at his ſtrangling no man of the companie ſeemed to be mooved to any ruth; but when he came to be quartered, the Executioner gave no blow that was not accompanied with a pitteous voyce, and hartie exclamation, as if every man had had a feeling ſympathie, or lent his ſenſes to the poore mangled wretch. Such inhumane outrages and barbarous exceſſes ſhould be exerciſed againſt the rinde, and not practiſed againſt the quicke. In a caſe ſomewhat like vnto this, did Artaxerces aſſwage and mittigate the ſharpneſſe of the ancient lawes of Perſia, appointing that the Lords, which had treſpaſſed in their eſtate, whereas they were wont to be whipped, they ſhould be ſtripped naked, and their clothes whipped for them: and where they were accuſtomed to have their haire pulled-off, they ſhould onely have their hat taken off. The Aegyptians ſo devout and religious, thought they did ſufficiently ſatiſfie divine Iuſtice, in ſacrificing painted and counterfait hogges vnto it: An over-hardy invention, to go about with pictures & ſhadowes to appeaſe God, a ſubſtance ſo eſſentiall and divine. I live in an age, wherein we abound with incredible examples of this vice, through the licentiouſneſſe of our civill and inteſtine warres: And read all ancient ſtories, be they never ſo tragicall, you ſhall find none to equall thoſe, we daily ſee practiſed. But that hath nothing made me acquainted with it. I could hardly be perſwaded, before I had ſeene it, that the world could have afforded ſo marble-hearted and ſavage-minded men, that for the onely pleaſure of murther would commit-it; then cut, mangle, and hacke other members in pieces: to rouze and ſharpen their wits, to invent vnuſed tortures and vnheard-of torments; to deviſe new and vnknowne deathes, and that in cold blood, without any former enmitie or quarrell, or without any gaine or profite; and onely to this end, that they may enjoy the pleaſing ſpectacle of the languiſhing geſtures, pittifull motions, horror-moving yellings, deep▪fetcht groanes, and lamentable voyces of a dying and drooping man. For, that is the extreameſt point whereunto the crueltie of man may attaine. 
                              Ʋt homo hominem, non iratus, non timens, tantum ſpectaturus
                           
                              Sen. cl
                                    ••
                                 . lib. 
                              
                                 •
                              . c. 4. 
                           occidat. That one man ſhould kill another, neither being angrie, nor afeard, but onely to looke on. As for me, I could never ſo much as endure, without remorſe and griefe, to ſee a poore, ſillie, and innocent beaſt purſued and killed, which is harmeleſſe and voide of defence, and of whom we receive no offence at all. And as it commonly hapneth, that when the Stag begins to be emboſt, and finds his ſtrength to faile-him, having no other remedie

left him, doth yeeld and bequeath himſelfe vnto vs that purſue him, with teares ſuing to vs for mercie.
                        —queſtúque cruentusVirg. Ae
                                 •
                              . li. 7. 521. Atque imploranti ſimilis▪
                        
                        
                           With blood from throat, and teares from eyes,
                           It ſeemes that he for pittie cryes.
                        
                        was ever a grievous ſpectacle vnto me. I ſeldom take any beaſt alive, but I give him his libertie. Pythagoras was wont to buy fiſhes of fiſhers, and birds of fowlers to ſet them free againe.
                        —primóque à cade ferarumOvid. Metam. lib. 15. 106. Incaluiſſe puto maculatum ſanguine ferrum.
                        
                           And firſt our blades in blood embrude I deeme
                           With ſlaughter of poore beaſts did reeking ſteeme.
                        
                        
                           Such as by nature ſhew themſelves bloodie-minded towards harmleſſe beaſts, witneſſe a naturall propenſion vnto crueltie. After the ancient Romanes had once enured themſelves without horror to behold the ſlaughter of wilde beaſts in their ſhewes, they came to the murther of men and Gladiators. Nature (I feare me) hath of hir owne ſelfe added vnto man a certaine inſtinct to humanitie. No man taketh delight to ſee wilde beaſts ſport and wantonly to make much one of another: Yet all are pleaſed to ſee them tugge, mangle, and enterteare one an other. And leaſt any bodie ſhould jeaſt at this ſimphathie, which I have with them. Divinitie it ſelfe willeth vs to ſhew them ſome favour: And conſidering, that one ſelfe-ſame maſter (I meane that incomprehenſible worlds-framer) hath placed all creatures in this his woondrous pallace for his ſervice, and that they, as well as we, are of his houſhold: I ſay, it hath ſome reaſon to injoyne vs, to ſhew ſome reſpect and affection towards them. Pythagoras borrowed Metempſychoſis of the Aegyptians, but ſince, it hath been received of divers Nations, and eſpecially of our Druides:
                        
                        
                           Morte carent animae, ſempérque priore relictâ158.
                           
                           Sede, novis domibus vi
                                 ••
                              nt, habitánque receptae.
                        
                        
                           Our death-leſſe ſoules, their former ſeats refrained,
                           In harbors new live and lodge entertained.
                        
                        The Religion of our ancient Gaules, inferred, that ſoules being eternall, ceaſed not to remove and change place, from one bodie to another: to which fantaſie was alſo entermixed ſome conſideration of divine juſtice. For, according to the ſoules behaviors, during the time ſhe had been with Alexander, they ſaid, that God appointed-it another bodie to dwell-in, either more or leſſe painfull, and ſutable to hir condition.
                        
                           —muta ferarum
                              Clau
                                    •
                                 . in Ruff. lib. 1 482.
                           
                           Cogit vincla pat
                                 •
                              , truculentos ingerit vrſis,
                           Praedonéſ
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               lupis, fallaces vulpibus addit.
                           Atque vbi per varios annos per mille figuras
                           Egit let
                                 •
                              e
                                 •
                               purgatos flumine tandem
                           Rurſus ad humanae revocat primordia formae.
                        
                        
                           Dumbe bands of beaſts he makes mens ſoules endure,491.
                           
                           Blood-thirſtie ſoules he doth to Beares enure,
                           Craftie to Foxes, to Woolves bent to rapes;
                           Thus when for many yeares, through many ſhapes,
                           He hath them driv'n in Lethe lake at laſt,
                           Them purg'd he turn's to mans forme whence they paſt.
                        
                        If the ſoule had been valiant, they placed-it in the bodie of a Lion; if voluptuous, in a Swine; if faint-harted, in a Stagge, or a Hare; if malicious in a Foxe, and ſo of the reſt, vntill that being purified by this puniſhment, it reaſſumed and tooke the bodie of ſome other man againe.
                        
                           Ipſe ego, nam memini, Troiani tempore belliOvid. M
                                    •
                                 ta
                                    •
                                 . lib. 15. 160.
                           
                           Panthoides Euphorbus eram.
                        
                        
                           When Troy was won, I, as I call to mind,
                           Euphorbus was, and Panthus ſonne by kind.
                        
                        As touching that alliance betweene vs and beaſts, I make no great accompt of-it, nor do I greatly admit it; neither of that which divers Nations, and namely of the moſt ancient and

noble, who have not onely received beaſtes into their ſocietie, and company, but allowed them a place farre aboue themſelves; ſometimes deeming them to bee familiars and favored of their Gods, and holding them in a certaine awfull reſpect and reverence, more then humane, and others acknowledging no other God, nor no other Divinitie, then they. Beluae
                           Cic. Nat. Deor. lib. 1. 
                           à barbaris propter beneficium conſecratae. Beasts by the Barbarians were made ſacred for ſome benefit.
                        
                        
                           —crocodilon adorat
                           
                           Pars haec, illa pavet ſaturam ſerpentibus Ibin,Iuven. ſat. 15 
                                    •
                                 
                              
                           
                           Effigies ſacri hic nitet aurea Cercopitheci.
                        
                        
                           This country doth the Crocodile adore,
                           That feares the Storke glutted with ſerpents goare,
                           The ſacred Babion here▪
                           
                           In gold ſhape doth appeare.
                        
                        —hic piſcem fluminis, illic Oppida tota canem venerantur.
                           7.
                        
                        
                           A fiſh here, whole Townes reverence moſt
                           A Dogge they honor in that coaſt.
                        
                        And the very ſame interpretation, that Plutarke giveth vnto this error, which is very well taken, is alſo honorable for them. For, he ſaith, that (for example-ſake,) it was neither the Cat nor the oxe, that the Egyptians adored; but that in thoſe beaſts, they worſhipped ſome image of divine faculties. In this patience and vtility, and in that, vivacity, or (as our neighbours the Borgonians with all Germany) the impatience to ſee themſelves ſhut-vp: Whereby they repreſented the liberty, which they loved and adored, beyond all other divine facultie, and ſo of others. But when amongſt the moſt moderate opinions, I meete with ſome diſcourſes, that goe about and labour to ſhew, the neere reſemblance betweene vs and beaſtes, and what ſhare they have in our greateſt Priviledges, and with how much likely-hood they are compared vnto vs, truely I abate much of our preſumption, and am eaſily removed from that imaginary Soveraigntie, that ſome give and aſcribe vnto vs aboue all other creatures. If all that were to be contradicted, yet is there a kind of reſpect, and a general duty of humanitie, which tieth vs, not only vnto brute beaſts that have life and ſenſe, but even vnto trees and plants. Vnto men we owe Iustice, and to all other creatures, that are capable of it, grace and benignitie. There is a kinde of enter-changeable commerce and mutuall bond between them and vs. I am not aſhamed nor affraide to declare the tenderneſſe of my childiſh Nature, which is ſuch, that I cannot well reject my Dog, if he chance (although out of ſeaſon) to fawne vpon me, or begge of mee to play with him. The Turkes have almes, and certaine Hoſpitalls appoynted for brute beaſts. The Romans had a publike care to breed and nouriſh Geeſe, by whoſe vigilancy their Capitoll had beene ſaved. The Athenians did precizely ordaine, that all maner of Mules, which had ſerved or beene emploied about the building of their Temple, called Hecatompedon, ſhould be free, and ſuffered to feede whereſoever they pleaſed, without any let or empeachment. The Agrigentines had an ordinary cuſtome, ſeriouſly and ſolemnly to bury all ſuch beaſts, as they had held deare; as horſes of rare worth and merit, ſpeciall dogs, choiſe or profitable birds, or ſuch as had but ſerved to make their children ſport. And the ſumptuous magnificence, which in all other things was ordinary and peculiar vnto them, appeared alſo almoſt notably in the ſtately ſumptuouſneſſe, and coſtly number of monuments erected to that end, which many ages after have endured and been maintained in pride and ſtate. The Aegyptians were wont to bury their Woolues, their Dogges, their Cats, their Beares, and Crocodiles in holy places, embalming their carcaſſes, and at their deaths to were mourning weedes for them. Cymon cauſed a ſtately-honourable toombe to be errected for the Mares, wherewith he had three times gained the prize at running in the Olimpike games. Ancient Xantippus cauſed his Dogge to be enterred vpon a hill by the ſea ſhoare, which ever ſince hath beene named by him. And Plutarke (as himſelfe ſaith) made it a matter of conſcience, in hope of a ſmall gaine, to ſell or ſend an Oxe to the ſhambles, that had ſerved him a long time.
                     
                     
                        
                        The twelfth Chapter.
                        
                           An Apologie of Raymond Sebond.
                           
                        
                        KNowledge is withoutall contradiction, a moſt profitable and chiefe ornament: Thoſe who deſpiſe it declare evidently their ſottiſhneſſe: Yet doe not Ivalue it at ſo exceſſive a rate, as ſome have done; namely Herillus the Philoſopher, who grounded his chiefe felicity vpon it, and held that it lay in hir power to make vs content and wiſe: which I cannot beleeve, nor that which others have ſaid, that Knowledge is the mother of all vertue, and that all vice proceedeth of ignorance. Which if it be, it is ſubject to a large interpretation. My houſe hath long ſince ever ſtood open to men of vnderſtanding, and is very well knowne to many of them: for, my father, who commanded the ſame fifty yeeres and vpward, ſet on fire by that new kind of earneſtneſſe, wherewith King Francis the firſt embraced Letters, and raiſed them vnto credite, did with great diligence, and much coſt, endevour to purchaſe the acquaintance of learned men: receiving and entertaining them as holy perſons, and who had ſome particular inſpiration of divine wiſedome; collecting their ſentences and diſcourſes, as if they had beene Oracles; and with ſo much more reverence and religious regard, by how much leſſe authority he had to judge of them: for, he had no knowledge of Letters, no more than his predeceſſors before him. As for me, I love them indeed, but yet I worſhip them not. Amongſt others, Peter Bunel (a man in his time, by reaſon of his learning, of high eſteeme) having ſo journed a few daies at Montagne with my father, and others of his coate, being ready to depart thence, preſented him with a booke entituled Theologia naturalis; five liber creatur arum magistri Raimondi de Scbonda. And for ſomuch as the Italian and Spaniſh tongues were very familiar vnto him, and that the booke was written in a kind of latinized Spaniſh, whereof diverſe words had Latine terminations; he hoped, that with little aide, he might reape no ſmall profite by it, and commended the ſame very much vnto him, as a booke moſt profitable, and fitting the daies in which he gave it him. It was even at what time the new-fangles of Luther began to creepe in favour, and in many places to ſhake the foundation of our ancient beliefe. Wherein he ſeemed to be well adviſed, as he who by diſcourſe of reaſon fore-ſaw, that this budding diſeaſe would eaſily turne to an execrable Atheiſme: For, the vulgar wanting the faculty to judge of things by themſelves, ſuffering it ſelfe to be carried away by fortune, and led-on by outward apparances, if once it be poſſeſſed with the boldneſſe to deſpiſe, and malapertneſſe to impugne the opinions, which to fore it held in awefull reverence (as are thoſe wherein conſiſteth their ſalvation) and that ſome articles of their religion be made doubtfull and queſtionable, they will ſoone and eaſily admit an equall vncertainty in all other parts of their beliefe, as they that had no other grounded authority or foundation, but ſuch as are now ſhaken and weakned, and immediately reject (as a tyrannicall yoke) all impreſſions, they had in former times received by the authority of Lawes, or reverence of ancient cuſtome,
                        Nam cupidè conculcatur nimis anté metutum
                        Lutr. l. 5. 1150
                        
                           That which we fear'd before too much,
                           We gladly ſcorne when tis not ſuch.
                        
                        vndertaking thence-forward to allow of nothing, except they have firſt given their voice and particular conſent to the ſame. My father, a few-daies before his death, lighting by chance vpon this booke, which before he had neglected, amongſt other writings commanded mee to tranſlate the ſame into French. It is eaſie to tranſlate ſuch authors, where nothing but the matter is to be repreſented; but hard and dangerous, to vndertake ſuch as have added much to the grace and elegancy of the language, namely to reduce them into a weaker and poorer tongue. It was a ſtrange taske, and new occupation for mee: but by fortune beeing then at leiſure, and vnable to gaineſay the commandement of the beſt father that ever was; I came ere long (as well as I could) to an end of it: wherein he tooke ſingular delight, and commanded the ſame to be printed, which accordingly was after his deceaſe performed. I found the

conceits of the author to be excellent, the contexture of his worke well followed, and his project full of pietie. Now foraſmuh as diverſe ammuſe themſelves to reade-it, and eſpecially Ladies, to whom we owe moſt ſervice, it hath often beene my hap to help them, when they were reading it, to diſcharge the booke of two principall objections, which are brought againſt the ſame. His drift is bold, and his ſcope adventurous; for he vndertaketh by humane and naturall reaſons, to eſtabliſh and verifie all the articles of Chriſtian religion againſt Atheiſts. Wherein (to ſay truth) I find him ſo reſolute and ſo happy, as I deeme it a thing impoſſible to doe better in that argument, and thinke that none equalleth him. Which booke ſeeming to me both over-rich and exquiſite, being written by an aucthor, whoſe name is ſo little knowne, and of whom. all we know, is, that he was a Spaniard, who about two hundred yeeres ſince profeſſed Phiſicke in Thoulouſe. I demanded once of Adrianus Turnebue (a man who knew all things) what ſuch a booke might be, who anſwered, that he deemed the ſame to be ſome Quinteſſence extracted from out Saint Thomas Aquinas: For, in good truth, onely ſuch a ſpirit fraught with ſo infinite erudition, and ſo full of admirable ſubtilitie, was capable of ſuch and ſo rare imaginations. So it is, that whoſoever be the authour or deviſer of it (the title whereof ought not without further reaſon to be taken from Sebond) he was a very ſufficient-worthie man, and endowed with ſundry other excellent qualities. The firſt thing he is reproved for in his Booke, is, that Chriſtians wrong themſelves much, in that
                           The firſt Obiection. 
                           they ground their beliefe vpon humane reaſons, which is conceived but by faith, and by a particular inſpiration of God. Which objection ſeemeth to containe ſome zeale of pietie; by reaſon whereof we ought with ſo much more mildnes and regarde, endevour to ſatisfie them that propoſe it. It were a charge, more befitting a man converſant, and ſutable to one acquainted with the holy Scriptures, than me, who am altogether ignorant in them. Nevertheleſſe I thinke, that even as to a matter ſo divine and high and ſo much exceeding al humane vnderſtanding, as is this Verity, wherewith it hath pleaſed the goodneſſe of God to enlighten vs, it is moſt requiſite, that he affoord and lend vs his helpe. And that, with an extraordinary and priviledged favour, that ſo we may the better conceive and entertaine the ſame: For, I ſuppoſe that meanes meerely humane can no way be capable of it; which if they were; ſo many rare and excellent mindes, and ſo plenteouſly ſtored with naturall faculties, as have beene in times paſt, would never by their diſcourſe, have miſt the attayning of this knowledge. It is faith onely, which lively and aſſiuredly embraceth the high mysteries of our Religion. And no man can doubt, but that it is a moſt excellent and commendable enterpriſe, properly to accommodate and fit to the ſervice of our faith, the natural helpes and humane implements which God hath beſtowed vpon vs. And no queſtion is to be made, but that it is the moſt honourable employment we can put them vnto; and that there is no occupation or intent more worthy a good Chriſtian, than by all meanes, ſtudies and imaginations, carefully to endevour, how to embelliſh, amplifie and extend the trueth of his beliefe and religion. It is not enough for vs to ſerve God in ſpirit and ſoule, we owe him beſides, and wee yeelde vnto him a corporall worſhiping; we applie our limmes, our motions, and all externall things, to honour him. The like ought to be done, and we ſhould accompany our faith with all the reaſon we poſſeſſe: Yet alwayes with this proviſo, that we thinke it doth not depend of-vs, and that all our ſtrength and arguments can never attaine to ſo ſupernaturall and divine a knowledge: Except it ſeize vpon vs, and as it were enter into vs by an extraordinarie infuſion: And vnleſſe it alſo enter into vs, not onely by diſcourſe, but alſo by humane meanes, ſhe is not in her dignitie, nor in her glorie. And verely I feare therfore, that except this waie, we ſhould not enjoy-it. Had we faſt-holde on God, by the enterpoſition of a lively faith; had we hold-faſt on God by himſelfe, and not by vs; had we a divine foundation, then ſhould not humane and worldly occaſions have the power ſo to ſhake and totter-vs, as they have. Our hold would not then yeeld to ſo weake a batterie: The love of noveltie; the conſtraint of Princes; the good ſucceſſe of one partie; the raſh and caſuall changing of our opinions, ſhould not then have the power to ſhake and alter our beliefe. We ſhould not ſuffer the ſame to be trouble at the will and pleaſure of a new argument, and at the perſwaſion, no, not of all the rhetorike that ever was: we ſhould withſtand theſe boiſtrous billowes with an inflexible and vnmoveable conſtancie:
                        
                           Illiſos fluctus rupes, vt vaſta refundit,Virg. Aen. l. 7. 587.
                           
                           Et varias circumlatrantes diſſipat vndas
                           
                              —Moſeſua.
                           
                        
                        
                           As huge rocks doe regorgeth invective waves,
                           And diſſipate the billowes brawling braves,
                           Which theſe gainſt thoſe ſtill bellow out,
                           Thoſe being big and ſtanding ſtout.
                        
                        If this raie of Divinitie did in any ſort touch vs, it would everie where appeare: Not only our words, but our actions, would beare ſome ſhew and luſtre of it. Whatſoever ſhould proceede from vs, might be ſeene inlightned with this noble and matchles brightnes. We ſhould bluſh for ſhame, that in humane ſects, there was never any ſo factions, what difficultie or ſtrangeneſſe ſoever his doctrine maintained, but would in ſome ſort conforme his behaviors and ſquare his life vnto it: Whereas ſo diuine and heavenly an inſtution never markes chriſtians but by the tongue. And will you ſee whether it be ſo? Compare but our maners vnto a Turke, or a Pagan, and we muſt needes yeeld vnto them: Whereas in reſpect of our religions ſuperioritie, we ought by much, yea by an incomparable diſtance, out-ſhine them in excellencie: And well might a man ſay, Are they ſo iust, ſo charitable, and ſo good? Then muſt they be Chriſtians. All other outward ſhewes and exterior apparences are common to all religions: As hope, affiance, events, ceremonies, penitence and martyrdome. The peculiar badge of our truth ſhould be vertiue; As it is the heavenlieſt and moſt difficult marke, and worthieſt production of Verity it ſelf. And therefore was our good Saint Lewis in the right, when that Tartarian king, who was become a Chriſtian, intended to come to Lions, to kiſſe the Popes feet, and there to view the ſanctitie he hoped to find in our lives and manners, inſtantly to divert him from it, fearing leſt our diſſolure manners, and licentious kind of life, might ſcandalize him, and ſo alter his opinion fore-conceived of ſo ſacred a religion. How beit the contrary happened to another, who for the ſame effect being come to Rome and there viewing the diſoluteneſſe of the prelates and people of thoſe dayes, was ſo much the more confirmed in our religion; conſidering with himſelfe what force and divinity it muſt of conſequence have, ſince it was able, amidſt ſo many corruptions, and ſo vicioſly-poluted hands, to maintaine her dignitie and ſplendor. Had we but one onely graine of faith, wee ſhould then be able to remoove mountaines from out their place. ſaith the holy Writ. Our actions being guided, and accompanied with divinitie, ſhould not then be meerely humane, but even as our beliefe, containe ſome wonder-cauſing thing. Brevis eſt institutio vitae honeſtae beatae
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                              , ſi credas. The inſtitution of an honeſt and bleſſed life is but ſhort, if a man beleeve. Some make the worlde beleeve, that they beleeve things they never do. Others (and they are the greater number) perſwade themſelves they doe ſo, as vnable to conceive what it is to beleeve. We thinke it ſtrange if in warres, which at this time doe ſo oppreſſe our ſtate, we ſee the events to floate ſo ſtrangly, and with ſo common and ordinarie a manner to change and alter: The reaſon is, we adde nothing vnto it but our owne. Iuſtice, which is on the one ſide, is vſed but for a cloake and ornament; ſhe is indeede alleadged, but nor received, nor harboured, nor wedded. She is as in the mouth of a Lawyer, and not as ſhe ought in the heart and affection of the partie. God oweth his extraordinarie aſſiſtance vnto faith and religion, and not to our paſſions. Men are but directors vnto-it and vſe religion for a ſhew: It ought to be cleane contrarie. Doe but marke if we doe not handle it as it were a peece of waxe, from our ſo right and ſo firme a rule, to drawe ſo many contrary ſhapes. When was this better ſeene than now-adaies in France? Thoſe which have taken it on the left, and thoſe who have taken it on the right hand; Such as ſpeake the falſe, and ſuch who ſpeake the truth of it, do ſo alike employ and fit the ſame to their violent and ambitious enterpriſes, proceede vnto it with ſo conformable a proceeding in riotouſnes and injuſtice, they make the diverſitie they pretend in their opinions doubtfull, and hard to be believed, in a thing from which depends the conduct and law of our life. Can a man ſee from one ſame Schoole and Diſcipline, more vnited and like cuſtomes and faſnions to proceed? View but the horrible impudencie wherewith we toſſe divine reaſons to and fro, and how irreligiouſly wee have both rejected and taken them againe, according as fortune hath in theſe publike ſtormes tranſported vs from place to place. This ſolemne propoſition; Whether it be lawfull for a ſubiect, for the defence of religion, to rebell and take armes againſt his Prince: Call but to minde, in what mouthes but a twelve-moneth agoe the affirmative of the ſame was the chiefe piller of the one part; the negative was the maine-vnderproppe of the other: And liſten now from whence commeth

the voyce and inſtruction of one and other: and whether armes clatter and clang leſſe for this, than for that cauſe. And we burne thoſe men, which ſay, that truth muſt be made to abide the yoke of our neede: And how much worſe doth France, than ſpeake it? Let vs confeſſe the truth? he that from out this lawfull army ſhould cull out, firſt thoſe who follow it for meere zeale of a religious affection, then ſuch as only regard the defence and protection of their countries lawes, or ſervice of their Prince; whether hee could ever erect a compleate company of armed men. How comes it to paſſe, that ſo few are found, who have ſtill held one ſame wil and progreſſe in our publike revolutions, and that we ſee them now and then but faintly, and ſometimes, as faſt as they can headlong to runne into the action? And the ſame men, now by their violence and raſhneſſe, and now through their ſlownes, demiſſnes, and heavines to ſpoile, and as it were overthrow our affaires, but that they are thruſt into them by caſuall motives, and particular conſideration, according to the diverſities wherewith they are moved? I plainely perceive, we lend nothing vnto devotion but the offices that flatter our paſſions. There is no hoſtilitie ſo excellent, as that which is abſolutly Chriſtian. Our zeale worketh wonders, when ever it ſecondeth our inclination toward hatred, crueltie, ambition, avarice, detraction, or rebellion. Towards goodnes, benignitie, or temperance, it goeth but ſlowly, and againſt the haire, except miraculouſly, ſome rare complexion leade him vnto it, it neither runnes nor flieth to it. Our religion was ordained to root out vices, but it ſhrowdeth, foſtreth and provoketh them. As commonly wee ſay, We muſt not make a foole of God. Did wee believe in him, I ſay not through faith, but with a ſimple beliefe, yea (I ſpeake it to our confuſion) did we but believe and know him, as wee doe another ſtorie, or as one of our companions, we ſhould then love him aboue all other things, by reaſon of the infinite goodnes, and vnſpeakable beauty that is, and ſhines in him: Had he but the ſame place in our affections, that riches, pleaſures, glory and our friends have: The beſt of vs doth not ſo much feare to wrong him, as he doth to injurie his neighbour, his kinſman, or his maiſter. Is there ſo ſimple a minde, who on the one ſide having before him the obiect of one of our vicious pleaſures, and on the other to his full viewe, perfect knowledge and aſſured perſwaſion, the ſtate of an immortall glorie, that would enter into contention of one for the other? And if we often refuſe it through meere contempt: for what drawes vsto blaſpheming, vnleſſe it be at all adventures, the deſire itſelfe of the offence? The Philoſopher Antiſthenes, when he was initiated in the myſteries of Orpheus, the prieſt; ſaying, vnto him, that ſuch as vowed themſelves to that religion, ſhould after death receive eternall and perfect felicities, replied, if thou believe-it, why doſt thou not die thy ſelf? Diogenes more roughly (as his manner was) and further from our purpoſe, anſwered the prieſt, who perſwaded him to be one of his order, that ſo he might come vnto, and attaine the happineſſe of the other world: Wilt thou have me believe, that thoſe famous men Ageſilaus and Epaminondas, ſhall be miſerable, and that thou, who art but an aſſe, and doſt nothing of any worth, ſhalt be happy, becauſe thou art a Prieſt? Did we but receive theſe large promiſes of everlaſting bleſſednes with like authoritie, as we do a philoſophicall diſcourſe, we ſhould not then have death in that horror as we have:
                        
                           Non iamſe moriens diſſolvi conquereretur,Luer. l. 3. 630.
                           
                           Sed magis ire foras, vestem
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               relinquere vt an
                                 •
                              uis
                           Gauderet, praelonga ſenex aut cornua cervus.
                        
                        
                           He would not now complaine to be diſſolved dying,
                           But rather more rejoice, that now he is forth-flying,
                           Or as a Snake his coate out-worne,
                           Or as old Harts, doth caſt his horne.
                        
                        I will be diſſolved ſhould we ſay, and be with Ieſus Christ. The forcible power of Platoes diſcourſe, of the immortality of the ſoule, provoked diverſe of his Schollers vnto death, that ſo they might more ſpeedily enjoy the hopes he told them of. All which is a moſt evident token, that we receive our religion, but according to our faſhion, and by our owne hands, and no otherwiſe than other religions are received. We are placed in the country, where it was in vſe; where we regard hir antiquity, or the authority of thoſe who have maintained hir; where we feare the menaces wherewith ſhe threatneth all miſ-beleevers, or follow hir promiſes. The conſiderations ought to be applied and employed to our beleefe, but as Subſidiaries: they be humane bondes. Another Country, other Teſtimonies, equall promiſes:

alike menaces, mighe ſemblably imprint a cleane contrary religion in vs: weare chriſtians by the ſame title, as we are either Perigordins or Germans. And as Plato ſaith, There are 
                                 •
                              ew ſo confirmed in Atheiſme, but ſome great danger will bring vnto the knowledge of Gods divine power. The parte doth not touch or concernea good Chriſtian: It is for mortall and worldly religions, to be received by a humane convoy. What faith is that like to be, which cowardice of heart doth plant, and weakneſſe eſtabliſh in vs! A goodly faith, that believes that which it beleeveth, onely becauſe it wanteth the courage not to beleeve the ſame. A vicious paſſion, as that of inconſtancie and aſtoniſhment is, can it poſſibly ground any regular production in our mindes or ſoules? They eſtabliſh (ſaith he) by the reaſon of their judgement, that whatſoever is reported of hell, or of after-comming paines, is but a fiction; but the occaſions to make triall of it, offering it ſelfe, at what time age or ſickenes doth ſommon them to death: the errour of the ſame, through the horrour of their future condition, doth then repleniſh them with an other kinde of beleefe. And becauſe ſuch impreſſions make mens hearts fearefull, hee by his lawes, inhibiteth all inſtruction of ſuch threats, and the perſwaſion, that any evill may come vnto man from the Gods, except for his greater good, and for a medicinable effect, whenſoever he falleth into-it. The report of Bion, that being infected with the Athieſmes of Theodorus, he had for along time made but a mockerie of religious men; but when death did once ſeize vpon him, he yeelded vnto the extreameſt ſuperſtions: As if the Gods would either be remooved, or come againe, according to Bions buſineſſe. Plato and theſe examples conclude, that wee are brought to beleeve in God, either by reaſon, or by compulſion. Atheiſme being a propoſition, as vnnaturall and monſtrous as it is harde and vneaſie to be eſtabliſhed in any mans minde, how inſolent and vnruly ſoever hee may be. Many have beene ſeene, to have conceived, either through vanitie or fierceneſſe, ſtrange and ſeld-knowne opinions, as if they would become reformers of the world, by affecting a profeſſion onely in countenaunce: who though they be ſufficiently fooliſh, yet are they not powerfull enough, to ground or ſettle it in their conſciences. Yet will not ſuch leave to liſt-vp their joyned hands to heaven, give them but a ſ
                              •
                           occado on their breaſt: and when feare ſhall have ſuppreſt, or ſickeneſſe vanquiſhed this licentious fervour of a wavering minde, then will they ſuffer themſelves gently to be reclaimed, and diſcreetly to be perſwaded, to give credite vnto true beliefe and publike examples. A decree ſeriouſly digeſted is one thing, and theſe ſhallow and ſuperficiall impreſſions another, which bred by the diſſolutneſſe of a looſe ſpirit, do raſhly and vncertainely floate vp and downe the fantaſie of a man. Oh men moſt braine-ſicke and miſerable, that endevour to be worſe than they can! The errour of Paganiſme, and the ignorance of our ſacred trueth, was the cauſe of this great ſoules-fall; but onely great in worldly greatnes; alſo in this next abuſe, which is, that children and olde men, are found to be more ſuſceptible or capable of religion, as if it were bredde and had her credite from our imbecilitie. The bond which ſhould binde our iudgement, tie our will, enforce and ioyne our ſoules to cur Creator, ſhould be a bond taking his doubling and forces, not from our conſiderations, reaſons and paſſions, but from a divine and ſupernaturall compulſion, having but one forme, one countenance, and one grace; which is the authoritie and grace of God. Now our heart being ruled, and our ſoule commaunded by ſaith, reaſon willeth, that ſhe drawes all our other parts to the ſervice of her intent, according to their power and facultie. Nor is it likely, but that this vaſt worldesframe muſt beare the impreſſion of ſome markes, therein imprinted by the hand of this great-wondrous Architect, and that even in all things therein created, there muſt be ſome image, ſomewhat reſembling, and having coherencie with the workeman that wrought and framed them. Hee hath left imprinted in theſe high and miſterious workes, the characters of his divinitie: and onely our imbecilitie is the cauſe, wee can nor diſcover, nor reade them. It is that which himſelfe telleth vs, That by his viſible operations, hee doeth manifest th
                                 •
                              ſe, that are inviſible to vs. Sebond hath much travelled about this woorthie ſtudie, and ſheweth vs, That there is no parcell of this world, that either beiyeth or ſhameth his Maker. It were a manifeſt wronging of Gods goodneſſe, if all this vniverſe did not conſent and ſimpathize with our beliefe. Heaven, earth, the elements, our bodies, our ſoule; yea all things-elſe, conſpire and agree vnto-it: onely the meanes how to make vſe of them muſt be found out: They will inſtruct vs ſufficiently, be we but capable to learne and apt to vnderſtand. For, this world is a moſt holy Temple, into which man is brought
                           
                           there to behold Statues and Images, not wrought by mortall hand, but ſuch as the ſecret thought of God hath made ſenſible, as the Sunne, the Starres, the Waters and the Earth, thereby to repreſent the intelligible vnto vs. The inviſible things of God (ſaith Saint Paul) doe evidently appeare by the creation o
                                 •
                               the world, iudgeing of his eternall Wiſedome and Divinity by his workes.
                        
                        
                           Atque adeo faciem coeli non invidet orbi,Manil. l. 4. 840
                           
                           Ipſe deus, vultuſ
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               ſuos corpúſ
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               recludit,
                           Semper voluend
                                 •
                              : ſe
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               ipſum inculcat & offert
                           Vt bene cognoſci poſſit, doc
                                 •
                              á
                                 •
                              
                              
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               videndo
                           Qualis ent, doceâ
                                 •
                              
                              
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               ſuas attendere leges.
                        
                        
                           God to the world doth not heav'ns face envie,
                           But by ſtill mooving it doth notifie
                           His face and eſſence, doth himſelfe applie,
                           That he may well be knowen, and teach by ſeeing,
                           How he goes, how we ſhould marke his decreeing.
                        
                        Now our reaſon and humane diſcourſe, is as the lumpiſh and barren matter; and the grace of God is the forme thereof. T'is that, which giveth both faſhion and worth vnto it. Even as the vertuous actions of Socrates and Cato, are but frivolous and profitable, becauſe they had not their end, and regarded not the love and obedience of the true creator of all things; and namely, becauſe they were ignorant of the true knowledge of God: So is it of our imaginations and diſcourſe; they haue a kind of body, but a ſhapeleſſe maſſe, without light or faſhion, vnleſſe faith and the grace of God be joyned thereunto. Faith, giving as it were a tincture and luſtre vnto Sebonds arguments, make them the more firme and ſolide: They may well ſerve for a direction and guide to a yong learner, to lead and ſet him in the right way of this knowledge. They in ſome ſort faſhion and make him capable of the grace of God, by meanes whereof our beliefe is afterward atchieved and made perfect. I know a man of authority, brought vp in letters, who confeſſed vnto me, that he was reclaimed from out the errours of miſ-beleeving by the Arguments of Sebond. And if it happen, they be diſpoyled of this ornament, and of the helpe and approbation of faith, and taken but for meere humane fantazies, yet to combate thoſe, that headlong are fallen into the dreadfull error, and horrible darkeneſſe of irreligion, even then, ſhall they be found as firme and forcible, as any other of that condition, that may be oppoſed againſt them. So that we ſhall ſtand vpon termes to ſay vnto our parties,
                        Si melius quid habes, accerſe, vel imperiumfer.
                        Hor. l. 1. epi. 5. 6.
                        
                           If you have any better, ſend for me,
                           Or elſe that I bid you, contented be.
                        
                        Let them either abide the force of our proofes, of ſhew vs ſome others, vpon ſome other ſubject, better compact and more full. I have in a maner vnawares halfe engaged my ſelfe in the ſecond objection, to which I had purpoſed to frame an anſwer for Sebond. Some ſay his Arguments are weake, and ſimple to verifie what he would, and vndertake to front him eaſily.The ſecond obiectiou. Such fellowes muſt ſomewhat more roughly be handled: for they are more dangerous, and more malicious then the firſt. Man doth willingly apply other mens ſayings to the advantage of the opinions he hath fore-judged in himſelfe. To an Atheiſt all writings make for Atheiſme. He with his owne Venome infecteth the innocent matter. Theſe have ſome preoccupation of judgement that makes their taſte wallowiſh and taſteleſſe, to conceive the reaſons of Sebond. As for the reſt, they thinke to have faire play offered them, if they have free liberty to combate our religion with meere worldly weapons; which they durſt not charge, did they behold hir in hir Majeſty, full of authority and commandement. The meanes I vſe to ſuppreſſe this frenzy, and which ſeemeth the fitteſt for my purpoſe, is to cruſh▪ and trample this humane pride and fierceneſſe vnder-foote-to make them feele the emptineſſe, vacuitie, and no worth of man: and violently to pull out of their hands, the ſilly weapons of their reaſon; to make them ſtoope, and bite and ſnarle at the ground, vnder the authority and reverence of Gods Majeſty. Onely to hir belongeth ſcience and wiſedome, it is ſhe alone can judge of hir ſelfe, and from hir we ſteale: whatſoever we repute, value, and count our ſelves to be.
                        
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Of greater, better, wiſer minde than he,
                           God can abide no mortall man ſhould be.
                        
                        Let vs ſuppreſſe this over-weening, the firſt foundation of the tyrannie of the wicked ſpirit: Deus ſuperbis reſiſtit: humilibus autem dat gratiam. God reſiſteth the proud, but giveth grace
                           Pro. 3. 14. 4. 6. 1. Pet. 5. 5. 
                           to the humble. Plato ſaith, That intelligence is in all the Gods, but little or nothing at all in men. Meane-while it is a great comfort vnto a Chriſtian man, to ſee our mortall implements, and fading tooles, ſo fitly ſorted to our holy and divine faith; that when they are employed to the mortal and fading ſubjects of their Nature, they are never more forcibly, nor more joyntlie appropriated vnto them. Let vs then ſee whether man hath any other ſtronger reaſons in his power, then Sebondes, and whether it lie in him, by argument or diſcourſe, to come to any certainty. For, Saint Auguſtine, pleading againſt theſe kind of men, becauſe he would vpbraide them with their injuſtice, in that they hold the partes of our beliefe to be falſe, and that our reaſon faileth in eſtabliſhing them. And to ſhew, that many things may be, and have beene, whereof our diſcourſe can never ground the nature and the cauſes; He propoſeth and ſetteth downe before them certaine knowen and vndoubted experiments, wherein man confeſſeth to ſee nothing; which he doth as all things elſe, with a curious and ingenious ſerch. More muſt be done, and they muſt be taught, that to convince the weakeneſſe of their reaſon; we neede not goe far to cull out rare examples: And that it is ſo defective and blinde, as there is no facility ſo cleare, that is cleare enough vnto hir; that eaſie and vneaſie is all one to hir; that all ſubjects equally, and Nature in Generall diſavoweth hir juriſdiction, and inter poſition. What preacheth truth vnto vs, when it biddeth vs flie and ſhun worldly Philoſophy; when it ſo often telleth vs, that all our wiſdome is but folly before God; that of all vanities, man is the greatest; that man, who preſumeth of his knowledge, doth not yet know what knowledge is: and that man, who is nothing, if he but thinke to be ſomething, ſeduceth and deceiveth himſelfe? Theſe ſentences of the Holy Ghoſt, doe ſo lively and manifeſtly expreſſe, what I would maintaine, as I ſhould neede no other proofe againſt ſuch as with all ſubmiſſion and obeyſance would yeeld to his authority. But theſe will needes be whipt to their owne Coſt, and cannot abide their reaſon to be combated, but by it ſelfe. Let vs now but conſider man alone without other help, armed but with his owne weapons, and vnprovided of the grace and knowledge of God, which is all his honour, all his ſtrength, and all the ground of his being. Let vs ſee what hold-faſt, or free-hold he hath in this gorgeous, and goodly equipage. Let him with the vtmoſt power of his diſcourſe make me vnderſtand, vpon what foundation, he hath built thoſe great advantages and ods, he ſuppoſeth to have over other creatures. Who hath perſwaded him, that this admirable mooving of heavens-vaults; that the eternal light of theſe lampes ſo fiercely rowling over his head; that the horror-moving and continuall motion of this infinite vaſte Ocean, were eſtabliſhed, and continue ſo many ages for his commoditie and ſervice? Is it poſſible to imagine any thing ſo ridiculous, as this miſerable and wretched creature, which is not ſo much as maiſter of himſelfe, expoſed and ſubject to 
                              •
                           ffences of all things, and yet dareth call himſelfe Maiſter and Emperour of this Vniverſe? In whoſe power it is not to know the leaſt part of it much leſſe to command the ſame. And the priviledge, which he ſo fondly challengeth, to be the onely abſolute creature in this huge worlds-frame, perfectly able to know the abſolute beautie, and ſeverall partes thereof, and that he is only of power to yeeld the great Architect thereof, due thankes for it, and to keepe account both of the receipts and layings out of the world. Who hath ſealed him this patent? Let him ſhew vs his letters of priviledge, for ſo noble and ſo great a charge. Have they beene granted onely in favour of the wiſe? Then concerne they but a few. Are the fooliſh and wicked worthy of ſo extraordinary a favour? Who being the worſt part of the world, ſhould they be preferred before the reſt? Shall we beleeve him; Quorum igitur cauſa quis dixeri
                                 •
                               effectum
                           Cic. nat. Deo. l. 2 
                           eſſe mundum? Eorum ſcilicet animantium, quaeratione 
                                 •
                              tuntur. Hiſunt dij & homines, quibus profectò nihil eſt melius. For whoſe cauſe then ſhall a man ſay, that the world was made? In ſooth, for thoſe creatures ſake, which have the vſe of reaſon: Thoſe are Gods and men, then whom aſſuredly nothing is better. We ſhall never ſufficiently baffle the impudency of this conjoyning. But ſilly wretch, what hath he in him worthy ſuch an advantage? To conſider the incorruptible life of the celeſtial bodies, their beauty, greatneſſe, and agitation, continued with ſo juſt and regular a courſe:
                        
                           —cum ſuſpicimus magni coeleſtia mundi
                              Lucr. l. 5. 1214.
                           
                           
                              Templa ſuper, ſtelliſque micantibus Aethera fixum,
                           Et venit in mentem Lune Soliſque viarum.
                        
                        
                           When we of this great world the heavenly-temples ſee
                           Above vs, and the skies with ſhine-ſtarres fixt to be,
                           And marke in our diſcourſe,
                           Of Sunne and Moone the courſe.
                        
                        To conſider the power and domination, theſe bodies have, not onely vpon our lives, and condition of our fortune;
                        Facta et
                              •
                           nim & vitas hominum ſuſpendit ab astris.
                        Manil. aſtron. lib. 3 58.
                        
                           For on the ſtars he doth ſuſpend
                           Of men, the deedes, the lives, and end.
                        
                        But alſo over our diſpoſitions and inclinations, our diſcourſes and wils, which they rule, provoke, and moove at the pleaſure of their influences, as our reaſon findes and teacheth vs.
                        
                           —ſpeculat 
                                    •
                                 que longé
                              Manil. aſtron. lib. 1. 62.
                           
                           
                              
                                 ••
                              prendi: tacit is dominantia legibus astra.
                           Et totum alterna mundum ratione m
                                 •
                              veri.
                           Fatorúmque vices cersis diſcern
                                 •
                              re ſignis.
                        
                        
                           By ſpeculation it from far diſcern's,
                           How ſtar's by ſecret lawes do guide our ſterns,
                           And this whole world is moov'd by entercourſe
                           And by ſure ſignes of fates to know the courſe.
                        
                        Seeing that not a man alone, nor a King only. But Monarchies and Empires, yea, and all this world below is mooved at the ſhaking of one of the leaſt heavenly motions.
                        
                           Quantaque quàm par vifaciant diſcrimina motus:Manil. aſtron. lib. 4. 93.
                           
                           Tantum eſt hoc regnum quod regibus imper at ipſis.
                        
                        
                           How little motions make, how different affection:
                           So great this kingdome is, that hath Kings in ſubjection.
                        
                        If our vertue, vices, ſufficiency and knowledge; and the ſame diſcourſe we make of the power of the ſtarres, and the compariſon betweene them and vs, commeth as our reaſon judgeth by their meane and through their favour.
                        
                           —furit alter amore,
                              Manil. aſtron. lib. 4. 178.
                           
                           Et pontu
                                 •
                              s tranare poteſt & vertere Troiam,
                           Alteriusſors eſt ſcribendis legibus apta:
                           Ecce patrem nati perimunt, nat òſ
                                 •
                               parentes,
                           Mutuá
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               armati coeunt in vulner a fratres,
                           Non noſtrum hoc bellum eſt, coguntur tanta mov
                                 •
                              re,
                           Inque ſuas f
                                 •
                              rri poenas, lacer and áque membra:118.
                           
                           Hoc quoque fatale eſt ſic ipſum expendere fatum.
                        
                        
                           One with love madded, his love to enjoy,
                           Can croſſe the ſeas, and over-turne all Troy:
                           
                           Anothers lot is to ſet lawes ſevere.
                           Loeſonnes kill fathers, fathers ſonnes deſtroy,
                           Brothers for mutuall wounds their armes doe beare,
                           Such war is not our owne, forc't are we to it,
                           Drawne to our owne paines, our owne limbes to teare;
                           Fates ſo t'obſerve t'is fatall, we muſt doe it,
                        
                        If we hold that portion of reaſon, which we have, from the diſtribution of heaven, how can ſhe make vs equall vnto it? How can ſhe ſubmit his eſſence and conditions vnto our knowledge? Whatſoever we behold in thoſe huge bodies, doth affright vs: Quae molitio,
                           Cie. Nat. Deo. lib. 1. 
                           quae ferrament
                                 •
                              , qui victes, quae machinae, qui miniſtri tant i operis fuerunt? What workemanſhip? What yron-braces? What maine beames, what engines? What Maſons and Carpenters, were to ſo great a worke? Why doe we then deprive them of ſoule, of life, and of diſcourſe? Have we diſcovered or knowen any vnmoveable or inſenſible ſtupidity in them? We, who have no commerce but of obedience with them? Shall we ſay we have ſeene the vſe of a reaſonable ſoule, in no other creature, but in man? What? Have we ſeene any thing comparable to the Sunne? Leaveth he to be, becauſe we have ſeene nothing ſemblable vnto it? And doth he

leav his moving, becauſe his equall is no where to be found? If that which we have not ſeene, is not, our knowledge is wonderfull abridged? Quae ſunt tanta animi anguſtia? What narrownes of my heart is ſuch? Be they not dreames of humane vanity, to make a celeſtiall earth, or world of the Moone? As Anaxagoras did? And therein to plant worldly habitations, and as Plato and Plutarch doe, erect their colonies for our vſe. And to make of our knowne earth a bright ſhining planet? Inter caetera mortalitatis incommoda, & hoc eſt caligo
                           Sen ir
                                 •
                              . lib. 2. cap. 9. 
                           mentium: nec tantùm neceſſitas errandi, ſed errorum amor. Among other diſcommodities of our mortality this is one, there is darkeneſſe in our minds, and in vs not onely neceſſity of erring, but a love of errors. Corruptibile corpus aggrauat animam, & deprimit terrena inhabitatio ſenſum
                           Sen. epiſt. 95. 
                           multa cogitantem. Our corruptible body doth over lode our ſoule, and our dwelling on earth weighet downe our ſence, that is ſet to thinke of many matters. Preſumption is our naturall and originall infirmitie. Of all creatures man is the moſt miſerable and fraile, and therewithall the proudeſt and diſdainfulleſt. Who perceiueth and ſeeth himſelfe placed here, amidſt their filth and mire of the world, faſt tied and nailed to the worſt, moſt ſenceles, and drooping part of the world, in the vileſt corner of the houſe, and fartheſt from heavens-coape, with thoſe creatures, that are the worſt of the three conditions; and yet dareth imaginarily place himſelfe above the circle of the Moone, and reduce heaven vnder his feete. It is through the vanity of the ſame imagination, that he dare equall himſelfe to God, that he aſcribeth divine conditions vnto himſelfe, that he ſelecteth and ſeparateth himſelfe from out the ranke of other creatures; to which his fellow-brethren and compeers, he cuts out and ſhareth their parts, and allotteth them what portions of meanes or forces he thinkes good. How knoweth he by the vertue of his vnderſtanding the inward and ſecret motions of beaſts? By what compariſon from them to vs doth he conclude the brutiſhneſſe, he aſcribeth vnto them? When I am playing with my Cat, who knowes whether ſhe have more ſport in dallying with me, then I have in gaming with hir? We entertaine one another with mutuall apiſh trickes, If I have my houre to begin or to refuſe, ſo hath ſhe hirs. Plato in ſetting forth the golden age vnder Saturne, amongſt the chiefe advantages that man had then, reporteth the communication he had with beaſts, of whom enquiring and taking inſtruction, he knew the true qualities, and differences of every one of them: by, and from whom he got an abſolute vnderſtanding and perfect wiſedome, whereby he led a happier life, then we can doe. Can we have a better proofe to judge of mans impudency, touching beaſts? This notable Author was of opinion, that in the greateſt part of the corporall forme, which nature hath beſtowed on them, 
                              •
                           he hath onely reſpected the vſe of the Prognoſtications, which in his daies were thereby gathered. That defect which hindreth the communication betweene them and vs, why may it not as well be in vs, as in them? It is a matter of divination to gueſſe in whom the fault is, that we vnderſtand not one another. For, we vnderſtand them no more then they vs. By the ſame reaſon, may they as well eſteeme vs beaſts, as we them. It is no great marvell if we vnderſtand them not: no more doe we the corniſh, the Welch, or Iriſh. Yet have ſome boaſted that they vnderſtood them, as Apollonius Thyaneus, Melampus, Tireſias, Thales and others. And if it be (as Coſmographers report) that there are Nations, who receive and admit a Dogge to be their King, it muſt neceſſarily follow, that they give a certaine interpretation to his voice and moving. We muſt note the parity that is betweene vs. We have ſome meane vnderſtanding of their ſenſes, ſo have beaſts of ours, about the ſame meaſure. They flatter and faune vpon vs, they threat, and entreate vs, ſo doe we them. Touching other matters, we manifeſtly perceive, that there is a full and perfect communication amongſt them, and that not onely thoſe of one ſame kinde vnderſtand one another, but even ſuch as are of different kindes
                        
                           Et mutae pecudes, & denique ſecla ferarumLucr. l. 5. 1069.
                           
                           Diſſimiles ſuerunt voces variaſque cluere
                           Cùm metus aut dolor eſt, aut cùm iam gaudia gliſcunt.
                        
                        
                           Whole heard's (though dombe) of beaſts, both wilde and tame
                           Vſe divers voices, diffrent ſounds to frame,
                           As joy, or griefe, or feare,
                           Vpſpringing paſſions beare.
                        
                        By one kinde of barking of a Dogge, the Horſe knoweth he his angrie; by another voice of his, he is nothing diſmaide. Even in beaſts, that have no voice at all, by the reciprocall

kindenes, which we ſee in them, we eaſily inferre, there is ſome other meane of entercommunication: their jeſtures treate, and their motions diſcourſe.
                        
                           Non alia longè ratione atque ipſa videturIb. 1040.
                           
                           Protrahere ad geſtum▪ pu
                                 •
                              ros infantia linguae.
                        
                        
                           No otherwiſe, then, for they cannot ſpeake,
                           Children are drawne by ſignes their mindes to breake.
                        
                        And why not, as well as our dombe-men diſpute, argue, and tell hiſtories by ſignes? I have ſeene ſome ſo ready, and ſo excellent in it, that (in good ſooth) they wanted nothing to have their meaning perfectly vnderſtood. Doe we not daily ſee lovers with the lookes and rowling of their eyes, plainly ſhew when they are angrie or pleaſed, and how they entreate, and thanke one another, aſſigne meetings, and expreſſe any paſſion?
                        
                           E'l ſilentio ancor ſuole
                           Hauer prieghi & parole.
                        
                        
                           Silence alſo hath a way,
                           Words and praiers to convay.
                        
                        What doe we with our hands? Doe we not ſue and entreate, promiſe and performe, call men vnto vs, and diſcharge them, bid them farwell, and be gone, threaten, pray, beſeech, deny, refuſe, demaund, admire, number, confeſſe, repent, feare, be aſhamed, doubt, inſtruct, command, encite, encourage, ſweare, witnes, accuſe, condemne, abſolve, injurie, deſpiſe, defie, deſpight, flatter, applaude, bleſſe, humble, mocke, reconcile, recommend, exalt, ſhewgladnes, reioyce, complaine, waile, ſorrowe, diſcomfort, diſpaire, cry-out, forbid, declare ſilence and aſtoniſhment? And what not? With ſo great variation, and amplifying, as if they would contend with the tongue. And with our head, doe we not envite and call to-vs, diſcharge and ſend away, avowe, diſavowe, be-lie, welcome, honour, worſhip, diſdaine, demaund, direct, rejoyce, affirme, deny, complaine, cheriſh, blandiſh, chide, yeeld, ſubmit, brag, boaſt, threaten, exhort, warrant, aſſure, and enquire? What doe we with our eye-lids? And with our ſhoulders? To conclude, there is no motion, nor jeſture, that doth nor ſpeake, and ſpeakes in a language, very eaſie, and without any teaching to be vnderſtoode: nay, which is more, it is a language common and publike to all: whereby it followeth (ſeeing the varietie, and ſeverall vſe it hath from others) that this muſt rather be deemed the proper and peculiar ſpeech of humane nature. I omit that, which neceſſitie in time of neede; doth particularly inſtruct and ſodainely teach ſuch as neede it; and the alphabets vpon fingers, and grammars by jeſtures; and the ſciences, which are onely exerciſed and expreſſed by them: and the nations Plinie reporteth to have no other ſpeech. An Ambaſſador of the Citie of Abdera, after he had talked a long time vnto Agis King of Sparta, ſaid thus vnto him: O King, what anſwere wilt thou that I beare backe vnto our citizens? Thus (anſwered he) that I have ſuffered thee to ſpeake all thou wouldeſt, and as long as thou pleaſedſt, without ever ſpeaking one word. Is not this a kinde of ſpeaking ſilence, and eaſie to be vnderſtoode? And as for other matters; what ſufficiencie is there in vs, that we muſt not acknowledge from the induſtrie and labors of beaſts? Can there be a more formall, and better ordred policie, divided into ſo ſeverall charges and offices, more conſtantly entertained, and better maintained, then that of Bees? Shall we imagine, their ſo orderly diſpoſing of their actions, and mannaging of their vacations, have ſo proporcioned and formall a conduct without diſcourſe, reaſon and forecaſt?
                        
                           His quidam ſignis atque haec exempla ſequuti,Virg. Georg. lib. 4. 219.
                           
                           Eſſe apibus partem divinae mentis, & hauſtus
                           Aethereos dixere.
                        
                        
                           Some by theſe ſignes, by theſe examples moved,
                           Said that in Bees there is and may be proved
                           Some taſte of heav'nly kinde,
                           Part of celeſtiall minde.
                        
                        The Swallows, which at the approch of ſpring-time, we ſee to prie, to ſearch, and ferret all the corners of our houſes; is it without judgement they ſeeke, or without diſcretion they chuſe from out a thouſand places, that which is fitteſt for them, to build their neſts and lodgeing? And in that pretie-cunning contexture, and admirable framing of their houſes, would birds rather fit themſelves with a round, then a ſquare figure with an obtuſe, then a right

angle, except they knew both the commodities and effects of them? Would they (ſuppoſe you) firſt take water, and then clay, vnleſſe they gueſſed that the hardnes of the one is ſoftned by the moiſtnes of the other; Would they floore their palace with moſſe or downe, except they fore-ſaw, that the tender parts of their yong-ons, ſhall thereby lie more ſoft and eaſie? Would they ſhroud and ſhelter themſelves from ſtormie weather, and builde their cabbins toward the Eaſt, vnleſſe they knew the different conditions of windes, and conſidered that ſome are more healthfull and ſafe for them, then ſome others? Why doth the Spider ſpin hir artificiall webbe thicke in one place, and thin in another? And now vſeth one, and then another knot, except ſhe had an imaginarie kinde of deliberation, fore-thought and concluſion? We perceive by the greater part of their workes, what excellencie beaſts have overvs, and how weake our-arte and ſhort our cunning-is, if we goe about to imitate them. We ſee notwithſtanding, even in our groſeſt workes, what faculties we employ in them, and how our minde employeth the vttermoſt of hir skill and forces in them: why ſhould we not thinke as much of them? Wherefore doe we attribute the workes, which excell what ever we can performe, either by nature or by arte, vnto a kinde of vnknowen, naturall and ſervill inclination? Wherein vnawars, we give them a great advantage over-vs, to inferre, that nature, led by a certaine loving kindnes, leadeth and accompanieth them (as it were by the hand) vnto all the actions and commodities of their life; and that ſhe forſaketh and leaveth vs to the hazard of fortune; And by arte to queſt, and finde-out thoſe things, that are beho
                              •
                           uefull and neceſſarie for our preſervation: and therewithall denieth vs the meanes, to attaine by any inſtitution and contention of ſpirit, to the naturall ſufficiencie of brute beaſts: So that their brutiſh ſtupiditie, doth in all commodities exceede, whatſoever our divine intelligence can effect. Verely, by this accoumpt, we might have juſt cauſe and great reaſon, to terme hir a moſt injuſt and partiall ſtepdame: But there is no ſuch thing, our policy is not ſo deformed and diſordered. Nature hath generally imbraced all hir creatures: And there is not any, but ſhe hath amply ſtored with all neceſſary meanes for the preſervation of their being. For, the daily plaints, which I often heare men make (when the licence of their conceits, doth ſomtimes raiſe them above the clouds, and then head-long tumbling them downe even to the Antipodes) exclayming, that man is the onely forſaken, and out caſt creature, naked on the bare earth, faſt bound and ſwathed, having nothing to cover and arme himſelf withall, but the ſpoile of others; whereas Nature hath clad and mantled all other creatures, ſome with ſhels, ſome with huskes, with 
                              ••
                           ndes, with haire, with wooll, with ſtings, with briſtles, with hides, with moſſe, with fethers, with skales, with fle
                              •
                           ces, and with 
                              ••
                           ke, according as their quality might neede, or their condition require: And hath fenced and a
                              ••
                           ed them, with clawes, with nailes, with talents, with hoofes, with teeth, with ſtings, and with hornes, both to aſſaile others, and to defend themſelves: And hath more-over inſtructed them in every thing fit and requiſit for them, as to ſwim, to runne, to creepe, to flie, to roare, to bellow, and to ſing: where as man onely (Oh ſilly-wretched man) can neither goe, nor ſpeake, nor ſhift, nor feed himſelefe, vnleſſe it be to whine and weepe onely, except he be taught.
                        
                           Tum porro, puer vt ſaevis proiectus ab vndisLucr. li. 5. 222
                           
                           Navita, nudus humi iacet infans, indigus omni
                           Vitali auxilio, cùm primùm in luminis oras
                           Nexibus ex alvo matris natura profudit,
                           Vagitúque locum lugubri complet, vt aequum eſt
                           Cui tantùm in vita reſtet tranſire malorum:
                           At variae creſcunt pecudes, armenta, feraeque,
                           Nec crepitacula eis opus eſt, nec cuiquam adhibenda eſt
                           Alma nutricis blanda atque infracta loquela:
                           Nec varias quaerunt vestes pro tempore caeli:
                           Denique non armis opus eſt, non moenibus altis
                           Queis ſua tutentur, quando omnibus omnia large
                           Tellus ipſaparit, natur àque daedalarerum.
                        
                        
                           An infant, like a ſhipwracke ſhip-boy caſt from ſeas,
                           Lies naked on the ground, and ſpeechleſſe, wanting all
                           The helpes of vitall ſpirit, when nature with ſmall eaſe
                           
                              Of throw's, to ſee firſt light, from hir wombe lets him fall,
                           Then, as is meete, with morn'full cries he fils the place,
                           For whom ſo many ils remaine in his lives race.
                           But divers heards of tame and wilde beaſts foreward ſpring,
                           Nor neede they rattles, nor of Nurces cockring-kinde
                           The flattering broken ſpeech their lulluby neede ſing.
                           Nor ſeeke they divers coates, as divers ſeaſons binde.
                           Laſtly no armour neede they, nor high-reared wall
                           Whereby to guard their owne, ſince all things vnto all
                           Worke-maſtres nature doth produce,
                           And the earth largely to their vſe.
                        
                        Such complaints are falſe: There is a greater equality, and more vniforme relation in the policy of the world. Our skin is as ſufficiently provided with hardneſſe againſt the injuries of the wether, as theirs: Witneſſe divers Nations, which yet never knew the vſe of clothes. Our ancient Gaules were but ſlightly apparelled, no more are the Iriſh-men, our neighbours, in ſo cold a climate: Which we may better judge by our ſelves; for, all thoſe parts of our bodie, we are pleaſed to leave bare to winde and wether, are by experience found able to endure it: If there be any weake part in vs, which in likely-hood ſhould ſeeme to feare cold, it ought to be the ſtomake, where diſgeſtion is made: Our forefathers vſed to have it bare, and our Ladies (as dainty-nice as they be) are many times ſeene to goe open-breaſted, as low as their navill. The bandles and ſwathes about our children are no more neceſſary: And the mothers of Lacedemonia, brought vp theirs in all liberty and looſeneſſe of moving their limmes without ſwathing or binding. Our whining, our puling and our weeping is common to moſt creatures, and divers of them are often ſeene to waile and grone along time after their birth, forſomuch as it is a countenance fitting the weakneſſe wherein they feele themſelves, As for the vſe of eating, and feeding, it is in vs, as in them, naturall and without teaching.
                        Sentit enim vim quiſque ſuam quam poſſit abuti.Ibid. 104.
                        
                        
                           For every one ſoone-vnderſtanding is
                           Of his owne ſtrength, which he may vſe amiſſe.
                        
                        Who will make queſtion, that a child having attained the ſtrength to feed himſelfe, could not queſt for his meate, and ſhift for his drinke? The earth without labour or tilling doth ſufficiently produce and offer him as much as he ſhall neede. And if not at all times, no more doth ſhe vnto beaſts; witneſſe the proviſion, we ſee the Antes and other ſilly creatures to make againſt the cold and barren ſeaſons of the yeare. The nations, that have lately bin diſcovered, ſo plenteouſly ſtored with all maner of naturall meate and drinke, without care or labor, teach vs, that bread is not our onely foode: And that without toyling, our common mother nature, hath with great plentie ſtored vs with whatſoever ſhould be needfull for vs, yea, as it is moſt likely, more ritchly and amply, then now adaies ſhe doth, that we have added ſo much art vnto it:
                        
                           Et tellus nitidas fruges vinetáque 
                                 •
                              etaLucr. l. 2. 1166.
                           
                           Sponte ſua primùm mortalibus ipſa creauit,
                           Ipſa dedit dulces foetus, & pabula laeta,
                           Quae nunc vix noſtro grandeſcunt aucta labore,
                           Conterimúſque boves & vires agricolarum:
                        
                        
                           The earth it ſelfe at firſt of th'owne accord
                           Did men rich Vineyards, and cleane fruite affoord.
                           It gave ſweet of ſprings foode from ſweeter ſoyle
                           Which yet ſcarſe greater grow for all our toyle,
                           Yet tire therein we doe,
                           Both Plough-mens ſtrength and Oxen too.
                        
                        The gluttonous exceſſe, and intemperate laviſhneſſe of our appetite exceeding all the inventions, we endevour to finde out, wherewith to glut and cloy the ſame. As for armes and weapons, we have more, that be naturall vnto vs, then the greateſt part of other beaſts: We have more ſeverall motions of limbs, and naturally, without teaching: We reape more ſerviceable vſe of them, then they do: Thoſe which are trained vp to fight naked, are ſeene head long to caſt themſelves into the ſame hazards and dangers, as we doe. If ſome beaſts excell vs

in this advantage, we exceede many others: And the induſtrie to enable, the skill to fortifie, and the wit to ſhelter and cover our body by artificiall meanes, we have it by a kind of naturall inſtinct and teaching. Which to prove; the Elephant doth whet and ſharpen histeeth, he vſeth in warre (for he hath ſome he onely vſeth for that purpoſe) which he heed fully ſpareth, and never puts them to other ſervice: When Buls prepare themſelves to fight, they raiſe, ſcatter, and with their feet, caſt the duſt about them: The wilde Boare whets his tuskes; when the Ichneumon is to grapple with the Crocodile, he walloweth his body in the mire, then lets the ſame drie and harden vpon him, which he doth ſo often, that at laſt the ſame becomes as hard and tough as any well compact cruſt, which ſerveth him in ſtead of a Cuirace. Why ſhall we not ſay, that it is as naturall for vs to arme our ſelves with wood and yron? As for ſpeech, ſure it is, that if it be not naturall it is not neceſſary. I beleeve nevertheleſſe, that if a childe, bred in ſome vncouth ſolitarineſſe, farre from haunt of people (though it were a hard matter to make triall of it) would no doubt have ſome kind of words to expreſſe, and ſpeech to vtter his conceits: And it is not to be imagined, that nature hath refuſed vs that meane, and barred vs that helpe, which ſhe hath beſtowed vpon many and divers other creatures: For, what is that faculty, we ſee in them, when they ſeeme to complaine, to rejoyce, to call one vnto another for helpe, and bid one another to loving copulation (as commonly they doe) by the vſe of their voice, but a kind of ſpeech? And ſhall not they ſpeake among themſelves, that ſpeake and vtter their minde vnto vs, and we to them? How many waies ſpeake we vnto our Dogges, and they ſeeme to vnderſtand and anſwer vs? With another language, and with other names ſpeake we vnto, and call them, then we doe our Birds, our Hogges, our Oxen, our Horſes, and ſuch like; and according to their different kindes we change our Idiome.
                        
                           Coſi per entro loro ſchiera bruna
                           S'ammuſa i'vna con l'altra formica,
                           Forſe â ſpiar lor via, & lor fortuna.
                        
                        
                           So Ants amidſt their ſable-colored band
                           One with another mouth to mouth confer,
                           Hap'ly their way, or ſtate to vnderſtand.
                        
                        Me ſeemeth that Lactantius doth not onely attribute ſpeech vnto beaſts, but alſo laughing. And the ſame difference of tongues, which according to the diverſity of Countries is found amongſt vs, is alſo found amongſt beaſts of one ſame kinde. Ariſtotle to that purpoſe alleageth the divers calles or purres of Partriges, according to the ſituation of their place of breeding:
                        
                           —variaeque volucres
                              Lucr. l. 5. 10
                                    ••
                                 .
                           
                           Longè alias alio iaciunt in tempore voces,
                           Et partim mutant cum tempeſtatibus vnâ
                           Rauciſones cantus.
                        
                        
                           And divers birds, ſend-forth much divers ſounds
                           At divers times, and partly change the grounds,
                           Of their hoarce-ſounding ſong,
                           As ſeaſons change along.
                        
                        But it would be knowen, what language ſuch a childe ſhould ſpeake: and what▪ ſome report by divination, hath no great likely-hood. And if againſt this opinion, a man would alleage vnto me, that ſuch as are naturally deafe, ſpeake not at all: I anſwer, that it is not onely becauſe they could not receive the inſtruction of the world by their eares, but rather in aſmuch as the ſenſe of hearing, whereof they are deprived, hath ſome affinity with that of ſpeaking, both which with a naturall kinde of ligament or ſeame, hold and are faſtned together: In ſuch ſort, as what we ſpeake, we muſt firſt ſpeake it vnto our ſelves, and before we vtter and ſend the ſame forth to ſtrangers, we make it inwardly to ſound vnto our eares. I haue ſaid all this, to maintaine the coherency and reſemblance, that is in all humane things, and to bring vs vnto the generall throng. We are neither aboue nor vnder the reſt: what ever is vnder the coape of heaven (ſaith the wiſe man) runneth one law and followeth one fortune.
                        Indupedita ſuis fatalibus omnia vinclis.Ibid. 885.
                        
                        
                           All things enfolded are,
                           In fatall bonds as fits their ſhare.
                        
                        
                           Some difference there is, there are orders and degrees; but all is vnder the viſage of one ſame nature.
                        —res quaeque ſuo rit
                              •
                            procedit, & omnesIbid 932. Foedere naturae cert
                              •
                            diſcrimina ſervant.
                        
                           All things proceed in their courſe, natures all
                           Keepe difference, as in their league dothe fall.
                        
                        Man muſt be forced, and marſhalled within the liſtes of this policie. Miſerable man with all his wit cannot in effect goe beyond it: he is embraced, and engaged, and as other creatures of his ranke are, he is ſubjected in like bondes, and without any prerogative or eſſentiall pre-excellencie, what ever Priviledge he aſſume vnto himſelfe, he is of very meane condition. That which is given by opinion or fantaſie hath neither body nor taſte. And if it be ſo, that he alone, above all other Creatures, hath this liberty of imagination, and this licence of thoughts, which repreſent vnto him, both what is and what is not and what him pleaſeth, falſe-hood and truth; it is an advantage bought at a very high rate, and whereof he hath litle reaſon to glorie: For thence ſprings the chiefeſt ſource of al the miſchiefs that oppreſſehim, as ſinne, ſickeneſſe, irreſolution, trouble and deſpaire. But to come to my purpoſe, I ſay therefore, there is no likely-hood, we ſhould imagine, the beaſts doe the very ſame things by a naturall inclination and forced genuitie, which we doe of our owne free-wil and induſtrie. Of the very ſame effects we muſt conclude alike faculties; and by the richeſt effects inferr the nobleſt faculties, and conſequently acknowledge, that the ſame diſcourſe and way, we hold in working, the very ſame, or perhapps ſome other better, doe beaſts hold. Wherefore ſhall we imagine that natural compulſion in them, that prove no ſuch effect our ſelves? Since it is more honourable to be addreſſed to act, and tyed to worke orderly, by and through a naturall and vnavoideable condition, and moſt approching to Divinitie, then regularly to worke and act, by, and through a caſuall and raſh libertie, and it is ſafer to leave the reignes of our conduct vnto nature, then vnto our ſelves. The vanitie of our preſumption maketh vs rather to be beholding, and as it were endebted vnto our owne ſtrength, for our ſufficiency, then vnto hir liberalitie; and enrich other creatures with natural giftes, and yeeld thoſe vnto them, that ſo we may en-noble and honour our ſelves with gifts purchaſed: as me thinketh, by a very ſimple humour: For, I would prize graces, and value gifts, that were altogether mine owne, and naturall vnto me, as much as I would thoſe, I had begged, and with a long prentiſhippe, ſhifted. For, It lyeth not in our power to obtaine a greater commendation, then to be favored both of God and Nature. By that reaſon, the Foxe, which the inhabitants of Thrace vſe when they will attempt to march vpon the yce of ſome frozen river, and to that end let hir go looſe afore them, ſhould we ſee hir running alongſt the river ſide, approch hir eare cloſe to the yce, to liſten whether by any farre or neere diſtance, ſhe may heare the noyſe or roaring of the water, running vnder the ſame, and according as ſhe perceiveth the ice thereby to be thicke or thinne, to goe either forward or backeward; might not we lawfully judge, that the ſame diſcourſe poſſeſſeth hir head, as in like caſe it would ours? And that it is a kinde of debating-reaſon and conſequence, drawen from naturall ſenſe▪ 
                           Whatſoever maketh a noyſe moveth▪ whatſoever mooveth, is not frozen, whatſoever is not frozen, is liquide; whatſoever is liquide, yeelds vnder any weight? For to impute that only to a quicknes of the ſenſe of hearing, without diſcourſe or conſequence, is but a fond conceipt, and cannot enter into my imagination. The like muſt be judged of ſo many wiles, and inventions, wherewith beaſts ſave themſelves from the ſnares, and ſcape the ba
                              •
                           ts we lay to entrap them. And if we will take hold of any advantage tending to that purpoſe, that it is in our power to ſeize vpon them, to employ them to our ſervice, and to vſe them at our pleaſure; it is but the ſame oddes we have one vpon another. To which purpoſe wee have our ſlaves or bond-men; and were not the Climacides, certaine women in Syria, which creeping on al foure, vpon the ground, ſerved the Ladies in ſteed of footſtoles or ladders to get vp into their coches? Where the greater part of free men for very ſlight cauſes, abandon both their life and being, to the power of others. The wives and Concubines of the Thracians ſtrive and contend, which of them ſhalbe choſen, to bee ſlaine over hir husbands or lovers tombe. Have tyrants ever failed to find many men vowed to their devotion? Where ſome for an over-pluſſe, or ſuperergation have added this neceſſity, that they muſt neceſſarily accompany them, as well in death, as in life. Whole hoſtes of men have thus tyed themſelves vnto their Captaines. The tenor of the oath miniſtred vnto

the ſchollers, that entered and were admitted the rude ſchoole of Roman Gladiators, emplied theſe promiſes: which was this. We vow and ſweare, to ſuffer our ſelves, to be enchained, beaten, burned and killed with the ſword, and endure whatſoever any lawfull fenſer ought to endure for his maiſter: moſt religiouſly engaging both our bodie and ſoule to the vſe of his ſervice:
                        
                           
                              Ʋre meum ſi vis flamma caput, & pete ferr
                                 •
                              
                              Tibul. l. 1. el 9. 21.
                           
                           Corpus, & intorto verbere 
                                 •
                              ergaſeca.
                        
                        
                           Burnetyrant (if thou wilt) my head with fire, with ſword▪
                           
                           My body ſtrike, my backe cut with hard-twiſted cord
                        
                        Was not this a very ſtrict covenant? Yet were there ſome yeares ten thouſand found, that entered and loſt themſelves in thoſe ſchooles. When the Scithians buried their King, they, ſtrangled over his dead body, firſt, the chiefeſt and beſt beloved of his Concubines, then his Cup-bearer, the Maſter of his horſe, his Chamberlaine, the Vſher of his Chamber, and his maſter Cooke. And in his anniverſary killed fiftie horſe, mounted with fifty Pages, whom before, they had ſlaine with thruſting ſharpe ſtakes into their fondament, which going vp along their chine-bone, came out at their throte. Whom thus mounted; they ſet in orderly ranckes about the tombe. The men that ſerve-vs, doe it better cheape, and for a leſſe curious, and favourable entreating, then wee vſe vnto birdes, vnto horſes, and vnto dogges. What carke and toyle, apply we not our ſelves vnto for their ſakes? Me thinks, the vileſt and baſeſt ſervants, will never doe that ſo willingly for their Maſters, which Princes are glad to doe for their beaſtes. Diogenes ſeeing his kinsfolkes, to take care how they might redeeme him out of thraldome; they are fooles (ſaid he) for, it is my Maſter, that governeth, keepeth feedeth and ſerveth mee: And ſuch as keepe or entertaine beaſts, may rather ſay they ſerve them, than that they are ſerved of them. And if they have that naturall greater magnanimity, that never Lyon was ſeene to ſubject himſelfe vnto another Lyon, nor one Horſe vnto another Horſe, for want of heart. As wee hunt after beaſtes, ſo Tygers and Lyons hunt after men, and have a like exerciſe one vpon another: Hounds over the Hare; the Pike or Luce over the Tench; the Swallowes over the Graſſe-hoppers, and the Sparrow-hawkes over Blacke-birds and Larkes.
                        
                           ſerpente ciconia pullosI
                                    ••
                                 e▪ ſat. 14. 74
                           
                           Nutrit, & inventâ per devia rura lacertâ,
                           Et leporem aut capream famulae Iovis, & generoſae
                           In ſaltu venantur aves.
                        
                        
                           The ſtorke hir yong-ones feedes with ſerpents pray,
                           And lyzerts found ſome where out of the way.
                           Ioves ſervants-Eagles, hawkes of nobler kinde,
                           In forreſts hunt, a hare or kidde to finde.
                        
                        We ſhare the fruits of our prey with our dogges and hawkes, as a meede of their paine and reward of their induſtry. As about Amphipolis in Thrace, faulkners, and wilde hawks divide their game equally: And as about the Maeotide-fennes, if fiſhers doe not very honeſtly leave behind them an even ſhare of their fiſhings for the Woolves that range about thoſe coaſts, they preſently runne and teare their nets. And, as we have a kinde of fiſhing, rather managed by ſleight, then ſtrength, as that of hooke and line about our Angling-rods, ſo haue beaſts amongſt themſelves. Ariſtotle reporteth, that the Cuttle-Fiſh, caſteth along got out of hir throte, which like a line ſhe ſendeth forth, and at her pleaſure pulleth it in againe, according as ſhe perceiveth ſome little fiſh come neere hir, who being cloſe-hidden in the gravell or ſtronde, letteth him nibble or bite the end of it, and then by little and little drawes it in vnto hir, vntill the Fiſh be ſo neere, that with a ſodaine leape ſhe may catch-it. Touching ſtrength, there is no Creature in the world, open to ſo many wrongs and injuries as man: He neede not a Whale, an Elephant, nor a Crocodile, nor any ſuch other wilde beaſt, of which one alone is of power to defeat a great number of men: ſeely lice are able to make Silla give over his Dictatorſhip: The hart and life of a mighty and triumphant Emperor, is but the break-faſt of a ſeely little Worme. Why ſay we, that skill to diſcerne, and knowledge to make choyſe (gotten by art, and acquired by diſcourſe) of things good for this life, and availfull againſt ſickneſſe, and ſo diſtinguiſh of thoſe which are hurtfull, and to know the vertue of Reubarbe, qualitie of Oake ferne, and operation of Polipodie, is only peculiar vnto man▪
                           
When we ſee the Goates of Candia, being ſhotte with an arrow, to chooſe from out a million of ſimples, the hearbe Dittamy or Garden-ginger, and therewith cure themſelves; and the Tortoiſe having eaten of a Viper, immediatly to ſeek for Origan or wild Marjoram, to purge hirſelfe: the Dragon to run and cleare his eies with fenel: the Cranes with their bils to miniſter gliſters of ſea-water vnto themſelves; the Elephants to pul out, not only from themſelves and their fellowes, but alſo from their maſters (witneſſe that of King Porus, whom Alexander defeated) ſuch j
                              •
                           v
                              •
                           lines or dartes, as in fight have beene thirled or ſhot at them▪ ſo nimbly and ſo cunningly, as our ſelves could never do it ſo eaſily, and with ſo little paine: Why ſay wee not likewiſe that that is ſcience, and prudence in them? For, if to de preſ
                              •
                           e them, ſome would alleadge, it is by the onely inſtruction and inſtinct of Nature, they know-it; that will not take the name of ſcience, and title of prudence from them; it is rather to aſcribe it vnto them, then to vs, for the honour of ſo aſſured a ſchoole-miſtris. Chryſippus, albeit in other things as diſdainful a judge of the condition of beaſts, as any other Philoſopher, conſidering the earneſt movings of the dog, who comming into a path, that led three ſeverall wayes, in ſearch or queſt of his Maſter, whom he had loſt, or in purſuite of ſome prey, that hath eſcaped him, goeth ſenting firſt one way, and then another, and having aſſured himſelf of two, becauſe he findeth not the tracke of what he hunteth-for, without more adoe, furiouſly betakes himſelfe to the third; he is enforced to confeſſe, that ſuch a dogge muſt neceſſarily diſcourſe thus with himſelfe. I have followed my Maſters footing hit her to, hee muſt of neceſſity paſſe by one of theſe three wayes; it is neither this nor that, then conſequently hee is gone this other. And by this concluſion or diſcourſe aſſuring himſelfe, comming to the third path, hee vſetli his ſenſe no more, nor ſoundes-it any longer, but by the power of reaſon ſuffers himſelfe violently to be caried through-it. This meere logicall tricke, and this vſe of divided and conjoyned propoſitions, and of the ſufficient numbring of parts: Is it not as good, that the dog know it by himſelfe, as by Trapezuntius his logicke? Yet are not beaſtes altogether vnapt to be inſtructed after our maner. We teach Blacke-birds, Starlines, Ravens, Plots, and Pasots to chat; and that facilitie we perceive in them, to lend vs their voyce ſo ſupple, and th
                              •••
                            wind ſo tractable, that ſo wee may frame and bring-it to a certaine number of letters and ſilables, witneſſeth, they have a kind of inward reaſon, which makes them ſo docile, and willing to learne. I thinke every man is cloid and wearied
                              •
                           , with ſeeing ſo many apiſh and mimmike trickes, that juglers teach their Dogges, as the dances, where they miſſe not one eadence of the ſounds or notes they heare: Marke but the divers turnings, and ſeverall kinds of motions, which by the commandement of their bare wordes they make them performe: But I wonder not a little at the effect, which is ordinary amongſt vs; and that is, the dogs which blinde men vſe, both in Cittie and Country: I have obſerved how ſodainly they will ſtoppe when they come before ſome dores, where they are wont to receive almes; how carefully they will avoyde the ſhocke of Cartes and Coaches, even when they have roume enough to paſſe by them ſelves. I have ſeene ſome, going along a Towne-ditch, leave a plaine and even path, and take a worſe, that ſo they might draw-their Maſter from the ditch. How could a man make the dog conceive, his charge was only to looke to his maſters ſafetie, and for his ſervice 
                              •
                           o deſpiſe his owne commoditie and good? And how ſhould he have the knowledge, that ſuch a path would be broade inough for him, but not for a blinde man? Can all this be conceived without reaſon? We muſt not forget what Plutarke affirmeth to have ſeene a dog in Rome doe, before the Emperour Veſpaſian the father, in the Theatre of Marcellus. This Dogge ſerved a jugler, who was to play a fiction of many faces, and ſundry countenances, there he alſo was to act a part. Amongſt other things, he was for a long while to counterfet and faine himſelfe dead, becauſe he had eaten of a certaine drugge: having ſwallowed a peece of bread, which was ſuppoſed to be the drug, he began ſodainly to ſtagger and ſhake, as if he had beene giddie, then ſtretching and laying himſelfe along, as ſtiffe as if hee were ſtarke-dead, ſuffered himſelfe to be dragged and haled from one place to another, according to the ſubject and plot of the play, and when he knew his time, firſt he began faire and ſoftly to ſtirre, as if he were rouzed out of a dead ſlumber, then lifting vp his head, hee looked and ſtared ſo gaſtly, that all the by-ſtanders were amazed. The Oxen, which in the Kings gardens of Suſa were taught to water them, and to draw water out of deepe Welles, turned certaine great wheeles, to which were faſtned great buckets (as in many places of Languedoke is commonly ſeene) and being every one appoynted to draw juſt a hundred turnes a day, they

were ſo accuſtomed to that number, as it was impoſſible by any compulſion to make them draw one more, which taske ended they would ſuddenly ſtop. We are growne ſtriplings before we can tell a hundred; and many Nations have lately beene diſcovered, that never knew what numbers meant. More diſcourſe is required to teach others, then to be taught. And omitting what Democritus judged and prooved, which is, that beaſtes have inſtructed vs in moſt of our Artes: As the Spider to weave and ſew, the Swollow to build, the Swan, and the Nightingale muſicke, and divers beaſtes, by imitating them, the Arte of Phyſicke: Aristotle is of opinion, that Nightingales teach their yoong-ons to ſing, wherein they employ both long time and much care: whence it followeth, that thoſe which we keepe tame in Cages and have not had leaſure to goe to their Parents ſchoole, loſe much grace in their ſinging. Whereby we may conclude, they are much amended by diſcipline and ſtudy. And amongſt thoſe that run wilde, their ſong is not all one, nor alike. Each one hath learnt either better or worſe, according to his capacity. And ſo jealous are they in their prentiſe-ſhip, that to excell one another, they will ſo ſtoutly contend for the maſtery, that many times, ſuch as are vanquiſhed die; their wind and ſtrength ſooner failing then their voice. The yoong-ones wil very ſadly ſit recording their leſſon, and are often ſeene labouring how to imitate certain ſongnotes: The Scholler liſtneth attentively to his Maſters Leſſon, and carefully yeeldeth account of it; now one and then another ſhall hold his peace: Marke but how they endevour to amend their faults, and how the elder ſtriveth to reproove the yoongeſt. Arrius proteſteth to have ſeene an Elephant, who on every thigh having a Cimball hanging, and one faſtned to his truncke, at the found of which, all other Elephants danced in a round, now riſing aloft, then lowting full low at certaine cadences, even as the inſtrument directed them, and was much delighted with the harmony. In the great ſhewes of Rome, Elephants were ordinarily ſeene, taught to moove and dance at the ſound of a voice, certaine dances, wherein were many ſtrange ſhifts, enter-changes, caprings, and cadences, very hard to be learned. Some have beene noted to konne and practiſe their leſſons, vſing much ſtudy and care, as being loath to be chidden and beaten of their maſters. But the tale of the Piot is very ſtrange, which Plutarke confidently witneſſeth to have ſeene: This Iay was in a Barbers ſhop of Rome, and was admirable in counterfaiting with hir voice whatſoever ſhe heard: It fortuned one day, that certaine Trumpeters ſtaied before this ſhop, and there ſounded a good while; and being gone, all that day, and the next after, the Piot began to be very ſad, ſilent, and melancholy, whereat all men marvelled, and ſurmized that the noiſe or clang of the Trumpets had thus affrighted and dizzied hir, and that with hir hearing ſhe had alſo loſt hir voice. But at laſt they found, ſhe was but in a deepe ſtudy, and dumpiſh retracting into hir ſelfe, exerciſing hir minde, and preparing hir voice, to repreſent the ſound, and expreſſe the noiſe of the Trumpets ſhe had heard: And the firſt voice ſhe vttered was that, wherein ſhe perfectly expreſſed their ſtraines, their cloſes, and their changes: having by hir new Prentiſhip altogether quit, and as it were, ſcorned what ever ſhee could prattle before. I will not omit to alleadge another example of a Dogge, which Plutarke alſo ſaith to have ſeene (as for any order or methode, I know very well I doe but confound it, which I obſerve no more in ranging theſe examples, than I doe in all the reſt of my buſineſſe) who being in a ſhip, noted that this Dogge was in great perplexity how to get ſome Oyle out of a deepe Pitcher, which by reaſon of it's narrow mouth, he could not reach with his tongue, got him preſently ſome Pibble-ſtones, and put ſo many into the Iarre, that he made the Oyle come vp ſo neare the brimme, as he could eaſily reach and licke ſome. And what is that but the effect of a very ſubtill ſpirit? It is reported, that the Ravens of Barbary will doe the like, when the water they would drinke is too low. This action doth ſomewhat reſemble that, which Iuba a King of that Nation relateth of their Elephants; that when through the wiles of thoſe who chaſe them, any one chanceth to fall into certaine deepe pittes, which they prepare for them, and to deceive them, they cover over with reedes, ſhrubs, and boughes, his fellowes will ſpeedily with all diligence bring great ſtore of ſtones and peeces of timber, that ſo they may helpe to recover him out againe. But this beaſt hath in many other effects, ſuch affinity with mans ſufficiency, that would I particularly trace out what experience hath taught, I ſhould eaſily get an affirmation of what I ſo ordinarily maintaine, which is, that there is more difference found betweene ſuch and ſuch a man, than betweene ſuch a beaſt and ſuch a man. An Elephants keeper in a private houſe of Syria, was wont every meale

to ſteale away halfe of the allowance which was alotted him; it fortuned on a day, his maſter would needes feede him himſelfe, and having poured that juſt meaſure of barly, which for his allowance hee had preſcribed him, into his manger: the Elephant ſternely eying his maſter, with his truncke divided the provender in two equall partes, and laide the one a ſide, by which he declared the wrong his keeper did him. An other having a keeper, who to encreaſe the meaſure of his provender, was wont to mingle ſtones with it, came one day to the pot which with meat in it for his keepers dinner was ſeething over the fire, and filled it vp with aſnes. Theſe are but particular effects: But that which all the world hath ſeene, and all men know, which is, that in all the armies that came out of the Eaſt, their chiefeſt ſtrength conſiſted in their Elephants by whom they reaped, without compariſon, farre greater effects, than now adaies we do by our great Ordonance, which in a maner holds their place in a ranged battell (ſuch as have any knowledge in ancient Hiſtories may eaſily gueſſe it to be true)
                        
                           —ſi quidem Tyrio ſervire ſolebant
                              
                                 
                                    •••
                                 . ſat. 12. 107
                           
                           Anibalt, & nostris ducibus, regi
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               Moloſſo
                           Horum maiores, & dorſo ferre cohortes,
                           Partem aliquam belli, & euntem in praelia turmam.
                        
                        
                           Their elders vſde great Hannibal to ſteede
                           Our Leaders, and Moloſſian Kings at neede,
                           And on their backe to beare ſtrong-guarding Knights,
                           Part of the warre, and troupes addreſt to fights.
                        
                        A man muſt needes reſt aſſured of the confidence they had in theſe beaſts, and of their diſcourſe, yeelding the front of a battell vnto them; where the leaſt ſtay they could have made, by reaſon of the hugeneſſe and weight of their bodies, and the leaſt amazement that might have made them turne head vpon their owne men, had bin ſufficient to loſe all. And few examples have been noted, that ever it fortuned they turned vpon their owne troupes, whereas we head-long throng one vpon another, and ſo are put to rowt: They had charge given them, not onely of one ſimple mooving, but of many and ſeverall parts in the combate: As the Spaniards did to their dogges in their new conqueſt of the Iudias; to whom they gave wages, and imparted their booties; which beaſts ſhewed as much dexteritie in purſuing, and judgement in ſtaying their victorie, in charging, or retreating, and as occaſion ſerved in diſtinguiſhing their friends from their enemies, as they did earneſtneſſe and eagernes: we rather admire and conſider ſtrange than common things: without which I ſhould never ſo long have ammuſed my ſelfe about this tedious catalogue. For, in my judgement he that ſhall neerely checke, what we ordinarily ſee in thoſe beaſts that live amongſt vs, ſhall in them finde as wonderful effects, as thoſe, which with ſo much toile are collected in far countries and paſſed ages. It is one ſame nature, which ſtil doth keep her courſe. He that throughly ſhould judge her preſent eſtate, might ſafely conclude, both what ſhall happen, and what is paſt. I have ſeene amongſt vs, men brought by ſea from diſtant countries, whoſe language, becauſe we could in no wiſe vnderſtand, and that their faſhions, their countenance, and their clothes did altogether differ from ours; who of vs did not deeme them brutiſh and ſavage? who did not impute their muteneſſe vnto ſtupiditie or beaſtlines, and to ſee them ignorant of the French tongue, of our kiſſing the handes, of our low-lowting courteſies, of our behaviour and carriage, by which, without contradiction, humane nature ought to take her patterne? Whatſoever ſeemeth ſtrange vnto vs, and we vnderſtand not, we blame and condemne. The like befalleth vs in our judging of beaſts. They have diverſe qualities, which ſomewhat ſimbolize with ours: from which, we may comparatively draw ſome conjecture, but of ſuch as are peculiar vnto them, what know wee what they are? Horſes, Dogges, Oxen, Sheepe, Birdes, and the greater number of ſenſitive cratures that live amongſt vs, knowe our voyce, and by it ſuffer themſelves to be directed. So did the Lamprey which Craſſus had, and came to him when he called it; ſo do the Eeles that breed in Arethuſaes fountaine. And my ſelfe have ſeene ſome fiſh-pondes, where, at a certaine crie of thoſe that kept them, the fiſh would preſently come to ſhoare, where they were wont to be fed.
                        —nomen habent, & ad magistriMart. 
                                 •
                              . 4. epig. 30. 6. 
                           Ʋocem quiſque ſui venit citatus.
                        
                           They have their proper names, and every one
                           Comes at his maſters voyce, as call'd vpon
                        
                        
                           By which we may judge, and conclude, that Elephants have ſome apprehenſion of religion, forſomuch as after diverſe waſhings and purifications, they are ſeene to lift vp their truncke, as we doe our armes, and at certaine hours of the day, without any inſtruction, of their owne accorde, holding their eies fixed towardes the Sunne-riſing, fall into a long meditating contemplation: yet, becauſe wee ſee no ſuch apparance in other beaſts, may wee righly conclude, that they are altogether voide of religion, and may not take that in payment, which is hidden from vs. As we perceive ſomething in that action, which the Phyloſopher Cleanthes well obſerved, becauſe it ſomewhat drawes neere vnto ours. He ſaw (as himſelfe reporteth) a company of Emmets goe from their neſt, bearing amongſt them the body of a dead Ant, toward another Emmets neſt, from which many other Ants came, as it were to meete them by the way to parly with them, who after they had continued together a while, they which came laſt, returned backe, to conſult (as you may imagine) with their fellow-citizens, and becauſe they could hardly come to any capitulation; they made two or three voyages to and fro: In the end, the laſt come, brought vnto the other a worme from their habitation, as for a ranſome of the dead, which worme the firſt company tooke vpon their backes, and carried it home, leaving the dead body vnto the other. Loe heere the interpretation that Cleanthes gave it: Witneſſing thereby, that thoſe creatures which have no voice at all, have nevertheleſſe mutual commerce, and enterchangeable communication, whereof if we be not partakers, it is onely our fault; and therfore doe we fondly to cenſure it. And they yet produce divers other effects, farre ſurpaſſing our capacity, and ſo farre out of the reach of our imitation, that even our thoughts are vnable to conceive them. Many hold opinion, that in the laſt and famous ſea-fight, which Antonie loſt againſt Auguſtus, his Admirall-gally was in hir courſe ſtaied by that little fiſh, the Latines call Remora, and the Engliſh a Sucke-ſtone, whoſe property is, to ſtay any ſhip he can faſten himſelfe vnto. And the Emperour Caligula, ſailing with a great fleete along the coaſt of Romania, his owne Gally was ſuddenly ſtaied by ſuch a fiſh, which he cauſed to be taken ſticking faſt to the keele moodily raging, that ſo little a creature had the power to force both ſea and winde, and the violence of all his oares, onely with hir bill ſticking to his Gally (for it is a kinde of ſhell-fiſh) and was much more amazed when he perceived the fiſh, being brought aboord his ſhip, to have no longer that powerfull vertue, which it had, being in the Sea. A certaine Citizen of Cyzicum, whilom purchaſed vnto himſelfe the reputation to be an excellent Mathematitian, becauſe he had learn't the quality of the Hedge-hogge, whoſe property is to build his hole or denne, open diverſe waies, and toward ſeverall windes, and fore-ſeeing riſing ſtormes, he preſently ſtoppeth the holes that way; which thing the foreſaid Citizen heedfully obſerving, would in the City foretell any future ſtorme, and what winde ſhould blow. The Cameleon taketh the colour of the place wherein he is. The fiſh called a Pourcontrell, or Manie-feete, changeth himſelfe into what colour he liſts, as occaſion offereth it ſelfe; that ſo he may hide himſelfe from what he feareth, and catch what he ſeeketh for. In the Camelion it is a change proceeding of paſſion, but in the Pourcontrell a change in action; we our ſelves doe often change our colour, and altar our countenance, through ſudden feare, choler, ſhame, and ſuch like violent paſſions, which are wont to alter the hew of our faces: but it is by the effect of ſufferance, as in the Cameleon. The jaundiſe hath power to make vs yelow, but it is not in the diſpoſition of our wils. The effects we perceive in other creatures, greater than ours, witneſſe ſome more excellent faculty in them, which is concealed from vs; as it is to be ſuppoſed, diverſe others of their conditions and forces are, whereof no apperance or knowledge commeth to vs. Of all former praedictions, the ancienteſt and moſt certaine were ſuch as were drawen from the flight of birds: we have nothing equall vnto it, nor ſo admirable. The rule of fluttering, and order of ſhaking their wings, by which they conjecture the conſequences of things to enſue, muſt neceſſarily be directed to ſo noble an operation by ſome excellent and ſupernaturall meane: For, it is a wreſting of the letter, to attribute ſo wondrous effects, to any naturall decree, without the knowledge, conſent, or diſcourſe of him, that cauſeth and produceth them, and is a moſt falſe opinion: Which to proove, the Torpedo or Cramp-fiſh hath the property to benumme and aſtoniſh, not onely the limbes of thoſe that touch it, but alſo theirs, that with any long pole or fiſhing line touch any part thereof, ſhee doth tranſmit and convey a kinde of heavie numming into the hands of thoſe that ſtirre or handle the ſame: Moreover, it is averred, that if any matter be caſt vpon them, the aſtoniſhment

is ſenſibly felt to gaine vpward vntill it come to the handes, and even through the water it aſtoniſheth the feeling-ſence. Is not this a wonderfull power? Yet is it not altogether vnprofitable for the Cramp-fiſh, ſhe both knowes and makes vſe of it: for to catch prey ſhe purſueth, ſhe is ſeene to hide hirſelfe vnder the mudde, that, other fiſhes ſwimming over hir, ſtrucken and benummed with hir exceeding coldneſſe, may fall into hir clawes. The Cranes, Swallowes, and other wandering birdes, changing their abode, according to the ſeaſons of the yeare, ſhew evidently the knowledge they have of their fore divining faculty, and often put the ſame in vſe. Hunters aſſure vs, that to chuſe the beſt dogge, and which they purpoſe to keepe from our a litter of other yoong whelpes, there is no better meane than the damme hirſelfe: for, if they be remooved from out their kennell, him that ſhe firſt brings th
                              •
                           ther againe, ſhall alwaies proove the beſt; or if one but encompaſſe hir kennell with fire, looke which of hir whelpes ſhe firſt ſeeketh to ſave, is vndoubtedly the beſt: whereby it appeareth, they have a certaine vſe of Prognoſticating, that we have not; or elſe ſome hidden vertue, to judge of their yoong ones, different and more lively then ours. The manner of all beaſts breeding, engendering, nouriſhing, working, mooving, living and dying, being ſo neere to ours, what ever we abridge from their mooving cauſes, and adde to our condition above theirs, can no way depart from our reaſons diſcourſe. For a regiment of our health, Phiſitious propoſe the example of beaſts manner of life and proceeding vnto vs: for this common ſaying is alwaies in the peoples mouth:
                        
                           Tenez chauds les pieds. & la teste,Ioub. err. p
                                    •
                                 p. pur. 2. pag. 140
                           
                           Au demeurant vivez en beste.
                        
                        
                           Keepe warme (t'is meete) thy head and feete:
                           In all the reſt, live like a beaſt.
                        
                        Generation is the chiefeſt naturall action: we have a certaine diſpoſition of ſome members, fitteſt for that purpoſe; nevertheleſſe, they bid vs range our ſelves vnto a brutiſh ſituation and diſpoſition, as moſt effectuall:
                        
                           —more ferarum,
                              Lucr. l. 4. 1256
                           
                           Quadrupedúm
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               magis ritu, plerúmque putantur
                           Concipere vxores: quia ſic loca ſumere poſſunt,
                           Pectoribus poſitis, ſublatis ſemina lumbis.
                        
                        And reject thoſe indiſcreete and inſolent motions, which women have ſo luxuriouſly found out, as hurtfull: conforming them to the example and vſe of beaſtes of their ſex, as more modeſt and conſiderate.
                        
                           Nam mulier prohibet ſe concipere, at que repugnat,Ibed. 1260.
                           
                           Clunib
                                 •
                              s ipſa viri Venerem ſi laet a retractet,
                           Atque exeſſat
                                 •
                               ciet omni pectore fluctus,
                           Eij
                                 •
                              it enim ſulci recta regione viáque
                           Vomerem, atque locis avert it 
                                 •
                              eminis ictum.
                        
                        If it be juſtice to give every one his due, beaſtes which ſerve, love, and defend their benefactors, purſue and outrage ſtrangers, and ſuch as offend them, by ſo doing they repreſent ſome ſhew of our juſtice, as alſo in reſerving a high kinde of equality in diſpenſing of what they have to their yoong-ones. Touching friendſhip, without all compariſon, they profeſſe it more lively and ſhew it more conſtantly, then men. Hircanus a dog of Lyſimachus the king, his maſter being dead, without eating or drinking would never come from off his bed, and when the dead corpes was remooved thence, he followed it, and laſtly flung himſelfe into the fire, where his maſter was burned. As did alſo the dogge of one called Pyrrhus, who after he was dead, would never budge from his maſters couch, and when he was remooved, ſuffered himſelfe to be carried away with him, and at laſt flung himſelfe into the fire wherein his maſter was conſumed. There are certaine inclinations of affection, which without counſell of reaſon ariſe ſomtimes in vs, proceeding of a caſuall temerity, which ſome call Sympathic: beaſts as wel as men are capable of it. We ſee horſes take a kinde of acquaintance one of another, ſo that often, travelling by the high-way, or feeding together, we have much ado to keep them aſunder, wee ſee them bend and applie their affections to ſome of their fellowes colours, as if it were vpon a certaine viſage; and when they meete with any ſuch, with ſignes of joy, and demonſtration of good will, to joine and accoſt them, and to hate aud ſhunne ſome other formes and colours. Beaſtes, as well as wee, have choiſe in their loves, and are

very nice in chuſing of their mates. They are not altogether voide of our extreame and vnappeſable jealouſies. Luſtful deſires are either natural, and neceſſary, as eating and drinking; or elſe naturall and not neceſſary, as the acquaintance of males and females: or elſe neither neceſſary nor naturall: Of this laſt kinde are almoſt all mens: For, they are all ſuperfluous and artificiall. It is wonderfull to ſee with how little, nature will be ſatisfied, and how little ſhe hath left for vs to be deſired. The preparations in our Kitchins, doe nothing at all concerne hir lawes. The Stoikes ſay, that a man might very well ſuſtaine himſelfe with one Olivea day. The delicacy of our wines, is no part of hir leſſon, no more is the ſurcharge and reliſhing, which we adde vnto our letcherous appetites.
                        —neque illaHor. ſer. li 1. ſar. 2 30. Magno prognatum depoſcit conſule cunnum.
                        Theſe ſtrange luſtfull longings, which the ignorance of good, and a falſe opinion have poſſeſt vs with, are in number ſo infinite, that in a maner they expell all thoſe which are naturall: even as if there were ſo many ſtrangers in a City, that ſhould either baniſn and expel all the naturall inhabitants thereof, or vtterly ſuppreſſe their ancient power and authority, and abſolutely vſurping the ſame, take poſſeſſion of it. Brute beaſts are much more regulate then we; and with more moderation containe themſelves within the compaſſe, which nature hath preſcribed them: yet not ſo exactly, but that they have ſome coherency with our riotous licenciouſneſſe. And even as there have beene found certaine furious longings and vnnaturall deſires, which have provoked men vnto the love of beaſtes, ſo have diverſe times ſome of them beene drawne to love vs, and are poſſeſſed with monſtrous affections from one kind to another: witneſſe the Elephant, that in the love of an hearb-wife, in the city of Alexandria, was corivall with Aristophanes, the Grammarian; who in all offices pertayning to an earneſt woer and paſſionate ſuter, yeelded nothing vnto him: For, walking thorow the Fruite-market, he would here and there ſnatch vp ſome with his truncke, and carry them vnto hir: as neere as might be he would never looſe the ſight of hir: and now and then over hir band put his truncke into hir boſome, and feele hir breaſts. They alſo report of a Dragon, that was exceedingly in love with a yong maiden; and of a Gooſe in the City of Aſope, which dearely loved a yong childe: alſo of a Ramme that belonged to the Muſitian Glauſia. Doe we not daily ſee Munkies ragingly in love with women, and furiouſly to purſue them? And certaine other beaſtes given to love the males of their owne ſex? Oppianus and others report ſome examples, to ſhew the reverence and manifeſt the awe, ſome beaſts in their marriages, beare vnto their kindred: but experience makes vs often ſee the contrary:
                        
                           ——nec habetur turpe iuvencae
                              Orid. Metam. lib. 10. 325.
                           
                           Ferre patrem tergo: fit equo ſua filia coniux:
                           Quàſque creavit, init pecudes caper: ipſaque cuius
                           Semine concepta est, ex illo concipit ales
                        
                        
                           To beare hir Sire the Heifer ſhameth not:
                           The Horſe takes his owne Fillies maiden-head:
                           The Goate gets them with yong, whom he begot:
                           Birds breed by them, by whom themſelves were bred,
                        
                        Touching a ſubtil pranke and witty tricke, is there any ſo famous as that of Thales the Philoſophers Mule, which, laden with ſalt, paſſing through a River chanced to ſtumble, ſo that the ſacks ſhe carried were all wet, and perceiving the ſalt (becauſe the water had melted it) to grow lighter, ceaſed not, aſſoone as ſhe came neere any water, together with hir loade to plunge hirſelfe therein, vntill hir maſter, being aware of hir craft, commanded hir to be laden with wooll, which being wet became heavier; the Mule finding hirſelfe deceived, vſed hir former policy no more. There are many of them, that lively repreſent the viſage of our avarice, who with a greedy kinde of deſire endevour to ſurpriſe whatſoever comes within their reach, and though they reape no commodity, nor have any vſe of it, to hide the ſame very curiouſly. As for husbandry, they exceede vs, not only in fore-ſight to ſpare, and gather together for times to come, but have alſo many parts of the skill belonging there vnto. As the Ants, when they perceive their corne to grow muſtie, and graine to be ſowre, for feare it ſhould rot and putrifie, ſpread the ſame abroad before their neaſtes, that ſo it may aire and drie. But the caution they vſe in gnawing, and prevention they imploy in paring their

graines of wheate, is beyond all imagination of mans wit: Becauſe wheat doth not alwaies keepe drie nor wholeſome, but moiſten, melt and diſſolve into a kinde of whey, namely when it beginneth to bud, fearing it ſhould turne to ſeede, and looſe the nature of a ſtorehouſe, for their ſuſtenance, they part and gnawe-off the end whereat it wonts to bud. As for warre, which is the greateſt and moſt glorious of all humane actions, I would faine know, if we will vſe it for an argument of ſome prerogative, or otherwiſe for a teſtimonie of our imbecilitie and imperfection, as in truth, the ſcience wee vſe to defeate and kill one another, to ſpoile and vtterly to overthrow our owne kinde, it ſeemeth, it hath not much to make it ſelfe to be wiſhed-for in beaſtes, that have it not.
                        
                           —quando leoni
                              Iuven. ſat. 1
                                    •
                                 . 160.
                           
                           Fortioreripuit vitam leo, quo nemore vnquam
                           Expiravit aper maioris dentibus apri?
                        
                        
                           When hath a greater Lion damnifide
                           A lions life? in what wood ever di'de,
                           A bore by tusks and gore,
                           Of any greater bore?
                        
                        Yet are not they altogether exempted from it: witneſſe the furious encounters of Bees, and the hoſtile enterpriſes of the Princes and Leaders of the two contrary Armies.
                        
                           —ſaepe duobus
                              Virg. Georg. l. 4. 67.
                           
                           Regibus inceſſit magno diſcordia motu,
                           Continuo
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               animos vulgi & trepidantia bello
                           Corda licet longè praeſciſcere.—
                        
                        
                           Oft-times twixt two no great Kings great diſſention
                           With much adoe doth ſet them at contention;
                           The vulgare mindes ſtrait may you ſee from farre,
                           And hearts that tremble at the thought of warre.
                        
                        I nevr marke this divine deſcription, but mee thinkes I reade humane fooliſhneſſe and wordly vanitie painted in it. For, theſe motions of warre, which out of their horror and aſtoniſhent breed this tempeſt of cries, and clang of ſounds in vs:
                        
                           Fulgur vbi ad caelumſe tollit, tota
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               circumIuer. l. 2. 326.
                           
                           Aere renideſcit tellus, ſubter
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               virum vi
                           Excitur pedibus ſonitus, clamore
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               montes
                           Icti reiectant voces ad ſider a mundi:
                        
                        
                           Where lightning raiſeth it ſelfe to the skies,
                           The earth ſhines round with armour, ſoundes doe riſe
                           By mens force vnder feere, wounded with noyſe
                           The hilles to heav'n reverberate their voyce.
                        
                        This horror-cauſing aray of ſo many thouſands of armed men, ſo great furie, earneſt fervor, and vndaunted courage, it would make one laugh to ſee by how many vaine occaſions it is raiſed and ſet on fire, and by what light meanes it is againe ſuppreſſed and extinct.
                        —Paridis propter narratur amoremHor. l. 1. epi. 2. 
                                 •
                              . Grae
                              •
                           ta Barbariediro colliſa duello.
                        
                           For Paris luſtfull love (as Stories tell)
                           All Greece to direfull warre with Aſia fell:
                        
                        The hatred of one man, a ſpight, a pleaſure, a familiar ſuſpect, or a jealouſie; cauſes, which ought not to moove two ſcolding fiſh-wives to ſcratch one another, is the ſoule and motive of all this hurly-burly. Shall we beleeve them that are the principall authors and cauſes therof? Let vs but hearken vnto the greateſt and moſt victitorious Emperour, and the mightieſt that ever was, how pleaſantly he laughs, and wittily he plaies, at ſo many battells and bloody fights, hazarded both by ſea and land, at the blood and lives of five hundred thouſand ſoules which followed his fortune, and the ſtrength and riches of twoo parts of the world conſumed and drawne drie for the ſervice of his enterpriſe:
                        
                           Quòd futuit Glaphyran Antonius, hanc mihi poenamMart. l. 11. epig. 21.
                           
                           Fulvia constituit, ſe quoqe vtifutuam:
                           Fulviam ego vtfutuam? quid ſi me Manius oret
                           Paedicem, faciam? non puto, ſi ſapiam.
                           
                              Aut futue, aut pugnemu
                                 •
                              ait: quid ſi mihivita
                           Charior eſt ipſa mentula? Signa canant.
                        
                        (I vſe my Latine ſomewhat boldly, but it is with that leave which yon have given mee,) This vaſte huge bodie hath ſo many faces and ſeverall motion, which ſeeme to threat both heauen and earth.
                        
                           Quám multi Lybico volvuntur marmore fluctusVirg Ae
                                    •
                                 . l. 7. 717.
                           
                           Saevus vbi Orion hyberu
                                 •
                              s conditur vndis:
                           Velcùm ſole novo denſae torrentur ariſt
                                 •
                              ,
                           Aùt Hermi campo, aut Lyciae flaventibus arvis,
                           Scuta ſonant, pulſu
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               pedum tremit excita tellus.
                        
                        
                           As many waves, as rowle in Affricke marble-ſoundes,
                           When fierce Oryon hides in Winter waves his head:
                           Or when thicke-eares of Corne are parch't by Sunne new-ſpredde.
                           In Hermus fruitfull fields, or Lycaees yellow grounds,
                           With noyſe of ſhields and feete, the trembling earth ſo ſounds.
                        
                        
                           This many-headed, divers-armed, and furiouſly-raging-monſter, is man; wretched weake and miſerable man: whom if you conſider well, what is he, but a crawling, and ever-moving Antes-neast
                                 •
                              
                           
                        
                        It nigrum campis agmen:—Virg. Aen. l. 4. 404.
                        
                        
                           The ſable-coloured band,
                           Marches along the Land.
                        
                        A guſt of contrarie winds, the croking of a flight of Ravens, the falſe paſe of a Horſe, the caſual flight of an Eagle, a dreame, a ſodaine voyce, a falſe ſigne, a mornings miſt, an evening fogge, are enough to overthrow, ſufficient to overwhelme and able to pul him to the ground. Let the Sunne but ſhine hote vpon his face, hee faintes and ſwelters with heate: Caſt but a little duſt in his eyes, as to the Bees mentioned by our Poet, all our enſignes, all our legions, yea great Pompey himſelfe in the forefront of them is overthrowne and put to route (For as I remember it was he whom Sertorius vanquiſhed in Spaine, with all thoſe goodly armes.) This alſo ſerved Eumenes againſt Antigonus, and Surena againſt Craſſus:
                        
                        
                           Hi motus animorum, at
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               haec certamina tanta,Virg. Georg. li. 4 36.
                           
                           Pulveris exigui tactu compreſſaquieſcent.
                        
                        
                           Theſe ſtomake-motions, theſe contentions great,
                           Clam'd with a little duſt, ſtrait looſe their heate,
                        
                        Let-vs but vncouple ſome of our ordinary flies, and let looſe a few gnats amongſt them, they ſhall have both the force to ſcatter, and courage to conſume him. The Portugalls not long ſince beleagring the City of Tamly, in the territory of Xiatine, the inhabitants thereof, brought great ſtore of Hives, )whereof they have plentie) vpon their walls: And with fire drove them ſo forcible vpon their enemies, who as vnable to abide their aſſaults, and endure their ſtingings, left their enterprize. Thus by this new kinde of helpe was the liberty of the Towne gained, and victory purchaſed; with ſo happy ſucceſſe, that in their retreating, there was not one towneſ-man found wanting. The ſoules of Emperours and Coblers are all caſt in one ſame mould. Conſidering the importance of Princes actions, and their weight, wee perſwade our ſelves, they are brought forth by ſome as weighty and important cauſes; wee are deceived: They are mooved, ſtirred and remooved in their motions, by the ſame ſprings and wardes, that wee are in ours. The ſame reaſon that makes vs chide and braule, and fall out with anie of our neighboures, cauſeth a warre to follow betweene Princes; The ſame reaſon that makes vs whip or beate a lackey, maketh a Prince (if hee apprehend it) to ſpoyle and waſte a whole Province. They have as eaſie a will as we, but they can doe much more. Alike deſires perturbe both a skinne-worme, and an Elephant. Thouching truſt and faithfulneſſe there is no creature in the worlde ſo treacherous as man. Our hiſtories report the earneſt purſuite and ſharpe chaſe, that ſome Dogges have made for the death of their maſters. King Pirrhus finding a Dog, that watched a dead man, and vnderſtanding he had done ſo three daies and nights together, commanded the corps to be enterred, and tooke the Dog along with him. It fortuned one day (as Pirrhus was ſurvaying the Generall Muſters of his Army) the Dog perceiving in that multitude, the man who had murthered his maiſter, loud-barking, and with great rage ran furiouſly vpon him; by which ſignes he furthered and procured his maiſters revenge, which by way of juſtice, was ſhortly executed. Even ſo did the Dogge belonging

to Heſiodus, ſurnamed the wiſe, having convicted the children of Caniſter of Naupactus, of the murther committed on his Maſters perſon. Another Dogge being appointed to watch a Temple in Athens, having perceived a ſacrelegious theefe, to carrie away the faireſt jewels therein, barked at him ſo long as he was able, and ſeeing he could not awaken the Sextons or Temple-keepers, followed the theefe, whither-ſoever he went; daie-light being come, he kept himſelfe a loof-off, but never loſt the ſight of him: if he offered him meat, he vtterly refuſed it; but if any paſſenger chanced to come by, on them he fawned, with waging his taile, and tooke whatever they offered him; If the theefe ſtaied to reſt himſelfe, he alſo ſtayed in the ſame place: The newes of this Dogge being come to the Temple-keepers, they as they went along, enquiring of the Dogs haire and colour, purſued his tracke ſo long, that at laſt they found both the Dog and the theefe in the Citie of Cromyon, whom they brought backe to Athens, where for his offence he was ſeverely puniſhed. And the judges in acknowledgement of the Dogges good office, at the Cities charge appointed him for his ſuſtenance a certaine daily meaſure of Corne, and enjoyned the Prieſts of the Temple, carefully to looke vnto him. Plutarke affirmeth this ſtorie to be moſt true, and to have hapned in his time. Touching gratitude and thankfulneſſe, (for me thinks we have need to further this word greatly) this onely example ſhall ſuffice, of which Appion reporteth to have been aſpectator himſelfe. One day (ſaith he) that the Senate of Rome, (to pleaſe and recreate the common people) cauſed a great number of wilde beaſts to be baited, namely huge great Lions, it ſo fortuned, that there was one amongſt the reſt, who by reaſon of his furious and ſtately carriage, of his vnmatched ſtrength, of his great limmes, and of his loude, and terror-cauſing roaring, drew all by-ſtanders eyes to gaze vpon him. Amongſt other ſlaves, that in ſight of all the people were preſented to encounter with theſe beaſts, there chanced to be one Androdus of Dacia, who belonged vnto a Roman Lord, who had been Conſull. This huge Lion, having eyed him a far off, firſt made a ſuddaine ſtop, as ſtrucken into a kind of admiration, then with a milde and gentle countenance, as if he would willingly have taken acquaintance of him, faire and ſoftly approached vnto him: Which done, and reſting, aſſured he was the man he tooke him for, begun fawningly to wagge his taile, as dogges doe that fawne vpon their new-ſound maſters, and licke the poore and miſerable ſlaves hands and thighes, who through feare was almoſt out of his wits and halfe dead. Androdus at laſt taking hart of grace; and by reaſon of the Lions mildeneſſe having rouzed vp his ſpirits, and wiſhly fixing his eies vpon him, to ſee whether he could call him to remembrance; it was to all beholders a ſingular pleaſure to obſerve the love, the joy, and blandiſhments, ech endevored to enter-ſhew one another. Whereat the people raiſing a loud crie, and by their ſhouting and clapping of hands ſeeming to be much pleaſed; the Emperour willed the ſlave to be brought before him, as deſirous to vnderſtand of him the cauſe of ſo ſtrange and ſeld-ſeene an accident: Who related this new, and wonderfull ſtorie vnto him.
                        My maſter (ſaid he) being Proconſull in Affrica, forſomuch as he cauſed me every day to be moſt cruelly beaten, and held me in ſo rigorous bondage, I was conſtrained, as being wearie of my life, to run away: And ſafely to ſcape from ſo eminent a perſon, and who had ſo great authoritie in the Countrie, I thought it beſt to get me into the deſert, and moſt vnfrequented wilderneſſes of that region, with a full reſolution, if I could not compaſſe the meanes to ſuſtaine my ſelfe, to finde one way or other, with violence to make my ſelfe away. One day, the Sunne about noone-tide being extreamly hote, and the ſcorching heat thereof intollerable, I fortuned to come vnto a wilde vnhanted cave, hidden amongſt crags, and almoſt inacceſſible, and where I imagined no footing had ever been; therein I hid my ſelfe: I had not long been there, but in comes this Lion, with one of his pawes ſore hurt, and bloody-goared, wailing for the ſmart, and groaning for the paine he felt; at whoſe arrivall, I was much diſmaide, but he ſeeing me lie cloſe-cowring in a corner of his den, gently made his approaches vnto me, holding forth his goared paw toward me, and ſeemed with ſhewing the ſame humbly to ſue, and ſuppliantly to beg for help at my hands. I, moved with ruth, taking it into my hand, pulled out a great ſplint, which was gotten into-it, and ſhakingoff all feare, firſt I wrung and cruſht his ſore, and cauſed the filth and matter, which therein was gathered, to come forth; then, as gently as for my hart I could, I cleanſed, wiped, and dried the ſame. He feeling ſome eaſe in his griefe, and his paine to ceaſe, ſtill holding his foote betweene my hands, began to ſleep and take ſome reſt. Thence forward he and I lived

together, the full ſpace of three years in his den, with ſuch meat as he ſhifted-for: For, what beaſts he killed, or what prey ſoever he tooke, he ever brought home the better part, and ſhared-it with me, which for want of fire, I roſted in the Sunne, and therewith nouriſhed my ſelfe all that while. But at laſt wearied with this kinde of brutiſh life, the Lion being one day gone to purchaſe his wonted pray, I left the place, hoping to mend my fortunes, and having wandred vp and downe three dayes, I was at laſt taken by certaine Souldiers, which from Africa brought me into this Citie to my Maſter againe, who immediately condemned me to death, and to be devoured by wilde beaſts. And as I now perceive, the ſame Lion was alſo ſhortly after taken, who as you ſee hath now required me of the good turne I did him, and the health which by my meanes he recoved. Behold heer the hiſtorie, Androdus reported vnto the Emperour, which after he cauſed to be declared vnto all the people, at whoſe generall requeſt, he was forthwith ſet at libertie, and quit of his puniſhment, and by the common conſent of all, had the Lion beſtowed vpon him. Appion ſaith further, that Androdus was daily ſeen to leade the Lion vp and downe the ſtreets of Rome, tied onely with a little twine, and walking from taverne to taverne, received ſuch money as was given him, who would gently ſuffer himſelfe to be handled, touched, decked, and ſtrowed with flowers, all over and over, many ſaying when they met him: yonder is the Lion that is the mans hoſte, and yonder is the man that is the Lions Phiſitian. We often mourne and weepe, for the loſſe of thoſe beaſts we love, ſo doe they many times for the loſſe of vs.
                        
                           Poſt bellator equus poſitis inſignibus Aethon.Virg. Aen. li. 11. 89.
                           
                           It lacrimans, guttiſque humectat grandibus ora.
                        
                        
                           Next Aethon horſe of warre, all ornaments laide downe,
                           Goes weeping, with great drops bedewe's his cheekes a downe.
                        
                        As ſome of our nations have wives in common, and ſome in ſeverall, each man keeping himſelfe to his owne; ſo have ſome beaſts; yet ſome there are, that obſerve their marriages, with as great reſpect as we doe ours. Touching the mutuall ſocietie, and reciprocall confederation, which they deviſe amongſt themſelves, that ſo they may be faſt combined together, and in times of need help one another, it is apparant, that if Oxen, Hogs, and other beaſts being hurt by vs, chance to crie, all the heard runnes to aide him, and in his defenſe will joine all together. The fiſh, called of the Latines Scarus, having ſwallowed the fiſhers hooke, his fellowes will preſently flocke about him, and nibble the line in ſunder; and if any of them happen to be taken in a bow-net, ſome of his fellowes turning his head away, will put his taile in at the necke of the net, who with his teeth faſt-holding the ſame, never leave him, vntill they have pulled him out. The Barble fiſhes, if one of them chance to be engaged, will ſet the line againſt their backes, and with a fin they have, toothed like a ſharp ſaw, preſently ſaw and fret the ſame aſunder. Concerning particular offices, which we for the benefit of our life, draw one from an other, many like examples are found amongſt them. It is aſſuredly beleeved, that the Whale never ſwimmeth, vnleſſe ſhe have a little fiſh going before her, as her vantgard, it is in ſhape like a Gudgeon, and both the Latines and we, call it the Whales-guide; for, ſhe doth ever follow him, ſuffering her ſelfe, as eaſily to be led and turned by him, as a ſhip is directed and turned by a ſterne: for requitall of which good turne, whereas all things elſe, be it, beaſt, fiſh, or veſſell, that comes within the horrible Chaes of this monſtrous mouth, is preſently loſt and devoured, this little fiſh, doth ſafely retire himſelfe therein, and there ſleepes verie quietly, and as long as he ſleepes, the Whale never ſtirs; but aſſoone as he awaketh and goeth his way, whereever he takes his courſe ſhe alwaies followeth him, and if ſhe fortune to looſe him, ſhe wanders here and there, and often ſtriketh vpon the rocks, as a ſhip that hath nor maſt nor rudder. This, Plutarke witneſſeth to have ſeen in the Iland of Anticyra. There is ſuch a like ſocietie betweene the little bird called a Wren, and the Crocodill: For, the Wren ſerveth as a ſentinell to ſo great a monſter: And if the Ichneumon, which is his mortall enemie approach to fight with him, the little bird let, leſt he might ſurpriſe him whilſt he ſleepeth, with his ſinging, and pecking him with his bill, awakens him, and gives him warning of the danger he is in. The bird liveth by the ſcraps, and feedeth vpon the leavings of that monſter, who gently receiveth him into his mouth, and ſuffers him to pecke his jawes and teeth for ſuch mammockes of fleſh as ſticke betweene them: and if he purpoſe to cloſe his mouth, he doth firſt warne him to be gone, faire and eaſie cloſing it by little and little, without any whit cruſhing or hurting him. The

ſhell-fiſh called a Nacre, liveth even ſo with the Pinnotere, which is a little creature like vnto a Crabfiſh, and as his porter or vſher waites vpon him, attending the opening of the Nacre, which he continually keepes gaping, vntill he ſee ſome little fiſh enter in, fit for their turne, then he creepes into the Nacre, and leaves not pinching his quicke fleſh, vntill he makes him cloſe his ſhell, and ſo they both together faſt in their hold, devour their prey. In the maner of the Tunnies life, may be diſcovered a ſingular knowledge of the three parts of the Mathematikes. Firſt for Aſtrologie, it may well be ſaid that man doth learne it of them: For, whereſoever the winter Solſtitium doth take them, there do they ſtay themſelves, and never ſtir till the next Aequinoctium, and that is the reaſon why Aristotle doth ſo willingly aſcribe that arte vnto them: Then for Geometrie and Arithmetike, they alwaies frame their ſhole of a Cubike figure, every way ſquare: and ſo forme a ſolide, cloſe and wel-ranged battailon, encompaſſed round about of ſixe equall ſides. Thus orderly marſhaled, they take their courſe and ſwim whither their journey tends, as broad and wide behind as before: So that he that ſeeth and telleth but one ranke, may eaſily number all the troope, forſomuch as the number of the depth is equall vnto the bredth, and the bredth vnto the length. Touching magnanimitie and haughtie courage, it is hard to ſet it forth more lively, and to produce a rarer patterne, then that of the Dog, which from India was ſent vnto Alexander: to whom was firſt preſented a Stag, then a wilde Boare, and then a Beare, with each of which he ſhould have foughten, but he ſeemed to make no accompt of them, and would not ſo much as remoove out of his place for them, but when he ſaw a Lion, he preſently rouzed himſelfe, ſhewing evidently he meant onely ſo noble a beaſt worthie to enter combate with him. Concerning repentance and acknowledging of faults committed, it is reported, that an Elephant having through rage of choller ſlaine his governour, conceived ſuch an extreame inward griefe, that he would never afterward touch any food, and ſuffered himſelf to pine to death. Touching clemencie, it is reported of a Tiger, (the fierceſt and moſt inhumane beaſt of all) who having a Kid given her to feed vpon, endured the force of gnawing hunger, two daies together, rather then ſhe would hurt him; the third day with maine ſtrength ſhe brake the cage, wherein ſhe was kept-pent, and went elſewhere to ſhift for feeding; as one vnwilling to ſeize vpon the ſeelie Kid her familiar and gueſt. And concerning priviledges of familiaritie and ſympathie cauſed by converſation, is it not oft ſeen, how ſome make Cats, Dogs, and Hares ſo tame, ſo gentle, and ſo milde, that without harming one another they ſhall live and continue together? But that which experience teacheth ſea-faring men, eſpecially thoſe that come into the ſeas of S
                                 ••
                              ilie, of the qualitie and condition of the Halcyon bird, or as ſome call it Alcedo or kings-fiſher, exceeds all mens conceit. In what kinde of creature did ever nature ſo much prefer both their hatching, ſitting, brooding, and birth? Poets faine, that the Iland of Delos, being before wandring and fleeting vp and downe, was for the delivery of Latona made firme and ſetled. But Gods decree hath been, that all the watrie wilderneſſe ſhould be quiet and made calme, without raine, wind, or tempeſt, during the time the Halcyon ſitteth and bringeth forth her yoong-ones, which is much about the Winter Solstitium, and ſhorteſt day in the yeare: By whoſe priviledge even in the hart & deadeſt time of Winter we have ſeven calme daies, and as many nights to ſaile without any danger. Their Hens know no other Cocke but their owne: They never forſake him all the daies of their life; and if the Cocke chance to be weake and crazed, the Hen will take him vpon her neck, and carrie him with her, whereſoever ſhe goeth, and ſerve him even vntill death. Mans wit could neuer yet attaine to the full knowledge of that admirable kind of building or ſtructure, which the Halcion vſeth in contriving of her neaſt, no, nor deviſe what it is-of.
                        
                           Plutarke, who hath ſeen and handled many of them, thinkes it to be made of certaine fiſh-bones, which ſhe ſo compacts, and conjoyneth together, enterlaſing ſome long, and ſome croſſe-waies, adding ſome foldings and roundings to it, that in the end ſhe frameth a round kind of veſſell, readie to floate and ſwim vpon the water: which done, ſhe carrieth the ſame where the Sea-waves beate moſt; there the Sea gently beating vpon it, ſnewes her how to daube and patch vp the parts not well cloſed, and how to ſtrengthen thoſe places, and faſhion thoſe ribs, that are not faſt, but ſtir with the Sea-waves: And on the other ſide, that which is cloſely wrought, the Sea beating on it, doth ſo faſten and conjoyne together, that nothing, no, not ſtone or yron, can any way looſen, divide, or break the ſame, except with great violence; and what is moſt to be wondred at, is the proportion and figure of the concavitie

within; for, it is ſo compoſed and proportioned, that it can receive or admit no manner of thing, but the Bird that built-it; for, to all things elſe, it is ſo impenetrable, cloſe and hard, that nothing can poſſiblie enter in: no, not ſo much as the Sea-water. Loe-heer a moſt plaine deſcription of this building, or conſtruction taken from a verie good Author: yet me thinks, it doth not fully and ſufficiently reſolve vs of the difficultie in this kinde of Architecture. Now from what vanitie can it proceed, we ſhould ſo willfully contemne, and diſdaeinfully interpret thoſe effects, which we can neither imitate nor conceive? But to follow this equalitie or correſpondencie betweene vs and beaſts ſomewhat further; the priviledge whereof our ſoule vants to bring to her condition whatſoever it conceiveth, and to diſpoile what of mortall and corporall qualities belongs vnto it, to marſhall thoſe things, which ſhe deemed worthie her acquaintance, to diſroabe and deprive their corruptible conditions, and to make them leave as ſuperfluous and baſe garments, thickneſſe, length, deapth, weight, colour, ſmell, roughneſſe, ſmoothneſſe, hardneſſe, ſoftneſſe, and all ſenſible accidents elſe, to fit and appropriate them to her immortall and ſpirituall condition: ſo that Rome and Paris, which I have in my ſoule; Paris which I imagine; yea, I imagine and conceive the ſame without greatneſſe and place, without ſtone and morter, and without wood: Then ſay I vnto my ſelfe, the ſame priviledge ſeemeth likewiſe to be in beaſts: for, a Horſe accuſtomed to heare the ſound of trumpets, the noyſe of ſhot, and the clattering of armes, whom we ſee to ſnort, to ſtartle, and to neigh in his ſleep, as he lies a long vpon his litter, even as he were in the hurly-burly; it is moſt certaine, that in his minde he apprehends the ſound of a Drum without any noyſe, and an armie without armes or bodie.
                        
                           Quippe videbis equos fortes, cùm membra iacebuntLuer. li. 4. 982.
                           
                           In ſomnis, ſudare tamen, ſpiraréque ſaepe,
                           Et quaſi de palma ſummas contendere vires.
                        
                        
                           You ſhall ſee warlike Horſes, when in ſleep
                           Their lims lie, yet ſweat, and a ſnorting keep,
                           And ſtretch their vtmoſt ſtrength,
                           As for a goale at length.
                        
                        That Hare, which a grey-hound imagineth in his dreame, after whom as he ſleepeth we ſee him bay, queſt, yelp, and ſnort, ſtretch out his taile, ſhake his legs, and perfectly repreſent the motions of his courſe; the ſame is a Hare without bones, without haire.
                        
                           
                              Ʋenantúmque canes in molli ſepae quiete.Ibid. 986.
                           
                           Iactant crura tamen ſubitè, vocèſque repente
                           Mittunt, & crebras redducunt naribus auras,
                           Vt veſtigia ſi teneant inventa ferarum:
                           Expergefactique, ſequuntur inania ſepae
                           Cervorum ſimulacra, fugae quaſi dedita cernant:
                           Donee diſcuſſis redeant erroribus ad ſe.
                        
                        
                           Oft times the hunters dogs in eaſie reſt
                           Stir their legs, ſuddainly, open, and queſt,
                           And ſend from noſtrels thicke-thicke ſnuffing ſent,
                           As if on traile they were of game full-bent:
                           And wakened ſo, they follow ſhaddowes vaine
                           Of Deere in chaſe, as if they fled amaine:
                           Till, their fault left, they turne to ſenſe againe.
                        
                        Thoſe watching-Dogs, which in their ſleep we ſometimes ſee to grumble, and then barking to ſtartle ſuddainly out of their ſlumber, as if they perceived ſome ſtranger to arive: that ſtranger which their minde ſeemeth to ſee, is but an imaginarie man, and not perceived; without any dimenſion, colour, or being:
                        
                           —Conſueta domi catulorum blanda propago
                              Ibid. 993.
                           
                           Degere, ſaepe levem ex oculis volucrémque ſoporem
                           Diſcutere, & corpus de terra corripere inſtant,
                           Proinde quaſi ignotas facies atque ora tuantur.
                        
                        
                           The fawning kinde of whelps, at home that liv's,
                           From eyes to ſhake light-ſwift ſleepe often ſtriv's,
                           And from the ground their ſtarting bodies hie,
                           
                              As if ſome vnknowne ſtranger they did ſpie.
                        
                        Touching corporall beautie, before I goe any further, it were neceſſarie I knew whether we are yet agreed about her deſcription. It is very likely that we know not well, what beautie either in nature, or in generall, ſince we give ſo many, and attribute ſo divers formes to humane beautie, yea, and to our beautie: Of which if there were any natural or lively deſcription, we ſhould generally know it, as we doe the heat of fire. We imagine and faine her formes, as our fantaſies lead vs.Proper li. 2. el. 18. 26.
                        
                        Turpis Romane Belgieus ore color.
                        
                           A Dutch-froes colour hath no grace,
                           Seen in a Romane Ladies face.
                        
                        The Indians deſcribe it blacke and ſwarthy, with blabberd-thicke lips, with a broad and flat noſe, the inward griſtle whereof they loade with great gold-rings, hanging downe to their mouth, and their neather lips with great circlets beſet with precious ſtones, which cover all their chins, deeming it an eſpeciall grace to ſhew their teeth to the rootes. In Peru, the greateſt eares are ever eſteemed the faireſt, which with all art and induſtrie, they are continually ſtretching out; and a man (who yet liveth) ſweareth to have ſeen in a province of the Eaſt-Indias the people ſo carefull to make them great, and ſo to load them with heavie jewels, that at eaſe he could have thruſt his arme through one of their eare-holes. There are other Nations, who endevour to make their teeth as blacke as Iet, and skorne to have them white; and in other places they die them red. Not onely in the province of Baske, but in other places, women are accounted faireſt when their heads are ſhaven; and which is ſtrange, in ſome of the Northerly frozen-countries, as Plinie affirmeth. Thoſe of Mexico, eſteeme the littleneſſe of their foreheads, as one of the chiefeſt beauties, and whereas they ſhave their haire over all their bodie beſides, by artificiall meanes they labour to nouriſh and make it grow onely in their foreheads; and ſo love to have great dugs, that they ſtrive to have their children ſucke over their ſhoulders. So would we ſet forth ilfavordneſſe. The Italians proportion-it big and plum; The Spaniards ſpynie and lanke, and amongſt vs one would have her white, another browne, one ſoft and delicate, another ſtrong and luſtie: ſome deſire wantonneſſè and blithneſſe, and other ſome ſturdineſſe and majeſtie to be joyned with it. Even as the preheminence in beautie, which Plato aſcribeth vnto the Sphericall figure, the Epicurians refer the ſame vnto the Piramidall or Square; and ſay they cannot ſwallow a God made round like a bowle. But howſoever it is, nature hath no more priviledged vs in that, then in other things, concerning her common lawes. And if we imparcially enter into judgement with our ſelves, we ſhall finde, that if there be any creature or beaſt leſſe favoured in that, then we, there are others (and that in great numbers) to whom nature hath been more favourable then to vs. A multis animalibus decore vincimur. We are excelled in comel
                                 •
                              neſſe, by many living creatures: Yea, of terreſtriall creatures, that live with vs. For, concerning thoſe of the Sea, omitting their figure, which no proportion can containe, ſo much doth it differ, both in colour, in neatneſſe, in ſmoothneſſe, and in diſpoſition, we muſt give place vnto them: which in all qualities we muſt likewiſe doe to the ayrie ones. And that prerogative, which Poets yeeld vnto our vpright ſtature, looking towards heaven whence her beginning is,
                        
                           Pronáque cùm ſpectent animalia caetera terram,Ouid. Metam. lib. 1. 84.
                           
                           Os homini ſublime dedit, caelúmque videre
                           Iuſſit, & erectos ad ſydera tollere vultus.
                        
                        
                           Where other creatures on earth looke and lie,
                           A loftie looke God gave man, bad him prie
                           On heav'n, raiſ'd his high count'nance to the skie.
                        
                        is meerely poeticall, for, there are many little beaſts, that have their ſight directly fixed towards heaven: I finde the Camels and the Eſtridges necke much more raiſed and vpright, then ours. What beaſts have not their face a loft and before, and looke not directly oppoſite, as we; and in their naturall poſture deſcrie not as much of heaven and earth, as man doth? And what qualities of our corporall conſtitution, both in Plato and Cicero cannot fit and ſerve a thouſand beaſts? Such as moſt reſemble man are the vileſt and filthieſt of all the rout: As for outward apparance and true ſhape of the viſage, it is the Munkie or Ape:Cic. Nat. deo. lib. 1. Enmi.
                        
                        Simia quàm ſimilis, turpiſſima beſtia, nobis!
                        
                           
                              An Ape, a moſt il-favored beaſt,
                           How like to vs in all the reſt?
                        
                        as for inward and vitall parts, it is the Hog. Truely, when I conſider man all naked (yea, be it in that ſex, which ſeemeth to have and challenge the greateſt ſhare of eye-pleaſing beautie, and view his defects, his naturall ſubjection, and manifold imperfections; I finde we have had much more reaſon to hide and cover our nakedneſſe, then any creature elſe. We may be excuſed for borrowing thoſe which nature had therein favored more then vs, with their beauties to adorne vs, and vnder their ſpoiles of wooll, of haire, of feathers, and ofſilke to ſhroude vs. Let vs moreover obſerve, that man is the onely creature, whoſe wants offends his owne followes, and he alone that in naturall actions muſt withdraw and ſequeſter himſelfe from thoſe of his owne kinde. Verely it is an effect worthie conſideration, that the skilfulleſt maſters of amorous dalliances appoint for a remedie of venerian paſſions, a free and full ſurvay of the bodie, which one longeth and ſeeks-after: and that to coole the longing and aſwage the heat of friendſhip, one need but perfectly view and throughly conſider what he loveth.
                        
                           Ille quòd obſcoenas in aperto corpore partesO
                                    •
                                 id. rem. Am. lib. 2. 33.
                           
                           —Viderat, in curſu qui fuit, haeſit amor.
                           
                        
                        
                           The love ſtoode ſtill, that ran in full carieere,
                           When bare it ſaw parts that ſhould not appeare
                        
                        And although this remedie may happily proceed from a ſqueamiſh and cold humor: yet is it a wonderfull ſigne of our imbecilitie, that the vſe and knowledge ſhould ſo make vs to be cloyd one of an other. It is not baſhfulneſſe ſo much, as art and foreſight makes our Ladies ſo circumſpect and vnwilling to let vs come into their cloſets before they are fully readie, and throughly painted, to come abroad, and ſhew themſelves:
                        
                           Nec veneres noſtras hoc fallit quò magis ipſeLuer. l. 4. 1176.
                           
                           Omnia ſummopere hos vitae poſtſcenia celant,
                           Quos retinere volunt adſtrictóque eſſe in amore.
                        
                        
                           Our Miſtreſſes know this, which mak's them not diſcloſe
                           Parts to be plaid within, eſpecially from thoſe
                           Whom they would ſervants hold, and in their love-bands cloſe.
                        
                        Whereas in other creatures, there is nothing but we love, and pleaſeth our ſenſes: ſo that even from their excrements and ordure, we draw not only dainties to eat, but our richeſt ornaments and perfumes. This diſcourſe of beautie toucheth only our common order, and is not ſo ſac
                              •
                           ilegious as it intendeth or dareth to comprehend thoſe divine, ſupernaturall, and extraordinarie beauties, which ſometimes are ſeen to ſhine amongſt-vs, even as ſtarres vnder a corporall and terreſtriall vaile. Moreover, that part of natures favours, which we impart vnto beaſts, is by our owne confeſſion much more advantageous vnto them. We aſſume vnto our ſelves imaginarie and fantaſticall goods, future and abſent goods, which humane capacitie can no way warrant vnto her ſelfe; or ſome other, which by the overweening of our owne opinion, we falſely aſcribe vnto our ſelves; as reaſon, honour, and knowledge; and to them as their proper ſhare we leave the eſſentiall, the maneagable, and palpable goods, as peace, reſt, ſecuritie, innocencie, and health: Health I ſay, which is the goodlieſt and richeſt preſent, nature can impart vnto vs. So that even Stoike Philoſophie dareth to affirme, that if Heracletus and Pherecydes could have changed their wiſedome with health, and by that meanes, the one to have rid himſelfe of the dropſie, and the other of the lowſieevill, which ſo ſore tormented them, they would ſurely have done-it: whereby they alſo yeeld ſo much more honor vnto wiſedome, by comparing and counterpeizing the ſame vnto health, then they do in this other propoſition of theirs, where they ſay, that if Circes had preſented 
                              Ʋhſſes with two kinds of drinke, the one to turne a wiſeman into a foole, the other to change a foole into a wiſeman, he would rather have accepted that of folly, then have been pleaſed, that Circes ſhould transforme his humane ſhape into a beaſts. And they ſay, that wiſedom her ſelfe would thus have ſpoken vnto him: Meddle not with me, but leave me rather then thou ſhouldeſt place me vnder the ſhape and bodie of an Aſſe. What? This great and heavenly wiſedom? Are Philoſophers contented then, to quit-it for a corporall & earthly vaile? Why then it is not for reaſons ſake, nor by diſcourſe, and for the ſoule, we ſo much excell beaſts: it is for the love we beare vnto our beautie, vnto our faire hew, and goodly diſpoſition

of limbs, that we reject, and ſet our vnderſtanding at nought, our wiſedome, and what elſe we have. Well, I allow of this ingenious and voluntarie confeſſion: ſurely they knew thoſe parts, we ſo much labour to pamper, to be meere fantazies. Suppoſe, beaſts had all the vertue, the knowledge, the wiſedome and ſufficiencie of the Stoikes, they ſhould ſtill be beaſts; nor might they ever be compared vnto a miſerable, wretched, and ſenſeleſſe man. For, when all is done, whatſoever is not as we are, is not of any worth. And God to be eſteemed of vs, muſt (as we will ſhew anon) draw ſomewhat neere-it. Whereby it appeareth, that it is not long of a true diſcourſe, but of a fooliſh-hardineſſe, and ſelfe-preſuming obſtinacie, we prefer our ſelves before other creatures, and ſequeſter our ſelves from their condition and ſocietie. But to returne to our purpoſe, we have for our part inconſtancie, irreſolution, vncertaintie, ſorrow, ſuperſtition, carefulneſſe for future things (yea after our life) ambition, covetouſneſſe, jelouſie, envie, inordiante, mad and vntamed appetites, warre, falſehood, diſloyaltie, detraction, and curioſitie. Surely we have ſtrangely overpaid this worthie diſcourſe, whereof we ſo much glorie, and this readineſſe to judge, or capacitie to know, if we have purchaſed the ſame with the price of ſo infinit paſſions, to which we are vnceſſantly enthralled. If we be not pleaſed (as Socrates is) to make this noble prerogative over beaſts, to be of force, that whereas nature hath preſcribed them certaine ſeaſons, and bounds for their naturall luſt and voluptuouſneſſe, ſhe hath given-vs at all howers and occaſions the full reines of them. 
                              Ʋt vinum
                           Cic. Nat. d
                                 •••
                              . lib. 3. 
                           egrotis, quia prodeſt rarò, nocet ſaepiſſime, melius eſt non adhibere omnino, quàm, 
                                 •
                              pe dubiaeſalutis in apertam perniciem incurrere: Sic, haud ſcio, an melius fuerit humano generi motum iſtum celerem, cogitationis a
                                 •
                              umen, ſolertiam, quem rationem vocamus, quoniam peſtifera ſint multis, admodum paucis ſalutaria, non dari omnino, quám tam munificè & tam largè dari. As it is better not to vſe wine at all in ſicke perſons, becauſe it ſeldome doth them good, but many times much hurt, then in hope of doubtfull health, to run into vndoubted danger; ſo doe I not know, whether it were better that this ſwift motion of the thought, this ſharpneſſe, this conceitedneſſe, which we call reaſon, ſhould not at all be given to mankind (becauſe it is pernicious vnto many, and healthfull to verie few) then that it ſhould be given ſo plentifully and ſo largely. What good or commoditie may we imagine this far-vnderſtanding of ſo many things brought ever vnto Varro, and to Ariſtotle? Did it ever exempt, or could it at any time free them from humane inconveniences? Were they ever diſcharged of thoſe accidents that incidently follow a ſeelie labouring man? Could they ever draw any eaſe for the gout from Logike? And howbeit they knew the humour engendring the ſame to lodge in the joints, have they felt-it the leſſe? Did they at any time make a covenant with death, although they knew full well that ſome nations rejoyce at her comming? as alſo of Cuckoldſhip, becauſe they knew women to be common in ſome Countries? But contrariwiſe having both held the firſt ranke in knowledge, the one amongſt the Romanes, the other among the Graecians, yea, and at ſuch times wherein ſciences flouriſhed moſt, we could never learne, they had any ſpeciall excellencie in their life. Wee ſee the Graecian hath been put to his plunges in ſeeking to diſcharge himſelfe from ſome notable imputations in his life. Was it ever found that ſenſualitie, and health, are more pleaſing vnto him that vnderſtands Aſtrologie and Grammar?
                        (
                              •
                           lliterati num minus nervi rigent?Hor. 
                                 •
                              pod. 8. 17.
                        
                        
                           As ſtiffe vnlearned ſinnewes ſtand,
                           As theirs that much more vnderſtand.)
                        
                        or ſhame and povertie leſſe importunate and vexing?
                        
                           Scilicet & morbis, & debilitate carebis,Iu
                                    •
                                 em. ſat. 14. 156.
                           
                           Et luctum, & curam effugies, & tempora vita
                           Longatibi posthaec fatomeliore dabuntur.
                        
                        
                           Thou ſhall be from diſeaſe and weakneſſe free,
                           From moane, from care, long time of life to thee
                           Shall by more friendly fate affoorded be.
                        
                        I have in my daies ſeen a hundred Artificers, and as many labourers, more wiſe and more happie, then ſome Rectors in the Vniverſitie, and whom I would rather reſemble. Me thinks Learning hath a place amongeſt things neceſſarie for mans life, as glorie, nobleneſſe, dignitie, or at moſt as riches, and ſuch other qualities, which indeed ſtead the ſame; but a far-off, and more in conceipt, than by Nature. We have not much more need of offices, of rules, and lawes how to live in our common-wealth, than the Cranes and Antes have in theirs. Which

notwithſtanding, we ſee how orderly, and without inſtruction they maintaine themſelves. If man were wiſe he would value every thing according to it's worth, and as it is either more profitable, or more neceſſarie for life. He that ſhall number vs by our actions and proceedings, ſhall doubt. leſſe finde many more excellent-ones amongſt the ignorant, then among the wiſer ſort: I meane in all kind of Vertues. My opinion is, that ancient Rome brought forth many men of much more valour and ſufficiencie, both for peace and warre, then this late learned Rome, which with all her wiſedom hath overthrowne her erſt-flouriſhing eſtate. If all the reſt were alike, then ſhould honeſtie and innocencie at leaſt belong to the ancient; for ſhe was exceedingly well placed with ſimplicitie. But I will ſhorten this diſcourſe, which happily would draw me further then I would willingly follow: yet this much I will ſay more, that onely humilitie and ſubmiſſion is able to make a perfect honest man. Every one muſt not have the knowledge of his dutie referred to his own judgement, but ought rather to have it preſcribed vnto him, and not be allowed to chuſe it at his pleaſure and free-will: otherwiſe according to the imbecilitie of our reaſons, and infinite varietie of our opinions, we might peradventure forge and deviſe ſuch duties vnto our ſelves, as would induce vs (as Epicurus ſaith) to endevour to deſtroy and devoure one another. The firſt law that ever God gave vnto man, was a Law of pure obedience. It was a bare & ſimple commandement, whereof man ſhould enquire and know no further: foraſmuch, as to obey is the proper dutie of a reaſonable ſoule, acknowledging a heavenly and ſuperiour benefactor. From obeying and yeelding vnto him proceed all other vertues; even as all ſinnes derive from ſelfe-over-weening. Contrariwiſe, the firſt temptation that ever ſeized on humane Nature was diſobedience, by the Divels inſtigation, whoſe firſt poiſon, ſo far inſinuated it ſelfe into vs, by reaſon of the promiſes he made vs of wiſedome and knowledge, Eritis ſicut Dij ſcientes bonum & malum. You ſhall be like Gods, knowing both good and evill. AndGeneſis. ca. 3. 5. the Syrens, to deceive 
                              Ʋlyſſes and alluring him to fall into their daungerous & confounding ſnares, offer to give him the full fruition of Knowledge. The opinion of Wiſdome is the plague of man. That is the occaſion why ignorance is by our Religion recommended vnto vs, as an inſtrument fitting beleefe, and obedience. Cavete, ne quis vos decipiat per Philoſophiam & inanes
                           Colloſſ. ca. 2. 8. 
                           ſeductiones, ſecundum elementa mundi. Take heed, leſt any man deceive you by Philoſophie and vaine ſeducements, according to the rudiments of the world. All the Philoſophers of all the ſects that everwere, do generally agree in this point, that the chiefeſt felicitie, or ſummum bonum, conſiſteth in the peace and tranquilitie of the ſoule and bodie: but where ſhall we finde-it?
                        
                           Ad ſummum ſapiens vno minor est love, dives,Her. li. 1. epiſt. 1. Antepen.
                           
                           Liber, honoratus, pulcher, Rex denique Regum:
                           Praecipuè ſanus, niſi cùm pituita moleſta est.
                        
                        
                           In ſumme, who wiſe is knowne,
                           Is leſſe then Iove alone,
                           Rich, honorable, free, faire, King of Kings,
                           Chiefely in health, but when fleagme trouble brings.
                        
                        It ſeemeth verily, that Nature for the comfort of our miſerable and wretched condition, hath allotted vs no other portion, but preſumption. It is therefore (as Epictetus ſaith) that man hath nothing that is properly his owne, but the vſe of his opinions. Our hereditarie portion is nothing but ſmoke and winde. The Gods (as ſaith Philoſophie) have health in true eſſence, and ſickneſſe in conceipt. Man cleane contrarie, poſſeſſeth goods in imagination, and evils eſſentially. We have had reaſon to make the powers of our imagination to be of force: For, all our felicities are but in conceipt, and as it were in a dreame. Heare but this poore and miſerable creature vaunt himſelfe. There is nothing (ſaith Cicero) ſo delightfull and pleaſant as the knowledge of Letters; of Letters I ſay, by whoſe meanes the infinitie of things, the incomprehenſible greatneſſe of nature, the heavens, the earth, and all the Seas of this vaſt vniverſe, are made knowne vnto vs. They have taught vs Religion, moderation, ſtowtneſſe of courage, and redeemed our ſoule out of darkneſſe, to make her ſee, and diſtinguiſh of all things, the high aſwell as the lowe, the firſt as the laſt, and thoſe betweene both. It is they that ſtore and ſupplie vs with all ſuch things as may make vs live happily and well, and inſtruct vs how to paſſe our time without ſorrow or offence. Seemeth not this goodly Orator to ſpeake of the Almighties and everliving Gods condition? And touching effects, a thouſand poore ſeelie women in a countrie towne have lived, and live a life much more repoſed, more peaceable, and more conſtant, then ever he did.
                        
                           
                           —Deus ille fuit Deus, inclyte Memmi,
                           
                           Qui princeps vitae rationem invenit eam, qua
                           Nunc appellatur ſapientia, quique per artem,
                           Fluctibus è tantis vitam tantiſque tenebris,
                           In tam tranquillo & tam clara luce locavit.
                        
                        
                           Good ſir, it was God, God it was, firſt found,
                           That courſe of mans life, which now is renown'd
                           By name of wiſedome; who by arte repoſde,
                           Our life in ſo cleare light, calme ſo compoſde,
                           From ſo great darkneſſe, ſo great waves oppoſde.
                        
                        Obſerve what glorious and noble words theſe be: yet but a ſleight accident brought this wiſemans vnderſtanding to a far worſe condition, than that of a ſimple ſheepheard: notwithſtanding this divine Teacher, and this heavenly wiſedome. Of like impudence is the promiſe of Democritus his Booke. I will now ſpeake of all things: And that fond title which Aristotle gives vs of mortall gods, and that raſh judgement of Chryſippus, that Dion was as vertuous as God: And my Seneca ſaith, he acknowledgeth that God hath given him life, but how to live well, that he hath of himſelfe. Like vnto this other: In virtute verè gloramur,
                           Cic. N
                                 •
                              t. de. lib. 3. 
                           quod non contingeret, ſi ià donum à Deo, non à nobis haberemus. We rightly vaunt vs of vertue, which we ſhould not doe, if we had it of God, not of our ſelves. This alſo is Senec
                                 •
                              es, that the wiſe man hath a fortitude like vnto Gods; but inhumane weakneſſe, wherein he excelleth him. There is nothing more common, than to meet with ſuch paſſages of temeritie: There is not any of vs that will be ſo much offended to ſee himſelfe compared to God, as he will deeme himſelfe wronged to be depreſſed in the ranke of other creatures. So much are we more jealous of our owne intereſt, than of our Creators. But we muſt tread this fooliſh vanitie vnder foote, and boldly ſhake off, and lively reject thoſe fond-ridiculous foundations, whereon theſe falſe opinions are built. So long as man ſhall be perſwaded to have meanes or power of himſelfe, ſo long will he denie, and never acknowledge what he oweth vnto his Maſter: he ſhall alwaies (as the common ſaying is) make ſhift with his owne: He muſt be ſtripped into his ſhirt. Let vs conſider ſome notable example of the effect of Philoſophie. Poſſiaonius having long time been grieved with a painfull-lingring diſeaſe, which with the ſmartingpaine made him to wring his hands, and gnaſh his teeth, thought to ſcorne griefe, with exclayming and crying out againſt-it: Doo what thou liſt, yet will I never ſay that thou arte evill or paine. He feeleth the ſame paſſions that my lackey doth, but he boaſteth himſelfe, that at leaſt he conteineth his tongue vnder the lawes of his ſect. Re ſuccumbere non oportebat verbis gloriantem: It was not for him to yeeld in deeds, who had ſo braved it in words. Arceſilas lying ſicke of the gowt, Carneades comming to viſite him, and ſeeing him to frowne, ſuppoſing he had been angrie, was going away againe, but he called him backe, and ſhewing him his feet and breſt, ſaid vnto him, there is nothing come from thence hither. This hath ſomewhat a better garbe; for he feeleth himſelfe grieved with ſickneſſe, and would faine be rid of it, yet is not his heart vanquiſhed or weakned thereby, the other ſtands vpon his ſtifneſſe (as I feare) more verball then eſſentiall. And Dionyſius Heracleotes being tormented with a violent ſmarting in his eies, was at laſt perſwaded to quit theſe Stoicke reſolutions.
                        Be it ſuppoſed that Learning and Knowledge ſhould worke thoſe effects they ſpeake of, that is, to blunt and abate the ſharpneſſe of thoſe accidents or miſchances, that follow and attend vs; doth ſhe any more than what ignorance effecteth much more evidently and ſimply? The Philoſopher Pyrrho being at Sea, and by reaſon of a violent ſtorme in great danger to be caſt away, preſented nothing vnto thoſe that were with him in the ſhip, to unitate but the ſecuritie of an Hog which was aboard, who nothing at all diſmaide, ſeemed to behold and out-ſtare the tempeſt. Philoſophie after all her precepts gives vs over to the examples of a Wreſtler, or of a Muletier, in whom we ordinarilie perceive much leſſe feeling of death, of paine, of griefe, and other inconveniences, and more vndanted conſtancie, then ever Learning or Knowledge could ſtore a man withall, vnleſſe he were borne, and of himſelfe through ſome naturall habitude, prepared vnto it. What is the cauſe, the tender members of a childe, or limbes of a horſe are much more eaſie, and with leſſe paine cut and inciſed then ours, if it be not ignorance? How many, onely through the power of imagination,

have falne into dangerous diſeaſes? We ordinarily ſee diverſe that will cauſe themſelves to be let bloud, purged, and dieted, becauſe they would be cured of diſeaſes, they never felt but in conceit; when eſſentiall and true maladies faile vs, then Science and knowledge lends-vs hirs: This colour or complexion (ſaid ſhe) preſageth ſome rheumatike defluxion will enſue you: This ſoultring-hote ſeaſon menaceth you with ſome febricant commotion; this cutting of the vitall line of your left hand warneth you of ſome notable and approaching indiſpolition. And at laſt ſhe will roundly addreſſe her ſelfe vnto perfect health; ſaying, this youthly vigor and ſuddaine joy can not poſſibly ſtay in one place, her bloud and ſtrength muſt be abated, for feare it turne you to ſome miſchiefe. Compare but the life of a man ſubject to theſe-like imaginations, vnto that of a day-labouring ſwaine, who followes his naturall appetites, who meaſureth all things onely by the preſent ſenſe, and hath neither learning nor prognoſtications, who feeleth no diſeaſe but when he hath it: whereas the other hath often the ſtone imaginarily, before he have it in his reines: As if it were not time enough to endure the ſickneſſe when it ſhall come, he doth in his fanſie prevent the ſame, and headlong runneth to meet with it. What I ſpeake of Phiſicke, the ſame may generally be applied and drawne to all maner of learning. Thence came this ancient opinion of thoſe Philoſophers, who placed chiefe felicitie in the acknowledging of our judgements weakneſſe. My ignorance affoords me as much cauſe of hope as of feare: and having no other regiment for my health, then that of other mens examples, and of the events, I ſee elſewhere in like occaſions, whereof I find ſome of all ſorts: And relie vpon the compariſons, that are moſt favourable vnto me. I embrace health with open armes, free, plaine, and full; and prepare my appetite to enjoy-it, by how much more, it is now leſſe ordinarie and more rare vnto me: ſo far is it from me, that I with the bitterneſſe of ſome new and forced kind of life, trouble her reſt, and moleſt her eaſe. Beaſts doe manifeſtly declare vnto vs, how many infirmities our mindes agitation brings vs. That which is told vs of thoſe that inhabite Breſill, who die onely through age, which ſome impute to the cleareneſſe and calmeneſſe of their aire▪ I rather aſcribe to the calmeneſſe and cleareneſſe of their minds, void and free from all paſſions, cares, toiling, and vnpleaſant labours, as a people that paſſe their life in a wonderfull kind of ſimplicitie and ignorance, without letters, or lawes, and without Kings, or any Religion. Whence comes it (as we daily ſee by experience) that the rudeſt and groſſeſt clownes, are more tough-ſtrong, and more deſired in amorous executions: And that the love of a Muletier is often more accepted, then that of a perfumed▪ quaint courtier? But becauſe in the latter, the agitation of his minde doth ſo diſtract, trouble, and wearie the force of his bodie; as it alſo troubleth and wearieth it ſelfe, who doth belie, or more commonly caſt the ſame downe even into madneſſe, but her owne promptitude, her point, her agilitie, and to conclude her proper force? Whence proceeds the ſubtileſt follie, but from the ſubtileſt wiſedome? As from the extreameſt friendſhips proceed the extreameſt enmities, and from the ſoundeſt healths, the mortalleſt diſeaſes; ſo from the rareſt and quickeſt agitations of our minds enſue the moſt diſtempered and outragious frenzies. There wants but halfe a pegs turne to paſſe from the one to the other. In mad mens actions, we ſee how fitly follie ſuteth and meets with the ſtrongeſt operations, of our minde. Who knowes not how vnperceivable the neighbourhood betweene follie with the livelieſt elevations of a free minde is; and the effects of a ſupreame and extraordinarie vertue? Plato affirmeth, that melancholy minds are more excellent and diſciplinable; So are there none more inclinable vnto follie. Diverſe ſpirits are ſeene to be overthrowne by their owne force, and proper nimbleneſſe. What a ſtart hath one of the moſt judicious, ingenious, and moſt fitted vnto the ayre of true ancientTorquato Taſſo. poeſie, lately gotten by his owne agitation and ſelfe▪gladneſſe, above all other Italian Poets that have been of a long time? Hath not he wherewith to be beholding vnto this his killing vivacitie? vnto this cleareneſſe, that hath ſo blinded him? vnto his exact and far-reaching apprehenſion of reaſon, which hath made him voide of reaſon? vnto the curious and laborious purſute of Sciences, that have brought him vnto ſottiſhneſſe? vnto this rare aptitude to the exerciſes of the minde, which hath made him without minde or exerciſe? I rather ſpited then pittied him, when I ſaw him at Ferrara, in ſo pitteous a plight, that he ſurvived himſelfe; miſacknowledging both himſelfe and his labours, which vnwitting to him, and even to his face, have been publiſhed both vncorrected and maimed. Will you have a man healthy, will you have him regular, and in conſtant and ſafe condition? overwhelme him in the darke

pit of idleneſſe, and dulneſſe. We muſt be beſotted ere we can become wiſe, and dazled before we can be led. And if a man ſhall tell me, that the commoditie to have the appetite cold to griefes, and wallowiſh to evils, drawes this incommoditie after-it, it is alſo conſequently the ſame, that makes vs leſſe ſharpe and greedie to the enjoying of good, and of pleaſures: It is true, but the miſerie of our condition beareth, that we have not ſo much to enjoy, as to ſhun, and that extreame voluptuouſneſſe doth not ſo much pinch vs, as a light ſmart: Segnius homines bona quàm mala ſentiunt. Men have a duller feeling of a good turne, then of an ill, we have not ſo ſenſible a feeling of perfect health, as we have of the leaſt ſickneſſe.
                        
                        
                           —pungit
                           
                           In cute vix ſumma violatum plagula corpus,
                           Quando valere nihil quemquam movet. Hoc invat vnum
                           Quod me non torquet latus aut pes; caetera quiſquam
                           
                              Ʋix queat aut ſanum ſeſe, aut ſentire valentem.
                        
                        
                           A light ſtroke that dooth ſcarſe the top-skin wound,
                           Greeves the gall'd bodie, when in health to be,
                           Doth ſcarſe move any: onely eaſe is found,
                           That neither ſide nor foote tormenteth me:
                           Scarſe any in the reſt can feel he's ſound.
                        
                        
                           Our being in health, is but the privation of being ill. See wherefore the ſect of Philoſophie, that hath moſt preferred ſenſualitie, hath alſo placed the ſame but to indolencie or vnfeeling of paine. To have no infirmitie at all is the chiefeſt poſſeſſion of health, that man can hopefor (as Ennius ſaid:)Ennius.
                        
                        Nimium boni est, cui nihil est mali.
                        
                           He hath but too much good,
                           Whom no ill hath withſtood.
                        
                        For▪ the ſame tickling and pricking, which a man doth feel in ſome pleaſures, and ſeemes beyond ſimple health, and indolencie, this active and moving ſenſualitie, or as I may terme it, itching and tickling pleaſure aymes but to be free from paine, as her chiefeſt ſcope. The luſt-full longing which allures vs to the acquaintance of women, ſeekes but to expell that paine, which an earneſt and burning deſire doth poſſeſſe-vs-with, and deſireth but to allay-it, thereby to come to reſt, and be exempted from this fever; And ſo of others. I ſay therefore, that if ſimplicitie directeth-vs to have no evill, it alſo addreſſeth vs, according to our condition to a moſt happie eſtate. Yet ought it not to be imagined ſo dull and heavie, that it be altogether ſenſeleſſe. And Crantor had great reaſon to withſtand the vnſenſibleneſſe of Epicurus, if it were ſo deeply rooted, that the approching and birth of evils might gainſay-it. I commend not that vnſenſibleneſſe, which is neither poſſible nor to be deſired. I am well pleaſed not to be ſicke, but if I be, I will know that I am ſo; and if I be cautherized or cut, I will feel-it. Verily, he that ſhould roote out the knowledge of evill, ſhould there with all extirp the
                           Ci
                                 •
                              . Tuſc. qu. 
                                 •
                              . 3 
                           knowledge of voluptuouſneſſe, and at laſt bring man to nothing. Istud nihil dolere, non ſine magna mercede contingitt immanit at is in animo, ſtuporis in corpore. This verie point, not to be offended or grieved with any thing, befals not freely to a man, without either inhumanitie in his minde, or ſenſeleſneſſe in his bodie. Sickneſſe is not amiſſe vnto man, comming in hir turne: Nor is he alwaies to ſhun paine, nor ever to follow ſenſualitie. It is a great advantage for the honour of ignorance, that Science it ſelfe throwes-vs into hir armes, when ſhe findes her ſelfe buſie to make vs ſtrong againſt the aſſaults of evils: ſhe is forced to come to this compoſition; to yeeld-vs the bridle, and give-vs leave to ſhrowd our ſelves in hir lap, and ſubmit our ſelves vnto hir favour, to ſhelter vs againſt the aſſaults and injuries of fortune. For, what meaneth ſhe elſe, when ſhe perſwades vs to withdraw our thoughts from the evils that poſſeſſe-vs, and entertaine them with fore-gon pleaſures, and ſtead-vs as a comfort of preſent evils with the remembrance of fore-paſt felicities, and call a vaniſhed content to our help, for to oppoſe it againſt that which vexeth vs? Levationes aegritudinum in avocatione à cogitanda moleſtia, & revocatione ad contemplandas voluptates ponit. Eaſes of griefes he repoſeth either in calling from the thought of offence, or calling to the contemplations of ſome pleaſures. Vnleſſe it be, that where force failes her, ſhe will vſe policie, and ſhew a tricke of nimbleneſſe and turne away, where the vigor both of her bodie and armes ſhall faile her. For, not onely to a ſtrict Philoſopher, but ſimply to any ſetled man, when he by experience feeleth the burning alteration of a hot fever,

what currant paiment is it to pay him with the remembrance of the ſweetneſſe of Greeke wine? It would rather empaire his bargaine.
                        Che ricordarſi il ben doppia la noia.
                        
                           For to thinke of our joy,
                           Redoubles our annoy.
                        
                        Of that condition is this other counſell, which Philoſophie giveth, onely to keepe forepaſt ſelicities in memorie, and thence blot out ſuch griefes as we have felt; as if the skill to forget were in our power: and counſell, of which we have much leſſe.
                        Suavis est laborum praeteritorum memoria.
                        Ci
                              •
                           . Fin. li 2. 
                              •
                           urip.
                        
                           Of labours overpaſt,
                           Remembrance hath ſweet taſte.
                        
                        What? ſhall Philoſophie, which ought to put the weapons into my hands, to fight againſt fortune; which ſhould harden my courage, to ſuppreſſe and lay at my feet all humane adverſities; will ſhe ſo faint, as to make me like a fearfull cunnie creepe into ſome lurking-hole, and like a craven to tremble and yeeld? For, memorie repreſenteth vnto vs, not what we chuſe, but what pleaſeth her. Nay, there is nothing ſo deeply imprinteth any thing in our remembrance, as the deſire to forget the ſame: It is a good way to commend to the keeping, and imprint any thing in our minde, to ſolicite her to looſe the ſame. And that is falſe. Eſt
                           Ci
                                 •
                              . fin. bon. li. 1. 
                           ſitum in nobis, vt & adverſa, quaſi perpetua oblivione obruamus, & ſecunda iucundè & ſuaviter meminerimus. This is ingraffed in vs, or at leaſt in our power, that we both burie in perpetuall oblivion things paſt againſt vs, and record with pleaſure and delight whatſoever was for vs.
                        
                        And this is true, Memini etiam quae nolo; obliviſci non poſſum quae volo. I remember even thoſe
                           Plu. in vita Them. 
                           things I would not; and can not forget what I would. And whoſe counſell is this? his, Qui ſe vnus ſapientem profiteri ſit auſus. Who onely durſt profeſſe himſelfe a wiſe man.
                        
                        
                           Qui genus humanum ingenio ſuperavit, & omnesLucr. li. 3. 1086. Epicur.
                           
                           Praeſtrinxit ſtellas, exortus vti aetherius Sol.
                        
                        
                           Who from all mankind bare for wit the prize,
                           And dimm'd the ſtars as when skies Sunne doth riſe.
                        
                        To emptie and diminiſh the memorie, is it not the readie and onely way to ignorance?
                        Iuers malorum remedium ignorantia est.Sen. Oed. act. 3. ſ
                                 •
                              e. 1.
                        
                        
                           Of ills a remedie by chance,
                           And verie dull is ignorance.
                        
                        We ſee diverſe like precepts, by which we are permitted to borrow frivolous apparances from the vulgar ſort, where lively and ſtrong reaſon is not of force ſufficient: alwaies provided, they bring vs content and comfort. Where they can not cure a ſore, they are pleaſed to ſtupifie and hide the ſame. I am perſwaded they will not denie me this, that if they could poſſiblie adde any order or conſtancie to a mans life, that it might thereby be ſtill maintained in pleaſure and tranquillitie, by, or through any weakneſſe or infirmitie of judgement, but they would accept-it.
                        —potare, & ſpargere floresHor. li. 1. epiſt. 5. 14. Incipiam, patiárque vel inconſultus haberi.
                        
                           I will begin to ſtrew flowers, and drinke free,
                           And ſuffer witleſſe, thriftleſſe, held to bee.
                        
                        There ſhould many Philoſophers be found of Lycas his opinion: This man in all other things being verie temperate, and orderly in his demeanors, living quietly and contentedly with his familie, wanting of no dutie or office both toward his owne houſhold and ſtrangers, verie carefully preſerving himſelfe from all hurtfull things: notwithſtanding through ſome alteration of his ſenſes or ſpirites, he was ſo poſſeſſed with this fantaſticall conceipt or obſtinate humour, that he ever and continually thought to be amongſt the Theaters, where he ſtill ſaw all manner of ſpectacles, paſtimes, ſports, and the beſt Comedies of the world. But being at laſt by the skill of Phyſitions cured of this maladie, and his offending humour purged, he could hardly be held from putting them in ſute, to the end they might reſtore him to the former pleaſures and contents of his imagination.
                        
                           —polme occidiſtis amici,Hor. li. 1. epiſt. 2. 138.
                           
                           Non ſervaſtis, ait, cui fic extorta voluptas,
                           Et demptus per vim menti gratiſſimus error▪
                           
                        
                        
                           
                           You have not ſav'd me, friends, but ſlaine me quite,
                           (Quoth he) from whom ſo reft is my delight,
                           And errour purg'd, which beſt did pleaſe my ſpright.
                        
                        Of a raving like vnto that of Thr
                                 •
                              ſylaus, ſonne vnto Pythodorus, who verily believed, that all the ſhips that went out from the haven of Pyraeum, yea and all ſuch as came into it, did only travell about his buſineſſe, rejoycing when any of them had made a fortunate voyage, and welcommed them with great gladneſſe: His brother Crito, having cauſed him to be cured, and reſtored to his better ſenſes, he much bewailed and grieved the condition wherein he had formerly lived in ſuch joy, and ſo voide of all care and griefe. It is that, which that ancient Greeke verſe ſaith, That not to be ſo adviſed brings many commodities with it:
                        
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           
                           Soph. Ala. flag.
                        
                        
                           The ſweeteſt life I wis,
                           In knowing nothing is.
                        
                        And as Eccleſiastes witneſſeth: In much wiſdome, much ſorrow: And who getteth knowledge, purchaſeth ſorrow and griefe. Even that, to which Philoſophy doth in generallEccleſiaſt
                                 ••
                              . tearmes allow this laſt remedy, which ſhe ordaineth for all manner of neceſſities; that is, to make an end of that life, which we can not endure. Placet? pare: Non placet? quacunque vis exi. Pungit dolor? velfodiat ſanè: ſi nudus es, da iugulum: ſint ectus armis vulcanijs, id est fortitudine,
                           Cic. Tuſc. que lib. 2. 
                           reſiste. Doth it like you? obey: doth it not like you? get out as you will: doth griefe pricke you? and let it perce you to: if you be naked, yeeld your throate: but if you be covered with the armour of Ʋulcan, that is, with fortitude, reſist. And that ſaying vſed of the Graecians in their banquets, which they apply vnto it, Aut bibat, aut abeat: Either let him carouſe, or carry him out of the
                           Ci
                                 •
                              . ib. lib. 5. 
                           houſe: which rather fitteth the mouth of a Gaſcoine, then that of Cicero, who very eaſily doth change the letter B into V,
                        
                           Vivere ſi recte nëſcis, decede peritis:Hor. lib. 2. piſt. 2. vl
                                    •
                                 .
                           
                           Luſisti ſatis, ediſti ſatis, atque bibisti:
                           Tempus abire tibi est, ne potum largiùs aequo
                           Rideat, & pulſet laſciva decentiùs aetas.
                        
                        
                           Live well you cannot, them that can give place;
                           Well have you ſported, eaten well, drunke well:
                           'Tis time you part; leaſt wanton youth with grace
                           Laugh at, and knocke you that with ſwilling ſwell.
                        
                        what is it but a confeſſion of his inſufficiency, and a ſending one backe not only to ignorance, there to be ſhrowded, but vnto ſtupidity it ſelfe, vnto vnſenſibleneſſe and not being?
                        
                           —Democritum post quàm matura vetuſtasLucr. lib. 3. 1083.
                           
                           Admonuit memorem, motus langueſcere mentis:
                           Sponte ſua let ho caput obvius obtulit ipſe.
                        
                        
                           When ripe age put Democritus in minde,
                           That his mindes motions fainted, he to finde
                           His death went willing, and his life reſign'd.
                        
                        It is that which Anthiſtenes ſaid, that a man muſt provide himſelfe either of wit to vnderſtand, or of a halter to hange himſelfe: And that which Chryſippus alleaged vpon the ſpeech of the Poet Tyrtaeus,
                        
                        De lavertu, ou de mort approcher.
                        Plut. in Solo
                              •
                           s l. f
                              •
                           .
                        
                           Or vertue to approch,
                           Or elſe let death incroch.
                        
                        And Crates ſaid, that love was cured with hunger, i
                              •
                            not by time; and in him that liked not theſe two meanes, by the halter. That Sextius, to whom Seneca and Plutarke give ſo much commendation, having given over all things elſe and betaken himſelfe to the ſtudy of Philoſophy, ſeeing the progreſſe of his ſtudies ſo tedious and ſlow, purpoſed to caſt himſelfe into the Sea; Ranne vnto death for want of knowledge: Reade here what the law, ſaith vpon this ſubject. If peradventure any great inconvenience happen, which cannot be remedied, the haven is not farre-off, and by ſwimming may a man ſave himſelfe out of his body, as out of a leaking boate: for, it is feare to die, and not deſire to live, which keepes a foole joyned to his body. As life through ſimplicity becommeth more pleaſant, So (as I erewhile began to ſay (becommeth-it more innocent and better. The ſimple and the ignorant

(ſaith S. Paul) raiſe themſelves vp to heaven, and take poſſeſſion of it; whereas we, withall the knowledge we have, plunge our ſelves downe to the pit of hell. I rely neither vpon Valentinianus (a profeſſed enemy to knowledge and learning) nor vpon Licinius (both Roman Emperours) who named them the venime and plague of all politike eſtates: Nor on Mahomet, who (as I have heard) doth vtterly interdict all maner of learning to his ſubjects. But the example of that great Lycurgus, and his authority ought to beare chiefe ſway, and thereverence of that divine Lacedemonian policy ſo great, ſo admirable, and ſo long time floriſhing in all vertue and felicity without any inſtitution or exerciſe at all of letters. Thoſe who returne from that new world, which of late hath beene diſcovered by the Spaniards, can witneſſe vnto vs, how thoſe nations being without Magiſtrates or law, live much more regularly and formally then we, who have amongſt vs more Officers and lawes, then men of other profeſſions, or actions.
                        
                           Di cit atorie piene & di libelli,
                           D'eſſamine, di carte, & diprocureAriſto. can. 14. ſtanz. 84.
                           
                           Hanno le mani e'lſeno, & granfaſtelli
                           Di chioſe, di conſigli & di letture,
                           Per cui le faculi â de'poverelli
                           Non ſono mai ne le citt à ſicure,
                           Hanno dietre & dinanzi & d'ambo i lati,
                           Notai, procuratori, & advocati.
                        
                        
                           Their hands and boſoms with writs and citations,
                           With papers, libels, proxjes, full they beare,
                           And bundels great of ſtrict examinations,
                           Of gloſſes, counſels, readings here and there.
                           Whereby in townes poore men of occupations
                           Poſſeſſe not their ſmall goods ſecure from feare,
                           Before, behind, on each ſides Aduocates,
                           Proctors, and Notaries hold vp debates.
                        
                        It was that, which a Roman Senatour ſaid, that their predeceſſors had their breath ſtinking of garlike, and their ſtomake perfumed with a good conſcience: and contrary, the men of his times, outwardly ſmelt of nothing but ſweet odours, but inwardly they ſtunke of all vices: Which in mine opinion, is as much to ſay, they had much Knowledge and Sufficiency, but great want of honeſty. In civility, ignorance, ſimplicity, and rudneſſe, are commonly joyned with innocency: Curioſity, ſubtilty, and knowledge, are ever followed with malice: Humility, feare, obedience, and honeſty (which are the principall inſtruments for the preſervation of humane ſociety) require a ſingle docile ſoule and which preſumeth little of hir ſelfe: Chriſtians have a peculiar knowledge, how curioſity is in a man a naturall, and originall infirmity. The care to encreaſe in wiſedome and knowledge was the firſt overthrow of man-kinde: It is the way whereby man hath headlong caſt himſelfe downe into eternall damnation. Pride is his loſſe and corruption: It is pride, that miſleadeth him from common waies; that makes him to embrace all newfangles, and rather chuſe to be chiefe of a ſtragling troupe and in the path of perdition, and be regent of ſome erronious ſect, and a teacher of falſehood, then a diſciple in the ſchoole of truth, and ſuffer himſelfe to be led and directed by the hand of others in the ready beaten high way. It is happily that, which the ancient Greeke proverbe implieth; 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           . Superſtion obaieth pride as a father. Oh overweening, how much doeſt thou hinder vs? Socrates being advertiſed, that the God of wiſedome, had attributed the name of wiſe vnto him, was thereat much aſtoniſhed, and diligently ſearching and rouzing vp himſelf, & ranſaking the very ſecrets of his hart found no foundation or ground for this divine ſentence. He knew ſome that were as juſt, as temperate, as valiant and as wiſe as he and more eloquent, more faire and more profitable to their country. In fine he reſolved, that he was diſtinguiſhed from others, and reputed wiſe, only becauſe he did not ſo eſteeme himſelfe: And that his God deemed the opinion of ſcience and wiſedome a ſingular ſottiſhnes in man; and that his beſt doctrine was the doctrine of ignorance, and ſimplicitie his greateſt wiſedome. The ſacred writ pronounceth them to be miſerable in this world, that eſteeme themſelves. Duſt and aſhes (ſaith he) what is there in thee, thou ſhouldeſt ſo much glory of? And in an other place. God hath made man like vnto a ſhadowe, of which

who ſhall judge, when the light being gone, it ſhall vaniſh away? Man is a thing of nothing. So far are our faculties from conceiving that high Deitie, that of our Creators works, thoſe beare his marke beſt, and are moſt his owne, which we vnderſtand leaſt. It is an occaſion to induce Chriſtians to beleeve, when they chance to meet with any incredible thing, that it is ſo much the more according vnto reaſon, by how much more it is againſt humane reaſon. If it were according vnto reaſon, it were no more a wonder; and were it to be matched, it were no more ſingular. Melius ſcitur Deus neſoiendo. God is better knowen by our not knowing him.
                           Sa. Auguſtine. Saith S. Augustine: And Tacitus, Sanctius est ac reverentius de actis deorum credere quàm ſcire: It is a courſe of more holineſſe and neverence, to hold beliefe, then to have knowledge of Gods actions. And Plato deemes it to be a vice of impiety, over-curiouſly to enquire after God, afterTacitus mor. German. the world, and after the firſt cauſes of things. Atque illum quidem parentem huius vniverſit atis invenire, difficile: & quum iam inveneris, indicare in vulgus, neſas. Both it is difficult to finde out the father of this vniverſe, and when you have found him, it is vnlawful to reveale him to the vulgar, ſaith Cicero. We eaſily pronounce puiſſance, truth and juſtice; they be words importingCic. vnive
                                 •
                              
                            ſome great matter, but that thing we neither ſee nor conceive. We ſay that God feareth, that God will be angry, and that God loveth.
                        
                           Immortalia mortali ſermone notante
                                 •
                              ,Luer. li 5. 122.
                           
                        
                        
                           Who with tearmes of mortality
                           Note things of immortality.
                        
                        They be all agitations and motions, which according to our forme can have no place in God, nor we imagine them according to his. It only belongs to God to know himſelfe, and interpret his owne workes; and in our tongues he doth it improperly, to deſcend and come downe to vs, that are, and lie groveling on the ground. How can wiſdome (which is the choiſe betweene good and evill) beſeeme him, ſeeing no evill doth touch him? How reaſon and intelligence, which we vſe to come from obſcure to apparant things, ſeeing there is no obſcure thing in God? Iuſtice which diſtributeth vnto every man, what belongs vnto him, created for the ſociety and converſation of man, how is ſhe in God? How temperance, which is the moderation of corporall ſenſualities, which have no place at all in his God-head? Fortitude patiently to endure ſorrowes, and labours and dangers, appertaineth a little vnto him; theſe three things no way approaching him, having no acceſſe vnto him. And therefore Aristotle
                           Cic. Nat. Deor. lib. 1. holdes him to be equally exempted from vertue and from vice. Ne
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               gratiâ, ne
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               irâ teneri potest, quòd quae talia eſſent, imbecilla eſſent omnia. Nor can he be poſſeſſed with favor and anger; for all that is ſo, is but weake. The participation which we have of the knowledge of truth, whatſoever ſhe is, it is not by our owne ſtrength we have gotten it; God hath ſufficiently taught it vs in that he hath made choiſe of the ſimple, common and ignorant, to teach vs his wonderfull ſecrets. Our faith hath not been purchaſed by vs: it is a gift proceeding from the liberality of others. It is not by our diſcourſe or vnderſtanding, that we have received our religion, it is by a forraine authority, and commandement. The weakneſſe of our judgement, helpes vs more than our ſtrength to compaſſe the ſame and our blindneſſe more then our cleare-ſighted eies. It is more by the meanes of our ignorance, then of our skill, that we are wiſe in heavenly knowledge. It is no marvell if our natural and terreſtriall meanes cannot conceive the ſupernaturall, or apprehend the celeſtial knowledge: Let vs adde nothing of our owne vnto it, but obedience and ſubjection: For (as it is written) I will confound the wiſdome of the wiſe and deſtroy
                           1. Cor. 1. 19. 20. 21. 
                           the vnderſtanding of the prudent, where is the Wiſe? Where is the Scribe? Where is the diſputer of this world. Hath not God made the wiſdome of this world fooliſhneſſe? For ſeeing the world by wiſedome knew not God in the wiſedome of God, it hath pleaſed him, by the vanity of preaching, to ſave them that beleeve. Yet muſt I ſee at laſt, whether it be in mans power to finde what he ſeekes for: and if this long ſearch, wherein he hath continued ſo many ages, hath enriched him with any new ſtrength or ſolid truth: I am perſwaded, if he ſpeake in conſcience, he will confeſſe, that all the benefit he hath gotten by ſo tedious a purſute, hath been, that he hath learned to know his owne weakneſſe. That ignorance which in vs was naturall, we have with long ſtudy confirmed and averred. It hath happened vnto thoſe that are truely learned, as it hapneth vnto eares of Corne, which as long as they are empty, grow and raiſe their head aloft, vpright and ſtout; but if they once become full and bigge, with ripe Corne, they begin to humble and droope downeward. So men having tried, and 
                              •
                           ounded all, and in all this Chaos, and huge heape of learning and proviſion of ſo infinite different things, and

found nothing that is ſubſtanciall firme and ſteadie, but all vanitie, have renounced their preſumption, and too late knowen their naturall condition. It is that, which 
                              Ʋelleius vpbraides Cotta and Cicero withall, that they have learnt of Philo, to have learned nothing. Pherecydes, one of the ſeaven wiſe, writing to Thales even as he was yeelding vp the Ghoſt; I have (ſaith he) appoynted my friends, as ſoone as I ſhalbe layed in my grave, to bring thee all my writings. If they pleaſe thee and the other Sages publiſh them; If not, conceale them. They containe no certaintie, nor doe they any whit ſatiſfie mee. My profeſſion is not to know the truth nor to attain it. I rather open, then diſcover things. The wiſest that ever was being demanded what he knew, anſwered, he knew that he knew nothing. He verified what ſome ſay, that the greateſt part of what we know, is the leaſt part of what we know not: that is, that that which we thinke to know, is but a parcel, yea and a ſmall particle of our ignorance. We know things in a dreame (ſaith Plato) and we are ignorant of them in truth. Omnes penè veteres nihil cognoſci,
                           Cic. Acad. q. l. 1 
                           nihil percipi, nihil ſciri poſſe dixerunt: angustos ſenſus, imbecilles animos, brevia curricula vitae. Almoſt all the ancients affirmed nothing may be knowen, nothing perceived, nothing vnderſtood: that our ſenſes are narrow, our mindes are weake, and the race of our life is ſhort. Cicero himſelfe, who ought all he had vnto learning, 
                              Ʋalerius ſaith, that in his age he began to diſeſteeme letters: And whil'ſt he practiſed them, it was without bond to any ſpeciall body, following what ſeemed probable vnto him, now in the one, and now in the other Sect; ever holding himſelfe vnder the Academies doubtfulneſſe. Dicendum eſt, ſed it a vt nihil affirmem: quaeram omnia, dubitans
                           Cic. divin. l. 1. 
                           plerum
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                              , & mihi diffide
                                 •
                              s. Speake I muſt, but ſo as I avouch nothing, queſtion all things, for the moſt part in doubt and diſtruſt of my ſelfe. I ſhould have too much adoe, if I would conſider man after his owne faſhion, and in groſe: which I might doe by his owne rule, who is wont to judge of truth not by the weight or value of voices but by the number. But leave we the common people,
                        
                           Qui vigilans ſtertit,
                           Who ſnoare while they are awake.
                           Mortua cui vita est, propè iam vivo atque videnti:Lucr. 3. 1091.
                           
                           Whoſe life is dead while yet they ſee,
                           And in a maner living be.Lucr. l. 3. 108
                                    •
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        Who feeleth not himſelfe, who judgeth not himſelfe, who leaves the greateſt part of his naturall parts idle. I will take man even in his higheſt eſtate. Let vs conſider him in this ſmall number of excellent and choiſe men, who having naturally beene endowed with a peculiar and exquiſite wit, have alſo foſtred and ſharpened the ſame with care, with ſtudy and with arte, and have brought and ſtrained vnto the higheſt pitch of wiſdome, it may poſſibly reach vnto. They have fitted their ſoule vnto all ſenſes, and ſquared the ſame to all byaſes; they have ſtrengthned and vnder-propped it with all forraine helpes, that might any way fit or ſteade hir, and have enriched and adorned hir with whatſoever they have beene able to borrow, either within or without the world for hir availe: It is in them, that the extreame height of humane Nature doth lodge. They have reformed the world with policies and lawes. They have inſtructed the ſame with artes and ſciences, as alſo by example of their wonderfull manners and life. I will but make accompt of ſuch people, of their witneſſe and of their experience. Let vs ſee how far they have gone, and what holdfaſt they have held by. The maladies and defects, which we ſhal finde in that Colledge, the world may boldly allow them to be his. Whoſoever ſeekes for any thing, commeth at laſt to this concluſion and ſaith, that either he hath found it, or that it cannot be found, or that he is ſtill in purſuit after it. All Philoſophy is divided into theſe three kindes. Hir purpoſe is to ſeeke out the, truth the knowledge and the certainty. The Peripatetike, the Epicurians, the Stoickes and others have thought they had found it. Theſe have eſtabliſhed the Sciences that we have, and as of certaine knowledges have treated of them; Clitomochus, Carneades and the Academikes, have diſpaired the finding of it, and judged that truth could not be conceived by our meanes. The end of theſe, is weakeneſſe and ignorance. The former had more followers, and the wortheiſt Sectaries. Pyrrho and other Sceptikes, or Epochiſtes, whoſe doctrine or manner of teaching, many auncient learned men have thought to have beene drawne, from Homer, from the ſeaven wiſe men, from Archilochus and Euripides, to whom they joyne Zeno, Democritus and Xenophanes, ſay, that they are ſtill ſeeking after truth. Theſe judge that thoſe are infinitely deceived, who imagine they have found-it, and that the ſecond degree is over boldly vaine in affirming that mans power is altogether vnable to attaine vnto it.

for to ſtabliſh the meaſure of our ſtrength to know and diſtinguiſh of the difficulty of things is a great, a notable and extreame ſcience, which they doubt whether man be capable thereof or no.
                        
                           Nil ſciri quisquis put at, id quo
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               neſcit,Lucr. l. 4. 471.
                           
                           An ſciri poſſit, quo ſe nil ſcire fatetur.
                        
                        
                           Who think's nothing is knowne, knowes not that, whereby hee
                           Grauntes he knowes nothing, if it knowne may bee.
                        
                        That ignorance, which knoweth judgeth and condemneth it ſelfe, is not an abſolute ignorance: For, to be ſo, ſhe muſt altogether be ignorant of her ſelfe. So that the profeſſion of the Phyrronians is ever to waver, to doubt and to enquire; never to be aſſured of any thing, nor to take any warrant of himſelf. Of the three actions or faculties of the ſoule, that is to ſay, he imaginative, the concupiſciple, and the conſenting, they allow and conceive the two former; the laſt, they hold and defend to be ambiguous, without inclination or approbation, either of one or other ſide, be it never ſo light, Zeno in jeſture painted forth his imagination vpon this diviſion of the ſoules faculties: the open and out-ſtretched hand was apparance; the hand halfe-ſhutte, and fingers ſomewhat bending, conſent: the fiſt cloſe, comprehenſion: if the fiſt of the left-hand were cloſely clinched together, it ſignified Science. Now this ſituation of their judgement, ſtraight and inflexible, receiving all objects with application or conſent, leades them vnto their Ataraxie; which is the condition of a quiet and ſetled life, exempted from the agitations, which we receive by the impreſſion of the opinion and knowledge, we imagine to have of things; whence proceed, feare, avarice, envie, immoderate deſires, ambition, pride, ſuperſtition, love of novelties, rebellion, diſobedience, obſtinacie, and the greateſt number of corporall evils: yea by that meane they are exempted from the jealouſie of their owne diſcipline, for they contend but faintly: They feare nor revenge, nor contradiction in the diſputations. When they ſay, that heavy things deſcend downeward, they would be loath to be believed, but deſire to be contradicted, therby to engender doubt, and ſuſpence of judgement, which is their end and drift. They put forth their propoſitions, but to contend with thoſe, they imagine wee holde in out conceipt. If you take theirs, then will they vndertake to maintaine the contrary: all is one to them, nor will they give a penny to chuſe. If you propoſe that ſnow is blacke, they wil argue on the other ſide, that it is white. If you ſay it is neither one nor other, they will maintaine it to be both. If by a certaine judgement, you ſay that you can not tell, they will maintaine that you can tell. Nay, if by an affirmative axiome, you ſweare that you ſtande in ſome doubt, they will diſpute, that you doubt not of it, or that you cannot judge or maintaine, that you are in doubt. And by this extreamitie of doubt, which ſtaggreth it-ſelfe, they ſeperat and devide themſelves from many opinions, yea from thoſe, which divers wayes have maintained both the doubt and the ignorance. Why ſhall it not be graunted then (ſay they) as to Dogmatiſts or Doctrine-teachers, for one to ſay greene, and another yellow, ſo for them to doubt? Is there any thing can be propoſed vnto you, eyther to allow or refuſe, which may not lawfully be conſidered as ambiguous and doubtfull? And whereas others be carryed either by the cuſtome of their Countrie, or by the inſtitution of their Parents, or by chaunce, as by a Tempeſt, without choyſe or judgement, yea ſometimes before the age of deſcretion, to ſuch or ſuch another opinion, to the Stoike or Epicurian Sect, to which they finde themſelves more engaged, ſubjected or faſt tyed, as to a prize they cannot let goe: Ad quamcum
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               diſciplinam, velut Tempeſtate, delat
                                 •
                              , ad eam tanquam
                           Cic. academ. qu. lib. 10. 
                           ad ſaxum, adhaereſcunt. Being carryed as it were by a Tempest, to any kinde of doctrine, they ſticke cloſe to it, as it were to a rocke. Why ſhall not theſe likewiſe be permitted, to maintaineIbid. their liberty, and conſider of things without dutie or compulſion? Hoc liberiores, & ſolutiores, quod integra illis eſt iudicandi potestas. They are ſo much the freer and at liberty, for that their power of iudgement is kept entire. Is it not ſome advantage for one to finde himſelfe diſingaged from neceſſitie, which brideleth others? Is it not better to remaine in ſuſpence, then to entangle himſelfe in ſo many errours, that humane fantaſie hath brought forth? Is it not better for a man to ſuſpend his owne perſwaſion, than to meddle with theſe ſedicious and quarellous deviſions? What ſhall I chuſe? Mary, what you liſt, ſo you chuſe. A very fooliſh anſwere: to which it ſeemeth nevertheleſſe, that all Dogmatiſme arriveth; by which it is not lawfull for you to bee ignorant of that we know not. Take the beſt and ſtrongeſt ſide, it ſhall never be ſo ſure, but you ſhall have occaſion to defend the ſame, to cloſe and combate a hundred and a hundred ſides? Is it not better to keepe out of this confuſion? You are ſuffered

to embrace as your honour and life Aristotles opinion, vpon the eternitie of the ſoule, and to belie and contradict whatſoever Plato ſaith concerning that; and ſhal they be interdicted to doubt of it? If it be lawfull for Panaeci
                                 •
                              s to maintaine his judgement about Aruſpices, Dreames, Oracles and Prophecies, whereof the Stoickes makes no doubt at all: Wherfore ſhall not a wiſeman dare that in all things, which this man dareth in ſuch as he hath learned of his Maſters? Confirmed and eſtabliſhed by the general conſent of the Schoole wherof he is a Sectary and a Profeſſor? If it be a Childe that judgeth, he wo
                              •
                           s not what it is; if a learned man, he is fore-ſtalled. They have reſerved a great advantage for themſelves in the combat, having diſcharged themſelves of the care how to ſhroud themſelves. They care not to be beaten, ſo they may ſtrike againe: And all is fiſh that comes to net with them: If they overcome, your propoſition halteth; if you, theirs is lame; if they faile they verifie ignorance, if you, ſhe is verified by you; if they proove that nothing is knowen, it is very well: If they cannot proove it, it is good alike: Vt quum in eadem re paria contrarijs in partibus momenta
                           Cic. ibid. 
                           inveniuntur, faciliùs ab vtra
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               parte aſſer
                                 ••
                              o ſuſtineatur. So as when the ſame matter the like weight and moment is found on divers parts, we may the more e
                                 •
                              ſ
                                 ••
                              y with hold avouching on both parts. And they ſuppoſe to find out more eaſily, why a thing is falſe, then true and that which is not, than that which is: and what they believe not, than what they believe. Their maner of ſpeech is, I confirme nothing: It is no more ſo than thus, or neither: I conceive it not; Apparances are every where alike: The law of ſpeaking pro or contra is all one. Nothing ſeemeth true, that may not ſeeme falſe. Their Sacramentall word is, 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , which is as much to ſay, as I hold and ſtir not. Behold the burdons of their ſongs and other ſuch like. Their effects is, a pure, entire and abſolute ſurceaſing and ſuſpence of judgement. They vſe their reaſon, to enquire and to debate; and not to ſtay and chooſe. Whoſoever ſhall imagine a perpetuall confeſſion of ignorance, and a judgement vpright and without ſtaggering, to what occaſion ſoever may chance; That man conceives the true Phyrrhoniſme. I expound this fanrazy as plaine as I can, becauſe many deeme it hard to be conceived: And the Authors themſelves repreſent it ſomewhat obſcurely and diverſly. Touching the actions of life, in that they are after the common ſort. They are lent and applied to naturall inclinations, to the impulſion and conſtraint of paſſions, to the conſtitutions of lawes, and cuſtomes and to the tradition of arts: Non enim nos Deus
                           Cic. diuin. l. 1. 
                           ista ſcire, ſed tantumodo v
                                 •
                              i voluit. For God would not have vs know theſe things, but onely vſe them. By ſuch meanes they ſuffer their common actions to be directed, without any conceit or judgement, which is the reaſon that I cannot well ſort vnto this diſcourſe, what is ſaid of Pyrro. They faine him to be ſtup
                              •
                           de and vnmoovable, leading a kinde of wilde and vnſociable life, not ſhunning to be 
                              ••
                           t with Car
                              •
                           es, preſenting himſelfe vnto downefales, refuſing to conforme himſelfe to the lawes. It is an endearing of his diſcipline. Hee would not make himſelfe a ſtone or a blocke, but a living, diſcourſing and reaſoning man, enjoying all pleaſures and naturall commodities, buſying himſelfe with, and vſing all his corporall and ſpirituall parts, in rule and right. The fantaſticall and imaginary, and falſe priviledges, which man hath vſurped vnto himſelfe, to ſway, to appoint, and to eſtabliſh, he hath abſolutely renounced and quit them. Yet is there no Sect, but is enforced to allow hir wiſe Sectary, in chiefe to follow diverſe things nor comprized nor perceived, nor allowed, if he will live. And if he take ſhipping, he followes his purpoſe, not knowing whether it ſhal be profitable or no; and yeeldes to this, that the ſhippe is good, that the pilote is skilfull, and that the ſeaſon is fit; circumſtances only probable; After which he is bound to goe, and ſuffer himſelfe to be removed by apparances alwaies provided they have no expreſſe contrariety in them. Hee hath a body, he hath a ſoule, his ſenſes vrge him forward, his mind mooveth him. Although he finde not this proper and ſingular marke of judging in himſelfe, and that hee perceive hee ſhould not engage his conſent, ſeeing ſome falſhood may be like vnto this truth: Hee ceaſeth not to detect the offices of his life fully and commodiouſly. How many arts are there, which profeſſe to conſiſt more in conjecture, than in the ſcience; That diſtinguiſh not betweene truth and falſhood, but onely follow ſeeming? There is both true and falſe (ſay they) and there are meanes in vs to ſeeke it out, but not to ſtay it when we touch it. It is better for vs to ſuffer the order of the world to manage vs without further inquiſition. A mind warranted from prejudice; hath a marvellous preferment to tranquility. Men that ſenſure and controule their iudges, doe never duely ſubmit themſelves vnto them. How much more docile and

tractable are ſimple and vncurious mindes found both towardes the lawes of religion and politike decrees, then theſe over-vigilant and nice-wits, teachers of divine and humane cauſes? There is nothing in mans invention, wherein is ſo much likelyhood, poſſibilitie and profite. This repreſenteth man bare and naked, acknowledging his naturall weakeneſſe, apt to receive from above ſome ſtrange power, disfurniſhed of all humane knowledge, and ſo much the more fitte to harbour divine vnderſtanding, diſannulling his judgement, that ſo he may give more place vnto faith: Neither misbeleeving nor eſtabliſhing any doctrine or opinion repugnant vnto common lawes and obſervances, humble, obedient, diſciplinable and ſtudious; a ſworne enemy to Hereſie, and by conſequence exempting himſelfe from all vaine and and irreligious opinions, invented and brought vp by falſe Sects. It is a white ſheet prepared to take from the finger of God, what form ſoever it ſhal pleaſe him to imprint therin. The more we addreſſe & commit our ſelves to God, and reiect our ſelves, the better it is for vs, Accept (ſaith Eccleſiastes) in good part things both in ſhew and taſte, as from day to day they are preſented vnto thee, the reſt is beyond thy knowledge. Dominus novit cogitationes hominum,
                           Pſal. 93. 
                                 •
                              1. 
                           quoniam vanae ſunt. The Lord knowes the thoughts of men, that they are vayne. See how of three generall Sects of Philoſophie, two make expreſſe profeſſion of doubt and ignorance; and in the third, which is the Dogmatiſts, it is eaſie to be diſcerned, that the greateſt number have taken the face of aſſurance; onely becauſe they could ſet a better countenance on the matter. They have not ſo much gone about to eſtabliſh any certainty in vs, as to ſhew how farre they had waded in ſeeking out the truth, Quam docti fingunt magis quàm norunt. Which the learned doe rather conceit, than know.
                        
                        
                           Tymaeus, being to inſtruct Socrates, of what hee knowes of the Gods, of the world and of men, purpoſeth to ſpeake of it, as one man to another; and that it ſufficeth, if his reaſons be as probable as another mans: For, exact reaſons are neither in his hands, nor in any mortall man; which one of his Sectaries hath thus imitated: 
                              Ʋt potero, explicabo: nec tamen, vt Pythius
                           Cic. Tuſc. qu. l. 1. 
                           Apollo, certa vt ſint & fixa, quae dixero: ſed, vt homunculus, probabilia coniectur â ſequens. As I can, I will explaine them; yet not as Apollo giving oracles, that all ſhould bee certaine and ſette donwe, that I ſay, but as a meane man, who followes likelihoode by his coniecture. And that vpon the diſcourſe of the contempt of death; a naturall and popular diſcourſe. Elſewhere he hath tranſlated▪it, vpon Platoes very words. Si fortè, de Deorum naturâ ortuque mundi diſſerentes,
                           Cic. Vniverſ. 
                           minus quod habemus in animo conſequimur, haud erit mirum. Aequum eſt enim meminiſſe, & me, qui diſſeram, hominem eſſe. & vos qui iudicetis: vt, ſi probabilia dicentur, nihil vltrà requiratis. It will be no marvell, if arguing of the nature of Gods and originall of the world, we ſcarſely reach to that which in our minde we comprehend; for it is meet we remember, that both I am a man, who am to argue, and you who are to iudge, ſo as you ſeeke no further, if I ſpeake but things likely. Ariſtotle ordinarily hoardeth vs vp a number of other opinions, and other beliefes, that ſo he may compare his vnto it, and make vs ſee how farre he hath gone further, and how neere he comes vnto true-likelyhood; For truth is not iudged by authoritie, nor by others teſtimonie. And therefore did Epicurus religiouſly avoyde to aleadge any in his compoſitions. He is the Prince of Dogmatiſts, and yet we learne of him, that, to know much, breedes an occaſion to doubt more. He is often ſeene, ſeriouſly to ſhelter himſelfe vnder ſo inextricable obſcuritie that his meaning cannot be perceived. In effect, it is a Pyrrhoniſme vnder a reſolving forme. Liſten to Ciceroes proteſtation, who doth declare vs others fantaſies by his owne. Qui requirunt,
                           Cic. Nat. deo. l. 1. 
                           quid de quaque re ipſi ſentiamus; curioſiùs id faciunt, quàm neceſſe eſt. Haec in philoſophiâ ratio, contra omnia diſſerendi, nullámque rem apertè iudicandi, profecta à Socrate, repetita ab Arceſila, confirmata à Carneade vſque ad noſtram viget aetatem. Hi ſumus, qui omnibus veris falſa quaedam adiuncta eſſe dicamus, tantâ ſimilitudine, vt in ijs nulla inſit certè iudicandi & aſſentiendi nota. They that would know what we conceit of every thing, vſe more curioſity than needes. This courſe in Philoſophy to diſpute againſt all things, to iudge expreſly of nothing, derived from Socrates, renewed by Arceſilas, confirmed by Carneades, is in force till our time: we are thoſe that aver ſome falſhood entermixt with every trueth, and that with ſuch likeneſſe, as there is no ſet note in thoſe things for any aſſuredly to give iudgement or aſſent. Why hath not Aristotle alone, but the greateſt number of Philoſophers affected difficulty, vnleſſe it be to make the vanity of the ſubject to prevaile, and to ammuſe the curioſity of our minde, ſeeking to feede it, by gnawing ſo raw and bare a bone? Clytomachus affirmed, that he could never vnderſtand by the writings of Carneades, what opinion he was of. Why hath Epicurus interdicted facility

vnto his Sectaries? And wherefore hath Heraclitus beene ſurnamed 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , a darke miſty clowded fellow? Difficulty is a coine, that wiſemen make vſe of, as juglers doe with paſſe and repaſſe, becauſe they will not diſplay the vanity of their arte, and wherewith humane fooliſhneſſe is eaſily apaide.
                        
                           Clarus ob obſcurum linguam, magis interinanes.Lucr. l. 1. 656.
                           
                           Omnia enim ſtolidi magis admirantur amântque,
                           Inverſis quae ſub verbis latitantia cernunt.
                        
                        
                           For his darke ſpeech much prais'd, but of th'vnwiſe;
                           For fooles doe all ſtill more admire and prize,
                           That vnder words turn'd topſie-turvie lies.
                        
                        
                           Cicero reproveth ſome of his friends, becauſe they were wont to beſtow more time about Aſtrology, Law, Logike, and Geometry, then ſuch Artes could deſerve; and diverted them from the devoirs of their life, more profitable and more honeſt. The Cyrenaike Philoſophers equally contemned naturall Philoſophy and Logicke. Zeno in the beginning of his bookes of the Common-wealth, declared all the liberall Sciences to be vnprofitable. Chryſippus ſaid that which Plato and Ariſtotle had written of Logike, they had written the ſame in jeſt and for exerciſe ſake; and could not beleeve that ever they ſpake in good earneſt of ſo vaine and idle a ſubject. Plutarke ſaith the ſame of the Metaphyſikes; Epicurus would have ſaid it of Rethorike, of Gramar, of Poeſie, of the Mathematikes, and (except natural Philoſophy) of all other ſciences: And Socrates of all; but of the Arte of civill manners and life. Whatſoever he was demanded of any man, he would ever firſt enquire of him, to give an accompt of his life, both preſent and paſt: which he would ſeriouſly examine and judge of: Deeming all other apprentiſhips as ſubſequents and of ſupererogation in regard of that. Parum mihi placeant eae literaequae advirtutem doctoribus nihil profuerunt. That learning pleaſeth me but a little, which nothing profiteth the teachers of it vnto vertue. Moſt of the Artes have thus beene contemned by knowledge it ſelfe: For they thought it not amiſſe to exerciſe their mindes in matters, wherein was no profitable ſolidity. As for the reſt, ſome have judged Plato a Dogmatiſt, others a Doubter, ſome a Dogmatiſt in one thing and ſome a Doubter, in another. Socrates, the fore-man of his Dialogues doth ever aske and propoſe his diſputation; yet never concluding, nor ever ſatisfying: and ſaith, he hath no other Science, but that of oppoſing. Their author Homer hath equally grounded the foundations of all Sects of Philoſophy, there by to ſhew, how indifferent he was which way we went. Some ſay, that of Plato aroſe ten diverſe Sects. And as I thinke, never was inſtruction wavering and nothing avouching, if his be not. Socrates was wont to ſay, that when Midwives begin once to put in practiſe the trade to make other women bring forth children, themſelves become barren. That he by the title of wiſe, which the gods had conferred vpon him, had alſo in his man-like and mentall love ſhaken off the faculty of begetting: Being well pleaſed to afford all helpe and ſavor to ſuch as were engendrers; to open their nature, to ſuple their paſſages, to eaſe the iſſue of their child-bearing, to judge thereof, to baptiſe the ſame, to foſter it, to ſtrengthen it, to ſwath it, and to circumciſe it; exerciſing and handling his inſtrument at the perrill and fortune of others So i
                              •
                            it with moſt Authors of this third kinde, as the ancients have well noted by the writings of Anaxagoras, Democritus, Parmenides, Xenophanes, and others. They have a maner of writing doubtfull both in ſubſtance and intent, rather enquiring then inſtructing: albeit heere and there, they enterlace their ſtile with dogmaticall cadences. And is not that as well ſeene in Seneca, and in Plutarke? How much doe they ſpeake ſometimes of one face, and ſometimes of another, for ſuch as looke neere vnto it? Thoſe who reconcile Lawyers, ought firſt to have reconciled them every one vnto himſelfe. Plato hath (in my ſeeming) loved this manner of Philoſophying, Dialogue wiſe in good earneſt, that therby he might more decently place in ſundry mout
                              •
                           es the diverſity and variation of his owne conceites. Diverſly to treat of matters is as good and better as to treate them conformably; that is to ſay, more copiouſly, and more profitably. Let vs take example by our ſelves. Definite ſentences make the laſt period of dogmaticall and reſolving ſpeech: yet ſee we, that thoſe which our Parlaments preſent vnto our people, as the moſt exemplare and fitteſt to nouriſh in them the reverence they owe vnto this dignitie, eſpecialy by reaſon of the ſufficiencie of thoſe perſons, which exerciſe the ſame, taking their glory, not by the concluſion, which to them is dayly, and is common to al judges as much as the debating of diverſe, and agitations of contrary reaſonings of law cauſes will

admit. And the largeſt ſcope for reprehenſions of ſome Philoſophers againſt others, draweth contradictions and diverſities with it, wherein every one of them findeth himſelfe ſo entangled, either by intent to ſhew the wavering of mans minde aboue all matters, or ignorantly forced by the volubilitie and incomprehenſibleneſſe of all matters: What meaneth this burdon? In a ſlippery and gliding place let vs ſuſpend our beliefe, For as Euripides ſaith,
                        
                           Les oeuures de Dieu en diverſesEuripides.
                           
                           Facons, nous donnent des traverſes.
                        
                        
                           Gods workes doe travers our imaginations,
                           And croſſe our workes in divers different faſhions.
                        
                        Like vnto that, which Empedocles was wont often to ſcatter amongſt his bookes, as moved by a divine furie and forced by truth. No no, we feele nothing, we ſee nothing; all things are hid from vs: There is not one, that we may eſtabliſh, how and what it is: But returning to this holy word. Cogitationes mortalium timidae & incertae adinventiones noſtrae, & providentiae.
                           Wiſd. c. 9. 14. 
                           The thoughts of mortal men are feareful, our devices and foreſights are vncertaine. It muſt not be thought ſtrange if men diſparing of the goale have yet taken pleaſure in the chaſe of it; ſtudie being in it ſelfe a pleaſing occupation, yea ſo pleaſing, that amid ſenſualities, the Stoikes forbid alſo that, which comes from the exerciſe of the minde, and require a bridle to it, and finde intemperance in over much knowledge. Democritus having at his table eaten ſome figges, that taſted of honny, began preſently in his minde, to ſeeke out whence this vnuſuall ſweetnes in them might proceede; and to be reſolved, roſe from the board, to view the place where thoſe figges had beene gathered. His maide ſervant noting this alteration in her maſter, ſmilingly ſaide vnto him, that hee ſhould no more buſie himſelfe about it; the reaſon was, ſhe had laide them in a veſſell, where honny had beene, whereat he ſeemed to be wroth in that ſhee had deprived him of the occaſion of his intended ſearch, and robbed his curioſitie of matter to worke vpon. Away (quoth he) vnto her, thou haſt much offended mee; yet will I not omit to finde out the cauſe, as if it were naturally ſo. Who perhaps would not have miſſed to finde ſome likely or true reaſon, for a falſe and ſuppoſed effect. This ſtorie of a famous and great Philoſopher dooth evidently repreſent vnto vs this ſtudious paſſion, which ſo dooth ammuſe vs in purſuite of things, of whoſe obtaining wee diſpaire. Plutarke reporteth a like example of one, who would not bee reſolved of what hee doubted, becauſe hee would not looſe the pleaſure hee had in ſeeking it: As another, that would not have his Phiſitian remove the thirſt hee felt in his ague, becauſe hee would not looſe the pleaſure he tooke in quenching the ſame with drinking. S
                                 •
                              tius eſt ſupervacua
                           Sen. epi. 89 f. 
                           diſcere, quàm nihil. It is better to learne more then wee neede, then nothing at all, Even as in all feeding, pleaſure is alwayes alone and ſingle; and all wee take that is pleaſant, is not ever nouriſhing and wholeſome: So likewiſe, what our minde drawes from learning leaveth not to be voluptuous, although it neither nouriſh nor be wholeſome. Note what their ſaying is: The conſideration of nature is a foode proper for our mindes, it raiſeth and puffeth vs vp, it makes vs by the compariſon of heavenly and high things to diſdaine baſe and low matters: the ſearch of hidden and great cauſes is very pleaſant, yea vnto him that attaines nought but thereverence and feare to iudge of them, Theſe are the very words of their profeſſion. The vaine image of this crazed curioſitie, is more manifeſtly ſeene in this other example, which they for honour-ſake have ſo often in their mouths. Eudoxus wiſhed, and praid to the Gods, that he might once view the Sunne neere at hand, to comprehend his forme, his greatneſſe and his beautie; on condition he might immediately be burnt and conſumed by it. Thus with the price of his owne life would he attaine a Science, whereof both vſe and poſſeſſion ſhall therewith bee taken from him; and for ſo ſudden and fleeting knowledge, looſe and forgoe all the knowledges he either now hath, or ever hereafter may have. I can not eaſily be perſwaded, that Epicurus, Plato, or Pithagoras have ſold vs their Atomes, their Ideas, and their Numbers for ready payment. They were overwiſe to eſtabliſh their articles of faith vpon things ſo vncertaine and diſputable. But in this obſcuritie and ignorance of the world, each of theſe notable men hath endevoured to bring ſome kinde of ſhew or image of light; and have buſied their mindes about inventions, that might at leaſt have a pleaſing and wil
                              •
                           e apparance, provided (notwithſtanding it were falſe) it might be maintained againſt contrary oppoſitions: 
                              Ʋnicuiquae ista pro ingento finguntur, non ex Scientiae v
                                 •
                              . Theſe things are conceited by every man as his wit ſerves, not as his knowledge ſtretches and reaches. An ancient Philoſopher

being blamed for profeſſing that Philoſophie, whereof, in his judgement hee made no eſteeme; anſwered, that that was true Philoſophizing. They have gone about to conſider all, to ballance all, and have found that it was an occupation fitting the naturall curioſitie which is in vs. Some things they have written for the behoofe of common ſocietie, as their religions: And for this conſideration was it reaſonable, that they would not throughly vnfold common opinions, that ſo they might not breede trouble in the obedience of lawes and cuſtomes of their countries. Plato treateth this myſterie in a very manifeſt kinde of ſport. For, where he writeth according to himſelfe, he preſcribeth nothing for certaintie: When he inſtitutes a Law giuer, he borroweth a very ſwaying and avouching kinde of ſtile: Wherein he boldly entermingleth his moſt fantaſticall opinions; as profitable to perſwade the common ſorte, as ridiculous to perſwade himſelfe: Knowing how apt we are to receive all impreſſions, and chiefly the moſt wicked and enormous. And therefore is he very carefull in his lawes that nothing bee ſung in publike but Poeſies; the fabulous fictions of which tend to ſome profitable end: being ſo apt to imprint all manner of illuſion in mans minde, that it is injuſtice not to feede them rather with commodious lies, then with lies either vnprofitable or damageable, He flatly ſaith in his Common-wealth, that for the benefit of men, it is often neceſſarie to deceive them. It is eaſie to diſtinguiſh, how ſome Sects have rather followed truth, and ſome profit; by which the latter have gained credit. It is the miſerie of our condition, that often, what offers it ſelfe vnto onr imagination for the likely eſt: preſents not it ſelfe vnto it for the moſt beneficiall vnto our life. The boldeſt ſects, both Epicurian, Pirrhonian and new Academike, when they have caſt their acoumpt, are compelled to ſtoope to the civill law. There are other ſubjects, which they have toſſed, ſome on the left and ſome on the right hand, each one labouring and ſtriving to give it ſome ſemblance, were it right or wrong: For, having found nothing ſo ſecret, whereof they have not attempted to ſpeake, they are many times forced to forge divers feeble and fond conjectures: Not that themſelves tooke them for a ground-worke, nor to eſtabliſh a truth, but for an exerciſe of their ſtudie. Non tam id ſenſiſſe, quod dicerent, quàm exercere ingenia materiae difficultate videntur voluiſſe. They ſeeme not ſo much to have thought as they ſaid, as rather willing to exerciſe their wits in the difficulty of the matter. And if it were not ſo taken, how ſhould we cloke ſo great an inconſtancie, varietie and vanity of opinions, which we ſee to have beene produced by theſe excellent and admirable ſpirits? As for example, What greater vanitie can there be, then to goe about by our proportions and coniectures to gueſſe at God? And to governe both him and the world according to our capacitie and lawes? And to vſe this ſmall ſcantlin of ſufficiencie, which he hath pleaſed to impart vnto our naturall condition, at the coſt and charges of divinitie? And becauſe we cannot extend our ſight ſo farre as his glorious throne, to haue removed him downe to our corruption and miſeries? Of all-humane and ancient opinions concerning religion, I thinke that to have had more likelyhood and excuſe, which knowledged and confeſſed God to be an incomprehenſible power, chiefe beginning and preſerver of all things; all goodnes, all perfection; accepting in good part the honour and reverence which mortall men did yeeld him, vnder what vſage, name and manner ſoever it was.
                        
                           Iupiter omnipotens rerum, regúmque, Deúmque,
                           Progenitor, genitrixque.
                        
                        
                           Almightie Iove, is parent ſaid to be
                           Of things, of Kings, of Gods, both he and ſne.
                        
                        This zeale hath vniverſally beene regarded of heaven with a gentle and gracious eye. All Policies have reaped ſome fruite by their devotion: Men, and impious actions have every where had correſpondent events. Heathen hiſtories acknowledge dignitie, order, juſtice, prodigies, and oracles, employed for their benefite and inſtruction, in their fabulous religion: God of his mercy daining peradventure, to foſter by his temporall bleſſings the budding and tender beginnings of ſuch a brute knowledge, as naturall reaſon gave them of him, athwart the falſe images of their deluding dreames: Not only falſe, but impious and injurious are thoſe, which man hath forged and diviſed by his owne invention. And of al religions Saint Paul found in credite at Athens, that which they had conſecrated vnto a certaine hidden and vnknowne divinitie, ſeemed to be moſt excuſable, Pithagoras ſhadowed the truth ſomewhat neerer, judgeing that the knowledge of this firſt cauſe and Ens entium muſt be vndefined, without any preſcription or declaration. That it was nothing elſe but the extreame

indevor of our imagination, toward perfection, every one amplifying the Idea thereof according to his capacitie. But if Numa vndertooke to conforme the devotion of his people to this project, to joyne the ſame to a religion meerly mentall, without any prefixt object, or materiall mixture; he vndertooke a matter to no vſe. Mans minde could never be maintained, if it were ſtill floting vp and downe in this infinite deepe of ſhapeles conceits. They muſt be framed vnto hir to ſome image, according to hir model. The majeſty of God hath in ſome ſort ſuffered it ſelfe to be circumſcribed to corporall limits: His ſupernaturall and celeſtiall Sacraments, beare ſignes of our terreſtriall condition. His adoration is expreſt by offices and ſenſible words; for, it is man that beleeveth and praieth. I omit other arguments, that are emplyed about this ſubject. But I could hardly be made beleeve, that the ſight of our Crucifixes, and pictures of that pittiful torment, that the ornaments and ceremonious motions in our Churches, that the voices accomodated and ſuted to our thoughts-devotions, and this ſtirring of our ſenſes, doth not greatly inflame the peoples ſoules, with a religious paſſion, of wonderous beneficiall good. Of thoſe, to which they have given bodies, as neceſſity required amid this generall blindneſſe; as for me, I ſhould rather have taken part with thoſe who worſhiped the Sunne.
                        
                           —la lumiere commune,
                           
                           L'oeil du monde: & ſi Dieu au chef porte des yeux,
                           Les rayons du Solil ſont ſes yeux radieux
                           Qui donnent vie à tous, nous maintiennent & gardent,
                           Et les faicts des humains en ce monde regardent:
                           Ce beau, ce grand Soleil, qui nons fait les ſayſons,
                           Selon qui'il entre ou ſort de ſes douze mayſos:
                           Qui remplit l'vnivers de ſes vertus cognues,
                           Qui d'vntraict de ſes yeux nous diſſipe les nues:
                           L'ſprit, l'ame du monde, ardant & flamboyant,
                           En la couree d'un iour tout le Ciel tour noyand,
                           Plein d'immenſe geandeur, rond, vagabond & ferme:
                           Lequel tient deſſoubs luy tout le monde pour terme,
                           Enrepos ſans repos, oyſif, & ſans ſeiour,
                           Fils aiſnè de nature, & le pere du iour.
                        
                        
                           The common light,
                           The worlds eye: and if God beare eyes in his cheefe head,
                           His moſt reſplendent eyes, the Sunne-beames may be ſaid,
                           Which vnto all give life, which vs maintaine and guarde,
                           And in this world of men, the workes of men regarde,
                           This great, this beauteous Sunne, which vs our ſeaſons makes,
                           As in twelve houſes he, ingreſſe or egreſſe takes;
                           Who with his Vertues knowne, doth fill this vniverſe
                           With one caſt of his eyes doth vs all clowdes diſperſe,
                           The ſpirit, and the ſoule of this world, flaming, burning,
                           Round about heav'n in courſe of one dayes journey turning.
                           Of endleſſe greatneſſe full, round, mooveable and faſt:
                           Who all the world for boundes beneath himſelfe hath pla'ſt:
                           In reſt, without reſt, and ſtill more ſtaide, without ſtay,
                           Of Nature th'eldeſt Childe, and father of the day.
                        
                        Foraſmuch as beſides this greatneſſe and matchleſſe beautie of his, it is the only glorious piece of this vaſte-worldes-frame, which we perceive to be furtheſt from vs: And by that meane ſo little known, as they are pardonable, that entered into admiration, and reverence of it. Thale
                                 •
                              , who was the firſt to enquire and finde out this matter, eſteemed God to bee a ſpirit, who made all things of water. Anaximander thought, the Gods did dy, and were new borne at divers ſeaſons: and that the worlds were infinite in number. Anaximenes deemed the ayre to be a God, which was created immenſe, and alwaies mooving. Anaxagoras was the firſt that held the deſcription and manner of all things, to be directed by the power and reaſon of a ſpirit infinit. Alcmaeon hath aſcribed Divinity vnto the Sunne, vnto the Moone, vnto Stars, and vnto the Soule. Pithagoras hath made God, a ſpirit diſperſed through the Nature

of all things, whence our ſoules are derived. Parmenides, a Circle circumpaſſing the heavens, and by the heate of light maintaining the world. Empedocles ſaid, the foure Natures, whereof all things are made, to be Gods. Protagords, that he had nothing to ſay, whether they were or were not, or what they were. Democritus would ſometimes ſay, that the images and their circuitions were Gods, and othertimes this Nature, which diſperſeth theſe images; and then our knowledge and intelligence. Plato ſcattereth his beliefe after diverſe ſemblances. In his Tymeus, he ſaith, that the worlds-father could not be named. In his Lawes, that his being muſt not be enquired-after. And elſe-where in the ſaid bookes, he maketh the world, the heaven, the ſtarres, the earth and our ſoules, to be Gods; and beſides, admiteth thoſe that by ancient inſtitutions have beene received in every Common-wealth. Xenophon reporteth a like difference of Socrates his diſcipline. Sometimes that Gods forme ought not to be inquired after; then he makes him infer, that the Sunne is a God, and the Soule a God: othertimes, that there is but one, and then more. Speuſippus Nephew vnto Plato, makes God to be a certaine power, governing all things, and having a ſoule. Aristotle ſaith ſometimes that it is the ſpirit, and ſometimes the world; othertimes he appoynteth another ruler over this world, and ſometimes he makes God to be the heat of heaven. Xenocrates makes eight; five named amongſt the planets, the ſixth compoſed of all the fixed ſtarres, as of his owne members; the ſeaventh and eight, the Sunne and the Moone. Heraclides Ponticus doth but roame among his opinions, and in fine depriveth God of ſenſe, and maks him remoove and tranſchange himſelfe from one forme to another; and then ſaith, that it is both heaven and earth. Theophrastus in all his fantazies wandereth ſtill in like irreſolutions, attributing the worldes ſuperintendency now to the intelligence, now to the heaven, and now to the ſtarres. Straio, that it is Nature having power to engender, to augment and to diminiſh, without forme or ſenſe. Zeno, the naturall Lawe, commaunding the good, and prohibiting the evil; which Lawe is a breathing creature; and remooveth the accuſtomed Gods, Iupiter, Iuno and Ʋeſta. Diogenes Appolloniates, that it is Age. Xenophanes makes God, round, ſeeing, hearing not breathing, and having nothing common with humane Nature. Ariſto deemeth the forme of God to bee incomprehenſible, and depriveth him of ſenſes, and wotteth not certainely whether he bee a breathing ſoule or ſomething elſe. Cleanthes, ſometimes reaſon, othertimes the World, now the ſoule of Nature, and other-while the ſupreame heate, enfoulding and containing all. Perſaeus Zenoes diſciple hath beene of opinion, that they were ſurnamed Gods, who had brought ſome notable good or benefite vnto humane life, or had invented profitable things. Chryſippus, made a confuſed huddle of all the foreſaide ſentences, and amongſt a thouſand formes of the Gods, which he faineth, hee alſo accompteth thoſe men, that are immortalized. Diagoras and Theodorus, flatly denyed, that there were anie Gods: Epicurus makes the Gods, bright-ſhining, tranſparent and perflable, placed as it were betweene two Forts, betweene two Worldes, ſafely ſheltered from all blowes; inveſted with a humane ſhape, and with our members, which vnto them are of no vſe.
                        
                           Ego Deûm genus eſſe ſemper duxi, & dicam c
                                 •
                              litum,E
                                    ••
                                 . Cice. diu. l. 2.
                           
                           Sed eos non curare opinor, quid agat humanum genus.
                        
                        
                           I ſtill thought and wil ſay, of Gods there is a kinde;
                           But what our mankinde doth, I thinke they nothing minde.
                        
                        Truſt to your Phyloſophie, boaſt to have hit the naile on the head; or to have found out the beane of this Cake, to ſee this coile and hurly-burly of ſo many Phyloſophical wits. The trouble or confuſion of worldly ſhapes and formes, hath gotten this of mee, that cuſtomes and conceipts differing from mine, doe not ſo much diſlike me, as inſtruct me; and at what time I conferre or compare them together, they doe not ſo much puffe me vp with pride, as humble me with lowlineſſe. And each other choyſe, except that, which commeth from the expreſſe hand of God, ſeemeth to me a choyſe of ſmall prerogative or conſequence. The worlds policies are no leſſe contrary one to another in this ſubject, than the ſchooles: Wherby we may learne, that Fortune hirſelf is no more divers, changing and variable, than our reaſon, nor more blinde and inconſiderat. Things moſt vnknowne are fitteſt to bee deified. Wherefore, to make gods of our ſelves (as antiquitie hath done,) it exceed the extreame weakenſſe of diſcourſe. I would rather have folowed thoſe that worſhipped the Serpent, the Dogge and the Oxe, forſomuch as their Nature and being is leaſt knowne to vs; and we may more lawfully imagine what we liſt of thoſe beaſts and aſcribe extraordinarie faculties

vnto them. But to have made Gods of our condition, whoſe imperfections we ſhould know, and to have attributed deſire, choller, revenge, marriages, generation, alliances, love and jealouſie, our limmes and our bones, our infirmities, our pleaſures, our deathes and our Sepulchres vnto them, hath of neceſſity proceeded from a meere and egregious ſottiſhneſſe, or drunkenneſſe of mans wit.
                        
                           Quae procul vſque adeo divino ab numine diſtantLucr. l. 5. 123.
                           
                           Inque Deûm numero quae ſint indigna videri.
                        
                        
                           Which from Divinity ſo diſtant are,
                           To ſtand in rancke of Gods vnworthy farre.
                        
                        
                           Forma, aetates, vestitus, ornatus noti ſunt: genera, coniugia, cognationes, omniáque traducta ad ſimilitudinem imbecillitatis humanae: nam & perturbatis animis inducuntur, accipimus enim Deorum cupiditates, agritudines, iracundias. Their ſhapes, their ages, their apparrell, their furnitures are knowen; their kindes, their marriages, their kindered, and all tranſlated to the likeneſſe of mans weakeneſſe: For they are alſo brought in with mindes much troubled: for we reade of the luſt fulneſſe, the grievings, the angrineſſe of the Gods. As to have aſcribed Divinity, not only vnto faith, vertue, honour, concord, liberty, victory and piety; but alſo vnto voluptuouſneſſe, fraud; death envie, age and miſery; yea vnto feare, vnto ague and vnto evill fortune and ſuch other iniuries and wrongs to our fraile and tranſitory life.
                        
                           Quid invat hoc, templ
                                 •
                              s noſtros inducere mores?Pers. ſat. 2. 62. 61.
                           
                           O curvae in terris animae & caleſtium inanes!
                        
                        
                           What boots it, into Temples to bring manners of our kindes?
                           O crooked ſoules on earth, and voide of heavenly mindes.
                        
                        The Aegyptians with an impudent wiſedome forbad vpon paine of hanging, that no man ſhould dare to ſay; that Serapis and Iſis their Gods, had whilom been but men, when all knew they had beene ſo. And their images or pictures drawne with a finger a croſſe their mouthes imported (as Varro ſaith) this miſterious rule vnto their prieſts, to conceale their mortall ofſpring, which by a neceſſary reaſon diſanulled all their veneration. Since man deſired ſo much to equall himſelfe to God, it had beene better for him (ſaith Cicero) to draw thoſe divine conditions vnto himſelfe, and bring them downe to earth, then to ſend his corruption, and place his miſerie above in heaven: but to take him aright, he hath divers waies and with like vanitie of opinion, done both the one and other. When Philoſophers blazon and diſplay the Hierarchy of their gods and to the vtmoſt of their skil indevor to diſtinguiſh their aliances, their charges, and their powers. I cannot beleeve they ſpeake in good earneſt when Plato decifreth vnto vs the orchard of Pluto, and the commodities or corporall paines which even after the ruine and conſumption of our bodie, waite for vs, and applyeth them to the apprehenſion or feeling we have in this life.
                        
                           Secreti celant colles, & myrtia circùmVirg. Aen. l. 6. 443.
                           
                           Sylva tegit, curae non ipſa in morte relinquunt.
                        
                        
                           Them paths aſide conceale, a mirtle grove
                           Shades them round; cares in death doe not remove.
                        
                        When Mahomet promiſeth vnto his followers aparadiſe all tapiſtred, adorned with gold and precious ſtones, peopled with exceeding beauteous damſels, ſtored with wines and ſingular cates. I well perceive they are but ſooffers, which ſute and applie themſelves vnto our fooliſhneſſe, thereby to enhonme and allure vs to theſe opinions and hopes fitting our mortall appetite. Even ſo are ſome of our men falne into like errours by promiſing vnto themſelves after their reſurection a terreſtriall and temporall life, accompanied with al ſorts of pleaſures and worldly commodities. Shall we thinke that Plato, who had ſo heavenly conceptions, and was ſo well acquainted with Divinity, as of moſt he purchaſed the ſurname of Divine, was ever of opinion, that man (this ſeely and wretched creature man) had any one thing in him, which might in any ſort be applied, and ſuted to this incomprehenſible and vnſpeakable power? or ever imagined, that our languiſhing hold faſts were capable, or the vertue of our vnderſtanding of force, to participate or be partakers, either of the bleſſedneſſe, or eternall puniſhment? He ought in the behalfe of humane reaſon be anſwered: If the pleaſures, thou promiſeſt vs in the other life, are ſuch as I have felt heere below, they have nothing in them common with infinity. If all my five naturall ſenſes were even ſurcharged with joy and gladneſſe, and my ſoule poſſeſſed with all the contents and, delights, it

could poſſibly deſire or hope for (and we know what it either can wiſh or hope for) yet were it nothing. If there bee any thing that is mine, then is there nothing that is Divine; if it be nothing elſe, but what may appertaine vnto this our preſent condition, it may not be accounted-of, All mortall mens contentment is mortall. The acknowledging of our parents, of our children and of our friends, if it can not touch, move or tickle vs in the other world, if we ſtill take hold of ſuch a pleaſure, we continue in Terreſtrial and tranſitorie commodities. We can not worthily conceive of theſe high, myſterious, and divine promiſes; if wee can but in any ſorte conceive them, and ſo imagine them aright; they muſt be thought to be inimaginable, vnſpeakeable and incomprehenſible, and abſolutely and perfectly other then thoſe of our miſerable experience. No eye can behold, (ſaith Sainte Paul) The happe that God prepareth
                           1. Cor. 2. 9. 
                           for his elect, nor can it poſſibly enter the heart of man. And if to make vs capable of it (as thou ſaith Plato by thy purifications) our being is reformed and eſſence changed, it muſt be by ſo extreame and vniverſall a change, that according to Philoſophicall doctrine, we ſhall be no more our ſelves:
                        
                           Hector erat tunc cùm bello certabat, at illeOrid. Triſt l. 3. el. 11. 27.
                           
                           Tr
                                 •
                              ctus ab Aemonio non er at Hector equo.
                           Hector he was, when he in fight vs'd force;
                           Hector he was not, drawne by th'enemies horſe.
                        
                        it ſhall be ſome other thing, that ſhall receive theſe recompences.
                        
                           —quod mutatur, diſſolvitur, interit ergo:
                              Lucr. l. 3. 781.
                           
                           Traijciuntur enim partes at que ordine migrant.
                           What is chang'd, is diſſolved, therefore dies:
                           Tranſlated parts in order fall and riſe.
                        
                        For, in the Metempſychoſis, or tranſmigration of ſoules of Pithagoras, and the change of habitation, which he imagined the ſoules to make; ſhall we thinke that the Lion in whom abideth the ſoule of Caeſar, doth wed the paſſions which concerned Caeſar, or that it is hee? And if it were hee, thoſe had ſome reaſon, who debating this opinion againſt Plato, object that the ſonne might one day bee found committing with his mother vnder the ſhape of a Mules body, and ſuch like abſurdities. And ſhall wee imagine, that in the tranſmigrations which are made from the bodies of ſome creatures into others of the ſame kind, the new ſucceeding-ones are not other, then their predeceſſors were? Of a Phenixes cinders, firſt (as they ſay) is engendred a worme and then another Phenix: who can imagine that this ſecond Phenix be no other and different from the firſt? Our Silk-wormes are ſeene to die and then to wither drie, and of that body breedeth a Butter-flie, and of that a worme, were it not ridiculous to thinke, the ſame to be the firſt Silkeworm? what hath once loſt his being, is no more.
                        
                           Nec ſi materiam noſtram collegerit aetasIb. 890.
                           
                           Post obitum, rurſúmque redegerit, vt ſita nunc est
                           Atque iterum nobis fuerint data lumina vitae,
                           Pertineat quidquam tamen ad nos id quoque factum,
                           Interrupta ſemel cùm ſit repet entia noſtra.
                           If time ſhould recollect, when life is paſt,
                           Our ſtuffe, and it replace, as now tis plac't,
                           And light of life were granted vs againe,
                           Yet nothing would that deede to vs pertaine,
                           When interrupted were our turne againe.
                        
                        And Plato, when in another place thou ſaiſt, that it ſhall be the ſpirituall part of man that ſhall enjoy the recompences of the other life, thou telleſt of things of as ſmall likely-hood.
                        
                           Scilicet avulſis radicibus vt nequit vllamIb. 580.
                           
                           Diſpicere ipſe oculus rem ſeorſum corpore toto.
                           Ev'n as no eye, by th'root's pull'd-out can ſee
                           Ought in whole body ſeverall to bee.
                        
                        For, by this reckoning, it ſhall no longer be man, nor conſequently vs, to whom this enjoying ſhall appertaine; for we are builte of two principall eſſentiall parts, the ſeparation of which, is the death and conſummation of our being.
                        
                           Inter enim iacta eſt vitai cauſa vagèqueIb. 903.
                           
                           D
                                 ••
                              rrarunt paſſim motus ab ſenſibus omnes.
                           
                              A pauſe of life is interpos'd; from ſenſe
                           All motions ſtraied are, farre wandring thence.
                        
                        we doe not ſay, that man ſuffereth, when the wormes gnaw his body and limbes whereby he lived, and that the earth conſumeth them.
                        
                           Et nihil hoc ad nos, qui coitu coniugioqueIbid. 888.
                           
                           Corporis atque animae conſistimus vniter apti.
                           This nought concern's vs, who conſiſt of vnion,
                           Of minde and body joyn'd in meete communion,
                        
                        Moreover, vpon what ground of their juſtice, can the Gods reward man and be thankefull vnto him after his death, for his good and vertuous actions, ſince themſelves addreſſed and bred them in him? And wherefore are they offended, and revenge his vicious deedes, when themſelves have created him with ſo defective a condition, and that but with one twinkling of their will, they may hinder him from ſinning? Might not Epicurus with ſome ſhew of humane reaſon object that vnto Plato, if he did not often ſhrowd himſelfe vnder this ſentence; That it is vnpoſſible by mortall nature to eſtabliſh any certainty of the immortall? Shee is ever ſtraying, but eſpecially when ſhe medleth with divine matters. Who feeles it more evidently then we? For, although we have aſcribed vnto hir, aſſured and infallible principles, albeit wee enlighten hir ſteps with the holy lampe of that truth, which God hath beene pleaſed to impart vnto vs, we notwithſtanding ſee daily, how little ſoever ſhe ſtray from the ordinary path, and that ſhe ſtart or ſtragle out of the way, traced and meaſured out by the Church, how ſoone ſhe looſeth, entangleth and confoundeth hir ſelfe; turning, toſſing and floating vp and downe, in this vaſt, troubleſome and tempeſtious ſea of mans opinions, without reſtraint or ſcope. So ſoone as ſhe looſeth this high and common way, ſhee devideth and ſcattereth hir ſelfe a thouſand diverſe waies. Man can be no other then he is, nor imagine but according to his capacitie: It is greater preſumption (ſath Plutarke) in them that are but men, to attempt to reaſon and diſcourſe of Gods, and of demie-Gods, then in a man meerly ignorant of muſicke, to judge of thoſe that ſing; or for a man, that was never in warres, to diſpute of Armes and warre, preſuming by ſome light conjecture, to comprehend the effects of an arte altogether beyond his skill- As I thinke, Antiquity imagined it did ſomething for divine Majeſty, when ſhee compared the ſame vnto man, attiring hir with his faculties, and enriching hir with his ſtrange humours, and moſt ſhamefull neceſſities: offering hir ſome of our cates to feede vpon, and ſome of our dances, mummeries, and enterludes to make hir merry, with our clothes to apparrell hir; and our houſes to lodge hir, cheriſhing hir with the ſweet odors of incenſe, and ſounds of muſicke, adorning hir with garlands and flowers, and to draw her to our vicious paſſion, to flatter her juſtice with an in humane revenge, gladding her with the ruine and diſſipation of things created and preſerved by her. As Tiberius Sempronius, who for a ſacrifice to Vulcane, cauſed the rich ſpoiles and armes, which he had gotten of his enemies in Sardinia, to be burned: And Paulus Emilius, thoſe he had obtayned in Macedonia, to Mars and Minerva. And Alexander comming to the Ocean of India, caſt in favour of Thetis many great rich veſſels of gold into the Sea, repleniſhing moreover hir Alters with a butcherly ſlaughter, not onely of innocent beaſts, but of men, as diverſe Nations, and amongſt the reſt, ours were wont to doe. And I thinke none hath beene exempted from ſhewing the like▪ Eſſayes.
                        
                           —Su
                                    •
                                 mone creatos
                              Virg. Aen. l. 10 517.
                           
                           Quatuor hic iuuenes, totidem, quos educat Vfens,
                           Viventes rapit, inferias quos immolet vmbris.
                           Foure yong-men borne of Sulmo, and foure more
                           Whom Vfens bred, he living over-bore,
                           Whom he to his dead friend
                           A ſacrifice might ſend.
                        
                        The Getes deeme themſelves immortall, and their death but the beginning of a jorney to their God Zamolxis. From five to five yeares, they diſpatch ſome one among themſelves toward him, to require him of neceſſarie things. This deputie of theirs is choſen by lottes; And the manner to diſpatch him, after they have by word of mouth inſtructed him of his charge, is that amongſt thoſe which aſſiſt his election, three holde ſo many javelins vpright, vpon which the others by meere ſtrength of armes, throwe him, if he chance to ſticke vpon

them in any mortall place, and that he die ſuddenly, it is to them an aſſured argument of divine favor; but if he eſcape, they deeme him a wicked and execrable man, and then chuſe another. Ameſtris mother vnto Xerxes, being become aged, cauſed at one time 14. yoong ſtriplings of the nobleſt houſes of Perſia (following the religion of hir countrie) to be buried all alive, thereby to gratifie ſome God of vnder-earth. Even at this day the Idols of Temixitan are cimented with the blood of yong children, and love no ſacrifice but of ſuch infant and pure ſoules: Oh juſtice greedie of the blood of innocencie.
                        
                           Tantum religio potuit ſu
                                 •
                              dere malorum.L
                                    •
                                 c. l. 1. 102.
                           
                           Religion ſo much miſcheefe could
                           Perſwade, where it much better ſhould.
                        
                        The Carthaginians were wont to ſacrifice their owne children vnto Saturne, and who had none, was faine to buy ſome: and their fathers and mothers were enforced in their proper perſons, with cheerefull and pleaſant countenance to aſſiſt that office. It was a ſtrange conceite, with our owne affliction to goe about to pleaſe and appay divine goodnes. As the Lacedemomans, who flattered and wantonized their Diana, by torturing of yong boyes, whom often in favor of hir they cauſed to be whipped to death. It was a ſavage kinde of humor, to thinke do gratifie the Architect with the ſubverſion of his architecture: and to cancel the puniſhment due vnto the guiltie, by puniſhing the guiltles, and to imagine that poore Iphigenia, in the port of Aulis, ſhould by hir death and ſacrifice diſcharge and expiate, towards God, the Grecians armie of the offences, which they had committed.
                        
                           Et caſta inceſte nubendi tempore in ipſoIbid. 99.
                           
                           Hoſtia concider et mactatu moeſt a parentis.
                           She, a chaſt offring, griev'd inceſtuouſly
                           By fathers ſtroke, when ſhe ſhould wed, to die.
                        
                        And thoſe two noble and generous ſoules of the Decij, father and ſonne, to reconcile, and appeaſe the favor of the Gods, towards the Romanes affaires, ſhould head long caſt their bodies athwart the thickeſt throng of their enemies. Quae fuit tanta Deorum iniquitas, vt placari populo Romano non poſſint, niſi tales viri occidiſſent? What iniuſtice of the Gods was ſo great, as they could not be appeaſed, vnleſſe ſuch men periſhed? Conſidering that it lies not in the offender to cauſe himſelfe to be whipped, how and when he liſt, but in the judge, who accoumpteth nothing a right puniſhment, except the torture he appointeth; and cannot impute that vnto puniſhment, which is in the free choiſe of him that ſuffereth. The divine vengeance preſuppoſeth our full diſſent, for his juſtice and our paine. And ridiculous was that humor of Polycrates, the Tyrant of Samos, who to interrupt the courſe of his continuall happines, and to recompence-it, caſt the richeſt and moſt precious jewell he had into the Sea, deeming that by this purpoſed miſhappe he ſhould ſatisfie the revolution and viciſſitude of fortune; which to deride his folly, cauſed the very ſame iewel, being found in a fiſhes-belly, to returne to his hands againe. And to what purpoſe are the manglings and diſmembrings of the Corybantes, of the Maenades, and now a daies of the Mahumetans, who skarre, and gaſh their faces, their ſtomake and their limmes, to gratifie their prophet: ſeeing the offence conſiſteth in the will, not in the breaſt, nor eyes, nor in the genitories, health, ſhoulders, or throte? Tantus eſt perturbatae mentis & ſedibus ſuis pulſae furror, vt ſic dij placentur, quemadmodum ne
                           Aug. Civi. Dei l. 6. c. 10. 
                           homines quidem ſaeuiunt. So great is the furie of a troubled minde put from the ſtate it ſhould be in, as the Gods muſt be ſo pacified, as even men would not be ſo outragious. This naturall contexture doth by hir vſe not only reſpect vs, but alſo the ſervice of God, and other mens: it is iniuſtice to make it miſcarie at our pleaſure, as vnder what pretence ſoever it be to kill our ſelves. It ſeemeth to be a great cowardiſe and manifeſt treaſon, to abuſe the ſtupide and corrupt the ſervile functions of the body, to ſpare the diligence vnto the ſoule how to direct them according vnto reaſon. 
                              Ʋbi iratos deos timent, qui ſic propitios habere merentur. In regiae libidinis
                           Ibid. e. Senec. 
                           voluptatem caſtrati ſunt quidam; ſed nemo 
                                 •
                              ibi, ne vir eſſet, in bente domino, manus intulit. Where are they afeard of Gods anger, who in ſuch ſort deſerve to have his favour; ſome have beene guelded for Princes lustfull pleaſure: but no man at the Lords command, hath laid hands on himſelfe, to be leſſe then a man. Thus did they repleniſh their religion and ſtuffe it with divers bad effects.
                        
                           —ſaepius olim
                              Lucr. l. 1. 82.
                           
                           
                              Religio peperit ſceleroſa atque impia facta.
                           
                           
                              Religion hath oft times in former times.
                           Bred execrable facts, vngodly crimes.
                        
                        Now can nothing of ours, in what manner ſoever, be either compared or referred vnto divine nature, that doth not blemiſh or defile the ſame with as much imperfection. How can this infinit beauty, power and goodneſſe admit any correſpondency or ſimilitude with a thing ſo baſe and abject as we are, without extreame intereſt and manifeſt derogation from his divine greatneſſe? Infirmum Dei fortius eſt hominibus; & ſtultum Dei ſapientius est hominibus,
                           1. Cor. 1. 25. 
                           The weakneſſe of God is ſtronger then men: and the fooliſhneſſe of God is wiſer then men. Stilpo the Philoſopher, being demanded, whether the Gods rejoyce at our honours and ſacrifices; you are indiſcreet (ſaid he) let vs withdraw our ſelues a part, if you ſpeake of ſuch matters. Notwithſtanding we preſcribe him limits, we lay continuall ſiege vnto his power by our reaſons. (I call our dreames and our vanities reaſon, with the diſpenſation of Philoſophy, which ſaith, that both the foole and the wicked doe rave and dote by reaſon; but that it is a reaſon of ſeverall and particular forme) we will ſubject him to the vaine and weake apparances of our vnderſtanding; him who hath made both vs and our knowledge. Becauſe nothing i
                              •
                            
                           
                              •
                           ade of nothing: God was not able to frame the world without matter. What? Hath God delivered into our hands the keyes, and the ſtrongeſt wardes of his infinite puiſſance? Hath he obliged himſelfe not to exceed the boundes of our knowledge? Suppoſe, oh man, that herein thou haſt beene able to marke ſome ſignes of his effects: Thinkeſt thou, he hath therein emploied all he was able to doe, and that he hath placed all his formes and Ideas, in this piece of worke? Thou ſeeſt but the order and policy of this little little Cell wherein thou art placed: The queſtion is, whither thou ſeeſt it: His divinity hath an infinit iuriſdiction far beyond that: This piece is nothing in reſpect of the whole.
                        
                           —omnia cùm caelo terraque marique,
                              Lucr. l. 6. 675.
                           
                           Nil ſunt ad ſummam ſummai totius omnem.
                           All things that are, with heav'n, with Sea, and land,
                           To th'whole ſumme of th'whole ſumme, as nothing ſtand.
                        
                        This law thou a leageſt is but a municipall law, and thou knoweſt not what the vniverſall is. Tie thy ſelfe vnto that, whereto thou are ſubject, but tie not him; he is neither thy companion, nor thy brother, nor thy fellow Citizen, nor thy compeſmate. If he in any ſort have communicated himſelfe vnto thee, it is not to debaſe himſelf, or ſtoope to thy ſmalneſſe, nor to give thee the controulment of his power. Mans body cannot ſoare vp vnto the cloudes, this is for thee. The Sunne vnceſſantly goeth his ordinary courſe: The bounds of the Seas and of the earth can not be confounded: The water is ever fleeting, wavering, and without firmeneſſe: A wal without breach or flaw, inpenetrable vnto a ſolid body: Man cannot preſerve his life amidſt the flames, he cannot corporally be both in heaven and on earth, and in a thouſand places together and at once. It is for thee that he hath made theſe rules; it is thou they take hold off. He hath teſtified vnto Chriſtians, that when ever it pleaſed him he hath out gone them all. And in truth, omnipotent as he is, wherefore ſhould he have reſtrained his forces vnto a limited meaſure? In favour of whom ſhould he have renounced his priviledge? Thy reaſon hath in no one other thing more likely-hood and foundation, then in that which perſwadeth thee a plurality of worlds.
                        
                           Terrámque & ſolem, lunam, mare, caetera quae ſunt,Ib. 2. 1094.
                           
                           Non eſſe vnica, ſed numero magis innumerali.
                           The earth, the Sunne, the Moone, the Sea and all
                           In number numberleſſe, not one they call.
                        
                        The famouſeſt wits of former ages have beleeved it, yea and ſome of our moderne, as forced therevnto by the apparance of humane reaſon. For as much as whatſoever we ſee in this vaſt worlds frame, there is no one thing alone, ſingle and one:
                        
                           —cùm in ſumma res nulla ſit vna,
                              Ib. 1086.
                           
                           
                              Ʋnica quae gignatur, & vnica ſol
                                 •
                              que creſcat:
                           Whereas in generall ſumme, nothing is one,
                           To be bred onely one, grow onely one.
                        
                        and that all ſeverall kindes are multiplied in ſome number: Wherby it ſeemeth vnlikely, that God hath framed this piece of worke alone without a fellow; and that the matter of this forme hath wholy beene ſpent in this onely Individuum;
                        
                        
                           
                           Quare etiam atque etiam tales fateare neceſſe eſt,Ib. 1
                                    •
                                 73.
                           
                           Eſſe alios alibi congreſſus materiaij,
                           Qualis hic eſt avido complexu quem tenet Aether.
                           Wherefore you muſt confeſſe, againe againe,
                           Of matter ſuch like meetings elſe where raigne
                           As this, theſe skies in greedy gripe containe.
                        
                        Namely if it be a breathing creature, as it's motions make it ſo likely, that Plato aſſureth it, and divers of ours eyther affirme it, or dare not impugne it; no more then this olde opinion, that the Heaven, the Starres and other members of the World, are Creatures compoſed both of body and ſoule; mortall in reſpect of their compoſition, but immortall by the creators decree. Now, if there be divers Worldes, as Democritus, Epicurus and well-neere all Phyloſophie hath thought; what know wee, whether the principles and the rules of this one concerne or touch likewiſe the others? Happily they have another ſemblance and another policie. Epicurus imagineth them either like or vnlike. We ſee an infinite difference and varietie in this world, only by the diſtance of places. There is neyther Corne, nor Wine; no nor any of our beaſtes ſeene in that new Corner of the World, which our fathers have lately diſcovered: All things differ from ours. And in the old time, marke but in how many parts of the world, they had never knowledge nor of Bacchus nor of Ceres. If any credit may be given vnto Plinie or to Herodotus, there is in ſome places a kind of men that have very little or no reſemblance at all with ours. And there be mungrell and ambiguous ſhapes, betweene a humane and brutiſh Nature. Some Cuntries there are, where men are borne headleſſe, with eyes and mouthes in their breaſts; where al are Hermaphrodites; where they creep on all foure; Where they have but one eie in their forehead, and heads more like vnto a dog than ours; Where from the Navill downewards they are halfe fiſh, and live in the water; Where women are brought a bed at five yeares of age, and live but eight; Where their heads and the skinne of their browes are ſo hard, that no yron can pierce them, but wil rather turne edge; Where men never have beardes. Other Nations there are, that never have vſe of fire? Others whoſe ſperme is of a blacke colour. What ſhall we ſpeake of them, who naturally change themſelves into Woolves, into Coults, and then into Men againe? And if it bee (as Plutark ſaith) that in ſome part of the Indiaes, there are men without mouthes, and who live only by the ſmell of certaine ſweete odours; how many of our deſcriptions be then falſe? Hee is no more ri
                              •
                           ible; nor perhappes capable of reaſon and ſocietie: The direction and cauſe of our inward frame, ſhould for the moſt part be to no purpoſe. Moreover, how many things are there in our knowledge, that oppugne theſe goodly rules, which we have allotted and preſcribed vnto Nature? And we vndertake to joyne GOD himſelfe vnto hir. How manie things doe we name miraculous and againſt Nature? Each man and every Nation doth it according to the meaſure of his ignorance. How many hidden proprieties and quinteſſences doe we dayly diſcover? For vs to goe according to Nature, is but to follow according to our vnderſtanding, as farre as it can follow, and aſmuch as we can perceive in it. Whatſoever is beyond it, is monſtrous and diſordred. By this accoumpt all ſhall then be monſtrous, to the wiſeſt and moſt ſufficient; for even to ſuch, humane reaſon hath perſwaded, that ſhe had neither ground nor footing, no not ſo much as to warrant ſnow to be white: And Anaxagoras ſaid, it was blacke; Whether there be any thing or nothing; Whether there be knowledge or ignorance; Which Metrodorus Chius denyed, that any man might ſay. Or whether we live as Euripides ſeemeth to doubt, and call in queſtion, whether the life we live be a life or no, or whether that which we call death be a life:
                        
                           
                              
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                              ,Pla
                                    •
                                 . Gerg 
                                    •
                                 x Eurip.
                           
                           
                              
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                              ;
                           Who knowes if thus to live, be called death,
                           And if it be to die, thus to draw breath?
                        
                        And not without apparance. For, wherefore doe we from that inſtant take a title of being, which is but a twinckling in the infinit courſe of an eternall night, and ſo ſhort an interruption of our perpetuall and naturall condition? Death poſſeſſing what-ever is before and behind this moment, and alſo a good part of this moment. Some others affirme, there is no motion, and that nothing ſtirreth; namely thoſe which follow Meliſſus. For if there be but 
                              〈…〉
                            this ſphericall motion ſerve him, nor the mooving from one place to another,

as Plato prooveth, that there is neither generation nor corruption in nature. Protagoras ſaith, there is nothing in Nature, but doubt: That a man may equally diſpute of all things: and of that alſo, whether all things may equally be diſputed of: Manſiphanes ſaid, that of things which ſeeme to be, no one thing, is no more, then it is not. That nothing is certaine, but vncertainty. Parmenides, that of that which ſeemeth, there is no one thing in Generall. That there is but one Zeno, that one ſelfe ſame is not: And that there is nothing. If one were he ſhould either be in another, or in himſelfe: if he be in another, then are they two: If he be in himſelfe, they are alſo two, the comprizing and the comprized. According to theſe rules or doctrines, the Nature of things is but a falſe or vaine ſhadow. I have ever thought, this manner of ſpeech in a Chriſtian, is full of indiſcretion and irreverence; God cannot die, God cannot gaine-ſay himſelfe, God cannot doe this or that. I cannot allow, a man ſhould ſo bound Gods heavenly power vnder the Lawes of our word. And that apparance, which in theſe propoſitions offers it ſelfe vnto vs, ought to be repreſented more reverently and more religiouſly. Our ſpeech hath his infirmities and defects, as all things elſe have. Moſt of the occaſions of this worlds troubles are Grammaticall. Our ſutes and proceſſes proceed but from the canvaſing and debating the interpretation of the Lawes, and moſt of our warres from the want of knowledge in State-counſellors, that could not cleerely diſtinguiſh and fully expreſſe the Covenants, and Conditions of accords, betweene Prince and Prince. How many weighty ſtrifes, and important quarrels, bath the doubt of this one ſilable, Hoc, brought forth in the world? examine the plaineſt ſentence, that Logike it ſelfe can preſent vnto vs. If you ſay, it is faire Weather, and in ſo ſaying, ſay true; it is faire Weather then. Is not thie a certaine forme of ſpeech? Yet will it deceive vs: That it is ſo; Let vs follow the example: If you ſay, I lie, and that you ſhould ſay true, you lie then. The Arte, the reaſon, the force of the concluſion of this laſt, are like vnto the other; notwithſtanding we are entangled. I ſee the Pyrhonian Phyloſophers, who can by no manner of ſpeech expreſſe their General conceit: for, they had neede of a new language. Ours is altogether compoſed of affirmative propoſitions, which are directly againſt them. So that, when they ſay, I doubt, you have them faſt by the throte to make them a vow, that at leaſt you are aſſured and know, that they doubt. So have they been compelled to ſave themſelves by this compariſon of Phyſicke, without which their conceite would be inexplicable and intricate. When they pronounce, I know not, or I doubt, they ſay, that this propoſition tranſportes it ſelfe together with the reſt, even as the Rewbarbe doeth, which ſcowred ill humours away, and therewith is carryed away himſelfe. This conceipt is more certainly conceived by an interrogation: What can I tell? As I beare it in an Impreſe of a paire of ballances. Note how ſome prevaile with this kinde of vnreverent and vnhallowed ſpeach. In the diſputation, that are now-adayes in our religion, if you overmuch vrge the adverſaries, they will roundly tell you, that it lieth not in the power of God to make his body at once to be in Paradiſe and on earth, and in many other places together. And how that ancient skoffer made profitable vſe of it. Atleaſt (ſaith he) it is no ſmall comfort vnto man, to ſee that God cannot doe all things; for he cannot kill himſelfe if he would, which is the greateſt benefite we have in our condition; he cannot make mortall men immortall, nor raiſe the dead to life againe, nor make him that hath lived, never to have lived, and him, who hath had honours, not to have had them, having no other right over what is paſt, but of ſorgetfulneſſe. And that this ſociety betweene God and Man; may alſo be combined with ſome pleaſant examples, he cannot make twiſe ten not to be twenty. See what he ſaith and which a Chriſtian ought to abhor, that ever ſuch and ſo profane words ſhould paſſe his mouth: Whereas on the contrary part, it ſeemeth that fond men endevour to finde out this fooliſh-boldneſſe of ſpeech, that ſo they may turne and winde God almighty according to their meaſure.
                        
                           —cras vel atra
                              Hor. car. l. 3. od. 29. 43.
                           
                           Nube polum pater occupato,
                           
                              Ʋel ſole puro, non tamen irritum
                           Quodeúmque retro eſt efficiet, neque
                           Diffinget infectúmque reddet
                           Quod fugiens ſemel hora vexit.
                           To morrow let our father fill the skie,
                           With darke clowde, or with cleare Sunne, he thereby
                           
                              Shall not'make voyde what once is overpaſt:
                           Nor ſhall he vndoe, or in new molde caſt,
                           What time hath once caught; that flyes hence ſo faſt.
                        
                        When we ſay, that the infinitie of ages, as well paſt as to come, is but one inſtant with God; that his wiſedome, goodneſſe and power, are one ſelfe-ſame thing with his eſſence; our tongue ſpeakes-it, but our vnderſtanding can no whit apprehend it. Yet will our ſelfe-overweening ſift his divinitie through our ſearce: whence are engendred all the vanities and errours wherewith the world is ſo full-fraught, reducing and weighing with his vncertaine balance, a thing ſo farre from his reach, and ſo diſtant from his weight. Mirum
                           Pli
                                 •
                              . nat. hiſt. l. 2. c. 23. 
                           quò procedat improbitas cordis humani, parvulo aliquo invitata ſucceſſu. It is a wonder, whether the perverſe wickedneſſe of mans heart will proceede, if it be but called-on with any little ſucceſſe. How inſolently doe the Stoikes charge Epicurus, becauſe he holds, that to be perfectly good and abſolutely happy, belongs but onely vnto God; and that the wiſeman hath but a ſhadow and ſimilitude thereof? How raſhly have they joyned God vnto deſtiny? (Which at my requeſt, let none that beareth the ſurname of a Chriſtian, doe at this day) And Thales, Plato, and Pithagoras have ſubjected him vnto neceſſitie. This over-boldneſſe, or rather bold-fiercenſſe, to ſeeke to diſcover God, by and with our eyes, hath beene the cauſe, that a notable man of our times hath attributed a corporall forme vnto divinitie and is the cauſe of that which dayly hapneth vnto vs, which is, by a particular aſſignation, to impute all important events to God: which becauſe they touch vs, it ſeemeth they alſo touch him, and that he regardeth them with more care and attention, then thoſe that are but ſlight and ordinary vnto vs. Magna dij curant, parva negligunt. The Gods take ſome care for great things, but none
                           Cic. Nat. D
                                 ••
                              r. lib. 2. Cic. ib. lib. 3. 
                           for litle. Note his example; he wil enlighten you with his reaſon. Nec inregnis quidem reges omnia minima curant. Nor doe Kings in their Kingdomes much care for the leaſt matters. As if it were all one to that King, either to remove an Empire, or a leafe of a tree: and if his providence were otherwiſe exerciſed, inclining or regarding no more the ſucceſſe of a battel, then the skip of a flea. The hand of his government affords it ſelfe to all things after a like tenure, faſhion and order; our intereſt addeth nothing vnto it: our motions and our meaſures concerne him nothing and move him no whit. Deus it a artifex magnus in magnis, vt minor non ſit in parvis. God is ſo great a workeman in great things, as he is no leſſe in ſmall things. Our arrogancie, ſetteth ever before vs this blaſphemous equality; becauſe our occupations charge-vs. State hath preſented the Gods with all immunitie of offices, as are their Prieſts. He maketh nature to produce and preſerve all things, and by hir weights and motions to compact all parts of the world, diſcharging humane nature from the feare of divine judgements.Cic. ib. lib. 1. 
                           Quod beatum aeternumque ſit, id nec habere, negotij quicquam, ne
                                 •
                               exhibere alteri. That which is bleſſed and eternall, nor is troubled it ſelfe, nor troubleth others. Nature willeth that in all things alike, there be alſo like relation. Then the infinite number of mortall men, concludeth a like number of immortall.: The infinite things that kill and deſtroy, preſuppoſe as many that preſerve and profit. As the ſoules of the Gods, ſanſe tongues, ſanſe eyes and ſanſe eares, have each one in themſelves a feeling of that which the other feele, and judge of our thoughts; ſo mens ſoules, when they are free and ſevered from the body, either by ſleepe or any diſtraction; divine, prognoſticate and ſee things, which being conjoyned to their bodies, they could not ſee. Men (ſaith Saint Paul) when they profeſſed themſelves to beeRun. 1. 22. 23. wiſe, they became fooles, for they turned the glory of the incorruptible God to the ſimilitude of the image of a corruptible man. Marke I pray you a little the jugling of ancient Deifications. After the great, ſolemne and prowd pompe of funeralls, when the fire began to burne the top of the Pyramis: and to take hold of the bed or hearce wherein the dead, corps lay, even at that inſtant, they let flie an Eagle, which taking her flight aloft vpward, ſignified that the ſoule went directly to Paradiſe. We have yet a thouſand medailes and monuments, namely of that honeſt woman Fauſtina, wherein that Eagle is repreſented, carrying a cocke-horſe vp towards heaven thoſe Deified ſoules. It is pity we ſhould ſo deceive our ſelves with our owne fooliſh deviſes and apiſh inventions,
                        
                           Quod finxere timent—Lucan. l. 1. 484
                           
                           Of that they ſtand in feare,
                           Which they in fancy beare.
                        
                        as children will be afeard of their fellowes viſage, which them ſelues have beſmeared and

blackt. Quaſi quicquam infoelicius ſit homine, cui ſua figment a dominantur. As though any thing were more wretched then man over whom his owne imaginations beare ſway and domineere. To honour him whom we have made, is farre from honouring him that hath made vs. Augustus had as many Temples as Iupiter, and ſerved with as much religion and opinion of myracles. The Thraſians, in requitall of the benefits they had received of Ageſilaus, came to tell him how they had canonized him. Hath your Nation (ſaid he) the power to make thoſe whom it pleaſeth, Gods: Then firſt (for example ſake) make one of your ſelues, and when I ſhall have ſeene what good he ſhall have thereby, I will then thanke you for your offer. Oh ſenceleſſe man, who can not poſſibly make a worme, and yet will make Gods by dozens. Liſten to Triſmegistus when he praiſeth our ſufficiency: For man to finde out divine nature, and to make it, hath ſurmounted the admiration of all admirable things. Loe heere arguments out of Philoſophies ſchooles it ſelfe,
                        
                           Noſcere cui Divos & coelinumina ſoli,Lucan. lib. 1. 452.
                           
                           Aut ſolineſcire datum.
                           Only to whom heav'ns Deities to know,
                           Only to whom is giv'n, them not to know.
                        
                        If God be, he is a living creature; if he be a living creature, he hath ſenſe; and if hee have ſenſe, he is ſubject to corruption. If he be without a body, he is without a ſoule, and conſequently without action: and if he have a body, he is corruptible. Is not this brave? we are incapable to have made the world, then is there ſome more excellent nature, that hath ſet hir helping hand vnto it. Were it not a ſottiſh arrogancy, that wee ſhould thinke our ſelves to be the perfecteſt thing of this Vniverſe? Then ſure there is ſome better thing, And that is God. When you ſee a rich and ſtately Manſion houſe, although you know not who is owner of it, yet will you not ſay, that it was built for Rats. And this more then humane frame, and divine compoſition, which we ſee, of heavens pallace, muſt we not deeme it to be the manſion of ſome Lord, greater then our ſelves? Is not the higheſt ever the moſt worthy? And we are ſeated in the loweſt place. Nothing that is without a ſoule and void of reaſon, is able to bring forth a living ſoule capable of reaſon. The world doth bring vs forth, then the world hath both ſoule and reaſon. Each part of vs, is leſſe then our ſelves, we are part of the world, then the world is ſtored with wiſedome and with reaſon, and that more plenteouſly, then we are. It is a goodly thing to have a great government. Then the worlds government belongeth to ſome bleſſed and happy nature. The ſtarres annoy vs not, then the ſtarres are full of goodneſſe. We have neede of nouriſhment, then ſo have the Gods, and feede themſelves with the vapours ariſing here below. Worldly goods, are not goods vnto God. Then are not they goods vnto vs. To offend and to bee offended, are equall witneſſes of imbecilitie; Then it is folly to feare God. God is good by his owne nature, man by his induſtry: which is more? Divine wiſedome and mans wiſedome, have no other diſtinction, but that the firſt is eternall. Now laſtingneſſe it not an acceſſion vnto wiſedome. Therefore are we fellowes. We have life, reaſon and libertie, we eſteeme goodneſſe, charitie and juſtice; theſe qualities are then in him. In concluſion the building and deſtroying the conditions of divinitie, are forged by man according to the relation to himſelfe. Oh what a patterne, and what a modell! Let vs raiſe, and let vs amplifie humane qualities as much as we pleaſe. Puffe-vp thy ſelfe poore man, yea ſwell and ſwell againe.
                        
                           —non ſi te ruperis, inquit.
                              Hor. ſerm. lib. 2. ſat. 3. 324.
                           
                           Swell till you breake, you ſhall not be,
                           Equall to that great one, quoth he.
                        
                        
                           Profectò non Deùm, quem cogitare non poſſunt, ſed ſemetipſos pro illo cogitantes, nonillum; ſed ſeipſos, non ills, ſed ſibi comparant. Of a truth, they conceiting, not God, whom they cannot conceive, but themſelves inſtead of God, doe not compare him, but themſelves, not to him, but themſelves. In naturall things the effects doe but halfe referre their cauſes. What this? It is above natures order it's condition is to high, to far out of reach, and overſwaying to endure, that our concluſions ſhould ſeize vpon, or fetter the ſame. It is not by our meanes we reach vnto it, this traine is too low. We are no nerer heaven on the top of Sina mount, then in the bottome of the deepeſt Sea: Conſider of it, that you may ſee with your Aſtrolabe. They bring God even to the carnall acquaintance of women, to a prefixed number of times, and to how many generations. Paulina, wife vnto Saturninus, a matron of great reputation in Rome, ſuppoſing to lie

with the God Serapis, by the maquerelage of the Prieſts of that Temple, found hi
                              •
                            ſelfe in the armes of a wanton lover of hirs. Varro the moſt ſubtill, and wiſeſt Latine Author, in his bookes of divinitie writeth, that Hercules his Sextaine, with one hand caſting lottes for himſelfe, and with the other for Hercules, gaged a ſupper and a wench againſt him: if he won, at the charge of his offerings, but if he loſt, at his owne coſt. He loſt and paid for a ſupper and a wench: Hir name was Laurentina: Who by night ſaw that God in hir armes, ſaying moreover vnto hir, that the next day, the firſt man ſhe met withall, ſhould heavenly pay hir hir wages. It fortuned to be one Taruncius, a very rich yong-man, who tooke hir home with him, and in time left hir abſolute heire of all he had. And ſhe, when it came to hir turne, hoping to doe that God ſome acceptable ſervice, left the Romane people heire generall of all hir wealth: And therefore had ſhe divine honors attributed vnto hir. As if it were not ſufficient for Plato to deſcend originally from the Gods; by a two-fold line, and to have Neptune for the common Author of his race. It was certainly beleeved at Athens, that Ariſton deſiring to enjoy faire Perictyone, he could not, and that in his dreame he was warned by God Apollo, to leave hir vntouch't and vnpolluted, vntill ſuch time as ſhe were brought a bed. And theſe were the father and mother of Plato. How many ſuch-like cuckoldries are there in hiſtories, procure be the Gods againſt ſeely mortal men? And husbands moſt injuriouſly blazoned in favor of their children? In Mah
                                 •
                              mets religion, by the eaſie beleefe of that people are many Merlins found; That is to ſay fatherles children: Spirituall children, conceived and borne divinely in the wombs of virgins, and that in their language beare names, importing as much▪ We muſt note, that nothing is more deare and precious to any thing, then it's owne being (the Lyon, the Eagle and the Dolphin eſteeme nothing above their kind) each thing referreth the qualities of all other things vnto hir owne conditions, which we may either amplifie or ſhorten; but that is all: for beſides this principle, and out of this reference, our imagination cannot goe, and gueſſe further: and it is vnpoſſible it ſhould exceede that, or goe beyond it: Whence ariſe theſe ancient concluſions. Of all formes, that of man is the faireſt: Then God is of this forme. No man can be happie without vertue, nor can vertue be without reaſon; And no reaſon can lodge but in a humane ſhape: God is then inveſted with a humane figure. Ita eſt informatum anticipatum mentibus noſtris, vt homini, quum de Deo
                           Cit. nat. Deo. lib. 1. 
                           cogitet, forma occurrat humana. The preiudice foreſtaled in our mindes is ſo framed, as the forme of man comes to mans mind, when he is thinking of God. Therefore Xenophanes ſaid pleaſantly, that if beaſts frame any Gods vnto themſelves, (as likely it is they doe) they ſurely frame them like vnto themſeves, and glorifie themſelves as we doe. For, why may not a Gooſe ſay thus? All parts of the world behold me, the earth ſerveth me to tread vpon, the Sunne to give me light, the ſtarres to inſpire we with influence: this commoditie I have of the windes, and this benefit of the waters; there is nothing that this worlds-vaulte doth ſo favorably looke vpon, as me ſelfe; I am the favorite of nature: Is it not man that careth for me, that keepeth me, lodgeth me, and ſerveth me? For me it is he ſoweth, reapeth and grindeth: If he eate me, ſo doth man feede on his fellow, and ſo doe I on the wormes, that conſume and eate him. As much might a Crane ſay, yea and more boldly, by reaſon of hir flights-libertie, and the poſſeſſion of this goodly and high-bownding region. Tam blanda conciliatrix, & tam ſui eſt
                           Cit. nat. Deo. ib 
                           lena ipſa natura. So flattring a broker, and bawd (as it were) is nature to it ſelfe, Now by the ſame conſequence, the deſtinies are for vs, the world is for vs; it ſhineth, and thundreth for vs: Both the creator and the creatures are for vs: It is the marke and point whereat the vniverſitie of things aymeth. Survay but the regiſter, which Philoſophie hath kept theſe two thouſand yeares and more, of heavenly affaires. The Gods never acted, and never ſpake, but for man: She aſcribeth no other conſultation, nor imputeth other vacation vnto them. Loe how they are vp in armes againſt vs.
                        
                           —domitóſque Herculeâ manu
                              H
                                    •
                                 r. 
                                    ••
                                 r. l. 2. 
                                    •
                                 d. 12. 6.
                           
                           Telluris iuvenes, vnde periculum
                           Fulgens contremuit domus
                           Saturni veteris.
                           And yong earth-gallants tamed by the hand
                           Of Hercules, whereby the habitation
                           Of old Saturnus did in peril ſtand,
                           And, ſhyn'd it ne're ſo bright, yet fear'd invaſion.
                        
                        
                           See how they are partakers▪ of our troubles, that ſo they may be even with vs, forſomuch as ſo many times we are partakers of theirs.
                        
                           Neptunus muros magnòque 
                                 •
                              mota trident
                                 •
                              
                              Virg. Ae
                                    •
                                 . lib. 2. 610.
                           
                           Fundamenta quatit totàmque á ſedibus vrbem
                           Eruit: hîc Iuno Scaeas ſaeviſſima portas
                           Prima tenet.—
                           
                              Neptunus with his great thre
                                 •
                              -forked ma
                                 ••
                              
                           
                           Shak's the weake wall, and t
                                 •
                              ttering foundation,
                           And from the ſite the Cittie doth diſplace,
                           Fierce Iuno firſt holds-ope the gates t'invaſion.
                        
                        The Caunians, for the jelouſie of their owne Gods domination, vpon their devotion-day arme themſelves, and running vp and downe, brandi
                              •
                           hing and ſtriking the ayre with their glaives, and in this erneſt manner they expell all foraine, and baniſh all ſtrange Gods from out their territorie. Their powers are limited according to our neceſſitie. Some heale Horſes, ſome cure men, ſome the plague, ſome the ſcalde, ſome the cough, ſome one kinde of ſcabbe, and ſome another: Adeo m
                                 ••
                              imis 
                                 •
                              t
                                 •
                              am rebus prava religio inſerit Deos: This corrup
                                 •
                               religion engageth and inferteth Gods even in the leaſt matters: Some make grapes to growe, and ſome garlike; Some have the charge of bawdrie and vncleannes, and Some of marchandiſe: To every kinde of trades-man a God. Some one hath his province and credit in the Eaſt, and ſome in the Weſt:
                        
                           —hîc illius arma
                              Virg. Ae
                                    •
                                 . li
                                    •
                                 
                                 ▪ 1. 10.
                           
                           Hîc currus fuit—
                           His armor heere
                           His char
                                 •
                              orts there apeare.
                           O ſancte Apollo▪ qui vmbilicum certum terrarum obtines.Cic. diu. lib. 2.
                           
                           Sacred Apollo, who enfoldeſt,
                           The earths ſet n
                                 •
                              vell, and it holdeſt.
                           Pallada Cecropidae, Minoya Creta Dianam,O
                                    •
                                 id. Faſ
                                    •
                                 . lib. 3. 81.
                           
                           Vulcanum tellus Hipſipil
                                 •
                              a colit.
                           Iunonem Sparte, Pelopeiadèſque Mycenae,
                           Pinigerum Fauni M
                                 •
                              nalis ora caput:
                           Mars Latio venerandus.—
                           Beſmeared with bloud and goare.
                           Th'Athenians Pallas; Minos-Candy coſt
                           Diana; Lemnos Ʋulcan honor's moſt▪
                           
                           Mycene and Sparta, Iuno thinke divine;
                           The coaſt of Maenalus Faune crown'd with pine;
                           Latium doth Mars adore.
                        
                        Some hath but one borough or familie in his poſſeſſion: Some lodgeth alone, and ſome in companie, either voluntarily or neceſſarily.
                        
                           Iunctàque ſunt magno templa nepotis avo.lib. 1. 294.
                           
                           To the great grand-ſires ſhrine,
                           The nephews temples doe combine.
                        
                        Some there are ſo ſeely and popular (for their number amounteth to ſix and thirtie thouſand) that five or ſix of them muſt be ſhufled vp to gether to produce an eare of corne, and thereof they take their ſeveral names. Three to a doore; one to be the boardes, one to be the hinges, and the third to the threſhold. Foure to a childe, as protectors of his bandels, of his drinke, of his meate and of his ſucking. Some are certaine, others vncertane, ſome doubtfull; and ſome that come not yet into paradiſe.
                        
                           Quos, quoniam caeli nondum dignamur honore,Ovid. M
                                    •
                                 tam. 
                                    ••
                                 b. 1. 194.
                           
                           Quas dedimus certè terras, habitare ſinamus.
                           Whom for as yet with heav'n we have not graced,
                           Let them on earth by our good grant be placed.
                        
                        There are ſome Philoſophicall, ſome poeticall, and ſome civill, ſome of a meane condition, betweene divine and humane nature, mediators, and ſpokeſ▪men betweene vs and God: worſhipped in a kinde of ſecond or diminutive order of adoration: infinite in titles and offices:

ſome good, ſome bad; ſome old and crazed, and ſome mortall. For Chryſippus thought, that in the laſt conflagration or burning of the world, all the Gods ſhould have an end, except Iupiter. Man faineth a thouſand pleaſant ſocieties betweene God and him. Nay is he not his countrieman?
                        
                           —lovis incunabul
                                    •
                                  Creten.
                              Ovid Met. l. 8. 99.
                           
                           The Ile of famous Creet,
                           
                           For love a cradle meete.
                        
                        Behold the excuſe, that Scaevola chiefe Biſhop, and Varro, a great Divine in their dayes, give vs vpon the conſideration of this ſubject. It is neceſſary (ſay they) that man be altogether ignorant of true things, and beleeve many falſe. Quum veritatem quâ liberetur, inquirat: credatur ei exp
                                 •
                              dire, quod fallitur. Since they ſeeke the truth, whereby they may be free, let vs beleeve it is expedient for them, to be deceived. Mans eie cannot perceive things, but by the formes of his knowledge. And we remember not the downefall of miſerable Phaeton, forſomuch as he vndertooke to guide the reins of his fathers ſteedes, with a mortall hand. Ou
                              •
                            minde doth ſtill relaps into the ſame depth, and by hir owne temeritie doth diſſipate and bruiſe it ſelfe. If you enquire of Philoſophy, what matter the Sun is compoſed-of? What wil it anſwer, but of yron and ſtone, or other ſtuffe for his vſe? Demand of Zeno, what Nature is? A fire (ſaith he) an Artiſt, fit to engender, and proceeding orderly. Archimedes maſter of this Science, and who in trueth and certaintie aſſumeth vnto him-ſelfe a precedencie aboue all others, ſaith, the Sunne is a God of enflamed-yron. Is not this a quaint imagination, produced by the inevitable neceſſitie of Geometricall demonſtrations? Yet not ſo vnavoidable and beneficiall, but Socrates hath beene of opinion, that it ſufficed to know ſo much of it as that a man might meaſure out the land, he either dem
                              •
                           ſed or tooke to rent: and that Polyaenus, who therein had beene a famous and principall Docter, after he had taſted the ſweet fruites of the lazie, idle and delicious gardens of Epicurus, did not contemne them, as full of falſehood and apparant vanitie. Socrates in Xenophon, vpon this point of Anaxagoras, allowed and eſteemed of antiquitie, well ſeene and expert above all others in heavenly and divine matters, ſaith, that he weakened his braines much, as all men doe, who over nicely and greedily will ſearch out thoſe knowledges, which hang not for their mowing, nor pertaine vnto them. When he would needes have the Sunne to be a burning ſtone, he remembered not, that a ſtone doth not ſhine in the fire; and which is more, that it conſumes therein. And when he made the Sunne and fire to be all one, he forgot, that fire doth not tanne and blacke thoſe he looketh vpon; that wee fixly looke vpon the fire, and that fire conſumeth and killeth all plants and hearbs. According to the adviſe of Socrates and mine, The wiſeſt iudging of heaven, is not to iudge of it at all. Plato in his Timeus, being to ſpeake of Doemons and ſpirits, ſaith, it is an enterpriſe far exceeding my skill and abilitie: we muſt beleeve what thoſe ancient forefathers have ſaid of them, who have ſaid to have beene engendred by them. It is againſt reaſon not to give credite vnto the children of the Gods although their ſayings be neither grounded vpon neceſſary, nor likely reaſons, ſince they tell vs, that they ſpeake of familiar and houſhold matters. Let vs ſee, whether we have a little more inſight in the knowledge of humane and naturall things. Is it not a fond enterpriſe, to thoſe vnto which, by our owne confeſſion, our learning cannot poſſible attaine, to diviſe and forge them another body, and of our owne invention to give them a falſe forme? as is ſeene in the planetary motions, vnto which becauſe our minde cannot reach, nor imagine their naturall conduct, we lend them ſomething of ours, that is to ſay, materiall, groſe and corporall ſprings and wards:
                        
                           —temo aureus, aurea ſumm
                                    •
                                 
                              
                              Orid. Met. l. 2. 107.
                           
                           Curvatura rotae, radiorum argenteus ordo.
                           The Axe-tree gold, the wheeles whole circle gold,
                           The ranke of raies did all of ſilver hold.
                        
                        you would ſay, we have had Coach-makers, Carpenters, and Painters, who have gone vp thither, and there have placed engines with diverſe motions, and ranged the wheelings, the windings, and enterlacements of the celeſtiall bodies d
                              •
                           apred in colours, according to Plato, about the ſpindle of neceſſity.
                        
                           Mundus domus est maxi
                                 •
                              a rerum,
                           Quam quinque altitonae fragmine zon
                                 •
                              
                           
                           Cingunt, per quam li
                                 •
                              bus pictus bis ſex ſignis,
                           
                              Stellimicantibus, alius in obliquo aethere, Lunae
                           Bigas acceptat.
                           The world, of things the greateſt habitation,
                           Which five high-thundring Zones by ſeparation
                           Engirde, through which a ſcarfe depainted faire
                           With twice ſix ſignes ſtar-ſhining in the aire.
                           Obliquely raiſde, the waine
                           O'th'Moone doth entertaine.
                        
                        They are all dreames, and mad follies. Why will not nature one day be pleaſed to open her boſome to vs, and make vs perfectly ſee the meanes and conduct of her motions, and enable our eyes to judge of them? Oh good God, what abuſes, and what diſtractions ſhould we finde in our poore vnderſtanding, and weake knowledge▪ I am deceived, if ſhe hold one thing directly in it's point; and I ſhall part hence more ignorant of all other things, then mine ignorance. Have I not ſeen this divine ſaying in Plato, that Nature is nothing but an aenigmaticall poeſie? As a man might ſay, an overſhadowed and darke picture, enter-ſhining with an infinite varietie of falſe lights, to exerciſe our conjectures. Latent iſta omnia
                           Ci
                                 •
                              . Acad. q. lib. 4. 
                           craſſi
                                 •
                               occultata & circumfuſa tenebris vt nulla acies humani ingenij tanta ſit, quae penetrare in coelum, terram intrare poſſit. All theſe things lie hid ſo veiled and environed with miſtie darkneſſe, as no edge of man is ſo pierſant, as it can paſſe into heaven, or dive into the earth. And truely, Philoſophie is nothing elſe but a ſophiſticated poeſie: whence have theſe ancient Authors all their authorities, but from Poets? And the firſt were Poets themſelves, and in their Art treated the ſame. Plato is but a looſe Poet. All high and more then humane Sciences are decked and enrobed with a Poeticall ſtile. Even as women, when their naturall teeth faile them, vſe ſome of yuorie, and in ſtead of a true beautie, or lively colour, lay-on ſome artificiall hew; and as they make trunk-ſleeves of wyre and whale-bone bodies, backes of lathes, and ſtiffe bumbaſt
                              •
                           d verdugals, and to the open-view of all men paint and embelliſh themſelves with counterfeit and borrowed beauties; ſo doth learning (and our law hath, as ſome ſay, certaine lawfull fictions, on which it groundeth the trueth of juſtice) which in liew of currant payment and preſuppoſition, delivereth vs thoſe things, which ſhe her ſelfe teacheth vs to be meere inventions: For, theſe Epicycles, Excentriques, and Concentriques, which Aſtrologie vſeth to direct the ſtate and motions of her ſtarres, ſhe giveth them vnto vs, as the beſt ſhe could ever invent, to fit and ſute vnto this ſubject: as in all things elſe, Philoſophie preſenteth vnto vs, not that which is, or ſhe beleeveth, but what ſhe inventeth, as having moſt apparance, likely hood, or comelyneſſe. Plato vpon the diſcourſe of our bodies-eſtate, and of that of beaſts: That what we have ſaid, is true, we would be aſſured of it, had we but the confirmation of ſome oracle, to confirme-it. This onely we warrant, that it is the likelieſt we could ſay. It is not to heaven alone, that ſhe ſendeth her cordages, her engines, and her wheeles: Let vs but ſomewhat conſider, what ſhe ſaith of our ſelves, and of our contexture. There is no more retorgradation, trepidation, augmentation, recoyling, and violence in the ſtarres and celeſtiall bodies, then they have fained and deviſed in this poore ſeelie little bodie of man. Verily they have thence had reaſon to name it Microcoſmos, or little world, ſo many ſeverall parts and viſages have they imploide to faſhion and frame the ſame. To accommodate the motions which they ſee in man, the divers functions and faculties, that we feel in our ſelves; Into how many ſeverall parts have they divided our ſoule? Into how many ſeats have they placed her? Into how many orders, ſtages, and ſtations have they divided this wretched man, beſide the naturall and perceptible? and to how many diſtinct offices and vacation? They make a publike imaginarie thing of it. It is a ſubject, which they hold and handle: they have all power granted them, to rip him, to ſever him, to range him, to joine and reunite him together againe, and to ſtuffe him, every one according to his fantaſie, and yet they neither have not poſſeſſe him. They cannot ſo order or rule him, not in trueth onely, but in imagination, but ſtill ſome cadence or ſound is diſcovered, which eſcapeth their architecture, bad as it is, and bot
                              •
                           ht together with a thouſand falſe patches, and fantaſticall peeces. And they have no reaſon to be excuſed: For, to Painters, when they pourtray the heaven, the earth, the ſeas, the hills, the ſcattered Ilands, we pardon them, if they but repreſent vs with ſome ſlight apparance of them; and as of things vnknowne we are contented with ſuch fained ſhadowes: But when they draw vs, or any other ſubject

that is familiarly knowne vnto vs, to the life, then ſeeke we to draw from them a perfect and exact repreſentation of theirs or our true lineaments, or colours; and ſcorne if they miſſe never ſo little. I commend the Mileſian wench, who ſeeing Thales the Philoſopher continually ammuſing himſelfe in the contemplation of heavens-wide-bounding vault, and ever holding his eyes aloft, laid ſomething in his way to make him ſtumble, thereby to warne and put him in minde, that he ſhould not ammuſe his thoughts about matters above the clowds, before he had provided for, and well conſidered thoſe at his feet. Verily ſhe adviſed him well, and it better became him, rather to looke to himſelfe then to gaze on heaven; For, as Democritus by the mouth of Cicero ſaith,
                        
                           Quod eſt ante pedes, nemo ſpectat: coeli ſcrutantur plagas,Cic. div. lib. 2.
                           
                           No man lookes, what before his feet doth lie,
                           They ſeeke and ſearch the climates of the skie.
                        
                        But our condition beareth, that the knowledge of what we touch with our hands, and have amongſt vs, is as far from vs and above the clouds, as that of the ſtars: As ſaith Socrates in Plato, That one may juſtly ſay to him who medleth with Philoſophie, as the woman ſaid to Thales, which is, he ſeeth nothing of that which is before him. For, every Philoſopher is ignorant of what his neighbour doth, yea, he knowes not what himſelfe doth, and wots not what both are, whether beaſts or men. Theſe people who thinke Sebondes reaſons to be weake and lame, who know nothing themſelves, and yet will take vpon them to governe the world and know all:
                        
                           Quae mare compeſcant cauſae, quid temperet annum,Hor. li. 1. epiſt. 12. 16.
                           
                           Stellae ſponte ſua, iuſſaeve vagentur & errent:
                           Quid praemat obſcurum Lunae, quid proferat orbem,
                           Quid velit & poſſit rerum concordia diſcors.
                           What cauſe doth calme the Sea, what cleares the yeare,
                           Whether Stars forc't, or of ſelfe-will appeare:
                           What makes the Moones darke Orbe towax or wane,
                           What friendly fewd of things both will and can.
                        
                        Did they never ſound amid their books, the difficulties that preſent themſelves to them, to know their owne being? We ſee verie well, that our finger ſtirreth, and our foote moveth, that ſome parts of our bodie, move of themſelves without our leave, and other ſome that ſtir but at our pleaſure: and we ſee that certaine apprehenſions engender a bluſhing-red colour, others a paleneſſe; that ſome imagination doth onely worke in the milt, another in the braine; ſome one enduceth vs to laugh, another cauſeth vs to weep; ſome aſtoniſhed and ſtupifieth all our ſenſes, and ſtaieth the motion of all our limbs: at ſome object the ſtomake riſeth, and at ſome other the lower parts. But how a ſpirituall impreſſion cauſeth or worketh ſuch a dent or flaw in a maſſie and ſolide bodie or ſubject, and the nature of the conjoyning, and compacting of theſe admirable ſprings and wards, man yet never knew: Omnia incerta
                           Plin. 
                           ratione, & in nature maieſtate abdita. All vncertain in reaſon, and hid in the maieſtie of nature, Saith Plinie and Saint Auguſtine, Modus, quo corporibus adbaerent ſpiritus, omnino mirus eſt, nec comprehendi
                           Aug. de ſpir & anim. 
                           ab homine poteſt, & hoc ipſe homo est. The meane is clearely wonderfull, whereby ſpirits cleave to our bodies, nor can it be comprehended by man, and that is verie man. Yet is there no doubt made of him: For mens opinions are received after ancient beliefes, by authoritie and vpon credit; as if it were a religion and a law. What is commonly held of it, is received as a gibriſh or fuſtian tongue. This trueth with all her framing of arguments, and proporcioning of proofes, is received as a firme and ſolid bodie, which is no more ſhaken, which is no more judged. On the other ſide, every one, the beſt he can, patcheth-vp and comforteth this received beliefe, with all the meanes his reaſon can afford him, which is an inſtrument very ſupple, pliable, and yeelding to all ſhapes. Thus is the world filled with toyes, and overwhelmed in lies and leafings- The reaſon that men doubt not much of things, is that common impreſſions are never throughly tride and ſifted, their ground is not ſounded, nor where the fault & weakneſſe lieth: Men onely debate and queſtion of the branch, not of the tree: They aske not whether a thing be true, but whether it was vnderſtood or meant thus and thus. They enquire not whether Galen hath ſpoken any thing of worth, but whether thus, or ſo, or otherwiſe. Truly there was ſome reaſon, this bridle or reſtraint of our judgements liberty, and this tyrannie over our beliefes ſhould extend it ſelfe even to ſchooles and arts. The God of ſcholaſticall learning,

is Aristotle: It is religion to debate of his ordinances, as of thoſe of Lycurgus in Sparta. His doctrine is to vs as a canon Law, which peradventure is as falſe as another. I know not why I ſhould or might not, as ſoone, & as eaſie accept, either Platoes Ideas, or Epicurus his Atomes and indiviſible things, or the fulneſſe and emptineſſe of Leucippus and Democritus, or the water of Thales, or of Anaximanders infinite of nature, or the aire of Diogenes, or the numbers or proportion of Pythagoras, or the infinite of Parmenides, or the ſingle-one of Muſaeus, or the water and fire of Apollodorus, or the ſimilarie and reſembling parts of Anaxagoras, or the diſcord and concord of Empedocles, or the fire of Heraclitus, or any other opinion (of this infinit confuſion of opinions and ſentences, which this goodly humane reaſon, by her certaintie and cleare-ſighted vigilancie brings forth in whatſoever it medleth withall) as I ſhould of Aristotles conceit, touching this ſubject of the principles of naturall things; which he frameth of three parts, that is to ſay, Matter, Forme, and Privation. And what greater vanitie can there be, then to make inanitie it ſelfe the cauſe of the production of things? Privation is a negative: With what humovr could he make it the cauſe and beginning of things that are? Yet durſt no man move that but for an exerciſe of Logike: Wherein nothing is diſputed to put it in doubt, but to deſend the Author of the Schoole from ſtrange objections: His authoritie is the marke, beyond which it is not lawfull to enquire. It is eaſie to frame what one liſt vpon allowed foundations: For, according to the law and ordinance of this poſitive beginning, the other parts of the frame are eaſilie directed without crack or danger. By which way we finde our reaſon well grounded, and we diſcourſe without rub or let in the way: For our maſters preoccupate and gaine afore-hand as much place in our beliefe, as they need to conclude afterward what they pleaſe, as Geometricians doe by their graunted queſtions: The conſent and approbation which we lend them, giving them wherewith to draw vs, either on the right or left hand, and at their pleaſure to winde and turne vs. Whoſoever is believed in his preſuppoſitions, he is our maſter, and our god: He will lay the plot of his foundations ſo ample and eaſie, that, if he liſt, he will carrie vs vp, even vnto the clouds. In this practiſe or negotiation of learning, we have taken the ſaying of Pythagoras for currant payment; which is, that every expert man ought to be believed in his owne trade. The Logitian referreth himſelfe to the Grammarian for the ſignification of words: The Rethoritian borroweth the places of arguments from the Logitian: The Poet his meaſures from the Muſitian: The Geometrician his proportions from the Arithmetician: The Metaphiſikes take the conjectures of the Phiſikes for a ground. For, every art hath her preſuppoſed principles, by which mans judgement is bridled on all parts. If you come to the ſhocke or front of this barre, in which conſiſts the principall error, they immediatly pronounce this ſentence; That there is no disputing againſt ſuch as denie principles. There can be no principles in men, except divinitie hath revealed them vnto them: All the reſt, both beginning, midle, and end, is but a dreame and a vapor. Thoſe that argue by preſuppoſition, we muſt preſuppoſe againſt them, the verie ſame axiome, which is diſputed of. For, each humane preſuppoſition, and every invention, vnleſſe reaſon make a difference of it, hath as much authoritie as another. So muſt they all be equally balanced, and firſt the generall & thoſe that tyrannize vs. A perſwaſion of certaintie, is a manifeſt teſtimonie of fooliſhneſſe, and of extreame vncertaintie. And no people are leſſe Philoſophers and more fooliſh, then Platoes Phylodoxes, or lovers of their owne opinions. We muſt know whether fire be hote, whether ſnow be white, whether in our knowledge there be any thing hard or ſoft. And touching the anſweres, whereof they tell old tales, as to him who made a doubt of heat, to whom one replied, that to trie he ſhould caſt himſelfe into the fire; to him that denied the yce to be cold, that he ſhould put ſome in his boſome; they are moſt vnworthie the profeſſion of a Philoſopher. If they had left vs in our owne naturall eſtate, admitting of ſtrange apparances, as they preſent themſelves vnto vs by our ſenſes, and had ſuffred vs to follow our naturall appetites, directed by the condition of our birth, they ſhould then have reaſon to ſpeake ſo. But from them it is that we have learn't to become judges of the world; it is from them we hold this conceit, that mans reaſon is the generall controuller of all that is, both without and within heavens-vault; which imbraceth all, and can doe all, by meanes whereof, all things are knowne and diſcerned. This anſwere were good among the Canibals, who without any of Aristotles precepts, or ſo much as knowing the name of naturall Philoſophie, enjoy moſt happily, a long, a quiet, & a peaceable life. This anſwere might happily availe more, and be of more force, then all thoſe they

can borrow from their reaſon and invention. All living creatures, yea, beaſts and all, where the commaundement of the naturall law is yet pure and ſimple, might with vs be capable of this anſwere; but they have renounced it. They ſhall not need to tell me, it is true, for you both heare and ſee, that it is ſo: They muſt tell me, if what I thinke I feel, I feel the ſame in effect; and if I feel it, then let them tell me, wherefore I feel it, and how and what: Let them tell me the name, the beginning, the tennons, and the abuttings of heat and of cold, with the qualities of him that is agent, or of the patient; or let them quit me their profeſſion, which is neither to admit, nor approve any thing, but by the way of reaſon: It is their touch ſtone, to trie all kinds of Eſſayes. But ſurely it is a touchſtone full of falſehood, errors, imperfection and weakneſſe: which way can we better make triall of it, then by it ſelfe? If ſhe may not be credited ſpeaking of hir ſelfe, hardly can ſhe be fit to judge of ſtrange matters: If ſhe know any thing, it can be but hir being and domicile. She is in the ſoule, and either a part or effect of the ſame. For, the true and eſſentiall reaſon (whoſe name we ſteal by falſe ſignes) lodgeth in Gods boſome: There is hir home, and there is hir retreat, thence ſhe takes hir flght, when Gods pleaſure is that we ſhall ſee ſome glimps of it: Even as Pallas iſſued out of hir fathers head, to communicate and empart hir ſelfe vnto the world. Now let vs ſee what mans reaſon hath taught vs of hir ſelfe and of the ſoule: Not of the ſoule in generall, whereof well nigh all Philoſophie maketh both the celeſtiall and firſt bodies partakers; nor of that which Thales attributed even vnto things, that are reputed without ſoule or life, drawne therevnto by the conſideration of the Adamant ſtone: But of that which appertaineth to vs, and which we ſhould know beſt.
                        
                           Ignoratur enim quae ſit natura animai,Lucr. li. 1. 113.
                           
                           Nata ſit, an contrá naſcentibus inſinuetur,
                           Et ſimul inter eat nobiſcum morte dirempta,
                           An tenebr as orci viſat, vaſtáſque lacunas,
                           An pecudes alias divinitùs inſinuet ſe.
                           What the ſoules nature is, we doe not know;
                           If it be bred, or put in thoſe are bred,
                           Whether by death divorſt with vs it goe,
                           Or ſee the darke vaſt lakes of hell be lowe,
                           Or into other creatures turne the head.
                        
                        To Crates and Dicaearchus it ſeemed that there was none at all; but that the bodie ſtirred thus with and by a naturall motion: To Plato, that it was a ſubſtance moving of it ſelfe: To Thales, a Nature without reſt; To Aſclepiades, an exercitation of the ſenſes: To Heſiodus and Anaximander, a thing compoſed of earth and water: To Parmenides, of earth and fire: To Empedocles of blood:
                        
                           Sanguineam vomit ille animam—Vir. Aen. li. 9. 349.
                           
                           His ſoule of purple-bloud he vomits out.
                        
                        To Poſſidonius, Cleanthes, and Galen, a heat, or hote complexion:
                        
                           Igneus eſt ollis vigor, & coelestis origo:Lib. 6. 730.
                           
                           A firie vigor and celeſtiall ſpring,
                           In their originall they ſtrangely bring.
                        
                        To Hyppocrates, a ſpirite diſperſed through the bodie: To 
                              Ʋarro, an aire received-in at the mouth, heated in the lunges, tempered in the heart, and diſperſed through all parts of the bodie: To Zeno, the quinteſſence of the foure Elements: To Heraclides Ponticus, the light: To Xenocrates, and to the Aegyptians, a mooving number: To the Chaldeans, a vertue without any determinate forme.—Habitum quendam vitalem corporis eſſe,
                        
                        
                           Harmoniam Graeci quam dicunt—Lucr. li. 3. 100.
                           
                           There of the bodie is a vitall frame,
                           The which the Greeks a harmonie doe name.
                        
                        And not forgetting Aristotle, that which naturally cauſeth the bodie to move, who calleth it Entelechy, or perfection mooving of it ſelfe (as cold an invention as any other) for he neither ſpeaketh of the eſſence, nor of the beginning, nor of the ſoules nature; but onely noteth the effects of it: Lactantius, Seneca, and the better part amongſt the Dogmatiſts, have confeſſed, they never vnderſtood what it was: And after all this rable of opinions: Harum
                           Cic. Tuſ. qu. l. 1. 
                           ſententiarum quae vera ſit, Deus aliquis viderit▪ Which of theſe opinions is true, let ſome God looke vnto.
                           
                           it, (ſaith Cicero.) I know by my ſelfe (quoth Saint Bernard) how God is incomprehenſible,Saint Bernard. ſince I am not able to comprehend the parts of mine owne being: Heraclitus, who held that every place was full of Soules and Daemons, maintained nevertheleſſe, that a man could never goe ſo far towards the knowledge of the ſoule, as that he could come vnto it; ſo deep and myſterious was hir eſſence. There is no leſſe diſſention nor diſputing about the place, where ſhe ſhould be ſeated. Hypocrates and Herophilus place it in the ventricle of the braine: Democritus and Aristotle, through all the bodie:Lucr. li. 3. 103.
                        
                        
                           
                              Ʋt bonaſaepe valetudo cùm dicitur eſſe
                           Corporis, & non est tamen haec pars vlla valentis.
                           As health is of the bodie ſaid to be,
                           Yet is no part of him, in health we ſee.
                        
                        
                           Epicurus in the ſtomacke.
                        
                           Haec exultat enim pavor ac met us, haec loca circùm142.
                           
                           Laetitiae mulcent—
                           For in theſe places feare doth domineere,
                           And neere theſe places joy keepes merrie cheere.
                        
                        The Stoickes, within and about the heart: Eraſistratus, joyning the membrane of the Epicranium: Empedocles, in the bloud: as alſo Moiſ
                                 •
                              s, which was the cauſe he forbad the eating of beaſts bloud, vnto which their ſoule is commixed: Galen thought that every part of the bodie had his ſoule: S
                                 •
                              rato hath placed it betweene the two vpper eye-lids: Qua facie
                           Cic. Tuſe. qu. lib. 1. 
                           quidem ſit animus aut vbi habitet, nec quaerendum quidem eſt. We muſt not ſo much as enquire, what face the min
                                 •
                              e beares, or where it dwels: Saith Cicero. I am well pleaſed to let this man vſe his owne words: For, why ſhould I alter the ſpeech of eloquence it ſelfe? ſince there is ſmall gaine in ſtealing matter from his inventions: They are both little vſed, not verie forcible, and little vnknowne. But the reaſon why Chryſippus, and thoſe of his Sect, will proove the ſoule to be about the heart, is not to be forgotten. It is (ſaith he) becauſe when we will affirme or ſweare any thing, we lay our hand vpon the ſtomacke; And when we will pronounce, 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            which ſignifieth, my ſelfe, we put downe our chin toward the ſtomacke. This paſſage ought not to be paſt-over without noting the vanitie of ſo great a perſonage: For, beſides that his conſiderations are of themſelves verie ſlight, the latter prooveth but to the Graecians, that they have their ſoule in that place. No humane iudgement is ſo vigilant or Argos-eied, but ſometimes ſhall fall a ſleep or ſ
                                 •
                              umber. What ſhall we feare to ſay? Behold the Stoickes, fathers of humane wiſedome, who deviſe that the ſoule of man, overwhelmed with any ruine, laboureth and panteth a long time to get out, vnable to free hirſelfe from that charge, even as a Mouſe taken in a trap. Some are of opinion, that the world was made, to give a bodie in lieu of puniſhment, vnto the ſpirits, which through their fault were fallen from the puritie, wherin they were created: The firſt creation having been incorporeall. And that according as they have more or leſſe remooved themſelves from their ſpiritualtie, ſo are they more or leſſe merilie and Giovially, or rudely & Saturnally incorporated: Whence proceedeth the infinite varietie of ſo much matter created. But the ſpirit, who for his chaſtizement was inveſted with the bodie of the Sunne, muſt of neceſſitie have a verie rare and particular meaſure of alteration. The extreamities of our curious ſearch turne to a glimmering and all to a dazeling. As Plutarke ſaith, of the off-ſpring of Hiſtories, that after the manner of Cardes or Maps, the vtmoſt limits of knowne Countries, are ſet downe to be full of thicke marriſh grounds, ſtadie forreſts, deſert and vncouth places. See heer wherefore the groſeſt and moſt Childiſh dotings, are more commonly found in theſe which treat of higheſt and furtheſt matters; even confounding & overwhelming themſelves in their owne curioſitie & preſumption. The end and beginning of learning are equally accompted fooliſh. Marke but how Plato takethand raiſeth his flight aloft in his Poeticall clouds, or cloudie Poeſies. Behold & read in him the gibbriſh of the Gods. But what dream'd or doted he on, when he defined man, to be a creature with two feet, and without feathers; giving them that were diſpoſed to mocke at him, a pleaſant and ſcopefull occaſion to doe-it? For, having plucked-off the feathers of a live capon, they named him the man of Plato. And by what ſimplicitie did the Epicureans firſt imagine, that the Atomes or Motes, which they termed to be bodies, having ſome weight and a naturall mooving downward, had framed the world; vntill ſuch time as they were adviſed by their adverſaries, that by this deſcription, it was not poſſible, they ſhould joyne and

take hold one of another; their fall being ſo downe-right and perpendicular, and every way engendring Parallell lines? And therefore was it neceſſarie, they ſhould afterward adde a caſuall moving, ſideling vnto them: And moreover to give their Atomes crooked and forked tailes, that ſo they might take hold of any thing and claſpe themſelves. And even then, thoſe that purſue them with this other conſideration, do they not much trouble them? If Atomes have by chance formed ſo many ſorts of figures, why did they never meet together to frame a houſe, or make a ſhooe? Why ſhould we not likewiſe believe that an infinit number of greek Letters confuſedly ſcattred in ſome open place, might one day meet and joine together to the contexture of th'Iliads? That which is capable of reaſon (ſaith Zeno) is better than that which is not. There is nothing better then the world: then the world is capable of reaſon. By the ſame arguing Cotta maketh the world a Mathematician, and by this other arguing of Zeno, he makes him a Muſition, and an Organiſt. The whole is more than the part: We are capable of Wiſedome, and we are part of the World: Then the World is wiſe. There are infinit like examples ſeen, not only of falſe, but fooliſh arguments, which cannot hold, & which accuſe their authors not ſo much of ignorance, as of folly, in the reproches that Philoſophers charge one another with, about the diſagreeings in their opinions and Sects. He that ſhould fardle-vp a bundle or huddle of the fooleries of mans wiſedome, might recount wonders. I willingly aſſemble ſome (as a ſhew or patterne) by ſome meanes or byaſe, no leſſe profitable then the moſt moderate inſtructions. Let vs by that judge, what we are to eſteeme of man, of his ſenſe, and of his reaſon; ſince in theſe great men, and who have raiſed mans ſufficiencie ſo high, there are found ſo groſe errors, and ſo apparant defects. As for me, I would rather believe, that they have thus caſually treated learning, even as a ſporting childs babie, and have ſported themſelves with reaſon, as of a vaine and frivolous inſtrument, ſetting forth all ſorts of inventions, deviſes, and fantaſies, ſomtimes more outſtretched, and ſomtimes more looſe. The ſame Plato, who defineth man like vnto a Capon, ſaith elſewhere after Socrates, that in good ſooth, he knoweth not what man is; and that of all parts of the world, there is none ſo hard to be knowne. By this varictie of conceits & inſtabilitie of opinions, they (as it were) leade vs cloſely by the hand to this reſolution of their irreſolution. They make a profeſſion not alwaies to preſent their adviſe manifeſt & vnmasked: they have oft concealed the ſame vnder the fabulous ſhadows of Poeſie, and ſomtimes vnder other vizards. For our imperfection admitteth this alſo, that raw meats are not alwaies good for our ſtomacks: but they muſt be dried, altred and corrupted, and ſo do they, who ſomtimes ſhadow their ſimple opinions and judgements; And that they may the better ſute themſelves vnto common vſe, they many times falſi
                              ••
                           e them. They will not make open profeſſion of ignorance, and of the imbecilitie of mans reaſon, becauſe they will not make children afraid: But they manifeſtly declare the ſame vnto vs vnder the ſhew of a troubled Science and vnconſtant learning. I perſwade ſome body in Italy, who laboured very much to ſpeak Italian, that alwaies provided, he deſired but to be vnderſtood, and not to ſeek to excell others therein, he ſhould only imploy & vſe ſuch words as came firſt to his mouth, whether they were Latine, French, Spaniſh, or Gaſcoine, and that adding the Italian terminations vnto them, he ſhould never miſſe to fall vpon ſome idiome of the Countrie, either Tuſcan, Roman, Venetian, Piemontoiſe, or Neapolitan; and amongſt ſo many ſeverall formes of ſpeech to take hold of one. The verie ſame I ſay of Philoſophie. She hath ſo many faces, and ſo much varietie, and hath ſaid ſo much, that all our dreames and deviſes are found in hir. The fantaſie of man can conceive or imagine nothing, be it good or evill, that is not to be found in hir: Nihil tam abſurdè dici poteſt, quod non dicatur
                           Cic. di
                                 •
                              . lib. 2. 
                           ab aliquo Phyloſophorum. Nothing may be ſpoken ſo abſurdlie, but that it is ſpoken by ſome of the Philoſophers. And therefore do I ſuffer my humours or caprices more freely to paſſe in publike; Foraſmuch as though they are borne with, and of me, and without any patterne; well I wot, they will be found to have relation to ſome ancient humour, and ſome ſhall be found, that will both know and tell whence, and of whom I have borrowed them. My cuſtomes are naturall; when I contrived them, I called not for the help of any diſcipline: And weake and faint as they were, when I have had a deſire to expreſſe them, & to make them appeare to the World a little more comely and decent, I have ſomewhat indevored to aide them with diſcourſe, & aſſiſt them with examples. I have wondred at my ſelfe, that by meere chance I have met with them, agreeing and ſutable to ſo many ancient examples and Philoſophicall diſcourſes. What regiment my life was-of, I never knew nor learned but after it was much worne

and ſpent. A new figure: An vnpremeditated Philoſopher and a caſuall. But to returne vnto our ſoule, where Plato hath ſeated reaſon in the braine; anger in the heart; luſt in the liver; it is verie likely, that it was rather an interpretation of the ſoules motions, then any diviſion or ſeparation he ment to make of it, as of a bodie into many members. And the likelieſt of their opinion is, that it is alwaies a ſoule, which by hir rationall facultie, remembreth hir ſelfe, comprehendeth, judgeth, deſireth, and exerciſeth all hir other functions, by divers inſtruments of the bodie, as the Pilote ruleth and directeth his ſhip according to the experience he hath of it; now ſtretching, haling, or looſing a cable, ſometimes ho
                              •
                           ſing the Main-yard, removing an Oare, or ſtirring the Rudder, cauſing ſeverall effects with one onely power: And that ſhe abideth in the braine, appeareth by this, that the hurts and accidens, which touch that part, doe preſently offend the faculties of the ſoule, whence ſhe may without inconvenience deſcend and glide through other parts of the bodie:
                        
                           —medium non deſerit vnquam
                              Claud. 6. Hon. conſ. pan. 411.
                           
                           Coeli Phebus iter: radijs tamen omnia lustrat.
                           Never the Sunne forſakes heav'ns middle waies,
                           Yet with his raies he light's all, all ſurvaies.
                        
                        as the Sunne ſpreadeth his light, and infuſeth his power from heaven, and therewith filleth the whole World.
                        
                           Caetera pars animae per totum diſſita corpusLucr. lib 3. 144.
                           
                           Paret, & ad numen mentis noménque movetur.
                           Th'other part of the ſoule through all the bodie ſent
                           Obayes, and moved is, by the mindes government.
                        
                        Some have ſaid, that there was a generall ſoule, like vnto a great bodie, from which all particular ſoules were extracted, and returned thither, alwaies reconjoyning and entermingling themſelves vnto that Vniverſall matter:
                        
                           —Deumnám
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  ire per omnes
                              Virg. Georg. lib. 4. Ge. 222.
                           
                           Terráſque tractú
                                 •
                              
                              
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               maris coelúmque profundum:
                           Hinc pecudes; armenta, viros, genus omne ferarum,
                           Quem
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               ſibi tenues naſcentem arceſſere vitas,
                           Scilicet huc red
                                 •
                              i deinde, ac reſoluta referri
                           Omnia: nec morti eſſe locum—
                           For God through all the earth to paſſe is found,
                           Through all Sea currents, through the heav'n profound,
                           Heer hence men, heards, and all wilde beaſts that are,
                           Short life in birth each to themſelves doe ſhare.
                           All things reſolved to this point reſtor'd
                           Returne, nor any place to death affoord.
                        
                        others, that they did but reconjoyne and faſten themſelves to it againe: others, that they were produced by the divine ſubſtance: others, by the Angels, of fire and aire: ſome from the beginning of the world; and ſome, even at the time of need: others, make them to deſcend from the round of the Moone, and that they returne to it againe. The common ſort of antiquitie, that they are begotten from Father to Sonne, after the ſame manner and production, that all other naturall things are; arguing ſo by the reſemblances, which are betweene Fathers and Children.
                        
                           Instillata patris virtus tibi,—
                           Thy Fathers vertues be,
                           Inſtilled into thee.
                           Fortes creantur fortibus & bonis,Hor. car. lib. 4. 
                                    •
                                 d. 4. 29.
                           
                           Of valiant Sires and good,
                           There comes a valiant brood.
                        
                        and that from fathers we ſee deſcend vnto children, not only the marks of their bodies, but alſo a reſemblance of humours, of complexions, and inclinations of the ſoule.
                        
                           Denique cur acrum violentia triſte LeonumLuer. 
                                    •
                                 i. 3. 766.
                           
                           Seminium ſequitur, dolus Vulpibus, & fuga Cervis
                           A patribus datur, & patrius pavor incitat Artus
                           Si non certa ſuo quia ſemine ſeminióque77
                                    •
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              Vis animi pariter creſcit cum corpore toto?
                           Why followes violence the ſavage Lyons race?
                           Why craft the Foxes? Why to Deere to flie a pace?
                           By parents is it given, when parents feare incites,
                           Vnleſſe becauſe a certaine force of inward ſpirits
                           With all the bodie growes,
                           As ſeed and ſeed-ſpring goes?
                        
                        That divine juſtice is grounded therevpon, puniſhing the fathers offences vpon the children; forſomuch as the contagion of the fathers vices, is in ſome ſort printed, in childrens ſoules, and that the miſgovernment of their will toucheth them. Moreover, that if the ſoules came from any other place, then by a naturall conſequence, and that out of the bodie they ſhould have been ſome other thing, they ſhould have ſome remembrance of their firſt being: Conſidering the naturall faculties, which are proper vnto him, to diſcourſe, to reaſon, and to remember.
                        
                           —ſi in corpus naſcentibus inſinuatur,
                              Luer. li. 3. 692.
                           
                           Cur ſuper anteactam aetatem meminiſſe nequimus,
                           Nec vestigia geſtarum rerum vlla tenemus?
                           If our ſoule at our birth be in our bodie caſt,
                           Why can we not remember ages over-paſt,
                           Nor any markes retaine of things done firſt or laſt?
                        
                        For, to make our ſoules condition, to be of that worth we would, they muſt all be preſuppoſed wiſe, even when they are in their naturall ſimplicitie and genuine puritie. So ſhould they have been ſuch, being freed from the corporall priſon, aſwell before they entred the ſame, as we hope they ſhall be, when they ſhall be out of it. And it were neceſſarie they ſhould (being yet in the bodie) remember the ſaid knowledge (as Plato ſaid) that what we learn't, was but a new remembring of that, which we had knowne before: A thing that any man may by experience maintaine to be falſe and erronious. Firſt, becauſe we doe not preciſely remember what we are taught, and that if memorie did meerely execute hir function, ſhe would at leaſt ſuggeſt vs with ſomething beſides our learning. Secondly, what ſhe knew being in hir puritie, was a true vnderſtanding, knowing things as they are, by hir divine intelligence: Whereas heer, if ſhe be inſtructed, ſhe is made to receive lies and apprehend vice, wherein ſhe cannot imploy hir memorie; this image and conception, having never had place in hir. To ſay, that the corporall priſon, doth ſo ſuppreſſe hir naturall faculties, that they are altogether extinct in hir: firſt, is cleane contrarie to this other beliefe, to knowledge hir forces ſo great, and the operations which men in this tranſitorie life feel of it, ſo wonderfull, as to have thereby concluded this divinitie, and fore-paſt eternitie, and the immortalitie to come:
                        
                           Nam ſi tantopere eſt animi mutata pot eſt as,
                           Omnis vt actarum exciderit retinentia rerum,695.
                           
                           Non vt opinor ea ab let ho iam longior errat.
                           If of our minde the power be ſo much altered,
                           As of things done all hold, all memorie is fled,
                           Then (as I gheſſe) it is not far from being dead.
                        
                        Moreover, it is here with vs, and no where elſe, that the ſoules powers and effects, are to be conſidered; all the reſt of hir perfections, are vaine and vnprofitable vnto hir: it is by hir preſent condition, that all hir immortalitie muſt be rewarded and paide, and ſhe is onely accomptable for the life of man: It were injuſtice to have abridged hir of hir meanes and faculties, and to have diſarmed hir againſt the time of hir captivitie and priſon, of hir weakneſſe and ſickneſſe, of the time and ſeaſon where ſhe had been forced and compelled to draw the judgement and condemnation of infinite and endleſſe continuance, and to relie vpon the conſideration of ſo ſhort a time, which is peradventure of one or two houres, or if the worſt happen, of an age, (which have no more proportion with infinite, then a moment) definitively to appoint and eſtabliſh of all hir being, by that inſtant of ſpace. It were an impious diſproportion to wreſt an eternall reward in conſequence of ſo ſhort a life. Plato, to ſave himſelfe from this inconvenience, would have future payments limited to a hundred yeares continuance, relatively vnto a humane continuance: and many of ours have given

them temporall limits. By this they judged, that her generation followed the common condition of humane things: As alſo her life, by the opinion of Epicurus and Democritus, which hath moſt been received, following theſe goodly apparances. That her birth was ſeen, when the bodie was capable of her; her vertue and ſtrength was perceived as the corporall encreaſed; in her infancie might her weakneſſe be diſcerned, and in time her vigor and ripeneſſe, then her decay and age, and in the end her decrepitude:
                        
                           —gigni pariter cum corpore, & vna▪
                              
                              Ib. 450.
                           
                           Creſcere ſeutimus, paritérque ſeneſcere mentem.
                           The minde is with the bodie bred, we doe behold,
                           It jointly growes with it, with it it waxeth old.
                        
                        They perceived her to be capable of diverſe paſſions, and agitated by many languiſhing and painfull motions, where through ſhe fell into wearineſſe and griefe, capable of alteration and change, of joy, ſtupefaction and languiſhment, ſubject to her infirmities, diſeaſes, and offences, even as the ſtomacke or the foote,
                        
                           —mentem ſanari, corpus vt aegrum
                              Ib. 517.
                           
                           Cernimus, & flecti medicinâ poſſe videmus:
                           We ſee as bodies ſicke are cur'd, ſo is the minde,
                           We ſee, how Phiſicke can it each way turne and winde.
                        
                        dazled and troubled by the force of wine; removed from her ſeat by the vapors of a burning feaver; drowzie and ſleepie by the application of ſome medicaments, and rouzed vp againe by the vertue of ſome others.
                        
                           —corpeream naturam animi eſſe neceſſe est▪
                              
                              Ib. 176.
                           
                           Corporeis quoniam telis ictúque laborat.
                           The nature of the minde muſt needs corporeall bee,
                           For with corporeall darts and ſtroks it's griev'd we ſee.
                        
                        She was ſeen to diſmay and confound all her faculties by the onely biting of a ſicke-dogge, and to containe no great conſtancie of diſcourſe, no ſufficiencie, no vertue, no philoſophicall reſolution, no contention of her forces, that might exempt her from the ſubjection of theſe accidents: The ſpittle or ſlavering of a maſtive dog ſhed vpon Socrater his hands, to trouble all his wiſdome, to diſtemper his great and regular immaginations, and ſo to vanquiſh and annull them, that no ſigne or ſhew of his former knowledge was left in him:
                        
                           —vis animaï
                              Ib. 501.
                           
                           Conturbatur,—& diviſa ſeorſum
                           Diſiectatur eodem illo diſtracta veneno▪
                           
                           The ſoules force is diſturbed, ſeperated,
                           Diſtraught by that ſame poiſon, alienated.
                        
                        And the ſaid venome to finde no more reſiſtance in his ſoule, then in that of a childe of foure yeares old, a venome able to make all Philoſophie (were ſhe incarnate) become furious and mad: So that Cato, who ſcorned both death and fortune, could not abide the ſight of a looking glaſſe, or of water; overcome with horrour, and quelled with amazement, if by the contagion of a mad dog, he had falne into that ſickneſſe, which Phiſitians call Hydrophobia, or feare of waters.
                        
                           —vis morbi diſtracta per artus
                              Ib. 495.
                           
                           Turbat agens animam, ſpumantes aequore ſalſo
                           Ventorum vt validis ferveſeunt viribus vndae.
                           The force of the diſeaſe diſperſt through joints offends,
                           Driving the ſoule, as in ſalt Seas the wave aſcends,
                           Foming by furious force which the winde raging lends.
                        
                        Now concerning this point, Philoſophie hath indeed armed man for the enduring of all other accidents, whether of patience, or if it be overcoſtly to be found, of an infallible defeat, in convaying her ſelfe, altogether from the ſenſe: but they are meanes, which ſerve a ſoule, that is her owne, and in her proper force, capable of diſcourſe and deliberation: not to this inconvenience, where with a Philoſopher, a ſoule becommeth the ſoule of a ſoole troubled, vanquiſhed and loſt, which divers occaſions may produce, as in an overviolent agitation, which by ſome vehement paſſion, the ſoule may beget in her ſelfe: or a hurt in ſome part of the bodie; or an exhalation from the ſtomack, caſting vs into ſome aſtonishment,

dazleing, or giddineſſe of the head:
                        
                           —morbis in corporis avius errat
                              Ib. 467.
                           
                           Saepe animus, dementit enim, deliráque fatur,
                           Interdúmque gravi Let hargo fertur in altum
                           Aeternúmque ſoporem, oculus nutúque cadenti.
                           The minde in bodies ſickneſſe often wandring ſtrayes:
                           For it enraged rave's, and idle talke outbrayes:
                           Brought by ſharpe Lethargie ſometime to more then deepe,
                           While eyes and eye-lids fall into eternall ſleepe.
                        
                        Philoſophers have in mine opinion but ſlightly harp't vpon this ſtring, no more then an other of like conſequence. They have ever this Dilemma in their mouth, to comfort our mortall condition. The ſoule is either mortall or immortall: if mortall, ſhe ſhall be without paine: if immortall, ſhe ſhall mend. They never touch the other branch: What, if ſhe empaire and be worſe? And leave the menaces of future paines to Poets. But thereby they deal themſelves a good game. They are two omiſſions, which in their diſcourſes doe often offer themſelves vnto me. I come to the firſt againe: the ſoule looſeth the vſe of that Stoicall chiefe felicitie, ſo conſtant and ſo firme. Our goodly wiſedome muſt neceſſarilie in this place yeeld her ſelfe, and quit her weapons. As for other matters, they alſo conſidered by the vanitie of mans reaſon, that the mixture and ſocietie of two ſo different parts, as is the mortall and the immortall is inimaginable:
                        
                           Quippe etenim mortale aeterno iungere, & vnàIb. 831.
                           
                           Conſentire putare, & fungi mutua poſſe,
                           Deſipere eſt. Quid enim diverſius eſſe putandum eſt,
                           Aut magis inter ſe diſiunctum diſcrepit anſque,
                           Quám mortale quod eſt, immortali at
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               perenni
                           Iunctum in concilio ſaevas tolerare procellas?
                           For what immortall is, mortall to joyne vnto,
                           And thinke they can agree, and mutuall duties do,
                           Is to be fooliſh: For what thinke we ſtranger is,
                           More diſagreeable, or more disjoyn'd, then this,
                           That mortall with immortall endleſſe joyn'd in vnion,
                           Can moſt outragious ſtormes endure in their communion?
                        
                        Moreover they felt their ſoule to be engaged in death, as well as the bodie;
                        
                           —ſimul aevo feſſa fatiſcit,
                              Ib. 463.
                           
                           It joyntly faint's in one,
                           Wearied as age is gone.
                        
                        Which thing (according to Zeno) the image of ſleep doth manifeſtly ſhew vnto vs. For he eſteemeth, that it is a fainting and declination of the ſoule, aſwell as of the bodie. Contrabi
                           Cic. di
                                 •
                              . lib. 2. 
                           animum, & quaſi labi putat atque decidere. He thinks the minde is contracted, and doth as it were ſlide and fall downe. And that (which is perceived in ſome) it's force and vigor maintaineth it ſelfe even in the end of life, they referred and imputed the ſame to the diverſitie of diſeaſes, as men are ſeen in that extremitie, to maintaine, ſome one ſenſe, and ſome another, ſome their hearing, and ſome their ſmelling, without any alteration; and there is no weakneſſe or decay ſeen ſo vniverſall, but ſome entire and vigorous parts will remaine.
                        
                           Non alio pacto quàm ſi pes cùm dolet aegri,Lucr. lib. 111.
                           
                           In nullo caput interea ſit fortè dolore.
                           No otherwiſe, then if, when ſick-mans foote doth ake,
                           Meane time perhaps his head no fellow-feeling take.
                        
                        Our judgements ſight referreth it ſelfe vnto truth, as doth the Owles eyes vnto the ſhining of the Sunne, as ſaith Aristotle. How ſhould we better convince him, then by ſo groſſe blindneſſe, in ſo apparant a light? For, the contrarie opinion of the ſoules immortalitie, which Cicero ſaith, to have firſt been brought in (at leaſt by the teſtimonie of books) by Pherecydes Syrius, in the time of King Tullus (others aſcribe the invention thereof to Thales, and other to others) it is the part of humane knowledge treated moſt ſparingly and with more doubt. The moſt conſtant Dogmatiſts (namely in this point) are inforced to caſt themſelves vnder the ſhelter of the Academikes wings. No man knowes what Ariſtotle hath eſtabliſhed vpon

this ſubject, no more then all the ancients in Generall, who handle the ſame with a verie wavering beliefe: Rem gratiſſimam promittentium magis quàm probantium. Who rather promiſe then approve a thing moſt acceptable. He hath hidden himſelfe vnder the clouds of intricare and ambiguous words, and vnintelligible ſenſes, and hath left his Sectaries as much cauſe to diſpute vpon his judgement, as vpon the matter. Two things made this his opinion plauſible to them: the one, that without the immortalitie of ſoules, there ſhould no meanes be left to ground or ſettle the vaine hopes of glorie; a conſideration of wonderfull credite in the world: the other (as Plato ſaith) that it is a moſt profitable impreſſion, that views, when they ſteal away from out the ſight and knowledge of humane juſtice, remaine ever as a blancke before divine juſtice, which even after the death of the guiltie, will ſeverely purſue them. Man is ever poſſeſſed with an extreame deſtre to prolong his being, and hath to the vttermoſt of his skill provided for it, Toombs and Monuments are for the preſervation of his bodie, and glorie for the continuance of his name. He hath imployed all his wit to frame him ſelfe a-new, (as impacient of his fortune) and to vnderprop or vphold himſelfe by his inventions. The ſoule by reaſon of hir trouble and imbecilitie, as vnable to ſubſiſt of hir ſelfe, is ever, and in all places queſting and ſearching comforts, hopes, foundations; and forraine circumſtances, on which ſhe may take hold and ſettle hir-ſelfe. And how light and fantaſticall ſoever his invention doth frame them vnto him, he notwithſtanding relieth more ſurely vpon them, and more willingly, than vpon himſelfe: But it is a wonder to ſee how the moſt obſtinat in this ſo juſt and manifeſt perſwaſion of our ſpirits immortalitie, have found themſelves ſhort and vnable to eſtabliſh the ſame by their humane forces. Somnia ſunt non docentis, ſed optantis. Theſe are dreames not of one that teacheth, but wiſheth what he would have: ſaid an ancient writer. Man may by his owne teſtimonie know, that the trueth he alone diſcovereth, the ſame he oweth vnto fortune and chance; ſince even when ſhe is falne into his hands, he wanteth wherewith to lay hold on hir, and keep hir; and that this reaſon hath not the power to prevaile with it. All things produced by our owne diſcourſe and ſufficiencie, as well true as falſe, are ſubiect to vncertaintie and disputation. It is for the puniſhment of our temeritie, and inſtruction of our miſerie and incapacitie, that God cauſed the trouble, downefall and confuſion of Babels Tower. Whatſoever we attempt without his aſſiſtance, whatever we ſee without the lampe of his grace, is but vanitie and follie: With our weakneſſe we corrupt and adulterate the verie eſſence of truth (which is vniforme and conſtant) when fortune giveth vs the poſſeſſion of it. What courſe ſoever man taketh of himſelfe, it is Gods permiſſion that he ever commeth to that confuſion, whoſe image he ſo lively repreſenteth vnto vs, by the juſt puniſhment, wherewith he framed the preſumptuous over-weening of Nembroth, and brought to nothing the frivolous enterpriſes of the building of his high-towring Pyramis, or Heaven-menacing tower. Perdam ſapientiam ſapientium, & prudentiam prudentium
                           1. Cor. 1. 19. 
                           reprobabo. I will deſtroy the wiſedome of the wiſe, and reprove the providence of them that are moſt prudent. The diverſitie of tongues and languages, wherewith he diſturbed that worke, and overthrew that proudly-raiſd Pile; what elſe is it, but this infinit altercation, and perpetuall diſcordance of opinions and reaſons, which accompanieth and entangleth the frivolous frame of mans learning, or vaine building of humane ſcience? Which he doth moſt profitably. Who might containe vs, had we but one graine of knowledge? This Saint hath done me much pleaſure: Ipſa vtilitatis occultatio, aut humilitatis exercitatio eſt, aut elationis attritio. The verie concealing of the profit, is either an exerciſe of humilitie, or a beating downe of arrogancie. Vnto what point of preſumption and inſolencie, doe we not carrie our blindneſſe & fooliſhneſſe? But to returne to my purpoſe: Verily there was great reaſon, that we ſhould be beholding to God alone, and to the benefit of his grace, for the truth of ſo noble a beliefe, ſince from his liberalitie alone we receive the fruit of immortalitie, which conſiſteth in enjoying of eternall bleſſedneſſe. Let vs ingenuouſly confeſſe, that onely God and Faith, hath told it vs: For, it is no leſſon of Nature, nor comming from our reaſon. And he that ſhall both within and without narrowly ſift, and curiouſly ſound his being and his forces without this divine priviledge; he that ſhall view and conſider man, without flattering him, ſhall nor finde nor ſee either efficacie or facultie in him, that taſteth of any other thing but death and earth. The more we give, the more we owe; and the more we yeeld vnto God, the more Christian-like doe we. That which the Stoike Philoſopher ſaid, he held by the caſuall conſent of the peoples voice; had it not been better he had held it of God? Cùm de animorum
                           Sen epiſt. 117.
                           
                           aeternitate diſſerimus, non leue momentum apud nos habet conſenſus hominum, aut timentium inferos, aut coleutium. Vtor hâc publicâ perſuaſione. When we diſcourſe of the immortalitie of ſoules, in my conceit the conſent of thoſe men is of no ſmall authoritie, who either feare or adore the infernall powers. This publike perſwaſion I make vſe-of. Now the weakneſſe of humane Arguments vpon this ſubject, is verie manifeſtly knowne by the fabulous circumſtances they have added vnto the traine of this opinion, to finde out what condition this our immortalitie was of. Let vs omit the Stoickes. 
                              Ʋſuram nobis largiuntur, tanquam cornicibus; di
                                 •
                               manſures aiunt animos,
                           Cic. Tuſc. qu. l. 1. 
                           ſemper, negant. They grant vs vſe of life, as it vnto Ravens: they ſay, our ſoules ſhall long continue, but they deny, they ſhall laſt ever. Who gives vnto ſoules a life beyond this, but finite. The moſt vniverſall, and received fantaſie, and which endureth to this day, hath been that, whereof Pythagoras is made Authour; not that he was the firſt inventor of it, but becauſe it received much force and credite, by the authoritie of his approbation; Which is, that ſoules at their departure from vs, did but paſſe and roule from one to an other bodie, from a Lyon to a Horſe, from a Horſe to a King, vnceſſantly wandring vp and downe, from Houſe to Manſion. And himſelfe ſaid, that he remembred to have been Aethaledes, then Euphorbus, afterward Hermotimus, at laſt from Pyrrhus to have paſſed into Pythagoras: having memorie of himſelfe, the ſpace of two hundred and ſix yeares: ſome added more, that the ſame ſoules do ſometimes aſcend vp to haven, and come downe againe:
                        
                           O Pater ánne aliquas ad coelum hinc ire putandum eſtVirg. Ae
                                    •
                                 . lib. 6. 739.
                           
                           Sublimes animas, iterum
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               ad tarda reverti
                           Corpora? Quae lucis miſeris tam dira cupido?
                           Muſt we thinke (Father) ſome ſoules hence doe go,
                           Raized to heav'n, thence turne to bodies ſlow?
                           Whence doth ſo dyre deſire of light on wretches grow?
                        
                        
                           Origen makes them eternally to go and come from a good, to a bad eſtate. The opinion that 
                              Ʋarro reporteth is, that in the revolution of foure hundred and fortie yeares, they reconjoine themſelves vnto their firſt bodies. Chryſippus, that that muſt come to paſſe after a certaine ſpace of time vnknowne, and not limitted. Plato (who ſaith that he holds this opinion from Pindarus, and from ancient Poeſie,) of infinite Viciſſitudes of alteration, to which the ſoule is prepared, having no paines nor rewards in the other World, but temporall, as her life in this is but temporall, concludeth in her a ſingular knowledge of the affaires of Heaven, of Hell, and heer below, where ſhe hath paſſed, repaſſed, and ſojourned in many voyages; a matter in his remembrance. Behold her progreſſe elſe-where: He that hath lived well, reconjoineth himſelfe vnto that Star or Planet, to which he is aſſigned: Who evill, paſſeth into a Woman: And if then he amend not himſelfe, he tranſchangeth himſelfe into a beaſt, of condition agreeing to his vicious cuſtomes, and ſhall never ſee an end of his Puniſhments, vntill he returne to his naturall condition, and by vertue of reaſon, he have deprived himſelfe of thoſe groſe, ſtupide, and elementarie qualities, that were in him. But I will not forget the objection, which the Epicureans make vnto this tranſmigration from one bodie to another: Which is verie pleaſant. They demaund, what order there ſhould be, if the throng of the dying, ſhould be greater then that of ſuch as be borne. For, the ſoules removed from their abode would throng and ſtrive together, who ſhould get the beſt ſeat in this new caſe: And demaund beſides, what they would paſſe their time about, whilſt they ſhould ſtay, vntill any other manſion were made readie for them: Or contrary-wiſe, if more creatures were borne, then ſhould die; they ſay, bodies ſhould be in an ill taking, expecting the infuſion of their ſoule, & it would come to paſſe, that ſome of them ſhould die, before they had ever bin living.
                        
                           Denique connubia ad veneris, partúſ
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               ferarum,L
                                    •
                                 cr. li. 3. 802.
                           
                           Eſſe animas praesto deridiculum eſſe videtur,
                           Et ſpectare immortales mortalia membra
                           Innumero numero, certaréque praeproperanter
                           Inter ſe, quae prima potiſſimaque infinuetur.
                           Laſtly, ridiculous it is, ſoules ſhould be preſt
                           To 
                                 Ʋenus meetings, and begetting of a beaſt:
                           That they to mortall lims immortall be addreſt
                           In number numberleſſe, and over-haſtie ſtrive,
                           Which of them firſt and chiefe ſhould get in there to live.
                        
                        
                           Others have ſtaid the ſoule in the deceaſed bodies, therewith to animate ſerpents, wormes and other beaſts, which are ſaid to engender from the corrupttion of our members, yea and from our aſhes: Others, devide it in two parts one mortall, another immortall: Others make it corporeall, and yet notwithſtanding immortall: Others, make it immortal, without any ſcience or knowledge. Nay there are ſome of ours, who have deemed that of condemned mens ſoules divels were made: As Plutarke thinks, that Gods are made of thoſe ſoules which are ſaved: For, there be few things that this authour doth more reſolutely averre, then this; holding every where elſe an ambiguous and doubtfull kind of ſpeech. It is to be imagined and firmlie believed (ſaith he) that the ſoules of men, vertuous both according vnto nature and divine Iuſtice, become of Men, Saints, and of Saints, Demi-Gods and after they are once perfectly, as in ſacrifices of purgation, cleanged and purified, being delivered from all paſſibility and mortalitie, they become of Demy-Gods (not by any civill ordinance, but in good truth, and according to manifeſt reaſon) perfect and very-very Gods; receiving a moſt bleſſed and thriſe glorious end. But whoſoever ſhall ſee him, who is notwithſtanding, one of the moſt ſparing and moderate of that faction, ſo vndantedly to skirmiſh, and will heare him relate his wonders vpon this ſubject, him I refer to his diſcourſe of the Moone, and of Socrates his Daemon; where as evidently as in any other place, may be averred, that the myſteries of Philoſophy have many ſtrange conceits, common with thoſe of Poeſie; mans vnderſtanding looſing it ſelfe once goe about to ſound and controule all things to the vtmoſt ende; as tired and troubled by a long and weariſome courſe of our life, we returne to a kind of doting child-hood. Note here the goodly and certaine inſtructions, which concerning our ſoulesſubject we drawe from humane knowledge. There is no leſſe raſhneſſe in that which ſhee teacheth vs touching our corporall parts. Let vs make choyſe but of one or two examples, elſe ſhould we looſe our ſelves in this troubleſome and vaſte Ocean of Phiſicall errours. Let vs know whether they agree but in this one, that is to ſay, of what matter men are derived and produced one from another. For, touching their firſt production, it is no marvel if in a thing ſo high and ſo ancient, mans wit is troubled and confounded. Archelaus the Phyſition, to whom (as Ariſtoxenus affirmeth) Socrates was Diſciple and Minion, aſſevered that both men and beaſtes had beene made of milkie ſlyme or mudde, expreſſed by the heate of the earth. Pythagoras ſaith, that our ſeed is the ſcumme or froth of our beſt blood. Plato the diſtilling of the marrow in the backe-bone, which he argueth thus, becauſe that place feeleth firſt the wearineſſe which followeth the ſweete generall buſineſſe.
                        
                           Alcmaeon, a part of the braines-ſubſtance, which to prove, he ſaith, their eyes are euer moſt troubled, that over-intemperately addict themſelvse to that exerciſe. Democritus, a ſubſtance extracted from all parts of this corporall Maſſe. Epicurus extracted from the laſt ſoule and the body: Aristotle an excrement drawne from the nouriſhment of the bloud, the laſt ſcattereth it ſelfe in our ſeverall members; others, blood, concocted and diſgeſted by the heate of the genitories, which they judge, becauſe in the extreame, earneſt and forced labours many ſhed drops of pure blood; wherein ſome apparance ſeemeth to be, if from ſo infinite a confuſion any likelihood may bee drawne. But to bring this ſeede to effect, how many contrary opinions make they of it? Aristotle and Democritus hold, that women have no ſperme, that it is but a ſweate, which by reaſon of the pleaſure, and frication they caſt forth, and availeth nothing in generation.
                        
                           Galen, and his adherents, contrariwiſe affirme, that there can bee no generation, except two ſeedes meete together. Behold the Phiſitians, the Philoſophers, the Lawyers, and the Divines pell-mell together by the eares with our women about the queſtion and diſputation how long women beare their fruite in their wombe. And as for me, by mine owne example I take their part, that maintaine, a woman may goe eleven months with childe. The world is framed of this experience; there is no meane woman ſo ſimple, that cannot give her cenſure vpon all theſe conteſtations, although we could not agree. This is ſufficient to verifie, that in the corporall parte, man is no more inſtructed of himſelfe, then in the ſpiritual. We have propoſed himſelfe to himſelfe, and his reaſon to his reaſon, to ſee what ſhe can tell vs of it. Me thinkes I have ſufficiently declared, how little vnderſtanding ſhe hath of herſelfe. And hePlin. Nat. hiſt. lib. 2. cap. 1. who hath no vnderſtanding of himſelfe, what can he have vnderſtanding of? Quaſi verò menſuram vllius rei poſſit agere, qui ſui neſciat. As though he could take meaſure of any thing that knowes not his owne meaſure. Truely Protagoras told vs prettie tales, when he makes man

the meaſure of all things, who never knew ſo much as his owne. If it be not he, his dignitie wil never ſuffer any other creature to have this advantage over him. Now he being ſo contrary in himſelfe, and one judgement ſo vnceſſantly ſubverting another, this favourable propoſition was but a jeſt, which induced vs neceſſarily to conclude the nullity of the Compaſſe and the Compaſſer. When Thales iudgeth the knowledge of man very hard vnto man, he teacheth him the knowledge of all other things to be impoſſible vnto him. You for whom I have taken the paines to enlarge ſo long a worke (againſt my cuſtome) will not ſhun to maintaine your Sebond, with the ordinary forme of arguing, whereof you are daily inſtructed, and will therin exerciſe both your minde and ſtudy: For this laſt tricke of fence, muſt not be emploied but as an extreame remedy. It is a deſperate thruſt, gainſt which you muſt forſake your weapons, to force your adverſary to renounce his; and a ſecret ſlight, which muſt ſeldome and very ſparingly be put in practiſe. It is great fond-hardineſſe to looſe our ſelfe for the loſſe of another. A man muſt not be willing to die to revenge himſelfe, as Gobrias was: who being cloſe by the eares with a Lord of Perſia, Darius chanced to come in with his ſword in hisJustin. l. 1. hand, and fearing to ſtrike, for feare he ſhould hurt Gobrias, he called vnto him, and bade him ſmite boldly although he ſhould ſmite through both. I have heard, armes, and conditions of ſingle combates being deſperate and in which he that offered them, put both himſelfe and his enemy in danger of an end inevitable to both, reproved as vnjuſt, and condemned as vnlawfull. The Portugals tooke once certaine Turkes priſoners in the Indian ſeas, who impatient of their captivity, reſolved with themſelves (and their reſolution ſucceeded) by rubbing of Ship-nailes one againſt another, and cauſing ſparkles of fire to fall amongſt the barrels of powder (which lay not far from them) with intent to conſume both themſelves, their maſters, and the ſhip. We but touch the skirts, and glance at the laſt cloſings of Sciences, wherein extremity, as well as in vertue, is vicious. Keepe your ſelves in the common path, it is not good to be ſo ſubtill, and ſo curious. Remember what the Italian proverbe ſaith,
                        
                           Chitroppos' aſſottiglia, ſiſcavezza.Petr. p. 1. canz. 13. 48.
                           
                           Who makes himſelfe too fine,
                           Doth breake himſelfe in fine.
                        
                        
                           I perſwade you in your opinions and diſcourſes, as much as in your cuſtomes, and in every other thing, to vſe moderation and temperance, and avoide all newfangled inventions and ſtrangeneſſe. All extravagant waies diſpleaſe me. You who by the authority and preheminence, which your greatneſſe hath laide vpon you, and more by the advantages, which the qualities that are moſt your owne, beſtow on you, may with anod command whom you pleaſe, ſhould have laide this charge vpon ſome one, that had made profeſſion of learning, who might otherwiſe have diſpoſed and enriched this fantaſie. Notwithſtanding here have you enough to ſupply your wants of it. Epicurus ſaid of the lawes, that the worſt were ſo neceſſary vnto vs, that without them, men would enter-devoure one another. And Plato verifieth, that without lawes we ſhould live like beaſtes. Our ſpirit is a vagabond, a dangerous, and fond-hardy implement; It is very hard to joyne order and meaſure to it. In my time, ſuch as have any rare excellency above others, or extraordinary vivacity, we ſee them almoſt all ſo laviſh and vnbridled in licence of opinions and maners, as it may be counted a wonder to finde any one ſetled and ſociable. There is great reaſon why the ſpirit of man ſhould be ſo ſtrictly embarred. In his ſtudy, as in all things elſe he muſt have his ſteps numbered and ordered. The limites of his purſuite muſt be cut out by Arte. He is brideled and fettered with, and by religions, lawes, cuſtomes, knowledge, precepts, paines and recompences, both mortall and immortall; yet we ſee him, by meanes of his volubility and diſſolution, eſcape all theſe bonds. It is a vaine body, that hath no way about him to be ſeized on, or cut off: a diverſe and deformed body, on which neither knot nor hold may be faſtened. Verily thereare few ſoules, ſo orderly, ſo conſtant, and ſo well borne, as may be truſted with their owne conduct, and may with moderation, and without raſhneſſe, ſaile in the liberty of their judgements beyond common opinions. It is more expedient to give ſome body the charge and tuition of them. The ſpirit is an outragious glaive, yea even to his owne poſſeſſor, except he have the grace, very orderly and diſcreetely to arme himſelfe therewith. And there is no beaſt, to whom one may more juſtly apply a blinding bord, to keepe her ſight in, and force her looke to her footing and keepe from ſtraying here and there, without the tracke which vſe and lawes trace hir out. Therefore ſhall it bee better for you to cloſe and bound your ſelves in the accuſtomed

path▪ howſoever it be, then to take your flight to this vnbridled licence. But if any one of theſe new Doctors ſhall vndertake, to play the wiſe or ingenious before you, at the charge of his and your health: to rid you of this dangerous plague, which daily more and more ſpreds it ſelle in your Courts, this preſervative will in any extreame neceſſity be a let, that the contagion of this venome, ſhall neither offend you nor your aſſiſtance. The liberty then, and the joll
                              •
                           ty of their ancient ſpirits brought forth many different Sects of opinions, in Philoſophy and humane Sciences: every one vndertaking to judge and chuſe, ſo he might raiſe a faction. But now that men walke all one way: Qui certis quibuſdam destinatiſque ſententijs addict
                                 •
                              
                           
                           Cic. T
                                 •
                              ſc. q
                                 •
                              . l. 2 
                           & conſecrati ſunt, vt etiam, quae non probant, cogantur defendere: Who are addicted and conſecrated to certaine ſet and fore-decreed opinions, ſo as they are enforced to maintaine thoſe things which they prove or approve not: And that we receive Artes by civill authority and appointment: So that ſchooles have but one patterne, alike circumſcribed diſcipline and inſtitution; no man regardeth more what coines weigh and are worth; but every man in his turne receiveth them according to the value, that common approbation and ſucceſſion allotteth them: Men diſpute no longer of the alloy, but of the vſe. So are all things ſpent and vented alike. Phyſicke is received as Geometry: and jugling trickes, enchantments, bonds, the commerce of deceaſed ſpirits, prognoſtications, domifications, yea even this ridiculous, wit and wealthconſuming purſuite of the Philoſophers ſtone, all is emploid and vttered without contradiction. It ſufficeth to know, that Mars his place lodgeth in the middle of the hands triangle; that of 
                              Ʋenus in the Thumme and Mercuries in the little finger: and when the table-line cutteth the teachers riſing, it is a ſigne of cruelty: When it faileth vnder the middle finger, and that the naturall Median-line makes an angle with the vitall, vnder the ſame ſide, it is a ſigne of a miſerable death: And when a womans naturall line is open, and cloſes not it angle with the vitall, it evidently denotes that ſhe will not be very chaſt. I call your ſelfe to witneſſe if with this Science onely, a man may not paſſe with reputation and favour among all companies. Theophrastus was wont to ſay, that mans knowledge, directed by the ſenſe, might judge of the cauſes of things, vnto a certain meaſure, but being come to the extreame and firſt cauſes, it muſt neceſſarily ſtay, and be blunted or abated; either by reaſon of it's weakneſſe, or of the things difficulty. It is an indifferent and pleaſing kind of opinion, to thinke, that our ſufficiency may bring vs to the knowledge of ſome things, and hath certaine meaſures of power, beyond which it is temerity to employ it. This opinion is plauſible and brought in by way of compoſition: but it is hard to give our ſpirit any limites, being very curious and greedy, and not tied to ſtay rather at a thouſand, then fifty paces. Having found by experience, that if one had miſt to attaine vnto ſome one thing, another hath come vnto it; and that which one age never knew, the age ſucceeding hath found out: and that Sciences and Artes are not caſt in a mould, but rather by little and little formed and ſhaped by often handling and polliſhing them over: even as beares faſhion their yong whelps by often licking them: what my ſtrength cannot diſcover, I ceaſe not to ſound and trie: and in handling and kneading this new matter and with removing and chafing it, I open ſome facultie for him that ſhal follow me, that with more eaſe he may inioy the ſame, and ſo make it more facile, more ſupple and more pliable:
                        
                           —vt hymettia ſole
                              Ovid. Metam. lib. 10. 284.
                           
                           
                              Ʋertitur infacies, ipſóque fit vtilis vſu.
                           As the beſt Bees wax melteth by the Sun,
                           And handled into many formes doth 
                                 ••
                              n,
                           And is made aptly fit,
                           For vſe by vſing it.
                        
                        As much will the ſecond doe for the thrid, which is a cauſe that difficultie doth not make me deſpaire, much leſſe my vnabilitie: for it is but mine owne. Man is as well capable of all things, as of ſome. And if (as Theophrastus ſaith) he avow the ignorance of the firſt cauſes and beginnings, let him hardly quit all the reſt of his knowledge. If his foundation faile him, his diſcourſe is overthrowne. The diſpute hath no other ſcope, and to enquire no other end but the principles: If this end ſtay not his courſe, he caſteth himſelfe into an infinite irreſolution. Non poteſt aliud alio magis minúſque comprehendi, quoniam omnium rerum vna eſt definitio comprehendendi. One thing can neither more nor leſſe be comprehended then another, ſince of all things there is one definition of comprehending. Now is it likely, that if the ſoule knew any thing, ſhe

firſt knew her ſelfe: and if ſhe knew any without and beſides her ſelfe, it muſt be her vaile and body before any thing elſe. If even at this day the Gods of Phyſicke are ſeene to wrangle about our Anatomie,
                        
                           Mulciber in Troiam, pro Troia ſtabat Apollo,Ovid. Triſt. li 1. 
                                    ••
                                 . 2. 5.
                           
                           Apollo ſtoode for Troy,
                           
                              Ʋulcan Troy to deſtroy.
                        
                        When ſhall we expect that they will be agreed? We are neerer vnto our ſelves, then is whiteneſſe vnto ſnow, or weight vnto a ſtone. If man know not himſelfe, how can he know his functions and forces? It is not by fortune that ſome true notice doth not lodge with vs, but by hazard. And foraſmuch as by the ſame way, faſhion and conduct, errours are received into our ſoule, ſhe hath not wherewithall to diſtinguiſh them, nor whereby to chuſe the truth from falſhood. The Academikes received ſome inclination of judgement, and found it over raw, to ſay, it was no more likely, ſnow ſhould be white then blacke, and that we ſhould be no more aſſured of the moving of a ſtone, which goeth from our hand, then of that of the eight Spheare. And to avoide this difficulty and ſtrangeneſſe, which in trueth can not but hardly lodge in our imagination, how beit they eſtabliſh, that we were no way capable of knowledge, and that truth is engulfed in the deepeſt Abyſſes, where mans ſight can no way enter; yet avowed they ſomethings to be more likely and poſſible then others, and received this faculty in their judgement, that they might rather encline to one apparance then to an other. They allowed hir this propenſion, interdicting hir all reſolution. The Pyrrhonians adviſe is more hardy, and therewithall more likely. For this Academicall inclination, and this propenſion rather to one then another propoſition, what elſe is it, then a reacknowledging of ſome apparant truth, in this than in that? If our vnderſtanding be capable of the forme, of the lineaments, of the behaviour and face of truth; it might as well ſee it all compleate, as but halfe, growing and imperfect. For this apparance of veriſimilitude, which makes them rather take the left then the right hand, doe you augment it; this one ounce of likelyhood, which turnes the ballance, doe you multiply it, by a hundred, nay by a thouſand ounces; it will in the end come to paſſe, that the ballance will abſolutely reſolve and conclude one choiſe and perfect truth. But how do they ſuffer themſelves to be made tractable by likelyhood if they know not truth? How know they the ſemblance of that, wherof they vnderſtand not the eſſence? Either we are able to judge abſolutely, or abſolutly we cannot. If our intellectual and ſenſible faculties are without ground or footing, if they but hull vp and downe and drive with the wind, for nothing ſuffer we our judgement to be caried away to any part of their operation, what apparance ſoever it ſeemeth to preſent vs with. And the ſureſt and moſt happy ſituation of our vnderſtanding ſhould be that, where without any tottering or agitation it might maintaine it ſelfe ſetled, vpright and inflexible. Inter viſa, vera, aut falſa, ad animi
                           Cic. Acad. q. l. 4. 
                           aſſenſum▪ 
                              
                                 •
                              hil
                                 •
                              nterest. There is no difference betwixt true and falſe viſions, concerning the minds aſſent. That things lodge not in vs in their proper forme and eſſence, and make not their entrance into vs, of their owne power and authority, we ſee it moſt evidently. For if it were ſo, we ſhould receive them all alike: wine would be ſuch in a ſicke mans mouth, as in a healthy mans. He whoſe fingers are chopt through cold, and ſtiffe or benummed with froſt, ſhould finde the ſame hardneſſe in the wood or iron he might handle, which another doth. Then ſtrange ſubjects yeeld vnto our mercy, and lodge with vs according to our pleaſure. Now if on our part we receive any thing without alteration; if mans hold-faſts were capable and ſuficiently powerfull, by our proper meanes to ſeize on truth, thoſe meanes being common to all; this truth would ſucceſſively remove it ſelfe from one to an other. And of ſo many things as are in the world, at leaſt one ſhould be found, that by an vniverſall conſent ſhould be believed of all. But that no propoſition is feene, which is not controverſied and debated amongſt vs or that may not be, declareth plainly, that our judgment doth not abſolutely and cleerely ſeize on that which it ſeizeth: for my judgement cannot make my fellowes judgement to receive the ſame: which is a ſigne, that I have ſeized vpon it by ſome other meane then by a naturall power in me or other men. Leave we aparte this infinite confuſion of opinions, which is ſeene amongſt Phyloſophers themſelves, and this vniverſall and perpetuall diſputation, in and concerning the knowledge of things.
                        For it is moſt truly preſuppoſed, that men (I meane the wiſeſt, the beſt borne, yea and the moſt ſufficient) do never agree, no not ſo much that heaven is over our heads: For they who

doubt of all, doe alſo doubt of this: and ſuch as affirme, that we cannot conceive any thing, ſay we have not conceived whether heaven be over our heads: which two opinions are in number (without any compariſon) the moſt forcible. Beſides this diverſity and infinite diviſion, by reaſon of the trouble, which our owne judgement layeth vpon our ſelves and the vncertainty which every man findes in himſelfe, it may manifeſtly be perceived, that this ſituation is very vncertaine and vnſtaid. How diverſly judge we of things? How often change we our fantaſies? What I hold and believe this day, I believe and hold with all my beleefe: all my implements, ſprings and motions, embrace and claſpe this opinion, and to the vtmoſt of their power warrant the ſame: I could not poſſibly embrace any verity, nor with more aſſurance keepe it, then I doe this. I am wholy and abſolutely given to it: but hath it not been my fortune, not once, but a hundred, nay a thouſand times, nay dayly, to have embraced ſome other thing, with the very ſame inſtruments and condition, which vpon better adviſe I have, afterward judged falſe? A man ſhould at least become wiſe, at his owne coſt, and learne by others harmes. If vnder this colour I have often found my ſelfe deceived, if my Touch-ſtone be commonly found falſe and my ballance vn-even and vnjuſt; What aſſurance may I more take of it at this time, then at others? Is it not folly in me, to ſuffer my ſelfe ſo often to be beguiled and couzened by one guide? Nevertheleſſe, let fortune remoove vs five hundered times from our place, let hir doe nothing but vnceſſantly empty and fill, as in a veſſell, other and other opinions in our minde, the preſent and laſt is alwaies ſuppoſed certaine and infallible. For this muſt a man leave goods, honour, life, ſtate, health and all:
                        
                           —poſterior res illa reperta
                           
                           Perdit; & immutat ſenſus ad priſtina quaeque.
                                 
                                    •
                                 uer. l. 5. 1424.
                           
                           The later thing deſtroies all found before
                           And altars ſenſe at all things lik't of yore.
                        
                        Whatſoever is tould vs, and what ever we learne, we ſhould ever remember, it is man, who delivereth, and man that receiveth: It is a mortall hand, that preſents it, and a mortall hand, that receives it. Onely things which come to vs from heaven, have right and authority of perſwaſion and markes of truth: Which we neither ſee with our eyes, nor receive by our meanes: this ſcred and great image would be of no force in ſo wretched a Manſion, except God prepare it to that vſe and purpoſe, vnleſſe God by his particular grace and ſupernaturall favor, reforme and ſtrengthen the ſame. Our fraile-defective condition ought at leaſt make vs demaene our ſelves more moderately, and more circumſpectly in our changes. We ſhould remember, that whatſoever we receive in our vnderſtanding, we often receive falſe things, and that it is by the ſame inſtruments, which many times contradict and deceive themſelves. And no marvell if they contradict themſelves, being ſo eaſie to encline, and vpon very ſlight occaſions ſubject to waver and turne. Certaine it is, that our apprehenſion, our judgement, and our ſoules faculties in generall, doe ſuffer according to the bodies motions and alterations, which are continuall. Have we not our ſpirits more vigilant, our memorie more ready, and our diſcourſes more lively in time of health, then in ſickeneſſe? Doth not joy and blithneſſe make vs receive the ſubjects, that preſent themſelves vnto our ſoule, with another kind of countenance, then lowring vexation, and drooping melancholy doth? Doe you imagine, that Catullus or Saphoes verſes, delight and pleaſe an old covetous Chuff-penny wretch, as they doe a luſty and vigorous yong-man? Cleomenes the ſonne of Anaxandridas being ſicke, his friends reproved him, ſaying he had new ſtrange humors, and vnvſuall fantaſies: It is not vnlikely (anſwered he) for, I am not the man I was wont to be in time of health: But being other, ſo are my fantaſies and my humors. In the rabble caſe-canvaſing of our plea-cours, this by-word. Gaudeat de bonafortuna, Let him ioy in his good fortune, Is much in vſe, and is ſpoken of criminall offendors, who happen to meete with judges in ſome milde temper, or well-pleaſed moode. For it is moſt certaine that in times of condemnation, the judges doome or ſentence is ſome times perceived to be more ſharpe, mercileſſe and forward, and at other times more tractable, facile, and enclined to ſhadow or excuſe an offence, according as he is well or ill pleaſed in minde. A man that commeth out of his houſe troubled with the paine of the goute, vexed with jelouſie, or angry that his ſervant hath robbed him and whoſe mind is overcome with griefe, and plunged with vexation, and diſtracted with anger, there is not queſtion to be made but his judgement is at that inſtant much diſtempred, and much tranſported that way. That venerable Senate of the Areopagites, was wont to iudge and ſentence
                           
                           by night, for feare the ſight of the ſuters 
                                 •
                              ight corrupt iuſtice. The ayre it'ſelfe, and the clearenes of the firmament, doth forebode vs ſome change and alteration of weather, as ſaith that Greeke verſe in Cicero,
                        
                        
                           Tales ſunt hominum mentes, quali pater ipſeCic. exi
                                    •
                                 tert.
                           
                           Iupiter, auctifer a luſtravit lampade terras.
                           Such are mens mindes, as with increaſefull light.
                           Our father Iove ſurvayes the world in ſight.
                        
                        It is not onely fevers, drinkes and great accidents, that over-whelme our judgment: The leaſt things in the world wil turne it topſiturvie. And although we feele it not, it is not to bee doubted, if a continual ague may in the end ſuppreſſe our minde, a tertiani will alſo (according to hir meaſure and proportion) breed ſome alteration in it. If an Apoplexie doth altogether ſtupifie, and extinguiſh the ſight of our vnderſtanding, it is not to be doubted but a cold and rhume will likewiſe dazle the ſame. And by conſequence, hardly ſhall a man in all his life finde one houre, wherein our judgement may alwaies be found in his right byaſe, our body being ſubiect to ſo many continuall alterations, and ſtuft with ſo divers ſortes of ginnes and motions, that, giving credit to Phiſitions, it is very hard to finde one in perfect plight, and that doth not alwaies miſtake his marke and ſhute wide. As for the reſt, this diſeaſe is not ſo eaſily diſcovered, except, it be altogether extreame and remedileſſe; foraſmuch as reaſon marcheth ever crooked, halting and broken-hipt; and with falſehood as with truth; And therefore it is very hard to diſcover hir miſtaking, and diſorder. I alwaies call reaſon, that apparance or ſhew of diſcourſes, which every man deviſeth or forgeth in himſelfe: That reaſon, of whoſe condition, there may be a hundred, one contrary to another, about one ſelfe ſame ſubject: It is an inſtrument of Lead and Wax, ſtretching, pliable, and that may be fitted to all byaſes, and ſquared to all meaſures: There remaines nothing but the skil and ſufficiency to know how to turne and winde the ſame. How well ſoever a judge meaneth and what good minde ſo ever he beareth, if diligent eare be not given vnto him (to which few ammuſe themſelves) his inclination vnto friendſhip, vnto kindred, vnto beauty, and vnto revenge, and not onely matters of ſo weighty conſequence, but this innated and caſuall inſtinct▪ which makes vs to favour one thing more then another, and encline to one man more then to another, and which without any leave of reaſon, giveth vs the choiſe, in two like ſubjects, or ſome ſhadow of like vanity, may inſenſibly inſinuate in his judgement the commendation and applauſe, or disfavour and diſallowance of a cauſe, and give the ballance a twitch. I that neareſt prie into my ſelfe and who have mine eyes vnceſſantly fixt vpon me, as one that hath much elſe to doe elſe where,
                        
                           —quis ſub arct
                                    •
                                 
                              
                           
                           Rex gelidae metuatur orae,H
                                    ••
                                 . 
                                    •
                                 ar. l. 1. od 26. 3.
                           
                           Quid Tyridatem terreat, vnicè
                           Securus,
                           Onely ſecure, who in cold coaſt
                           Vnder the North-pole rules the roſt,
                           And there is feard; or what would fright,
                           And Tyridates put to flight.
                        
                        dare very hardly report the vanity and weakneſſe I feele in my ſelfe. My foot is ſo ſtaggering and vnſtable, and I finde it ſo ready to trip, and ſo eaſie to ſtumble; and my ſight is ſo dimme and vncertaine, that faſting I finde my ſelfe other then full fed: If my health applaud me, or but the calmeneſſe of one faire day ſmile vpon me, then am I a luſly gallant; but if a corne wring my toe, then am I pouting, vnpleaſant and hard to be pleaſed. One ſame pace of a horſe is ſometimes hard, and ſometimes eaſie vnto mee; and one ſame way, onetime ſhort, another time long and weariſome; and one ſame forme, now more, now leſſe agreeable and pleaſing to me: Sometimes I am apt to doe any thing, and other times fit to doe nothing: What now is pleaſing to mee, within a while after will be painfull. There are a thouſand indiſcreet and caſuall agitations in mee. Either a melancholy humour poſſeſſeth me, or a chollericke paſſion ſwaieth me, which having ſhaken off, ſometimes forwardneſſe and peeviſhnes hath predominancy, and other times gladnes and blithnes over rule me. If I chance to take a booke in hand, I ſhall in ſome paſſages perceive ſome excellent graces, and which ever wound me to the ſoule with delight; but let me lay it by, and reade him another

time; let me turne and toſſe him as I liſt, let me apply and manage him as I will, I ſhall finde it an vnknowne and ſhapeles maſſe. Even in my writings, I ſhall not at all times finde the tracke, or ayre of my firſt imaginations; I wot not my ſelfe what I would have ſaid, and ſhall vexe and fret my ſelfe in correcting and giving a new ſenſe to them, becauſe I have peradventure forgotten or loſt the former, which happily was better. I doe but come and goe; my judgement doth not alwaies goe forward, but is ever floting, and wandering,
                        
                           —velut minut a magno
                              Cd
                                    ••
                                 l. lyr. epig. 22. 12.
                           
                           Deprenſa navis in mari veſan
                                 •
                              ente vento.
                           Much like a pettie skiffe, that's taken ſhort
                           In a grand Sea, when winds doe make mad ſport.
                        
                        Many times (as commonly it is my hap to doe) having for exerciſe and ſport-ſake vndertaken to maintaine an opinion contrarie to mine, my minde applying and turning it ſelfe that way, doth ſo tie me vnto it, as I finde no more the reaſon of my former conceit▪ and ſo I leave it. Where I encline, there I entertaine my ſelfe, howſoever it be, and am caried away by mine owne waight. Every man could neere-hand ſay as much of himſelfe, would he but looke into himſelfe as I doe. Preachers knowe, that the emotion, which ſurpriſeth them, whilſt they are in their earneſt ſpeech, doth animate them towards beliefe, and that being angrie we more violently give our ſelves to defend our propoſition, emprint it in our ſelves, and embrace the ſame with more vohemencie and approbation, then we did, being in our temperate and repoſed ſenſe. You relate ſimply your caſe vnto a Lawyer, he anſwers faltring and doubtfully vnto it, whereby you perceive it is indifferent vnto him to defend either this, or that ſide, all is one to him: Have you paid him well, have you given him a good baite or fee, to make him earneſtly apprehend it, beginnes he to be intereſſed in the matter, is his will moved, or his minde enflamed? Then will his reaſon be moved, and his knowledge enflamed withall. See then an apparant and vndoubted truth preſents it ſelfe to his vnderſtanding; wherein he diſcouers a new light, and beleeves it in good ſooth, and ſo perſwades himſelfe. Shall I tell you? I wot not whether the heate of proceeding of ſpight and obſtinacie, againſt the impreſſion and violence of a magiſtrate, and of danger; or the intereſt of reputation, have induced ſome man, to maintaine, even in the fiery flames the opinion, for which amongſt his friends, and at libertie, he would never have beene moved, nor have ventred his fingers end. The motions and fittes which our ſoule receiveth by corporall paſſions, doe greatly prevaile in hir, but more hir owne; with which it is ſo fully poſſeſſ, as happily it may be maintained, ſhe hath no other way, or motion, then by the blaſt of hir windes, and that without their agitation, ſhe ſhould remaine without action, as a ſhip at Sea, which the winds have vtterly forſaken. And he who ſhould maintain that, following the Peripatetike faction, ſhould offer vs no great wrong, ſince it is knowne, that the greateſt number of the ſoules-actions, proceede and have neede of this impulſion of paſſion; valor (ſay they) cannot be perfected without the aſſiſtance of choller,
                        
                           Semper Aiax fortis, fortiſſimus tamen in furore.Cic. Tuſ. qu. l. 4.
                           
                           Aiax ever valor had,
                           Moſt then, when he was moſt mad.
                        
                        Nor doth any man runne violently enough vpon the wicked, or his enemies, except he be throughly angrie; and they are of opinion, that an Advocate or counſeller at the barre, to have the cauſe goe one his ſide, and to have juſtice at the judges hands doth firſt endevor to provoke him to anger. Longing-deſires mooved Them
                                 •
                              ſtoc
                                 •
                              es, and vrged Demoſt henes, and have provoked Phyloſophers, to long travels, to tedious watchings, and to Img
                              •
                           ing peregrinations: And leade vs to honors, to doctrine, and to health; all profitable reſpects. And this demiſnes of the ſoule, in ſuffering moleſtation and tediouſnes, ſerveth to no other purpoſe, but to breede repentance, and cauſe penitence in our conſciences; and for our puniſhment to feele the ſcourge of God, and the rod of politike correction. Compaſſion ſerveth as a ſting vnto clemencie, and wiſedome to preſerve and governe our ſelves, is by our owne feare rouzed vp; and how many noble actions, by ambition, how many by preſumption? To conclude, no eminent or gloriou
                                 •
                               
                              
                                 〈…〉
                               can be without ſome immoderate and 
                                 ••
                              regular agitation. May not this be one of the reaſons, which moved the Epicurians, to diſcharge God of all care and thought of our affaires: For ſo much as the verv effects of his goodnes, cannot exerciſe themſelves towards vs, without diſturbing his reſt, by meanes of the paſſions, which

are as motives and ſolicitations, directing the ſoule to vertuous actions? Or have they thought otherwiſe and taken them as tempeſts, which ſhamfully lead aſtray the ſoule from hir reſt and tranquilitie? Vt maris tranquillit as tutelligitur, nullâ, ne minim à quidem, aur â fluctus commovente: Sic animi quietus & placatus ſtatus cernitur, quum perturbati
                                 •
                               nulla eſt, quâ moveri
                           Cic. ib. lib. 5. 
                           queat. As we concesve the Seas calmeneſſe, when not ſo much as the leaſt pirling wind doth ſtirre the waves, ſo is a peaceable repoſed ſtate of the minde then ſeene, when there is no per turbation, wher by it may be moved. What differences ofſenſe and reaſon, what contrarietie of imaginations, doth the diverfitie of our paſſions preſent vnto vs? What aſſurance may we then take of ſo vnconſtant and wavering a thing, ſubject by it's owne condition to the power of trouble, never marching but a forced and borrowed pace? If our judgement be in the hands of ſickenes it ſelfe, and of perturbation; if by raſhnes and folly it be retained to receive the impreſſion of things, what aſſurance may we expect at his hands? Dares nos Philoſophie thinke that men produce their greateſt effects, and neareſt approching to divinitie, when they are beſides themſelves, furious, and madde? We amend our ſelves by the privation of reaſon, and by hir drooping. The two naturall waies, to enter the cabinet of the Gods, and there to fore-ſee the courſe of the deſtinies, are furie and ſleepe. This is very pleaſing to be conſidered. By the diſlocation, that paſſions bring vnto our reaſon, we become vertuous; by the extirpation, which either furie or the image of death bringeth vs, we become Prophets and Divines. I never beleeved it more willingly. It is a meere divine inſpiration, that ſacred truth hath inſpired in a Philoſophicall ſpirit, which againſt his propoſition exacteth from him; that the quiet ſtate of our ſoule, the beſt-ſettled eſtate, yea the healthfulleſt that Philoſophie can acquire vnto it, is not the beſt eſtate. Our vigilancie is more drouzie, then ſleepe it ſelfe: Our wiſedome leſſe wiſe, then folly; our dreames of more worth then our diſcourſes. The worſt place we can take, is in our ſelves. But thinkes it not, that we have the foreſight to marke, that the voyce, which the ſpirit vttereth, when he is gone from man, ſo cleare ſighted, ſo great, and ſo perfect, and whilſt he is in man, ſo earthly, ſo ignorant, and ſo overclouded, is a voyce proceeding from the ſpirit, which is in earthly, ignorant, and over clouded man; and therefore a truſtles and not to be-beleeved voyce? I have no great experience in theſe violent agitations, being of a ſoft and dull complex on; the greateſt part of which, without giving it leaſure to acknowledge hir ſelfe, doe ſodainly ſurpriſe our ſoule. But that paſſion, which in yoongmens hartes is ſaid, to be produced by idlenes, although it march but leaſurly, and with a meaſured progreſſe, doth evidently preſent to thoſe, that have aſſaid to oppoſe themſelves againſt hir endevor, the power of the converſion and alteration, which our judgement ſuffereth. I have ſome times enterpriſed to arme my ſelfe with a reſolution to abide, reſiſt, and ſup preſſe the ſame. For, I am ſo farre from being in their ranke, that call and allure vices, that vnleſſe they entertaine me, I ſcarcely follow them. I felt it, mauger my reſiſtance, to breed, to growe, and to augment; and in the end being in perfect health, and cleare-ſighted, to ſeize-vpon and poſſeſſe me; in ſuch ſort, that, as in dronkennes, the image of things, began to appeare vnto me, otherwiſe then it was wont: I ſawe the advantages of the ſubject, I ſought after, evidently to ſwell and growe greater, and much to encreaſe by the winde of my imagination; and the difficulties of my enterpriſe to become more eaſie and plaine; and my diſcourſe and conſcience to ſhrinke and draw-backe. But that fire being evaporated all on a ſodaine, as by the flaſhing of a lightning my ſoule to reaſſume an other ſight, another ſtate, and other judgement. The difficultie in my retreate ſeemed great and invincible, and the very ſame things of another taſte and ſhew than the fervencie of deſire had preſented them vnto me. And which more truely, Pyrrho cannot tell. We are never without ſome infirmity. Fevers have their heat, and their colde: From the effects of a burning paſſion, we fall into the effects of a chilling paſſion. So much as I had caſt my ſelfe foreward, ſo much do I draw my ſelfe backe.
                        
                           Qualis vbi alterno procurrens gurgite pontus,
                           Nunc ruit ad terr as ſcopuliſ
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               ſuperiacit vndam,Virg. Aen. l. 11. 508.
                           
                           Spumeus, extremám
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               
                              
                                 •
                              inu perfundit arenam,
                           Nunc rapidus retro atque aestu revoluta reſorbens
                           Saxa fugit, littuſ
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               vado labente relinquit.
                           As th'ocean flowing, ebbing in due courſe,
                           To land now ruſhes, foming throw's his ſourſe,
                           On rockes, there with bedew's the vtmoſt ſand,
                           
                              Now ſwift return's, the ſtones rould backe from ſtrand
                           By tide reſuck's, foord failing leaves the land.
                        
                        Now by the knowledge of my volubilitie, I have by accidence engendred ſome conſtancie of opinions in my ſelfe; yet have not ſo much altered my firſt and naturall ones. For, what apparance ſoever there be in noveltie, I doe not eaſily change, for feare I ſhould looſe by the bargaine: And ſince I am not capable to chuſe, I take the choiſe from others; and keepe my ſelfe in the ſeate, that God hath placed me in. Elſe could I hardly keepe my ſelfe from continuall rowling. Thus have I by the grace of God preſerved my ſelfe whole (without agitation or trouble of conſcience) in the ancient beliefe of our religion, in the middeſt of ſo many ſects and diviſions, which our age hath brought forth. The writings of the ancient fathers (I meane the good, the ſolide, and the ſerious) doe tempt, and in a manner remove me which way they liſt. Him that I heare ſeemeth ever the moſt forcible. I finde them everieone in his turne to have reaſon, although they contrarie one another. That facilitie, which good wittes have to prove any thing they pleaſe, likely; and that there is nothing ſo ſtrange, but they will vndertake to ſet ſo good a gloſſe on it, as it ſhall eaſily deceive a ſimplicitie like vnto mine, doth manifeſtly ſhew the weakenes of their proofe. The heavens and the planets have moved theſe three thouſand yeares, and all the world believed as much, vntill Cleanthes the Samian, or elſe (according to Thcophraſtus) Nicetas the Syracuſian tooke vpon him to maintaine, it was the earth that moved, by the oblique circle of the Zodiake, turning about hir axell tree. And in our daies C
                                 •
                              pernicus hath ſo well grounded this doctrine, that hee doth very orderly fit it to all Aſtrologicall conſequences. What ſhall we reape by it, but only that we neede not care, which of the two it be? And who knoweth whether a thouſand yeares hence a third opinion will riſe, which happily ſhall overthrow theſe two praecedent.
                        
                           Sic volvenda aetas commut at tempora rerum,Lucr. l. 5. 1
                                    •
                                 86.
                           
                           Quodque fuit pretio, ſit nullo denique honore,
                           Porrò aliud ſuccedit, & è contemptibus exit,
                           Inque dies magis appetitûr, floret
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               repertum
                           Laudibus, & miro eſt mortales inter honore.
                           So age to be paſt-over alter's times of things:
                           What earſt was moſt eſteem'd,
                           At laſt nought-worth is deem'd:
                           An other then ſucced's, and from contempt vpſprings,
                           Is daily more deſir'd, flowreth as found but then
                           With praiſe and wondrous honor amongſt mortall men
                        
                        So when any new Doctrine is repreſented vnto vs, we have great cauſe to ſuſpect it, and to conſider, how before it was invented, the contrarie vnto it was in credite; and as that hath beene reverſed by this latter, a third invenſion may paradventure ſueceede in after-ages, which in like ſort ſhall front the ſecond. Before the principles, which Ariſtotle found out, were in credite, other principles contented mans reaſon, as his doe now content vs. What learning have theſe men, what particular priviledge, that the courſe of our invention ſhould rely only vpon them, and that the poſſeſſion of our beliefe, ſhal for ever hereafter belong to them? They are no more exempted from being rejected, then were their fore-fathers. If any man vrge me with a new Argument, it is in me to imagine, that if I cannot anſwere it, another can. For, to believ
                                 •
                               all apparances, which we cannot reſolve, is meere ſimplicitie. It would then follow, that all the common ſort (whereof we are all part) ſhould have his beliefe turning and winding like a weather-cocke: For, his ſoule being ſoft, and without reſiſtance, ſhould vnceſſantly be enforced to receive new and admit other impreſſions: the latter ever defacing the precedents trace. He that perceiveth himſelfe weake, ought to anſwer, according to law termes, that he will conferre with his learned counſel, or elſe referre himſelfe to the wiſeſt, from whom he hath had his prentiſeſhip. How long is it ſince Phyſicke came firſt into the World? It is reported that a new ſtart-vp fellow, whom they call Paracelius, changeth and ſubverteth all the order of ancient, and ſo long time-received rules, and maintaineth that vntill this day it hath only ſerved to kill people. I thinke he will eaſily verifie it. But I ſuppoſe it were no great wiſedome to hazard my life vpon the triall of his new-fangled experience. We muſt not believe al men, ſaith the precept, ſince every man may ſay all things. It is not long ſince, that one of theſe profeſſours of novelties, and Phyſicall reformations

told me, that all our forefathers had notoriouſly abuzed themſelves in the nature and motions of the windes, which, if I would liſten vnto him, he would manifeſtly make me perceve. After I had with ſome patience given attendance to his Arguments, which were indeed full of likely-hood, I demaunded of him, whether they that failed according to Theophraſtus his Lawes, went weſtward, when they bent their courſe eaſtward? Or whether they failed ſideling, or backeward? It is fortune, anſwered he, but ſo it is they tooke their marke amiſſe: To whom I then replyed, that I had rather follow the effects, then his reaſon. They are things that often ſhocke together: and it hath beene told me, that in Geometrie (which ſuppoſeth to have gained the high point of certainty amongſt al ſciences) there are found vnavoidable Demonſtrations, and which ſubvert the truth of all experience: As Iames Peletier tolde me in mine owne houſe, that he had found out two lines, bending their courſe one towards another, as if they would meete and joyne together; nevertheleſſe he affirmed, that even vnto infinity, they could never come to touch one another. And the Pyrrhonians vſe their Arguments, and Reaſon, but to deſtroy the apparance of experience: And it is a wonder to ſee how farre the ſuppleneſſe of our reaſon, hath in this deſigne followed them, to reſiſt the evidence of effects: For, they affirme, that wee moove not, that we ſpeake not, that there is no weight, nor heate, with the ſame force of arguing, that we averre the moſt likelyeſt things. Ptolomey, who was an excellent man, had eſtabliſhed the boundes of the world; All ancient Phyloſophers have thought they had a perfect meaſure thereof, except it were certaine ſcattered Ilandes, which might eſcape their knowledge: It had bin to Pyrrhonize a thouſand yeeres agoe, had any man gone abut to make a queſtion of the arte of Coſmography: and the opinions that have beene received thereof, of all men in Generall: It had beene flat hereſie to avouch, that there were Antipodes. See how in our age an infinite greatneſſe of firme land hath beene diſcovered, not an Iland onely, nor one particular country, but a parte in greatneſſe verie neere equall vnto that which wee knewe. Our moderne Geographers ceaſe not to affirme, that now all is found, and all is diſcovered;
                        
                           Nam quod adeſt praeſto, placet, & pollere videtur,
                                 
                                    •
                                 b. 1422.
                           
                           For, what is preſent heere
                           Seemes ſtrong, is held moſt deare.
                        
                        The queſtion is now, if Ptolomey was heretofore deceived in the grounds of his reaſon, whether it were not folly in me, to truſt what theſe late followes ſay of it, and whether it bee not more likely, that this huge body, which we terme the World, is another manner of thing, than we judge it. Plato ſaith, that it often changeth his countenance, that the Heaven, the Starres, and the Sunne do ſomtimes re-enverſe the motion we perceive in them, changing the Eaſt into Weſt. The Aegyptian Prieſts, told Heredotus, that ſince their firſt King, which was eleaven thouſand and odde yeares (when they made him ſee the pictures of all their former Kings, drawne to the life in ſtatues) the Sunne had changed his courſe foure times: That the ſea and the earth do enterchangeably change one into another; that the worldes birth is vndetermined: The like ſaid, Ariſtotle and Cicero. And ſome one amongſt vs averreth, that it is altogether eternall, mortall, and new reviving againe, by many Viciſſitudes, calling Salomon and Eſay to witneſſe: avoyde theſe oppoſitions, that God hath ſometimes beene a Creator without a creature: that he hath beene idle; that hee hath vnſaide his idleneſſe, by ſetting his hand to this worke, and that by conſequence he is ſubject vnto change. In the moſt famous Schooles of Greece, the World is reputed a God, framed by another greater and mightier God, and is compoſed of a body and a ſoule, which abideth in his centre, ſpreading it ſelfe by Muſicall numbers vnto his circumference, divine, thriſe-happy, very great, moſt wiſe and eternall. In it are other Gods, as the Sea, the earth, and plants, which mutually entertaine one another, with an harmonious and perpetual agitation and celeſtial dance; ſomtimes meeting, othertimes farre-ſundering themſelves; now hiding then ſhewing themſelves; and changing place, now forward, now backward. Heraclitus firmely maintained, that the World was compoſed of fire, and by the deſtinies order, it ſhould one day burſt forth into flames, and be ſo conſumed into cinders, and another day it ſhould be new borne againe. And Apulcius of men ſaith; ſigillatim mortales, cunctim perpetui: ſeverally mortall, altogether everlaſting.
                           L. Apul. de deo Socrat. 
                           Alexanderwrit vnto his mother the narration of an Aegyptian Prieſt, drawne from out their monuments, witneſſing the antiquitie of that Nation, infinite; and comprehending the birth and progreſſe of their countries to the life. Cicero and Diodorus, ſaid in their daies, that

the Chaldeans kept a regiſter of foure hundred thouſand and odde yeares. Aristotle, Plinie, and others, that Zoroastes lived ſixe thouſand yeares before Plato. And Plato ſaith, that thoſe of the citty of Sa
                                 •
                              s, have memories in writing of eight thouſand yeares, and that the towne of Athens, was built a thouſand yeares before the city of Sa
                                 •
                              s. Epicurus, that at one ſame time, all things that are, looke how we ſee them, they are all alike, and in the ſame faſhion, indivers other Worldes, which he would have ſpoken more confidently, had he ſeene the ſimilitudes and correſpondencies, of this new-found world of the Weſt-Indiaes, with ours, both preſent and paſt, by ſo many ſtrange examples. Truly, when I conſider what hath followed our learning by the courſe of this terreſtriall policie, I have diverſe times wondred at my ſelfe, to ſee in ſo great a diſtance of times and places, the ſimpathy or jumping of ſo great a number of popular and wilde opinions, and of extravagant cuſtomes and beliefes, and which by no meanes ſeeme to hold with our naturall diſcourſe. Mans ſpirit is a wonderful worker of miracles. But this relation hath yet a kind of I wot not what more Heteroclite: which is found both in names, and in a thouſand other things. For, there were found Nations, which (as far as we know) had never heard of vs, where circumciſion was held in requeſt; where great ſtates and common wealths were maintained onely by Women, and no men: Where our faſts and Lent was repreſented, adding thervnto the abſtinence from women; where our croſies were ſeverall waies in great eſteeme; In ſome places they adorned and honored their ſepulchres with them, and elſwhere, eſpecially that of Saint Andrew, they employed to ſhield themſelves from nightly viſions, and to lay them vpon childrens couches, as good againſt enchantments and witch-crafts: In another place, they found one made of Wood, of an exceeding height, worſhipped for the God of rayne: which was thruſt very deepe into the ground: There was found a very expreſſe and lively image of our Penitentiaries: the vſe of Myters-the Prieſtes ſingle life; the Arte of Divination by the entrailes of ſacrificed beaſtes; the abſtinence from all ſorts of fleſh & fiſh, for their food; the order amongſt Prieſts in ſaying of their divine ſervice, to vſe, a not vulgar, but a particular tongue; and this erronious and fond conceipt, that the firſt God was expelled his throne by a yoonger brother of his: That they were at 
                              ••••
                            created with all commodities, which afterward by reaſon of their ſinnes were abridged them: That their territory hath beene changed; that their naturall condition hath beene much impaired: That they have heeretofore beene drowned by the inundation of Waters come from heaven; that none were ſaved but a few families, which caſt themſelves into the crackes or hollow of high Mountaines, which crackes they ſtopped very cloſe, ſo that the Waters could not enter in, having before ſhutte therein many kinds of beaſts: That when they perceived the Raine to ceaſe, and Waters to ſal, they firſt ſent out certaine dogs which returning clean-waſ
                              •
                           t, and wet, they judged that the waters were not yet much falne; and that afterward ſending out ſome other, which ſeeing to returne all muddy and foule, they iſſued forth of the mountaines, to repeople the world againe, which they found repleniſhed onely with Serpents. There were places found, where they vſed the perſwaſion of the day of judgement, ſo that they grew wondrous wroth and offended with the Spaniards, who in digging and ſearching of riches in their graves, ſcattered here and there the bones of their deceaſed friends; ſaying that thoſe diſperſed bones could very hardly be reconjoyned together againe. They alſo found where they vſed traffike by exchange, and no otherwiſe; and had Faires and Markets for that purpoſe: They found dwarfes, and ſuch other deformed creatures, vſed for the ornament of Princes tables: They found the vſe of hawking and fowling according to the Nature of their birdes: tyrannicall ſubſides, and grievances vppon ſubjects; delicate in pleaſant gardens; dancing, tumbling; leaping and jugling, muſike of inſtruments, armories, dicing-houſes, tenniſſe-courtes, and caſting lottes, or mumne-chaunce, wherein they are often ſo earneſt and moody, that they will play themſelves and their liberty: vſing no other phyſicke but by charmes: the manner of writing by figures: believing in one firſt man, vniverſall father of all people: The adoration of one God, who heretofore lived man, in perfect Virginitie, faſting, and penance, preaching the law of Nature, and the cerimonies of religion; and who vaniſhed out of the world, without any naturall death: The opinion of Gyants; the vſe of drunkenneſſe, with their manner of drinks, and drinking and pledging of healths: religious ornaments, painted over with bones and dead-mens ſculs; ſurplices, holy-Water, and holy-Water ſprinckles: Women and Servaunts, which ſtrivingly preſent themſelves, to be burned or enterred with their deceaſed husbands, or maſters▪ a law

that the eldeſt or firſt borne child ſhall ſucceed and inherit all; where nothing is reſerved for Punies, but obedience: a cuſtome to the promotion of certaine officers of great authority, and where he that is promoted takes vpon him a new name, and quiteth his owne: Where they vſe to caſt lime vpon the knees of new borne children, ſaying vnto him; from duſt thou cameſt and to duſt thou ſhalt returne again: the Arts of Augures or prediction. Theſe vaine ſhadowes of our religion, which are ſeene in ſome of theſe examples, witneſſe the dignity and divinity thereof. It hath not onely in ſome ſort inſinuated it ſelfe among all the infidell Nations, on this ſide by ſome imitations, but amongſt thoſe barbarous Nations beyond, as it were by a common and ſupernaturall inſpiration: For amongſt them was alſo found the beliefe of Purgatory, but after a new forme: For, what we aſcribe vnto fire, they impute vnto cold, and imagine that ſoules are both purged and puniſhed by the vigor of an extreame coldneſſe. This example putteth me in minde of another pleaſant diverſity: For, as there were ſome people found, who tooke pleaſure to vnhood the end of their yard, and to cut off the fore-skinne, after the manner of the Mahometans and Iewes, ſome there were found, that made ſo great a conſcience to vnhood it, that with little ſtrings, they carried their fore-skin very carefully out-ſtretched and faſtened above, for feare that end ſhould ſee the aire. And of this other diverſity alſo, that as we honour our Kings, and celebrate our Holy-daies with decking and trimming our ſelves with the beſt habilliements we have; in ſome regions there, to ſhew all diſparity and ſubmiſſion to their King, their ſubjects preſent themſelves vnto him in their baſeſt and meaneſt apparrell; and entring into his pallace, they take ſome old torne garment and put it over their other attire, to the end all the glory and ornament may ſhine in their Soveraigne and Maiſter.
                        But let vs goe on: If Nature encloſe within the limites of hir ordinary progreſſe, as all other things, ſo the beliefes, the judgements and the opinions of men; if they have their revolutions, their ſeaſons, their birth, and their death, even as Cabiches: If heaven doth moove, agitate and rowle them at his pleaſure, what powerfull and permanent authority doe we aſcribe vnto them? If by vncontroled experience we palpably touch, that the forme of our being depends of the aire, of the climate, and of the ſoile wherein we are borne, and not onely the hew, the ſtature, the complexion and the countenance, but alſo the ſoules faculties: Et plaga coeli non ſolúm ad rebur corporum, ſed eiam animorum facit. The climate helpeth not onely for ſtrength of body, but of mindes, ſaith 
                              Ʋegetius: And that the Goddeſſe foundreſſe of the Citie of Athens, choſe a temperature of a countrie to ſituate it in, that mightmake the men wiſe, as the Aegyptian Prieſts taught Solon: Athen
                                 •
                              s tenue coelum: ex quo etiam acutiores putantur
                           
                              
                                 •
                              ic. de 
                                 ••
                              to. 
                           A
                                 •
                              tici: craſſum Thebis: itaque pingues Thebani, & valentes: About Athens is a thin aire, whereby thoſe Country-men are esteemed the ſharper-
                                 •
                              itted: About Thebes the aire is groſe, and therefore the Thebans were groſe and ſtrong of conſtitution. In ſuch manner that as fruites and beaſts doe ſpring vp diverſe and different; So men are borne, either more or leſſe warlike, martiall, juſt, temperate and docile: heere ſubject to wine, there to theft, and whoredome; heere inclined to ſuperſtition, addicted to miſ-believing; heere given to liberty, there to ſervitude; capable of ſome one Arte or Science; groſe-witted or ingenious: either obedient or rebellious; good or bad, according as the inclination of the place beareth, where they are ſeated; and being remooved from one ſoile to another (as plants are) they take a new complexion: which was the cauſe, that Cirus would never permit the Perſians to leave their barren, rough and craggie Country, for to tranſport themſelves into another, more gentle, more fertile, and more plaine,: ſaying that fat and delicious countries, make men wanton and effeminat; and fertile ſoiles yeeld infertile ſpirites. If ſometimes we ſee one arte to floriſh, or a beliefe, and ſometimes another, by ſome heauenly influence; ſome ages to produce this or that nature, and ſo to encline mankind to this or that biaſe: mens ſpirits one while flouriſhing, another while barren, even as fields are ſeene to be? what become of all thoſe goodly prerogatives, wherwith we ſtill flatter our ſelves? Since a wiſe man may miſtake himſelfe; yea many men, and whole nations; and as wee ſay, means nature either in one thing or other, hath for many ages together miſtaken hirſelfe. What aſſurance have we that at any time ſhe leaveth her miſtaking▪ and that ſhe continueth not even at this day, in hir error? Me thinkes amongſt other teſtimonies of our imbecilities, this one ought not to be forgotten, that by wiſhing it ſelfe, man cannot yet finde out what he wanteth; that not by enjoying our poſſeſſing, but by imagination and full wiſhing, we can not all agree in

one, that we moſt ſtand in need-of, and would beſt content vs. Let our imagination have free libertie to cut out and ſew at her pleaſure, ſhe cannot ſo much as deſire what is fitteſt to pleaſe and content her.
                        
                           —quid enim ratione timemus
                              Iuven. ſat. 10. 4
                           
                           Aut cupimus? quid tam dextro pede concipis, vt te
                           Conatus non poeniteat, votique peracti?
                           By reaſon what doe we feare, or deſire?
                           With ſuch dexteritie what doeſt aſpire,
                           But thou eftſoones repenteſt it,
                           Though thy attempt and vow doe hit?
                        
                        That is the reaſon why Socrates, never requeſted the gods to give him any thing, but what they knew to be good for him. And the publike and private prayer of the Lacedemonians, did meerely implie, that good and faire things might be granted them, remitting the election and choiſe of them to the diſcretion of the higheſt power.
                        
                           Coniugium petimus partúmque vxoris, at illiIbid. 352.
                           
                           Notum qui pueri, qualiſque futura ſit vxor.
                           We wiſh a wife, wifes breeding: we would know,
                           What children; ſhall our wife be ſheep or ſhrow?
                        
                        And the Chriſtian beſeecheth God, that his will may be done, leaſt he ſhould fall into that inconvenience, which Poets faine of King Midas: who requeſted of the Gods, that whatſoever he toucht, might be converted into gold: his praiers were heard, his wine was gold, his bread gold, the feathers of his bed, his ſhirt, and his garments were turned into gold, ſo that he found himſelfe overwhelmed in the injoying of his deſire, and being enrich't with an intollerable commoditie, he muſt now vnpray his prayers:
                        
                           Attonitus novitate mali, divéſque miſérque,Ovid Met. lib. 11. 128.
                           
                           Effugere optat opes, & quae modó voverat, odit.
                           Wretched and rich, amaz'd at ſo ſtrange ill,
                           His riches he would flie, hates his owne will.
                        
                        Let me ſpeake of my ſelfe; being yet verie yong. I beſought fortune above all things, that ſhe would make me a knight of the order of Saint Michaell, which in thoſe daies was verie rare, and the higheſt tipe of honour the French Nobilitie aymed at. She verie kindly granted my requeſt; I had it. In liew of raiſing and advancing me from my place, for the attaining of it, ſhe hath much more graciouſly entreated me, ſhe hath abaſed and depreſſed it, even vnto my ſhoulders and vnder. Cleobis and Biton, Trophonius and Agamedes, the two firſt having beſought the Goddeſſe, the two latter their God, of ſome recompence worthie their pietie, received death for a reward: So much are heavenly opinions different from ours, concerning what we have need-of. God might grant vs riches, honours, long life and health, but many times to our owne hurt: For, whatſoever is pleaſing to vs, is not alwayes healthfull for vs; If in liew of former health, he ſend vs death, or ſome worſe ſickneſſe: Virga
                           Pſal. 23. 4. 
                           tua & baculus tuus ipſa me conſolata ſunt: Thy rod and thy ſtaffe hath comforted me. He doth it by the reaſons of his providence, which more certainly conſidereth and regardeth what is meet for vs, then we our ſelves can doe, and we ought to take it in good part, as from a moſt wiſe and thrice-friendy-hand.
                        
                           —ſi concilium vis
                              Iuven. ſat. 10. 346.
                           
                           Permittes ipſis expendere numinibus, quid
                           Conveniat nobis, rebúſque ſit vtile noſtris:
                           Charior est illis homo quám ſibi—
                           If you will counſell have, give the Gods leave
                           To weigh, what is moſt meet we ſhould receive,
                           And what for our eſtate moſt profit were:
                           To them, then to himſelfe man is more deare.
                        
                        For, to crave honours and charges of them, is to requeſt them to caſt you in ſome battle, or play at hazard, or ſome ſuch thing, whereof the event is vnknowne to you, and the fruit vncertaine. There is no combate amongſt Philoſophers ſo violent and ſharpe, as that which ariſeth vpon the queſtion of mans chiefe felicitie: from which (according to 
                              Ʋarroes calculation) aroſe two hundred and foure ſcore Sects. Qui autem de ſummo bono diſſentit, de
                           
                           tota Philoſophiae ratione diſputat. But he that diſagrees about the chiefeſt felicitie, cals in queſtion the whole courſe of Philoſophie.
                        
                        
                           Tres mihi convivae propè diſſentire videntur,Hor. lib. 2. epiſt. 2. 61.
                           
                           Poſcentes vario multum diverſ
                                 •
                              palato.
                           Quid dem? quid non dem? renuis tu quod iubet alter:
                           Quod petis, id ſanè eſt inviſum acidúmque duobus.
                           Three gueſts of mine doe ſeeme almoſt at ods to fall,
                           Whilſt they with divers taſte for divers things doe call:
                           What ſhould I give? What not? You wil not, what he will:
                           What you would, to them twaine is hatefull, ſowre and ill.
                        
                        Nature ſhould thus anſwer their conteſtations, and debates. Some ſay, our felicitie conſiſteth, and is in Vertue: Others in voluptuouſneſſe: Others in yeelding vnto Nature: Some others in learning: others in feeling no maner of paine or ſorrow: Others for a man never to ſuffer himſelfe to be carried away by apparances: and to this opinion ſeemeth this other of ancient Pithagoras to encline,
                        
                           Niladmir ar
                                 •
                               propè res eſ
                                 •
                               vna, Numici,Lib. 1 epiſt. 6. 1.
                           
                           Soláque quae poſſit facere & ſeruare beatum.
                           Sir, nothing to admire is th'only thing,
                           That may keepe happy, and to happy bring.
                        
                        which is the end and ſcope of the Pyrrhonian Sect. Ariſtotle aſcribeth vnto magnanimitie, to admire and wonder at nothing. And Arceſila
                                 •
                              s ſaid, that ſufferance, and an vpright and inflexible ſtate of judgement, were true felicities; whereas conſents and applications, were vices and evils. True it is, that where he eſtabliſheth it for a certaine Axiome, he ſtared from Pyrrhoniſme. When the Pirrhonians ſay, that Ataraxy is the chiefe felicity, which is the immobilitie of judgement, their meaning is not to ſpeake it affirmatively, but the very wavering of their minde, which makes them to ſhun downefalls, and to ſhrowd themſelves vnder the ſhelter of calmeneſſe, preſents this fantaſie vnto them, and makes them refuſe another. Oh how mu
                              •
                           h doe I deſire, that whileſt I live, either ſome other learned men, or Inſ
                                 ••
                              s Lipſius, the moſt ſufficient and learned man now living; of a moſt poliſhed and judicious wit, true Coſin-germane to my Turnebus, had both will, health and leiſure enough, ſincerely and exactly, according to their diviſions and formes, to collect into on volume or regiſter, as much as by vs might be ſeene, the opinions of ancient Philoſophie, concerning the ſubject of our being and cuſtoms, their controverſies, the credite, & pertaking of factions and ſides, the application of the Authors and Sectators lives, to their precepts, in memorable and exemplarie accidents. O what a worthie and profitable labor would it be! Beſides, if it be from our ſelves that we draw the regiment of our cuſtomes, into what a bottomleſſe confuſion doe we caſt our ſelves? For, what our reaſon perſwades vs to be moſt likely for it, is generally for every man to obey the lawes of his countrie, as is the adviſe of Socrates, enſpired (ſaith he) by a divine perſwaſion. And what elſe meaneth ſhe thereby, but onely that our devoire or duety hath no other rule, but caſuall? Truth ought to have a like and vniuerſall viſage throughout the world. Law and juſtice, if man knew any, that had a body and true eſſence, hee would not faſten it to the condition of this or that countries cuſtomes. It is not according to the Perſians or Indians fantazie, that vertue ſhould take her forme. Nothing is more ſubject vnto a continuall agitation, then the lawes. I have ſince I was borne, ſeene thoſe of our neighbors the Engliſh-men changed and rechanged three or foure times, not only in politike ſubjects, which is, that ſome will diſpence of conſtancie, but in the moſt important ſubject, that poſſibly can be, that is to ſay in religion, whereof I am ſo much the more both grieved and aſhamed, becauſe it is a nation, with which my count
                              •
                           iemen have heretofore had ſo inward and familiar acquaintance, that even to this day, there remaine in my houſe ſome ancient monuments of our former aliance. Nay I have ſeene amongſt our ſelves ſome things become lawfull, which erſt were deemed capitall: and we that hold ſome others, are likewiſe in poſſibilitie, according to the vncertaintie of warring fortune, one day or other, to be offendors againſt the Majeſtie both of God and man, if our juſtice chance to fall vnder the mercy of injuſtice; and in the ſpace of few yeares poſſeſſion, taking a contrary eſſence. How could that ancient God more evidently accuſe, in humane knowledge, the ignorance of divine eſſence, and teach men that their religion was but a peece of their owne

invention, fit to combine their ſocietie, then in declaring (as he did) to thoſe which ſought the inſtruction of it, by his ſacred Tripos, that the true worſhipping of God, was that, which he found to be obſerved by the cuſtome of the place, where he lived? Oh God, what bond, or dutie is it, that we owe not vnto our Soveraigne Creators benignitie, in that he hath beene pleaſed to cleare and enfranchize our beliefe from thoſe vagabonding and arbitrary devotions, & fixt it vpon the eternall Baſe of his holy word? What will Philoſophie then ſay to vs in this neceſſity? that we follow the lawes of our country, that is to ſay, this waving ſea of a peoples or of a Princes opinions, which ſhall paint me forth juſtice with as many colours, and reforme the ſame into as many viſages as there are changes and alterations of paſſions in them. I cannot have my judgement ſo flexible. What goodneſſe is that, which but yeſterday I ſaw in credite and eſteeme, and to morrow, to have loſt all reputation, and that the croſſing of a River, is made a crime? What truth is that, which theſe Mountaines bound, and is a lie in the World beyond them? But they are pleaſant, when to allow the Laws ſome certainetie, they ſay, that there be ſome firme, perpetuall and immoveable, which they call naturall, and by the condition of their proper eſſence, are imprinted in man-kinde: of which ſome make three in number, ſome, foure ſome more, ſome leſſe: an evident token, that it is a marke as doubtfull as the reſt. Now are they ſo vnfortunate (for, how can I terme that but misfortune, that of ſo infinite a number of lawes, there is not ſo much as one to be found, which the fortune or temeritie of chance hath graunted to be vniverſally received, and by the conſent and vnanimitie of all Nations to be admitted?) They are (I ſay) ſo miſerable, that of theſe three or foure choiſe-ſelected lawes, there is not one alone, that is not impugned or diſallowed, not by one nation, but by many. Now is the generalitie of approbation, the onely likely enſigne, by which they may argue ſome lawes to be naturall: For, what nature had indeede ordained vs, that ſhould we doubtleſſe follow with one common conſent; and not one onely nation, but every man in particular, ſhould have a feeling of the force and violence, which he ſhould vrge him with, that would incite him to contrary and reſiſt that Law. Let them all (for examples ſake) ſhew me but one of this condition. Protagoras and Ariſton gave the juſtice of the lawes no other eſſence, but the authoritie and opinion of the Law-giver, and that excepted, both Good and Honeſt loſt their qualities, and remained but vaine and idle names, of indifferent things. Thraſymachus in Plato, thinkes there is no other right, but the commoditie of the ſuperiour. There is nothing wherin the world differeth ſo much, as in cuſtomes and lawes. Somethings are here accompted abhominable, which in another place are eſteemed commendable: as in Lacedemonia, the ſlight and ſubt
                              •
                           ltie in ſtealing. Mariages in proximitie of blood are amongſt vs forbidden as capitall, elſewhere they are alowed and eſteemed;
                        
                           —gentes eſſe ferunt
                                    •
                                 r,
                              O
                                    •
                                 id. Metam. lib▪ 10. 331.
                           
                           In quibus & nato genitrix, & nata parenti
                           Iungitur, & p
                                 •
                              etas geminato creſcit amore.
                           There are ſome people, where the mother weddeth
                           Hir ſonne, the daughter her owne father beddeth,
                           And ſo by doubled love, their kindneſſe ſpreddeth.
                        
                        the murthering of children and of parents; the communication with women; traffike of robbing and ſtealing; free licence to all maner of ſenſualitie: to conclude, there is nothing ſo extreame and horrible, but is found to be received and allowed by the cuſtome of ſome nation. It is credible that there be naturall lawes; as may be ſeene in other creatures, but in vs they are loſt: this goodly humane reaſon engrafting it ſelfe among all men, to ſway and command, confounding and topſie-turving the viſage of all things, according to her inconſtant vanitie and vaine inconſtancie. Nihil it aque amplius noſtrum eſt, quod noſtrum dico, art
                                 •
                              s eſt. Therefore nothing more is ours: all that I call ours, belongs to Arte. Subjects have divers luſtres, and ſeverall conſiderations, whence the diverſitie of opinions is chiefly engendred. One nation vieweth a ſubject with one viſage, and thereon it ſtayes; an other with an other. Nothing can be imagined ſo horrible, as for one to eate and devoure his owne father. Thoſe people, which anciently kept this cuſtome, holde it nevertheleſſe for a teſtimonie of pietie and good affection: ſeeking by that meane to give their fathers the worthieſt and moſt honorable ſepulchre, harboring their fathers bodies & reliques in themſelves and in their marrow; in ſome ſorte reviving and regenerating them by the tranſmutation made in their

quicke fleſh, by digeſtion and nouriſhment. It is eaſie to be conſidered what abhomination and crueltie it had beene, in men accuſtomed and trained in this inhumane ſuperſtition, to caſt the carcaſſes of their parents into the corruption of the earth, as foode for beaſts and wormes. Lycurgus wiſely conſidered in theft, the vivacitie, diligence, courage, and nimbleneſſe, that is required in ſurpriſing or taking any thing from ones neighbour, and the commoditie which thereby redoundeth to the common-wealth, that every man heedeth more curiouſly the keeping of that which is his owne: and judged, that by this two fold inſtitution to aſſaile and to defend, much good was drawne for military diſcipline (which was the principall Science and chiefe vertue, wherein he would enable that nation) of greater reſpect and more conſideration, then was the diſorder and injuſtice of prevailing and taking other mens goods. ▪
                           Dionyſius the tyrant offered Plato a robe made after the Perſian faſhion, long, damasked and perfumed: But he refuſed the ſame, ſaying, that being borne a man, he would not willingly put-on a womans garment: But Ariſtippus tooke it, with this anſwere, that no garment could corrupt a chaſte minde. His Friends reproved his demiſſeneſſe, in being ſo little offended, that Dionyſius had ſpitten in his face. Tut (ſaid he) Fiſhers ſuffer themſelves to be waſhed ouer head and eares, to get a gudgion. Diogenes waſhing of coleworts for his dinner, ſeeing him paſſe by, ſaid vnto him, If thou couldeſt live with coleworts, thou wouldeſt not cour
                                 •
                               and faune vpon a tyrant; to whom Ariſtippus replied; If thou couldeſt live among men, thou wouldeſt not waſh coleworts. See here how reaſon yeeldeth apparance to divers effects. It is a pitcher with two eares, which a man may take hold-on, either by the right or left hand.
                        
                           —bellum ô terra hoſpita portas,
                              Virg. Ae
                                    •
                                 
                                 ▪ lib 3. 559.
                           
                           Bello armantur equi, bellum haec arment a minantur:
                           Sed tamen ijdem molim curru ſuccedere ſueti
                           Quadrupedes, & franaiugo concordia ſerre.▪
                           
                           Spes eſt pacis—
                           O ſtranger-harb'ring land, thou bringſt vs warre;
                           Steed's ſerve for warre;
                           Theſe heard's do threaten jarre.
                           Yet horſes erſt were wont to drawe our waines,
                           And harneſt matches beare agreeing raines;
                           Hope is hereby that wee,
                           In peace ſhall well agree.
                        
                        
                           Solon being import
                              •
                           ned not to ſhed vaine and bottles teares for the death of his ſonne; That's the reaſon (anſwered hee) I may more iuſtly ſhed them, becauſe they are booteleſſe and vaine. Socrates his wife, exaſperated her griefe by this circumſtance; Good Lord (ſaid ſhe) how vniuſtly doe theſe bad iudges put him to death! What? Wouldeſt thou rather they ſhould execute me iuſtly? replide he to her. It is a faſhion amongſt vs to have holes bored in our 
                              •
                           ares: the Greekes held it for a badge of bondage. We hide our ſelves when we will enjoy our wives: The Indians doe it in open view of all men. The Scithians were wont to ſacrifice ſtrangers in their Temples, whereas in other places Churches are Sanctuaries for them.
                        
                           Inde furor vulgi, quòd numina vicinorum
                                 
                                    ••
                                 ue. ſat. 15. 36
                           
                           Odit quiſque locus, cùm ſolos credat habendos
                           Eſſe Deos quos ipſe colit—
                           The vulgar hereupon doth rage, becauſe
                           Each place doth hate their neighbours ſoveraigne lawes,
                           And onely Gods doth deeme,
                           Thoſe Gods themſelues eſteeme.
                        
                        I have heard it reported of a Iudge, who when he met with any ſharp conflict betweene Bartolus and Baldus, or with any caſe admitting contrariety, was wont to write in the margin of his booke, A queſtion for a friend, which is to ſay, that the truth was ſo entangled, and diſputable, that in ſuch a caſe he might favour which party he ſhould thinke good. There was no want but of ſpirit and ſufficiency, if he ſet not every where through his books, A Queſtion for a friend. The Advocates and Iudges of our time find in all caſes by aſes too-too-many, to fit them where they thinke good. To ſo infinite a ſcience, depending on the authoritie of ſo many opinions, and of ſo arbitrary a ſubject, it cannot be, but that an exceeding confuſion of judgements muſt ariſe. There are very few proceſſes ſo cleere, but the Lawiers adviſes vpon

them will be found to differ: What one company hath judged, another will adjudge the contrary, and the very ſame will another time change opinion. Whereof wee ſee ordinarie examples by this licence, which wonderfully blemiſheth the authoritie and luſtre of our Law, never to ſtay vpon one ſentence, but to run from one to another Iudge, to decide one ſame caſe. Touching the liberty of Philoſophicall opinions, concerning vice and vertue, it is a thing needing no great extenſion, and wherin are found many adviſes, which were better vnſpoken, then publiſhed to weake capacities. Arceſilaus was wont to ſay, that in pailliardize, it was not worthy conſideration, where, on what ſide, and how it was done. Et obſ
                                 •
                              oenas volupt at es, ſi nat ura requirit, non genere, aut loco, aut ordine, ſed forma, aetate, figura metiendas Epicurus putat. Ne amores quidem ſanctos à ſapiente alienos eſſe arbitrantur. Quaeramus ad quam vſ
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               aet 
                                 •
                              tem i
                                 •
                              ven
                                 •
                              s amandi ſint. Obſcene pleaſures, if nature require them, the Epicure eſteemeth not to be meaſured by kinde, place, or order▪ but by forme, age, and faſhion. Nor doth he thinke that holy loves ſhould be ſtrange from a wiſeman. Let vs then question to what yeares yoong folke may be beloved. Theſe two laſt Stoicke places, and vpon this purpoſe, the reproch of Diogarchus to Plato himſelfe, ſhew how many exceſſive licenſes, and out of common vſe, ſoundeſt Philoſophie doth tolerate. Lawes take their authoritie from p
                                 •
                              ſſ
                                 •
                              ſſion and custome: It is dangerous to reduce them to their beginning: In rowling on, they ſwell, and grow greater and greater, as do our rivers: follow them vpward, vnto their ſourſe, & you ſhall find them but a bubble of water, ſcarſe to be diſcerned, which in gliding on ſwelleth ſo proud, & gathers ſo much ſtrength. Behold the auncient conſiderations, which have given the firſt motion to this famous torrent, ſo full of dignitie, of honour and reverence, you ſhall finde them ſo light and weake, that theſe men which will weigh all, and complaine of reaſon, and who receive nothing vpon truſt and authoritie, it is no wonder if their judgements are often far diſtant from common judgement. Men that take Natures firſt image for a patterne, it is no marvaile, if in moſt of their opinions, they miſſe the common-beaten path. As for example; few amongſt them would have approved the forced conditions of our mariages, and moſt of them would have had women in community, and without any private reſpect. They refuſed our ceremonies: Chryſippus ſaid, that ſome Philoſophers would in open view of all men ſhew a dozen of tumbling-tricks, yea, without any ſlops or breeches, for a dozen of olives. He would hardlie have perſwaded Calisthenes to refuſe his faire daughter Agarista to Hippoclides, becauſe he had ſeen him graffe the forked tree in hir vpon a table. Metrocles ſomewhat indiſcreetly, as he was diſputing in his Schoole, in preſence of his Auditorie let a fart, for ſhame whereof he afterward kept his houſe, and could not be drawen abroad, vntill ſuch time as Crates went to viſite him, who to his perſwaſions and reaſons, adding the example of his libertie, began to fart a vie with him, and to remove this ſcruple from off his conſcience; and moreover, won him to his Stoicall (the more free) Sect, from the Peripateticall (and more civill) one, which thetherunto he had followed. That which we cal civility, not to dare to do that openly, which amongſt vs is both lawfull and honeſt, being done in ſecret, they termed folly: And to play the wilie Foxe, in concealing and diſcla
                              •
                           ming what nature, cuſtome, & our deſire publiſh and proclaime of our actions, they deemed to be a vice. And thought it a ſuppreſſing of 
                              Ʋenus hir myſteries, to remove them from out the private veſtrie of hir Temple, & expoſe them to the open view of the people. And that to draw his ſports from out the Curtines, was to looſe them▪ 
                           Shame is matter of ſome conſequence. Concealing, reſervation, and circumſpection, are parts of eſtimation. That, ſenſuality vnder the maske of Vertue did very ingeniouſly procure not to be proſtituted in the midſt of high-waies, not trodden vpon, and ſeene by the common ſort; alledging the dignity and commoditie of her wonted Cabinets. Whereupon ſome ſay, that to forbid and remoue the common brothel-houſes, is not only to ſpread whoredome every where, which only was allotted to thoſe places, but alſo to incite idle & vagabond men to that vice, by reaſon of the difficultie.Mart. 
                                 ••
                              
                              ▪ 3. ep
                                 ••
                              
                              ▪ 70.
                        
                        
                           Moechus es A
                                 ••
                              idiae qui vir Corvine fuiſti,
                           Rival
                                 ••
                               fuerat qui 
                                 •
                              uus, ill
                                 •
                               vir 
                                 •
                              ſt.
                           Cur aliena placet tibi, quae tua non placet vxor?
                           Nunquid ſecurus non potes arrig
                                 •
                              re?
                        
                        This experience is diverſified by a thouſand examples.Lib. 1. epig. 74.
                        
                        
                           Nullus in Ʋrbefuit tota, qui tangere vellet
                           
                              Ʋxorem gratis Caeciliane tuam,
                           
                              Dum licuit: ſed nunc poſitis cuſtodibus, 
                                 ••
                              gens
                           Turba fututorum eſt. Ingenioſus homo es.
                        
                        A Philoſopher being taken with the deede, was demaunded, what he did: anſwered very mildely, I plant man, bluſhing no more being found ſo napping, then if he had bin taken ſetting of Garlike. It is (as I ſuppoſe) of a tender and reſpectiue opinion, that a notable and religious Authour, holds this action ſo neceſſarily-bound to ſecrecy and ſhame, that in Cynike embracements and dalliances, hee could not be perſwaded that the worke ſhould come to her end; but rather, that it lingred and ſtaid, only to repreſent wanton geſtures, and laſcivious motions, to maintaine the impudencie of their ſchooles-profeſſion: and that to powre forth what ſhame had forced and baſhfulneſſe reſtrained, they had alſo afterward neede to ſeeke ſome ſecret place. He had not ſeene farre-enough into their licenciouſneſſe: For, Diogenes in ſight of all, exerciſing his Maſturbation, bred a longing-deſire, in the by-ſtanders, that in ſuch ſort they might fill their bellies by rubbing or clawing the ſame. To thoſe that asked him, why hee ſought for no fitter place to feede in, then in the open frequented high way, he made anſwere, It is becauſe I am hungry in the open frequented high-way. The Philoſophers Women, which medled with their Sects, did likewiſe in all places, and without any diſcretion meddle with their bodies: And Crates had never received Hipparchia into his fellowſhip, but vpon condition, to follow all the cuſtomes and faſhions of his order. Theſe Philoſophers ſet an extreame rate on vertue; and rejected all other diſciplines, except the morall; yet is it, that in al actions, they aſcribed the Soveraigne authority to the election of their wiſe, yea, and above all lawes: & appointed no other reſtraint vnto voluptuouſneſſe, but themoderation, & preſervation of others liberty▪ 
                           Heraclitus & Protagoras, forſomuch as wine ſeemeth bitter vnto the ſick, and pleaſing to the healthy; and an Oare crooked in the water, and ſtraight to thoſe that ſee it above water, & ſuch-like contrary apparances, which are ſound in ſome ſubjects; argued that all ſubjects had the cauſes of theſe apparances in them; and that, there was ſome kinde of bitterneſſe in the wine, which had a reference vnto the ſickmans taſte; in the Oare a certain crooked quality, having relation to him that ſeeth it in the water. And ſo of all things elſe. Which implieth, that all is in all things, & by conſequence nothing in any: for either nothing is, or all is. This opinion put me in minde of the experience we have, that there is not any one ſence or viſage, either ſtraight or crooked, bitter or ſweete, but mans wit ſhall find in the writings, which he vndertaketh to runne-over. In the pureſt, moſt vnſpotted, and moſt abſolutely-perfectworde, that poſſibly can be, how many errors, falſhoods, and lies have beene made to proceede from-it? What hereſie hath not found teſtimonies and ground ſufficient, both to vndertake and to maintaine it 
                              •
                           e
                              •
                           e? It is therefore, that the Authors of ſuch errours will never goe from this proof of the Teſtimony of words interpretation. A man of worth, going about by authority to approve the ſearch of the Philoſophers ſtone, (wherein he was overwhelmd) aleaged at leaſt five or ſix ſeveral paſſages out of the holy bible vnto me, vpon which (he ſaid) he had at firſt grounded himſelfe, for the diſcharge of his conſcience (for he is a man of the Eccleſiaſtical profeſſion) & truly, the invention of them, was not only pleaſant, but alſo very fitly applied to the defence of this goodly & mind-inchanting ſcience. This way is the credit of divining fables attained to. There is no prognoſticator, if he have but this authority, that any one wil but voutſafe to reade him over, and curiouſly to ſearch all the infoldings and luſtres of his words, but a man ſhall make him ſay what he pleaſeth, as the Sibilles. There are ſo many means of interpretation, that it is hard, be it flat-long, ſide-long, or edge-long, but an ingenious and pregnant wit, ſhall in all ſubjects meete with ſome aire that will fit his turne. Therefore is a clowdy, darke, and ambiguous ſtile found in ſo frequent and ancient cuſtome. That the Author may gaine, to draw, allure, and buſie poſterity to himſelf, which not only the ſufficiency, but the caſuall favour of the matter, may gaine as much or more. As for other matters, let him, be it either through fooliſhneſſe or ſubtiltie, ſhew himſelf ſomewhat obſcure and divers, it is no matter, care not he for that. A number of ſpirits ſifting, and toſſing him-over, wil find and expreſſe ſundrie formes, either according, or collaterally, or contrary to his own▪ al which ſhall do him credite He ſhal ſee himſelfe enriched by the means of his Diſciples, as the Grammer Schoole Maiſters. It is that, which hath made many things of nothing, to paſſe very currant, that hath brought divers bookes in credite, and charged with all ſorts of matter, that any hath but deſired: one ſelfe ſame thing admitting a thouſand and a thouſand, and as many ſeverall images, and divers conſiderations, as it beſt pleaſeth vs. Is it poſſible, that ever Homer meant all that,

which ſome make him to have meant. And that he proſtrated himſelfe to ſo many, and ſo ſeverall ſhapes, as, Divines, Lawyers, Captains, Philoſophers & all ſort of people elſe, which, how diverſly and contrary ſoever it be, they treate of ſciences, do notwithſtanding wholy relie vpon him, & refer them-ſelves vnto him; as a Generall Maiſter for all offices, workes, ſciences, & tradeſmen & an vniverſall counſellor in all enterpriſes? whoſoever hath had need of Oracles or Predictions, & would apply them to himſelfe, hath found them in him for his purpoſe. A notable man, & a good friend of mine, would make one marvel to heare what ſtrange far-fetcht conceites, and admirable affinities, in favor of our religion, he maketh to derive from him; And can hardly be drawne from this opinion, but that ſuch was Homers intent & meaning (yet is Homer ſo familiar vnto him, as I thinke no man of our age is better acquainted with him.) And what he findes in favor of religion, many ancient learned men, have found in favor of theirs. See how Plato is toſſed and turned over, every man endevoring to apply him to his purpoſe, giveth him what conſtruction he liſt. He is wreſted & inſerted to all new-fangled opinions, that the world receiveth or alloweth of, and according to the different courſe of ſubjects is made to be repugnant vnto himſelfe. Every one according to his ſenſe makes him to d
                              ••
                           avowe the cuſtomes that were lawfull in his daies, in aſmuch as they are vnlawfull in theſe times. All which is very lively and ſtrongly maintained, according as the wit and learning of the interpreter is ſtrong and quicke. Vpon the ground which Heraclitus had, and that ſentence of his; that all things had thoſe ſhapes in them, which men found in them. And Democritus out of the very ſame drew a cleane contrarie concluſion, id eſt, that ſubiects had nothing at all in them of that which we found in them; And foraſmuch as honny was ſweete to one man, and bitter to another, hee argued that honny was neither ſweete nor bitter. The Pyrrhonians would ſay, they know not whether it be ſweete or bitter, or both, or neither: For, they ever gaine the higheſt point of doubting. The Cyrenaicks held, that nothing was perceptible outwardly, and onely that was perceivable, which by the inward touch or feeling, touched or concerned vs, as griefe and ſenſualitie, diſtinguiſhing neither tune, nor collours, but onely certaine affections, that came to vs of them; and that man had no other ſeate of his judgement. Protagoras deemed, that to be true to all men, which to all men ſeemeth ſo. The Epicurians, place all judgement in the ſenſes, and in the notice of things, and in voluptuouſnes. Platoes minde was, that the judgement of truth, and truth it ſelfe drawne from opinions and ſenſes, belonged to the ſpirit, and to cogitation. This diſcourſe hath drawne me to the conſideration of the ſenſes, wherein conſiſteth the greateſt foundation and triall of our ignorance. Whatſoever is knowne, is without all peradventure knowne by the facultie of the knower: For, ſince the judgment commeth from the operation of him that judgeth, reaſon requireth, that he perfourme and act this operation by his meanes and will, and not by others compulſion: As it would follow if we knewe things by the force, and according to the law of their eſſence. Now all knowledge is addreſſed into vs by the ſenſes, they are our maiſters:
                        
                           —via quâ munit a fidei
                              Lu
                                    •
                                 r. l. 5. 10
                                    •
                                 .
                           
                           Proxima fert humanum in pectus, templáque mentis:
                           Whereby a way for credit lead's well-linde
                           Into mans breaſt and temple of his minde.
                        
                        Science begins by them & in them is reſolved. After all, wee ſhould knowe no more than a ſtone, vnles we know, that there is, ſound, ſmell, light, ſavor, meaſure, weight, ſoftnes, hardnes, ſharpnes, colour, ſmoothnes, breadth and depth. Behold here the platforme of all the frame, and principles of the building of all our knowledge. And according to ſome, ſcience is nothing elſe, but what is knowne by the ſenſes. Whoſoever can force me to contradict my ſenſes, hath me faſt by the throate, and can not make me recoyle one foote backward. The ſenſes are the beginning and end of humane knowledge.
                        
                           Invenies primis ab ſenſibus eſſe creatamlib 4. 480.
                           
                           Notitiam veri, neque ſenſus poſſe refelli.
                           Quid maiore fide porrò quàm ſenſus haberi484.
                           
                           Debet?—
                           You ſhall finde knowledge of the truth at firſt was bred
                           From our firſt ſenſes, nor can ſenſes be miſſe-led.
                           What, then our ſenſes, ſhould
                           
                              With vs more credit hold?
                        
                        Attribute as litle as may be vnto them, yet muſt this ever be granted them, that all our inſtruction is addreſſed by their means & intermiſſion. Cicero ſaith, that Chryſippus having aſſaid to abate the power of his ſenſes, and of their vertue, preſented contrarie arguments vnto him ſelfe, and ſo vehement oppoſitions, that he could not ſatisfie himſelfe. Whereupon Car
                                 •
                              eades (who defended the contrarie part) boaſted, that he vſed the verie ſame weapons and words of Chryſippus to combate againſt him; and therefore cried out vpon him. Oh miſerable man! thine owne ſtrength hath foyled thee. There is no greater abſurditie in our judgement, then to maintaine, that fire heateth not, that light ſhineth not, that in yron there is neither weight nor firmeneſſe, which are notices our ſenſes bring vnto vs: Nor beliefe or ſcience in man, that may be compared vnto that, in certaintie. The firſt conſideration I have vpon the ſenſes ſubject, is, that I make a queſtion, whether man be provided of all naturall ſenſes, or no. I ſee divers creatures, that live an entire and perfect life, ſome without ſight, and ſome without hearing; who knoweth whether we alſo want either one, two, three, or many ſenſes more: For, if we want any one, our diſcourſe cannot diſcover the want or defect thereof. It is the ſenſes priviledge, to be the extreame bounds of our perceiving. There is nothing beyond them, that may ſtead vs to diſcover them: No one ſenſe can diſcover another.
                        
                           An poterunt oculos aures reprehendere, an aures488.
                           
                           Tactus, an hunc porro tactum ſapor arguet oris,
                           An confutabunt nares, oculive revincent?
                           Can eares the eyes, or can touch reprehend
                           The eares, or ſhall mouths-taſte that touch amend?
                           Shall our noſe it confute,
                           Or eyes gainſt it diſpute?
                        
                        They all make the extreameſt line of our facultie.
                        
                           —ſcorſum cuique poteſtas
                              491.
                           
                           Diviſa eſt, ſua vis cuique eſt—
                           To each diſtinctly might
                           Is ſhar'de, each hath it's right.
                        
                        It is impoſſible to make a man naturally blind, to conceive that he ſeeth not; impoſſible to make him deſire to ſee, and ſorrow his defect. Therefore ought we not to take aſſurance, that our minde is contented and ſatisfied with thoſe we have, ſeeing it hath not wherewith to feel hir owne maladie, and perceive hir imperfection, if it be in any. It is impoſſible to tell that blinde man any thing, either by diſcourſe, argument, or ſimilitude, that lodgeth any apprehenſion of light, collour, or ſight in his imagination. There is nothing more backward, that may puſh the ſenſes to any evidence. The blind-borne, which we perceive deſire to ſee, it is not to vnderſtand what they require; they have learn't of vs, that ſomething they want, and ſomething they deſire, that is in vs, with the effect & conſequences thereof, which they call good: Yet w
                              •
                           t not they what it is, nor apprehend they it neere or far. I have ſeene a Gentleman of a good houſe, borne blinde, at leaſt blinde in ſuch an age, that he knowes not what ſight is; he vnderſtandeth ſo little what he wanteth, that as we doe, he vſeth words fitting ſight, and applieth them after a manner onely proper and peculiar to himſelfe. A child being brought before him, to whom he was god-father, taking him in his armes, he ſaid, good Lord what a fine child this is 
                              •
                           it is a goodly thing to ſee him: What a cheerefull countenance he hath, how prettily he looketh. Hee will ſay as one of vs. This hall hath a faire proſpect: It is very faire weather: The Sunne ſhines cleare. Nay, which is more; becauſe hunting, hawking, tenniſ-play, and ſhuting at buts are our common ſportes and exerciſes (for ſo he hath heard) his minde will be ſo affected vnto them, and he wil ſo buſie himſelfe about them, that hee will thinke to have as great an intereſt in them, as any of vs, and ſhew himſelfe as earneſtly paſſionate, both in liking and diſliking them as any elſe; yet doth he conceive and receive them but by hearing. If he be in a faire champian ground, where he may ride, they will tell him, yonder is a Hare ſtarted, or the Hare is killed, he is as buſily earneſt of his game, as he heareth others to be, that have perfect ſight. Give him a ball, he takes it in the left hand, and with the right ſtreekes it away with his racket; In a piece he ſhutes at randome; and is well pleaſed with what his men tell him, be it high or wide. Who

knowes whether man-kind commit as great a folly, for want of ſome ſenſe, and that by this default, the greater part of the viſage of things be concealed from vs? Who knowes whether the difficulties we find in ſundrie of Natures workes, proceede thence? And whether diuers effects of beaſts, which exceede our capacitie, are produced by the facultie of ſome ſenſe, that we want? And whether ſome of them, have by that meane a fuller and more perfect life then ours? We ſeize on an apple wel-nigh with all our ſenſes? We finde rednes, ſmoothnes, odor and ſweetnes in it; beſides which, it may have other vertues, either drying or binding, to which we have no ſenſe to be referred. The proprieties which in many things we call ſecret, as in the Adamant to drawe yron, it is not likely there ſhould be ſenſitiue faculties in nature able to judge and perceive them, the want whereof breedeth in vs the ignorance of the true eſſence of ſuch things? It is happily ſome particular ſenſe that vnto Cockes or Chanticleares diſcovereth the morning and midnight houre, and mooveth them to crow: That teacheth a Hen, before any vſe or experience, to feare a Hawke, and not a Gooſe or a Peacocke, farre greater birds: That warneth yong chickins of the hoſtile qualitie which the Cat hath againſt them, and not to diſtruſt a Dog; to ſtrut and arme themſelves againſt the mewing of the one (in ſome ſort a flattering and milde voyce) and not againſt the barking of the other (a ſnarling & quarrelous voice:) that inſtructeth Rats, Waſps, and Emmets, ever to chuſe the beſt cheeſe and frute, having never taſted them before: And that addreſſeth the Stag, the Elephant, and the Serpent, to the knowledge of certaine herbs and ſimples, which, being either wounded or ſicke, have the vertue to cure them. There is no ſence but hath ſome great domination, and which by his meane affordeth not an infinite number of knowledges. If we were to report the intelligence of ſoundes, of harmony and of the voyce, it would bring an imaginable confuſion to all the reſt of our learning and ſcience. For, beſides what is tyed to the proper effect of every ſenſe, how many arguments, conſequences and concluſions draw we vnto other things, by comparing one ſenſe to another? Let a skilfull wiſe man but imagine humane nature to be originally produced without ſight and diſcourſe, how much ignorance and trouble ſuch a defect would bring vnto him, and what obſcurity and blindneſſe in our minde: By that ſhall wee perceiue, how much the privation of one, or two, or three ſuch ſenſes, (if there be any in vs) doth import vs about the knowledge of truth. We have by the conſultation & concurrence of our five ſenſes formed one Verity, whereas peradventure there was required the accord & conſent of eight or ten ſenſes, and their contribution, to attaine a perſpicuous inſight of her, and ſee her in her true eſſence. Thoſe Sects which combate mans ſcience, do principally combate the ſame by the vncetainety and feebleneſſe of our ſences: For, ſince by their meane and intermiſſion al knowledge comes vnto vs, if they chaunce to miſſe in the report they make vnto vs, if eyther they corrupt or alter that, which from abroade they bring vnto vs, if the light which by them is tranſported into our ſoule bee obſcured in the paſſage, wee have nothing elſe to holde by. From this extreame difficultie are ſprung all theſe fantazies, which everie Subject containeth, whatſoever wee finde in it: That it hath not what wee ſuppoſe to finde in it: And that of the Epicurians, which is, that the Sunne is no greater than our ſight doth judge it,
                        
                           Quicquid id eſt, nihilo fortur maiore figurâ,
                           Quàm noſtris oculis quam cernimus eſſe videtur.Lucr. li. 5. 576.
                           
                           What ere it be, it in no greater forme doth paſſe,
                           Then to our eyes, which it behold, it ſeeming was.
                        
                        that the apparances, which repreſent a great body, to him that is neare vnto them, & a much leſſer to him that is further from them, are both true;
                        
                           Nec tamen hic oculis falli concedimus hilum:Lib. 4. 380. 387.
                           
                           Proinde animi vitium hoc oculis adfingere noli.
                           Yet graunt we not in this our eyes deceiv'd or blind,
                           Impute not then to eyes this error of the mind.
                        
                        and reſolutely, that there is no deceit in the ſenſes: That a man muſt ſtand to their mercie, and elſewhere ſeeke reaſons to excuſe the difference and contradiction we find in them; yea invent all other vntruthes, and raving conceites (ſo farre come they) rather then accuſe the cauſes. Timagoras ſwore, that howſoever he winked or turned his eyes, he could never perceive the light of the candle to double: And that this ſeeming proceeded from the vice of opinion,

and not from the inſtrument. Of all abſurdities, the moſt abſurd amongſt the Epicurians, is, to diſavowe the force and effect of the ſenſes.
                        
                           Proinde quod in quoque eſt bis viſum tempore, verum eſt.502.
                           
                           Et ſi non potuit ratio diſſolvere cauſam,
                           Cur ea qu
                                 •
                               fuerint iuxtim quadrata, procul ſint
                           
                              Ʋiſa rotunda: tamen praeſtat rationis egent 
                                 •
                              m
                           Reddere mendosè cauſas vtriúſque figurae,
                           Quàm manibus manifeſta ſuis emittere quoquam,
                           Et violare fidem primam, & convellere tota
                           Fundamenta, quibus nixatur vita ſalúſque.
                           Non modò enim ratio ruat omnis, vita quoque ipſa
                           Concidat extemplo, niſi creder
                                 •
                              ſ
                                 •
                              nſibus auſis,
                           Praecipitéſque locos vitare, & caetera quaeſint
                           In genere hoc fugienda.—
                           Whatby the eies is ſeene at any time, is true,
                           Though the cauſe Reaſon could not render of the view,
                           Why what was ſquare at hand, a farre-off ſeemed round,
                           Yet it much better were, that wanting reaſons ground
                           The cauſes of both formes we harp-on, but not hit,
                           Then let ſlip from our hands things cleare, and them omit,
                           And violate our firſt beliefe, and raſhly rend
                           All thoſe ground-works, whereon both life and health depend,
                           For not alone all reaſons falls, life likewiſe muſt
                           Faile out of hand, vnleſſe your ſenſes you dare truſt,
                           And break-necke places, and all other errors ſhunne,
                           From which we in this kinde moſt carefully ſhould runne.
                        
                        This deſperate and ſo little-philoſophicall counſell, repreſents no other thing, but that humane ſcience cannot be maintained but by vnreaſonable, fond & mad reaſon; yet is it better, that man vſe it to prevaile, yea & of all other remedies elſe how fantaſticall ſoever they be, rather then avow his neceſſarie fooliſhnes: So prejudiciall and diſadvantageous a veritie he cannot auoide, but ſenſes muſt neceſſarily be the ſoveraigne maiſters of his knowledge: But they are vncertaine and falſifiable to all circumſtances: There muſt a man ſtrike to the vtmoſt of his power, and if his juſt forces faile him (as they are wont) to vſe and employ obſtinac
                              •
                           e, temeritie and impudencie. If that which the Epicurians affirme, be true, that is to ſay, we have no ſcience, if the apparances of the ſenſes be falſe: and that which the Stoicks ſay, if it is alſo true that the ſenſes apparances are ſo falſe, as they can produce vs no ſcience: We will conclude at the charges of theſe two great Dogmatiſt Sects, that there is no ſcience. Touching the error and vncertaintie of the ſenſes operation, a man may ſtore himſelfe with as many examples as he pleaſeth, ſo ordinarie are the faults and deceits they vſe towards vs. And the ecchoing or reporting of a valley, the ſound of a Trumpet ſeemeth to ſound before vs, which cometh a mile behinde vs.
                        
                           Extantéſque procul medio de gurgite montesLucr. l. 4. 398.
                           
                           Iidem apparent longe diver ſi licet.—
                           Et fugere ad puppim colles camp
                                 •
                              que videntur390.
                           
                           Quos agimus propter navim.—
                           —vbi in medio nobis equus acer obhaeſit
                              423.
                           
                           Flumine, equi corpus tranſverſum ferre videtur
                           
                              Ʋis, & in adverſum flumen contrudere raptim.
                           And hilles, which from the maine far-off to kenning ſtand,
                           Appeare all one, though they farre diſtant be at hand.
                           And hilles and fields doe ſeeme vnto our bote to fly,
                           Which we drive by our bote as we doe paſſe thereby.
                           When in midſt of a ſtreame a ſtately Horſe doth ſtay,
                           The ſtream's orethwarting ſeems his body croſſe to ſway,
                           And ſwiftly gainſt the ſtreame to thruſt him th'other way.
                        
                        To roule a bullet vnder the fore-finger, the midlemoſt being put over-it, a man muſt very

much enforce himſelfe, to affirme there is but one, ſo aſſuredly doth ou
                              •
                            ſenſe preſent vs two. That the ſenſes do often maiſter our diſcourſe, and force it to receive impreſſions, which he knoweth and judgeth to be falſe, it is daily ſeene. I leave the ſenſe of feeling, which hath his functions neerer, more quicke and ſubſtantiall, and which by the effect of the griefe or paine it brings to the body doth ſo often confound and re-enverſe all theſe goodly Stoicall reſolutions, and enforceth to cry out of the belly-ache him, who hath with all reſolution eſtabliſhed in his minde this Doctrine, that the chol
                              •
                           ke, as every other ſickneſle or paine, is a thing indifferent, wanting power to abate any thing of Soveraigne good or chiefe felicitie, wherein the wiſe man is placed by his owne vertue: there is no heart ſo demiſſe, but the ra
                                 ••
                              ing ſound of a drumme▪ or the clang of a Trumpet, will rowze and inflame; nor minde ſo harſh and ſterne, but the ſweeteneſſe and harmonie of muſike, will moove and tickle; nor any ſoule ſo skittiſh and ſtubborne, that hath not a feeling of ſome reverence, in conſidering the clowdy vaſtitie and gloomi
                                 •
                               canapies of our churches, the 
                                 •
                              ye-pleaſing diverſitie of ornaments, and orderly order of our ceremonies, and hearing the devout and religious ſound of our Organs, the moderate, ſimphoniall, and heaevenly harmonie of our voices: Even thoſe that enter into them with an obſtinate will and contemning minde, have in their heart 
                                 •
                               feeling of remorſe, of chilneſſe, and horrour, that puts them into a certaine diffidence of their former opinions. As for me, I diſtruſt mine owne ſtrength, to heare with a ſettled minde ſome of Horace or Catullus verſesſung with a ſufficiently well tuned voice, vttered by, and proceeding from a faire, yong, and hart-alluring mouth▪ And Zeno had reaſon to ſay, that the voice was the flower of beautie. Some have gone about to make me believe, that a man, who moſt of vs French men know, in repeating certaine verſes he had made, had impoſed vpon me, that they were not ſuch in writing, as in the aire, and that mine eyes would judge of them otherwiſe then mine eares: ſo much credite hath pronunciation to give priſe and faſhion to thoſe workes that paſſe her mercie: Whereupon Philoxenus was not to be blamed, when hearing one to give an ill accent to ſome compoſition of his, hee tooke in a rage ſome of his pottes or brickes, and breaking them, trode and trampled them vnder his feete, ſaying vnto him, I breake and trample what is thine, even as thou mangleſt and marreſt what is mine. Wherefore did they (who with an vndanted reſolve have procured their owne death, becauſe they would not ſee the blow or ſtroke comming) turne their face away? And thoſe who for their healths ſake cauſe themſelves to be cut and cauterized, cannot endure the ſight of the preparations, tooles, inſtruments and workes of the Chirurgion, but becauſe the ſight ſhould have no part of the paine or ſmart? Are not theſe fit examples to verifie the authoritie, which ſenſes have over diſcourſe? We may long-enough know that ſuch a ones lockes or flaring-treſſes are borrowed of a Page, or taken from ſome Lacky, that this faire ruby-red came from Spaine, & this whiteneſſe or ſmoothnes from the Ocean ſea: yet muſt ſight force vs to find, and deeme the ſubject more lovely and more pleaſing, againſt all reaſon. For, in that there is nothing of it's owne,
                        
                           Auferimur cultu; gemmis, aur ôque teg
                                 •
                              snturOvid. r
                                    ••
                                  a
                                    •
                                 . lib. 1. 343.
                           
                           Crimina, pars minima eſt ipſa puella ſui.
                           Saepe vbi ſit quod ames inter tam multa requiras:
                           Decipit hâc oculos Aegide dives amor.
                           We are miſſe-led by ornaments: what is a miſſe
                           Gold and gemmes cover, leaſt part of her ſelfe the maiden is.
                           Mongſt things ſo many you may aske, where your love lies,
                           Rich love by this Gorgonian ſh
                                 •
                              eld deceives thine eyes.
                        
                        How much doe Poets aſcribe vnto the vertue of the ſenſes, which make Narciſſu
                                 •
                              
                            to have even fondly loſt himſelfe for the love of his ſhadow?
                        
                           Cunctâque miratur, quibus eſt mirabilis ipſe,Ovid. M
                                    ••
                                 am. lib. 3. 424.
                           
                           Se cupit imprudens, & qui probat, ipſe probatur,
                           Dúmque petit, petitur: paritér que accendit & ardet.
                           He all admires, whereby himſelfe is admirable,
                           Fond he, fond of himſelfe, to himſelfe amiable,
                           He, that doth like, is lik't, and while he doth deſire;
                           He is deſired, at once he burnes and ſets on fire.
                        
                        and Pigmal
                                 •
                              o
                                 •
                              s wits ſo troubled by the impreſſion of the ſight of his ivory ſtatue that he loveth and ſerves it, as if it had life:
                        
                           
                           Oſcula dat, redd
                                 •
                              que put at, ſequitú
                                 •
                               que tenétqueOrid. ib. l
                                    •
                                 . 10: 256.
                           
                           Et credit tactis digitos inſidere membris,
                           Et metuit preſſos veniat ne livor in artus.
                           He kiſſes, and thinks kiſſes come againe,
                           He ſues, purſues, and holds, beleeves in vaine
                           His fingers ſinke where he doth touch the place,
                           And feares leſt blacke-and-blew toucht-lims deface.
                        
                        Let a Philoſopher be put in a Cage made of ſmall and thin-ſet yron-wyre, and hanged on the top of our Ladies Church ſteeple in Paris; he ſhall, by evident reaſon, perceive that it is impoſſible he ſhould fall downe out of it; yet can he not chuſe (except he have been brought vp in the trade of T
                              •
                           lers or Tha
                              •
                           chers) but the ſight of that exceeding height muſt needs dazle his ſight, and amaze or turne his ſenſes. For, we have much ado
                              •
                            to warrant our ſelves in the walks or battlements of an high tower or ſ
                              •
                           eeple, if they be battlemented and wrought with pillers, and ſomewhat wide one from another, although of ſtone, and never ſo ſtrong. Nay, ſome there are, that can ſcarcely thinke or heare of ſuch heights. Let a beame or planke be laide acroſſe from one of thoſe two Steeples to the other, as big, as thicke, as ſtrong, and as broade, as would ſuffice any man to walke ſafely vpon it, there is no Philoſophicall wiſedome of ſo great reſolution and conſtancie, that is able to encourage and perſwade vs to march vpon it, as we would, were it below on the ground. I have ſometimes made triall of it vpon our mountaines on this ſide of Italie, yet am I one of thoſe that will not eaſily be affrighted with ſuch things, and I could not without horror to my minde, and trembling of legs and thighes endure to looke on thoſe infinit precipiſes and ſteepie down-fals, though I were not neere the brim, nor any danger within my length, and more; and vnleſſe I had willingly gone to the perill, I could not poſſiblie have falne. Where I alſo noted, that how deep ſoever the bottom were, if but a tree, a ſhrub, or any out-butting crag of a Rocke preſented it ſelfe vnto our eyes, vpon thoſe ſteepie and high Alpes, ſomewhat to vphold the ſight, and divide the ſame, it doth ſomewhat eaſe and aſ
                              •
                           ure vs from feare, as if it were a thing, which in our fall might either help or vphold vs: And that we cannot without ſome dread and giddineſſe in the head, ſo much as abide to looke vpon one of thoſe even and down-right precipiſes: 
                              Ʋ
                              
                                 •
                               deſpici ſine vertigine ſimul oculorum animique non poſſit. So as they can not looke downe without giddineſſe both of eyes and mindes: Which is an evident deception of the ſight. Therefore was it, that a worthy Philoſopher pulled out his eies, that ſo he might diſcharge his ſoule of the ſeducing and diverting he received by them, and the better and more freely applie himſelfe vnto Philoſophie. But by this accompt, he ſhould alſo have ſtopped his eares, which (as Theophraſtus ſaid) are the moſt dangerous inſtruments we have to receive violent and ſuddaine impreſſions to trouble and alter vs, and ſhould, in the end, have deprived himſelfe of all his other ſenſes, that is to ſay, both of his being, and life. For, they have the power to command our diſcourſes and ſway our mind: Fit etiam ſaepe ſpec
                                 •
                              e quadam, ſaepe
                           Ci
                                 •
                              . d
                                 •
                              vin. lib. 1. 
                           vocum gravitate & cantibus, vt pellantur animi vehementius: ſaepe etiam curâ & timore. It comes to paſſe, that many times our minds are much mooved with ſome ſhadow, many times with deepſounding, or ſinging of voyces, many times with care and feare. Phiſitions hold, that there are certaine complexions, which by ſome ſounds and inſtruments are agitated even vnto furie. I have ſeen ſome, who without infringing their patience, could not well heare a bone gnawne vnder their table: and we ſee few men, but are much troubled at that ſharp, harſh, and teethedging noiſe that Smiths make in fi
                              •
                           ing of braſſe, or ſcraping of yron and ſteele together: others will be offended, if they but heare one chew his meat ſomewhat a loude; nay, ſome will be angrie with, or hate a man, that either ſpeaks in the noſe, or rattles in the throat. That pyping prompter of Graccus, who mollified▪ raiſed, and wound his maſters voice, whileſt he was making Orations at Rome; what good did he, 
                              ••
                            the motion and qualitie of the ſound, had not the force to move, and efficacie to alter the auditories judgement? Verily, there is great cauſe to make ſo much adoe, and keep ſuch a coyle about the conſtancie and firmeneſſe of this goodly piece, which ſuffers it ſelfe to be handled, changed, and turned by the motion and accident of ſo light a winde. The verie ſame cheating and cozening, that ſenſes bring to our vnderſtanding, themſelves receive it in their turnes. Our minde doth likewiſe take revenge of it, they lie, they cog, and deceive one another a vie. What we ſee and heare, being paſſionately tranſported by anger, we neither ſee or heare it as it is.
                        
                           
                           Et ſolem geminum, & duplices ſ
                                 •
                               oſtendere Thebas.Virg. Aen. l. 
                                    •
                                  470.
                           
                           That two Sunnes doe appere
                           And double Thebes are there.
                        
                        The object which we love, ſeemeth much more fairer vnto vs, then it is;
                        
                           Multimodis igitur pravas turpéſqve videmus
                           Eſſe in delitijs, ſummoque in honore vigere.L
                                    ••
                                 r. l. 4. 1147
                           
                           We therefore ſee that thoſe, who many waies are bad,
                           And fowle, are yet belov'd, and in chiefe honor had.
                        
                        and that much fowler which we loth. To a penſive and hart-grieved man, a cleare day ſeemes gloomie and duskie. Our ſenſes are not only altered, but many times dulled, by the paſſions of the mind. How many things ſee we, which we perceive not, if our minde be either buſied or diſtracted elſe where?
                        
                           —in rebus quoque apertis noſcere poſſis,
                              Ibid. 80
                                    •
                                 .
                           
                           Si non advertas animum proinde eſſe, quaſ
                                 •
                               omni
                           Tempore ſemotae fuerint, longéque remotae.
                           Ev'n in things manifeſt it may be ſeene,
                           If you marke not, they are, as they had beene
                           At all times ſever'd farre, remooved cleane.
                        
                        The ſoule ſeemeth to retire her ſelfe into the inmoſt parts, and ammuſeth the ſenſes faculties: So that both the inward and outward parts of man are full of weakenes and falſehood. Thoſe which haue compared our life vnto a dreame, have happily had more reaſon ſo to doe, then they were aware. When we dreame, our ſoule liveth, worketh and exerciſeth all hi
                              •
                            faculties even, and as much, as when it waketh; and if more ſoftly, and obſcurely; yet verily not ſo, as that it may admit ſo great a difference, as there is betweene a darke night, and a cleare day: Yea as betweene a night and a ſhadow: There it ſleepeth, heere it ſlumbreth: More or leſſe, they are ever darkeneſſes, yea Cimmerian darkeneſſes. We wake ſleeping, and ſleepe waking. In my ſleepe I ſee not ſo cleare; yet can I never finde my waking cleare enough, or without dimneſſe. Sleepe alſo in his deepeſt reſt, doth ſometimes bring dreames aſleepe: But our waking is never ſo vigilant, as it may cleerely purge and diſſipate the ravings or 
                              ••
                           le fantazies, which are the dreames of the waking, and worſe then dreames. Our reaſon and ſoule, receiuing the fantaſies and opinions, which ſleeping ſeize on them, and authoriſing our dreames actions, with like approbation, as it doth the daies. Why make wee not a doubt, whether our thinking, and our working be another dreaming, and our waking ſome kinde of ſleeping? If the ſenſes be our firſt iudges, it is not ours that muſt onely bee called to counſell: For, in this facultie beaſts have as much (or more) right, as we. It is moſt certaine, that ſome haue their hearing more ſharp then man; others their ſight; others their ſmelling; others their feeling, or taſte. D
                                 •
                              mocritus ſaid, that Gods and beaſts had the ſenſitiue faculties much more perfect then man. Now between the effects of their ſenſes and ours, the difference is extreame. Our ſpettle cleanſeth and drieth our ſores, and killeth Serpents.
                        
                           Tantáque in his rebus diſtantia differitáſque eſt,L
                                    ••
                                 r. l. 4. 640.
                           
                           
                              Ʋt quod alijs cibus eſt, alijs 
                                 •
                              uat acre venenum.
                           Saepe 
                                 •
                              t enim ſ
                                 •
                              rpens, hominis contacta ſalivâ,
                           Diſperit, acſeſe mandendo conficit ipſa.
                           There is ſuch diſtance, and ſuch difference in theſe things,
                           As what to one is meate, t'another poiſon brings.
                           For oft a Serpent toucht with ſpittle of a man
                           Doth die, and gnaw it ſelfe with fretting all he can.
                        
                        What quality ſhall we give vnto ſpettle, either according to vs, or according to the Serpent? By which two ſenſes ſhall we verifie it's true 
                              •
                           ſſence, which we ſeeke for? Pliny ſaith, that there are certaine Sea-hares in India, that to vs are poyſon, and we bane to them▪ ſo that we die, if we but touch them; now whether is man or the Hare poyſon? Whom ſhall we beleeve, either the fiſh of man, or the man of fiſh? Some quality of the aire infecteth man, which nothing at all hurteth the Oxe: Some other the Oxe, and not man: Which of the two is either in truth, or nature the peſtilent quality? Such as are troubled with the yellow jandiſe, deeme all things they looke vpon to bee yellowiſh, which ſeeme more pale and wan to them then to vs.
                        
                           
                           Lurida praeterea fiunt quaecunque tuenturIbid. 333.
                           
                           Arquati.
                           And all that jaundis'd men behold,
                           They yellow ſtraite or paliſh holde.
                        
                        Thoſe which are ſicke of the diſeaſe which Phyſitions call Hypoſphagma, which is a ſuffuſion of blood vnder the skin, imagine that all things they ſee are bloodie and red. Thoſe humors that ſo change the ſightes operation, what knowe we whether they are predominant and ordinarie in beaſts? For, we ſee ſome, whoſe eyes are as yellow as theirs that have the jandiſe, others, that have them all blood-ſhotten with rednes. It is likely that the objectscollour they looke vpon, ſeemeth otherwiſe to them then to vs. Which of the two judgements ſhall be true? For, it is not ſaid, that the eſſence of things, hath reference to man alone. Hardnes, whitenes, depth and ſharpneſſe, touch the ſervice and concerne the knowledge of beaſts as well as ours: Nature hath given the vſe of them to them, as well as to vs. When we winke a little with our eye, we perceive the bodies we looke vpon to ſeeme longer and outſtretched. Many beaſts have their eie as winking as we. This length is then happily the true forme of that body, and not that which our eyes give it, being in their ordinarie ſeate. If we cloſe our eye above, things ſeeme double vnto vs.
                        
                           Bina lucernarum florentia lumina flammis,Ibid. 452. 454.
                           
                           Et duplices hominum facies, & corpora bina.
                           The lights of candels double flaming then;
                           And faces twaine, and bodies twaine of men.
                        
                        If our eares chance to be hindred by any thing, or that the paſſage of our hearing be ſtop't, we receive the ſound otherwiſe, then we were ordinarily wont. Such beaſts as have hearie eares, or that in liew of an eare have but a little hole, doe not by conſequence heare that we heare, and receive the ſound other then it is. We ſee at ſolemne ſhewes or in Theaters, that oppoſing any collourd glaſſe betweene out eyes and the torcher light, whatſoever is in the roome ſeemes or greene, or yellow, or red vnto vs, according to the collour of the glaſſe.
                        
                           Et vulgò faciunt id lutea ruſſaque vela,Ibid. 73.
                           
                           Et ferrugine cùm magnis, intenta theatris
                           Per malos volgata trabéſque trementia pendent:
                           Namque ibi conceſſum caveai ſubter, & omnem
                           Scenai ſpeciem, patrum matrúmque deorumque
                           Inficiunt coguntque ſuo volitare,
                           And yellow, ruſſet, ruſtie curtaines worke this feate
                           In common ſights abroade, where over skaffolds great
                           Stretched on maſts, ſpred over beames, they hang ſtill waving.
                           All the ſeates circuit there, and all the ſtages braving,
                           Of fathers, mothers, Gods, and all the circled ſhowe
                           They double-die and in their collours make to flowe.
                        
                        It is likely, that thoſe beaſts eyes, which we ſee to be of diverſe collours, produce the apparances of thoſe bodies they looke vpon, to be like their eyes. To judge the ſenſes-operation, it were then neceſſary we were firſt agreede with beaſtes, and then betweene our ſelves; which we are not, but ever-and-anon diſputing about that one ſeeth, heareth or taſteth, ſomething to be other, then indeede it is; and contend as much as about any thing elſe of the diverſity of thoſe images, onr ſenſes reporte vnto vs. A yong childe heareth, ſeeth, and taſteth otherwiſe by natures ordinary rule, then a man of thirtie yeares; and he otherwiſe then another of threeſcore. The ſenſes are to ſome more obſcure and dimme, and to ſome more open and quicke. We receive things differently, according as they are, and ſeeme vnto vs. Things being then ſo vncertaine, and full of controverſie, it is no longer a wonder if it be told vs, that we may avouch ſnow to ſeeme white vnto vs; but to affirme that it is ſuch in eſſence and in truth, we cannot warrant our ſelves: which foundation being ſo ſhaken, all the Science in the world muſt neceſſarily goe to wracke. What? doe our ſenſes themſelves hinder one another? To the ſight a picture ſeemeth to be raiſed aloft, and in the handling flat: Shall we ſay that muske is pleaſing or no, which comforteth our ſmelling and offendeth out taſte? There are Hearbs and Ointments, which to ſome parts of the body are good, and to

otherſome hurtfull. Honie is pleaſing to the taſte, but vnpleaſing to the ſight. Thoſe jewels wrought and faſhioned like fethers or ſprigs, which in impreſes are called, fethers without ends, no eye can diſcerne the bredth of them, and no man warrant himſelfe from this deception, that on the one end or ſide it groweth not broder and broder, ſharper and ſharper, and on the other more and more narrow, eſpecially being rouled about ones finger, when notwithſtanning in handling it ſeemeth equall in bredth, and every where alike. Thoſe who to encreaſe and aide their luxury were anciently wont to vſe perſpective or looking glaſſes, fite to make the object they repreſented, appeare very big and great, that ſo the members they were to vſe, might by that oculare increaſe pleaſe them the more: to whether of the two ſenſes yeelded they, either to the ſight preſenting thoſe members as big and great as they wiſht them, or to the feeling, that preſented them little and to be diſdained? It is our ſenſes that lend theſe diverſe conditions vnto ſubjects, when for all that, the ſubjects have but one? as we ſee in the Bread we eate: it is but Bread, but one v
                              •
                           ing it, it maketh bones, blood, fleſh, haire, and nailes thereof:
                        
                           Vt cibus in membra atque artus cùm diditur omnesIbid. l. 3. 72
                                    •
                                 .
                           
                           Diſperit, atque aliam naturam ſufficit ex ſe.
                           As meate diſtributed into the member dies.
                           Another nature yet it perriſhing ſupplies.
                        
                        The moiſtneſſe which the roote of a tree ſuckes, becomes a trunke, a leafe and fruite: And the aire being but one; applied vnto a trumpet, becommeth diverſe in a thouſand ſortes of ſounds. Is it our ſenſes (ſay I) who likewiſe faſhion of diverſe qualities thoſe ſubjects, or whether they have them ſo and ſuch? And vpon this doubt, what may we conclude of their true eſſence? Moreover, ſince the accidents of ſickeneſſe, of madneſſe, or of ſleepe, make things appeare other vnto vs, then they ſeeme vnto the healthie, vnto the wiſe, and to the waking. Is it not likely, that our right ſeate and naturall humors, have alſo wherewith to give a being vnto things, having reference vnto their condition, and to appropriate them to it ſelfe, as doe inordinate humours; and our health, as capable to give them his viſage, as ſickeneſſe? Why hath not the temperate man ſome forme of the objects relative vnto him-ſelfe, as the intemperate: and ſhall not he likewiſe imprint his Character in them? The diſtaſted impute wallowiſhneſſe vnto Wine: the healthie, good taſte; and the thirſtie briskneſſe, relliſh and delicacie. Now our condition appropriating things vnto it ſelfe, and transforming them to it's owne humour: we know no more how things are in ſooth and truth; For, nothing comes vnto vs but falſified and altered by our ſenſes. Either the compaſſe, the quadrant or the ruler are crooked: All proportions drawne by them, and all the buildings erected by their meaſure, are alſo neceſſarily defective and imperfect. The vncertaintie of our ſenſes yeelds what ever they produce, alſo vncertaine.
                        
                           Denique vt in fabrica, ſi prava eſt regula prima,Ibid. l. 4. 514.
                           
                           Normáque ſi fallax rectis regionibus exit,
                           Et libella aliqaâ ſi ex parte claudicat hilum,
                           Omnia mendoſè fieri, atque obſtipa neceſſum eſt,
                           Prava, cubantia, prona, ſupina, atque obſona tecta,
                           I am ruere vt quaedam videantur velle, ruántque
                           Prodita iudicijs fallacibus omnia premis.
                           Hic igitur ratio tibi rerum prava neceſſe eſt,
                           Falſaque ſit falſis quaecunque á ſencibus orta eſt.
                           As in building if the firſt rule be to blame,
                           And the deceitfull ſquire erre from right forme and frame,
                           If any inſtrument want any jot of weight,
                           All muſt needes faultie be, and ſtooping in their height,
                           The building naught, abſurd, vpward and downeward bended,
                           As if they meant to fall, and fall as they intended;
                           And all this as betrayde
                           By judgements formoſt laide.
                           Of things the reaſon therefore needes muſt faultie bee
                           And falſe, which from falſe ſenſes drawes it's pedegree;
                        
                        As for the reſt, who ſhall be a competent judge in theſe differences? As we ſaid in controverſies

of religion, that we muſt have a judge enclined to neither party, and free from part
                              •
                           alitie, or affection, which is hardly to be had among Chriſtians; ſo hapneth it in this: For if he be old, he cannot judge of ages ſenſe; himſelfe being a party in this controverſie: and ſo if he be yoong, healthy, ſicke ſleeping or waking, it is all one: We had need of ſome body void and exempted from all theſe qualities, that without any preoccupation of judgement might judge of theſe propoſitions as indifferent vnto him: By which accoumpt we ſhould have a Iudge, that were no man. To judge of the apparances that we receive of ſubjects, we had neede have a judicatorie inſtrumentito verifie this inſtrument, we ſhould have demonſtration; and to approove demonſtration, an inſtrument: thus are wee ever turning round. Since the ſenſes cannot determine our diſputation, themſelves being ſo ful of vncertaintie, it muſt then be reaſon: And no reaſon can be eſtabliſhed without another reaſon: then are we ever going backe vnto infinity. Our fantaſie doth not apply it ſelf to ſtrange things, but is rather conceived by the interpoſition of ſenſes; and ſenſes cannot comprehend a ſtrange ſubject; Nay not ſo much as their owne paſſions; and ſo, nor the fantaſie, nor the apparance is the ſubjects, but rather the paſſions only, and ſufferance of the ſenſe: which paſſion and ſubject are diverſe things: Therefore who iudgeth by apparances, iudgeth by a thing, different from the ſubiect. And to ſay, that the ſenſes paſſions referre the qualitie of ſtrange ſubjects by reſemblance vnto the ſoule: How can the ſoule and the vnderſtanding reſt aſſured of that reſemblance, having of itſelfe no commerce with forraigne ſubjects? Even as he that knowes not Socrates, ſeeing his picture cannot ſay that it reſembleth him. And would a man judge by apparances, be it by all it is impoſſible; for by their contraries and differences they hinder one another, as we ſee by experience. May it be that ſome choice apparances rule and direct the others? This choyſe muſt be verified by an other choyſe, the ſecond by a third: and ſo ſhall we never make an end. In few, there is no constant existence, neither of our being, nor of the obiects. And we, and our judgement, and al mortal things els do vnceſſantly rowle turne and paſſe away. Thus can nothing be certainely eſtabliſhed, nor of the one, nor of the other; both the judging and the judged being in continuall alteration and motion. Wee have no communication with being; for every humane nature is ever in the middle betweene being borne and dying; giving nothing of it ſelfe but an obſcure apparance and ſhaddow, and an vncertaine and weake opinion. And if perhappes you fix your thought to take it's being; it would be even, as if one ſhould goe about to graſpe the water: for, how much the more he ſhall cloſe and preſſe that, which by its owne nature is ever gliding, ſo much the more he ſhall looſe what he would hold and faſten. Thus, ſeeing all things are ſubject to paſſe from one change to another; reaſon, which therein ſeeketh a reall ſubſiſtance, findes hir ſelfe deceived as vnable to apprehend any thing ſubſiſtant and permanent: forſomuch as each thing eyther commeth to a being, and is not yet altogether; or beginneth to dy before it be borne. Plato ſaid, that bodies had never an exiſtence but in deede a birth, ſuppoſing that Homer made the Ocean Father, and Thet is Mother of the Gods, thereby to ſhew-vs, that all things are in continuall motion, change and variation. As he ſaith, a common opinion amongſt all the Philoſophers before his time; Only Parmenides, excepted, who denied any motion to be in things; of whoſe power he maketh no ſmall accoumpt. Pythagoras that each thing or matter was ever gliding, and labile. The Stoickes affirme, there is no preſent time, and that which we call preſent, is but conjoyning and aſſembling of future time & paſt. Heraclitus averreth that no man ever entred twiſe one ſame river. Epicarmus avowcheth, that who erewhile borrowed any mony, doth not now owe it: and that he who yeſternight was bidden to dinner this day, commeth to day vnbidden; ſince they are no more themſelves, but are become others: and that one mortall ſubſtance could not twiſe be found in one ſelf ſtate: for by the ſodaineſſe and lightneſſe of change, ſomtimes it waſteth, and othertimes it re-aſſembleth; now it comes and now it goes; in ſuch ſort, that he who beginneth to be borne, never comes to the perfection of being. For, this being borne commeth never to an end, nor ever ſtayeth as being at an end; but after the ſeede proceedeth continually in change and alteration from one to another. As of mans ſeede, there is firſt made a ſhapeleſſe fruit in the Mothers Wombe, than a ſhapen Childe, then being out of the Wombe, a ſucking babe, afterward he becommeth a ladde, then conſequently a ſtriplin, then a full-growne man, then an old man, and in the end an aged decrepite man. So that age and ſubſequent generation goeth ever vndoing and waſting the precedent.
                        
                           Mut at enim mundi naturam totius aetas,Ibid. l. 5. 937.
                           
                           
                              Ex alióque alius ſtatus excipere omnia debet,
                           Nec manet vlla ſui ſimilis res, omnia migrant,
                           Omnia commut at natura & vertere cogit.
                           Of th'vniverſall world, age doth the nature change,
                           And all things from one ſtate muſt to another range,
                           No one thing like it ſelfe remaines, all things doe paſſe,
                           Nature doth change, and drive to change, each thing that was.
                        
                        And when wee do fooliſhile feare a kinde of death, when as wee have already paſt, and dayly paſſe ſo many others. For, not only (as Heraclitus ſaid) the death of fire is a generation of ayre; and the death of ayre, a generation of Water. But alſo we may moſt evidently ſee it in our ſelves. The flower of age dieth, fadeth and fleeteth, when age comes vpon vs, and youth endeth in the flower of a full growne mans age: Child-hood in youth, and the firſt age, dieth in infancie: and yeſter-day endeth in this day, and to day ſhall die in to morrow. And nothing remaineth or ever continueth in one ſtate. For to proove it, if we ſhould ever continue one and the ſame, how is it then, that now we rejoyce at one thing, and now at another? How comes it to paſſe, we love things contrary, or we hate them, or we love them, or we blame them? How is it, that we have different affections, holding no more the ſame ſence in the ſame thought? For it is not likely, that without alteration we ſhould take other paſſions, and What admitteth alterations, continueth not the ſame: and if it be not one ſelfe ſame, than is it not: but rather with being all one, the ſimple being doth alſo change, ever becomming other from other. And by conſequence Natures ſenſes are deceived and lie falſely; taking what appeareth for what is; for want of truely knowing what it is that is. But then what is it, that is indeed? That which is eternall, that is to ſay, that which never had birth, nor ever ſhall have end; and to which no time can bring change or cauſe alteration. For time is a fleeting thing, and which appeareth as in a ſhadow, with the matter ever gliding, alwaies fluent, without ever being ſtable or permanent; to whom rightly belong theſe termes, Before and After: and it Hath beene, or Shall be. Which at firſt ſight doth manifeſtly ſhew, that it is not a thing, which is; for, it were great ſottiſhneſſe, and apparant falſe-hood, to ſay, that that is which is not yet in being, or that already hath ceaſed from being. And concerning theſe words, Preſent, Inſtant, Even-now, by which it ſeemes, that eſpecially we vphold and principally ground the intelligence of time; reaſon diſcovering the ſame, doth forth with deſtroy it: for preſently it ſevereth it aſunder and divideth it into future and paſt-time, as willing to ſee it neceſſarily parted in two. As much happeneth vnto nature, which is meaſured according vnto time, which meaſureth hir: for no more is there any thing in hir, that remaineth or is ſubſiſtent: rather all things in hir are either borne or ready to be borne, or dying. By meanes whereof, it were a ſinne to ſay of God, who is the only that is, that he was or ſhalbe: for theſe words are declinations, paſſages, or Viciſſitudes of that, which cannot laſt, nor continue in being. Wherfore we muſt conclude; that onely God is, not according to any meaſure of time, but according to an immoovable and immutable eternity, not meaſured by time, nor ſubiect to any declination, before whom nothing is, nor nothing ſhall be after, nor more now nor more recent, but one really being: which by one onely Now or Preſent, filleth the Ever, and there is nothing that truly is, but the alone: Without ſaying, he hath beene, or he ſhall be, without beginning, and ſans ending. To this ſo religious concluſion of a heathen man, I will onely adde this word, taken from a teſtimony of the ſame condition, for an end of this long and period of this tedious diſcourſe which might well furniſh me with endleſſe matter. Oh what a vile and abiect thing is man (ſaith he) vnleſſe he raiſe himſelfe aboue humanity! Obſerve here a notable ſpeech, and a profitable deſire; but likewiſe abſurd. For to make the handful greater than the hand and the embraced greater then the arme; and to hope to ſtraddle more than our legs length; is impoſſible and monſtious: nor that man ſhould mount over and above himſelfe or humanity; for, he cannot ſee but with his owne eies, nor take hold but with his owne armes. He ſhall raiſe himſelfe vp, if it pleaſe God extraordinarily to lend him his helping hand. He may elevate himſelfe by forſaking and renouncing his owne meanes, and ſuffering himſelfe to be elevated and raiſed by meere heavenly meanes. It is for our Chriſtian faith, not for his Stoicke vertue to pretend or aſpire to this divine Metamorphoſis, or miraculous tranſmutation.
                     
                     
                        
                        The thirteenth Chapter.
                        
                           Of iudging of others death.
                        
                        WHen we judge of others aſſurance or boldneſſe in death, which without all peradventure, is the moſt remarkeable action of humane life, great heed is to be taken of one thing, which is, that a man will hardly beleeve he is come to that point. Few men die with a reſolution, that it is their laſt houre: And no where doth hopes deceit ammuſe vs more. She never ceaſeth to ring in our eares, that others have beene ſicker, and yet have not died; the cauſe is not ſo deſperate as it is taken; and if the worſt happen, God hath done greater wonders. The reaſon is, that we make to much account of our ſelves. It ſeemeth, that the generality of things doth in ſome ſort ſuffer for our annullation, and takes compaſſion of our ſtate. Forſomuch as our ſight being altered, repreſents vnto it ſelfe things alike; and we imagine, that things faile it, as it doth to them: As they who travell by Sea, to whom mountaines, fields, townes, heaven and earth, ſeene to goe the ſame motion, and keepe the ſame courſe, they doe:
                        
                           Provehimur portu, terraeque vrbéſque recedunt.Vir. Aen
                                    •
                                  l. 3. 72
                           
                           We ſayling launch from harbour, and
                           Behinde our backee leave townes, leave land.
                        
                        Who ever ſaw old age, that commended not times paſt, and blamed not the preſent, charging the world and mens cuſtomes with hir miſery, and lowring diſcontent?
                        
                           Iámque caput quaſſans grandis ſuſpirat arator,L
                                    •
                                 ced. l. 2. 113.
                           
                           Et cùm tempor a temporibus praeſentia confert
                           Praeteritis, laudat fortunas ſaepe parentis
                           Et crepat antiquum genus vt pietate repletum.
                           The gray-beard Plow-man ſighes, ſhaking his hoary head,
                           Compares times that are now, with times paſt heretofore,
                           Praiſes the fortunes of his father long ſince dead,
                           And crakes of ancient men, whoſe honeſty was more.
                        
                        We entertaine and carry all with vs: Whence it followeth, that we deeme our death to be ſome great matter, and which paſſeth not ſo eaſily, nor without a ſolemne conſultation of the Starres; Tot circa v
                                 •
                              um caput tumultuantes Deos. So many Gods keeping a ſtirre about one mans life. And ſo much the more we thinke it, by how much more we praiſe our ſelves. What? Should ſo much learning and knowledge be loſt with ſo great dommage, without the Deſtinies particular care? A ſoule ſo rare and exemplar, coſts it no more to be killed, then a popular and vnprofitable ſoule? This life, that covereth ſo many others, of whom ſo many other lives depend, that, for his vſe poſſeſſeth ſo great a part of the world and filleth ſo many places, is it diſplaced as that which holdeth by it's owne ſimple ſtring? No one of vs thinkes it ſufficient, to be but one. Thence came thoſe words of Caeſar to his pilot, more proudly ſwolne, then the Sea that threatned him:
                        
                           —Italiam ſi caelo authore recuſas,
                              Lucan. li. 3. 579.
                           
                           Mepete: ſola tibi cauſa haec eſt iuſta timoris,
                           
                              Ʋectorem non noſſe tuum perrumpe procellas
                           Tutelâ ſecure maie:—
                           If Italie thou do refuſe with heav'n thy guide,
                           Turne thee to me: to thee only juſt cauſe of feare
                           Is that thy paſſinger thou know'ſt not: ſtormie tide
                           Breake through, ſecure by guard of me, whom thou doſt beare.
                        
                        And theſe.
                        
                           —credit iam digna pericula Caeſar
                           
                           Fatis eſſe ſuis: tantúſque evertere (dixitIbid. 653.
                           
                           Meſuperis labor eſt, parvâ q
                                 •
                              em puppe ſedentem.
                           
                              Tam magno petiere mari.
                           Ceſar doth now beleeve, thoſe dangers worthie are
                           Of his ſet fate; and ſaies, doe Gods, take ſo much paine
                           Me to vndoe, whom they thus to aſſault prepare
                           Set in ſo ſmall a skiffe, in ſuch a ſurging maine?
                        
                        And this common foppery, that Phoebus for one whole yeare, bare mourning weedes on his forehead for the death of him:Virg. Georg. li. 1. 466.
                        
                        
                           Ille etiam extincto miſeratus Caeſare Romam,
                           Cùm caput obſcurá nitidum ferrugine texit.
                           The Snnne did pittie take of Rome when Caeſar dide,
                           When he his radiant head in obſcure ruſt did hide.
                        
                        And a thouſand ſuch, wherewith the world ſuffers it ſelfe to be ſo eaſily conicatcht, deeming that our owne intereſts diſturbe heaven, and his infinitie is moved at our leaſt actions. Non tanta caelo ſocietas nobiſcum eſt, vt noſtro fato mortalis ſit ille quoque ſiderum fulgor. There is
                           Plin. nat. 
                                 •
                              iſt. l 2. 
                                 •
                              . 8. 
                           no ſuch ſocietie betweene heaven and vs, that by our deſtinie the ſhining of the ſtarres ſhould be mort all as we are. And to judge a reſolution and conſtancie in him, who though he be in manifeſt danger, dooth not yet beleeve it, it is no reaſon: And it ſufficeth not, that he die in that ward, vnleſſe he have directly, and for that purpoſe put himſelfe into it: It hapneth, that moſt men ſet a ſterne countenance on the matter, looke big, and ſpeake ſtoutly, thereby to acquire reputation, which if they chance to live, they hope to enjoy. Of all I have ſeene die, fortune hath diſpoſed their countenances, but not their deſſeignes. And of thoſe which in ancient times have put themſelves to death, the choiſe is great, whether it were a ſodaine death, or a death having time and leaſure. That cruell Romane Emperor, ſaid of his priſoners, that he would make them feele death: And if any fortuned to kill himſelfe in priſon, That fellow hath eſcaped me (would he ſay.) He would extend and linger death, and cauſe it, be felt by torments.
                        
                           
                              Ʋidimus & toto quamuis in corpore caeſe,Lucan. l. 2. 179
                           
                           Nil animae let hale datum, morémque nefandae
                           Durum ſaevitiae, pereuntis parcere morti.
                           And we have ſeeene, when all the body tortur'd lay,
                           Yet no ſtroke deadly giv'n, and that in humane way
                           Of tyranny, to ſpare his death that ſought to die.
                        
                        Verely, it is not ſo great a matter, being in perfect health, and well ſetled in minde, for one to reſolve to kill himſelfe: It is an eaſie thing to ſhew ſtoutnes and play the wag before one come to the pinch. So that Heliogabalus the moſt diſſoluteman of the world, amidſt his moſt riotous ſenſualities, intended, whenſoever occaſion ſhould force him to it, to have a daintie death. Which, that it might not degenerate from the reſt of his life, hee had purpoſely cauſed a ſtately tewre to be built, the nether part and fore-court wherof was floored with boardes richly ſet and enchaſed with gold and precious ſtones, from-off which hee might headlong throwe himſelfe downe: He had alſo cauſed cordes to be made of gold and crimſon ſilke, therewith to ſtrangle himſelfe: And a rich golden rapier, to thruſt himſelfe through: And kept poiſon in boxes of Emeraldes and Topaſes, to poiſon himſelfe with, according to the humor hee might have, to chuſe which of theſe deaths ſhould pleaſe him.
                        
                           Impiger & fortis virtute coactâ.
                                 
                                    •
                                 ib. 4. 797. Gurie.
                           
                           A ready minded gallant,
                           And in forſt valour valiant.
                        
                        Notwithſtanding, touching this man, the wantonneſſe of his preparation makes it more likely, that he would have fainted, had he beene put to his triall. But even of thoſe, who moſt vndantedly have reſolved themſelves to the execution, we muſt conſider (I ſay) whether it were with a life ending ſtroke, and that tooke away any leaſure to feele the effect thereof. For, it is hard to geſſe, ſeeing life droope away by little and little, the bodies-feeling entermingling it ſelfe with the ſoules, meanes of repentance being offered, whether in ſo dangerous an intent, conſtancie or obſtinacie were found in him. In Caeſars civill warres, Lucius domitius taken in pruſſia, having empoiſoned himſelfe, did afterward rue and repent▪ his deede. It hath hapned in our daies, that ſome having reſolved to die, and at firſt not

ſtricken deepe enough, the ſmarting of his fleſh, thruſting his arme backe, twice or thrice more wounded himſelfe a new, and yet could never ſtrike ſufficiently deepe. Whilſt the arraignement of Plantius Silvanus was preparing, Vrgulaniae his grandmother, ſent him, a poignard, wherewith not able to kill himſelfe throughly, hee cauſed his owne ſervants to cutte his veines. Albucilla in Tiberius time, purpoſing to kill hirſelfe, but ſtriking over faintly, gave hir enemies leaſure to apprehend and impriſon hir, and appoint hir what death they pleaſed. So did Captaine Demoſthenes after his diſcomfiture in Sicilie. And C. Fimbria having over feeblie wounded himſelfe, became a ſutor to his boy, to make an end of him. On the other ſide, Oſtorius, who forſomuch as hee could not vſe his owne arme, diſdained to employ his ſervants in any other thing but to hold his dagger ſtiffe and ſtrongly; and taking his running, himſelfe caried his throate to it's point, and ſo was thruſt through. To ſay truth, it is a meate a man muſt ſwallow without chewing, vnleſſe his throate be froſtſhod. And therefore Adrianus the Emperour made his Phi
                              ••
                           tian to marke and take the juſt compaſſe of the mortall place about his pap, that ſo his aime might not faile him, to whom he had given charge to kill him. Loe why Caeſar being demanded; which was the death he moſt allowed, anſwered, the leaſt premeditated, and the ſhorteſt. If Caeſar ſaid it, it is no faintneſſe in me to beleeve it. A ſhort death (ſaith Plinie) is the chiefe happe of humane life. It grie veth them to acknowledge it. No man can be ſaide, to be reſolved to die, that feareth to purchaſe it, and that cannot abide to looke vpon, and out-ſtare it with open eyes. Thoſe, which in times of execution are ſeene to runne to their end, and haſten the execution, doe it not with reſolution, but becauſe they will take away time to conſider the ſame; it grieves them not to be dead, but to die.
                        
                           Emori nolo, ſed me eſſe mortuum, nihil aeſtimo.Cie. Tuſc. qut l. 1. Epicha.
                           
                           I would not die too ſoone,
                           But care not, when tis doone.
                        
                        It is a degree of conſtancie, vnto which I have experienced to arrive, as thoſe that caſt themſelves into danger, or into the Sea, with cloſed eyes. In mine opinion, there is nothing more worthy the noting in Socrates life, then to have had thirtie whole dayes to ruminate his deaths-decree, to have digeſted it all that while, with an aſſured hope, without diſmay or alteration, and with a courſe of actions and words, rather ſuppreſt; and looſe-hanging, then out-ſtretched and raiſed by the weight of ſuch a cogitation. That Pomponius Atticus, to whome Cicero writeth, being ſicke, cauſed Agrippa his ſonne in lawe, and two or three of his other friends to be called▪ for, to whom he ſaid; that having aſſaied, how he got nothing in going about to be cured, and what he did to prolong his life did alſo lengthen and augment his griefe, he was now determined to make an end of one and other; intreating them to allow of his determination, and that by no meanes, they would looſe their labour to diſſwade him from it. And having choſen to end his life by abſtinence, his ſickenes was cured by accident; The remedy he had employed to make himſelfe away, brought him to health againe. The Phyſitions, and his friendes, glad of ſo happy a ſucceſſe, and rejoycing thereof with him, were in the end greatly deceived; for, with all they could doe, they were never able to make him alter his former opinion, ſaying, that as he muſt one day paſſe that cariere, and being now ſo forward, he would remoove the care, another time to beginne againe. This man having with great leaſure apprehended death, is not onely no whit diſcouraged, when hee comes to front it, but reſolutely falles vpon it: for, being ſatisfied of that, for which he was entred the combate, in a braverie he thruſt himſelfe into it, to ſee the end of it. It is farre from fearing death, to goe about to taſte and ſavour the ſame. The hiſtorie of Cleanthes the philoſopher, is much like to this. His gummes being ſwolne, his Phyſitions perſwaded him to vſe great abſtinence; having faſted two dayes, he was ſo well amended, as they told him he was well, and might returne to his wonted courſe of life. He contrarily, having already taſted ſome ſweetenes in this fainting, reſolveth not to draw backe, but finiſh what he had ſo well begunne, and was ſo farre waded into. Tullius Marcellinus, a yoong Romane Gentleman, willing to prevent the houre of his deſtiny, to ridde himſelfe of a diſeaſe, which tormented him more than he would endure, although Phyſitions promiſed certainely to cure him, howbeit not ſodainely; called his friends vnto him to determine about it: ſome (ſaieth Seneca) gave him that counſell, which for weakeneſſe of heart, themſelves would have taken others for flatterie that, which they imagined would be moſt pleaſing vnto him: but a certaine

Stoike ſtanding by, ſaide thus vnto him. Toyle not thy ſelfe Marcellinus, as if thou determinedſt ſome weightie matter, to live is no ſuch great thing, thy baſe groomes and bruit beasts live alſo, but it is a matter of conſequence to die honeſtly, wiſely and conſtantly. Remember how long it is, thou do est one ſame thing, to eat, to drinke, and ſleepe, to drinke, to ſleepe, to eat. We are ever vnceſſantly wheeling in this endleſſe circle. Not onely bad and intollerable accidents, but the very ſaciety to live, brings a deſire of death. Marcellinus had no neede of a man to counſell, but of one to helpe him: his ſervants were afraid to meddle with him; but this Philoſopher made them to vnderſtand, that familiars are ſuſpected, onely when the queſtion is, whether the maiſters death have beene voluntary: otherwiſe it would be as bad an example to hinder him, as to kill him, forſomuch as,
                        
                           Invitum qui ſervat, idem facit occidenti.Hor. art. Po
                                    ••
                                 . 467.
                           
                           Who ſaves a man againſt his will,
                           Doth ev'n as much as he ſhould kill.
                        
                        Then he advertized Marcellinus, that it would not be vnſeemely, as fruit or comfets at our tables, when our bellies be full, are given vnto by-ſtanders, ſo the life ended, to diſtribute ſomething to ſuch as have beene the miniſters of it. Marcellinus being of a franke and liberall diſpoſition, cauſed certaine ſummes of mony to be divided amongſt his ſervants, and comforted them. And for the reſt, there needed neither yron nor blood, he vndertooke to depart from this life, not by running from it: Not to eſcape from death, but to taſte it. And to have leiſure to condition or bargaine with death, having quit all manner of nouriſhment, the third day enſuing, after he had cauſed himſelfe to be ſprinckled over with luke-warme water, by little and little he conſumed away; and (as he ſaid) not without ſome voluptuouſneſſe and pleaſure. Verily, ſuch as have had theſe faintings and ſwownings of the heart; which proceed from weakeneſſe, ſay, that they feele no paine at all in them, but rather ſome pleaſure, as of a paſſage to ſleepe and reſt. Theſe are premeditated, and digeſted deaths. But that Caeto alone, may ſerve to all examples of vertue, it ſeemeth, his good deſtiny, cauſed that hand wherewith he gave himſelfe the fatall blow, to be ſicke and ſore: that ſo he might have leiſure to affront death and to embrace it, reen forcing his courage in that danger, in liew of mollifying the ſame. And ſhould I have repreſented him in his prowdeſt ſtate, it ſhould have beene all bloody-gored, tearing his entrailes, and rending his guttes, rather then with a ſword in his hand, as did the Statuaries of his time. For this ſecond murther, was much more furious, then the firſt.
                     
                     
                        The fourteenth Chapter.
                        
                           How that our ſpirit hindereth it ſelfe.
                        
                        IT is a pleaſant imagination, to conceive a ſpirit juſtly balanced between two equall deſires. For, it is not to be doubted, that he ſhall never be reſolved vpon any match: Forſomuch as the application and choiſe brings an inequality of priſe: And who ſhould place vs between a Bottle of wine, and a Gammon of Bacon, with an equall appetite to eat and drinke, doubtleſſe there were no remedy, but to die of thurſt and of hunger. To provide againſt this inconvenient, when the Stoikes were demanded, whence the election of two indifferent things commeth into our ſoule (and which cauſeth, that from out a great number of Crownes or Angels we rather take one then another, when there is no reaſon to induce vs to prefer any one before others) the anſwer, that this motion of the ſoule is extraordinarie and irregular comming into vs by a ſtrange, accidentall and caſuall impulſion. In my opinion, it might rather be ſaid, that nothing is preſented vnto vs, wherein there is not ſome difference, how light ſo ever it be: And that either to the ſights, or to the feeling, there is ever ſome choiſe, which tempteth and drawes vs to it, though imperceptible and not to be diſtinguiſhed. In like maner, he that ſhall preſuppoſe a twine-third equally ſtrong all-through, it is impoſſible by all impoſſibilitie that it breake, for, where would you have the flaw or breaking to beginne? And at once to breake in all places together, it is not in nature. Who ſhould

alſo adde to this, the Geometricall propoſitions, which by the certainty of their demonſtrations, conclude, the contained greater then the containing, and the centre as great as his circumference: And that finde two lines vnceſſantly approaching one vnto another, and yet can never meete and joyne together: And the Philoſophers ſtone, and quadrature of the circle, where the reaſon and the effects are ſo oppoſite: might peradventure draw thence ſome argument to ſalve and helpe this bold ſpeech of Pliny. Solum certum nihil eſſe certi, & homine nihil miſerius aut ſuperbius. This onely is ſure, that there is nothing ſure; and nothing more miſerable,
                           Plin. nat. hiſt. lib. 2. c. 7. 
                           and yet more arrogant then man.
                        
                     
                     
                        The fifteenth Chapter.
                        
                           That our deſires are encreaſed by difficulty.
                        
                        THere is no reaſon but hath another contrary vnto it, ſaith the wiſeſt party of Philoſophers. I did erewhile ruminate vpon this notable ſaying, which an ancient writer aleadgeth for the contempt of life. No good can bring vs any pleaſure, except that, against whoſe loſſe we are prepared: In aequo eſt dolor amiſſaerei, & timor amittendae, Sorrow for a thing loſt, and feare of
                           Sen. epiſt 98. 
                           looſing it, are on an even ground. Meaning to gaine thereby, that the fruition of life, cannot perfectly be pleaſing vnto vs, if we ſtand in any feare to looſe it. A man might nevertheleſſe ſay on the contrary part, that we embrace and claſpe this good ſo much the harder, and with more affection, as we perceive it to be leſſe ſure, and feare it ſhould be taken from vs. For, it is manifeſtly found, that as fire is rouzed vp by the aſſiſtance of cold, even ſo our will is whetted on by that which doth reſiſt it.
                        
                           Si nunquam Danaen habuiſſet ahenea turris,Orid. Am. li. 2. 
                                    •
                                 l. 19. 27.
                           
                           Non eſſet Danae de love facta parens.
                           If Danae had not beene clos'd in brazen Tower,
                           
                              Iove had not clos'd with Danae in golden ſhower.
                        
                        And that there is nothing ſo naturally oppoſite to our taſte, as ſatiety, which comes from eaſe and facility, nor nothing that ſo much ſharpneth it, as rareneſſe and difficulty. Omnium rerum voluptas ipſo quo debet fugare periculo creſcit. The delight of all things encreaſeth by the danger, whereby it rather ſhould terrifie them that affect it.
                        
                        
                           Galla nega; ſatiatur amor, niſi gaudia torquent.Mart. l. 4. epig. 38. 1.
                           
                           Good wench, deny, my love is cloied,
                           Vnleſſe joyes grieve, before enjoyed.
                        
                        To keepe love in breath and longing, Lycurgus ordained, that the maried men of Lacedemonia might never converſe with their wives, but by ſtealth, and that it ſhould be as great an imputation and ſhame to finde them laid together, as if they were found lying with others. The difficulty of aſſignations or matches appointed, the danger of being ſurpriſed, and the ſhame of enſuing to morrow,
                        
                           —& languor, & ſilentium,
                              Hor. epod. 11. 13
                           
                           Et latere petitus imo ſpiritus.
                           And whiſpering voice, and languiſhment,
                           And breath in ſighes from deepe ſides ſent,
                        
                        are the things that give reliſh and tartneſſe to the ſawce. How many moſt laſciviouſly-pleaſant ſports, proceed from modeſt and ſhamefaſt manner of ſpeech, of the daliances and workes of love? Even voluptuouſneſſe ſeekes to provoke and ſtirre it ſelfe vp by ſmarting. It is much ſweeter when it itcheth, and endeared when it gauleth. The curtezen Flora was wont to ſay, that ſhe never lay with Pompey, but ſhe made him carrie away the markes of hir teeth.
                        
                           Quod petiere, premunt arctè, faciúntque doloremLucr. l. 4. 1070
                           
                           Corporis, & dentes inlidunt ſaepe labellis:
                           Et ſtimuli ſubſunt, qui inſtigant laedere idipſum
                           Quodcumque eſt, rabies vnde iſti germina ſurgunt,
                        
                        
                           So goes it every where: Rarenes and difficultie giveth eſteeme vnto things. Thoſe of Marca d' Ancona in Italy, make their vowes, and goe on pilgrimage rather vnto Saint Iames in Galicia, and thoſe of Galicia rather vnto our Lady of Loreto. In the Country of Liege, they make more account of the Bathes of Luca; and they of Tuſ
                                 •
                              any eſteeme the Baths of Spawe more then their owne: In Rome the Fence-ſchooles are ever full of French-men, when few Romans come vnto them. Great Cato, as well as any elſe, was even clo
                              •
                           ed and diſtaſted with his wife, ſo long as ſhe was his owne, but when another mans, then wiſhed he for hir, and would faine have lickt his fingers at hir. I have heretofore put forth an old ſtalion to ſoile, who before did no ſooner ſee or ſmell a Mare, but was ſo luſty, that no man could rule him, nor no ground hold him; eaſe and facility, to come to his owne when he liſt, hath preſently quailed his ſtomake, and ſo cloyed him, that he is weary of them: But toward ſtrange Mar
                              •
                           s, and the firſt that paſſeth by his paſture, there is no hoe with him; but ſuddenly he returnes to his old wonted neighings, and furious heate. Our appetite doth contemne and paſſe over what he hath in his free choiſe and owne poſſeſſion, to runne after, and purſue what he hath not.Hor. Ser. l. 1. Sat. 2 107.
                        
                        
                           Tranſuolat in medio poſita, & f
                                 •
                              gienti
                                 •
                               captat.
                           It over-flies what open lies,
                           Purſuing onely that which flies.
                        
                        
                           To forbid vs any thing, is the ready way to make vs long for it.
                           Orid. Am. lib. 2. 
                                 •
                              l. 19. 47.
                        
                        
                           —niſi tu ſervare puellam
                           
                           Incipis, incipiet deſinere eſſe mea,
                           If you begin not your wench to enſhrine,
                           She will begin to leave off to be mine.
                        
                        And to leave it altogether to our will, is but to breede diſlike and contempt in vs; So that to want, and to have ſtore, breedeth one ſelfe ſame inconvenience.
                        
                        
                           Tibi quod ſuper eſt, mihi quod defit, dolet.Ter. Phor. act. 1. ſ
                                    ••
                                 . 3.
                           
                           You grieve becauſe you have to much;
                           It griev's me that I have none ſuch.
                        
                        Wiſhing and injoying trouble vs both a like. The rigor of a miſtris is yrkeſome, but eaſe and facility (to ſay true) much more; foraſmuch as diſcontent and vexation proceed of the eſtimation we have of the thing deſired, which ſharpen love, and ſet it afire: Whereas Satiety begets diſtaſte: It is a dull, blunt, weary, and drouzy paſſion.
                        
                           Siqua volet regnare diu, com
                                 •
                              emnat amantem.Opid. 
                                    •
                                 m. lib. 2. 
                                    •
                                 l. 19. 33.
                           
                           If any liſt long to beare ſway,
                           Scorne ſhe hir lover, ere ſhe play.
                           —contemnite amantes,
                              Prop▪ lib. 2. 
                                    •
                                 l. 14. 19.
                           
                           Sic hodie veniet, 
                                 ••
                              qua negauit heri,
                           Lovers, your lovers ſcorne, contemne, delude, deride;
                           So will ſhe come to day, that yeſterday denide.
                        
                        Why did Poppea deviſe to maske the beauties of hir face, but to endeare them to hir lovers? Why are thoſe beauties vailed downe to the heeles, which all deſire to ſhew, which all wiſh to ſee? Why doe they cover with ſo many lets, one over another, thoſe parts, where chiefly conſiſteth our pleaſure and theirs? And to what purpoſe ſerve thoſe baricadoes, and verdugalles, wherewith our women arme their flankes, but to allure our appetite, and enveagle vs to them by puttingvs off?
                        
                           Et 
                                 •
                              ugit ad ſalices, & ſe cupit anté videriVirg. 
                                    •
                                 uc
                                    •
                                 . 
                                    •
                                 cl. 3. 65.
                           
                           She to the willow's runs to hide,
                           Yet gladly would ſhe firſt be ſpide.
                           Interdum tunica duxit operatamoram,Pro. ibid. el
                                    •
                                 g. 15▪ 6.
                           
                           She cover'd with hir cote in play.
                           Did ſomtime make a ſhort delay.
                        
                        Whereto ſerveth this mayden-like baſhfullneſſe, this wilfull quaintneſſe, this ſevere conntenaunce, this ſeeming ignorance of thoſe things, which they know better than our ſelves, that goe about to inſtruct them, but to encreaſe a deſire, and endeare a longing in vs, to vanquiſh, to gourmandize, and at our pleaſure, to diſpoſe all this ſqeamiſh ceremony, and all theſe peeviſh obſtacles? For, it is not onely a delight, but a glory to beſot and debauch this dainty

and nice ſweetneſſe, and this infantine baſhfulneſſe, and to ſubject amarble and ſterne gravitie to the mercy of our flame. It is a glory (ſay they) to triumph over modeſty, chaſtity and temperance: and who diſſwadeth Ladies from theſe parts, betraieth both them and himſelfe. It is to be ſuppoſed, that their hart yerneth with feare, that the ſound of our wordes, woundeth the purity of their eares, for which they hate vs, and with a forced conſtraint, agree to withſtand our importunitie. Beauty with all hir might, hath not wherewith to give a taſte of her ſelf without theſe interpoſitions. See in Italie, where moſt, and of the fineſt beauty is to be ſold, how it is forced to ſeek other ſtrange meanes and ſuttle deviſes, arts and trickes, to yeeld hir ſelf pleaſing and acceptable: and yet in good ſooth, do what it can, being venall and common, it remaineh 
                              •
                           eeble, and is even languiſhing. Even as in vertue, of two equall effects, we hold that the faireſt, and worthieſt, wherein are propoſed more lets, and which affoordeth greater hazards. It is an effect of Gods providence, to ſuffer his holy Church, to be vexed and turmoyled, as we ſee, with ſo many troubles and ſtormes, to rouze, and awaken by this oppoſition and ſtrife the godly and religious ſoules, and raiſe them from out a lethall ſecurity, and ſtupified ſlumber, wherein ſo long tranquility had plunged them. If wee ſhall counterpoize the loſ
                              •
                           e we have had, by the number of thoſe, that have ſtrayed out of the right way, and the profite that accrueth vnto vs, by having taken hart of grace, and by reaſon of combate raiſed our zeale, and forces; I wot not whether the profite doth ſurmount the loſſe. We thought to tie the bond of our marriages the faſter, by remooving all meanes to diſſolve them, but by how much faſter, that of conſtraint hath bin tyed, ſo much more hath that of our will and affection beene ſlacked and looſed: Whereas on the contrary ſide, that, which ſo long time held marriages in honour and ſafety in Rome, was the liberty to breake them who liſt. They kept their wives the better, forſomuch as they might leave them; and when divorces might freely be had, there paſt five hundred yeares and more, before any would ever make vſe of them.
                        
                           Quod licet, ingratum eſt, quod non licet, acriùs vrit,Orid▪ Am▪ lib. 2. 
                                    •
                                 l. 19. 3.
                           
                           What we may doe, doth little pleaſe:
                           It woormes vs more, that hath leſſe eaſe.
                        
                        To this purpoſe might the opinion of an ancient Writer be adjoyned that torments doe rather encourage vices, than ſuppreſſe them; that they beget not a care of well-doing, which is the work of reaſon and diſcipline, but only a care not to be ſurprized in doing evill.
                        
                           Latiùs exciſ
                                 •
                               peſtis contagia ſerpunt.
                           Th'infection of the plague nigh-ſpent,
                           And rooted out, yet further went.
                        
                        I wot not whether it be true, but this I know by experience, that policie was never found to bee reformed that way. The order and regiment of manners dependeth of ſome other meane. The Greeke ſtories, make mention of the Agrippians, neighbouring vpon Scithia, who live without any rod or ſtaffe of offence, where not onely, no man vndertakes to buckle with any other man, but whoſoever can but ſave himſelf there (by reaſon of thei vertue and ſanctity of life) is as it were in a Sanctuary: And no man dares ſo much as touch him. Manie have recourſe to them, to attone and take vp quarrels and differences, which ariſe amongſt men elſe where. There is a Nation, where the encloſures of Gardens and Fields, they intend to keep ſeverall, are made with a ſeely twine of cotten, which amongſt them is found to be more ſafe and faſt, then are our ditches and hedges. Furem ſignata ſollicitant, Aperta effractarius
                           Sen▪ 
                              
                                 •
                              piſt. 69. 
                           praeterit. Things ſealed vp ſolicite a thiefe to breake them open: Whereas a common burglayer will paſſe by quietly things that lie open. Amongſt other meanes, eaſe and facility dooth haply cover and ſence my houſe from the violence of civill warres: Incloſure and fencing draws on the interpriſe; and diſtruſt the offence. I have abated and weakned the ſouldiers deſigne, by taking hazard and al meanes of military glory from their exploite▪ which is wont to ſerve them for a title, and ſteade them for an excuſe. What is performed couragiouſly, at what time juſtice lieth dead, and law hath not hir due courſe, is ever done honorably. I yeeld them the conqeſt of my houſe daſtardly and tretcherous. It is never ſhut to any that know
                              •
                           
                           keth. It hath no other guardian or proviſion but a Porter, as an ancient cuſtome, and vſed ceremony who ſerveth not ſo much to defend my gate, as to offer it more decently and courteouſly to all commers. I have nor watch nor ſentinell, but what the Starres keepe for mee. That Gentleman is much to blame, who makes a ſhew to ſtand vpon his guarde, except he be very ſtrong indeede. Who ſo is open on one ſide; is ſo every where. Our Fore-fathers

never dreamed on building of frontire Townes or Caſtles.
                        The meanes to aſſaile (I meane without batterie, and troopes of armed men) and to ſurpriſe our houſes, encreaſe dayly beyond the meanes of garding or defending. Mens wits are generally exaſperated and whetted one that way. An invaſion concerneth all, the defence none but the rich. Mine was ſufficiently ſtrong, according to the times when it was made. I have ſince added nothing vnto it that way; and I would feare; the ſtrength of it ſhould turne againſt my ſelfe. Seeing a peaceable time will require we ſhall vnfortifie them. It is dangerous not to be able to recover them againe, and it is hard for one to be aſſured of them. For, concerning inteſtine broiles, your owne ſervant may be of that faction you ſtand in feare of. And where religion ſerveth for a pretence, even alliances and conſanguinitie become miſtruſtfull vnder collour of juſtice. Common rents cannot entertaine our private gariſons. They ſhould all be conſumed. We have not wherewith, nor are we able to do it, without our apparant ruine, or more incommodiouſly, and therewithall injuriouſly, without the common peoples deſtruction. The ſtate of my loſſe ſhould not be much worſe. And if you chance to be a looſer, your owne friends are readier to accuſe your improvidence and vnhedineſſe, then to moane you, and excuſe your ignorance and careleſneſſe, concerning the offices belonging to your profeſſion. That ſo many ſtrongly-garded houſes have beene loſt, whereas mine continueth ſtill, makes mee ſuſpect they were overthrowne, onely becauſe they were ſo diligently garded. It is that which affoordeth a deſire, and miniſtreth a pretence to the aſſailant. All gards beare a ſhew of warre; which if God be ſo pleaſed may light vpon me. But ſo it is, I will never call for it. It is my ſanctuary or retreate to reſt my ſelfe from warres. I endevour to free this corner from the publike ſtorme, as I doe another corner in my ſoule. Our warre may change forme, and multiply and diverſifie how and as long as it liſt; but for my ſelfe I never ſtirre. Amongſt ſo many baricaded and armed houſes, none but my ſelfe (as farre as I know) of my qualitie, hath meerely truſted the protection of his vnto the heavens: for I never remooved neither plate, nor hangings, nor my evidences. I will neither feare, nor ſave my ſelfe by halfes. If a full acknowledgement purchaſeth the favour of God, it ſhall laſt me for ever vnto the end: if not, I have continued long enough, to make my continuance remarkeable, and worthy the regiſtring. What? Is not thirtie yeares a goodly time?
                     
                     
                        The ſixteenth Chapter.
                        
                           Of Glory.
                        
                        THere is both name, and the thing: the name, is a voyce which noteth, and ſignifieth the thing: the name, is neither part of thing nor of ſubſtance: it is a ſtranger-piece ioyned to the thing, and from it. God who in and by himſelfe is all fulneſſe, and the tipe of all perfection, cannot inwardly be augmented or encreaſed: yet may his name be encreaſed and augmented, by the bleſſing and praiſe, which we give vnto his exteriour workes; which praiſe and bleſſing ſince we cannot incorporate into him, forſomuch as no acceſſion of good can be had vnto him, we aſcribe it vnto his name, which is a part without him, and the neereſt vnto him. And that is the reaſon why glory and honour appertaineth to God onely. And there is nothing ſo repugnant vnto reaſon, as for vs to goe about to purchaſe any for our ſelves: For, being inwardly needie and defective, and our eſſence imperfect, and ever wanting amendment, we ought onely labour about that. Wee are all hollow and emptie, and it is not with breath and words we ſhould fill our ſelves. Wee have neede of a more ſolide ſubſtance to repaire our ſelves▪ 
                           An huuger-ſtarved man might be thought moſt ſimple, rather to provide himſelfe of a faire garment, then of a good meales-meate: We muſt run to that, which moſtLuk. 2. 14. concerneth vs. Gloria in excelſis Deo, & interrapax hominibus. Glory be to God on high, and peace in earth amongst men; As ſay our ordinary prayers. We are in great want of beautie, health, wiſedome, vertue and ſuch like eſſentiall partes. Exteriour ornaments may be ſought-for when we are once provided, of neceſſary things. Divinitie doth very amply and pertinently

treate of this ſubject, but I am not very converſant with it. Chryſippus and Diogenes have beene the firſt, and moſt conſtant authors of the contempt of glory. And amongſt all ſenſualities, they ſaid, there was none ſo dangerous, nor ſo much to be avoided, as that which commeth vnto vs by the approbation of others. Verily experience makes vs thereby feele, and vndergoe many domageable treaſons. Nothing ſo much empoiſoneth Princes as flattery: Nor nothing whereby the wicked-minded gaine ſo eaſie credite about them; nor any enticement ſo fit, nor panderſhip ſo ordinary to corrupt the chaſtitie of women, then to feede and entertaine them with their praiſes. The firſt enchantment the Syrens employed to deceive V
                                 ••
                              ſſes, is of this nature.
                        
                           Deca vers nous, deca, o treſlevable Ʋliſſe,
                           Et le plus grand honneur dont ſa Grece fleuriſſe.
                           Turne to vs, to vs turne, 
                                 Ʋliſſes thrice-renowned.
                           The principall renowne wherewith all Greece is crowned.
                        
                        Philoſophers ſaid, that all the worlds glory deſerved not, that a man of wiſedome ſhould ſo much as ſtretch forth his finger to acquire it.
                        
                        
                           Gloria quantalibet quid erit, ſi gloria tantùm est?Iuven. Sat. 7. 
                                    •
                                 1.
                           
                           Never ſo glorious name,
                           What iſt, be it but fame?
                        
                        I ſay for it alone: for, it drawes many commodities after it, by which it may yeeld it ſelfe deſirable: It purchaſeth vs good will: It makes vs leſſe expoſed to others injuries and offences, and ſuch like things. It was alſo one of the principall decrees of Epicurus: for, that precept of his Sect, HIDE THY LIFE, which forbiddeth men to meddle with publike charges and negotiations, doth alſo neceſſarily preſuppoſe that a man ſhould deſpiſe glory: which is an approbation the world makes of thoſe actions we give evidence of. He that bids vs to hide our life, and care but for our ſelves, and would not have vs know of others, would alſo have vs not to be honoured and glorified thereby. So doth he counſell Idomeneus, by no meanes to order his actions, by the vulgar opinion and publike reputation: vnleſſe it be to avoide other accidentall incommodities, which the contempt of men might bring vnto him. Thoſe diſcourſes (are in mine adviſe) very true and reſonable: But, I wot not how, wee are double in our ſelves, which is the cauſe, that what wee beleeve, wee beleeve it not, and cannot rid our ſelves of that, which we condemne. Let vs conſider the laſt words of Epicurus and which hee ſpeaketh as hee is dying: they are notable and woorthy ſuch a Philoſopher: but yet they have ſome badge of his names commendations, and of the humour which by his precepts he had diſauowed. Behold heere a letter, which hee endited a little before hee yeelded vp his ghoſt.. Epicurus to Hermachus health and greeting: Whilſt I paſſed the happy, and even the last day of my life I writ this, accompanied nevertheleſſe with ſuch paine in my bladder and anguiſh in my entrails, that nothing can be added to the greatneſſe of it; yet was it recompenced with the pleaſure, which the remembrance of my inuentions and diſcourſes brought vnto my ſoule. Now as requireth the affection, which even from the infancie thou haſt borne me and Philoſophy, embrace the protection of Metrodorus his children: Loe here his letter. And which makes me interpret, that the pleaſure which in his ſoule he ſaith to feele of his inventions, doth in ſome ſort reſpect the reputation, which after his death he thereby hoped to attaine, is the ordinance of his laſt will and teſtament▪ by which he willeth, that Aminomachus and Timocretes his heires, ſhould for the celebration of his birth-day every month of Ianuary ſupply all ſuch charges as Hermachus ſhould appoint: And alſo for the expence hee might bee at vpon the twentieth of every Moone for the feaſting and entertainment of the Philoſophers his familiar friendes, who in the honour of his memorie and of Metrodorus ſhould meete together. Carneades hath beene chiefe of the contrary opinion, and hath maintained, that glory was in it ſelfe to be deſired, even as we embrace our poſthumes for themſelves, having neither knowledge nor joviſſance of them. This opinion hath not miſſed to be more commonly followed, as are ordinarily thoſe, that fit moſt and come neereſt our inclinations. Aristotle amongſt externall goods yeeldeth the firſt ranke vnto it: And avoideth, as two extreame vices, the immoderation, either in ſeeking, or avoiding it. I believe, that had we the bookes which Cicero writ vpon this ſubject, wee ſhould heare ſtrange matters of him: for he was ſo fond in this paſſion, as had he dared, he would (as I thinke) have eaſily falne into the exceſſe, that others fell in; which is, that even vertue

was not to be deſired, but for the honour, which ever waited on it:Hor. car. l. 4. od. 9. 29.
                        
                        
                           Paulum ſepultae diſtat inertiae
                           Celata virtus.—
                           There is but little difference betweene,
                           Vertue conceald, vnskilfulneſſe vnſeene.
                        
                        Which is ſo falſe an opinion, as I am vexed it could ever enter a mans vndeſtanding that had the honour to beare the name of a Philoſopher. If that were true, a man needed not to be vertuous but in publike: and we ſhould never neede to keepe the ſoules-operations in order and rule, which is the true feate of vertue, but onely ſo much as they might come to the knowledge of others. Doth then nothing elſe belong vnto it, but craftily to faile, and ſubtilly to cozen? If thou knoweſt a Serpent to be hidden in any place (ſaith Carneades) to which, he by whoſe death thou hopeſt to reape commodity, goeth vnawares to ſit vpon, thou committeſt a wicked act if thou warne him not of it: and ſo much the more, becauſe thy action ſhould be known but to thy ſelf. If we take not the law of wel-doing from our ſelves: If impunity be juſtice in vs; to how many kindes of trecheries are we daily to abandon our ſelves? That which Sp. Peduceus did, faithfully to reſtore the riches which C. Plotius had committed to his only truſt and ſecrecie, and as my ſelfe have done often? I thinke not ſo commendable, as I would deeme it execrable, if we had not done it. And I think it beneficial we ſhould in our dayes be mindefull of Publius Sextilius Rufus his example, whom Cicero accuſeth that he had received a great inheritance againſt his conſcience: Not only repugnant▪ but agreeing with the lawes. And M. Craſſus, and Q. Hortenſius, who by reaſon of their authority and might, having for certaine Quidities beene called by a ſtranger to the ſucceſſion of a forged will, that ſo he might make his ſhare good: they were pleaſed not to be partakers of his forgery, yet refuſed not to take ſome profite of it: Very cloſely had they kept themſelves vnder the countenance of the accuſations, witneſſes and lawes. Meminerint Deum ſe habere testem, id eſt (vt Ego arbitror) mentem ſuam. Let them remember they have God to witnſſe, that is, (as I construe it) their owne minde. Ʋertue is a vaine and frivolous thing, if it draw hir commendation from glorie. In vaine ſhould we attempt to make hir keepe hir rancke apart, and ſo ſhould we disjoyne it from fortune: for, What is more caſuall than reputation? Profecto fortuna in omni re dominatur: Ea res cunctas ex libidine magis quàm ex vero celebrat obſcurátque. Fortune governeth in al things, and either advancethor abaſeth them rather by froward diſpoſition, then vpright iudgement. To make actions to be knowen and ſeene, is the meere worke of fortune, It is chance that applyeth glory vnto vs, according to her temeritie. I have often ſeene it to goe before deſert; yea and many times to out-goe merite by very much. He that firſt bethought himſelfe of the reſemblance betweene ſhadow and glory, did better than he thought of. They are exceeding vaine things. It alſo often goeth before hir body, and ſometimes exceeds by much in length. Thoſe who teach Nobility to ſeeke in valour nothing but honor: Quaſi non ſit honestum quod nobilitatum non ſit; As though it were not honest, except it were ennobled. What gaine they by it? But to inſtruct them never to hazard themſelves, vnleſſe they be ſeene of others; and to be very heedy, whether ſuch witneſſes are by, that may report newes of their valour, whereas a thouſand occaſions, to doe well are dayly offered, and no man by to marke them? How many notable particular actions, are buried in the throng of a Battell? Whoſoever ammuſeth himſelfe to controule others, in ſo confuſed a hurly-burly, is not greatly buſied about it: and produceth the teſtimony which hee giveth of his fellowes proceedings or exploits againſt himſelfe. Vera & ſapiens animi magnitudo, honestum illud quod maxime naturam ſequitur, in factis poſitum, non in gloria iudicat. A true and wiſe magnanimitie esteemeth that honesty, which especially followeth Nature, to conſist in good actions, and not in glory, All the glory I pretend in my life, is, that I have lived quietly. Quietly not accord to Metrodorius, Arceſilas, or Ariſtippus, but according to my ſelfe. Since Philoſophie could never finde any way for tranquility, that might be generally good, let every man in his particular ſeeke for it. To whom are Caeſar and Alexander beholding for that infinite greatnes of their renowne, but to fortune? How many men hath ſhe ſuppreſſed in the beginning of their progreſſe, of whom we have no knowledge at all, who bare the ſame courage that others did, if the il fortune of their chance had not ſtaid them even in the budding of their enterpriſes? Amongſt ſo many and ſo extreame dangers (to my remembrance) I never read, that Caeſar received any hurt. A thouſand have dyed in leſſe danger, than the leaſt of thoſe he

eſcaped. Many worthy exploits and excellent deedes muſt be loſt, before one can come to any good. A man is not alwayes vpon the toppe of a breache, nor in the front of an army, in the ſight of his Generall, as vpon a ſtage. A man may be ſurpriſed betweene a hedge and a ditch. A man is ſometimes put to his ſodaine ſhifts, as to try his fortune againſt a Hens-rooſt, to ferret out foure ſeely ſhotte out of ſome barne, yea and ſometimes ſtraggle alone from his troupes; and enterpriſe, according as neceſſity and occaſion offereth it ſelfe. And if it be well noted (in mine adviſe) it will be found, and experience doth teach it, that the leaſt blazoned occaſions, are the moſt dangerous, and that in our late home-warres, more good men have periſhed in ſlight and little-importing occaſions, and incontention about a ſmall cottage, than in worthy atchievements, and honourable places. Who ſo thinketh his death il emploied, except it be in ſome glorious exploite, or famous attempt, in liew of dignifying his death, he happily obſcureth his life: Suffering in the meane time many juſt and honor affoording oportunties to eſcape, wherein he might and ought adventure himſelfe. And all juſt occaſions are glorious enough; his owne conſcience publiſhing them ſufficiently to all2. Car. 1. 12. Aug. bo
                                    •
                                 . 35. men. Gloria noſtra eſt, testimonium conſcienti
                                 •
                               nostra. Our glory is the testimony of our conſcience. He that is not an honeſt man, but by that which other men know by him, and becauſe he ſhall the better be eſteemed, being knowne to be ſo, that will not do well but vpon condition his vertue may come to the knowledge of men; ſuch a one is no man from whom any great ſervice may be drawne, or good expected.
                        
                           Credo ch'il reſte di quel verne, coſeArieſt. Orl. can 11. ſtan 81.
                           
                           Faceſſe degne di tenerne conto.
                           Ma fur fin'a quel tempo ſi n
                                 •
                              ſcoſe,
                           Che non è colpa mia s'hor'non le conto,
                           Perche Orlando a far'
                                 •
                              pre virtuoſe
                           Piu ch'à narrarle poiſempre era pronto;
                           Ne mai fu alcun'de li ſuoi fatti eſpreſſo,
                           Senen quando hebbe i teſtimonij appreſſo.
                           I gueſſe, he of that winter all the reſt
                           Atchiev'd exploites, whereof to keepe account,
                           But they vntill that time were ſo ſuppreſt,
                           As now my fault t'is not, them not to count,
                           Becauſe Orlando ever was more preſt
                           To doe, than tell deeds that might all ſurmount.
                           Nor was there any of his deeds related
                           Vnleſſe ſome witneſſe were aſſociated.
                        
                        A man muſt goe to wars for his devoirs ſake and expect this recompence of it, which cannot faile all worthy actions, how ſecret ſoever▪ no not to vertuous thoughts: It is the contenment that a well diſpoſed conſcience receiveth in it ſelfe, by well doing. A man muſt be valiant for himſelfe and for the advantage he hath to have his courage placed in a conſtant and aſſured ſeate, to withſtand all aſſaults of fortune.
                        
                           Virtus repulſae neſci
                                 •
                               ſordide,Hor car. li 3. od. 2. 17.
                           
                           Iutaminatis fulget honoribus:
                           Nec ſumit aut ponit ſecures
                           Arbitrio popularis a
                                 •
                              rae.
                           Vertue vnskill'd to take repulſe that's baſe,
                           In vndefiled honors clearely ſhines,
                           At the diſpoſe of peoples airy grace
                           She ſignes of honor tak's not, nor reſignes.
                        
                        It is not onely for an exterior ſhew or oſtentaion, that our ſoule muſt play hir part, but inwardly within our ſelves, where no eyes ſhine but ours: There it dooth ſhroud vs from the feare of death, of ſorrowes and of ſhame: There it aſſureth vs, from the loſſe of our children, friends and fortunes; and when oportunitie is offerd it alſo leades vs to the dangers of warre. Non emolumento aliquo, ſed ipſius honeſtatis decore. Not for any advantage, but for
                           Cie. fin. l. 1. 
                           the greacefulnes of honeſtie it ſelfe. This benefit is much greater, and more worthie to be wiſhed and hoped, then honor and glorie, which is nought but a favorable judgement that is made of vs. Wee are often driven to empanell and ſelect a jury of twelve men out of a whole

countrie to determine of an acre of land: And the judgement of our inclinations and actions (the waightieſt and hardeſt matter that is) we referre it to the idle breath of the vaine voice of the common ſort and baſe raskalitie, which is the mother of ignorance, of injuſtice, and inconſtancie. Is it reaſon to make the life of a wiſe man depend on the judgement of fooles? An quidquam ſtultius, quàm quos ſingulos contemnas, eos aliquid putare eſſe vniverſes?
                           Aelian var. hiſt. l. 2. c. 1. 
                           Is there any thing more fooliſh, then to thinke that altogether they are oughts, whom every one ſingle you would ſet at noughts? Whoſoever aimeth to pleaſe them, hath never done: It is a But, that hath neither forme nor holdfaſt. Nil tam inaeſtimabile eſt, quàm animi multitudinis. Nothing is ſo incomprehenſible to be iuſt waied as the mindes of the multitude. Demetrius ſaid merely of the common peoples voice, that he made no more reckoning of that which iſſued from out his mouth above, then of that which came from a homely place below, and ſaith moreover: Ego hoc iudico, ſi quando turpe non ſit, tamen non eſſe non turpe, quum id à multi
                                 •
                              udins laudetur:
                           cic. fin. bon. l. 2. 
                           Thus I eſteeme of it, if of it ſelfe it be not diſhoneſt, yet can it not but be diſhoneſt, when it is applauded by the meny. No arte, no mildeneſſe of ſpirit might direct our ſteps to follow ſo ſtragling and diſordred a guide. In this breathie confuſion of bruites, and frothie Chaos of reports and of vulgar opinions, which ſtill puſh-vs on, no good courſe can be eſtabliſhed. Let vs not propoſe ſo fleeing and ſo wavering an end vnto our ſelves. Let vs conſtantly follow reaſon: And let the vulgar approbation follow vs that way. If it pleaſe: And as it depends all on fortune, we have no lawe to hope for it, rather by any other way then by that. Should I not follow a ſtraite path for it's ſtraightnes, yet would I doe it becauſe experience hath taught me, that in the end, it is the happieſt and moſt profitable. Dedit hoc providentia hominibus munus, vt honeſt a magis iuvarent. Mans providence hath given him this gift that honeſt things ſhould more delight and availe him. The antient Sailer ſaid thus to Neptune in a great ſtorme, Oh God, thou ſhalt ſave me if thou pleaſe, if not, thou ſhalt looſe me; yet will I ke
                                 •
                              p
                                 •
                               my helme ſtill faſt. I have, in my daies, ſeene a thouſand milde, mungrell and ambiguous men, and whom no man thought to be more worldly-wiſe than my ſelfe, looſe themſelves, where I have ſaved my ſelfe.
                        
                           Riſi ſucceſſu poſſe carere dolos.Orid. epiſt. Penel. v. 18.
                           
                           I ſmild to ſee that wily plots.
                           Might want ſucceſſe (and leave men ſots.)
                        
                        
                           Paulus Aemilius going to the glorious expedition of Macedon, advertized the people of Rome during his abſence, not to ſpeake of his actions: For The licence of Iudgements is an eſpeciall let in great affaires. Foraſmuch as all men have not the conſtancy of Fabius againſt common, contrary and detracting voices: who loved better to have his authority diſmembred by mens vaine fantaſies, then not to performe his charge ſo well, with favourable and popular applauſe. There is a kind of I know not what naturall delight, that man hath to heare himſelfe commended, but we yeeld too too-much vnto it.
                        
                           Laudari haud metuam, neque enim mihi cornea fibra eſt,Perſ. ſat. 1. 47
                           
                           Sed recti finem
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               extremum
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               eſſe recuſo
                           Euge tuum & bellè—
                           Nor feare I to be prais'd, for my guttes are not horne,
                           But that the vtmoſt end of good ſhould be, I ſcorne,
                           Thy O well ſaid, well done, well plaid.
                        
                        I care not ſo muh what I am with others, as I reſpect what I am in my ſelfe. I will be rich by my ſelfe, and not by borrowing. Strangers ſee but externall apparances and events a every man can ſet a good face vpon the matter, when within he is full of care, griefe and infirmities. They ſee not my heart, when they looke vpon my outward countenance. There is great reaſon the hypocriſie that is found in warre ſhould be diſcovered: For, what is more eaſie in a man of practiſe, then to flinch in dangers and to counterfeit a gallant and a boaſter, when his heart is full of faintneſſe, and ready to droope for feare? There are ſo many waies to ſhunne occaſions for a man to hazard himſelfe in particular, that wee ſhall have deceived the world a thouſand times, before wee neede engage our ſelves into any perillous attempt; and even when wee finde our ſelves entangled in it, wee ſhall not want skill how to cloake our ſporte with a good face, ſtearne countenance, and bold ſpeeches; although our heart doe quake within vs. And hee that hadde the vſe of the Platonical Ring, whoſe vertue was to make him inviſible that wore it vpon his finger, if it were

turned toward the flat of the hand; many would hide themſelves, when they ſhould moſt make ſhewe of their worth, and would be ſorie to be placed in ſo honorable a place, where neceſſitie may be their warrant of ſafetie.
                        
                           Falſus honor invat, & mendax infamia terretH
                                    •
                                 r. lib. 1. epi. 16. 39.
                           
                           Quem niſi mendoſum & mendacem?—
                           Falſe honour tickles; falſe defame affright's,
                           Whom, but the faulty, and falſe-fierd ſprights?
                        
                        See how all thoſe judgements, that men make of outward apparances, are wonderfully vncertaine and doubtfull, and there is no man ſo ſure a teſtimonie, as every man is to himſelfe: How many horſe-boyes have we in them as partners and companions of our glorie? He that keepes his ſtand in an open trench, what doth he more, but divers poore pioners doe as much before him, who open the way for him, and with their bodies ſhelter him, for poore ſix-pence a day, and happily for leſſe?
                        
                           —non quicquid turbida Roma
                              Perſ. ſat. 1. 5.
                           
                           Elevet, accedas, examénque improbum in illa
                           Caſtiges trutinâ, nec te quaſiver is extrà.
                           If troublous Rome ſet ought at naught, make you not one,
                           Nor chaſtiſe you vnjuſt examination
                           In balance of their lode:
                           Nor ſeeke your ſelfe abrode.
                        
                        We call that a magnifying of our name, to extend and diſperſe the ſame in many mouthes, we will have it to be received in good part, and that it's encreaſe redound to his benefit: This is all that is moſt excuſable in it's deſſeigne: But the infirmity of it's exceſſe proceeds ſo farre, that many labour to have the world ſpeake of them, howſoever it be. Trogus Pompeius ſaith of Heroſtratus, and Titus Livius of Manlius Capitolinus, that they were more deſirous of great, then good reputation. It is an ordinary fault; we endevour more that men ſhould ſpeake of vs, then how and what they ſpeake, and 
                              ••
                           ſufficeth vs, that our name run in mens mouthes, in what manner ſoever. It ſeemeth that to be knowen, is in ſome ſort, to have life and continuance in other mens keeping. As for me▪ I hold that I am but in my ſelfe; and of this other life of mine, which conſiſteth in the knowledge of my friends, being ſimply and barely conſidered in my ſelfe, well I wot, I neither feele fruite or joviſlance of it, but by the vanity of fantaſticall opinion. And when I ſhall be dead, I ſhall much leſſe have a feeling of it: And ſhall abſolutely looſe the vſe of true vtilities, which ſometimes accidentally follow it: I ſhall have no more faſtneſſe to take hold on reputation, nor whereby it may either concerne or come vnto mee. For, to expect my name ſhould receive it: Firſt I have no name that is ſufficiently mine: Of two I have, the one is common to all my race, yea and alſo to others. There is a family at Paris, and another at Montpellier, called Montaigne, another in Brittany, and one in Xa
                                 •
                              togne, ſurnamed dela-Montaigne. The removing of one onely ſillable may ſo confound our webbe, as I ſhall have a ſhare in their glory, and they perhaps a part of my ſhame. And my Anceſtors have heere-to-fore beene ſurnamed Higham, or Eyquem, a ſurname which alſo belongs to a houſe well knowen in England. As for my other name, it is any bodies that ſhall have a minde to it. So ſhall I happily honour a Porter in my ſtead. And ſuppoſe I had a particular marke or badge for my ſelfe, what can it marke when I am no more extant? May it deſſeigne or favour inanity?
                        
                           —nunc levior cippus non imprimit eſſa?
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 bid. 37.
                           
                           Laudat poſter it as, nunc non è manibus illis,
                           Nunc non è tumulo fortunatáque favillâ
                           Naſcuntur violae?
                           Doth not the grave-ſtone on ſuch bones ſit light?
                           Poſterity applaudes: from ſuch a ſpright,
                           From ſuch a tombe, from aſhes bleſſed ſo,
                           Shall there nor violets (in Cart-lodes) grow?
                        
                        But of this I have ſpoken elſewhere. As for the reſt, in a whole battell, where ten thouſand are either maymed or ſlaine, there are not peradventure fifteene that ſhall be much ſpoken off. It muſt be ſome eminent greatnes, or important conſequence, that fortune hath joyned

vnto it, to make a private action prevaile, not of a meane ſhot alone, but of a chieftaine: For, to kill a man, or two, or tenne; for one to preſent himſelfe vndantedly to death, is indeed ſomething to every one of vs in particular; for, a mans free-hold goes on it: But in regarde of the world, they are ſuch ordinarie things, ſo many are daily ſeene, and ſo ſundrie alike muſt concurre together to produce a notable effect, that we can looke for no particular commendation by them.I
                                 •
                              rem ſat. 13. 9
                        
                        
                           —casus multis hic cognitus, aciam
                           
                           Tritus, & è medio fortunae ductus acervo.
                           This caſe is knowne of many, worne with nothing,
                           Drawne from the midle heape of fortunes doting.
                        
                        Of ſo many thouſands of worthie-valiant men, which fifteene hundred yeares ſince have died in France, with their weapons in hand, not one hundred have come to our knowledge: The memorie not onely of the Generals and Leaders, but alſo of the battels and victories lieth now low-buried in oblivion. The fortunes of more then halfe the world, for want of a regiſter, ſtirre not from their place, and vaniſh away without continuance. Had I all the vnknowne events in my poſſeſſion, I am perſwaded I might eaſily ſupplant thoſe that are knowne in all kindes of examples. What? Of the Romanes themſelves, and of the Grecians, amongſt ſo many writers and teſtimonies, and ſo infinit rare exploites and matchles examples: How are ſo few of them come to our notice?
                        
                           Ad nos vix tenuis famae perlabitur aura.Virg. Aen li. 7. 646.
                           
                           Scarſely to vs doth paſſe
                           Fames thin breath, how it was.
                        
                        It ſhall be much, if a hundred yeares hence, the civill warres which lately we have had in France, be but remembred in groſe. The Lacedemonians as they were going to their battles, were wont to ſacrifice vnto the Muſes, to the end their deedes might be well written, and worthily regiſtred; deeming it a divine favor, and vnuſuall grace, that noble actions might finde teſtimonies able to give them life and memorie. Thinke we that at every ſhot that hits vs, or at every dangerous attempt we runne into, to have a Clarke preſent to enrole it: And beſides, it may be, that a hundred Clarkes ſhall write them, whoſe Commentaries ſhall not continue three daies, and ſhall never come to any bodies ſight. We have but the thouſanth part of ancient writings: It is Fortune, which according to hir favor gives them either ſhorter or longer life; and what we have, we may lawfully doubt-of, whether it be the worſe, ſince we never ſaw the reſt. Hiſtories are not writen vpon every ſmall trifle: It is requiſite that a man have beene conqueror of an Empire, or of a Kingdome; a man muſt have obtained two and fiftie ſet battles, and ever with a leſſer number, as Caeſar was and did. Tenne thouſand good-fellowes, and many great Captaines have died moſt valiantly and couragiouſly in purſute of hir, whoſe names have continued no longer then their wives and children lived:
                        
                           —quos fama obſcura recondit.
                              Verg. Aen. l. 5. 292.
                           
                           Whom fame obſcure before
                           Layes vp in vnknowne ſtore.
                        
                        Even of thoſe, whom we ſee to doe excellently well, if they h
                              •
                           ve but once continued ſo three months, or ſo many yeares, there is no more ſpeech of them, then if they had never bin. Whoſoever ſhall in due meaſure proportion, and impartially conſider, of what kinde of people, and of what deedes the glory is kept in the memorie of bookes, he ſhall finde, there are few actions, and very few perſons, that may juſtly pretend any right in them. How many vertuous men have we ſeene to ſurviue their owne reputation, who even in their preſence have ſeene the honor and glorie, which in their young daies, they had right-juſtly purchaſed, to be cleane extinguiſhed? And doe we for three yeares of this fantaſticall and imaginarie life, looſe and foregoe our right and eſſentiall life, and engage our ſelves in a perpetuall death? The wiſer ſorte propoſe aright-fairer, and much more juſt end vnto themſelves, to ſo vrgent and weightie an enterpriſe. Rectè facti, feciſſe merces eſt: Officijfructus, ipſum 
                                 •
                              ſſicium eſt. The reward
                           Senec. epiſt. 81. 
                           of wel doing, is the doing, & the fruit of our duty, is our dutie. It might peradventure be excuſable in a Painter, or other artificer, or alſo in a Rethoritian, or Gramarian, by his labours to endevor to purchaſe a name: But the a
                              •
                           tions of vertue are of themſelves too-too-noble, to ſeeke any other reward, then by their owne worth and merit, and eſpecially to ſeeke it in the vanitie

of mans judgement. If this falſe-fond opinion doe notwithſtanding ſerve and ſtead a common wealth to holde men in their dutie: If the people be thereby ſtirred vp to vertue: If Princes be any way touched, to ſee the world bleſſe and commend the memorie of Trai
                                 •
                              n, and deteſt the remembrance of Nero: If that doth moove them, to ſee the name of that arch-villa ne, heretofore ſo dreadfull and ſo much redoubted of all, ſo boldly curſed, and ſo freely outraged, by the 
                              ••
                           rſt ſcholer that vndertakes him. Let it hardly be encreaſed, and let vs (as much as in vs li
                              •
                           th) ſtill foſter the ſame amongſt our ſelves. And Plato employing all meanes to make his Citizens vertuous, doth alſo perſwade them, not to contemne the peoples good eſtimation. And ſaith, that through ſome divine inſpiration it commeth to paſſe, that even the wicked know often, as well by word, as by opinion, how to diſtinguiſh juſtly the good from the bad. This man, together with his maſter, are woonderfull and bolde workemen, to joyne divine operations and revelations, whereſoever humane force faileth And therefore did peradventure Timon (deeming thereby to wrong him) ſurname him the great forget of miracles. Vt tragici poetae confugiunt ad Deum, cùm explicare argumenti exitum
                           Cic
                                 •
                              . Nat D
                                 ••
                              r. lib. 1. 
                           non p
                                 •
                              ſſunt. As Poets that write Tragedies have recourſe to ſome God, when they cannot vnfold the end of their argument. Since men by reaſon of their inſufficiencie cannot well pay themſelves with good lawfull coyne, let them alſo employ falſe mony. This meane hath beene practiſed by all the law-givers: And there is no common-wealth where there is not ſome mixture either of ceremonious vanitie or of falſe opinion, which as a reſtraint ſerveth to keepe the people in awe and dutie. It is therefore, that moſt of them have ſuch fabulous grounds and trifling beginnings, and enriched with ſupernaturall myſteries, It is that which hath given credite vnto adulterate and vnlawful religions, and hath induced men of vnderſtanding to favour and countenance them. And therefore did Numa and Sertorius, to make their men have a beter beliefe, feede them with this foppery; the one, that the Nimph Egeria, the other that his white Hinde, brought him all the counſel she tooke from the Gods. And the ſame authoritie, which Numa gave his Lawes vnder the title of this Goddeſſes patronage, Zoroastres Law giver to the Bactrians and Perſians, gave it to his, vnder the name of the God Orom
                                 •
                              zis: Triſmegiſtus of the Aegyptians, of Mercurie: Zamolzis of the Scithians, of Veſta: Charondas of the Chalcid onians, of Saturne: Minos of the Candiots, of Iupiter: Lycurgus of the Lacedemonians, of Apollo: Dracon and Solon of the Athenians, of Minerva. And every common wealth hath a God to her chief: all others falſly, but that truly, which Moſes inſtituted for the people of Iewry deſceded from Aegypt. The Bedoins religion (as ſaith the Lord of Iovinuile) held among other things that his ſoule which among them al died for his Prince went directly into another more happy body, much fairer and ſtronger than the firſt: by means wherof, they much more willingly hazarded their live for his ſake.
                        
                           In ferrum mens pronavir
                                 ••
                              , animaque capacesLuca. l. 1. 461.
                           
                           Mortis: & ignavum eſt rediturae parcerevitae.
                           Thoſe men ſword▪ minded, can death entertaine,
                           Thinke baſe to ſpare the life that turnes againe.
                        
                        Loe-heere, although very vaine, a moſt needefull doctrine, and profitable beliefe. Everie Nation hath ſtore of ſuch examples in itſelfe. But this ſubject would require a ſeverall diſcourſe. Yet to ſay a word more concerning my former purpoſe: I doe not counſell Ladies any longer to call their duty, honour: vt enim conſuetudo loquitur, id ſolum dicitur honestum, quod
                           Cit. fin. l. 2. 
                           eſt populari famâ glorioſum: For as cuſtome ſpeakes, that onely is called honeſt which is glorious by popular report. Their duty is the marke; their honour but the barke of it. Nor doe I perſwade them to give vs this excuſe of their refuſall, in payment; for I ſuppoſe, their intentions, their deſire, and their will, which are parts wherein honor can ſee nothing foraſmuch as nothing appeareth outwardly there, are vet more ordred then the effects.
                        
                           Quae, quia non liceat, non facit, illa facit.Ovid. Am. l. 3. el. 4. 4.
                           
                           She doth it, though ſhe doe it not,
                           Becauſe ſhe may not doe't (God wot.)
                        
                        The offence both toward God, and in conſcience, would be as great to deſire it, as to effect the ſame. Beſides, they are in themſelves actions ſecret and hid; it might eaſily be, they would ſteale ſome one from others knowledge, whence honor dependeth, had they no other reſpect to their duty, and affection, which they beare vnto chaſtity, in regard of it ſelfe. Each honorable perſon chuſeth rather to looſe his honour, then to forgoe his conſcience.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        The ſeuenteenth Chapter.
                        
                           Of Preſumption.
                        
                        THere is another kinde of glorie, which is an over-good opinion we conceive of our worth. It is an inconſiderate affection, wherewith wee cheriſh our ſelves, which preſents-vs vnto our ſelves other then wee are. As an amorous paſſion addeth beauties, and lendeth graces to the ſubject it embraceth, and maketh ſuch as are therewith poſſeſſed, with a troubled conceite, and diſtracted Iudgement, to deeme what they love, and finde what they affect, to bee other, and ſeeme more perfect, then in trueth it is. Yet would I not have a man, for feare of offending in that point, to miſacknowledge himſelfe, nor thinke to bee leſſe then hee is: A true Iudgement ſhould wholy and in every reſpect maintaine his right. It is reaſon, that as in other things, ſo in this ſubject hee ſee what truth preſenteh vnto him. If hee be Caesar, let him hardly deeme himſelfe the greateſt Captaine of the world. We are nought but ceremonie; ceremonie doth tranſport▪ vs, and wee leave the ſubſtance of things; wee hold-faſt by the boughs, and leave the trunke or body. We have taught Ladies to bluſh, onely by hearing that named, which they nothing feare to doe. Wee dare not call our members by their proper names, and feare not to employ them in all kinde of diſſoluteneſſe. Ceremonie forbids vs by words to expreſſe lawfull and naturall things; and we believe it. Reaſon willeth vs to doe no bad or vnlawfull things, and no man giveth credite vnto it. Heare I find my ſelfe entangled in the lawes of Ceremonie, for it neither allowes a man to ſpeake ill or good of himſelfe. Therefore will wee leave her at this time. Thoſe whom Fortune (whether wee ſhall name her good or bad) hath made to paſſe their life in ſome eminent or conſpicuous degree, may by their publike actions witneſſe what they are; but thoſe whom ſhe never emploied, but in baſe things, and of whom no man ſhall ever ſpeake, except themſelves doe it, they are excuſable, if they dare ſpeake of themſelves to ſuch as have intereſt in their acquaintance, after the example of Lucilius:
                        
                        
                           Ille velut fidis arcana ſodalibus olimHor. ſ
                                    •
                                 r. l. 2. ſat. 1. 30.
                           
                           Credebat libris, neque ſi malè: ceſſer at vſquam
                           Decurre
                                 •
                              s ali
                                 •
                              , neque ſi benè: quo fit, vt omnis
                           Votivâ pateat veluti deſcripta tabellâ
                           Vita ſ
                                 •
                              nis.—
                           He truſted to his booke, as to his truſty friend
                           His ſecrets, nor did he to other refuge bend,
                           How ever well, or ill, with him his fortune went.
                           Hence is it, all the life is ſeene the old man ſpent,
                           As it were in a Table noted,
                           Which were vnto ſome God devoted.
                        
                        This man committed his actions and imaginations to his paper and as he felt, ſo he pourtraiedC
                                 •
                              r
                                 •
                              . Tacit. vi
                                 •
                               I
                                 •
                              l. Agri
                                 •
                              . himſelfe. Nec id Rutili
                                 •
                               & Scauro citra fidem, aut ob
                                 •
                              rectationifuit. Nor was that without credit, or any imputation to Rutilius or Scaurus. I remember then, that even from my tendereſt infancy, ſome noted in me a kind of I know not what faſhion in carrying of my body, and geſtures, witneſſing a certaine vaine and fooliſh fierceneſſe. This I will firſt ſay of it, that it is not inconvenient to have conditions ſo peculiar, and propenſions ſo incorporated in vs, that we have no meane to feele, or way to know them. And of ſuch naturall inclinations, vnknowne to vs, and without our conſent, the body doth eaſily retaine ſome ſigne or impreſſion. It was an affectation witting of his beauty, which made Alexander to bend his head a little on one ſide, and Alcibiades, his ſpeach ſomewhat effeminate and liſping: Iulius Caeſar was wont to ſcrath his head with one finger, which is the countenance of a man ſurcharged with painefull imaginations: And Cicero (as I remember) had gotten a cuſtome to wrythe his Noſe▪ which ſignifieth a naturall ſcoffer. Such motions may vnawares and imperceptibly

poſſeſſe-vs. Others there be which are artificiall, whereof I will not ſpeake. As ſalutations, reverences, or conges, by which ſome doe often purchaſe the honor, (but wrongfully) to be humble, lowly, and courteous: A man may be humble through glory. I am very prodigall of cappings, namely in Summer, and I never receive any from what quality of men ſoever, but I giue them as good and as many as they bring, except he be ſome ſervant of mine. I wiſh that ſome Princes whom I know, would be more ſparing, and impartial diſpencers of them; for, being ſo indiſcreetly employed, they have no force at all: If they be without regard, then are they without effect. Amongeſt diſordered countenaunces, let vs not forget the ſterne looke of Constantius the Emperour, who in publike held ever his head bolt-vpright, without turning or bending the ſame on any ſide, no not ſo much as to looke on them that ſaluted him ſideling, holding his body ſo fixt and vnmooveable, that let his Coche ſhake never ſo much, he kept ſtill vp-right: he durſt never ſpit nor wipe his Noſe, nor dry his face before the people. I wot not whether thoſe geſtures, which were noted in me were of this firſt condition, and whether in truth I had any ſecret propenſion to this fault, as it may well be: and I cannot anſwer for the motions of my body. But concerning thoſe of the ſoule, I will heere ingeniouſly confeſſe what I thinke of them. There are two parts in this glory: Which is to ſay, for a man to eſteeme himſelfe overmuch, the other, not ſufficiently to eſteeme of others. For the one, firſt me thinkes, theſe conſiderations ought ſomewhat to be accompted of. I feele my ſelfe ſurcharged with one errour of the minde, which both as bad, and much more as importunate, I vtterly diſlike. I endevour to correct it; but I cannot diſplace it. It is, becauſe I abate the juſt value of thoſe things, which I poſſeſſe; and enhance the worth of things, by how much they are more ſtrange, abſent and not mine owne. This humour extends it ſelfe very farre, as doth the prerogative of the authority, wherewith husbands looke vpon their owne wives with a vicious diſdame, and many fathers vpon their children: So doe I, and betweene two like workes would I ever weigh againſt mine. Not ſo much that the jealouſie of my preferment, and amendment troubleth my judgement, and hindereth me from pleaſing my ſelfe, as that maſtery hirſelfe begets a contempt of that which a man poſſeſſeth and oweth. Policies, far cuſtomes and tongues flatter me; and I perceive the Latine tongue by the favour of hir dignity to deceive me, beyond what belongs vnto hir, as children and the vulgar ſort. My neighbours oeconomie; his houſe, and his horſe, though but of equall value, is more worth then mine, by how much more it is not mine owne. Beſides, becauſe I am moſt ignorant in mine owne matters: I admire the aſſurance, and wonder at the promiſe, that every man hath of himſelfe: whereas there is almoſt nothing, that I wot I know, nor that I dare warrant my ſelfe to be able to doe. I have not my faculties in propoſition, or by eſtate, and am not inſtructed in them but after the effect: As doubtfull of mine owne ſtrength, as vncertaine of anothers force. Whence it followeth, if commendably I chance vpon any one piece of worke, I rather impute it to my fortune, then aſcribe it to mine induſtry; foraſmuch as I deſſeigne them all to hazard, and in feare. Likewiſe I have this in generall, that of all the opinions, which Antiquity hath had of man in groſe, thoſe which I moſt willingly embrace, and whereon I take moſt hold, are ſuch as moſt vilifie, contemne, and annihilate vs. Me thinkes Philoſophy hath never better cardes to Shew, then when ſhe checketh our preſumption, and croſſeth our vanity; when in good ſooth ſhe acknowledgeth hir irreſolution, hir weakeneſſe and hir ignorance. Me ſeemeth the over good conceit, and ſelfe-weening opinion man hath of himſelfe, is the Nurce-mother of the falſeſt opinions, both publike and particular. Thoſe which a cocke-horſe will pearch themſelves vpon the Epicicle of Mercury, and ſee ſo farre into heaven, they even pull out my teeth. For in the ſtudy which I profeſſe, the ſubject whereof is Man, finding ſo extreame a variety of judgements, ſo inextricable a laberinth of difficulties one vpon the necke of another, ſo great diverſity, and ſo much vncertainty, yea even in the ſchoole of wiſedome it ſelfe: you may imagine ſince thoſe men could never be reſolved of the knowledge of themſelves and of their owne condition, which is continually before their eyes, which is ever within them; ſince they know not how that mooveth, which themſelves cauſe to moove, nor how to ſet forth the ſprings, and deſcipher the wards, which themſelves hold and handle, how ſhould I thinke of the true cauſe of the flux and reflux of the river Nilus? The curioſity to know things hath beene given to men (as ſaith the holy Scripture) for a ſcourge. But to come to my particular, it is very hard (mee ſeemeth) that ſome other regardeth himſelfe

leſſe, yea and ſome other eſteemeth me leſſe then I eſteeme my ſelfe. I accompt my ſelfe of the comon ſort except in that I deeme myſelfe guiltie of the baſeſt, and culpable of the moſt popular defects: but not diſavowed nor excuſed. And I only priſe my ſelfe, wherein I know my worth. If any glory be in me, it is but ſuperficially infuſed into me; by the treaſon of my complexion: and hath no ſolide body appearing to the ſight of my judgement. I am but ſprinckled over, but not throughly dyed. For in trueth, touching the effects of the ſpirite, in what manner ſoever, there never came any thing from me, that contented me. And others approbation is no currant payment for me. My judgement is tender and hard eſpecially in mine owne behalfe. I feele my ſelfe to waver and bend through weakeneſſe: I have nothing of mine owne to ſatisfie my judgement. My ſight is indifferently cleare and regular; but if I take any ſerious worke in hand, it is trobled, and dimmed: as I perceive moſt evidenly in Poeſie: I love it exceedingly: I have ſome inſight or knowledge in other mens Labours, but in trueth I play the Novice when I ſet my hand vnto it: Then can I not abide my ſelfe. A man may play the foole every where elſe, but not in Poeſie.
                        
                           —mediocribus eſſe poetis
                              Hor. art. Poet. 372.
                           
                           Non dij, non homines, non conceſſere columnae.
                           Nor Gods, nor men, nor pillers gave the graunt,
                           That Poets in a meane, ſhould meanely chaunt.
                        
                        I would to God this ſentence were found in the front of our Printers or Stacioners ſhops, to hinder the entrance of ſo many bald-rimers.
                        
                           —verum
                              Mart. lib. 12. epig. 64.
                           
                           Nil ſecurius eſt malò Poeta.
                           Nothing ſecurer may be had,
                           Then is a Poet bolde and bad.
                        
                        Why have we no ſuch people? Dioniſius the father eſteemed nothing in himſelfe ſo much as his poeſie. In the times of the Olimpike games, with chariots exceeding all other in magnificence, he alſo ſent Poets and Muſitians to preſent his verſes, with tents and pavilions gilt and moſt ſumtuouſly tapiſtred. When they firſt beganne to reherſe them, the favour and excellencie of the pronuntiation did greatly allure the peoples attention: but when they beganne to conſider the fondneſſe of the compoſition, they fell as ſoone to contemne them: and being more and more exaſperated fell furiouſly into an vprore, and headlong ranne in moſt ſpitefull maner to teare and caſt downe all his pavillions. And foraſmuch as his rich chariets did no good at all in their courſe, and the ſhip which carried his men, returning homeward miſſed the ſhore of Sicilie, and was by violent ſtormes driven and ſpilt vpon the coaſt of Tarentum, they certainly believed, the wrath of the Gods to have beene the cauſe of it, as being greatly offended, both againſt him, and his vile and wicked Poeme: yea and the Mariners themſelves that eſcaped the ſhipwracke did much ſecond the peoples opinion: to which the Oracle that foretold his death ſeemed in ſome ſorte to ſubſcribe: which implied, that Dioniſius ſhould be neere his end, at what time he had vanquiſhed thoſe that ſhould be of more worth than himſelfe: Which he interpreted to be the Carthaginians, who exceeded him in might. And having at any time occaſion to fight or grapple with them, that he might not incurre the meaning of this prediction, he would often temper and avoyde the victory. But he miſ-vnderſtoode the matter, for the God obſerved the time of advantage, when as through partiall favour and injuſtice he obtained the victory over the tragicall Poets at Athens, who were much better than he was, where he cauſed in contention of them, his Tragedie, entitled the Lenetens, to be publikely acted. After which vſurped victorie, he preſently deceaſed: And partly through the exceſſive joy, hee thereby conceived. What I finde excuſable in mine, is not of itſelfe, and according to truth: but in compariſon of other compoſitions, worſe than mine, to which I ſee ſome credite given. I envie the good happe of thoſe, which can applaude and gratifie themſelves by their owne labours; for it is an eaſie matter for one to pleaſe himſelfe, ſince he drawes his pleaſure from him ſelfe: Eſpecially if one bee ſomewhat conſtant in his owne wilfulneſſe. I knowe a Poetaſter, gainſt whom both weake and ſtrong, in company and at home, both heaven and earth, affirme and ſay, he hath no skill or judgement in Poeſie, who for all that is nothing diſmaied, nor will not abate one jote of that meſure whereunto he hath fitted himſelfe; but is ever beginning againe, ever conſulting anew, and alwayes perſiſting; by ſo much the more fixed in

his opinion, by how much the more it concerneth him alone, and he onely is to maintaine it. My compoſitions are ſo farre from applauding mee, that as many times as I looke them over, ſo often am I vexed at them.
                        
                           Cùm relego, ſcripfiſſe pudet, quia plurima cerno,Ovid. Pont. lib. 1. 
                                    •
                                 . 6. 15.
                           
                           Me quoque qui feci, iudice digna lini.
                           When I re-reade, I ſhame I write for much I ſee,
                           My ſelfe, who made them, being judge, blotted to be.
                        
                        I have ever an Idea in my mind, which preſents me with a better forme, then that I have alreadie framed, but I can neither lay hold on it, nor effect it. Yet is that Idea but of the meaner ſtamp. I thereby conclude, that the productions of thoſe rich and great mindes of former ages, are farre beyond the extreame extention of my wiſh and imagination. Their compoſitions doe not onely ſatisfie and fill me, but they aſtoniſh and wrap me into admiration. I judge of their beauty, I ſee it, if not to the end, at leaſt ſo far as it is impoſible for me to aſpire vnto it. Whatſoever I vndertake (as Plutarke ſaith of one) I owe a ſacrifice to the Graces, hoping thereby to gaine their favour.
                        
                           —ſi quid enim placet,
                           
                           Siquid dulce hominum, ſenſibus influit,
                           Debentur lepidis omnia gratijs.
                           If ought doe pleaſe, if any ſweet
                           The ſenſe of men with pleaſures greet,
                           To thanke the Graces it is meet.
                        
                        They altogether forſake mee: What I doe, it is but bunglingly, and wants both poliſhing and beauty. I can rate them at no higher value, then they are worth. My work manſhip addeth no grace vnto the matter. And that's the reaſon I muſt have it ſtrong, with good holdfaſt, and ſhining of it ſelfe. If I chance to ſeize on any popular and more gay, it is to follow me, who love not a ceremonious prudence and gloomy wiſedome, as doth the world; and to glad my ſelfe, not my ſtile, who would rather have it grave and ſevere: If at leaſt I may call that a 
                              ••
                           ile, which is a formeleſſe and abrupt ſpeech. A popular gibriſh, and a proceeding without definition, without partition, and ſanſe concluſion, troubled as that of Amafanius, and Rabirius. I can neither pleaſe, nor glad, nor tickle. The beſt tale in the world comming into my hands, becomes withered and tarniſhed. I cannot ſpeake but in good earneſt, and am altogether barren of that facility which I ſee in many of my companions, to entertaine firſt commers, to keep a whole troupe in talk, to ammuſe a Princes eares with al maner of diſcourſes and never to be weary, and never to want matter, by reaſon of the graces they have in applying their firſt approches, and fitting them to the humour and capacity of thoſe they have to doe withall. Princes loue not greatly ſerious and long diſcourſes, nor I to tell tales. The firſt and eaſieſt reaſons (which are commonly the beſt taken) I can neither employ nor make vſe of them. I am an ill Orator to the common ſort. I ſpeake the vtmoſt I know of all matters. Cicero thinkes, in diſcourſes of Philoſophy, the exordium to be the hardeſt part: If it be ſo, I wiſely lay hold on the concluſion. Yet ſhould a man know how to tune his ſtrings to all aires: And the ſharpeſt comes ever laſt in play. There is at laſt as much perfection in raiſing vp an empty, as to vphold a waighty thing: A man muſt ſometimes handle matters but ſuperficially, and at other times dive into them. I wot well that moſt men keepe themſelves on this low ſtage, becauſe they conceive not of things but by the outward ſhew. I alſo know, that the greateſt Clarkes, yea Xenophon and Plato, are often ſeene to yeelde to this low and popular faſhion, in ſpeaking of matters, vpholding it with thoſe graces, which they never want. As for the reſt, my language hath neither facility nor fluency in it, but is harſh and ſharpe, having free and vnſinnowy diſpoſitions. And ſo it liketh mee, if not by my judgement, yet by my inclination. But yet I perceive that ſometimes I wade to farre into it, and that forcing my ſelfe to avoide arte and affectation, I fall into it another way.
                        
                           —breuis eſſe laboro,
                              Hor. art. P
                                    ••
                                 s. 25.
                           
                           Obſcurus fio.—
                           To be ſhort labor I?
                           I darker grow thereby.
                        
                        
                           Plato ſaith, that either long or ſhort, are not properties, that either diminiſh or give price

vnto ſpeech. If I ſhould vndertake to follow this other ſmoothe, even and regular ſtile, I ſhould never attaine vnto it. And although the cadences, and breakings of Saluſt doe beſt agree with my humour, yet doe I finde Caeſar both greater, and leſſe eaſie to bee repreſented. And if my inclination doth rather carrie mee to the imitation of Senecaes ſtile, I omit not to eſteeme Plutarke much more. As well in ſilence as in ſpeech, I am ſimply my naturall forme, whence happily enſueth, that I am more in ſpeaking than in writing. The motions and actions of the body, give life vnto words, namely in them that move roundly and without affectation, as I doe, and that will be earneſt. Behaviour, the face, the voice, the gowne, and the place, may ſomewhat endeare thoſe things, which in themſelves are but meane, as prating. Meſſala complaineth in Tacitus of certaine ſtrait garments vſed in his time, and diſcommendeth the faſhion of the benches whereon the Orators were to ſpeake, ſaying, they weakened their eloquence. My French tongue is corrupted both in the pronuntiation, and elſe-where by the barbariſme of my countrie. I never ſaw man of theſe hither-countries, that did not evidently taſte of his home-ſpeech, and who often did not wound thoſe eares, that are purely French. Yet is it not becauſe I am ſo cunning in my Perigordin: For I haue no more vſe of it, than of the Dutch, nor doe I greatly care. It is a language (as are many others round about me) like to that of Poitou, Xaintogne, Angouleſme, Limoſin, and Auergne, ſquattering, dragling, and filthie. There is about vs, toward the mountaines a Gaſcoine tongue, which I much commend and like, ſinnowie, pithie, ſhort, ſignificant, and in truth man-like and militarie, more than any other I vnderſtand. As compendious powerfull, and pertinent as the French is gracious, delicate, and copious. As for the Latine, which was given me for my mother-tongue, by reaſon of diſcontinuance, I have ſo loſt the promptitude of it, as I cannot well make vſe of it in ſpeech, and ſcarſely in writing, in which I have heerctofore beene ſo ready, that I was called a maſter in it. Loe heere my little ſufficiencie in that behalfe. Beauty is a part of great commendation in the commerce and ſocietie of men. It is the chiefe meane of reconciliation betweene one and other. Nor is there any man ſo barbarous, and ſo hardhearted, that in ſome ſort feeleth not himſelfe ſtrucken with her ſweetneſſe. The body hath a great part in our being, and therein keepes a ſpeciall ranke: For, his ſtructure and compoſition are worthy due conſideration. Such as goe about to ſunder our two principall parts, and ſeparate them one from another, are much to blame: They ought rather to be coupled and joined faſt together. The ſoule muſt be enjoined not to retire her ſelfe to her quarter, nor to entertaine her ſelfe apart, nor to deſpiſe and leave the bodie (which ſhe cannot well doe, except it beby ſome counterfaited apiſh tricke) but ought to combine and cling faſt vnto him, to embrace, to cheriſh, aſſiſt, correct, perſwade and adviſe him, and if he chance to ſwarve or ſtray, then to leade and direct him: In fine, ſhe ſhould wed and ſerve him in ſtead of a husband, that ſo their effects may not ſeeme contrary and divers, but agreeing and vniforme. Chriſtians have a particular inſtruction concerning this bond, for they know that Gods juſtice alloweth this ſocietie, and embraceth this conjunction of the body and ſoule, yea ſo farre as to make the body capable of euerlaſting rewards. And that God beholds the whole man to worke, and will have him entirely to receive either the puniſhment, or the recompenſe, according to his demerits. The Peripatetike Sect (of all Sects the moſt ſociable) attributeth this onely care vnto wiſedome, in common to procure and provide, the good of theſe two aſſociated parts: And declareth other Sects to have partialized overmuch, becauſe they had given themſelves to the full conſideration of this commixture; this one for the bodie, this other for the ſoule, with one like error and overſight, and had miſtaken their ſubject, which is Man; and their guide, which in generall they avouched to be Nature. The firſt diſtinction, that hath beene amongſt men, and the firſt conſideration, that gave preheminences to ſome over others, it is very likely it was the advantage of beautie.
                        
                           —agros diviſere atque dedere
                              Lucr. l. 5. 11. 20.
                           
                           Pro facie cuiuſque & viribus ingenióque:
                           Nam facies multum valuit, viréſque vigebant.
                           They lands divided and to each man ſhared
                           As was his face, his ſtrength, his wit compared.
                           For face and ſtrength were then
                           Much prized amongſt men.
                        
                        I am of a ſtature ſomewhat vnder the meane. This default hath not only vncomlineſſe in

it, but alſo incommoditie: Yea even in thoſe which have charge and commandement over others; For, the authoritie which a faire preſence and corporall majeſtie endoweth a man withall is wanting. Caius Marius did not willingly admit any Souldiers in his bands, that were not ſix foot high. The Courtier hath reaſon to require an ordinarie ſtature in the Gentleman he frameth, rather, than any other; and to avoid all ſtrangeneſſe that may make him to be pointed-at; But if he miſſe of this mediocritie, to chuſe that he rather offend in lownes, then in tallnes. I would not doe it in a militarie man. Little men (ſaith Ariſtotle) are indeede pretie, but not beauteous, nor goodly: and in greatnes, is a great ſoule knowne as is beautie in a great and high body. The Ethiopians and Indians (ſaith he) in chuſing of their Kings and Magiſtrates, had an eſpeciall regard to the beautie and tallnes of the perſons. They had reaſon, for it breedeth an awfull reſpect in thoſe that follow him, and a kind of feare in his enimes, to ſee a goodly, tall and handſome man march as Chiefe and Generall in the head of an armie, or front of a troup:
                        
                           Ipſe inter primos praeſtanti corpore TurnusVirg. Aen li. 7. 725.
                           
                           Vertitur, armatenens, & toto vertice ſuprà eſt.
                           Turnus, a goodly man, mongſt them that led,
                           Stood arm'd, then all they higher by the head.
                        
                        Our great, divine and heavenly King, all whoſe circumſtances ought with much care, religion and reverence to be noted and obſerved, hath not refuſed the bodies commendation. Specioſus formá prae filigs hominum. In favor beautifull above the ſonnes of men. And Plato wiſhethPſal. 45. 3. beautie to be joyned vnto temperance and fortitude in the preſervers of his Commonwealth. Is it not a great ſpite, if being amongſt your owne ſervants, a ſtranger commeth to your ſelfe to aske you where your Lord or Maiſter is? And that you have nothing but the remainder of a capping, which is as well put off to your Barber, or to your Secritarie? As it happened to poore Philopaemen, who having left his companie behind, and comming alone into a houſe where he was expreſly looked-for, his hoſteſſe who knew him not, and ſaw him to be ſo il-favored a fellow, employed him to helpe her maides to drawe water, and to mend the fire for the ſervice of Philopaemen. The Gentlemen of his traine being come and finding him ſo buſily at worke (for he failed not to fulfill his hoſteſſes commandement) enquired of him what he did, who anſwered, I pay the penaltie of my vnhandſomneſſe. Other beauties are for women. The beautie of a handſome comely tallneſſe is the only beautie of men. Where lowneſſe and littleneſſe is, neither the largeneſſe or rouudneſſe of a forehead, nor the whiteneſſe or lovelineſſe of the eyes, nor the prettie faſhion of a noſe, nor the ſlenderneſſe of the eare, littleneſſe of the mouth, order and whiteneſſe of teeth, ſmooth thickneſſe of a beard, browne like a cheſſe-nut, well-curled and vpſtanding haire, juſt proportion of the head, freſhneſſe of collour, the cheerful aſpect of a pleaſing face, the ſweet-ſmelling of a body, nor the well decorated compoſition of all limmes, can make a handſome beautious man. As for me, I am of a ſtrong and well compacted ſtature, my face is not fat, but full, my complexion betweene joviall and melancholy, indifferently ſanguine and hote.
                        
                           
                              Ʋnde rigens ſetis mihi crura, & pector a villis:
                                 
                                    ••
                                 a
                                    •
                                 t. li. 6. epig. 56. 1.
                           
                           Where by my legs and breſt,
                           With rough haire are oppreſt.
                        
                        My health is blithe and luſtie, though well-ſtrooken in age, ſeldome troubled with diſeaſes: Such I was, for I am now engaged in the aproches of age, having long ſince paſt-over fortie yeares.
                        
                           —minutatim vires & robur adultum
                              Luer. l. 2. I 140.
                           
                           Frangit, & in partem peiorem liquitur aetas.
                           By little and a little age break's ſtrength,
                           To worſe and worſe declining melt's at length.
                        
                        What hereafter I ſhall be, will be but halfe a being. I ſhall be no more my ſelfe. I daily eſcape, and ſtill ſteale my ſelfe from my ſelfe:
                        
                           Singula de nobis anni praedantur cuntes.Hor. li. 2. epiſt. 2. 55.
                           
                           Yeares as they paſſe away,
                           Of all our things make pray.
                        
                        Of addreſſing, dexteritie, and diſpoſition, I never had any, yet am I the ſonne of a well diſpoſed father, and of ſo blithe and mery a diſpoſition, that it continued with him even to his

extreameſt age. He ſeldome found any man of his condition, and that could match him in all exerciſes of the body; As I have found few, that have not out-gon me, except it were in running, wherein I was of the middle ſort. As for muſicke, were it either in voice, which I have moſt harſh, and very vnapt, or in inſtruments, I could never be taught any part of it. As for dancing, playing at tennis, or wreſtling; I could never attaine to any indifferent ſufficiencie; but none at all in ſwimming, in fencing in vauting, or in leaping. My hands are ſo ſtiffe and nummie, that I can hardly write for my ſelfe, ſo that what I have once ſcribled, I had rather frame it a new, than take the paines to correct it; and I reade but little better. I perceive how the auditorie cenſureth me: Otherwiſe I am no bad clarke. I cannot very well cloſe vp a letter; nor could I ever make a pen. I was never good carver at the table. I could never make readie nor arme a Horſe: Nor handſomely arry a Hawke vpon my fiſt, nor caſt her off or let her flie, nor could I ever ſpeake to Dogges, to Birds, or to Horſes. The conditions of my body are in fine, very well agreeing with thoſe of my minde, wherein is nothing lively; but onely a compleate and conſtant vigor. I endure labour and paine, yet not very well, vnleſſe I carry my ſelfe vnto it, and no longer than my deſire leadeth and directeth me.
                        
                           Molliter auſterum ſtudio fallente laborem.Ser. lib. 2. ſa. 2. 12.
                           
                           While earneſtneſſe for ſport or gaine,
                           Sweetly deceiv's the ſowreſt paine.
                        
                        Otherwiſe, if by any pleaſure I be not allured, & if I have other direction, than my genuine and free will, I am nothing worth, and I can never fadgewell: For I am at ſuch a ſtay, that except for health and life, there is nothing I will take the paines to fret my ſelfe about, or will purchaſe at ſo high a rate, as to trouble my wits for it, or be conſtrained thereunto.
                        
                           —Tanti mihi non ſit opaci
                              Iurem ſat. 3. 54
                                    •
                                 
                              
                           
                           Omnis arena Tagi, quódque in mare voluitur aurum:
                           So much I weigh not ſhadowed Tagui ſande,
                           Nor gold that roules into the Sea from land,
                        
                        I am extreamely lazie and idle, and exceedingly free, both by nature and art. I would as willingly lend my blood as my care. I have a mind free and altogether her owne; accuſtomed to follow her owne humor. And to this day never had nor commanding nor forced maiſter. I have gon as farre, and kept what pace pleaſed me beſt. Which hath enfeobled and made me vnprofitable to ſerve others, and made me fit and apt but onely for my ſelfe. And as for me, no man euer needed to force this heavie, lither, and idle nature of mine: For, having even from my birth found my ſelfe in ſuch a degree of fortune, I have found occaſion to ſtay there: (An occaſion notwithſtanding, that a thouſand others of mine acquaintance would have taken as a plancke to paſſe over to ſearch, to agitation, and to vnquietnes. (And as I have ſought for nothing, ſo have I taken nothing.
                        
                           Non agimur tumidis ventis Aquilone ſecundo,H
                                    •
                                 r. lib. 2. epiſt. 2. 201
                           
                           Non tamen adverſis aetatem ducimus auſtris:
                           
                              Ʋiribus, ingenio, ſpecie, virtute, loco, re,
                           Extremi primorum, extremis vſque priores.
                           With full ſailes, proſp'rous winde, we doe not drive,
                           Nor yet with winde full in our teeth doe live.
                           In ſtrength, in wit, in vertue, ſhape, goods, place,
                           Laſt of the firſt, before the laſt we pace.
                        
                        I have had no neede but of ſufficiency to content my ſelfe: Which being well taken is ever a regiment for the minde, equally difficult in all ſortes of condition; and which by vſe, we ſee more eaſily found in want, than in plenty; peradventure, becauſe that according to the courſe of our other paſſions, the greedineſſe of riches is more ſharpned by their vſes than by their neede: and the vertue of moderation more rare, than that of patience. And I have had no need, but to enjoy thoſe goods quietlie, which God of his bountie had beſtowed vpon me. I have taſted no kinde of tedious trouble. I have ſeldome mannaged other than mine owne buſineſſe: Or if I have, it hath been vpon condition, I might do it at my leiſure, and according to my will; committed vnto me, by ſuch as truſted me, and knew me well, and would not importune me; For, the skilfull rider, will reape ſome ſervice of a reſtie and windbroken jade. My very Childe-hood hath beene directed by a ſoft, milde, gentle and free faſhion

and ever exempted from rigorous ſubjection. All which hath endowed me with a delicate kinde of complexion, and made me incapable of any care: So that I love, men ſhould conceale my loſtes from me, & the diſorders which concerne me. In the Chapter of my charges and expences, I have ſet downe what my negligence or careleſneſſe coſts me, both to feed and entertaine my ſelfe.
                        
                           —bec nempe ſuper ſuut,
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 or. lib. 1. epiſt. 6. 45.
                           
                           Quae dominum fallunt, quae proſint furibus.
                           This remnant of accoumpts I have,
                           Which may deceive Lords, help a Knave.
                        
                        I love not to know an accompt of what I have, that I may leſſe exactly feele my loſſes: I deſire thoſe that live with mee, where they want affection, or good effects, to cozen and pay me with good apparances. For want of ſufficient conſtancy to endure the importunity of contrary or croſſe accidents, whereunto we are ſubject; and becauſe I cannot alwaies keepe my ſelfe prepared to governe and order my affaires, as much as I am able, I 
                              •
                           oſter this opinion in me, relying wholly vpon fortune, and ready to take every thing at the worſt, and reſolve to beare that worſt, mildely and patiently. About that onely doe I buſie my ſelfe, and to that end doe I direct all my diſcourſes. In any dangerous matter, I care not ſo much how I may avoide it, and how little it importeth whether I avoide it or no; And what were it if I would continue in it? Being vnable to direct events, I governe my ſelfe; and if they apply not themſelves to me, I apply my ſelfe to them: I have no great arte to ſhunne fortune, and how to ſcape or force it, and with wiſedome to addreſſe matters to my liking: I have alſo leſſe ſufferance to endure the ſharpe and painefull care, which belongeth to that. And the moſt toileſome ſtate for me, is to be doubtfull in matters of weight, and agitated betweene feare & hope. To deliberate, be it but in ſlight matters, doth importune me. And I feele my ſpirit more perplexed to ſuffer the motions of doubt, and ſhakings of conſultation, than to be ſettled and reſolved about any accident whatſoever, after the chaunce is once caſt. Fewe paſſions have troubled my ſleepe; but of deliberations the leaſt doth trouble it. Even as of high-waies, I willingly ſeeke to avoyde the downe-hanging, and ſlipperi
                              •
                           , and take the beaten-path, though myrie, and deepe, ſo I may go no lower, and there ſeeke I ſafety: So love I pure miſhapes, and which exerciſe and turmoile me no more, after the vncertaintie of their mending: And which euen at the firſt caſt, drive me directly into ſufferance.
                        
                           —dubia plus torquent mala.
                              S
                                    •
                                 n. Agam. act. 3. ſc. 1. 29.
                           
                           Evils yet in ſuſpence,
                           Doe give vs more offence.
                        
                        In events; I carry my ſelfe man-like; in the conduct childiſhly. The horror of a fall doth more hurt me, than the blow. The play is not worth the candle. The covetous man hath a worſe reckoning of his paſſion, than the poore; and the jealous man, than the cuckold. And it is often leſſe harme for one to looſe his farme, than pleade and wrangle for it: The ſloweſt march, is the ſafeſt. It is the ſeate of conſtancie. Therein you have no need but of your ſelfe. There ſhe takes her footing and wholly reſteth vpon her ſelfe. This example of a Gentleman, whom many have knowen, hath it not ſome Philoſophicall ſhew? This man having paſſed all his youth like a good fellow, a jollie companion, a great talker, and a merry ladde, being now well in yeares, would needes be married. Remembring himſelfe how much the ſubject of cuckoldry had given him cauſe to ſpeake, and ſcoffe at others; to put himſelfe vnder covert-baron, he tooke him a wife from out that place, where all men may have them for mony, and with her made his aliance: Good morrow Whoore, Good morrow Cuckold. And there is nothing wherewith he oftner and more openly entertained ſuch as came vnto him, than with this tale; Whereby he brideled the ſecret pratlings of mockers, and blunted the point of this reproch. Concerning ambition, which is next neighbour or rather daughter to preſumption, it had beene needefull (to advance me) that fortune had come to take me by the hand: For to put my ſelfe into any care for an vncertaine hope, and to ſubmit my ſelfe to all difficulties, waiting on ſuch as ſeeke to thruſt themſelves into credite and reputation, in the beginning of their progreſſe, I could never have done it.
                        
                           —Spem pretio non emo,
                              Ter. Adel. act. 2 ſe. 2.
                           
                           Expence of preſent pay
                           For hope, I do not lay.
                        
                        
                           I faſten my ſelfe on that which I ſee and hold and go not far from the ſhore:
                        
                           Alter remi
                                 •
                              s aquas, alter tibi radat arenas.Throp. lib. 3. ele 2. 23.
                           
                           Keepe water with one Oare,
                           With th'other grate the ſhore.
                        
                        Beſides, a man ſeldome comes to theſe preferments, but in hazarding firſt his own: And I am of opinion, if that which a man hath, ſuffizeth to maintaine the condition, wherein he was borne and brought vp, it is folly to let it go, vpon the vncertainety of encreaſing the ſame. He to whom fortune refuſeth meanes to ſettle his eſtate, and eſtabliſh a quiet and repoſed being, is excuſable if he caſt what he hath at hazard, ſince thus as well as thus, neceſſitie ſends him to ſhift and ſearch out.
                        
                           Capienda rebus in malis preceps via eſt.Sen. Agam. act. 2. Sc. 1. 47.
                           
                           A headlong courſe is beſt,
                           When miſchiefes are addreſt.
                        
                        And I rather excuſe a yonger brother, to make ſale of his inheritance, than him, who hath the honor of his houſe in charge, who cannot fall into wants but through his default: I have by the counſell of my good friendes of former times, found the way ſhorter and eaſier to rid my ſelfe of this deſire and keepe my ſelfe huſht:
                        
                           Cut ſit conditio dulcis, ſine pulvere palmae.Hor. lib. 1. Epiſt 1. 51.
                           
                           Who like it wel
                                 •
                               to beare the priſe.
                           But take no toile in any wiſe.
                        
                        Iudging alſo rightly of my forces `that they were not capable of great matters: And remembring the ſaying of Lord Oliver whilome-Chaunceler of France, who ſaid, that French-men might be compared to Apes, who climbing vp a tree, never ceaſe skipping from bough to bough, till they come to the higheſt, where they ſhew their bare tailes.
                        
                        
                           Turpe eſt quòd nequeat capiti committere pondui,Prop. lib. 3. cle. 8. 5.
                           
                           Et preſſum in
                                 •••
                              xo mox daret erga genu.
                           T' is ſhame, more than it can well beare, on head to packe,
                           And thereby ſoone oppreſſt with bended knee flie backe.
                        
                        Such qualities as are now in me voide of reproch, in that age I deemed vnprofitable. The facilitie of my maners had beene named faintnes and weakneſſe; faith and conſcience would have beene thought ſcrupulous and ſuperſtitious: liberty and freedome, importunate, inconſiderate and rath. Misfortune ſerveth to ſome purpoſe. It is not amiſſe to bee borne in a much depraved age: for in compariſon of others, you are judged vertuous, very cheape. In our dayes, he that is but a partcide, or a ſacrilegious perſon, is a man of 
                                 •
                              oneſty and honor.
                        
                        
                           Nunc ſi depoſitum non inficiatur amicus,
                           Sireddat veterem cum tot
                                 •
                              aerugine follem,
                           Prodigioſafides, & Thuſcis digna libellis,Inven. Sat. 13. 60.
                           
                           Quaeque coronatâ lustrari debeat agnâ.
                           If now a friend deny not what was laide in truſt,
                           If wholly hee reſtore th' old bellowes with their ruſt:
                           A wondrous truſt, to be in Chronicles related,
                           And ſhould with ſacrifice, as ſtrange, be expiated.
                        
                        
                           And never was there time or place, wherein more aſſured and great reward was propoſed vnto Princes for goodneſſe and iuſtice. The firſt that ſhall bee adviſed, by theſe meanes to thruſt himſelfe into favour and credit, I am much deceived if in part of paiment, he get not the ſtart of his fellowes. Force and violence can doe very much; but never all. Weeſee Merchants, countrey-Iuſtices, and Artificers to march cheeke by joll with our Nobilitie, in valour, and military diſcipline. They performe honourable combates, both publike and private. They batter and defend Townes and Cities in our preſent warres. A Prince ſmoothereth his commendation amid this throng. Let him ſhine over others with humanitie, with truth, loyaltie, temperance, and above all with iuſtice; markes now adaies rare, vnknowen and exiled. It is only the peoples will, wherewith he may effect what he pleaſeth: And no other qualities can allure their will ſo much as they, as being the profitableſt for them. Nihil est tam populare quam bonitas. Nothing is ſo popular as goodneſſe is. By this proportion I had beene a rare great man: As by that of certaine ages paſt, I am now a pigmey and popular man; In which it was common, if ſtronger qualities did not concurre withall, To ſee a
                           
                           man temperate in his revenges, milde in revenging of offences, religious in keeping of his word; neither double, nor over tractable, nor applying his faith to others will, or to every occaſion. I would rather let all affaires goe to wrake, than breake my word for their availe. For, touching this new-found vertue of faining and diſſimulation, which now is ſo much in credit, I hate it to the death: and of all vices, I finde none that ſo much witneſſeth demiſſeneſſe and baſeneſſe of heart. It is a coward and ſervile humour, for a man to diſguiſe and hide himſelfe vnder a maske, and not dare to ſhew himſelfe as he is. Thereby our men addreſſe themſelves to trecherie: Being trained to vtter falſe words, they make no conſcience to breake them. A generous minde ought not to belie his thoughts, but make ſhew of his in moſt parts: There all is good, or at leaſt all is humane. Ariſtotle thinkes it an office of magnanimitie to hate and love openly, to iudge and ſpeake with all libertie; and never (though the priſe of truth goe on it) to make eſteeme either of the approbation ot reprobation of others. Apollonius ſaid, it was for ſeruants to lie, and for freemen to ſpeake truth. It is the cheefe and fundamentall part of vertue. Shee muſt be loved for her owne ſake. He that ſpeaketh truth, becauſe hee is bound to doe ſo, and for that hee ſerveth: and that feares not to tell a lie, when it little importeth another man, is not ſufficiently true. My mind of her owne complexion deteſteth falſhood, and hateth to think on it. I feele an inward baſhfulneſſe, and a ſtinging remorce, if at any time it ſcape me; as ſometimes it doth, if vnpremeditated occaſions ſurpriſe me. A man muſt not alwaies ſay all he knowes, for that were follie: But what a man ſpeakes ought to be agreeing to his thoughts, otherwiſe it is impietie. I know not what benefit they expect, that ever faine, and ſo vnceſſantly diſſemble; except it be not to bee beleeved, even when they ſpeake truly. That may deceive men once or twice, but to make a profeſſion to cary it away ſmoothly, and as ſome of our Princes have done, to boaſt, that if their ſhirt were privie to their ſecret and true cogitations, they would burne it: which was the ſaying of ancient Metellus Macedonicus; And that he who cannot diſſemble, cannot raigne, ſerves but only to warne thoſe who have to deale with them, that what they ſay is but vntruth and diſſimulation. Quo quis verſutior & callidior eſt, hoc inviſior & ſuſpectior, detract à opinione probitatis.
                           Cic. Off. lib. 1. 
                           The finer-headed, and more ſubtle-brained a man is, the more is he hated and ſuſpected, if once the opinion of honeſtly be taken from him. It were great ſimplicity for a man to ſuffer himſelfe to be miſled either by the lookes or words of him, that outwardly profeſſeth what he is not inwardly, as did Tiberius. And I know not what ſhare ſuch people may challenge in the commerce of men, never producing any thing, that may be taken for good paiment. Hee who is diſloyall to truth, is likewiſe falſe againſt lying. Such as in our daies, in the eſtabliſhing of a Princes dutie, have only conſidered the good and felicitie of his affaires, and preferred the ſame before the reſpect of his faith and conſcience, would ſay ſomething to a Prince, whoſe affaires fortune hath ſo diſpoſed, that with once breaking and falſifying of his word, hee might for ever confirme and eſtabliſh them. But it goeth otherwiſe. A man may more than once come to ſuch a bargaine. A man during his life concludeth more than one peace or treatie. The commoditie or profit that enviteth them to the firſt diſloyaltie (and daily ſome offer themſelves, as to all other trecheries) ſacrileges, murders, rebellions, treaſons, are vndertaken for ſome kinde of profit. But this firſt gaine brings ever infinite loſſes and dangers with it: caſting this Prince from-out all commerce and meanes of negotiation, by the example of this 
                              ••
                           fidelitie. Solyman of the Ottomans race (a race little regarding the keeping of promiſes or performance of covenants) at what time hee cauſed his Armie to land at Otranto (I being then but a childe) having knowen that Mercurin of Gratinara, and the inhabitants of Caſtro, were detained priſoners, after the Towne was yeelded, contrary to that which by his Captaines had beene capitulated with them, hee ſent word they ſhould be releaſed, and that having other weighty enterpriſes in hand in that countrey, ſuch diſloyaltie, although it had apparance of great and preſent benefit, yet in time to come it would bring a diſtruſt and reproch of infinite prejudice. As for mee, I had rather be importunate and indiſcreet, than a flatterer and a diſſembler. I allow, a man may entermingle ſome point of fierceneſſe and wilfulneſſe, to keepe himſelfe ſo entire and open as I am, without conſideration of others. And mee ſeemeth I become a little more free, where I ſhould be leſſe, and that by the oppoſition of reſpect I grow earneſt. It may alſo bee, that for want of Art I follow mine owne nature. Preſenting to the greater ſort the very ſame licence of ſpeech and boldneſſe of countenance, that I bring from my houſe: I perceive how much it inclineth towards indiſcretion and incivilitie. But although I be ſo faſhioned, my ſpirit is not ſufficiently yeelding to avoid a ſudden

queſtion, or to ſcape it by ſome winding, nor to diſſemble a truth, nor have I memorie able to continue it ſo fained, nor aſſurance ſufficient to maintaine it; and I play the Braggard through feebleneſſe. And therefore I apply my ſelfe to ingenuitie, and ever to ſpeake truth and what I thinke, both by complexion and by intention; leaving the ſucceſſe thereof vnto fortune. Ariſtippus ſaid, that the chiefeſt commoditie her reaped by Philoſophie, was, that he ſpake freely and ſincerely to all men: Memory is an inſtrument of great ſervice, and without which, judgement will hardly diſcharge his duty, whereof I have great want. What a man will propoſe vnto me, he muſt doe it by peece-meales: For, to anſwer to a diſcourſe that hath many heads, lieth not in my power. I cannot receive a charge, except I have my writing tables about me: and if I muſt remember a diſcourſe of any conſequence, be it of any length, I am driven to this vile and miſerable neceſſitie, to learne every word I muſt ſpeake, by rote; otherwiſe I ſhould never doe it well or aſſuredly, for feare my memory ſhould in my greateſt need faile me; which is very hard vnto me, for I muſt have three houres to learne three verſes. Moreover in any long diſcourſe, the libertie or authoritie to remoove the order, to change a word, vnceſſantly altering the matter, makes it more difficult to bee confirmed in the authors memory. And the more I diſtruſt it, the more it troubleth me. It ſerveth me better by chance, and I muſt careleſly ſollicite her, for if I vrge her, ſhe is aſtoniſhed; and if it once beginne to waver, the more I ſound her, the more entangled and intricate ſhee proveth. She will wait vpon me when ſhe liſt, not when I pleaſe. And what I feele in my memorie, I feele in many other parts of mine. I eſchew commandement, duty, and compulſion. What I doe eaſily and naturally, if I reſolve to doe it by expreſſe and preſcribed appointment, I can then doe it no more. Even in my body, thoſe parts, that have ſome liberty, and more particular juriſdiction, doe ſometimes refuſe to obey me, if at any time I appoint and enjoine them to doe me ſome neceſſary ſervices. This forced and tyrannicall preordinance doth reject them, and they either for ſpight or feare ſhrinke and are quailed. Being once in a place, where it is reputed a barbarous diſcourteſie not to pledge thoſe that drinke to you, where although I were vſed with all liberty, in favour of certaine Ladies that were in companie, according to the faſhion of the countrey, I would needs play the good fellow. But it made vs all mery; for the threats and preparation, that I ſhould force my ſelfe beyond my naturall cuſtome, did in ſuch ſort ſtop, and ſtuffe my throat, that I was not able to ſwallow one drop, and was barr'd of drinking all the repaſt. I found my ſelfe glutted and full of drinke by the overmuch ſwilling that my imagination had fore-conceived. This effect is more apparant in thoſe, whoſe imagination is more vehement and ſtrong: yet it is naturall: and there is no man, but ſhall ſometimes have a feeling of it. An excellent Archer being condemned to death, was offered to have his life ſaved, if he would but ſhew any notable triall of his profeſſion, refuſed to make proofe of it; fearing leſt the contention of his will ſhould make him to miſſe-direct his hand, and that in lieu of ſaving his life, hee might alſo loſe the reputation he had gotten in ſhooting in a bow. A man whoſe thoughts are buſie about other matters, ſhall very neere within an inch keepe and alwaies hit one ſelfe ſame number and meaſure of paces, in a place where he walketh; but if heedily hee endevour to meaſure and count them, he ſhall finde that what he did by nature and chance, he cannot doe it ſo exactly by deſſeigne. My Library (which for a countrey Library, may paſſe for a very faire one) is ſeated in a corner of my houſe: if any thing come into my minde, that either I muſt goe ſeeke or write in it, for feare I ſhould forget it in croſſing of my Court, I muſt deſire ſome other body to remember the ſame for me. If ſpeaking, I embolden my ſelfe never ſo little to digreſſe from my Diſcourſe, I doe ever looſe it; which makes mee to keepe my ſelfe in my ſpeech, forced, neere and cloſe. Thoſe that ſerve me, I muſt ever call them, either by their office or countrey: for I finde it very hard to remember names. Well may I ſay, it hath three ſillables, that it's ſound is harſh, or that it beginneth or endeth with ſuch a letter. And ſhould I live long, I doubt not but I might forget mine own name, as ſome others have done heretofore. Meſſala Corvinus lived two yeeres without any memory at all, which is alſo reported of George Trapezoncius. And for mine owne intereſt, I doe often ruminate what manner of life theirs was, and whether wanting that part, I ſhall have ſufficient to maintaine myſelfe in any good ſort: which looking neere vnto, I feare that this defect, if it be perfect, ſhall looſe all the functions of my ſoule.
                        
                           Plenus rimarum ſum, hâc atque illâc perfluo.Ter. Eun. act. 1. ſcen. 2.
                           
                           
                              I am ſo full of holes, I can not holde,
                           I runne out ev'ry way, when tales are tolde.
                        
                        It hath often befallen me, to forget the word, which but three houres before I had either given or received of another, and to forget where I had layed my purſe; let Cicero ſay what he liſt. I helpe my ſelfe to looſe, what I perticularly locke vp. Memoria certè non modè Philoſophiam, ſed omnis vitae vſum, omnéſque artes vna maximè continet. Aſſuredly memorie alone, of all other things compriſeth not onely Philoſophy, but the vſe of our whole life, and all the ſciences. Memorie is the receptacle and caſe of knowledge. Mine being ſo weake, I have no great cauſe to complaine if I know but little. I know the names of Artes in Generall and what they treate of, but nothing further. I turne and toſſe over bookes, but do not ſtudie them; what of them remaines in me, is a thing which I no longer acknowledge to be any bodies elſe. Onely by that hath my judgement profited: and the diſcourſes and imaginations, wherewith it is inſtructed and trained vp. The Authours, the place, the words, and other circumſtances, I ſodainely forget: and am ſo excellent in forgetting, that as much as any thing elſe I forget mine owne writings and compoſitions. Yea, mine owne ſayings are every hand-while alleaged againſt my ſelfe, when God wot I perceive it not. He that would know of me, whence or from whom the verſes or examples, which here I have hudled vp are taken, ſhould greatly put me to my ſhifts, & I could hardly tell it him. Yet have I not begged them, but at famous and very well knowen gates: which though they were rich in themſelves, did never pleaſe me, vnleſſe they alſo came from rich and honourable hands, and that authority concurre with reaſon. It is no great marvell, if my booke follow the fortune of other bookes; and my memory forgoe or forget as well what I write, as what I reade: and what I give, as well as what I receive. Beſides the defect of memory, I have others, which much further my ignorance. My wit is dull and ſlow, the leaſt cloud dimmeth it, ſo that (for example ſake) I never propoſed riddle vnto it (were it never ſo eaſie) that it was able to expound. There is no ſubtility ſo vaine, but confounds me. In games, wherein wit may beare a part, as of cheſſe, of cards, of tables and others, I could never conceive but the common and plaineſt draughts. My apprehenſion is very ſluggiſh and gloomy; but what it once holdeth, the ſame it keepeth faſt: and for the time it keepes it, the ſame it embraceth generally, ſtrictly and deepely. My ſight is quicke, ſound, perfect and farre-ſeeing, but eaſily wearied, if much charged or emploied. By which occaſion I can haue no great commerce with books, but by others ſervice which reade vnto me. Plime the yoonger can inſtruct thoſe that have tri'd it, how much this fore ſlowing importeth thoſe that give themſelves to this occupation. There is no ſpirit ſo wretched or ſo brutiſh, wherein ſome particular facultie is not ſeene to ſhine; and none ſo low buried, but at one hole or other it will ſally out ſometimes. And how it commeth to paſſe, that a minde blinde and ſlumbering in all other things, is in ſome particular effects, lively, cleare and excellent, a man muſt inquire of cunning maſters. But thoſe are the faire ſpirits, which are vniverſall, open, and ready to all, if not inſtructed, at leaſt to be inſtructed. Which I alleage to accuſe mine: For, be it either through weakeneſſe, or retchleſſeneſſe (and to be careleſſe of that which lieth at our feet, which we have in our hands, which neereſt concerneth the vſe of life, is a thing farre from my Dogma or Doctrine) there is none ſo ſimple or ſo ignorant as mine, in divers ſuch common matters, and of which without imputation or ſhame a man ſhould neuer be ignorant; whereof I muſt needs tell ſome examples. I was borne and brought vp in the Countrey, and amidſt huſbandry: I have ſince my predeceſſours quit me the place and poſſeſſion of the goods I enjoy, both buſineſſe and husbandry in hand. I cannot yet caſt account either with penne or Counters. There are diuers of our French Coines, I know not: nor can I diſtinguiſh of one graine from another, be it in the field or in the barne, vnleſſe it be very apparant: nor do I ſcarcely know the difference betweene the Cabidge or Lettice in my Garden. I vnderſtand not the names of the moſt vſuall tooles about husbandry, nor of the meaneſt principles of tillage, which moſt children know. I was never skilfull in Mechanicall arts, nor in Traffike or knowledge of Merchandize, nor in the diverſity and nature of fruits, wines, or cates, nor can I make a Hawke, phyſick a Horſe, or teach a Dogge. And ſince I muſt make full ſhew of my ſhame or ignorance, it is not yet a moneth ſince, that I was found to be ignorant, whereto Leven ſerued to make bread withall; or what it was to cunne Wine. The Athenians were anciently wont to thinke him very apt for the Mathematikes, that could cunningly

order or make vp a faggot of bruſn-wood? Verily a man might draw a much contrarie concluſion from me: For let me have all that may belong to a Kitchin, yet ſhall I be ready to ſtarve for hunger. By theſe partes of my confeſſion, one may imagine divers others, to my coſt and detriment. But howſoever I make my ſelfe knowen, alwaies prouided it be as I am indeede, I have my purpoſe. And I excuſe not my ſelfe, that I dare ſet downe in writing, ſo baſe and frivolous matters as theſe. The baſeneſſe of the ſubject forceth me therevnto. Let who ſo liſt accuſe my project, but not my progreſſe. So it is, that without being warned of others, I ſee very wel, how little this weigheth or is worth, and I perceive the fondneſſe of my purpoſe. It is ſufficient that my judgement is not diſmayed or diſtracted, whereof theſe be the Eſſayes.
                        
                           Naſutus ſis vſque licet, ſis denique naſut,Mart. l. 13. epig. 2. 1.
                           
                           Quantum noluerit ferre rogatus Atlas:
                           Et poſſis ipſum tu deridere Latinum,
                           Non potes, in nugas dicere plura meas,
                           Ipſe ego quàm dixi: quid dentem dente iuvabit
                           Rodere? carne opus eſt, ſi ſatur eſſe velis.
                           Ne perdas operam, qui ſe mirantur, in illos
                           Virus habe, nos haec novimus eſſe nihil.
                           Suppoſe you were long nos'd, ſuppoſe ſuch noſe you weare
                           As Ailas, if you ſhould entreate him, would not beare,
                           That you in flouting old Latinus can be fine.
                           Yet can you ſay no more againſt theſe toyes of mine,
                           Then I have ſaid; what boote, tooth with a tooth to whet?
                           You muſt have fleſh, if you to glut your ſelfe be ſet.
                           Looſe not your paines; gainſt them who on themſelves are doting
                           Keepe you your ſting: we know theſe thing of ours are nothing.
                        
                        I am not bound to vtter no follies, ſo I be not deceived to knowe them: And wittingly to erre, is ſo ordinarie in me, that I erre not much otherwiſe; and ſeldome erre caſually. It is a ſmall matter to yeeld the fond actions vnto the raſhneſſe of my humours, ſince I cannot warrant my ſelf ordinarily to yeeld them the vicious. Being at Barleduc, I ſaw, for the commendation of Renate the King of Sicilies memory a picture which with his owne hands hee had made of himſelfe, preſented vnto our King Francis the ſecond: why is it not as lawfull for every man elſe to pourtray himſelfe with his pen, as it was for him to doe it with a penſell? I will not then forget this other blemiſh, vnfit to be ſeene of all. That is irreſolution: a moſt incommodious defect in the negotiation of worldly affaires: I cannot reſolve in matters admitting doubtfulneſſe:
                        
                           Ne ſi, ne nò, nel cuor miſuona intiero.Petr Pa. 1. ſon. 138. 8.
                           
                           Nor yea, nor nay ſounds clearely in my hart.
                        
                        I can maintaine an opinion, but not make choiſe of it: For, in humane things, what ſide ſoever a man leaneth-on, many apparances preſent themſelves vnto vs, which confirme vs in them: and Chryſippus the Philoſopher was wont to ſay, that he would learne nothing elſe of his maiſters Zeno and Cleanthes, but their doctrines ſimply: For, proofes and reaſons he would finde enough of himſelfe. Let me turne to what ſide I will, I ever finde ſufficient matter, and likely-hoode to keepe my ſelfe vnto it. Thus keepe I doubt and libertie to my ſelfe, to chuſe, vntill occaſion vrge me, and then (to confeſſe the truth) as the common ſaying is, I caſt my fether to the winde, and yeelde to fortunes mercie. A very light inclination, and a ſlender circumſtance caries me away.
                        
                           Dum in dubio est animus paulo momento huc atque illuc impellitur.Ter. And. act. 1 ſcen. 3.
                           
                           While mind is in ſuſpence, with ſmall a doe,
                           T'ts hither, thither, driven fro and to.
                        
                        The vncertaintie of my judgement, is in many occurrences ſo equally ballanced, as I would willingly compromiſe it to the deciding of chance and of the dice. And I note with great conſideration of our humaine imbecilitie, the examples, which the hiſtorie of God it ſelfe hath left vs of this vſe, to remit the determination of elections in doubtfull matters, vnto fortune and hazard: Sors cecidit ſuper Matthiam. The lot fell vpon Mathias. Humane reaſon
                           Act. 1. 26 
                           is a two-edged dangerous ſworde; Even in Socrates his hand, her moſt inward and familiar

friend, marke what a many-ended ſtaffe it is. So am I onely fit to follow, and am eaſily caried away by the throng. I do not greatly truſt mine owne ſtrength, to vndertake to command, or to leade. I rejoyce to ſee my ſteps traced by others. If I muſt runne the hazard of an vncertaine choiſe, I would rather have it be vnder ſuch a one, who is more aſſured of his opinions, and more wedded to them, than I am of mine; the foundation and platforme of which I finde to be very ſlippery; yet am I not very eaſie to change, forſomuch as I perceive a like weakeneſſe in contrarie opinions. Ipſa conſuetudo aſſentiendi periculoſa eſſe videtur, & lubrica.
                           Ci
                                 •
                              . Acad. qu. lib. 4. 
                           The very cuſtome of aſſenting ſeemeth hazerdous and ſlipperie: Namely in politike affaires, wherein is a large field open to all motions, and to conteſtation.
                        
                           Iuſta pari premitur velut cum pondere libra,Til 
                                    •••
                                 . lib 4. h
                                    •
                                 ro. v. 41.
                           
                           Prona nec hâc plus parte ſedet, nec ſurgit ab illa.
                           As when an even skale with equall weight is peized,
                           Nor falles it downe this way, or is it that way raiſed.
                        
                        As for example, Machiavels diſcourſes, were very ſolid for the ſubject; yet hath it beene very eaſie to impugne them, and thoſe that have done it, have left no leſſe facilitie to impugne theirs. A man might ever finde anſweres enough to ſuch an argument, both rejoynders, double, treble, quadruple, with this infinit contexture of debates, that our pettie-foggers have wyre-drawne, and wreſted as much as ever they could in favour of their pleas and proceſſes:
                        
                           Caedimur, & totidem plagis conſumimus hoſtem.Hor. lib. 2. epiſt. 2 97.
                           
                           We by our foes are beaten, if not ſlaine,
                           We with as many ſtrokes waſte them againe.
                        
                        Reaſons having no other good ground than experience, and the diverſitie of humane events, preſenting vs with infinite examples for all manner of formes. A wiſe man of our times, ſaith, that where our Almanakes ſay warme, ſhould a man ſay cold, and in liew of drie, moyſt; And ever ſet downe the contrarie of what they foretell; were he to lay a wager of one or others ſucceſſe, he would not care what ſide he tooke, except in ſuch things as admit no vncertaintie; as to promiſe extreame heate at Chriſtmas, and exceeding cold at Midſomer. The like I thinke of theſe politike diſcourſes. What part ſoever you are put vnto, you have as good a game as your fellow: Provided you affront not the apparant and plaine principles. And therefore (according to my humor) in publike affaires, there is no courſe ſo bad (ſo age and conſtancie be joyned vnto it) that is not better then change and alteration. Our manners are exceedingly corrupted, and with a merveilous inclination bend toward worſe and worſe; Of our lawes and cuſtomes many are barbarous, and divers monſtrous; notwithſtanding, by reaſon of the difficultie to reduce vs to better eſtate, and of the danger of this ſubverſion, if I could fixe a pegge into our wheele, and ſtay it where it now is, I would willingly doe it.
                        
                           —nunquam adeo foedis adeóque pudendis
                              Iuve. ſat. 8. 183
                           
                           
                              Ʋtimur exemplis, vi non peiora ſuper ſint.
                           Examples of ſo filthy ſhamefull kinde
                           We never vſe, but worſe remaines behind.
                        
                        Inſtabilitie is the worſt I find in our ſtate, and that our lawes, no more than our garments, can take no ſetled forme. It is an eaſie matter to accuſe a ſtate of imperfection, ſince all mortall things are full of it. As eaſie is it to beget in a people a contempt of his ancient obſervances: No man ever vndertooke it, but came to an end: But to eſtabliſh a better ſtate in place of that which is condemned and raced out, divers who have attempted it, have ſhronke vnder the burthen. Touching my conduct, my wiſedome hath ſmall ſhare therein. I am very eaſily to be directed by the worlds publike order. Oh happie people, that doth what is commanded, better then they which command, without vexing themſelves about cauſes; which ſuffer themſelves gently to be rowled on, according to the heavens rowling. Obedience is never pure and quiet in him, who talketh, pleadeth and contendeth. In ſome, (to returne to my ſelfe) the onely matter, for which I make ſome accompt of my ſelfe, is that, wherein never man did thinke himſelfe defective. My commendation is vulgar, common and popular; For, who ever thought he wanted wit? It were a propoſition, which in itſelfe would imply contradiction. It is an infirmity, that is never where it is ſeene, it is very ſtrong and faſtholding, but yet pierced and diſſipated by the firſt beame of the pacients ſight, as doth the Sunnes raies ſcatter and diſpearce a gloomie miſt. For a man to accuſe himſelfe, were to excuſe

himſelfe of that ſubject; and to condemne himſelfe, an abſolving of himſelfe. There was never ſo baſe a porter, nor ſo ſilly a woman, but thought he had ſufficient wit for his proviſion. We eaſely know in others, the advantage of courage, of bodily ſtrength, of experience, of diſpoſition and of beautie, but we never yeelde the advantage of judgement to any body: And the reaſons, which part from the ſimple naturall diſcourſe in others, we thinke, that had we but looked that way, wee had ſurely found them. The skill, the knowledge, the ſtile and ſuch like partes, which we ſee in ſtrange workes, we eaſily perceive whether they exceede ours; but the meere productions of wit and vnderſtanding, every man deemeth it lyeth in him to meete with the very like, and doth hardly perceive the weight and difficultie of it, except (and that verie ſcarſely) in an extreame and incomparable diſtance. And he that ſhould clearely ſee the height of a ſtrangers judgement, would come and bring his vnto it. Thus, is it a kind of exerciſing, whereof a man may hope but for meane commendation and ſmall praiſe, and a maner of compoſition, of little or no harme at all. And then, for whom doe you write? The wiſer ſort, vnto whom belongeth bookiſh juriſdiction, know no other price but of doctrine, and avow no other proceeding in our wits, but that of erudition and arte. If you have miſtaken one Scipio for an other, what of any worth have you left to ſpeake-of? He that is ignorant of Aristotle (according to them) he is there withall ignorant of himſelfe. Popular and ſhallow-headed minds, cannot perceive the grace or comelineſſe, nor judge of a ſmooth and quaint diſcourſe. Now theſe two kindes poſſeſſe the world. The third, vnto whoſe ſhare you fall, of regular wits, and that are ſtrong of themſelves, is ſo rare, that juſtly it hath neither name or ranke amongſt vs; he looſeth halfe his time, that doth aſpire or endevour to pleaſe it. It is commonly ſaid, that the juſteſt portion, nature hath given vs of the graces, is that of ſenſe and vnderſtanding: for there is no man, but is contented with the ſhare ſhe hath allotted him: I i
                              •
                            not reaſon? He who ſhould ſee beyond that, ſhould ſee further then his ſight. I perſwade my ſelfe to have good and ſound opinions; but who is not ſo perſwaded of his owne? One of the beſt trials I have of it, is the ſmall eſteeme I make of my ſelfe: for, had they not been well aſſured, they would eaſily have ſuffered themſelves to be deceived, by the affection I beare vnto my ſelfe, ſingular, as he who brings it almoſt all vnto my ſelfe, and that ſpill but a little beſides. All that, which others diſtribute thereof vnto an infinite number of friends and acquaintances, to their glorie and greatneſſe, I referre to the repoſe of my ſpirite and to my ſelfe. What elſe-where eſcapes of it, is not properly by the appointment of my diſcourſe:
                        
                           —mihi nempe valere & vivere doctus.
                           
                           Well learn'd in what concerneth me,
                           To live, and how in health to be.
                        
                        
                           As for my opinions, I finde them infinitely bold aend conſtant to condemne mine inſufficiencie. And to ſay truth, it is a ſubject, where about I exerciſe my judgement, as much as about any other. The world lookes ever for eright, I turne my ſight inward, there I fix it, there I ammuſe it. Every man lookes before him ſelfe, I looke within my ſelfe; I have no buſineſſe but with my ſelfe. I vnceſſantly conſider, controle and taſte my ſelfe: other men goe ever elſe-where, if they thinke well on it: they go ever foreward,
                        
                           —nemo in ſeſe tentat deſcendere.—Perſ. ſat. 4. 23
                           
                           No man attempteth this Eſſay,
                           Into himſelfe to finde the way.
                        
                        as for me I roule me into my ſelfe. This capacitie of ſifting out the truth, what, and howſoever it be in me, and this free humour I have, not very eaſily to ſubject my beliefe, Iowe eſpecially vnto my ſelfe; for the moſt conſtant, and generall imaginations I have are thoſe; which (as one would ſay) were borne with me: They are naturall vnto me, and wholy mine. I produced them raw and ſimple, of a hardy and ſtrong production, but ſomewhat troubled and vnperfect: which I have ſince eſtabliſhed and fortified by the authoritie of others, and by the ſound examples of ancients, with whom I have found my ſelfe conformable in judgement: Thoſe have aſſured me of my hold-faſt of them, and have given me both the enjoying and poſſeſſion thereof more abſolute and more cleare. The commendation which every man ſeekes after, for a vivacitie and promptitude of wit, I chalenge the ſame by the order of a notable and farre ſounding action, or of ſome particular ſufficiencie; I pretend it by the order, correſpondency, and tranquilitie of opinions and cuſtomes. Omnlno ſi quidquam eſt
                           Cic. Off. lib. 
                                 •
                              .
                           
                           decorum, nihil eſt profectò magis quam aequabilitas vniverſae vitae, tum ſingularum actionum: quam conſervare non poſſis, ſi aliorum naturam imitans, omittas tuam. Clearely if any thing bee decent for a man▪ nothing is more than an even carriage and equabilitie of his whole life, and every action therein: which you cannot vphold, if following the nature of others, you let paſſe your owne. Behold here then how far forth I finde my ſelfe guilty of that firſt part, I ſaid to be in the vice of preſumption- Concerning the ſecond, which conſiſteth in not eſteeming ſufficiently of others, I wot not whether I can ſo well excuſe my ſelfe; for, whatſoeuer it coſt mee, I intend to ſpeake what is of it. It may be, the continuall commerce I have with ancient humours, and the Idea of thoſe rich mindes of former ages doth bring me out of liking and diſtaſte both of others and of my ſelfe, or that in truth we live in an age, which produceth things but meane and indifferent. So it is, that I know nothing worthy any great admiration. Alſo I know not many men ſo familiarly as I ſhould, to be able to judge of them: and thoſe with whom the quality of my condition doth ordinarily make me converſant, are for the moſt part, ſuch as have little care for the manuring of the ſoule, and to whom nothing is propoſed for chiefe felicitie, but honour; and for abſolute perfection, but valour. Whatſoever I ſee or beauteous or worthy in any other man, I willingly commend and regard; yea and I often endeare my ſelfe with what I thinke of it, and allow my ſelfe to lie ſo farre forth: For, I cannot invent a falſe ſubject. I willingly witneſſe with my friends what I finde praiſe-worthy in them. And of an inch of valour, I willingly make an inch and a halfe; but to lend them qualities they have not, I cannot; and openly to defend their imperfections, I may not: yea bee they mine enemies, I ſhall ſincerely give them their due, in witneſſing their worth or honour. My affection may change; my judgement never. And I confound not my quarrell with other circumſtances, that are impertinent and belong not vnto it. And I am ſo jealous of the liberty of my judgement, that for what paſſion ſo ever I can hardly quit it. I wrong my ſelfe more in lying, than him of whom I lie. This commendable and generous cuſtome of the Perſian nation, is much noted; They ſpake very honourably and iustly of their mortall enemies, and with thoſe with whom they were at deadly fude and warre, ſo farre foorth as the merit of their vertue deſerved. I know divers men who have ſundry noble and worthy parts; ſome wit, ſome courage, ſome dexteritie, ſome conſcience, ſome a readineſſe in ſpeech, ſome one Science, and ſome another; but of a great man in generall, and that hath ſo many excellent parts together, or but one, in ſuch a degree of excellencie, as hee may thereby bee admired, or but compared to thoſe of former ages whom we honour, my fortune hath not permitted me to ſee one. And the greateſt I ever knew living (I meane of naturall parts of the minde, and the beſt borne) was Stephanus de la Boitie: Verily it was a compleat minde, and who ſet a good face, and ſhewed a faire countenance vpon all matters: A minde after the old ſtampe, and which, had fortune therewith beene pleaſed, would no doubt have brought forth wondrous effects; having by skill and ſtudy added very much to his rich naturall gifts. But I know not how it comes to paſſe, and ſurely it doth ſo, there is as much vanitie and weakeneſſe of vnderſtanding found in thoſe, that profeſſe to have moſt ſufficiencie, that will entermeddle with learned vacations, and with the charges that depend of bookes, than in any ſort of people; whether it be becauſe there is more required, and expected at their hands, and common faults cannot be excuſed in them, or that the ſelfe-opinion of knowledge emboldeneth them the more to produce and diſcover themſelves over-forward, whereby they looſe and betray themſelves. As an Artificer doeth more manifeſt his ſottiſhneſſe in a rich piece of worke, which he hath in hand, if fooliſhly and againſt the rules of his trade he ſeeke to apply it and entermeddle, than in a vile and baſe one; and men are more offended at a fault or overſight in a ſtatue of gold, than in one of clay. Theſe doe as much, when they ſet foorth things, which in themſelves and in their place, would bee good; for, they employ them without diſcretion, honouring their memory at the coſt and charge of their vnderſtanding: and doing honour to Cicero, to Galen, to 
                              Ʋlpian, and to Saint Ierome, to make themſelves ridiculous. I willingly returne to this diſcourſe of the fondneſſe of our inſtitution: whoſe aime hath beene to make vs not good and wittie, but wiſe and learned; She hath attained her purpoſe. It hath not taught vs to follow vertue and embrace wiſedome; but made an impreſſion in vs of it's Etymologie and derivation. Wee can decline vertue, yet can we not love it. If wee know not what wiſedome is by effect and experience, wee know it by prattling and by rote. Wee are not ſatisfied to know the race, the aliances,

and the pedegrees of our neighbours, but we will have them to be our friends, and contract both converſation and intelligence with them: It hath taught vs the definitions, the diviſions, and diſtinctions of vertue, as of the ſurnames and branches of a genalogie, without having other care to contract practiſe of familiaritie or private acquaintance betweene vs and it. She hath appointed vs for our learning, not bookes that have ſounder and truer opinions, but volumes that ſpeake the beſt Greeke or Latine: and amongſt her choiſe words, hath made the vaineſt humours of antiquitie to glide into our conceits. A good institution changeth iudgement and maners, as it hapned to Polemon. This diſſolute yong Graecian, going one day by chance to heare a Lecture of Xenocrates, where he not onely marked the eloquence and ſufficiencie of the Reader, and brought not home the knowledge of ſome notable thing, but a more apparant and ſolide fruit, which was the ſodaine change and amendment of his former life. Who ever heard ſuch an effect of our diſcipline?
                        
                           —faciáſne quod olim
                              Hor. ſer. lib. 2. ſa
                                    •
                                 . 3. 253.
                           
                           Mutatus Polemon, ponas inſignia morbi,
                           Faſciolus, cubital, focalia, potus vt ille
                           Dicitur ex collo furtim carpſiſſe coronas,
                           Poſtquam eſt impranſi correptus voce magiſtri.
                           Can you doe as did Polemon reformed,
                           Caſt-off your ſicknes ſignes, which you deformed,
                           Your bolſters mufflers, ſwathes? As he drink-lin'de,
                           His dronken garlands covertly declinde,
                           By ſpeech of faſting reader diſciplinde?
                        
                        The leaſt diſdainefull condition of men, me thinkes, is that, which through ſimplicitie holds the laſt rancke, and offreth vs more regular commerce. The cuſtomes and diſcourſes of Countrie-clowniſh-men, I finde them commonly to be more conformable and better diſpoſed, according to the true preſcription of Philoſophie, then are thoſe of our Philoſophers. Plus ſapit vulgus, quia tantum, quantum opus eſt, ſapit. The vulgar is the wiſer, becauſe it is but as wiſe as it muſt needes. The worthieſt men, I have judged by externall apparances (for, to judge them after my faſhion, they ſhould be ſifted nearer) concerning warre, and militarie ſufficiencie, have beene, the Duke of Guiſe, that died before Orleans, and the whilom Marſhall Strozzi: For men extraordinarily ſufficient, and endowed with no vulgar vertue, Oliver, and L'Hoſpitall, both great Chancelors of France. Poeſie hath likewiſe in mine opinion, had hir vogue and credit in our age. We have ſtore of cunning and able men in that profeſſion, Aurate, Beza, Buchanan, L'Hoſpitall, Mont-dore, & Turnebus. As for French-men, I thinke they have attained the higheſt degree of perfection that can or ever ſhall be, and in thoſe parts wherein Ronſart, and excellent Bellay have writen, I thinke they are not farre ſhort of the ancient perfection. Adrianus Turnebus knew more and better, what he knewe, then any man in his age or of many ages paſt. The lives of the late Duke of Alva, and of our Conſtable Mommorancie have beene very noble, and have had ſundrie rare reſſemblances of fortune. But the worthily-faire and glorious death of the laſt, in the full ſight of Paris, and of his King, for their ſervice, againſt his neareſt friends and alliance, in the front of an armie, victorious through his conduct of it, and with an hand-ſtroke, in that old age of his, deſerveth in mine opinion, to be placed and regiſtred amongſt the moſt renoumed and famous accidents of my times. As alſo the conſtant goodnes, the mildnes in behaviour, and conſcionable facilitie of Monſieur la Noüe, in ſuch an injuſtice of armed factions (a very ſchoole of treaſon, of inhumanitie and brigandage) wherein he was ever brought vp, a worthie, and famous man of warre, and moſt experienced in his profeſſion. I have greatly pleaſed my ſelfe in publiſhing in ſundrie places, the good hope I have of Marie Gournay le 
                                 •
                              ars my daughter in alliance, and truely of me beloved with more then a fatherly love, and as one of the beſt parts of my being, enfeoffed in my home and ſolitarines. There is nothing in the world I eſteeme more then hir. If childehoode may preſage any future ſucceſſe, hir minde ſhall one day be capable of many notable things, and amongſt other of the perfection of this thrice-ſacred amitie, whereunto we reade not, hir ſexe could yet attaine; the ſinceritie and ſoliditie of hir demeanors are therein alreadie ſufficient; hir kinde affection towards me is more then ſuperabounding and ſuch in deede as nothing more can be wiſhed vnto it, ſo that the apprehenſion, which ſhe hath of my aproching end, by reaſon of the

fifty five yeares, wherein her hap hath beene to knowe me, would ſomewhat leſſe cruelly trouble hir. The judgement ſhe made of my firſt Eſſayes, being a woman, of this age, ſo yong, alone where ſhe dwelleth, and the exceeding vehemencie wherewith ſhe loved me, and long time, by the onely eſteeme, which before ever ſhe ſawe me, ſhe had by them conceived of me, ſhe deſired me; is an accident moſt worthy conſideration. Other vertues have had little or no currantneſſe at all in this age: But valour is become popular by reaſon of our civill warres, and in this part, there are mindes found amongſt vs very conſtant, even to perfection, and in great number, ſo that the choiſe is impoſſible to be made. Loe heere what hitherto I have knowen of any extraordinary, and not common greatneſſe.
                     
                     
                        The eighteenth Chapter.
                        
                           Of giving the lie.
                        
                        YEa but, will ſome tell me, this deſſeigne in a man to make himſelfe a ſubject to write of, might be excuſed in rare and famous men, and who by their reputation, had bred ſome deſire in others of their acquaintance. It is true, I confeſſe it, and I know, that a handy-craftſman will ſcarcely looke off his worke, to gaze vpon an ordinary man: Whereas to ſee a notable great perſon come into a towne, he will leave both worke and ſhop. It ill beſeemeth any man to make himſelfe knowen, onely he excepted, that hath ſomewhat in him worthy imitation, and whoſe life and opinions may ſtand as a patterne to all. Caeſar and Xenophon have had wherewithall to ground and eſtabliſh their narration, in the greatneſſe of their deedes, as on a juſt and ſolid ground-worke. So are the Iornall bookes of Alexander the great, the Commentaries which Augustus, Cato, Brutus, Silla and divers others had left of their geſts, greatly to be deſired. Such mens Images are both beloved and ſtudied, be they either in Braſſe or Stone. This admonition is moſt true, but it concerneth mee very little.
                        
                           Non recit
                                 •
                               cuiquam: niſi amicis, idque rogatus.Hor. ſer. l. 1. ſa
                                    •
                                 . 4. 73.
                           
                           Non vbivis, corá
                                 •
                              ve quibuſlibet. In medio qui
                           Scripta fore recitant ſunt multi, quique lauantes.
                           My writings I reade not, but to my friends, to any,
                           Nor each-where, nor to all, nor but deſir'd: yet many
                           In Market-place read theirs,
                           In Bathes, in Barbers-chaires.
                        
                        I erect not here a ſtatue to be ſet vp in the Market-place of a towne, or in a Church, or in any other publike place:
                        
                           Non equidem hoc ſtudeo bullatis vt mihi nugisPer
                                    •
                                  ſat. 5. 19.
                           
                           Pagina turgeſcat:—
                           I ſtudie not, my written leaves ſhould grow
                           Big-ſwolne with bubled toyes, which vaine breth's blow.
                           Secreti loquimur—21.
                           
                           We ſpeake alone,
                           Or one to one.
                        
                        It is for the corner of a Library, or to ammuſe a neighbour, a kinſman, or a friend of mine withall, who by this image may happily take pleaſure to renew acquaintance, and to reconverſe with me. Others have beene emboldned to ſpeake of themſelves, becauſe they have found worthy and rich ſubject in themſelves. I, contrariwiſe, becauſe I have found mine ſo barren, and ſo ſhallow, that it cannot admit ſuſpition of oſtentation. I willingly judge of other mens actions; of mine by reaſon of their nullity, I give ſmall cauſe to judge. I finde not ſo much good in my ſelfe, but I may ſpeake of it without bluſhing. Oh what contentment were it▪ vnto mee, to heare ſome body that would relate the cuſtome, the viſage, the countenance, the moſt vſuall words, and the fortunes of my anceſtors! Oh how attentively would I liſten vnto it! Verily it were an argument of a bad nature, to ſeeme to deſpiſe

the very pictures of our friends and predeceſſors, the faſhion of their garments and armes. I keepe the writing, the manuall ſeale, and a peculiar ſword: And I reſerve ſtill in my cabinet certaine long ſwitches or wands, which my father was wont to carry in his hand. Paterna vestis & annulus, tanto charior eſt poſteris, quanto erga parentes maior affectus. The fathers garment and his ring is ſo much more eſteemed of his ſucceſſors, as their affection is greater towards their progenitors. Notwithſtanding if my poſteritie be of another minde, I ſhall have wherewith to be avenged; for they cannot make ſo little accoumpt of me, as then I ſhall doe of them. All the commerce I have in this with the worlde, is, that I borrow the inſtruments of their writing, as more ſpeedy, and more eaſie: in requitall whereof I may peradventure hinder the melting of ſome piece of butter in the market, or a Grocer from ſelling an ounce of pepper.
                        
                           Ne toga cordyllis, ne penula deſit olivis,Mart. li. 13. epig. 1. 1.
                           
                           Leaſt Fiſh-fry ſhould a fit gowne want,
                           Leaſt cloakes ſhould be for Olives ſcant.Catul. epig. eleg. 
                                    •
                                 7. 8.
                           
                           Et laxas ſcombris ſaepe dabo tunicas.
                           To long-tail'd Mackrels often I,
                           Will ſide-wide (paper) cotes apply.
                        
                        And if it happen no man read me, have I loſt my time, to have entertained my ſelfe ſo many idle houres, about ſo pleaſing and profitable thoughts? In framing this pourtraite by my ſelfe, I have ſo often beene faine to frizle and trimme me, that ſo I might the better extract my ſelfe, that the patterne is thereby confirmed, and in ſome ſort formed. Drawing my ſelfe for others, I have drawne my ſelfe with purer and better colours, then were my firſt. I have no more made my booke, then my booke hath made me. A booke conſubſtantiall to his Author: Of a peculiar and fit occupation. A member of my life. Not of an occupation and end, ſtrange and forraine; as all other bookes. Have I miſ-ſpent my time, to have taken an account of my ſelfe ſo continually and ſo curiouſly? For thoſe who onely run themſelves over by fantazy, and by ſpeech for ſom houre, examine not themſelves ſo primely and exactly, nor enter they into themſelves, as he doth, who makes his ſtudy, his worke, and occupation of it: Who with all his might, and with all his credit engageth himſelfe to a regiſter of continuance. The moſt delicious pleaſures, though inwardly diſgeſted, ſhun to leave any trace of themſelves; and avoide the ſight, not onely of the people, but of any other. How often hath this buſineſſe diverted me from tedious and yrkſome cogitations? (And all frivolous ones muſt be deemed tedious and yrkeſome.) Nature hath endowed vs with a large faculty to entertaine our ſelves a part, and often calleth vs vnto it: To teach vs, that partly we owe our ſelves vnto ſociety, but in the better part vnto our ſelves. To the end I may in ſome order and project marſhall my fantaſie, even to dote, and keepe it from looſing, and ſtraggling in the aire, there is nothing ſo good, as to give it a body, and regiſter ſo many idle imaginations as preſent themſelves vnto it. I liſten to my humors, and harken to my conceits, becauſe I muſt enroule them. How often, being grieved at ſome action, which civility and reaſon forbad me to withſtand openly, have I diſgorged my ſelfe vpon them here, not without an intent of publike inſtruction? And yet theſe Poeticall rods,
                        
                           Zon deſſus l'oeil, zon ſur le groin,
                           Zon ſur le dos du Sagoin.
                        
                        are alſo better imprinted vpon paper, than vpon the quicke fleſh; What if I lend mine eares, ſomewhat more attentively vnto bookes, ſith I but watch if I can filch ſomthing from them, wherewith to enammell and vphold mine? I never ſtudied to make a booke; Yet have I ſomewhat ſtudied, becauſe I had already made it (if to▪ nibble or pinch, by the head or feet, now one Author, and then another be in any ſort to ſtudy) but nothing at all to forme my opinions: Yea being long ſince formed, to aſſiſt, to ſecond and to ſerve them. But whom ſhal we believe ſpeaking of himſelfe, in this corrupted age? ſince there are few or none, whom we may beleeve ſpeaking of others, where there is leſſe intereſt to lie. The firſt part of cumſtoms corruption, is; the baniſhment of truth: For as Pindarus ſaid, to be ſincerely true, is the beginning of a great vertue; and the firſt article Plato requireth in the Governor of his Common-wealth: Now-adaies, that is not the truth which is true, but that which is perſwaded to others. As

we call mony not onely that which is true and good, but alſo the falſe; ſo it be currant. Our Nation is long ſince taxed with this vice. For Salvianus Maſſilienſis who lived in the time of Valentinian the Emperour, ſaith, that amongſt French-men, to lie and forſweare is no vice, but a manner of ſpeach. He that would endeare this Teſtimonie, might ſay, it is now rather deemed a vertue among them. Men frame and faſhion themſelves vnto it, as to an exerciſe of honour; for, diſſimulation is one of the not ableſt qualities of this age. Thus have I often conſidred, whence this cuſtome might ariſe, which wee obſerve ſo religiouſly, that we are more ſharpely offended with the reproach of this vice, ſo ordinary in vs, than with any other; and that it is the extreameſt injurie, may be done vs in words, to vpbraid and reproch vs with a lie. Therein I finde, that it is naturall, for a man to defend himſelfe moſt from ſuch defects as we are moſt tainted with. It ſeemeth that if we but ſhew a motion of revenge, or are but moved at the accuſation, we in ſome ſort diſcharge our ſelves of the blame or imputation; if we have it in effect, at leaſt we condemne it in apparance. May it not alſo be, that this reproch ſeemes to enfold cowardiſe and faintneſſe of hart? Is there any more manifeſt, than for a man to eate and deny his owne Worde? What? To deny his Word wittingly? To lie is a horrible-filthy vice; and which an ancient writer ſetteth forth very ſhamefully, when he ſaith, that whoſoever lieth, witneſſeth that he co
                                 ••
                              mneth God and ther withal feareth men It is impoſſible more richly to repreſent the horrour, the vileneſſe and the diſorder of it: For, What can be imagined ſo vile, and baſe, as to be a coward towards men, and a boaſter towards God? Our intelligence being onely conducted by the way of the Word: Who ſo falſifieth the ſame, betraieth publike ſociety. It is the onely inſtrument, by meanes whereof our wils and thoughts are communicated: it is the interpretour of our ſoules: If that faile vs we hold our ſelves no more, we enter-know one another no longer. If it deceive vs, it breaketh all our commerce, and diſſolveth all bonds of our policy. Certaine Nations of the new Indiaes (whoſe names we neede not declare, becauſe they are no more; for the deſolation of this conqueſt hath extended it ſelfe to the abſolute aboliſhing of names and ancient knowledge of Places, with a marvellous and never the like heard example) offred humane bloud vnto their Gods, but no other than that which was drawne from their tongues and eares, for an expiation of the ſinne of lying, as well heard as pronounced. That good-fellow-Graecian ſaid, children were dandled with toies, but men with words. Concerning the ſundry faſhions of our giving the lie, and the lawes of our honour in that and the changes they have received, I will refer to another time, to ſpeake what I thinke and know of it, and if I can, I will in the meane time learne, at what time this cuſtome tooke his beginning, ſo exactly to weigh and precizely to meaſure words, and tie our honour to them: for it is eaſie to judge, that it was not anciently amongſt the Romans and Graecians. And I have often thought it ſtrange, to ſee them wrong and give one another the lie, and yet never enter into quarrell. The lawes of their duty, tooke ſome other courſe than ours. Caeſar is often called a thiefe, and ſometimes a drunkard to his face. We ſee the liberty of their invectives, which they write one againſt another: I meane the greateſt Chieftaines and Generals in war; of one and other Nation, where words are only retorted and revenged with words, and never wreſted to further conſequence.
                     
                     
                        The nineteenth Chapter.
                        
                           Of the liberty of Conſcience.
                        
                        IT is ordinarily ſeene, how good intentions being managed without moderation, thruſt men into moſt vicious effects. In this controverſie, by which France is at this inſtant moleſted with civill warres, the beſt and ſafeſt ſide, is no doubt, that which maintaineth both the ancient religion and policy of the Country. Nevertheleſſe amongſt the honeſt men that follow it (for my meaning is not to ſpeake of thoſe, who vſe them as a colour, either to exerciſe their particular revenges, or to ſupply their greedy avarice, or to follow the favour of Princes: But of ſuch as doe it with a true zeale toward their Religion, and an vnfained holy affection, to maintaine the peace and vphold the ſtate of their Country) of thoſe I ſay, divers

are ſeene, whom paſſion thruſts out of the bounds of reaſon, and often forceth them to take and follow vnjuſt, violent and raſh counſels. Certaine it is, that when firſt our religion beganne to gaine authoritie with the Lawes, it's zeale armed many againſt all ſorts of Pagane bookes, whereof the learned ſort have a great loſſe. My opinion is, that this diſorder hath done more hurt to learning, than all the Barbarian flames. Cornelius Tacitus is a ſufficient teſtimonie of it: for, howbeit the Emperor Tacitus his kinſman had by expreſſe appointment ſtored all the libraries in the World with it, notwithſtanding one onely entire copy could not eſcape the curions ſearch of thoſe, who ſought to aboliſh it, by reaſon of five or ſixe vaine clauſes, contrary to our beleefe. They have alſo had this eaſily to affoord falſe commendations to all the Emperours, that made for vs, and vniverſally to condemne all the actions of thoſe, which were our adverſaries, as may plainly be ſeene in Iulian the Emperor, ſurnamed the Apoſtata; who in truth was a notable-rare-man, as he whoſe mind was lively endowed with the diſcourſes of Philoſophie, vnto which hee profeſſed to conforme all his actions; and truely there is no kind of vertue, wherof he hath not left moſt notable examples. In chaſtity (whereof the whole courſe of his life giveth apparant teſtimony) a like example, vnto that of Alexander and S
                                 ••
                              oio is read of him, which is, that of many wonderfull faire captive Ladies, brought before him, being even in the very prime of his age (for he was ſlaine by the Parthians about the age of one and thirty yeares) he would not ſee one of them. Touching juſtice, himſelfe would take the paines to heare all parties: And although for curioſity ſake, he would enquire of ſuch as came before him, what religion they were of, nevertheleſſe the enmitie he bare to ours, did no whit weigh downe the ballance. Himſelfe made ſundrie good Lawes, and revoked diverſe ſubſidies and impoſitions, his Predeceſſours before him had receaved. We have two good Hiſtorians, as eye-witneſſes of his actions. One of which, (who is Marcellinus) in ſundry places of his Hiſtorie bitterly reprooveth this ordinance of his, by which he forbade ſchooles, and interdicted all Chriſtian Rhethoricians, and Gramarians to teach: Saying, he wiſhed this his action might be buried vnder ſilence. It is very likely, if he had done any thing elſe more ſharpe or ſevere againſt vs, he would not have forgot it, as he that was well affected to our ſide. Hee was indeede very ſevere againſt vs, yet not a cruell enemie. For, our people themſelves report this Hiſtorie of him, that walking one day about the Citty of Calcedon, Maris Biſhop thereof, durſt call him wicked and traitor to Chriſt, to whom he did no other thing, but anſwered thus: Goe wretched man, weepe and deplore the loſſe of thine eyes; to whom the Biſhop replyed, I thanke Ieſus Chriſt, that he hath deprived me of my ſight, that ſo I might not view thy impudent face, affecting therby (as they ſay) a kind of Philoſophicall patience. So it is, this part cannot be referred to the cruelties, which he is ſaid to have exerciſed againſt vs. He was (ſaith Eutropius my other teſtimony) an enemy vnto Chriſtianity, but without ſhedding of bloud. But to returne to his juſtice, he can be accuſed of nothing but of the rigors he vſed in the beginning of his Empire, againſt ſuch as had followed the faction of Constantius his Predeceſſour. Concerning ſobrietie, he ever lived a Souldiers kinde of life, and in time of peace, would feede no otherwiſe, than one who prepared and enured himſelfe to the auſteritie of warre. Such was his vigilancie, that he divided the night into three or foure parts, the leaſt of which hee allotted vnto ſleepe; the reſt he employed in viſiting the ſtate of his army, and his guardes, or in ſtudy; for, amongeſt other his rare qualities, he was moſt excellent in all ſorts of learning. It is reported of Alexander the Great, that being laide down to reſt, fearing leſt ſleep ſhould divert him from his thoughts and ſtudies, he cauſed a baſen to be ſet neere his bed ſide, and holding one of his handes out, with a brazen ball in it, that if ſleepe ſhould ſurprize him, looſing his fingers endes, the ball falling into the baſen, might with the noyſe rouze him from out his ſleepe. This man had a mind ſo bent to what he vndertook, and by reaſon of his ſingular abſtinence ſo little troubled with vapours, that he might well have paſt this deviſe. Touching military ſufficiencie, he was admirable in all partes belonging to a great Captaine. So was he almoſt all his life time in continuall exerciſe of War, and the greater part with vs in France againſt the Alemans and French. Wee have no great memorie of any man, that either hath ſeene more dangers, nor that more often hath made triall of his perſon. His death hath ſome affinitie with that of Epaminoudas, for being ſtrucken with an arrow, and attempting to pull it out, he had ſurely done it, but that being ſharpe-cutting, it hurt and weakened his hand. In that plight he earneſtly requeſted to bee carryed forth in the middeſt of his army,

that ſo he might encourage his ſouldiers, who without him couragiouſly maintained the battell, vntill ſuch time as darke night ſevered the Armies. Hee was beholding to Philoſophie for a ſingular centempt, both of himſelfe and of all humane things. Hee aſſuredly believed the eternitie of ſoules. In matters of religion, he was vicious every-where. He was ſurnamed Apostata, becauſe he had forſaken ours; notwithſtanding this opinion ſeemes to mee more likely, that never tooke it to hart, but that for the obedience which he bare to the lawes, he diſſembled til he had gotten the Empire into his hands. He was ſo ſuperſtitious in his, that even ſuch as lived in his time, and were of his owne religion, mocked him for it; and it was ſaide, that if he had gained the Victory of the Parthians, hee would have conſumed the race or breede of Oxen, to ſatisfie his ſacrifices. He was alſo beſetted with the Art of ſooth ſaying, and gave authoritie to all manner of prognoſtikes. Amongſt other things hee ſpake at his death, he ſaide, he was much beholding to the Gods, and greatly thanked them, that they had not ſuffred him to be ſlaine ſodainely or by ſurprize, as having long before warned him both of the place and houre of his end; nor to die of a baſe and eaſie death, more beſeeming idle and effeminate Perſons, nor of a lingring, languiſhing, and dolorous death; and that they had deemed him worthy to end his life ſo nobly in the courſe of his victories and in the flower of his glory. There had before appeared a viſion vnto him, like vnto that of Marcus Brutus, which firſt threatned him in Gaule, and afterward even at the point of his death, preſented it ſelfe to him in Perſia. The ſpeach he is made to ſpeake when he felt himſelfe hurt, Thou hast vanquiſhed ô Nazaraean; or as ſome wil have it; Content thy ſelf oh Nazaraean, would ſcarce have beene forgotten, had it beene believed of my teſtimonies, who being preſent in the army, have noted even the leaſt motions, and wordes at his death, no more than certaine other wonders, which they annex vnto it. But to returne to my theame, he had long before (as ſaith Marcellinus) hatched Paganiſme in his hart, but forſomuch as he ſaw all thoſe of his armie to be Chriſtians, he durſt not diſcover him ſelfe. In the end, when he found himſelfe to be ſufficiently ſtrong, and durſt publiſh his minde, he cauſed the Temples of his Gods to be opened, and by all meanes endevoured to advance idolatrie. And to attaine his purpoſe, having found in Constantinople the people very looſe, and at ods with the Prelates of the chriſtian church, and cauſed them to appeare before him in his pallace, he inſtantly admoniſhed them to appeaſe all their civill diſſentions, and every one without hinderance or feare apply themſelves to follow and ſerve religion. Which he verie carefully ſollicited, hoping this licence might encreaſe the factions, and controverſies of the diviſion, and hinder the people, from growing to any vnity, and by conſequence from fortifying themſelves againſt him, by reaſon of their concord and in one mind-agreeing intelligence: having by the cruelty of ſome Chriſtians found, that There is no beaſt in the world, ſo much of man to be feared, as man. Loeheere his very words, or very neare: Wherin this is worthy conſideration, that the Emperor Iulian, vſeth the ſame receipt of libertie of conſcience, to enkindle the trouble of civill diſſention, which our Kings employ to extinguiſh. It may be ſaide on one ſide, that, To give factions the bridle to entertaine their opinion, is to ſcater contention and ſew diviſion, and as it were to lend it a hand to augment and encreaſe the ſame: There beeing no Barre or Obſtacle of Lawes to bridle or hinder hir courſe. But on the other ſide, it might alſo bevrged, that to give factions the bridle to vpholde their opinion, is, by that facilitie and eaſe, the readie way to mollifie and releaſe them; and to blunt the edge, which is ſharpned by rareneſſe, noveltie, and difficultie. And if for the honour of our Kings devotion, I believe better; it is, that ſince they could not doe as they would, they have fained to will what they could not.
                     
                     
                        The twentieth Chapter.
                        
                           We taste nothing purely.
                        
                        THe weakenes of our condition, cauſeth, that things in their naturall ſimplicitie and puritie cannot fall into our vſe. The elements we enjoy are altered: Metals likewiſe, yea

golde muſt be empaired with ſome other ſtuffe to make it fit for our ſervice. Nor vertue ſo ſimple, which Ariston, Pirrho, and the Stoikes, made the end of their life, hath beene able to doe no good without compoſition: Nor the Cirenaike ſenſualitie or Ariſtippian voluptuouſnes. Of the pleaſures and goods we have, there is none exempted from ſome mixture of evill, and incommoditie.—medio de fonte leporum
                           Lucr. l. 4. 12. 24
                        
                        
                           Surgit amori aliquid, quod in ipſis floribus angat.
                           From middle ſpring of ſweetes ſome bitter ſpings,
                           Which in the very flower ſmartly ſtings.
                        
                        Our exceeding voluptuouſneſſe hath ſome aire of groning and wailing: Would you not ſay, it dieth with anguïſh? Yea when we forge it's image in hir excellency, we decke it with Epithers of ſickiſh and dolorous qualities: languor, effeminacy, weakneſſe, fainting and Morbidezza, a great teſtimony of their conſanguinity and conſubſtantiality: Exceſſive joy hath more ſeverity, then jolity: Extreame and full content, more ſettledneſſe then cheerefulneſſe. Ipſa faelicitas, ſe niſi temperat, premit. Felicitie it ſelfe, vnleſſe it temper it ſelfe, diſtempers vs.
                           Se
                                 •
                              t. quare &c. Eaſe conſumeth vs. It is that, which on old Greeke verſe ſaith of ſuch a ſenſe. The Gods ſell vs all the goods they give vs; that is to ſay, they give vs not one pure and perfect, and which we buy not with the price of ſome evill. Travell and pleaſure, moſt vnlike in nature, are notwithſtanding followed toget her by a kinde of I wot not what naturall conjunction of Socrates ſaith, that ſome God attempted to huddle vp together, and confound ſorrow and voluptuouſneſſe: but being vnable to effect it, he bethought himſelfe to couple them together, at leaſt by the taile. Metrodorus ſaid, that in ſadneſſe there is ſome aloy of pleaſure. I know not whether he meant any thing elſe, but I imagine, that for one to enure himſelfe to melancholy, there is ſome kind of purpoſe, of conſent and mutuall delight: I meane beſides ambition, which may alſo be joyned vnto it. There is ſome ſhadow of delicacy, and quaintneſſe, which ſmileth and fawneth vpon vs, even in the lap of melancholy. Are there not ſome complexions, that of it make their nouriſhment?
                        
                           —eſt quaedam flere voluptas.
                              Ori. Triſt. l. 4. el. 3. 37.
                           
                           It is ſome pleaſure yet,
                           With teares our cheekes to wet.
                        
                        And one Attalus in Seneca ſaith, the remembrance of our laſt friends is as pleaſing to vs, as bitterneſſe in wine that is over old;
                        
                           Miniſter veteris puer falerniCat. lyr. epig. 24. 1.
                           
                           Ingere m
                                 •
                               calices amariores:
                           Sir boy, my ſervitor of good old wine,
                           Bring me my cup thereof bitter, but fine.
                        
                        and as of ſweetly-ſower apples. Nature diſcovereth this confuſion vnto vs: Painters are of opinion, that the motions and wrinkles in the face, which ſerve to weepe, ſerve alſo to laugh. Verely, before one or other be determined to expreſſe which; behold the pictures ſucceſſe, you are in doubt toward which one enclineth. And the extreamity of laughing entermingles it ſelfe with teares. Nullum ſine auctor amento malum eſt. There is no evill without ſome obligation.
                           Sen. epiſt. 69. 
                                 ••
                              
                            When I imagine man fraught with all the commodities may be wiſhed, let vs ſuppoſe, all his ſeverall members were for ever poſſeſſed with a pleaſure like vnto that of generation, even in the higheſt point that may be: I finde him to ſinke vnder the burthen of his eaſe, and perceive him altogether vnable to beare ſo pure, ſo conſtant, and ſo vniverſall a ſenſuality. Truely he flies when he is even vpon the nicke, and naturally haſtneth to eſcape it, as from a ſtep, whereon he cannot ſtay or containe himſelfe, and feareth to ſinke into it. When I religiouſly confeſſe my ſelfe vnto my ſelfe, I finde, the beſt good I have, hath ſome vicioustaint. And I feare that Plato in his pureſt vertue (I that am as ſincere and loyall an eſteemer thereof, and of the vertues of ſuch a ſtampe, as any other can poſſibly be) if he had neerely liſtned vnto it (and ſure he liſtned very neere) he would therein have heard ſome harſh tune, of humane mixture, but an obſcure tune, and onely ſenſible vnto himſelfe. Man all in all, is but a botching and party-coloured worke. The very Lawes of Iustice, cannot ſubſiſt without ſeme commixture of Iniuſtice: And Plato ſaith, They vndertake to out off Hidraes heades, that pretend to remoove all incommodities and inconveniences from the Lawes. Omne magnum
                           Tacitus A
                                 ••
                              . l. 14. Caſſ
                                 •
                              . 
                           exemplum habet aliquid eximquo, quod contraſingulos vtilitate publicârependitur. Every great example hoth ſome touch of iniustice, which is requited by the common good againſt particulars,
                           
ſaith Tacitus. It is likewiſe true, that for the vſe of life and ſervice of publike ſocietie, there may be exceſſe in the purity and perſpicuity of our ſpirits. This piercing brightneſſe hath overmuch ſubtility and curioſity. They ſhould be made heavy and dull, to make them the more obedient to example and practiſe; and they muſt be thickned and obſcured, to proportion them to this ſhady and terreſtriall life. Therefore are vulgar and leſſe-wire-drawnewits found to be more fit and happy in the conduct of affaires. And the exquiſite and highraiſed opinions of Philoſophy vnapt and vnfit to exerciſe. This ſharp vivacity of the ſpirit and this ſupple and reſtleſſe volubility, troubleth our negotiations. Humane enterpriſes ſhould be managed more groſely and ſuperficially, and have a good and great part of them left for the rights of fortune. Affaires neede not be ſifted ſo nicely and ſo profoundly. A man looſeth himſelfe about the conſiderations of ſo many contrary luſters and diverſe formes. Volntantibus res inter ſe pugnantes, obtorpuerant animi. Their mindes were 
                                 •
                              ſt o
                                 •
                              iſhed, while they revolved
                           
                              
                                 •••
                              . d
                                 ••
                              . 4. l. 2. 
                           things ſo different. It is that which our elders report of Simonides; becauſe his imagination, concerning the queſtion Hyeron the King had made vnto him (which the better to anſwer he had diverſe dates allowed him to thinke of it) preſented ſundry ſubtill and ſharpe conſiderations vnto him; doubting which might be the likelieſt; he altogether diſpaired of the truth. Whoſoever ſearcheth all the circumſtances and embraceth all the conſequences therof, hindereth his election. A meane engine doth equally conduct, and ſufficeth for the executions of great and little weights. It is commonly ſeene, that the beſt husbands and the thriſtieſt, are thoſe who cannot tell how they are ſo; and that theſe cunning Arethmeticians doe ſeldome thrive by it. I know a notable pratler, and an excellent blazoner of all ſorts of husbandry and thrift, who hath moſt pitteouſly let ten thouſand pound ſterline a yeare paſſe from him. I know another, who ſaith, he conſulteth better then any man of his counſell, and there cannot be a properer man to ſee vnto or of more ſufficiency; notwithſtanding when he commeth to any execution; his owne ſervants finde he is farre otherwiſe: This I ſay without mentioning or accounting his ill lucke.
                     
                     
                        The one and twentieth Chapter.
                        
                           Against idleneſſe, or doing nothing.
                        
                        THe Emperour Vespaſian, lying ſicke of the diſeaſe whereof he died, omitted not to endevour to vnderſtand the ſtate of the Empire; and lying in his bed, vnce
                              ••
                           antly diſpatched many affaires of great conſequence; and his Phiſitians chiding him, as of a thing hurtfull to his health; he anſwered, That an Emperour ſhould die ſtanding vpright. Loe heere a notable ſaying, fitting my humour, and worthy a great Prince. Adrian the Emperour vſed the ſame afterward to like purpoſe. And Kings ought often to be put in minde of it, to make them feele, that this great charge, which is given them of the commandement over ſo many men, is no idle charge; and that there is nothing may ſo juſtly diſtaſte a ſubject from purting himſelfe in paine and danger for the ſervice of his Prince, then therewhilſt to ſee him given to lazineſſe, to baſe and vaine occupations, and to have care of his conſervation, ſeeing him ſo careleſſe of ours. If any ſhall goe about to maintaine, that it is better for a Prince to manage his warres by others, then by himſelfe; Fortune will ſtore him with ſufficient examples of thoſe, whoſe Lieutenants have atchieved great enterpriſes; and alſo of ſome whoſe preſence would have beene more hurtfull, then profitable. But no vertuous and coragious Prince will endure to be entertained with ſo ſhamefull inſtructions. Vnder colour of preſerving his head (as the ſtatue of a ſaint) for the good fortune of his eſtate, they degrade him of his office, which is altogether in military actions, and declare him vncapable of it. I know one, would rather chuſe to be beaten, then ſleepe whilſt others fight for him; and who without jelouſie never ſaw his men performe any notable act in his abſence. And Selim the firſt had reaſon to ſay, that he thought victories gotten in the maſters abſence, not to be compleate. So much more willingly would he have ſaid, that ſuch a maſter ought to bluſh for ſhame, who

onely by his name ſhould pretend any ſhare in it, having therevnto employed nothing but his thought and verbal direction: Nor that, ſince in ſuch a buſines, the adviſes and commandements, which bring honor, are only thoſe given in the field and even in the action. No Pilote exerciſeth his office ſtanding ſtil. The princes of Otomans race (the chefeſt race in the world in warlike fortune) have earneſtly embraced this opinion. And Baiazeth the ſecond with his ſonne, who ammuſing themſelves about Sciences, and other private home-matters, neglected the ſame, gave diverſe prejudiciall blowes vnto their Empire. And Amurath the third of that name, who now raigneth following their example, beginneth very well to feele their fortune. Was it not the King of England, Edward the third, who ſpake theſe words of our King Charles the fifth? There was never King that leſſe armed himſelfe; and yet was never King, that gave me ſo much to doe, and put me to ſo many plunges. He had reaſon to thinke it ſtrange, as an effect of fortune, rather then of reaſon. And let ſuch as will number the Kings of Castile and Portugall amongſt the warlike and magnanimous conquerors, ſeeke for ſome other adherent then my ſelfe; forſomuch as twelve hundred leagues from their idle reſidence they have made themſelves maſters of both Indias, onely by the conduct and direction of their factors; of whom it would be knowne, whether they durſt but goe and enjoy them in perſon. The Emperor Iuhan ſaid moreover, that a Philoſopher and gallant minded man ought not ſo much as breath; that is to ſay, not to give corporall neceſſities, but what may not be refuſed them; ever holding both minde and body buſied about notable, great and vertuous matters. He was aſhamed, any man ſhould ſee him ſpitte or ſweat before people (which is alſo ſaid of the Lacedemonian youths, and Xenphon reporeth it of the Perſian) foraſmuch as he thought that continuall travel, exerciſe and ſobriety ſhould have concocted and dried vp all ſuch ſuperfluities. What Seneca ſaith ſhall not impertinently be alleaged here; That the ancient Romanes kept their youth vpright, and taught their children nothing, that was to be learned ſitting. It is a generous deſire, to endevor to die both profitable and manlike: But the effect conſiſteth not ſo much in our good reſolution, as in our good fortune. A thouſand have reſolved to vanquiſh or to die fighting, which have miſſed both the one and other: Hurts or empriſonment, croſſing their deſſeigne and yeelding them a forced kinde of life. There are diſeaſes which vanquiſh our deſires and knowledge. Fortune ſhould not have ſeconded the vanitie of the Romane Legions, who by othe bound themſelves, either to die or conquer. 
                              Ʋictor, Marce Fabi, revertar ex acie: Si fallo, lovem patrem
                           Li
                                 •
                              . d
                                 ••
                              . 
                                 〈…〉
                               
                              
                                 •
                              . 2 
                           Gradiuumque Martem al
                                 •
                              oſque iratos inveco Deos. I will, O Marcus Fabius, returne conqueror from the armie. If in this I deceive you, I wiſh both great Iupiter and Mars, and the other Gods offended with me. The Portugalles report, that in certaine places of their Indian conqueſts, they found ſome Souldiers, who with horrible execrations had damned themſelves, never to enter into any compoſition, but either they would be killed or remaine victorious; and in ſigne of their vowe
                              •
                           ore their heads and beards ſhaven. We may hazard and obſtinate our ſelves long enough. It ſeemeth that blowes ſhunne them, who over-joyfully preſent themſelves vnto them; and vnwillingly reach thoſe that overwillingly goe to meete them and corrupt their end. Some vnable to looſe his life by his adverſaries force, having aſſaied all poſſible meanes, hath beene enforced to accompliſh his reſolution, either to beare away the honor; or not to carie away his life and even in the fury of the fight to put himſelfe to death. There are ſundrie examples of it; but nete this one. Philiſtus, chiefe Generall of yong Dioniſius his navie againſt the Siracuſans, preſented them the battle, which was very ſharply withſtood, their forces being alike; wherein, by reaſon of his proweſſe he had the better in the beginning. But the Siracuſans flocking thicke and threefold about his gally, to grapple and board him, having performed many worthie exploytes with his owne perſon, to ridd
                              •
                            himſelfe from them, diſparing of all eſcape, with his owne hand deprived himſelfe of that life, which ſo laviſhly and in vaine he had abandoned to his enemies hands. Mole
                                 •
                               Moluch, King of Fez, who not long ſince obtained that famous victorie againſt Sebaſtian King of Portugall; a notable victorie, by reaſon of the death of three Kings, and tranſmiſſion of ſo great a Kingdome to the crowne of Castile, chanſed to be grievouſly ſicke, at what time the Portugales with armed hand entred his dominions, and afterward, though hee foreſaw it, approching nearer vnto death, empaired worſe and worſe. Never did man more ſtoutly, or more vigorouſly make vſe of an vndanted courage, than he. He found himſelfe very weake to endure the ceremonious pompe which the Kings of that Country at their entrance into

he Camp, are preſented withall, which according to their faſhion is full of all magnificence and ſtate, and charged with all maner of action; and therefore he reſigned that honour to his brother, yet reſigned he nothing but the office of the chiefe Captaine. Himſelfe moſt gloriouſly executed, and moſt exactly perfourmed all other neceſſarie duties and profitable Offices. Holding his body laid along his cowch, but his minde vpright and courage conſtant, even to his laſt gaſpe; and in ſome ſort after. He might have vndermined his enemies, who were fond-hardily advanced in his dominions: And was exceedingly grieved, that for want of a litle longer life, and a ſubſtitute to manage the Warre, and affaires or ſo troubled a ſtate, he was enforced to ſeeke a bloody and hazardous battell, having another pure and vndoubted victory in hand. He notwithſtanding managed the continuance of his ſicknes ſo miraculouſly, that he conſumed his enemy, diverted him from his Sea-Fleete, and Maritime places, he helde along the Coaſte of Affricke, even vntill the laſt day of his life, which by deſigne he reſerved and emploied for ſo great and renowmed a fight.
                        He ranged his battell in a round, on ev'ry ſide beſieging the Portugals army, which bending round, and comming to cloſe, did not onely hinder them in the conflict) which through the valour of that yong-aſſailant King was very furious) ſince they were to turne their faces on all ſides, but alſo hindred them from running away after the rowte. And finding all iſſewes ſeized, and all paſſages cloſed, they were conſtrained to turne vpon themſelves: coacervantúrque non ſolum caede, ſed etiam fug
                                 •
                              . They fall on heapes, not only by ſlaughter, but by flight. And ſo pel-mell to heape one on anothers neck, preparing a moſt murthrous and compleat victory to the Conquerours. When he was even dying, hee cauſed himſelfe to be carryed and haled, where-ever neede called for him; and paſſing along the files, hee exhorted the Captaines, and animated the Souldiers one after another. And ſeeing one wing of the fight to have the worſt, and in ſome danger, no man could hold him, but he would needs with his naked-ſword in hand get on horſ-backe, ſtriving by all poſſible meanes, to enter the throng; his men holding him, ſome by the Bridle, ſome by the Gowne, and ſome by the Stirrops. This toyle and ſtraining of himſelfe, made an end of that litle remainder of his life: Then was he laid on his bed: But comming to himſelfe again, ſtarting vp, as out of a ſwowne, each other faculty failing him he gave them warning to conceale his death (which was the neceſſarieſt commandement he could give his ſervaunts, leſt the ſouldiers hearing of his death, might fal into diſpaire) and ſo yeelded the Ghoſt, holding his fore-fingers vpon his mouth; an ordinary ſignall to impoſe ſilence. What man ever lived ſo long and ſo neere death; Who ever died ſo vpright and vndaunted? The extreameſt degree, and moſt naturall, couragiouſly to manage death, is to ſee or front the ſame, not only without amazement, but without care; the courſe of life continuing free, even in death. As Cato, who ammuzed himſelfe to ſtudie and ſleepe, having a violent and bloudy death, preſent in his hart, and as it were holding it in his hand.
                     
                     
                        The two and twentieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of running Poſts, or Curriers.
                        
                        I Have beene none of the weakeſt in this exerciſe, which is proper vnto men of my ſtature, well-truſt, ſhort and tough, but now I have given it over: It toyles vs over-much, to holde out long. I was even-now reading, how King Cyrus, that he might more ſpeedily receave newes from all parts of his Empire, (which was of exceeding great length) would needs have it tried, how farre a horſe could in a day goe out-right, without baiting, at which diſtance hee cauſed Stations to be ſet and men to have freſh horſes ready, for al ſuch as came to him. And ſome report, this ſwift kinde of running, anſwereth the flight of Cranes. Caeſar ſaith, that Lu
                              
                                 •
                              ius Vibulus Rufus, making haſte to bring Pompey an advertiſement, rode day and night, and to make more ſpeed ſhifted many horſes. And himſelfe (as Suetonius writeth) would vpon an hyred coache runne a hundred miles a day. And ſure he was a rancke-runner: for where any river hindred his way, he ſwam it over, and never went out of his way to ſeeke for a bridge

or foarde. Tib erius Nero going to viſite his brother Druſus, who lay ſicke in Germanie, having three coaches in his companie, ranne two hundred miles in foure and twenty hours. In the Romane warres againſt King Antiochus, Titus Sempronius Gracchus (ſai
                              •
                           h Titus Livius)
                           Livius. 
                           per dispoſitos equos propè incredibili celeritae ab Amphiſa tertio dic Pellam pervenit: By horſe laide poſte, with incredible ſpeede within three dayes he paſt from Amphiſa to Pella. And viewing the place, it ſeemeth, they were ſet Stations for Poſtes, and not newly appointed for that race. The inuention of Cecinna in ſending newes to thoſe of his houſe had much more ſpeede; he carried certaine ſwallowes with him, and having occaſion to ſend newes home, he let them flie toward their neſts, firſt marking them with ſome colour, proper to ſignifie what he meant, as before he had agreed vpon with his friends. In the Theatres of Rome, the houſhold Maſters, carried Pigeons in their boſomes, vnder whoſe wings they faſtened letters, when they would ſend any word home, which were alſo taught to bring back an anſwer. D. Brutus, vſed ſome being beſieged in Mutina, and otherselfe-where. In Peru they went poſte vpon mens backes, who tooke their Maſters vpon their ſhoulders, ſitting vpon certaine beares or chaires, with ſuch agilitie, that in full running ſpeede the firſt porters without any ſtay, caſt their loade vpon others who vpon the way waited for them, and ſo they to others. I vnderſtand that the Valachians, which are meſſengers vnto the great Turk, vſe extreame diligence in their buſineſſe, foraſmuch as they have authoritie to diſ-mount the firſt paſſenger they meete vpon the high-way, and give him their tyred Horſe. And bicauſe they ſhall not be weary, they are wont to ſwathe themſelves hard about the bodie with a broade Swathe or Seare cloath, as diverſe others doe with vs: I could never finde eaſe or good by it.
                     
                     
                        The three and twentieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of bad meanes emploied to a good end
                        
                        THere is a woonderfull relation and correſpondencie found in this vniverſall pollicie of Natures workes, which manifeſtly ſheweth, it is neither caſuall, nor directed by diverſe maſters. The infirmities and conditions of our bodies, are likewiſe ſeene in ſtates and goverments: Kingdomes and Commowealths as well as we, are borne, floriſh, and fade through age. We are ſubject vnto a repleatneſſe of humours, hurtfull and vnprofitable, yea be it of good humours (for even Phiſitians feare that, and becauſe there is nothing conſtant in vs, they ſay, that perfection of health over joyfull and ſtrong, muſt by arte be abated and diminiſhed, leſt our nature vnable to ſettle it ſelfe in any certaine place, and for hir amendment to aſcend higher, ſhould over-violently recoile backe into diſorder; and therefore they preſcrib vnto Wreſtlers purging and phlebotomie, to ſubſtract that ſuperabundance of health from them) or of bad, which is the ordinarie cauſe of ſickeneſſe. Of ſuch like repletion are States often ſeene to be ſicke, and diverſe purgations are wont to be vſed to purge them. As wee have ſeene ſome to diſmiſſe a great number of families (chiefly to disburthen the Countrey) which elſe where goe to ſeeke where they may at others charge ſeare themſelves. In this ſorte our ancient French leaving the high Countries of Germanie, came to poſſeſſe Gaule, whence they diſplaced the firſt Inhabitants. Thus grew that infinite confluence of people, which afterward vnder Brennus and others, over-ranne Italie. Thus the Gothes and 
                              Ʋandalles, as alſo the Nations which poſſeſſe Greece, left their naturall countries, to go where they might have more elbow-roome: And hardly ſhall we ſee two or three corners in the worlde, that have not felt the effect of ſuch a remooving alteration. The Romanes, by ſuch meanes, erected their Colonies; for perceiving their Cittie to growe over-populous, they were wont to diſcharge it of vnneceſſarie people, which they ſent to inhabite and manure the Countries they had ſubdued. They have alſo ſometimes maintained warre wi
                              •
                           h ſome of their enemies, not onely thereby to keepe their men in breath, leſt Idleneſſe, the mother of Corruption, ſhould cauſe them ſome worſe inconvenience.
                        
                           
                           Et patimur longae pacis mala, ſaevior armisJuven. ſa
                                    •
                                 . 6. 192.
                           
                           Luxuria incumbit.
                           We ſuffer of long peace the ſoking harmes,
                           On vs lies luxury more fierce then armes.
                        
                        But alſo to let the Common-wealth bloud, and ſomewhat to allay the over vehement heat of their youth, to lop the ſprigs, and thin the branches of this over-ſpreading tree, too much abounding in rankneſſe and gaillardiſe. To this purpoſe they maintained a good while war with the Carthaginians. In the treaty of Bretigny, Edward the third, King of England, would by no meanes comprehend in that generall peace the controverſie of the Dutchie of Britany to the end he might have ſome way to disburthen himſelfe of his men of war, and that the multitude of Engliſh-men, which he had emploied about the warres of France, ſhould not returne into England. It was one of the reaſons, induced Philip our King to conſent, that his ſonne Iohn ſhould be ſent to warre beyond the ſeas, that ſo he might carry with him a great number of yong hot-blouds, which were amongſt his trained military men. There are divers now adaies, which will ſpeake thus, wiſhing this violent and burning emotion we ſee and feele amongſt vs, might be derived to ſome neighbour war, fearing leſt thoſe offending humours, which at this inſtant are predominant in our bodie, if they be not diverted elſewhere, will ſtill maintaine our fever in force, and in the end cauſe our vtter deſtruction: And in truth a forraine warre is nothing ſo dangerous a diſ
                                 •
                              aſe as a civill: But I will not beleeve that God would favour ſo vnjuſt an enterpriſe, to offend and quarrell with others for our commodity.
                        
                           Nil mihi tam valdè placeat Rhammuſia virgo,Cat. epig. el
                                    •
                                 g. 6. 77.
                           
                           Quòd temerè invitis ſuſcipiatur heris.
                           That fortune likes me not, which is conſtrained,
                           By Lords vnwilling raſhly entertained.
                        
                        Notwithſtanding the weakneſſe of our condition, doth often vrge vs to this neceſſity, to vſe bad meanes to a good end. Lycurgus the moſt vertuous and perfect Law-giver that ever was, deviſed this moſt vnjuſt faſhion, to inſtruct his people vnto temperance, by force to make the Helotes, which were their ſervants, to be drunke, that ſeeing them ſo loſt and buried in wine, the Spartanes might abhor the exceſſe of that vice. Thoſe were alſo more to be blamed, who anciently allowed that criminall offendors, what death ſoever they were condemned vnto, ſhould by Phiſitians all alive be torne in pieces, that ſo they might naturally ſee our inward parts, and thereby eſtabliſh a more aſſured certainty in their arte: For if a man muſt needes erre or debauch himſelfe, it is more excuſable, if he doe it for his ſoules health, then for his bodies good. As the Romans trained vp, and inſtructed their people to valour, and contempt of dangers and death, by the outragious ſpectacles of Gladiators, and deadly fighting Fencers, who in preſence of them all combated, mangled, ſliced and killed one another;
                        
                           Quid veſani aliud ſibi vult ars impia luds,
                           Quid mortes iuvenum, quid ſanguine paſta voluptas?
                           What elſe meanes that mad arte of impious fenſe,
                           Thoſe yong-mens deaths, that blood-fed pleaſing ſenſe?
                        
                        which cuſtome continued even vntill the time of Theodoſius the Emperour.P
                                 •
                              ud 
                                 ••
                              ſt. Sym. l. 2. f.
                        
                        
                           Arripe delatam tua dux in tempora famam,
                           Quódque patris ſuperest ſucceſſor laudis habeto:
                           Nullus in vrbe cadat, cuius ſit poena voluptas,
                           Iam ſolis contenta feris infamis arena,
                           Nulla cruentatis homicidia ludat in armis.
                           The fame defer'd to your times entertaine,
                           Enherite praiſe which doth from Sire remaine,
                           Let none die to give pleaſure by his paine:
                           Be ſhamefull Theaters with beaſtes content,
                           Not in goar'd armes mans ſlaughter repreſent.
                        
                        Surely it was a wonderfull, example and of exceeding benefit for the peoples inſtitution, to ſee dayly one or two hundred, yea ſometimes a thouſand brace of men armed one againſt another, in their preſence to cut and hacke one another in pieces with ſo great conſtancy

of courage, that they were never ſeene to vtter one word of faintneſſe or commiſeration, never to turne their backe, nor ſo much as to ſhew a motion of demiſſeneſſe, to avoide their adverſaries blowes: but rather to extend their neckes to their ſwords, and preſent themſelves vnto their ſtrokes. It hath hapned to diverſe of them, who through many hurts being wounded to death, have ſent to aske the people, whether they were ſatisfied with their duty, before they would lie downe in the place. They muſt, not onely fight and die conſtantly, but jocondly: in ſuch ſort as they were curſed and bitterly ſcolded at, if in receiving their death they were any way ſeene to ſtrive, yea maidnes encited them to it.
                        
                           —conſurgit adictus,
                           
                           Et quoties victor ferrum iugulo inſerit, illaPrud. cont. Sym. lib. 2.
                           
                           Delicias ait eſſe ſuas, pectúſque iacentis
                           Virgo modeſta iubet converſo pollice rumpi.
                           The modeſt maide, when wounds are giv'n; vpriſeth;
                           When victors ſword the vanquiſht throate ſurpriſeth,
                           She ſaith, it is hir ſport, and doth command,
                           T'embrue the conquer'd breaſt, by ſigne of hand.
                        
                        The firſt Romans diſpoſed thus of their criminals: But afterward they did ſo with their innocent ſervants; yea of their free-men, which were ſold to that purpoſe: yea of Senators, and Roman Knights, and women alſo.
                        
                           Nunc caput in mortem vendunt, & fumus arenae,Ma
                                    •
                                 il. aſtr. l. 4 224.
                           
                           Atque hoſtem ſibi quiſque parat cùm bella quieſcunt.
                           They ſell mens lives to death and Stages ſight,
                           When wars doe ceaſe, they finde with whom to fight.
                           Hos inter fremitus novóſque luſus,
                           Stat ſexus rudis inſciúſque ferri,
                           Et pugnas capit improbus viriles.
                           Amidſt theſe tumults, theſe ſtrange ſporting ſights.
                           That Sex doth ſit, which knowes not how ſword bites,
                           And entertaines vnmov'd, thoſe manly fights.
                        
                        Which I ſhould deeme very ſtrange and incredible; if we were not dayly accuſtomed to ſee in our wars many thouſands of forraine nations, for a very ſmall ſome of mony to engage both their blood and life in quarrels wherein they are nothing intereſſed.
                     
                     
                        The foure and twentieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of the Roman greatneſſe.
                        
                        I Will but ſpeake a word of this infinite argument, and ſlightly glance at it, to ſhew the ſimplicity of thoſe, who compare the ſeely greatneſſe of theſe times vnto that. In the ſeaventh booke of Ciceroes familiar Epiſtles (and let Gramarians remove this title of Familiar, if they pleaſe, for to ſay truth it makes but little to the purpoſe: and they who in liew of familiar, have placed ad familiares, may wreſt ſome argument for themſelves, from that which Suetonius ſaith in Caeſars life, that there was a volume of his Epiſtles ad familiares) there is one directed vnto Caeſar then being in Gaule, in which Cicero repeats theſe very words, which were in the end of a former letter that Caeſar had written to him: Touching Marcus Furius, whom thou haſt commended vnto me, I will make him King of Gaule, and if thou wilt have me preferre any other of thy friends, ſend them to me. It was not new in a ſimple Roman Citizen (as Caeſar then was) to diſpoſe of Kingdomes, for as well deprived he King Deiotarus of his, to give it to a Gentleman of the City of Pergamo, called Mithridates. And thoſe who writ his life, mention many Kingdomes ſold by him. And Suetonius reporteth, that he at one time wreſted three millions and ſix hundred thouſand crownes of gold from King Ptolomeus, which amounted very neere vnto the price of his Kingdome.Claud. in E
                                 •
                              
                              trop. li. 1. 20
                        
                        
                           Tot Galatae, tot Pontus eat, tot lidia n
                                 •
                              mmis:
                           
                              Forſomuch let Galatia go,
                           Forſomuch Lidia, Pontus ſo.
                        
                        
                           Marcus Antonius ſaid, the greatneſſe of the Romane people, was not ſo much diſcerned by what it tooke, as by what it gave. Yet ſome ages before Antonius, was there one amongſt others, of ſo wonderfull authority, as through all his hiſtory I know no marke, carrieth the name of his credit higher. Antiochus poſſeſſed all Aegypt, and was very neere to conquer Cipres, and others depending of that Empire. Vpon the progreſſe of his victories, C. Popilius came vnto him in the behalfe of the Senate, and at firſt arrivall, refuſed to take him by the hand, before he had read the letters he brought him. The King having read them, ſaid, he would deliberate of them. Popilius with a wand encircled the place about, where he ſtood, and thus beſpake him; Give me an anſwer to carry backe vnto the Senate, before thou goe out of this circle. Antiochus amazed at the rudeneſſe of ſo vrging a commandement, after he had pawſed a while, replyed thus, I will doe what the Senate commandeth me. Then Popilius ſaluted him as a friend vnto the Roman people. To have renounced ſo great a Monarchy, and forgon the courſe of ſo ſucceſſefull proſperity, by the onely impreſſion of three written lines. He had good reaſon, as afterward he did, by his Ambaſſadors to ſend the Senate word, that he had received their ordinances with the ſame reſpect, as if they had come from the immortall Gods. All the Kingdomes Auguſtus ſubdued by right of war, he reſtored to thoſe who had loſt them, or preſented ſtrangers with them: And concerning this purpoſe, Tacitus ſpeaking of Cogidunus King of England, by a wonderfull tract makes vs perceive this infinit greatneſſeCor. Tac. vit. Jul. Agric. and might. The Romans (ſaith he) were from all antiquity accuſtomed, to leave thoſe Kings whom they had vanquiſhed, in the poſſeſſion of their kingdomes, vnder their authority: Vt haberent inſtrument a ſervitutis & reges. That they might have even Kings alſo for inſtruments of their bondage. It is very likely that Soliman the great Turke, whom we have ſeene to vſe ſuch a liberality, and give away the kingdome of Hungary, and other dominions, did more reſpect this conſideration, then that he was wont to alleage; which is, that he was over wearied with the many Monarchies and ſurcharged with the ſeverall dominions, which either his owne or his anceſtors vertue had gotten him.
                     
                     
                        The five and twentieth Chapter.
                        
                           How a men ſhould not counterfeit to be ſicke.
                        
                        THere is an epigram in Martiall, that may paſſe for a good one (for there are of all ſortes in him) wherein he pleaſantly relateth the ſtorie of Caelius, who to avoide the courting of certaine great men in Rome, to give attendance at their riſing, and to waite, aſſiſt and follow them, fained to be troubled with the goute; and to make his excuſe more likely, hee cauſed his legges to bee ointed and ſwathed, and lively counteirfeted the behaviour and countenance of a goutie man. In the end fortune did him the favour to make him goutie indeede.
                        
                           Tantum cura poteſt & ars doloris,Mart. lib. 7. epig. 38. 8.
                           
                           Deſiit fingere Caelius podagram.
                           So much the care and cunning can of paine:
                           Caelius (growne gowty) leaves the gowt to faine.
                        
                        As farre as I remember I have read a like Hiſtory in ſome place of Appian, of one who purpoſing to eſcape the proſcriptions of the Triumutrat of Rome, and to conceale himſelfe from the knowledge of thoſe who purſued him, kept himſelfe cloſe and diſguiſed, adding this other invention to it, which was to counter feit blindneſſe in one eye, who when he came ſomewhat to recouer his liberty, and would have left off the plaiſter hee had long time worne over his eye, he found that vnder that maske he had altogether loſt the ſight of it. It may be the action of his ſight was weakened, having ſo long continued without exerciſe and the viſual vertue was wholy converted into the other eie: For, we may plainely perceive, that holding one eye ſhut, it convaieth ſome part of it's effect into his follow; in ſuch ſort as it

will ſwell and growe bigger. As alſo the idlenes, together with the warmth of the medicaments and ſwathing, might very well drawe ſome goutie humor into the legge of Martials goutie ſellow. Reading in Freiſart, the vowe which a gallant troupe of young Engliſh-men had made, to weare their left eyes hoodwink's, vntill ſuch time as they ſhould paſſe into France, and there performe ſome notable exploite of armes vpon vs, I have often laughed with my ſelfe to think what they would have imagined if as to the fore aleaged, it had hapned to them, and had all beene blinde of the left eye, at what time they returned to looke vpon their miſtreſſes, for whoſe ſake they had made their vowe and vndertaken ſuch an enterpriſe. Mothers have great reaſon to chide their children when they counterſet to be blind with one eye, crompt backt, ſquint'-eyed, or lame, and ſuch other deformities of the body; for beſides that the body thus tender may eaſily receive ſome ill cuſtome, I know not how, it ſeemeth that fortune is glad to take vs at our word; And I have heard divers examples of ſome, who have falne ſicke in very deede, becauſe they had purpoſed to ſaine ſickenes. I have at all times enured my ſelfe, whether I be on horſebacke or a foote, to carrie a good heavie wand or cudgell in my hand; yea I have endevored to doe it handſomely, and with an effected kinde of countenance to continue ſo. Many have threatned me, that fortune will one time or other turne this my wantonnes into neceſſitie. I preſume vpon this, that I ſhould be the firſt of my race, that ever was troubled with the gowt. But let vs ſomewhat amplifie this chapter, and patch it vp with another piece concerning blindnes. Plinie reports of one, who dreaming in his ſleepe, that he was blinde, awaking the next morning, was found to be ſtarke blinde, having never had any precedent ſickenes. The power of imagination may very well further ſuch things, as elſewhere I have ſhewed; And Plinie ſeemeth to be of this opinion; but it is more likely, that the motions, which the body ſelt inwardly (whereof Phiſitions, may if they pleaſe, finde out the cauſe) and which tooke away his ſight, and were the occaſion of his dreame. Let vs alſo adde another ſtorie, concerning this purpoſe, which Seneca reporteth in his Epiſtles. thou knoweſt (ſaith he writing vnto Lucilius) that Harpaſte my wiues foole, is left vpon me as an hereditarie charge; for by mine owne nature, I am an enemie vnto ſuch monſters, and if I have a deſire to laugh at a foole, I neede not ſeeke one farre; I laugh at my ſelfe. This fooliſh woman hath ſodainly loſt hir ſight. I report a ſirange thing, but yet very true: She will not beleeve ſhe is blind; and vrgeth hir keeper vnceſſantly to lead hir, ſaying ſtill, my houſe is very darke. What we laugh at in hir, I entreat thee to belieeve, that the ſame h
                                 •
                              pneth to each for vs. No man knoweth himſelfe to be covetous, or niggardly. Even the blind require a guide, but wee ſtray from our ſelves. I am not ambui
                                 •
                              us, ſay we, but no man can live otherwiſe at Rome: I am not ſumptuous, but the Cittie requireth great charges: It is not my fault, if I be collerike; If I have not yet ſet downe a ſure courſe of my life, the fault is in youth. Let vs not ſeeke our evill out of vs; it is within vs it is rooted in our entrailes. And only becauſe we perceive not that we are ſick, makes our recoverie to proue more difficult. If we beginne not betimes to cure our ſelves, when ſhall we provide for ſo many ſores, for ſo many evils? Yet have we a moſt-ſweete and gentle medicine of Philoſophie; for of others, no man feeles the pleaſure of them, but after his recoverie, where as ſhe pleaſeth, eaſeth, and cureth all at once. Lo here what Seneca ſaith, who hath ſomewhat diverted me from my purpoſe: But there is profit in the exchange.
                     
                     
                        The ſixe and twentieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of Thumbs.
                        
                        
                           TAcitus reporteth, that amongſt certaine barbarous Kings, for the confermation of an inviolable bonde, or covenant, their manner was, to joyne their right hands cloſe and hard together, with enterlacing their thumbs: And when by hard wringing them the blood appeared at their ends, they pricked them with ſome ſharpe point, and then mutually enterſuck't each one the others. Phiſicions ſay, thumbs are the maſter-fingers of the hand and that their Latin eEtymologie is derived of Pollere. The Graecians cal it 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            as a man

would ſay another hand. And it ſeemeth, the Latins likewiſe take them ſometimes in this ſenſe, id eſt, for a whole hand:
                        
                           Sed nec vocibus excitata blandis,Mart. lib. 12. epigram. 99. 8
                           
                           Molli pollice nec rogata ſurgit.
                           It will not riſe, though with ſweete words excited,
                           Nor with the touch of ſofteſt thumb invited.
                        
                        In Rome it was heeretofore a ſigne of favor, to wring and kiſſe the thumbs,
                        
                           Fautor vtroque tuum laudabit pollice ludum:Hor. lib. 1. epiſt. 18. 66.
                           
                           He that applaudes will praiſe,
                           With both his thumbs thy plaies.
                        
                        and of disfavour or diſgrace to lift them vp, and turne them outward:
                        
                           —converſo pollice vulgi
                              Iuven. ſat. 3. 36.
                           
                           Quemlibet occidunt populariter.—
                           When people turne their thumbs away,
                           The popularly any ſlay.
                        
                        Such as were hurt or maymed in their thumbs, were by the Romanes diſpenſed from going to warre, as they who had loſt their weapons hold-faſt. Auguſtus did confiſcate all the goods of a Romane Knight, who through malice had cut off the thumbes of two yong children of his thereby to excuſe them from going to warre: And before him, the Senate in the time of the Italian warres, had condemned Caius Ʋatienus to perpetuall priſon, and confiſcated all his goods, forſomuch as he had willingly cut off the thumb of his left hand, ſo to exempt himſelfe from that voyage. Some one, whoſe name I remember not, having gained a great victorie by Sea, cauſed all the enemies whom he had vanquiſhed and taken priſoners to have their thumbes cut off, thinking thereby to deprive them of all meanes of fighting, of rowing, or handling their oares. The Athenians likewiſe cauſed them to be cut off from them of Aegina, to take from them the preheminence in the arte of navigation. In Lacedaemon, maſters puniſhed their Schollers by byting their thumbs.
                     
                     
                        The ſeaven and twentieth Chapter.
                        
                           Cowardize, the Mother of Crueltie.
                        
                        I Have often heard it reported, that Cowardize is the Mother of Crueltie: And have perceived by experience, that this malicious ſharpnes, and inhumane ſeveritie of corage, is commonly accompanied with feminine remiſſeneſſe: I have ſeene ſome of the crueleſt ſubject to weep eaſily, and for frivolous cauſes. Alexander the tyrant of Pheres, could not endure to ſee tragedies acted in the Theaters, for feare his ſubjects ſhould ſee him ſob and weepe at the misfortunes of Hecuba and Andromaca; he who without remorce or pittie cauſed daily ſo many poore people to be moſt cruelly maſſacred and barbarouſly murthered. May it be weakneſſe of ſpirit, makes them ſo pliable to all extremities? valor (whoſe effect is onely to exerciſe it ſelfe againſt reſiſtance.
                        
                           Nec niſi bellantis gaudet cervice iuvenci.Claud. epiſt. ad Hadr. v. 39.
                           
                           Nor takes he joy to domineere,
                           But on the necke of ſturdie ſteere)
                        
                        refraines it ſelfe in ſeeing her enemie proſtrate to her mercie: But puſillanimitie, to ſay that ſhe alſo is of the feaſte, ſince it cannot bee joyned to the firſt part, takes for her ſhare the ſecond, which is maſſacre and blood. Murthers after victories, are commonly effected by the baſer kinde of people, and officers that waite vpon the baggage and cariage. And the reaſon we ſee ſo many vnheard-of cruelties in popular warres, is, that this vulgar raſcalitie doth martially fleſh and enure it ſelfe to dive in blood vp to the elbowes, and mangle a bodie, or hacke a carcaſe lying and groveling at their feete, having no manner of feeling of other valor.
                        
                           Et Lupus & turpes inſtant morientibus Vrſi.Ovid. Triſt. li. 3. 
                                    •
                                 l. 5. 35.
                           
                           
                              —Et quaecumque minor nobilitate fera eſt.
                           
                           A Wolfe or filthie Beare the dying man oppreſſe,
                           Or ſome ſuch beaſt as in nobilitie is leſſe.
                        
                        As the Craven Curres, which at home or in their Kennels will tugge and bite the skinnes of thoſe wilde beaſtes, which in the fields they durſt not ſo much as barke-at. What is it that now adaies makes all our qaurrels mortall? And whereas our forefathers had ſome degree of reuenge, we now beginne by the laſt; and at firſt brunt nothing is ſpoken of but killing? What is it, if it be not Cowardiſe? Euery man ſeeth, it is more bravery and diſdaine for one to beare his enemie, than make an end of him; and to keepe him at a bay, than make him die. Moreouer, that the deſire of revenge is thereby alayed, and better contented; for, it aymeth at nothing ſo much as to give or ſhew a motion or feeling of reuenge onely of her ſelfe. And that's thereaſon reaſon we doe not chalenge a beaſt or fall vpon a ſtone, when it hurts vs, becauſe they are incapable to feele our ren
                              •
                           nge. And to kill a man, is to ſhelter him from our offence. And euen as Bias, exclaimed vpon a wicked man; I know that ſoone or late thou ſhalt be puniſhed for thy lewdnes, but I feare me I ſhall not ſee it: And moaned the Orchomenians, becauſe the penance which Liciſcus had for his treaſon committed againſt them, came at ſuch a time, as none of them were living, whome it had concerned, and whom the pleaſure of that puniſhment might moſt delight: So ought revenge to be moaned, when he on whom it is inflicted, looſeth the meanes to endure or feel it. For, even as the revenger, will ſee the action of the revenge, that ſo he may feele the pleaſure of it, ſo muſt he on whom he is revenged both ſee and feele that he may hereby receive both repentance and griefe. He ſhall rew it, ſay we, And though he receive a ſtabbe or a blow with a piſtoll on his head, ſhall we thinke he will repent? Contrariwiſe, if we marke him well, we ſhall perceive that in falling, he makes a moe or bob at vs, Hee is farre from repenting, when hee rather ſeemes to be beholding to vs: In aſmuch as we affoord him the favourableſt office of life, which is to make him dye ſpeedily, and as it were inſenſibly. We are left to ſhift vp and downe, runne and trot, and ſquat heere and there, and all to avoy de the Officers, or eſcape the Magiſtrates that purſue vs; and he is at reſt. To kill a man, is good to eſcape a future offonce, and not revenge the wrougs past. It is rather an action of feare, than of bravery; Of precaution, than of courage; Of defence, than of an enterpriſe. It is apparant, that by it, we quit both the true end of revenge, and the reſpect of our reputation: If he live we feare he will or may charge vs with the like. It is not againſt him, it is for thee, thou riddeſt thy ſelfe of him. In the Kingdome of Narſinga, this expedient would be bootleſſe: There, not onely Souldiers, and ſuch as profeſſe armes, but euery meane Artificer, decide their quarels with the Swordes point. The King neuer refuſeth anie man the combate, that is diſpoſed to fight; And if they be men of qualitie, he will be by in perſon, and reward the Victor with a chaine of Gold: Which, whoſoeuer hath a mind vnto, and will obtaine it, may freely chalenge him that weareth the ſame, and enter combate with him. And hauing overcome one combate hath many following the ſame, If we thought by vertue to be ever ſuperiors vnto our enemy, and at our pleaſure gourmandize him, it would much grieve vs he ſhould eſcape vs, as he doeth in dying. We rather endevor to vanquiſh ſurely, than honourably. And in our quarrels we rather ſeeke for the end, than for the glory. Aſinius Pollio for an honeſt man, leſſe excuſable, committed a like fault; Who hauing written certaine invectives againſt Plancus, ſtaide vntill he were dead to publiſh them. It was rather to flurt at a blind man, and raile in a dead-mans eare, and to offend a ſenceleſſe man, than incurre the danger of his revenge. And men anſwered in this behalfe, that it onely belonged to Hobgoblins to wrestle with the dead. He who ſtaieth till the Author be dead, whoſe writings hee will combate, what ſaith he, but that he is weake and quarrellous? It was told Aristotle, that ſome body had ſpoken ill of him, to whom he anſwered, Let him alſo whippe me, ſo my ſelfe be not by. Our forefathers were contented to revenge an iniurie with a lie; a lie with a blowe, a blowe with bloud; and ſo in order. They were ſufficiently valiant not to feare their adverſary though he lived aud were wronged: Whereas we quake for feare, ſo long as we ſee him a foote. And that it is ſo, doth not our moderne practize, purſue to death, as well him who hath wronged vs, as him whom we have offended? It is alſo a kinde of daſtardlineſſe, which hath brought this faſhion into onr ſingle combates, to accompany vs into the field with ſeconds, thirdes, and fourths. They were aunciently ſingle combates, but now they are skirmiſhes and battels. To be alone, feared the firſt that invented it: Quum in ſe cui
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               minimum fiduciae eſſet.
                           
                           When every man had leaſt confidence in himſelfe. For, what company ſoever it be, it doth naturally bring ſome comfort & eaſe in danger, In ancient time they were wont to employ third perſons as ſticklers, to ſee no trechery or diſorder were vſed, and to beare witnes of the combates ſucceſſe. But now this faſhion is come vp, let any man be engaged whoſoever is envited, cannot well containe himſelfe to be a ſpectator, leſt it be imputed vnto him, it is either for want of affection, or lacke of courage. Beſides the injuſtice of ſuch an action and villany, for your honours protection, to engage other valour and force then your owne, I finde it a diſadvantage in an honeſt and worthie man, and who wholly truſts vnto himſelfe, to entermingle his fortune with a ſecond man: every one runneth ſufficient hazard for himſelfe, and neede not alſo runne it for another: And hath enough to doe to aſſure himſelfe of his owne vertue for the defence of his life, without committing ſo precious a thing into third menshandes. For, if the contrarie hath not expreſſely beene covenanted of all foure, it is a combined party. If your fellow chance to faile, you have two vpon you, and not without reaſon: And to ſay, it is a Superchiery, as it is indeed: as being wel armed, to charge a man who hath but a piece of a ſword, or being ſound and ſtrong, to ſet vpon a man fore hurt. But if they bee advantages you have gotten fighting, you may vſe them without imputation. Diſparitie is not conſidered, and inequality is not balanced, but by the ſtate wherein the fight is begunne. As for the reſt you muſt rely on fortune: and if alone or ſingle, you chance to have three vpon you, your other two companions being ſlaine, you have no more wrong done you, than I ſhould offer in Wars in ſtriking an enemie, whom at ſuch an advantage I ſhould finde grapled with one of my Fellow Souldiers. The nature of ſocietie beareth, where troupe is againſt troupe (as where our Duke of Orleans chalenged Henry King of England, one hundred againſt another hundred; three hundred againſt as many, as did the Argians againſt the Lacedemonians; three to three, as were the Horatij againſt the Curatij) the pluralitie of either ſide is never reſpected for more than a ſingle man. Wherſoever there is company, the hazard is confuſed and diſordered. I have a private intereſt in this diſcourſe. For, my brother, the Lord of Matecoulom, being deſired in Rome, to ſecond and accompany a Gentleman, with whom he had no great acquaintance, who was defendant and challenged by another; The fight begunne, my brother by chance found himſelfe confronted with one neerer and better knowne to him (I would faine be reſolved of theſe Lawes of honour, which ſo often ſhocke and trouble thoſe of reaſon) whom after he had vanquiſhed and diſpatched, ſeeing the two principalls of the quarrell yet ſtanding and vnhurt, he went to reskew his fellow. What could he do leſſe? ſhould he have ſtoode ſtill, and (if chance would ſo have had it) ſee him defeated, for whoſe defence he was entred the quarrell? What vntill then he had done was nothing to the purpoſe, and the quarrell was ſtill vndecided. All the curteſie you can, you ought ſurely vſe to your enemy, eſpecially when you have brought him vnder, and to ſome great diſadvantage; I know not how a man may vſe it, when anothers intereſt depends on it, where you are but acceſſory, and where the quarrell is not yours. Hee could never be juſt nor curteous, in hazard of him vnto whom he had lent himſelfe. So was he preſently delivered out of the Italian priſons by a ſpeedy and ſolemne letter of commendations from our King. Oh indiſcreete Nation! We are not contented to manifeſt our follies, and bewray our vices to the world by reputation: but wee goe into forraine Nations and there in perſon ſhew them. Place three French-men in the deſerts of Libia, and they will never live one moneth together without brawling, falling out and ſcratching one another: you would ſay this peregrination, is a party erected to pleaſe ſtrangers with our tragedies; and thoſe moſt commonly, who reioyce and ſcoffe at our evills. We travell into Italie to learne the Arte of fencing, and practiſe it at the coſt of our lives, before we know it; it were requiſite according to the order of true Diſcipline, we ſhould preferre the Theorike before the practike. We betray our apprentiſage.
                        
                           Primitiae iuvenum miſerae, bellique futuriS
                                    ••
                                 t. 
                                    ••
                                 lv. lib. 5.
                           
                           Dura rudimenta.—
                           The miſerable firſt eſſayes of youth,
                           And hard beginnings of warre that 
                                 •
                              nſu'th.
                        
                        I know it is an Arte profitable to her end (in the ſingle combate betweene the two Princes, coſin-Germanes, in Spaine, the eldeſt of which (ſaieth T. Livius) by the skill of his weapons, & by craft, over came eaſily the diſmayed forces of the yonger) and as by experience I have knowen, the knowledge and skill whereof, hath puffed vp the hart of ſome, beyond

their naturall proportion. But it is not properly a vertue, ſince ſhee draweth her ſtay from dexteritie, and takes her foundation from other than from her ſelfe. The honour of combatet conſiſteth in the iealoſie of the hart, not of the ſcience. And therefore have I ſeene ſome of my friends, renowned for great Maſters in this exerciſe, in their quarels to make choiſe of weapons, that might well take the meane of this aduantage or oddes from them; and which wholly depended on fortune, and aſſurance that their victory might not rather be imputed to their fencing, than aſcribed to their valour And in my infancy, our nobility ſcorned the reputation of a fencer, though neuer ſo cunning, as injurious; and if any learnt it, they would ſequeſter themſelves from company, deeming the ſame as a myſtery of craft and ſubtilty, derogating from true and perfect vertue.
                        
                           Non ſchivar, non parar, non ritirarſiTaſſ
                                    •
                                  
                                 
                                    •
                                 i
                                    •
                                 r. can. 12. 
                                    ••••
                                 . 55.
                           
                           
                              Ʋoglion coſtor, ne qui destrezzaha parte;
                           Non danno i colpi finti hor pie
                                 •
                              i, hor ſcarſi;
                           Toglie lirae il furor 
                                 •
                               vſo deilarte,
                           Odi le ſpade horribilmente vrtarſi
                           A mozzo il ferro, il pie d`orma non parte,
                           Sempre è il pie fermo, è la man ſempre in moto,
                           Ne ſcende taglio in van, ne punta à voto.
                           T`avoyde, towarde retiring to give ground
                           They reke not, nor hath nimblenes heere part:
                           Nor give falſe blowes, nor full, nor ſcarſe, nor ſound,
                           Rage and revenge bereave all vſe of Arte.
                           Their Swordes at halfe Sword horribly reſound
                           You might heare mette: No foote from ſteppe doth parte:
                           Their foote ſtill faſt, their hand ſtill faſter mooveth:
                           No ſtroke in vaine, no thruſt in vaine, but prooveth.
                        
                        
                           Shooting at Buts, Tiltings, Torneyes, Barriers, the true images of martiall combates, were the exerciſes of our forefathers. This other exerciſe is ſo much the leſſe noble, by how much it reſpecteth but a private end; which againſt the lawes of juſtice, teacheth vs to deſtroy one another, and euery way produceth euer miſchievous effects. It is much more worthy, and beeter beſeeming, for a man to exerciſe himſelfe in things that aſſure and offend not our Commonwealth; and which reſpect publike ſecuritie and generall glory. Publius Conſus, was the firſt that ever inſtituted the Souldier to manage his armes by dexteritie and skill, and joyned arte vnto vertue, not for the vſe of private contentions, but for the wars and Roman peoples quarrels. A popular and civill manner of fencing. And beſides the example of Caeſar, who appointed his Souldier, above all things, to aime and ſtrike at the face of Pompeyes men in the battell of Pharſalia: A thouſand other Chieſtaines and Generals have deviſed new faſhions of weapons, and new kindes of ſtriking, and covering of themſelves, according as the preſent affaires required. But even as Philopoemen condemned wreſtling, wherein hee excelled others, forſomuch as the preparations appertaining to this exerciſe differed from thoſe that belong to military diſcipline, to which he ſuppoſed, men of honour ſhould ammuſe and addict themſelves. Me thinkes alſo, that this nimbleneſſe or agilitie, to which men faſhion and enure themſelves, their limbes, their turnings, windings, and timble-quicke motions, wherein youth is inſtructed and trained in this new ſchoole, are not onely vnprofitable, but rather contrary and domageable for the vſe of militarie combate: And we ſee our men doe commonly employ particular weapons, in their fence ſchooles, and peculiarly appointed for that purpoſe. And I have ſeene it diſallowed, that a gentleman chalenged to fight with Rapier and Dagger, ſhould preſent himſelfe in the equipage of a man at armes; or that another ſhould offer to come with his cloake inſteade of a Dagger. It is worthy the noting, that Lachaz in Plato, ſpeaking of an apprentiſlage, how to manage armes, conformable to ours, ſaith, he could never ſee any notable warrior come of a ſchoole of fence, and eſpecially from among the maiſters. As for them our owne experience confirmes as much. And for the reſt we may at leaſt ſay, they are ſufficiencies of no relation or correſpondencie. And in the inſtitution of the children of his Common wealth, Plato interdicts the artes of ſtriking or playing with fiſts, deviſed by Amycus and Epeius, and to wreſtle, invented by Anthoeus and Cecyo: becauſe they aime at another end, then to adapt youth to warlike ſervice,

and have no affinitie with it. But I digreſſe much from my theame. The Emperour Mauricius, being forewarned by dreames▪ and ſundry prognoſtications, that one Phocas a Souldier at that time yet vnknowne, ſhould kill him, demanded of Philip his ſonne in law, who that Phocas was, his nature, his conditions, and cuſtomes, and how amongſt other things Philip told him, he was a fainte, cowardly, and timorousfellow: The Emperour thereby preſently concluded, that he was both cruell and a murtherer. What makes tyrants ſo bloud-thirſtie? it is the care of their ſecuritie, and that their faint-hart yeelds them no other meanes to aſſure themſelves, then by rooting out thoſe which may in any ſort offend them; yea ſilly women for feare they ſhould or bite or ſcrach them?
                        
                           Cuncta ferit dum cuncta timet.—Claud in Eutrop. lib. 1. 182.
                           
                           Of all things he afraide,
                           At all things fiercely laide.
                        
                        The firſt cruelties are exerciſed by themſelves, thence proceedeth the feare of a juſt revenge, which afterward produceth a ſwarme of new cruelties; by the one to ſtiſ
                              •
                           le the other. Philip, the King of Macedon, who had ſo many crowes to pull with the Romanes, agitated by the horrour of ſo many murthers committed by his appointment, and vnable to make his partie good, or to take any ſaue reſolution againſt ſo many families, by him at ſeverall times injuried, reſolved at laſt to ſeize vpon all their children whom he had cauſed to be murthered, that ſo he might day by day one after another rid the world of them, and ſo eſtabliſh his ſafety. Matters of worth are not impertinent whereſoever they be placed. I, who rather reſpect the weight and benefite of diſcourſes, then their order and placing, neede not feare to place here at randone a notable ſtorie. When they are ſo rich of their owne beautie, and may very well vpholde themſelves alone, I am content with a haires end, to fitte or joyne them to my purpoſe. Amongſt others who had beene condemned by Philip, was one Herodicus, Prince of the Theſſalians: After whome he cauſed his two ſonnes in lawe to bee put to death; each of them leaving a yoong ſonne behinde him. Theoxena and Arco were the two widdowes. Theoxena although ſhee were inſtantly vrged therevnto, coulde never be induced to marry againe. Arco tooke to husbande Poris a chiefe man amongſt the Aenians, and by him had diverſe children, all which ſhe left very yoong. Theoxena moved by a motherly charitie toward her yoong nephewes, and ſo to have them in her protection and bringing vp wedded Poris. Vpon this came out the proclamation of the Kings Edict. This noble-minded mother, diſtruſting the kings crueltie, and fearing the mercileſnes of his Satelities or officers towards theſe noble, hopefull and tender youths, feared not to ſay, that ſhee would rather kil them with her owne hands, then deliver them. Poris amazed at her proteſtations, promiſeth her ſecretly to convey them to Athens, there by ſome of his faithfull friends to be kept ſafely. They take occaſion of an yearely feaſt, which to the honor of Aeneas was ſolemnized at Aenia, and thither they goe, where having all day-long aſſiſted to the ceremonies▪ and publike banket: night being come, they convay themſelves iuto a ſhippe, appointed for that purpoſe, in hope to ſave themſelves by Sea. But the winde fell out ſo contrarie, that the next morning they found themſelves in view of the towne, whence the night before they had hoiſed ſailes, where they were purſued by the guarders and Souldiers of the Porte. Which Poris perceiving, laboured to haſten and encourage the Mariners to ſhift away: But Theoxena, enraged through love and revenge, remembring her firſt reſolution, prepared both weapons and poiſon, and preſenting them to their ſight, thus ſhee beſpake them: Oh my deere children, take a good heart, death is now the onely meane of your defence and libertie, and ſhall be a juſt cauſe vnto the Gods for their holy juſtice. Theſe bright-keene blades, theſe full cuppes ſhall free you the paſſage vnto it. Courage therefore, and thou my eldeſt childe, take this ſworde to die the ſtrongeſt death. Who on the one ſide hauing ſo vndaunted a perſwader, and on the other their enemies ready to cut their throates, in furious manner ranne all to that which came next to his hand. And ſo all goared and panting were throwne into the Sea. Theoxena, prowde ſhee had ſo gloriouſlie provided for her childrens ſafety, lovingly embracing her husband, ſaide thus vnto him; Oh my deare heart, let vs follow theſe boyes, and together with them enjoy one ſelfe ſame graue, And ſo cloſe-claſpt-together, they flung themſelves in to the maine: So that the ſhip was brought to ſhoare againe, but emptie of hir Maiſters. Tyrants to act two things together, that is, to kill and cauſe their rage to be felt, have employed the vtmoſt of their skill, to

deviſe lingring deaths. They will have their enemies die, yet not ſo ſoone, but that they may have leiſure to feele their vengeance. Wherein they are in great perplexitie: for if the torments be over-violent, they are ſhort; if lingring, not grievous inough. In this they imploy their wits and deviſes. Many examples whereof we ſee in antiquitie; and I wot not, whether wittingly we retaine ſome ſpice of that barbari
                              •
                           me. Whatſoever is beyond a ſimple death, ſeemeth to mee meere crueltie. Our juſtice cannot hope, that he whom the terror of death cannot diſmay, be he to be hanged or beheaded, can in any ſort be troubled with the imagination of a languiſhing fire, of a wheele, or of burning pincers. And I wot not, whether in that meane time we bring him to deſpaire: For, what plight can the ſoule of a man be in, that is broken vpon wheele, or after the olde faſhion, nailed vpon a Croſſe, and xxiiij. houres together expects his death? Ioſephus reporteth, that whileſt the Romane warres continued in Iurie, paſſing by a place where certaine Iewes had beene crucified three dayes before, he knew three of his friends amongſt them, and having gotten leave to remoove then, two of them died, but the third lived long after. Chalcondylas a man of credite, in the memories he left off matters happened in his time and thereabouts, maketh report of an extreame torment, the Emperor Mechmed was often wont to put in practiſe, which was by one onely blow of a Cimitary or broad Perſian Sword, to have men cutte in two parts, by the waſte of the body, about the Diaphragma, which is a membrane lying ouerthwart the lower part of the breaſt, ſeparating the heart and lights from the ſtomake, which cauſed them to dy two deaths at once: and affirmeth that both parts were ſeene full of life, to moove and ſtirre long time after, as if they had beene in lingring torment. I doe not thinke, they felt any great torture in that mooving. The gastlieſt torments to looke vpon, are not alwai
                                 •
                              s the greateſt to be endured: And I finde that much more fiercely-horrible, which other Hiſtorians write and which he vſed againſt certain Lords of Epirus, whom faire and leaſurely he cauſed to be fleade all over, diſpoſed by ſo malicious a diſpenſation, that their lives continued fifteene daies in that languor and anguiſh. And theſe two others; Croeſus having cauſed a Gentleman to be apprehended, greatly favoured by Pantaleon his brother; led him into a fullers or cloth-workers ſhoppe, where with Cardes and Teazles belonging to that trade, he made him to be carded, ſcraped, and teazled ſo long vntill he died of it. George Sechell Ring-leader of the Countrymen of Polina, who vnder the title of a Croyſada, wrought ſo many miſchiefes, having beene defeated in a battell by the 
                              Ʋayvoda of Tranſilvania, and taken Priſoner, was for three dayes together tyed naked to a woden-horſe, expoſed to all maner of tottures, any man might deviſe againſt him; during which time divers other priſoners were kept faſting. At laſt, he yet living, ſaw Lueat his deare brother, and for whoſe ſafety he ſaued and entreated, forced to drinke his bloud, drawing all the envie and hatred of his miſdeedes vpon himſelfe. And twentie of his moſt favoured Captaines were compelled to feed vpon his fleſh, which with their teeth they muſt teare off, and ſwallow their morſels. The reſt of his body and entrailes, he being dead, were boiled in a pan, and given for foode to other of his followers.
                     
                     
                        The eight and twentieth Chapter.
                        
                           All things have their ſeaſon.
                        
                        THoſe who compare Cato the Cenſor, to C
                                 ••
                              o the yonger that killed himſelfe, compare two notable natures, and in forme neare one vnto another. The firſt exploited his, ſundrie waies, and excelleth in militarie exploites, and vtilitie of his publike vacations. But the yongers vertue (beſides that it were blaſphemie, in vigor to compare any vnto him) was much more ſincere and vnſpotted. For, who will diſcharge the Cenſores of envie and ambition, that durſt counter-checke the honor of Scipio, in goodneſſe and all other parts of excellencie, farre greater and better than him or any other man living in his age? Amongſt other things reported of him, this is one, that in his eldeſt yeares he gave himſelfe, with ſo erneſt a longing to learne the Greeke tong, as if it had been to quench a long burning thirſt: A thing in mine opinion not very honorable in him. It is properly that which we call doting

or to become a child againe. All things have their ſeaſon, yea the good and all. And I may ſay my Pator noster out of ſeaſon. As T. Quintius Flaminius was accuſed, foraſmuch as being Generall of an Army, even in the houre of the conflict, he was ſeene to withdraw himſelfe apart, ammuſing himſelfe to pray God, although he gained the battell.
                        
                           Imponit finem ſapiens & rebus honestis.Iuve. ſat. 6. 344
                           
                           A wiſe-man will vſe moderation,
                           Even in things of commendation.
                        
                        
                           Eudemonidas ſeeing Xenocrates very old, laboriouſly apply himſelf in his Schoole-lectures ſaid, when will this man know ſomething, ſince he is yet learning? And Philopoemen, to thoſe who highly extolled King Ptolomey, becauſe he daily hardned his body to the exerciſe of armes: It is not (ſaid he) a matter commendable in a King of his age, in them to exerciſe himſelfe, he ſhould now really and ſubſtancially imploy them. Wiſe men ſay, that yoong-men ſhould make their preparations, and old men enioy them. And the greateſt vice they note in vs, is, that our deſires doe vnceſſantly grow yonger and yonger. We are ever beginning a new to live. Our ſtudies and our deſires ſhould ſometimes have a feeling of age. We have a foote in the grave, and our appetites and purſuites are but new-borne.
                        
                           Tuſecanda marmoraHor car. lib. 2 od. 18. 17.
                           
                           Locas ſub ipſum funus, & ſepulcri
                           Immemor, ſtruis domos.
                           You, when you ſhould be going to your grave,
                           Put Marble out to worke, build houſes brave,
                           Vnmindfull of the buriall you muſt have.
                        
                        The longeſt of my deſſeignes doth not extend to a whole yeare; now I onely apply my ſelfe to make an end: I ſhake off all my newe hopes and enterpriſes: I bid my laſt farewell to all the places I leave, and daily diſpoſſeſſe my ſelfe of what I have. Olim iam nec peris quicquam mihi, nec acquiritur: Plus ſupereſt viatici quam viae. It is a good while ſince I neither looſe
                           Sen. epist. 77. p. 
                           nor get any thing; I have more to beare my charges then way to goe.
                        
                        
                           Vixi, & quem dederat curſum fortuna peregi.Virg. Aen. l. 4. 653.
                           
                           I have liv'd, and the race have paſt,
                           Wherein my fortune had me plaſt.
                        
                        To conclude, it is all the eaſe I finde in my age, and that it ſuppreſſeth many cares and deſires in me, wherewith life is much diſquieted. The care of the worlds courſe, the care of riches, of greatneſſe, of knowledge, of health and of my ſelfe. This man learneth to ſpeake, when he ſhould rather learne to hold his peace for ever. A man may alwaies continue his ſtudie, but not ſchooling. O fond-fooliſh for an old man to be ever an Abcedarian.
                        
                        
                           Diverſos diverſa iuuant, non omnibus annis.Catul. eleg. 1. 103.
                           
                           Omnia conveniunt.—
                           Diverſe delights to diverſe, nor to all
                           Do all things at all yeares convenient fall.
                        
                        If we muſt needes ſtudy let vs ſtudy ſomething ſorteable to our condition, that we may anſwer, as he did, who being demanded what his ſtudies would ſteade him in his decrepity, anſwered; that he might the better, and with more eaſe leave this world. Such a ſtudy was yoong Catoes, in 
                              •
                           ore feeling his approaching end, who lighting vpon Platoes diſcourſe of the ſoules immortality. Not, as it may be ſuppoſed, that long before he had not ſtored himſelfe with all ſorts of munition for ſuch a diſlodging. Of aſſurance, of conſtancy and inſtruction, he had more then Plato hath in all his writings: His Science, and his courage, were in this reſpect above all Philoſophie. Hee vndertooke this occupation, not for the ſervice of his death, but as one, who did not ſo much as interrupt his ſleepe, in a deliberation of ſuch conſequence, whoever without choiſe or change continued his wonted ſtudies, and all other accuſtomed actions of his life. The ſame night, wherein the Pretorſhip was refuſed him, he paſſed over in play. That wherein he muſt die, he ſpent in reading. The loſſe of life or office was all one to him.
                     
                     
                        
                        The nine and twentieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of Vertue.
                        
                        I Finde by experience, that there is great difference betweene the ſodaine fits and fantaſies of the ſoule, and a reſolute diſpoſition and conſtant habitude: And I ſee, there is nothing but we may attaine vnto, yea, as ſome ſay, to exceede Divinitie it ſelfe; forſomuch as it is more to become impaſſible of himſelfe, then to be ſo by his originall condition: And that one may joyne a reſolution and aſſurance of God to mans imbecilitie. But it is by fits. And in the lives of thoſe Heroes or noble worthies of former ages, are often found wonderfull parts, and which ſeeme greatly to exceede our naturall forces: but they are prankes or parts conſonant to truth: and it may hardly be believed, mans ſoule may ſo be tainted and fed with thoſe ſo high-raiſed conditions, that vnto it they may become as ordinary and naturall. It hapneth vnto our ſelves, who are but abortiue broodes of men, ſometimes to rowze our ſoule farre beyond her ordinary pitch, as ſtirred vp by the diſcourſes, or provoked by the examples of others. But it is a kinde of paſſion, which vrgeth, mooveth, agitateth and in ſome ſorte raviſheth her from out her ſelfe: for, that guſt overblowne, and ſtorme paſt, we ſee, it will vnawares vnbend and looſe it ſelfe, if not to the loweſt pitch, at leaſt to be no more the ſame ſhe was, ſo that vpon every ſlight occaſion, for a bird loſt, or for a glaſſe broken, we ſuffer our ſelves to be mooved and diſtempered very neere as one of the vulgar ſort. Fxcept order, moderation and conſtancie, I imagine all things may bee done by an indifferent and defective man. Therefore ſay wiſemen, that directly to judge of a man, his common actions muſt ſpecially be controuled, and he muſt every day be ſurpriſed in his worky-day clothes. Pyrrho, who framed ſo pleaſant a Science of ignorance, aſſaide (as all other true Philoſophers) to faſhion his life anſwerable to his doctrine. And foraſmuch as hee maintained the weakeneſſe of mans judgement, to be ſo extreame, as it could take nor reſolution, nor inclination: and would perpetually ſuſpend it, ballancing, beholding and receiving all things, as indifferent: It is reported of him, that he ever keept himſelfe after one faſhion, looke and countenance: If he had begunne a diſcourſe, he would end it, though the party to whom he ſpake, were gone: And if he went any where, he would not goe an inche out of his path, what let or obſtacle ſomever came in his way; being kept from falls, from cartes or other accidents by his friends. For, to feare or ſhunne any thing, had beene to ſhocke his propoſitions, which remooved all election and certainty from his very ſenſes. He ſometimes ſuffered himſelfe to be cut and cautherized, with ſuch conſtancie, as he was never ſeene ſo much as to ſhrug, twitch, move or winke with his eyes. It is ſomething to bring the minde to theſe imaginations, but more to joine the effects vnto it, yet is it not impoſſible. But to joyne them with ſuch preſeverance and conſtancie, as to eſtabliſh it for an ordinary courſe; verily in theſe enterpriſes ſo farre from common vſe, it is almoſt incredible to be done. The reaſon is this, that he was ſometimes found in his houſe, bitterly ſcolding with his ſiſter, for which being reproved, as hee that wronged his indifferencie: What? ſaid hee, muſt this ſeely woman alſo ſerve as a witneſſe to my rules? Another time, being found to defend himſelfe from a dog: It is (replied he) very hard, altogether to dispoyle and ſhake off man: And man muſt endevour and enforce himſelfe to reſiſt and confront all things, firſt by effects, but if the worſt befall, by reaſon and by diſcourſe. It is now about ſeaven or eight yeares ſince, that a countrie man, yet living, not above two leagues from this place, having long before beene much vexed and troubled in minde, for his wives jealouſie; one day comming home from his worke, and ſhe after her accuſtomed maner welcomming and entertaining him with brawling and ſcowlding, as one vnable to endure her any longer, fell into ſuch a moodie rage, that ſodainely with a Sickle, which he held in his hand, he cleane cut off thoſe parts, that were the cauſe of her jealouſie, and flung them in her f
                              •
                           ce. And it is reported, that a yong gentleman of France, amorous and luſtie, having by his perſeverance at laſt mollified the hart of his faire miſtreſſe, deſperate, becauſe comming to the point of his ſo long ſued-for buſineſſe, he found himſelfe vnable and vnprepared, and that
                        
                           
                           —non viriliter
                              T
                                    •
                                 b. l, ad Pri ap. v 4.
                           
                           Iners ſenil
                                 •
                               penis extulerat caput.
                        
                        as ſoone as he came home, he deprived himſelfe of it: and ſent it as a cruell and bloudy ſacrifice for the expiation of his offence. Had he done it by diſcourſe or for religions ſake, as the prieſtes of Cybele were wont to do, what might we not ſay of ſo haughty an enterpriſe? Not long ſince at Bragerac, five leagues-diſtance from my houſe, vp the river of Dordaigne, a woman, having the evening before beene grievouſly tormented, and ſore beaten by hir husband; froward and skittiſh by complexion, determined, though it ſhould coſt hir the price of hir life, by one meane or other, to eſcape his rudeneſſe, and riſing the next morning, went as ſhe was accuſtomed to viſite hir neighbours to whom in ſome ſort the recommended the ſtate of hir affaires, than taking a ſiſter of hirs by the hand, ledde hir along vntill ſhee came vppon the bridge that croſſeth the River, and having bid hir hartily farwell; as in the way of ſport without ſhewing any maner of change or alteration, headlong threw hirſelfe downe into the River, where ſhe periſhed. And which is more to be noted in hir, is, that this hir determination ripened a whole night in hir head. But the Indian Wives, may not here be forgotten as worthy the noting: Whoſe cuſtome is, that Husbands have many Wives and for hir that is deareſt vnto hir Husband, to kil hirſelfe after him: Every one in the whole courſe of hir life, endevoreth to obtaine this priviledge and advantage over al hir fellow-wives: And in the good offices and duties they ſhew their hubands, reſpect no other recompence, than to be preferred to accompany them in death.
                        
                           Vbi mortifero iacta eſt fax vltima laecto,Propert. lib. 3. el. 12. 17.
                           
                           —Vxorum fuſis, ſtat pia turba comis:
                           
                           Et certamen habent Laethi, quae viva ſequatur
                           —Coniugium, pudor eſt non licuiſſe mori:
                           
                           Ardent victrices, & flammae pectora praebent,
                           —Imponúnt que ſuis or a peruſt a viris.
                           
                           When for his death-bed laſt flame is appli'de
                           With looſe haires many kind wives ſtand be ſide,
                           And ſtrive for death, which alive may be next
                           Hir wedlocke, who may not is ſham'd and vex't
                           They that orecome, are burn'd, to flames give way,
                           Their bodies burnt on their burnt husbands lay.
                        
                        A late Writer affirmeth, that himſelfe hath ſeene this cuſtome highly reputed in the new diſcovered Eaſt Indiaes, where not only the wives are buried with their husbands, but alſo ſuch ſlaves as hee hath enjoyed; which is done after this manner. The husband being deceaſed, the widdow may, if ſhe will (but fewe doe it) requeſt two or three Moneths ſpace to diſpoſe of hir buſines. The day come, adorned as a ſumptuous bride, ſhe mounteth on horſebacke, and with a cheerful countenance, tell eth every body, ſhe is going to lie with hir bride groome, holding in her left hand a looking-glaſſe, and an arrow in the right. Thus having a while rid vp and downe in great pompe and magnificence, accompanied with her friendes and kinſ-men, and much concourſe of people, in feaſt and jolitie, ſhe is brought vnto a publike place, purpoſely appointed for ſuch ſpectacles. Which is a large open place, in the middeſt whereof is a pit or grave full of Wood, and neere vnto it an vpraiſed ſcaffold, with foure or five ſteppes to aſcend, vpon which ſhe is brought, and ſerved with a ſtately and ſumptuous banket, Which ended, ſhe beginneth to dance and ſing, and when ſhe thinks good commandeth the fire to be kindled. That done, ſhe commeth downe againe, and taking the neareſt of hir Husbands kindred by the hand, they goe together to the nex River, where ſhee ſtrippes hir ſelfe all naked, and diſtributeth hir jewels and clothes among hir friends, then plungeth herſelfe in the Water, as if ſhe meant to waſh away hir ſins; then comming out ſhe enwrappeth herſelfe in a yellow piece of linnen cloth, about the length of fourteene yards; And giving hir hand againe vnto hir Husbands Kinſ-man, they returne vnto the Mount, where ſhe ſpeakes vnto the people, to whom (if ſhe have any) ſhe recommendeth hir Children. Betweene the Pitte and Mount, there is commonly a Curtaine drawne, leſt the ſight of that burning furnace might diſmay them: Which many, to ſhew the greater courage, will not have it drawne. Her ſpeech ended, a Woman preſenteth her with a Veſſell ful of Oyle, therewith to annoint hir head and body, which done, ſhe caſteth the reſt into the fire, and

there withall ſodainely flings herſelfe into it: Which is no ſooner done, but the people caſt great ſtore of Faggo
                              •
                           s and Billets vpon hir, leſt ſhe ſhould languiſh over-long: and all their joy is converted into griefe and ſorrow. If they be perſons of meane quality, the dead mans body is carried to the place where they intend to bury him, and there he is placed ſitting; his Widdow kneeling before him with hir armes cloſe about his middle, and ſo keepeth hirſelfe, whileſt a Wall is erected vp about them both, which raiſed to the height of her ſhoulders, ſome of her kindred taking her by the head behind, wrings her neck about; and having given the laſt gaſpe, the wall is immediately made vp cloſe over their heades, wherein they remaine buried. In the ſame Country, there was ſomething like to this in their Gymnoſophiſts, or wiſe-men, who not by meanaces-or compulſions of others, nor by the violence of a ſodaine humour but by the expreſſe and voluntary profeſſion of their rule, their maner was according as they attained vnto a certaine age, or ſaw themſelves threatned by ſome ſickeneſſe, to cauſe a pile of Wood to be erected, and vpon it▪a rich bedde; and having cheerefully feaſted their friends and acquaintance, with ſuch a reſolution laide themſelves downe in that bedde, that fire ſet vnto it, they were never ſeene to ſtirre nor hand nor foote? and thus died one of them, named Calanus, in the preſence of all the army of Alexander the Great. And who had not ſo made himſelfe away, was neither eſteemed holy nor abſolutely happy amongſt them? ſending his ſoule purged and purified by fire, after it had conſumed whatſoever was mortall and iterreſtriall in it. This conſtant premeditation of al the life, is that which makes the wonder. Amongeſt our other diſputation, that of Fatum, hath much entermedled it ſelfe: and to joyne future things, and our will it ſelfe vnto a certaine vnavoidable neceſſity, wee yet ſtand vpon that argument of former times: ſince God foreſeeth all things muſt thus happen as vndoubtedly he doeth: They muſt then neceſſarily happen ſo. To which our Clarks and Maiſters anſwere, that to ſee any thing come to paſſe, as we doe, and likewiſe God (for hee being preſent in full eſſence, rather feeth than foreſeeth) is not to force the ſame to happen: yea we ſee, becauſe things come to paſſe, but things happen not becauſe we ſee. The hapning makes the ſcience or knowledge, and not knowledge the happening. What we ſee come to paſſe, happeneth; but it might come to paſſe otherwiſe. And God in the eternall regiſter of the cauſes of happenings, which he hath in his preſcience, hath alſo thoſe, which are called caſuall; and the voluntary, which depend of the liberty, he hath given vnto our free wil, and knoweth we ſhall faile, becauſe our will ſhall have beene to faile. I have ſeene diverſe encourage their troupes with this fatall neceſſitie: For, if our houre be tied vnto a certaine point neither the musket-ſhottes of our enemies, nor our courage, nor our flight and cowardize, can either advance or recoyle the ſame.
                        This may well be ſaide, but ſeeke you who ſhall effect it: And if it be ſo, that a ſtrong and lively faith, doth likewiſe draw action after it: truely this faith (wherewith wee ſo much fill our mouths) is marvelous light in our times: except the contempt it hath of workes, make her diſdaine their company. So it is, that to the ſame purpoſe, the Lord of Ioinville, as credible a witneſſe as any other, tells vs of the Bedoins, a nation entermingled with the Saracine, with whom our King Saint Lewes had to deale in the holy land, who ſo confidently believed in their religion, the dayes of every one to be prefixed and numbred from all eternitie, by an inevitable preordinance, that they went all bare and naked to the warres, except a Turkiſh Glaive in their hand, and their body covered but with a white linnen-cloth: And for the the bittereſt curſe, if they chanced to fall out one with another, they had ever in their mouth: Curſed be thou, as he that armeth himſelfe for feare of death. Here is another maner of triall or a beliefe or faith, then ours, In this rank may likewiſe be placed that which thoſe two religious men of Florence, not long ſince gave vnto their countrymen. Being in ſome controverſie betweene themſelves about certaine points of learning; they accorded to goe both into the fire, in the preſence of all the people, and in the open market place, each one for the verifying of his opinion; and all preparations were ready made, an execution to be performed, but that by an vnexpected accident it was interrupted. A yong Turkiſh Lord, having atchieved a notable piece of ſervice in armes, and with his owne perſon, in full view of the two battels betweene Ammurath & Huniades ready to be joyned together, being demanded by Ammurath his Prince, who (being ſo yong and vnexperienced, for is was the firſt warre o
                              •
                            ſervice he had ſeene before) had repleniſhed him with ſo generous and vndanted vigor of courage? anſwered, that a Hare had beene his ſoveraigne maiſter and onely teacher of valour; and

thus began his ſpeech. Being one day a hunting, I found a Hare ſitting in her forme, and although I had a brace of excellent good gray-houndes with me in a ſlip or leaſh, I thought it good, becauſe I would be ſure of my game to vſe my bow; for ſhe was a very faire marke I beganne to ſhoot
                                 •
                               my arrowes at her, which I did to the number of fortie (for in my quiver were iuſt ſo many) yet could I never hurt her, no not ſo much as ſtart her: After all this, I let ſlip my gray-hounds, who could doe no more then I had done: by which I learnt, that ſhe had beene ſheltred and defended by her deſtinie; and that no glaives nor arrowes never hit, but by the permiſſion of our fatalitie, which it lieth not in vs to avoide or advance. This ſtorie may ſerve to make vs perceive by the way, how flexible our reaſon is to all ſorts of Objects. A notable man, great in yeares, in name, in dignity and in learning, vaunted himſelfe vnto me, that he was induced to a certaine moſt important change of his religion, by a ſtrange and fantaſticall incitation: and in all things ſo il-concluding that I deemed the ſame ſtronger and more forcible, being taken contrary. He termed it a miracle, and ſo did I, but in a different ſenſe. Their hiſtorians ſay, that perſwaſion having popularly beene ſcattered amongſt the Turkes, of the fatall and inflexible preſcription of their dayes, doth apparantly ayde to warrant and emboulden them in dangers. And I know a great Prince, who happily thrives by it, be it he beleive it, or take it for an excuſe to hazard himſelfe extraordinarily; provided fortune be not ſoone wearie to favour and backe him. There hath not happened in our memorie a more admirable effect of reſolution, than of thoſe two villaines that conſpired the death of the Prince of Orange: It is ſtrange how, the laſt, who perfourmed the ſame could be induced or encouraged to vndergoe ſuch an enterpriſe, wherein his fellow (though he had reſolutely attempted it, and had all might be required for ſuch an action) had ſo ill ſucceſſe, and miſcarried. And in theſe ſteps, and with the ſame weapons, to goe and vndertake a Lord, armed with ſo late an inſtruction of diſtrust; mighty in friends and followers; puiſſant of bodily ſtrength; in his owne hall; amiddeſt his ſervants and guarde; and in a Citty wholy at his devotion. It muſt of force be ſaide, that in perfourming it, he employed a well-directed and reſolute hand, and a dreadleſſe courage mooved by a vigorous paſſion. A Poynard is more ſure to wound a man, which forſomuch as it requireth more motion and vigor of the arme, than a piſtole, it's ſtroke is more ſubject to be hindred or avoided. That the firſt ranne not to an aſſured death, I make no great doubt, for the hopes wherewith hee might be entertained could not harbour in a well ſetled and reſolute minde; and the conduct of his exploit, ſheweth, hee wanted no more that, then courage. The motions of ſo forcible a perſwaſion may be diverſe; for, our fantaſie diſpoſeth of her ſelfe and of vs as ſhe pleaſeth. The execution committed neere Orleans had no coherence with this, wherein was more hazard, then vigor; the blow was not mortall, had not fortune made it ſo: and the enterpriſe to ſhoote on horſe-backe and farre-off, and to one who mooved ſtill according to the motion of his horſe was the attempt of a man, that rather loved to miſſe of his effect, then faile to ſave himſelfe. What followed did manifeſtly ſhew it. For, he was ſo amazed & drunken with the thought of ſo haughty an execution, as he loſt all his ſenſes, both to worke his eſcape, and direct his tongue in his anſweres. What needed he have done more, then recover his friends by croſſing of a river; It is a meane, wherin I have caſt my ſelfe in farre leſſe dangers, and which I thinke of ſmall hazard, how broade ſoever, alwayes provided your horſe finde an eaſie entrance, and on the further ſide you foreſee an eaſie and ſhallow landing, according to the courſe of the ſtreame of the water. The ſecond, when the horrible ſentence was pronounced againſt him, anſwered ſtowtly, I was prepared for it, and I ſhall amaze you with my patience. The Aſſaſſines, a nation depending of Phaenicia, are eſteemed among the Mahometiſts of a ſoveraigne devotion and puritie of maners; they hold, that the readieſt and ſhorteſt way to gaine Paradiſe, is to kill ſome one of a contrary religion: therefore hath it often beene ſeene, that one or two in their bare doublets have vndertaken to aſſault mightie enemies, with the price of an aſſured death, and without any care of their owne danger. And thus was our Earle Raymond of Tripoli murthered or aſſaſſinated (this word is borrowed from their name) in the middeſt of his Cittie, during the time of our warres in the holy land: And likewiſe Conrade Marquis of Montferrato, his murtherers being brought to their torture, were ſeene to ſwel with pride, that they had performed ſo worthy an exploit.
                     
                     
                        
                        The thirtieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of a monſtrous Child,
                        
                        THis diſcourſe ſhall paſſe ſingle, for I leave it to Phiſitions to treate of. I ſawe two dayes ſince a childe, whom two men and a nurce (which named themſelves to be his father, his Vnckle, and his Aunt) carried about with intent to get ſome money with the ſight of him, by reaſon of his ſtrangenes. In all the reſt, he was as other children are, He ſtoode vpon his feete, went and pratled in a maner as all others of his age: Hee would never take nouriſhment, but by his nurces breaſt; and what in my preſence was offred to be put in his mouth, he chewed a little, and put it all out againe. His puling differed ſomewhat from others: He was juſt fourteene moneths olde. Vnder his paps he was faſtned and joyned to an other childe, but had no head, and who had the conduite of his backe ſtopped, the reſt whole. One of his armes was ſhorter then the other, and was by accident broken at their birth. They were joyned face to face, and as if a h
                              ••
                           e childe would embrace another ſomewhat bigger. The joyning and ſpace whereat they were cloſed together, was but foure inches b
                              •
                           oade, or thereabouts; inſuch ſort that if you thruſt vp the imperfect childe, you might ſee vnder the others navill: And the ſeame was betweene the paps and his navill. The navill of the imperfect one could not be ſeene but all the reſt of his belly 
                              ••
                           ght, Thus, what of the imperfect one was not joyned, as armes buttocks, thighes and legges did hang and ſhake vpon the other, whoſe length reached to the middle-leg of the other perfect. His Nurce tolde me, hee made water by both privities. The members of the little one were nouriſhed, living▪ and in the ſame ſtate as the others, except only, they were leſſe and thinner. This double body, and theſe different members, having reference to one onely head, might ſerve for a favorable prognoſtieation to our King, to maintaine the factions and differing parties of this our kingdome vnder an vnitie of the lawes. But, leaſt the ſucceſſe ſhould prove it contrarie, it is not amiſſeCic. divin. lib. 2. to let him runne his courſe: For in things alreadie paſt their neede no divination. 
                              Ʋt quum factaſunt, tum ad coniecturam aliqua inter pretatione revocantur: So as when they are done, they then by ſome conſtruction ſhould be revoked to coniecture: As it is reported of Epimenides, who ever divined backward, I come now from ſeeing of a ſhepheard at Medoc, of thirtie yeares of age, or thereabouts, who had no ſigne at all of genitorie parts: But where they ſhould be, are three little holes, by which his water doth continually trill from him. This poore man hath a beard, and deſireth ſtill to be fumbling of women. Thoſe which we call monsters are not ſo with God, who 
                                 ••
                               the immenſitie of his worke fecth the infinitie of forme therein contained. And it may be thought, that any figure doth amaze vs, hath relation vnto ſome other figure of the ſame kinde, although vnknowne vnto man. From out his all-ſeeing wiſedome proceedeth nothing but good, common regular and orderly; but we neither ſee the ſorting, nor conceive the relation. Quod crebrò videt, non miratur, etiam ſi, our fiat neſcit. Quod antè non videt, id, ſi evenerit, oſtentum
                           Cic. divin. lib. 2. 
                           eſſe cenſet. That which he often ſeeth, he doth not wonder at, though he know not why it is done; But if that happen, which he never ſaw before, he thinkes it ſome portentuous wonder. Wee call that againſt nature, which commeth againſt cuſtome: There is nothing, whatſoever it be, that is not according to hir. Let therefore this vniverſall and naturall reaſon, chaſe from vs the error, and expell the aſtoniſhment, which noveltie breedeth, and ſtrangenes cauſeth in vs.
                     
                     
                        The one and thirtieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of anger and choller.
                        
                        
                           PLutarke is every where admirable, but eſpecially where he judgeth of humane actions. The notable things he reporteth, may be perceived in the compariſon of Lycurgus and

                           Numa, ſpeaking of the great ſimplicitie we commit, in leaving yong children vnder the government and charge of their fathers and parents. Moſt of our policies, or Common-wealths, ſaith Ariſtotle (as the Cyclopes were wont) commit the conduct of their wives, and charge of their children, to all men, according to their fooliſh humor or indiſcreete fantazies. And wel-nigh, none but the Lacedemonian and Cretenſian, have reſigned the diſcipline of children to the lawes. Who ſeeth not, that in an eſtate all things depend of nurture and education? And all the while, without diſcretion, it is wholy left to the parents mercie, how fooliſh and wicked ſoever they be. Amongſt other things, how often (walking through our ſtreetes) have I deſired to have a play or comedie made in revenge of yoong boyes, which I ſawe thumpt, miſuſed▪ and well nigh murthered by ſome hare-brained, moodie, and through choller-raging Fathers and Mothers, from out whoſe eyes a man might ſee ſparkles of rage to ſtartle,
                        
                           —rabie iecur incendente feruntur
                              I
                                    ••
                                  ſat. 6. 548
                           
                           Praecipites, vt ſaxa iugis abrupta, quibus mons
                           Subtrahitur, cli
                                 •
                              òque latus pendente recedit:
                           They headlong runne with rage, which doth enflame their livers
                           Like ſtones that broken fall from mountaine tops in ſhivers,
                           The hill withdrawes, and they are rould
                           From hanging cliffe which leaves their hold.
                        
                        (And according to Hypocrates, the moſt dangerous infirmities, are thoſe which disfigure the face) and with a loud thundring voice often to follow children that came but lately from nurce; Which after prove lame, maimed, blockiſh and dull-pated with blowes: And yet our lawes make no accoumpt of it, as if theſe ſpraines, and vnjoyntings of lims, or theſe maimes were no members of our Common-wealth.
                        
                           Gratum eſt quód patriae civem populóque dediſti,
                           Si facis vt patriae ſit, idoneus vtilis agris,I
                                    ••
                                 . ſat. 14. 70.
                           
                           
                              Ʋtilis & bellorum & pacis rebus agendis.
                           That you to th'countrie give a man, 'tis acceptable,
                           If for the countrie fit you make him, for field's able,
                           Of peace and warre for all achievements profitable.
                        
                        
                           There is no paſſion ſo much tranſports the ſinceritie of iudgement, as doth anger. No man would make conſcience to puniſh that Iudge by death; who in rage or choller had condemned an offender▪ And why ſhould fathers be allowed to beate, or ſchoolemaeſters be ſuffered to whip children, or to puniſh them being angrie? It is no longer correction, but revenge. Puniſhment 
                                 ••
                               vnto children as phiſike; and would any man endure a phiſicion, that were angrie and wroth againſt his patient? Our ſelves (did wee well) during the time of our anger, ſhould never lay hands one our ſervants. So long as our pulſe panted, and wee feele any concitation, ſo long remit we the partie: And things will ſeeme farre otherwiſe vnto vs, if we once come to our ſenſes againe, and ſhall better bethinke vs. Then is it paſſion that commandes. It is paſſion that ſpeaketh and not wee. Athwart it, faults ſeeme much greater vnto vs, as bodies doe athwart a foggie miſt. Whoſo is hungrie, vſeth meate, but who ſo will vſe chaſtiſement, ſhould never hunger nor thirſt after it. Moreover, corrections given with diſcretion and moderation, are more gently received, and with more good to him that receiveth them. Otherwiſe hee ſhall never thinke to have beene juſtly condemned, by a man who is tranſported by rage and choller, and for his juſtification alleadgeth the extraordinarie motions of his maiſter, the inflammation of his face, his vnwonted othes, his chafing, his vnquierneſſe and hi
                              •
                            ra
                              •
                           h precipitation.
                        
                           Ora tument ira, nigreſcunt ſanguine venae,
                           Lumina Gorgoneo ſaeuius igne micant.Ovid. art. Am. lib. 3. 53.
                           
                           The face with anger ſwelles, the veineſ growe blacke with blood,
                           The eyes more fiercely ſhine then Gorgons, fierie moode.
                        
                        
                           Suetonius writeth, that Caius Rabirius, having by Caeſar beene condemned, nothing, did him ſo much good toward the people (to whom he appealed) to make him obtain his ſute, as the ſharpnes and over boldnes which Caeſar had declared in that judgement. Saying is one thing, and doing another. A man muſt conſider the ſermon apart and the preacher ſeverall. Thoſe have made themſelves good ſport, who in our daies have gone about to checke the veritie of our

Church, by the miniſters vice: She fetcheth hir teſtimonie from elſewhere. It is a fooliſh manner of arguing, and which would ſoone reduce all things to a confuſion. An honeſt man may ſometimes have falſe opinions, and a wicked man may preach truth: Yea ſuch a one as beleeves it not. Verely, it is a pleaſing harmonie, when doing and ſaying goe together. And I will not deny, but ſaying, when deedes follow, is of more efficacie and authoritie: As ſaid Eudamidas, when he heard a Philoſopher diſcourſe of warre: Theſe ſpeeches are good, but he that ſpeakes them, is not to be beleeved, For his eares were never accuſtomed to heare the clang of trumpets, nor rattling of drums. And Cleomenes hearing a Rethoritian ſpeake of valour, burſt out into an extreame laughter: Whereat the other being offended, he ſaid vnto him: I would doe as much if it were a Swallowe ſhould ſpeake of it, but were he an Eagle, I ſhould gladly heare him. Me ſeemeth I perceive in ancient mens writings, that he who ſpeakes what he thinketh, toucheth nearer the quicke, then he who counterfaits. Heare Cicero ſpeake of the love of libertie; then liſten to Brutus, their very wordes will tell you and ſound in your eare, the latter was a man raedie to purchaſe it with the price of his life. Let Cicero, that father of eloquence treate of the contempt of death, and let Seneca diſcourſe of the ſame; the firſt drawes it-on languiſhing, and you ſhall plainely perceive, he would faine reſolve you of a thing, whereof he is not yet reſolved himſelfe. He giveth you no hart, for himſelfe hath none: Whereas the other doth rowze, animate and inflame you. I never looke vpon an Author, be they ſuch as write of vertue and of actions, but I curiouſly endevor to finde out what he was himſelfe. For, the Ephori of Sparta, hearing a diſſolute liver propoſe a very beneficiall adviſe vnto the people, commaunded him to hold his peace, and deſired an honeſt man to aſſume the invention of it vnto himſelfe and to propound it. Plutarkes compoſitions, if they be well favored, doe plainely manifeſt the ſame vnto vs: And I am perſwaded I knowe him inwardly: Yet would I be glad, we had ſome memories of his owne life: And by the way I am falne into this diſcourſe, by reaſon of the thankes I owe vnto Aulus Gellius, in that he hath left vs written this ſtorie of his manners, which fitteth my ſubiect of anger. A ſlave of his, who was a lewd and vicious man, but yet whoſe eares were ſomewhat fedde with Philoſophicall documents, having for ſome faults by him committed, by the commandement of Plutarke his maſter, beene ſtripped naked, whilſt another ſervant of his whipped him, grombled in the beginning, that he was whipped without reaſon, and had done nothing: But in the end, mainly crying out, he fell to rayling and wronging his maſter, vpbraiding him, that he was not a true Philoſopher, as he vanted himſelfe to be, and how he had often heard him ſay, that, it was an vnſeemely thing in a man to be angrie. And that he had made a booke of it: And now all plonged in rage, and engulfed in choller to cauſe him ſo cruelly to be beaten, was cleane contrarie to his owne writing. To whom Plutarke with an vnaltered, and milde-ſettled countenance, ſaid thus vnto him. What? Thou raskall, whereby doeſt thou judge I am now angrie? Doth my countenance, doth my voice, doth my colour, or doth my ſpeech give thee any teſtimonie, that I am either mooved or chollerike? Me ſeemeth, mine eyes are not ſtaringly-wilde, nor my face troubled, nor my voice frightfull or diſtempered: Doe I waxe redde? Doe I foame at the mouth? Dooth any word eſcape me I may repent heareafter? Doe I ſtartle and quake? Doe I rage and ruffle with anger? For, to tell thee true, theſe are the right ſignes of choler and tokens of anger. Then turning to the party that whipped him, continue ſtill thy worke, quoth he whilſt this fellow and I diſpute of the matter. This is the report of Gellius. Architas Tarentinus returning from a war, where he had been Captaine generall, found his houſe all out of order, husbandrie all ſpoiled, and by the ill government of his Baily, his ground all waſte and 
                              ••
                           manured; and having called for him, ſaid thus; Away bad man, for if I were not angrie, I would have the whipt for this. Plato likewiſe, being vexed and angrie with one of his ſlaves, commaunded Speuſippus to puniſh him, excuſing himſelfe, that now being angrie he would not lay hands vpon him. Charillus the Lacedemonian, to on Ilelot or cuntrey hinde behaved himſelfe over inſolently and audaciouſly towards him; By the Gods (ſaid he) If I were not now angrie, I would preſently make thee die. It is a paſſion which pleaſeth and flattereth it ſelfe. How many times being moved by any falſe ſuggeſtion, if at that iuſtant we be preſented with any lawfull defence or true excuſe, doe we fall into rage againſt truth and innocencie it ſelfe? Touching this purpoſe, I have retained a wonderfull example of antiquitie. Piſo in divers other reſpects, a man of notable vertue, being angrie, and chafing with one of his Souldiers, who returning from forage or boot-haling, could not give him an accoumpt

where hee had left a fellow-Souldier of his, and thereupon concluding hee had killed or made him away, foorthwith condemned him to be hanged. And being vpon the gallowes readie to die; behold his companion, who had ſtragled abroade, comming home, whereat all the army rejoyced very much, and after many embracings and ſignes of joy betweene the two ſouldiers, the hangman brought both vnto Piſo; all the companie hoping, it would bee a great pleaſure vnto him; but it fell out cleane contrarie▪ for through ſhame & ſpite his wrath ſtill burning was redoubled, and with a ſlie deviſe his paſſion inſtantly preſented to his mind, he made three guiltie, forſomuch as one of them was found innocent; and cauſed them all three to be diſpat
                              •
                           h
                              •
                           d. The firſt Souldier becauſe he was aliedie condemned; the ſecond, which had ſtrag
                              •
                           ed abroade, by reaſon he was the cauſe of his fellowes death; and the hangman, for that he had not fulfilled his Generalles commaundement. Thoſe who have to deale with froward and skittiſh women have no doubt ſeen what rage they wil fal into, if when they are moſt angrie and cha
                              •
                           ing, a man be ſilent and patient, and diſdaine to foſter their anger and wrath, Celius the Orator was by nature exceeding fretfull and cholerike. To one who was with him at ſupper, a man of a milde and gentle converſation, and who becauſe he would not moue him, ſeemed to approve what ever he ſaid, and yeelde to him in every thing; as vnable to endure his peeviſhnes ſhould ſo paſſe without ſome nouriſhment, burſt out into a rage, and ſaid vnto him. For the love of God deny me ſomething, that we may be two. So women are never angrie, but to the end a man ſhould againe be angrie with them, therein imitating the lawes of Love. Phocion to a man who troubled his diſcourſe with brawling and skolding at him, in moſt injurious manner, did nothing elſe but holde his peace and given him what leaſure hee would to vent his choller; which done, without taking any notice of it, began his diſcourſe againe where hee had left it off, There is no reply ſo ſharpe as ſuch ſilent contempt. Of the moſt chollerike and teaſtie man of France (which is ever an imperfection, but more excuſable in a military man; for it muſt needes be granted, there are in that profeſſion ſome men who cannot well avoyde it) I ever ſay, hee is the patienteſt man I knowe to bridle his choller; it mooveth and trannſporteth him with ſuch furie and violence,
                        
                           —magno veluti cùm flamma ſonore
                              Virg. Ae
                                    •
                                 . lib. 462.
                           
                           
                              Ʋirgea ſuggeritur coſt is vndantis aheni,
                           Exultántque aeſtu latices, furit in
                                 •
                              us aquaï
                           Fumidus atque al
                                 •
                              è ſpumis exuberat amnis,
                           Nec iam ſe capit vnda, volat vapor ater ad auras,
                           As when a fago
                                 •
                               flame with hurring ſounds
                           Vnder the ribbes of boyling cauldron lies,
                           The water ſwelles with heat beyond the bounds,
                           Whence ſteeming ſtreames raging and foming riſe,
                           Water out-runn's it ſelfe, blacke vapors flye to skies.
                        
                        that hee muſt cruelly enforce himſelfe to moderate the ſame. And for my part, I knowe noe paſſion I were able to 
                              •
                           mother with ſuch temper and abide with ſuch reſolution. I would not ſet wiſedome at ſo high a rate. I reſpect not ſo much what hee doth, as how much it coſts him not to doe worſe. Another boaſted in my preſence, of his behauiours order and mildeneſſe, which in truth is ſingular: I tolde him, that indeede it was much, namely in men of ſo eminent qualitie, as himſelfe was, on whome all eyes are fixed, alwayes to ſhew himſelfe in a good temper: but that the chiefeſt point conſiſted in providing inwardly and for himſelfe; and that in mine opinion, it was noe diſcreete parte inwardly to fret: which, to maintaine that marke and formall outward apparance, I feared hee did. Choller is incorporated by concealing and ſmothering the ſame, as Diogenes ſaide to Demoſthenes, who fearing to be ſeene in a Taverne, withdrew himſelfe into the ſame: The more thou recoyleſt backe, the further thou goeſt into it. I woulde rather perſwade a man, though ſomewhat out of ſeaſon, to give his boy a whirret on the ea
                              •
                           e, then to diſſemble this wiſe, ſterne or ſevere countenance, to vex and fret his minde. And I woulde rather make ſhew of my paſſions, then ſmother them to my coſt: which being vented and expreſt, become more languiſhing and weake: Better it is to let it's pointe worke outwardly, then bend it againſt our ſelves. Omnia vitia in aperto leviora
                           Sen. epiſti 56. 
                           ſunt: & tunc pernicioſiſſimae, quum ſimulata ſanitate ſubſidunt. All vices are then leſſe perillous when they lie open to bee ſeene, but then moſt pernicious, when they lurke vnder counterfeited
                           
                           ſoundneſſe. I ever warne thoſe of my houſhold, who by their offices-authoritie may ſometimes have occaſion to be angry, firſt to husband their anger; then not to employ it vpon every ſlight cauſe; for that empeacheth the effect and worth of it. Raſh and ordinary brawling is converted to a cuſtome, and that's the reaſon each man contemnes it: That which you employ againſt a ſervant for any theeving, is not percei
                              •
                           ed, becauſe it is the ſame he hath ſundry times ſ
                              •
                           ene you vſe againſt him, if hee have not waſht a glaſſe well o
                              •
                            miſplaced a ſtoole. Secondly, that they be not angry in vaine, but ever have regard their ch
                              •
                           ding come to his eares with whom they are offended: for, commonly ſome will brawle before hee come in their preſence, and chide a good while after he is gone,
                        
                           & ſecum petulans amentia ce
                                 •
                               tat.Claud. in 
                                    〈◊〉
                                  1. 48.
                           
                           Madneſſe makes with it ſelfe a fray,
                           Which fondly doth the wanton play.
                        
                        and wreake their anger againſt his ſhadow, and make the ſtorme fall where no man is either chaſtiſed or interreſſed, but with the rumour of their voice, and ſometimes with ſuch as cannot doe withall. I likewiſe blame thoſe who being angry, will brave and mutime when the partie with whome they are offended is not by. Theſe Rodomantados muſt be employed on ſuch as feare them.
                        
                           Mugitus veluti cùm prima in praelia taurusVir Aen. l. 12. 1. 03.
                           
                           Terrificos 
                                 •
                              iet, atque ir aſci in cornua tentat,
                           Arborts obnixus trunco, ventóſque lac
                                 •
                              ſſit
                           Ictibus, & ſparſa ad pugnam proludit arena.
                           As when a furious Bull to his firſt combate mooves
                           His terror-breeding lowes, his horne to anger prooves,
                           Striving againſt a trees trunke, and the winde with ſtrokes,
                           His preface made to fight with ſca
                                 •
                              tered ſand, provokes.
                        
                        When I chance to be angry, it is in the earneſt
                              •
                           ſt manner that may be, but yet as briefly and as ſecretly, as is poſſible. I looſe my ſelfe in haſtineſſe and violence, but not in trouble: So that, let me ſpend all maner of injurious wordes at random and without all heede, and never reſpect to place my points pertinently, and where they may doe moſt hurt: For commonly I employ nothing but my tongue. My boyes ſcape better cheape in great matters, then in ſmall trifles. Slight occaſions ſurpriſe me, and the michiefe is, that after you are once falne into the pit, it is no matter who thruſts you in, you never ceaſe till you come to the bottome. The fall preſſeth, haſteneth, mooveth and furthereth it ſelfe. In great occaſions I am pleaſed, that they are ſo juſt. that every body expects a reaſonable anger to inſue. I glorify my ſelfe to deceive their expectation. Againſt theſe I bandy and prepare my ſelfe; they make me ſummon vp my wits, and threaten to carry me very farre, if I would follow them. I eaſily keepe my ſelfe from falling into them, and if I ſtay for them, I am ſtronge enough to reject the impulſion of this paſſion, what violent cauſe ſoever it hath. But if it ſeize vpon and once preoccupate me, what vaine cauſe ſoever it hath, it doth cleane tranſport me: I condition thus with thoſe that may conteſt with me, when you perceve me to be firſt angry, be it right or wrong, let me hold-on my courſe, I will do the like to you, when ever it ſhall come to my lot. The rage is not engendred but by the concurrencie of cholers, which are eaſily produced one of another, and are not borne at one inſtant. Let vs allow every man his courſe, ſo ſhall we ever be in peace. Oh profitable preſcription, but of an hard execution! I ſhall ſome time ſeeme to be angry for the order and direction of my houſe, without any juſt emotion. Accoding as my age yeeldeth my humours more ſharpe or peeviſh, ſo doe I endevour to oppoſe my ſelfe againſt them, and if I can I will hereafter enforce my ſelfe to be leſſe froward and not ſo teaſty. As I ſhall have more excuſe and inclination to be ſo; although I have heretofore beene in their number that are leaſt. A word more to conclude this Chapter: Aristotle ſaith, Choller doth ſometimes ſerve as armes vnto Ʋertue and Valour. It is very likely: notwithſtanding ſuch as gaineſay him, anſwer pleaſantly, it is a weapon of a new faſhion and ſtrange vſe: For we moove other weapons, but this mooveth vs: our hand doth not guide it, but it directeth our hand; it holdeth vs, and we hold not it.
                     
                     
                        
                        The two and thirtieth Chapter.
                        
                           A defence of Seneca and Plutarke.
                           
                        
                        THe familiarity I have with theſe two men, and the ayde they affoord me in my olde age, and my Booke meerely framed of their ſpoiles, bindeth me to wed and maintaine their honour. As for Seneca, amongeſt a thouſand petty-Pamphlets, thoſe of the pretended reformed religion have publiſhed for the defence of their cauſe, which now and then proceede from a good hand, and which, pitty it is, it ſhould not be employed in more ſerious and better ſubjects: I have heeretofore ſeene one, who to prolong and fill vp the ſimilitude, he would finde betweene the governement of our vnfortunate late king Charles the ninth and that of Nero, compareth the whilom lord Cardinall of Loren
                                 •
                              
                            vnto Seneca; their fortunes to have beene both chiefe men in the governement of their Princes, and therewithall their manners, their conditions and their demeanours: wherein (in mine opinion) hee doth the ſaide lorde Cardinall great honour: for, although I bee one of thoſe that highly reſpect his ſpirite, his woorth, his eloquence, his zeale toward his religion and the ſervice of his King; and his good fortune to have beene borne in an age, wherein hee was ſo new, ſo rare, and there withall ſo neceſſarie for the common-wealth, to have a Cleargie-man of ſuch dignitie and nobilitie, ſufficient and capable of ſo weightie a charge: yet to confeſſe the truth, I eſteeme not his capacitie ſuch, nor his vertue ſo exquiſitely vnſpotted, nor ſo entire or conſtant, as that of Seneca. Now this Booke whereof I ſpeake, to come to his intention, maketh a moſt injurious deſcription of Seneca, having borrowed his reproaches from Dion the Hiſtorian, to whoſe teſtimony I give no credite at all: For beſides, he is inconſtant, as one who after hee hath called Seneca exceeding wiſe, and ſhortly after termed him a mortall enemy to Neroes vices, in other places makes him covetous, given to vſurie, ambitious baſe-minded, voluptuous and vnder falſe pretences, and fained ſhewes, a counterfet Philoſopher; his vertue appeareth ſo lively, and wiſedome ſo vigorous in his writings; and the defence of theſe imputations is ſo manifeſt, as well of his riches, as of his exceſſive expences, that I beleeve no witneſſe to the contrarie. Moreover, there is great reaſon wee ſhould rather give credite to Romane Hiſtorians in ſuch things, then to Graecians and ſtrangers, whereas Tacitus and others ſpeake very honourably of his life and death, and in all other circumſtance declare him to have beene a moſt excellent and rarely-vertuous man. I will alleadge noe other reproch againſt Dions judgement, then this, which is vnavoydable: that is, his vnderſtanding of the Roman affaires, is ſo weake and ill adviſed, as he dareth defend and maintaine Iulius Caeſars cauſe againſt Pompey, and bl
                              •
                           ſheth not to juſtifie Antonius againſt Cicero. But let vs come to Plutarke; Iohn Bodine is a good moderne Author▪ and endowed with much more judgement then the common-rabble of Scriblers and blur-papers which now adayes ſtuffe Stationers ſhops, and who deſerveth to bee judged, conſidered and had in more then ordinary eſteeme. Nevertheleſſe I finde him ſomewhat malapert and bolde in that paſſage of his Methode of Historie, when he accuſeth Plutarke, not onely of ignorance (wherein I woulde have let him ſay his pleaſure, for that is not within my element) but alſo that he often writeth, things, altogether incredible and meerely fabulous (theſe are his very words) If he had ſimply ſaid things otherwiſe than they are, it had beene no great reprehenſion: for, what we have not ſeene, we receive from others and vpon truſt: And I ſee him ſometime, wittingly and in good earneſt report one and ſame ſtory diverſly: As, the judgemenns of three beſt captaines that ever were, ſpoken by Hanibal, is otherwiſe in Flaminius his life, & otherwiſe in Pyrrhus. But to taxe him, to have taken incredible and impoſſible things for ready payment, is to accuſe the more judicious author of the World of want of judgement. And ſee heere his example: As (ſaith he) when he reports, that a Childe of Lacedemon ſuffered all his belly and guttes to be torne out by a Cubbe or yoong Foxe, which he had ſtolne. and kept cloſe vnder his garment, rather than he would diſcouer his theft. Firſt, I finde this example ill choſen: Foraſmuch as it is verie heard to limit the powers of the ſoules-faculties, whereas of corporall

forces, we have more law to limite and know them: And therfore, had I beene to write of ſuch a ſubject I would rather have made choyce of an example of this ſecond kinde. And ſome there be leſſe credible. As amongeſt others, that which he reportes of Pyrrhus, who being fore wounded, gave ſo great a blow with a ſword vnto one of his enemies, armed at all aſſayes, and with all pieces, as he cleft him from the Crowne of the head downe to the groine, ſo that the body fell in two pieces. In which example I finde no great wonder, nor doe I admit of his excuſe, wherewith he cloaketh Plutarke, to have added this Word, (as it is ſaid) to forewarne vs, and reſtraine our beliefe. For, if it be not in things received by authoritie and reverence of antiquity or religion, neither would himſelfe have received, nor propoſed to vs▪ to believe things in themſelves incredible: And that (as it is ſaide) hee doeth not heere ſette downe this phraſe to that purpoſe, may eaſily bee perceived, by what himſelfe in other places telleth vs vpon the ſubject of the Lacedemonian Childrens patience, of examples happened in his time, much harder to be perſwaded: As that which Cicero hath alſo witneſſed before him becauſe, (as he ſaith) he had beene there himſelfe: That even in their times there were Children found prepared to endure all maner of patience, whereof they made triall before Dianaes Aulter, and which ſuffered themſelves to bee whipped, till the blood trilled downe all partes of their body, not onely without crying, but alſo without ſobbing: and ſome who voluntarily ſuffered themſelvs to bee 
                              •
                           courged to death. And what Plutarke alſo reporteth, and a hundreth other witneſſes averre, that aſſiſting at a ſacrifice, a burning coale happened to fall into the ſleeve of a Lacedemonian childe, as he was buſie at incenſing, ſuffered his arme to burne ſo long, vntill the ſmell of his burnt fleſh came to all the by-ſtanders. There was nothing according to their cuſtome, ſo much called their reputation in queſtion, and for which they endured more blame and ſhame, than to be ſurpriſed ſtealing. I am ſo well inſtructed of thoſe mens greatneſſe of courage, that this report, doth not onely not ſeeme incredible to mee, as to Bodine, but I doe not ſo much as deeme it rare, or ſuppoſe it ſtrange: The Spartane ſtory is full of thouſands of much more rare and cruell examples; then according to this rate, it containeth nothing but myracle. Concerning this point of ſtealing, Marcellinus reporteth, that whileſt hee lived, there could never be found any kinde of torment that might in any ſort compell the Aegyptians ſurprized filching (which was much vſed amongeſt them) to confeſſe and tell but their names. A Spaniſh Peaſant being laide vpon the racke, about the complices of the murther of the Pretor Lucius Piſo, in the midſt of his torments cried out, his friends ſhould not ſtir, but with all ſecuritie aſſiſt him, & that it was not in the power of any griefe or paine to wreſt one word of confeſſion from him: and the firſt day nothing elſe could poſſibly be drawne from him: The next morrow as he was led toward the racke, to be tormented a new, he by ſtrong violence freed himſelfe from out his keepers hands, and ſo furiouſly ranne with his head againſt a Wall, that he burſt his braines out, and preſently fell downe dead. Epicharis, having glutted & wearied the moody cruelty of Neroes Satellites or officers, and ſtoutly endured their fire, their beatings, & their engins a whole day long, without any one voyce, or word of revealing hir conſpiracy, & the next day after, being againe brought to the torture, with hir limbs bruzed & broken, convayed the lace or ſtring of hir Gowne over one of the pillers of the Chaire wherein ſhe ſate, with a ſliding knot in it, into which ſodainely thruſting hir head, ſhe ſtrangled herſelfe with the weight of hir body: Having the courage to dye ſo, and ſteale from the firſt torments; ſeemeth ſhee not purpoſely to have lent hir life to the triall of hir patience of the precedent day, only to mocke that Tyrant, and encorage others to attempt the like enterprize againſt him? And he that ſhall enquire of our Argolettiers or Free-booters, what experiences they have had in theſe our late Civill wars, ſhall no doubt find effects & examples of patience, of obſtinacy and ſtif-neckedneſſe in theſe our miſerable dayes, and amidſt the effeminate, and puling worldlings farre beyond the Aegyptian, and well worthy to be compared to thoſe already reported of Spartan vertue. I know, there have beene found ſeely boores, who have rather endured to have their feet broiled vpon a Greedyron, their fingers ends cruſht and wrung with the locke of a Piſtole, their eyes all bloody to be thruſt out of their heades with wringing and wreſting of a corde aboute their foreheads, before they would ſo much as be ranſomed. I have ſeene and ſpoken with one, who had beene left all naked in a ditch for dead, his necke all bruſed and ſwolne, with a halter about it, wherewith he had beene dragged a whole night at a horſes taile through thick & thinne, with a hundred thruſts in his body, given him with daggers, not to kil him outright,

but to grieve and terrifie him, and who had patiently endured all that, and loſt both ſpeech and ſenſe, fully reſolved (as himſelfe told me) rather to die a thouſand deaths (as verily, if you apprehend what he ſuffered, he paſt more then one full death) then promiſe any ranſome; yet was he one of the wealthieſt husbandmen in all his countrie. How many have bin ſeene, who have patiently endured to be burnt and roſted for vnknowne and wilful opinions, which they had borrowed of others: My ſelfe have knowne a hundred and a hundred women (for, the ſaying is, Gaskoine heads have ſome prerogative in that) whom you might ſooner have made to bite a red-hot piece of yron, then recant an opinion, they had conceived in anger. They will be exaſperated and growe more fell againſt blowes and compulſion. And he who firſt invented the tale of that woman, which by no threates or ſtripes, would leave to call her husband pricke-lowſe, and being caſt into a pond and duckt vnder water, lifted vp her hands, and joyning her two thumbs-nailes in act to kill lice above her head, ſeemed to call him louſie ſtill, deviſed a fable, whereof in truth we dayly ſee the expreſſe image in divers womens obſtinacie and wilfulneſſe. And yet obſtinacie is the ſiſter of conſtancy, at leaſt in vigor and ſtedfaſtneſſe.
                        A man muſt not judge that which is poſſible, and that which is not, according to that which is credible and incredible to our ſenſe and vnderſtanding, as I have already ſaide elſewhere. And it is a great fault, wherein the greater number of men doe dayly fall (I ſpeake not this of Bodine) to make a difficultie in believing that of others, which themſelves neither can nor would doe. Every man perſwades himſelfe, that the chiefe-forme of humane nature is in himſelfe; according to her, muſt all others be directed. The proceedings that have no reference to hirs, are falſe and fa
                              ••
                           ed. Is any thing propoſed vnto him of anothers mans faculties or actions; The firſt thing he calls to the judgement of his conſultation▪ is his owne examples; according as it goeth in him, ſo goeth the worlds order. Oh dangerous ſottiſhneſſe, and intolerable foppery! I conſider ſome men a farre-off, beyond and above my ſelfe, namely amongſt thoſe ancient ones: and though I manifeſtly acknowledge mine owne inſufficiencie to follow or come neere them by a thouſand paces; I ceaſe not to keepe them ſtill in view, and to judge of thoſe wardes and ſprings that raiſe them ſo high; the ſeedes whereof I ſomewhat perceive in my ſelfe: as likewiſe I doe of the mindes extreame baſenes, which amazeth me nothing at all, and I misbelieve no more. I ſee the turne thoſe give to wind vp themſelves, and I admire their greatneſſe, and thoſe ſtarts which I perceive to be ſo wondrous faire, I embrace them: and if with man wrength I reach not vnto them, at leaſt my judgement doth moſt willingly apply it ſelfe vnto them. The other example, he alledgeth of things incredible, and altogether fabulous, reported by Plutarke, is, that Ageſilaus was fined by the Ephories, becauſe he had drawne tee harts and good wills of all his fellow-cittizens ento himſelfe alone. I knowe not what marke of falſhood, or ſhew of impoſſibiiltie he findes in it; but ſo it is▪ that Plutarke ſpeakes there of things which in all likelihood were better knowne to him, then to vs: And as it was not ſtrange in Geecce, to ſee men puniſhed and exiled, onely becauſe they were too popular, and pleaſed the common people over much. Witneſſe the Oſtraciſme amongſt the Athenians, and the Petaliſme among the Siracuſans. There is another accuſation in the ſame place, which for Plutarkes ſake doth ſomewhat touch me, where he ſaieth, that he hath very well and in good trueth ſorted the Romanes with the Romanes, and the Graecians amongſt themselues, but not the Romanes with the Graecians, witneſſe (ſaith he) Demoſthenes and Cicero, and Ariſtides, Syll
                                 •
                              
                            and Lyſander Marcellus and Pelopidas; Pompey and Ageſilaus, deming thereby that hee hath fauoured the Graecians, in giving them ſo vnequall companions. It is a juſt reproving of that, which is moſt excellent and commendable in Plutarke: Eor, in his compariſons (which is the moſt admirable part of his worke, and wherein in mine opinion hee ſo much pleaſed himſelfe) the faithfulneſſe and ſinceritie of his judgement equalleth their depth and weight. Hee is a Philoſopher that teacheth vs vertue. But let vs ſee, whether wee can warrant him from this reproch of prevarication and falſe-hood. That which I imagine hath given occaſion or ground to this judgement is, that great and farre-ſpreading luſtre of the Romane names, which ſtill are tingling in our eares, and never our of our mindes. Wee doe not thinke, Demoſthenes may equall the glory of a Conſull, of a Pro
                              •
                           ouſull and a Queſtor of this great Common wealth of Rome. But hee that ſhall impartially conſider the truth of the matter, and men in themſelves, which Plutarke did chiefly aime at, and more to balance their cuſtome, their

naturall diſpoſitions and their ſufficiencie, then their fortune: I am of a cleane oppoſite opinion to Bodine, and thinke that Cicero and old Cato are much behinde or ſhort of their parallels. For this purpoſe, I would rather have choſen the example of yong Cato compared to Phocion: for in that paire might well be found a more likely diſparitie for the Romanes advantage. As for Marcellus, Sylla and Pompey, I ſee very well, how their exploites of warre, be more ſwolne, glorious and pompous, then the Craecians, whom Plutarke compareth vnto them; but the moſt vertuous, and faireſt actions, no more in warre, then elſewhere, are not alwayes the moſt famous. I often ſee the names of ſome Captaines ſmothered vnder the brightneſſe of other names of leſſer deſert: witneſſe Labienus, Ʋentidius, Teleſinus and diverſe others. And to take him in that ſenſe, were I to complaine for the Graecians, might not I ſay, that Camillus is much leſſe comparable vnto Themiſtocles, the Gracchi to Agis and Cleomenes, and Numa to Lycurgus? But it is follie at one glance to judge of things with ſo many and diverſe faces. When Plutarke compares them, he doth not for all that equall them. Who could more eloquently, and with more conſcience note their differences? Doth he compare the victories, the exploites of armes, the power of the armies conducted by Pompey and his triumphs vnto thoſe of Ageſilaus? I doe not believe (ſaith he) that Xenophon himſelfe (were he living) though it were granted him to write his pleaſure for the advantage of Ageſilaus, durſt ever dare to admit any compariſon betweene them. Seemeth he to equall Lyſander to Sylla? There is no compariſon (ſaith he) neither in number of victories, nor in hazard of battels betweene them: for, Lyſander onely obtained two ſea-battels, &c. This is no derogation from the Romanes. If he have but ſimply preſented them vntothe Graecians, what ever diſparitie may be betweene them, he hath not in any ſort wronged them. And Plutarke doth not directly counterpoiſe them. In ſome there is none perferred before others; He compareth the parts and the circumſtances one after another▪ and ſeverally judgeth of them. If therefore any would goe about to convince him of favour, hee ſhould narrowly ſift out ſome particular judgement; or in generall and plaine termes ſay, he hath miſſed in ſorting ſuch a Graecian to ſuch a Romane, foraſmuch as there are other more ſortable and correſpondent, and might better be compared, as having more reference one vnto another.
                     
                     
                        The three and thirtieth Chapter.
                        
                           The History of Spurina.
                           
                        
                        PHiloſophy thinketh, ſhe hath not ill employed hir meanes, having yeelded the ſoveraine rule of our minde, and the authoritie to reſtraine our appetites, vnto reaſon. Amongeſt which, thoſe who judge there is none more violent, than thoſe which love begetteth, have this for their opinion, that they holde both of body and ſoule; and man is wholy poſſeſſed with them: ſo that health it ſelfe depended of them, and phiſike is ſometimes conſtrained to ſerve them inſteede of a Panderſhip. But contrariwiſe, a man might alſo ſay, that the commixture of the body doth bring abatement and weakeneſſe vnto them; becauſe ſuch deſires are ſubject to ſacietie and capable of materiall remedies. Many who have endevored to free and exempt their mindes from the continuall alarumes, which this appetite did aſſaile them with, have vſed inciſions, yea and cut-off the mooving, turbulent and vnruly parts. Others have alayed the force and fervency of them by frequent applications of cold things, as ſnow and vineger. The haire-cloths which our forefathers vſed to weare for this purpoſe, wherof ſome made ſhirts, and ſome waſte-bands or girdles, to torment their reignes. A Prince told me not long ſince, that being very yoong, and waiting in the Court of King Francis the firſt, vpon a ſolemne feaſtival day, when all the Court endevored to be in their beſt clothes, a humor poſſeſſed him to putte-on a ſhirt of haire-cloth, which he yet keepeth, and had beene his fathers; but what devotion ſoever poſſeſſed him, he could not poſſibly endure vntill night to put it off againe▪ and was ſick a long time after, proteſting he thought no youthly heat could be ſo violent, but the vſe of this receipt would coole and alay; of which he perhappes never

aſſayed the ſtrongeſt: For, experience ſheweth vs, that ſuch emotion doth often maintaine it ſelfe vnderbaſe, rude and ſlovenly cloathes: and haire-cloathes doe not ever make thoſe poore that weare them. Zenocrates proceeded more rigorouſly? for, his Diſciples to make triall of his continencie, having convayed that beauteous and famous curtizan Lais naked into his bed, ſaving the weapons of hir beauty, wanton alurements, and amorous or love-procuring pocions, feeling that maugre all Philoſophicall diſcourſes, and ſtrict rules, his skittiſh body beganne to mutinie, he cauſed thoſe members to be burned, which had liſtened to that rebellion. Whereas the paſſions that are in the minde, as ambition, covetouſneſſe and others, trouble reaſon much more: for, it can have no ayde but from it's owne meanes; nor are thoſe appetites capable of ſacietie, but rather ſharpened by enjoying, and augmented by poſſeſſion. The example alone of Iulius Caeſar may ſuffice to ſhew vs the diſparitie of theſe appetites, for neuer was man more given to amorous delights. The curious and exact care he had of his body, is an authenticall witneſſe of it, forſomuch as hee vſed the moſt laſcivious meanes that then were in vſe, as to have the haires of his body ſmeered and perfumed all over, with an extreame and labored curioſitie; being of himſelfe a goodly perſonage, white, of a tall and comely ſtature, of a cheerfull and ſeemly countenance, his face full and round, and his eies browne lively; if at leaſt Suetonius may be believed: For, the ſtatues which nowadayes are to be ſeene of him in Rome, anſwer not altogether this portraiture wee ſpeake of. Beſides his wiues, which he changed foure times, without reckoning the bies, or Amours in his youth with Nicomedes King of Bythinia, hee had the Maiden-head of that ſo farre, and highly-renowmed Queene of Aegypt, Cleopatra; witneſſe yong Caeſarion, whom he begotte of hir. He alſo made love vnto E
                                 •
                              no
                                 •
                              
                            Queene of Mauritania, and at Rome, to Posthumia, wife vnto Servius Sulpitius: to Lolio, wife to 
                              
                                 •
                              abinius to Tertulla, of Craſſus; yea vnto Mutia, wife to great Pompey, which as Hiſtorians ſay, was the cauſe hir Husband was divorced from her. Which thing Plutarke confeſſeth not to have knowne. And the Curious both father and ſonne twitted Pompey in the teeth, at what time he tooke Caeſars Daughter to wife, that he made himſelfe Sonne in law to one, who had made him Cuckold, and himſelfe was wont to call Aegystus. Beſides all this number, he entertained Servilia the ſiſter of Cat
                                 •
                              , and mother to Marcus Brutus, whence (as divers hold) proceeded that great affection, he ever bare to Marcus Brutus; for his Mother bare him at ſuch a time as it was not vnlikely he might be borne of him. Thus, (as me ſeemeth) have I good reaſon to deeme him a man extreamelie addicted to all amorous licenciouſneſſe, and of a wanton-laſcivious complexion. But the oother paſſion of ambition, wherewith he was infinitely infected, and much tainted, when he came once to withſtand the ſame, it made him preſently to give ground. And touching this point, when I call Mahomet to remembrance (I meane him that ſubdued Constantinople, and who brought the final extermination of the name of Graecians) I know not where theſe two paſſions are more equall ballanced: equally an indefatigable letcher, and a never-tired ſouldier. But when in his life they ſeeme to ſtrive and concurre one with another, the mutinous heate, doeth ever gourmandize the amorous flame. And the latter, although out of naturall ſeaſon did never attaine to a ful and abſolute authority, but when he perceived himſelfe to be ſo aged, that he was vtterly vnable longer to vndergoe the burthen of Warre. That which is aleaged, as an example on the contrary ſide of Ladiſla
                                 •
                              s King of Naples, is very well worth the noting, who though he were an excellent, couragious and ambitious Captaine, propoſed vnto himſelfe, as the principall ſcope of his ambition, the execution of his ſenſuality, and enjoyning of ſome rare and vnmatched beauty. So was his death: Having by a continuall tedious ſiege brought the Citty of Florence to ſo narrow a pinch, that the inhabitantes were ready to yeeld him the victory, he yeelded the ſame to them, vpon condition they would deliver into his hands a wench of excellent beauty that was in the city, of whom he had heard great commendations; which they were enforced to graunt him, and ſo by a private injury to warrant the publike ruine of the Citty. Shee was the Daughter of a notable rare Phiſicion, and whileſt he lived chiefe of his profeſſion: Who ſeeing himfelie engaged in ſo ſtuprous a neceſſity, reſolved vpon an haughtie enterprize; Whileſt all were buſie adorning his daughter, and beſetting her with coſtly jeweles, that ſhee might the more delight and pleaſe this new Kingly lover, he alſo gave her an exquiſitely-wrought, and ſweetly-perfumed handkircher, to vſe in their firſt approaches and embracements, a thing commonly in vſe amongſt the Women of that Country. This Handkercher ſtrongly empoyſoned according to the

cunning skill of his Art, comming to wipe both their enflamed ſecret parts and open pores, did ſo readily convay and diſperſe it's poyſon, that having ſodainely changed their heate into colde, they immediately deceaſed one in anothers aimes. But I will now returne to Caeſar. His pleaſures could never make him looſe one minute of an houre, nor turne one ſtep from the occaſions, that might any way further his advancement. This paſſion did ſo ſoveraignly overſway all others, and poſſeſſed his minde with ſo vncontrouled an authority, that ſhe carryed him whither ſhe liſt. Truely I am grieued, when in other things I conſider this mans greatneſſe, and the wondrous partes that were in him; ſo great ſufficiencie in all maner of knowledge and learning, as there is almoſt no ſcience wherein he hath not written; He was ſo good an Orator, that diverſe have preferred his eloquence before Ciceroes: And himſelfe (in mine opinion) in that facultie thought himſelfe nothing ſhort of him. And his two Anti-Catoes, were eſpecially written to over-ballance the eloquence which Cicero had emploied in his Cato. And for all other matters; was ever minde ſo vigilant, ſo active, and ſo patient of labour as his? And doubtleſſe, it was alſo embelliſhed with ſundry rare ſeedes of vertue. I meane lively, natural and not counterſets. He was exceeding ſober, and ſo homely in his feeding, that Oppius reporteth: how vppon a time, through a certaine Cookes negligence, his meat being dreſſed with a kinde of medicinable Oyle, in ſtead of Olive-oyle, and ſo brought to the boorde, although he found it yet he fed hartily of it, only becauſe hee would not ſhame his Hoſte. Another time he cauſed his Baker to bee whipped, becauſe hee had ſerved him with other, than common houſhold bread, Cato himſelfe was wont to ſay of him, that hee was the firſt ſober man, had addreſt himſelf to the ruine of his country. And wheras the ſame Cato called him one day drunkard, it hapned in this maner, Being both together in the Senate houſe, where Catilines conſpiracie was much ſpoken of, wherein Caeſar was greatly ſuſpected to have a hand; a note was by a friend of his brought, & in very ſecret ſort delivered him, which Cato perceiving, ſuppoſing it might be ſomething, that the Conſpiratours advertized him of, inſtantly ſummoned him to ſhew it, which Caeſar to avoide a greater ſuſpition, refuſed not: It was by chance an amorous letter, which Servilia Catoes ſiſter writ to him: Cato having read-it, threw it at him, ſaying, hold it againe thou drunkard. I ſay, it was rather a word of diſdaine and anger, than an expreſſe reproch of this vice; as often we nicke-name thoſe that anger vs, with the firſt nicke-names of reproaches, that come into our mouth, though meerly impertinent to thoſe with whom we fall out. Conſidering, that the vice wherewith Cato charged him, hath neare coherencie vnto that, wherein he had ſurpriſed Caeſar: for Venus and Bacchus (as the vulgar Proverb ſaith) agree well together; but with me 
                              Ʋenus is much more blithe and game-ſome, being accompanied with ſobrietie.
                        The examples of his mildneſſe and clemencie, towards ſuch as had offended him, are infinite: I meane, beſides thoſe he ſhewed during the civill warres, which (as by his owne writings may plainely appeare) he vſed to blandiſh and allurehis enemies, to make them feare his future domination and victorie the leſſe. But if any ſhall ſay, thoſe examples are not of validitie to witnes his genuine and naturall affabilitie, we may lawfully anſwere, that at leaſt they ſhew vs a wonderfull confidence, and greatneſſe of courage to have beene in him. It hath often befalne him, to ſend whole armies backe againe to his enemies, after he had vanquiſhed them, without dayning to binde them ſo much, as with an oth, if not to favour, at leaſt not to beare armes againſt him. He hath three or foure times taken ſome of Pompeys chiefe Captaines priſoners, and as often ſet them at libertie againe. Pompey declared all ſuch as would not follow and accompanie him in his wars, to be his enemies; and he cauſed thoſe to be proclamed as friends, who either would not ſtirre at all, or not effectually arme themſelves againſt him. To ſuch of his Captaines as fled from him, to procure other conditions, he ſent them their weapons, their horſes and all other furniture. The Citties he had taken by maine force, he freed to follow what faction they would, giving them no other gariſon, then the memorie of his clemencie and mildnes. In the day of his great battaile of Pharſalia, he expreſly inhibited, that vnleſſe they were driven to vnavoidable extremitie, no man ſhould lay hands vpon any Romane cittizen. In my judgement theſe are very hazardous partes, and it is no wonder, if in the civill warres or tumultuous broiles, we have now on foote, thoſe that fight for the ancient lawes and ſtate of their countrie, as he did, doe not follow and imitate the example. They are extraordinarie meanes, and which onelye belongs to Caeſars fortune, and to his admirable fore-ſight, ſuccesfully to direct, and happily to conduct them.

When I conſider the incomparable greatneſſe and vnvaluable worth of his minde, I excuſe Victorie, in that ſhee could not well give him over, in this moſt vnjuſt and vnnaturall cauſe. But to returne to his clemencie; wee have divers genuine and lively examples, even in the time of his al-ſwaying gouernment, when all things were reduced into his handes, and hee needed no longer to diſſemble. Caius Memmius, had written certaine detracting and railing orations againſt him, which hee at full and moſt ſharpely had anſwered, nevertheleſſe hee ſhortly after helped to make him Conſull. Caius Calvus, who had compoſed divers moſt injurious Epigrams againſt him having employed ſundrie of his friendes to bee reconciled to him againe, Caeſar deſcended to write firſt vnto him. And our good Catullus, who vnder the name of Mamurra had ſo rudely and bitterly railed againſt him, at laſt comming to excuſe himſelfe, Caeſar that very night made him to ſuppe at his owne table. Having beene advertiſed how ſome were overlaviſh in rayling againſt him, all hee did was but in a publike oration to declare how hee was advertiſed of it. His enemies, he feared leſſe then he hated them. Certaine conſpiracies and conventicles were made againſt his life, which being diſcovered vnto him, he was contented by an edict to publiſh, how he was throughly enformed of them, and never proſecuted the Authors. Touching the reſpect hee ever bare vnto his friendes; Caius Oppius traveling with him, and falling very ſicke, having but one chamber he reſigned the ſame vnto him, and himſelfe was concented to lie all night abroade and vpon the bare ground. Concerning his juſtice, he cauſed a ſervant of his whom hee exceedingly loved, to be executed, for ſomuch as he had laine with the wife of a Roman Knight, although noe man ſued or complained of him. Never was man, that ſhewed more moderation in his victorie, or more reſolution in his adverſe fortune. But all theſe noble inclinations, rich giftes, woorthy qualities, were altered ſmoothered and eclipſed by this furious paſſion of ambition; by which he ſuffered himſelfe to be ſo farre miſ-ledde, that it may be well affirmed, ſhe onely ruled the Sterne of all his actions. Of a liberall man, ſhe made him a common thee
                              •
                           e, that ſo hee might the better ſupply his profuſion and prodigality; and made him vtter that vile and moſt injurious ſpeech; that if the wickedſt and moſt pernicious men of the world, had for his ſervice and furtherance beene faithfull vnto him, hee would to the vtmoſt of his power have cheriſhed and preferred them, as well as if they had beene the honeſteſt: It ſo beſotted, and as it were made him drunke with ſo extreame vanitie, that in the preſence of all his fellow cittizens hee durſt vaunt himſelfe, to have made that great and farre-ſpread Romane Commonwealth, a ſhapeleſſe and bodileſſe name; and pronounce, that his Sentences or Anſweres ſhould thence forward ſerve as Lawes: And ſitting, to receive the whole bodie of the Senate comming toward him: and ſuffer himſelfe to be adored: and in his preſence divine honours to be done him. To conclude, this onely vice (in mine opinion) loſt, and overthrew in him the faireſt naturall and richeſt in genuitie that ever was; and hath made his memorie abhominable to all honeſt mindes, inſomuch as by the ruine of his countrey, and ſubverſion of the mightieſt State and moſt flouriſhing Common-wealth, that ever the worlde ſhall ſee, hee went about to procure his glorie. A man might contrariewiſe finde diverſe examples of greate perſons, whome pleaſure hath made to forget the conduct of their owne affaires, as Marcus Antonius, and others: but where love and ambition ſhould be in one equall balance. and with like forces mate one another, I will never doubt, but Caeſar would gaine the prize and gole of the victorle. But to come into my path againe. It is much, by diſcourſe of reaſon, to bridle our appetites, or by violence to force our members, to containe themſelves within the bounds of duty. But to whippe vs for the intereſt of our neighbors, not only to ſhake off this ſweete pleaſing paſſion, which tickleth vs with ſelfe-joying pleaſure, wee apprehend and feel to ſee our ſelves grateful to others, and of all men beloved and ſued vnto: but alſo to hate and ſcorne thoſe graces, which of it are the cauſe; and to condemne our beauty, becauſe ſome others will be ſet on ſire with it, I have ſeene few examples like to this. Spurina a yong Gentleman of Thuſcanie,
                        
                        
                           Qualis gemma micat flavum quae dividit aurum,Virg Ae
                                    ••
                                 . 10. 134.
                           
                           Aut collo decus aut capiti, vel quale per artem,
                           Incluſum buxo aut Ericia terebintho,
                           Lucet ebur.
                           As when a precious ſtone cleare rayes doth ſpread.
                           Set in Pure golde, adorning necke or head:
                           
                              Or as faire I v'ry ſhines in boxe enclos'd,
                           Or workemanly with Mountaine gumme diſpos'd.
                        
                        being endowed with ſo alluringly-exceſſive and ſingular beautie, that the chaſteſt eyes could not poſſibly gainſtand or continently reſiſt the ſparkling glances thereof; not contented to leave ſo great a flame ſuccourleſſe, or burning fever remedileſſe, which hee in all perſons, and every where enkindled, entred into ſo furious deſpite againſt himſelfe, and thoſe rich gifts, nature had ſo prodigally conferred vpon him (as if they muſt beare the blame of others faults) that with gaſhes, and skars, he wittingly mangled, & voluntarily cutthat perfect, proportion and abſolute feature, which nature had ſo curiouſly obſerved in his vnmatched face; whereof to ſpeake my opinion, ſuch out rages are enemies to my rules. I rather admire, then honour ſuch actions. His intent was commendable, and his purpoſe conſciencious, but in my ſeeming ſomewhat wanting of wiſedome. What? if his deformitie or vglineſſe was afterward an inſtrument to induce others to fall into the ſinne of contempt and vice of hatred, or fault of envy for the glory of ſo rare commendation; or of ſlander, interpreting his humour to bee a franticke ambition; Is there any forme, whence vice (if ſo it pleaſe) may not wreſt an occaſion, in ſome maner to exerciſe it ſelfe? It had beene more juſt, and therewithall more glorious, of ſo rare gifts of God, to have made a ſubject of exemplar vertue and orderly methode. Thoſe which ſequeſter themſelves from publike offices, and from this infinite number of thornie and ſo many-faced rules, which in civill life, binde a man of exact honeſty and exquiſite integritie: in mine opinion reape a goodly commoditie, what peculiar ſharpeneſſe ſoever they enjoyne themſelves. It is a kinde of death, to avoide the paine of well-doing, or trouble of well-living. They may have another priſe, but the priſe of vneaſines me thinks they never had. Nor that in difficulty, there be any thing that is amid the waves of the worldly multitude, beyond keeping himſelfe vpright and vntainted, anſwering loyally and truely diſcharging all members and ſeverall parts of his charge. It is happily more eaſie for one, in honeſt ſort to neglect and paſſe over all the ſexe, then duely and wholly to maintaine himſelfe in his wives companie. And a man may more incuriouſly fall into povertie, then into plenteouſneſſe; being juſtly diſpenſed. Cuſtome, according to reaſon, doth leade to more ſharpneſſe then abſtinence hath. Moderation is a vertue much more toyleſome, then ſufferance. The chaſte and well living of yong Scipio, hath a thouſand ſeverall faſhions; that of Diogenes but one. This doth by ſo much more exceede all ordinary lives in innocencie and vnſpottedneſſe, as thoſe which are moſt exquiſite and accompliſhed, exceede in profite and outgoe it in force.
                     
                     
                        The foure and thirtieth Chapter.
                        
                           Obſervations concerning the meanes to warre after the maner of Iulius Caeſar.
                           
                        
                        IT is reported of divers chiefe Generals in warre, that they have particularly affected ſome peculiar booke or other: as Alexander the great highly eſteemed Homer; Scipio Affrieanus, Xenophon: Marcus Brutus, Polybius; Charles the fifth, Philip de Comines: And it is lately averred, that in ſome places, and with ſome men, Machiavell is much accompted of: But our late Marſhall Strozzi, who had made eſpeciall choiſe to love Caeſar; without doubt, I thinke of all other choſe beſt: for truely he ought to be the Breviarie of all true Souldiers, as beeing the abſolute and perfect chiefe patterne of Military profeſſion And God hee knowes with what grace, and with what decorum, hee hath embelliſhed this rich ſubject, with ſo pure a kinde of ſpeech, ſo pleaſing and ſo abſolutely perfect, that to my taſte, there are no writing in the world, which in this ſubject may bee compared to his. I will heere regiſter certaine particular and rare parts concerning his maner of warre, which yet remaine in my memory. His Armie beeing ſome what afrighted, vpon the report that ranne of the great forces, which king Iuba brought againſt him, inſtead of abating the opinion his ſoldiers had conceived of it, and to diminiſh the meanes or forces of his enemie, having cauſed them

to be aſſembled altogether, thereby to aſſure and incourage them, he tooke a cleane contrary courſe, to that which in like caſes we are accuſtomed to do: for he bad them troble themſelves no more to finde out the number of the forces, which his enemies brought againſt him, for himſelfe had already true knowledge & certaine intelligence of them: and told them a number farre exceeding both the truth and report of them: following what Cyrus commandeth in Xenophon. For a ſmuch as the deceipt is not of like interreſt, for a man to finde his enemies in effect weaker then he hoped, then ſtronger indeede, having once conceived an opinion of their weakeneſſe. He enured all his Souldiers ſimply to obey, without controling, gaineſaying, or ſpeaking of their captaines deſſeignes, which he never communicated vnto them, but vpon the laſt point of execution: and was pleaſed, if by chance they had any inkling of them, ſo to deceive them, preſently to change his opinion: And having prefixt a place to quarter-in at night, hee hath often beene ſeene to march further, and lengthen his journey, namely if the weather were foule, or if it rained. The Swizzers in the beginning of his warres in Gaule, having ſent toward him to give them free paſſage through the Roman countries, and he being reſolved by force to empeach them, did notwithſtanding ſhew them very good lookes, and tooke, certaine dayes reſpit to give them an anſwere, during which time he might have leaſure to aſſemble his Armie together. Theſe poore people knew not how well he could husband time: For he often repeated, that the skill to embrace occaſisons in the nicke, is the chiefeſt parte of an abſolute Captaine: And truely the diligence he vſed in all his exploits, is incredible; and the like was never heard of. If he were not over conſciencious in that vnder colour of ſome treatie, parlie or accord, to take any advantage of his enemies: hee was as little ſcrupulous, in that he required no other vertue in his Souldiers but valour; and except mutinie and diſobedience, he puniſhed not grealy other vices. After his victories, hee often gave them the reines to all licentiouſneſſe, for a while diſpenſing them from all rules of military diſcipline; ſaying moreover his ſouldiers were ſo well inſtructed, that though they were in theit gayeſt clothes, pranked vp, musked and perfumed, they would notwithſtanding runne furiouſly to any combate. And in truth hee loved to ſee them richly armed, and made them weare gilt, graven and ſilvered armours, that their care to keepe them cleane and bright, might make them more fierce, and readie to defend themſelves. Speaking to them, hee ever called them by the name of Fellow-ſouldiers; a name vſed at this day by ſome Captaines; which his ſucceſſour Augustus afterward reformed, eſteeming hee had done it for the neceſſitie of his affaires, and to flatter the hearts of thoſe which followed him but voluntarily;
                        
                           —Rheni mihi Caeſar in vndis.
                              Lucan. l. 5. 289.
                           
                           Dux erat, hic ſocius facinus quos inquinat, aequat.
                           When Caeſar paſt the Rheine he was my Generall,
                           My Fellow heere: ſinne, whom it ſtaines, makes fellowes-al.
                        
                        but that this cuſtome was over-lowelie for the dignitie of an Emperor, and chiere Generall of an Armie, and brought vp the faſhion againe to call them ouly Souldiers. To this curteſie, Caeſar did notwithſtanding intermixe a great ſeverity, to ſuppreſſe & keep them humble. His ninth Legion having mutined neere vnto Placentia, hee preſently caſſiered the ſame with great ignominie vnto it, notwithſtanding that Pompey were yet on foote and ſtrong; and would not receive it into favour, but with humble petitions and entreatie. Hee did more appeaſe them by authoritie and audacitie, then by mildeneſſe and affabilitie. Where hee ſpeaketh of his paſſage over the river of Rheine, towardes Germanie, hee ſaith, that deeming it vnworthy the honour of the Romane people, his Army ſhould paſſe over in ſhippes, he cauſed a bridge to be built, that ſo it might paſſe over drie-foote. Their hee erected that admirable bridge, whereof he ſo particularly deſcribeth the frame: For hee never more willingly dilates himſelfe in deſcribing any of his exploites, then where hee endeuoreth to repreſent vnto vs the ſubtilitie of his inventions, in ſuch kindes of manuall workes. I have alſo noted this in his booke, that hee much accompteth of his exhortations he made to his Sculdiers before any fight: for where he would ſhew to have beene either ſurpriſed or vrged, he ever alledgeth this, that hee had ſo much leaſure as to make an oration to his Souldiers or Armie: Before that great battell againſt thoſe of Tournay; Caeſar (ſaith he) having diſpoſed of the reſt, ranne ſodainely whither fortune carried him, to exhort his men: and meeting with the tenth Legion hee had not leaſure to ſay any thing elſe vnto them, but that they ſhould
                           
                           remember their former wonted vertue, they ſhould nothing be danted, they ſhould stoutly reſiſt the encounter of their adverſaries; and foraſmuch as the enemie was come within an arrow-ſhoote vnto him, he gave the ſignall of the battell; and ſodainely going elſewhere, to encourage others, he found them already together by the eares; See here what himſelfe ſaith of it in that place. Verely his tongue hath indivers places much beſtead, and done him notable ſervice, and even whilſt hee lived, his militarie eloquence was ſo highly regarded, that many of his Armie were ſeene to copie and keepe his orations; by which meanes divers volumes were filled with them, and continued many ages after his death, His ſpeech had particular graces, ſo that his familiar friends, and namely Auguſtus, hearing that rehearſed, which had beene collected of his, knew by the Phraſes and words, what was his or not. The firſt time that with any publike charge hee iſſued out of Rome, hee came in eight dayes to the river of Rhone, having ever one or two Secretaries before him, who continually writ what hee endited, and one behinde him that carried his ſword. And ſurely, if one did nothing but runne vp and downe, he could very hardly attaine to that promptitude, wherewith ever being victorious, having left Gaule, and following Pompey to Brunduſium, in eighteene dayes he ſabdued all Italie; returned from Brunduſium to Rome, and thence went even to the hart of Spaine, where he paſt many extreame difficulties, in the warres betweene Afranius and Petreius, and at the long ſiege of Marſeille: from whence he returned into Macedon, overthrew the Romane Armie at Pharſalia; thence purſuing Pompey hee paſſed into Aegipt, which he ſubdued; from Aegipt he came vnto Syria, and into the countrie of Pontus, where he fought with Pharnaces; thence into Affrica, where he defeated Scipio and Iuba, and thence through Italie he returned into Spaine, where he overthrew Pompeyes childrenIucau. l. 4 505. Virg. Ae
                                 •
                              . li. 12 684.
                        
                        
                           O cior & caeli flammis & tigride foeta.
                           Ac veluti montis ſaxum de vertice praeceps
                           Cùm ruit avulſum vento, ſeu turbidus imber
                           Proluit, aut annis ſolvit ſublapſa vetuſtas,
                           Fertur in abruptum magno mons improbus actu
                           Exult átque ſolo, ſilvas, armenta, viróſque,
                           Involvens ſecum.
                           Swifter then breed-yong Tiger, or heav'ns flaſh,
                           And as from mountaines top a headlong ſtone
                           Rent-off by winde, or by ſtormes troublous daſh
                           Waſht-off, or loos'd by age of yeares are gone,
                           Crosse-carried with great force that hill-like maſſe
                           Bounds on the earth, and rowles with it in one.
                           Woods, heards, and men, and all that neere-it was.
                        
                        Speaking of the ſiege of Avaricum, he ſaith, that it was his cuſtome, both day and night, ever to be neere and about ſuch workemen, as he had ſet a worke. In all enterpriſes of conſequence hee was ever the firſt skout-man, or ſurvayer of any place: and his Armie never approched place, which hee had not viewd or ſurvayed himſelfe. And if wee may believe Suetonius, at what time hee attempted to paſſe over into England, he was the firſt man that ſounded the paſſage. He was wont to ſay, that he eſteemed that victorie much more, which was conducted by adviſe, and managed by counſell, then by maine ſtrength and force. In the warre againſt Petreius and Afranius▪
                            Fortune preſenting an apparant occaſion of advantage vnto him, he ſaith, that he refuſed it, hoping with a little more time, but with leſſe hazard, to ſee the overthrow of his enemie. Where he alſo plaide a notable part, to command all his Armie to ſwimme over a river, without any neceſſitie,Lucan. l. 4. 151.
                        
                        
                           —rapuitque ruens in praeli
                                    •
                                  miles,
                           
                           Quod fugiens timtiſſet iter, mox vdareceptis
                           Memb
                                 ••
                               fovent armis, gelidóſque à gurgite curſu
                           Reſtituunt artus.
                           The Souldier rids that way in haſte to fight,
                           Which yet he would have fearde in haſte of flight;
                           His limbs with water wet and cold before,
                           With armes he covers, running doth reſtore.
                        
                        I finde him ſomewhat more warie and conſiderate in his enterpriſes, then Alexander; for

the latter ſeemeth to ſeeke out, and by maine force to runne into dangers, as an impetuous or raging torrent, which without heede, diſcretion, or choiſe, ſhockes and checkmates what 
                              •
                           r
                              •
                            it meeteth withall.
                        
                           Sic tauri formis volvitur Aufidus,Her. car. lib. 4. 
                                    •
                                 d. 14 25.
                           
                           Qui Regna Dauni perfluit Appuli
                           Dum ſaevit, horrendámque cultis
                           Diluviem meditatur agris.
                           So Bull-fac't Aufidus ſtill rowling growes,
                           Which through Apulias ancient kingdome flowes,
                           When he doth rage in threatning meditation
                           To bring on faire fields fearefull inundation.
                        
                        And to ſay truth, his hap was to bee moſt employed in the ſpring-time, and firſt heate of his age: whereas Caeſar was well ſtrucken in yeares, when he beganne to follow armes. Alexander was of a more cholerike, ſanguine and violent conſtitution, which humour hee ſtirred vp with wine, whereof Caeſar was very abſtinent. But where occaſions of neceſſitie were offered, and where the ſubject required it, there was never man that ſo little regarded his perſon. As for me, me ſeemeth I reade indivers of his exploits, a certaine reſolution rather to looſe himſelfe, than to abide the brunt or ſhame to bee overthrowne. In that great battell, which he fought againſt thoſe of Turnay, ſeeing the vangarde of his Armie ſomewhat enclining to route, even as hee was, without ſhield or target, hee ranne headlong to the front of his enemies: Which many other times happened vnto him. Hearing once how his men were beſieged, hee paſt diſguized through the midſt and thickeſt of his enemies campe, ſo to encourage and awe them with his preſence. Having croſſed the way to Dyrrhachium, with verie few forces, and perceiving the reſt of his Armie (the Conduct whereof hee had left vnto Antonius,) to bee ſomewhat ſlowe in comming, hee vndertooke all alone, to repaſſe the Sea, notwithſtanding a violent and raging Tempeſt; and ſecretly ſtole himſelfe away to fetch the reſt of his forces: All the havens on that ſide, yea and all the Sea being poſſeſſed by Pompey, And concerning the enterpriſes hee vnder-went with armed hand, there are divers of them, which in reſpect of the hazard, exceede all diſcourſe of militarie reaſon: for, with how weake meanes vndertooke hee to ſubdue the Kingdome of Aegypt, and afterward to front the forces of Scipio and Iuta, which were tenne partes greater than his? Mee thinkes ſuch men have had a kinde of more than humane confidence of their fortune: And himſelfe was wont to ſay, that Haughtie enterpriſes were to be executed and not conſulted vpon. After the battell of Pharſalia, having ſent his Armie before into Aſia, and himſelfe with onely one ſhip paſſing through the ſtraite of Helleſpont, hee mette on the Seas with Lucius Caſſius, attended on with tenne tall ſhips of Warre; he was ſo farre from ſhunning him, that hee durſt not onely ſtay for him but with all haſte make toward and ſummon him, to yeeld himſelfe to his mercie; which hee did. Having vndertaken that furious ſiege of Alexia, wherein were foureſcore thouſand men of Defence, and all France vp in armes, with a reſolution to runne vpon him and raiſe the ſiege, and having an Arm
                              •
                           e on foote of one hundred and nine thouſand horſe, and two hundred fortie thouſand foote; What a fond hardy and outragious confidence was it in him, that hee would never give over his attempt and reſolve in two ſo great difficulties together? Which hee notwithſtanding vnder went: And after he had obtained ſo notable a battell of thoſe which were without, hee ſoone reduced thoſe that were beſieged in the Towne to his mercy. The verie like happened to Lucullus at the ſiege of Tigranocerta, againſt King Tigranes but with an vnlike condition, ſeeing his enemies demiſſeneſſe, with whom Lucullus was to deale. I will heere note two rare and extraordinarie events, touching the ſiege of Alexia; the one, that the French men beeing all aſſembled together with a purpoſe to meete with Caeſar, having diligently ſurvaied and exactly numbred all their forces, reſolved in their counſell, to cutte-off a great part of this huge multitude for feare they might breede a confuſion. This example is new, to feare to bee over many; yet if it be well taken, it is very likely, that The bodie of an Armie ought to have a well proportioned greatneſſe, and ordered to indifferent bounds. Whether it be for the difficulty to feed the ſame, or to lead it in order and keepe it in awe. And we may eaſily verifie by examples, that Theſe numerous and infinite Armies haue ſeldome brought any not able thing to paſſe: According to Cyrus his ſaying in Xenophon. It is not the multitude of men, but the number of good men that cauſeth an advantage:
                           
The reſt rather breeding confuſion and trouble, than helpe or availe. And Baiazeth tooke the chiefeſt foundation of his reſolution, againſt the adviſe of all his Captaines, to joyne fight with Tamburlane, onely becauſe the innumerable number of men, which his enemie brought into the field, gave him an aſſured hope of route and confuſion. Scanderbeg, a ſufficient and moſt expert Iudge in ſuch a caſe, was wont to ſay, that tenne or twelve thouſand truſty and reſolute fighting men, ought to ſuffice any ſufficient Chieftaine of Warre, to warrant his reputation in any kinde of military exploite. The other point, which ſeemeth to be repugnant both vnto cuſtome and reaſon of Warre, is, that 
                              Ʋercingentorix, who was appointed chiefe Generall of all the forces of the revolted Gaules, vndertooke to immure and ſhutte himſelfe into Alexia. For, He that hath the commaundement of a whole Countrie. ought never to engage himſelfe, except in caſes of extreamitie, and where all his reſt and laſt refuge goeth on it, and hath no other hope leſt him, but the defence of ſuch a place. Otherwiſe he ought to keepe himſelfe free, that ſo he may have meanes to provide in all partes of his Government. But to returne to Caeſar, hee became in time ſomewhat more ſlow, heedy, and conſiderate, as witneſſeth his familiar friend Oppius; deeming, he ſhould not ſo eaſily hazard the honour of ſo many Victories which one onely diſaſter, or miſ-encounter, might make him looſe. It is that the Italians are wont to ſay, when they will or blame or reproach any man with this overdaring, or raſh fond-hardineſle, which is often ſeene in yoong men, calling them, Biſognoſid honore, as much to ſay as needie of honour: And that being yet hungrie, greedy and voyde of reputation, they have reaſon to ſeeke after it, whatſoever it may coſt them; Which they ſhould never doe, that have already acquired the ſame. There may be ſome juſt moderation in this deſire of glory, and ſome ſacietie in this appetite, as well as in others; Divers doe ſo practize it. He was farre from that religion of the auncient Romans, who in their Warres would never prevaile but with meere and genuine vertue: But rather joyned more conſcience vnto it, than now-adayes wee ſhould doe; And would never allow of all meanes, were he never ſo certaine to get the victory. In his Warres againſt Ariovistus, whileſt he was in Parly with him, ſome tumult or inſurrection happened betweene the two armies, which beganne by the fault or negligence of ſome of Arioviſtus horſmen. In which hurlie-burlie Caeſar found himſelfe to have a great advantage over his en
                              •
                           emies. which notwithſtanding he would not embrace, for feare he might be taxed or ſuſpected to have proceeded falſly, or conſented to any trechery. At what time ſoever hee went to fight, he was accuſtomed to weare a verie rich garment, and of a ſheene and gariſh colour, that ſo he might the better be marked. When his Souldiers were neereſt vnto their enemies, he reſtrained and kept them very ſhort. When the ancient Graecians would accuſe or tax any man of extreame inſufficiencie, they vſed this common Proverbe; That he could neyther read nor ſwimme: And himſelfe was of this opinion, that the arte of ſwimming was moſt neceſſary and beneficiall in Warre, and a Souldier might reape divers commodities by it. If hee were in haſte, and to make ſpeede, he would ordinarily ſwimme over al the Rivers hee met withal: and loved greatly to travell on foote, as Alexander the Great was wont. In Aegypt being on a time forced (to ſave himſelfe) to leape into a little Whirry or Boate, and ſo many of his people following him, that he was in danger to ſinke, hee rather choſe to fling himſelfe into the Sea, which he did; and ſwimming came into his fleete, that was more than two hundred paces from him, holding his writing-Tables in his left hand out of the Water, and with his teeth drawing his Coate of Armes after him, that his enemies might not enjoy it: and this did hee being well ſtrucken in yeares. No Generall of Warre had ever ſo much credit with his Souldiers. In the beginning of his civill warres, his Centeniers offered him every one, at their owne charges to pay and finde him a man at Armes, and his foote▪men to ſerve him for nothing and thoſe that were beſt able, to defray the poore and needie.
                        Our late Admirall of France Lord Chaſtillion, in our late civill warres ſhewed ſuch an example: For, the French-men of his armie, at their proper coſt and charges helped to pay ſuch ſtrangers as followed him. Few examples of ſo loving and earneſt affection may bee found amongſt thoſe that follow the old manner of warre, and ſtrictly hold themſelves vnder the ancient pollicie of their lawes. Paſſion hath more ſway over vs, then reaſon: Yet hath it chanced in the warres againſt Hanniball, that imitating the example of the Romane Peoples liberalitie in the Cittie, the Souldiers and Captaines refuſed their pay, and in Marcellus his campe, thoſe were called mercenarie, that tooke any pay. Having had ſome defeate

neere vnto Dyrrachium, his Souldiers came voluntarily before him, and offred themſelves to be puniſhed; ſo that he was more troubled to comfort, then to chide them. One onely of his Cohortes (whereof ten went to a Legion) held fight above foure howres with foure of Pompeies whole Legions, vntill it was well-nigh all defeated with the multitude and force of arrowes: And in his trenches were afterward found one hundred and thirtie thouſand ſhafts. A Souldier of his, named Scava, who commanded one of the entrances, did ſo invincibly defend and keepe himſelfe, that he had one of his eyes thruſt out, and one ſhoulder and one thigh thruſt through, and his ſheild flawed and pearced in two hundred and thirtie ſeverall places. It hath befalne to many of his Souldiers, being taken priſoners, to chuſe rather to die then promiſe to follow any other faction, or receive any other entertainement. Granius Petronius taken by Scipio in Affricke: After Scipio had cauſed all his fellowes to bee put to death, ſent him word that hee gave him his life, forſomuch as hee was a man of ranke and a Queſtor: Petronius anſwered, that Caeſars Souldiers were wont to give life to others, and not accept it themſelves; And therewithall with his owne handes killed himſelfe. Infinite examples there are of their fidelitie. That part, which they acted, who were beſeiged in Salona, a Cittie which tooke partwith Caeſar againſt Pompey, muſt not be forgotten, by reaſon of a rare accident that there hapned. Marcus O
                                 •
                              tavius, having long time beleagred the Towne, they within were reduced to ſuch extreamitie and pinching neceſſitie of all things, that to ſupply the great want they had of men, moſt of them being alreadie or hurt or dead; they had ſet all their ſlaues at libertie, and for the behoofe of their engines, were compelled to cut-off all their womens haires, to make ropes with them; beſides a wonderfull lacke of victualles reſolving notwithſtanding never to yeeld themſelves: After they had a long time lingered the ſiege, and that Octavius was thereby become more careleſſe, and leſſe heeding or attentive to his enterpriſe; they one day about high noone (having firſt ranged their wives and children vpon the walles, to ſet the better face vpon the matter) ruſhed out in ſuch a furie vpon the beſeigers, that having put to rout and defeated the firſt, the ſecond, and third corps de garde; then the fourth and the reſt; and having forced them to quit their trenches, chaſed them even to their ſhippes: and Octavius with much adoe ſaved himſelfe in Dyrrachium, where Pompey was. I remember not at this time, to have read of any other example, where the beleagred doe in groſſe beate the beleagrers, and get the maiſtrye and poſſeſſion of the field; nor that a ſallie hath drawne a meere and abſolute victory of a battell into conſequence
                     
                     
                        The five and thirtieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of three good women.
                        
                        THey are not to be had be dozens, as each one knowes, namely in rights and duties of mariage; For, it is a bargaine full of ſo many thornie circumſtances, that it is hard the will of a woman ſhould long keepe hir ſelfe whole and perfect therein. And although men have ſomewhat a better condition in the ſame, yet have they much to doe. The touchſtone and perfect triall of a good mariage, reſpects the time that the ſocietie continueth; whether it have conſtantly beene milde loyall and commodious. In our age, they more commonly reſerve to enſtall their good offices, and ſet foorth the vehemence of their affections toward their loſt husbands: And then ſeeke they at leaſt to yeeld ſome teſtimonie of their good wil. Oh late teſtimony & out of ſeaſon, whereby they rather ſhew, they never love them but when they are dead. Our life is full of combuſtion and ſcolding, but our diſeaſe full of love and of curteſie. As fathers conceale affection toward their children; ſo they to maintaine an honeſt reſpect, cloake their love toward their husbands. This myſterie anſwereth not my taſte. They may long enough ſcratch and diſhevell themſelues; let me enquire of a chamber-maide or of a ſecretarie, how they were, how they did, and how they have lived together: I can never forget this good ſaying, Iactantius maerent, quae minus dolent, They keepe a 
                                 •
                              owling with moſt
                           
                           oſtentation, who are leſſe ſorrowfull at heart. Their lowring and puling is hatefull to the living, and vaine to the dead. Wee ſhall eaſily diſpence with them to laugh at vs when we are dead, vpon condition they ſmile vpon vs while we live. Is not this the way to reviue a man with ſpite; that he who hath ſpitten in my face when I was living, ſhall come and clawe my feete when I am dead? If there be any honour for a woman to weepe for hir husband, it belongs to hir that hath ſmiled vpon him when ſhe had him. Such as have wept when they lived, let them laugh when they are dead, as well outwardly as inwardly. Moreover, regard not thoſe blubred eyes, nor that pittie-mooving voyce; but view that demeanor, that colour and cheerefull good plight of thoſe cheekes, vnder their great vailes; thence it is ſhe ſpeakes plaine French. There are few whoſe health doth not daily growe better and better; a qualitie that cannot lie. This ceremonious countenance looketh not ſo much backeward, as foreward: It is rather a purchaſe then a payment. In mine infancie, an honeſt and moſt faire Ladie (who yet liveth, the widdowe of a Prince) had ſomewhat more of I wot not what in hir attires, then the lawes of widowehood would well permit. To ſuch as blamed hir for it: 
                              •
                           t is (ſaid ſhee) becauſe I intend no more new acquaintances, and have no mind at all to marry againe. Becauſe I will not altogether diſſent from out cuſtome, I have heere made choiſe of three women, who have alſo employed the vtmoſt endevor of their goodnes and affection, about their husbandes deathes. Yet are they examples ſomewhat different and ſo vrging that they hardly drawe life into conſequence. Plinie the yonger, had dwelling neere vnto a houſe of his in Italie a neighbour wonderfully tormented with certaine vlcers, which much troubled him in his ſecret parts. His wife perceiving him to droope and languiſh away, entreated him ſhe might leaſurely ſearch and neerely view the qualitie of his diſeaſe, and ſhe would more freely then any other tell him what hee was to hope for: Which having obtained, and curiouſly conſidered the ſame, ſhee found it impoſſible ever to be cured, and all he might expect was but to lead a long, dolorous, and languiſhing life; and therefore for his more ſafetie and ſoveraigne remedie, perſwaded him to kill himſelfe. And finding him ſomewhat nice and backeward to effect ſo rude an enterpriſe: Thinke not my deare friend (quoth ſhee) but that the ſorrowes and griefes, I ſee thee feele, touch me as neere and more, if more may be, as they ſelfe, and that to be rid of them, I will applie the ſame remedie to my ſelfe, which I preſcribe to thee. I will accompanie thee in thy cure, as I have done in thy ſickeneſſe: remoove all feare, and aſſure they ſelfe, we ſhall have pleaſure in this paſſage, which ſhall deliver vs from all torments, for we will happily goe together: That ſaid, and having cheared vp her husbands courage ſhe determined they ſhould both headlong throw themſelves into the ſea from out a window of their houſe, that over looked the ſame: and to maintaine this loyall, vehement and never to be ſevered affection to the end, wherewith ſhee had during his life embraced him, ſhee would alſo have him die in her armes; and fearing they might faile her, and through the fall, or feare or apprehenſion her hold-faſt might be looſed, ſhee cauſed herſelfe to be faſt bound vnto him by the middle: And thus for the eaſe of her huſbands life ſhee was contented to forgoe her owne. She was but of meane place and low fortune: and amidde ſuch condition of people, it is not ſo ſtrange to ſee ſome parts of rare vertue and exemplare goodneſſe.
                        
                           —extremaper illos
                           
                           Iuſtitia excedens terris vestigia fecit.Virg. Georg. Il. 2. 473.
                           
                           Iuſtice departing from the earth did take
                           Of them her leave, through them laſt paſſage make.
                        
                        The other two are noble and rich; where examples of vertue are rarely lodged. Arria wife vnto Cecinna Paetus, a man that had beene conſul was mother of another Arria, wife to Thraſea Paetus; whoſe vertue was ſo highly renowmed during the time of Nero; and by meane of his ſonne-in-lawe, grandmother to Fannia: For, the reſemblance of theſe mens and womens names and fortunes hath made diverſe to miſtake them. This firſt Arria, her husband Cecinna Paetus, having beene taken priſoner by the Souldiers of Claudius the Emperour, after the overthrow of Scribonianus, whoſe faction hee had followed, entreated thoſe who led him priſoner to Rome▪
                            to take her into their ſhip, where for the ſervice of her husband ſhee ſhould be of the leſſe charge and incommoditie to them, then a number of other perſons, which they muſt neceſſarily have, and that ſhe alone might ſupply and ſteade him in his chamber, in his kitchin and all other offices; which they vtterly refuſed, and ſo hoiſed ſailes, but ſhee

leaping into a Fiſhers boate, that ſhe immediately hired, followed him aloofe from the further ſhoare of Sclavonia. Being come to Rome, one day, in the Emperours preſence, Iunia the widdow of Scribonianus, by reaſon of the neereneſſe and ſocietie of their fortunes, familiarly accoſted her, but ſhe rudely, with theſe wordes, thruſt her away. What (quoth ſhee) ſhall I ſpeake to thee, or ſhall I liſten what thou ſaieſt: Thou, in whoſe lappe Scribonianus thy husband was ſlaine, and thou yet liveſt? and thou breatheſt? Theſe words with divers other ſignes, made her kinsfolkes and friendes perceive, that ſhee purpoſed to make herſelfe away, as impatient to a abide her husbands fortune. And Thraſea her ſonne in law, taking hold of her ſpeeches, beſeeching her that ſhe wold not ſo vnheedily ſpoile her ſelfe, he thus beſpake her. What? If I were in Cecinnaes Fortune or the like, would you have my wife your daughter to doe ſo? What elſe? make you a queſtion of it? (anſwered ſhe) Yes mary would I, had ſhe lived ſo long and in ſo good-agreeing ſort with thee, as I have done with my husband. Theſe and ſuch-like anſweres, encreaſed the care they had of her; and made them more heedfully to watch, and neerely to looke vnto her. One day, after ſhe had vttered theſe wordes to her keepers; you may looke long enough to mee, well may you make mee die worſe but you ſhall never be able to keepe me from dying: and therewith furiouſly flinging her ſelfe out of a chaire (wherein ſhee fate) with all the ſtrength ſhee had, ſhe fiercely ranne her head againſt the next wall; with which blowe having ſore hurt her ſelfe, and falling into a dead ſwowne, after they had with much adoe brought her to her ſelfe againe: Did I not tell you (quoth ſhe) that if you kept me from an eaſie death, I would chooſe another, how hard and difficult ſoever? The end of ſo admirable a vertue was this. Her husband Paetus wanting the courage to doe himſelfe to death, vnto which the Emperors crueltie reſerved him; one day, having firſt employed diſcourſes and exhortations, befitting the counſell ſhe gave him to make himſelfe away, ſhee tooke a Dagger that her husband wore, and holding it outright in her hand, for the period of her exhortation: Doe thus Paetus ſaid ſhee) and at that inſtant, ſtabbing herſelfe mortally to the heart, and preſently pulling the Dagger out againe, ſhee reached the ſame vnto her husband, and ſo yeelded vp the ghoſt, vttering this noble, generous and immortall ſpeech▪ 
                           Paete non dolet, ſhee had not the leaſure to pronounce other than theſe three wordes, in ſubſtance materiall and worthy her ſelfe, Holde Paetus, it hath done me no hurt.
                        
                        
                           Caſta ſuo gladium cùm traderet Arria Paeto.Ma
                                    •
                                 t. li. 1. epig. 14. 1.
                           
                           Quem de viſceribus traxerat ipſa ſuis:
                           Si qua fides, vulnus quod feci, non dolet, inquit.
                           Sed quod tu facies, id mihi Paete dolet.
                           Chaſt Arria when ſhe gave her Paetus that ſharpe ſword,
                           Which from her bowells ſhe had drawne forth bleeding new
                           The wound I gave and have, if you will truſt my word,
                           Griev's not, ſaid ſhe, but that which mill be made by you.
                        
                        It is much more lively in his owne naturall, and of a richer Senſe; for both her husbands wound and death, and her owne hurts, ſhee was ſo farre from grieving to have beene the counſelor and motive of them, that ſhee rejoiced to have performed ſo haughtie and couragious an act, onely for the behoofe of her deere husband, and at the laſt gaſpe of her life, ſhe onely regarded him; and to remove all feare from him, to follow her in death, which Paetus beholding, he immediatly wounded himſelfe with the ſame dagger, aſhamed (as I ſuppoſe) to have had need of ſo deare an inſtruction, and precious a teaching. Pompea Paulina, an high and noble-borne yong Roman Lady, had wedded Seneca, being very aged. Nero (his faire diſciple) having ſent his Satellites or officers toward him, to denounce the decree of his death to him: which in thoſe dayes was done after this maner. When the Roman Emperors had condemned any man of qualitie to death, they were wont to ſend their officers vnto him, to chuſe what death he pleaſed, and to take it within ſuch and ſuch a time, which according to the temper of their choller, they preſcribed vnto him, ſometimes ſhorter, and ſometimes longer, giving him that time to diſpoſe of his affaires, which alſo by reaſon of ſome ſhort warning they divers times tooke from him: And if the condemned partie ſeemed in any ſort to ſtrive againſt their will, they would often ſend men of purpoſe to execute him, either cutting the v
                              •
                           i
                              •
                           s of his armes and legs, or compelling him to take and ſwallow poiſon. But men of honor ſtayed not that enforcement, but to that effect vſed their own Phiſitions or

Surgeons. Seneca, with a repoſed and vndanted countenance liſtned attentively to their charge, and preſently demaunded for paper and inke to make his laſt will and teſtament, which the Captaine refuſing him, hee turned toward his friends, and thus beſpake them. S
                              ••
                           h (my loving friends) I cannot bequeath you any other thing in remembrance or acknowledgement of what I owe you, I leave you at leaſt the richeſt and beſt portion I have, that is the image of my maners and my life, which I beſeech you to keepe in memory; which doing, you may acquire the glory and purchaſe the name of truly ſincere and abſolutely-true friends And therewithall ſom
                              ••
                           mes appeaſing the ſharpnes of the ſorow he ſaw them endure for his ſake, with mild and gentle ſpeaches, ſometimes raiſing his voyce to chide th
                              •
                           m; Where are (ſaid he) thoſe memorable precepts of Philoſophy? What is becom of thoſe proviſions, which for ſo many yeares together we have laid vp, againſt the brunts and accidents of Fortune? Was Nero
                                 •
                              s innated cru
                              •
                           ly vnknowen vnto vs? What might we expect or hope-for at his hands who hath murdered his Mother and maſſacred his Brother, but that he would alſo do his Tutor and Governor to death that hath foſtred and brought him vp? Having vttered theſe words to all the by-ſtanders, he turned him to his wife, as ſhe was ready to ſinke downe, and with the burthen of hir griefe to faint in heart and▪ ſtrength; hee coll
                              •
                           d and e
                              •
                           braced her abou
                              •
                            the necke, and heartily entreated hir, for the love of him, ſomwhat more patiently to beare this accident; and that his houre was come, wherein he muſt ſh
                              •
                           w no longer by diſcourſe and diſputation, but in earneſt effect, declare the fruite he had reaped by his ſtudie; and that vndoubtedly he embraced death, not onely without griefe, but with exceeding joy? Wherefore my deere-deere heart, doe not diſhonour it by thy teares, l
                              •
                           ſt thou ſeeme to love thy ſelfe more than my reputation. Aſſwage thy ſorrowes, and comfort thy ſelfe in the knowledge thou haſt had of mee and of my actions; leading the reſt of thy life by the honeſt occupations to which thou art addicted. To whom Paulina, having ſomwhat rouzed hir drooping ſpirites, and by▪ a thrice-noble affection awakened the magnanimitie of her high-ſetled courage, anſwered thus: No Seneca, thinke not that in this neceſſitie I will leave you with out my companie.
                        I would not have you imagin that the vertuous examples of your life have not alſo taught me to die: And when ſhall I be able to doe it or better, or more honeſtly, or more to mine owne liking, then with your ſelfe? And be reſolved I will goe with you, and be partaker of your fortune. Seneca taking ſo generous a reſolve, and glorious a determination of his wife in good part▪ and to free himſelfe from the feare he had to leave her after his dea
                              •
                           h, to his enemies mercie and crueltie: Oh my deare Paulina,! I had (quoth hee) perſwaded thee what I thought was convenient, to leade thy life more happily, and dooſt thou then rather chooſ
                              •
                            the honour of a glorious death? Aſſuredly I will not envy thee: Be the conſtancie and reſolution anſwerable to our common end; but be the beautie and glory greater on thy ſide. That ſaid, the vei
                              •
                           es of both their a
                              •
                           mes were cut, to the end they might bleede to death; but becauſe Senecaes were ſomwhat ſhrunken vp through age and abſtinence, and his bloud could have no ſpeedy courſe, he commaunded the veines of his thighes to be launced: And fearing leſt the torments he felt, might in ſome ſort entender his wifes heart; as alſo to deliver 
                              •
                           imſelfe from the affliction, which greatly yearned him to ſee her in ſo pitteous plight: after he had moſt lovingly taken leave of her, he be
                              •
                           ought her to be pleaſed ſhee might be caried into the next chamber, which was accordingly performed. But all thoſe inciſions being vnable to make him die, he willed Statius Annous his Phiſition to give him ſome poyſoned potion, which wrought but ſmall effect in him, for through the weakneſſe and coldeneſſe of his members, it could not come vnto his heart. And therefore they cauſed a warme bath to be prepared, wherein they layde him▪ then perceiving his end to approch, ſo long as he had breath, hee continued his excellent diſcourſes, concerning the ſubject of the eſtate, wherein he found himſelfe, which his Secretaries, ſo long as they could heare his voyce, collected very diligently, whoſe laſt words continued long time after in high eſteeme and honor amongſt the better ſort of men, as Oracles; but they were afterward loſt, and great pittie it is they never came vnto our handes. But when he once beganne to feele the laſt pangs of death, taking ſome of the water, wherein he lay bathing, all bloody, he therewith waſhed his head, ſaying, I vow this water vnto Iupiter the▪ Deliver
                              •
                           r. Nero being advertiſed of all this, fearing leſt P
                                 •
                              ulinaes death (who was one of the beſt alied Ladies in Rome, and to whome hee bare no particular grudge) might cauſe him ſome reproach, ſent in all poſte

haſte to have her inciſions cloſed vp againe, and if poſſibly it could be, to ſave her life; which hir ſervants by vnwriting vnto her, performed, ſhe being more than halfe dead and voyde of any ſence. And that afterward, contrary to her intent, ſhee lived, it was very honourable, and as be
                              •
                           itted her vertue, ſhewing by the pale 
                              •
                           ew and wanne colour of her face, how much of her life ſhee had waſted by her inciſions. Loe heere my three true Stories, which in my concei
                              •
                           e are as pleaſant and as tragicall, as any wee deviſe at our pleaſures, to pleaſe the vulga
                              •
                            ſort with al: and I wonder, that thoſe who invent ſo many fabulous tales, do not rather make choiſe of infinite excellent, and quaint Stories, that are found in Books, wherein they ſhould have leſſe trouble to write them, and might doubtleſſe proove more pleaſing to the hearer, and profitable to the Reader. And whoſoever would vndertake to frame a compleate and well-joynted bodie of them, neede neither employe nor adde any thing of his owne vnto it except the 
                              •
                           igaments, as the 
                              •
                           oldring of another mettall, and by this meanes might compact ſundry events of all kindes, diſpoſing and diverſifying them, according as the beauty and luſtre of the worke ſhould require: And very neere, as Ovid hath ſowen and contrived his Me
                              •
                           amorphoſis, with that ſtrange number of divers fables. In the laſt couple, this is alſo worthy conſideration, that Paulina offreth willingly to leave her life for hir husbands ſake, & that hir husband had alſo other times quit death for the love of hir. There is no great counterpoyze in this exchange for vs: but according to his Sto
                              •
                           ke humour, I ſuppoſe hee perſwaded himſelfe to have done as much for hir prolo
                              •
                           ging his life for hir availe, as if hee had died for hir. In one of his letters, he writeth to Lucilius, after he hath given him to vnderſtand how an ague having ſurpriſed him in Rome▪
                            contrary to his wives opinion, who would needs have ſtayed him, hee ſodainely tooke his Coach, to goe vnto a houſe of his into the Country; and how he tolde hir that the ague he had, was no bodily fever, but of the place: and followeth thus: At laſt ſhee let me goe, earneſtly recommending my health vntome. Now I who knowe, how her life lodgeth in mine, beginne to provide for my ſelfe, that conſequently I may provide for her: The priviledge my age hath beſtowed on me, in making me more conſtant, and more reſolute in many things, I looſe it; when-ever I call to minde, that in this aged corps there harboureth a yoong woman, to whome I bring ſome profite. Since I cannot induce her to love me more couragiouſly, ſhee induceth me to love my ſelfe more carefully; for ſomething muſt be l
                                 •
                              nt to honeſt affections, and ſometimes, although occaſions vrge vs to the contrary, life must be revoked againe, yea with torment. The ſoule muſt bee held faſt with ones teeth, ſince the lawe to live in honeſt men, is not to live as long as they pleaſe, but ſo long as they ought. He who eſteemeth not 
                                 •
                              is wife or a friend ſo much, 
                                 ••
                               that he will not lengthen his life for th
                                 •
                              m, and will ob
                                 ••
                              inately die, that man is over-nice, and too 
                                 •
                              ff
                                 •
                              minate: The Soule muſt commaund that vnto her ſelfe, when the vtilitie of our friends requireth it: we muſt ſometimes lend our ſelves vnto our friends, and when we woulde die for vs, we ought for their ſak
                                 •
                              s to interrupt our deſeigne. It is a teſtimony of high courage to returne to life for t
                                 •
                              e reſpect of other
                                 •
                               as diverſe notable men have done: and to preſerve age is a parte of ſingular integritie (the chiefest commoditie whereof, is the careleſneſſe of her continuance, and a more couragi
                                 •
                              us and diſdaine
                                 •
                              ull vſe of life) if a man perceive ſuch an office to bee pleaſing, acceptable and profitable to any well-affected friend. And who dooth it, receiveth thereby a gratefull m
                                 ••
                              de and pleaſing rec
                                 •
                              mpence: for what can bee ſweeter, than to be ſo deare vnto his wife, that in reſpect of her a man become more deere vnto himſelfe; So my Paulina, hath not onely charged me with her feare, but alſo with mine. It hath not beene ſufficient for mee to conſ
                                 •
                              der, how reſolutely I might dye, but I have alſo conſidered how irreſolutely ſhee might endure it. I have enforced my ſelfe to live: And to live is ſomtimes magnanimitie: Reade heere his owne wordes, as excellent as is his vſage.
                     
                     
                        The ſixe and thirtieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of the worthieſt and moſt excellent men.
                        
                        IF a man ſhould demaund of mee, which of all men that ever came to my knowledge, I would make choiſe-of, me ſeemeth, I finde three, who have beene excellent above all others. The one is, Homer, not that Ariſtotle or Varro, (for example ſake) were not peradventure

as wiſe and as ſufficient as he: Nor that 
                              Ʋirgil, (and poſſibly in his owne arte) be not comparable vnto him. I leave that to their judgements that know them both. I who know but one of them, according to my skill may onely ſay this, that I cannot be perſwaded, the Muſes themſelves did ever goe beyond the Roman.
                        
                           Tal
                                 •
                               facit carmen docta t
                                 •
                              studine, qualePropert. li. 2. 
                                    •
                                 l: 34. 79.
                           
                           —Cynthius impoſitis temperat articulis.
                           
                           He on his learned Lu
                                 •
                              e ſuch verſe doth play,
                           As Phoebus ſhould thereto his fingers lay.
                        
                        In which judgement, this muſt notwithſtanding not be forgotten, that 
                              Ʋirgil doth eſpecially derive his ſufficiencie from Homer, and hee is his guide and School
                              •
                           maſter; and that but one only glance or ſentence of the Iliads, hath given both bodie and matter to that great and divine Poem of the Aeneid. My meaning is not to accoump
                              •
                            ſo: I entermix divers other circumſtances, which yeeld this man moſt admirable vnto me, and as it were beyond humane condition. And truely I am often amazed, that he who hath produced, and by his authoritie brought ſo manie Deitie
                              •
                            in credit with the World, hath not obtained to be reputed a God himſelfe. Being blind and indigent; having lived before ever the Sciences were redacted into ſtrict rules and certaine obſervations, hee had ſo perfect knowledge of them, that all thoſe which ſince his time have labored to eſtabliſh Pollicies or Common-wealths, to manage warres, and 
                              •
                           o write either of Religion or Philoſophie, in what Sect ſoever or of all A
                              •
                           tes, have made vſe of him, as of an abſolutely-perfect Maſter in the knowledge of all things; and of his Bookes, as of a Seminarie, a Spring-garden or Store-houſe of all kinds of ſufficiency and learning.
                        
                           Qui quid ſit purchrum▪ quid turpe, quid v
                                 •
                              ile, quid non,
                                 
                                    •
                                 or. li. epiſt. 23
                           
                           Pl
                                 •
                              ntus ac melius Chryſippo ac Crantore dicit.
                           What is faire, What is foule, What p
                                 •
                              ofit may, What no
                                 •
                              ,
                           Better than Crantor or Chryſippus, Homer wrot.
                        
                        And as another ſaith:
                        
                           —à quo ceu fonte perrenni
                              Ovid. Am. li 3. 
                                    •
                                 l. 8. 25.
                           
                           Vatum Pierijs labra rigantur aquis.
                           By whom, as by an ever-flowing-filling ſpring,
                           With Muſes liquor Poets lippes are bath'de to ſing.
                        
                        And another:
                        
                           Adde Heliconiadum comites, quorum vnus HomerusLucr. l▪ 3. 1081.
                           
                           Astrapotitus.
                           Muſes companions adde to theſe, of all
                           One onely Homer hath in heav'n his ſtall.
                        
                        And another:
                        
                           —cuiuſque ex ore profuſo
                              Ma
                                    •
                                 il 
                                    •
                                 st. l. 2. 8.
                           
                           Omnis posterit as latices in carmina duxit,
                           Amnémque in tenu
                                 •
                              s, a
                                 •
                              ſa eſt deducere rivos:
                           Vnius foecunda bonis.
                           From whoſe large mouth for verſe all that ſince live
                           Drew water, and grew bolder to derive,
                           Into thinne ſhallow rivers his deepe floods:
                           Richly luxuriant in one mans goods.
                        
                        It is againſt natures courſe▪ that he hath made the moſt excellent production, that may be; for, the ordinarie birth of things is imperfect: They are augmented by encreaſe, and corroborated by growth. He hath reduced the infancie of Poeſie, and divers other Sciences to be ripe perfect and compleate. By which reaſon he may be termed the firſt and laſt of Poets, following the noble teſtimony, antiquitie hath left vs of him, that having had no man before him, whom hee might imitate, ſo hath hee had none after him, could imitate him▪ His wordes (according to Aristotle) are the onely words that have motion and action: they are the onely ſubſtantiall Wordes. Alexander the Great, having lighted vpon a rich casket amongeſt D
                                 •
                              rius his ſpoyles, appoynted the ſame to be ſafely kep
                              •
                            for himſelfe, to keepe his Homer in: ſaying, he was the beſt adviſer, and faithfulleſt counſelor he had in his military affaires. By the ſame reaſon ſaid C
                                 •
                              eom
                                 •
                              nes, ſonne to Anaxandridas, that hee was the Lacedemonians

Poet; for he was an excellent good teacher or Maſter of Warre like diſcipline. This ſingular praiſe and particular commendation hath alſo beene given him by Plutarke, where he ſaith, that he is the only Author in the world, who yet never diſtaſted Reader, or glutted man; ever ſhewing himſelfe other, and different to the Readers; and ever flouriſhing with a new grace. That Wagge Alcibiades, demanding one of Homers bookes of one who proſeſſed letters, becauſe he had it not, gave him a whirrit one the care; as if a man ſhould finde one of our Prieſts, without a Breviarie. Xenophanes one day made his moane to Hieron the Tyrant of Siracuſa, that he was ſo poore as hee had not wherewithall to finde two ſervants: How commeth that to paſſe? (anſwered Hieron) Homer, who was much poorer than thou art, dead as he is, findeth more then tenne thouſand. What left Panaetius vnſaide, when he named Plato the Homer of Philoſophers? Beſides what glory may be compared to his? There is nothing, liveth ſo in mens mouthes as his name and his workes; nothing ſo knowne and received as Troy, as Helen and her Warres, which paradventure never were. Our Children are yet called by the names hee invented three thouſand yeeres ſince and more. Who knoweth not Hector? Who hath not heard of Achilles? Not onely ſome particular races, but moſt nations ſeeke to derive themſelves from his inventions. Mach
                                 •
                              m
                                 •
                              t, aſecond of that name, Emperour of Turkes, writing to Pope Pius the ſecond: I wonder (ſaith he) how the Italians will bandie againſt me, ſeeing we have our common off-ſpring, from the Troians; and I as well as they have an intereſt to revenge the blood of Hector vpon the Graecians, whom they favour againſt mee. Is it not a woorthy Comedie, whereof Kings, Common-wealths, Principalities and Emperours, have for many ages together played their parts, and to which this great Vniverſe ſerveth as a Theatre: ſeven cities of Greece ſtrived amongſt themſelves about the places of his birth. So much honour his very obſcuritie procured him.
                        
                           Smyrna, Rhodos, Colophon, Salamis, Chios, Argos, Athenae,A. Gel. 
                                    ••
                                 ct. Att. 13 c. II.
                           
                           Rhodes, Salamis, Colophon, Chios, Argos, Smyrna, with Athens,
                           
                        
                        The other is Alexander the great. For, who ſhall conſider his age, wherein hee beganne his enterpriſes; the ſmall meanes he had to ground ſo glorious a deſſeigne vpon the authoritie he attained unto in his infancie, amongſt the greateſt Commaunders, and moſt experienced Captaines in the world, by whom he was followed: the extraordinarie favour, wherwith fortune embraced him, and ſeconded ſo many of his haughtie-dangerous exploites, which I may in a manner call raſh or fond-hardie.
                        
                           Impellens quicquid ſibi ſummapetentiLucan. l. 1. 148.
                           
                           Obſtaret, gaudenſ
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               viam feciſſe ruina.
                           While he ſhot at the high'ſt, all that might ſtay
                           He for'ſt, and joy de with ruine to make way.
                        
                        That eminent greatneſſe, to have at the age of thirtie yeares paſſed victorious through all the habitable earth, and but with halfe the life of a man to have attained the vtmoſt endevour of humane nature; ſo that you cannot imagine his continuance lawfull, and the laſting of his increaſe in fortune, and progreſſe in vertue even vnto a juſt terme of age, but you muſt ſuppoſe ſomething above man, to have cauſed ſo many Royal branches to 
                              •
                           ſſue from out the loines of his Souldiers, leaving the world after his death to be ſhared betweene foure ſucceſ
                           
                              •
                           ours, onely Captaines of his Armie, whoſe ſucceeders, have ſo long time ſince continued, and deſcendents maintained that large poſſeſſion. So infinite, rare and excellent vertues that were in him, as juſtice, temperance, liberalitie, integritie in words, love toward his, and humanitie toward the conquered. For in truth, his maners ſeeme to admit no juſt cauſe of reproach: indeed ſome of his particular, rare and extraordinary actions, may in ſome fort be taxed. For it is impoſſible to conduct ſo great, and direct ſo violent motions with the ſtrict rules of juſtice. Such men ought to be judged in groſe, by the miſtris end of their actions. The ruine of Thebes; the murther of Menander, and of Epheſtions Phiſitian; the maſlacre of ſo many Perſian priſoners at once: of a troupe of Indian Souldiers, not without ſome prejudice vnto his word and promiſe: and of the Coſſeyans and their little children, are eſcapes ſomewhat hard to be excuſed. For, concerning Clitus, the fault was expiated beyond it's merite; and that action, as much as any other, witneſſeth the integritie and cheerefulnes of his complexion, and that it was a complexion in it ſelfe excellently formed to goodneſſe; And it was wittily ſaide of one, that he had vertues by nature, and vices by accident. Concerning

the point, that he was ſomewhat to laviſh a boaſter, and over-impatient to heare himſelfe ill-ſpoken-of; and touching thoſe mangers, armes, and bits, which He cauſed to be ſcattered in India, reſpecting his age and the proſperitie of his fortune, they are in my conceit pardonable in him. He that ſhall alſo conſider his many military vertues, as diligence, foreſight patience; diſcipline, policie, magnanimitie, reſolution and good fortune; wherein, though Ha
                                 ••
                              balls authority had not taught it vs, he hath been the firſt and chief of men: the rare beauties, matchleſſe features, and incomparable conditions of his perſon, beyond all compariſon, and wonder-breeding; his carriage; demeanor, and venerable behaviour, in a face ſo yoong, ſo verm
                              •
                           ill, and heart-enflaming:
                        
                           Qualis vbi Occani perfuſus Lucifer vnda,Virg Aen. l. 8. 589.
                           
                           Quen
                                 •
                               Venus ante alios aſtrorum diligit ignes.
                           Extulit os ſacrum caelo, tenebrá ſquere ſolvit,
                           As when the day ſtarre waſht in Ocean-ſtreames,
                           Which Venus moſt of all the ſtarres eſteemes,
                           Shewes ſacred ligh, tſhakes darkeneſſe-off with beames.
                        
                        The excellencie of his wit, knowledge and capacitie; the continuance and greatneſſe of his glorie, vnſpotted, vntainted, pure and free from all blame or envie: inſomuch as long aftet his death, it was religiouſly beleived of many, that the medalls or brooches repreſenting his perſon brought good lucke vnto ſuch as wore or had them about them. And that more Kings and Princes have written his geſtes and actions, then any other hiſtorians, of what qualitie ſoever, have regiſtred the geſts, or collected the actions of any other King or Prince that ever was: And that even at this day, the Mahometiſts, who contemne all other hiſtories, by ſpeciall priviledge, allow, receive, and onely honour his. All which premiſes duely conſidered together, hee ſhall confeſſe, I have had good reaſon to preferre him before Caeſar himſelfe who alone might have made me doubt of my choiſe. And it muſt needes bee granted, that in his exploites there was more of his owne; but more of fortunes in Alexanders atchievements. They have both had many things mutually alike, and Caeſar happily ſome greater. They were two quicke and devouring fires, or two ſwift and ſurrounding ſtreames, able to ravage the world by ſundrie wayes.
                        
                           Et velut immiſſi diverſis partibus ignesLib. 12 521.
                           
                           Arentem in ſilvam, & virgulta ſonantia lauro:
                           Aut vbi decurſu rapido de montibus altis
                           Dant ſonitum ſpumoſi amnes, & in aequora currunt,
                           Quiſque ſuum populatus iter.
                           As when on divers ſides fire is applied
                           To crackling bay-ſhrubs, or to woods Sunne dried,
                           Or as when foaming ſtreames from mountaines hie,
                           With downe-fall ſwift reſound, and to ſea flie;
                           Each-one doth havoc
                                 •
                              e-out his way thereby.
                        
                        But grant Caeſars ambition were more moderate, it is ſo vnhappy, in that it met with this vile ſubject of the ſubverſion of his countrie, and vniverſall empairing of the world; that all parts imparcially collected and put together in the balance, I muſt neceſſarily bend to Alexanders ſide. The third, and in my judgement, moſt excellent man, is Epaminondas. Of glorie he hath not ſo much as ſome, and is farre ſhort of diverſe (which well conſidered is no ſubſtantiall part of the thing) of reſolution and true valour, not of that which is ſet-on by ambition, but of that, which wiſedome and reaſon may ſettle in a well diſpoſed minde, hee had as much as may be imagined or wiſhed for. Hee hath in mine opinion, made as great triall of his vertues, as ever did Alexander or Caeſar: for although his exploites of warre bee not ſo frequent, and ſo high-raiſed, yet being throughly conſidered, they are as weightie, as reſolute, as conſtant, yea and as authenticall a teſtimonie of hardines and militarie ſufficiencie, as any mans elſe. The Graecians, without any contradiction affoorded him the honour, to entitle him the chiefe and firſt man among themſelves: and to be the firſt and chiefe man of Greece is without all queſtion to bee chiefe and firſt man of the world. Touching his knowledge and worth, this ancient judgement doth yet remaine amongſt vs, that never was man who know ſo much, nor never man that ſpake leſſe then he. For he was by Sect a Pythagorian; and what he ſpake, no man ever ſpake better: An excellent and moſt perſwaſive Orator was hee.

And concerning his manners and conſcience therein hee farre outwent all that ever medled with managing affaires: For in this one part, which ought eſpecially to bee noted, and which alone declareth what we are, and which onely I counter poiſe to all others together, he giveth place to no Philoſopher; no not to Socrates himſelfe. In whom innocencie is a qualitie, proper, chiefe, conſtant, vniforme and incorruptible. In compariſon of which, it ſeemeth in Alexander ſubalternall, vncertaine, variable, effeminate and accidentall. Antiquine judged that preciſely to ſift out, and curiouſly to prie into all other famous Captaines, there is in every one ſeverally ſome ſpeciall qualitie, which makes him renowmed and famous. In this man alone, it is a vertue and ſufficiencie, every where compleate and alike; which in all offices of humane life, leaveth nothing more to bee wiſhed-for. Bee it in publike or private; in peaceable negotiations or warlike occupations; be it to live or die, greatly or gloriouſly, I know no forme or fortune of man, that I admire or regard, with ſo much honour, with ſo much love. True it is, I finde this obſtinacie in povertie, ſomewhat ſcrupulous; and ſo have his beſt friends pourtrayed-it. And this onely action (high notwithſtanding and very worthy admiration) I finde or deeme ſomewhat ſharpe; ſo as I would nor wiſh, nor deſire the imitation thereof in me, according to the forme it was in him. Scipio Aemilianus alone (would any charge him with as fierce, and noblie-minded an end, and with as deepe and vniverſall knowledge of Sciences) might be placed in the other ſcale of the ballance againſt him. Oh what a diſpleaſure hath ſwift-gliding Time done me, even in the nicke, to deprive our eyes, of the chiefeſt paire of lives, directly the nobleſt that ever were in Plutarke, of theſe two truelyworthy perſonages: by the vniverſall conſent of the world, the one chiefe of Graecians, the other principall of Romanes. What a matter, what a workeman! For a man that was noe Saint, but as we ſay, a gallant-honeſt man, of civill maners and common cuſtomes; of a temperate haughtineſſe; the richeſt liſe I know (as the vulgar ſaying is) to have lived amongſt the living, and fraughted with the richeſt qualities, and moſt to bee deſired parts (all things imparcially conſidered) in my humour, is that of Alcibiades. But touching Epaminondas. for a patterne of exceſſive goodneſſe, I will here inſert certaine of his opinions, The ſweeteſt contentment he had in all his life, he witneſſeth to have beene, the pleaſure he gave his father and mother, of his victorie vpon Le
                                 •
                              ctra: he ſtaketh much, in preferring their pleaſure, before his content, ſo juſt and full of ſo glorious an action. Hee thought it vnlawfull, yea were it to recover the libertie of his countrey. for any one to kill a man, except hee knew ſome iuſt cauſe. And therefore was he ſo backeward in the enterpriſe of Pelopidas his companion, for the deliverance of Thebes. Hee was alſo of opinion, that in a battel a man ſhould avoide to encounter his friend, being on the contrary part; and if he met him, to ſpare him. And his humanity or gentlenes, even towards his very enemies, having made him to be ſuſpected of the 
                              ••
                           otians, for ſo much as after he had miraculouſly forced the Lacedemonians to open him a paſſage, which at the entrance of Mor
                                 ••
                              
                            neere Corinth, they had vndertaken to make-good, hee was contented, without fur ther purſuing them in furie, to have marched over their bellies; was the cauſe he was depoſed of his office of Captaine Generall. Moſt honourably for ſuch a cauſe; and for the ſhame it was to them, ſoone after to bee forced by neceſſitie to advance him to his firſt place: and to acknowledge how their glorie, and confeſſe that their ſafetie did onely depend on him: victory following him as his ſhadow, whither ſoever hee went: and as the proſperitie of his countrie was borne by and with him, ſo it died with and by him.
                     
                     
                        The ſeaven and thirtieth Chapter.
                        
                           Of the reſemblance betweene children and fathers.
                        
                        THis 
                              •
                           udling vp of ſo much traſh, or packing of ſo many ſeverall pieces, is done ſo ſtrangely, as I never lay hands on it, but when an over lazie idleneſſe vrgeth me; and no where, but in mine owne houſe. So hath it beene compact at ſundry pauſes, and contrived at ſeverall intervalls, as occaſions have ſometime for many months together, heere and

there in other places, detained me. Beſides, I never correct my firſt imaginations by the ſecond; it may happen, I now and then alter ſome word, rather to diverſifie, then take any thing away. My purpoſe is, to repreſent the Progreſſe of my humours, that every part be ſeene or member diſtinguiſhed, as it was produced. I would to God I had begunne ſooner, and knew the tracke of my changes, and courſe of my variations. A boy whom I employed to write for me, ſuppoſed, he had gotten a rich bootie, when he ſtole ſome parts, which he beſt liked. But one thing comforts me that he ſhall gaine no more, then I loſt by them. I am growne elder by ſeaven or eight yeares ſince I beganne them; nor hath it beene without ſome new purchaſe. I have by the liberalitie of yeares acquainted my ſelfe with the ſtone chollike. Their commerce and long converſation, is not eaſiely paſt-over witho
                              ••
                            ſome ſuch-like fruite. I would be glad, that of many other preſents, they have ever in ſtore, to beſtow vpon ſuch as waite vpon them long, they had made choiſe of ſome one, that had beene more acceptable vnto me: for they could never poſſeſſe me with any, that, even from my infancie, I hated more. Of all accidents incident to age, it was that I feared moſt. My ſelfe have many times thought, I went on too farre, and that to hold out ſo long a journey, I muſt of neceſſitie, in the end, ſtumble vpon ſome ſuch vnpleaſing chance. I perceived plainely, and proteſted ſufficiently, it was high time to depart, and that according to the 
                              •
                           ule of skillfull chirurgions, who when they muſt cut off ſome member, life muſt be ſeared to the quicke, and cut to the ſound fleſh. That nature is wont to make him pay vntollerable vſurie, who doth not yeeld or pay the ſame in due time. I was ſo farre from being readie to make lawfull tender of it, that in eighteene months, or thereabouts, I have continued in ſo yrkeſome and vnpleaſing plight, I have already learn't to apply my ſelfe vnto it; and am now entring into covenant with this chollicall kinde of life; for therein I finde matter, wherewith to comfort me, and to hope better. So much are men enured in their miſerable eſtate, that no condition is ſo poore, but they will accept; ſo they way continue in the ſame. Heare M
                                 •
                              cen
                                 ••
                              .
                        
                        
                           Debilem facito ma
                                 ••
                              ,Sen. epiſt. 101. f
                           
                           Debilem pede, coxa,
                           Lubricos quate dentes,
                           
                              Ʋita dum ſupereſt, bene eſt.
                           Make me be weake of hand,
                           Scarſe on my legges to ſtand,
                           Shake my looſe teeth with paine,
                           T'is well, ſo life remaine.
                        
                        And Tamburlane cloked the fantaſticall crueltie, he exerciſed vpon Lazars or Leprouſmen, with a fooliſh kinde of humanitie, putting all he coulde finde or heare-of, to death, (as he ſaide,) to ridde them from ſo painefull and miſerable a life, as they lived. For, there was none ſo wretched amongeſt them, that would not rather have beene three times a Leaper, than not to be at all. And Antisthenes the Stoick, being very ſicke, and crying out: Oh who ſhall deliver me from my tormenting evils? Diogenes, who was come to viſite him, foorth with preſenting him a knife; Mary, this, ſaid he, and that very ſpeedily, i
                              •
                            thou pleaſe: I meane not of my life, replyed hee, but of my ſickeneſſe. The ſufferances which ſimply touch vs in minde, doe much leſſe afflict me, then moſt men: Partly by judgement; For the Worlde deemeth diverſe things horrible, or avoydable with the loſſe of life, which to me are in maner indifferent: Partly, by a ſtupide and inſenſible complexion, I have in accidents, that hit me not point-blancke: Which complexion I eſteeme one of the better partes of my naturall condition. But the truely-eſſentiall and corporall ſufferances, thoſe I taſte very ſenſibly: Yet is it, having othertimes fore-apprehended them with a delicate and weake ſight and by the enjoying of this long health and happy reſt, which God hath lent me, the better part of my age, ſomewhat empaired: I had by imagination concciued them ſo intolerable, that in good truth, I was more afraide, than ſince I have found hurt in them: Wherevpon, I dayly augment this opinion: That moſt of our ſoules faculties (as we employ them) doe more trouble than ſteade the quiet repoſe of life. I am continually grapling with the worſt of all diſeaſes, the moſt grievous, the moſt mortall, the moſt remedileſſe and the moſt violent. I have already had triall of five or ſixe long and painefull fittes of it: Nevertheleſſe, eyther I flatter my ſelfe, or in this plight there is yet ſomething, that would faine keep life and ſoule together, namely in him, whoſe minde is free from feare of death, and from the threats,

concluſions and conſequences, which phiſicke is ever buzzing into our heads. But the effect of paine it ſelfe, hath not ſo ſharpe a ſmarting, or ſo pricking a ſharpneſſe, that a ſetled man ſhould enter into rage or fall into deſpaire. This commoditie at leaſte, I have by the chollicke, that what I could never bring to paſſe in my ſelfe, which was, altogether to reconcile, and throwly to acquaint my ſelfe with death, ſhee ſhall atchieve, ſhee ſhall accompliſh: for, by how much more ſhee ſhall importune and vrge me, by ſo much leſſe ſhall death bee fearefull vnto mee, I had already gotten, not to bee beholding to life, but onely in regrad of life, and for lives ſake: She ſhall alſo vntie this intelligence, and looſe this combination. And God graunt, if in the end her ſharpeneſſe ſhall happen to ſurmount my ſtrength, ſhee caſt 
                              ••
                           ce not into the other extreamitie, no leſſe vicious, no leſſe bad, that is, to love and deſire to die
                        
                           Summum nec metuas diem, nec optes.Mart. l. 10. 
                                    •
                                 
                                 pig. 47. v
                                    •
                                 t.
                           
                           Nor feare thy lateſt doome,
                           Nor wiſh it ere it come.
                        
                        They are two paſſions to be feared, but one hath her remedy neerer than the other. Otherwiſe, I have ever found that precept ceremonious, which ſo precizely appoints a man to ſet a good countenance, a ſetled reſolution, and diſdainefull carriage, vpon the ſufferance of evills. Why doth Philoſophy, which onely reſpecteth livelineſſe and regardeth effects, ammuze it ſelfe about theſe externall apparances? Let her leave this care to Mimikes, to Hiſtrions, and to Rhethoricke Maſters, who make ſo great accoumpt of our geſtures. Let her hardly remit this vocall litherneſſe vnto evill, if it be neyther cordiall, nor ſtomacall▪ And let her lend her voluntary plants to the kinde of ſighes, ſobbes, palpatations and paleneſſe, which nature hath exempted from our puiſſance, Alwayes provided, the courage be without feare, and wordes ſance diſpaire; let her be ſo contented. What matter is it if wee bend our armes, ſo wee writhe not our thoughts? She frameth vs for our ſelves, not for others: to be, not to ſeeme. Let her applie her ſelfe to governe our vnderſtanding, which ſhee hath vndertaken to inſtruct. Let her in the pangs or fittes of the chollike, ſtill maintaine the ſoule capable to acknowledge hir ſelfe and follow her accuſtomed courſe, reſiſting ſorrow and enduring grie
                              •
                           e▪ and not ſhamefully to proſtrate her ſelfe at his feete: Mooved and chafed with the combate, not baſely ſuppreſſed nor faintly overthrowen: Capable of entertainement and other occupations, vnto a certaine limite. In ſo extreame accidents, it is crueltie, to require ſo compoſed a warde at our hands. If wee have a good game, it skills not, though wee have an ill countenaunce. If the body be any whit eaſed by complaining, let him doe it: If ſtirring or agitation pleaſe him, let him turne, rowle and toſſe himſelfe as long as hee liſt: If with raiſing his voyce, or ſending it forth with more violence, hee thinke his griefe any thing alayed or vented (as ſome Phiſitians affirme, it ſome what eaſeth women great with childe, and is a meane of ea
                              •
                           ie or ſpeedie delivery) feare hee not to doe it; or if hee may but entertaine his torment, let him mainely cry out. Let vs not commaund our voyce to depart, but if ſhe will, let vs not hinder it. Epicurus doth not only pardon his wiſe man to crie-out, when hee is grievedCi
                                 •
                              . T
                                 •
                              ſc. qu. l. 2 or vexed, but perſwadeth him to it. Pugiles etiam quum feriunt, in iactandis cestibus inge
                              
                                 •
                              iſcunt, quia profundenda voce omne corpus intenditur, venit que plaga vehementior. Men when they fight with ſand-baoges or ſuch heavy Weapons, in fetc
                                 •
                              ing their blowe and driving it, wil give a groane with all, becauſe by ſtretching their voyce all their body is alſo ſtrayned, and the ſtroke commeth with more vehemence. We are vexed and troubled enough with the euill, without troubling and vexing our ſelves with theſe ſuperfluous rules. This I ſay to excuſe thoſe, which are ordinarily ſeene to rage in the fittes and ſtorme in the aſſaults of this ſickeneſſe: for, as for mee, I have hitherto paſt it over with ſomwhat a better countenaunce, and am content to groane without braying and exclaiming. And yet I trouble not my ſelfe, to mainetaine this exterior decency; for, I make ſmall reckoning of ſuch an advantage; In that I lend my ſickneſſe what it requireth: But either my paine is not ſo exceſſive, or I beare it with more conſtancy than the vulgare ſorte. Indeede I muſt confeſſe, when the ſharpe fittes or throwes aſſaile me, I complaine, and vex my ſelfe, but yet I never fall into deſpaire, as that fellow:
                        
                           Eiulatu, queſtu, gemitu, fremitibusC
                                    ••
                                 . ibid.
                           
                           Reſanando multum flebiles v
                                 •
                              ces refert.
                           with howling, groaniug, and complaint of fates,
                           Moſt lamentable cries he imitates.
                        
                        
                           I feele my ſelfe in the greateſt heate of my ſickeneſſe; and I ever found my ſelfe capable and in tune, to ſpeake, to thinke and to anſwer, as ſoundly as at any other time, but not ſo conſtantly, becauſe my paine doeth much trouble and diſtract mee. When I am thought to bee at the loweſt, and that ſuch as are about me ſpare me, I often make a triall of my forces, and propoſe them ſuch diſcourſes as are furtheſt from my ſtate. There is nothing impoſſible for mee, and me thinkes I can doe all things vppon a ſodaine fitte, ſo it continue not long. Oh why have not I the gift of that dreamer; mentioned by Cicero, who dreaming, that hee was cloſely embracing a yong wench; found himſelfe ridde of the ſtone in his ſheets! Mine doe ſtrangely diſ-wench me. In the intermiſſion or reſpites of this outragious pairre, when as my Vreters (through which the vrine paſſeth from the reines to the bladder) languiſh without gnawing mee, I ſodainely returne into my ordinarie forme: forſomuch as my mind taketh no other allarume, but the ſenſible and corporall. All which I certeinely owe vnto the care I have had to prepare my ſelfe by reaſon and diſcourſe of ſuch accidents:
                        
                           —laborumVirg. Aen. l. 6. 103.
                           
                           Nulla mihi nova nuncfacies inopináque ſurgit,
                           Omnia praecept, at que animo mecum antè peregi.
                        
                        
                           No new or vnexpected forme is caſt
                           Of travels in my breſt: all I forecaſt,
                           In my minde with ſelfe I all forepaſt.
                        
                        I am handled ſomewhat roughly for a Prentiſe, and with a violent and rude change; being at one inſtant falne from a very pleaſing, calme, and moſt happy condition of life, vnto the moſt do
                              •
                           orous, yrkeſome and painefull, that can poſſibly be imaginad: For, beſides that in it ſelfe it is a diſeaſe greatly to be feared, it's beginnings or approaches are in mee ſharper or more difficult▪ than it is wont to trouble others withall. The pangs and fittes thereof doe ſo often aſſaile mee, that in a manner I have no more feeling of perfect health. Notwithſtanding I hitherto keepe my ſpirite ſo ſeated, as if I can but joyne conſtancy vnto it, I finde my ſelfe to be in a much better ſtate of life, than a thouſand others, who have neither ague nor other infirmitie, but ſuch as for want of diſcourſe they give themſelves. There is a certaine faſhion of ſubtile humilitie, which proceedeth of preſumption: As this: That in many things wee acknowledge our ignorance, and are ſo curteous to avowe, that in Natures workes, there are ſome qualities and conditions, which to vs are imperceptible, and whereof our ſufficiencie cannot diſcover the meanes, nor finde out the cauſes. By this honeſt and conſcientious declaration, wee hope to gaine, that wee ſhall alſo be beleeved in thoſe, we ſhall ſay to vnderſtand. Wee neede not goe to cull out myracles, and chuſe ſtrange difficulties: mee ſeemeth, that amongſt thoſe things wee ordinarily ſee, there are ſuch incomprehenſible rarities, as they exceede all difficulty of myracles. What monſter is it, that this teare or drop of ſeed, wherof we are ingendred brings with it; and in it the impreſſions, not only of the corporall forme, but even of the very thoughts and inclinations of our fathers? Where dooth this droppe of water containe or lodge this infinite number of formes? And how beare they theſe reſemblances, of ſo raſh, and vnruly a progreſſe, that the childes childe ſhall be anſwerable to his grandfather, and the nephew to his vnckle? In the family of Lepidus the Roman, there have beene three, not ſucceſſively, but ſome between, that were borne with one ſame eye covered with a cartilage or griſtle. There was a race in Thebes, which from their mothers wombe, bare the forme of a burre, or yron of a launce; and ſuch as had it not, were judged as miſ-begotten and deemed vnlawfull. Ariſtotle reporteth of a certaine Nation, with whome all women were common, where children were alloted their fathers, only by their reſemblances. It may bee ſuppoſed, that I am indebted to my father for this ſtonie qualitie; for he died exeeedingly tormented with a great ſtone in his bladder. He never felt himſelfe troubled with the diſeaſe, but at the age of ſixtie ſeaven yeares: before which time hee had never felt any likelihoode or motion of it, nor in his reines, nor in his ſides, nor elſewhere: and vntill then had lived in very proſperous health, and little ſubject to infirmities, and continued ſeven yeares and more with that diſeaſe training a very dolorous lives-end. I was borne five and twenty yeares before his ſickeneſſe, and during the courſe of his healthy ſtate his third child. Where was al this while the propenſion or inclination to this defect, hatched? And when he was ſo farre from ſuch a diſeaſe, that light part of his ſubſtance wherewith he compoſed me, how could it for hir part, beare ſo great an impreſſion of it? And how ſo

cloſely covered, that fortie five yeares after, I have begunne to have a feeling of it? And hitherto alone, among ſo many brethren and ſiſters, and all of one mother. He that ſhall reſolve me of this progreſſe, I will believe him as many other miracles as he ſhall pleaſe to tell mee: alwayes provided (as commonly they doe) hee goe not about to pay me, with a doctrine much more difficult and fantaſticall, then is the thing it ſelfe (let Phyſitians ſomewhat excuſe my libertie:) for by the ſame infuſion and fatall infinuation, I have received the hate and contempt of their doctrine. The Antipathie, which is betweene me and their arte, is to me hereditarie. My father lived three ſcore and foureteene yeares: My grandfather three ſcore and nine; my great grandfather very neere foure ſcore, and never faſted or tooke any kinde of Phyſicke. And whatſoever was not in ordinary vſe amongſt them, was deemed a drug. Phiſicke is grounded vpon experience and examples. So is mine opinion. Is not this a manifeſt kinde of experience and very advantageous? I know not whether in all their regiſters, they are able to finde me three more, borne, bred, brought vp, and diceaſed, vnder one roofe, in one ſame chimnie, that by their owne direction and regiment have lived ſo long. Wherein they muſt needes grant me, that if it be not reaſon, at leaſt it is Fortune that is on my ſide. Whereas among Phiſitions fortune is of more conſequence, then reaſon. Low-brought, and weake as I am now, let them not take me at an advantage, nor let them not threaten me: for that were inſulting a
                              •
                           rogance. And to ſay truth, I have by my familiar examples gained enough vpon them although they would take hold and ſtay there. Humane things have not ſo much conſtancie: It is now two hundred yeares; wanting but eighteene, that this Eſſay continueth with vs: For, the firſt was borne in the yeare of our Lord one thouſand foure hundred and two, Some reaſon there is why this experience ſhould now beginne to faile vs. Let them not vpbraide me with thoſe infirmities, which now have ſeazed vpon me: Is it not ſufficient to have lived ſeaven and fortie yeares in good and perfect health for my part? Suppoſe it be the end of my carriere, yet it is of the longeſt, Mine anceſtors by ſome ſe
                              •
                           ret inſtinct and naturall inclination have ever l
                              •
                           athed all maner of Phiſicke: for the very ſight of drugs bred a kinde of horror in my father. The Lord of Gaviac mine vnckle by the fathers ſide, a man of the church, ſickiſh even from his birth, and who notwithſtanding made his weake life to hold out vntill ſixtie ſeaven yeares; falling once into a dangerous and vehement continuall feaver, it was by the Phiſitions concluded, that vnleſſe he would aide himſelfe (for they often 
                              •
                           erme that aide, which indeede is impeachment) hee was but a dead man. The good ſoule, afrighted as he was, at that horrible ſentence, anſwered thus, why when I am a dead man: But ſhortly after God made their prognoſtications to proove vaine. The Lord of Buſſaguet laſt of the brethren (for they were foure) and by much the laſt, he alone ſubmitted himſelfe to that arte, as I imagine by reaſon of the frequence he had in other Sciences; for he was a Counſellor in the Court of Parliament, which proſpered ſo ill with him, that though he were in ſhew of a very ſtrong complexion, he died long before the others, except one, the Lord of Saint Michaell. It may well be, I have received of them that naturall dyſpathie vnto Phiſicke. Yet if there had beene no other conſideration but this, I would have endevoured to force it. For, all theſe conditions, which without reaſon are borne in vs, ate vicious. It is a kinde of maladie a man muſt fight withall. It may be I had ſuch a propenſion, but I have ſettled and ſtrongthned the ſame by diſcourſes, which in me have confirmed the opinion I have of it. For, I have alſo the conſideration to refuſe Phiſicke by reaſon of the ſharpeneſſe of it's taſte. It would not eaſily agree with my humour, who thinke health worthie to bee purchaſed, with the price of all cautheries and inciſions, how painefull ſo ever. And following Epicurus, mee ſeemeth that all maner of voluptuouſneſſe ſhould be avoided, if greater griefes follow them: And griefes to be ſought after, that have greater volup
                              •
                           uouſneſſe enſuing them. Health is a very precious jewell, and the onely thing, that in purſuite of it deſerveth, a man ſhould not onely employ, time, labour, ſweate and goods, but alſo life to get it; foraſmuch as without it, life becommeth injurious vnto vs. Voluptuouſnes, Science and vertue, without it tarniſh and vaniſh away. And to the moſt conſtant & exact diſcourſes, that Philoſophie wil imprint in our mindes to the contrarie, wee need not oppoſe any thing againſt it but the image of Plato, being viſited with the falling ſickeneſſe, or an Apoplexie; and in this preſuppoſition chalenge him to cal the richeſt faculties of his minde to helpe him.
                        All meanes that may bring vs vnto health, can not be eſteemed of mee either ſharpe or

deare. But I have ſome other apparances, which ſtrangely make me to diſtruſt all this ware. I doe not ſay but there may be ſome arte of it: It is certaine, that amongſt 
                              •
                           o many of Natures workes, there are ſome things proper for the preſervation of our health. I knowe there are ſome ſimples, which in operation are moiſtning and ſome drying: My ſelfe have found by experience that radiſh-rootes are windie, and ſenie-leaves breede looſeneſſe in the belly. I have the knowledge of diverſe ſuch experiments, as I knowe that Mutton nouriſheth that Wine warmeth me. And Solon was wont to ſay, that eating was as all other Drugges are, a medicine againſt the diſeaſe of hunger. I diſallow not the vſe we drawe 
                              •••
                           m the world, nor doubt I of Natures power and fruitefulneſſe, and of her application to our neede. I ſee, that the Pickrell▪fiſh, and the Swallowes live well by her lawes. I greatly diſtruſt the inventions of our wit, of our arte and of our Science: in favour of which we have forſaken Nature, and abandoned her rules; wherein we can neither obſerve limitation, nor keepe moderation. As wee terme 
                              •
                           uſtice, the compoſition of the firſt lawes that come vnto our hands, and their practiſe and diſpenſation very often moſt wicked and vnconvenient. And as thoſe which mocke and condemne it, intend nevertheleſſe to wrong this noble vertue; but onely to condemne the abuſe and profanation of ſo ſacred a title: So likewiſe in Phyſicke, I knowe her glorious name, her propoſition, and her promiſe, ſo profitable to mankinde: but what it deſſeigneth amongſt vs, I neither honour nor reſpect. 
                              〈◊〉
                           , experience makes mee feare it, for of all I knowe, I ſee no kinde of men ſo ſoone ſicke, nor ſo late cured, as thoſe who are vnder the uriſdiction of Phyſicke. Their very health is diſtempered and corrupted by the conſtraint of 
                              •
                           their preſcriptions. Phyſitions are not contented to have the government over Sickeneſſe, but they make Health to be ſicke, leſt a man ſhould at any time eſcape their authoritie. Of a conſtant and perfect health, doe they not frame an argument of ſome future daungerous ſickeneſſe? I have often beene ſicke, and without any their helpe, I have found my ſickeneſſes (though I never medled with the bitterneſſe of their preſcriptions) as eaſie to be tolerated, and as ſhort, as any mans elſe, and yet I have felt diverſe. My health is free and ſound, without any rules or diſcipline) except of my owne cuſtome and pleaſure. I finde noe difference in places, all are alike to me to dwell in: forbeing ſicke, I neede no other commodities, then thoſe I muſt have when I am in health. I am nothing paſſionated, though I be without Phyſition, without Apothecary, or without phyſicall helpe; whereat I ſee ſome as much troubled in minde, as they are with their diſeaſe, What? doth the beſt Phyſition of them all make vs perce
                                 •
                              ve any happineſſe or continuance in his life, as may w
                                 ••
                              neſſe ſome manifeſt effect of his skill and l
                                 ••
                              rning? There is no Nation, but hath continued many ages without phyſicke: yea the firſt ages, which is as much to ſay, the beſt and moſt happy: and the tenth part of the world hath as yet no vſe of it. Infini
                              •
                           e Nations knowe it not; where they live both more healthie and much longer then we doe: yea and amongſt vs, the common 
                              •
                           ort live happily without it. The Romanes had beene ſixe hundred yeares before ever they received it: by meanes or interpoſition of Cato the Cenſor, they baniſh
                              •
                            it their Cittie, who declared how eaſily man might live without it, having lived himſelfe foure ſcore and five yeeres, and his wife vntill ſhe was ex
                              •
                           reamely old, not without Phyſicke, but indeede without any Phyſition: For, whatſoev
                                 •
                              r is by experience found healthie for our body and health, may be termed phyſicke. He entertained (as Pi
                                 •
                              tarke ſaith) his familie in health, by the vſe (as farre as I remember) of Hares milke: As the Arcadians (ſaith Plinic) cure all malladies with Cowes milke. And the Lybians (ſaith Herodotus) doe generally enjoy a perfect health, by obſerving this cuſtome, which is, ſo ſoone as their children are about foure yeeres olde, to cauterize and ſeare the veines of their head and temples, whereby they cut-off the way to all rheumes and defluxions. And the countrie▪people where I dwell, vſe nothing againſt all diſeaſes, but ſome of the ſtrongeſt wine they can get, with ſtore of ſaffron and ſpice in it; and all with one like fortune. And to ſay true, of all this dive
                              •
                           ſiti
                              •
                            of rules, and confuſion of preſcriptions, what other end or effect workes it, but to evacuate the belly? which a thouſand home-ſimples will doe as well. And I knowe not whether it be as profitable (as they ſay) and whether our nature require the reſidents of her ex
                              •
                           rements, vntill a certaine meaſure, as wine doth his lees for his preſervation. You ſee often men very healthy, by ſome ſtrange accidents, to fall into violent vomi
                              •
                           es, and fluxes, and voyde great ſtore of excrements, without any praecedent neede, or ſucceeding benefite: yea with ſome empairing and prejudice. I learn't of Plato not long ſince, that of three motions, which belong to vs, the laſt and worſt, is that of purgations, and that

no man, except hee be a foole, ought to vndertake it; vnleſſe it be in great extreamitie. The evill is troubled and ſtirred vp by contrary oppoſitions. It is the forme of life, that gently muſt diminiſh, conſume and bring it to an end. Since the violent twinges of the drug and maladie are ever to our loſſe; ſince the quarrell is cleared in vs, and the drug a truſtleſſe helpe; by it's owne nature an enemie to our health, and but by trouble hath no acceſſe in our ſtate. Let's give them leave to go on. That order which provideth for Fleas and Moles, doth alſo provide for men, who have the ſame patience to ſuffer themſelves to be governed, that Fleas and Moles have. We may fairely cry bo-bo-boe; it may well make vs hoarſe, but it will nothing advaunce it. It is a prowd and impetuous order. Our feare and our deſpaire, in liew of enviting the ſame vnto it, doth diſtaſte and delay it out of our helpe: he oweth his courſe to evill, as well as to ſickeneſſe. To ſuffer himſelfe to be corrupted in favour of one, to the prejudice of the others rights, he will not doe it; ſo ſhould they fall into diſorder. Let vs goe on in the name of God; let vs follow; He leadeth-on ſuch as follow him: thoſe that follow him not he haleth-on, both with their rage and phiſicke together. Cauſe a purgation to be prepared for your braine; it will bee better employed vnto it, then to your ſtomacke. A Lacedemonian being asked, what had made him live ſo long in health, anſwered, The ignorance of phyſicke- And Adrian the Emperour, as he was dying, ceaſed not to crie out, that the number of Phyſitions had killed him. A bad wreſtler became a Phyſition. Courage, ſaide Diogenes to him, thou haſt reaſon to doe ſo, for now ſhalt thou helpe to put them into the ground, who have heeretofore ayded to lay thee on it. But according to Nicoles, they have this happe, That the Sunne doth manifeſt their ſucceſſe, and the earth doth cover their fault, And beſides, they have a very advantageous faſhion among themſelves, to make vſe of all manner of events; for, whatſoever either Fortune or Nature, or any otherſtrange cauſe (whereof the number is infinite) produceth in vs, or good or healthfull, it is the priviledge of Phyſicke to aſcribe it vnto herſelfe. All the fortunate ſucceſſes that come to the patient, which is vnder their government, it is from nature he hath them. The occaſions that have cured me, and which heale a thouſand others, who never ſend or call for Phyſitions to helpe them, they vſurpe them in their ſubjects. And touching ill accidents, either they vtterly diſavow them, in imputing the blame of them to the patient, by ſome vaine reaſons, whereof they never miſſe to finde a great number; as he lay with his armes out of the bed, he hath heard the noyſe of a coach;
                        
                           —rhedarum tranſitus arcto
                              Iuv▪ ſat. 3. 236.
                           
                           Vicorum inflexu.
                           Coaches could hardly paſſe,
                           The lane ſo crooked was.
                        
                        His Window was left open all night; Hee hath laine vpon the left ſide, or troubled his head with ſome heavie thought. In ſome, a word, a dreame, or a looke, is of them deemed a ſufficient excuſe, to free themſelves from all imputation: Or if they pleaſe, they will alſo make vſe of this emparing, and thereby make vp their buſineſſe; and as a meane which can never faile them, when by their applications the diſeaſe is growne deſperate, to pay vs with the aſſurance, that if their remedies had not beene, it would have beene much woorſe. He, whom but from a colde they have brought to a Cotidian Ague, without them ſhoulde have had a continuall feaver. They muſt needes thrive in their buſineſſe, ſince all ills redownd to their profit. Truely they have reaſon to require of the pacient an application of favourable confidence in them; which muſt neceſſarily be in good earneſt, and yeelding to apply itſelfe vnto imaginations, over-hardly to be believed, Plato ſaid very well and to the purpoſe, that freely to lie belonged onely to Phyſitions, ſince our health dependeth on their vanitie and falſehood of promiſes. Aeſope an Authour of exceeding rare excellence, and whoſe graces few diſcover, is very pleaſant in repreſenting this kinde of tyrannicall authoritie vnto vs. which they vſurpe vpon poore ſoules, weakened by ſickeneſſe, and over-whelmed through feare; for he reporteth, how a ſicke man being demaunded by his Phyſition, what operation hee felt by the Phyſicke he had given him. I have ſweate much, anſwered he; that is good, replied the Phyſition, Another time he asked him againe how he had done ſince; I have had a great colde and quivered much, ſaid he: that is very well, quoth the Phyſition againe, The third time he demaunded of him, how he felt himſelfe; He anſwered, I ſwell and puffe-vp as it were with the dropſie; That's not amiſſe, ſaide the Phyſition. A familiar friend of his comming afterward to viſite him, and to know how hee did? Verely (ſaid hee) my friend I

die with being too too well. There was a more equall Law in Aegypt, by which for the firſt three dayes the Phiſition tooke the patient in hand, vpon the patients perrill and fortune; but the three dayes expired, it was at his owne. For, What reaſon is there, that Aeſculapius their patrone muſt have beene ſtrucken with Thunder, forſomuch as hee recovered Hippolitus from death to life?
                        
                        
                           Nampater omnipotens aliquem indignatus ab vmbris,
                           Mortalem infernis, ad lumina ſurgere vitae.Vi
                                    •
                                 g. Ae
                                    •
                                  l. 7. 770.
                           
                           Ipſe repertorem medicinae talis, & artis
                           Fu
                                 •
                              mine Phoebigenam ſlygias detruſit advndas,
                           
                              Iove ſcorning that from ſhades infernall night,
                           A mortall man ſhould riſe to lifes new light
                           
                              Apolloes ſonne to hell he thunder-threw.
                           Who ſuch an arte found out, ſuch med'cine knew,
                        
                        
                           and his followers muſt be abſolved, that ſend ſo many ſoules from life to death? A Phiſitian boaſted vnto Nicocles, that his Arte was of exceeding great authoritie, It is true (quoth Nicocles) for, it may kill ſo many people without feare of puniſhment by Law. As for the reſt, had I beene of their counſel, I would ſurely have made my diſcipline more ſacred and myſterious. They had begunne very well, but the end hath not anſwered the beginning. It was a good ground, to have made Gods and Doemons Authors of their Science, to have affi
                              •
                           med a peculiar language and writing to themſelves. Howbeit Philoſophie ſuppoſeth it to be folly to perſwade a man to his profit, by wayes not vnderſtood: 
                              Ʋt ſi quis medicus imperet vt ſumat: As if a Phyſition ſhould bid a man take.
                        
                        
                           Terrigenam▪ herbigradam, demiportam, ſanguine caſſam,Ci
                                    •
                                 . divin. lib. 2.
                           
                           One earth-borne, goe-by graſſe, houſe-bearing▪ ſlimilie, bloodleſſe.
                        
                        It was a good rule in their arte, and which accompanieth all fanaticall, vaine, and ſupernaturall artes, that the pacients beliefe muſt by good hope and aſſurance preoccupate their effect and operation. Which rule they holde ſo farre forth, that the moſt ignorant and bungling horſeleach is fitter for a man that hath confidence in him, than the skilfulleſt and learnedſt Phyſition. The verie choyce of moſt of their Drugges, is ſomewhat myſterious and divine. The left fonte of a Tortoyze; The ſtale of a Lizard; The dongue of an Elephant; The liver of a Mole, Blood drawne from vnder the right wing of a white Pigeon; And for vs who are troubled with the ſtone-cholike (ſo diſdainfully abuſe they our miſery) Some Rattes pounded to ſmall powder; and ſuch other fooliſh traſh, which rather ſeeme to be magike-ſpells or charmes▪ than effects of any ſolide ſcience. I omit to ſpeake of The odde number of their pilles; The deſtination of c
                                 •
                              rtaine dayes and feaſtes of the yeere; The diſtinction of houres to gather the ſimples of their ingredients; And the ſame rewbarbative and ſeverely-grave looke of theirs, and of their port and countenan
                                 ••
                              ; Which 
                              
                                 •
                              l
                                 ••
                              i
                                 •
                              
                            himſelfe mocketh at. But, as I was about to ſay they have failed, forſomuch as they have not added this to their faire beginning, to make their aſſemblies more religious, and their conſuitations more ſecret. No proſane man ſhould have acceſſe vnto them, no more than to the ſecret ceremonies of Aeſculapius. By which meanes it commeth to paſſe, that their irreſolution, the weakeneſſe of their Arguments, divinations and grounds, the ſharpeneſſe of their conteſtations full of hatred, of jealouſie and particular conſiderations, being apparant to all men; a man muſt needes be ſtarke blinde, 
                              ••
                            he who falleth into their handes, ſee not himſelfe greatly endangered. Who ever ſaw Phiſition vſe his fellowes receipt, without diminiſhing or adding ſomewhat vnto it? Whereby they greatly betrai
                              •
                            their Arte; And make vs perceive, they rather reſpect their reputation, and conſequently their profit, than the well-fare or intereſt of their pacients. Hee is the wiſ
                              •
                           ſt amongſt their Doctors, who hath long ſince preſcribed them, that one alone ſhould meddle to cure a ſicke man; for, if it proſper not with him, and he doe no good, the reproch will not be great to the Arte of Phiſicke, through the fault of one man alone; and on the other ſide, if it thrive well with him, the Glorie ſhalbe the greater. Whereas if they be mani
                              •
                           , everie hand-while they diſcover their myſterie, becauſe They oftner happen to d
                                 •
                              e ill than well. They ſhould have beene content with the perpetuall diſ-agreeing, which is ever found in the opinions of the principall Maſters and chieſe Authors of their Science, knowen but by ſuch as are converſant in Bookes, without making apparant ſhew of the controverſies, and inconſtanties of their judgement, which they foſter and continue amongeſt themſelves. Will wee have an

example of the ancient debate of Phyſicke? Hirophil
                                 •
                              s placeth the originall cauſe of ſickeneſſe in the humours: Eraſiſtratus, in the blood of the A
                              •
                           te
                              •
                           i
                              •
                           s: Aſ
                                 •
                              l
                                 •••
                              ad
                                 •
                              s, in the 
                              •
                           nviſible Atomes that paſſe into our pores: Al
                                 •
                              meon, in the abundan
                              •••
                           r de
                              •
                           ence of co
                              •
                           porall forces: Diocles, in the inequal
                              ••
                           ie of the bodies elements, and in the 
                              〈◊〉
                            of the a
                              •
                           e, wee breathe: Strato, in the abundance, cruditie and corruption of the 
                              •
                           o
                              •••
                           ſhment we take: Hipocrates doth place it in the ſpirits. There is a friend of the
                              •
                           rs, whom they know better than I, who to this purpoſe crieth out; that the moſt important ſcience in vſe amongſt vs (as that which hath charge of our health and preſervation) is by ill hap, the moſt vncertaine, the moſt confuſed, and moſt agitated with infinite changes. There is no great danger to miſtake the height of the Sunne, or miſſe-reckon the fraction of ſome Aſ
                              •••
                           n
                              •
                           m
                              •
                           cal
                              •
                            ſ
                              •
                           pputation; but herein, whereon our being and chiefe free-hold doth wholly depend it is no wiſedome to abandon ou
                              •
                            ſelves to the mercy of the agitation of ſo ma
                              •••
                           old 
                              •
                           on rari
                              •
                            wind
                              •
                           s. Before the Peloponeſian warre, there was no great newes of this ſcience. Hipocrates brought it into credite. Whatſoever hee eſtabliſhed, Chryſippus overthrewe, Afterward Eraſistrat
                                 •
                              s Grand-Childe to Ariſtotle, re-enve
                              •
                           ſt what ever Chryſippus had written of it. After theſe, ſtart vp the Empeirikes, who concerning the managing of this Arte, tooke a new cou
                              •
                           ſe▪ altogether different from thoſe ancient fathers. And when their credite began to groweſta
                              •
                           e; Hirophilus brought another kinde of Phyſicke into vſe, which Aſ
                                 •
                              l
                                 •
                              piades when his 
                              •
                           u
                              •
                           ne came, impugned, and in the end ſubverted. Then came the opinions of Themi
                                 •
                              on to bee in great authoritie, then thoſe of Muſa, and afterward thoſe of 
                              Ʋect
                                 ••
                              s Ʋ
                              
                                 •
                              l
                                 •
                              ns, a famous Phiſition, by reaſon of the acquaintance hee had with Meſſalina. During the time of N
                                 •
                              ro, the ſoveraintie of Phiſicke fell to the handes of Theſſalus, who aboliſhed and condemned whatſoever had beene held of it before his time. This mans Doctrine was afterward wholly overthrowne by Crinas of Marſ
                                 •
                              ille, who a new revived and framed, that all men ſhould direct and rule medicinable operations to the Ephemerides and motions of the ſtar
                              •
                           es, to eate, to drinke, to ſleepe at what houre it ſhould pleaſe Luna and M
                                 •
                              rcu
                                 •
                              ie. His authoritie was ſoone after ſupplanted by Charinus; a Phiſition of the ſame towne of Marſ
                                 •
                              illes, who not onely impugned ancient Phiſicke, but alſo the vſe of warme and publike bathes, which had beene accuſtomed ſo many ages before. Hee cauſed men to bee ba
                              •
                           h
                              •
                           d in cold Water; yea, were it in the deepe of Winter hee plunged and dived ſicke men into the running ſtreame of Rivers. Vntill Plinies time noe Romane had ever da
                              •
                           ned to exerciſe the Arte of Phiſicke, but was ever vſed by ſtrangers and Graecians, as at this daie it is vſed in France by Latinizers. For, as a famous Phiſition ſaith, wee doe not eaſily admit and allow that Phyſicke, which we vnderſtand, nor thoſe Drugs we gather our ſelves. If thoſe Nations from whom wee have the Wood Guiacum, the Salſapar
                                 •
                              ille, and the Wood Deſqu
                                 •
                              ne, have any Phyſition amongſt them, how much thinke wee by the ſame commendation of the ſtrangeneſſe, rareneſſe and d
                              •
                           a
                              •
                           th, they will rejoyce at our coleworts and pa
                              •
                           ſly? For, who dar
                              •
                           th contemne things ſought and fetch ſo farre-off with the hazard of ſo long and dangerous a peregrination? ſince theſe auncient mutations of phyſicke, there have beene infinite others, that have continued vnto our dayes, and moſt often entire and vniverſall mutations; as are thoſe which Paracelſus, Fioravanti and Argenterius have produced: for (as it is told me) they doe not only change a receipt, but alſo the whole contexture and policie of phiſickes whole bodie, accuſing ſuch as hitherto have made profeſſion thereof, of ignorance and couſinage. Now I leave to your imagination, in what plight the poore patient findeth himſelfe. If we could but be aſſured, when they miſtake themſelves, their phiſicke would do vs no harme, although not profit vs; It were a reaſonable compoſition, for a man to hazard himſelfe to get ſome good, ſo hee endangered not himſelfe to looſe by it. Aeſope reporteth this ſtorie; that one who had bought a Mooreſlave, ſuppoſing his blacke hew had come vnto him by ſome ſtrange accident, or ill vſage of his former Maiſter with great diligence cauſed him to bee medicined with divers bathes and ſundry potions: It fortuned the Moore did no whi
                              •
                            mend or change his ſwarthie complexion, but loſt his former health. How often commeth it to paſſe, and how many times ſee we phyſitions charge one another with their pacients death. I remember a popular ſickeneſſe, which ſome yeares ſince, greatly troubled the Townes about me, very mortall and dangerovs; the rage whereof being over-paſt, which had carried away an infinite number of perſons: One of the moſt famous phyſitions in all the country, publiſhed a booke, concerning that diſeaſe; wherein hee adviſeth himſelfe, that they had done amiſſe to vſe phl
                              •
                           botomie▪ and confeſſeth,

it had beene one of the principall cauſes of ſo great an inconvenience. Moreover, their Authors holde, that there is no kinde of Phyſicke, but hath ſome hurtfull part in it. And 
                              ••
                            thoſe that f
                              •
                           t ou
                              •
                            turne, doe in ſome ſort harme vs; what muſt thoſe doe, which are given vs to no purpoſe, and out of ſeaſon? As for me, if nothing elſe belonged thereunto, I deeme it a matter very dangerous▪ and of great prejudice for him who loathes the taſte, or abhorres the ſmell of a potion, to ſwallow it at ſo vnconvenient houres, and ſo much againſt his heart. And I thinke it much d
                              •
                           ſtempereth a ſicke man, namely in a ſeaſon he hath ſo much neede of reſt. Beſides, conſider but the occaſions, on which they ordinarily ground the cauſe of our ſickeneſſes; they are ſo light and delicate, as thence I argue, That a very ſmall error in compounding of their Drugges, may occaſion vs mu
                                 •
                              h de
                                 •
                              riment. Now if the miſtaking in a Phyſition be dangerous, it is very ill for vs: for it is hard if he fall not often into it. He hath neede of many parts, divers conſiderations and ſeverall circumstances to proportion his deſſeigne iustly. He ought to know the ſicke mans complexion, his temper, his humours, his inclinations, his actions, his thoughts and his imaginations. He must be aſſured of externall circumſtances; of the nature of the place; the condition of the aire; the quality of the weather; the ſituation of the Planets, and their influences. In ſickeneſſe, he ought to be acquainted with the cauſes, with the ſignes, with the affections and criticall daies: In drugges 
                                 ••
                               ſhould vnderſtand their weight, their vertue and their operation, the country, the figure, the age, the dispenſation. In all theſe parts, he muſt know how to proportion and referre them one vnto another; thereby to bege
                              •
                            a perfect Symmetrie or due proportion of each part: wherein if he miſſe never ſo little, or if amongſt ſo many wheeles and ſeverall motions, the leaſt be out of tune or temper; it is enough to marre all.
                        God knowes how hard the knowledge of moſt of theſe parts is: As for example, how ſhall he finde out the proper ſigne of the diſeaſe, every malady being capable of an infinite number of ſignes; How many debates, doubts and controverſies have they amongſt themſelves about the interpretations of Vrine? Otherwiſe whence ſhould that continuall alt
                              •••
                           ation come we ſee amongſt them, about the knowledge of the diſeaſe? How ſhould we excuſe this fault, wherein they fall ſo often, to take a Martin for a Fox? In thoſe diſeaſes I have had (ſo they admitted any difficulty) I could never yet finde three agreeing in on
                              •
                            opinion. I more willingly note examples that concerne my ſelfe. A Gentleman in Paris was not long ſince cut off the ſtone by the appointment of Phiſitions, in whoſe bladder they found no more ſtone, then in his hand: Where alſo a Biſhop, who was my very good friend, had by his Phiſitions beene earneſtly ſol
                              •
                           cited to be cut; and my ſelfe, becauſe they were of his counſell, vpon their words, aided to perſwade him to it; who being deceaſed and opened, it was found, he had no infirmity but in his reines. They are leſſe excuſable in this d
                              •
                           ſeaſe, forſomuch as it is in ſome ſort palpable. Whereby I judge the arte of Chirurgery much more certaine; For it ſeeth and handl
                              •
                           th what it doth; and therein is leſſe conjecture and divination. Whereas Phiſitions have no ſpeculum matricis, to diſcover our braine, our 
                              •
                           ungs and our l
                              •
                           ver vnto them. The very promiſes of phiſicke are incredible. For being to provide for divers and contrary accidents, which often trouble vs together, and with a kinde of neceſſary relation one vnto another; as the heate of the liver, and the cold of the ſtomake, they will perſwade vs, that with their ingredients, this one ſhall warme the ſtomacke, and this other coole the liver; the one hath charge to goe directly to the reynes, yea even to the bladder, without enſtalling his operation any where elſe, and by reaſon of it's ſecret propriety, keeping his force and vertue, all that long way, and ſo full of ſtops or lets, vntill it come to the place, to whoſe ſeruice it is deſtinated. Another ſhall drie the braine, and another moiſten the lungs. Of all this hotch-pot having compoſed a mixture or potion, is it not a kinde of raving, to hope their ſeverall vertues ſhall devide and ſeperate themſelves from out ſuch a confuſion or c
                                 •
                              mmixture, to run to ſo diverſe charges? I ſhould greatly feare they would looſe or change the
                              •
                           r tickets and trouble their quarters. And who can imagine, that in this liquid confuſion, theſe faculties be not corrupted, confounded and alter one another? What? that the execution of this ordenance depends from another officer, to whoſe truſt and mercy we muſt once moreforſake our lives? As we have doublet and hoſe-makers to make our clothes, and are ſo much the better fitted, in as much as each medleth with his owne trade, and ſuch have their occupation more ſtrictly limited, then a Tailer that will make all. And as for our neceſſary foode, ſome of our great Lords, for their more commodity and eaſe have ſeverall cookes, as ſome only to dreſſe boyled meates, and ſome to roſte, others to bake, whereas if one Cooke alone would ſupply

all three in generall, he could never doe it ſo exactly. In like ſort for the curing of all diſeaſes, the Aegyptians had reaſon to reject this generall myſterie of Phyſitians, and to ſunder this profeſſion for every maladie, allotting each part of the body his diſtinct workman. For, every particular part was thereby more properly attended, and leſſe confuſedly governed, and for ſo much as they regarded but the ſame eſpecially. Our Phyſitians never remember, that he who will provide for all, provideth for nothing; and that the totall and ſummarie policie of this little world, is vnto them vndig eſtible Whilſt they feared to ſtop the courſe of a bloody flux, becauſe he ſhould not fal into an ague, they killed me a friend of mine, who was more worth then all the rabble of them; yea were they as many more. They ballance their diuinatious of future things, with preſent cuils, and becauſe they will not cure the braine in preiudice of the ſtomacke, they offend the ſtomacke and empaire the braine, and all by their ſeditious and tumultuary drugs. Concerning the variety and weaknes of the reaſons of this Art, it is more apparent then in any other Art. Aperitive things are good for a man thats troubled with the collike, becauſe that opening and dilating the paſſages, they addreſſe this ſlimie matter whereof the gravell and ſtone is ingendred, and ſo convay downeward whatſoever beginneth to harden and petrifie in the reines: A peritive things are dangerous for a man thats troubled with the collike, becauſe that opening and dilating the paſſages, they addreſſe towards the reines, the matter engendring gravell, which by reaſon of the propenſions they have with it, eaſily ſeizing on the ſame, muſt by conſequence ſtay great ſtore of that which is convaied vnto them. Moreover, if by chance it fortune to meet with a body, ſomewhat more groſſe then it ought to be, to paſ
                              •
                           e all thoſe ſtrait turnings, which to expell the ſame they muſt glide thorow; that body being mooved by thoſe ſoluble things, and caſt in thoſe ſtrait chanels, and comming to ſtop them, it will doubtleſſe haſten a certaine and moſt dolorous death. They have a like conſtancie about the counſels they giue vs, touching the regiment of our life. It is good to make water often; for by experience we ſee, that permitting the ſame idlely to lie ſtill, we give it leiſure to diſcharge it ſelfe of her lees and excrements, which may ſerve to breed the ſtone in the bladder: It is good to make water but ſeldome, for the weightie dregs it drawes with it, are not eaſily caried away, except by violence: as by experience is ſeene in a torrent that runneth very ſwift, which ſweepeth and clenſeth the place through which he paſſeth, much more then doth a ſlow-gliding ſtreame. Likewiſe it is good to have often copulation with women; for that openeth the paſſages, and convaieth the gravell away: It is alſo hurtfull; for it heateth, wearieth, and weakneth the reines. It is good for one to bathe himſelfe in warme water; for ſo much as that looſeth and moiſtneth the places where the gravel and ſtone lurketh: It is alſo bad; becauſe this application of externall heat helpeth the reines to concoct, to harden and petrifie the matter diſpoſed vnto it. To ſuch as are at the bathes, it is more healthfull to eat but little at night, that the water they are to drinke the next morning, finding the ſtomacke empty, and without any obſtacle, it may worke the greater operation: on the other ſide, it is better to eat but a little at dinner, leſt a man might hinder the operation of the water, which is not yet perfect, and not to charge the ſtomacke ſo ſuddenly, after this other travell, and leave the office of digeſting vnto the night, which can better do it then the day; the body and ſpirit being then in continuall motion and action. Loe heere how they in all their diſcourſes juggle, dally, and trifle at our charge, and are never able to bring mee a propoſition, but I can preſently frame another to the contrary, of like force & conſequence. Let them then no longer raile againſt thoſe who in any ſickneſſe, ſuffer themſelves gently to be directed by their owne appetite, and by the counſell of nature; and who remit themſelves to common fortune. I have by occaſion of my travels ſeene almoſt all the famous Bathes of Chriſtendome, and ſome yeers ſince haue begun to vſe them: For, in generall I deeme bathing to be very good and healthy, and I am perſwaded, we incurre no ſmall incommodities in our health, by having neglected and loſt this cuſtome, which in former times were generally obſerved very neere amongſt all Nations, and is yet with divers at this time to wath their bodies every day: And I cannot imagine but that we are much the worſe with keeping our bodies all over-cruſted, and our pores ſtopt with greaſe and filth. And touching the drinking of them, fortune hath firſt made it to agree very well with my taſte: ſecondly it is naturall and ſimple; and though vaine, nothing dangerous: whereof this infinitie of people of all ſorts and complexions, and of all nations that come to them, doth warrant mee. And although I have as yet found no extraordinary good or wondrous effect in them, but rather having

ſomewhat curiouſly examined the matter, I finde all the reports of ſuch operations, which in ſuch places are reported, and of many believed, to be falſe and fabulous. So eaſily doth the world deceive it ſelfe, namely in things it deſireth, or faine would have come to paſſe. Yet have I ſeene but few or none at all, whom theſe waters have made worſe; and no man can without malice denie, but that they ſtirre vp a mans appetite, make eaſie digeſtion, and except a man goe to them overweake and faint (which I would have none doe) they will adde a kinde of new mirth vnto him. They have not the power to raiſe men from deſperate diſeaſes. They may ſtay ſome light accident, or prevent the threates of ſome alteration. Whoſoever goeth to them, and reſolveth not to be merry, that ſo hee may enjoy the pleaſure of the good company reſorts to them, and of the pleaſant walkes or exerciſes, which the beauty of thoſe places, where bathes are commonly ſeated, doth affoord and delight men withall; he without doubt looſeth the better part and moſt aſſured of their effect. And therefore have I hitherto choſen to ſtay my ſelfe and make vſe of thoſe, where I found the pleaſure of the ſcituation moſt delightſome, moſt conveniencie of lodging, of victuals and companie, as are in France the bathes of Banieres; thoſe of Plombieres, on the frontiers of Germanie and Loraine; thoſe of Baden in Switzerland; thoſe of Lucea in Tuſcanie; and eſpecially thoſe of Della villa
                                 •
                              , which I have vſed moſt often and at diverſe ſeaſons of the yeare. Every nation hath ſome particular opinion concerning their vſe, and ſeverall lawes and formes how to vſe them, and all different: And as I have found by experience the effect in a maner all one. In Germanie they never vſe to drinke of their waters; but bathe themſelves for all diſeaſes, and will lie padling in them, all moſt from Sunne to Sunne. In Italie if they drinke nine dayes of the water, they waſh themſelves other thirtie dayes with it. And commonly they drincke it mixed with other drugges, thereby to helpe the operation. Heere our Phiſitions appoint vs when wee have drunke to walke vpon it, that ſo wee may helpe to digeſt it: There, ſo ſoone as they have drunke, they make them lie a bed, vntill they have voided the ſame out againe, continually warming their ſtomake and feete with warme clothes. All the Germanes whilſt they lie in the water, doe particularly vſe cupping glaſſes, and ſcarifications: And the Italians vſe their Do
                                 •
                              ci
                                 •
                              , which are certaine ſpowts running with warme waters, convaied from the bathes-ſpring in leaden pipes, where, for the ſpace of a month, they let it ſpout vpon their heads, vpon their ſtomake, or vpon any other part of the bodie, according as neede requireth, one houre in the forenoone, and as long in the after noone▪ there are infinite other differences of cuſtomes in every countrey: or to ſay better, there is almoſt no reſemblances betweene one and other. See how this part of Phiſicke, by which alone I have ſuffered my ſelfe to be carried away, which though it be the leaſt artificiall, yet hath ſhe the ſhare of the confuſion and vncertainty, ſeene in all other parts and every where of this arte. Poets may ſay what they liſt, and with more emphaſis and grace: witneſſe theſe two Epigrames.
                        
                           Alcon hesterno ſignum Iovis attigit. IlleLucil. Auſo
                                    •
                                 . epig. 73
                           
                           Quamvis marmoreus, vim patitur medici.
                           Ecce hodie iuſſus transferri ex 
                                 •
                              de vetusta,
                           Effertur, quamuis ſit Deus at que lapis.
                           
                              Alcon look't yeſter-day on carved Iove.
                           
                           
                              Iove, though of Marble, feeles the letches force,
                           From his old Church to day made to remoove,
                           Though God and Stone, hee's carried like a coarſe.
                        
                        And the other:
                        
                           Lotus nobiſcum est hilaris, coenavit & idem,Mart. l. 6. epig. 53.
                           
                           Inventus mane est mortuus Androgoras.
                           
                           Tam ſubitae mortis cauſam Fustine requiris?
                           In ſomnis medicum viderat Hermocratem.
                           
                           
                              Androg
                                    •
                                 ras in helth bath'd over night with vs,
                           And merry ſupt, but in the morne ſtarke dead was found.
                           Of his ſo ſudden death, the cauſe ſhall I diſcuſſe.
                           
                              Hermocrates the Leech he ſaw in ſleepe vnſound.
                        
                        Vpon which I will tell you two pretty ſtories. The Baron of Caupene in Chaloſſe and I, have both in common the right of the patronage of a benifice, which is of a very large precinct, ſituated at the feet of our Mountaines, named Lohontan. It is with the inhabitants of

that corner, as it is ſaid to be with thoſe of the valley of Angrougne. They lead a kind of peculiar life; their attire, and their cuſtomes apart and ſeverall. They were directed and governed by certaine particular policies and cuſtomes, received by tradition from Father to Child: Whereto, without other Lawes or Compulſion, except the reverence and awe of their cuſtome and vſe, they awefully tied and bound themſelves. This petty ſtate had from all antiquity continued in ſo happy a condition, that no neighbouring ſevere judge had ever beene troubled to enquire of their life and affaires, nor was ever Atturny or Pety fogging Lawyer called for, to give them adviſe or counſell; no
                              •
                            ſtranger ſought vnto to determine their quarrels or decide their contentions; neither were ever beggers ſeene amongſt them. They alwaies avoided commerce and ſhunned alliances with the other World, leaſt they ſhould alter the purity of their orders and policy; vntill ſuch time (as they ſay) that one amongeſt them, in their fathers daies, having a minde pufft vp with a noble ambition, to bring his name and credit in reputation, deviſed to make one of his Children Sir Iohn Lackelatine, or Maſter Peter-an-Oake: And having made him learne to write in ſome neighbour Towne not farre off, at laſt procured him to be a Country Notary, or Petty-fogging Clarke. This fellow having gotten ſome pelfe and become great, began to diſdaine their ancient cuſtomes, and put the pompe and ſtatelineſſe of our higher regions into their heads. It fortuned that a chiefe Goſſip of his had a Goate diſhorned, whom he importunately ſolicited to ſue the Treſpaſſer, and demand law and right at the Iudge or Iuſticers hands, that dwelt there-abouts; And ſo never ceaſing to ſow ſedition and breed ſutes amongeſt his neighbours, he never left till he had confounded and marred all. After this corruption or intruſion of law (they ſay) there enſued preſently another miſchiefe of worſe conſequence, by meanes of a Quacke-ſalver, or Empirike Phyſition that dwelt amongeſt them, who would needes be married to one of their daughters, and ſo endenizon and ſettle himſelfe amongſt them.
                        This gallant began firſt to teach and inſtruct them in the names of agewes, rheumes and impoſtumes; then the ſcituation of the heart, of the liver and other entrailes: A Science vntill then never knowen or heard of among them. And in ſtead of garlike, wherewith they had learned to expell, and were wont to cure all diſeaſes, of what qualitie and how dangerous ſoever they were, he induced and inured them, were it but for a cough or cold, to take ſtrange compoſitions and potions: And thus beganne to trafficke not onely their health, but alſo their deaths. They ſweare, that even from that time, they haue apparantly perceived, that the evening Sereine or night-calme bred the head-ach and blaſted them; that to drinke being hot or in a ſweat empaired their helthes; that Autumne windes were more vnwholeſome and dangerous, then thoſe of the Springe-time: And that ſince his ſlibberſawces, potions and phyſicke came firſt in vſe; they finde themſelues moleſted and diſtempered with Legions of vnaccuſtomed malladies and vnknowen diſeaſes; and plainely feele and ſenſibly perceive a generall weakeneſſe and declination in their antient vigor; and that their lives are nothing ſo long, as before they were. Loe heere the firſt of my tales. The other is, that before I was troubled with the ſtone-chollicke and gravell in the bladder, hearing diuers make eſpeciall account of a hee-goats blood, as of an heavenly Manna ſent in theſe latter-ages for the good and preſervation of mans life: and hearing men of good vnder ſtanding ſpeake of it, as of an admirable and much-good-working drugge, and of an infallible operation: I, who have ever thought my ſelfe ſubject to all accidents, that may in any ſort fall on man, being yet in perfect health, beganne to take pleaſure to provide my ſelfe of this myracle, and foorthwith gave order (according to the receipt) to have a Bucke-goate gotten, and carefully fed in mine owne houſe. For the blood muſt be drawne from him in the hotteſt moneth of Summer, and he muſt onely be fed with ſoluble hearbes, and drincke nothing but White-wine. It was my fortune to come to mine owne houſe the very ſame day the Goate ſhould be killed; where ſome of my people came in haſte to tell mee, that my Cooke found two or three great bowles in his paunch, which in his maw amongſt his meat ſhocked one againſt another. I was ſo curious as I would needes have all his garbage brought before me; the thicke and large skinne whereof I cauſed to be opened, out of which came three great lumpes or bodies, as light as any ſpunge, ſo framed as they ſeemed to be hollow, yet outwardly hard and very firme, bemotled with divers dead and wanniſ
                              •
                            colours: The one perfectly as round as any bowle, the other two ſomewhat leſſer, and not

ſo round, yet ſeemed to grow towards it. I have found (after I had made diligent inquiry among ſuch as were wont to open ſuch beaſts) that it was a ſeld-ſeene and vnheard of accident. It is very likely they were ſuch ſtones as ours be, and cozen-germanes to them; which if it be, it is but vaine for ſuch as be troubled with the ſtone or gravell to hope to be cured, by meanes of a beaſts-blood, that was drawing neere vnto death, and ſuffered the ſame diſeaſe. For, to aleadge the blood cannot participate of that contagion', and doth no whit thereby alter his accuſtomed vertue, it may rather be inferred, that nothing ingendreth in a body, but by conſent and communication of all the parts. The whole maſſe doth worke, and the whole frame agitate altogether, although one part, according to the diverſitie of operations, doth contribute more or leſſe than another; whereby it manifeſtly appeareth, that in all parts of this bucke-goate, there was ſome grettie or petrificant qualitie. It was not ſo much for feare of any future chaunce, or in regard of my ſelfe, that I was ſo curious of this experiment; as in reſpect, that as well in mine owne houſe, as elſe-where in ſundry other places, it commeth to paſſe, that many women doe often gather and lay vp in ſtore, divers ſuch kindes of ſlight drugges to help their neighbours, and other people with them, in time of neceſſitie; applying one ſame remedy to an hundred ſeverall diſeaſes: yea many times ſuch as they would be very loath to take themſelves; with which they often have good lucke, and well thrives it with them. As for mee I honour Phyſitions, not according to the common-received rule, for neceſſitie ſake (for to this paſſage another of the Prophet may be alleaged, who reprooved King Aſa, becauſe hee had recourſe vnto Phyſitions) but rather for love I beare vnto themſelves; having ſeene ſome, and knowne diverſe honeſt men amongſt them, and worthy all love and eſteeme. It is not them I blame, but their Arte; yet doe I not greatly condemne them for ſeeking to profit by our fooliſhneſſe (for moſt men doe ſo) and it is a thing common to all worldlings. Diverſe profeſſious and many vacations, both more and leſſe worthie than theirs, ſubſist and are grounded onely vpon publike abuſes and popular errours. I ſend for them when I am ſicke, if they may conveniently be found; and love to be entertained by them, rewarding them as other men doe. I give them authoritie to enjoyne me to keepe my ſelfe warme, if I love it better ſo than otherwiſe. They may chuſe, be it either leekes or lettuce, what my broth ſhall be made withall, and appoynt mee either white or clarer to drinke; and ſo of other things elſe, indifferent to my taſte, humor or cuſtome. I know well it is nothing to them, forſomuch as Sharpeneſſe and Strangeneſſe are accidents of Phyſickes proper eſſence. Lycurgus allowed and appoynted the ſicke men of Sparta to drinke wine. Why did he ſo? Becauſe being in health, they hated the vſe of it. Even as a Gentleman who dwelleth not farre from mee, vſeth wine as a ſoveraigne remedie againg agews, becauſe being in perfect health, he hateth the taſte thereof as death. How many of them ſee wee to be of my humour? That is, to diſdaine all Phyſicke for their owne behoofe, and live a kinde of formall free life, and altogether contrarie to that, which they preſcribe to others? And what is that, but a manifeſt abuſing of our ſimplicitie? For, they holde their life as deare, and eſteeme their health as pretious as wee doe ours, and would apply their effects to their skill, if themſelves knew not the vncertaintie and falſehood of it. It is the feare of paine and death; the impatience of the diſeaſe and griefe; and indiſcreete deſire and headlong thirſt of health, that ſo blindeth them, and vs. It is meere faintnes that makes our conceit; and puſillanimitie forceth our credulitie, to bee ſo yeelding and pliable. The greater parte of whome doe notwithſtanding not beleeve ſo much, as they endure and ſuffer of others: For I heare them complaine, and ſpeake of it no otherwiſe than wee doe. Yet in the ende are they reſolved. What ſhould I doe then? As if impatience were in itſelfe a better remedie than patience Is there any of them, that hath yeelded to this miſerable ſubjection, that doth not likewiſe yeelde to all manner of impoſtures? or dooth not ſubject himſelfe to the mercie of whomſoever hath the impudencie to promiſe him recoverie, and warrant him health?
                        The Babilonians were wont to carry their ſicke people into the open ſtreetes; the common ſort were their phyſitions: where all ſuch as paſſed by were by humanitie and civilitie to enquire of their ſtate and maladie, and according to their skill or experience, give them ſome 
                              •
                           ound aduiſe and good counſell. We differ not greatly from them: There is no poore Woman ſo ſimple, whoſe mumbling and muttering, whoſe ſlibber-ſlabbers and drenches wee doe not employ. And as for mee, were I to buy any medicine, I would rather ſpend my money in this kinde of phyſicke, than in any other; becauſe therein is no danger or hurt

to be feared. What Homer and Plato ſaid of the Aegyptians, that they were all Phyſitions, may well be ſaid of all people. There is neither Man nor Woman, that vanteth not himſelfe to have ſome receipt or other, and doth not hazard the ſame vpon his neighbour, if he will but give credite vnto him.
                        I was not long ſince in a company, where I wot not who of my fraternity, brought newes of a kinde of pilles, by true accompt, compoſed of a hundered and odde ſeverall ingredients; Whereat we laughed very heartily, and made our ſelves good ſport: For, what rocke ſo hard were able to reſiſt the ſhocke, or withſtand the force of ſo thicke and numerous a battery? I vnderſtand nevertheleſſe, of ſuch as tooke of them, that the leaſt graine gravell dained not to ſtirre at all. I cannot ſo ſoone give over writing of this ſubject, but I muſt needes ſay a word or two, concerning the experience they have made of their preſcriptions, which they would have vs take as a warrantize or aſſurance of the certainty of their drugges and potions. The greateſt number, and as I deeme, more than the two thirds of medicinable vertues, conſiſt in the quinteſſence or ſecret propriety of ſimples, whereof we can have no other inſtruction but vſe and cuſtome. For, Quinteſſence is no other thing than a quality, whereof we cannot with our reaſon finde out the cauſe. In ſuch trials or experiments, thoſe which they affirme to have acquired by the inſpiration of ſome Daemon, I am contented to receive and allow of them (for, touching myracles, I meddle not with them) or be it the experiments drawne from things, which for other reſpects fall often in vſe with vs: As if in Wooll, wherewith we wont to cloth our ſelves, ſome ſecret exſiccating or drying quality, have by accident beene found, that cureth kibes or chilblaines in the heeles; and if in reddiſhes, we eat for nouriſhment, ſome opening or aperitive operation have beene diſcovered. Galen reporteth, that a Leprous man chanced to be cured, by meanes of a Cuppe of Wine he had drunke, forſomuch as a Viper was by fortune fallen into the Wine caske. In which example we finde the meane, and a very likely directory to this experience. As alſo in thoſe, to which Phyſitions affirme, to have beene addreſſed by the examples of ſome beaſts. But in moſt of other experiences, to which they ſay they came by fortune, and had no other guide but hazard, I finde the progreſſe of this information incredible. I imagine man, heedfully viewing about him the infinite number of things, creatures, plants and mettals. I wot not where to make him beginne his Eſſay; And ſuppoſe he caſt his firſt fantaſie vpon an Elkes-Horne, to which an eaſie and gentle credulity muſt be given; he will be as farre to ſeeke, and as much troubled in his ſecond operation: So, many diſeaſes and ſeverall circumſtances are propoſed vnto him, that before he come to the certainty of this point, vnto which the perfection of his experience ſhould arrive, mans wit ſhall be to ſeeke, and not know where to turne himſelfe; And before (amiddeſt this infinity of things) hee finde out what this Horne is: Amongſt the numberleſſe diſeaſes that are, what an Epilepſie is; the ſundrie and manifolde complexions in a melancholy man; So many ſeaſons in Winter: So diverſe Nations amongſt French-men; So many ages in age; So diverſe coeleſtiall changes and alterations, in the conjunction of Venus and Saturne; So ſeverall and many partes in a mans body, nay in one of his fingers. To all which being neyther guided by argument, nor by conjecture, nor by example, or divine inſpiration, but by the one ly motion of fortune; it were moſt neceſſary, it ſhould be by a perfectly artificiall, well-ordred, and methodicall fortune. Moreover, ſuppoſe the diſeaſe thorowly cured, how ſhall he reſt aſſured, but that eyther the evill was come to his vtmoſt period, or that an effect of the hazard, cauſed the ſame health? Or the operation of ſome other thing, which that day he had eyther eaten, drunke or touched? or whether it were by the merite of his Grand-mothers prayers? Beſides, ſuppoſe this experiment to have beene perfect, how many times was it applied and begun a new; And how often was this long and tedious web of fortunes and encounters woven over againe, before a certaine rule might be concluded? And being concluded, by whom is it I pray you? Amongſt ſo many millions of men, you ſhall ſcarſe meete with three or foure, that well duely obſerve, and carefully keepe a Regiſter of their experiments; ſhall it be your, or his happe, to light truely, or hit juſt with one of them three or foure? What if another man? Nay what if a hundred other men have had and made contrary experiments, and cleane oppoſite concluſions, and yet have ſorted well? We ſhould peradventure diſcerne ſome ſhew of light, if all the judgements and conſultations of men were knowne vnto vs. But That three Witneſſes and three Doctors ſhall ſway all mankind, there
                           
                           is no reaſon. It were requiſite, humane nature had appointed and made ſpeciall choiſe of them and that by expreſſe procuration and letter of atturny they were by her declared our Iudges and deputed our Atturnies.
                     
                     
                        To my Lady of Duras.
                        MAdame, the laſt time it pleaſed you to come and viſite me, you found me vpon this point. And becauſe it may be, theſe toyes of mine may happily come to your hands: I would have them witneſſe, their Authour reputeth himſelfe highly honoured, for the favours it ſhall pleaſe you to ſhew them. Wherein you ſhall diſcerne the very ſame demeanor and ſelfe-countenance, you have ſeene in his converſaſion. And could I have aſſumed vnto my ſelfe any other faſhion, than mine owne accuſtomed, or more honourable and better forme, I would not have done it: For, all I ſeeke to reape by my writings, is, they will naturally repreſent and to the life, pourtray me to your remembrance. The very ſame conditions and faculties, it pleaſed your Lady-ſhip to frequent and receive, with much more honor and curteſie, than they any way deſerve, I will place and reduce (but without alteration and change) into a ſolide body, which may happily continue ſome daies and yeares after mee: Where, when ſoever it ſhall pleaſe you to refreſh your memory with them, you may eaſily finde them, without calling them to remembrance; which they ſcarſely deſerve. I would entreate you to continue the favour of your Friend-ſhip towards mee, by the ſame qualities, through whoſe meanes it was produced. I labour not to be beloved more and eſteemed better being dead, than alive. The humour of Tyberius is ridiculous and common, who endevoured more to extinguiſh his glory in future ages, than yeeld himſelfe regardfull and pleaſing to men of his times. If I were one of thoſe, to whom the World my be indebted for praiſe, I would quit it for the one moytie, on condition it would pay me before-hand: And that the ſame would haſten, and in great heapes environ me about, more thicke than long, and more full than laſting. And let it hardly vaniſh with my knowledge, and when this ſweet alluring ſound ſhall no more tickle mine eares. It were a fond conceite, now I am ready to leave the commerce of men, by new commendations, to goe about, anew to beget my ſelfe vnto them.
                        I make no account of goods, which I could not employ to the vſe of my life. Such as I am ſo would I be elſewhere then in Paper. Mine arte and induſtry have beene emploied to make my ſelfe of ſome worth. My ſtudy and endevour to doe, and not to write. I have applied all my skill and devoire to frame my life. Lo-heere mine occupation and my worke. I am a leſſe maker of books, then of any thing elſe. I have deſired and aimed at ſufficiencie, rather for the benefite of my preſent and eſſentiall commodities, then to make a Store-houſe, and hoard it vp for mine heires. Whoſoever hath any worth in him, let him ſhew it in his behaviour, maners and ordinary diſcourſes; be it to treat of love or of quarrels, of ſport and play or bed-matters, at board or elſe-where; or be it in the conduct of his owne affaires, or private houſhold matters. Thoſe whom I ſee make good bookes, having tattered hoſen and ragged clothes on, had they believed mee they ſhould firſt have gotten themſelves good clothes. Demand a Spartan, whether he would rather be a cunning Rhethorician, then an excellent Souldier: nay were I asked, I would ſay, a good Cooke, had I not ſome to ſerve me. Good Lord (Madame) how I would hate ſuch a commendation, to be a ſufficient man in writing, and a fooliſh-ſhallow-headed braine or coxcombe in all things elſe: yet had I rather be a foole; both here and there, then to have made ſo bad a choiſe, wherein to imploy my worth. So farre am I alſo from expecting, by ſuch trifles to gaine new honour to my ſelfe: as I ſhal think I make a good bargaine, if I looſe not a part of that little, I had already gained. For, beſides that this dombe and dead picture, ſhall derogate and ſteale from my naturall being, it fadgeth not and hath no reference vnto my better ſtate, but is much falne from my firſt vigor and naturall jollity, enclining to a kinde of drooping or mouldineſſe. I am now come to the bottome of the veſſell, which beginneth to taſte of his dregs and lees. Otherwiſe (good Madame) I ſhould not have dared ſo boldly to have ripped vp the myſteries of Phiſicke,

ſicke, conſidering the eſteeme and credite your ſelfe, and ſo many others, aſcribe vnto it, and hold it in; had I not been directed therunto by the authors of the ſame. I thinke they have but two ancient ones in Latine, to wit Pliny and Celſus. If you fortune at any time to looke into them, you ſhall finde them to ſpeake much more rudely of their Art, then I doe. I but pinch it gently, they cut the throate of it. Pliny amongſt other things, doth much ſcoffe at them, forſomuch as when they are at their wits end, and can goe no further, they have found out this goodly ſhift, to ſend their long-turmoiled, and to no end much tormented patient, with their drugs and diets, ſome to the help of their vowes and myracles, and ſome others to hot Baths and waters. (Be not offended noble Lady, he meaneth not thoſe on this ſide, vnder the protection of your houſe, and all Gramontoiſes.) They have a third kinde of ſhift or evaſion to ſhake vs off and diſcharge themſelves of the imputations or reproaches, we may juſtly charge them with, for the ſmall amendment of our infirmities; whereof they have ſo long had the ſurvay and governement, as they have no more inventions or deviſes left them, to ammuſe vs with; that is, to ſend vs, to ſeeke and take the good aire of ſome other Country. Madam, we have harped long enough vpon one ſtring; I hope you will give me leave to come to my former diſcourſes againe, from which for your better entertainement, I had ſomewhat digreſſed.
                        It was (as farre as I remember) Pericles, who being demanded, how he did; you may (ſaid he) judge it by this, ſhewing certain ſcroules or briefes he had tied about his necke and armes. He would infer, that he was very ſicke, ſince he was forced to have recourſe to ſuch vanities, and had ſuffered himſelfe to be ſo dreſt. I affirme not, but I may one day be drawne to ſuch fond opinions, and yeeld my life and health to the mercy, diſcretion and regiment of Phiſitions. I may happily fall into this fond madneſſe; I dare not warrant my future conſtancy. And even then if any aske me how I doe, I may anſwer him as did Pericles; You may judge, by ſhewing my hands fraughted with ſix drammes of Opium. It will be an evident token of a violent ſickeneſſe. My judgement ſhal be exceedingly out of temper. If impacience or feare get that advantage vpon me, you may thereby conclude ſome quelling fever hath ſeized vpon my minde. I have taken the paines to plead this cauſe, whereof I have but ſmall vnderſtanding, ſomewhat to ſtrengthen and comfort naturall propenſion, againſt the drugs and practiſe of our Phiſicke, which is derived into me from mine anceſtors: leſt it might onely be a ſtupid and raſh inclination; and that it might have a little more forme. and that alſo thoſe, who ſee me ſo conſtant againſt the exhortations and threates, which are made againſt me, when ſickneſſe commeth vpon me, may not thinke it to be a meere conceit, and ſimple wilfulneſſe; And alſo, leſt there be any ſo peeviſh, as to judge it to be ſome motive of vaine glory. It were a ſtrange deſire, to ſeeke to draw honour from an action, common both to me, to my Gardiner, or to my Groome. Surely my heart is not ſo pufft vp, nor ſo windy, that a ſolide, fleſhy and marrowy pleaſure, as health is; I ſhould change it for an imaginary, ſpirituall and airy delight. Renowme or glory (were it that of Aymons foure ſons) is over-deerely bought by a man of my humour, if it coſt him but three violent fits of the chollike. Give me health a Gods name. Thoſe that love our Phyſicke, may likewiſe have their conſiderations good, great and ſtrong. I hate no fantaſies contrary to mine. I am ſo far from vexing myſelfe, to ſee my judgement differ from other mens, or to grow incompatible of the ſociety or converſation of men, to be of any other faction or opinion then mine owne; that contrariwiſe (as variety is the moſt generall faſhion that nature hath followed, and more in the mindes, then in the bodies; forſomuch as they are of a more ſupple and yeelding ſubſtance, and ſuſceptible or admitting of formes) I finde it more rare to ſee our humor or deſſeignes agree in one. And never were there two opinions in the world alike, no more than two haires, or two graines. Diverſity is the most vniverſall quality.
                        
                     
                  
                  The end of the ſecond Booke.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  THE ESSAYES OR MORAL, POLITIKE AND MILITARIE Diſcourſes Of LO. MICHAEL de Montaigne, Knight Of the noble Order of St. MICHAEL, and one of the Gentlemen in Ordinarie of the French king HENRY the Third his Chamber.
                  
                  THE THIRD BOOKE.
                  1613
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE ESSAYES OF MICHAEL Lord of Montaigne.
                  
                  
                     The third Booke.
                     
                        The first Chapter.
                        
                           Of profit and honeſty.
                        
                        
                           
                              NO man living is free from ſpeaking fooliſh things; the ill lucke is, to ſpeake them curiouſly:
                        
                           Naeiste magno conatu magnas nugasTer. Heant. act. 4. ſee. 1. dixerit.
                           This fellow ſure with much a doe,
                           Will tell great tales and trifles too.
                        
                        That concerneth not me; mine ſlip from me with as little care, as they are of ſmal worth: whereby they ſpeed the better. I would ſuddenly quit them, for the leaſt coſt were in them: Nor doe I buy, or ſell them, but for what they weigh. I ſpeake vnto Paper, as to the firſt man I meete. That this is true, marke well what followes. To whom ſhould not treachery be detestable, when Tiberius refuſed it on ſuch great intereſt? One ſent him word out of Germany, that if he thought it good, Ariminius ſhould be made away by poiſon. He was the mightieſt enemy the Romans had, who had ſo vilely yſed them vnder Varus, and who onely empeached the encreaſe of his domination in that country. His anſwer was; 
                              
                                 •
                              hat the people of Rome were accuſtomed to be reuenged on their enemies by open courſes, With weapons in hand; not by ſubtill ſteights, nor in bugger mugger: thus left he the profitable for the honeſt. He was (yon will ſay) a coſener. I beleeue it; that's no wonder in men of his profeſſion. But the confeſſion of vertue, is of no leſſe conſequence in his mouth that hateth the ſame, for ſo much as truth by force doth wreſt it from him, and if he will not admit it in him, at leaſt, to adorne himſelfe, he will put it on. Our compoſition, both publike and priuate, is full of imperfection; yet is there nothing in nature vnſerviceable, no not inutility itſelfe; nothing thereof hath beene inſinuated in this huge vniuerſe, but holdeth ſome fit place therein. Our eſſence is ſymented with craſed qualities; ambition, jealoſie, enuy, revenge, ſuperſtition, diſpaire, lodge in vs, with ſo naturall a poſſeſſion, as their image is alſo diſcerned in beaſts: yea and cruelty, ſo vnnaturall a vice: for in the middeſt of compaſſion, we inwardly feele a kinde of bitter-ſweetpricking of malicious delight, to ſee others ſuffer; and children feele it alſo:
                        
                           Suaue mari magno turbantibus aequora ventis,Luer. l. 2. 1.
                           
                           Eterra magnum alterius ſpectare laborem.
                           T'is ſweet on graund ſeas, when windes waues turmoyle,
                           From land to ſee an others greeuous toyle.
                        
                        The ſeed of which qualities, who ſhould roote out of man, ſhould ruine the fundamentall

conditions of our life: In matter of policy likewiſe; ſome neceſſary functions are not onely baſe, but faulty: vices finde therein a ſeate, and employ themſelues in the ſtitching vp of our frame; as poiſons in the preſeruation of our health. If they become excuſable, becauſe we have neede of them, and that common neceſſity effaceth their true property; let vs reſigne the acting of this part to hardy Citizens, who ſticke not to ſacrifice their honours and conſciences, as thoſe of old, their lives, for their Countries availe and ſafety. We that are more weake, had beſt aſſume taskes of more eaſe and leſſe hazard. The Common-wealth requireth ſome to betray, ſome to lie, and ſome to maſſaker: leave we that commiſſion to people more obedient and more p
                              ••
                           able. Truly, I have often beene vexed, to ſee our judges, by fraude or falſe hopes of favour or pardon, draw on a malefactor, to bewray his offence, employing therein both couzinage and impudencie. It were fit for iuſtice, and Plato himſelfe, who favoureth this cuſtome, to furniſh me with meanes more ſutable to my humour. T'is a 
                              •
                           a
                              ••
                           cious juſtice, and in my conceit no leſſe wounded by it ſelfe, then by others. I anſwered not long ſince, that hardly could I betray my Prince for a particular man, who ſhould be very ryſery to betray a particular man for my Prince. And loath not onely to deceave, but that 
                              〈…〉
                            me; whereto I will neither furniſh matter nor occaſion. In that little buſineſſe I have managed betweene our Princes, amid the diuiſions and ſubdiuiſions, which at 
                              〈…〉
                            day ſo 
                              〈…〉
                            and turn oile vs, I have curiouſly eeded, that they miſtake me not, nor 
                              〈…〉
                            themſelves in my maske. The profeſſors of that trade hold themſelves moſt covert; preſending and 
                              〈…〉
                            the greateſt indifference and nee
                              •
                           eneſſe to the cauſe they can. As for me, I offer my ſelfe in my livelieſt reaſons, in a forme moſt mine owne: A tender and yoong Negotiation, and who had rather faile in my buſineſſe, then in my ſelfe. Yet hath this beene 
                              •
                           ithetto with ſo good hap (for ſurely fortune is in theſe matters a principal actor) that few have dealt betweene party and party with leſſe ſuſpition, and more inward favour. I have in all my proceedings an open faſhion, eaſie to inſinuate and give it ſelfe credite at firſt acquaintance. Sincerity, plaineneſſe, and naked truth, in what age ſo ever, finde alſo their opportunity and employment. Beſides, their liberty is little called in queſtion, or ſubiect to hate, who deale without reſpect of their owne intereſt. And they may truely vſe the anſwer of 
                              
                                 〈…〉
                              
                            vnto the Athenians, complaining of his bitter inuectives and ſharpneſſe of his ſpeech: Conſider not, my maſters whether I am free, but whether I be ſo, without taking ought, or better 
                                 〈…〉
                               my ſtate by it. My liberty alſo hath eaſily diſcharged me from all ſuſpition of faintneſſe, by it's vigor (nor forbearing to ſpeake any thing, though it bite or ſtung them; I could not have ſaid worſe in their abſence) and becauſe it carrieth an apparant ſhow of ſimplicity and careleſneſſe. I pretend no other fruite by negotiating, then to negotiate; and annex no long purſuites or propoſitions to it. Every action makes his particular game, win he if he can. Nor am I vrged with the paſſion of love or hate vnto great men; nor is my will ſhackled with anger, or particular reſpect. I regard our Kings with an affection ſimply lawfull, and meerely ciuil, neither mooved nor vnmooved by private intereſt: for which I like my ſelfe the better. The general and iuſt cauſe bindes me no more then moderately, and without violent fits. I am not ſubiect to theſe piercing pledges and inward gages. Choller and hate are beyond the duty of juſtice, and are paſſions fitting only thoſe, whoſe reaſon is not ſufficient to hold them to their duty: 
                              Ʋtatur motu animi, qui vti ratione non poteſt, Let him vſe the motion of his minde, that cannot vſe reaſon. All lawfull intentions are of themſelves temperate: if not, they are altered into ſedicious and vnlawfull. It is that makes me march every where with my head aloft, my face and heart open. Verily (and I feare not to avouch it) I could eaſily for a neede, bring a candle to Saint Michell, and another to his Dragon, as the good old woman. I will follow the beſt ſide to the fire, but not into it, if I can chooſe. If neede require, let Montaigne my Mannor-houſe be ſwallowed vp in the publike ruine: but if there be no ſuch neceſſity, I will acknowledge my ſelfe beholding vnto fortune if ſhe pleaſe to ſave it; and for it's ſafety employ as much ſcope as my endeuours can affoord me. Was it not A
                                 ••
                              icus, who cleaving to the right (but looſing ſide) ſaved himſelfe by his moderation, in that generall Ship
                              •
                           racke of the world, amidſt ſo many changes and divers alterations? To private men, ſuch as he was, it is more eaſie. And in ſuch kinde of buſineſſes, I thinke one dealeth juſtly, not to be too forward to inſinuate or inuite himſelfe: To hold a ſtaggering or midle courſe, to beare an vnmooued affection, and without inclination in the troubles of his country, and publike diuiſions, I deeme neither ſeemely nor honeſt: Ea non media, ſed nu
                                 ••
                              a via
                           
                           eſt velut euenium expectantium, quo fortuna conſilia ſua applicent, That is not the mid-way, but a mid way, or no way, as of thoſe that expect the euent with intent to apply their deſſignes as fortune ſhall fall out. That may be permitted in the affaires of neighbours. So did Gelon the tyrant of Siracuſa ſuſpend his inclination in the Barbarian wars againſt the Greekes, keeping Ambaſſadours at Delphos, with preſents, to watch on what ſide the victory would light, and to apprehend the fitteſt occaſion of reconcilement with the victors. It were a kinde of treaſon to doe ſo in our owne affaires and domeſticall matters, wherein of neceſſitie one muſt reſolve and take aſide; but for a man that hath neither charge, nor expreſſe commaundement to vrge him; not to buſie or entermedle himſelfe therein, I holde it more excuſable; (Yet frame I not this excuſe for my ſelfe) then in forraine and ſtrangers wars, wherewith according to our lawes, no man is troubled againſt his will, Nevertheleſſe thoſe, who wholly ingage themſelves into them, may carry ſuch an order and temper, as the ſtorme (without offending them) may glide over their head, Had wee not reaſon to hope as much of the deceaſed Biſhop of Orleans, Lord of Moruillters? And I know ſome, who at this preſent worthilie beſtirre themſelues, in ſo even a faſhion or pleaſing a manner, that they are likely to continue on foote, whatſoeuer iniurious alteration or fall, the heavens may prepare againſt vs. I holde it onely fit for Kings to hee angry with Kings: And mocke at thoſe raſh ſpirits, who from the brauerie of their harts offer themſelues to ſo vnproportionate quarrels. For one vndertaketh not a particular quarrell againſt a Prince, in marching againſt him openly and couragiouſly, for his honour, and according to his dutie: If hee love not ſuch a man; hee doth better; at leaſt hee eſteemeth him. And the cauſe of lawes eſpecially, and defence of the auncient ſtate, hath ever found this priviledge, that ſuch as for their owne intereſt, diſturbe the ſame, excuſe (if they honour not) their defendors. But wee ought not terme duty (as now a dayes we do) a ſower rigour, and inteſtine crabbedneſſe, proceeding of priuate intereſt and paſſion; nor courage a treacherous and malicious proceeding. Their diſpoſition to frowardneſſe and miſchiefe, they entitle zeale: That's not the cauſe doth heate them, t'is their owne intereſt: They kindle a warre, not becauſe it is juſt, but becauſe it is warre. Why may not a man beare himſelfe betweene enemies featly and faithfully? Doe it, if not altogether with an equall (for it may admit different meaſure) at leaſt with a ſober affection, which may not ſo much engage you to the one, that hee looke for all at your hands. Content your ſelfe with a moderate proportion of their fauour, and to glide in troubled waters without fiſhing in them. Th'other manner of offering ones vttermoſt endeuours to both ſides, implyeth leſſe diſeration then conſcience. What knowes hee, to whom you betray another, as much your friend as hmſelfe, but you will doe the like for him, when his turne ſhall come. Hee takes you for a villaine; that whilſt hee heares you, and gathers out of you; and makes his beſt vſe of your diſloyaltie: For, double fellowes are onely beneficiall in what they bring, but we muſt looke, they carry away as little as may be. I carry nothing to the one, which I may not (hauing opportunity) ſay vnto the other, the accent only changed a little: and report either but indifferent or knowne, or common things▪ Noe benefit can induce mee to lye vnto them; what is entruſted to my ſilence I conceale religiouſly, but take as little in truſt as I can▪ 
                           Princes ſecrets are a troubleſome charge, to ſuch as haue nought to doe with them. I euer by my good will capitulate with them, that they truſt mee with very little; but let them aſſuredly truſt what I diſcloſe vnto them. I alwayes knew more then I wold. An open ſpeach opens the way to another, and drawes all out, euen as Wiue, and Loue. Philippides in my minde, anſwered king Lyſi
                                 ••
                              achus wiſely, when hee demaunded of him; what of his wealth or ſtate hee ſhoulde empare vnto him; Which and what you pleaſe (quoth hee) ſo it be not your ſecrets. I ſee euery one mutinie, if another conceale the deapth or miſterie of the affaires from him, wherein he pleaſeth to employ him, or haue but purloyned any circumſtance from him. For my part, I am content one tell me no more of his buſineſſe then hee will haue mee knowe or deale in, nor deſire I, that my knowledge exceede or ſtraine my word. If I muſt needes bee the inſtrument of cozinage, it ſhall at leaſt bee with ſafety of my conſcience. I will not be eſteemed a ſeruant, nor ſo affectionate, nor yet ſo faithfull, that I bee iudged fit to betray any man. Who is vnfaithfull to himſelfe, may bee excuſed if hee be faithleſſe to his Maiſter. But Princes entertaine not men by halfes, and deſpiſe bounded and condicionall ſeruice. What remedy? I freely tell them my limits; for, a ſlaue 
                              •
                            muſt not bee but vnto reaſon; which yet I cannot compaſſe: And they are to blame; to exact from a free man, the like ſubiection vnto

their ſeruice, and the ſame obligation, which they may from thoſe they haue made and bought; and whoſe fortune dependeth particularly and expreſly on theirs. The lawes haue deliuered mee from much trouble: they haue choſen mee aſide to followe, and appointed mee a maiſter to obey: all other ſuperioritie and duty, ought to bee relatiue vnto that and bee reſtrained. Yet may it not bee concluded, that if my affection ſhould otherwiſe tranſport mee, I would preſently afforde my helping hand vnto it. Will and deſires are a law to themſelues, actions are to receiue it of publike inſtitutions: All theſe proceedings of mine, are ſome what diſſonant from our formes. They ſhould produce noe great effects, nor holde out long among vs. Innocencie it ſelfe could not in theſe times nor negotiate without diſſimulation, nor trafficke without lying. Neither are publike functions of my dyet; what my profeſſion requires thereto, I furniſh in the moſt priuate manner I can. Being a childe, I was plunged into them vp to the eares, and had good ſucceſſe; but I got looſe in good time. I have often ſince ſhunned medling with them, ſeldome accepted and neuer required; euer holding my backe toward ambition; but if not rowers, who goe forward as it were backeward; Yet ſo, as I am leſſe beholding to my reſolution, then to my good fortune, that I was not wholly embarked in them. For, there are courſes leſle againſt my taſte, and more comfortable to my carriage, by which if heere tofore it had called mee to the ſeruice of the common-wealth, and my aduancement vnto credit in the world; I know that in following the ſame I had exceeded the reaſon of my couceite. Thoſe which commonly ſay againſt my proſeſſion, that what I terme liberty, ſimplicity and plaineneſſe in my behauiour, is arte, cunning and ſubtilty: and rather diſcretion, then goodneſſe; induſtry then nature; good wit, then good hap; doe mee more honour then ſhame. But truely they make my cunning ouercunning. And whoſoeuer hath traced mee and nearely looked into my humoures, lie looſe a good wager if hee confeſſe not, that there is noe rule in their ſchoole, could, a midde ſuch crooked pathes and diuerſe windings, ſquare and raport this naturall motion, and maintaine an apparance of liberty and licence, ſo equall and inflexible; and that all their attention and wit, is not of power to bring them to it. The way to trueth is but one and ſimple; that of particular profit and benefit of affaires a man hath in charge, double, vneven and accidentall. I haue often ſeene theſe counterſet 
                              〈…〉
                            artificiall liberties in practiſe, but moſt commonly without ſucceſſe. They ſauour of Aeſopes. Aſſe; who in emulation of the dogge, layde his two fore-feete very jocondly vpon his maiſters ſhoulders; but looke how many blandiſhments the pretty dogge receiued, vnder one, ſo many baſtinadoes were redoubled vpon the poore Aſles backe. Id maxime quemque decet; quod eſt cuiuſque ſuum
                           Cic. off. l. 1. 
                           maxime: that becomes euery man eſpecially, which is his owne eſpecially: I will not depriue couſinage of her ranke that were to vnderſtand the worlde but ill: I know it hath often done profitable ſeruice, it ſupporteth, yea and nouriſheth the greateſt part of mens vacations.
                        There are ſome lawfull vices; as many-actions, or good or excuſable vnlawfull. Iuſtice in it ſelfe naturall and vniuerfall is otherwiſe ordered, and more nobly diſtributed, then this other eſpeciall, and nationall iuſtice, reſtrained and ſuted to the neede of our pollicie: 
                              Ʋeri iuris germanaeque iuſtitiae ſolidam et expreſſam effigiem nullam tenemus; vmbra
                           Cic. off. l. 3. 
                           & imaginibus vtimur. Wee haue noe liuely nor life-like purtrature of vpright law and naturall iuſtice: wee vſe but the ſhaddowes and colours of them. So that wiſe Dandamys, hearing the liues of Socrates, Pythagoras and Diogenes repeated, in other thinges, iudged them great and woorthy men, but ouermuch ſubiected to the reuerence of the lawes: which to authorize and ſecond, true vertue is to decline very much from his naturall vigor: and not onely by their permiſſion, but perſwaſions diuerſe vicious actions are committed and take place. Ex Senatus conſultis plobiſque ſcitis ſcelera exercentur. Euen by decrees of counſell, and by ſtatute-lawes are miſchiefes put in practiſe. I follow the common phraſe, which makes a difference betweene profitable and honeſt things; terming ſome naturall actions which are not onely profitable but neceſſarie, diſhoneſt and filthie. But to continue our examples of treaſon. Two which aſpired vnto the kingdome of Thrace, were falne into controverſie for their right. The Emperor hindred them from falling together by the eares: the one vnder collour of contriving ſome friendlie accorde by an enterview inuiting the other to a feaſt in his houſe, empriſoned and murthred him. Iuſtice required, that the Romanes ſhould be ſatiſfied for this outrage: ſome difficulties empeached the ordinarie

courſe. What they could not lawfully doe without warre and hazard, they attempted to accompliſh by treaſon: what they coulde not honeſtlie archieue, they profitably compaſſed. For exployting whereof, Pomponius Flaccus was thought moſt fitte: who trayning the fellowe into his Nettes by fained wordes and ſugred aſlurances; in liew of the fauour and honour hee promiſed him, ſent him bound hand and foote to Rome. One traytour ouer-reached another, againſt common cuſtome: For, they are all full of diſtruſt, and t'is very hard to ſurprize them in their owne arte: witneſſe the heauie and diſmall experience wee have lately felt of it. Let who liſte bee Pomponius Flaccus; and there are too-too many that will bee ſo. As for my parte, both my word and faith, are as the reſt; pieces of this common bodie: their beſt effect is the publike ſeruice: that's ever preſuppoſed with mee. But as, if one ſhould command mee to take the charge of the Rolles or Recordes of the Pallace, I would anſwere: I have noe skill in them: or to bee a leader of Pioners, I would ſay; I am called to a worthier office: Even ſo, who would goe about to employ mee, not to murther or poyſon, but to lye, betraye, and forſweare my ſelfe, I would tell him; If I have robbed or ſtolne any thing from any man, ſend mee rather to the Gallies. For, a Gentleman may lawfully ſpeake as did the Lacedemonians, defeated by Antipater, vpon the points of their agreement: You may impoſe as heauie burdens, and harmefull taxes vpon vs as you pleaſe; but you looſe your time, to commaund vs any ſhamefull or diſhoneſt things. Euery man ſhould give himſelfe the oathe, which the Aegyptian Kings, ſolemnlie and vſuallie preſented to their judges; Not to ſwarue from their conſciences, what commaund ſoever they ſhould receive from themſelues to the contrarie. In ſuch commiſſions there is an evident note of ignominie and condemnation. And whoſoever giues them you, accuſeth you; and if you conceave them right, giues you them as a trouble and burthen. As much as the publike affaires amend by your endeuours, your owne empaireth: the better you doe, ſo much the worſe doe you. And it ſhall not bee newe, nor peraduenture without ſhadowe of juſtice, that hee who ſetteth you a worke, becommeth your ruine. If treaſon bee in any caſe excuſable, it is onely then, when t'is employed to puniſh and betraye treaſon. Wee ſhall finde many treacheries, to haue beene not onely refuſed, but puniſhed by them, in whoſe fauour they were vnder taken. Who knowes not the ſentence of Fabritius, againſt Pyrrus his Phyſition? And the commaunder hath often ſeverely revenged them on the partic hee employed in them, refuſing ſo vnbridled a credite and power, and diſavowing ſo lewde and ſo vile an obedience. Iaropelc Duke of Ruſſia, ſollicited an Hungarian Gentleman, to betraye Bol
                                 •
                              ſlaus King of Polonia, in contriuing his death, or furniſhing the Ruſſians with meanes to worke him ſome notable miſchiefe. This gallant, preſently beſtirres him in it, and more then euer applying himſelfe to the Kings ſeruice obtained to bee of his counſell, and of thoſe hee moſt truſted. By which aduantages, and with the opportunitie of his maiſters abſence, hee betrayde 
                              Ʋicilicia, a great and rich cittie to the Ruſſians: which was whollie ſackt and burnt by them, with a generall ſlaughter, both of the inhabitants, of what ſexe or age ſoever, and a great number of nobility there abouts, whom to that purpoſe he had aſſembled. Iaropelc his anger thus aſſwaged with revenge, and his rage mitigated (which was not without pretext, for Bol
                                 •
                              ſlaus had mightily wronged and in like manner incenſed him) and glutted with the fruite of treaſon, examining the vglineſſe thereof, naked and alone, and with imparciall eyes behoulding the ſame, not diſtempred by paſſion, conceaved ſuch a remorſe, and tooke it ſo to hart, that he forthwith cauſed the eyes of his inſtrumentall executioner to be pulled out, and his tongue and priuie partes to be cut of. Antigonus perſwaded the Argyraſpides ſoldiers, to betray Eumenes their generall, and his adverſarie, vnto him, whom when they had deliuered, and hee had cauſed to be ſlaine; himſelfe deſired to be the Commiſſarie of diuine juſtice, for the puniſhment of ſo deteſtable a trecherie: and reſigning them into the hands of the Gouernor of the Prouince, gave him expreſſe charge, in what manner ſoever it were, to rid himſelfe of them, and bring them to ſome miſchieuous end. Whereby, of that great number they were, not one ever after ſawe the ſmoake of Macedon. The better they ſerued hit turne, the more wicked hee iudged them, and the more worthie of puniſhment. The ſlave that betraide the corner wherein his maiſter P. Sulpicius lay hid, was ſet at libertie, according to the promiſe of Syllas proſcription: But according to the promiſe of common reaſon, beeing freed, hee was throwne head-long from off the Tarpeyan rocke. And Clouis King of France, in liew of the goldenarmes he had promiſed the three ſervants of Cannacre,
                           
cauſed them to be hanged, after they had by his ſollicitation betraide their maiſter vnto him. They hang them vp with the purſe of their reward about their neckes. Having ſaſatisfied their ſecond and ſpeciall faith, they alſo ſatisfie the generall and firſt. Mahomet the ſecond, deſirous to rid himſelfe of his brother (through jealouſie of rule, and according to the ſtile of that race) employed one of his officers in it; who ſtifled him, by much water powred downe his throate all at once: which done, in expiation of the fact, hee deliuered the murtherer into the hands of his brothers mother (for they were brethren but by the fathers ſide) ſhee, in his preſence, opened his boſome, and with hir owne revenging handes ſearching for his heart, pluckt it out, and caſt it vnto dogges to eate. Even vnto vile diſpoſitions (hauing made vſe of a filthie action) it is ſo ſweete and pleaſing, if they may with ſeeuritie, as it were, in way of recompence and holie correction, ſowe one ſure ſtitche of goodneſſe, and juſtice vnto it. Beſides; they reſpect the miniſters of ſuch horrible crimes, as people, that ſtill vpbraide them with them, and couet by their deaths to ſmother the knowledge, and cancell the teſtimonie of their practiſes. Now if perhaps, not to fruſtrate the publike neede of that laſt and deſperate remedy, one rewarde you for it: yet, hee who doth it (if hee bee not as bad himſelfe) will hould you a moſt accurſed and execrable creature. And deemeth you a greater traytor, then he whom you haue betrayed: for with your owne handes, hee toucheth the lewdneſſe of your diſpoſition, without diſavowing, without object. But employeth you, as we do out-caſt perſons in the executions of juſtice: an office as profitable as little honeſt. Beſides the baſeneſſe of ſuch commiſſions, there is in them a proſtitution of conſcience. The daughter of Sejanus, could not in Rome, by any true formall courſe of lawe, bee put to death, becauſe ſhee was a virgine: that lawes might haue their due courſe, ſhee was firſt deflowred by the common hang-man, and then ſtrangled. Not his hand onely, but his ſoule is a ſlave vnto publike commoditie. When Amurath the firſt, to aggrauate the puniſhment of his ſubjects, who had given ſupport vnto his ſons vnnaturall rebellion, appointed their neereſt kinſmen to lend their hands vnto this execution: I finde it verie honeſt in ſome of them, who rather choſe vnjuſtly to bee held guiltie of anothers parricide, then to ſerue iuſtice with their owne. And whereas in ſome paltrie townes forced in my time, I haue ſeene baſe varlets for ſauegarde of their owne lives, yeelde to hang their friends and companions, I ever thought them of worſe condition, then ſuch as were hanged. It is reported, that Witoldus Prince of Lituania, introduced an order with that nation, which was that the partie condemned to die, ſhould with his owne handes make himſelfe away; finding it ſtrange, that a third man beeing guitleſſe of the fact, ſhoulde bee employed and charged to commit a murther. When an vrgent circumſtance, or any violent and vnexpected accident, induceth a Prince for the neceſſitie of his eſtate, or as thay ſay for ſtate matters, to breake his worde and faith, or otherwiſe forceth him out of his ordinary dutie, hee is to aſcribe that neceſſitie vnto a laſh of Gods rod: It is no vice, for hee hath quit his reaſon, vnto a reaſon more publike, and more powerfull, but ſurely t'is ill fortune. So that to one, who asked mee what remedie? I replyde, none; were hee trulie rackt betweene theſe two extreames (Sed videat ne quaeratur latebra periurio. But let him take heede hee ſeeke not a ſtarting hole for periurie) hee muſt have done it;Cic. off. l. 3. but if hee did it ſans regret or ſcruple, if it greeued him not to doe it, t'is an argument his conſcience is but in ill tearmes. Now were there any one of ſo tender or cheuerell a conſcience, to whome no cure might ſeeme worthie of ſo extreame a remedie: I ſhould priſe or regard him no whit the leſſe. Hee cannot looſe himſelfe more handſomelie nor more excuſable. Wee cannot doe every thing, nor bee in euery place. When all is done, thus and thus, muſt wee often, as vnto our laſt Anker and ſole refuge, reſigne the protection of our veſſellvnto the onely conduct of heauen. To what juſter neceſſitie can hee reſerue himſelfe? What is leſſe poſſible for him to doe, then what hee cannot effect, without charge vnto his faith, and imputation to his honour? things which peradventure ſhould bee dearer to him, then his owne ſaluation, and the ſafety of his people. When with enfoulded armes hee ſhall deuoutly call on God for his ayde, may hee not hope, that his fatherlie mercie ſhall not refuſe the extraordinarie fauour, and ſinne-forgiuing grace of his all powerfull hand, vnto a pure and righteous hand? They are dangerous exemples, rare and craſed exceptions to our naturall rules: wee muſt yeelde vnto them, but with great moderation, and heedie circumſpection. No priuate commoditie, may any way deſerue wee

ſhould offer our conſcience this wrong the common-wealth may, when it is moſt apparant and important. Timoleon did fitlie warrant and warde the ſtrangeneſſe of his exploite by the teares hee ſhed, remembring it was with a brotherlie hand hee ſlew the tyrant, And it neerelie pinched his ſelfe-gnawne conſcience, that hee was compelled to purchaſe the common good, at the rate of his honeſtie. The ſacred Senate it ſelfe, by his meanes deliuered from thraldome, durſt not definitively decide of ſo haughtie an action, and rend in two ſo vrgent and different ſemblances. But the Siracuſans having opportunelie and at that very inſtant ſent to the Corinthians, to require their protection, and a gouernour able to re-eſtabliſh their towne in former maieſtie, and deliuer Sicilie from a number of pettie tyrants, which greeuouſhe oppreſſed the ſame: they appointed Timoleon, with this new caucat and declaration: That according as hee ſhould well or ill demeane himſelfe in his charge, their ſentence ſhould encline, either to grace him as the redeemer of his country, or diſgrace him, as the murtherer of his brother. This fantaſticall concluſion, hath ſome excuſe vpon the danger of the example, and importance of an act ſo different. and they did well, to diſcharge their iudgement of it, or to embarke him ſome where elſe, and on their conſiderations Now the proceedings of Timoleon in his renowned iournie did ſoone yeelde his cauſe the cleerer, ſo worthily and vertuouſly did hee euery way beare himſelfe therein. And the good hap, which euer accompanied him in the encombrances and difficulties hee was to ſubdue in the atchieuement of his noble enterpriſe, ſeemed to bee ſent him by the Gods, conſpiring to ſecond, and conſenting to favour his juſtification: This mans end is excuſable, if euer any could bee. But the encreaſe and profit of the publike revenues, which ſerued the Roman Senate for a pretext of the enſuing-foule concluſion I purpoſe to relate, is not of ſufficient force to warrant ſuch injuſtice. Certaine citties had by the order and permiſſion of the Senate, with mony purchaſed their libertie, at the hands of L. Sylla. The matter comming in queſtion againe, the Senate condemned them, to bee fineable and taxed as before: and the mony they had employed for their ranſome, ſhould bee deemed as loſt and forfetted. Ciuill warres doe often produce ſuch enormous examples: That we puniſh priuate men, for ſomuch as they have beleeved vs, when wee were other then now wee are. And one ſame magiſtrate doth laie the penaltie of his change on ſuch as cannot do withall. The Schoolemaſter whippeth his ſcholler for his docilitie, and the guide ſtreeketh the blind man he leadeth. A horrible image, of juſtice. Some rules in Philoſophie are both falſe and fainte. The example propoſed vnto vs, of reſpecting priuate vtilitie before faith giuen, hath not ſufficient power by the circumſtance they adde vnto it. Theeves have taken you, and on your oath to pay them a certaine ſum of money, haue ſet you at libertie againe: They erre, that ſay, an honeſt man is quit of his worde and faith without paying, beeing out of them handes; There is noe ſuch matter, What feare and danger hath once forced mee to will and conſent vnto, I am bound to will and performe boing out of danger and feare. And although it have but forced my tongue, and not my will, yet am I bound to make my worde good, and keepe my promiſe. For my part, when it hath ſometimes vnaduiſedly ouer-runne my thought, yet haue I made a conſcience to diſavowe the ſame. Otherwiſe wee ſhould by degrees come to aboliſh all the right a third man taketh and may challenge of our promiſes. Quaſi verò forti viro vis poſſit adhiberi.
                           Cic. off. l. 3. 
                           As though any force could be vſed vpon a valiant man, T'is onely lawfull for our priuate intereſt to excuſe the breache of promiſe, if wee have raſhlie promiſed things in them ſelves wicked and vnjuſt. For, the right of vertue ought to over-rule the right of our bonde. I have heretofore placed Fpaminondas in the firſt ranke of excellent men, and now recant it not. Vnto what high pitch raiſed hee the conſideration of his particular dutie? who never ſlew man hee had vanquiſhed; who for that vnvaluable good of reſtoring his countrie hir libertie, made it a matter of conſcience, to murther a Tyrant or his complices, without a due and formal courſe of lawe: and who judged him a bad man, how good a cittizen ſoever, that amongeſt his enemies and in the furie of a battle, ſpared not his friend, or his hoſte. Loc here a minde of a riche compoſition. Hee matched vnto the moſt violent and rude actions of men, goodneſſe and courteſie, yea and the moſt choiſe and delicate, that may bee found in the ſchoole of Philoſophie. This ſo high-raiſed courage, ſo ſwelling and ſo obſtinate againſt ſorow, death and povertie, was it nature or arte, made it relent, even to the vtmoſt ſtraine of exceedeng tenderneſſe and debonaretie of complexion? Being cloathed in the dreadfull liuerie of ſteele and blood, hee goeth on cruſhing and bruſing a nation, inuincible

to all others, but to himſelfe: yet mildely relenteth in the midſt of a combat or confuſion, when hee meets with his hoſt or with his friend. Verily, this man was deſervedly fit to command in warre, which in the extremeſt furie of his innated rage, made him to feele the ſting of courteſie, and remorſe of gentleneſſe: then when all enflamed, it foamed with furie, and burned with murder. T'is a miracle, to be able to joine any ſhew of juſtice with ſuch actions. But it only belongeth to the vnmatched courage of Epaminondas, in that confuſed plight, to joine mildneſſe and facilitie of the moſt gentle behaviour that ever was, vnto them, yea and pure innocencie it ſelfe. And whereas one told the Mamertins, that ſtatutes were of no force againſt armed men: another to the Tribune of the people, that the time of juſtice and warre, were two: a third, that the confuſed noiſe of warre and clang of armes, hindred him from vnderſtanding the ſober voice of the lawes: This man was not ſo much as empeached from conceiving the milde ſound of civilitie and kindneſſe. Borrowed hee of his enemies the cuſtome of ſacrificing to the Muſes (when hee went to the warres) to qualifie by their ſweetneſſe and mildneſſe, that martiall furie, and hoſtile ſurlineſſe? Let vs not feare, after ſo great a maſter, to hold that ſome things are vnlawfull, even againſt our felleſt enemies: that publike intereſt, ought not to challenge all of all, againſt private intereſt: Manente memoria etiam in diſſidio publicorum foederum privati iuris: Some memorie of private right continuing euen in diſagreement of publike contracts.
                        
                        
                           —& nulla potentia vires
                              Ouid. Punt. l. 1. 
                                    •
                                 l. 8. 37.
                           
                           Praeſtandi, ne quid peccet amicus, habet:
                           No power hath ſo great might,
                           To make friends ſtill goe right.
                        
                        
                           And that all things be not lawfull to an honeſt man, for the ſervice of his King, the generall cauſe and defence of the lawes. Non enim patria praeſtat omnibus officijs, & ipſi conducit pios habere cives
                           Cic. off. l. 3. 
                           in parentes. For our countrey is not above all other duties; it is good for the countrey to have her inhabitants vſe pietie toward their parents. T'is an inſtruction befitting the times: wee need not harden our courages with theſe plates of iron and ſteele; it ſufficeth our ſhoulders be armed with them: it is enough to dippe our pens in inke, too much, to die them in blood. If it be greatneſſe of courage, and th' effect of a rare and ſingular vertue, to neglect friendſhip, deſpiſe private reſpects and bonds; ones word and kindred, for the common good and obedience of the Magiſtrate: it is verily able to excuſe vs from it, if we but allege, that it is a greatneſſe vnable to lodge in the greatneſſe of Epaminondas his courage. I abhorre the enraged admonitions of this other vnruly ſpirit.
                        
                           - dum tela micant, non vos pietatis imago
                              Luan. l. 7. 320. Caeſ.
                           
                           Vlla, nec aduerſa conſpect
                                 •
                               fronte parentes
                           Commoveant, vult us gladio turbante verendos.
                           While ſwords are brandiſht, let no ſhew of grace
                           Once moove you, nor your parents face to face,
                           But with your ſwords diſturbe their reverend grace.
                        
                        Let vs bereave wicked, bloodie and traiterous diſpoſitions, of this pretext of reaſon: leave wee that impious and exorbitant iuſtice, and adhere vnto more humane imitations, Oh what may time and example bring to paſſe! In an encounter of the civill warres againſt Cinna, one of Pompeyes ſouldiers, having vnwittingly ſlaine his brother, who was on the other ſide, through ſhame and ſorrow preſently killed himſelfe; And ſome yeeres after, in another civill warre of the ſaid people, a ſouldier boldly demanded a reward of his Captaines for killing his owne brother. Falſly doe wee argue honour, and the beautie of an action, by it's profit: and conclude as ill, to thinke every one is bound vnto it, and that it is honeſt, if it be commodious.
                        
                           Omnia non pariter rerum ſunt omnibus apta.Prop. l. 3. el. 8. 7
                           
                           All things alike to all
                           Doe not well-fitting fall.
                        
                        
                           Chooſe we out the moſt neceſſary and moſt beneficiall matter of humane ſociety, it will be a mariage: yet is it, that the Saints counſell findeth and deemeth the contrary ſide more honeſt, excluding from it the moſt reverend vocation of men: as we to our races aſſigne ſuch beaſts as are of leaſt eſteeme.
                     
                     
                        The ſecond Chapter.
                        
                           Of Repenting.
                        
                        OThers faſhion man, I repeat him; and repreſent a particular one, but ill made; and whom were I to forme a new, he ſhould be far other then he is; but he is now made. And though the lines of my picture change and vary, yet looſe they not themſelves. The world runnes all on wheeles: All things therein moove without entermiſſion; yea the earth, the rockes of Caucaſus, and the Pyramides of Aegypt, both with the publike and their owne motion. Constancy it ſelfe is nothing but a languiſhing and wauering dance. I cannot ſettle my obiect; it goeth ſo vnquietly and ſtaggering, with a naturall drunkenneſſe. I take it in this plight, as it is at th'inſtant I ammuſe my ſelfe about it. I deſcribe not the eſſence, but the paſſage; not a paſſage from age to age, or as the people reckon, from ſeaven yeares to ſeaven, but from day to day, from minute to minute. My hiſtory muſt be fitted to the preſent. I may ſoone change, not onely fortune, but intention. It is a counter-roule of divers and variable accidents, and irreſolute imaginations, and ſometimes contrary: whether it be that my ſelfe am other, or that I apprehend ſubiects, by other circumſtances and conſiderations. Howſoever, I may perhaps gaine ſay my ſelfe, but truth (as Demades ſaid) I never gaine-ſay: Were my minde ſetled, I would not eſſay, but reſolue my ſelfe. It is ſtill a Prentiſe and a probationer. I propoſe a meane life, and without luſter: T'is all one. They faſten all morall Philoſophy as well to a popular and priuate life, as to one of richer ſtuffe. Every man beareth the whole ſtampe of humane condition. Authors communicate themſelves vnto the world by ſome ſpeciall and ſtrange marke; I the firſt, by my generall diſpoſition; as Michael de Montaigne; not as a Grammarian, or a Poet, or a Lawyer. If the world complaine, I ſpeake too much of my ſelfe, I complaine, it thinkes no more of it ſelfe. But is it reaſon, that being ſo private in vſe, I ſhould pretend to make my ſelfe publike in knowledge? Or is it reaſon, I ſhould produce into the world, where faſhion and arte have ſuch ſway and command, the raw and ſimple effects of nature; and of a nature as yet exceeding weake? To write bookes without learning, is it not to make a wall without ſtone or ſuch like thing? Conceites of muſicke are directed by arte; mine by hap. Yet have I this according to learning, that never man handled ſubject, he vnderſtood or knew, better then I doe this I have vndertaken; being therein the cunningeſt man alive.
                        Secondly, that never man waded further into his matter, nor more diſtinctly ſifted the partes and dependances of it, nor arrived more exactly and fully to the end he propoſed vnto himſelfe. To finiſh the ſame, I have need of naught but faithfulneſſe: which is therein as ſincere and pure as may be found. I ſpeake truth, not my belly-full, but as much as I dare; and I dare the more, the more I grow into yeares: for it ſeemeth, cuſtome alloweth old age more liberty to babbell, and indiſcretion to talke of it ſelfe. It cannot herein be, as in trades; where the Crafts-man and his worke doe often differ. Being a man of ſo ſound and honeſt conuerſation, write he ſo fooliſhly? Are ſuch learned writings come from a man of ſo weake a converſation? who hath but an ordinary conceite, and writeth excellently, one may ſay his capacity is borrowed, not of himſelfe. A skilfull man, is not skilfull in all things: But a ſufficient man, is ſufficient euery where, even vnto ignorance. Heere my booke and my ſelfe march together, and keepe one pace. Elſe-where one may commend or condemne the worke, without the worke-man; heere not: who toucheth one, toucheth the other. He who ſhall iudge of it without knowing him, ſhall wrong himſelfe more then me: he that knowes it,

hath wholly ſatisfied mee. Happie beyond my merite, If I get this onely portion of publike approbation, as I may cauſe men of vnderſtanding to thinke, I had beene able to make vſe and benefit of learning, had I beene endowed with any: and deſerued better helpe of memorie. excuſe wee heere what I often ſay, that I ſeldome repent my ſelfe, and that my conſcience is contented with it ſelfe; not of an Angels or a horſes conſcience, but as of a mans conſcience. Adding euer this clauſe, not of ceremonie, but of true and eſſentiall ſubmiſſion; that I ſpeake inquiring and doubting, meerely and ſimply referring my ſelfe, from reſolution, vnto common and lawfull opinions. I teach not; I report: Noe vice is abſolutely vice, which offendeth not, and a ſound iudgement accuſeth not: For, the deformitie and incommoditie thereof is ſo palpable, as peraduenture they haue reaſon, who ſay, it is chiefly produced by ſottiſhneſſe and brought forth by ignorance; ſo hard is it, to imagine one ſhould know it without hating it. Malice ſucks vp the greateſt part of her owne venome, and therewith impoyſoneth herſelfe. Ʋice, leaueth, as an vlcer in the fleſh, a repentance in the ſoule, which ſtill ſcratcheth, and bloodieth it ſelfe. For reaſon effaceth other griefes and ſorrowes, but engendereth thoſe of repentance: the more yrkeſome, becauſe inwarde: As the colde and heate of agues is more offenſiue then that which comes outward. I account vice (but each according to their meaſure) not onely thoſe which reaſon diſalowes, and nature condemnes, but ſuch as mans opinion bath forged as falſe and erronious, if lawes and cuſtome authorize the ſame. In like manner there is not goodneſſe but gladdeth an honeſt diſpoſition. There is truely I wot not what kinde or congratulation, of well doing, which reioyceth in our ſelues, and a generous jollitie, that accompanieth a good conſcience. A minde couragiouſlie vicious, may happily furniſh it ſelfe with ſecurity, but ſhee cannot bee fraught, with this ſelfe-ioyning delight and ſatisfaction. It is noe ſmall pleaſure, for one to feele himſelfe preſerued from the contagion of an age ſo infected as ours, and to ſay to himſelfe; could a man enter and ſee euen into my ſoule, yet ſhould he not finde me guilty, either of the affliction or ruine of any body, nor culpable of enuie or reuenge, nor of publike offence againſt the lawes, nor tainted with innouation, trouble or ſedition; nor ſpotted with falſifying of my worde; and although the libertie of times alowed and taught it every man, yet could I neuer bee induced to touch the goods or diue into the purſe of any French man; and haue alwayes liued vpon mine own, as well in time of war, as of peace: nor did I euer make vſe of any pooremans labour, without reward. Theſe teſtimonies of an vnſpotted conſcience are very pleaſing, which naturall ioy is a great benefit vnto vs; and the onely payment neuer faileth vs. To ground the recompence of vertuous actions, vpon the approbation of others, is to vndertake a moſt vncertaine or troubled foundation, namely in an age ſo corrupt and times ſo ignorant, as this is: the vulgar peoples good opinion is iniurious. Whom truſt you in ſeeing what is commendable; God keepe mee from beeing an honeſt man, according to the deſcription I dayly ſee made of honour, each one by himſelfe. Quae fuerant vitia, mores ſunt. What earſt were vices, are now growne faſhious. Some of my friendes, have ſometimes attempted to ſchoole me roundly, and ſift mee plainely, either of their owne motion, or envited by me, as to an office, which to a well compoſed minde, both in profit and lovingneſſe, exceedeth all the duties of ſincere amity. Such have I euer entertained with open armes of curteſie, and kinde acknowledgement. But now to ſpeake from my conſcience, I often found ſo much falſe meaſure in their reproches and praiſes, that I had not greatly erred if I had rather erred, then done well after their faſhion. Such as wee eſpecially, who live a private life not expoſed to any gaze but our owne, ought in our hartes eſtabliſh a touchſtone, and thereto touch our deedes and try our actions; and accordingly, now cheriſh, and now chaſtiſe our ſelues. I haue my owne lawes and tribunall, to iudge of mee, whether I adreſſe my ſelfe more then any where els. I reſtraine my actions according to other, but extend them according to my ſelfe. None but your ſelf knowes rightly whether you be demiſſe and cruel, or loyall and deuout. Others ſee you not, but gheſſe you by vncertaine coniectures: They ſee not ſo much your nature, as your arte. Adhere not then to their opinion, but hold vnto your owne. Tuo tibi iudicio eſt vtendum. Virtutis & viciorum graue ipſius conſcientiae pondus
                           Cic. Nat. Deor. L. 3. 
                           eſt: qua ſublata iacent omnia; You muſt vſe your owne iudgement: The weight of the very conſcience of vice and vertues is heauy: take that away, and all is downe. But where as it is ſaid, that repentance nearely followeth ſinne, ſeemeth not to emplye ſinne placed in his rich aray, which lodgeth in vs as in his proper manſion. One may diſavowe and diſclaime vices, that ſurpriſe vs, and whereto our paſſions tranſport vs: but thoſe, which by long habite are rooted in a

ſtrong, and ankred in a powerfull will, are not ſubiect to contradiction. Repentance is but a denying of our will, and an oppoſition of our fantaſies which diuerts vs here and there. It makes ſome diſauow his former vertue and continencie.
                        
                           Quae mens eſt hodie, cur eadem non puero fuit,Hor. car. l. 4. od. 10 7.
                           
                           
                              Ʋel cur his animis incolumes non redeunt genae?
                           Why was not in a youth ſame minde as now?
                           Or why beares not this minde a youthfull brow?
                        
                        
                           That is an exquiſite life, which euen in his owne priuate keepeth it ſelfe in awe and order. Euery one may play the jugler, and repreſent an honeſt man vpon the ſtage; but within, and in boſome, where all thinges are lawfull, where all is concealed; to keepe a due rule or formall decorum, that's the point. The next degree, is to bee ſo in ones owne home, and in his ordinary actions, whereof we are to giue accoumpt to no body: wherin is no ſtudy, nor arte, And therefore Bias deſcribing the perfect ſtate of a family, whereof (ſaith hee) the maiſter, be ſuch inwardly by himſelfe, as hee is outwardly, for feare of the lawes, and reſpect of mens ſpeaches. And it was a worthy ſaying of Iulius Druſus, to thoſe worke-men, which for three thouſande crownes, offered ſo to reforme his houſe, that his neighbours ſhould no more ouer looke into it: I will giue you ſixe thouſand (ſaid hee) and contriue it ſo, that on all ſides euery man may looke into it. The cuſtome of Ageſilaus is remembred with honour, who in his trauaile was wont to take vp his lodging in churches, that the people, and Gods themſelues might pry into his priuate actions. Some haue beene admirable to the world, in whom nor his wife, nor his ſeruant euer noted any thing remarkeable. Few men haue beene admired of their familiars. No man hath beene a Prophet, not onely in his houſe, but in his owne country, ſaith the experience of hiſtories. Euen ſo in things of nought. And in this baſe example, is the image of greatneſſe diſcerned. In my climate of Gaſcoigne they deeme it a ieſt to ſee mee in print. The further the knowledge which is taken of mee is from my home, of ſo much more woorth am I. In Guienne I pay Printers; in other places they pay mee. Vpon this accident they ground, who liuing and preſent keepe cloſe-lurking, to purchaſe credit when they ſhall be dead and abſent. I had rather haue leſſe. And I caſt not my ſelfe into the world, but for the portion I draw from it. That done, I quit it. The people attend on ſuch a man with wonderment, from a publike act, vnto his owne doores: together with his roabes hee leaues-of his part; falling ſo much the lower, by how much higher hee was mounted. View him within, thereall is turbulent, diſordered and vile. And were order and formality found in him, a liuely, impartiall and well ſorted iudgement is required, to perceiue and fully to diſcerne him in theſe baſe and priuate actions. Conſidering that order is but a dumpiſh and drowſie vertue: To gaine a Battaile, perfourme an Ambaſſage, and gouerne a people, are noble and woorthy actions; to chide, laugh, ſell, pay, loue, hate, and mildely and iuſtly to conuerſe both with his owne and with himſelfe; not to relent, and not gaine-ſay himſelfe, are thinges more rare, more difficult and leſſe remarkeable.
                        Retired liues ſuſtaine that way, what euer ſom ſay, offices as much more crabbed, and extended, then other liues doe. And priuate men (ſaith Ariſtotle) ſerue vertue more hardly, and more highly attend her, then thoſe which are magiſtrates or placed in authority. Wee prepare our ſelues vnto eminent occaſions, more for glory then for conſcience. The neareſt way to come vnto glory, were to doe that for conſcience, which wee doe for glory. And me ſeemeth the vertue of Alexander repreſenteth much leſſe vigor in her large Theater, then that of Socrates, in his baſe and obſcure excercitation. I eaſily conceiue Socrates, in the roome of Alexander; Alexander in that of Socrates I cannot. If any aske the one, what hee can doe, hee will anſwere, Conquer the world; let the ſame queſtion bee demaunded of the other, he will ſay, leade my life conformably to it's naturall condition; A ſcience much more generous, more important, and more lawfull.
                        
                           The woorth of the minde conſisteth not in going high, but in marching orderly. Her greatneſſe is not excerciſed in greatneſſe; in mediocritye it is. As thoſe, which iudge and touch vs inwardely, make no great accoumpt of the brightneſſe of our publique actions; and ſee they are but ſtreakes and poyntes of cleare Water,

ſurging from a bottome, otherwiſe ſlimie and full of mud: So thoſe who iudge vs by this gay outward apparance, conclude the ſame of our inward conſtitution, and cannot couple popular faculties as theirs are, vnto theſe other faculties, which amaze them ſo farre from their leuell. So doe we attribute ſauage ſhapes and ougly formes vnto diuels. As who doeth not aſcribe high-raiſed eye-browes, open noſtrils, a ſterne frightfull viſage, and a huge body vnto Tamburlane, as is the forme or ſhape of the imagination we haue fore-conceiued by the bruite of his name? Had any heretofore ſhewed me Eraſmus, I could hardly had bin induced to think, but whatſoeuer he had ſaid to his boy or hoſtes, had beene Adages and Apothegmes. We imagine much more fitly an Artificer vpon his cloſe ſtoole or on his wife, then a great judge, reverend for his carriage and regardfull for his ſufficiencie; we thinke, that from thoſe high thrones they ſhould not abaſe themſelues ſo low, as to liue. As vicious mindes are often incited to do well by ſome ſtrange impulſion, ſo are vertuous ſpirits mooued to d
                              •
                           e ill. They muſt then bee judged by their ſettled eſtate, when they are neare themſelues, and as we ſay, at home, if at any time they be ſo; or when they are neareſt vnto reſt, and in their naturall ſeate. Naturall inclinations are by inſtitution helped and ſtrengthned, but they neither change nor exceed. A thouſand natures in my time, haue a thwart, a contrary diſcipline, eſcaped toward vertue or toward vice.
                        
                           Sic vbi deſuetae ſiluis in carcere clauſae,Lucan. l. 4. 237.
                           
                           Manſueuére ferae, & vultui poſuere minaces,
                           Atque hominem dedicere pati, ſi torrida paruus
                           
                              Ʋenit in or a cruor, redeunt rabieſ
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               furorque,
                           Admonitaeque tument guſtato ſanguine fauces,
                           Feruet, & à trepido vix abſtinet ir a magiſtro.
                           So when wilde beaſts, diſuſed from the wood,
                           Fierce lookes laide-downe, growe tame, cloſde in a cage,
                           Taught to beare man, if then a little blood
                           Touch their hot lips, furie returnes and rage;
                           Their iawes by taſte admoniſht ſwell with vaines,
                           Rage boyles, and from fainte keeper ſcarſe abſtaines.
                        
                        Theſe originall qualities are not grubd out, they are but covered, and hidden: The Latine tongue is to mee in a manner naturall; I vnderſtand it better then French; but it is now fortie yeares, I have not made vſe of it to ſpeake, nor much to write: yet in ſome extreame emotions and ſuddaine paſſions, wherein I haue twice or thrice falen, ſince my yeares of diſcretion; and namely once, when my father being in perfect health, fell all along vpon me in a ſwoune, I haue euer, euen from my very hart vttered my firſt wordes in latine: Nature ruſhing and by force expreſſing it ſelfe, againſt ſo long a cuſtome; the like example is aleaged of diuers others. Thoſe which in my time, haue attempted to correct the faſtions of the world by new opinions, reforme the vices of apparance; thoſe of eſſence they leaue vntouched if they encreaſe them not: And their encreaſe is much to be feared. We willinglie protract all other well-doing vpon theſe externall reformations, of leſſe coſt, and of greatter merit; whereby wee ſatisfie good-cheape, other naturall conſubſtantiall and inteſtine vices. Looke a little into the courſe of our experience. There is no man (if he liſten to himſelfe) that doth not diſcouer in himſelfe a peculiar forme of his, a ſwaieng forme, which wreſtleth againſt the inſtitution, and againſt the tempeſts of paſſions, which are contrarie vnto him. As for me, I feele not my ſelfe much agitated by a ſhocke; I commonly finde my ſelfe in mine owne place, as are ſluggiſh and lumpiſh bodies. If I am not cloſe and neare vnto my ſelfe, I am never farre-off: My debauches or exceſſes tranſport me not much. There is nothing extreame and ſtrange: yet haue I ſound fits and vigorous luſts.▪ The true condemnation, and which toucheth the common faſhion of our men, is, that their very retreate is full of corruption and filth: The Idea of their amendment blurred and deformed; their repentance crazed and faultie, very neere as much as their ſinne. Some, either becauſe they are ſo faſt and naturally ioyned vnto vice, or through long cuſtome, haue loſt all ſence of it's vglineſſe. To others (of whoſe rancke I am) vice is burthenous, but they counter-ballance it with pleaſure, or other occaſions: and ſuffer it, and at a certaine rate lend themſelues vnto it; though baſely and viciouſly. Yet might happily ſo remote a diſproportion of meaſure bee imagined, where with juſtice, the pleaſure might excuſe the offence, as we ſay of profit,

Not onely being accidentall, and out of ſinne, as in thefts, but even in the very excerciſe of it, as in the acquaintance, or copulation with women; where the prouocation is ſo violent, and as they ſay, ſometime vnreſiſtable, In a towne of a kinſman of mine; the other day, beeing in Armignac, I ſawe a country man, commonly ſirnemed the Theefe: who himſelfe reported his life to haue beene thus. Beeing borne a begger, and perceiuing, that to get his bread by the ſweate of his brow and labour of his handes, would neuer ſufficiently arme him againſt penury, he reſolued to become a Theefe; and that trade had employed all his youth ſafely, by meanes of his bodily ſtrength: for he euer made vp Harueſt and Vintage in other mens groundes; but ſo farre off, and in ſo great heapes, that it was beyond imagination, one man ſhould in one night carry away ſo much vpon his ſhoulders: and was ſo carefull to equall the pray, and diſperce the miſchiefe he did, that the ſpoile was of leſſe import to euery particular man.
                        Hee is now in olde yeares indifferently rich; for a man of his condition (Godamercy his trade) which hee is not aſhamed to confeſſe openly, And to reconcile himſelfe with God, hee affirmeth, to bee dayly ready, with his gettings, and other good turnes, to ſatisfie the poſterity of thoſe hee hath heeretofore wronged or robbed; which if himſelfe bee not of abilitie to performe (for hee cannot doe all at once) hee will charge his heires withall, according to the knowledge hee hath, of the wrongs by him done to euery man. By this deſcription, bee it true or falſe, hee reſpecteth theaft, as a diſhoneſt and vnlawfull action, and hateth the ſame: yet leſſe then pinching want: Hee repents but ſimplie; for in regarde it was ſo counterballanced and recompenced, hee repenteth not. That is not that habit which incorporates vs vnto vice, and confirmeth our vnderſtanding in it; nor is it that boyſterous winde, which by violent blaſtes dazeleth and troubleth our mindes, and at that time confoundes, and ouerwhelmes both vs, our iudgement, and all into the power of vice. What I doe, is ordinarily full and compleate, and I march (as wee ſay) all in one piece: I haue not many motions, that hide themſelves and ſlinke away from my reaſon, or which very neare are not guided by the conſent of all my partes, without diuiſion, or inteſtine ſedition: my iudgement hath the whole blame, or commendation; and the blame it hath once, it hath euer: for, almoſt from it's birth, it hath beene one, of the ſame inclination, courſe and force. And in matters of generall opinions, euen from my infancie, I ranged my ſelfe to the point I was to hold. Some ſinnes there are outragious, violent and ſuddaine; leaue we them.
                        But thoſe other ſinnes, ſo often reaſſumed, determined and aduiſed vpon, whether they bee of complexion, or of profeſſion and calling, I cannot conceiue how they ſhould ſo long bee ſettled in one ſame courage, vnleſſe the reaſon and conſcience of the ſinner were thervnto inwardly priuie and conſtantly willing. And how to imagine or faſhion the repentance thereof, which hee vanteth, doeth ſome times viſite him, ſeemeth ſomewhat hard vnto mee. I am not of Phythagoras Sect, that men take a new ſoule, when to receive Oracles, they approach the images of Gods; vnleſſe he would ſay with all, that it muſt bee a ſtrange one, new, and lent him for the time: our owne, giuing ſo little ſigne of purification, and cleaneſſe worthy of that office, They doe altogether againſt the Stoycall precepts, which appoint vs to correct the imperfections and vices we finde in our ſelues, but withall forbidde vs to diſturbe the quiet of our minde. They make vs beleeue, they feele great remorſe, and are inwardly much diſpleaſed with ſinne; but of amendment, correction or intermiſſion, they ſhew vs none. Surely there can bee noc perfect health; Where the diſeaſe is not perfectlye remooued. Were repentance put in the ſcale of the ballance, it woulde weigh downe ſinne. I finde no humour ſo eaſie to bee counterfeited as Deuotion: If one conforme not his life and conditions to it, her eſſence is abſtruſe and concealed, her apparance gentle and ſtately.
                        For my part, I may in generall wiſh to bee other then I am; I may condemne and miſlike my vniuerſall forme; I may beſeech God to grant mee an vndefiled reformation, and excuſe my naturall weakeneſſe; but mee ſeemeth I ought not to tearme this repentance noe more then the diſpleaſure of being neither Angell nor Cat
                                 •
                              . My actions are ſquared to what I am and conformed to my condition. I cannot doe better: And repentance dooth not properly concerne what is not in our power; ſorrow dooth. I may imagine infinite diſpoſitions of a higher pitch, and better gouerned then myne, yet doe I nothing better my faculties;

noe more then mine arme becommeth ſtronger, or my wit more excellent, by conceiuing ſome others to be ſo. If to ſuppoſe & wiſh a more nobler working then ours, might produce the repentance of our owne, wee ſhould then repent vs of our moſt innocent actions: forſomuch as wee iudge that in a more excellent nature, they had heene directed with greater perfection and dignity; and our ſelves would doe the like. When I conſult with my age of my youthes proceedings, I finde that commonly, (according to my opinion) I managed them in order. This is all my reſiſtance is able to performe. I flatter not my ſelfe: in like circumſtances, I ſhould euer bee the ſame. It is not a ſpot, but a whole dye, that ſtaynes mee. I acknowledge noe repentance, that is ſuperficiall, meane and ceremoious. It muſt touch mee on all ſides, before I can terme it repentance. It muſt pinch my entrailes, and afflict them as deepely and throughly, as God himſelfe beholdes mee. When in negotiating, many good fortunes haue ſlipt mee for want of good diſcretion, yet did my proiects make good choyce, according to the occurrences preſented vnto them. Their manner is euer to take the eaſier and ſurer ſide. I finde that in my former deliberations, I proceeded, after my rules, diſcreetely, for the ſubiects ſtate propounded to mee; and in like occaſions, would proceede a like; a hundred yeares, hence. I reſpect not what now it is, but what it was, when I conſulted of it. The conſequence of all deſſignes conſiſtes in the ſeaſons; occaſions paſſe, and matters change vnceſſantlie. I have in my time runne into ſome groſſe, abſurde and important errors; not for want of good aduiſe, but of good happe. There are ſecret and indiuinable partes in the obiects men doe handle; eſpeciallie in the nature of men and mute conditions, without ſhew, and ſometimes vnknowne of the very poſſeſſours, produced and ſtirred vp by ſuddaine occaſions. If my wit coulde neyther finde nor preſage them, I am not offended with it; the function thereof is contained within it's owne limits. If the ſucceſſe beate mee, and favour the ſide I refuſed; there is noe remedy; I fall not out with my ſelfe; I accuſe my fortune, not my endeuour: that's not called repentance. Phocion had giuen the Athenians ſome counſell, which was not followed; the matter, againſt his opinion, ſucceeding happily; How now Phocion, (quoth one) art thou pleaſed the matter hath thriued ſo well? yea (ſaide hee) and I am glad of it, yet repent not the aduiſe I gaue.
                        When any of my friends come to mee for counſell, I beſtowe it francklie and clearelie, not as (well nigh all the worlde doth) wavering at the hazard of the matter, whereby the contrary of my meaning may happen, that ſo they may juſtly finde fault with my aduiſe: for which I care not greatly. For they ſhall doe mee wrong, and it became nor mee to refuſe them that dutie. I haue no body to blame for my faultes or misfortunes, but my ſelfe. For in effect I ſeldome vſe the aduiſe of other vnleſſe it be for complements ſake, and where I haue need of inſtruction or knowledge of the fact. Marry in things wherin nought but judgment is to bee employed; ſtrange reaſons may ſerve to ſuſtaine, but not to divert me. I lende a favourable and curteous eare vnto them all. But (to my remembrance) I never beleeued any but mine owne. With mee they are but Flyes and Moathes, which diſtract my will. I little regarde mine owne opinions, other mens I eſteeme as little: Fortune payes mee accordingly. If I take no counſell I give as little. I am not much ſought after for it and leſſe credited when I give it: Neither knowe I any enterpriſe, either private or publike, that my aduiſe hath directed and brought to concluſion. Euen thoſe whome fortune had ſome-way tyde therevnto, have more willingly admitted the direction of others conceites, then mine. As one that am a jealous of the rights of my quiet, as of thoſe of my authoritie; I would rather haue it thus.
                        Where leaving me, they iumpe with my profeſſion, which is, wholly to ſettle and containe mee in my ſelfe. It is a pleaſure vnto mee, to bee diſintereſſed of other mens affayres, and diſingaged from their contentions. When ſutes or buſineſſes bee ouer-paſt, how-ſo-ever it bee, I greeve little at them. For, the imagination that they muſt neceſſarily happen-ſo, puts mee out of paine; behould them in the courſe of the Vniuerſe, and enchained in Stoy call cauſes. Your fantazie cannot by wiſhe or imagination, remooue one point of them, but the whole order of things muſt reverſe both what is paſt, and what is to come. More-over, I hate that accidentall repentance which olde age bringes with it.
                        
                           Hee that in ancient times ſaid, hee was beholden to yeares, becauſe they had ridde him of voluptuouſneſſe, was not of mine opinion. I ſhall neuer giue impuiſſance thankes, for any good it can doe mee. Nec tam averſa vnquam videbitur ab opere ſuo providentia, vt debilitas inter optima inuenta ſit. Nor ſhall fore-ſight euer bee ſeene ſo auerſe from hir owne worke, that weakeneſſe bee found to bee one of the best things. Our appetites are rare in olde-age: the blowe over-paſſed, a deepe ſacietie ſeazeth vpon vs: Therein I ſee no conſcience. Fretting care and weakeneſſe, imprint in vs an effeminate and drowzie vertue.
                        Wee muſt not ſuffer our ſelues ſo fully to be carried into naturall alterations, as to corrupt or adulterate our iudgement by them. Youth and pleaſure haue not heretofore prevailed ſo much ouer me, but I could ever (even in the midſt of ſenſualities) diſcerne the vgly face of ſinne: nor can the diſtaſte which yeares bring on me, at this inſtant, keepe mee from diſcerning that of voluptuouſneſſe in vice. Now I am no longer in it, I judge of it as if I were ſtill there. I who lively and attentively examine my reaſon, finde it to be the ſame that poſſeſſed me in my moſt diſſolute and licentious age; vnleſſe perhaps, they being enfeebled and empayred by yeares, doe make ſome difference: And finde, that what delight it refuſeth to affoorde mee in regarde of my bodilie health, it would no more denie mee, then in times paſt, for the health of my ſoule. To ſee it out of combate, I holde it not the more couragious. My temptations are ſo mortified and crazed, as they are not worthy of it's oppoſitions; holding but my hand before me, I be-calme them. Should one preſent that former concupiſcence vnto it, I feare it would be of leſſe power to ſuſtance it than heretofore it hath beene. I ſee in it, by it ſelfe no encreaſe of iudgement, nor acceſſe of brightneſſe, what it now iudgeth, it did then. Wherefore if there be any amendment, t'is but diſeaſed. Oh miſerable kinde of remedie, to be beholden vnto ſickneſſe for our health. It is not for our miſhap, but for the good ſucceſſe of our iudgement to performe this office. Croſſes and afflictions, make me doe nothing but curſſe them. They are for people, that cannot be awaked but by the whip. The courſe of my reaſon is the nimbler in proſperitie; It is much more diſtracted and buſied in the digeſting of miſchiefes, than of delights. I ſee much cleare
                              •
                            in faire weather. Health forewarneth me, as with more pleaſure, ſo to better purpoſe than ſickneſſe. I approached the neareſt I could vnto amendment and regularity, when I ſhould have enioyed the ſame; I ſhould be aſhamed and vexed, that the miſery and miſhap of my old age could exceede the helth, attention and vigor of my youth: and that I ſhould be eſteemed, not for what I have beene, but for what I am leaft to be. The happy life (in my opinion) not (as ſaid Antiſthenes) the happy death, is it that makes mans happineſſe in this world.
                        I have not prepoſterouſly buſied my ſelfe to tie the taile of a Philoſopher, vnto the head and bodie of a varlet: nor that this paultrie end, ſhould diſavow and belie the faireſt, ſoundeſt, and longeſt part of my life. I will preſent my ſelfe, and make a generall muſter of my whole, every where vniformally. Were I to live againe, it ſhould bee as I have already lived. I neither deplore what is paſt, nor dread what is to come: and if I be not deceived, the inward parts have neerely reſembled the outward. It is one of the chiefeſt points wherein I am beholden to fortune, that in the courſe of my bodies eſtate, each thing hath beene carried in ſeaſon. I have ſeene the leaves, the bloſſomes, and the fruit; and now ſee the drooping and withering of it. Happily, becauſe naturally. I beare my preſent miſeries the more gently, becauſe they are in ſeaſon, and with greater favour make mee remember the long happineſſe of my former life. In like manner, my diſcretion may well bee of like proportion in the one and the other time: but ſure it was of much more performance, and had a better grace, being freſh, iolly and full of ſpirit, then now that it is worne, decrepite and toyleſome.
                        I therefore renounce theſe caſuall and dolourous reformations. God must touch our heartes; our conſcience must amende of it ſelfe, and not by re-inforcement of our reaſon, nor by the enfeebling of our appetites. Voluptuouſneſſe in it ſelfe is neither pale nor diſcouloured, to be diſcerned by bleare and troubled eyes. Wee ſhould affect temperance and chaſtity for it ſelfe, and for Gods cauſe, who hath ordained them vnto vs:

that which Catars beſtow vpon vs, and which I am beholden to my chollicke for, is neither temperance nor chaſtitie. A man cannot boaſt of contemning or combating ſenſualitie, if hee ſee her not, or know not her grace, her force and moſt attractive beauties. I know them both, and therefore may ſpeake it. But mee thinkes our ſoules in age are ſubject vnto more importunate diſeaſes and imperfections, then they are in youth. I ſaid ſo being young, when my beardleſſe chinne was vpbraided mee; and I ſay it againe, now that my gray beard gives me authoritie. We entitle wiſdome, the frowardneſſe of our humours, and the diſtaſte of preſent things; but in truth wee abandon not vices, ſo much as wee change them; and in mine opinion for the worſe. Beſides a ſillie and ruinous pride, comberſome tattle, wayward and vnſociable humours, ſuperſtition and a ridiculous carking for wealth, when the vſe of it is well nigh loſt, I finde the more enuie, injuſtice and leaudneſſe in it. It ſets more wrinckles in our mindes, then on our foreheads: nor are there any ſpirits, or very rare ones, which in growing old taſte not ſowrely and muſtily. Man marcheth entirely towards his encreaſe and decreaſe. View but the wiſedome of Socrates, and divers circumſtances of his condemnation, I dare ſay he ſomething lent himſelfe vnto it by prevarication of purpoſe: being ſo neere, and at the age of ſeventie, to endure the benumming of his ſpirits richeſt pace, and the dimming of his accuſtomed brightneſſe. What Metamorphoſes have I ſeene it daily make in diuers of mine acquaintances? It is a powerfull maladie, which naturally and imperceptible glideth into vs: There is required great prouiſion of ſtu
                              ••
                           , heed and precaution, to auoid the imperfections wherewith it chargeth vs; or at leaſt to weaken their further progreſſe. I finde that notwithſtanding all my entrenchings, by little and little it getteth ground vpon mee: I hold out as long as I can, but know not whither at length it will bring mee. Happe what happe will, I am pleaſed the world know from what height I tumbled.
                     
                     
                        The third Chapter.
                        
                           Of three commerces or ſocieties.
                        
                        WE muſt not cleave ſo faſt vnto our humours and diſpoſitions. Our chiefeſt ſufficiencie is, to applie our ſelves to divers faſhions. It is a being, but not a life, to bee tied and bound by neceſſitie to one onely courſe. The goodlieſt mindes are thoſe that have moſt varietie and pliableneſſe in them. Behold an honourable teſtimonie of old Cato: Huic verſatile ingenium ſic pariter ad omnia fuit, vt natum ad id vnum diceres, quodcunque ageret.
                           Iiu. bel. Mac. l. 9. 
                           Hee had a wit ſo turneable for all things alike, as one would ſay hee had beene onely borne for that hee went about to doe. Were I to dreſſe my ſelfe after mine owne manner, there is no faſhion ſo good, whereto I would bee ſo affected or tied, as not to know how to leave and looſe it. Life is a motion vnequall, irregular and multiforme. It is not to bee the friend (leſſe the maſter) but the ſlave of ones ſelfe to follow vnceſſantly, and bee ſo addicted to his inclinations, as hee cannot ſtray from them, nor wreſt them. This I ſay now, as being extremely peſtred with the importunitie of my minde, forſomuch as ſhee cannot ammuſe her ſelfe, but whereon it is buſied; not employ it ſelfe, but bent and whole. How light ſoever the ſubject is one giues it, it willingly amplifieth, and wire-drawes the ſame, even vnto the higheſt pitch of toile. It's idleneſſe is therefore a painefull trade vnto mee, and offenſive to my health. Moſt wits have neede of extravagant ſtuffe, to vn-benumme and exerciſe themſelves: mine hath neede of it, rather to ſettle and continue it ſelfe: 
                              Ʋitia otij negotio diſcutienda ſunt, The vices of idleneſſe ſhould bee ſhaken off with buſineſſe: For, theS
                                 ••
                              . ep. 56. moſt laborious care and principall ſtudie of it, is, to ſtudie it ſelfe. Bookes are one of thoſe buſineſſes that ſeduce it from ſtudie. At the firſt thoughts that preſent themſelves, it rouzeth vp and makes proofe of all the vigour it hath. It exerciſeth it's function ſometimes toward force, ſometimes toward order and comelineſſe, it rangeth, moderates

and fortifieth. It hath of it ſelfe to awaken the faculties of it: Nature having given it, as vnto all other, matter of it's owne for advantage, and ſubiects fit enough whereon to deviſe and determine. Meditation is a large and powerfull ſtudie to ſuch as vigorouſly can taſte and employ themſelues therein. I had rather forge then furniſh my minde.
                        There is no office or occupation either weaker or ſtronger, then that of entertaining of ones thoughts according to the minde, whatſoever it be. The greateſt make it their vacation, Quibus viuere eſt cogitare, to whom it is all one to liue and to meditate. Nature hath alſo favoured it with this priuilege, that there is nothing we can doe ſo long; nor action, whereto wee give our ſelves more ordinarily and eaſily. It is the worke of Gods (ſaith Aristotle) whence both their happineſſe and ours proceedeth. Reading ſerves mee eſpecially, to awake my conceit by divers objects; to buſie my judgement, not my memorie. Few entertainments then, ſtay mee without vigour and force. T'is true that courteſie and beautie poſſeſſe mee, as much or more, then waight and depth. And becauſe I ſlumber in all other communications, and lend but the ſuperficiall parts of my attention vnto them, it often befalleth mee, in ſuch kinde of weake and abſurd diſcourſes, (diſcourſes of countenance) to blurt out and anſwer ridiculous toies, and fond abſurdities, vnworthie a childe; or wilfully to hold my peace; therewithall more fooliſhly and incivilly. I have a kinde of raving fancie-full behaviour, that retireth mee into my ſelfe; and on the other ſide, a groſſe and childiſh ignorance of many ordinarie things; by meanes of which two qualities, I have in my daies committed five or ſix as ſottiſh trickes, as any one whoſoever; which to my derogation may bee reported. But to follow my purpoſe, this harſh complexion of mine makes me nice in conuerſing with men (whom I muſt picke and cull out for the nonce) and vnfit for common actions. Wee liue and negotiate with the people: If their behaviour importune vs, if wee diſdaine to lend our ſelves to baſe and vulgar ſpirits, which often are as regular as thoſe of a finer mould; and all wiſedome is vaſavourie, that is not conformed to common inſipience. Wee are no longer to intermeddle either with our, or other mens affaires: and both publike and private forſake ſuch kinde of people.
                        The leaſt wreſted, and moſt naturall proceedings of our minde, are the faireſt; the beſt occupations, thoſe which are leaſt forced. Good God, how good an office doth wiſedome vnto thoſe, whoſe deſires ſhee ſquareth according to their power! There is no ſcience more profitable. As one may, was the burden and favoured ſaying of Socrates: A ſentence of great ſubſtance. Wee muſt addreſſe and ſtay our deſires, to things moſt eaſie and neereſt. Is it not a fond-peeviſh humour in mee, to diſagree from a thouſand; to whom my fortune joineth mee, without whom I cannot live, to adhere vnto one or two, that are out of my commerce and conuerſation; or rather to a fantaſticall conceit, or fancie-full deſire, for a thing I cannot obtaine? My ſoft behaviours and milde manners, enemies to all ſharpneſſe and foes to all bitterneſſe, may eaſily have diſcharged mee from envie and contention. To bee beloved, I ſay not, but not to bee hated, never did man give more occaſion. But the coldneſſe of my conuerſation, hath with reaſon robd mee of the good will of many; which may bee excuſed, if they interpret the ſame to other, or worſe ſenſe. I am moſt capable of getting rare amities, and continuing exquiſite acquaintances. For ſo much as with ſo greedie hunger I ſnatch at ſuch acquaintances as anſwer my taſte and ſquare with my humour. I ſo greedily produce and headlong caſt my ſelfe vpon them, that I doe not eaſily miſſe to cleaue vnto them, and where I light-on, to make a ſteadie impreſſion; I have often made happie and ſucceſſefull triall of it.
                        In vulgar worldly friendſhips, I am ſomewhat cold and barren; for my proceeding is not naturall, if not vnreſiſted and with hoiſed-full ſailes. Moreover, my fortune having enured and allured mee, even from my infancie, to one ſole-ſingular and perfect amitie, hath verily, in ſome ſort, diſtaſted mee from others: and over-deeply imprinted in my fantaſie, that it is a beaſt ſociable and for companie, and not of troupe, as ſaid an ancient writer. So that it is naturally a paine vnto mee, to communicate my ſelfe by halves, and with modification; and that ſervile or ſuſpicious wiſedome, which in the converſation of theſe numerous and imperfect amities, is ordained and propoſed

vnto vs: Preſcribed in theſe daies eſpecially, Wherein one cannot ſpeake of the world but dangerouſlie or falſelie. Yet I ſee, that who (as I doe) makes for his ende, the commodities of his lyfe (I meane eſſentiall commodities) muſt auoyde as a plague, theſe difficulties and quaintneſſe of humour.
                        I ſhould commend a high-rayſed minde, that could both bende and diſcharge it ſelfe: that where-ever hir fortune might tranſporte hir, ſhee might continue conſtant: that could diſcourſe with hir neyghbour of all matters, as of hir building, of hir hunting and of any quarrell; and entertaine with delight a Carpenter or a Gardiner. I enuye thoſe which can be familiar with the meaneſt of their followers, and vouchafe to contract friendſhip, and frame diſcourſe with their owne ſeruantes. Nor do I like the aduiſe of Plato, ever to ſpeake imperiouſlye vnto our attendants, without blithneſſe and ſance any familiaritie: be it to men or women ſeruants. For, beſides my reaſon, it is inhumanitie, and injuſtice, to attribute ſo much vnto that prerogatiue of fortune: and the govenrment, where leſſe inequalitie is permited betweene the ſeruant and mayſter, is, in my conceite the more indifferent. Some other ſtudie to rouze and raiſe their minde; but I to abaſe and proſtrate mine: it is not faultie but in extenſion.
                        
                           Narras et genus Aeaci,idor. 
                                    •
                                 ar. l. 3 od 19. 2.
                           
                           Et pugnata ſacro bella ſub Ilio.
                           Quo Chium pretio cadum
                           Mercemur, quis aquam temperet iguibus,
                           Quo praebente domum, et quota
                           Pelignis caream frigoribus, taces.
                           You tell of Aeacus the pedegree;
                           The warres at ſacred Troye you doe diſplay,
                           You tell not at what price a hogs-head we
                           May buie of the beſt Wine; who ſhall allaye
                           Wine-fire with water. at whoſe houſe to holde.
                           At what a-clock, I may be kept from colde,
                        
                        Even as the Lacedemonian valoure had neede of moderation, and of ſweete and pleaſing ſoundes of Flutes, to flatter and allaye it in time of warre, leaſt it ſhould runne head-long into raſhneſſe and furye: whereas all other nations vſe commonly pearcing ſoundes and ſtrong ſhouts, which violently excite, and enflame their ſouldyers courage: ſo thinke I (againſt ordinarye cuſtome) that in the imployment of our ſpirite, wee have for the moſt part more need of leade then winges; of coldeneſſe and quiet, then of heate and agitation. Above all, in my mind, The onely way to playe the foole well, is to ſeeme wiſe among fooles: to ſpeake as though ones tongue were ever bent to Fauelar' in punta diforchetta, To
                           Ital. Preu. 
                           ſyllabize or ſpeake minſinglie. One muſt lend himſelfe vnto thoſe hee is with, and ſometimes affect ignorance: Set force and ſubtiltie aſide; In common employments t'is enough to reſerue order; dragge your ſelfe even cloſe to the ground, if they will have it ſo. The learned ſtumble willinglie on this blocke; making continuall muſter, and open ſhowe of their skill, and diſperſing their bookes abroade: And have in theſe dayes ſo filled the cloſets, and poſſeſſed the eares of Ladyes, that if they retayne not their ſubſtance, at leaſt they have theyr countenance: vſing in all ſortes of diſcourſe and ſubject how baſe or popular ſoever, a newe, an affected and learned faſhion of ſpeaking and writing.
                        
                           Hoc ſermone pauent, hoc iram, gaudia, curas,Iuuen. Sat. 6. 189.
                           
                           Hoc cuncta effundunt animi ſecreta, quid vltra?
                           Concumbunt docte.
                           They in this language feare, in this they faſhion
                           Their ioyes, their cares, their rage, their inward paſſion;
                           What more? they learned are in copulation.
                        
                        And alleadge Plato, and Saint Thomas for things, which the firſt man they meete would decide as well, and ſtand for as good a witneſſe. Such learning as could not enter

into their minde, hath ſtaid on their tongues. If the well borne will give any credit vnto me, they ſhall be pleaſed to make their owne and naturall riches to prevaile and be of worth: They hide and ſhroud their formes vnder fortaine and borrowed beawties: It is great ſimplicity, for any body to ſmoother and conceale his owne brightneſſe, to ſhine with a borrowed light: They are buried and entombed vnder the Arte of CAPSƲLA TOTAE, It is becauſe they doe not ſufficiently know themſelves: the World containes nothing of more beauty: It is for them to honour Artes, and to beawtifie embelliſhment. What neede they more then to live beloved and honoured? They have, and know but too much in that matter. There needes but a little rouzing and enflaming of the faculties that are in them.
                        When I ſee them medling with Rhetoricke, with Law, and with Logicke, and ſuch like traſh, ſo vaine and vnprofitable for their vſe; I enter into feare, that thoſe who adviſe them to ſuch things, doe it, that they may have more law to governe them vnder that pretence. For, what other excuſe can I deviſe for them? It is ſufficient, that without vs, they may frame, or roule the grace of their eyes, vnto cheerefulneſſe, vnto ſeverity, and vnto mildeneſſe: and ſeaſon a No with frowardneſſe, with doubt and with favour; and require not an interpretor in diſcourſes made for their ſervice. With this learning they command without controule, and over-rule both Regents and Schooles. Yet if it offend them to yeeld vs any preheminence, and would for curioſity ſake have part in bookes alſo: Poeſie is a ſtudy fit for their purpoſe: being a wanton, ammuſing, ſubtill, diſguiſed, and pratling Arte; all in delight, all in ſhew, like to themſelves. They may alſo ſelect diverſe commodities out of Hiſtory. In Morall Philoſophy, they may take the diſcourſes which enable them to judge of our humours, to cenſure our conditions, and to avoide our guiles and treacheries; to temper the raſhneſſe of their owne deſires. to huſband their liberty: lengthen the delights of life; gently to beare the inconſtancy of a ſeruant, the peeviſhneſſe or rudeneſſe of a husband, the importunity of yeares, the vnwellcomneſſe of wrinckles, and ſuch like minde-troubling accidents. Loe heare the moſt and greateſt ſhare of learning I would aſſigne them. There are ſome particular, retired and cloſe diſpoſitions.
                        My eſſentiall forme is fit for communication, and proper for production: I am all outward and in apparance; borne for ſociety and vnto friendſhip. The ſolitude I love and commend, is eſpecially but to retire my affections and redeeme my thoughts vnto my ſelfe; to reſtraine and cloſevp, not my ſteppes, but my deſires and my eares, reſigning all forraigne ſolicitude and trouble, and mortally ſhunning all manner of ſeruitude and obligation; and not ſo much the throng of men as the importunity of affaires. Locall ſolitarineſſe (to ſay trueth) doth rather extend and enlarge mee outwardly; I give my ſelfe to State-buſineſſe, and to the world, more willingly when I am all alone. At the Court, and in preſſe of people, I cloſe and ſlinke into mine owne skinne. Aſſemblies thruſt mee againe into my ſelfe. And I never entertaine my ſelfe ſo fondly, ſo licenciouſly, and ſo particularly, as in places of reſpect, and ceremonious diſcretion. Our follies make mee not laugh, but our wiſdomes doe. Of mine owne complexion, I am no enemy to the agitations and ſtirrings of our Courts: I have there paſt great part of my life: and am enured to bee merry in great aſſemblies; ſo it beeby entermiſſion, and ſutable to my humour.
                        But this tenderneſſe and coineſſe of judgement (whereof I ſpeake) doth perforce tie mee vnto ſolitarineſſe. Yea even in mine owne houſe, in the middeſt of a numerous familie and moſt frequented houſes, I ſee people more then a good many, but ſeldome ſuch as I love to converſe or communicate withall. And there I reſerve, both for my ſelfe, and others, an vnaccuſtomed libertie; making truce with ceremonies, aſſiſtance, and invitings, and ſuch other troubleſome ordinances of our courteſie (O ſervile cuſtome and importunate manner) there every man demeaneth himſelfe as hee pleaſeth, and entertaineth what his thoughts affect; whereas I keepe my ſelfe ſilent, meditating and cloſe, without offence to my gueſts or friends.
                        The men whoſe familiaritie and ſocietie I hunt after, are thoſe which are called honeſt, vertuous and ſufficient: the image of whom doth diſtaſte and divert mee from others. It

is (being rightly taken) the rareſt of our formes; and a forme or faſhion chiefly due vnto nature.
                        The end or ſcope of this commerce, is principally and ſimply familiarity, conference and frequentation: the exerciſe of mindes, without other fruite. In our diſcourſes, all ſubiects are alike to mee: I care not though they want either waight or depth; grace and pertmency are never wanting; all therein is tainted with a ripe and conſtant iudgement, and commixt with goodneſſe, liberty, cheerefulneſſe, and kindneſſe. It is not onely in the ſubiect of Lawes and affaires of Princes, that our ſpirit ſheweth it's beautie, grace and vigor: It ſheweth them as much in priuate conferences. I know my people by their very ſilence and ſmyling, and peraduenture diſcover them better at a Table, then ſitting in ſerious counſell.
                        
                           Hippomacus ſaid, hee diſcerned good Wreſtlers but by ſeeing them march through a Street. If learning vouchſafe to ſtep into our talke, ſhee ſhall not be refuſed; yet muſt not ſhee be ſterne, maſtring, imperious and importunate, as commonly ſhee is; but aſſiſtant, and docile of hirſelfe. Therein wee ſeeke for nothing but recreation and paſtime: when we ſhall looke to be inſtructed, taught and reſolved, we will goe ſeeke and ſue to hir in hir Throne. Let hir if ſhee pleaſe keepe from vs at that time; for, as commodious and pleaſing as ſhee is: I preſume that for a neede wee could ſpare hir preſence, and doe our buſineſſe well-enough without hir. Wits well borne, ſoundly bred and exerciſed in the practiſe and commerce of men, become gracious and plauſible of themſelves. Arte is but the Checke-roule, and Regiſter of the Productions vttered, and conceites produced by them.
                        The company of faire, and ſociety of honeſt women is likewiſe a ſweet commerce for me: Nam
                                 ••
                              s quoque oculos cruditos habemus, for wee alſo have learned eyes. If the minde haveCi
                                 •
                              . parad. not ſo much to ſolace hir-ſelfe, as in the former; the corporall ſences, whoſe part is more in the ſecond, bring it to a proportion neere vnto the other; although in mine opinion not equall. But it is a ſociety wherein it behooveth a man ſomewhat to ſtand vpon his guard; and eſpecially thoſe that are of a ſtrong conſtitution, and whoſe body can doe much, as in mee. In my youth I heated my ſelfe therein and was very violent; and endured all the rages and furious aſſaults, which Poets ſay happen to thoſe who without order or diſcretion abandon themſelves over-looſly and riotouſly vnto it. True it is indeed, that the ſame laſh hath ſince ſtood me inſtead of an inſtruction.
                        
                           Quicunque Argolica de claſſe Capharea fugit,Ovid. Trist. l. 1. el. 1. 83.
                           
                           Semper ab Euboicis vela retorquet aquis.
                           Greeke Sailers that Capharean Rockes did fly,
                           From the Euboean Seas their ſailes ſtill ply.
                        
                        It is folly to faſten all ones thoughts vpon it, and with a furious and indiſcreet affection to engage himſelfe vnto it: But on the otherſide, to meddle with it without loue or bond of affection, as Comediants doe, to play a common part of age and manners, without ought of their owne but bare-conned words, is verily a prouiſion for ones ſafety: and yet but a cowardly one; as is that of him, who would forgoe his honour, his profit or his pleaſure for feare of danger; for it is certaine that the practiſers of ſuch courſes, cannot hope for any fruite able to moove or ſatisfie a worthy minde.
                        One muſt very earneſtly have deſired that, whereof he would enioy an abſolute delight: I meane, though fortune ſhould vniuſtly fauour their intention: which often hapneth becauſe there is no woman, how deformed and vnhandſome ſoever, but thinkes hir-ſelfe louely, amiable and praiſe-worthy, either for hir age, hir haire or gate (for there are generally no more faire then foule ones) And the Brachmanian maides wanting other commendations; by Proclamation for that purpoſe, made ſhew

of their matrimoniall parts vnto the people aſſembled, to ſee if thereby at leaſt they might get them husbands. By conſequence there is not one of them, but vpon the firſt oath one maketh to ſerve her, will very eaſily bee perſwaded to thinke well of her ſelfe. Now this common treaſon and ordinary proteſtations of men in theſe daies, muſt needes produce the effects, experience already diſcovereth: which is, that either they joine together, and caſt away themſelves on themſelves, to avoid vs, or on their ſide follow alſo the example wee give them; acting their part of the play, without paſſion; without care, and without love, lending themſelves to this entercourſe: Neque affectui ſuo aut alieno obnoxiae: Neither liable to their owne nor other folkes affection. Thinking, according to Lyſias perſwaſions in Plato, they may ſo much the more profitably and commodiouſly yeeld vnto vs; by how much leſſe we love them: Wherein it will happen as in Comedies, the ſpectators ſhall have as much or more pleaſure, as the Comedians. For my part, I no more acknowledge 
                              Ʋenus without Cupid, then a motherhood without an off-ſpring: They are things which enter-lend and enter-owe one another their eſſence. Thus doth this cozening rebound on him that vſeth it; and as it coſts him little, ſo gets he not much by it. Thoſe which made Venus a Goddeſſe, have reſpected that her principall beautie was incorporeall and ſpirituall. But ſhee whom theſe kinde of people hunt after, is not ſo much as humane, nor alſo brutall; but ſuch as wilde beaſts, would not have her ſo filthy and terreſtriall. We ſee that imagination enflames them, and deſire or luſt vrgeth them, before the body: Wee ſee in one and other ſex, even in whole heards, choiſe and diſtinctions in their affections, and amongſt themſelves acquaintances of long continued good-will and liking. And even thoſe to whom age denieth bodily ſtrength, doe yet bray, neigh, roare, skip and wince for love. Before the deed wee ſee them full of hope and heat; and when the body hath plaid his part, even tickle and tingle themſelves with the ſweetneſſe of that remembrance: ſome of them ſwell with pride at parting from it, others all weary and glutted, ring out ſongs of glee and triumph. Who makes no more of it but to diſcharge his body of ſome naturall neceſſitie, hath no cauſe to trouble others with ſo curious preparation. It is no food for a greedie and clowniſh hunger. As one that would not be accounted better then I am, thus much I will diſplay of my youths wanton-errours: Not onely for the danger of ones health that followes that game (yet could I not avoid two, though light and curſorie aſſaults) but alſo for contempt, I have not much beene given to mercenarie and common acquaintances. I have coveted to ſet an edge on that ſenſuall pleaſure by difficultie, by deſire, and for ſome glory. And liked Tiberius his faſhions, who in his amours was ſwa
                              •
                           ed as much by modeſty and nobleneſſe, as by any other qualitie. And Floras humour, who would proſtitute her ſelfe to none worſe then Dictators, Conſuls, or Cenſors, and tooke delight in the dignitie and greatneſſe of her lovers, doth ſome-what ſute with mine. Surely glittering pearles and ſilken cloathes adde ſome thing vnto it, and ſo doe titles, nobilitie and a worthie traine. Beſides which, I made high eſteeme of the minde, yet ſo as the body might not iuſtly be found fault withall: For, to ſpeake my conſcience, if either of the two beauties were neceſſarily to bee wanting, I would rather have choſen to want the mentall, whoſe vſe is to be emploied in better things. But in the ſubject of love; a ſubject that chiefly hath reference vnto the two ſenſes of ſeeing and touching, ſome thing may be done without the graces of the minde, but little or nothing without the corporall. Beautie is the true auailefull advantage of women: It is ſo peculiarly theirs, that ours though it require ſome features and different allurements, is not in her right kue, or true bias, vnleſſe confuſed with theirs; childiſh and beardleſſe. It is reported, that ſuch as ſerve the great Turke vnder the title of beautie (whereof the number is infinite) are diſmiſſed at furtheſt when they once come to the age of two and twenty yeeres. Diſcourſe, diſcretion, together with the offices of true amitie, are better found amongst men: and therefore governe they the worlds affaires. Theſe two commerces or ſocieties are accidentall and depending of others; the one is troubleſome and tedious for it's raritie; the other withers with old age: nor could they have ſufficiently provided for my liues neceſſities. That of bookes, which is the third, is much more ſolid-ſure and much more ours; ſome other advantages it yeeldeth to the two former; but hath for her ſhare conſtancie and the facilitie of her ſervice. This accoſteth and ſecondeth all my courſe, and every where aſſiſteth me: It comforts mee in age, and ſolaceth me in ſolitarineſſe: It eaſeth mee of the burden of a weary-ſome ſloth; and at all times rids mee of tedious companies; it abateth

the edge of fretting ſorrow, on condition it bee not extreme and over-inſolent. To divert me from any importunate imagination or inſinuating conceit, there is no better way then to have recourſe vnto bookes: with eaſe they allure mee to them, and with facilitie they remoove them all. And though they perceive I neither frequent nor ſeeke them, but wanting other more eſſentiall, lively, and more naturall commodities, they never mutinie or murmure at mee; but ſtill entertaine mee with one and ſelfe-ſame viſage. Hee may well walke a foot, that leades his horſe by the bridle, ſaith the proverbe. And our Iames king of Naples and Sicilie, who being faire, yoong, healthy and in good plight, cauſed himſelfe to bee caried abroad in a plaine wagon or skreene, lying vpon an homely pillow of courſe feathers, cloathed in a ſute of homeſpunne gray, and a bonet of the ſame, yet royally attended on by a gallant troupe of Nobles, of Litters, Coches, and of all ſorts of choice led-horſes, a number of gentlemen, and officers, repreſented a tender and wavering auſteritie. The ſicke man is not to be moaned, that hath his health in his ſleeve. In the experience and vſe of this ſentence, which is moſt true, conſiſteth all the commoditie I reape of bookes. In effect I make no other vſe of them, then thoſe who know them not. I enioy them, as a miſer doth his gold; to know, that I may enioy them when I liſt; my minde is ſetled and ſatisfied with the right of poſſeſſion. I never travell without bookes, nor in peace nor in warre; yet doe I paſſe many daies and moneths without vſing them. It ſhall be anon, ſay I or to morrow, or when I pleaſe; in the meane while the time runnes away, and paſſeth without hurting mee. For it is wonderfull, what repoſe I take, and how I continue in this conſideration, that they are at my elbow to delight me when time ſhall ſerve: and in acknowledging what aſſiſtance they give vnto my life. This is the beſt munition I have found in this humane peregrination; and I extremely bewaile thoſe men of vnderſtanding that want the ſame. I accept with better will all otehr kindes of ammuſements, how ſlight ſoever, forſomuch as this cannot faile me. At home I betake me ſomwhat the oftner to my Librarie, whence all at once I command and ſurvay all my houſhold; It is ſeated in the chiefe entrie of my houſe, thence I behold vnder mee my garden, my baſe court, my yard, and looke even into moſt roomes of my houſe. There without order, without method, and by peece-meales I turne over and ranſacke, now one booke and now another. Sometimes I muſe and rave; and walking vp and downe I endight and enregiſter theſe my humours, theſe my conceits. It is placed on the third ſtorie of a tower. The lowermoſt is my Chapell; the ſecond a chamber with other lodgings, where I often lie, becauſe I would bee alone. Above it is a great ward-robe. It was in times paſt the moſt vnprofitable place of all my houſe. There I paſſe the greateſt part of my lives daies, and weare out moſt houres of the day. I am never there a nights: Next vnto it is a handſome neat cabinet, able and large enough to receive fire in winter, and very pleaſantly windowed. And if I feared not care, more then coſt; (care which drives and diverts mee from all buſineſſe) I might eaſily ione a convenient gallerie of a hundred paces long, and twelve broad, on each ſide of it, and vpon one floore; having already, for ſome other purpoſe, found all the walles raiſed vnto a convenient height. Each retired place requireth a walke. My thoughts are prone to ſleepe, if I ſit long. My minde goes not alone as if legges did moove it. Thoſe that ſtudie without bookes, are all in the ſame caſe. The forme of it is round, and hath no flat ſide, but what ſerveth for my table and chaire: In which bending or circling manner, at one looke it offreth mee the full ſight of all my bookes, ſet round about vpon ſhelves or desks, five rankes one vpon anotehr. It hath three bay-windowes, of a farre-extending, rich and vnreſiſted proſpect, and is in diameter ſixteene paces void. In winter I am leſſe continually there: for my houſe (as the name of it importeth) is pearched vpon an over-pearing hillocke; and hath no part more ſubject to all wethers then this: which pleaſeth me the more, both becauſe the acceſſe vnto it is ſomwhat troubleſome and remote, and for the benefit of the exerciſe, which is to be reſpected; and that I may the better ſeclude my ſelfe from companie, and keepe incrochers from mee: There is my ſeat, that is my throne. I endevour to make my rule therein abſolute, and to ſequeſter that onely corner from the communitie of wife, of children and of acquaintance. Elſe-where I have but a verball authoritie, of confuſed eſſence. Miſerable, in my minde is hee, who in his owne home, hath no where to be to himſelfe; where hee may particularly court, and at his pleaſure hide or with-draw himſelfe. Ambition paieth her followers well, to keepe them ſtill in open view, as a ſtatue in ſome conſpicuous place. Magna
                           Sen. conſ. ad Pol. c. 26. p. 
                           ſeruitus est magna fortuna: A great fortune is a great bondage. They cannot bee private ſo

much as at their priuie, I have deemed nothing ſo rude in the auſteritie of the life, which our Church-men affect, as that in ſome of their companies they inſtitute a perpetuall ſocietie of place, and a mumerous aſſiſtance amongſt them in any thing they doe. And deeme it ſomewhat more tolerable to bee ever alone, then never able to be ſo. If any ſay to mee, It is a kinde of vilifying the Muſes, to vſe them onely for ſporte and recreation, he wots not as I doe, what worth, pleaſure, ſporte and paſſe-time is of: I had well nigh termed all other ends ridiculous. I live from hand to mouth, and with reverence bee it ſpoken, I live but to my ſelfe: there end all my deſignes. Being young I ſtudied for oſtentation; then a little to enable my ſelfe and become wiſer; now for delight and recreation; never for gaine. A vaine conceit and laviſh humour I had after this kinde of ſtuffe; not onely to prouide for my neede but ſomewhat further to adorne and embelliſh my ſelfe withall: I have ſince partlie leaft it. Bookes have and containe diuerſe pleaſing qualities to thoſe that can duly chooſe them. But no good without paines; no Roſes without prickles. It is a pleaſure not abſolutely pure and neate, no more then all others; it hath his enconueniences attending on it and ſomtimes waightie ones: The minde is therein exerciſed, but the body (the eare whereof I have not yet forgotten) remaineth there-whilſt without action, and is waſted, and enſorrowed. I know no exceſſe more hurtfull for me, nor more to be auoided by me, in this declining age. loe here my three moſt favoured and particulare employments. I ſpeake not of thoſe I owe of dutie to the world.
                     
                     
                        The fourth Chapter.
                        
                           Of diuerting and diuerſions.
                        
                        I Was once employed in comforting of a trulie-afflicted Ladie: the greateſt part of their diſcourſes are artificiall and ceremonious.
                        
                           
                              Ʋberibus ſemper lachrimis, ſemperque paratis.Iuuen. Sat. 6. 273.
                           
                           In ſtatione ſua, atque expectantibus illam,
                           Quo iubeat manare modo.
                           With plenteous teares; ſtill readie in their ſtand,
                           Expecting ſtill their Miſtreſſes commaund,
                           How they muſt flowe, when they muſt goe.
                        
                        Men doe but ill in oppoſing themſelves againſt this paſſion; for oppoſition doth but incenſe and engage them more to ſorrowe and quietneſſe: The diſeaſe is exaſperated by the iealouſie of debate. In matters of common diſcourſe, we ſee, that what I have ſpoken without heede or care, if one come to conteſt with me about it, I ſtiffly maintaine and make good mine owne; much more if it bee a thing wherein I am intereſſed. Beſides, in ſo dooing, you enter but rudely into your matter, whereas a Phyſitions firſt entertainement of his pacient ſhould be gracious, cheerefull and pleaſing. An vglie and froward Phyſition wrought never any good effect. On the contrary then, wee muſt at firſt aſſiſt and ſmoothe their laments, and witneſſe ſome approbation and excuſe thereof. By which meanes you get credit to goe on, and by an eaſie and inſenſible inclination, you fall into more firme and ſerious diſcourſes and fit for their amendment. I, who deſired chieflie but to gull the aſſiſtants, that had their eyes caſt on me, meant to ſalve their miſchiefe; I verilie finde by experience, that I have but an ill and vnfruitefull vaine to perſwade. I preſent my reaſons either too ſharpe, or too drie; or too ſtirringly or too careleſlie. After I had for a while applyed my ſelfe to hir torment, I attempted not to cure it by ſtrong and liuely reaſons; either becauſe I want them, or becauſe I ſuppoſed I might otherwiſe effect my purpoſe the better. Nor did I cull out the ſeverall faſhions of comfort preſcribed by Phyloſophy: That the thing lamented is not ill, as Cleanthes: or but a little ill, as the Peripatetikes: That to lament is neither juſt, nor commendable; as Chryſippus; Nor this Epicurus, moſt agreeing with my manner, to tranſlate the conceit of ykreſome into delightſome things; Nor to make a loade of all this maſſe, diſpenſing the ſame, as one hath occaſion, as Cicero. But faire and ſoftly declining our

diſcourſes, and by degrees bending them vnto ſubjects more neare; then a little more remote, even as ſhee more or leſſe enclined to mee. Ivnperceaueably remooved thoſe dolefull humours from hir; ſo that as long as I was with hir, ſo long I kept hir in cheerefull countenance,, and vntroubled faſhion; wherein I vſed diverſion. Thoſe which in the ſame ſeruice ſucceded mee, found hir no whit amended: the reaſon was, I had not yet driven my wedge to the roote. I haue peraduenture elſe where, glaunced at ſome kindes of publike diuerſions. And the militarie cuſtomes vſed by Pericles in the Peloponenſian warre, and a thouſand others elſe-where, to diuert or withdrawe the armie of an enemie from their owne countrie, is too frequent in hiſtories. It was an ingenious diuerting, where-with the Lord of Himbercourt ſaved both himſelfe and others in the towne of Liege, into which the Duke of Burgondie, who beleagred the ſame, had cauſed him to enter, to performe the covenants of their accorded yeelding. The inhabitants thereof, to provide for it, aſſembled by night, and began to mutinie againſt their former agreement, determining vpon this advantage to ſet vpon the Negotiators, now in their power. Hee perceiuing their intent, and noiſe of this ſhoure readie to fall vpon him, and the danger his lodging was in, forth-with ruſhed out vpon them two cittizens (whereof hee had diuers with him) furniſhed with moſt plauſible and new offers to bee propounded to their counſell; but indeed forged at that inſtant to ſerue his turne withall, and to ammuſe them. Theſe two ſtayed the firſt approching ſtorme, and carryed this incenſed Hydra-headed-monſter multitude backe to the townehouſe, to heare their charge, and accordingly to determine of it. The conſultation was ſhort; when loe a ſecond tempeſt came ruſhing on, more furiouſlie inraged then the former; to whom he immediatly diſpatched foure new and ſemblable interceſſors, with proteſtations, that now they were in earneſt to propoſe and declare newe and farre more ample conditions vnto them, wholly to their content and ſatisfaction; whereby this diſordered rout was againe drawen to their Conclaue and Senate-houſe. In ſumme, he by ſuch a diſpenſation of amuſements, diuerting their headlong fury, and diſſipating the ſame with vaine and friuolous conſultations, at length lulled them into ſo ſecure a ſleepe▪ that he gained the day, which was his chiefeſt drift and only aimed ſcope. This other ſtorie is alſo of the ſame predicament. Atalanta a maid of rare ſurpaſſing beautie, and of a wondrous ſtrange diſpoſition, to ridde herſelfe from the importunate purſuit of a thouſand amorous ſutors, who ſollicited her for mariage, preſcribed this law vnto them; that ſhee would accept of him that ſhould equall her in running; on condition thoſe ſhe ſhould ouercome might loſe their lives. Some there were found, who deemed this prize worthy the hazard, and who incurred the penaltie of ſo cruell a match. Hippomenes comming to make his eſſay after the reſt, deuoutly addreſſed himſelfe to the diuine protectreſſe of all amorous delights, earneſtly inuoking her aſſiſtance; who gently liſtning to his hearty praiers, furniſhed him with three golden Apples, and taught him how to vſe them. The ſcope of the race being plaine, according as Hippomenes perceiued his ſwift▪ footed miſtreſſe to approch his heeles, he let fall (as at vnawares) one of his Apples: the heedleſſe maiden gazing and wondring at the alluring beautie of it, failed not to turne and take it vp.
                        
                           Obstupuit virgo, nitidique cupidine pomi,Ouid. M
                                    •
                                 t. lib. 10. 666.
                           
                           Declinat curſus, aurumque volubile tollit.
                           The maid amaz'd, deſiring that faire gold,
                           Turnes by her courſe, takes it vp as it rold.
                        
                        The like hee did (at his need) with the ſecond and third: vntill by this digreſſing and diverting, the goale and aduantage of the courſe was judged his, When Phyſitians cannot purge the rheume, they divert and remooue the ſame vnto ſome leſſe dangerous part. I alſo perceiue it to be the moſt ordinary receit for the mindes diſeaſes. Abducendus etiam nonnunquam animus eſt ad alia ſtudia, ſollicitudines, curas, negotia: Loci denique mutatione, tanquam aegroti non conualeſcentes, ſaepe curandus eſt: Our minde alſo is ſometimes to bee diuerted to other ſtudies, cogitations, cares and buſineſſes: and laſtly to be cured by change of place, as ſicke folkes vſe, that otherwiſe cannot get health. We make it ſeldome to ſhocke miſchiefes with direct reſiſtance: we make it neither to beare nor to breake, but to ſhun or divert, the blow. This other leſſon is too high, and over-hard. It is for them of the firſt ranke, meerely to ſtay vpon the thing it ſelfe, to examine and iudge it. It belongeth to one onely Socrates, to accoſt and entertaine death with an vndaunted ordinary viſage, to become familiar and play with it.

He ſeeketh for no comfort out of the thing it ſelfe. To die ſeemeth vnto him a naturall and indifferent accident: thereon he wiſhly fixeth his ſight, and thereon he reſolueth without looking elſe-where. Hegoſias his diſciples, who with hunger ſtarued themſelues to death, incenſed therevnto with the perſwading diſcourſes of his leſſons; and that ſo thicke as King Ptolomey forbad him any longer to entertaine his ſchoole with ſuch murtherous precepts. Thoſe conſidered not death in it ſelfe, they iudge it not: This was not the limit of their thoughts, they run on, and ayme at another being. Thoſe poore creatures we ſee on ſcaffolds, fraught with an ardent deuotion, therein to the vttermoſt of their power, employing all their ſences; their eares attentive to ſuch inſtructions as Preachers give them, their hands and eies li
                              •
                           t vp towardes heaven; their voice vttering loud and earneſt praiers; all with an eager and continual ruth-mooving motion; doe verily what in ſuch an vnavoidable exigent is commendable and conuenient. One may well commend their religion, but not properly their conſtancy. They ſhunne the brunt; they divert their conſideration from death; as we vſe to dandle and buſie children, when we would lance them or let them bloud. I have ſeene ſome, who if by fortune they chanced to caſt their eies towards the dreadfull preparations of death, which were round about them, fall into trances, and with fury caſt their cogitations elſe-where. We teach thoſe that are to paſſe-over ſome ſteepy downe fall or dreadfull abiſſe, to ſhut or turne aſide their eies. Subrius Flauius, being by the appointment of Nero to be put to death by the hands of Niger, both chiefe commanders in war: when he was brought vnto the place where the execution ſhould be performed, ſeeing the pit Niger had cauſed to be digged for him vneuen and vnhandſomely made; Nor is this pit (quoth he to the ſouldiers that ſtood about him) according to the true diſcipline of war: And to Niger, who willed him to hold his head ſteddy, I wiſh thou wouldest ſtricke as ſteddily. He gueſſed right; for Nigers arme trembling, he had divers blowes at him before he could ſtrike it off. This man ſeemeth to haue fixed his thoughts ſurely and directly on the matter. He that dies in the fury of a battle, with weapons in hand thinkes not then on death, and neither feeleth nor conſidereth the ſame: the heate of the fight tranſports him. An honeſt man of my acquaintance, falling downe in a ſingle combat, and feeling himſelfe ſtab'd nine or ten times by his enemy, was called vnto by the by-ſtanders to call on God and remember his conſcience: but he tould me after, that albeit thoſe voices came vnto his eares, they had no whit mooued him, and that he thought on nothing, but how to diſcharge and reuenge himſelfe. In which combat he vanquiſhed and ſlew his aduerſary.
                        He who brought L. Syllanus his condemnation, did much for him; in that when he heard him anſwer he was prepared to die, but not by the hands of baſe villaines; ran vpon him with his ſouldiers to force him; againſt whom obſtinately defending himſelfe though vnarmed) with fiſts and feet; he was ſlaine in the conflict: diſperſing with a ready and rebellious choller the painefull ſence of a long and fore-prepared death; to which he was aſſigned. We euer thinke on ſomewhat elſe: either the hope of a better life doth ſettle and ſupport vs, or the confidence of our childrens worth; or the future glory of our name; or the auoyding of theſe liues miſchieues; or the reuenge hanging ouer their heads that have cauſed and procured our death:
                        
                           Spero equidem medijs, ſi quid 
                                 •
                              ia numina poſſunt,Virg. Aen. l. 4. 382.
                           
                           Supplicia hauſurum ſcopulis, & nomine Dido
                           Saepe vocaturum.
                           Audiam, & haec manes veniet mihi fama ſub imos.387.
                           
                           I hope, if powers of heaven have any power,
                           On rockes he ſhall be puniſht, at that houre,
                           He oft on Didoes name ſhall pittileſſe exclaime.
                           This ſhall I heare, and this report, ſhall to me in my grave reſort.
                        
                        
                           Xenophon ſacrificed with a crowne on his head, when one came to tell him the death of his ſonne Gryllus in the battell of Mantinea. At the firſt hearing whereof hee caſt his crowne to the ground; but finding vpon better relation how valiantly hee died, hee tooke it vp and put it on his head againe. Epicurus alſo at his death comforted himſelfe in the eternitie and worth of his writings. Omnes clari & nobilitati labores fiunt tolerabiles.
                           Cic. Tuſc. l. 2.
                           
                           All glorious and honourable labours are made tolerable. And the ſame wound, and the ſame toile (ſaith Xenophon) toucheth not a Generall of an armie, as it doth a private ſouldier. Epaminondas tooke his death much the more cheerefully, being informed that the victorie remained on his ſide. Haec ſunt ſolatia, haec fomenta ſummorum dolorum: Theſe are the comforts,
                           Ibid. 
                           theſe the eaſes of moſt grieuous paines. And ſuch other like circumſtances ammuſe, divert and remoove vs from the conſideration of the thing in it ſelfe. Even the arguments of Philoſophie, at each clappe wreſt and turne the matter aſide, and ſcarcely wipe away the ſcabbe thereof. The firſt man of the firſt Philoſophicall Schoole and Superintendent of the reſt, that great Zeno, againſt death, cried out; No euill is honourable; death is: therefore is death no euill. Againſt drunkenneſſe; No man entruſts his ſecrets to a drunkard; every one to the wiſe: therefore the wiſe will not be drunke. Is this to hit the white? I love to ſee, that theſe principall wits cannot rid themſelves of our company. As perfect and abſolute as they would be, they ſtill are but groſſe and ſimple men. Revenge is a ſweet-pleaſing paſſion; of a great and naturall impreſſion: I perceive it well, albeit I have made no triall of it. To divert of late a yoong Prince from it, I told him not, hee was to offer the one ſide of his cheeke, to him who had ſtrooke him on the other, in regard of charitie; nor diſplaid I vnto him the tragicall events Poeſie beſtoweth vpon that paſſion. There I left him, and ſtrove to make him taſte the beautie of a contrary image: the honour, the favour and the good-will he ſhould acquire by gentleneſſe and goodneſſe: I diverted him to ambition. Behold how they deale in ſuch caſes. If your affection in love be over-powerfull, disperſe or diſſipate the ſame, ſay they; and they ſay true, for I have often, with profit made triall of it: Breake it by the vertue of ſeverall deſires, of which one may be Regent or chiefe Maſter, if you pleaſe; but for feare it ſhould miſuſe and tyrannize you, weaken it with dividing, and protract it with diverting the ſame.
                        
                           Cùm moroſa vago ſingultiet inguine vena,Perſ. Sat. 6. 73. Lucr. l. 4. 1056.
                           
                           Conijcito humorem collectum in corpora quaeque.
                           When raging luſt excites a panting tumor,
                           To divers parts ſend that collected humor.
                        
                        And looke to it in time, leſt it vex you, if it have once ſeized on you.
                        
                           Si non prima novis conturbes vulnera plagis,
                           Volgiuagáque vagus Venere ante recentia cures,Lucr. l. 4. 
                                    •
                                 061.
                           
                           Vnleſſe the firſt wounds with new wounds you mix,
                           And ranging cure the freſh with common tricks.
                        
                        I was once neerely touched with a heavie diſpleaſure, according to my complexion; and yet more juſt then heavie: I had peradventure loſt my ſelfe in it, had I only relied vpon mine owne ſtrength. Needing a vehement diverſion to with-draw me from it; I did by Art and ſtudie make my ſelfe a Lover, whereto my age aſſiſted mee; love diſcharged and diverted me from the inconvenience, which good-will and amitie had cauſed in mee. So is it in all things elſe. A ſharpe conceit poſſeſſeth, and a violent imagination holdeth mee: I finde it a ſhorter courſe to alter and divert, then to tame and vanquiſh the ſame: if I cannot ſubſtitute a contrary vnto it, at leaſt I preſent another vnto it. Change ever eaſeth, varietie diſſolveth, and ſhifting diſſipateth. If I cannot buckle with it, I ſlip from it: and in ſhunning it, I ſtray and double from it. Shifting of place, exerciſe and company, I ſave my ſelfe amid the throng of other ſtudies and ammuſements, where it loſeth my tracke, and ſo I ſlip away. Nature proceedeth thus, by the benefit of inconſtancie: For, the time it hath beſtowed on vs, as a ſoveraigne Phyſitian of our paſſions, chiefly obtaines his purpoſe that way, when fraughting our conceits with other and different affaires, it diſſolveth and corrupteth that firſt apprehenſion, how forcible ſoever it be. A wiſe man ſeeth little leſſe his friend dying at the end of five and twenty yeeres, then at the beginning of the firſt yeere; and according to Epicurus, nothing leſſe: for he aſcribed no qualification of perplexities, either to the foreſight or antiquitie of them. But ſo many other cogitations croſſe this, that it languiſheth, and in the end groweth weary. To divert the inclination of vulgar reports, Alcibiades cut off his faire dogges cares and taile, and ſo drove him into the market place; that giuing this ſubject of prattle to the people, they might not meddle with his other actions. I have alſo ſeen ſome women, who to divert the opinions and coniectures of the babling people, and to divert the fond tatling of ſome, did by counterfet and diſſembled affections, ouerſhadow and cloake true affections.

Amongſt which I haue noted ſome, who in diſſembling and counterfeting haue ſuffred themſelues to be intrapped wittingly and in good earneſt; quitting their true and originall humor for the fained: of whom I learne, that ſuch as finde themſelues well ſeated, are very fooles to yeelde vnto that maske. The common greetings, and publike entertainements being reſerued vnto that ſet or appointed ſeruant, beleeue there is little ſufficiencie in him, if in the end he vſurpe not your roome and ſend you vnto his. This is properly to cut out and ſtitch vp a ſhoe, for another to put on. A little thing doth diuert and turne vs; for a ſmall thing holas vs. We do not much reſpect ſubiects in groſſe and alone: they are circumſtances, or ſmall and ſuperficiall images that mooue and touch vs; and vaine rindes which rebound from ſubiects.
                        
                           Folliculos vt nunc ter etes aeſtate cicadaeLucr. l. 5. 812.
                           
                           Linquunt.
                           As graſſe-hoppers in ſummer now forſake
                           The round-grown ſheafes, which they in time ſhould take.
                        
                        
                           Plutarke himſelfe bewailes his daughter by the fopperies of his childehood. The remembrance of a farewell, of an action, of a particular grace, or of a laſt commendation, afflict vs. Caeſars goune diſquieted all Rome, which his death had not done; The very ſound of names, which gingleth in our eares, as, Oh my poore maiſter; or, Alas my deare friend; Oh my good father; or, Alas my ſweete daughter, When ſuch like repetitions pinch me, and that I looke more nearely to them, I finde them but grammaticall laments, the word and the 
                              ••
                           ne wound mee. Euen as Preachers exclamations doe often mooue their auditorie more, then their reaſons; and as the pitty full groane of a beaſt yerneth vs though it be killed for our vſe; without poyſing or entring there-whilſt, into the true and maſſie eſſence of my ſubiect
                        
                           His ſe ſtimulis dolor ipſe laceſſit.
                           Griefe by theſe prouocations.Lucan. l. 2. 42.
                           
                           Puts it ſelfe in more paſſions.
                        
                        They are the foundations of our mourning. The conceipt of the ſtone, namely in the yarde hath ſometime for three or foure dayes together, ſo ſtopped my vrine, and brought mee ſo neare deathes-dore, that it had beene meere folly in mee, to hope, nay to deſire, to auoyde the ſame, conſidering what cruell pangs that painefull plight did ſeaze mee with. Oh how cunning a maiſter in the murthering arte, or hangmans trade was that good Emperour, who cauſed malefactors yardes to bee faſt-tide, that ſo hee might make them dye for want of piſſing. In which ill plight finding my ſelfe, I conſidered by how flight cauſes and friuolous obiects, imagination nouriſhed in mee the griefe to looſe my life: with what Atomes the conſequence and difficulty of my diſlodging was contriued in my minde; to what idle conceits and friuolous cogitations we giue place in ſo waighty a caſe or important affaire. A Dogge, a Horſe, a Hare a Glaſſe, and what not? were corrupted in my loſſe. To others, their ambitious hopes, their purſe, their learning; In my minde as ſottiſhly. I view death careleſſely when I behould it vniuerſally as the end of life. I ouerwhelme and contemne it thus in great, by retayle it ſpoyles and proules me. The teares of a Lacquey, the diſtributing of my caſt ſutes, the touch of a knowne hand, an ordinary conſolation; doth diſconſolate and 
                              •
                           ntende
                              •
                            me. So doe the plaints and of fables trouble and vex our mindes; and the wailing laments of Dydo, and Ariadne paſſionare euen thoſe, that beleeue them not in 
                              Ʋirgill, nor in Catullus: It is an argument of an obſtinate nature, and indurate hart, not to be mooued therewith: as for a wonder, they report of Polemon: who was not ſo much as appaled, as the biting of a Dog, who tooke away the braune or calfe of his leg. And no wiſedome goeth ſo far, as by the due iudgement to conceiue aright the euident cauſe of a Sorrow and griefe, ſo liuely and wholly that it ſuffer or admit noe acceſſion by preſence, when eyes and eares haue their ſhare therein: parts that cannot be agitated but by vaine accidents. Is it reaſon, that euen arts ſhould ſerue their purpoſes, and make their profit of our imbecility and naturall blockiſhnes? An Orator (ſaith Rethorick) in the play of his pleading, ſhall bee mooued at the ſound of his owne voice, and by his fained agitations; and ſuffer himſelfe to be cozoned by the paſſion he repreſenteth: imprinting a liuely and eſſentiall ſorrow, by the iugling he acteth, to transferre it into the iudges, whome of the two it concerneth leſſe: As the perſons hyred at our funerals, who to ayde the ceremony of mourning, make ſale of their teares by meaſure, & of their ſorrow by waight. For although they ſtriue to act it in a borrowed forme, yet by habituating

and ordering their countenance, it is certaine they are often wholly tranſported into it, and entertaine the impreſſion of a true and vnfained melancholly. I aſſiſted amongſt diuers others of his friends, to conuay the dead corpes of the Lord of Grammont from the ſiege of Laferre, where hee was vntimely ſlaine, to Soiſſous. I noted that euery where as we paſſed a long, we filled wth lamentation and teares all the people we met, by the onely ſhewe of our conuoyes mourning attire; for the deceaſed mans name was not ſo much as knowne, or hard of about thoſe quarters. Quintilian reporteth, to haue ſeene Comediants ſo farre ingaged in a ſorrowfull part, that they wept after being come to their lodgings: and of himſelfe, that hauing vndertaken to mooue a certaine paſſion in another, hee had found himſelfe ſurpriſed not onely with ſhedding of teares, but with a paleneſſe of countenance, and behauiour of a man truely deiected with griefe. In a country neare our Mountaynes, the women ſay and vnſay, weepe and laugh with one breath: as Martin the Prieſt; for, as for their leſt husbands they encreaſe their way mentings by repetition of the good and gracefull parts they were endowed with, therewithall vnder one they make publike relation of thoſe imperfections; to worke, as it were ſome recompence vnto themſelues, and tranſchange their pitty vnto diſdaine; with a much better grace then we, who when we looſe a late acquaintance, ſtriue to loade him with new and forged prayſes, and to make him farre other, now that we are depriued of his ſight, then hee ſeemed to bee when wee enioyed and beheld him. As if mourning were an inſtructing party; or teares cleared our vnderſtanding by waſhing the ſame. I renounce from this time forward all the fauourable teſtimonies any man ſhall affoorde mee, not becauſe I ſhall deſerue them, but becauſe I ſhall bee dead. If one demand that fellow, what intereſt hee hath in ſuch a ſiege; The intereſt of example (will bee ſay) and common obedience of the Prince; I nor looke nor pretend any benefit thereby; and of glory I know how ſmall a portion commeth to the ſhare of a priuate man, ſuch as I am. I haue neyther paſſion nor quarrell in the matter; yet the next day ſhall you ſee him all changed, and chafing, boyling and bluſhing with rage, in his ranke of battaile, ready for the aſſault. It is the glaring reflecting of ſo much ſteele, the flaſhing thundering of the Cannon, the clang of trumpers, and the ratling of Drummes, that haue infuſed this new furie, and rankor in his ſwelling vaines. A friuolous cauſe, will you ſay: How a cauſe? There needeth none to excite our minde. A doating humour without body, without ſubſtance ouerſwayeth and toſſeth it vp and downe, Let mee thinke of building Caſtles in Spayne, my imagination will forge mee commodities and afforde mee meanes and delights wherewith my mynde is really tickled and eſſentially gladded. How often doe wee peſter our ſpirits with anger or ſadneſſe by ſuch ſhaddowes, and entangle our ſelues into fantaſticall paſſions which alter both our mynde and bodye? what aſtoniſhed, flearing and confuſed mumpes and mowes doth this dotage ſtirre vp in our viſages? what skippings and agitations of members and voyce, ſeemes it not by this man alone, that hee hath falſe viſions of a multitude of other men with whome hee dooth negotiate; or ſome inwarde Goblin that torments him? Enquire of your ſelfe, where is the object of this alteration? Is there any thing but vs in nature, except ſubſiſting nullitye? ouer whome it hath any power? Becauſe Cambyſes dreamed that his brother ſhould bee King of Perſia, hee put him to death; a brother whom he loued, and euer truſted. Ariſtodemus King of the Meſſenians killed himſelfe; vpon a conceite he tooke of ſome ill preſage, by, I know not what howling of his Dogs, And King Midas did aſmuch, beeing troubled and vexed by a certaine vnpleaſing dreame of his owne. It is the right way to prize ones life at the right worth of it, to forgo it for a dreame. Heare notwithſtanding our mindes triumph ouer the bodies weakeneſſes and miſery; in that it is the prey and marke of all wrongs and alterations, to ſeede on and aime at. It hath ſurely much reaſon to ſpeake of it.
                        
                           O prima infoelix fingenti terra Prometheo;Pro p. l. 3. el. 4. 7.
                           
                           Ille parum cauti pectoris egit opus.
                           Corpora diſponens, ment em non vidit in arte;
                           Recta animi primum debuit eſſe via.
                        
                        
                           Vnhappy earth firſt by Prometheus formed,
                           Who of ſmall providence a worke performed:
                           
                              He framing bodies ſaw in arte no minde?
                           The mindes way firſt ſhould rightly be aſſign'd.
                        
                     
                     
                        The fifth Chapter.
                        
                           Vpon ſome verſes of Virgill.
                           
                        
                        PRofitable thoughts, the more full and ſolide they are, the more comberſome and heauy are they; vice, death, poverty and diſeaſes, are ſubjects that waigh and grieve. We muſt have our minde inſtructed with meanes to ſuſtaine and combate miſchiefes, and furniſhed with rules how to live well and believe right: and often rouze and exerciſe it in this goodly ſtudy. But to a minde of the common ſtampe; it muſt be with intermiſſion and moderation; it groweth weake, by being continually over-wreſted: When I was young, I had neede to be aduertiſed and ſollicited to keepe my ſelfe in office: Mirth and health (ſaies one) ſute not ſo well with theſe ſerious and grave diſcourſes. I am now in another ſtate. The conditions of age doe but over-much admoniſh, inſtruct and preach vnto me. From the exceſſe of iollity, I am falne into the extreame of ſeverity; more peeviſh and more vntoward. Therefore, I doe now of purpoſe ſomewhat give way vnto licentious allurements; and now and then employ my minde in wanton and youthfull conceits, wherein ſhe recreates hir ſelfe. I am now but too much ſetled; too heavy and too ripe. My yeares read me daily a leſſon of coldneſſe and temperance. My body ſhunneth diſorder, and feares it: it hath his turne to direct the minde toward reformation; his turne alſo to rule and ſway; and that more rudely and imperiouſly. Be I awake or a ſleepe, it doth not permit me one houre but to ruminate on inſtruction, on death, on patience and on repentance. As I have heer
                              •
                           tofore defended my ſelfe from pleaſure, ſo I now ward my ſelfe from temperance: it haleth me too far backe, and even to ſtupidity. I will now every way be maſter of my ſelfe. Wiſdome hath hir exceſſes, and no leſſe neede of moderation, then folly. So that leaſt I ſhould wither, tarniſh and over cloy my ſelfe with prudence, in the intermiſſions my evils affoord mee;
                        
                           Mens intenta ſuis ne ſict vſque malis.Ouid. Trist. li. 4. 
                                    •
                                 . 1. 4.
                           
                           Still let not the conceit attend,
                           The ils that it too much offend.
                        
                        I gently turne aſide, and ſteale mine eies from viewing that tempeſtuous and cloudy skie, I have before me; which (thankes be to God) I conſider without feare, but not without contention and ſtudy. And ammuſe my ſelfe with the remembrance of paſſed youth-tricks:
                        
                           —animus quod perdidit, optat,
                              Petron. Arb. Sa
                                    •
                                 .
                           
                           Atque in praeterita ſe totus imagine verſat.
                           The minde, what it hath loſt, doth wiſh and caſt,
                           And turne and wind in Images forepaſt.
                        
                        That infancy looketh forward, and age backward; was it not that which Ianus his double viſage ſignified? yeares entraine me if they pleaſe; but backward. As far as mine eies can diſcerne that faire expired ſeaſon, by fits I turne them thitherward. If it eſcape my bloud and veines, yet will I not roote the image of it out of my memory:
                        
                           —hoc est,
                              Mart. l. 10. epig. 23. 7.
                           
                           
                              Ʋinere bis, vita poſſe priore frui,
                           This is the way for any to live twiſe,
                           Who can of former life enioy the price.
                        
                        
                           Plato appoints old men to be preſent at youthfull exerciſes, dances and games, to make them reioyce at the bodies agility and comlineſſe of others, which is now no longer in them; and call to their remembrance, the grace and fauour of that blooming age: and willeth them to give the honour of the victory to that young-man, who hath gladded and made moſt of them mery. I was heretofore wont to note ſullen and gloomy daies, as extraordinary: now are they my ordinary ones; the extraordinary are my faire and cleere daies. I am ready to

leape for ioy, as at the receaving of ſome vnexſpected fauour, when nothing grieueth mee. Let me tickle my ſelfe, I can now hardly wreſt a bare ſmile from this wretched body of mine. I am not pleaſed but in conceite and dreaming: by ſleight to turne aſide the way-ward cares of age: but ſure ther-s neede of other remedies, then dreaming, A weake contention of arte againſt nature. It is meere ſimplicitie, as moſt men doe, to prolong and anticipate humane in commodities. I had rather be leſſe while olde, then old before my time. I take hold even of the leaſt occaſions of delight I can meet withall. I know by how heare-ſay diuers kindes of wiſe, powerfull and glorious pleaſures: but opinionis not of ſufficient force over me, to make mee long for them. I would not haue them ſo ſtately, lofty and diſdainfull; as pleaſant gentle andSen, cp 99. ready. A natura diſcedimus; populo nos damus, nullius rei bono auctori; We forſake nature, We followe the people aucthor of no good. My Philophie is in action, in naturall and preſent little in conceit. What if I ſhould be pleaſed to play at cob-nut, or whip a top?
                        
                           Non ponebat enim rumores ante ſalutem.Ennius.
                           
                           He did not prize what might be ſaid,
                           Before how al might ſafe be laid.
                        
                        Voluptuouſneſſe is a qualitie little ambitious; it holds it ſelfe rich enough of it ſelfe without any acceſſe of reputation; and is beſt affected where it is moſt obſcured. That young man ſhould deſerue the whip. who would ſpend his time in chooſing out the neareſt Wine, and beſt ſauces. There is nothing I ever knew or eſteemed leſſe: I now beginne to learne it. I am much aſhamed of it, but what can I doe withall? and am more aſhamed and vexed, at the occaſions that compell me to it. It is for vs to dally, doate and trifle out the time; and for youth to ſtand vpon nice reputation, and hold by the better end of the ſtaffe. That creepeth towards the world and marcheth toward credite; we come from it. Sibi arma, ſibi equos, ſibi
                           Cic. de Senectute. 
                           haſtas, ſibi clauam, ſibi pilam, ſibi natationes & curſus habeant: nobis ſenibus, ex luſionibus multis, talos relinquant, & teſſeras; Let them keepe their armor, their horſes, their lances, their polaxes, their tennis, their ſwimming, and their running; and of their many games, let them put ouer to vs old men the tables and the cardes. The very lawes ſend vs home to our lodgings. I can do no leſſe in favour of this wretched condition, whereto my age forceth mee, then furniſh it with ſomewhat to dandle and ammuſe it ſelfe, as it were childehood; for when all is done we fall into it againe. And both wiſedome and folly ſhall have much a doe, by enterchange offices to ſupport aud ſuccour me in this calamitie of age.Ho. l. 4. 
                                 •
                              d. 12. 27.
                        
                        
                           Miſce ſtultitiam conſilijs breuem.
                           With ſhort-like-fooliſh tricks,
                           Thy graueſt counſels mixe.
                        
                        Withall I ſhun the lighteſt pricklings; and thoſe which heretofore could not have ſcratcht me, doe now tranſpearce me. So willingly my habite doth now begin to apply it ſelfe to euill:Cic. de. Sene. 
                           infragili corpore odioſa omnis offenſio eſt: all offences is yrkeſome to a crazed body.
                        
                        
                           Menſ
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               pati durum ſuſtinet agra nihil.Ouid. Pont. 
                                    ••
                                 . el. 6. 18.
                           
                           A ſicke minde can endure,
                           No hard thing for hir cure.
                        
                        I have ever beene tickliſh and nice in matters of offence, at this preſent I am more tender, and every where open.
                        
                           Et minimae vires frangere quaſſavalent.Ouid. Triſt. l. 3. el. 11. 22.
                           
                           Leaſt ſtrength can breake,
                           Things worne and weake.
                        
                        Well may my iudgement hinder mee from ſpurning and repining at the inconueniences which nature allots mee to indure; from feeling them it cannot. I could finde in my heart to runne from one ende of the world to another, to ſearche and purchaſe one yeare of pleaſing and abſolute tranquillity; I who have no other ſcope, then to live and be mery. Drouzie and ſtupide tranquillitie is ſufficiently to bee found for mee, but it makes me drouzie and dizzie; therefore I am not pleaſed with it. If there bee any body, or any good company in the cuntrie, in the cittie, in France, or any where els, reſident traveiling, that likes of my conceites, or whoſe humoures are pleaſing to mee, they neede but holde vp their hand, or whiſtle in their fiſte, and I will ſtore them with Eſſayes, of pithe and ſubſtance, with might and maine. Seeing it is the mindes priuiledge to renew and recouer it ſelfe on olde age, I earneſtly aduiſe it to doe it: let it bud, bloſſome, and flouriſh if it can, as Miſle-toe on a dead tree. I

feare it is a traitor; ſo ſtraightly is ſhe claſped, and ſo hard doth ſhe cling to my body, that every hand while ſhe forſakes me; to follow hir in hir neceſſities. I flatter hir in private, I vrge hir to no purpoſe; in vaine I offer to diuert hir from this combination, and bootleſſe it is for me to preſent hir Seneca or Catullus, or Ladies, or ſtately dances; if hir companion have the chollicke, it ſeemes ſhe alſo hath it. The very powers or faculties that are particulare and proper to hir, cannot then rouze themſelues: they euidently ſeeme to be en-rheumed: there is no blitheneſſe in hir productions, if there be none in the body. Our ſchollers are to blame, who ſearching the cauſes of our mindes extraordinary fits and motions, beſides they aſcribe ſome to a diuine fury, to love, to warre-like fierceneſſe, to Poeſie, and to Wine; if they haue not alſo allotted health her ſhare. A health youthfull, luſtie, vigorous, full, 
                              •
                           dle, ſuch as heretofore the Aprill of my yeares and ſecurity offorded mee by fittes. That fire of iocondneſſe ſtirreth vp lively and bright ſparckles in our minde, beyond our naturall brightneſſe and amongſt the moſt working, if not the moſt deſperate Enthuſiaſmes or inſpiraſions. Well, it is no wonder if a contrary eſtate clogge and naile my ſpirite, and drawe from it a contrary effect.
                        
                           Ad nullum conſurgit opus, cum corpore lauguet,Cor. Gal. el. 1. 125.
                           
                           It to no worke doth riſe,
                           When body fainting lyes.
                        
                        And yet would have me beholden to him, for lending (as he ſayth) much leſſe to this conſent, then beareth the ordinary cuſtome of men. Let vs at leaſt whilſte we have truce, chaſe all euils, and expell all difficulties from our ſocietie.
                        
                           Dum licet obduct a ſoluatur fronte ſenectus:
                           With wrinckled wimpled for head let old yeares,Hor. epod. 13. 7.
                           
                           While we may, be roſolu'd to merie cheeres.
                        
                        
                           Tetrica ſunt amoenanda iocularibus, Vnpleaſant things, and ſowre matters ſhould be ſweetned and made pleaſant with ſportefull mixtures. I love a lightſome and civill diſcretion, and loathe a roughneſſe and auſteritie of behauiour: ſuſpecting every peeviſh and wayward countenance.
                        
                           Triſtem
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               vultus tetrici arrogantiam.
                           Of auſtere countenance,Mart. l. 7. epig 57. 9.
                           
                           The ſad ſoure arrogance.
                           Et habet tristis quoque turba cynaedos,
                           Fidlers are often had,
                           Mongſt people that are ſad.
                        
                        I eaſily beleeue Plato, who ſaieth, that eaſie or hard humoures, are a great preiudice vnto the mindes goodneſſe or badneſſe. Socrates had a conſtant countenance, but light-ſome and ſmyling: not frowardly conſtant, as olde Craſſus, who was neuer ſeene to laugh. Vertue is a pleaſant and buxom qualitie. Few, I know will ſnarle at the liberty of my writings, that haue not more cauſe to ſnarle at their thoughts-looſenes. I conforme my ſelfe vnto their courage, but I offend their eyes. It is a well ordered humour to wreſt Platos writings, and ſtraine his pretended negotiations with Phedon, Dion, Stella, Archeanaſſa. Non pudeat dicere, quod non pudeat ſentire. Let vs not bee aſhamed to ſpeake, what wee ſhame not to thinke. I hate a way ward and ſad diſpoſition, that glideth ouer the pleaſures of his life, and faſtens and feedes on miſeries. As flyes that cannot cleaue to ſmooth and ſleeke bodies, but ſeaze and holde on rugged and vneuen places. Or as Cupping-glaſſes, that affect and ſuck none but the worſt bloud. For my part I am reſoluted to dare ſpeake whatſoeuer I dare doe: And am diſpleaſed with thoughts not to be publiſhed. The worſt of my actions or condicions ſeeme not ſo vgly vnto me, as I finde it both vgly and baſe not to dare to avouch them. Every one is wary in the confeſſion; we ſhould be as heedy in the action. The bouldneſſe offending is ſomewhat recompenſed and reſtrained by the bouldneſſe of confeſſing▪ he that ſhould be bound to tell all, ſhould alſo bind himto doe nothing which one is forced to conceale. God graunt this exceſſe of my licence drawe men to freedome, beyond theſe cowardly and ſqueamiſh vertues, ſprung from our imperfections; and that by the expence of my immoderation, I may reduce them vnto reaſon. One muſt ſur
                                 •
                              ay his faultes and ſtudy them, ere he be able to repeat them. Thoſe which hide them from others, commonly conceale them alſo from themſelues; and eſteeme them not ſufficiently hidden, if themſelues ſee them. They withdraw and diſguiſe them from their owne conſciences.

                           Quare vicia confitetur? Quia etiam nunc in illis eſt, ſomnium narrare vigilantis eſt. Why doth noe
                           S
                                 •
                              n. ep. 53. 
                                 〈…〉
                              . 
                           man confeſſe his faults? Becauſe hee is yet in them; and to declare his dreame, is for him that is waking. The bodies euils are diſcerned by their increaſe. And now we finde that to be the gout which we termed the rheume or a bruſe. The euils of the minde are darkened by their owne force; the moſt infected feeleth them leaſt. Therfore is it, that they muſt often a day be handled, and violently be opened and rent from out the hollow of our boſome. As in the caſe of good; ſo of bad offices, onely confeſſion is ſometimes a ſatisfaction. Is there any deformitie in the error, which diſpenſeth vs to confeſſe the ſame? It is a paine for mee to diſſemble: ſo that I refuſe to take charge of other mens ſecrets, as wanting hart to diſauow my knowledge. I cannot conceale it; but deny it I cannot, without much a do and ſome trouble. To be perfectly ſecret, one muſt be ſo by nature; not by obligation. It is a ſmal matter to be ſecret in the Princes ſeruice, if one be not alſo a liar. He that demanded Thales Mileſius, whether he ſhould ſolemnly deny his lechery; had he come to me, I would haue anſwered him, he ought not do it: for a lie is in mine opinion, worſe then lechery. Thales aduiſed him otherwiſe, bidding him ſweare, therby to warrant the more by the leſſe. Yet was not his counſell ſo much the election, as multiplication of vice. Wherevpon we ſometimes vſe this by-word, that we deale well with a man of conſcience, when in counterpoiſe of vice we propoſe ſome difficulty vnto him? but when he is incloſed between two vices, he is put to a hard choiſe. As Origen was dealt with al, either to commit idolatry, or ſuffer himſelf to be Sodomaticaly abuſed by a filthy Egiptian ſlave, that was preſented vnto him; he yeilded to the firſt condition, and viciouſly, ſaith one. Therfore ſhould not thoſe women be diſtaſted, according to their error, who of late proteſt, that they had rather charge their conſcience with ten men, then one Maſſe. If it bee indiſcretion ſo to divulge ones errors, ther is no danger though it come into example and vſe, For Ariſton ſaid, that The winds men feare moſt, are thoſe which diſcouer them. We muſt tuck vp this homely rag, that cloaketh our maners. They ſend their conſcience to the ſtewes, and keep their countenance in order. Even traitors and murtherers obſerue the lawes of complements, and therto 
                              •
                           ixe their endeuors. So that neither can iniuſtice complaine of inciuility, nor malice of indiſcretion. T's pitry a bad man is not alſo a foole, a
                              •
                           d that decency ſhould cloake his vice. Theſe pargettings belong only to good and ſound wals, ſuch as deſerue to bee whited, to bee preſerued. In fauor of Hugonots, who accuſe our auricular and priuate confeſſion, I confeſſe my ſelfe in publike; religiouſly and purely. Saint Auguſtine, Origene, and Hippocrates, haue publiſhed their errors of their opinions; I likewiſe of my maners. I greedily long to make my ſelfe known; nor care I at what rate, ſo it be truly: or to ſay better, I hunger for nothing; but I hate mortally to be miſtaken by ſuch as ſhall happen to know my name. He that doth all for honor and glory, what thinks he to gaine by preſenting himſelfe to the world in a maske, hiding his true being from the peoples knowledge? Commend a crook-back for his comely ſtature, hee ought to take it as an iniury: if you be a coward, and one honoreth you for a valiant man, is it of you he ſpeaketh? you are taken for another: I ſhould like as well, to have him glory in the cour
                              •
                           ſies and lowtings that are ſhewed him, ſuppoſing himſelfe to be ring-leader of a troupe when he is the meaneſt folower of it, Archelaus king of Macedon, paſſing throgh, a ſtreet ſome body caſt water vpon him, was aduiſed by his followers to puniſh the party: yea but (quoth he) who ever it was, he caſt not the water vpon me, but vpon him he thought I was. Socrates to one that told him he was railed vpon and ill ſpoken of? Tuſh (ſaid he) there is not ſuch thing in me. For my part, ſhould one commend me to be an excellent Pilote, to be very modeſt, or moſt chaſte, I ſhould owe him no thankes. Likewiſe ſhould any man call meetraitour, theefe or drunkard, I would deeme my ſelfe but little wronged by him. Thoſe who misknow themſelues, may feed themſelues with falſe approbations; but not I, who ſee and ſearch my ſelfe into my very bowels, and know full well what belongs vnto me. I am pleaſed to beleſſe commended, provided I be better knowne. I may be eſteemed wiſe for ſuch conditions of wiſedome, that I account meere follies. It vexeth me, that my Eſſayes ſerue Ladies in liew of common ware and ſtuffe for their hall: this Chapter will preferre me to their cabinet: I love their ſocietie ſome what private; their publike familiaritie wants fauor and ſauor. In farewels we heate aboue ordinary our affections to the things we forgoe. I heere take my laſt leave of this worlds pleaſures: loe heere our laſt embraces. And now to our theame. Why was the acte of generation made ſo naturall, ſo neceſſary and ſo iuſt, ſeeing we feare to ſpeake of it without ſhame, and exclude it from our ſerious and regular diſcourſes we pronounce boldly,

to rob, to murther, to betray; and this we dare not but betweene our teeth. Are we to gather by it, that the leſſe wee breath out in words the more we are allowed to furniſh our thoughtes with? For words leaſt vſed leaſt writen and leaſt concealed ſhould beſt be vnderſtood, and moſt generally knowne. No age, no condition are more ignorant of it, then of their bread. They are imprinted in each one, without expreſſing, without voice or figure. And the ſexe that doth it moſt, is moſt bound to ſuppreſſe it. It is an action we have put in the precincts of ſilence, whence to draw it were an offence: not to accuſe or iudge it. Nor dare we beate it but in circumlocution and picture. A notable fauor, to a criminall offender, to be ſo execrable, that juſtice deeme it injuſtice to touch and behold him, freed and ſaved by the benefit of this condemnations ſeuerity. It is not herein as in matters of bookes, which being once called-in and forbidden become more ſaleable and publike? As for me, I will take Ariſtotle at his word, that baſhfulneſſe is an ornament to youth, but a reproach to age. Theſe verſes are preached in the old ſchoole; a ſchoole of which I hold more then of the moderne: her vertues ſeeme greater vnto me, her vices leſſe.
                        
                           Deux qui par trop fuiant Venus eſtriueut
                           Failent aut aut que ceux qui trop la ſuiuent.
                           Who ſtriues ore much Venus to ſhunne, offends
                           Alike with him, that wholy hir intends,
                           Tu dea, tu rerum naturam ſola gubernas,Lucr. l. 1. 22.
                           
                           Nec ſine te quisquam dias in luminis oras
                           Exoritur, neque fit laetum, nec amabile quicquam,
                           Goddeſſe, thou rul'ſt the nature of all things.
                           Without thee nothing into this light ſprings.
                           Nothing is louely, nothing pleaſures brings.
                        
                        I know not who could ſet Pallas and the Muſes at oddes with Venus, and make them colde and flowe in affecting of love; as for me, I ſee no Deities that better ſute together, nor more endebted one to another. Who▪ ever ſhall goe about to remooue amorous imaginations from the Muſes, ſhall depriue them of the beſt entertainment they have, and of the nobleſt ſubject of their worke: and who ſhall debarre Cupid the ſeruice and conuerſation of Poeſie, ſhall weaken him of his beſt weapons. By this meanes they caſte vpon the God of acquaintance, of amitie and goodwil; and vpon the Goddeſſes, protectreſſes of humanitie, and juſtice, the vice of ingratitude, and imputation of churliſhneſſe. I haue not ſo long beene caſhiered from the ſtate and ſeruice of this God, but that my memorie is ſtill acquainted with the force of his worth and valour.
                        
                           —agnoſco veteris veſtigia flammae.
                              Virg. Ae
                                    •
                                 . l. 4. 23.
                           
                           I feele and feeling know, How my old flames regrow.
                        
                        
                           There commonly remaine ſome reliques of ſhiuering and heate after anague,
                        
                        
                           Nec mihi d
                                 •
                               ficiat
                                 •
                              alor hic, hyemantibu, annis.
                           When Winter yeares com-on,
                           Let not this heate be gon.
                        
                        As drie, as ſluggiſh and as vnwieldie as I am, I feele yet ſome warme cinders of my paſſed heate.
                        
                           Qual'
                                 •
                               alto Aegeo perche Aquiloneo Noto
                           Ceſſi che tutto prima il volſe et ſcoſſe,
                           Nons' accheta ei peró, ma il ſuono 
                                 •
                              'l moto,
                           Ritien delionde anco agitat
                                 ••
                              t groſſe.
                           As graund Aegean Sea, becauſe the voice
                           Of windes doth ceaſe, which it before enraged,
                           Yet doth not calme, but ſtil retaines the noiſe
                           And motion of huge billowes vnaſwaged.
                        
                        But for ſo much as I know of it, the power and might of this God, are found more quicke and lively in the ſhadowe of the Poeſie, then in their owne eſſence.
                        
                           Et verſus digitos habet.
                           Verſes have full effect,
                           Of fingers to erect,Iuuen. Sat. 6. 197.
                           
                        
                        It repreſenteth a kinde of ayre more lovely then love it ſelfe. Venus is not ſo faire, nor ſo alluring all naked, quick and panting, as ſhe is here in Virgill.
                        
                        
                           Dixerat, & niveis hinc atque hinc diua lacertisVirg. Ae
                                    •
                                 . l. 8. 387.
                           
                           Cunctant
                                 •
                              m amplexu mollifouet: Ille repente
                           
                              Accepit folitam flammam, notuſque medullas
                           Intrauit calor, & labefacta per oſſa cucurrit.
                           Nonſecus atque olim tonitru cùm rupta coruſco,
                           Ignea rima micans percurrit lumine nimbos.
                           So ſaid the Goddeſſe, and with ſoft embrace,
                           Of Snow-white arme, the grim-fire doth enchaſe,
                           He ſtraight tooke wonted fire, knowne heate at once,
                           His marrow pearc't, ranne through his weakned bones;
                           As firie flaſh with thunder doth divide,
                           With radiant lightning through a ſtorme doth glide.
                           —ea verba loquutus,
                           
                           Optatos dedit amplexus, placidumque petiuit.Ibi▪ 404.
                           
                           Coniugis infuſus gremio per membra ſoporem.
                           A ſweete embrace, when he thoſe words had ſaid
                           He gave, and his limmes pleaſing-reſt he praid
                           To take in his wiues boſome lolling-laide.
                        
                        What therein I finde to be conſidered, is, that he depainteth hir ſomewhat ſtirring for a maritall 
                              Ʋenus. In this diſcreete match, appetites are not commonly ſo fondling; but drowſi
                              •
                            and more ſluggiſh. Loue diſdaineth a man ſhould holde of other then himſelfe, and dealeth but faintly with acquaintances begun and entertained vnder another title; as mariage is. Alliances, reſpects and meanes, by all reaſon, waigh as much or more, as the grace and beauty. A man doth not mary for himſelfe, whatſoeuer he allegeth; but as much or more for his poſteritie and familie. The vſe and intereſt of mariage concerneth our off-ſpring, a great way beyond vs. Therefore doth this faſhion pleaſe me, to guide it rather by a third hand, and by anothers ſence, then our owne: All which, how much doth it diſſent from amorous conuentions? Nor is it other then a kinde of inceſt, in this reverend alliance and ſacred bonde, to employ the efforts and extravagant humor of an amorous licentiouſnes, as I thinke to haue ſaid elſe-where. One ſhould (ſaith Ariſtotle) touch his wife ſoberlie, diſcreetly and ſeuerely, leaſt that tickling too laſciviouſly, pleaſure tranſport her beyond the bounds of reaſon. What he ſpeaketh for conſcience, Phiſitions alledge for health: ſaying that pleaſure exceſſively whotte, voluptuous and continuall, altereth the ſeede, and hindereth conception. Some other ſay beſides, that to a languiſhing congreſſion (as naturally that is) to ſtore it with a couuenient, and fertile heat, one muſt but ſeldome, and by moderate intermiſſions preſent himſelfe vnto it.
                        
                           Quo rapiet ſitiens venerem interiuſque recondat.Virg Geor. l. 3. 137.
                           
                           Thirſting to ſnatch a fit,
                           And inly harbor it.
                        
                        
                           I ſee no mariages faile ſooner, or more troubled, then ſuch as are concluded for beauties ſake, and hudled vp for amorous deſires. There are required more ſolide foundations, and more conſtant grounds, and a more warie marching to it: this earneſt youthly heate ſerueth to no purpoſe. Thoſe who thinke to honour marriage, by ioyning love vnto it (in mine opinion) doe as thoſe, who to doe vertue a fauour, holde, that Nobilitie is noe other thing then Vertue. Indeed theſe things have ſome affinitie; but therewithall great difference: their names and titles ſhould not thus be commixt: both are wronged ſo to bee confounded. Nobilitie is a worthy, goodly qualitie, aud introduced with good reaſon; but in as much as it dependeth on others, and may fall to the ſhare of my vicious and worthleſſe fellowe, it is in eſtimation farre ſhorte of vertue. If it be a vertue, it is artificiall and viſible; relying both on time and fortune; diuers in forme, according vnto countries; living and mortall; without birth, as the riuer Nilus genealogicall and common; by ſucceſſion and ſimilitude; drawne along by conſequence, but a very weake one. Knowledge, ſtrength, goodneſſe, beautie, wealth and all other qualities fall within compaſſe of commerce and communication: whereas this conſumeth it ſelfe in it ſelfe, of no employment for the ſeruice of others. One propoſed to one of our Kinges the choiſe of two competitors in one office, the one a Gentleman, the other a Yeoman: hee appointed that without reſpect vnto that qualitie, hee who deſerued beſt ſhould be elected; but were their valour or worth fully a-like, the Gentleman ſhould be regarded: this was iuſtlie to give nobilitie hir right and ranke. Antigonus, to an vnknowne young-man, who ſued

vnto him for his fathers charge, a man of valour and who was lately deceaſed: My friend (quoth hee) in ſuch good turnes, I waigh not my ſouldiers noble birth, ſo much as their ſufficiencie. Of truth it ſhould not be herein, as with the officers of Spartan kings; Trumpetors, Muſitions, Cookes, in whoſe roome their children ſucceded, how ignorant ſoeuer, before the beſt experienced in the trade. Thoſe of Calicut make of their nobility a degree aboue humane. Marriage is interdicted them, and all other vocations, ſauing warre. Of Concubines they may haue as many as they liſt, and women as many lechardes, without Jealouſie one of another. But it is a capitall crime, and vnremiſſible offence to contract or marry with any of different condition: Nay they deeme themſelues diſparaged and polluted, if they haue but touched them in paſſing by. And as if their honour were much iniuried and interreſſed by it, they kil thoſe who but approach ſome what to neare them. In ſuch ſort, that the ignoble are bound to cry as they walke along, like the Gondoliers or Water-men of 
                              Ʋenice along the ſtreetes, leaſt they ſhould iuſtle with them: and the nobles command them to what ſide of the way they pleaſe. Thereby doe theſe auoyde an obloquie which they eſteeme perpetuall; and thoſe an aſſured death. No continuance of time, no fauour of Prince, no office, no vertue, nor any wealth can make a clowne to become a gentleman. Which is much furthered by this cuſtome, that mariages of one trade with another are ſtricktlie for bidden. A Shoo-maker cannot marry with the race of a Carpenter; and parents are preciſely bounde to traine vp orphanes in their fathers trade, and in no other. Whereby the difference, the diſtinction and continuance, of their fortune is maintained. A good marriage (if any there be) refuſeth the company and conditions of loue; it endeuoureth to preſent thoſe of amity. It is a ſweete ſociety of life, full of conſtancie, of truſt, & an infinite number of profitable and ſolid offices, and mutuall obligations: No woman that throughly and impartially taſteth the ſame,
                        
                           (Optat
                                    •
                                  quam iunxit lumine taeda
                           
                           Whom loues-fire ioyned in double band,Cat
                                    •
                                 l. co
                                    •
                                 . Ber. 79.
                           
                           With wiſhed light of marriage brand)
                        
                        would forgoe her eſtate to bee her husbands maſter. Be ſhe lodged in his affection, as a wife, ſhe is much more honourably and ſurely lodged. Be a man paſſionately entangled in any vnlawful luſt or loue, let him then be demanded on whom he would rather haue ſome ſhame or diſgrace to alight; eyther on his lawfull wife, or on his lechard miſtris whoſe misfortune would afflict him moſt, and to whom hee wiſheth greater good or more honour. Theſe queſtions admit no doubt in an abſolute ſound marriage. The reaſon we ſee ſo few good, is an apparent ſigne of it's worth, and a teſtimony of it's price. Perfectly to faſhion and rightly to take it, is the worthieſt and beſt part of our ſociety. We cannot be without it, and yet wee diſgrace and vilifie the ſame. It may bee compared to a cage, the birdes without diſpaire to get in, and thoſe within diſpaire to get out. Socrates being demanded, whether was moſt commodious, to take, or not to take a wife; Which ſoever a man doth (quoth he) he ſhall repent it. It is a match wherto may well be applied the common ſaying, homo homini aut Deus, aut▪ Lupus. Man vnto man is either
                           Eraſ▪ chil. 1. cent. 169. 70. 
                           a God or a Wolfe▪
                            to the perfect erecting wereof are the concurrences of diuers qualities required: It is now a dayes found moſt fit or commodious for ſimple mindes and popular ſpirits whom dainties, curioſity and idleneſſe doe not ſo much touble. Licentious humours, debauſhed conceits (as are mine) who hate all manner of duties, bondes, or obſeruances are not ſo fit, ſo proper, and ſo ſutable for it.
                        
                           Et mihi dulce magis reſolute viuere collo.Cor. Gal. el. 
                                    •
                                 . 61.
                           
                           Sweeter it is to me, with looſe necke to liue free.
                        
                        Of mine owne diſpoſition, would wiſedoome it ſelfe haue had me, I ſhould haue refuſed to wed her. But we may ſay our pleaſure; the cuſtome and vſe of common life ouer beareth vs. Moſt of my actions are guided by example, and not by election: Yet did I not properly enuite my ſelfe vnto it, I was led and brought therevnto by ſtrange and vnexpected occaſions: For, not onely incommodious things, but foule, vicious and ineuitable, may by ſome condition and accident become acceptable and allowed. So vaine is mans poſture and defence. And truely I was then drawne vnto it, being but ill prepared and more backeward, then now I am that haue made triall of it. And as licentious as the world reputes mee, I haue (in good truth) more ſtricktly obſerued the lawes of wedlock, then either I had promiſed or hoped. It is no longer time to wince when one hath put on the ſhackles. A man ought wiſely to husband his liberty; but after he hath once ſubmitted himſelfe vnto bondage, he is to ſtick vnto it by the lawes of common

duty or at leaſt enforce himſelfe to keepe them. Thoſe which vndertake that couenant to deale therein with hate and contempt, doe both iniuſtly and incommodiouſly. And that goodly rule I ſee paſſe from hand to hand among women, as a ſacred Oracle,
                        
                           Serston mary comme maiſtre:
                           Et t'en garde comme d'un traiſtre.
                           Your husband as your maſter ſerue-yee:
                           From him as from falſe friend preſerue-yee.
                        
                        which is as much to ſay; Beare thy ſelfe toward him with a conſtrained, enemy and diſtruſtfull reverence (a ſtile of warre, and cry of defiance) is likewiſe iniurious and difficult. I am to milde for ſuch crabbed diſſignes. To ſay truth, I am not yet come to that perfection of ſufficiency and quaintneſſe of wit, as to confound reaſon with iniuſtice: and laugh or ſcoffe at each order or rule, that iumps not with my humour. To hate ſuperſtition, I doe not preſently caſt my ſelfe into irreligion. If one doe not alwaies diſcharge his duety, yet ought he at leaſt euer loue, euer acknowledge it: It is treaſon for one to marry vnleſſe he wed. But goe we on. Our Poet deſcribeth a marriage full of accord and good agreement, wherein notwithſtanding there is not much loyaltie. Did he meane it was not poſſible to performe loues rights, and yet reſerue ſome rightes toward marriage; and that one may, bruſe it, without altogether breaking it? A ſervant may picke his maſters purſe, and yet not hate him. Beautie, opportunitie, deſtinie, (for deſtinie hath alſo a hand therein)
                        
                           —fatum eſt in partibus illis.
                              
                                 
                                    〈…〉
                                 . 
                                    〈…〉
                                 . 9. 32
                           
                           Quas ſinus abſcondit; nam ſi tibi fideracaſſent,
                           N
                                 •
                              l faciet longi menſura incognita nervi.
                           In thoſe parts there is fate, which hidden are;
                           If then thou be not wrought-for by thy ſtarre,
                           The meaſure of long nerves, vnknowne to nothing ſerves.
                        
                        have entangled a wo
                              •
                           an to a ſtranger, yet peradventure not ſo abſolutely but that ſome bond may bee left to hold her to her husband. They are two diſſignes, having ſeverall and vnconfounded pathes leading to them. A woman may yeeld to ſuch a man, whom in no caſe ſhe would have married. I meane not for the conditions of his fortune, but for the qualities of his perſon. Few men have wedded their ſweet hearts, their paramours or miſtreſſes, but have come home by weeping Croſſe, and ere long repented their bargaine. And even in the other world, what an vnquiet life leades Iupiter with his wife, whom before hee had ſecretly knowen, and lovingly enioied? This is as they ſay, to beray the panier, and then put it on your head. My ſelfe have ſeene in ſome good place, love, ſhamefully and diſhoneſtly cured by mariage: the conſiderations are to much different. Wee love without diſturbance to our ſelves; two divers and in themſelves contrary things. Iſocrates ſaid, that the towne of Athens pleaſed men, even as Ladies doe whom wee ſerve for affection. Every one loved to come thither, to walke and paſſe away the time: but none affected to wed it: that is to ſay, to endeniſon, to dwell and habituate himſelfe therein. I have (and that to my ſpight and griefe) ſeene husbands hate their wives, onely becauſe themſelves wronged them: Howſoever, wee ſhould not love them leſſe for our faults; at leaſt for repentance and compaſſion they ought to be dearer vnto vs. Theſe are different ends (ſaith hee) and yet in ſome ſort compatible. Wedlocke hath for his ſhare honour, juſtice, profit and conſtancie: a plaine, but more generall delight. Love melts in onely pleaſure; and truly it hath it more tickliſh, more lively, more quaint, and more ſharpe: a pleaſure inflamed by difficulty: there muſt be a kinde of ſtinging, tingling and ſmarting. It is no longer loue, be it once without Arrowes, or without fire. The liberality of Ladies is to profuſe in marriage, and blunts the edge of affection and deſire. To avoide this inconnenience, ſee the puniſhment inflicted by the lawes of Lycurgus and Plato. But Women are not altogether in the wrong, when they refuſe the rules of life preſcribed to the World, forſomuch as onely men have eſtabliſhed them without their conſent. There is commonly brauling and contention betweene them and vs. And the neareſt conſent wee have with them, is but ſtormy and tumultuous. In the opinion of our Authour, we heerin vſe them but inconſiderately. After wee have knowen, that without compariſon they are much more capable and violent in Loues-effectes then wee, as was teſtified by that ancient Prieſt, who had beene both man and woman,

and tried the paſſions of both ſexes.
                        
                           
                              Ʋenus huic erat vtraque nota:
                           Of both ſortes he knew venery.Ouid. Meta. l. 3. 323. Tiros.
                           
                        
                        We haue moreouer learned by their owne mouth, what tryall was made of it, though in divers ages, by an Emperour and an Empreſſe of Rome, both skilfull and famous maſters in lawleſſe luſt and vnrulye wantonneſſe; for hee in one night deflowred ten Sarmatian virgines, that were his captiues; but ſhee realy did in one night alſo, anſwere fiue and twenty ſeuerall aſſaults, changing her aſſailants as ſhe found cauſe to ſupplye her neede, or fitte her taſte,
                        
                           —adhuc ardens rigidae tentigine vuluae
                              Iu
                                    •
                                 en. Sat. 6. 127.
                           
                           Et laſſ
                                 •
                              ta viris, non dum ſatiata receſſit.
                        
                        and that vpon the controuerſie happened in Catalogne, betweene a wife and a husband; ſhee complaining on his ouer violence and continuance therein (not ſo much in my conceite, becauſe ſhe was thereby ouerlabored (for but by faith I beleeue not miracles) as vnder this pretext, to abridge and bridle the autority of husbands ouer their wiues, which is the fundamental part of marriage: And to ſhew that their frouning, ſullenneſſe and peeuiſhneſſe exceede the very nuptial bed, and trample vnder-foote the very beauties, graces and delightes of 
                              Ʋenus; to whoſe complaint her husband, a right churliſh and rude fellow anſwered, that euen on faſting dayes he muſt needes do it ten times at leaſt) was by the Queene of Aragon giuen this notable ſentence: by which after mature deliberation of counſel, the good Queen to eſtabliſh a rule and imitable example vnto al poſterity, for the moderation and required modeſty in a lawfull marriage, ordained the number of ſixe times a day, as a lawfull, neceſſary and competent limit. Releaſing and diminiſhing a great part of her ſexes neede and deſire: to eſtabliſh (quoth ſhe) an eaſie forme, and conſequently permanent and immutable. Here vpon doctors cry out; what is the appetite and luſt of women, when as their reaſon, their reformation and their vertue, is retailed at ſuch a rate? conſidering the diuers iudgement of our deſires: for Solon maſter of the lawiers ſchoole alloweth but three times a moneth, becauſe this matrimoniall entercourſe ſhould not decay or faile. Now after we beleeued (ſay I) and preached thus much, we haue for their particular portion allotted them continencie; as their laſt and extreame penalty. There is no paſſion more importunate then this, which we would haue them only to reſiſt: Not ſimply, as a vice in it ſelf, but as abhemination and execration, and more then irreligion and parricide; whilſt wee our ſelues without blame or reproach offend in it at our pleaſure. Euen thoſe amongſt vs, who haue earneſtly labored to ouercome luſt, haue ſufficiently vowed, what difficulty, or rather vn
                              •
                            eſiſtable impoſſibility they found in it, ▪vſing nevertheles material remedies, to tame, to weaken and coole the body. And we on the other ſide would haue them ſound, healthy, ſtrong, in good liking, wel-fed and chaſte together, that is to ſay, both hotte and colde. For marriage which we auerie ſhould hinder them from burning, affords them but ſmall refreſhing, according as our manners are. If they meete with a husband, whoſe force by reaſon of his age is yet boyling, he will take a pride to ſpend it elſe-where:
                        
                           Sit tandem pudor, aut eamus inius,Mart l. 12. epig. 99. 10.
                           
                           Multis mentula millibus redempta,
                           Non eſt haec tua, Baſſe, vendidiſti.
                        
                        The Philoſopher Polemon was iuſtly called in queſtion by his wife, for ſowing in a barren fielde the fruite due to the fertile. But if they match with broken ſtuffe in ful wedlocke, they are in worſe caſe then either virgines or widowes. Wee deeme them ſufficiently furniſhed, if they haue a man lie by them. As the Romans reputed Clodia Laeta a veſtall virgine defloured, whom Caligula had touched, although it was manifeſtly prooued hee had but approached her: But on the contrary, their neede or longing is thereby encreaſed; for but the touch or company of any man whatſoever ſtirreth vp their heate, which in their ſolytude was huſht▪ and quiet, and laye as cinders raked vp in aſhes. And to the ende, as it is likely, to make by this circumſtance and conſideration their chaſtitie more meritorious: Bòleſtaus and Kingè his wife, King and Queene of Poland, lying together, the firſt day of their mariage vowed it with mutuall conſent, and in deſpight of all wedlocke commoditie of nuptiall-delightes maintained the ſame. Euen from their infancie wee frame them to the ſportes of loue: their inſtruction, behauiour, attire, grace, learning and all their words aimeth onely at loue, reſpects, onely affection. Their nurces and their keepers

imprint no other thing in them, then the louelineſſe of love, were it but by continually preſenting the ſame vnto them, to diſtaſte them of it: My daughter (all the children I have) is of the age wherein the lawes excuſe the forwardeſt to marry. She is of a ſlowe, nice and milde complexion, and hath accordingly beene brought vp by hir mother, in a retired and particular manner: ſo that ſhee beginneth but now to put-off childiſh ſimplicitie. She was one day reading a French booke before mee, an obſcene word came in hir way (more bawdie in ſound then in effect, it ſignifieth the name of a Tree and another thing) the woman that lookes to hir, ſtaid hir preſently, and ſomwhat churliſhly making hir ſtep ouer the ſame: I let hir alone, becauſe I would not croſſe their rules, for I medle nothing with this government; womens policie hath a miſticall proceeding, wee muſt be content to leave it to them. But if I bee not deceiued, the conuerſation of twenty laqueis could not in ſix moneths have ſetled in hir thoughts, the vnderſtanding, the vſe and conſequences of the found belonging to thoſe filthy ſilables, as did that good olde woman by hir checke and interdiction.
                        
                           Motus doceri gaudet Ionicos
                           Matura virgo, et fingitur artubusId r. ca▪ 
                                 
                                    •
                                 . 3. 
                                    •
                                 d 
                                    •
                                  21.
                           
                           I am nunc, et inceſtos amores
                           De tenero meditatur vngui.
                           Maides mariage-ripe ſtraight to be taught delight
                           
                              Ionique daunces, fram'de by arte aright
                           In every ioynt, and eu'n from their firſt haire
                           Inceſtuous loves in meditation beare.
                        
                        Let them ſomwhat diſpence with ceremonies, let them fall into free libertie of ſpeach; wee are but children, wee are but gulles, in reſpect of them, about any ſuch ſubject. Heare them relate how wee ſue, how we wooe, how we ſollicite and how we entertaine them, they will ſoone giue you to vnderſtand, that wee can ſay, that we can doe, and that we can bring them nothing, but what they already knew, and had long before diſgeſted without vs. May it be) as Plato ſaith) becauſe they have one time or other beene themſelues wanton, licentious and amorous lads? Mine eares hapned one day in a place, where without ſuſpicion they might liſten and ſteale ſome of their priuate, laviſh and bould diſcourſes; oh why is it not lawfull for me to repeate them? Birlady (quoth I to my ſelfe) It is high time indeede for vs to goe ſtudie the phraſes of Amadis, the metaphors of Aretine, and eloquence of Boccace, thereby to become more skilfull, more ready and more ſufficient to confront them: ſurely we beſtowe our time well; there is nor quaint phraſe, nor choiſe worde, nor ambiguous figure, nor patheticall example, nor love-expreſſing geſture, nor alluring poſture, but they knowe them all better then our bookes: It is a cunning bred in their vaines and will never out of the fleſh,
                        
                           Et mentem Venus 
                                 •
                              pſa dedit.Virg. Geor. l 3. 267.
                           
                           
                              
                                 Ʋenus hir ſelfe aſſign'de,
                           To them both meanes and minde,
                        
                        which theſe skill infuſing Schoole-miſtriſſes nature, youth, health and opportunitie, are ever buzzing in their eares, euer whiſpering in their mindes: They neede not learne, not take paines about it; they beget it; with them it is borne.
                        
                           Nec tantum niueo gauiſa eſt nulla columbe
                           Compar, vel ſi quid dicitur improbius,Catul. 
                                    •
                                 leg 4. 125.
                           
                           Oſcula mordenti ſemper decerpereroſtro:
                           Quantum praecipuè multiuola est mulier.
                           No pigeons hen, or paire, or what worſe name
                           You liſt, makes with hir Snow-white cock ſuch game,
                           With biting bill to catch when ſhe is kiſt,
                           As many minded women when they liſt.
                        
                        Had not this naturall violence of their deſires beene ſomwhat held in awe, by feare and honor, wherewith they have beene provided we had all beene defamed. All the worlds motions bend and yeelde to this coniunction: it is a matter euery-where infuſed; and a Centre whereto all lines come, all things looke. The ordinances of ancient and wiſe Rome, ordained for the ſeruice and inſtituted for the behoofe of love, are yet to be ſeene: together with the precepts of Socrates to inſtruct courtizans.
                        
                           
                           Nec non libelli Stoici inter ſericosHor. Epod. 8. 15.
                           
                           Iacere puluillos amant.
                           Ev'n Stoicks bookes are pleas'd
                           Amidſt ſilke cuſhions to be eas'd.
                        
                        
                           Zeno among other lawes, ordered alſo the ſtruglings, the opening of legges, and the actions, which happen in the deflowring of a virgin. Of what ſence was the booke of Sirato the Philoſopher, of carnall copulation? And whereof treated Theophraſtus in thoſe he entitled, one The Lover, the other, Of Love? Whereof Aristippus in his volume Of ancient deliciouſneſſe or ſports? What implied or what imported the ample and lively deſcriptions in Plato, of the loves practiſed in his daies? And the lover of Demetrius Phalereus? And Clinias, or the forced lover of Heraclides Ponticus? And that of Artiſthenes, of the getting of children, or of weddings? And the other, Of the Maſter or of the lover? And that of Ariſto, Of amorous exerciſes? Of Cleanthes, one of love, another of the Art of love? The amorous dialogues of Spherus? And the filthy intolerable, and without bluſhing not to be vttered table of Iupiter and Iuno, written by Chryſippus? And his ſo laſcivious fifty Epiſtles? I will omit the writings of ſome Philoſophers, who have followed the ſect of Epicurus, protectreſſe of all maner of ſenſualitie and carnall pleaſure. Fifty ſeverall Deities were in times paſt allotted to this office. And there hath beene a nation found, which to allay and coole the luſtfull concupiſcence of ſuch as came for devotion, kept wenches of purpoſe in their temples to be vſed; and it was a point of religion to deale with them before one went to praiers. Nimirum propter continentiam incontinentia neceſſaria eſt, incendiumignibus ex
                                 •
                              inguitur. Belike we muſt be incontinent that we may be continent, burning is quenched by fire. In moſt places of the world, that part of our body was Deified. In that ſame province, ſome flead it to offer, and conſecrated a peece thereof; others offred and conſecrated their ſeed. In another the young-men did publikely pierce, and in divers places open their yard betweene fleſh and skin, and thorow the holes put the longeſt and biggeſt ſtickes they could endure, and of thoſe ſtickes made afterward a fire, for an offring to their Gods, and were eſteemed of ſmall vigour and leſſe chaſtitie, if by the force of that cruell paine they ſhewed any diſmay. Elſe-where, the moſt ſacred magiſtrate was reverenced and acknowledged by thoſe parts. And in divers ceremonies the portraiture thereof was carried and ſhewed in pompe and ſtate, to the honour of ſundry Deities. The Aegyptian Dames in their Bacchanalian feaſts wore a wodden one about their necks, exquiſitly faſhioned, as huge and heavie as every one could conveniently beare: beſides that which the ſtatue of their God repreſented, which in meaſure exceeded the reſt of his body. The maried women heere-by, with their Coverchefs frame the figure of one vpon their forheads; to glory themſelves with the enioying they have of it; and comming to bee widowes, they place it behinde, and hide it vnder their quoifes. The greateſt and wiſeſt matrons of Rome, were honoured for offring flowers and garlands to God Priapus. And when their Virgins were maried, they (during the nuptials) were made to ſit vpon their privities. Nor am I ſure, whether in my time, I have not ſeene a glimps of like devotion. What meant that laughtermooving, and maids looke-drawing peece our Fathers wore in their breeches, yet extant among the Switzers? To what end is at this preſent day the ſhew of our formall peeces vnder our Gaſcoine hoſes? and often (which is worſe) above their naturall greatneſſe, by falſhood and impoſture? A little thing would make me beleeve, that the ſaid kinde of garment was inuented in the beſt and moſt vpright ages, that the world might not be deceived, and all men ſhould yeeld a publike account of their ſufficiencie. The ſimpleſt nations have it yet ſomewhat reſembling the true forme. Then was the worke-mans skill inſtructed, how it is to bee made, by the meaſure of the arme or foot. That good-meaning man, who in my youth, thorowout his great citie, cauſed ſo many faire, curious and ancient ſtatues to bee guelded, left the ſenſe of ſeeing might bee corrupted, following the advice of that other good ancient man;
                        
                           Flagitij principium eſt nudare inter cives corpora:Cie. Tuſc. l. 4. En.
                           
                           Mongſt civill people ſinne,
                           By baring bodies we beginne.
                        
                        ſhould have conſidered, how in the myſteries of the good Goddeſſe, all apparance of man was excluded; that he was no whitneerer, if he did not alſo procure both horſes and aſſes, and al length nature her ſelfe to be guelded.
                        
                           
                           Omne adeo genus in torris, hominum
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                              , ferarum
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                              ,Virg. Georg. l. 3. 244.
                           
                           Et genus 
                                 •
                              quoreum, pecudes, pictaeque volucres,
                           In furias ignem
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               ruunt.
                           All kindes of things on earth, wilde beaſts, mankinde,
                           Field-beaſts, faire-fethered fowle, and fiſh (we finde)
                           Into loves fire and fury run by kinde.
                        
                        The Gods (ſaith Plato) have furniſhed man with a diſobedient, skittiſh, and tyrannicall member; which like an vntamed furious-beaſt, attempteth by the violence of his appetite to bring all things vnder his becke. So have they allotted women another as inſulting, wilde and fierce; in nature like a greedie, devouring, and rebellious creature, who if when hee craveth it, hee bee refuſed nouriſhment, as impatient of delay, it enrageth; and infuſing that rage into their bodies, ſtoppeth their conduicts, hindreth their reſpiration, and cauſeth a thouſand kindes of inconveniences; vntill ſucking vp the fruit of the generall thirſt, it have largely bedewed and enſeeded the bottome of their matrix. Now my law-giver ſhould alſo have conſidered, that peradventure it were a more chaſte and commodiouſly fruitfull vſe, betimes to give them a knowledge and taſte of the quicke; then according to the liberty and heat of their fantaſie, ſuffer them to gheſſe and imagine the ſame. In lieu of true eſſentiall parts, they by deſire ſurmiſe, and by hopeſubſtitute others, three times as extravagant. And one of my acquaintance was ſpoiled, by making open ſhew of his in place, where yet it was not convenient to put them in poſſeſſion of their more ſerious vſe. What harme cauſe not thoſe huge draughts or pictures, which wanton youth with chalke or coales draw in each paſſage, wall, or ſtaires of our great houſes? whence a cruell contempt of our naturall ſtore is bred in them. Who knoweth, whether Plato ordaining amongſt other well-inſtituted Common-wealths, that men and women, old and yoong, ſhould in their exerciſes or Gymnaſtickes, preſent themſelves naked one to the ſight of another, aimed at that or no? The Indian women, who daily without interdiction view their men all over, have at leaſt wherewith to aſſwage and coole the ſenſe of their ſeeing. And whatſoever the women of that great kingdome of Pegu ſay, who from their waſte downward, have nothing to cover themſelves but a ſingle cloth ſlit before; and that ſo ſtraight, that what nice modeſtie, or ceremonious decencie ſoever they ſeeme to affect, one may plainly at each ſtep ſee what God hath ſent them: that it is an invention or ſhift deviſed to draw men vnto them, and with-draw them from other men or boies, to which vnnaturall brutiſh ſinne that nation is wholly addicted: it might be ſaid, they loſe more then they get: and that a full hunger is more vehement, then 
                                 •
                              ne which hath beene glutted, be it but by the eies. And Livia ſaid, that to an honeſt woman, a naked man is no more then an Image. The Lacedemonian women, more virgin-wives, then are our maidens, ſaw every day the yoong men of their citie, naked at their exerciſes: themſelves nothing preciſe to hide their thighes in walking, eſteeming themſelves (ſaith Plato) ſufficiently cloathed with their vertue, without vardingall. But thoſe, of whom S. Auguſtine ſpeaketh, have attributed much to nakedneſſe, who made a queſtion, whether women at the laſt day of judgement ſhould riſe againe in their proper ſex, and not rather in ours, leſt even then they tempt vs in that holy ſtate. In ſumme, we lure and every way fleſh them: we vnceſſantly enflame and encite their imagination: and then we cry out, but oh, but oh the belly. Let vs confeſſe the truth, there are few amongſt vs, that feare not more the ſhame they may have by their wives offences, then by their owne vices; or that cares not more (oh wondrous charity) for his wives, then his own conſcience; or that had not rather be a theefe and church-robber, and have his wife a murderer and an heretike, then not more chaſte then himſelfe. Oh impious eſtimation of vices. Both wee and they are capable of a thouſand more hurtfull and vnnaturall corruptions, then is luſt or laſciviouſneſſe. But we frame vices and waigh ſinnes, not according to their nature, but according to our intereſt; whereby they take ſo many different vnequall formes. The ſeverity of our lawes makes womens inclination to that vice, more violent and faulty, then it's condition beareth; and engageth it to worſe proceedings then is their cauſe. They will readily offer rather to follow the practiſe of law, and plead at the barre for a fee, or goe to the warres for reputation, then in the midſt of idleneſſe and deliciouſneſſe be tied to keepe ſo hard a Sentinell, ſo dangerous a watch. See they not plainly, how there is

neither Merchant, Lawyer, Souldier, or Church-man, but will leave his accounts, forſake his client, quit his glory and neglect his function, to follow this other buſineſſe? And the burden bearing porter, ſouterly cobler, and toilefull labourer, all haraſſed, all beſmeared, and all bemoiled, through travell, labour and trudging, will forget all, to pleaſe himſelfe with this pleaſing ſport.
                        
                           Num tu quae tenuit dives Achaemenes,H
                                    •
                                 r. car. l. 2. 
                                    ••
                                 . 12. 21.
                           
                           Aut pinguis Phrygiae Mygdonias opes,
                           Permutare velis crine Liciniae,
                           Plenas aut Arabum domos,
                           Dum fragrantia detorquet ad oſ
                                 •
                              ula
                           Ceruicem, aut facili ſaeuitianegat,
                           Quae poſcente magis ga
                                 •
                              deat eripi,
                           Interdum rapere occupet?
                           Would you exchange for your faire miſtreſſe haire,
                           All that the rich Achaemenes did hold,
                           Or all that fertill Phrygias ſoile doth beare,
                           Or all th' Arabians ſtore of ſpice and gold?
                           Whilſt ſhe to fragrant kiſſes turnes her head,
                           Or with a courteous coineſſe them denies;
                           Which more then he that ſpeeds ſhe would have ſped,
                           And which ſometimes to ſnatch ſhe formoſt hies?
                        
                        I wot not whether Caeſars exploits, or Alexanders atchivements exceed in hardineſſe the reſolution of a beautious yoong woman, trained after our manner, in the open view and vncontrolled converſation of the world, ſollicited and battered by ſo many contrary examples, expoſed to a thouſand aſſaults and continuall purſuits, and yet ſtill holding her ſelfe good and vnvanquiſhed. There is no point of doing more thornie, nor more active, then this of not doing. I finde it eaſier, to beare all ones life a comberſome armour on his backe, then a maiden-head. And the vow of virginitie, is the nobleſt of all vowes, becauſe the hardeſt. Diaboli virtus in lumbis est:
                           Hier
                                 •
                              n. 
                           The divels maſter-point lies in our loines, ſaith S. Ierome. Surely we haue re
                              •
                           igned the moſt difficult and vigorous devoire of mankinde vnto women, and quit them the glory of it, which might ſtead them as a ſingular motive to opinionate themſelves therein: and ſerve them as a worthy ſubiect to brave vs, and trample vnder feet that vaine preheminence of valour and vertue wee pretend over them. They ſhall finde (if they but heed it) that they ſhall thereby not only be highly regarded, but alſo more beloved. A gallant vndaunted ſpirit leaveth not his purſuits for a bare refuſall; ſo it bee a refuſall of chaſtitie, and not of choiſe. Wee may ſweare, threaten and wailingly complaine; we lie, for we love them the better. There is no enticing lure to wiſdome and ſecret modeſtie; ſo it be not rude, churliſh, and froward. It is blockiſhneſſe and baſeneſſe to be obſtinately wilfull againſt hatred and contempt: But againſt a vertuous and conſtant reſolution, matched with an acknowledging minde, it is the exerciſe of a noble and generous minde. They may accept of our ſervice vnto a certaine meaſure, and make vs honeſtly perceive how they diſdaine vs not: for, the law which enioineth them to abhorre vs, becauſe we adore them; and hate vs, forſomuch as we love them; is doubtleſſe very cruell, were it but for it's difficultie. Why may they not liſten to our offers, and not gaine-ſay our requeſts, ſo long as they containe themſelves within the bounds of modeſtie▪ Wherefore ſhould we imagine, they inwardly affect a freer meaning? A Queene of our time ſaid wittily, that to refuſe mens kinde ſummo
                                 •
                              s, is a teſtimonie of much weakneſſe, and an accuſing of ones owne facilitie: and that an vnattempted Lady could not vaunt of her chaſtitie. Honours limits are not reſtrained ſo ſhort; they may ſomewhat be ſlacked, and without offending ſomewhat diſpenſed withall. At the end of his frontiers▪ there is left a free, indifferent, and newter ſpace. He that could drive and force his miſtreſſe into a corner, and reduce her into her fort, hath no great matter in him, if he be not content with his fortune. The price or honour of the conqueſt is rated by the difficultie. Will you know what impreſſion your merits, your ſervices and worth have made in her heart? Iudge of it by her behaviour and diſpoſition.
                        Some one may give more, that (all things conſidered) giveth not ſo much. The obligation
                           
                           of a benefit hath wholly reference vnto the will of him that giveth: other circumſtances which fall within the compaſſe of good-turnes, are dumbe, dead and caſuall. That little ſhe giveth may coſt her more, then all her companion hath. If rareneſſe be in any thing worthy eſtimation, it ought to be in this. Reſpect not how little it is, but how few have it to give. The value of money is changed according to the coine, ſtampe or marke of the place. Whatſoever the ſpight or indiſcretion of ſome, may vpon the exceſſe of their diſcontentment, make them ſay; 
                              Ʋertue and truth doe ever recover their advantage. I have knowen ſome, whoſe reputation hath long time beene impeached by wrong, and intere
                              ••
                           ed by reproach, reſtored vnto all mens good opinion and generall approbation, without care or Art, onely by their conſtancie; each repenting and denying what he formerly beleeved. From wenches ſomewhat ſuſpected, they now hold the firſt ranke amongſt honourable Ladies. Some told Plato, that all the world ſpake ill of him; Let them ſay what they liſt (quoth hee) I will ſo live, that Ile make them recant and change their ſpeeches. Beſides the feare of God, and the reward of ſo rare a glory, which ſhould incite them to preſerve themſelves, the corruption of our age enforceth them vnto it: and were I in their clothes, there is nothing but I would rather doe, then commit my reputation into ſo dangerous hands. In my time, the pleaſure of reporting and blabbing what one hath done (a pleaſure not much ſhort of the act it ſelfe in ſweetneſſe) was only allowed to ſuch as had ſome aſſured, truſtie and ſingular friend; whereas now-a-daies, the ordinary entertainements and familiar diſcourſes of meetings and at tables, are the boaſtings of favours received, graces obtained, and ſecret liberalities of Ladies. Verily it is too great an abiection, and argueth a baſeneſſe of heart, ſo fiercely to ſuffer thoſe tender, daintie, deliciousioies, to bee perſecuted, pelted, and foraged by perſons ſo vngratefull, ſo vndiſcreet, and ſo giddy-headed. This our immoderate and lawleſſe exaſperation againſt this vice, proceedeth and is bred of jealouſie; the moſt vaine and turbulent infirmitie that may afflict mans minde.
                        
                           Quis vetat appo
                                 •
                              ito lumen de lumine ſumi?O
                                    •
                                 id. Art. Amand
                                    •
                                 . 3. 93.
                           
                           Dent licet aſſiduè, nil tamen inde perit.
                           To borrow light of light, who would deny?
                           Though ſtill they give, nothing is loſt thereby.
                        
                        That, and Envie her ſiſter, are (in mine opinion) the fondeſt of the troupe. Of the latter, I cannot ſay much; a paſſion which how effectuall and powerfull ſoever they ſet foorth; of her good favour ſhe medleth not with me. As for the other, I know it only by ſight. Beaſts have ſome feeling of it. The ſhepheard Cratis being fallen in love with a ſhee Goat, her Bucke for jealouſie beat out his braines as hee lay aſleepe. Wee have raiſed to the higheſt ſtraine the exceſſe of this moodie feaver, after the example of ſome barbarous nations: The beſt diſciplined have therewith beene tainted, it is reaſon; but not caried away by it:
                        
                           Enſe maritali nemo confoſſus adulter,
                           Purpureo ſtygias ſanguine tinxit 
                                 •
                              quas.
                           With husbands ſword yet no adultrer ſlaine,
                           With purple blood did Stygian waters ſtaine.
                        
                        
                           Lucullus, Caeſ
                                 •
                              r, Pompey, Anthoni
                                 •
                              , Cato, and divers other gallant men were Cuckolds, and knew it, though they made no ſtirre about it. There was in all that time but one gulliſ
                              ••
                            coxcombe Lepidus, that died with the anguiſh of it.
                        
                           Ah tum te miſerum mali
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               fati,C
                                    •
                                 tu
                                    •
                                 . lyr. epig. 15. 17.
                           
                           Quem attractis pedibus patente porta,
                           Percurrent mugileſ
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               raphanique.
                           Ah thee then wretched, of accurſed fate,
                           Whom Fiſh-wives, Rediſh-wives of baſe eſtate,
                           Shall ſcoffing over-runne in open gate.
                        
                        And the God of our Poet, when he ſurpriſed one of his companions napping with his wife, was contented but to ſhame them:
                        
                           Atque aliquis de ijs non triſtibus optat,O
                                    •
                                 id. Met. l. 4. 187.
                           
                           Sic fieri turpis.
                           Some of the merier Gods doth wiſh in heart,
                           To ſhare their ſhame, of pleaſure to take part.
                        
                        And yet forbeareth not to be en
                              •
                           lamed with the gentle dalliances, and amorous blandiſhments

ſhe offereth him, complaining that for ſo ſlight a matter he ſhould diſtruſt her to him deare-deare affection:
                        
                           Quid cauſas pet is ex alto? 
                                 •
                              iducia ceſſit
                                 
                                    ••
                                 rg. Aen. l. 2. 395.
                           
                           Quo tibi Divamei?
                           So farre why fetch you your pleas pedigree?
                           Whither is fled the truſt you had in mee?
                        
                        And which is more, ſhe becomes a ſuiter to him in the behalfe of a baſtard of hers,
                        
                           Arma rogo genitrix nato.Ibid. 382.
                           
                           A mother for a ſonne, I crave,
                           An armor he of you may have.
                        
                        Which is freely granted her: And 
                              Ʋulcan ſpeakes honourably of Aeneas:
                        
                        
                           Arma acrifacienda viro.Ibid. 441.
                           
                           An armour muſt be hammered out,
                           For one of courage ſterne and ſtout.
                        
                        In truth with an humanitie, more then humane. And which exceſſe of goodneſſe by my conſent ſhall only be left to the Gods:
                        
                           Nec divis homines componier aequum eſt.Catul. eleg. 4. 141.
                           
                           Nor is it meet, that men with Gods
                           Should be compar'd, there is ſuch ods.
                        
                        As for the confuſion of children, beſides that the graveſt law-makers appoint and affect it in their Common-wealths, it concerneth not women, with whom this paſſion is, I wot not how, in ſome ſort better placed, fitter ſeated.
                        
                           Saepe etiam Iuno maxima coelicolumCatul. eleg. 4. 138.
                           
                           Coniugis in culpa flagravit quotiaiana.
                           Ev'n Iuno chiefe of Goddeſſes oft time,
                           Hath growne hot at her husbands daily crime.
                        
                        When iealouſie once ſeazeth on theſe ſilly, weake, and vnreſiſting ſoules, t'is pitifull, to ſee, how cruelly it tormenteth, how inſultingly it tyrannizeth them. It inſinuateth it ſelfe vnder colour of friendſhip: but after it once poſſeſſeth them, the ſame cauſes which ſerved for a ground of good-will, ſerve for the foundation of mortall hatred. Of all the mindes diſeaſes, that is it, whereto moſt things ſerve for ſuſtenance, and feweſt for remedy. The vertue, courage, health, merit and reputation of their husbands, are the firebrands of their deſpight, and motives of their rage.
                        
                           Nullae ſunt inimicitiae niſi amoris acerbae.Prop. l. 2. el. 8. 3▪
                              
                           
                           No enmities ſo bitter prove,
                           And ſharpe, as thoſe which ſpring of love.
                        
                        This conſuming feaver blemiſheth and corrupteth all that otherwiſe is good and goodly in them. And how chaſte or good a huſwife ſoever a jealous woman is, there is no action of hers, bu
                              •
                            taſteth of ſharpneſſe and ſmaks of importunitie. It is a furious perturbation, a moodie agitation, which throwes them into extremities altogether contrary to the cauſe. The ſucceſſe of one Octauius in Rome was ſtrange, who having laien with, and enioied the love of Pontia Poſt humia, increaſed his affection by enioying her, and inſtantly ſued to mary her; but being vnable to perſwade her, his extreme paſſionate love prec
                              •
                           pitated him into effects of a moſt cruell, mortall and inexorable hatred; whereupon he killed her. Likewiſe the ordinary Symptomes or paſſions of this other amorous diſeaſe, are inteſtine hates, ſlie Monopolies, cloſe conſpiracies:
                        
                           Notumque, furens quid foemina poſſit.Virg. Aen. l. 5. 6
                           
                           It is knowne what a woman may,
                           Whoſe raging paſſions have no ſtay.
                        
                        And a raging ſpight, which ſo much the more fretteth itſelfe, by being forced to excuſe it ſelfe vnder pretence of good-will. Now the dutie of chaſtitie hath a large extenſion and farrereaching compaſſe. Is it their will, we would have them to bridle? That's a part very pliable and active. It is very nimble and quick-rolling to be ſtaied. What? If dreames doe ſometimes engage them ſo farre, as they cannot diſſemble nor deny them; It lieth not in them (nor perhaps in chaſtitie it ſelfe, ſeeing ſhe is a female) to ſhield themſelves from concupiſcence and avoid deſiring. If only their will intereſſe and engage vs, where and in what caſe

are we? Imagine what great throng of men there would bee, in purſuit of this priuilege, with winged-ſpeed (though without eies and without tongue) to be conueied vpon the point of every woman that would buy him. The Scythian women were wont to thruſt out the eies of all their ſlaves and priſoners taken in warre, thereby to make more free and private vſe of them. Oh what a furious advantage is opportunitie! He that ſhould demand of me, what the chiefe or firſt part in love is, I would anſwer, To know how to take fit time; even ſo the ſecond, and likewiſe the third. It is a point which may doe all in all. I have often wanted fortune, but ſometimes alſo enterpriſe. God ſhield him from harme, that can yet mocke himſelfe with it. In this age more raſhneſſe is required; which our youths excuſe vnder colour of heat. But ſhould our women looke neerer vnto it, they might finde, how it rather proceedeth of contempt. I ſuperſticiouſly feared to offend; and what I love, I willingly reſpect. Beſides that, who depriveth this merchandize of reverence, defaceth all luſter of it. I love that a man ſhould therein ſomewhat play the childe, the daſtard and the ſervant. If not altogether in this, yet in ſome other things I have ſome aires or motives of the ſottiſh baſhfulneſſe, whereof Plutarch ſpeaketh; and the courſe of my life hath diverſly beene wounded and tainted by it: a qualitie very ill beſeeming my vniverſall forme. And what is there amongst vs, but ſedition and 
                                 •
                              arring? Mine eies be as tender to beare a refuſall, as to refuſe; and it doth ſo much trouble me to be troubleſome to others, that where occaſions force me or dutie compelleth me to trie the will of any one, be it in doubtfull things, or of coſt vnto him, I doe it but faintly and much againſt my will: But if it be for mine owne private buſineſle (though Homer ſay moſt truly, that in an indigent or needy man, baſhfulneſſe is but a 
                                 •
                              ond vertue) I commonly ſubſtitute a third party, who may bluſh in my roome: and direct them that employ mee, with like difficultie: ſo that it hath ſometimes befallen me, to have the will to deny, when I had not power to refuſe. It is then folly, to goe about to bridle women of a deſire, ſo fervent and ſo naturall in them. And when I heare them bragge to have ſo virgin-like a will and cold minde, I but laugh and mocke at them. They recoile too farre backward. If it be a toothleſſebeldame or decrepit grandame, or a yoong drie pthiſicke ſiarveling; if it be not altogether credible, they have at leaſt ſome colour or apparance to ſay it. But thoſe which ſtirre about, and have a little breath left them, marre but their market with ſuch ſtuffe: forſomuch as inconfiderate excuſes are no better then accuſations. As a Gentleman my neighbour, who was ſuſpected of inſufficiencie,
                        
                           Languidi
                                 ••
                               tenera cui pendens ſicula beta,Ca
                                    ••
                                 l. 
                                    •
                                 le. 3. 21.
                           
                           Nunquam ſe mediam ſuſtulis ad tunicam.
                        
                        to juſtifie himſelfe, three or foure daies after his mariage, ſwore confidently, that the night before, he had performed twenty courſes: which oath hath ſinceſerved to convince him of meere ignorance, and to divorce him from his wife. Beſides, this allegation is of no great worth: For, there is nor continencie nor vertue, where no reſiſtance is to the c
                                 •
                              ntrary. It is true, may one ſay, but I am not ready to yeeld. The Saints themſelves ſpeake ſo. This is vnderſtood of ſuch as boaſt in good earneſt of their coldneſſe and inſenſibilitie, and would be credited with a ſerious countenance: for, when it is from an affected looke (where the eies give words the lie) and from the faltring ſpeech of their profeſſion (which ever workes againſt the wooll) I allow of it. I am a duteous ſervant vnto plainneſſe, ſimplicitie and libertie: but there is no remedie, if it be not meerely plaine, ſimple or infantine; it is fond, inept and vnſeemely for Ladies in this commerce: it preſently inclineth and bendeth to impudencie. Their diſguiſings, their figures and diſſimulations cozen none but fooles; there lying ſitteth in the chaire of honour; it is a by-way, which by a falſe poſterne leads vs vnto truth. If we cannot containe their imaginations, what require we of them? the effects? Many there be, who are free from all ſtrangers-communication, by which chaſtitie may be corrupted, and honeſtie defiled.
                        
                           Illud ſaepe facit, quod fine teſte facit.M
                                    ••
                                 t. l. 7. epig. 6
                                    •
                                 . 6.
                           
                           What ſhe doth with no witneſſe to it,
                           She often may be found to doe it.
                        
                        And thoſe whom we feare leaſt, are per adventure moſt to be feared: their ſecret ſins are the worſt.
                        
                           Offendor moecha ſimpliciore minus.
                           Pleas'd with a whores ſimplicitie,Ibid. l. 6. epig. 7. 6.
                           
                           Offended with her nicitie.
                        
                        There are effects, which without impuritie may looſe them their pudicitie; and which is

more, without their knowledge. Obſtetrix virginis cuiuſdam integritatem manu velut explorans, ſive malevolentia, ſive inſcitia, ſive c
                                 •
                              ſu, dum inſpicit, perdidit: A Midwife ſearching with her finger into a certaine maidens virginitie, either for ill will, or of vnskilfulneſſe, or by chance, whileſt ſhee ſeekes and lookes into it, ſhee loſt and ſpoiled it. Some one hath loſt or wronged her virginitie in looking or ſearching for it; ſome other killed the ſame in playing with it. Wee are not able preciſely to circumſcribe them the actions we forbid them: Our law muſt be conceived vnder generall and vncertaine termes. The very Idea we forge vnto their chaſtitie is ridiculous. For, amongſt the extremeſt examples or patternes I have of it, it is Fatua the wife of Faunas, who after ſhee was maried, would never ſuffer her ſelfe to be ſeene of any man whatſoever. And Hierons wife; that never felt her husbands ſtinking breath, ſuppoſing it to be a qualitie common to all men. It were neceſſary, that to ſatisfie and pleaſe vs, they ſhould become inſenſible and inviſible. Now let vs confeſſe, that the knot of the iudgement of this duty conſiſteth principally in the will. There have beene husbands who have endured this accident, not only without reproach and offenſe againſt their wives, but with ſingular acknowledgement, obligation and commendation to their vertue. Some one that more eſteemed her honeſtie then ſhe loved her life, hath proſtituted the ſame vnto the lawleſſe luſt and raging ſenſualitie of a mortall hatefull enemy, thereby to ſave her husbands life; and hath done that for him, which ſhe could never have beene induced to doe for her ſelfe. This is no place to extend theſe examples: they are too high and over-rich, to be preſented in this luſter: let vs therefore reſerve them for a nobler ſeat. But to give you ſome examples of a more vulgar ſtampe: Are there not women daily ſeene amongſt vs, who for the only profit of their huſbands, and by their expreſſe order and brokage, make ſale of their honeſty? And in old times Phau
                                 •
                              ius the Argian, through ambition offred his to king Philip. Even as that Galba, who beſtowed a ſupper on Mecenas, perceiving him and his wife beginne to bandy eie-trickes and ſignes, of civilitie ſhrunke downe vpon his cuſhion, as one oppreſſed with ſleepe; to give better ſcope vnto their love; which he avouched as pretily: for at that inſtant, a ſervant of his preſuming to lay hands on the plate which was on the table, he cried outright vnto him; How now varlet? Seeſt thou not I ſleepe only for Mecenas? One may be of a looſe behaviour, yet of purer will and better reformed, then another who frameth her ſelfe to a preciſe apparance. As ſome are ſeene complaine becauſe they vowed chaſtitie before yeeres of diſcretion or knowledge: ſo have I ſeene others vnfainedly bewaile and truly lament that they were vowed to licentiouſneſſe and diſſoluteneſſe before the age of iudgement and diſtinction. The parents leaudneſſe may be the cauſe of it; or the force of impulſive neceſſitie, which is a ſhrewd counſellor, and a violent perſwader. Though chaſtitie were in the Eaſt Indias of ſingular eſteeme, yet the cuſtome permitted, that a maried wife might freely betake her ſelfe to what man ſoever did preſent her an Elephant: and that which ſome glory, to have beene valued at ſo high a rate. Phedon the Philoſopher, of a noble houſe, after the taking of his country Elis, profeſſed to proſtitute the beauty of his youth to all commers, ſo long as it ſhould continue, for money to live with and beare his charges. And Solon was the firſt of Greece (ſay ſome) who by his lawes, gave women libertie, by the price of their honeſtie, to provide for their neceſſities: A cuſtome which Herodotus reporteth, to have beene entertained before him in divers Common-wealthes. And moreover, what fruit yeelds this carefull vexation? For, what juſtice ſoever be in this paſſion, yet ſhould wee note whether it harrie vs vnto our profit or no. Thinkes any man that he can ring them by his induſtrie?
                        
                           Pone ſeram, cohibe; ſed quis cuſtodiet ipſos
                           Cuſtodes? cauta eſt, & ab illis incipit vxor.Inveu. Sat. 6. 247.
                           
                           Keepe her with locke and key: but from her who ſhall keepe
                           Her Keepers? She begins with them, her wits ſo deepe,
                        
                        What advantage ſufficeth them not, in this ſo skilfull age? Curioſity is every where vicious; but herein pernicious. It is meere folly for one to ſeeke to be reſolved of a doubt, or ſearch into a miſchiefe; for which there is no remedie, but makes it worſe, but feſtereth the ſame: the reproach whereof is increaſed, and chiefely publiſhed by jealouſie: and the revenge whereof doth more wound and diſgrace our children, then it helpeth or graceth vs. You waſte away and die in purſuit of ſo concealed a myſterie of ſo obſcure a verification. Whereunto how pitiouſly have they arrived, who in my time have attained their purpoſe? If the accuſer, or intelligencer preſent not withall the remedie

and his aſſiſtance, his office is injurious, his intelligence harmefull, and which better deſerveth a ſtabbe, then doth a lie. Wee flout him no leſſe, that toileth to prevent it, then laugh at him that is a Cuckold and knowes it not. The character of cuckoldrie is perpetuall; on whom it once faſtneth, it holdeth for ever. The puniſhment bewraieth it more then the fault. It is a goodly fight, to draw our private misfortunes from out the ſhadow of oblivion or dungeon of doubt, for to blazon and proclaime them on Tragicall Stages: and misfortunes which pinch vs not, but by relation. For (as the ſaying is) ſhee is a good wife, and that a good mariage, not that is ſo indeed, but whereof no man ſpeaketh. Wee ought to be wittily-wary to avoid this irk ſome, this tedious and vnprofitable knowledge. The Romans were accuſtomed, when they returned from any iourney, to ſend home before, and give their wives notice of their comming, that ſo they might not ſurprize them. And therefore hath a certaine nation inſtituted the Prieſt to open the way vnto the Bridegroome, on the wedding day, thereby to take from him the doubt and curioſitie of ſearching in this firſt attempt, whether ſhee come a pure virgin to him, or be broken and tainted with any former love. But the world ſpeakes of it. I know a hundred Cuckolds, which are ſo, honeſtly and little vndecently. An honeſt man and a gallant ſpirit, is moaned, but not diſeſteemed by it. Cauſe your vertue to ſuppreſſe your miſhap; that honeſt-minded men may blame the occaſion, and curſe the cauſe; that he which offends you, may tremble with onely thinking of it. And moreover, what man is ſcot-free, or who is not ſpoken of in this ſenſe, from the meaneſt vnto the higheſt?
                        
                           —tot qui legionibus imperitavit,
                              Lu
                                    •
                                 r. l. 3. 1070
                           
                           Et melior quàm tu mult is fuit, improbe, rebus.
                           He that ſo many bands of men commanded,
                           Thy better much, ſir knave, was much like branded.
                        
                        Seeſt thou not how many honeſt men, even in thy preſence, are ſpoken of and touched with this reproach? Imagine then they will bee as bold with thee, and ſay as much of thee elſe-where. For no man is ſpared. And even Ladies will ſcoffe and prattle of it. And what doe they now adaies more willingly flout at, then at any well-compoſed and peaceable mariage? There is none of you all but hath made one Cuckold or other: Now nature ſtood ever on this point, Kae mee Ile kae thee, and ever ready to bee even, alwaies on recompences and viciſſitude of things, and to give as good as one brings. The long-continued frequence of this accident, ſhould by this time have ſeaſoned the bitter taſte thereof: It is almoſt become a cuſtome. Oh miſerable paſſion, which hath alſo this miſchiefe, to bee incommunicable.
                        
                           Fors etiam noſtris invidit quaeſtibus aures.Catul. her. Ar
                                 
                                    •
                                 on. 170.
                           
                           Fortune ev'n eares enuied,
                           To heare vs when we cried.
                        
                        For, to what friend dare you entruſt your greevances, who, if hee laugh not at them, will not make vſe of them, as a direction and inſtruction to take a ſhare of the quarie or bootie to himſelfe? As well the ſowreneſſe and inconveniences, as the ſweetneſſe and pleaſures incident to mariage, are ſecretly concealed by the wiſer ſort. And amongſt other importunate conditions belonging to wedlocke, this one, vnto a babling fellow as I am, is of the chiefeſt; that tyrannous cuſtome makes it vncomely and hurtfull, for a man to communicate with any one all hee knowes and thinkes of it. To give women advice to diſtaſte them from jealouſie, were but time loſt or labour ſpent in vaine. Their eſſence is ſo infected with ſuſpicion, with vanitie and curioſitie, that we may not hope to cure them by any lawfull meane. They often recover of this infirmitie by a forme of health, much more to be feared, then the diſeaſe it ſelfe. For even as ſome inchantment cannot ridde away an evill, but with laying it on another, ſo when they loſe it, they transferre and beſtow this maladie on their husbands. And to ſay truth, I wot not whether a man can endure any thing at their hands worſe then jealouſie: of all their conditions it is moſt dangerous, as the head of all their members. Pittaeus ſaid, that every man had one imperfection or other: his wives curst pate was his; and but for that, he ſhould eſteeme himſelfe moſt happy. It muſt needs be a weightie inconvenience, wherewith ſo juſt, ſo wiſe and worthie a man, felt the ſtate of his whole life diſtempered: what ſhall wee petie fellowes doe then? The Senate of Marceille had reaſon to grant and enroll his requeſt, who demanded leave to

kill himſelfe, thereby to free and exempt himſelfe from his wives tempeſtuous ſcolding humor; for it is an evill, that is never cleane rid away, but by remooving the whole peece: and hath no other compoſition of worth, but flight or ſufferance; both too-too hard, God knowes. And in my conceit, he vnderſtood it right, that ſaid, a good mariage might be made betweene a blinde woman and a deafe man. Let vs alſo take heed, leſt this great and violent ſtrictneſſe of obligation we enioine them, produce not two effects contrary to our end: that is to wit, to ſet an edge vpon their ſuiters ſtomacks, and make women more eaſie to yeeld. For, as concerning the firſt point, enhancing the price of the place, we raiſe the price and endeare the deſire of the conquest. Might it not be Venus her ſelfe, who ſo cunningly enhanced the market of her ware, by the brokage or panderizing of the lawes? knowing how ſottiſh and taſtleſſe a delight it is, were it enabled by opinion, and endeared by deareneſſe? To conclude, it is all but hogges fleſh, varied by ſauce, as ſaid Flaminius his hoaſt. Cupid is a roguiſh God; his ſport is to wreſtle with devotion and to contend with juſtice. It is his glory, that his power checketh and copes all other might, and that all other rules give place to his.
                        
                           Materiam culpae proſequitur
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               ſuae.Ovid. Triſt. l. 
                                    •
                                 . el. 1. 34.
                           
                           He proſecutes the ground,
                           Where he is faulty found.
                        
                        And as for the ſecond point; ſhould wee not be leſſe Cuckolds if wee leſſe feared to be ſo? according to womens conditions: whom inhibition inciteth, and reſtraint inviteth.
                        
                           Vbi velis nolunt, vbi nolis volunt vl
                                 •
                              r
                                 •
                              :Ter. Eunuc. act. 4. ſc
                                    •
                                 . 6. Lucan. l. 2. 4
                                    ••
                                 .
                           
                           They will not when you will,
                           When you will not, they will.
                           Conceſſâpudet ire viâ.
                           They are aſham'd to paſſe
                           The way that granted was.
                        
                        What better interpretation can we finde concerning Meſſalinas demeanor? In the beginning ſhe made her ſilly husband Cuckold, ſecretly and by ſtealth (as the faſhion is) but perceiving how vncontrolled and eaſily ſhe went on with her matches, by reaſon of the ſtupidity that poſſeſſed him, ſhee preſently contemned and forſooke that courſe, and began openly to make love, to avouch her ſervants, to entertaine and favour them in open view of all men; and would have him take notice of it, and ſeeme to be diſtaſted with it: but the ſilly gull and ſenſeleſſe coxombe awaked not for all this, and by his over-baſe facilitie, by which hee ſeemed to authorize and legitimate her humors, yeelding her pleaſures weeriſh, and her amours taſteleſſe: what did ſhee? Being the wife of an Emperour, luſtie, in health and living; and where? In Rome, on the worlds chiefe Theater, at high noone-day, at a ſtately feaſt, in a publike ceremonie; and which is more, with one Silius, whom long time before ſhe had freely enioied, ſhe was ſolemnly maried one day that her husband was out of the Citie. Seemes it not that ſhee tooke a direct courſe to become chaſte, by the retchleſneſſe of her husband? or that ſhe ſought another husband, who by jealouſie might whet her appetite, and who inſiſting might incite her? But the firſt difficultie ſhe met with, was alſo the laſt. The drowzie beaſt rouzed himſelfe and ſuddenly ſtarted vp. One hath often the worſt bargaines at the hands of ſuch ſluggiſh logger-heads. I have ſeene by experience, that this extreme patience or longſufferance, if it once come to be diſſolved, produceth moſt bitter and outragious revenges: for, taking fire all at once, choller and fury hudling all together, becomming one confuſed chaos, clattereth foorth their violent effects at the firſt charge.
                        
                           Irarum
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               omnes 
                                 •
                              ffundit habenas.Virg. A
                                    ••
                                 . l. 12. 499.
                           
                           It quite lets looſe the raine,
                           That anger ſhould reſtraine.
                        
                        He cauſed both her and a great number of her inſtruments and abettors to be put to death, yea ſuch as could not doe withall, and whom by force of whipping ſhe had allured to her

adulterous bed. What Virgil ſaith of Venus and Vulcan, Lucretius had more ſutably ſaid it of a ſecretly-ſtolne enioying betweene her and Mars.
                        
                        
                           —belli fer a munera Mav
                                    •
                                 rs
                              Lucret. l. 1. 33.
                           
                           Armipotens regit, in gremium qui ſaepe tuum ſe
                           Reijcit, aeterno devinctus vulnere amoris:
                           Paſcit amore avidos inhians in te Dea viſus,
                           Eque tuo pendet reſupini ſpiritus ore:
                           Hunc tu Diva tuo recubantem corpore ſancto
                           Circunfuſa ſuper, ſuaveis ex ore loquelas
                           Funde.
                           
                              Mars mighty-arm'd, rules the fierce feats of armes,
                           Yet often caſts himſelfe into thine armes,
                           Oblig'd thereto by endleſſe wounds of love,
                           Gaping on thee feeds greedy ſight with love,
                           His breath hangs at thy mouth who vpward lies;
                           Goddeſſe thou circling him, while he ſo lies,
                           With thy celeſtiall body, ſpeeches ſweet
                           Powre from thy mouth (as any Nectar ſweet.)
                        
                        When I conſider this, reijcit, paſcit, inhians, molli, fovet, medullas, labefacta, pendet, percurrit, and this noble circunfuſa, mother of gentle infuſus; I am vexed at theſe ſmall points and verball alluſions, which ſince have ſprung vp. To thoſe well-meaning people, there needed no ſharpe encounter or witty equivocation: Their ſpeech is altogether full and maſſie, with a naturall and conſtant vigor: They are all epigram; not only taile, but head, ſtomacke and feet. There is nothing forced, nothing wreſted, nothing limping; all marcheth with like tenour. Contextus totus virilis eſt, non ſunt circa floſculos occupati. The whole compoſition or text is manly, they are not bebuſied about Rhetorike flowers. This is not a ſoft quaint eloquence, and only without offence, it is ſinnowie, materiall, and ſolid; not ſo much delighting, as filling and raviſhing, and raviſheth moſt the ſtrongeſt wits, the wittieſt conceits. When I behold theſe gallant formes of expreſſing, ſo lively, ſo nimble, ſo deepe: I ſay not this is to ſpeake wel, but to thinke well. It is the quaintneſſe or livelineſſe of the conceit, that elevateth and puffes vp the words. Pectus eſt quod diſertum facit. It is a mans owne breſt, that makes him eloquent. Our people terme judgement, language; and full conceptions, fine words. This pourtraiture is directed not ſo much by the hands dexteritie, as by having the object more lively printed in the minde. Gallus ſpeakes plainly, becauſe he conceiveth plainly. Horace is not pleaſed with a ſleight or ſuperficiall expreſſing, it would betray him; he ſeeth more cleere and further into matters: his ſpirit pickes and ranſacketh the whole ſtore-houſe of words and figures, to ſhew and preſent himſelfe; and he muſt have them more then ordinary, as his conceit is beyond ordinary. Plutarch ſaith, that he diſcerned the Latine tongue by things. Heere likewiſe the ſenſe enlightneth and produceth the words: no longer windie or ſpungie, but of fleſh and bone. They ſignifie more then they vtter. Even weake ones ſhew ſome image of this. For, in Italie, I ſpake what I liſted in ordinary diſcourſes, but in more ſerious and pithy, I durſt not have dared to truſt to an Idiome, which I could not winde or turne beyond it's common grace, or vulgar bias. I will bee able to adde and vſe in it ſomewhat of mine owne. The managing and emploiment of good wits, endeareth and giveth grace vnto a tongue: Not ſo much innovating as filling the ſame with more forcible and divers ſervices, wreſting, ſtraining and enfolding it. They bring no words vnto it, but enrich their owne, waigh-downe and cramme-in their ſignification and cuſtome; teaching it vnwonted motions; but wiſely and ingenuouſly. Which skill how little it is given to all, may plainly bee diſcerned by moſt of our moderne French Writers. They are over-bold and ſcornefull, to ſhunne the common trodden path: but want of invention and lacke of diſcretion looſeth them. There is nothing to be ſeene in them but a miſerable ſtrained affectation of ſtrange Inke-pot termes; harſh, cold and abſurd diſguiſements, which in ſtead of raiſing, pull downe the matter. So they may gallantize and fluſh it in noueltie, they care not for efficacie. To take hold of a new farre-fetcht word, they neglect the vſuall, which often are more ſignificant, forcible and

ſinnowy. I finde ſufficient ſtore of ſtuffe in our language, but ſome defect of faſhion. For there is nothing but could be framed of our Hunters gibbriſh words or ſtrange phraſes, and of our Warriours peculiar tearmes; a fruitfull and rich ſoyle to borrow off. And as hearbes and trees are bettered and fortified by being tranſplanted, ſo formes of ſpeach are embelliſhed and graced by variation. I finde it ſufficiently plenteous, but not ſufficiently plyable and vigorous. It commonly faileth and ſhrinketh vnder a pithy and powerfull conception. If your march therein be far extended, you often feele it droope and languiſh vnder you, vnto whoſe default the Latine doth now and then preſent his helping hand, and the Greeke to ſome others. By ſome of theſe words which I have culled out, we more hardly perceive the Energi
                                 •
                              
                            or effectuall operation of them, forſomuch as vſe and frequencie haue in ſome ſort abaſed the grace and made their beauty vulgar. As in our ordinary language, we ſhall ſometimes meete with excellent phraſes, and quaint metaphors, whoſe blithneſſe fadeth through age, and colour is tarniſh by to common vſing them. But that doth nothing diſtaſte thoſe of ſound judgement, nor derogate from the glory of thoſe ancient Authours, who, as it is likely were the firſt that brought theſe words into luſter, and raiſed them to that ſtraine. The Sciences handle this ouer finely, with an artificiall maner, and different from the vulgar and naturall forme. My Page makes loue, and vnderſtands it feelingly; Read Leon Hebraeus or Ficinus vnto him; you ſpeake of him, of his thoughts and of his actions, yet vnderſtands he nothing what you meane. I nor acknowledg nor diſcerne in Aristotle, the moſt part of my ordinary motions. They are clothed with other robes, and ſhrouded vnder other veſtures, for the vſe of Academicall ſchooles. God ſend them well to ſpeed: but were I of the trade, I would naturalize Arte, as much as they Artize nature. Benbo and Equicola. When I write, I can well omit the company, and ſpare the remembrance of bookes; for feare they interrupt my forme. And in truth good Authours deiect me too-toomuch, and quaile my courage. I willingly imitate that Painter, who having bungler-like drawne, and fondly repreſented ſome Cockes, forbad his boies to ſuffer any live Cocke to come into his ſhop. And to give my ſelfe ſome luſter or grace haue rather neede of ſome of Antinonydes the Muſicions invention; who when he was to play any muſicke, gave order that before or after him, ſome other bad muſicions ſhould cloy and ſurfet his auditory. But I can very hardly be without Plutarke; he is ſo vniuerſal and ſo full, that vpon all occaſions, and whatſoever extravagant ſubiect you haue vndertaken, he intrudeth himſelfe into your worke, and gently reacheth you a helpeaffording hand, fraught with rare embeliſhments, and inexauſtible of precious riches. It ſpights me, that he is ſo much expoſed vnto the pillage of thoſe which haunt him. He can no ſooner come in my ſight, or if I caſt but a glance vpon him, but I pull ſome legge or wing from him. For this my diſſignement, it much fitteth my purpoſe, that I write in mine owne houſe, in a wilde country, where no man helpeth or releeveth me; where I converſe with no body that vnderſtands the Latine of his Paternoſter and as little of French. I ſhould no doubt have done it better elſe where, but then the worke had beene leſſe mine: whoſe principall drift and perfection, is to be exactly mine; I could mend an accidentall errour, whereof I abound in mine vnwary courſe; but it were a kinde of treaſon to remoove the imperfections from me, which in me are ordinary and conſtant. When any body elſe, or my ſelfe have ſaid vnto my ſelfe: Thou art to full of figures or allegories; here is a word meerely-bred Gaskoyne; that's a dangerous phraſe: (I refuſe none that are vſed in the frequented ſtreets of France; thoſe that wil combat vſe and cuſtome by the ſtrict rules of Grammar do but ieſt) there's an ignorant diſcourſe, that's a paradoxical relation; or there's a fooliſh conceit: thou doeſt often but dally: one will thinke thou ſpeakeſt in earneſt, what thou haſt but ſpoken in ieſt▪ Yea (ſay I) but I correct vnaduiſed, not coſtumarie errors. Speake I not ſo euery where? Doe I not liuely diſplay my ſelfe? that ſufficeth; I have my will; All the world my know me by my booke, and my booke by me: But I am of an Apiſh and imitating condition. When I medled with making of verſes (and I neuer made any but in Latine) they euidently accuſed the Poet I came laſt from reading: And of my firſt Eſſayes, ſome taſte a little of the ſtranger. At Paris I ſpeake ſomewhat otherwiſe then at Montaigne. Whom I behold with attention, doth eaſily convay and imprint ſomething of his in me. What I heedily conſider, the ſame I vſurpe: a fooliſh countenance, a crabbed looke, a ridiculous manner of ſpeech. And vices more: Becauſe they pricke mee, they take faſt hold vpon mee, and leaue mee not, vnleſſe I ſhake them off. I have more often beene heard to ſweare by imitation, then by

complexion. Oh iniurious and dead-killing imitation: like that of thoſe huge in greatneſſe and matchleſſe in ſtrength Apes, which Alexander met withall in a certaine part of India: which otherwiſe it had beene hard to vanquiſh. But by this their inclination to counterfeit whatſoever they ſaw done, they afforded the meanes. For, thereby the Hunters learn't in their ſight to put on ſhooes, and tie them with many ſtrings and knots; to dreſſe their heads with divers ſtrange attires, full of ſliding-knots; and diſſemblingly to rub their eyes with Glew, or Birde-lime. So did thoſe ſilly harmeleſſe beaſtes indiſcreetly employ their Apiſh diſpoſition. They enſnared, glewed, entrameled, haltred and ſhackled themſelves. That other faculty of Extemp
                                 •
                              re and wittily repreſenting the geſtures and words of another, which often cauſeth ſport and breedeth admyring, is no more in me then in a blocke. When I ſweare after mine owne faſhion, it is onely by God; the directeſt of all oathes. They report that Socrates ſwore by a Dogge; Zeno by that interiection (now a daies vſed amongſt the Italies) Cappari; and Pithagoras by water and by aire. I am ſo apt at vnawares to entertaine theſe ſuperficiall impreſſions, that if but for three daies together I vſe my ſelfe to ſpeake to any Prince with your Grace or your Highneſſe, for eight daies after I ſo forget my ſelfe, that I ſhall ſtill vſe them for your Honour or your Worſhip: and what I am wont to ſpeake in ſport or ieſt the next day after I ſhall ſpeake in good ſerious earneſt. Therefore in writing I aſſume more vnwillingly much beaten arguments, for feare I handle them at others charges. All arguments are alike fertile to me. I take them vpon any trifle. And I pray God this were not vndertaken by the commandement of a minde as fleeting. Let me begin with that likes me beſt for all matters are linked one to another. But my conceit diſpleaſeth me, for ſomuch as it commonly produceth moſt fooliſh dotages from deepeſt ſtudies; and ſuch as content me on a ſuddaine, and when I leaſt looke for them; which as faſt fleete away, wanting at that inſtant ſome holde faſt. On horſe-backe, at the table, in my bed; but moſt on horſe-backe, where my ampleſt meditations and my fartheſt reaching conceites are. My ſpeach is ſomewhat nicely iealous of attention and ſilence; if I be in any earneſt talke, who interrupteth me, cuts me off. In travell, even the neceſſity of waies breakes off diſcourſes. Beſides that I moſt commonly travell without company, which is a great helpe for continued reaſonings; whereby I have ſufficient leaſure to entertaine my ſelfe. I thereby have that ſucceſſe I have in dreames; In dreaming I commend them to my memory (for what I dream I doe it willingly) but the next morning, I can well call to minde what colour they were of, whether blith, ſad or ſtrange; but what in ſubſtance, the more I labour to finde out, the more I overwhelme them in oblivion. So of caſuall and vnpremeditated conceits that come into my braine, nought but a vaine image of them remaineth in my memory; ſo much onely, as ſufficeth vnprofitably to make me chafe, ſpight and fret in purſuite of them. Well then, leaving bookes aſide and ſpeaking more materially and ſimply; when all is done, I finde that love is nothing elſe but an inſatiate chirst of enioying a greedily deſired ſubiect. Nor Venus that good huſwife, other, then a tickling delight of emptying ones ſeminary veſſels: as is the pleaſure which nature giveth vs to diſcharge other parts: which becommeth faulty by immoderation, and defectiue by indiſcretion. To Socrates, loue is an appetite of generation by the mediation of beauty. Now conſidering oftentimes the rediculous tickling, or titilation of this pleaſure, the abſurd, giddy and hare-braind motions wherwith it toſſeth Zeno, and agitates Cratippus; that vnadviſed rage, that furious and with cruelty enflamed viſage in loues luſtfull and ſweeteſt effects: and then a graue, ſterne, ſeuere ſurly countenance in ſo fond-fond an action, that one hath pell-mell lodged our ioyes and filthes together: and that the ſupremeſt voluptuouſneſſe both raviſheth and plaineth, as doth ſorrow: I beleeve that which Plato ſaies to be true, that man was made by the Gods for them to toy and play withall.
                        
                        
                           —quanam ista ioc a
                                    ••
                                 di Sſuitia?
                           
                           What cruelty is this, ſo ſet on ieſting is?
                        
                        And that Nature in mockery left vs the moſt troubleſome of our actions, the moſt common▪ therby to equal vs, and without diſtinction to ſet the fooliſh and the wiſe, vs and beaſts all in one ranke: no barrell better Hering. When I imagine the moſt contemplative and diſcreetly-wiſe-men in theſe tearmes in that humour, I hold him for a cozoner, for a cheater to

ſeene either ſtudiouſly contemplatiue, or diſcreetly wiſe. It is the fouleneſſe of the Peacockes feete, which doth abate his pride, and ſtoope his gloatiug-eyed tayle;
                        
                        
                           —ridentem dicere verum,
                           
                           Quid vetat?
                           What ſhould forbid thee ſooth to ſay, yet be as mery as we may.
                                 Hor. ſer. l. 1▪ 
                                 ſat. 2. 24.
                           
                        
                        Thoſe which in playes refuſe ſerious opinions, doe as one reporteth, like vnto him who dreadeth to adore the image of a Saint, if it want a couer, an approne or a tabernacle. We feed full well, and drinke like beaſtes; but they are not actions that hinder the offices of our minde. In thoſe, we hold good our aduantage ouer them; whereas this brings each other thought vnder ſubiection, and by it's imperious authority make-brutiſh and dulleth all Platoes philoſophie and diuinity; and yet he complaines not of it. In al other things you may obſerue decorum and maintaine ſome decencie: all other operations admit ſome rules of honeſty: this cannot onely be imagined, but vicious or ridiculous. See whether for example ſake, you can but find a wiſe or diſcreete proceeding in it. Alexander ſaid, that he knew himſelfe mortall chiefly by this action, and by ſleeping: ſleepe doth ſtifle, and ſuppreſſeth the faculties of our ſoule; and that, both endeuoureth and diſſipates them. Surely it is an argument not onely of our originall corruption, but a badge of our vanity and deformity. On the one ſide nature vrgeth vs vnto it; hauing thereunto combined, yea faſtned, the moſt noble, the moſt profitable, and the moſt ſenſually-pleaſing, of all her functions; and on the other ſuffereth vs to accuſe, to condemne and to ſhunne it, as inſolent, as diſhoneſt and as lewder to bluſh at it, and allow, yea and to commend abſtinence. Are not we moſt brutiſh, to terme that worke beaſtly which begets, and which maketh vs? Moſt people haue concurred in diuers cerimonies of religion, as ſacrifices, luminaries, faſtings, incenſings, offrings; and amongſt others, in condemning of this action. All opinions agree in that, beſides the ſo farre extended vſe of circumciſion. Wee haue perad venture reaſon to blame our ſelues, for making ſo fooliſh a production as man, and to entitle both the deed and parts thereto belonging, ſhamful (mine are properly ſo at this inſtant). The Eſſeniens, of whom Plinte ſpeaketh, maintained themſelues a long time without nurces, or ſwathling clothes, by the arriual of ſtrangers that came to their ſhoares, who ſeconding their fond humor, did often viſit them. A whole nation hazarding rather to conſume, then engage themſelues to feminine embracements; and rather looſe the ſucceſſion of all men, then forge one. They report that Zeno neuer dealt with woman but once in all his life; which hee did for ciuilitie, leaſt he ſhould ouer obſtinately ſeeme to contemne the ſex. Each one auoideth to ſee a man borne, but all runne haſtily to ſee him dye. To deſtroy him wee ſeeke a ſpacious field and a full light; but to conſtruct him, we hide our ſelues in ſome darke corner, and worke as cloſe as we may. It is our dutie to conceale our ſelues in making him; it is our glory, and the orginall of many vertues to deſtroy him, being framed. The one is a manifeſt iniurie, the other a greater fauor; for Ariſtotle ſaith, that in a certaine phraſe where he was borne, to bonifie or benefit, was as much to ſay as to kill one. The Athenians, to equall the diſgrace of theſe two actions being to cleanſe the Ile of Delos, and iuſtifie themſelues vnto Apollo, forbad within that precinct all buriall and births. Noſtri noſmet poenitet, We are weary of our ſelues. There are ſome nations that when they are eating, they cover themſelues. I know a Lady (yea one of the greateſt) who is of opinion that to chew is an vnſeemly thing, which much empaireth their graceTer. Phor. and beauty: and therefore by hir will ſhe never comes abroad with an appetite. And a man that cannot endure one ſhould ſee him eate; and ſhunneth all company more when he filleth, then when he emptieth himſelfe. In the Turkiſh Empire there are many, who to excell the reſt, will not be ſeene when they are feeding, and who make but one meale in a weeke: who mangle their face and cut their limmes; and who neuer ſpeake to any body; who thinke to honour their nature, by diſnaturing themſelues: oh fantaſticall people, that prize themſelues by their contempt, and mend their empairing. What monſtrous beaſt is this that makes himſelfe a horror to himſelfe, whome his delightes diſpleaſe, who tyes himſelfe vnto miſfortune? ſome there are that conceale their life,
                        
                           Exilio
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                              
                              ▪ domos & dulcia limina mutant.Virg Geor. l. 2. 51 
                                    •
                                 
                                 ▪
                              
                           
                           They change for baniſhment, The places that might beſt content.
                        
                        and ſteale it from the ſight of other men: That eſchew health, and ſhunne mirth as hatefull qualities and harmefull. Not onely diuers Sects, but many people curſe their birth

and bleſſe their death. Some therebe that abhorre the glorious Sunne, and adore the hiddious darkeneſſe. We are not ingenious but to our owne vexation: It is the true foode of our ſpirits force: a dangerous and moſt vnruly implement.
                        
                           O miſeri quorum gaudia crimen habent,Corn. Gal. 
                                    •
                                 l. 1. 188.
                           
                           O miſerable they, whoſe ioyes in fault we lay.
                        
                        Alas poore ſilly man, thou haſt but too-too many neceſſary and vnauoidable incommodities, without increaſing them by thine owne inuention, and are ſufficiently wretched of condition without any arte: thou aboundeſt in reall and eſſentiall deformities, and needeſt not forge any by imagination. Doeſt thou finde thy ſelfe to well at eaſe, vnleſſe the moity of thine eaſe moleſt thee? Findeſt thou to haue ſupplied or diſcharged al neceſſary offices, wherto nature engageth thee, and that ſhe is idle in thee, if thou binde not thy ſelfe vnto new offices? thou feareſt not to offend hir vniuerſall and vndoubted lawes, and art mooued at thine owne partiall and fantaſticall ones. And by how much more particular, vncertaine, and contradicted they are, the more endeuours thou beſtoweſt that way. The poſitiue orders of thy pariſh tie thee, thoſe of the world do nothing concerne thee. Runne but a little ouer the examples of this conſideration; thy life is full of them. The verſes of theſe two Poets, handling laſciviouſnes ſo ſparingly & ſo diſcreetly, as they do, in my conceite ſeeme to diſcouer, and diſplay it nearer; ladies cover their boſome with networke; prieſts many ſacred things with a vaile, and painters ſhadow their workes, to giue them the more luſter, and to adde more grace vnto them. And they ſay that the ſtreakes of the Sunne, and force of the winde, are much more violent by reflection, then by a direct line. The Egyptian anſwered him wiſely, that asked him, what he had hidden vnder his cloake? it is (quoth he) hidden vnder my cloake, that thou maist not know what it is. But there are certaine other things which men conceale to ſhew them. Here this fellow more open.
                        
                           Et nudam preſſi corpus aduſque meum.Quid. Am. l. 1. el. 5. 24.
                           
                           My body I applide, Euen to her naked ſide,
                        
                        Me thinkes he baffles me. Let Martiall at his pleaſure tuck-vp Uenus he makes her not by much appeare ſo wholly. He that ſpeakes all he knows, doth cloy and distaste vs. Who feareth to expreſſe himſelfe, leadeth our conceite to imagine more them happily he conceiueth. There is treaſon in this kinde of modeſty: and chiefly as theſe doe, in opening vs ſo faire a path vnto imagination: Both the action and deſcription ſhould taſte of purloyning, The loue of the Spaniards, and of the Italians pleaſeth me; by how much more reſpectiue and fearefull it is the more nicely cloſe and cloſely nice it is, I wot not who in ancient time wiſhed his throat were as long as a Cranes neck, that ſo hee might the longer and more leaſurely taſte what hee ſwallowed. That wiſh were more to purpoſe then this ſuddaine and violent pleaſure: Namely in ſuch natures as mine, who am faulty in ſuddaineneſſe. To ſtay her fleeting, and delay her with preambles, with them all ſerueth for fauour, all is conſtrued to bee a recompence, a winke, a caſt of the eye, a bowing, a word, or a figue, a becke is as good as a Dew guard. Hee that could dine with the ſmoake of roste-meat, might we not dine at a cheape rate? would he not ſoone be rich? It is a paſſion that commixeth with ſmall ſtore of ſolide eſſence, great quantitie of doating vanity, and febricitant raving: it muſt therefore be required and ſerved with the like. Let vs teach Ladies, to know how to prevaile; highly to eſteeme themſelues; to ammuſe, to circumvent and cozen vs. We make our laſt charge the firſt: we ſhew our ſelues right French men: ever raſh, ever headlong. Wire-drawing their favours, and enſtalling them by retaileeach one, even vnto miſerable old age, findes ſome liſtes end, according to his worth and merite. He who hath no joviſance but in enjoying; who ſhootes not but to hit the marke; who loues not hunting but for the prey; it belongs not to him to entermeddle with our Schoole. The more ſteps and degrees there are: the more delight and honour is there on the top. We ſhould bee pleaſed to bee brought vnto it, as vnto ſtately Pallaces, by divers porches ſeverall paſſages, long and pleaſant Galleries, and well contrived turnings. This diſpenſation would in the end, redound to our benefite; we ſhould ſtay on it, and longer ioue to lie at Racke and Manger; for theſe ſnatches and away, marre the grace of it. Take away hope and deſire, we grow faint in our courſes, we come but lagging after: Our maſtery and abſolute poſſeſſion, is infinitely to bee feared of them: After they have wholy yeelded themſelues to the mercy of our faith and conſtancie, they haue hazarded ſomething: They are rare and difficult vertues: ſo ſoone as they are ours, we are no longer theirs.
                        
                           
                           —post quam cupidae mentis ſatiata libido est.
                           
                           Verba nihil metuere, nihil periuria curant.Catul. Arg. v. 147.
                           
                           The luſt of greedy minde once ſatisfied,
                           They ſeare no words, nor reke othes falſified,
                        
                        And Thraſonides a young Grecian, was ſo religiouſly amorous of his love, that having after much ſute gained his miſtris hart and favour, he was refuſed to enjoy hir, leaſt by that jouiſſance he might or quench, or ſatisfie, or languiſh that burning flame and reſtleſſe heat wherwith he gloryed, and ſo pleaſingly fed himſelfe. Things farre fetcht and dearly bought are good for Ladyes. It is the deare price makes viands ſauour the better. See but how the forme of ſalutations, which is peculiar vnto our nation, doth by it's facilitie baſtardize the grace of kiſſes, which Socrates ſaith, to be of that conſequence, waight and danger, to raviſh and ſteale our hearts. It is an vnpleaſing and iniurious cuſtome vnto Ladies, that they muſt afford their lips to any man that hath but three Lackies following him, how vnhandſome and lothſome ſoeuer he be:
                        
                           C
                                 •••
                              s liuida naribus caninis,
                           Dependet glacies, riget
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               barba:Mart. l. 5. epig. 94 10.
                           
                           Centùm occurrere malo culilingis.
                           From whoſe dog-noſthrils black-blew Iſe depends,
                           Whoſe beard froſt-hardned ſtands on briſtled ends, &c.
                        
                        Nor do we our ſelues gaine much by it: for as the world is diuided into foure parts, ſo for foure faire ones, we muſt kiſſe fiſtie foule: and to a nice or tender ſtomacke, as are thoſe of mine age, one ill kiſſe doth ſurpay one good. In Italy they are paſſionate and languiſhing ſutors to very common and mercenarie women; and thus they defend and excuſe themſelues, ſaying; That euen in enioying there be certaine degrees; and that by humble ſeruices, they will endeuour to obtaine that, which is the moſt abſolutely perfect. They ſell but their bodyes, their willes cannot be put to ſale; that is too free, and too much it's owne. So ſay theſe, that it is the will they attempt, and they haue reaſon: It is the will one muſt ſerue and moſt ſolicite. I abhor to imagine mine, a body voide of affection. And me ſeemeth, this frenzie hath ſome affinitie with that boyes fond humor, who for pure love would wantonize with that fayre Image of Venus, which Praxiteles had made: or of that furious Aegyptian, who luſted after a dead womans corpes which he was enbaulming and ſtitching vp: which was the occaſion of the lawe that afterwarde was made in Aegypt: that the bodies of faire, young and nobly borne women, ſhould be kept three dayes, before they ſhould be delivered into the hands of thoſe who had the charge to provide for their funerals and burials. Periander did more miraculouſſie: who extended his coniugall affection (more regular and lawfull) vnto the enioying of Meliſſa his deceaſed wife. Seemes it not to be a lunatique humor in the Moone, being otherwiſe vnable to enjoy Endimion hir fauorite darling, to lull him in a ſweete ſlumber for many moneths together; and feed hirſelfe with the jouiſlance of a boye, that ſtirred not but in a dreame? I ſay likewiſe, that a man loveth a body without a ſoule, when he loveth a body without his conſent and deſire. All enioyings are not alike. There are ſome hecticke, faint and languiſhing ones, A thouſand cauſes, beſides affection and good will, may obtaine vs this graunt of women. It is no ſufficient teſtimonie of true affection: therein may lurke treaſon, as elſe-where: they ſometime goe but faintlie to worke, and as they ſay with one buttocke;
                        
                           Tanquam thura merum
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               parent;Ibid. l. 11. epi 14. 5. 12.
                           
                           As though they did diſpenſe,
                           Pure Wine and Frankincenſe.
                           Abſentem mar more ámue putes.Ibid. epig. 61. 8.
                           
                           Of Marble you would thinke ſhe were,
                           Or that ſhe were not preſent there.
                        
                        I knowe ſome, that would rather lend that, then their coach; and who emparte not themſelues, but that way: you muſt alſo marke whether your company pleaſeth them for ſome other reſpect, or for that end onely, as of a luſtie-ſtrong grome of a Stable: as alſo in what rank, and at what rate you are there lodged or valued;
                        
                           —tibi ſi datur vni
                              
                                 Catul. eleg. 4. 147:
                           
                           Quo lapide illa diem candidiore notet.
                           If it afforded be to thee alone,
                           
                              Whereby ſhe counts that day of all dayes one.
                        
                        What if ſhe eate your bread, with the ſauce of a more pleaſing imagination?
                        
                           Te tenet, abſentes alios ſuſpirat amores.
                           Thee ſhe retaines, yet ſigheth ſheTibul. l. 4. el. 5. 11.
                           
                           For other loves that abſent be.
                        
                        What? have we not ſeene ſome in our dayes, to have made vſe of this action, for the execution of a moſt horrible revenge, by that meanes murthering and empoyſoning (as one did) a very honeſt woman? ſuch as know Italie will neuer wonder, if for this ſubiect, I ſeeke for no examples elſe-where. For the ſaid nation may in that point be termed Regent of the world. They have commonly more faire women, and fewer foule then we; but in rate and excellent beauties I thinke we match them. The like I judge of their wi
                              ••
                           ; of the vulgar ſort they have evidently many more. Blockiſhnes is without all compariſon more rare amongſt them: but for ſingular wits, and of the higheſt pitch, we are no whit behinde them. Were I to extend this compariſon, I might (me thinkes) ſay, touching valor, that on the other-ſide, it is in regard of them popular and naturall amongſt vs: but in their hands one may ſometimes finde it ſo compleate and vigorous, that it exceedeth all the moſt forcible examples wee haue of it. The mariages of that countrie are in this ſomewhat defectiue. Their cuſtome doth generally impoſe ſo ſevere obſeruances, and ſlauiſh lawes vpon wives, that the remoteſt acquaintance with a ſtranger, is amongſt them as capitall as the neareſt. Which law cauſeth, that all approaches prooue neceſſarilie ſubſtanciall: and ſeeing all commeth to one reckoning with them, they haue an eaſie choiſe: and haue they broken downe their hedges? Beleeve it, they will have fire: Luxuria ipſis vinculis, ſicut fera beſtia, irritata, deinde emiſſa: Luxurie is like a wilde beaſt, firſt made fiercer with tying, and then let looſe. They muſt have the reynes giuen them a little.
                        
                           Vidi ego nuper equum contra ſua frenat enacem▪
                           
                           Ore reluctanti fulminis ire modo.Quid. am l. 3. 
                                    •
                                 l. 4. 13.
                           
                           I ſaw, ſpite of his bit, a reſty colt,
                           Runne head-ſtrong headlong like a thunder-bolt.
                        
                        
                           They allay the deſire of company, by giuing, it ſome libertie. It is a commendable cuſtome with our nation, that our children are entertained in noble houſes there, as in a ſchoole of nobilitie to be trained and brought vp as Pages. And t'is ſaid to be a kinde of diſcourteſie, to refuſe it a gentleman. I have obſerued (for, ſo many houſes ſo many ſeuer all formes and orders) that ſuch Ladies as haue gone about to giue their waiting women, the moſt auſtere rules, have not had the beſt ſucceſſe. There is required more then ordinary moderation: a great part of their government muſt bee left to the conduct of their diſcretion: For, when all comes to all no diſcipline can bridle them in each point. True it is, that ſhee who eſcapeth ſafe and vnpolluted from out the ſchoole of freedome, giveth more confidence of hirſelfe, then ſhee who commeth ſound out of the ſchoole of ſeveritie and reſtraint. Our forefathers framed their daughters countenances vnto ſhamefaſtneſſe and feare, (their inclinations and deſires alwaies alike) wee vnto aſſurance. We vnderſtand not the matter. That belongeth to the Sarmatian wenches, who by their lawes may lie with noe man, except with their owne hands they have before killed another man in warre. To mee that haue no right but by the eares, it ſufficeth, if they retaine me to be of their counſell, following the priuiledge of mine age: I then aduiſe both them and vs to embrace abſtinence, but if this ſeaſon bee too much againſt it, at leaſt modeſtie and diſcretion. For, as Ariſtippus (ſpeaking to ſome young men who bl
                              •
                           ſhed to ſee him go into a bawdy houſe) ſaid, the fault was not in entring, but in not comming out againe, She that will not exempt hir conſcience, let hir exempt hir name: though the ſubſtance bee not of worth, yet let the apparance hould ſtill good. I loue gradation and prolonging, in the diſtribution of their fauours. Plato ſheweth, that in all kinds of love, facilitie and readineſſe is forbidden to defendants. T'is a trick of greedineſſe, which it behoueth them to cloake with their arte, ſo raſhly and fond-hardily to yeeld themſelues in groſſe. In their diſtributions of fauours, holding a regular and moderate courſe, they much better deceiue our deſires, and conceale theirs. Let them ever bee flying before vs: I meane euen thoſe that intend to bee ouertaken as the Scithians are wont, though they ſeeme to runne away, they beate vs more, and ſooner put vs to route. Verily according to the lawe which nature giueth them, it is not fit for them to will and deſire: their part is to beare, to obay and to conſent. Therefore hath nature beſtowed a perpetuall capacitie; on vs a ſeld and vncertaine abilitie. They haue

alwayes their houre, that they may euer be ready to let vs enter. And whereas ſhe hath willed our appetites ſhould make apparant ſhew and declaration, ſhe cauſed theirs to bee concealed and inward: and hath furniſhed them with parts vnfit for oſtentation; and onely for defence. Such prankes as this, we muſt leave to the Amazonian libertie. Alexander the great marching through Hircania, Thaleſtris Queen of the Amazones came to meet him with three hundred lances of her ſex, all well mounted and compleately armed; having left the reſidue of a great armie, that followed hir, beyond the neighbouring mountaines. And thus aloud, that all might heare ſhe beſpake him; That the farre-reſounding fame of his victories, and matchleſſe valour, had brought hir thither to ſee him, and to offer him hir meanes and forces, for the aduancing and furthering of his enterpriſes. And finding him ſo faire, ſo young and ſtrong, ſhe, who was perfectly accompliſhed in all his qualities, aduiſed him to ly with hir that ſo there might be borne of the moſt valiant woman in the world, and onely valiat man then living, ſome great and rare creature for poſteritie. Alexander thanked hir for the reſt; but to take leaſure for hir laſt demands accompliſhment, he ſtaide thirteene dayes in that place, during which, he reuelled with as much glee, and feaſted with as great iollitie as poſſibly could be deuiſed, in honour and fauour of ſo couragious a Princes. Wee are well-nigh-in all things parciall and corrupted Iudges of their action, as no doubt they are of ours. I allow of truth as well when it hurts me, as when it helpes me. It is a foule diſorder, that ſo often vrgeth them vnto change, and hinders them from ſetling their affection on any one ſubiect: as wee ſee in this Goddeſſe, to whom they impute ſo many changes and ſeverall friends. But withall it is againſt the nature of loue, not to be violent, and againſt the condition of violence, to be constant. And thoſe who wonder at it, exclaime againſt it, and in women ſearch for the cauſes of this infirmitie, as incredible and vnnatural: why ſee they not how often, without any amazement and exclaiming, themſelues are poſſeſſed and infected with it? I might happily ſeeme more ſtrange to find any conſtant ſtay in them. It is not a paſſion meerely corporeall. If no end be found in coueteouſneſſe, nor limit in ambition, aſſure your ſelfe there is nor end nor limit in letchery, It yet continueth after ſacietie: nor can any man preſcribe it or end or conſtant ſatisfaction: it ever goeth on beyond it's poſſeſſion, beyond it's bounds. And if conſtancie bee peraduenture in ſome ſort more pardonable in them then in vs: They may readily alleage againſt vs, our ready inclination vnto day lie variety and new ware: And ſecondly alleage without vs, that they buy a pigge in a poake. Ione Queene of Naples cauſed Andreoſſe her firſt husband to be ſtrangled and hang'd out of the barres of his window, with a corde of Silke and golde wouen with her owne handes; becauſe in bed-buſineſſe ſhee found neither his members nor endeuours anſwerable the hope ſhee had conceiued of him, by viewing his ſtature, beauty, youth, and diſpoſition, by which ſhe had formerly beene ſurpriſed and abuſed. That action hath in it more violence then paſſion: ſo that on their part at leaſt neceſſitie is ever prouided for: on our behalfe it may happen otherwiſe. Therefore Plato by his lawes did very wiſely eſtabliſh, that before marriages the better to decide it's opportunity, competent Iudges might be appointed to take view of yong men which pretended the ſame, al naked: and of maidens but to the waſte: in making triall of vs, they happily find vs not worthy their choiſe:
                        
                           Experta latus, madidoque ſimillima loro
                           Inguina nec laſſa ſtare coacta manuMarti l. 7. epig. 57. 3.
                           
                           Deſerit imbelles thalamos.
                        
                        It is not ſufficient, that will kerpe a liuelie courſe: weakeneſſe and incapacity may lawfully breake wedlock;
                        
                           Et quoerendum aliunde foret neruoſius illud
                           Quod poſſet Zonam ſolituere virgineam.Catul. eleg. 3. 27.
                           
                        
                        Why not, and according to meaſure, an amorous intelligence, more licencious and more actiue?
                        
                           Si blando nequeat ſupereſſe labori.
                           If it cannot out laſt, labor with pleaſure paſt.
                        
                        But is it not great impudencie, to bring our imperfections and weakeneſſe, in place whereVirg. Geor. l 3. 127. we deſire to pleaſe, and leaue a good report and commendation behind vs? for the little I now ſtand in need of.
                        
                           —advnum
                           
                           Mollis opus.
                           Vnable to hold out, one only buſie bout,
                        
                        
                           I would not importune any one, whom I am to reverence.
                        
                           —fuge ſuſpicari,
                           
                           Cuius vndenum trepidauit at as
                           Claudere luſtrum.Her. card. 2. 
                                    •
                                 d. 4. 22.
                           
                           Him of ſuſpition cleare,
                           Whom age hath brought well neare
                           To fiue and fifty yeare,
                        
                        Nature ſhould have beene pleaſed to have made this age miſerable, without making it alſo ridiculous. I hate to ſee one for an inch of wretched vigor, which enflames him but thrice a week, take-on and ſwagger as fiercely, as if he had ſome great and lawfull dayes-worke in his belly: a right blaſt or puffe of winde: And admire his itching, ſo quick and nimble, all in a moment to be lubberly ſquat and benummed. This appetite ſhould onely belong to the bloſſom of a prime youth. Truſt not vnto it, thogh you ſee it ſecond that indefatigable, ful, conſtant and ſwelling heate, that is in you: for truly it will leave you at the beſt, and when you ſhall moſt ſtand in neede of it. Send it rather to ſome tender, irreſolute and ignorant girle, which yet trembleth for feare of the rod, and that will bluſh at it,
                        
                           Indum ſanguineo veluti violauerit oſtro,Virg' Ae
                                    ••
                                 . 12. 67.
                           
                           Si quis ebur, vel miſta rubent vbi lilia, multa
                           Albaroſa.
                           As if the Indian Yuory one ſhould taint,
                           With blodie Scarlet-graine, or Lillies paint,
                           White entermixt with red with Roſes enter-ſpred.
                        
                        Who can ſtay vntill the next morrow, and not die for ſhame, the diſdaine of thoſe loue ſparkling eyes, privie to his faintneſſe, daſtardiſe and impertinencie;
                        
                           Et taciti fecere tamen conuitia vultus.
                                 
                                    •
                                 uid. A
                                    ••
                                 . 1. el. 7. 21.
                           
                           The face though ſilent, yet ſilent vpbraydes-it.
                        
                        he never felt the ſweet contentment, and the ſence-moouing earneſtnes, to have beaten and tarniſhed them by the vigorous exerciſe of an officious and active night. When I haue perceiued any of them weary of me, I have not preſently accuſed her lightnes: but made queſtion whether I had not more reaſon to quarrell with nature, for handling me ſo vnlawfully and vnciuilly,
                        
                           Si non longa ſatis, ſi non benè mentula craſſa:Luſ. P
                                    •
                                 iap. penu
                                    •
                                 . 1. 
                                    ••
                                 . 8. 4.
                           
                           Nimirum ſapiunt vident que paruam
                           Matronae quo que mentulam illibenter.
                        
                        and to my exceding hurt. Each of my pieces are equally mine, one as another: and no other doth more properly make me a man then this. My whole pourtraiture I vniuerſally owe vnto the world. The wiſedom and reach of my leſſon, is all in truth, in liberty, in eſſence: Diſdaining in the catalogue of my true duties, theſe eaſie, ſaint, ordinary and prouinciall rules. All naturall, conſtant and generall
                              •
                           ; whereof ciuility and cerimonie, are daughters, but baſtards. We ſhall eaſily haue the vices of apparance, when we ſhall have had thoſe of eſſence. When we haue done with theſe, we run vpon others, if we finde need of running. For there is danger, that we deuiſe new offices, to excuſe our negligence toward naturall offices, and to confound them. That it is ſo, we ſee that in places where faults are bewitchings, bewitchings are but faults. That among nation, where lawes of ſeemelineſſe are more rare and ſlacke, the primitiue lawes of common reaſon are better obſerued: The innumerable multitude of ſo manifold duties ſtifling, languiſhing and diſperſing our care. The applying of our ſelues vnto ſleight matters, with-draweth vs from ſuch as be iuſt. Oh how eaſie and plauſible a courſe do theſe ſuperficiall men vndertake, in reſpect of ours. Theſe are but ſhadowes vnder which we ſhroud, and wherwith we pay one another. But we pay not, but rather heape debt on debt, vnto that great and dreadfull judge, who tucks vp our clouts and rags from about our privie parts, and is not ſqueamiſh to view all over, even to our moſt inward and ſecret deformities: a beneficiall decencie of our maidenly baſhfulneſſe, could it debar him of this tainted diſcovery. To conclude, he that could recouer or vn-be
                              •
                           o
                              •
                            man, from ſo ſcrupulous and verball a ſuperſtition, ſhould not much prejudice the world. Our life conſiſteth partly in folly, and partly in wiſedome. Hee that writes of it but reverently and regularly, omits the better moytie of it. I excuſe me not vnto my ſelfe, and if I did, I would rather excuſe my excuſes, then any fault elſe of mine: I excuſe my ſelfe of certaine humors, which in number I hold ſtronger, then

thoſe which are on my ſide: In conſideration of which I will ſay thus much more (for I deſire to pleaſe all men; though it be a hard matter, Eſſe vnum hominem accommodatum ad tantam morum, ac ſermonum & voiuntatum varietatem, That one man ſhould be applyable to ſo great variety of manners, ſpeeches and diſpoſitions) that they are not to blame me, for what I cauſe auctorities receiued and approued of many ages, to vtter: and that it is not reaſon, they ſhould for want of ryme denie me the diſpenſation, which ever ſome of our churchmen vſurpe and enjoy in this ſeaſon; whereof behold here two, and of the moſt pert and cocker amongſt them:
                        
                           Rimula diſpeream, ni monogramma tua eſt.
                           
                              Ʋn vit a' amy la contente et bien traitte.
                        
                        How many others more? I love modeſtie; nor is it from iudgement that I have made choiſe of this kinde of ſcandalous ſpeech; t'is nature hath choſen the ſame for me: I commend it no more, then all formes contrary vnto receiued cuſtome: onely I excuſe it; and by circumſtances aſwell generall, as particular, would qualifie the imputation. Well, let vs proceed. Whence commeth alſo the vſurpation of ſoveraine auctoritie, which you aſſume vnto your ſelues, over thoſe that fauour you to their coſt and preiudice,
                        
                           Si furtiua dedit nigra munuſcula nocte,Catul. el. 4. 145.
                           
                           If ſhe have giu'n by night, The ſtolne gift of delight.
                        
                        that you ſhould immediatly inueſt withall the intereſt, the coldnes, and a wedlock auctority? It is a free bargaine, why doe you not vndertake it on thoſe termes you would have them to keepe? There is no preſcription vpon voluntarie things. It is againſt forme, yet it is true, that I have in my time managed this match (ſo farre as the nature of it would allow) with as much conſcience as any other whatſoeuer, and not without ſome colour of iuſtice: and have giuen them no further teſtimonie of mine affection, then I ſincerely felt: and have lively diſplaide vnto them the declination, vigor and birth of the ſame; with the fits and deferring of it: A man cannot alwayes keepe an even pace, nor ever go to it alike. I haue bin ſo ſparing to promiſe, that (as I thinke) I have paid more then either I promiſed or was due. They have found mee faithfull, euen to the ſeruice of their inconſtancie: I ſay an inconſtancie avowed, and ſomtimes multiplied. I never broke with them, as long as I had any hold, were it but by a threds end: and whatſoever occaſion they have giuen me by their ficklenes, I never fell-of vnto contempt and hatred: for ſuch familiarities, though I attaine them on moſt ſhamefull conditions, yet do they bind mee vnto ſome conſtant good will. I have ſometime giuen them a taſte of choller and indiſcreet impacience, vpon occaſions of their wyles, ſleights, cloſe-conuayances, controuerſies and conteſtations betweene vs; for, by complexion, I am ſubiect to haſtie and raſh motions, which often empeach my trafficke, and marre my bargaines, though but meane and of ſmall worth. Have they deſired to eſſay the libertie of my iudgement, I neuer diſſembled to giue them fatherly councell and and biting aduiſe, and ſhewed my ſelfe ready to ſcrath them where they itched. If I haue given them cauſe to complaine of mee, it hath bin moſt for finding a love in me, in reſpect of our moderne faſhion, fooliſhly conſcientious. I haue religiouſly kept my word in things: that I might eaſily haue bin diſpenſed with. They then yeelded ſometimes with reputation, and vnder conditions, which they would eaſily ſuffer to bee infringed by the conqueror. I have more then once, made pleaſure In hir greateſt efforts ſtrik ſaile vnto the intereſt of their honor: and where reaſon vrged me, armed them againſt me, ſo that they guided themſelues more ſafely and ſeuerly by my preſcriptions, if they once freely yeelded vnto them, then they could haue done by their owne. I haue as much as I could endeuored to take on my ſelfe the charge and hazard of our appointments, thereby to diſcharge them from all imputation; and euer contrived our meetings in moſt hard, ſtrange and vnſuſpected manner, to be the leſſe miſtruſted, and (in my ſeeming) the more acceſſible. They are opened, eſpecially in thoſe parts, where they ſuppoſe themſelues moſt concealed. Things leſt feared are leſt defended and obſerued. You may more ſecurely dare, what no man thinks you would dare, which by difficulty becommeth eaſie. Neuer had man his approches more impertinently, genitale. This way to loue, is more according to diſcipline. But how ridiculous vnto our people, and of how ſmall effect, who better knowes then I? yet will I not repent me of it; I have no more to looſe by the matter,
                        
                           —me tabulaſacer
                              H
                                    •
                                 r. car. l 
                                    •
                                 . od. 5 13.
                           
                           V
                                 •
                              tiua paries, indicat vuida,
                           Suſpendiſſe potenti
                           
                              
                              Ʋeſtimenta maris Deo.
                           By tables of the vowes which I did owe
                           Faſtned thereto the ſacred wall doth ſhowe;
                           I have hung-vp my garments water-wet,
                           Vnto that God whoſe power on ſeas is great.
                        
                        It is now high time to ſpeake plainely of it. But even as to another, I would perhaps ſay; My friend thou doteſt, the love of thy times hath ſmall affinitie with faith and honeſtie;
                        
                           —haec ſi tu poſtule
                                    •
                                 
                              
                              Y
                                    ••
                                 . 
                                    •••••
                                 . 
                                    •
                                 ct. 1. ſc. 1
                           
                           Ratione certa facere, nihilo plus agas,
                           Quàm ſi des operam, vt cum ratione inſanias.
                           If this you would by reaſon certaine make,
                           You doe no more, then if the paines you take,
                           To be ſtarke mad, and yet to thinke it reaſon fit,
                        
                        And yet if I were to beginne anew, it ſhould bee by the very ſame path and progreſſe, how fruitleſſe ſoeuer it might prooue vnto me. Inſufficiency and ſo
                                 •
                              tiſhneſſe are commendable in a diſcommendable action. As much as I ſeperate my ſelfe from their humour in that, ſo much I approach vnto mine owne. Moreover, I did neuer ſuffer my ſelfe to bee wholly given over to that ſport; I therewith pleaſed, but forgot not my ſelfe. I ever kept that little vnderſtanding and diſcretion, which nature hath beſtowed on me, for their ſeruice and mine; ſome motion towards it, but no dotage. My conſcience alſo was engaged therein, even vnto incontinency and exceſſe, but neuer vnto ingratitude, treaſon, malice or cruelty. I bought not the pleaſure of this vice at all rates; and was content with it's owne and ſimple coſt. Nullum intraſe vi
                                 •
                              ium eſt, There is no vice contained in it ſelfe. I hate almoſt alike a crouching and dull laſineſſe, and a toileſome and thorny working. The one pincheth, the other dulleth mee. I loue wounds asS
                                 ••
                              . epi 95. much as bruſes, and blood wipes as well as dry-blowes. I had in the practiſe of this ſolace, when I was fitter for it, an even moderation betweene theſe two extremities. Loue is a vigila
                                 ••
                              , liuely and blithe agitation: I was neither troubled nor tormented with it, but heated and diſtempred by it: There wee muſt make a ſtay; It is onely hurtfull vnto fooles. A young man demanded of the Philoſopher Panetius, whether it would be ſeeme a wiſe man to be in loue; Let wiſemen alone (quoth he) but for thee and me that are not ſo, it were beſt not to engage our ſelues into ſo ſtirring and violent a humor, which maks vs ſlaves to others and contemptible vnto our ſelues. He ſaid true, for we ought not entruſt a matter ſo dangerous, vnto a mind that hath not wherwith to ſuſtaine the approaches of it, nor effectually to quaile the ſpeach of Ageſilaus; That wiſedome and loue cannot liue together: It is a vaine occupation (t'is true) vnſeemely, ſhamefull and lawleſſe: But vſing it in this manner, I eſteeme it wholſome and fit to rouze a dull ſpi
                              •••
                            and a heauy body: and as a phiſition experienced, I wold preſcribe the ſame vnto a man of my complexion and forme, as ſoone as any other receipt, to keepe him awake and in ſtrength, when he is well in yeares; and delay him from the gripings of olde age. As long as wee are but in the ſuburbes of it, and that our pulſe yet beateth.
                        
                           Dum noua canities, dum prima & recta ſenectus,
                                 
                                    •••••
                                 . Sat 3. 26.
                           
                           Dum ſupereſt Lachefi quod torqueat, & pedibus me
                           Port
                                 •
                               meis, nullo dex
                                 •
                              ram ſubeunte bacillo.
                           While hoarie haires are new, and ould-age freſh and ſtraight,
                           While Lacheſis hath yet to ſpin, while I my waight
                           Beare on my feeete, and ſtand, without ſtaffe in my hand.
                        
                        Wee had need to bee ſollicited and tickled, by ſome biting agitation, as this is. See but what youth, vigour and iollitie it reſtored vnto wiſe Anacreon. And Socrates, when hee was elder then I am, ſpeaking of an amorous obiect: leaning (ſaies hee) ſhoulder to ſhoulder, and approaching my head vnto his, as we were both together looking vpon a booke, I felt, in truth, a ſudden tingling or prickling in my ſhoulder, like the biting of ſome beaſt, which more then five daies after tickled mee, whereby a continuall itching glided into my heart. But a caſuall touch, and that but in a ſhoulder, to enflame, to diſtemper and to diſtract a minde, enfeebled, tamed and cooled through age; and of all humane mindes the moſt reformed. And why not I pray you? Socrates was but a man, and would neither bee nor ſeeme to bee other. Philoſophie contends not againſt naturall delights, ſo that due meaſure bee ioined therewith; and alloweth the moderation, not the ſhunning of

them. The efforts of her reſiſtance are employed againſt ſtrange and baſtard or lawleſſe ones. She ſaith, that the bodyes appetites ought not to be encreaſed by the minde. And wittily aduiſeth vs, that we ſhould not excite our hunger by ſacietie; not to ſtuffe, inſteed of filling our bellies: to auoide all jouiſſance that may bring vs to want: and ſhunne all meat and drink, which may make vs hungry or thirſtie. As in the ſeruice of love, ſhe appoints vs to take an obiect, that onely may ſatisfie the bodies neede, without once moouing the mind: which is not there to have any doing, but onely to follow and ſimply to aſſiſt the body. But have I not reaſon to thinke, that theſe precepts, which (in mine opinion are elſewhere ſomewhat rigorous) haue reference vnto a body which doth his office; and that a dejected one, as a weakned ſtomacke may be excuſed if he cheriſh and ſuſtaine the ſame by arte, and by the entercouſe of fantazie, to reſtore it the deſires, the delights and blithneſſe, which of it ſelfe it hath loſt? May we not ſay, that there is nothing in vs, during this earthly priſon, ſimply corporall, or purely ſpirituall? and that iniuriouſlie we diſmember a living man? that there is reaſon wee ſhould carrie our ſelues in the vſe of pleaſure, at leaſt as fauourablie as we doe in the pangs of griefe? For example, it was vehement, even vnto perfection, in the ſoules of Saints, by repentance. The body had naturally a part therein, by the right of their combination, and yet might haue but little ſhare in the cauſe: and were not contented that it ſhould ſimply follow and aſſiſt the afflicted ſoule: they haue tormented the body it ſelfe with conuenient and ſharpe puniſhments; to the end that one with the other, the body and the ſoule might a vie plunge man into ſorrow; ſo much the more ſaving, by how much the more ſmarting. In like caſe, in corporall pleaſures, is it not iniuſtice to quaile and coole the minde and, ſay, it muſt thereunto be entrained, as vnto a forced bond, or ſervile neceſſitie? Shee ſhould rather hatch and cheriſh them, and offer and invite it ſelfe vnto them; the charge of ſwaying rightly belonging to her. Even as in my conceit, it is her part, in her proper delights, to inſpire and infuſe into the body all ſenſe or feeling which his condition may beare, and indevour that they may be both ſweet and healthy for him. For, as they ſay, tis good reaſon; that the body follow not his appetites to the mindes preiudice or dammage. But why is it not likewiſe reaſon, that the minde ſhould not follow hers to the bodies danger and hurt? I have no other paſſion that keepes mee in breath. What avarice, ambition, quarels, ſutes in law, or other contentions worke and effect in others, who as my ſelfe have no aſſigned vacation, or certaine leiſure, love would performe more commodiouſly: It would reſtore me the vigilancie, ſobrietie, grace and care of my perſon; and aſſure my countenance againſt the wrinckled frowns of age (thoſe deformed and wretched frownes) which elſe would blemiſh and deface the ſame; It would reduce me to ſerious, to ſound and wiſe ſtudies, whereby I might procure more love, and purchaſe more eſtimation: It would purge my minde from deſpaire of it ſelfe, and of its vſe, acquainting the ſame againe with it ſelfe: It would divert me from thouſands of irkſome tedious thoughts, and melancholie carking cares, wherewith the doting idleneſſe and crazed condition of our age doth charge and comber vs: It would reſtore and heat, though but in a dreame, the blood which nature forſaketh: It would vphold the drooping chinne, and ſomewhat ſtrengthen or lengthen the ſhrunken finewes, decaied vigour, and dulled lives-blitheneſſe of ſilly wretched man, who gallops apace to his ruine. But I am not ignorant how hard a matter it is to attaine to ſuch a commoditie: Through weakeneſſe and long experience, our taſte is growne more tender, more choiſe and more exquiſite. We challenge moſt, when we bring leaſt; we are moſt deſirous to chooſe, when we leaſt deſerve to be accepted: And knowing our ſelves to bee ſuch, we are leſſe hardy and more diſtruſtfull: Nothing can aſſure vs to be beloved, ſeeing our condition and their quality. I am aſhamed to be in the companie of this greene, blooming and boyling youth;
                        
                           Cuius in indomito conſtantior inguine neruus,
                           Quàm noua collibus arbor inhaeret:Hor. Epod. 12. 19.
                           
                        
                        Why ſhould we preſent our wretchedneſſe admid this their iollitie?
                        
                           Poſſint vt iuuenes viſere feruidiHor. car. l. 4. 
                                    •
                                 d. 13. 26.
                           
                           Multo non fine riſu,
                           Dilapſam in cineres facem,
                           That hot young men may goe and ſee,
                           Not without ſport and mery glee,
                           Their fire-brands turn'd to aſhes be.
                        
                        
                           They have both ſtrength and reaſon on their ſide: let vs give them place: we have no longer holde faſt. This bloome of budding beauty, loues not to be handled by ſuch nummed, and ſo clomſie hands, nor would it be dealt-with by meanes purely materiall or ordinarie ſtuffe, For, as that ancient Philoſopher anſwered one that mocked him, becauſe hee could not obtaine the fauour of a yongling, whom he ſuingly purſued: My friend (quoth hee) the hooke bites not at ſuch freſh cheeſe. It is a commerce needing relation and mutuall correſpondency: other pleaſures that we receiue, may bee requitted by recompences of different nature: but this cannot be repaid but with the very ſame kinde of coyne. Verily, the pleaſure I do others in this ſport, doth more ſweetly tickle my imagination, then that is done vnto me. Now if no generous minde, can receive pleaſure where he returneth none; it is a baſe minde that would haue all duty and delights to feed with conference, thoſe vnder whoſe charge hee remaineth. There is no beautie, nor fauour, nor familiarity ſo exquiſite, which a gallant minde ſhould deſire at this rate. Now if women can do vs no good but in pittie, I had much rather not to live at all, then to live by almes. I would I had the priuiledge to demande of them, in the ſame ſtile I haue heard ſome begin Italy: Fate bene per voi, Doe ſome good for your ſelfe: or after the manner that Cyrus exhorted his ſouldiers; Whoſoeuer loveth mee, let him follow mee. Conſort your ſelfe, will ſome ſay to me, with thoſe of your owne condition, whom the company of like fortune will yeelde of more eaſie acceſſe. Oh ſottiſh and wallowiſh compoſition;
                        
                           —nolo
                           
                           Barbam vellere mortuo leoni.Mar. l. 10. epig. 90. 9.
                           
                           I will not pull (though not a fearde)
                           When he is dead a Lions beard.
                        
                        
                           Xenophon vſeth for an obiection and accuſation againſt Menon, that in his love hee dealt with fading obiects. I take more ſenſuall pleaſure by onely viewing the mutuall, even proporcioned and delicate commixture of two yong beauties; or only to conſider the ſame in mine imagination, then if my ſelfe ſhould be ſecond in a lumpiſh, ſad and diſproporcioned coniunction. I refigne ſuch diſtaſted and fantaſtical appetites vnto the Emperour Galba, who medled with none but caſt, worne, hard-old fleſh, And to that poore ſlave,
                        
                           O ego dij faciant talem te cernere poſſim,
                           Char áque mutatis oſculaferre comis.
                           Amplectique meis corpus non pingue lacertis.Quid. P
                                    •
                                 nt. l▪ 1. el. 5. 49.
                           
                           Gods graunt I may beholde thee in ſuch caſe,
                           And kiſſe thy chang'd locks with my deareſt grace,
                           And with mine armes thy limmes not fat embrace.
                        
                        And amongſt blemiſhing-deformities, I deeme artificiall and forced beautie to be of the chiefeſt. Emonez a young lad of Chios, ſuppoſing by gorgeous attires to purchaſe the beautie, which nature denied him, came to the Philoſopher Ar
                                 •
                              ſilaus, and asked of him, whether a wiſe man could be in l
                                 •
                              ue, or no? Yes marrie (quoth hee) ſo it were not with a painted and ſophiſticate beautie, as thine is. The fowleneſſe of an olde knowne woman is in my ſeeming, not ſo aged nor ſo ill-fauoured, as one that's painted and ſleeked. Shall I bouldly ſpeake it, and not haue my throate cut for my labour? Loue is not properly nor naturallie in ſeaſon, but in the age next vnto infancie:
                        
                        
                           Quam ſi puellarum inſereres choro,
                           Mille ſagaces falleret hoſpites,
                           Diſcrimen obſcurum, ſolutisHor. car. l. 2. 
                                    •
                                 d. 5. 12.
                           
                           Crinibus, ambiguoque vultu.
                           Whom if you ſhould in crue of wenches place,
                           With haire looſe-hanging, and ambiguous face,
                           Strangely the vndiſcern'd diſtinction might
                           Deceiue a thouſand ſtrangers of ſharpe ſight.
                        
                        No more is perfect beautie. For, whereas Homer extends it vntill ſuch time as the chinne begins to bud. Plato himſelfe hath noted the ſame for very rare, And the cauſe for which the Sophiſter Dion termed youthes budding hayres; Ariſtogitons and Harmodij, is notoriouſlie knowne. In man-hoode I finde it alreadie to bee ſomewhat out of date, much more in olde age.
                        
                           
                           Importunus enim tranſuolat aridas
                           Quercus.Ibid. l. 4. od. 13. 9.
                           
                           Importune loue doth ouer-flie.
                           The Okes with withered olde-age drie.
                        
                        And Margaret Queene of Nauarre, lengthens much (like a woman) the priviledge of women: Ordaining thirty feares to be the ſeaſon, for them to change the title of faire into good. The ſhorter poſſeſſion we allow it ouer our liues, the better for vs. Behold it's behauiour, It is a princock boy, who in his ſchoole, knowes not, how far one proceeds againſt all order: ſtudy, exerciſe, cuſtome and practiſe, are paths to inſufficiencie: the novices beare all the ſway; Amor ordinem neſcit, Loue knowes or keeps no order. Surely it's courſe hath more garbe, when it is commixt with vnaduiſednes and trouble: faultes and contrary ſucceſſes, giue it edge and grace: ſo it be eager and hungry, it little importeth whither it bee prudent. Obſerue but how he ſtaggers, ſtumbleth and fooleth; you fetter and ſhackle him, when you guide him by arte and diſcretion: and you force his ſacred liberty, when you ſubmit him to thoſe bearded, grim and tough-hard hands. Moreover I often heare them diſplay this intelligence as abſolutely ſpirituall diſdaining to draw into conſideration the intereſt which all the ſences have in the ſame. All ſerueth to the purpoſe: But I may ſay, that I haue often ſeen ſome of vs excuſe the weakeneſſe of their minds, in fauour of their corporall beauties; but I never ſaw them yet, that in behalfe of the mindes-beauties, how ſound and ripe ſoever they were, would afforde an helping hand vnto abedy, that never ſo little falleth into declination. Why doth not ſome one of them long to produce that noble Socraticall brood; or breed that precious gem, between the body and the minde, purchaſing with the price of her thighes a Philoſophicall and ſpirituall breed and intelligence? which is the higheſt rate ſhe can poſſibly value them at. Plato appointeth in his lawes, that he who performeth a notable and worthy exploite in warre, during the time of that expedition, ſhould not be denide a kiſſe or refuſed any other amorous fauour, of whomſoever he ſhall pleaſe to deſire it, without reſpect either of his ill-fauourdnes, deformitie, or age. What he deemeth ſo juſt and allowable in commendation of Military valour, may not the ſame be thought as lawfull in commendation of ſome other worth? and why is not ſome one of them poſſeſſed with the humor to preocupate on hir companions the glory of this chaſte loue? chaſte I may well ſay;
                        
                           —nam ſi quando ad praelia ventum est,
                           
                           
                              Ʋt quondam ſtipulis magnus ſine viribus ignisVirg. Geor. l. 3. 98. 
                                    •
                                 
                              
                           
                           In caſſum furit.
                           If once it come to handy-gripes; as great,
                           But force-leſſe fire in ſtubble; ſo his heate
                           Rageth amaine, but all in vaine.
                        
                        Vices ſmoothered in ones thought, are not the woorſt. To conclude this notable commentarie, eſcaped from me by a flux of babling: a flux ſometimes as violent as hurtfull,
                        
                           
                              Ʋt miſſum ſponſi furtiuo munere malum,
                           Procurrit casto virginis è gremio:Catul. eleg 1▪ 19
                           
                           Quod miſerae oblitae molli ſub veste locatum,
                           Dum aduentu matris proſilit, excutitur,
                           Atque illud prono praeceps agitur decurſu,
                           Huic manat triſti conſcius ore rubor.
                           As when ſome fruite by ſtealth ſent from hir friend,
                           From chaſte lap of a virgin doth deſcend,
                           Which by hir, vnder hir ſoft aprone plaſt,
                           Starting at mothers comming thence is caſt:
                           And trilling downe in haſt doth head-long goe,
                           A guiltie bluſh in hir ſad face doth floe.
                        
                        
                           I ſay, that both male and female, are caſt in one ſame moulde; inſtruction and custome excepted, there is no great difference betweene them: Plato calleth them both indifferently to the ſocietie of all ſtudies, exerciſes, charges and functions of warre and peace, in his Commonwealth. And the Philoſopher Antisthenes took away al diſtinction betweene their vertue and ours. It is much more eaſie to accuſe the one ſexe, then to excuſe the other. It is that which ſome ſay prouerbialie. Ill may the Kill call the Ouen burnt taile.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        The ſixth Chapter.
                        
                           Of Coaches.
                        
                        IT is eaſie to verifie, that excellent authors, writing of cauſes doe not only make vſe of thoſe which they imagine true, but eftſoones of ſuch as themſelues beleeue not: alwayes prouided they have ſome inuention and beautie. They ſpeake ſufficiently, trulie and profitably, if they ſpeake ingeniouſlie. We cannot aſſure▪ our ſelues of the chiefe cauſe: we hudle vp a many together, to ſee whether by chance it ſhall be found in that number,
                        
                           Namque vnam dicere cauſam.Lucret. l. 6. 700.
                           
                           Non ſatis eſt, verum plures vnde vna tamenſit.
                           Enough it is not one cauſe to deviſe,
                           But more, whereof that one may yet ariſe,
                        
                        Will you demand of me, whence this cuſtome ariſeth, to bleſſe and ſay God helpe to thoſe that ſneeſe? Wee produce three ſortes of winde; that iſſuing from belowe is too vndecent; that from the mouth, implieth ſome reproach of gourmandiſe; the third is ſneeſing: and becauſe it commeth from the head, and is without imputation, wee thus kindly entertaine it: Smile not at this ſubtiltie, it is (as ſome ſay) Ariſtotles. Mee ſeemeth to haue read in Plutarch (who of all the authors I know, hath beſt commixt arte with nature, and coupled iudgement with learning) where he yeeldeth a reaſon, why thoſe which trauell by ſea, doe ſometimes feele ſuch qua
                              •
                           mes and riſings of the ſtomacke, ſaying, that it proceedeth of a kinde of feare: hauing found-out ſome reaſon, by which hee prooveth, that feare may cauſe ſuch an effect. My ſelfe who am much ſubiect vnto it, knowe well, that this cauſe doth nothing concerne me. And I know it, not by argument, but by neceſſarie experience, without alleaging what ſome haue tolde mee, that the like doth often happen vnto beaſts, namely vnto ſwine, when they are fartheſt from apprehending any danger: and what an acquaintance of mine hath aſſured mee of himſelfe, and who is greatly ſubiect vnto it, that twice or thrice in a tempeſtuous ſtorme, being ſurpriſed with execeeding feare, all manner of deſire or inclination to vomit had left him. As to that ancient good fellow; Peius vexabar quàm vt periculum mihi ſuccurreret. I was worſe vexed then that danger covld helpe me. I never apprehended feare vpon the water; nor any where elſe (yet haue I often had 
                              ••
                           ſt cauſe offred me, if death it ſelfe may give it) which eyther might trouble or aſtonie mee. It proceedeth ſometimes as well from want of iudgement, as from lacke of courage. All the dangers I haue had, have beene when mine, eyes were wide-open and my ſight cleare, ſound and perfect: For, even to feare, courage is required. It hath ſometimes ſteaded me, in reſpect of others, to direct and keepe my flight in order, that ſo it might be, if not without feare, at leaſt without diſmay and aſtoniſhment. Indeede it was mooued, but not amazed nor diſtracted. Vndanted mindes marche further, and repreſent flight, not onely temperate, ſetled and ſound, but alſo fierce and bolde▪ Report we that which Alcibiades relateth of Socrates his companion in armes. I found (ſaith he) after the route and diſcomfiture of our armie, both him and Lachez in the laſt ranke of thoſe that ranne away, and with all ſafetie and leaſure conſidered him, for I was mounted vpon an excellent good horſe, and he on foote, and ſo had we combatted all day. I noted firſt, how in reſpect of Lachez, he ſhewed both diſcr
                              ••
                           te iudgement and 
                              •
                           ndanted reſolution: then I obſerued the vndiſmaide brauery of his marche, nothing different from his ordinarie pace: his looke orderly and conſtant, duly obſ
                              ••
                           uing and 
                              •
                           eedily iudging what euer paſſed round about him: ſometimes viewing the one, and ſometimes looking on the other both friendes and enemies, with ſo compoſed a manner, that he ſeemed to encourage the one and menace the other, ſignifying, that whoſoever ſhould attempt his life, muſt purchaſe the ſame, or his blood at a high-valued rate; and thus they both ſaued themſelues; for, men doe not willingly graple with theſe; but follow ſuch as ſhew or feare or diſmay. Loe heare the teſtimonie of that renow
                              •
                           ed Captaine, who teacheth vs what wee daily finde by experience, that there is nothing doth ſooner caſt vs into dangers, then an inconſiderate greedineſſe to a
                              •••
                           de them. Quo timoris minus eſt, eo minus fermè periculi eſt. The leſſe feare there is moſt commonly,
                           
                           the leſſe danger there is. Our people is to blame, to ſay, ſuch a one feareth death, when it would ſignifie, that he thinkes on it, and doth foreſee the ſame. Foreſight doth equally belong as well to that which concerneth vs in good, as touche vs in euill. To conſider and iudge danger, is in ſome ſort, not to bee danted at it. I doe not finde my ſelfe ſufficiently ſtrong to withſtand the blow and violence of this paſſion of feare, or of any other impetuoſity, were I once therewith vanquiſhed and deterred, I could never ſafely recouer my ſelfe. Hee that ſhould make my minde forgoe hir footing, could never bring her vnto her place againe. She doth ouer liuely ſound, and ouer deepely ſearch into hirſelfe: And therefore neuer ſuffers the wound which pierced the ſame, to be throughly cured and conſolidated. It hath beene happy for me: that no infirmity could euer yet diſplace her. I oppoſe and preſent my ſelfe in the beſt warde I have, againſt all charges and aſſaults that beſet mee. Thus the firſt that ſhould beare mee away, would make mee vnrecouerable. I encounter not two: which way ſoeuer ſpoile ſhould enter my holde, there am I open, and remedileſly drowned. Epicurus ſaith, that a wiſe man can neuer paſſe from one ſtate to its contrary. I have ſome opinion anſwering his ſentence, that hee who hath once beene a very foole, ſhall at no time prooue very wiſe. God ſends my colde anſwerable to my clothes, and paſſions anſwering the meanes I haue to indure them. Nature hauing diſcouered me on one ſide, hath couered me one the other. Hauing diſarmed me of ſtrength, ſhe hath armed me with inſenſibility, and a regular or ſoft apprehenſion. I cannot long endure (and leſſe could in my youth) to ride either in coach or litter, or to go in a boate; and both in the Citty and country I hate all manner of riding, but a horſe-back: And can leſſe endure a litter, then a coach, and by the ſame reaſon, more eaſily a rough agitation vpon the water, whence commonly proceedeth feare, then the ſoft ſtirring a man ſhall feele in calme weather. By the ſame eaſie gentle motion, which the oares giue, conuaying the boate vnder vs, I wot not how, I feele both my head intoxicated and my ſtomacke diſtempered: as I cannot likewiſe abide a ſhaking ſtoole vnder me. When as either the ſaile, or the gliding courſe of the water doth equally carry vs away, or that wee are but towed, that gently, gliding and euen agitation, doth no whit diſtemper or hurte mee. It is an interrupted and broken motion, that offendes mee; and more when it is languiſhing. I am not able to diſplaye it's forme. Phiſitions haue taught mee to binde and gird my ſelfe with a napkin or ſwath round about the lower part of my belly, as a remedy for this accident; which as yet I haue not tride, being accuſtomed to wreſtle and with ſtand ſuch defects as are in me; and tame them by my ſelfe. Were my memory ſufficientlye informed of them, I would not thinke my time loſt, heere to ſet downe the infinite variety, which hiſtories preſent vnto vs, of the vſe of coaches in the ſeruice of warre: diuers according to the nations, and different according to the ages: to my ſeeming of great effect and neceſſitye. So that it is wondrouſlye ſtrange, how wee haue loſt all true knowledge of them; I will onely aleadge this, that euen lately in our fathers time, the Hungarians did very auailefully bring them into faſhion, and profitablie ſet them a worke againſt the Turkes; euery one of them containing a Targattier and a Muskettier, with a certaine number of harquebuſ
                              •
                           s or caliuers, ready charged; and ſo ranged, that they might make good vſe of them: and all ouer couered with a paueſado, after the manner of a Galliotte. They made the front of their battaile with three thouſand ſuch coaches: and after the Cannon had playde, cauſed them to diſcharge and ſhoote off volie of ſmale ſhotte vppon their enemies, before they ſhoulde know or feele, what the reſt of their forces could doe: which was no ſmale aduancement; or if not this, they mainely droue thoſe coaches amidde the thickeſt of their enemies ſquadrons, with purpoſe to breake, diſroute and make waye through them. Beſides the benefit and helpe they might make of them, in any ſuſpicious or dangerous place, to flanke their troupes marching from place to place: or in haſt to encompaſſe, to embarricado, to couer or fortifie any lodgement or quarter. In my time, a gentleman of quality, in one of our frontieres, vnwealdy and ſo burly of bodye, that hee coulde finde no horſe able to beare his waight, and hauing a quarrell or deadly fude in hand, was wont to trauaile vp and downe in a coach made after this faſhion, and found much eaſe and good in it. But leaue wee theſe warlike coaches, as if their nullity were not ſufficiently knowne by better tokens; The laſtkings of our firſt race were wont to trauell in chariors drawne by foure oxen. Marke Antonie was the firſt, that cauſed himſelfe, accompanied with a minſterell harlot to bee drawne by Lyons fitted to a coach. So did Heliogabalus after him, naming himſelfe Cibele
                           
the mother of the Gods; and alſo by Tigers, counterfetting God Bacchus: who ſometimes would alſo bee drawne in a coach by two Stagges: and an-other time by foure maſtiue Dogs: and by foure naked wenches, cauſing himſelfe to bee drawne by them in pompe and ſtate, hee being all naked. The emperour Firmus, made his coach to bee drawne by Eſtriges of exceeding greatneſſe, ſo that hee rather ſeemed to flye, then to roule on wheeles. The ſtrangeneſſe of theſe inuentions, doth bring this other thing vnto my fantaſie. That it is a kinde of puſilanimity in Monarkes, and a teſtimony that they doe not ſufficiently know what they are, when they labour to ſhew their worth, and endeuour to appeare vnto the world, by exceſſiue and intolerable expences. A thing, which in a ſtrange country might ſomewhat bee excuſed; but amongſt his natiue ſubiects, where hee ſwayeth all in all, hee draweth from his dignity the extreameſt degree of honour, that hee may poſſible attaine vnto. As for a gentleman, in his owne priuate houſe to apparrell himſelfe richly and curiouſly, I deeme it a matter vaine and ſuperfluous; his houſe, his houſhold, his traine and his kitchin doe ſufficiently anſwere for him. The counſell which Iſocrates giueth to his King (in my conceite) ſeemeth to carry ſome reaſon: when hee willeth him to bee richly-ſtored and ſtately adorned with mooueables and houſholde-ſtuffe, forſomuch as it is an expence of continuance, and which deſcendeth euen to his poſterity or heires: And to auoyde all magnificences, which preſently vaniſh both from cuſtome and memory. I loued when I was a yonger brother to ſet my ſelfe foorth and bee gaye in cloathes, though I wanted other neceſſaries; and it became mee well: There are ſome on whoſe backes their ritch Robes weepe, or as wee ſay their rich cloathes are lyned with heauye debts. We haue diuers ſtrange tales of our auncient Kings frugalitie about their owne perſons, and in their gifts: great and farre renouned Kings both in credit, in valour and in fortune. Demoſthenes mainely combates the law of his Cittie, who aſſigned their publique money to be imployed about the ſtately ſetting forth of their playes and feaſtes: He willeth that their magnificence ſhould bee ſeene in the quantity of tall ſhips well manned and appointed, and armies well furniſhed. And they haue reaſon to accuſe Theophraſtus, who in his booke of riches eſtabliſhed a contrarie opinion, and vpholdeth ſuch a quality of expences, to be the true friute of wealth and plenty. They are pleaſures (ſaith Ariſtotle) that onely touch the vulgar and baſeſt communalty, which as ſoone as a man is ſatisfied with them, vaniſh out of minde; and whereof no man of ſound judgement of gravity can make any eſteeme. The imployment of it, as more profitable, juſt and durable would ſeeme more royall, worthy and commendable, about portes, heauens, fortifications and walles; in ſumptuous buildings, in churches, hoſpitales, colledges, mending of heighwayes and ſtreetes, and ſuch like monuments: in which things Pope Gregory the thirteenth ſhall leaue aye-laſting and commendable memory vnto his name: and wherein our Queene Catherin ſhould witnes vnto ſucceeding ages her naturall liberality and exceeding bounty, if her meanes were anſwarable to her affection. Fortune hath much ſpighted mee to hinder the ſtructure and brake-off the finiſhing of our new-bridge in our great Citty; and before my death to depriue mee of all hope to ſee the great neceſſity of it ſet forwarde againe. Moreouer, it appeareth vnto ſubjects, ſpectators of theſe triumphs, that they haue a ſhow made them of their owne riches, and that they are feaſted at their proper charges: For, the people doe eaſily preſume of their kings, as wee doe of our ſeruants; that they ſhould take care plenteouſly to provide vs of whatſoeuer wee ſtand in neede of, but that on their behalfe they ſhould no way lay handes on it. And therefore the Emperor Galba, ſitting at ſupper, hauing taken pleaſure to heare a muſicion play and ſing before him, ſent for his casket, out of which he tooke a handful of Crowns and put them into his hand, with theſe wordes; Take this, not as a guift of the publique money, but of mine owne priuate ſtore. So is it, that it often commeth to paſſe, that the common people haue reaſon to grudge, and that their eyes are fedde, with that which he ſhould feede their belly. Liberality it ſelfe, in a ſoueraigne hand is not in her owne luſter: priuate men haue more right, and may challenge more intereſt in her. For, taking the matter exactlye as it is, a King hath nothing that is properlye his owne; hee oweth euen himſelfe to others. Authority is not giuen in fauour of the authoriſing, but rather in fauour of the authoriſed. A ſuperiour is neuer created for his owne profit, but rather for the benefit of the inferiour: And a Phiſition is inſtituted for the ſicke, not for himſelfe. All Magiſtracie, euen as each arte, reiecteth her end out of her ſelfe. Nulla ars in ſe verſatur. No arte is all in it ſelfe. Wherefore the gouernours and

overſeers of Princes childhood or minoritie, who ſo earneſtly endevour to imprint this vertue of bountie and liberalitie in them; and teach them not to refuſe any thing, and eſteeme nothing ſo well imploied, as what they ſhall give (an inſtruction which in my daies I have ſeene in great credit) either they preferre and reſpect more their owne profit then their maſters; or elſe they vnderſtand not aright to whom they ſpeake. It is too eaſie a matter to imprint liberalitie in him, that hath wherewith plenteouſly to ſatisfie what he deſireth at other mens charges. And his eſtimation being directed not according to the meaſure of the preſent, but according to the qualitie of his meanes, that exerciſeth the ſame, it commeth to proove vaine in ſo puiſſant hands. They are found to be prodigall, before they be liberall. Therefore is it but of ſmall commendation, in reſpect of other royall vertues. And the only (as ſaid the tyrant Dionyfius) that agreed and ſquared well with tyrannie it ſelfe. I would rather teach him the verſe of the ancient labourer,
                        
                           
                              
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                              
                              Plat de Athen. Eraſ. chil. 3. cent. 1. ad. 32.
                           
                           Not whole ſackes, but by the hand
                           A man ſhould ſow his ſeed i'the land.
                        
                        That whoſoever will reape any commoditie by it, muſt ſow with his hand, and not powre out of the ſacke: that corne muſt be diſcreetly ſcattered, and not laviſhly diſperſed: And that being to give, or to ſay better, to pay and reſtore to ſuch a multitude of people, according as they have deſerved, he ought to be a loyall, faithfull, and adviſed diſtributer thereof. If the liberalitie of a Prince be without heedy diſcretion and meaſure, I would rather have him covetous and ſparing. Princely vertue ſeemeth to conſiſt moſt in iuſtice. And of all parts of juſtice, that doth beſt and moſt belong to Kings, which accompanieth liberalitie. For, they have it particularly reſerved to their charge; whereas all other juſtice, they happily exerciſe the ſame by the intermiſſion of others. Immoderate bountie, is a weake meane to acquire them good will: for, it reiecteth more people, then it obtaineth: Quo in plures vſus ſis, minus in multos
                           Cic. off. l. 
                                 •
                              . 
                           vti poſſis. Quid autem eſt ſtultius, quàm, quod libenter facias, curare vt id diutius facere non poſſis? The more you have vſed it to many, the leſſe may you vſe it to many more: And what is more fond, then what you willingly would doe, to provide you can no longer doe it? And if it be emploied without reſpect of merit, it ſhameth him that receiveth the ſame, and is received without grace. Some Tyrants have beene ſacrificed to the peoples hatred, by the very hands of thoſe, whom they had raſhly preferred and wrongfully advanced: ſuch kinde of men, meaning to aſſure the poſſeſſion of goods vnlawfully and indirectly gotten, if they ſhew to hold in contempt and hatred, him from whom they held them, and in that combine themſelves vnto the vulgar iudgement and common opinion. The ſubiects of a Prince, raſhly exceſſive in his gifts, become impudently exceſſive in begging: they adhere, not vnto reaſon, but vnto example. Verily we have often iuſt cauſe to bluſh, for our impudencie. We are over-paid according to juſtice, when the recompence equalleth our ſervice: for, doe we not owe a kinde of naturall dutie to our Princes? If he beare our charge, he doth over-much; it ſufficeth if hee aſſiſt it: the over-plus is called a benefit, which cannot be exacted; for the very name of liberalitie implieth libertie. After our faſhion, we have never done; what is received is no more reckoned of: only future liberalitie is loved: Wherefore the more a Prince doth exhauſt himſelfe in giving, the more friends he impoveriſheth. How ſhould he ſatisfie intemperate deſires, which increaſe according as they are repleniſhed? Who ſo hath his mind on taking, hath it no more on what he hath taken. Covetouſneſſe hath nothing ſo proper, as to be vngratefull. The example of Cyrus ſhall not ill fit this place, for the behoofe of our kings of theſe daies, as a touch-ſtone, to know whether their gifts be well or ill emploied; and make them perceive, how much more happilie that Emperour did wound and oppreſſe them, then they doe. Whereby they are afterward forced to exact and borrow of their vnknowen ſubiects, and rather of ſuch as they have wronged and aggrieved, then of thoſe they have enriched and done good vnto: and receive no aids, where any thing is gratitude, except the name. Craeſus vpbra
                              •
                           ded him with his laviſh bountie, and calculated what his treaſure would amount vnto, if he were more ſparing and cloſe-handed. A deſire ſurpriſed him to iuſtifie his liberalitie, and diſpatching letters over all parts of his dominions, to ſuch great men of his eſtate, whom hee had particularly advanced, intreated every one to aſſiſt him with as much money as they could, for an vrgent

neceſſitie of his; and preſently to ſend it him by declaration: when all theſe count-bookes or notes were brought him, each of his friends ſuppoſing that it ſufficed not, to offer him no more then they had received of his bounteous liberalitie, but adding much of their owne vnto it, it was found, that the ſaid ſumme amounted vnto much more, then the niggardly ſparing of Croeſus. Whereupon Cyrus ſaid, I am no leſſe greedy of riches, then other Princes, but am rather a better husband of them. You ſee with what ſmall venture I have purchaſed the vnvaluable treaſure of ſo many friends, and how much more faithfull treaſurers they are to mee, then mercenarie men would be, without obligation and without affection: and my exchequer or treaſurie better placed then in paltery coafers; by which I draw vpon mee the hate, the envie and the contempt of other Princes. The ancient Emperours were wont to draw ſome excuſe, for the ſuperfluitie of their ſports and publike ſhewes, for ſo much as their authoritie did in ſome ſort depend (at leaſt in apparance) from the will of the Roman people; which from all ages was accuſtomed to be flattered by ſuch kindes of ſpectables and exceſſe.
                        But they were particular-ones who had bred this cuſtome, to gratifie their con-citizens and fellowes: eſpecially with their purſe, by ſuch profuſion and magnificence. It was cleane altered, when the maſters and chiefe rulers came once to imitate the ſame. Pecuniarum tranſlatio
                           Cic. Off. l. 1. 
                           à iuſtis dominis ad alienos non debet liberalis videri. The paſſing of money from right owners to ſtrangers ſhould not ſeeme liberalitie. Philip, becauſe his ſonne endevoured by gifts to purchaſe the good will of the Macedonians, by a letter ſeemed to be diſpleaſed and chid him in this manner: What? Wouldest thou have thy ſubiects to account thee for their purſe-bearer, and not repute thee for their King? Wilt thou frequent and practiſe them? Then doe it with the benefits of thy vertue, not with thoſe of thy coafers: Yet was it a goodly thing, to cauſe a great quantity of great trees, all branchie and greene, to be farre brought and planted in plots yeelding nothing but drie gravell, repreſenting a wilde ſhady foreſt, divided in due ſeemely proportion: And the firſt day, to put into the ſame a thouſand Eſtriges, a thouſand Stagges, a thouſand wilde Boares, and a thouſand Buckes, yeelding them over to be hunted and killed by the common people: the next morrow in the preſence of all the aſſembly to cauſe a hundred great Lions, a hundred Leopards, and three hundred huge Beares to be baited and tugg'd in peeces: and for the third day, in bloodie manner and good earneſt to make three hundred couple of Gladiators or Fencers, to combat and murder one another; as did the Emperour Probus. It was alſo a goodly ſhew, to ſee thoſe wondrous huge Amphitheaters all enchaſed with rich marble, on the out ſide curiouſly wrought with carved ſtatues, and all the inner ſide glittering with precious and rare embelliſhments,
                        
                           Baltheus en gemmis, en illita porticus auro.
                           A belt beſet with gemmes behold,
                           Behold a walke bedawb'd with gold.
                        
                        All the ſides round about that great void, repleniſhed and environed from the ground vnto the very toppe, with three or foure ſcore rankes of ſteps and ſeats, likewiſe all of marble covered with faire cuſhions,
                        
                           —exeat, inquit,
                              Iauen. Sat. 3. 153.
                           
                           Si pudor eſt, & de pulvino ſurgat equeſtri,
                           Cuius res legi non ſufficit.
                           If ſhame there be, let him be gone, he cries,
                           And from his knightly cuſhion let him riſe,
                           Whoſe ſubſtance to the law doth not ſuffice.
                        
                        Where might conveniently bee placed an hundred thouſand men, and all ſit at eaſe. And the plaine-ground-worke of it, where ſports were to bee acted, firſt by Art to cauſe the ſame to open and chap in ſunder with gaps and craniſhes, repreſenting hollow cavernes which vomited out the beaſts appointed for the ſpectacle: That ended, immediately to overflow it all with a maine deepe ſea, fraught with ſtore of ſea-monſters and other ſtrange fiſhes, all over-laid with goodly tall ſhips, ready rigd and appointed to repreſent a Sea-fight; and thirdly, ſuddenly to make it ſmooth and drie againe, for the combat of Gladiators: and

fourthly being forthwith cleanſed, to ſtrewe it ouer with Vermillion and Storay, inſteede of gravell, for the erecting of a ſolemne banket, for all that infinite number of people: the laſt act of one onely day.
                        
                           —quoties nos deſcendentis arenae
                           
                           
                              Ʋidimus in partes, rupta
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               voragine terrae
                           Emerſiſſe feras, & ijſdem ſaepe latebris
                           Aurea cum croceo creuerunt arbuta libro.
                           Nec ſolum nobis ſilueſtria cernere monſtra
                           Contigit, aequoreos ego cum certantibus vrſis
                           Spectaui vitulos, et equorum nomine dignum,
                           Sed deforme pecus.
                        
                        
                           How oft have we beheld wilde beaſts appeare
                           From broken gulfes of earth, vpon ſome parte
                           Of ſande that did not ſinke? how often there
                           And thence did golden boughs oreſaffron'd ſtarte?
                           Nor onely ſaw we monſters of the wood,
                           But I have ſeene Sea-calues whom Beares withſtood,
                           And ſuch a kinde of beaſt as might be named
                           A horſe, but in moſt foule proportion framed.
                        
                        They haue ſometimes cauſed an high ſteepy mountaine to ariſe in the midſt of the ſayde Amphitheaters, all ouer-ſpred with fruitfull and flouriſhing trees of all ſortes, on the top whereof guſhed out ſtreames of water, as from out the ſource of a purling ſpring. Other times they haue produced therein a great tall Ship floating vp and down, which of it ſelfe opened and ſplit a ſunder, and after it had diſgorged from out it's bulke, foure or fiue hundred wilde beaſts to bee baited, it cloſed and vaniſhed away of itſelfe, without any viſible helpe. Sometimes from out the bottome of it, they cauſed ſtreakes and purlings of ſweete water to ſpoute vp, bubling to the higheſt top of the frame, and gently watring, ſprinkling and refreſhing that infinite multitud. To keepe and couer themſelues from the violence of the wether, they cauſed that huge compaſſe to bee all ouer-ſpred, ſometimes with purple ſailes, all curiouſly wrought with the needle, ſometimes of ſilke, and of ſome other colour, in the twinkling of an eye, as they pleaſed, they diſplaid and ſpred, or drewe and pulled them in againe.
                        
                           Quamuis non modico caleant ſpectacula ſole
                           
                              Ʋelareducuntur cumvenit Hermogenes.
                           Though fervent Sunne make't hotte to ſee a play,
                           When linnen-thieues come, ſailes are kept away.
                        
                        The nets likewiſe, which they vſed to put before the people, to ſave them from harme and violence of the baited beaſts, were wouen with golde.
                        
                           auro quoque tortarefulgent
                           Retia.
                           Nets with golde enterlaced,
                           Their ſhewes with glittring graced.
                        
                        If any thing bee excuſable in ſuch laviſh exceſſe, it is, where the inuention and ſtrangeneſſe breedeth admiration, and not the coſtlie charge. Euen in thoſe vanities, wee may plainely perceiue how fertile and happy thoſe former ages were of other manner of wittes, then ours are. It hapneth of this kinde of fertilitie, as of all other productions of nature. Wee may not ſay what nature employed then the vtmoſt of hir power. Wee goe not, but rather creepe and ſtagger here and there: wee goe our pace. I imagine our

knowledge to bee weake in all ſences: wee neither diſcerne far-forward, nor ſee much backward. It embraceth little, and liueth not long: It is ſhotte both in extenſion of time, and in ampleneſſe of matter or inuention.
                        
                           Vixere fortes ante AgamemnonaH
                                    •
                                 r. car. l. 4. ed. 9. 25.
                           
                           Multi, ſed omnes illachrymabiles
                           Vrgentur, ignoti
                                 •
                               longa
                           Nocte.
                           Before great Agamemnon and the reſt,
                           Many liu'd valiant, yet are all ſuppreſt,
                           Vnmoan'd, vnknowne, in darke oblivions neſt.
                        
                        
                           Et ſupera bellum Troianum & funera Troiae,Lucret. l. 5. 326.
                           
                           Mul
                                 •
                              s alias alij quoque res cecinere poetae.
                           Beſide the Troian warre, Troyes funerall night,
                           Of other things did other Poets write.
                        
                        And Solons narration concerning what he had learned of the Aegiptian Prieſts, of their ſtates long-life, and manner how to learne and preſerue ſtrange or forraine hiſtories, in mine opinion is not a teſtimony to bee refuſed in this conſideration. Si interminatam in omnes partes
                           Cit. Nat. De
                                 •
                              . l. 1. 
                           magnitudinem regionum videremus, & temporum, in quam ſe inijciens animus & intendens, ita latè longeque peregrinatur, vt nullam oram vltimi videat, in qua poſſit inſiſtere: In haec immenfitate infinita, vis innumerabilium appareret formarum. If wee behold an vnlimited greatneſſe on all ſides both of religions and times, wherevpon the minde caſting it ſelfe and intentine doth trauell farre and neare, ſo as it ſees no bounds of what is laſt, whereon it may inſiſt; in this infinite immenfi
                                 •
                              te there would appeare a multitude of innumerable formes. If whatſoeuer hath come vnto vs by report of what is paſt were true, and knowne of any body, it would bee leſſe then nothing, in reſpect of that which is vnknowne. And even of this image of the world, which whileſt wee liue therein, glideth and paſſeth away, how wretched, how weake and how ſhort is the knowledge of the moſt curious? Not onely of the particular events, which fortune often maketh exemplar and of conſequence: but of the ſtate of mighty common wealths, large Monarkies and renowned nations, there eſcapeth our knowledge a hundred times more, then commeth vnto our notice. Wee keepe a coyle, and wonder at the miraculous inuention of our artilerie, and reſt amazed at the rare deuiſe of Printing: when as vnknowne to vs, other men, and an other end of the worlde named China, knew and had perfect vſe of both, a thouſand yeares before. If wee ſawe as much of this vaſte worlde, as wee ſee but a leaſt part of it, it is very likely wee ſhould perceiue a perpetuall multiplicity, and euer-rouling viciſſitude of formes. Therein is nothing ſingular, and nothing rare, if regard bee had vnto nature, or to ſay better, if relation bee had vnto our knowledge: which is a weake foundation of our rules, and which dooth commonly preſent vs a right-falſe Image of things. How vainely doe wee now-adaies conclude the declination and decrepitude of the worlde, by the fond arguments wee drawe from our owne weakeneſſe, drooping and declination:
                        
                           Iamque adeo affecta eſt 
                                 •
                              tas, affecta
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               tellus:Lucret. l. 2. 1159.
                           
                           And now both age and land
                           So ſicke affected ſtand.
                        
                        And as vainly did another conclude it's birth and youth, by the vigour he perceived in the wits of his time, abounding in novelties and invention of divers Arts:
                        
                           
                              Ʋerùm, vt opinor, habet novitatem, ſumma, recenſqueIbid. 5. 330.
                           
                           Natura eſt mundi, ne
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               pridem exordia cepit:
                           Quare etiam quaedam nunc artes expoliuntur,
                           
                              Nunc etiam augeſcunt, nunc addita navigijs ſunt
                           Multae.
                        
                        
                           But all this world is new, as I ſuppoſe,
                           Worlds nature freſh, nor lately it aroſe:
                           Whereby ſome arts refined are in faſhion,
                           And many things now to our navigation
                           Are added, daily growne to augmentation.
                        
                        Our world hath of late diſcovered another (and who can warrant vs whether it be the laſt of his brethren, ſince both the Daemons, the Sybilles, and all we have hitherto beene ignorant of this?) no leſſe large, fully-peopled, all-things-yeelding, and mighty in ſtrength, than ours: nevertheleſſe ſo new and infantine, that he is yet to learne his A. B. C. It is not yet full fifty yeeres that he knew neither letters, nor waight, nor meaſures, nor apparell, nor corne, nor vines. But was all naked, ſimply-pure, in Natures lappe, and lived but with ſuch meanes and food as his mother-nurce affoorded him. If wee conclude aright of our end, and the foreſaid Poet of the infancie of his age, this late-world ſhall but come to light, when ours ſhall fall into darkneſſe. The whole Vniverſe ſhall fall into a palſey or convulſion of ſinnowes: one member ſhall bee maimed or ſhrunken, another nimble and in good plight. I feare, that by our contagion, wee ſhall directly have furthered his declination, and haſtened his ruine; and that wee ſhall too dearely have ſold him our opinions, our new-fangles and our Arts. It was an vnpolluted, harmeleſſe infant world; yet have wee not whipped and ſubmitted the ſame vnto our diſcipline, or ſchooled him by the advantage of our valour or naturall forces; nor have wee inſtructed him by our juſtice and integritie; nor ſubdued by our magnanimitie. Moſt of their anſwers, and a number of the negotiations wee have had with them, witneſſe that they were nothing ſhort of vs, nor beholding to vs for any excellencie of naturall wit or perſpicuitie, concerning pertinencie. The woonderfull, or as I may call it, amazement-breeding magnificence of the never-like ſeene Cities of Cuſco and Mexico, and amongſt infinite ſuch like things, the admirable Garden of that King, where all the Trees, the Fruits, the Hearbes and Plants, according to the order and greatneſſe they have in a Garden, were moſt artificially framed in golde: as alſo in his Cabinet, all the living creatures that his Countrey or his Seas produced, were caſt in gold; and the exquiſite beautie of their workes, in precious Stones, in Feathers, in Cotton and in Painting; ſhew that they yeelded as little vnto vs in cunning and induſtrie. But concerning vnfained devotion, awefull obſervance of lawes, vnſpotted integritie, bounteous liberalitie, due loyaltie and free libertie, it hath greatly availed vs, that wee had not ſo much as they: By which advantage, they have loſt, caſt-away, ſold, vndone and betraied themſelves.
                        Touching hardineſſe and vndaunted courage, and as for matchleſſe conſtancie, vnmooved aſſuredneſſe, and vndiſmaied reſolution againſt paine, ſmarting, famine and death it ſelfe; I will not feare to oppoſe the examples which I may eaſily finde amongſt them, to the moſt famous ancient examples, wee may with all our induſtrie diſcover in all the Annalles and memories of our knowen old World. For, as for thoſe which have ſubdued them, let them lay aſide the wiles, the policies and ſtratagems, which they have emploied to cozen, to cunny-catch, and to circumvent them; and the iuſt aſtoniſhment which thoſe nations might iuſtly conceive, by ſeeing ſo vnexpected an arrivall of bearded men; divers in language, in habite, in religion, in behaviour, in forme, in countenance; and from a part of the world ſo diſtant, and where they never heard any habitation was: mounted vpon great and vnknowen monſters; againſt thoſe, who had never ſo much as ſeene any horſe, and leſſe any beaſt whatſoever apt to beare, or taught to carry either man or burden; covered with a ſhining and hard skinne, and armed with ſlicing-keene weapons and glittering armour: againſt them, who for the wonder of the gliſtring of a looking-glaſſe or of a plaine knife, would have changed or given ineſtimable riches in Gold, Precious Stones and Pearles; and who had neither the skill nor the matter

wherewith at any leaſure, they could haue pierced our ſteele: to which you may adde the flaſhing-fire and thundring roare ofſhotte and Harguebuſes; able to quell and daunt even Caeſar himſelfe, had hee beene ſo ſodainely ſurpriſed and as little experienced as they were: and thus to come vnto, and aſſault ſilly-naked people, ſauing where the inuention of weauing of Cotton cloath was knowne and vſed: for the moſt altogether vnarmed, except ſome bowes, ſtones, ſtaues and wodden bucklers: vnſuſpecting poore people, ſurpriſed vnder colour of amity and well-meaning faith, over-taken by the curioſity to ſee ſtrange and vnknowne things: I ſay, take this diſparity from the conquerors, and you depriue them of all the occaſions and cauſe of ſo many vnexpected victories. When I conſider that ſterne-vntamed obſtinacy, and vndanted vehemence, wherewith ſo many thouſandes of men, of women and children, doe ſo infinite times preſent themſelves vnto inevitable dangers, for the defence of their Gods and liberty: This generous obſtinacie to endure all extremities, all difficulties and death, more eaſily and willingly, then baſely to yeelde vnto their domination, of whome they haue ſo abhominably beene abvſed: ſome of them chooſing rather to ſtarue with hunger and faſting, being taken, then to accept foode at their enemies hands, ſo baſely victorious: I perceaue, that whoſoeuer had vndertaken them man to man, without ods of armes, of experience or of number, ſhould haue had as dangerous a warre, or perhaps more, as any we ſee amongſt vs.
                        Why did not ſo glorious a conqueſt happen vnder Alexander, or during the time of the ancient Greekes and Romanes? or why befell not ſo great a change and alteration of Empires and people, vnder ſuch handes as would gently haue poliſhed, reformed and incivilized, what in them they deemed to be barbarous and rude: or would haue nouriſhed and foſtered thoſe good ſeedes, which nature had there brought foorth: adding not onely to the manuring of their grounds and ornaments of their citties ſuch artes as wee had; and that no further then had beene neceſſary for them, but therewithall ioy ning vnto the originall vertues of the country, thoſe of the ancient Grecians and Romanes? What reputation and what reformation would all that farre-ſpredding worlde haue found, if the examples, demeanors and pollicies, wherewith wee firſt preſented them, had called and allured thoſe vncorrupted nations, to the admiration and imitation of vertue, and had eſtabliſhed betweene them and vs a brotherly ſociety and mutuall correſpondencie? How eaſie a matter had it beene, profitably to reforme, and chriſtianly to inſtruct, mindes yet ſo pure and new, ſo willing to bee taught, beeing for the moſt part endowed with ſo docile, ſo apt and ſo yeelding naturall beginnings? whereas contrarywiſe, wee have made vſe of their ignorance and inexperience, drawe them more eaſily vnto treaſon, fraude, luxurie, auarice and all manner of inhumanitie and cruelty, by the example of our life, and patterne of our cuſtomes. Who ever raiſed the ſeruice of marchandize and benefit of trafficke to ſo high a rate? So many goodly citties ranſacked and razed; ſo many nations deſtroyed and made deſolate; ſo infinite millions of harmeleſſe people of all ſexes, ſtates and ages, maſſacred, ravaged and put to the ſworde; and the richeſt, the fayreſt and the beſt part of the world topſituruied, ruined and defaced for the trafficke of Pearles and Pepper: Oh mecanicall victoryes, oh baſe conqueſt. Never did blinde ambition, never did greedy revenge, publike wrongs or generall enmities, ſo moodily enrage, and ſo paſſionately incenſe men againſt men, vnto ſo horrible hoſtilities, bloody diſſipation, and miſerable calamities.
                        Certaine Spaniardes coaſting alongſt the Sea in ſearch of mines, fortued to land in a very fertile, pleaſant and well peopled country: vnto the inhabitants whereof they declared their intent, and ſhewed their accuſtomed perſwaſions; ſaying: That they were quiet and well meaning-men, comming from farre-countries, being ſent from the King of Caſtile, the greateſt king of the habitable earth, vnto whom the Pope, repreſenting God on earth, had given the principalitie of all the Indies. That if they would become tributaries to him, they ſhould bee moſt kindly vſed aud courteouſly entreated: They required of them victualles for their nouriſhment; and ſome golde for the behoofe of certaine Phyſicall experiments. Moreover, they declared vnto them, the beleeuing in one

onely God, and the trueth of our religion, which they perſwaded them to embrace, adding thereto ſome minatorie threates. Whoſe anſwer was this: That happily they might be quiet and well-meaning, but their countenance ſhewed them to be otherwiſe: As concerning their King, ſince he ſeemed to begge, he ſhewed to be poore and needie: And for the Pope, who had made that diſtribution, he expreſſed himſelfe a man louing diſſention, in going about to give vnto a third man, a thing which was not his owne: ſo to make it queſtionable and litigious amongst the auncient poſſeſſors of it. As for victualles, they ſhould haue part of their ſtore: And for golde, they had but little, and that it was a thing they made very ſmall accoumpt of, as meerely vnprofitable for the ſeruice of their life, whereas all their care was but how to paſſe it happily and pleaſantly: and therefore, what quantity ſoever they ſhould finde, that onely excepted which was employed about the ſeruice of their Gods, they might bouldly take it. As touching one onely God, the diſcourſe of him had very well pleaſed them: but they would by no meanes change their religion, vnder which they had for ſo long time liued ſo happily: and that they were not accuſtomed to take any counſell, but of their friendes and acquaintance. As concerning their menaces, it was a ſigne of want of iudgement, to threaten thoſe, whoſe nature, condition, power and meanes was to them vnknowne. And therefore they ſhould with all ſpeed haſten to auoyd their dominions, forſomuch as they were wont to admit or take in good part the kindeneſſes and remonſtrances of armed people, namely of ſtrangers, otherwiſe they would deale with them, as they had done with ſuch others, ſhewing them the heads of certaine men ſticking vpon ſtakes about their Cittie, which had lately beene executed. Loe here an example of the ſtammering of this infancy.
                        But ſo it is, neither in this, nor in infinite other places, where the Spaniards found not the marchandiſe they ſought for, neither made ſtay or attempted any violence, whatſoeuer other commodity the place yeelded: witneſſe my Canibales. Of two the moſt mighty and glorious Monarkes of that world, and peraduenture of all our Weſterne partes, Kings ouer ſo many Kings: the laſt they depoſed and ouercame: He of Peru, hauing by them beene taken in a battell, and ſet at ſo exceſſiue a ranſome, that it exceedeth all beliefe, and that truely paide: and by his conuerſation hauing giuen them apparant ſignes of a free, liberall, vndanted and conſtant courage, and declared to be of a pure, noble, and well compoſed vnderſtanding; a humour poſſeſſed the conquerors, after they had moſt inſolently exacted from him a Million, three hundred fiue and twenty thouſand, and fiue hundred waights of golde; beſides the ſiluer and other precious things, which amounted to no leſſe a ſumme (ſo that their horſes were all ſhood of maſſive golde) to diſcouer what diſloyalty or treachery ſoever it might coſt them) what the remainder of this kings treaſure might be, and without controlment enioy what euer he might haue hidden or concealed from them. Which to compaſſe, they forged a falſe accuſation and proofe againſt him; That he practiſed to raiſe his prouinces, and intended to induce his ſubiects to ſome inſurrection, ſo to procure his liberty. Whereupon, by the very iudgement of thoſe who had complotted this forgery and treaſon againſt him, hee was condemned to be publikely hanged and ſtrangled: hauing firſt made him to redeeme the torment of being burned aliue, by the baptiſme which at the inſtant of his execution in charity they beſtowed vpon him. A horrible and the like neuer heard of accident: which nevertheleſſe he vndiſmayedly endured with an vnmooued manner, and truly-royall grauity, without euer contradicting himſelfe eyther in countenance or ſpeech. And then, ſomewhat to mittigate and circumvent thoſe ſilly vnſuſpecting people amazed and aſtoniſhed at ſo ſtrange a ſpectacle, they counterfetted a great mourning and lamentation for his death and appointed his funeralls to be ſolemnly and ſumptuouſly celebrated.
                        The other King of Mexico, having a long time manfully defended his beſieged Citie, and in that tedious ſiege, ſhewed what ever pinching-ſufferance and reſolute-perſeverance can effect, if ever any courageous Prince or warre-like people ſhewed the ſame; and his diſaſtrous ſucceſſe having delivered him alive into his enemies hands, vpon conditions to bee vſed as beſeemed a King: who during the time of his impriſoment, did neuer make the leaſt ſhew of any thing vnworthy that glorious title. After which victory, the Spaniards not finding that quantitie of gold, they had promiſed themſelves, when they had ranſacked and ranged all corners, they by meanes of the crue
                              •
                           leſt tortures and horribleſt torments they could poſſibly deuiſe, beganne to wreſt and draw ſome more from ſuch priſoners as they had in keeping. But vnable to profit any thing that waye, finding ſtronger hearts then their torments, they in the end fell to ſuch moody

outrages, that contrary to all law of nations, and againſt their ſolemne vowes and promiſes, they condemned the King himſelfe and one of the chiefeſt Princes of his Court, to the Racke, one in preſence of another: The Prince, environed round with hot burning coales, being ouercome with the exceeding torment, at laſt in moſt pittious ſort turning his dreary eyes toward his Maſter, as if hee asked mercy of him for that hee could endure no longer▪ The king fixing rigorouſly and fiercely his lookes vpon him, ſeeming to vpbraide him with his remiſneſſe and puſilanimity, with a ſterne and ſetled voyce vttered theſe few wordes vnto him; What? ſuppoſeſt thou I am in a colde bath? am I at more eaſe then thou art? Where at the ſilly wretch immediately fainted vnder the torture, and yeelded vp the ghoſt. The king halfe roſted, was carryed away: Not ſo much for pitty (for what ruth could euer enter ſo barbarous mindes, who vpon the ſurmiſed information of ſome odde peece or veſſell of golde, they intended to get, would broyle a man before their eyes, and not a man onely, but a king, ſo great in fortune and ſo renouned in deſert?) but forſomuch as his vnmatched conſtancie did more and more make their inhumane cruelty aſhamed: They afterward hanged him, becauſe he had couragiouſly attempted by armes to deliuer himſelfe out of ſo long captiuity and miſerable ſubiection; where he end ed his wretched life, worthy an high minded and neuer danted Prince. At another time, in one ſame fire, they cauſed to be burned all aliue foure hundred common men, and three ſcore principall Lordes of a prouince, whom by the fortune of warre they had taken priſoners. Theſe narrations we have out of their owne bookes: for they doe not onely auouche, but vauntingly publiſh them. May it be, they doe it for a teſtimony of their iuſtice or zeale toward their religion? verily they are wayes ouerdifferent and enemies to ſo ſacred an ende. Had they propoſed vnto themſelues to enlarge and propagate our religion, they would haue conſidered, that it is not amplified by poſſeſſion of landes, but of men: and would have beene ſatisfied with ſuch ſlaughters, as the neceſſity of warre bringeth, without indifferently adding therevnto ſo bloody a butchery, as vpon ſavage beaſtes; and ſo vniverſall as fire or ſword could ever attaine vnto; having purpoſely preſerued no more then ſo many miſerable bond ſlaues, as they deemed might ſuffice for the digging, working and ſeruice of their mines: So that diuers of their chieftaines have beene executed to death, even in the places they had conquered, by the appointment of the Kings of Castile, iuſtly offended at the ſeld-ſeene horror of their barbarous demeanours, and well nigh all diſeſteemed, contemned and hated. God hath meritoriouſly permitted, that many of their great pillages, and ill gotten goods, have eyther beene ſwallowed vp by the revenging Seas in tranſporting them, or conſumed by the inteſtine warres and ciuill broyles, wherewith themſelues have devoured one another; and the greateſt part of them have beene ouer-whelmed and buryed in the bowels of the earth, in the very places they found them, without any fruite of their victory. Touching the obiection which ſome make, that the receipte, namely in the handes of ſo thrifty, wary and wiſe a Prince, doth ſo little anſwer the fore-conceaved hope, which was given vnto his predeceſſors and the ſaid former aboundance of riches, they mette withall at the firſt diſcovery of this new-found world, (for although they bring home great quantitye of gold and ſiluer, we perceiue the ſame to be nothing, in reſpect of what might bee expected thence) it may bee anſwered, that the vſe of mony was there altogether vnknowne; and conſequently, that all their golde was gathered together, ſeruing to no other purpoſe, then for ſhew, ſtate and ornament, as a mooveable reſerued from father to ſonne by many puiſſant Kings, who exhauſted all their mines; to collect ſo huge a heape of veſſels and ſtatues for the ornament of their Temples, and embelliſhing of their Pallaces: whereas all our golde employed in commerce and trafficke betweene man and man. Wee mince and alter it into a thouſand formes: wee ſpend, wee ſcatter and diſperce the ſame to ſeverall vſes. Suppoſe our Kings ſhould thus gather and heape vp all the golde they might for many ages hoarde vp together, and keepe it cloſe and vntouch't. Thoſe of the kingdome of Mexico were ſomewhat more encivilized, and better artiſtes, then other nations of that worlde. And as wee doe, ſo judged they, that this Vniuers was neare his end: and tooke the deſolation wee brought amongſt them as an infallible ſigne of it. They beleeued the ſtate of the worlde, to bee divided into fiue ages, and in the life of fiue ſucceeding Sunnes, whereof foure had already ended their courſe or time; and the ſame which now ſhined vpon them, was the fifth and laſt. The firſt periſhed together with all other creatures, by an vniverſall inundation of waters. The

ſecond by the fall of the heavens vpon vs which ſtifled and ouerwhelmed euery living thing: in which age they affirme the Giants to haue beene, and ſhewed the Spaniards certaine bones of them, according to whoſe proportion the ſtature of men came to bee of the height of twenty handfuls. The third, was conſumed by a violent fire, which burned and deſtroyed all. The fourth by a whirling emotion of the ayre and windes, which with the violent fury of it ſelfe, remooued and ouerthrew diuers high mountaines: ſaying, that men dyed not of it, but were tranſformed into Munkeis. (Oh what impreſſions doth not the weakeneſſe of mans beliefe admit?) After the conſummation of this fourth Sunne, the world continued fiue and twenty yeares in perpetuall darkeneſſe: in the fifteenth of which one man and one woman were created, who renewed the race of man-kinde. Ten yeares after, vpon a certaine day, the Sunne appeared as newly created: from which day beginneth euer ſince the calculation of their yeares. On the third day of whoſe creation, died their ancient Gods, their new ones haue day by day beene borne ſince. In what manner this laſt Sunne ſhall periſh, my aucthor could not learne of them. But their number of this fourth change, doth iumpe and meete with that great coniunction of the Starres, which eight hundred and odde yeares ſince, according to the Aſtrologians ſuppoſition, produced diuers great alterations and ſtrange novelties in the world. Concerning the proud pompe and glorious magnificence, by occaſion of which I am fallen into this diſcourſe, nor Greece, nor Rome, nor Aegipt, can (bee it in profit, or difficultie or nobility) equall or compare ſundrie and diuers of their workes. The cawcy or high-way which is yet to bee ſeene in Peru, errected by the Kings of that countrie, ſtretching from the citty of Quito, vnto that of Cuſco (containing three hundred leagues in length) ſtraight, euen, and fine, and twentie paces in breadth, curiouſly paved, rayſed on both ſides with goodly, high maſonrie-walles, all along which, on the inner ſide there are two continuall running ſtreames, pleaſantly beſet with beautious trees, which they call Moly. In framing of which, where they mette any mountaines or rockes, they haue cut, raiſed and leuelled them, and filled all hollow places with lime and ſtone. At the ende of euery dayes journey, as ſtations, there are built ſtately great pallaces, plentiouſly ſtored with all manner of good victuals, apparrell and armes, as well for daylie way-fairing men, as for ſuch armies that might happen to paſſe that way. In the eſtimation of which worke I haue eſpecially conſidered the difficulty, which in that place is particvlarly to bee remembred. For they built with no ſtones that were leſſe then ten foote ſquare: They had no other meanes to cary or tranſport them, then by meere ſtrength of armes to draw and dragge the carriage they needed: they had not ſo much as the arte to make ſcaffolds; nor knew other deuiſe, then to raiſe ſo much earth or rubiſh, againſt their building, according as the worke riſeth, and afterwarde to take it a way againe. But returne we to our coaches. In ſteade of them, and of all other carrying beaſtes they cauſed themſelues to be carryed by men, and vpon their ſhoulders. This laſt King of Peru, the ſame day hee was taken, was thus carried vpon rafters or beames of maſſiue Golde, ſitting in a faire chaire of ſtate, likewiſe all of golde, in the middle of his battaile. Looke how may of his porters as were ſlaine, to make him fall (for all their endeuour was to take him aliue) ſo many others, and as it were auye, tooke and vnder-went preſently the place of the dead: ſo that he could never be brought down or made to fall, what ſlaughter ſo ever was made of thoſe kinde of people, vntill ſuch time as a horſeman furiouſly ranne to take him by ſome parte of his body, and ſo pulled him to the ground.
                     
                     
                        The ſeuenth Chapter.
                        
                           Of the incommoditie of greatneſſe.
                        
                        SInce we cannot attaine vnto it, let vs revenge our ſelues with railing againſt it: yet is is not abſolute railing, to finde faulte with any thing: There are defects found in all
                           
                           things, how faire ſoever in ſhow, and deſirable they be. It hath generally this evident aduantage, that when ever it pleaſeth it will decline, and hath well-nigh the choiſe of one and other condition. For a man doth not fall from all heights; divers there are, whence a man may deſcend without falling. Verily, mee ſeemeth, that we value it at too high a rate: and prize over-deare the reſolution of thoſe, whom we have either ſeene or heard, to have contemned, or of their owne motion rejected the ſame. Hir eſſence is not ſo evidently commodious, but a man may refuſe it without wonder. Indeed I finde the labour very hard in ſuffering of evils; but in the contentment of a meane meaſure of fortune, and ſhunning of greatneſſe, therein I ſee no great difficulty. In my conceit, it is a vertue, wherevnto my ſelfe, who am but a ſimple n
                              •
                           nny, might eaſily attaine, and without great contention. What ſhall they doe, who would alſo bring into conſideration, the glory, which accompanieth this refuſall, wherein may fall more ambition, then even in the deſire and abſolute enioying of greatneſſe? For ſomuch as ambition is never better directed according to it ſelfe, then by a ſtraying and vnfrequented path. I ſharpen my courage toward patience, and weaken the ſame againſt deſire. I have as much to wiſh for as another, and leave my wiſhes as much liberty and indiſcretion: but yet, it never came into my minde, to wiſh for Empire, for royalty or eminency of high and commanding fortunes. I aime not that way: I love my ſelfe too well. When I thinke to grow, it is but meanely; with a forced and coward aduancement; fit for me: yea in reſolution, in wiſedome, in health, in beauty and alſo in riches. But this credite, this aſpiring reputation, this overſwaying authority, ſuppreſſeth my imagination. And cleane oppoſite to ſome other, I ſhould peradventure loue my ſelfe better, to be the ſecond or third man in Perigot, then the firſt in Paris: At leaſt, without faining, I had rather be the third man in Paris, then the firſt in charge. I will neither contend with an Vſher of a doore, as a ſilly vnknowen man; nor with gaping and adoration make a Lane through the throng as I paſſe. I am enured to a meane calling; mediocrity beſt fitteth me, as well by my fortune, as by mine owne humor. And have ſhewed by the conduct of my life and courſe of my enterpriſes, that I have rather ſought to avoid, then otherwiſe to embrace beyond the degree of fortune that at my birth it pleaſed God to call me vnto. Each naturall conſtitution, is equally iuſt and eaſie. My minde is ſo dull and ſlowe, that I meaſure not good fortune according to her height, but rather according to her facility. And if my hart be not great enough, it is ratably free and open, and who biddeth me, bouldly to publiſh my weakneſſe. Should any will me, on the one part, to conferre and conſider the life of L. Thorius Balbus, a worthy gallant man, wiſe, faire, goodly, healthie, of good vnderſtanding, richly-plentious in all maner of commodities and pleaſures, leading a quiet eaſefull life, altogether his owne, with a minde armed, and well prepared againſt death, ſuperſtition, griefes, cares and other encombrances of humane neceſſity; dying in his olde age, in an honourable battell, with his weapons in his hand, for the defence of his country; and on the other ſide the life of M. Rugulus, ſo high and great, as all men know, together with his admirable and glorious ende: the one vnmentioned and without dignity, the other exemplare and wonderfull renouned: truely I would ſay what Cicero ſaith of it, had I the gift of well-ſpeaking as hee had. But if I were to ſute them vnto mine, I would alſo ſay, that the former is aſmuch agreeing to my quality, and to the deſire I endeuour to conforme my quality vnto, as the ſecond is farre beyond it. That to this I cannot attaine but by veneration; and to the other I would willingly attaine by cuſtome. But returne we to our temporall greatneſſe, whence we have digreſſed. I am diſtaſted of all maſtry, both actiue and paſſiue. Otanes one of the ſeaven that by right might chalenge the crowne, or pretend the kingdome of Perſia, reſolved vpon ſuch a reſolution as I ſhould eaſily have done the like: which was, that he vtterly renounced all maner of claime he might in any ſort pretend vnto that crowne, to his fellow competitores, were it either by election or chance: alwaies provided that both himſelfe and all his, might liue in that Empire, free from all ſubjections, and exempted from all maner of commandement, except that of the ancient lawes: and might both chalenge all liberty, and enioy all immunities, that ſhould not preiudice them: being as impacient to command, as to becommanded. The ſharpeſt and most aificile profeſſion of the world, is (in mine opinion) worthily to act and play the King. I excuſe more of their faults, then commonly other men doe: and that in conſideration of the downe-bearing waight of their immenſe charge, which much aſtoniſheth me: It is a very hard task to keep a aue meaſure, in ſo vnmeaſurable a power. Yet is it, that euen with thoſe, that are of a leſſe excellent

nature, it is a ſingular incitation to vertue, to be ſeated in ſuch a place, where you ſhall doe no manner of good, that is not regiſtred and recorded: And where the leaſt well-dooing, extendeth to ſo many perſons: And where your ſufficiencie (as that of Preachers) is principally directed to the people; a weake and parciall iudge, eaſilie to be beguiled, and eaſie to bee pleaſed There are but few things, of which we may giue a ſincere iudgement: for there bee very few, wherein in ſome ſort or other, we are not particularly intereſſed. Superioritie and inferioritie, maiſtrie and ſubiection, are joyntly tied vnto a naturall kinde of enuie and conteſtation; they muſt perpetually enter-ſpoile one another. I beleeue neither the one nor the other, concerning hir companions rights: let vs ſuffer reaſon to ſpeake of it, which is inflexible and impaſſible, when or how wee ſhall make an end. I was not long ſince reading of two Scottiſh bookes ſtriuing vpon this ſubiect. The popular makes the King to bee of worſe condition then a Carter: and hee that extolleth Monarchie, placeth him both in power and ſoueraignty, many ſteps aboue the Gods. Now the incommoditie of greatneſſe, which heere I have vndertaken to note and ſpeake of, (vpon ſome occaſion lately befalne mee) is this. There is peraduenture nothing more pleaſing to the commerce of men, then the Eſſayes, which wee through iealouſie of honour or valour, make one againſt another, bee it in the exerciſe of the body or of the minde: wherein ſoueraigne greatneſſe, hath no true or eſſentiall part. Verily, it hath often ſeemed vnto mee, that through over much reſpect, Princes are therein vſed diſdainefully and treated iniuriouſhe: For, the thing whereat (in my youth) I was infinitely offended, was, that thoſe which were trained and ſchooled with mee, ſhould for beare to doe it in good earneſt, becauſe they found mee vnworthy to bee withſtood or to reſiſt their endeuours. It is that wee dayly ſee to happen vnto them; euery man finding himſelfe vnworthy to force himſelfe againſt them. If one perceive them never ſo little affected to have the victorie, there is none but will ſtriue to yeelde it them, and that will not rather wrong his glory, then offend theirs: No man imployeth more diligence then needes hee muſt to ſerue their honour. What ſhare haue Princes in the throng, where all are for them? Mee thinkes I ſee thoſe Paladines of former ages, preſenting themſelues in iouſtes, tiltings and combates, with bodies and armes enchanted. Briſſon running againſt Alexander, counterfetted his courſe: Alexander chid him for it: but hee ſhould haue cauſed him to bee whipt. For this conſideration, was Carneades wont to ſay, that Prince children learn't nothing aright but to mannage and ride horſes; for ſomuch as in all other exerciſes, euery manyeeldeth, and giueth them the victory: but a horſe who is neither a flatterer nor a Courtier, will as ſoone throw the childe of a king as the ſonne of a baſe porter. Homer hath beene forced to conſent that Venus (ſo ſweete a ſaint and delicate a Goddeſſe) ſhould be hurt at the ſiege of Troy, thereby to aſcribe courage and hardineſſe vnto her qualities neuer ſeene in thoſe that are exempted from danger. The Gods themſelues are fained to bee angry, to feare, to bee jealous, to greeue, to ſhew paſſion, and bee ſubiect to mortall ſence, thereby to honour them with the vertues which Poets deuiſe and Philoſophers inuent amongſt vs: Nay, they are ſuppoſed to runne away▪ and to haue a feeling of all our imperfections. Who doth not participate both hazard and difficulties, cannot iuſtly pretend intereſt in the honour, or challenge ſhare in the pleaſure, that followeth dangerous actions or hazardous attemps. It is pitty a man ſhould bee ſo powerfull, that all things muſt yeeld and giue place vnto him. Such as are in ſo high eminencie of greatneſſe, their fortune reiects ſociety and conuerſation too farre from them; ſhee placeth them in over remote and vncouth places. This eaſefull life and plauſible facilitie to bring all vnder, and ſubiect mens mindes, is an enemy to all manner of pleaſure. It is a kinde of ſliding▪ and not a going▪ It is to ſleepe, and not to liue. Conceaue man accompanied with omnipotencie, you ouerwhelme him: hee muſt in begging manner craue ſome empeachment and reſiſtance of you. His beeing and his good, is in want and indigence. Their good qualities are dead and loſt: for, they are not heard but by compariſon, and they are excluded: they haue little knowledge of true praiſe, beeing beaten with ſo continuall and vniforme an approbation. Have they to doe with the ſimpleſt of their ſubiects? thy haue no meane to take aduantage of him, if hee but ſay; It is becauſe hee is my King, hee ſuppoſeth to haue ſufficiently expreſſed, and you muſt vnderſtand, that in ſo ſaying, hee hath lent a helping hand to ouerthrow himſelfe. This qualitie ſuppreſſeth and conſumeth all other true and eſſentiall qualities: they are euen drowned in the Royaltie; which gives them no leave, to make the offices of their charge to preuaile, except in ſuch actions as directly concerne and ſtead the ſame. To be a King, is a matter of that conſequence,
                           
                           that onely by it he is ſo. That ſtrange glimmering and eye-dazeling light, which round about enuironeth, overcaſteth and hideth him from vs: our weake ſight is thereby bleared and diſſipated, as being filled and obſcured by that greater and further-ſpredding brightnes. The Senate allotted the honor and priſe of eloquence vnto Tiberius; he refuſed it, ſuppoſing that if it had beene true, he could not revenge himſelfe of ſo limited and partiall iudgement. As we yeeld Princes all aduantages of honor, ſo we aucthorize their defects and ſooth-vp their vices: not onely by approbation, but alſo by imitation. All Alexanders followers bare their heads ſideling, as he did. And ſuch as flattered Dionyſius, in his owne preſence did run and iuſtle one another, and either ſtumbled at, or over-threw what euer ſtood before their feete, to inferre; that they were as ſhort-ſighted or ſpur-blinde, as hee was. Naturall imperfections haue ſometimes ſerued for commendation and fauour. Nay I haue ſeene deafneſle affected. And becauſe the maiſter hated his wife, Plutarch hath ſeen courtiers to ſue a diuorce of theirs, whom they loued very well. And which is more paillardiſe and all maner of diſſolution hath thereby beene held in credit; as alſo diſloyaltie, blaſphemy, cruelty, hereſie, ſuperſtition, irreligion, wantonneſſe and worſe, if worſe may be. Yea by an example more dangerous, then that of Mithridates his flatterers, who forſomuch as their maiſter pretended to haue skill in phiſicke, and aſpired to the honour of a good Phyſition, came to him to haue their members incized and cauterized. For, theſe others ſuffer to haue their ſoules cauterized; a much more precious and nobler part then the body. But to end where I began: Adrian the Emperor debating with Fauorinus the Philoſopher about the interpretation of ſome word; Fauorinus did ſoone yeeld the victory vnto him, his friends finding fault with him for it; you but jeſt, my maiſters (quoth hee) would you not haue him to bee much wiſer then I, who hath the abſolute command ouer thirty legions? Auguſtus writ ſome verſes againſt Aſinius Pollio, which Pollio hearing, he ſaid, I will hould my peace; for, it is no wiſedome to contend in writing with him, who may proſcribe. And they had reaſon: For, Dionyſius, becauſe he could not equall Philoxenus in Poeſie, nor match Plato in diſcourſe, condemned the one to the ſtone-quaries, and ſent the other to be ſould as a ſlave in the Ile of Aegina.
                        
                     
                     
                        The eight Chapter.
                        
                           Of the Arte of conferring.
                        
                        IT is a cuſtome of our law, to condemne ſome, for the warning of others. To condemne them becauſe they haue miſdone, were folly, as ſaith Plato. For what is once done can neuer be vndone: but they are condemned to the end that they ſhould not offend againe, or that others may avoide the example of their offence. Hee who is hanged is not corrected, but others by him. Even ſo doe I. My errors are ſometimes naturall, incorrigible and remedileſſe. But whereas honeſt men profit the Common-wealth in cauſing themſelues to be imitated. I ſhall happily benefit the ſame, in making my ſelfe to be evitated.
                        
                           Nonne vides Albivt malè viuat filius, utqueHor Ser. l. 1. Sect. 4. 109.
                           
                           Barrus inops? magnum documentum, ne patriam rem
                           Perdere quis velit.
                        
                        
                           Doe you not ſee, how that mans ſonne lives badly,
                           That man's a begger by his ſpending madly?
                           A leſſon great, that none take ioy: His patrimonie to deſtroy.
                        
                        By publiſhing and accuſing my imperfections, ſome man may peraduenture learne to feare them. The partes I moſt eſteeme in my ſelfe, reape more honour by accuſing, then by commending my ſelfe. And that's the cauſe I more often fall into them againe, and reſt vpon them. But when all the cardes bee told, a man neuer ſpeakes of himſelfe, without loſſe. A mans own
                           
                           condemnations are ever increaſed: praiſes ever decreaſed. There may be ſome of my complexion, who am better inſtructed by contrariety then by ſimilitude; and more by eſcaping then by following. Cato ſenior had a ſpeciall regard to this kind of diſcipline, when he ſaid, that wiſemen have more to learne of fooles, then fooles of wiſemen. And that ancient player on the Lyra, whom Pauſantas reporteth, to haue beene accuſtomed to compell his ſchollers ſometimes to goe heare a bad Player, who dwelt right over-againſt him; where they might learne to hate his diſcordes and falſe meaſures. The horror of cruelty drawes me neerer vnto clemency, then any patterne of clemencie can poſſibly win mee. A cunning rider or skilfull horſeman doth not ſo properly teach mee, to ſit well on horſe-backe, as doth one of our Lawyers, or a Venetian by ſeeing him ride. And an ill manner of ſpeech doth better reforme mine, then any well-poliſhed forme of ſpeaking. The ſottiſh countenance of another, doth dayly advertiſe and forewarne me. That which pricketh, toucheth and rouzeth better, then that which delighteth. Theſe times are fit to reforme vs backward, more by diſſenting, then by conſenting; more by difference then by accord. Being but little inſtructed by good examples, I make vſe of bad: the leſſon of which is ordinary. I haue endeuoured, nay I have laboured to yeeld my ſelfe as pleaſing and affable, as I ſaw others peeviſh and froward: as conſtant, as I ſaw others variable; as gentle and milde, as I perceived others intractable and wild: and as good and honeſt, as I diſcerned others wicked and diſhoneſt. But I propoſed certaine invincible meaſures vnto my ſelfe. The moſt fruitful and natural exerciſe of our ſpirit, is, in my ſelfe-plea
                              •
                           ing conceit, conference. The vſe whereof, I finde to bee more delightſome, then any other action of our life: And that's the reaſon, why, if I were now forced to chooſe, (being in the minde I now am in) I would rather yeeld to looſe my ſight, then fogoe my hearing or my ſpeech. The Athenians and alſo the Romans, did ever hold this exerciſe in high honor and reputation, namely in their Academies. And at this day, the Italians doe yet keepe a kinde of forme and trace of it, to their great profit, as may apparantly bee diſcerned by comparing their wits vnto ours. The ſtudy and plodding on bookes, is a languiſhing and weake kinde of motion, and which heateth or earneſteth nothing; whereas conference doth both learne, teach and exerciſe at once. If I confer
                              •
                           e with a ſtubborne wit, and encounter a ſturdy wreſtler, he toucheth me to the quicke, hits me on the flanks, and pricks me both on the left and right ſide: his imaginations vanquiſh and confound mine. Ielouſie, glory and contention, driue, caſt and raiſe me aboue my ſelfe. And an vniſon or conſent, is a qualitie altogether tedious and weariſome in conference. But as our minde is fortified by the communication of regular and vigorous ſpirits; it cannot well be expreſſed, how much it looſeth and is baſtardized, by the continuall commerce and frequentation, we have with baſe, weake and dull ſpirits. No contagion ſpreds it ſelfe further then that. I know by long experience what an ell of it is worth. I love to conteſt and diſcourſe, but not with many, and only for my ſelfe. For, to ſerue as a ſpectacle vnto great men, and by way of contention▪ for one to make a glorious ſhew of his ready wit and running tongue; I deeme it a profeſſion farre vnfitting a man of honor. Sottiſhnes is an ill quality, but not to be able to endure it, and to fret and vex at it, as it hapneth to me, is another kinde of imperfection, which in opportunity is not much behinde ſottiſhnes: and that's it I will now accuſe in my ſelfe: I doe with great liberty and facilitie, enter into conference and diſputation: forſomuch as opinion findes but a hard ſoile to enter and take any deepe roote in me. No propoſitions amaze me, no conceit woundeth me, what contrarietie ſoever they have to mine. There is no fantazie ſo frivolous or humour ſo extravagant, that in mine opinion is not ſortable to the production, of humane wit. We others, who debarre our judgement of the right to make concluſions, regard but negligently the diuerſe opinions: and if wee lend it not our judgement, wee eaſily affoord it our eares. Where one ſcale of the ballance is altogether empty. I let the other waver too and fro, vnder an old wiues dreames. And me ſeemeth, I may well be excuſed, if I rather accept an odde number, then an even: Thurſday in reſpect of Friday, if I had rather make a twelfth or fourteenth at a table, then a thirteenth: if when I am trauelling I would rather ſee a Hare coaſting, then croſſing my way: and rather reach my left, then my right foote, to be ſhod. All ſuch fond conceits, now in credit about vs, deſerue at feaſt to be liſtned vnto. As for me, they only beare away inanity, and ſurely they do ſo. Vulgar and caſuall opinions are yet of ſome waight, which in nature are ſomthing els then nothing. And who wadeth not ſo far into them, to auoide the vice of ſuperſtition, falleth happily into the blame of wilfulneſſe. The contradictions then of judgements,

doe neither offend nor moove, but awaken and exerciſe me. Wee commonly ſhunne correction whereas we ſhould rather ſeeke and preſent our ſelves vnto it, chiefly when it commeth by the way of conference, and not of regency. At every oppoſition, wee conſider not whether it be iuſt; but be it right or wrong, how we may avoide it: In ſteede of reaching our armes, we ſtretch forth our clawes vnto it. I ſhould endure to be rudely handled and checked by my friends, though they ſhould call me foole, coxcombe or ſay I raved. I love a man that doth ſtoutly expreſſe himſelfe, amongſt honeſt and worthy men and whoſe wordes anſwer his thoughts. We ſhould fortifie and harden our hearing, againſt the tenderneſſe of the cerimonious ſound of wordes. I love a friendly ſociety and a virile and conſtant familiarity: An amitie, which in the earneſtneſſe and vigor of it's commerce, flattereth it ſelfe: as love in bitings and bloody ſcratchings. It is not ſufficiently generous or vigorous, except it bee contentious and quarelous: If ſhe be civiliſed and a skilfull artiſte: if it feare a ſhocke or free encounter, and have hir ſtarting hoales or forced by-wayes. Neque enim diſputari ſine repreherſione poteſt. Diſputation cannot be held without reprehenſion. When I am impugned or contraried, then is mine attention and not mine anger, ſtirred vp; I advance my ſelfe toward him, that doth gaineſay and inſtruct me. The cauſe of truth, ought to be the common cauſe, both to one and other: What can he anſwer? The paſſion of choller hath already wounded his iudgement: trouble, before reaſon hath ſeazed vpon it. It were both profitable and neceſſary, that the determining of our diſputations, might be decided by way of wagers; and that there were a materiall marke of our loſſes: that we might better remember and make more accoumpt of it: and that my boy might ſay vnto me: Sir, if you call to minde; your conteſtation, your ignorance and your ſelfe-wilfulneſſe, at ſeverall times, coſt you a hundred crownes the laſt yeare: I feaſt, I cherriſh and I embrace truth, where and in whom ſoever I finde it, and willingly and merily yeeld my ſelfe vnto hir; as ſoone as I ſee but hir approach, though it bee a farre-off, I lay downe my weapons and yeeld my ſelfe vanquiſhed. And alwayes provided, one perſiſt not or proceede therein, with an over imperious ſtiffneſſe or commanding ſurlineſſe; I am well pleaſed to be reprooved. And I often accomodate my ſelfe vnto my accuſers, more by reaſon of civilitie, then by occaſion of amendment: loving by the facilitie of yeelding, to gratifie and foſter their liberty, to teach or advertiſe mee. It is notwithſtanding no eaſie matter to draw men of my times vnto it. They have not the courage to correct, becauſe they want the hart to endure correction: And ever ſpeake with diſſimulation in preſence one of another. I take ſo great a pleaſure to bee judged and knowne, that it is indifferent to me, in whether of the two formes I be ſo. Mine owne imagination doth ſo often contradict and condemne it ſelfe, that if another doe it, all is one vnto me; eſpecially ſeeing, I give his reprehenſion no other aucthoritie then I liſt. But I ſhall breake a ſtraw or fall at ods with him, that keepes himſelfe ſo aloſt; as I know ſome, that will fret and chafe if their opinions be not believed, and who take it as an iniury, yea and fall out with their beſt friends, if they will not follow it. And that Socrates ever ſmiling, made a collection of ſuch contradictions as were oppoſed to his diſcourſe, one might ſay, his force was cauſe of it; and that the advantage being aſſuredly to fall on his ſide, he tooke them as a ſubject of a new victory. Nevertheleſſe we ſee on the contrary, that nothing doth ſo nicely yeeld our ſence vnto it as the opinion of preheminence and diſdaine of the adverſary. And that by reaſon, it rather befits the weakeſt to accept of oppoſitions in good part, which reſtore and repaire him. Verily I ſeeke more the converſation of ſuch as curbe me, then of thoſe that feare me. It is an vnſavory and hurtfull pleaſure, to have to doe with men, who admire and give vs place. Antiſthenes commanded his children, never to bee boholding vnto, or thanke any that ſhould command them. I feele my ſelfe more luſtie and cranke for the victory I gaine over my ſelfe, when in the heate or fury of the combate, I perceive to bend and fall vnder the power of my adverſaries reaſon, then I am pleaſed with the victory, I obtaine of him by his weakeneſſe. To conclude, I receave all blowes and allow all attaints given directly, how weake ſoever: but am very impacient at ſuch as are ſtrucken at randan and without order, I care but little for the matter, and with me opinions are all one, and the victory of the ſubject in a manner in different. I ſhall quietly conteſt a whole day, if the conduct of the controveſie be followed with order and decorum. It is not force nor ſubtiltie, that I ſo much require, as forme and order. The forme and order, dayly ſeene in the altercations of Shepheards, or contentions

of ſhop-prentiſe-boyes; but never amongſt vs; If they part or give one another over, it is with incivility: and ſo doe we. But their wrangling, their brawling and impacience, cannot make them to forgoe or forget their theame.
                        Their diſcourſe holdes on his courſe. If they prevent one another, if they ſtay not for, at leaſt they vnderſtand one another. A man doth ever anſwere ſufficiently well for mee, if hee anſwere what I ſay. But when the diſputation is confounded and orderleſſe, I quit the matter, and betake me to the forme, with ſpight and indiſcretion: and embrace a kinde of debating, teaſty, headlong, malicious and imperious, whereat I afterward bluſh. It is impoſſible to treate quietly and diſpute orderly with a foole. My judgement is not onely corrupted vnder the hand of ſo imperious a maiſter, but my conſcience alſo. Our diſputations ought to be forbidden and puniſhed, as other verball crimes. What vice raiſe they not, and heape vp together, beeing ever ſwayed and commaunded by choller? Firſt wee enter into enmity with the reaſons, and then with the men. Wee learne not to diſpute, except it be to contradict: and every man contradicting and being contradicted, it commonly followeth, that the fruit of diſputing, is to looſe and to diſanull the trueth. So Plato in his common wealth, forbiddeth fooliſh, vnapt and baſe-minded ſpirits, to vndertake that exerciſe. To what purpoſe goe you about to queſt or enquire that which is with him, who hath neither good pace nor proceeding of woorth? No man wrongs the ſubject, when he quits the ſame, for want of meanes to treat or mannage it. I meane not a ſcholaſticall and artiſt meane, but intend a naturall meane, and of a ſound vnderſtanding. What will the end bee? one goeth Eaſtward, and another Weſtward: They looſe the principall, and ſtray it in the throng of incidents. At the end of an houres wrangling, they wot not what they ſeeke for: one is high, another low, and another wide. Some take holde of a word, ſome of a ſimilitude. Some forget what was obiected againſt them, ſo much are they engaged in the purſuite and thinke to follow themſelues, and not you. Some finding themſelues weake-backt, feare all, refuſe all, and at the very entrance mingle the ſubiect and confound the purpoſe: or in the heate of the diſputation, mutine to holde their peace altogether: through a ſpightfull ignorance, affecting a proud kinde of contempt, or a fooliſh modeſty auoydiug of contention. Prouided that one ſtrike and hit, hee careth not how open hee lie. Another compteth his wordes, and wayeth them for reaſons; Another employeth no thing but the aduantage of his voyce and winde. Here one concludeth againſt himſelfe; here another wearieth you with idle prefaces, and friuolous digreſſions. Another armeth himſelfe afore hand with iniuries, and ſeekes after a Dutch quarrell, to rid himſelfe of the ſociety, and ſhake off the conference of a ſpirite, that preſſeth and ouer beareth his. This laſt hath no inſight at all in reaſon, but ſtill beleagreth you with the dialecticall or logicall cloſe of his clavſ
                              •
                           , and ties you to the rule of his arte or forme of his skill. Now who doth not enter into diſtruſt of ſciences, and is not in doubt, whether in any neceſſity of life hee may reape ſolid fruite of them; if hee conſider the vſe wee haue of them? Nihil ſanantibus literis. Since learning doth not cure. Who hath learnt any wit or vnderſtanding in Logique? Where are her faire promiſes? Nec admelius vi
                                 •
                              endum nec, ad commodius diſſerendum. Nether to liue better or to diſpute fitter. Shall a man heare more brabling or confuſion in the tittle-tatle of fiſh wi
                              •
                           es or ſcoulding ſluts, then in the publike diſputations of men of this profeſſion? I had rather my childe ſhould learne to ſpeake in a Taverne, then in the ſchooles of well-ſpeaking Arte. Take you a maiſter of artes, and conferre with him, why doth hee not make vs perceive his artificiall exceliencie, and by the admiration of his reaſons-conſtancie, or with the beauty of his quaint order, and grace of his method, raviſh ſilly women, and bleare ignorant men as wee are? Why doth hee not ſway, winde, and perſwade vs as he liſt? Why ſhould one ſo advantageous in matter and conduct, entermixe injuries, indiſcretion and chollericke rage with his fence? Let him pull-of his twofaced hoode, his gowne and his latine, let him not fill our eares with meerely beleeved Ariſtotle, you will diſcover and take him for one of vs, and worſe if worſe my bee. Mee thinkes this implication and entangling of ſpeech, wherewith they doe ſo much importune vs, may fitly bee compared vnto juglers play of faſt and looſe: their nimbleneſſe combates and forceth our ſences, but it nothing ſhaketh our beliefe: Take away their jugling, what they doe is but baſe, common and ſlight. Though they bee more wittie and nimble ſpirited, they are not the leſſe fooliſh, ſimple and vnapt. I love wit, and honour wiſedome, as

much as them that have it. And being rightly vſed, it is the nobleſt, the moſt forcible, yea and richeſt purchaſe men can make. But in ſuch (of which kinde the number is infinite) that vpon it eſtabliſh their fundamentall ſufficiency and worth: that from their wit refer themſelves to their memory, ſub aliena vmbra latentes: repoſing them vnder another mans protection; and can do nothing but by the booke (if I may be bold to ſay ſo) I hate the ſame, a little more then ſottiſhnes. In my country, and in my daies, learning and bookiſhnes, doth much mend purſes, but minds nothing at all. If it chance to finde them empty light and dry, it filleth, it over-burthens and ſwelleth them: a raw and indigeſted maſſe: if thinne, it doth eaſily purifie, clarifie, extenuate and ſubtilize them, even vnto exinanition or evacuation. It is a thing of aquality very neare indifferent: a moſt profitable acceſſory or ornament vnto a well borne minde, but pernicious and hurtfully domagable vnto any other. Or rather a thing of moſt precious vſe, that wil not baſely be gotten, nor vilie poſſeſſed. In ſome hands a royal ſcepter, in other ſome a rude mattocke. But let vs proceed. What greater or more glorious victory can you expect, then teach your enemy, that he cannot withſtand you? When you gaine the advantage of your propoſition, it is Truth that winneth: when you get the advantage of the order and conduct, it is you that winne. I am of opinion, that both in Plato and in Xenophon, Socrates diſputeth more in favour of the diſputers, then in grace of the diſputation: and more to inſtruct Euthydemus and Protagoras with the knowledge of their impertinency, then with the impertinency of their arte. He takes hold of the firſt matter, as he who hath a more profitable end, then to cleare it; that is, to cleare the ſpirits he vndertaketh to manage and to exerciſe. Agitation, ſtirring and hunting is properly belonging to our ſubject or drift; we are not excuſable to conduct the ſame ill and impertinently, but to miſſe the game, and faile in taking, that's another matter. For wee are borne to queſt and ſeeke after trueth; to poſſeſſe it belongs to a greater power. It is not (as Democritus ſaid) hidden in the deepes of abiſſe: but rather elevated in infinite height of diuine knowledge. The world is but a Schoole of inquiſition. The matter is not who ſhall put in, but who ſhall runne the faireſt courſes. As well may hee play the foole that ſpeaketh truely, as hee that ſpeaketh falſely: for wee are vpon the manner, and not vppon the matter of ſpeaking. My humour is, to haue as great aregarde to the forme, as to the ſubſtance; as much reſpect to the Aduocate, as to the cauſe; as Alcibiades appointed wee ſhould doe. And I day lie ammuſe my ſelfe to reade in authors, without care of their learning: therein ſeeking their manner, not their ſubiect. Euen as I purſue the communication of ſome famous wit, not that hee ſhould teach mee, but that I may know him; and knowing him (if he deſerue it) I may imitate him. Every one may ſpeake truely, but to ſpeake orderly, methodically, wiſely and ſufficiently, few can doe it. So falſehood proceeding of ignorance doth not offend mee; ineptneſſe and trifling doth. I haue broken-off diuers bargaines, that would haue beene very commodious vnto me, by the impertinencie of their conteſtation, with whome I did bargaine. I am not mooued once a yeare, with the faults or ouerſights of thoſe, over whom I have power: but touching the point of the ſottiſhineſſe and fooliſhneſſe of their allegations, excuſes, and defences, rude and brutiſh, wee are every day ready to goe by the eares. They neyther vnderſtand what is ſaid nor wherefore, and even ſo they anſwer; a thing able to make one diſpaire. I feele not my head to ſhock hard but by being hit with another. And I rather enter into compoſition with my peoples vices, then with their raſhneſſe, importunity and fooliſhneſſe. Let them doe leſſe, prouided they be capable to doe. You liue in hope to enflame their will: But of a block there is nothing to bee hoped for, nor any thing of worth to bee enioyed. Now, what if I take things otherwiſe then they are? So it may bee: And therefore I accuſe my impatience. And firſt I hould, that it is equally vicious in him, who is in the right, as in him, that is in the wrong: For, it is ever a kinde of tyrannicall ſharpeneſſe, not to be able to endure a forme different from his: and verily, ſince there is not a greater fondneſſe, a more conſtant gulliſhneſſe, or more heteroclite inſipidity then for one to move or vex himſelfe at the fondneſſe, at the gulliſhneſſe, or inſipidity of the world: For it principally formalizeth and moveth vs againſt our ſelves: and that Philoſopher of former ages ſhould never have wanted occaſion to weepe, ſo long as he had conſidered himſelfe. Miſo, one of the ſeaven ſages (a man of a Timonian diſpoſition and Democraticall humour) being demanded, where-at hee laughed alone; he anſwered, becauſe I laugh alone; How many follies doe I ſpeake and anſwer every day, according to my ſelfe; and then how much more frequent according to others? And if

I bite mine owne lips at them, what ought others to doe? In fine, wee muſt live with the quicke, and let the water runne vnder the bridge, without any care, or at leaſt without alteration to vs. In good ſooth, why meet we ſometimes with crooked, deformed, and in body miſhapen men, without falling into rage and diſcontent, and cannot endure to light-vpon a froward, skittiſh, and ill-ranged ſpirit, without falling into anger and vexation? This vicious auſteritie is rather in the Iudge, then in the fault. Let vs ever have that ſaying of Plato in our mouthes: What I finde vnwholſome, is it not to be vnhealthy my ſelfe? Am not I in fault my ſelfe? May not mine owne advertiſement be retorted againſt my ſelfe? Oh wiſe and divine reſtraint, that curbeth the moſt vniverſall and common errour of men: Not only the reproches, we doe one to another, but our reaſons, our arguments and matters controverſed, are ordinarily retortable vnto vs: and we pinch our ſelves vp in our owne armes. Whereof antiquitie hath left me divers grave examples. It was ingeniouſly ſpoken and fit to the purpoſe, by him that firſt deviſed the ſame.
                        
                           Stercus cuique ſuum bene olet.Eraſ. chil. 3. cent. 4. ad. 2.
                           
                           Ev'ry mans ordure well, To his owne ſenſe doth ſmell.
                        
                        Our eies ſee nothing backward. A hundred times a day we mocke our ſelves, vpon our neighbours ſubject, and deteſt ſome defects in others, that are much more apparant in vs; yea and admire them with a ſtrange impudencie and vnheedineſſe. Even yeſterday, I chanced to ſee a man of reaſonable vnderſtanding, who no leſſe pleaſantly then iuſtly flouted at anothers fond faſhion, and yet vpon every ſilly occaſion doth nothing but moleſt all men with the impertinent bedrowle and regiſter of his pedigrees, genealogies and alliances, more then halfe falſe and wreſted in; (for it is the maner of ſuch people, commonly to vndertake ſuch fooliſh diſcourſes, whoſe qualities are more doubtfull and leſſe ſure) who if he had impartially conſidered and looked vpon himſelfe, ſhould doubtleſſe have found himſelfe no leſſe intemperate, indiſcreet, and tedious, in publiſhing and extolling the prerogative of his wives pedigree and deſcent. Oh importunate preſumption, wherewith the wife ſeeth her ſelfe armed by the hands of her owne husband. If he vnderſtand Latine, a man ſhould ſay to him,
                        
                           Age ſi h
                                 •
                              c non inſanit ſatis ſua ſponte, inſtiga.Ter. And. act. 4. ſc. 2.
                           
                           Goe too, if of her owne accord before,
                           She were not mad enough, provoke her more.
                        
                        I ſay not, that none ſhould accuſe, except hee bee ſpotleſſe in himſelfe: For then none might accuſe: no not ſpotleſſe in the ſame kinde of fault. But my meaning is, that our iudgement charging and blaming another, of whom there is then queſtion, ſpareth vs nothing, of an inward and ſevere iuriſdiction. It is an office of charitie, that he who cannot remove a vice from himſelfe, ſhould nevertheleſſe endevour to remove it from others, where it may have a leſſe hurtfull and froward ſeed. Nor doe I deeme it a fit anſwer, for him that warneth me of my fault, to ſay, the ſame is likewiſe in him. But what of that? Well meaning warning is alwaies true and profitable. Had we a good and ſound noſe, our owne ordure ſhould be more vnſavory vnto ourſelves, foraſmuch as it is our owne. And Socrates is of opinion, that he, who ſhould find himſelfe, and his ſon, and a ſtranger guilty of any violence or iniurie, ought firſt begin by himſelfe, and preſent himſelfe to the ſentence and condemnation of the law, and for his owne diſcharge and acquital implore the aſſiſtance of the executioners hand: ſecondly for his ſon, and laſtly for the ſtranger. If this precept take his tune ſomewhat too high: it ſhould at leaſt be firſt preſented to the puniſhment of ones owne conſcience. Our ſenſes are our proper and firſt iudges, who diſtinguiſh not things, but by externall accidents; and no marvell, if in all parts of the ſervice belonging to our ſocietie, there is ſo perpetuall and vniverſall commixture of ceremonies and ſuperficiall apparances: ſo that the beſt and moſt effectuall part of policies, conſiſts in that. It is man with whom we have alwaies to doe, whoſe condition is marvellouſly corporall. Let thoſe, who in theſe latter daies haue ſo earneſtly laboured, to frame and eſtabliſh vnto vs, an exerciſe of religion and ſervice of God, ſo contemplative and immateriall, wonder nothing at all, if ſome be found, who thinke, it would have eſcaped and mouldred away betweene their fingers, if it had not held and continued amongſt vs, as a marke, a title and inſtrument of diviſion and faction, more then by it ſelfe. As in conference: The gravitie, the gowne and the fortune of him that ſpeaketh, doth often adde and winne credit vnto vaine, trifling and abſurd diſcourſes. It is not to be preſumed, that one of theſe gowne▪Clarkes or quoifed Serjants, ſo followed,

and ſo redoubted, have not ſome ſufficiencie within him, more then popular: and that a man ſo ſullen ſo grim aud ſo diſdainfull, to whom ſo many commiſſions, charges and aucthorities are given▪ be not more ſufficient and worthy, then another, who ſaluteth and vaileth to him ſo farre-off, and whom no man employeth. Not onely the wordes, but the powtings of ſuch people, are conſidered and regiſtred, every one applying himſelfe to give them ſome notable and ſolide interpretation. If they ſloope to common conference, and that a man affoord or ſhew them other then reverence and approbation, they ouerthrow you with the authoritie of their experience: they haue read, they haue heard, ſeene and done goodly things, you are cleane ouerwhelmed with examples. I would faine tell them, that the fruit of a Chirurgions experience, is not the ſtorie of his practiſes, or the remembrance that hee hath cured foure who had the plague, and healed as many that had the Goute, except he know and haue the wit, from his vſe and experience, to draw a methode how to frame his judgements and by his skill and practiſe make vs perceaue, hee is become wiſer in his arte. As in a conſort of inſtruments, one heares not ſeuerally a Lute, a Vyol, a Flute, or a paire of Virginalles, but a perfect-full harmonie: the aſſemblie and fruit of all thoſe inſtruments in one. If their travels and charges have amended them, it is in the production of their vnderſtanding to make it appeare. It ſufficeth not to number the experiments; they ought to be well poiſed and orderly ſorted: and to extract the reaſons and concluſions they containe, they ſhould bee well diſgeſted and thorowly diſtilled. There were never ſo many Hiſtorians. It is ever good and profitable to heare them: for out of the magazin of their memorie, they ſtore vs with diuers good inſtructions and commendable documents. Verily a chiefe part, for the aſſiſtance and directing of our life. But now a daies wee ſeeke not after that, but raher whether the Collectors and reporters of them be praiſe woorthy themſelues. I hate all maner of tyrannie, both verball and effectuall. I willingly bandie and oppoſe my ſelfe againſt theſe vaine and friuolous circumſtances, which by the ſences delude our judgement; and holding my ſelfe aloofe of from theſe extraordinarie greatneſſes, haue found, that for the moſt part, they are but men as others be:
                        
                           Rarus enim fermè ſenſus communis in illa
                           Fortuna.
                                 
                                    ••
                                 ven. S
                                    •
                                 t. 8. 73.
                           
                           For common ſenſe is ſeldome found
                           In fortunes that ſo much abound.
                        
                        They are peraduenture eſteemed and diſcerned leſſe then they bee, forſomuch as they vndertake more, and ſo ſhew themſelues; they anſwer not the charge they haue taken. There muſt neceſſarily be more vigour and ſtrength in the bearer, then in the burden. Hee who is not growne to his full ſtrength, leaves you to gheſſe, whether hee haue any left him beyond that, or have beene tried to the vtmoſt of his power. Hee who ſainteth vnder his burden, bewraieth his meaſure and the weakeneſſe of his ſhoulders. Thats the reaſon, why amongſt the wiſer ſort, there are ſo many fooliſh and vnapt mindes ſeene, and more then of others. They might happily have beene made good husbandmen, thriving merchants, and plodding artificers. Their naturall vigour was cut out to this proportion. Learning is a matter of great conſequence: they faint vnder it. To enſtall and diſtribute, ſo rich and ſo powerfull a matter, and availefully to employ the ſame, their wit hath neither ſufficient vigour, nor conduct enough to manage it. It hath no preuailing vertue but in a ſtrong nature; and they are very rare: and ſuch as are but weake (ſaith Socrates) corrupt and ſpoilingly deface the dignitie of Philoſophie, in handling the ſame. Shee ſeemeth faultie and vnprofitable, being ill placed and vnorderly diſpoſed. Loe how they ſpoile and entangle themſelves.
                        
                           Humani qualis ſimulator ſimius oris,
                           Quem puer arridens, pretioſo ſtamine ſerumClaud. 
                                    ••
                                 trop. 1. 303.
                           
                           
                              Ʋelavit, nudaſ
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               nates ac terga reliquit,
                           Ludibrium menſis.
                           Such counterfets as Apes are of mans face,
                           Whom children ſporting at, featly incaſe
                           
                              In coaſtly coates, but leave his backeſide bare
                           For men to laugh at, when they feaſting are.
                        
                        To thoſe likewiſe, who ſway and command vs, and have the world in their owne hands, t'is not ſufficient to have a common vnderſtanding, and to be able to doe, what wee can effect. They are farre beneath vs, if they be not much above vs. As they promiſe more, ſo owe they more. And therefore ſilence is in them, not onely a countenance of reſpect and grauitie, but often of thrift and profit: Megabyſus going to viſite Apelles in his worke-houſe, ſtood ſtill a good while without ſpeaking one word, and then began to diſcourſe of his workes. Of whom he received this rude and nipping checke: So long as thou heldeſt thy peace, by reaſon of thy gariſh clothes, goodly chaines and ſtately pompe, thou ſeemedſt to be ſome worthy gallant: but now thou haſt ſpoken, there is not the ſimpleſt boy of my ſhop, but ſcorneth and contemns thee. That great ſtate of his, thoſe rich habilliments, and goodly traine, did not permit him to bee ignorant with a popular ignorance and to ſpeake impertinently of painting. He ſhould have kept mute, and concealed his externall and preſuming ſufficiency. Vnto how many fond and ſhallow minds, hath in my dayes, a ſullen, cold and ſilent countenance, ſerved as a title of wiſedome and capacity? Dignities, charges and places, are neceſſarily given, more by fortune then by merit: and they are often to blame, that for it lay the blame on Kings. Contrariwiſe it is a wonder, that being ſo vntoward, they ſhould therein have ſo good lucke: Principis eſt virtus maxima, noſſe ſuos. Chiefe vertue it is knowne, In Kings to know their owne. For Nature hath not given them ſo perfect a ſight, that it might extend it ſelfe and overlooke ſo many people, to diſcerne their pre-excellency; and enter their breaſts, where lodgeth the knowledge of our will and better worth. It is by coniectures, and as it were groping they muſt try vs: by our race, alliances, dependences, riches learning, and the peoples voice: all over-weake arguments. He that could deviſe a meane, how men might be iudged by law, choſen by reaſon, and advanced by deſert, ſhould eſtabliſh a perfect forme of a Commonwealth. Yea but he hath brought that great buſineſſe vnto a good paſſe. It is to ſay ſomething: but not to ſay ſufficiently. For, this ſentence is juſtly received, That counſels ought not to be iudged by the events. The Carthaginians were wont to puniſh the ill counſels of their Captaines, although corrected by ſome fortunate ſucceſſe. And the Roman people hath often refuſed triumphes too famous, ſuccesfull and moſt profitable victories, forſomuch as the Generals conduct, anſwered not his good fortune. It is commonly perceived by the worldes actions, that fortune, to teach vs, how farre hir power extendeth vnto all things; and who taketh pleaſure to abate our preſumption, having not beene able to make ſilly men wiſe, ſhe hath made them fortunate, in enuie of vertue: And commonly gives hir ſelfe to favour executions, when as their complot and deviſe is meerely hirs. Whence we dayly ſee, that the ſimpleſt amongſt vs, compaſſe diverſe great and important affaires, both publike and private. And as Sirannez the Perſian Prince, anſwered thoſe, who ſeemed to wonder how his negotiations ſucceeded ſo ill, his diſcourſes being ſo wiſe: That he was only maiſter of his diſcourſes, but fortune miſtris of his affaires ſucceſſe. Theſe may anſwer the like; but with a contrary bias. Moſt things of the world are made by themſelves.
                        
                           Fata viam inveniunt.
                           Fates finde and know, which way to goe.Sirg. Aen. l. 3. 395.
                           
                        
                        The iſſue doth often aucthorize a ſimple conduct. Our interpoſition is in a manner nothing els but an experience, and more commonly a conſideration of vſe and example, then of reaſon. And as one amazed at the greatneſſe of ſome buſineſſe, I have ſomtimes vnderſtood by thoſe who had atchieved them, both their motives and addreſſes: wherein I have found but vulgar adviſes: and the moſt vulgar and vſed, are peradventure the ſureſt and moſt commodious for the practiſe, if not for the ſhew. And what if the plaineſt reaſons are the beſt ſeated: the meaneſt, baſeſt and moſt beaten, are beſt applied vnto affaires? To maintaine the aucthority of our Kings-counſell, it is not requiſite, that prophane perſons ſhould be partakers of it, and looke further into it, then from the firſt barre. To vphold it's reputation, it ſhould be reverenced vpon credit, and at full. My conſultation doth ſomewhat roughly hew the matter, and by it's firſt ſhew, lightly conſider the ſame: the maine and chiefe point of the worke, I am wont to reſigne to heaven.
                        
                           
                           Permitte diuis caetera,
                           How all the rew ſhall goe,Hor. l. 1. od. 9 9
                           
                           Giue leaue to Gods to know.
                        
                        Good and bad fortune, are in my conceit two ſoveraigne powers T'is folly to thinke, that humane wiſedome may act the full part of fortune. And vaine is his enterpriſe, that preſumeth to embrace both cauſes and conſequences, and lead the progreſſe of his fact by the hand. And aboue all, vaineſt in military deliberations. There was neuer more circumſpection and militaty wiſedome, then is ſometimes ſeene amongſt vs: May it bee that manfeareth to looſe himſelfe by the way, reſeruing himſelfe to the cataſtrophe of that play? I ſay moreover, that euen our wiſedome and conſultation for the moſt part followeth the conduct of hazard. My will and my diſcourſe, is ſometimes mooued by one ayre, and ſometimes by another: and there be many of theſe motions, that are governed without me. My reaſon hath dayly impulſions and caſuall agitations:
                        
                           Vertuntur ſpecies animorum, & pectoramotusVirg. Geor. l
                                    •
                                 . 
                                    •
                                  20.
                           
                           Nunc alios, alios dum nubila ventis agebat.
                           Concipiunt.
                           The ſhowes of mindes are chang'd, and breſts conceaue
                           At one time motions, which anon they leave,
                           And others take againe, As windes drive clouds amaine.
                        
                        Let but a man looke who are the mightieſt in Citties and who thrive beſt in their buſineſſe: he ſhall commonly find, they are the ſillieſt and pooreſt in wit. It hath hapned to ſimple women, to weake children, and to mad men, to command great ſtates, as well as the moſt ſufficient Princes. And the gulliſh or ſhallow-pated (ſaith Thucidides) doe more ordinarily come vnto them, then the wiſeſt and ſubtileſt. We aſcribe their good fortunes effects, vnto their prudence.
                        
                           —vt quiſque fortuna vtitur,
                              Pla
                                    •
                                 c. Pſcu. a
                                    ••
                                 . 5 ſc. 4.
                           
                           Ita praecellit: at que exinde ſapere illum omnes dicimus.
                           As men their fortune vſe, ſo they excell,
                           And ſo we ſay, they are wiſe and doe well.
                        
                        Wherefore I ſay well, that howſoeuer, events are but weake teſtimonies of our worth and capacitie. I was now vpon this point, that we need but looke vpon a man aduanced to dignity; had we but three dayes before knowne him to bee of little or no worth at all: an image of greatneſſe, and an Idea of ſufficiencie, doth inſenſibly glide and creepe into our opinions; and wee perſwade our ſelues, that increaſing in ſtate and credit and followers, hee is alſo increaſed in merit. Wee iudge of him, not according to his worth; but after the manner of caſtingcounters, according to the prerogatiue of his ranke. But let fortune turne hir wheele, let him againe decline and come downe amongſt the vulgar multitude; euery one with admiration enquireth of the cauſe, and how he was raiſed ſo high. Good Lord, is that he? will ſome ſay. What? knew he no more? had he no other skill when hee was ſo aloft? Are Princes pleaſed with ſo little? Now in good ſooth wee were in very good hands, will others ſay. It is a thing my ſelfe have often ſeene in my dayes. Yea the very maske of greatneſſe, or habite of maieſty, repreſented in Tragedies, doth in ſome ſort touch and beguile vs. The thing I adore in Kings, is the throng of their adoratores. All inclination and ſubmiſſion is due vnto them, except the mindes. My reaſon is not framed to bend or ſtoope; my knees are. Melanthius being demanded, what he thought of Dionyſius his tragedy, anſwered, I haue not ſeene it, ſo much was it over-clouded with language. So ſhould thoſe ſay, that judge of great mens diſcourſes: I haue not vnderſtood his diſcourſe, ſo was it ouerdarkned with grauity, with greatnes and with maieſty. Antiſthenes one day perſwaded the Athenians, to command, that their aſſes ſhould as well be employed about the manuring of grounds, as were their horſes: who anſwered him, that the Aſſe was not borne for ſuch ſeruice: that's all one (quoth he) there needs but your allowance for it: for the moſt ignorant and incapable men you imploy about the directing of

your warres, leaue not to become out of hand moſt worthy, onely becauſe you employ them. Wherevpon depends the cuſtome of ſo many men, who canonize the king, whom they haue made amongſt them, and are not contented to honour him, vnleſſe they alſo adore him. Thoſe of Mexico, after the cerimonies of his conſecration are finiſhed, dare no more looke him in the face: but as if by his royalty, they had deified him, they afterward deeme him to bee a God: amongſt the oathes, they make him ſweare to maintain their religion, to keepe their lawes, to deſend their liberties, to be valiant, iuſt and debonaire; hee is alſo ſworne to make the Sunne march in his accuſtomed light: in time of need to cauſe the cloudes ſhowre downe their waters; to enforce riuers to runne in their right wonted chanels; and compell the earth to produce all neceſſary things for his people. I differ from this common faſhion, and more diſtruſt ſufficiencie, when I ſee it accompanied with the greatnes of fortune, and applanded by popular commendation. We ſhould heedfully marke, of what conſequence it is, for a man to ſpeake in due time, to chooſe fit opportunity, to breake or change his diſcourſe with a magiſtrale authority: to defend himſelfe from others oppoſitions, by a nod or moouing of the head, by a ſmile, a ſhrug or a ſilence, before an aſſembly, trembling with reuerence and reſpect. A man of monſtrous fortune, chancing to ſhoote his boult, and giue his opinion vpon a frivolous ſubiect, which but jeſtingly was toſſed too and fro at his table, beganne ever thus; he cannot chooſe but be a lyer, or an ignorant aſſe, that will ſay otherwiſe then, &c. Follow this Philoſophicall point, out commeth a dagger, and there is ſome miſchiefe. Loe here another aduertiſment; from whence I reape good vſe; Which is, that in diſputations and conferences, all good ſeeming wordes, ought not preſently to be allowed and accepted. Moſt men are rich of a ſtrange ſufficiency. Some may chance to ſpeake a notable ſaying, to give a good anſwere, to vſe a witty ſentence, and to propound it, without knowing the force of it. That a man holdeth not all he borroweth, may peraduenture be verified in my ſelfe. A man ſhould not alwayes yeeld, what truth or goodnes ſoever it ſeemeth to containe. A man muſt either combat the ſame in good earneſt, or draw-backe, vnder colour of not vnderſtanding the matter: to try on all parts, how it is placed in it's author. It may fortune, that we ſhut our ſelues vp, and further the ſtroake, beyond its bearing. I haue ſometimes in neceſſity and throng of the combat, employed ſome reuiradoes or turnings, which beyond my intent, have prooved falſe offers. I but gave them by tale, and they were received by waight. Euen as when I contend with a vigorous man; I pleaſe my ſelfe to anticipate his concluſions: I eaſe him the labour to interpret himſelfe, I endeuour to preuent his imperfect and yet budding imagination: the order and pertinencie of his vnderſtanding for warneth and menaceth a farre off: of theſe others I doe cleane contrary; a man muſt vnderſtand or preſuppoſe nothing but by them. If they judge in generall termes: This is good; that's naught: and that they iump right; ſee whither it be fortune, that iumpeth for them. Let them a little circumſcribe and reſtraine their ſentence; wherefore it is, and which way it is. Theſe vniuerſall judgements, I ſee ſo ordinarily ſay nothing at all. They are men, that ſalute a whole multitude, in throng and troupe. Such as have true knowledge of the ſame, ſalute and marke it by name and particularly. But it is a hazardous enterpriſe. Whence I haue oftner and dayly ſeen, to happen that wits weakly grounded, intending to ſhew themſelues ingenious, by obſeruing in the reading of ſome worke, the point of beaury: ſtay their admiration with ſo bad a choiſe, that in liew of teaching vs the authors excellencie, they ſhew vs their owne ignorance. This manner of exclaimation is ſafe; Loe this is very excellent; Surely this is very good, hauing heard a whole page of Virgil. And that's the ſhift whereby the ſubtill ſaue themſelues, But to vndertake to follow him by ſhrugs and crinches, and with an axpreſſe ſelected iudgement to goe about to marke which way a good author ſurmounteth himſelfe; pondning his words, his phraſes, his inuentions, and his ſeverall vertues one after another: Away; goe by; It is not for you. Videndum eſt non modo, quid quiſque loquatur, ſed etiam quid quiſ
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               ſentiat, at que etiam qua de cauſa quiſ
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               ſentiat. Man muſt take heed not onely what he ſpeakes, but what he thinkes, and alſo why he thinkes. I dayly heate fooles vtter vnfooliſh words. Speake they any good thing; let vs vnderſtand whence they know it, how farre they vnderſtand and whereby they hold it. We helpe them to employ this fine word, and this goodly reaſon, which they poſſeſſe not, and have but in keeping; they haue happily produced the ſame by chance and at randan, our ſelues bring it in credit and eſteeme with them. You lend them your hand; what to doe? to konne you no thankes, and thereby become more ſimple, and more fooliſh. Doe not ſecond them; let

them goe-on: they will handle this matter as men affraide to bewray themſelues, they dare neither change her ſeate or light, nor enter into it. Shake it neuer ſo little, it eſcapeth them; quit the ſame how ſtrong and goodly ſoeuer it bee. They are hand-ſome weapons, but ill hafted. How often haue I ſeene the experience of it? Now if you come to expound and confirme them, they take hold of you, and preſently ſteale the aduantage of your interpretation from you. It was that which I was about to ſay: It was iuſt my conceite: if I have not ſo expreſt it, it is but for want of ſpeech. Handy-dandy, what is this? Malice it ſelfe muſt be employed to correct this fierce rudeneſſe. Hegeſias his poſition, that a man muſt neither hate nor accuſe, but inſtruct, hath ſome reaſon elſe where. But heere, it is iniuſtice to affiſt, and inhumanity to raiſe him vp againe, that hath nothing to doe with it, and is thereby of leſſer worth. I love to have them entangle and bemire themſelues more then they are and if it bee poſſible, to wade ſo deepe into the gulfe of error, that in the end they may recall and aduiſe themſelues. Sottiſhneſſe and diſtraction of the ſences, is no diſeaſe curable by a tricke of aduertiſment. And wee may fitly ſay of this reparation, as Cyrus anſwered one, who vrged him to exhort his army in the nicke when the battell ſhould beginne; That men are not made warlike and couragious in the field, by an excellent oration; no more then one becommeth a ready cunning muſition, by hearing a good ſong. They are prentiſages that muſt bee learnt a forehand, by long and conſtant inſtitution. This care wee owe to ours, and this aſſiduitie of correction and inſtruction: but to preach to him that firſt paſſeth by, or ſway the ignorance or fondneſſe of him wee meete next, is a cuſtome I cannot well away with. I ſeldome vſe it, even in ſuch diſcourſes as are made to mee; and I rather quit all, then come to theſe far-fetcht and magiſtrale inſtructions. My humour is no more proper to ſpeake, then to write, namely for beginners. But in things commonly ſpoken, or amongſt others, how falſ and abſurd ſoever I iudge them, I neuer croſſe or gibe them, neither by word nor ſigne. Further, nothing doth more ſpight mee in ſottiſhneſſe then that it pleaſeth it ſelfe more, then any reaſon may iuſtly be ſatisfied. It is ill lucke, that wiſedome forbids you to pleaſe and truſt your ſelfe, and ſends you alwayes away diſcontented and fearefull: whereas wilfulnes and raſhneſſe, fill their gueſts with gratulation and aſſurance. It is for the ſimpleſt and leaſt able, to looke at other men ouer their ſhoulders, ever returning from the combatful of glory and gladnes. And moſt often alſo, this outrecuidance of ſpeech and cheerefulneſſe of countenance, giueth them the victory ouer the by-ſtanders, who are commonly weake, and incapable to iudge aright and diſcerne true aduantage. Obſtinacie and earneſtneſſe in opinion, is the ſureſt tryall of folly and ſelfe conceite. Is there any thing ſo aſſured, ſo reſolute, ſo diſdainefull, ſo contemplatiue, ſo ſerious and ſo grave, as the Aſſe; May wee not commixe with the title of conference and communication, the ſharpe and interrupted diſcourſes, which mirth and familiaritie introduceth amongſt friends, pleaſantly dallying and wittily ieſting one with another? An exerciſe, to which my naturall blitheneſſe makes me very apt. And if it be not ſo wire-drawne and ſerious, as this other exerciſe I now ſpeake of, yet is it no leſſe ſharpe or ingenious, no leſſe profitable, as it ſeemed to Lycurgus. For my regard I bring more liberty then wit vnto it, and have there in more lucke then inuention: but I am perfect in ſufferance; for I endure the revenge, not onely ſharpe but alſo indiſcreete, without any alteration. And to any aſſault giuen me, if I have not preſently or ſtoutly wherewith to worke mine own amends, I ammuſe not my ſelf to follow that ward or point, with a tedious and ſelfe-wil'd conteſtation, enclining to pertinacie: I let it paſſe, and hanging downe mine eares, remit my ſelfe to a better houre to right my ſelfe. He is not a marchant that ever gaineth. Moſt men change both voice and countenance, where might faileth them: And by an importunate rage, inſtead of avenging themſelues, they accuſe their weakeneſſe and therewith bewray their impacience. In this 
                              •
                           ollitie we now and then harpe vpon ſome ſecret ſtrings of our imperfections; which ſetled or conſiderate we cannot tonch without offence: and wee profitably enter-aduertize our ſelues of our defects. There are other handy-ſportes in diſcreete, fond and ſharpe, iuſt after the French manner; which I hate mortally: I have a tender and ſenſible skinne: I have in my dayes ſeene two Princes of our royall blood brought to their graues for it. It is an ill ſeeming thing for men, in ieſt to hitte, or in ſport to ſtrike on another. In other matters, when I ſhall iudge of any body. I demaund of him, how farre or how much he is contented with himſelfe how: how farre his ſpeath or his worke pleaſeth him. I will auoyde theſe goodly excuſes, I did it but in ieſt:
                        
                        
                           
                           Ablatum medijs opus eſt incudibus iſtud.
                           This worke away was brought,
                                 Ovid. Triſt. l. 1. l. 1. 
                                    
                                       •
                                    leg. 6. 29.
                           
                           Halfe hammered, halfe wrought.
                        
                        
                           I was not an houre there; I haue not ſeene him ſince. Now I ſay, let vs then leaue theſe partes, giue me one that may repreſent you whole and entire, by which it may pleaſe you to be meaſured by another. And then; what finde you faireſt in your owne worke? is it that or this part? the grace or the matter, the inuention, the iudgement, or the learning? For I ordinarily perceiue, that a man miſſeth as much in iudging of his owne worke, as of anothers. Not onely by the affection, he therein imployeth; but becauſe he hath not ſufficiencie to know, nor skill to diſtinguiſh it. The worke of it's owne power and fortune, may ſecond the worke-man, and tranſport him beyond his inuention and knowledge. As for me, I iudge not the worth of anothers worke more obſcurely then of mine owne: and place my Eſſayes ſometimes lowe, ſometimes high, very vnconſtantly and doubtfully. There are dyuers bookes profitable by reaſon of their ſubjects of which the author reapeth no commendations at all: And good bookes, as alſo good workes, which make the workeman aſhamed. I ſhall write the manner of our bankets, aud the faſhion of our garments; and I ſhall write it with an ill grace: I ſhall publiſh the Edicts of my time, and the letters of Princes that publikely paſſe from hand to hand: I ſhall make an abridgement of a good booke (and every abridgement of a good booke, is a foole abridged) which booke ſhall come to be loſt; and ſuch like things. Poſterity ſhall reape ſingular profit by ſuch compoſitions: but I, what honour, except by my good fortune? Many famous bookes are of this condition.
                        When I read Philip de Commines, (now dyuers yeares ſince) a right excellent author, I noted this ſpeach in him, as a ſaying not vulgar: That a man ſhould carefully take heed▪ how he do his maſter ſo great or much ſeruice, that he thereby be hindred from finding his due recompence for it. I ſhould haue commended the inuention, but not him. After that I found it in Tacitus: Beneficia
                           Corn. Tacit. Annal. l. 4. 
                           eo vſque lata ſunt, dum videntur exolui poſſe, vbi multum antevenere progratia odium redditur. Benefites are ſo long wel-come, as wee thinke they may be requited, but when they much exceede all power of recompence, hate is return'd for thankes and good will. And Seneca very ſtoutely. Nam qui putat eſſe turpe non reddere, non vult eſſe cui reddat. For he that thinkes it a ſhame not to
                           S
                                 •
                              n. epiſt. 81. f. Cicero. 
                           requite, could wiſh, he were not whom he ſhould requite. Q. Cicero with a looſer byas: Qui ſe non putat ſatisfacere, amicus eſſe nullo modo poteſt. He that thinkes he doth not ſatisfie, can by no meanes be a friend. The ſubiect according as it is, may make a man be iudged learned, wiſe and memorious: but to iudge in him the parts moſt his owne and beſt worthy, together with the force and beautie of his minde; t'is very requiſite we know firſt what is his owne, and what not: and in what is not his owne, what we are beholding to him for, in conſideration of his choiſe, diſpoſition, ornament, and language he hath thereunto furniſhed. What if he have borrowed the matter and empaired the forme? as many times it commeth to paſſe. Wee others that have little practiſe with bookes, are troubled with this; that when wee meet with any rare or quaint inuention in a new Poet, or forcible argument in a Preacher, we dare not yet commend them, vntill we have taken inſtruction of ſome wiſe man, whether that part be their owne or another bodies. And vntill then I ever ſtand vpon mine owne guard. I come lately from reading ouer, (and that without any intermiſſion) the ſtory of Tacitus (a matter not vſuall with me; it is now twenty yeares, I never ſpent one whole houre together vpon a booke) and I have now done it, at the inſtant requeſt of a gentleman, whom France holdeth in high eſteeme; as well for his owne worth and valour, as for a conſtant forme of ſufficiencie and goodnes, apparantly ſeene in divers brethren of his. I know no author, that in a publike regiſter entermixeth ſo many conſiderations of manners, and particular inclinations. And I deeme cleane contrary, to what hee thinketh: who being eſpecially to follow the lives of the Emperours of his time, ſo divers and extreme in all manner of forme, ſo many notable and great actions, which, namely their crueltie produced in their ſubiects: he had a more powerfull and attractiue matter, to diſcourſe and relate, then if hee had beene to ſpeake or treat of battles and vniverſall agitations. So that I often finde him barren, ſleightlie running-over thoſe glorious deaths, as if he feared to attediate and moleſt vs with their multitude and continuance. This forme of hiſtorie is much more profitable: Publike innouations, depend more on the conduct of fortune: priuate on ours. It is rather a iudgement, then

a deduction of an hiſtory: therein are more precepts, then narrations: It is not a booke to reade, but a volume to ſtudy and to learne: It is ſo fraught with ſentences, that right or wrong they are hudled vp: It is a ſeminary of mortall, and a magazine of pollitique diſcourſes, for the prouiſion and ornament of thoſe, that poſſeſſe ſome place in the managing of the world. He ever pleadeth with ſolide and forcible reaſons; after a ſharpe and witty faſhion: following affected and laboured ſtile of his age: They ſo much loved to raiſe and puffe themſelues vp, that where they found neither ſharpeneſſe nor ſubtility in things, they would borrow it of wordes. He draweth ſomewhat neare to Senecas writing. I deeme Tacitus more ſinnowy, Seneca more ſharpe. His ſeruice is more proper to a crazed troubled ſtate, as is ours at this preſent: you would often ſay, hee pourtrayeth and toucheth vs to the quicke. Such as doubt of his faith, doe many feſtly accuſe themſelues to hate him for ſomewhat elſe. His opinions be ſound, and encl
                              ••
                           ing to the better ſide of the Romane affaires. I am neuertheleſſe ſomething greeued, that he hath more bitterly iudged of Pompey, then honeſt mens opinions, who lived and conuerſed with him, doe well allow-off: to have eſteemed him altogether equall to Marius and Silla, ſaving that he was more cloſe and ſecret. His intention and canuaſing for the gouernment of affaires, hath not beene exempted from ambition, nor cleared from revenge: and his owne friends haue feared, that had he gotten the victory, it would have tranſported him beyond the limites of reaſon; but not vnto an vnbridled and raging meaſure. There is nothing in his life that hath threatned vs with ſo many feſt a cruelty, and expreſſe tyranny. Yet muſt not the ſuſpition be counterpoiſed to the euidence: So doe not I beleeue him.
                        That his narrations are naturall and right, might happily be argued by this: That they doe not alwayes exactly apply themſelues to the concluſions of his iudgments; which hee purſueth according to the courſe hee hath taken, often beyond the matter hee ſheweth vs; which hee hath dained to ſtoope vnto with one only glance. He needeth no excuſe to have approoved the religion of his times, according to the lawes which commaunded him, and beene ignorant of the true and perfect worſhip of God. That's his ill fortune, not his defect. I have principally conſidered his iudgement, whereof I am not every where throughly reſolued. As namely theſe wordes contayned in the letter, which Tiberius being ſicke and aged, ſent to the Senate. What ſhall I write to you my maſters, or how ſhall I write to you, or what ſhall I not write to you in theſe times? May the Gods and Goddeſſes looſe mee worſe, then I dayly feele my ſelfe to periſh, if I can tell. I cannot perceiue why hee ſhould ſo certainely apply them vnto a ſtinging remorſe, tormentiug the conſcience of Tiberius: At leaſt when my ſelfe was in the ſame plight, I ſaw it not. That hath likewiſe ſeemed ſomwhat demiſſe and baſe vnto me, that having ſaid, how hee had exerciſed a certayne honourable magiſtracy in Rome, he goeth about to excuſe himſelfe, that it is not for oſtentation, he ſpake it: This on tricke, namely in a minde of his quality, ſeemeth but baſe and cource vnto me: For, not to dare ſpeake roundly of himſelfe, accuſeth ſome want of courage: A conſtant, reſolute and high judgement, and which iudgeth ſoundly and ſurely, euery hand while vſeth his owne examples, as well as of any ſtrange thing; and witneſſeth as freely of himſelfe as of a third perſon: A man muſt ouergoe theſe populare reaſons of ciuility, in fauour of trueth and liberty. I dare not onely ſpeake of my ſelfe: but ſpeake alone of my ſelfe. I ſtragle when I write of any other matter, and digreſſe from my ſubiect. I doe not ſo diſcreetly love my ſelfe, and am ſo tide and commixt to my ſelfe, as that I can not diſtinguiſh and conſider my ſelfe a part: as a neighbour; as a tree. it is an equall error, eyther not to ſee how farre a mans worth ſtretcheth, or to ſay more of it then one ſeeth good cauſe. We owe more love to God, then to our ſelues, and know him leſſe, and yet we talke our fill of him. If his writings relate any thing of his conditions: he was a notable man, vpright and couragious; not with a ſuperſtitious vertue, but Philoſophicall and generous: He may be found over-hardy in his teſtimonies: As where hee holdeth, that a ſouldier carrying a burden of wood, his hands were ſo ſtifly benummed with cold, that they ſtucke to his woode, and remayned ſo faſt vnto it, that as dead fleſh they were divided from his armes. In ſuch caſes I am wont to yeeld vnto the authoritie of ſo great teſtimonies. Where he alſo ſaith, that 
                              Ʋeſpaſian by the fauour of the God Serapis, healed in the 
                              •
                           itie of Alexandria a blinde woman, with the rubbing and anointing her eies with faſting ſpertle: and ſome other miracles, which I remember not well now: hee doth it by the example and devoire of all good hiſtorians. They keepe a regiſter of important euents: among publike

accidents, are alſo populare reports and vulgar opinions. It is their part to relate common conceits, but not to ſway them. This part belongeth to Diuines and Philoſophers, directors of conſciences. Therefore that companion of his, and as great a man as hee, ſaide moſt wiſely: Equidem plura tranſcrib
                                 •
                               quam credo: Nam nec affirmare ſuſtineo, de quibus dubito, nec ſubducere quae accepi: I write out more then I beleeue: for neither can I bide to affirme what I doubt of, nor to withdrawe what I have heard: And that other: Haec neque affirmare neque refellere operae precium est: fama rerum ſtandum eſt. It is not worth the talke, or to avouch, or to refute theſe things; wee muſt ſtand to report. And writing in an age, wherein the beliefe of prodigies began to decline, he ſaith, he would notwithſtanding not ommit to inſert in his Annals, and giue footing to a thing receiued and allowed of ſo many honeſt men, and with ſo great reuerence by antiquity. It is very well ſaid: That they yeelde vs the hiſtory, more according as they receaue, then according as they eſteeme it. I who am king of the matter I treat of, and am not to giue accompt of it to any creature liuing, doe neuertheleſſe not altogether beleeue my ſelfe for it: I often hazard vpon certaine outſlips of my minde, for which I diſtruct my ſelfe; and certaine verball wilie-beguilies, whereat I ſhake mine eares: but I let them runne at hab or nab; I ſee ſome honour them ſelues with ſuch like things: T'is not for me alone to iudge of them. I preſent my ſelfe ſtanding and lying, before and behinde, on the right and left ſide, and in all by naturall motions. Spirits alike in force, are not euer alike in application and taſte. Loe here what my memory doth in groſe, and yet very vncertainely preſent vnto me of it. In breefe, all iudgements are weake, demiſſe and imperfect.
                     
                     
                        The ninth Chapter.
                        
                           Of Ʋanitie.
                        
                        THere is peraduenture no vanity more manyfeſt, then ſo vainely to write of it. What Divinity hath ſo divinely expreſſed thereof vnto vs, ought of all men of vnderſtanding to be diligently and continually meditated vpon. Who ſeeth not, that I have entred ſo large a field, and vndertaken ſo high a pitch, wherein ſo long as there is either Inke or Paper in the world, I may vnceſſantly wander and fly without encombrance? I can keepe no regiſter of my life by my actions: fortune placeth them too Iowe: I hould them of my fantaſies. Yet haue I ſeen a gentleman, who neuer communicated his life, but by the operations of his belly; you might haue ſeene in his houſe, ſet out for a ſhow, a row of baſins for ſeauen or eight dayes: It was all his ſtudy; it was all his talke: All other diſcourſes were vnſavory to him. Theſe are ſomewhat more ciuile, the excrements of an ould ſpirite, ſometimes hard, ſometimes laxatiue; but euer indigeſted. And when ſhall I come vnto an end of repreſenting a continuall agitation or vnceſſant alteration of my thoughts, what ſubiect ſoeuer they happen vpon; ſince Diomedes filled ſix thouſand bookes only with the ſubiect of Grammar? What is idle babling like to produce, ſince the faltring and liberty of the tongue hath ſtuft the world with ſo horrible a multitude of volumes? So many words onely for words. Oh Pythagoras, why didſt thou not coniure this tempeſt? One Galba of former ages, being accuſed for liuing idlie; anſwered, that all men ought to giue an account of their actions, but not of their abiding. He was deceived; for iuſtice hath alſo knowledge and animaduerſion ouer ſuch as gather ſtubble (as the common ſaying is) or looke about for gape▪ ſeed. But there ſhould be ſome correction appointed by the lawes, againſt fooliſh and vnprofitable writers, as there is againſt vagabonds and loiterers: ſo ſhould both my ſelfe and a hundred others of our people be baniſhed. It is no mockerie: Scribling ſeemeth to be a Symthome or paſſion of an irregular and licentious age. When writ we ever ſo much as we haue done ſince our inteſtine troubles? or when filled the Romans ſo many volumes, as in the times of their ruine? Beſides that, the r
                                 •
                              fining of wits in a common wealth, doth ſeldome make them the wiſer: this idle working proceedeth of this that all men doe ouer▪ ſlowly giue them ſelues to the office of their function, and are eaſily withdrawe from it. The corruption of the times we live in, is wrought by the particular contribution of euery

one of vs: ſome conferre treaſon vnto it, ſome iniuſtice, other ſome irreligion, tyranny, auarice and cruelty; according as they are more or leſſe powerfull: the weaker ſort, whereof I am one imparte fooliſhneſſe, vanity and idleneſſe vnto it. It ſeemeth to bee the ſeaſon of vaine things; when the domageable preſſe vs. In a time, where to doe euill is common: to do nothing profitable, is in a manner commendable. One thing comforts me, that I ſhall be of the laſt, that ſhall be attached: whilſt they ſhall prouide for the worſer ſort and the moſt hurtfull, I ſhall haue leaſure to amend my ſelfe: For, mee thinkes it would bee againſt reaſon buſily to inſiſt and purſue petty inconueniences, when great ones infect vs. And the Phiſition Philotimus, to one that offred him his finger to dreſſe, by whoſe face, looke and breath he apparantly perceaued, that he had an impoſtume in his loonges; My friend (quoth he) It is now no fit time to buſie your ſelfe about your nayles. Yet concerning this purpoſe, I ſaw not many yeares ſince a friend of mine, whoſe name and memory (for diuerſe reſpects,) I hould in ſingular account, who in the midſt of our troublous miſchiefes: when, no more then at this time, neither lawe, nor iuſtice, nor magiſtrate was executed or did his office, publiſhed certaine ſilly reformations, concerning the exceſſe of apparell gluttony and diet, and abuſes committed among petty-fogging lawiers. They be ammuſings wherewith a people in a deſperate taking is fed, that ſo men may ſay they are not cleane forgotten. Euen ſo doe theſe others, who mainely apply them ſelues to forbid certaine manners of ſpeach, dances and vaine ſports, vnto a people wholy giuen ouer to all licenciouſneſſe and execrable vices. It is then no conuenient time for a man to waſh and netifi
                                 •
                               himſelfe when he is aſſailed, by a violent feuer. It onely belongs to Spartans, to tricke, to combe and waſh themſelues at what time they are ready to caſt themſelues into ſome extreame hazard of life. As for me, I am ſubiect to this ill cuſtome, that if but a pump ſit not handſomly vppon my foote, I ſhall alſo neglect my ſhirt and my cloake: for I diſdaine to correct my ſelfe by halſes: when I am in bad eſtate, I fleſh my ſelfe on euil and abandon my ſelfe through diſpaire, and run to downefall, and (as the ſaying is) caſt the haſt after the hatchet. I grow obſtinate in empairing; and eſteeme my ſelfe no more worthy of my care, eyther all well or all euill. It is a fauour to me, that the deſolation of our ſtate doth ſutably meet with the deſolation of my age: I rather endure that my euills ſhould thereby be ſurcharged, then if my goods had thereby beene troubled. The wordes I vtter agaynſt misfortune, are wordes of ſpite. My courage inſteede of yeelding, doth grow more obſtinate; and contrary to others. I finde my ſelfe more giuen to deuotion, in proſperous then aduerſe fortune: according to Xenophons rule, if not according to his reaſon. And I rather looke on heauen with a chearefull eye, to thanke it, then to begge any thing. I am more carefull to increaſe my health when it ſmiles vpon me, then to recouer it when I haue loſt it. Proſperities are to me as diſcipline and inſtruction, as aduerſities and croſſes are to others. As if good fortune were incompatible with a good conſcience, men neuer become honeſt but by aduerſe and croſſe chances. Good fortune is to me a ſingular motiue vnto moderation, and forcible ſpurre vnto modeſty. Prayers winne me, menaces reiect me, ſauoures relent me, feare imperuerſeth me. Amongſt humane conditions, this one is verie common, that we are rather pleaſed with ſtrange things then with our owne: we loue changes, affect alterations, and like innouations.
                        
                           Ipſa dies ideo nos grato perluit hauſ
                                 •
                              u,
                           Quod permutatis hora recurrit equis.
                           Times therefore vs refreſh with welcome ayre,
                           Becauſe their houres on chang'd horſe doe repayre.
                        
                        And my ſhare is therein. Such as follow the other extremitie, onely to bee well pleaſed with and in themſelues; and ſelfe-conceitedly to ouer▪ eſteeme what they poſſeſſe aboue others; and acknowledge no forme fayrer, then that they ſee; if they bee not more aduiſed then we, they are indeed more happy. I enuie not their wiſedome, but grudge their good fortune: This greedy humour of new and vnquenchable deſire of vnknowne things, dooth much increaſe and nouriſh in me a deſire to trauell: but diuers other circumſtances conferre vnto it. I am well pleaſed to neglect and ſhake▪ of the gouernment of mine owne houſehold. It is ſome pleaſure to command, were it but a mole-hill, and a delight to be obaied. But it is a pleaſure over-vniforme and languiſhing. Beſides that it is ever neceſſarily intermixed with troublous

cares, and hart-wearing thoughts. Sometimes the indigence and oppreſſion of your owne people; ſometimes the contentions and quarels of your neighbours, and othertimes their inſulting and vſurpation ouer you, doth vexe, doth trouble and afflict you,
                        
                           Aut verberatae grandine vine
                                 •
                              ,H
                                    •
                                 r. 
                                    •
                                 ar. l. 3. 
                                    •
                                 d. 1. 29.
                           
                           Funduſque mendax, arbore nunc aquas
                           Culpante, nunc torrentia agros
                           Sydera, nunc hyemes iniquas.
                           Or Vineyards beate and wet with haile and raine,
                           Or grounds defrauding hope, while trees complaine;
                           Sometime of waters, ſometime of thoſe ſtarres,
                           That ſcorch the fields, ſometime of winters warres.
                        
                        And that God will hardly once in halfe a yeare ſend you a ſeaſon, that ſhal throughly pleaſe your Bayly, and content your Receauer: and that if it be good for your vines, it be not hurtfull for your meddowes.
                        
                           Aut nimijs torret feruoribus aetherius Sol,
                           Aut ſubiti perimunt imbres, gelidaeque pruinae,Lucret. l. 5▪ 215.
                           
                           Flabràque ventorum violento turbine vexent.
                           Or with exceſſiue heate heau'ns Sunne doth toaſt,
                           Or ſodaine ſtormes do kill, and chilling froſt,
                           Or violent whirle-winde blaſts doe vexe the coaſt.
                        
                        As that new and well-ſhapen ſhoe of that man of former ages, which hurts and wrings your foote: and that a ſtranger knowes not what it coſtes you, and what you contribute to maintaine the ſhow of that order, which is ſeene in your houſholde: and which peraduenture you purchaſe at too high a rate. It was very late before I betooke my ſelfe to husbandrie. Thoſe whom nature cauſed to be borne before mee, haue long time ridde mee of that carefull burthen: I had already taken another habite, more ſutable to my complexion. Neuertheleſſe by that I haue obſerued therein, I finde it to be rather a troubleſome, then a hard occupation. Whoſoeuer is capable of any other thing, may eaſily diſcharge that. If I would ſeeke to grow rich; that way would ſeeme ouer-long and tedious to mee: I would then haue ſerued our kings; a trade more beneficiall then all others; ſince I pretend but to get the reputation, that as I haue gotten nothing, ſo haue I not waſted any thing; ſutable to the reſt of my life; as vnfit to affect any good, as improper to worke any euill of conſequence: and that I onely ſeeke to weare out my life, I may (God bee thanked) doe it without any great attention: if the worſt come to paſſe, before pouerty aſſaile you, ſeeke by preuention to cut of your charges, and by husbanding your expences keepe afore hand with it; that is it I truſt vnto, and hope to reforme my ſelfe before it come neare or enforce mee to it. As for other matters, I haue foreſtalled many degrees and eſtabliſhed ſundry wayes in my minde, to liue and rubbe out with leſſe then I haue. I ſay to liue with contentment. Non aeſtimatione
                           Cic. Parad. 
                           cenſus, verum victu atque cultu, terminatur pecuniae modus. The meaſure of money is lymited not by the eſtimate of wealth or place, but by the manner of liuing and other furniture. My very neede doth not ſo preciſely poſſeſſe my whole eſtate, but that without touching to the quick or empairing the maine, fortune ſhall finde ſomething to play vpon, or take hold of. My very preſence as ignorant and grim as it is, affordeth much helpe to my houſhould affaires: I apply my ſelfe thereunto but ſomewhat diſpightfully: conſidering the manner of my houſe, which is, that ſeuerally to burne my candle at one end, the other is thereby nothing ſpared. Trauels do not much hurt mee, were it not for the charges▪ which are exceeding great and beyond my ability: hauing euer beene accuſtomed to iourney not onely with neceſſary, but alſo decent equipage: and that's the reaſon I make but ſhort iorneis and trauel not to often: wherein I imploy but the ſcumme and what I can well ſpare, temporiſing and differing, according as it commeth more or leſſe. I will not haue the pleaſure of my wandring to corrupt the delight of my retiring. Contrary-wiſe my intent is, that they nouriſh and fauor one another. Fortune hath ſteaded me in this; that ſince my chiefeſt profeſſion in this life, was to

liue delicately and quietly, and rather negligently then ſeriouſly, it hath depriued me of need to hoard vp riches, to prouide for the multitude of my heires. For one, if that be not ſufficient for him, where with I haue liued ſo plentiouſly, at his owne perill be it. His indiſcretion ſhall not deſerue, that I wiſh him more. And euery man (according to the example of Phocion) prouid
                                 •
                              th ſufficiently for his children, that prouid
                                 •
                              th they be not vnlike to him. I ſhould by no meanes be of Crates his mind, or commend his proceeding. He left his mony with a banquier vpon this condition: That if his children were fooles he ſhould deliuer it them: but proouing wiſe and able to ſhift for themſelues, hee ſhould diſtribute the ſame amongſt the greateſt fooles. As if fooles being leaſt capable to make ſhift without it, were more capable to vſe riches. So it is, that the hurt▪ proceeding from my abſence, doeth not (in mine opinion) deſerue, ſo long as I ſhall haue meanes to beare it, I ſhould refuſe to accept the occaſions that offer themſelues, to diſtract mee from this toyleſome aſſiſtance. There is euer ſome peece out of ſquare. Sometimes the buſineſſe of one houſe, and other times the affaires of another, doe hurry you. You pry too neare into all things: herein, as well as els where, your perſpicuity doth harme you. I ſteale from ſuch occaſions as may mooue me to anger; and remooue from the knowledge of things, that thriue not: yet can I not ſo vſe the matter, but ſtill I ſtumble (being at home) vpon ſome inconuenience, which diſpleaſeth me. And ſleight knaveries, that are moſt hidden from mee are thoſe I am beſt acquainted with Some there are, which to avoyd a further miſchiefe, a man muſt helpe to concea
                              ••
                            himſelfe: vaine prickings (vaine ſometimes) but yet ever prickings. The leaſt and ſleighteſt hindrances, are the ſharpeſt. And as the ſmalleſt letters hurt our eyes moſt, ſo the leaſt affaires grieue vs moſt: A multitude of ſlender euils offendeth more, then the violence of one alone, how great ſoeuer. Euen as ordinary thornes being ſmall and ſharpe pricke vs more ſharpely and ſans threatning, if on a ſudden we hit vpon them. I am no Philoſopher: Euils oppreſſe me according as they waigh; and waigh according to their forme, as well as according to the matter; and often more. I haue more inſight in them, then the vulgar ſort; and ſo haue I more pacience. To conclude, if they hurt me not, they lie heauie vpon me. Life is a tender thing, and eaſie to be diſtempered. Since I began to grow towards peeuiſh age, andby conſequence toward frowardnes, nemo enim reſiſti
                                 •
                              
                           
                           
                              S
                                    ••
                                 . 
                                    •
                                 p. 1. 13▪ 
                              f.
                            
                           ſibi eum ceperit impelli; For no man ſtayes himſelfe when he is ſet on going. What euer fond cauſe hath brought me to it; I prouoke the humour that way: which afterward by his owne motion is ſoſ
                              •
                           red and exaſperated, atracting and heaping vp one matter vpon another, to feede it ſelfe withal.
                        
                           Stillici
                                 •
                              i
                                 •
                               caſus lapidem cauat:
                           By often falling on,
                           Euen water breakes a ſtone.
                        
                        Theſe ordinary diſtilling drops conſume and v
                              •
                           cerate me. Ordinary inconueniences are never light. They are continuall and irreparable, if they continually and inſeperatly aryſe from the members of husbandry. When I conſider my affaires a farre off, and in groſſe, I finde, be it becauſe I have no exact memory of them, that hitherto they have thrived beyond my reaſons and expectation. Me thinks I draw more from them, then there is in them: then good ſucceſſe betraieth me. But am I waded into the buſineſſe? See I all theſe parcels march?
                        
                           Tum vero in curas animum deducimus omnes.Virg. Aen. l. 5. 720.
                           
                           Then we our minde divide,
                           To cares on every ſide.
                        
                        A thouſand things therein giue me cauſe to deſire and feare. Wholy to forſake them is very eaſie vnto me: without toyling and vexation altogether to apply my ſelfe vnto them; is moſt hard. It is a pitty full thing, to be in a place, where whatſouer you ſee, doeth ſet you a worke and concerne you. And me thinkes, I enioy more blithely and taſte more choiſely the pleaſures of a ſtranger houſe, then of mine owne: and both my minde and taſte runne more freely and purely on them. Diogenes anſwered according to my humor when being demanded what kinde of Wine he liked beſt: Another mans, ſaid he. My father delighted to build at Montaigne▪
                            where he was borne: and in all this policy of domeſtik affairs, I loue to make vſe of his examples and rules; vnto which I will as much as poſſibly I can tie my ſucceſſors. Could I

doe better for him, I would performe it. I glory his will is at this day practiſed by mee, and doth yet worke in me. God forbid I ſhould ever ſuffer any image of life to periſh vnder my hands, that I may yeeld vnto ſo good and ſo kinde a father. If I have vndertaken to finiſh any old peece of wall, or repaire any building either imperfect or decaied: it hath certainly beene, becauſe I had rather a reſpect to his intention, then a regard to my contentment. And I blame my negligence or litherneſſe, that I have not continued to perfect the foundations he had laid, or beginnings he had left in his houſe: by ſo much the more, becauſe I am in great likelihood to be the laſt poſſeſſor of it, namely of my race, and ſet the laſt hand vnto it. For, concerning my particular application, neither the pleaſure of building, which is ſaid to be ſo bewitching, nor hunting, nor hauking, nor gardens, nor ſuch other delights of a retired life, can much embuſie or greatly ammuſe me. It is a thing for which I hate my ſelfe, as of all other opinions, that are incommodious to me. I care not ſo much to have them vigorous and learned, as I labour to have them eaſie and commodious vnto life. They are indeed ſufficiently true and ſound, if they be profitable and pleaſing. Thoſe, who hearing mee relate mine owne inſufficiencie in matters pertaining to husbandry or thrift, are ſtill whiſpering in mine eares, that it is but a kinde of diſdaine, and that I neglect to know the implements or tooles belonging to husbandry or tillage, their ſeaſons and orders; how my wines are made, how they graft; and vnderſtand or know the names and formes of hearbes, of ſimples, of fruits, and what belongs to the dreſſing of meats wherewith I live and whereon I feede; the names and prizes of ſuch ſtuffes I cloath my ſelfe withall, only becauſe I doe more ſeriouſly take to heart ſome higher knowledge; bring me in a manner to deaths doore. That is meere ſottiſhneſſe; and rather brutiſhneſſe then glory: I would rather be a cunning horſeman, then a good Logician.
                        
                           Quin tu aliquid ſaltem potius quorum indiget vſus,Virg. buc. ecl. 2. 71.
                           
                           
                              Ʋiminibus mollique paras detexere iunco?
                           Why rather with ſoft wings make you not ſpeed,
                           To worke-vp ſomething, whereof there is need?
                        
                        Wee hinder our thoughts from the generall and maine point, and from the cauſes and vniverſall conducts; which are very well directed without vs, and omit our owne buſineſſe; and Michael, who concernes vs neerer then man. Now I moſt commonly ſtay at home, but I would pleaſe my ſelfe better there, then any where elſe.
                        
                           Sit meaeſedes vtinam ſenectae,
                           Sit modus laſſo maris, & viarum,Hor. car. l. 2. od. 6. 6.
                           
                           —Militiaeque.
                           
                           Some repaire and reſt to mine old age I crave,
                           Iournying, ſailing, with a weary warring,
                           O let an end have.
                        
                        I wot not whether I ſhall come to an end of it. I would that in lieu of ſome other part of his ſucceſſion, my father had reſigned me that paſſionate love and deare affection, which in his aged yeeres he bare vnto his houſhold husbandrie. He was very fortunate, in conforming his deſires vnto his fortune, and knew how to be pleaſed with what he had. Politike Philoſophie may how it liſt accuſe the baſeneſſe and blame the ſterilitie of my occupation, if as hee did, I may but once finde the taſte of it. I am of this opinion, that the honorableſt vacation, is to ſerve the Common-wealth, and be profitable to many. Fructus enim ingeni
                                 •
                               & virtutis, omniſ
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               praeſtantiae,
                           Cicer. Amic. 
                           tum maximus accipitur, quum in proximum quem
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               confertur. For then is moſt fruit reaped, both of our wit and vertue, and all other excellencie, when it is beſtowed vpon our neighbours. As for me, I depart from it: partly for conſcience ſake; (for whence I diſcerne the wait, concerning ſuch vacations, I alſo diſcover the ſlender meanes I have to ſupply them withall: And Plato a maſter workman in all politike government, omitted not to abſtaine from them) partly for litherneſſe. I am well pleaſed to enioy the world, without troubling or preſſing my ſelfe with it; to live a life, onely excuſable: and which may neither bee burthenſome to mee, nor to any other. Never did man goe more plainly and careleſly to worke in

the care and government of a third man, then I would, had I a ground to worke vpon. One of my wiſhes at this inſtant, ſhould be to finde a ſonne in law, that could handſomely allure and diſcreetly beguile my old yeeres, and lull them aſleepe; into whoſe hands I might depoſe, and in all ſov
                              ••
                           raigntie reſigne the conduct and managing of my goods; that he might diſpoſe of them as I doe, and gaine vpon them what I gaine: alwaies provided he would but carry a truly-thankfull and friendly minde. But what? wee live in a world, where the loyaltie of our owne children is not knowen. Whoſoever hath the charge of my purſe when I travell, hath it freely and without controll: as well might hee deceive me in keeping of reckonings. And if he be not a Divell, I bind him to deale well and honeſtly, by my careleſſe confidence. Multi fallere docuerunt, dum timent falli, & alies ius peccands ſuſpicando fecerunt. Many have taught others to deceive, while themſelves feare to be deceived, and have given them iuſt cauſe to offend, by ſuſpecting them vniuſtly. The moſt ordinary aſſurance I take of my people, is a kinde of diſacknowledge or neglect: I never preſume vices, but after I have ſeene them: and truſt more yoong men, ſuch as I imagine to be leaſt debauſhed and corrupted by ill examples. I had rather heare at two moneths end, that I have ſpent foure hundred crownes, then every night when I ſhould goe to my quiet bed, have mine eares tired and my minde vexed with three, five, or ſeven. Yet in this kinde of ſtealing, have I had as little ſtolne from mee as any other: True it is, I lend a helping hand to ignorance. I wittingly entertaine a kinde of troubled and vncertaine knowledge of my money: vntill it come to a certaine meaſure I am content to doubt of it. It is not amiſſe if you allow your boy or ſervant ſome ſmall ſcope for his diſloyalty and indiſcretion. If in groſſe we have ſufficiently left to bring our matters to paſſe, this exceſſe of fortunes-liberalitie, let vs ſomewhat more ſuffer it to ſtand to her mercie: It is the gleaners fee. After all, I eſteeme not ſo much my peoples fidelitie, as I diſeſteeme their iniurie. Oh baſe and abſurd ſtudy, for a man to ſtudy his money, and pleaſe himſelfe with handling and counting the ſame: for that's the way whereby covetouſneſſe maketh her approches. Since eighteene yeeres, that I have had the full diſpoſing of my goods in mine owne hands, I could never yet be brought to over-looke, neither titles nor bookes, no not ſo much as the principall affaires, that ſhould neceſſarily paſſe thorow my knowledge and care.
                        It is no Philoſophicall contempt, to neglect worldly and tranſitorie things: my taſte is not ſo exquiſitly nice; for I value them according to their worth at leaſt: but truly it is an inexcuſable ſlothfulneſſe and childiſh negligence. What would I not rather doe, then reade a contract? And more willingly, as a ſlave to my buſineſſe, with carke to over-looke, and care to ſurvay a company of old-duſtie bookes, and plod vpon muſtie writings? and which is worſe, other mens, as ſo many doe daily for money? I have nothing ſo deare as care and paine: and I only endevour to become careleſſe and retchleſſe. I had, in mine opinion, beene fitter (if it might be) to live by others fortune, without bounden dutie or bondage. And yet I wot not (the matter being thorowly ſifted) whether according to my humour and fortune, what I muſt endure with my affaires, and pocket vp at my ſervants and familiars hands, hath not more abiection, importunitie and ſharpneſſe, then the following of another man ſhould have, better borne then my ſelfe, and who ſhould guide me ſomewhat at mine eaſe. Servitus obedientia eſt fra
                                 •
                              ti animi & abi
                                 •
                              cti, arbitrio carentis ſuo: Service is an obedience of an abiect broken
                           C
                                 •
                              c. Parad. 5. 
                           heart, that cannot diſpoſe of it ſelfe. Crates did worſe, who voluntarily caſt himſelfe into the liberties of povertie, only to ridde himſelfe of the inconveniences, indignities and cares of his houſe. Which I would not doe: I hate povertie as much as griefe; yet could I finde in my heart to change this manner of life, with another leſſe glorious and not ſo troubleſome. Being abſent, I diſcharge my ſelfe of all ſuch carefull thoughts, and ſhould leſſe feele the ruinous downe-fall of a Towne, then being preſent, the fall of a Tile. Alone my minde is eaſily freed, but in companie, it endureth as much as a Plough-mans. My horſe vncurb'd, his reines miſplaced, or a ſtirrup or a ſtrap hitting againſt my legge, will keepe me in a checke a whole day long. I rouze my courage ſufficiently againſt inconvenience; mine eies I cannot.
                        Senſus ô ſuperi ſenſus!
                        At home I am ever anſwerable for whatſoever is amiſſe. Few maſters (I ſpeake of meane condition, as mine is; whereof if any be, they are the more happie) can ſo fully relie vpon a ſecond, but ſtill a good part of the burden ſhall lie vpon them. That doth peradventure take ſomething from my faſhion, in entertaining of gueſts or new commers; and happily I have

beene able to ſtay ſome, more by my kitchin, then by my behaviour or grace: as doe the peeviſh and fantaſticall; and I greatly diminiſh the pleaſure I ſhould take in my houſe, by the viſitations and meetings of my friends. No countenance is ſo fooliſh, or ſo ill beſeeming a gentleman in his owne houſe, as to ſee him vexed or troubled about his houſhold or domeſ
                              •
                           icke affaires; to ſee him whiſper one of his ſervants in the eare, and threaten another with his lookes. It ſhould inſenſibly glide-on, and repreſent an ordinary courſe. And I vtterly diſlike, that a man ſhould entertaine h
                              ••
                            gueſts with either excuſing, or boaſting of the entertainment he affoordeth them. I love order and cleanlineſſe,
                        
                           —& cantharus & lanx,
                              H
                                    ••
                                 . l. 1. epiſt. 5. 23.
                           
                           Oſtendun
                                 •
                               mihime.
                           My diſh, my drinking kanne,
                           Shew me what kinde of man.
                        
                        well nigh as much as plentie: In mine owne houſe I exactly looke vnto neceſſitie, little vnto ſtate, and leſſe vnto ornament. If your neighbours ſervant be fighting with his companion, if a diſh be overthrowen, you but laugh at it: you ſleepe quietly whileſt Sir ſuch a one is buſie caſting vp of accounts, and over-ſeeing his ſtocke with his ſteward, and all about your proviſion for to morrow. I ſpeake according to mine opinion: omitting not in generall to thinke, how pleaſing an ammuſement it is to certaine natures, to ſee a quiet and proſperous houſhold, directed by a formall and guided by a regular order. But not intending to faſten mine owne errours and inconveniences to the matter: Nor to gaine-ſay Plato, who deemeth that the happieſt occupation any man can follow, is, to apply himſelfe to his owne private buſineſſe, without injuſtice. When I iourney, I have nothing to care for but my ſelfe, and how my money is laid out: which is diſpoſed with one onely precept. Over-many parts are required in hoarding and gathering of goods: I have no skill in it. In ſpending, I have ſome knowledge, and how to give my expences day; which indeed is it's principall vſe. But I attend it over-ambitiouſly, which makes it both vnequall and deformed: and beſides that immoderate in one and other viſage. If it appeare and make a good ſhew, if it ſerve the turne, I indiſcreetly goe after it; and as indiſcreetly reſtraine my ſelfe, if it ſhine or ſmile not vpon mee. Whatſoever it bee, either Art or nature, that imprints this condition of life into vs, by relation to others, it doth vs much more hurt then good. In going about to frame apparances according to the common opinion, wee defraud our ſelves of our owneprofits. Wee care not ſo much, what our ſtate, or how our being is, in vs and in effect, as wee doe how and what it is, in the publike knowledge of others. Even the goods of the minde, and wiſedome it ſelfe, ſeeme fruitleſſe vnto vs, if onely enioied by vs: except it bee ſet foorth to the open view and approbation of ſtrangers. There are ſome, whoſe gold runnes by ſtreames in places vnder ground, and that imperceptible: others extend the ſame in plates and leaves: So that to ſome, pence are worth crownes, to others the contrary: the world iudging the employment and value, according to the outward ſhew. All over-nice care and curious heed about riches, hath a touch or a taſte of avarice. Even their diſpending and over regular and artificiall liberalities are not worth a warie heede-taking, and countervaile not a painefull diligence. Who ſo will make his expence even and juſt, makes it ſtrict and forced. Either cloſe-keeping or employing of money, are in themſelves things indifferent; and admit no colour of good or evill, but according to the application of our will. The other cauſe that drawes mee to theſe iourneies or vagaries, is the diſſent or diſparitie in the preſent manners of our ſtate: I could eaſily comfort my ſelfe with this corruption, in regard of the publike intereſt;
                        
                           —peioraque ſ
                                    •
                                 cula f
                                    •
                                 rri,
                              Iuven. ſat. 13. 28.
                           
                           Temporibus, quorum ſceleri non invenit ipſa
                           Nomen, & à nullo poſuit natura met allo.
                           Times worſe then times of Iron, for whoſe bad frame
                           And wickedneſſe ev'n nature findes no name,
                           Nor hath from any metall ſet the ſame.
                        
                        
                           But not for mine owne: I am in particular over-preſſed by it. Forround about where I dwell, we are, by the over-long licentiouſneſſe of our inteſtine civill warres, almoſt growen old, in ſo licentious and riotous a forme of ſtate,
                        
                           Quippe vbi fas verſum atque nefas;Virg. Georg. l. 1. 505.
                           
                           As where of good and bad,
                           There is no difference had.
                        
                        That in good truth, it were a wonder, if it ſhould continue and maintaine it ſelfe.
                        
                           Armati terram exercent, ſemperque recentesVirg. Aen. l. 9. 612.
                           
                           Convectare invat praedas, & vivere rapto.
                           They armed plow the land, and ioy to drive,
                           And draw new booties, and on rapine live.
                        
                        To conclude, I ſee by our example, that the ſocietie of men doth hold and is ſewed together, at what rate ſoever it be: where ever they be placed, in mooving and cloſing, they are ranged and ſtowed together; as vneven and rugged bodies, that orderleſſe are hudled in ſome cloſe place, of themſelves finde the way to be vnited and ioined together one with another: and many times better, then Art could have diſpoſed them. King Philip aſſembled a rabble of the moſt leaud, reprobate and incorrigible men he could finde out, all which he placed in a Citie, which of purpoſe he had cauſed to be built for them, of whom it bare the name. I imagine, that even of their vices, they erected a politike contexture amongſt themſelves, and a commodious and iuſt ſocietie. I ſee not one action, or three, or a hundred, but even divers manners, admitted and commonly vſed: ſo extravagant (namely in diſloyaltie) and ſo barbarous in inhumanitie, which in my conceit, are the worſt and moſt execrable kinde of vices, that I have not the heart ſo much as to conceive them without horrour: All which I in a manner admire as much as I deteſt. The exerciſe of theſe egregious villanies, beareth a brand of vigour and hardineſſe of minde, as much as of error and irregular confuſion. Neceſſitie compoſeth, and aſſembleth men together. This caſuall combining is afterward framed into lawes. For, there have beene ſome as barbarouſly-ſavage, as humane opinion could poſſible produce, which notwithſtanding have kept their bodies in as good health and ſtate, in long life, as thoſe of Plato or Ariſtotle could doe. And to ſay true, all theſe deſcriptions of policie, fained by Art and ſuppoſition, are found ridiculous and fooliſh, to bee put in practiſe. Theſe great and long-continuing altercations, about the beſt forme of ſocietie, and moſt commodious rules to vnite vs together, are altercations onely proper for the exerciſe of our wit: As in arts, divers ſubiects are found, that have no eſſence but in agitation and diſputing, without which they have no life at all. Such an Idea of policie, or picture of government, were to be eſtabliſhed in a new world; but we take a world already made and formed to certaine cuſtomes: wee engender not the ſame as Pyrrha, nor beget it as Cadmus. By what meanes ſoever we have the privilege to re-erect and range the ſame anew, wee can very hardly wreſt it from the accuſtomed habit and fold it hath taken, except we breake all. Solon being demanded, whether hee had eſtabliſhed the beſt lawes he could for the Athenians: anſwered, yea of thoſe they would have received: with ſuch a ſhift doth Varre excuſe himſelfe; ſaying, that if hee were newly to beginne to write of religion, he would plainly tell what his beleefe were of it: But being alreadie received, he will ſpeake more of it according to cuſtome, then to nature. Not to ſpeake by opinion, but conſonant to truth, the moſt excellent and beſt policie, for any nation to obſerve, is that vnder which it hath maintained it ſelfe. It's forme and eſſentiall commoditie doth much depend of cuſtome. We are eaſily diſpleaſed with the preſent condition: yet doe I hold that to wiſh the government of few, in a popular eſtate: or in a Monarchie, another kinde of policie, it is a manifeſt vice and meere follie.
                        
                           Ayme l' eſt at tel que tu le uois eſtre,P
                                    ••
                                 rac.
                           
                           S'il eſt royall, ayme laroyautè,
                           S'il eſt de peu, ou bien communantè,
                           Ayme l' auſſi, car Dieu t'y a faict naiſtre.
                        
                        
                           
                           Love thou the ſtate, as thou ſeeſt it to be,
                           If it be Regall, love the royall race,
                           If of a few, or Common-weale, embrace
                           It as it is; borne there God pointed thee.
                        
                        So was the good Lord of Pibrac wont to ſpeake of it, whom we have lately loſt: a man of ſo quaint and rare wit, of ſo ſound iudgement, and of ſo milde and affable behaviour. The vntimely loſſe of whom, with that of the Lord of Foix, both fatally hapning to vs at one time, are ſurely loſſes of great conſequence vnto our crowne. I wot not well, whether France, amongſt all the men it hath left, is able to affoord vs two ſuch other Gentlemen, as may either in ſinceritie and worth, or in ſufficiencie and iudgement, for the counſell of our Kings, match theſe two Gaſcoynes. They were two mindes diverſly faire; and verily, if we reſpect the corrupted age wherein we live, both rare and gloriouſly-ſhining, every one in her forme. But alas, what deſtinie had placed them on the Theater of this age, ſo diſſonant and different in proportion from our deplorable corruption, and ſo farre from agreeing with our tumultuous ſtormes? Nothing doth ſo neerely touch and ſo much overlay an eſtate, as innovation: Only change doth give forme to iniuſtice, and ſcope to tyrannie. If ſome one peece be out of ſquare, it may be vnderpropt: one may oppoſe himſelfe againſt that, which the alteration, incident, and corruption, naturall to all things, doth not too much elonge and draw vs from our beginnings and grounded principles: But to vndertake to re-erect and found againe ſo huge a maſſe, and change or remoove the foundations of ſo vaſt a frame, belongeth only to them, who in ſtead of purging, deface; and in lieu of cleanſing, ſcrape out: that will amend particular faults by an vniverſall confuſion, and cure diſeaſes by death: Non tam commutandarum quàm overtendarum rerum cupidi. Not ſo deſiroús to have things altered, as overthrowen. The world is fondly vnapt to cure it ſelfe: So impatient with that which vexeth or grieveth it, that it only aimeth to ridde it ſelfe of it, never regarding at what rate. Wee ſee by a thouſand examples, that it doth ordinarily cure it ſelfe at it's owne charges: To be freed from a preſent evill, is no perfect cure, except there be a generall amendment of condition. The end of a skilfull Chirurgion, is not to mortifie the bad fleſh, it is but the beginning and addreſſing of his cure: he aimeth further, that is, to make the naturall to grow againe, and reduce the partie to his due being and qualitie. Whoever propoſeth onely to remoove what gnaweth him, ſhall be to ſeeke: for good doth not neceſſarily ſucceed evill: another, yea a worſe evill may ſucceed it. As it hapned vnto Ceſars murderers, who brought the common-wealth to ſo diſtreſfull a plunge, that they repented themſelves they ever medled with the ſame. The like hath ſince fortuned to divers, yea in our daies. The French that live in my times, know very well what to ſpeake of ſuch matters. All violent changes and great alterations, diſorder, diſtemper and ſhake a ſtate very much. He that ſhould rightly reſpect a ſound recovery or abſolute cure, and before al other things thorowly conſult about it, might happily grow ſlaoke in the buſineſſe, and beware how he ſet his hand vnto it. Pacuvius Calavius corrected the vice of this manner of proceeding by a notable example. His fellow Citizens had mutined againſt their magiſtrates; He being a man of eminent authoritie in the City of Capua, found one day the means to ſhut vp the Senate in the Guildhall or Palace, then calling the people together in the market place, told them; That the day was now come, wherein with full and vnreſiſted libertie, they might take vengeance of the tyrants, that had ſo long and ſo many waies oppreſſed them, all which he had now at his mercy, alone and vnarmed. His opinion was, that orderly by lots, they ſhould be drawen out one after another: which done, they might particularly diſpoſe of every one: and whatſoever ſhould be decreed of them, ſhould immediately be executed vpon the place; provided they ſhould therewithall preſently adviſe and reſolve to nominate and eſtabliſh ſome honeſt and vndetected man, to ſupply the roome of the condemned, leſt their Citie ſhould remaine void of due officers. To which they granted, and heard no ſooner the name of a Senatour read, but a loud exclamation of a generall diſcontent was raiſed againſt him: which Pacuvius perceiving, hee requeſted ſilence, and thus beſpake them. My countrey-men, I ſee very well, that man muſt be cut off, hee is a pernicious and wicked member; but let vs have another ſound-good man in his place; and whom would you name for that purpoſe? This vnexpected ſpeech bred a diſtracted ſilence; each one finding himſelfe to ſeeke and much confounded in the choiſe. Yet one,

who was the boldeſt-impudent amongſt them, nominated one whom he thought fitteſt; who was no ſooner heard, but a generall conſent of voices, louder then the firſt, followed, all refuſing him: as one taxed with a hundred imperfections, lawfull cauſes and iuſt obiections, vtterly to reject him. Theſe contradicting humours growing more violent and hot, every one following his private grudge or affection, there enſued a farre greater confuſion and hurly-burly in drawing of the ſecond and third Senatour, and in naming and chooſing their ſucceſſours; about which they could never agree. As much diſorder and more conſuſion about the election, as mutuall conſent and agreement about the demiſſion and diſplacing. About which tumultuous trouble, when they had long and to no end laboured and wearied themſelves, they began, ſome heere, ſome there, to ſcatter and ſteale away from the aſſemblie: every one with this reſolution in his minde, that the oldeſt and beſt knowen evill, is ever more tolerable, then a freſh and vnexperienced miſchiefe. By ſeeing our ſelves piteouſly toſſed in continuall agitation: for what have we not done?
                        
                           Eheu cicatricum & ſceleris pudet,Hor. car. l. 1. od. 95. 33.
                           
                           Fratrum
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                              : quid nos dur a refugimus
                           Aetas? quid intactum nefaſti
                           Liquimus? vnde manus iuventus
                           Metu Deorum continuit? quibus
                           Pepercit aris?
                           Alas for ſhame of wickedneſſe, and ſcarres
                           Of brother-country-men in civill warres.
                           We of this hardned world, what doe we ſhunne?
                           What have we execrable left vndone?
                           To ſet their hand whereto hath youth not dared
                           For feare of Gods? what altars hath it ſpared?
                        
                        I am not very ſudden in reſolving or concluding.
                        
                           —ipſa ſi velit ſalus,
                              Ter. Adel. act. 4. ſc. 7.
                           
                           Servare prorſus non poteſt hanc familiam:
                           This familie if ſafetie would
                           Keepe ſafe, I doe not thinke it could.
                        
                        Yet are wee not peradventure come vnto our laſt period. The preſervation of ſtates, is a thing in all likelihood exceeding our vnderſtanding. A civill policie (as Plato ſaith) is a mighty and puiſſant matter, and of very hard and difficult diſſolution; it often endureth againſt mortall and inteſtine diſeaſes: yea againſt the iniury of vniuſt lawes, againſt tyrannie, againſt the ignorance and debordement of Magiſtrates, and againſt the licentiouſneſſe and ſedition of the people. In all our fortunes, we compare our ſelves to that which is above vs, and looke toward thoſe that are better. Let vs meaſure our ſelves by that which is beneath vs, there is no creature ſo miſerably wretched, but findes a thouſand examples to comfort himſelfe withall. It is our fault, that we more vnwillingly behold what is above vs, then willingly what is beneath vs, And Solon ſaid, that ſhould a man heape vp in one maſſe all evils together, there is none, that would not rather chuſe to carry backe with him ſuch evils as he alreadie hath, then come to a lawfull diviſion with other men of that chaos of evils, and take his allotted ſhare of them. Our Common-wealth is much crazed, and out of tune. Yet have divers others beene more dangerouſly ſicke, and have not died. The Gods play at hand-ball with vs, and toſſe vs vp and downe on all hands. Enimverò Dij nos homines quaſi pilas habent.
                           Plaut. capt. Prel. 
                           The Gods perdie doe reckon and racket vs men as their tennis-balles. The deſtinies have fatally ordained the ſtate of Rome, for an exemplar patterne of what they can doe in this kinde. It containeth in it ſelfe all formes and fortunes that concerne a ſtate: whatſoever order, trouble, good or bad fortune may in any ſort effect in it. What man may iuſtly deſpaire of his condition, ſeeing the agitations, troubles, alterations, turmoiles and motions, wherewith it was toſſed to and fro, and which it endured? If the extenſion of rule, and far-ſpreading domination, be the perfect health of a ſtate, of which opinion I am not in any wiſe (and Iſocrates doth

greatly pleaſe me, who inſtructeth Nicocles, not to enuie thoſe Princes, who haue large dominations, but ſuch as can well maintaine and orderly preſerue thoſe that haue beene hereditarily eſcheated vnto them) that of Rome was neuer ſo ſound, as when it was moſt ſicke and diſtempered. The worſte of it's forme, was to it the moſt fortunate. A man can hardly diſtinguiſh or know the image of any policy vnder the firſt Emperors: it was the moſt horrible and turbulent confuſion that could be conceaued, which notwithſtanding it endured and therein continued; preſeruing, not a Monarchie bounded in hir limites, but ſo many nations, ſo different, ſo diſtant, ſo euill affected, ſo confuſedly commanded, and ſo vniuſtly conquered.
                        
                           —nec gentibus vllis
                              Lucret. l. 1. 82.
                           
                           Commodat in populum terrae pelagi
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               potentem,
                           Inuidiam fortuna ſuam.
                           Fortune doth to no other nation lend
                           Enuie, againſt that people force to bend,
                           Which both by land and ſea their force extend.
                        
                        
                           All that ſhaketh doth not fall: The contexture of ſo vaſt a frame houlds by more then one naile. It houlds by it's antiquity: as olde buildings, which age hath robbed of foundation, without loame or morter, and neuertheleſſe live and ſubſiſt by their owne waight,
                        
                           —nec iam validis radicibus haerens
                              Ibid 138.
                           
                           Pondere tuta ſuo eſt.
                           Though now to no ſtrong roote it ſticke ſo faſt,
                           Yet is it ſafe by ſelfe-waight, and will laſt.
                        
                        Moreouer he goes not cunningly to worke, that onely ſuruayes the flankes and dykes: to iudge well of the ſtrength of a place; he muſt heedily marke how, and view which way it may be approached, and in what ſtate the aſſailant ſtand. Few veſſels ſinke with their owne waight, and without ſome extraordinary violence. Caſt wee our eyes about vs, and in a generall ſuruay conſider all the world; all is tottring; all is out of frame. Take a perfect view of all great ſtates both in Chriſtendome and where ever els we haue knowledge-of, and in all places you ſhall finde a moſt evident threatning of change and ruine:
                        
                           Et ſua ſunt illis incommoda, parque per omnes
                           Tempeſtas.
                           Their diſcommodities they knowe:
                           One ſtorme alike ore-all doth grow.
                        
                        Aſtrologers may ſport themſelves, with warning vs, as they doe of imminent alterations and ſucceeding revolutions: their divinations are preſent and palpable, wee need not prie into the heavens to finde them out. Wee are not only to draw comfort from this vniverſall aggregation of evils and threats; but alſo ſome hope for the continuance of our ſtate: forſomuch as naturally nothing falleth, where all things fall: a generall diſeaſe is a particular health: Conformitie is a qualitie enemie to diſſolution. As for me, I nothing deſpaire of it, and me thinks I already perceive ſome ſtarting holes to ſave vs by:
                        
                           Deus haec fortaſſe benignaHor epod. 13. 10.
                           
                           Reducet in ſedem vice.
                           It may be, God with gracious entercourſe
                           Will re-eſtabliſh theſe things in their courſe.
                        
                        Who knowes, whether God hath determined it ſhall happen of them, as of bodies that are purged, and by long grieuous ſickeneſſes brought to a better and ſounder ſtate; which thorowly purged diſeaſes do afterward yeeld them a more entire and purely-perfect health, then that they tooke from them? That which grieveth me moſt, is, that coumpting the ſymptomes or affects of our evill, I ſee as many meerely proceeding of nature, and ſuch as the heavens ſend vs, and which may properly be termed theirs, as of thoſe that our owne ſurfet, or exceſſe, or miſſe-diet, or humane indiſcretion confer vpon vs. The very Planets ſeeme orderly to declare vnto vs, that we haue continued long enough, yea and beyond our ordinary limits. This alſo grieves me, that the neereſt evill threatning vs, is not a diſtemper or alteration in the whole and ſolide maſſe, but a diſſipation and divulſion of it: the extreameſt of our feares. And even in theſe fantaſticall humors or dotings of mine, I feare the treaſon of my memory, leaſt vnwarily it haue made me to regiſter ſomethings twiſe. I hate to correct

and agnize my ſelfe, and can never endure but grudgingly to review and repoliſh what once hath eſcaped my pen. I heere ſet downe nothing that is new or lately found out. They are vulgar imaginations; and which peradventure having beene conceived a hundred times, I feare to have already enrolled them. Repetition is ever tedious, were it in Homer: But irkeſome in things, that have but one ſuperficiall and tranſitorie ſhew. I am nothing pleaſed with inculcation or wreſting-in of matters, be it in profitable things, as in Seneca. And the maner of his Stoike ſchoole diſpleaſeth me, which is, about every matter, to repeat at large, and from the beginning to the end, ſuch principles and preſuppoſitions, as ſerve in generall: and every hand-while to re-allege anew the common arguments, and vniverſall reaſons. My memorie doth daily grow worſe and worſe, and is of late much empaired:
                        
                           Pocula lethaeos vt ſi duc
                                 •
                              ntia ſomnos,Hor. Epod. 14: 3
                           
                           —Arente fauce traxerim.
                           
                           As though with drie lips I had drunke that vp,
                           Which drawes oblivions ſleepe in drowſie cup.
                        
                        I ſhall henceforward be faine (for hitherto thankes be to God, no capitall fault hath hapned) whereas others ſeeke time and occaſion, to premeditate what they have to ſay, that I avoid to prepare my ſelfe, for feare I ſhould tie my ſelfe to ſome ſtrict bond, on which I muſt depend. To be bound and tied doth ſomewhat diſtract me: namely when I am wholly to relie and depend on ſo weake an inſtrument, as is my memorie. I never read this ſtory, but I feele a certaine proper and naturall offence. Lyncestez being accuſed of a conſpiracie againſt Alexander, the very ſame day, that according to cuſtome, he was led forth in preſence of all the armie, to be heard in his owne defence, had in his minde a premeditated oration, which he had ſtudiouſly learn't by rote, whereof, ſtammering and faltring, hauing vttered ſome words: And wreſtling with his memory, and ſtriving to run-it ouer againe, he was ſodainly charged by the ſoldiers that were about him and ſlaine with pikes; as they who held him to be conuicted. His amazement and ſilence, ſerued them as a confeſſion. For they ſuppoſed that hauing had ſo long leaſure in priſon to prepare himſelfe, it was not (as they thought his memory failed him, but his guilty conſcience bridled ſo his tongue and depriued him of his wonted faculties. It was truly wel ſpoken. The very place, the company and expectation aſtonieth a man, when he moſt aimeth at an ambition of well-ſpeaking. What can a man doe, when a meere oration ſhall bring his life into conſequence? As for mee, if I bee tide vnto a preſcript kinde of ſpenking, what bindes mee to it, doth alſo looſe me from it, when I haue committed and wholly aſſigned my ſelfe vnto my memory; I ſo ſtrongly depend on the ſame, that I ouerwhelme it: ſhe faints vnder her owne burthen. So much as I refer my ſelfe vnto her, ſo much am I diuided from my ſelfe: vntill I make tryall of my countenance. And I have ſometimes beene in paine, in concealing the bondage wherevnto I was engaged: whereas my deſſigne, in ſpeaking, to repreſent a maine careleſneſſe of accent and countenance, ſuddaine and vnpremeditated, or ca
                              •
                           ull motions as riſing of preſent occaſions; rather loving to ſay nothing of any worth, then make ſhew I came provided to ſpeake well: a thing above all vnſeemely, to men of my profeſſion, and of over ſtrict an obligation, to one that cannot hold much: Preparation gives more to hope, then it brings with it. A man doth often ſtrip himſelfe into his doblet, to leape ſhorter, then he did in his gowne. Nihil eſt his, qui placere volunt, tam adverſarium, quam expectati
                                 •
                              . There is none ſo great an enemy, to them that would pleaſe, as expectation. It is written of Curio the Orator, that when he propoſed the diſtribution of the parts of his oration, into three or foure; or the number of his arguments and reaſons, it was his ordinary cuſtome, either to forget ſome one, or adde one or two more vnto it. I have ever ſhunned to fall into ſuch an inconvenience: as one hating theſe ſelfepromiſes and preſcriptions: Not onely for the diſtruſt of my memory; but alſo becauſe this forme drawes over neare vnto an artiſte. Simplicior a militares decent. Plaine wordes and manners become Martialiſts. Sufficeth, I have now made a vow vnto my ſelfe, no more to vndertake the charge, to ſpeake in any place of reſpect: For, to ſpeake in reading what one hath written: beſides that it is moſt fooliſh and abſurde, it is a matter of great diſadvantage to ſuch as by nature were interreſſed or might do any thing in the action. And wholy to rely or caſt my ſelfe to the mercy of my preſent inuention, much leſſe: I have it by nature ſo dull and troubled, that it cannot in any wiſe ſupply me in ſudaine, and ſtead me in important neceſſities. May it pleaſe the gentle reader, to ſuffer this one part of Eſſay to runne on, and this third

ſtraine or addition of the reſt of my pictures peeces. I adde, but I correct not: Firſt, becauſe he who hath hypothekiſed or engaged his labour to the world, I finde apparance, that he hath no longer right in the ſame: let him, if hee be able, ſpeake better els where, and not corrupt the worke he hath already madeſale-off; Of ſuch people, a man ſhould buy nothing, but after they are dead: let them throughly thinke on it, before they produce the ſame. Who haſtens them? My booke is alwaies one: except that according as the Printer goes about to renew it, that the buyers depart not altogether empty-handed, I give my ſelfe law to adde thereto (as it is but vncoherent chocky, or ill joined in-laid-worke) ſome ſupernumeral embleme. They are but over-waights, which diſgrace not the firſt forme, but give ſome particular price vnto every one of the ſucceeding, by an ambitious pety ſubtility. Whence notwith ſtanding, it may eaſily happen, that ſome tranſpoſition of chronology is thereto commixt: my reportes taking place according to their opportunity, and not ever according to their age. Secondly, forſomuch as in regard of my ſelfe, I feare to looſe by the exchange: My vnderſtanding doth not alwayes goe forward, it ſometimes goes alſo backeward: I in a manner diſtruſt mine owne fantaſies as much, though ſecond or third as I doe when they are the firſt; or preſent, as paſt. We many times correct our ſelves as fooliſhly, as we taxe others vnadviſedly. I am growne aged by a number of yeares ſince my firſt publications, which were in a thouſand five hundred and foure ſcore. But I doubt whether I be encreaſed one inch in wiſedome. My ſelfe now, and my ſelfe anon, are indeede two; but when better; in good ſooth I cannot tell. It were a goodly thing to be old, if wee did onely march towards amendment. It is the motion of a drunkard, ſtumbling, reeling, giddiebrain'd, formeles; or of reedes, which the ayre dooth cauſually waue to and fro, what way it bloweth. Antiochus in his youth, had ſtoutly and vehemently written in fauor of the Academy; but being olde hee changed copy, and writ as violently againſt it: which of the two I ſhould follow, ſhould I not ever follow Antiochus? Hauing once eſtabliſhed a doubt, to attempt to confirme the certainty of humane opinions, were it not an eſtabliſhing of a doubt, and not of the certainty? and promiſe, that had he had another age given him with aſſurance to liue, hee ſhould euer haue beene in termes of new agitations; not ſo much better, as other and different? Publike fauor hath given me ſome more bouldnes, then I hoped for: but the thing I feare moſt, is to breed a glutting ſaciety. I would rather ſpur, then bee weary. As a wiſeman of my time hath done. Commendation is ever pleaſing, from whom, from whence, or wherefore ſo ever it come: yet ought a man to be informed of the cauſe, if he will iuſtly pleaſe and applaud himſelfe therewith. Imperfections themſelues haue their meanes to be recommended. Vulgar and common eſtimation, is little happy if it come to encounter: And I am deceiued, if in my dayes, the worſt compoſitions and abſurdeſt bookes have not gained the credit of popular breath. Verily I am much beholding to diuers honeſt men, and I thanke them, that vouchſafe to take my endeuours in good parte. There is no place where the deffects of the faſhion doe ſo much appeare, as in a matter, that in it ſelfe hath nothing to recommend it. Good reader blame not me, for thoſe that paſſe here, either by the fantazie or vnwarineſſe of others: for every hand, each workman, brings his owne vnto them. I neither medle with orthography (and would onely have them follow the ancient) nor with curious pointing: I have ſmall experience in either. Where they altogether breake the ſence, I little trouble my ſelfe therewith; for at leaſt they diſcharge me. But where they will wreſt-in and ſubſtitute a falſe ſence (as often they doe) and wyre-draw me to their conceits, then they ſpoile me. Nevertheleſſe, when the ſentence is not ſtrong or ſinnowie according to my meaning, an honeſt man may reject it to be mine. Hee that ſhall know how little laborious I am and how framed after mine owne faſhion, will eaſily beleeve, I would rather endite anew, as many more other Eſſayes, then ſubject my ſelfe to trace theſe over againe, for this childiſh correction. I was ſaying erewhile, that being plunged in the deepeſt mine of this new kinde of mettall, I am not onely deprived of great familiarity with men of different cuſtome from mine; and other opinions, by which they holde together by a knot, commanding all other knots: but am not alſo without ſome hazard, amongſt thoſe, with whom all things are equally lawfull: moſt of which cannot now adayes empaire their market towarde our juſtice: whence the extreame degree of licenciouſneſſe proceedeth. Caſting ouer all the particular circumſtances that concerne mee, I finde no one man of ours, to whome the inhibition of our lawes coſteth any thing, eyther in gaine ceaſing, or

in loſſe appearing (as Lawyers ſay) more then vnto my ſelfe. And ſome there bee, that in chollericke heate and humourous fury will cracke and vaunt much, that will performe a great deale leſſe then my ſelfe, if once wee come to an equall ballance. As a houſe at all times freely open, much frequented, of great haunt and officious in entertaining all ſortes of people (for I could never bee induced, to make an implement of warre thereof: which I perceive much more willingly to bee ſought-out and flocked vnto, where it is furtheſt from my neighbours) my houſe hath merited much popular affection: And it were a hard matter to gourmandize my ſelfe vpon mine owne dung-hill: And I repute it a wonderfull and exemplar ſtrangeneſſe, that having vndergone ſo many ſtormie-wrackes, ſo divers changes and tumultuous-neighbour agitations, it doth yet to this day continue free, and (as I may ſay) an vndefiled virgine from ſhedding of blood, ſpoile or ſacking. For, to ſay true, it was poſſible for a man of my diſpoſition to eſcape from a conſtant and continuall forme, whatſoever it was. But the contrary invaſions, hoſtile incurſions, alternations and viciſſitudes of fortune, round about me, have hetherto more exaſperated, then mollified the humor of the country: and recharge mee with dangers and invincible difficulties. I have eſcaped. But it greeveth me that it is rather by fortune: yea and by my diſcretion then by juſtice: And it vexeth me, to bee without the protection of the lawes and vnder any other ſafegard, then theirs. As things now ſtand, I live more then halfe by the favour of others; which is a ſevere obligation. I would not bee endebted for my ſafety, neither to the goodneſſe, nor to the goodwill of other great men, which applaude themſelves with my liberty and legalitie; nor to the facilitie of my predeceſſours or mine owne manners: for, what if I were other then I am? If my demeanour, the libertie of my converſation, or happily alliance, binde my neighbours: It is a cruelty, that they ſhould acquit themſelves of it, in ſuffring mee to live, and that they may ſay; wee give him a free and and vndiſturbed continuation of divine ſeruice, in the chaple of his houſe, whilſt all other Churches round about him are by vs prophaned and deſerted; and wee freely allow and pardon him the fruition of his goods and vſe of his life, as hee maintaineth our wiues, and in time of neede keepeth our cattle. It is long ſince, that in my houſe, wee have a ſhare in Lycurgus the Athenians praiſe, who was the generall ſtorier, depoſitary and guardian of his fellow-cittizens goods and purſes. I am now of opinion, that a man muſt live by lawe and authoritie, and not by recompence or grace. How many gallant men have rather made choiſe to looſe their life, then be endebted for the ſame? I ſhunne to ſubmit my ſelfe to any manner of obligation. But aboue all, to which bindes mee by dutye of bondes of honour. I finde nothing ſo deare, as what is given mee: and that becauſe my will remaines engaged by a title of ingratitude: And I more willinglye receaue ſuch offices, as are to bee ſould. A thing eaſie to bee beleeved; for theſe I give nothing but money; but for thoſe, I give my ſelfe. The bonde that houldes mee by the lawe of honeſtie, ſeemeth to mee much more vrgent and forcible, then that of ciuill compulſion. I am more gentlye tide by a Notarie, then by my ſelfe. Is it not reaſon, that my conſcience bee much more engaged to that, wherein ſhee hath ſimplie and onely beene truſted? Els, my faith oweth nothing; for ſhee had nothing lent hir. Let one helpe himſelfe with the confidence or aſſurance hee hath taken from mee. I would much rather breake the priſon of a wall or of the lawes, then the bonde of my worde. I am nicely ſcrupulous in keeping of my promiſes, nay almoſt ſuperſticious; and in all ſubiects I commonly paſſe them vncertaine and conditionall. To ſuch as are of no waighty conſequence, I adde force with the jealouſie of my rule: ſhee rackes and chargeth mee with hir owne intereſt. Yea, in ſuch enterpriſes as are altogether mine owne and free, if I ſpeake the word, or name the point, mee thinkes I preſcribe the ſame vnto mee: and that to give it to anothers knowledge, it is to preordaine it vnto himſelfe. Me ſeemes I abſolutely promiſe, when I ſpeake. Thus I make but ſmall bragge of my propoſitions. The condemnation I make of my ſelfe, is more mooving, forcible and ſevere, then that of the judges, who onely take me by the countenance of common obligation: the conſtraint of my conſcience is more rigorous and more ſtrictly ſevere: I faintly follow thoſe duties, to which I ſhould bee haled, if I did not goe to them. Hoc ipſum it a iuſtum eſt quod rectè fit, ſi voluntarium. This is ſo iuſt, as it is well done, if it be voluntarie. If the action have no glimps of libertie,Cic. off. l. 1. it hath neither grace nor honour.
                        
                           
                           Quod me ius cogit, vix voluntate impetrent.Ter. Ad. act. 3. ſc. 4.
                           
                           What law enforceth me to doe,
                           By will they can ſcarſe winne me to.
                        
                        Where neceſſitie drawes mee, I loue to relent my will. Quia quicquid imperio cogitur, exigenti magis, quam praestanti acceptum refertur. For whatſoeuer is enforced by command, is more imputed to him that exacteth then in him that performeth. I know ſome, that follow this aire, even vnto injuſtice: They will rather giue, then reſtore; ſooner lend, then pay; and more ſparingly doe good to him, to whom they are bound to doe it. I bend not that way, but am mainely againſt it. I love ſo much to diſoblige and diſcharge my ſelfe, that I have ſomtimes eſteemed as profit, the ingratitudes, the offences, and indignities I had receiued of thoſe, to whom either by nature or accidents, I was by way of friendſhip ſomewhat behoulding: taking the occaſion of their fault for a quittance and diſcharge of my debt. Although I continue to pay them the apparent offices with common reaſon; I notwith ſtanding finde ſome ſparing in doing that by juſtice, which I did by affection, and ſomwhat to eaſe my ſelfe with the attention and diligence of my inward will. Est prudentis ſustinere vt curſum, ſic impetum
                           Cic. de. A
                                 •••
                              . 
                           benevolentiae. It is a wiſemans part to keepe a hand as on the courſe, ſo on the career of his goodwill: Which where ever I apply my ſelfe, is in me too vrgent and over-preſſing: at leaſt for a man that by no meanes would be enthronged. Which husbandrie ſtands mee in ſtead of ſome comfort, about the imperfections of thoſe that touch me. Indeed I am much diſpleaſed, they ſhould thereby be of leſſe worth: but ſo it is, that I alſo ſave ſomething of my engagement and application towards them. I allow of him, that loves his childe ſo much the leſſe, by how much more he is either deformedly crooked, or ſcald-headed: And not onely when he is knaviſh or ſhrewd, but alſo being vnluckie or ill borne (for God himſelfe hath in that abated of his worth and naturall eſtimation) alwaies provided, that in ſuch a cold and ſleight affection, hee beare himſelfe with moderation and exact iuſtice. In mee, proximitie of blood doth nothing diminiſh, but rather aggravate defects. After all, according to the skill I have in the knowledge of benefits and thankfulneſſe, which is a knowledge very ſubtill and of great vſe, I ſee no man more free and leſſe indebted, then hitherto I am my ſelfe. What ever I owe, the ſame I owe ſimply to common and naturall obligations. There is no man more abſolutely quit and cleare elſe whence.
                        
                           —nec ſunt mihi nota potentum
                           
                           Munera.
                           With gifts I am not much acquainted,
                           Of mighty men, and much leſſe tainted.
                        
                        
                           Princes give mee ſufficiently, if they take nothing from me, and doe me much good, if they doe me no hurt: it is all I require of them. Oh how much am I beholding to God, forſomuch as it hath pleaſed him, that whatſoever I enioy, I have immediately received the ſame from his grace: that he hath particularly reſerved all my debt vnto himſelfe. I moſt inſtantly beſeech his ſacred mercy, that I may never owe any man ſo much as one eſſentiall God-a-mercie. Oh thriſe fortunate libertie, that hath brought me ſo farre. May it end ſucceſſefully. I endevour to have no manner of need of any man. In me omnis ſpes eſt mihi. All my hope for all my helpe is my ſelfe. It is a thing that every man may effect in himſelfe: but they more eaſily, whom God hath protected and ſheltred from naturall and vrgent neceſſities. Indeed it is both lamentable and dangerous, to depend of others. Our ſelves, which is the ſafeſt and moſt lawfull refuge, are not very ſure vnder our ſelves. I have nothing that is mine owne, but my ſelfe: yet is the poſſeſſion thereof partly defective and borrowed. I manure my ſelfe, both in courage (which is the ſtronger) and alſo in fortune, that if all things elſe ſhould forſake me, I might finde ſomething, wherewith to pleaſe and ſatisfie my ſelfe. Eleus Hippias did not onely ſtore himſelfe with learning, that in time of need hee might ioifully withdraw himſelfe amongſt the Muſes, and be ſequeſtred from all other company: nor onely with the knowledge of Philoſophie, to teach his minde to be contented with her, and when his chance ſhould ſo diſpoſe of him, manfully to paſſe over ſuch incommodities, as exteriorlie might come vnto him. But moreover he was ſo curious in learning to dreſſe his meat, to notte his haire, to make his clothes, breeches and ſhoes, that as much as could poſſibly be, he might wholly relie & truſt to himſelfe, & be freed from all ſorraine helpe. A man doth more freely and more blithely enioy borrowed goods: when it is not a bounden ioviſſance and

conſtrained through neede: and that a man hath in his will the power, and in his fortune the meanes to live without them. I know my ſelfe well. But it is very hard for mee to imagine any liberalitie of another body ſo pure towards me, or ſuppoſe any hoſpitalitie ſo free. ſo hartie and genuine, as would not ſeeme affected, tyrranicall, diſgraced and attended on by reproach, if ſo were that neceſſitie had forced and tied me vnto it. As to give is an ambicious qualitie, and of prerogative, ſo is taking a qualitie of ſubmiſſion. Witnes the injurious and pickthanke refuſall, that Baiazeth made of the preſents which Themir had ſent him. And thoſe which in the behalfe of Soliman the Emperor were ſent to the Emperour of Calicut, did ſo vex him at the hart, that hee did not onely vtterly reject and ſcornfully refuſe them; ſaying, that neither himſelfe nor his predeceſſors before him, were accuſtomed to take any thing, and that their office was rather to give; but beſides he cauſed the Ambaſſadors, to that end ſent vnto him, to be caſt into a deepe dungeon. When Thetis (ſaith Ariſtotle) flattereth Iupiter: when the Lacedemonians flatter the Athenians, they doe not thereby intend to put them in minde of the good they have done them, which is ever hatefull, but of the benefits they have received of them. Thoſe I ſee familiarly to employ and make vſe of all men, to begge and borrow of all men, and engage themſelves to all men, would doubtleſſe never doe it, knew they as I doe, or taſted they as I have done, the ſweete content of a pure and vndepending libertie: and if therewithall (as a wiſeman ought) they did duly ponder what it is for a man to engage himſelfe into ſuch an obligation, or libertie depriving bond. It may happily be paide ſometimes, But it can never be vtterly diſſolved. It is a cruell bondage, to him that loveth, throughly and by all meanes to have the free ſcope of his libertie. Such as are beſt and moſt acquainted with mee, know, whether ever they ſaw any man living, leſſe ſoliciting, leſſe craving, leſſe inportuning or leſſe begging, then I am, or that leſſe employeth or chargeth others, which if I be, and that beyond all moderne example, it is no great wonder, ſithence ſo many parts of my humours or manners contribute thereunto. As a naturall kinde of ſtubborneſſe; an impatience to be denied; a contraction of my deſires and deſſeignes; and an inſufficiencie or vntowardlineſſe in all manner of affaires; but aboue all, my moſt fauoured qualities, lethall ſloathfulneſſe, and a genuine liberty. By all which meanes, I have framed an habite, mortally to hate, to be behoulding to any creature els, or to depend of other, then vnto and of my ſelfe. True it is, that before I employ the beneficence or liberalitie of an other, in any light or waighty occaſion, ſmall or vrgent neede ſoever: I doe to the vtmoſt power employ all that ever I am able, to auoide and forbeare it. My friends doe ſtrangelie importune and moleſt me, when they ſolicite and vrge mee to entreate a third man. And I deeme it a matter of no leſſe charge and imputation, to diſingage him that is endebted vnto mee, by making vſe of him, then to engage my ſelfe vnto him that oweth mee nothing. Both which conditions being removed, let them not looke for any comberſome, negotious and carefull matter at my hands (for I have denounced open warre vnto all manner of carke and care) I am commodiouſly eaſie and ready in times of any bodies neceſſitie. And I have alſo more avoyded to receave, then ſought to giue: which (as Ariſtotle ſaith) is alſo more facile. My fortune hath afforded me ſmall meanes to benefit others and that little ſhe hath beſtowed on me, the ſame hath ſhee alſo meanely and indifferently placed. Had ſhee made mee to bee ſo borne that I might have kept ſome ranke amongſt men, I would then have beene ambicious in procuring to bee beloved, but never to bee feared or admired. Shall I expreſſe it more inſolentlie? I would have had as much regarde vnto pleaſing, as vnto profiting. Cyrus doth moſt wiſelye, and by the mouth of an excellent Captaine and alſo a better Philoſopher, eſteeme his bountie and priſe his good deedes, farre beyonde his valour and aboue his warlike conqueſts. And Scipio the elder, whereſoever hee ſeeketh to prevaile and ſet forth himſelfe, rateth his debonairitie and valueth his humanitie above his courage and beyond his victories: and hath ever this glorious ſaying in his mouth: That hee hath left his enemies as much cauſe to love him, as his friends. I will therefore ſay, that if a man muſt thus owe any thing, it ought to bee vnder a more lawfull title, then that whereof I ſpeake, to which the law of this miſerable warre dooth engage me; and not of ſo great a debt, as that of my totall preſervation and whole eſtate: which dooth vnreparablie over-whelme mee. I have a thouſand times gone to bedde in mine houſe, imagining I ſhould the very ſame night, either have beene betrayed or ſlaine in my bedde:

compounding and conditioning with fortune, that it might be without apprehenſion of fearefull aſtoniſhment and languiſhment; And after my praiers, have cried out,
                        
                           Impius haec tam culta novalia miles habebit?
                           Shall theſe our grounds ſo deckt and dreſt,Virg. eclo. 1. 11.
                           
                           By godleſſe ſouldiers be poſſeſt?
                        
                        What remedie? It is the place where my ſelfe and moſt of my anceſtors were borne: therein have they placed their affection and their name. Wee harden our ſelves vnto whatſoever we accuſtome our ſelves. And to a wretched condition, as ours is, cuſtome hath beene a moſt favourable preſent, given vs by nature, which enureth and lulleth our ſenſe aſleepe, to the ſuffring of divers evils. Civill warres have this one thing worſe then other warres, to cauſe every one of vs to make a watch-tower of his owne houſe.
                        
                           Quàm miſerum, porta vitam muro
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               tueri,O
                                    •
                                 id. Triſt. l. 4. el. 1. 69.
                           
                           Vixque ſuae tutum viribus eſſe domus!
                           How hard with gate and wall our life to gard,
                           And ſcarce be ſafe in our owne houſes bard
                        
                        It is an irkeſome extremitie, for one to be troubled and preſſed even in his owne houſhold and domeſticall reſt. The place wherein I dwell, is ever both the firſt and laſt to the batterie of our troubles: and where peace is never abſolutely diſcerned,
                        
                           Tum quoque cùm pax eſt, trepidant formidine belli.Lucan. l. 1. 256
                           
                           Ev'n when in peace they are,
                           They quake for feare of warre.
                           —quoties pacem fortuna laceſſit,
                              Ibid. 252.
                           
                           Hac iter eſt bellis, melius fortuna dediſſes
                           Orbe ſub Eoo ſedem, gelida
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               ſub Arcto,
                           Erranteſ
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               domos.
                           As oft as fortune troubleth peace, their race
                           Warres makes this way: fortune with better grace,
                           In th'Eaſterne world thou ſhouldſt have giv'n them place,
                           Or wandring tents for warre, vnder the cold North-ſtarre.
                        
                        I ſometimes draw the meanes to ſtrengthen my ſelfe againſt theſe conſiderations, from careleſneſſe and idleneſſe: which alſo in ſome ſort bring vs vnto reſolution. It often befulleth me, with ſome pleaſure, to imagine what mortall dangers are, and to expect them. I do even hood-winkt, with my head in my boſome and with ſtupiditie, plunge my ſelfe into death, without conſidering or knowing it, as into a deepe, hollow and bottomleſſe abyſſe, which at one leape doth ſwallow me vp, and at an inſtant doth caſt me into an eternall ſlumber, full of inſipiditie and indolencie. And in theſe ſhort, ſudden or violent deaths, the conſequence I fore-ſee of them, affoords me more comfort, then the effect of feare. They ſay, that even an life is not the beſt, becauſe it is long, ſo death is the beſt, becauſe it is ſhort. I eſtrange not my ſelfe ſo much by being dead, as I enter into confidence with dying. I enwrap and ſhrowd my ſelfe in that ſtorme, which ſhall blinde and furiooſly wrap me, with a ready and inſenſible charge. Vea if it hapned (as ſome gardners ſay) that thoſe Roſes and Violets are ever the ſweeter and more odoriferous, that grow neere vnto Garlike and Onions, forſomuch as they ſucke and draw all the ill ſavours of the ground vnto them: ſo that theſe depraved natures would draw and ſucke all the venome of mine aire, and infection of my climate; and by their neereneſſe vnto me, make me ſo much the better and purer; that I might not loſe all. That is not; but of this, ſomething may be, forſomuch as goodneſſe is the fairer and more attracting when it is rare, and that contrarietie ſtifneth, and diverſitie encloſeth well-doing in it ſelfe, and by the jealouſie of oppoſition and glory, it doth inflame it. Theeves and ſtealers (godamercie their kindneſſe) have in particular nothing to ſay to mee: no more have I to them. I ſhould then have to do with over-many ſorts of men. Alike conſciences lurke vnder diver
                                 •
                               kinds of garments: Alike crueltie, diſloialtie and ſtealing. And ſo much the worſe, by how much it is more baſe, more ſafe and more ſecret vnder the colour of lawes. I hate leſſe an open-profeſſed iniurie, then a deceiving traitrous wrong; an hoſtile and war-like, then a peacefull and lawfull. Our feaver hath ſeaſed vpon a body, which it hath not much empaired. The fire was in it, but now the flame hath taken hold of it. The report is greater; the hurt but little. I ordinarily anſwer ſuch as demand reaſons for my voiages: That I know what I ſhunne,
                           
                           but w
                                 •
                              t not what I ſeeke. If one tell mee, there may bee as little ſound health amongſt ſtrangers, and that their manners are neither better nor purer, then ours: I anſwer firſt that it is very hard:
                        
                           Tam multa ſcelerum facies.Virg. Georg. l. 1. 506.
                           
                           The formes ſo manifold
                           Of wickedneſſe we hold.
                        
                        Secondly, that it is ever a gaine, to change a bad eſtate for an vncertaine. And that others evils, ſhould not touch vs ſo neare as ours. I will not forget this, that I can never mutinie ſo much againſt France, but I muſt needs looke on Paris with a favourable eye: It hath my hart from my infancy: whereof it hath befalne me as of excellent things: the more other faire and ſtately citties I have ſeene ſince, the more hir beauty hath power and doth ſtill vſurpingly gaine vpon my affection. I love that Cittie for hir owne ſake, and more in hir onely ſubſiſting and owne being, then when it is full-fraught and embelliſhed with forraine pompe and borrowed gariſh ornaments: I love hir ſo tenderly, that even hir ſpots, hir blemiſhes and hir warts are deare vnto me. I am no perfect French-men, but by this great-matchleſſe Cittie, great in people, great in regard of the felicitie of hir ſituation; but above all, great and incomparable in varietie and diverſitie of commodities: The glory of France, and one of the nobleſt and chiefe ornaments of the world. God of his mercy free hir, and chaſe away all our diviſions from hir: Being entirely vnited to hir ſelfe, I finde hir defended from all other violence. I forewarne hir, that of all factions, that ſhall bee the worſt, which ſhall breed diſcord and ſedition in hir. And for hir ſake, I onely feare hir ſelfe. And ſurely, I am in as great feare for hir, as for any other part of our ſtate. So long as ſhe ſhall continue, ſo long ſhall I never want a home or retreat, to retire and ſhrowd my ſelfe at all times: a thing able to make me for get the regret of all other retreates. Not becauſe Socrates hath ſaid it, but becauſe ſuch is in truth my humour, and peradventure not without ſome excuſe, to eſteeme all men as my country-men; and as I kindly embrace a Polonian as a Frenchman; poſtpoſing this naturall bond, to vniverſall and common. I am not greatly ſtrucken with the pleaſantneſſe of naturall aire. Acquaintances altogether new and wholly mine, doe in my conceit countervaile the woorth of all other vulgar and caſuall acquaintances of our neighbours. Friendſhips meerely acquired by our ſelves, doe ordinarily exceed thoſe, to which wee are joyned, either by communication of Climate, or affinity of blood. Nature hath plac't vs in the world free and vnbound, wee empriſon our ſelves into certaine ſtreights: As the kings of Perfia▪
                            who bound themſelves never to drinke other water, then of the river Choaſpez; fooliſhly renouncing all lawfull righ of vſe in all other waters: and for their regard dried vp all the reſt of the world. What Socrates did in his latter dayes, to deeme a ſentence of baniſhment worſe, then a doome of death againſt himſelfe, being of the minde I am now, I ſhall never be neither ſo baſe minded, nor ſo ſtrictly habituated in my country, that I would follow him. The celeſtiall lives, have divers images, which I embrace more by eſtimation, then by affection. And ſome to extraordinary, and ſo highly elevated, which becauſe I am not able to conceive, I cannot embrace by eſtimation. This humor was very tenderly appehended by him, who deemed all the world to be his Citty. True it is, he diſdained peregrinations, and had not much ſet his foote beyond the territory of Athens. What, if he bewailed the mony his friend offred to lay out, to diſingage his life, and refuſed to come out of priſon, by the interceſſion of others, becauſe he would not diſobey the lawes, in a time wherin they were otherwiſe ſo corrupted? Theſe examples are of the firſt kind for me Of the ſecond there are others, which I could find in the very ſame man. Many of theſe rare examples exceed the power of my action; but ſome exceed alſo the force of my judgement. Beſides theſe reaſons, I deem travell to be a profitable exerciſe. The minde hath therein a continuall exercitation, to marke things vnknowne, and note new obiects. And as I have often ſaid, I know no better ſchoole, to faſhion a mans life, then vnceſſantly to propoſe vnto him the diverſity of ſo many other mens lives, cuſtomes, humors and fantazies; and make him taſte or apprehend one ſo perpetuall variety of our natures ſhapes or formes. Therein the body is neither abſolutely idle nor wholly troubled: and, that moderate agitation doth put him into breath. My ſelfe, as crazed with the chollicke as I am, can ſit eight, yea ſometimes ten houres on horſe-backe, without wearineſſe or tyring.
                        
                           
                           
                              Ʋires vltra ſortemque ſenectae.Virg. Aen. l. 6. 114.
                           
                           Beyond ſtrength ordinary,
                           Which old yeeres vſe to cary.
                        
                        No weather is to me ſo contrary, as the ſcorching heat of the parching Sunne. For, theſe 
                              Ʋmbrels or riding canapies, which ſince the ancient Romans, the Italians vſe, doe more weary the armes, then eaſe the head. I would faine-faine know what induſtry it was in the Perſians, ſo anciently, and even in the infancie of luxuriouſneſſe (as Xenoph
                                 •
                              n reporteth) to fanne themſelves, and at their pleaſures to make cold ſhades. I love rainy and durty weather, as duckes doe. The change either of aire or climate doth nothing diſtemper mee. All heavens are alike to me, I am never vexed or beaten, but with internall alterations, ſuch as I produce my ſelfe, which ſurpriſe and poſſeſſe me leaſt in times of way-fairing. It is a hard matter to make mee reſolve of any iourney: but if I be once on the way, I hold out as long and as farre, as another. I ſtrive as much in ſmall, as I labour in great enterpriſes: and to prepare my ſelfe for a ſhort journey or to viſit a friend, as to vndertake a farre-ſet voiage. I have learn't to frame my journies after the Spaniſh faſhion, all at once and out-right; great and reaſonable. And in extreme heats, I travell by night, from Sunne-ſet to Sunne-riſing. The other faſhion, confuſedly and in haſte to bait by the way and dine, eſpecially in Winter, when the daies are ſo ſhort, is both troubleſome for man, and incommodious for horſe. My Iades are the better, and hold out longer. No horſe did ever faile me, that held out the firſt daies iourney with me. I water them in all waters; and onely take care of their laſt watering, that before I come to mine Inne they have way enough to beat their water. My ſlothfulneſſe to riſe in the morning, alloweth ſuch as follow mee ſufficient leaſure to dine, before wee take horſe. As for me, I never feed over-late: I commonly get an appetite in eating, and no otherwiſe: Iam never hungry but at the table. Some complaine, that being maried, and well ſtrucken in yeeres, I have enured my ſelfe, and beene pleaſed to continue this exerciſe. They doe me wrong: The beſt time for a man to leave his houſe, is when hee hath ſo ordered and ſettled the ſame, that it may continue without him: and when he hath ſo diſpoſed his affaires, that they may anſwer the ancient courſe and wonted forme. It is much more indiſcretion, and an argument of want of judgement, to goe from home, and leave no truſtie guard in his houſe, and which for lacke of care may be ſlow or forgetfull in providing for ſuch neceſſities, as in your abſence it may ſtand in need of. The moſt profitable knowledge, and honourableſt occupation for a matron or mother of a familie, is the occupation and knowledge of huſwiferie. I ſee divers covetous, but few huſwives. It is the miſtreſſe-qualitie that all men ſhould ſeeke after, and above all other endevour to finde: as the only dowry, that ſerveth, either to ruine and overthrow, or to ſave and enrich our houſes. Let no man ſpeake to me of it; according as experience hath taught me, I require in a maried woman the Oeconomicall vertue above all others. Wherein I would have her abſolutely skilfull, ſince by my abſence I commit the whole charge, and bequeath the full government of my houſhold to her.
                        I ſee (and that to my griefe) in divers houſes the maſter or goodman come home at noone all weary, durty and duſty, with drudging and toiling about his buſineſſe, when the miſtreſſe or good-wife is either ſcarce vp, or if ſhee bee, ſhee is yet in her cloſet, dreſſing, decking, ſmugging or trimming of her ſelfe. It is a thing onely fitting Queenes or Princes; whereof ſome doubt might be made. It is ridiculous that the idleneſſe, and vniust that the litherneſſe of our wives ſhould be foſtered with our ſweat, and maintained by our travell: No man (as neere as I can) ſhall fortune to have a more free and more abſolute vſe, or a more quiet and more liquid fruition of his goods, then I have. If the huſband bring matter; nature her ſelfe would have women to bring forme. Concerning duties of wedlocke-friendſhip, which ſome happily imagine to be intereſſed or preiudiced by the husbands abſence, I beleeve it not. Contrariwiſe, it is a kinde of intelligence, that eaſily growes cold by an over-continuall aſſiſtance, and decaieth by aſſiduitie; for, to ſtand ſtill at racke and manger breedeth a ſatietie. Every ſtrange woman ſeemeth to vs an honeſt woman: And all feele by experience, that a continuall ſeeing one another, cannot poſſibly repreſent the pleaſure, men take by parting and meeting againe. Theſe interruptions fill mee with a new kinde of affection, toward mine owne people, and yeeld me the vſe

of my houſe more pleaſing: viciſſitude doth now and then en-earneſt my minde toward one, and then toward another. I am not ignorant how true amitie hath armes long enough, to embrace, to claſpe and hold from one corner of the world Ʋnto another: namely in this, where is a continuall communication of offices, that cauſe the obligation, and revive the remembrance thereof. The Stoickes ſay, that there is ſo great an affinitie and mutuall relation, betweene wiſe men, that he who dineth in France, feedeth his companion in Aegypt; and if one of them doe but hold vp his finger, where ever it bee, all the wiſe men diſperſed vpon the habitable land, feele a kinde of aid thereby. IoƲiſſance and poſſeſſion, appertaine chiefly Ʋnto imagination. It embraceth more earneſtly and vnceſſantly what ſhe goeth to fetch, then what wee touch. Summon and count all your daily ammuſements; and you ſhall finde, you are then furtheſt and moſt abſent from your friend, when hee is preſent with you. His aſſiſtance releaſeth your attention, and giveth your thoughts libertie, at all times and vpon every occaſion, to abſent themſelves. If I be at Rome, or any where elſe, I hold, I ſurvay and governe my houſe and the commodities, which I have left about and in it. I even ſee my walles, my trees, my graſſe and my rents, to ſtand, to grow, to decay and to diminiſh, within an inch or two of that I ſhould doe when I am at home.
                        
                           Ante oculos errat domus, errat forma locorum.
                           My houſe is ſtill before mine eies,
                           There ſtill the forme of places lies.
                        
                        If we but onely enioy what we touch, farewell our crownes when they are in our coafers, and adiew to our children, when they are abroad or a hunting; we would have them neerer. In the garden is it farre off? within halfe a daies iourney? What, within ten leagues, is it farre or neere? If it be neere: what is eleven, twelve, or thirteene? and ſo ſtep by ſtep. Verily that woman who can preſcribe vnto her husband, how many ſteps end that which is neere, and which ſtep in number begins the diſtance ſhe counts farre, I am of opinion, that ſhe ſtay him betweene both.
                        
                           —excludat iurgïa finis.
                              Hor. l. 2. epiſt. 1. 38.
                           
                           Let the concluſion, Exclude confuſion.
                           
                              Ʋtor permiſſo, caudaeque pilos vt equinae
                           Paulatim vello: & demo vnum, demo etiam vnum
                           Dum cadat eluſus ratione ruentis acervi.
                           Ivſe the grant, and plucke by one and oneIbid. 45.
                           
                           The horſe-taile haires, till when the buſh is gone,
                           I leave the Iade a curtall taile or none.
                        
                        And let them boldly call for Philophie to helpe them. To whom ſome might reproach, ſince ſhe neither diſcerneth the one nor other end of the joynt, betweene the ouermuch and the little; the long and the ſhort; the light and the heauie, the neare and the farre; ſince ſhe neither knowes the beginning nor ending thereof, that ſhe doth very vncertainly judge of the middle. Rerum natur a nullam nobis dedit cognitionem finium: Nature hath affoorded vs no knowledge of hir endes. Are they not yet wives and friendes of the deceaſed, that are not at the end of this, but in the other world? wee embrace both thoſe that haue beene, and thoſe which are not yet, not onely the abſent. We did not condition, when wee were maried, continually to keepe our ſelues cloſe hugging one another, as ſome, I wot not what little creatures doe, we ſee daily; or as thoſe bewitched people of Karenti, in a kinde of dogged manner. And a woman ſhould not haue hir eyes ſo greedily or ſo dotingly fixed on hir husbands fore-part, that if neede ſhall require, ſhe may not view his hinder-partes. But might not the ſaying of that cunning Painter, who could ſo excellently ſet foorth their humours and pourtray their conditions, fitly bee placed heere, liuely to repreſent the cauſe of their complaints?
                        
                           
                              Ʋxor, ſi ceſſes, aut te amare cogitat,Ter. Adelph. act. 1. ſ
                                    •
                                 . 1.
                           
                           Aut tete amari, aut potare, aut animo obſequi,
                           Et tibi bene eſſe ſoli, cum ſibi ſit malè.
                           If you be ſlow, your wife thinkes that in loue you are,
                           Or are belov'd, or drinke, or all for pleaſure care,
                           And that you onely fare-well, when ſhe ill doth fare.
                        
                        
                           Or might it be, that oppoſition and contradiction doe naturally entertaine, and of themſelves nouriſh them: and that they are ſufficiently accomodated, provided they diſturbe and incommode you? In truly-perfect friendſhip, wherein I preſume to have ſome skill and well-grounded experience; I give my ſelfe more vnto my friend, than I draw him vnto me. I doe not onely rather love to doe him good, then he ſhould doe any to me; but alſo, that he ſhould rather doe good vnto himſelfe, then vnto me; For then doth he me moſt good, when he doth it to himſelfe. And if abſence be either pleaſing or beneficiall vnto him, it is to me much more pleaſing, then his preſence: and that may not properly be termed abſence, where meanes and waies may be found to enter-advertiſe one another. I have heeretofore made good vſe, and reaped commoditie by our abſence and diſtance. Wee better repleniſhed the benefit, and extended further the poſſeſſion of life, by being divided and farre-aſunder: He lived, he reioiced, and he ſaw for mee, and I for him, as fully, as if he had beene preſent: Being together, one partie was idle: We confounded one another. The ſeparation of the place, made the conjunction of our mindes and willes, the richer. This inſatiate and greedie deſire of corporall preſence, doth ſomewhat accuſe the weakeneſſe in the ioviſſance of ſoules. Concerning age, which ſome allege againſt me, it is cleane contrary. It is for youth, to ſubject and bondage it ſelfe to common opinions, and by force to conſtraine it ſelfe for others. It may fit the turne of both; the people and it ſelfe: Wee have but overmuch to doe with our ſelves alone. According as naturall commodities faile vs, let vs ſuſtaine our ſelves by artificiall meanes. It is injuſtice, to excuſe youth in following her pleaſures, and forbid age to deviſe and ſeeke them. When I was yong, I concealed my wanton and covered my youthfull paſſions, with wit; and now being aged, I endevour to paſſe the ſadde and incident to yeeres, with ſport and debauches. Yet doe Platoes lawes forbid men to travell abroad, before they are forty or fifty yeeres of age, that ſo their travell may ſort more profitable, and proove more inſtructive. I ſhould more willingly conſent to this other ſecond article of the ſaid lawes, which forbiddeth men to wander abroad, after they are once threeſcore. Of which age, few that travell farre-journies returne home againe. What care I for that? I vndertake it not, either to returne or to perfect the ſame. I onely vndertake it to be in motion: So long as the motion pleaſeth me, and I walke that I may walke. Thoſe runne not, that runne after a Benefice or after a Hare: But they runne, that runne at barriers and to exerciſe their running. My de
                              •
                           ſcigne is every where diviſible, it is not grounded on great hopes: each day makes an end of it. Even ſo is my lifes voiage directed. Yet have I ſeene divers farre-countries, where I would have beene glad to have beene ſtaied. Why not? If Chryſippus, Diogenes, Cleanthes, Antipater and Zeno, with ſo many other wiſe men of that roughly-ſevere, and ſeverely-ſtrict Sect, forſooke their Countries (without iuſt cauſe to bee offended with them) onely to enioy another aire? Truly the greateſt griefe of my peregrinations, is, that I cannot have a firme reſolution, to eſtabliſh my abiding where I would. And that I muſt ever reſolve with my ſelfe to returne, for to accommodate my ſelfe vnto common humours. If I ſhould feare to die in any other place, then where I was borne; if I thought I ſhould die leſſe at my eaſe, farre from mine owne people: I would hardly goe out of France, nay I ſhould ſcarcely goe out of mine owne pariſh, without feeling ſome diſmay. I feele death ever pinching me by the throat, or pulling me by the backe: But I am of another mould; to me it is ever one, and at all times the ſame. Nevertheleſſe if I were to chuſe, I thinke it ſhould rather be on horſebacke, than in a bed; from my home, and farre from my friends. There is more hartsſorrow, than comfort, in taking ones laſt farewell of his friends. I doe eaſily forget or neglect theſe duties or complements of our common or civill courteſie. For, of Offices appertaining to vnaffected amitie, the ſame is the moſt diſpleaſing and offenſive: And I ſhould as willingly forget to give a body that great adiew, or eternall farewell. If a body reape any commoditie by this aſſiſtance, hee alſo findes infinite inconveniences in it. I have ſeene divers die moſt piteouſly, compaſſed and beſet round with their friends and ſervants: Such multitudes, and thronging of people doth ſtifle them. It is againſt reaſon, and a teſtimony of ſmal affection, and little care they have of you ſhould die at reſt. One offendeth your eies, another moleſteth your eares, the third v exeth your mouth: You have neither ſenſe nor limme, or parte of your body, but is tormented and grieved. Your hart is ready to burſt for pittie to heare your friends moanes and complaints; and to rive aſunder with ſpite to heare peradventure ſome of their wailings and moans, that are but fained and counterfet. If a man

have ever had a milde or tender nature, being weake and ready to die, he muſt then neceſſarily have it more tender and relenting. It is moſt requiſite, that in ſo vrgent a neceſſitie, one have a gentle hand and fitly applied to his ſences, to ſcratch him where he itcheth; or elſe he ought not be clawed at all. If wee muſt needs have the helpe of a Midwife, to bring vs into this world, there is reaſon we ſhould alſo have the aiding-hand of a wiſe man, to deliver vs out of the ſame. Such a one, and there with all a true friend, ſhould a man before-hand purchaſe very deare, only for the ſervice of ſuch an occaſion. I am not yet come to that diſdainfull vigor, which ſo fortifieth it ſelfe, that at ſuch times nothing aideth, nor nothing troubleth: I flie a lower pitch. I ſeeke to ſquat my ſelfe, and ſteale from that paſſage: not by feare, but by Art. My intent is not in ſuch an action, to make either triall or ſhew of my conſtancie. Wherefore? Becauſe, then ſhall the right and intereſt I have in reputation ceaſe. I am content with a death vnited in it ſelfe, quiet and ſolitarie, wholly mine, convenient to my retired and private life. Cleane contrary to the Roman ſuperſtition, where hee was judged vnhappie, that died without ſpeaking, and had not his neereſt friends to cloſe his eies. I have much adoe to comfort my ſelfe, without being troubled to comfort others: cares and vexations 
                              •
                           now in my minde, without needing circumſtances to bring me new; and ſufficient matter to entertaine my ſelfe, without borrowing any. This ſhare belongs not to the part of ſocietie: It is the act of one man alone. Let vs live, laugh and be merry amongſt our friends, but die and yeeld vp the ghoſt amongſt ſtrangers, and ſuch as wee know not. Hee who hath money in his purſe, ſhall ever finde ſome ready to turne his head, make his bedde, rubbe his feet, attend him, and that will trouble and importune him no longer than hee list: and will ever ſhew him an indifferent and well-compoſed countenance, and without grumbling or grudging give a man leave to doe what he pleaſe, and complaine as he liſt. I daily endevour by diſcourſe to ſhake off this childiſh humour and inhumane conceit, which cauſeth, that by our griefes and paines we ever deſire to moove our friends to compaſſion and ſorrow for vs, and with a kinde of ſympathie to condole our miſeries and paſſions. We endeare our inconveniences beyond meaſure, to extract teares from them: And the conſtancie we ſo much commend in all others, vndauntedly to endure all evill fortunes; we accuſe and vpbraid to our neereſt allies, when they moleſt vs: we are not contented they ſhould have a ſenſible feeling of our calamities, if they doe not alſo afflict themſelves for them. A man ſhould as much as he can ſet foorth and extend his joy; but to the vtmoſt of his power, ſuppreſſe and abridge his ſorrow. He that will cauſeleſly be moaned, and ſans reaſon, deſerveth not to be pitied when he ſhall have cauſe and reaſon for it. To be ever complaining and alwaies moaning, is the way never to be moaned and ſeldome to be pitied: and ſo often to ſeeme over-paſſionately-pitifull, is the meane to make no man feelingly-ruthfull towards others. He that makes himſelfe dead being alive, is ſubiect to be accounted alive when he is dying. I have ſeene ſome take pepper in the noſe, forſomuch as they were told that they had a cheerefull countenance; that they looked well; that they had a temperate pulſe: to force laughter, becauſe ſome betraied their recoverie: and hate their health, becauſe it was not regreetable. And which is more, they were no women. I for the moſt, repreſent my infirmities ſuch as they are: And ſhunne ſuch words as are of evill preſage, and avoid compoſed exclamations. If not glee and mirth, at leaſt an orderlyſetled countenance of the by-ſtanders and aſſiſtants, is ſufficiently-convenient to a wiſe and diſcreet ſicke-man, who though he ſee himſelfe in a contrary ſtate, he will not picke a quarrell with health. He is pleaſed to behold the ſame, ſound and ſtrong in others; and at leaſt for company-ſake to enjoy his part of it. Though he feele and finde himſelfe to faint and ſinke downe, he doth not altogether reject the conceits and imaginations of life, nor doth he avoid common entertainments. I will ſtudie ſickneſſe when I am in health: when it comes, it will really enough make her impreſſion, without the helpe of my imagination. We deliberately prepare our ſelves before hand for any voiage we vndertake, and therein are reſolved: the houre is ſet when we will take horſe, and we give it to our company, in whoſe favour we extend it. I finde this vnexpected profit by the publication of my maners, that in ſome ſort it ſerveth me for a rule. I am ſometimes ſurprized with this conſideration, not to betray the hiſtorie of my life. This publike declaration, bindes me to keepe my ſelfe within my courſe, and not to contradict the image of my conditions: commonly leſſe disfigured and gaine-ſaid, then the malignitie and infirmitie of moderne judgements doth beare. The vniformitie and ſingleneſſe of my manners, produceth a viſage of eaſie interpretation; but becauſe the faſhion

of them is ſomewhat new and ſtrange, and out of vſe, it giveth detraction to faire play. Yet is it true, that to him, who will goe about loyally to iniure me, me thinkes I doe ſufficiently affoord him matter, whereby he may detract and ſnarle at my avowed and knowen imperfections, and wherewith hee may be ſatisfied, without vaine contending and idle skirmiſhing. If my ſelfe by preoccupating his diſcovery and accuſation, hee thinkes I barre him of his ſnarling, it is good reaſon hee take his right, towards amplification and extenſion: Offence hath her rights beyond juſtice: And that the vices, whereof I ſhew him the rootes in mee, he ſhould amplifie them to trees. Let him not onely employ there unto thoſe that poſſeſſe mee, but thoſe which but threaten mee. Injurious vices, both in qualitie and in number. Let him beate mee that way. I ſhould willingly embrace the example of Dion the Philoſopher. Antigonus going about to ſcoffe and quip at him touching his birth and off-ſpring, he interrupted him and tooke the word out of his mouth: I am (ſaid hee) the ſonne of a bondſlave, a butcher, branded for a rogue, and of a whoore, whom my father by reaſon of his baſe fortune, tooke to wife: Both were puniſhed for ſome miſdeede. Being a childe, an Orator bought me as a ſlave, liking me for my beautie and comelineſſe; and dying, left mee all his goods; which having tranſported into this citie of Athens, I have applied my ſelfe vnto Philoſophie. Let not Hiſtorians buſie themſelves in ſeeking newes of mee. I will at large blaz on my ſelfe, and plainely tell them the whole diſcourſe. A generous and free-minded confeſſion doth diſable a reproch and diſarme an iniurie. So it is, that when all Cards be told, me ſeemes, that I am as oft commended as diſpraiſed beyond reaſon. As alſo me thinks, that even from my infancie, both in ranke and degree of honour, I have had place given mee, rather above and more, than leſſe and beneath that which appertained to mee. I ſhould better like to be in a countrie, where theſe orders might either be reformed or contemned. Amongeſt men, after that ſtriving or altercation for the prerogative or vpper hand in going or ſitting, exceedeth three replies, it becommeth incivill. I neither feare to yeeld and give place, nor to follow and proceed vnjuſtly, ſo I may avoid ſuch irkeſome and importunate conteſtations. And never did man deſire precedencie or place before me, but I quitted the ſame without grudging. Beſides the profit I reape by writing of my ſelfe, I have hoped for this other, that if ever it might happen my humours ſhould pleaſe or ſympathize with ſome honeſt man, he would before my death ſeeke to be acquainted with me, or to overtake mee. I have given him much ground: For, whatſoever a long acquaintance or continuall familiarity might have gained him in many weariſome yeares, the ſame hath hee in three dayes fully ſeene in this Regiſter; and that more ſafely and more exactly. A pleaſant fantazie is this of mine; many things I would bee loath to tell a particular man, I vtter to the whole world. And concerning my moſt ſecret thoughts and inward knowledge, I ſend my deareſt friends to a Stationers ſhop.
                        
                           Excutienda damus praecordia.Perſ. ſat. 5. 22.
                           
                           Our very entrailes wee
                           Lay foorth for you to ſee.
                        
                        If by ſo good markes and tokens, I had ever knowen or heard of any one man, that in this humour had beene anſwerable to mee, I would aſſuredly have wandred very farre to finde him out: For, the exceeding joy of a ſortable and in one conſent agreeing company, cannot (in mine opinion) be ſufficiently endeared or purchaſed at too high a rate. Oh God! who can expreſſe the value or conceive the true worth of a friend? How true is that ancient golden ſaying, that the vſe of a friend is more neceſſary and pleaſing, then of the elements, water and fire. But to returne to my former diſcourſe: There is then no great inconvenience in dying farre from home and abroad. Wee eſteeme it a part of duty and decencie to withdraw our ſelves for naturall actions, leſſe hideous and leſſe diſgracefull then this. But alſo thoſe that come vnto that, in languiſhing manner to draw a long ſpace of life, ſhould not happily wiſh with their miſerie to trouble a whole family. Therefore did the Indians of a certaine countrie deeme it juſt and lawfull, to kill him that ſhould fall into ſuch neceſſitie. And in another of their Provinces, they though it meete to forſake him, and as well as hee could leave him alone to ſeeke to ſave himſelfe. To whom at laſt, proove they not themſelves tedious and intolerable? Common offices proceed not ſo farre. Perforce you teach crueltie vnto your beſt friends; obdurating by long vſe, both wife and children, not to feele, nor to conceive, nor to moane your evils any longer. The groanes and out-cries of my chollike, cauſe no

more ruth and wailing in any body. And ſhould we conceive pleaſure by their converſation (which ſeldome hapneth, by reaſon of the diſparitie of conditions, which eaſily produceth either contempt or envy towards what man ſoever) is it not too-too much, therwith to abuſe a whole age? The more I ſhould ſee them with a good heart to ſtraine themſelves for me, the more ſhould I bewaile their paine. The law of curteſie alloweth vs to leane vpon others, but not ſo vnmanerly to lie vpon them and vnderpropt our ſelves in their ruine. As hee who cauſed little infants to be ſlaine, that with their innocent blood he might be cured of a malady he had. Or another who was continually ſtored with yoong teudrels or laſſes, to keepe his old-frozen limbs warme a nights, and entermix the ſweeteneſſe of their breath with his old-ſtinking and offenſive vapours. Decrepitude is a ſolitary qualitie. I am ſociable even vnto exceſſe, yet doe I thinke it reaſonable, at laſt to ſubſtract my opportunity from the ſight of the world, and hatch it in my ſelfe. Let me ſhrowd and ſhrugge my ſelfe into my ſhell, as a tortoiſe: and learne to ſee men, without taking hold of them. I ſhould outrage them in ſo ſteepe a paſſage. It is now high time to turne from the company. But heere will ſomeſay, that in theſefarre journies you may peradventure fall into ſome miſerable dog-hole or poore cottage, where you ſhall want all needfull things. To whom I anſwer, that for things moſt neceſſary inſuch caſes, I ever carry moſt of them with me: And that, where-ever wee are, wee cannot poſſibly avoid fortune, if ſhe once take vpon her to perſecute vs. When I am ſicke, I want nothing that is extraordinarie: what nature cannot worke in me, I will not have a Bolus, or a gliſter to effect. At the very beginning of my agues or ſickeneſſes that caſt me downe, whilſt I am yet whole in my ſenſes and neere vnto health, I reconcile my ſelfe to God by the laſt duties of a Chriſtian; whereby I finde my ſelfe free and diſcharged; and thinke I have ſo much more reaſon and authoritie over my ſickeneſſe, I finde leſſe want of Notaries and counſell, then of Phyſitions. What I have not diſpoſed of my affaires or ſettled of my ſtate when I was in perfect health, let none expect I ſhould doe it beeing ſicke. Whatever I will doe for the ſervice of death, is alwayes ready done. I dare not delay it one onely day. And if nothing be done, it is as much to ſay, that either ſome doubt hath delaide the choiſe: For, ſometimes it is a good choiſe, not to chuſe at all: Or that abſolutely I never intended to doe any thing. I write my booke to few men, and to few yeares. Had it beene a matter of laſting continuance, it ſhould have beene compiled in a better and more poliſhed language: According to the continuall variation, that hitherto hath followed our French tongue. Who may hope, that it's preſent forme ſhall be in vſe fifty yeares hence? It dayly changeth and ſlips our hands: and ſince I could ſpeake the ſame, it is much altred and well nigh halfe varied. We ſay it is now come to a full perfection. There is no age but ſaith as much of hirs. It lies not in my power, ſo long as it glideth and differeth and altereth as it doth, to keepe it at a ſtay. It is for excellent and profitable compoſitions to faſten it vnto them, whoſe credit ſhall either diminiſh or encreaſe, according to the fortune of our ſtate. For all that, I feare not to inſert therein divers private articles, whoſe vſe is conſumed amongſt men living now adayes: and which concerne the particular knowledge of ſome, that ſhall further ſee into it, then with a common vnderſtanding. When all is done, I would not (as I often ſee the memory of the deceaſed toſſed too and fro) that men ſhould deſcant and argue: Thus and thus be iudged; thus he lived; thus he ment: had he ſpoken when his life left him, he would have given I wot what: There is no man knew him better then my ſelfe. Now, as much as modeſtie and decorum doth permit me; I heere give a taſte of my inclinations and an eſſay of my affection: which I doe more freely and more willingly by word of mouth, to any that ſhall deſire to be throughly informed of them. But ſo it is, that if any man ſhall looke into theſe memorialls, he ſhall finde, that either I have ſaid all, or deſſeigned all. What I cannot expreſſe, the ſame I point at with my finger.
                        
                           Verum animo ſatis haec veſtigia parva ſagaciLutt. lib. 1. 4. 19.
                           
                           Sunt, per quae poſſis cognoſcere cateratnte.
                           But this ſmall footing to a quicke-ſent minde
                           May ſerve, whereby ſafely the reſt to finde.
                        
                        I leave nothing to bee deſired or divined of mee. If one muſt entertaine himſelfe with them, I would have it to be truely and juſtly. I would willingly come from the other world, to give him the lie, that ſhould frame me other then I had beene: were it he meant to honour mee. I ſee that of the living, men never ſpeake according to truth; and they are ever made to
                           
                           he, what they are not. And if with might and maine, I had not vpheld a friend of mine whom I have lately loſt, he had ſurely been mangled and torne in a thouſand contrrary ſhapes. But to make an end of my weake humours: I confeſſe, that in travelling I ſeldome alight in any place or come to any Inne, but firſt of all I caſt in my minde whether I may conveniently lie there, if I ſhould chance to fall ſicke; or dying, die at my eaſe and take my death quietly. I will, as neere as I can be lodged in ſome convenient part of the houſe, and in particular from all noiſe or ſtinking favours; in no cloſe, filthy or ſmoaky chamber. I ſeeke to flatter death by theſe frivolous circumſtances: Or as I may rather ſay, to diſcharge my ſelfe from all other trouble or encombrance; that ſo I may wholly apply and attend her, who without that ſhall happily lie very heavy vpon me. I will have her take a full ſhare of my lives eaſes and commodities; it is a great part of it and of much conſequence, and I hope it ſhall not belie what is paſt. Death hath ſome formes more eaſie then others, and aſſumeth divers qualities; according to all mens fantazies. Among the naturall ones, that proceeding of weakeneſſe and heavy dulneſſe, to me ſeemeth gentle and pleaſant. Among the violent I imagine a precipice more hardly, then a ruine that overwhelmes me: and a cutting blow with a ſword, then a ſhot of an harquebuſe: and I would rather have choſen to drinke the potion of Socrates, then wound my ſelfe as Cato did. And though it bee all one yet doth my imagination perceive a difference, as much as is betweene death and life, to caſt my ſelfe into a burning furnace, or in the channell of a ſhallow river. So fooliſhly doth our feare reſpect more the meane, then the effect. It is but one inſtant; but of ſuch moment, that to paſſe the ſame according to my deſire, I would willingly renounce many of my lives-dayes. Since all mens fantazies, finde either exceſſe or diminution in her ſharpenſſe; ſince every man hath ſome choiſe betweene the formes of dying, let vs trie a little further, whether we can finde out ſome one, free from all ſorrow and griefe. Might not one alſo make it ſeeme voluptuous, as did thoſe who died with Anthonic and Cleopatra? I omit to ſpeake of the ſharpe and exemplar efforts, that philoſophy and religion produce. But amongſt men of no great fame, ſome have beene found (as one Petronius, and one Tigillinus at Rome) engaged to make themſelves away, who by the tenderneſſe of their preparations have in a manner lulled the ſame aſleepe. They have made it paſſe and glide away, even in the midſt of the ſecurity of their accuſtomed paſtimes and wanton recreations: Amongſt harlots and good felowes; no ſpeech of comfort, no mention of will or teſtament, no ambitious affectation of conſtancie, no diſcourſe of their future condition, no compunction of ſinnes committed, no apprehenſion of their ſoules-health, ever troubling them; amid ſports, playes, banketting, ſurfetting, chambring, jeſting, muſicke and ſinging of amorous verſes: and all ſuch popular and common entertainments. Might not wee imitate this manner of reſolution in more honeſt affaires and more commendable attempts? And ſince there are deaths good vnto wiſe men and good vnto fooles, let vs find ſome one that may be good vnto ſuch as are betweene both. My imagination preſents me ſome eaſie and milde countenance thereof, and (ſince we muſt all die) to bee deſired. The tyrants of Rome have thought, they gave that criminall offender his life, to whom they gave the free choiſe of death. But Theophraſtus a Philoſopher ſo delicate, ſo modeſt and ſo wiſe, was he not forced by reaſon, to dare to vtter this verſe, latinized by Cicero:
                        
                        
                           
                              Ʋitam regit fortuna non ſapientia.Cic. Tuſc. qu. l. 5. Theoph. Caliſth.
                           
                           Fortune our life doth rule,
                           Not wiſedome of the ſchoole.
                        
                        Fortune giveth the facilitie of my lives-condition ſome aide; having placed it in ſuch a time, wherein it is neither needefull nor comberſome vnto my people. It is a condition I would have accepted in all the ſeaſons of my age: but in this occaſion to truſſe vp bag and baggage, and take vp my bed and walke: I am particularly pleaſed, that when I ſhall die, I ſhall neither breede pleaſure nor cauſe ſorrow in them. Shee hath cauſed (which is the recompence of an artiſt) that ſuch as by my death may pretend any materiall benefit, receive thereby elſewhere, jointly a materiall loſſe and hinderance. Death lies ſometimes heavie vpon vs, in that it is burthenſome to others: and intereſſeth vs with their intereſt, almoſt as much as with ours: and ſomtimes more; yea altogether. In this inconveniency of lodging that I ſeeke, I neither entermix pompe nor amplitude; For, I rather hate it. But a certaine ſimple and homely proprietie, which is commonly found in places where leſſe Arte is, and that

nature honoureth with ſome grace peculiar vnto her ſelfe. Non ampliter ſed munditer convivium. Plus ſalis quàm ſumptus. Not a great, but a neate feaſt. More conceite then cost.
                           Plantin.
                        
                        And then, it is for thoſe, who by their vrgent affaires are compelled to travell in the midſt of deepe Winter, and amongeſt the Griſons, to be ſurprized by ſuch extreamities in their journies. But I, who for the moſt part never travell, but for pleaſure, will neither bee ſo ill adviſed, nor ſo ſimply guided. If the way be fowle on my right hand, I take the left: If I find my ſelfe ill at eaſe or vnfit to ride, I ſtay at home. Which doing, and obſerving this courſe, in very truth I ſee no place, and come no where, that is not as pleaſant, as convenient and as commodious as mine owne houſe. True it is, that I ever finde ſuperfluitie ſuperfluous: and obſerve a kinde of troubleſomeneſſe in delicateneſſe and plenty. Have I omitted or left any thing behind me that was worth the ſeeing? I returne backe; It is ever my way, I am never out of it. I trace no certaine line, neither right nor crooked. Comming to any ſtrange place, finde I not what was tould mee? As it often fortuneth, that others judgements agree not with mine, and have moſt times found them falſe, I grieve not at my labour: I have learned that what was reported to bee there, is not. I have my bodies complexion as free, and my taſte as common, as any man in the world. The diverſity of faſhions betweene one and other nations, concerneth mee nothing, but by the varieties-pleaſure. Each cuſtome hath his reaſon. Bee the trenchers or diſhes of wood, of pewter or of earth: bee my meate boyled, roſted or baked; butter or oyle, and that of Olives or of Wall-nuts; hot or colde; I make no difference; all is one to me: And as one, that is growing old, I accuſe the generous facultie; and had neede that delicatneſſe and choiſe, ſhould ſtay the indiſcretion of my appetite, and ſometime eaſe and ſolace my ſtomacke. When I have beene out of France, and that to do me curteſie, ſome have asked me, whether I would be ſerved after the French maner, I have jeſted at them, and have ever thruſt-in amongeſt the thickeſt tables and fulleſt of ſtrangers. I am aſhamed to ſee our men beſotted with this fooliſh humor, to fret and chafe, when they ſee any faſhions contrary to theirs. They thinke themſelves out of their element, when they are out of their Village. Where ever they come they keepe their owne country faſhions, and hate, yea and abhorre all ſtrange maners: Meete they a countriman of theirs in Hungary, they feaſt that good fortune: And what doe they? Marry cloſe and joyne together, to blame, to condemne and to ſcorne ſo many barbarous faſhions as they ſee. And why not Barbarous, ſince not French? Nay happily they are the better ſort of men, that have noted and ſo much exclaimed againſt them. Moſt take going out but for comming home. They travell cloſe and covered, with a ſilent and incommunicable wit, defending themſelves from the contagion of ſome vnknowne ayre. What I ſpeake of ſuch, puts mee in minde in the like matter, of that I have heretofore perceived in ſome of your yoong Courtiers. They onely converſe with men of their coate; and with diſdaine or pitty looke vpon vs, as if we were men of another World. Take away their new fangled, myſterious and affected courtly complements, and they are out of their byaſe. As farre to ſeeke and ſhort of vs, as we of them. That ſaying is true; That An honest man is a man compounded. Cleane contrary, I travell fully glutted with out faſhions: Not to ſeeke Gaskoines in Sicilie; I have left over many at home. I rather ſeeke for Graecians and Perſians: Thoſe I accoſt, them I conſider, and with ſuch I endevor to be acquainted: to that I prepare and therein I employ my ſelfe. And which is more, me ſeemeth, I have not met with many maners, that are not worth ours. Indeede I have not wandred farre, ſcarſly have I loſt the ſight of our Chimnies. Moreover, moſt of the caſuall companies you meete withall by the way, have more incommodity than pleaſure: a matter I doe not greatly take hold of, and leſſe now that age dooth particularize and in ſome ſort ſequeſter me from common formes. You ſuffer for other, or others endure for you. The one inconvenience is yrkeſome, the other troubleſome: but yet the laſt is (in my conceipt) more rude. It is a rare, chaunce and ſeld-ſeene fortune, but of exceeding ſolace and inestimable woorth, to have an honest man, of ſingular experience, of a ſound iudgement, of a reſolute vnderstanding and constant reſolution, and of manners comformable to yours, to accompany or follow you with a goodwill. I have found great want of ſuch a one in all my voyages. Which company a man muſt ſeeke with diſcretion and with great heed obtaine, before he wander from home. With me no pleaſure is fully delightſome without communication; and no delight abſolute, except imparted. I do not ſo much as apprehend one rare conceipt, or conceive one excellent good thought in my minde, but me thinks I am much grieved and grievouſty perplexed, to

have produced the ſame alone, and that I have no ſimpathyzing companion to impart it vnto. Si cum hac exceptione detur ſapientia, vt illam incluſam tencam, nec enunciem, reijciam. If wiſdome ſhould be offered with this exception, that I ſhould keepe it concealed, and not vtter it, I would refuſe it. The other ſtrain'd it one note higher. Si contigerit ea vita ſapienti, vt omnium rerum
                           Cic. Offic. lib 1. 
                           affluentibus copijs, quamvis omnia, quae cognitione digna ſunt, ſummo otio ſecum ipſe conſideret & contempletur, tamen ſi ſolitudo tanta ſit, vt hominem videre nonpoſſit, excedat è vita. If a wiſeman might leade ſuch a life, as in abundance of all things hee may in full quiet contemplate and conſider all things worthy of knowledge, yet if he must be ſo ſolitary as he may ſee no man, he ſhould rather leave ſuch a life. Architas his opinion is ſutable to mine, which was, that it would bee a thing vnpleaſing to the very heavens and diſtaſtefull to man, to ſurvay and walke within thoſe immenſe and divine and coeleſtiall bodies, without the aſſiſtance of a friend or companion: Yet is it better to be alone, than in tedious and fooliſh company. Ariſtippus loved to live as an alien or ſtranger every where.
                        
                           Me ſi faeta meis paterentur ducere vitamVirg. A
                                    ••
                                 . lib. 4. 339.
                           
                           Auſpicijs,
                           If fates would me permit
                           To live as I thinke fit,
                        
                        I ſhould chuſe to weare out my life with my bum in the ſaddle, ever riding.
                        
                           —viſere geſtiens,
                              Her car. lib. 3. 
                                    •
                                 d. 3. 54.
                           
                           Quaparte debacchentur ignes,
                           Qua nebulae pluvijque rores.
                           Delighting much to goe and ſee
                           Where firy heats rage furiouſly,
                           Where clouds and rainy dews moſt be.
                        
                        Have you not more eaſie paſtimes? What is it you want? Is not your houſe well ſeated, and in a good and wholeſome ayre? Sufficiently furniſhed, and more then ſufficiently capable? His Royall Majeſty hath in great ſtate beene in the ſame, and more than once taken his repaſt there. Doth not your family in rule and government leave many more inferior to hir, than above hir eminency? Is there any locall thought or care, that as extraordinary doth vlcerate, or as indigeſtible doth moleſt you?
                        
                           Quae te nunc coquat & vexet ſub pectore fixa.E
                                    ••
                                 i. Cic. Senect. p.
                           
                           Which now boyles in thy breſt.
                           And let's thee take no reſt.
                        
                        Where doe you imagine you may bee without empeachment or diſturbance? Nunquam ſimpliciter fortuna indulget. Fortune never favours fully without exception. You ſee then, there is none but you that trouble and buſie your ſelfe: and every where you ſhall follow your ſelf, and in all places you ſhall complaine. For, Heere below there is no ſatisfaction or content, except for brutall or divine mindes. Hee who in ſo juſt an occaſion hath no content, where doth he imagine to finde it? Vnto how many thouſands of men, doth ſuch a condition as yours, bound and ſtay the limites of their wiſhes? Reforme but your ſelfe; by that you may doe all: Whereas towardes fortune you have no right or intereſt, but patience. Nulla placida quies eſt,
                           Sen. ep. 56. 
                                 ••
                              . 
                           niſi quam ratio compoſuit. There is no pleaſing ſettled rest, but ſuch as reaſon hath made-vp. I ſee the reaſon of this advertiſement, yea I perceive it wel. But one ſhould ſooner have done and more pertinently, in one bare word to ſay vnto me: Be wiſe. This reſolution is beyond wiſdome. It is her Worke and hir production. So doth the Phyſition, that is ever crying to a languiſhing, heart-broken ſicke-man, that he be merry and pull vp a good hart; he ſhould leſſe fooliſhly perſwade him if he did but bid him, To be healthy; as for me, I am but a man of the common ſtamp. It is a certaine, ſound and of eaſie-vnderſtanding precept: Be content with your own; that is to ſay with reaſon: the execution wherof notwithſtanding is no more in the wiſer ſort, than in my ſelf: It is a popular word, but it hath a terrible far-reaching extenſion. What comprehends it not? All things fall within the compaſſe of diſeretion and modification. Well wot, that being taken according to the bare letter, the pleaſure of travell brings a teſtimony of vnquietneſſe and irreſolution. Which to ſay truth, are our miſtriſſe and predominant qualities. Yea, I confeſſe it: I ſee nothing, bee it but a dreame or by wiſhing, whereon I may take hold. Onely varietie and the poſſeſſion of diverſitie doth ſatisfie mee: if at leaſt any thing ſatisfie mee. In travell this doth nouriſh mee, that without intereſt I may ſtay my ſelfe; and

that I have meanes commodiouſly to divert my ſelfe from it. I love a private life, becauſe it is by mine owne choice, that I love it, not by a diffidence or diſagreeing from a publike life; which peradventure is as much according to my complexion. I thereby ſerve my Prince more joifully and genuinely, becauſe it is by the free election of my judgement and by my reaſon, without any particular obligation. And that I am not caſt or forced thereunto, becauſe I am vnfit to be received of any other, or am not beloved: ſo of the reſt. I hate thoſe morſels that neceſſitie doth carve mee. Every commoditie, of which alone I were to depend▪ ſhould ever hold me by the throat:
                        
                           Alter remus aq
                                 •
                              as, alter mihi radat are
                                 •
                              as.
                           Let me cut waters with one oare,Propert. li 3. 
                                    •
                                 l. 2. 23.
                           
                           With th'other ſhave the ſandie ſhoare.
                        
                        One ſtring alone can never ſufficiently hold me. You will ſay, there is vanitie in this ammuſement. But where not? And theſe goodly precepts are vanitie, and Meere vanitie is all worldly wiſedome. Dominus novit cogitationes ſapientum▪ quoniam vanae ſunt. The Lords knowes
                           Pſal. 93. 11. 
                           the thoughts of the wiſe, that they are vaine. Such exquiſite ſubtilities, are only fit for ſermons. They are diſcourſes, that will ſend vs into the other World on horſebacke. Life is a materiall and corporall motion; an action imperfect and diſordered, by it's owne eſſence: I employ or apply my ſelfe to ſerve it according to it ſelfe.
                        
                           Quiſqu
                                 •
                               ſuos pat
                                 •
                              mur manes:
                                 
                                    ••
                                 r. 
                                    ••
                                 n. l. 6. 
                                    •
                                 43.
                           
                           All of vs for our merit,
                           Have ſome attending ſpirit.
                        
                        
                           Sic est faciendum, vt contra naturam vniverſam nihil contendamus, ea tamen conſervata, propriam
                           Cic. Offic. lib. 1. 
                           ſequamur. W
                                 •
                               muſt ſo worke, as we endevour nothing againſt nature in generall, yet ſo obſerve it, as we follow o
                                 •
                              r owne in ſpeciall. To what purpoſe are theſe heaven-looking and nice points of Philoſophie, on which no humane being can eſtabliſh and ground it ſelfe? And to what end ſerve theſe rules, that exceed our vſe and excell our ſtrength? I often ſee, that there are certaine Ideaes or formes of life propoſed vnto vs, which neither the propoſer nor the Auditors have any hope at all to follow; and which is worſe, no deſire to attaine. Of the ſame paper, whereon a Iudge writ but even now the cond
                                 •
                              mnation againſt an adulterer, hee will teare a ſcantlin, thereon to write ſome love-lines to his fellow-iudges wife. The ſame w
                                 •
                              ma
                                 •
                               from whom you came lately, and with whom you have committed that vnlawfull-pleaſing ſport, will ſoone after, even in your preſence, ratle and ſcold more bitterly againſt the ſame fauli in h
                                 •
                              r neighbour, than ever Portia or Lucrece could. And ſome condemne men to di
                                 •
                               for crimes, that themſelves eſteeme no faults. I have in my youth ſeene a notable man with one hand to preſent the people moſt excellent and well-written verſes, both for invention and extreme licentiouſneſſe; and with the other hand, at the ſame inſtant, the moſt ſharpe-railing reformation, according to Divinitie, that happily the World hath ſeene theſe many-many yeeres. Thus goes the world, and ſo goe men. We let the lawes and precepts follow their way, but we keepe another courſe: Not onely by diſorder of manners, but often by opinion and contrary iudgement. Heare but a diſcourſe of Philoſophie read; the invention, the eloquence and the pertinencie, doth preſently tickle your ſpirit and moove you. There is nothing tickleth or pricketh your conſcience: it is not to her that men ſpeak
                              •
                           
                           ▪ Is it not true? Ariston ſaid, that Neither Bath nor Lecture are of any worth, except the one waſh cleane, and the other cleanſe all filth away. One may buſie himſelfe about the barke, when once the pith is gotten out: As when wee have drunke off the Wine, wee conſider the graving and workmanſhip of the cuppe. In all the parts of ancient Philoſophie, this one thing may be noted, that one ſame worke-man publiſheth ſome rules of temperance, and therewithall ſome compoſitions of love and licentiouſneſſe. And Xenophon in Cliniaes boſome, writ againſt the Ariſtipp
                              •
                           an vertue. It is not a miraculous converſion, that ſo doth wave and hull them to and fro. But it is, that Solon doth ſometimes repreſent himſelfe in his owne colours, and ſomtimes in forme of a Law-giver: now he ſpeaketh for the multitude, and now for himſelfe. And takes the free and naturall rules to himſelfe; warranting himſelfe with a conſtant and perfect ſoundneſſe.
                        
                           Curentur dubij medicis maioribus 
                                 •
                              gri.
                           Let patients in great doubt,
                                 
                                    •
                                 ur. ſat. 13. 124.
                           
                           Seeke great Phyſitians out.
                        
                        
                           Antiſthenes alloweth a wiſe man to love and doe what hee liſt, without reſpect of lawes,

eſpecially in things he deemeth needefull and ſit: Foraſmuch as he hath a better vnderſtanding than they, and more knowledge of vertue. His Diſciple Diogenes ſaid; To perturbations we ſhould oppoſe, reaſon; to fortune, confidence: and to lawes, nature: To dainty and tender ſtomacks, conſtrained and artificiall or dinances. Good ſtomackes are ſimplie ſerved with the preſcriptions of their naturall appeti
                              ••
                           . So doe our Phiſitions, who whilſt they tie their pacients to a ſtrik't diet of a panada or a ſirope, feede themſelves vpon a melone, dainty fruits, much good meat, and drinke all maner of good Wine. I wot not what Bookes are, nor what they meane by wiſedome and philoſophy (quoth the Curtizan Lais) but ſure I am, thoſe kinds of people knocke as often at my gates, as any other men. Becauſe our licenciouſneſſe tranſports vs commonly beyond what is lawfull and allowed, our lives-precepts and lawes have often been wreſted or reſtrained beyond vniverſall reaſon.
                        
                           Nemo ſatis credit tantum delinquere, quantumInv. ſat. 14. 233
                           
                           Permittas.
                           No man thinks it enough ſo farre t'offend
                           As you give lawfull leave (and thereto end)
                        
                        It were to bee wiſhed, there were a greater proportion betwene commandement and obedience: And vniuſt ſeemeth that ayme or goale whereto one cannot poſſibly attaine. No man is ſo exquiſitely honest or vpright in living, but brings all his actions and thoughts within compaſſe and danger of the lawes; and that ten times in his life might not lawfully be hanged. Yea happily ſuch a man, as it were pittie and dangerouſly-hurtfull to looſe, and moſt vnjuſt to puniſh him.
                        
                           —Olle quid ad te,
                           
                           De cute quid faciat ille vel illa ſua;
                           Foole, what haſt thou to doe, what he or ſheeMart. li. 7. epig. 9. 1.
                           
                           With their owne skinnes or themſelves doing bee?
                        
                        And ſome might never offend the lawes, that notwithſtanding ſhould not deſerve the commendations of vertuovs men: and whom philoſophie might meritoriouſly and juſtly cauſe to be whipped. So troubled, dimme-ſighted and partiall is this relation. Wee are farre enough from being honeſt according to God: For, wee 
                                 •
                              annot bee ſuch according to our ſelves. Humane wiſedome could never reach the duties, or attaine the devoires it had preſcribed vnto it ſelfe. And had it at any time attained them, then would it doubtleſſe preſcribe ſome others beyond them, to which it might ever aſpire and pretend. So great an enemy is our condition vnto conſiſtence. Man dooth neceſſarily ordaine vnto himſelfe to bee in fault. Hee is not very craftie, to meaſure his dutie by the reaſon of another beeing, than his owne. To whom preſcribes he that, which he expects no man will performe? Is he vnjuſt in not dooing that, which hee cannot poſſibly atchieve? The lawes which conde
                              ••
                           e vs, not to hee able; condemne vs for that we cannot performe. If the worſt happen, this deformed libertie, for one to preſent himſelfe in two places, and the actions after one fashion, the diſcourſes after an other; is lawfull in them, which report things: But it cannot bee in them, that acknowledge themſelves as I doe. I muſt walke with my penne, as I goe with my feete. The common high way muſt have conference with other wayes. Catoes vertue was vigorous, beyond the reaſon of the age he lived in: and for a man that entermedled with governing other men, deſtinated for the common ſervice; it might bee ſaid to have beene a juſtice, if not vnjuſt, at leaſt vaine and out of ſeaſon. Mine owne manners, which ſcarſe diſagree one inch from thoſe now currant, make me notwithſtanding in ſome ſort, ſtrange, vncouth and vnſociable to my age. I wot not, whether it be without reaſon, I am ſo diſtaſted and out of liking with the world, wherein I live and frequent: but well I know, I ſhould have ſmall reaſon to complaine, the world were diſtaſted and out of liking with mee, ſince I am ſo with it. The vertue aſſigned to the worlds affaires, it is a vertue with ſundry byaſes, turnings, bendings and elbowes, to apply and joyne it ſelfe to humane imbecilitie: mixed and artificiall: neither right, pure or coſtant, nor meerely innocent. Our Annales even to this day, blameſome one of our Kings, to have over-ſimply ſuffred himſelfe to be led or miſ-led by the conſcientious perſwaſions of his Confeſſor. Matters of ſtate have more bold precepts.
                        
                        
                           —exeat aula,
                              L
                                    •
                                 ca
                                    •
                                 . bell. cir. lib. 8. 493.
                           
                           Qui vult eſſe pius.
                           He that will godly bee,
                           From Court let him be free.
                        
                        
                           I have heretofore aſſayd to employ my opinions and rules of life, as new, as rude, as imp
                              •
                           liſhed or as vnpolluted, as they were naturally borne with me, or as I have attained them by my inſtitution; and wherewith, if not ſo commodiouſly, at leaſt ſafely in particular, I ſerve mine owne turne, vnto the ſervice of publike affaires and benefit of my Commonwealth: A ſcholaſticall and novice vertue; but I have found them very vnapt and dangerous for that purpoſe. He that goeth in a 
                              •
                           reſſe or throng of people, muſt ſometimes ſtep aſide, hold in his elbowes, croſſe the way, advance himſelfe, ſtart backe, and forſake the right way, according as it falls out: Live he not ſo much as he would himſelfe, but as others will: not according to that he propoſeth to himſelfe, but to that which is propoſed to him: according to times, to men and to affaires; and as the skilfull Mariner, ſaile with the winde. Plato ſaith, that who eſcapes vntainted and cleane-handed from the managing of the world; eſcapeth by ſome wonder. He ſayes alſo, that when he inſtituteth his Philoſopher as chiefe over a Common-wealth; he means not a corrupted or law-broken commonwealth, as that of Athens; and much leſſe, as ours, with which wiſedome herſelfe would be brought to a non-plus, or put to her ſhifts. And a good hearb, tranſplanted into a ſoile very diverſe from her nature, doth much ſooner conforme it ſelfe to the ſoile, then it reformeth the ſame to it ſelfe. I feelingly perceive that if I were wholy to envre my ſelfe to ſuch occupations, I ſhould require much change and great repairing. Which could I effect in me (and why not with time and diligence?) I would not. Of that litle which in this vacation I have made triall-of, I have much diſtaſted my ſelfe: I ſometimes finde certaine temptations ariſe in my minde, towards ambition; but I ſtart aſide, bandie and opinionate my ſelfe to the contrarie:
                        
                           At tu Catulle obſtinatus obdura.Catul. ly
                                    •
                                 . p
                                    ••
                                 
                                 ▪ 8. 19.
                           
                           Be thou at any rate,
                           O
                                 •
                              durate, obſtinate.
                        
                        I am not greatly called, and I invite my ſelfe as litle vnto it. Libertie and idleneſſe, my chiefe qualities, are qualities diameterly contrary to that myſterie. We know not how to di
                              ••
                           inguiſh mens faculties. They have certaine diviſions and limites vneaſie and over nice to be choſen. To conclude by the ſufficiency of a private life, any ſufficiencie for publike vſe, it is ill concluded: Some one directs himſelfe well, that cannot ſo well direct others; and compoſeth Eſſayes, that could not worke effects. Some man can diſpoſe and order a ſiege, that could but ill commaund and marſhall a battell: and diſcourſeth well in private, that to a multitude or a Prince would make but a bad Oration. Yea peradventure, t'is rather a teſtimonie to him that can do one, that he cannot doe the other, but otherwiſe. I finde that high ſpirits are not much leſſe apt for baſe things, then baſe ſpirits are for high matters. Could it be imagined, that Socrates would have given the Athenians cauſe to laugh at his owne charges, becauſe hee could never juſtly compt the ſuffrages of his tribe, and make report thereof vnto the counſell? Truely the reuerence I beare and reſpect I owe vnto that mans perfections, deſerveth that his fortune bring to the excuſe of my principal imperfections, one ſo notable example. Our ſufficiencie is retailed into ſmall parcells. Mine hath no latitude, and is in number very miſerable. Saturninus anſwered thoſe, who had conferred all authoritie vpon him, ſaying. Oh you my fellow-ſouldiers, you have loſt a good Captaine, by creating him a bad Generall of an Armie. Who in time of infection vanteth himſelfe, for the worlds-ſervice, to employ a genuine or ſincere vertue, either knowes it not, (opinions being corrupted with maners; in good ſooth, heare but them paint it forth, marke how moſt of them magnifie themſelves for their demeanours, and how they forme their rules: in liew of pourtraying vertue, they onely ſet forth meere injuſtice and vice: and thus falſe and adulterate they preſent the ſame to the inſtitution of Princes) or if he know it, hee wrongfully boaſteth himſelfe; and whatever he ſaith, he doth many things whereof his owne conſcience accuſeth him. I ſhould eaſily believe Seneca, of the experience he made of it in ſuch an occaſion, vpon condition he would freely ſpeake his minde of it vnto mee. The honourableſt badge of goodneſſe in ſuch a neceſſitie, is ingenuouſly for a man to acknowledge both his owne and others faults; to ſtay and with his might, hinder the inclination towards evill: and avie to follow this courſe, to hope and wiſh better. In theſe diſmembrings or havocks of France, and diviſions wherinto we are miſerably falne, I perceive every man travell and buſie himſelfe to defend his owne cauſe, and the better ſort, with much diſſembling and falſehood. Hee that ſhould plainely and roundly write of it, ſhould write raſhly and viciouſly. Take the beſt and juſteſt part; what is it elſe but the

member of a craſed, worme-ea
                              •
                           en and corrupted body? But of ſuch a body the member leaſt ſicke, is called ſound: and good reaſon why, becauſe our qualities have no title but in compariſon. Civill innocency is meaſured according to places and ſeaſons. I would be glad to ſee ſuch a commendation of Ageſilaus in Xenophon, who beeing entreated of a neigbour Prince, with whom he had ſometimes made warre, to ſuffer him to paſſe through his countrie, was therewith well pleaſed; granting him free paſſage through Peloponneſe, and having him at hi
                              •
                            mercy, did not only not empriſon nor empoiſon him, but according to the tenour of his promiſe, without ſhew or offence or vnkindneſſe, entertained him with all curteſie and humanitie. To ſuch humours, it were a matter of no moment: At other times and elſewhere, the libertie and magnanimitie of ſuch an action ſhall be highly eſteemed. Our gulliſh Gaberdines would have mockt at it. So little affinity is there betweene the Spartan and the French innocencie. We have notwithſtanding ſome honeſt men amongſt vs; but it is after our faſhion. He whoſe maners are in regularity eſtabliſhed above the age he liveth-in; let him either wreſt or muffle his rules: or (which I would rather perſwade him) let him withdraw himſelfe apart, and not medle with vs. What ſhall he gaine thereby?
                        
                           Egregium ſanctúmque virum ſicerno, bimembriI
                                    ••
                                 e. ſat. 13. 64▪
                              
                           
                           Hoc monſtrum puero, & miranti iam ſub aratro
                           Piſcibus inventis & foetae compare mulae.
                           See I a man of holineſſe and vertues rare.
                           To births bimembred, vnder wonderfull plow-ſhare,
                           Fiſh found, or moiles with fole, this moſter I compare.
                        
                        
                           One may bewaile the better times, but not a voide the preſent: one may deſire other magiſtrates but notwithstanding he must obey thoſe he hath: And happily it is more commendable to obey the wicked, than the good. So long as the image of the received, allowed and ancient lawes of this Monarchie ſhall be extant and ſhine in any corner thereof; there will I be; there will I abide. And if by any diſaſter they ſhall chaunce to have contradiction or empeachment amongſt themſelves, and produce two factions, of doubtfull or hard choiſe: my election ſhall bee to avoide, And if I can eſcape this ſtorme. In the meane while, either nature or the hazard of warre, ſhal
                              •
                            lend mee that helping hand. I ſhould freely have declared my ſelfe betweene Caeſar and Pompey. But betweene thoſe three theeves which came after, where either one muſt have hid himſelfe, or followed the winde: which I deeme lawfull, when reaſon ſwayeth no longer.
                        
                           Quo diverſus abis?Virg. A
                                    •
                                 n. lib. 5 166.
                           
                           Whither have you recourſe,
                           So farre out of your courſe?
                        
                        This mingle-mangle is ſomewhat beſide my text. I ſtragle out of the path; yet is it rather by licence, then by vnadviſedneſſe: My fantaſies follow one another: but ſometimes a farre-off, and looke one at another; but with an oblique looke. I have heretofore caſt mine eyes vpon ſome of Platoes Dialogues; bemolted with a fantaſticall variety: the firſt part treated of love, all the latter of Rhetoricke. They feare not thoſe variances; and have a wonderfull grace in ſuffering themſelves to bee tranſported by the winde; or to ſeeme ſo. The titles of my chapters, embrace not alwayes the matter: they often but glance at it by ſome marke: as theſe others, Andria, Eunuchus; or theſe, Sylla, Cicero, Torquatus. I love a Poe
                           
                              •
                           icall kinde of march, by friskes, skips and jumps. It is an arte (ſaith Plato) light, nimble, fleeting and light-brain'd. There are ſome treatiſes in Plutarke, where he forgets his theame, where the drift of his argument is not found but by incidencie and chaunce, all ſtuffed with ſtrange matter. Marke but the vagaries in his Daemon of Socrates. Oh God▪ what grace hath the variation, and what beautie theſe ſtartings and nimble eſcapes; and then moſt, when they ſeeme to emply careleſeneſſe and caſualtie: It is the vnheedie and negligent reader, that looſeth my ſubject, and not my life. Some word or other ſhall ever be found in a corner, that hath relation to it, though cloſely couched. I am indiſcreetly and tumultuouſly at a fault; my ſtile and wit are ſtill gadding alike. A little folly is tolerable in him, that will not be more ſottiſh; ſay our maiſters precepts, and more their examples. A thouſand Poets labour and languiſh after the proſe-manner, but the beſt ancient proſe, which I indifferently ſcatter heere and there forver
                              •
                           e, ſhineth every where, with a poeticall vigour and boldneſſe, and repreſenteth ſome aire or touch of it's fury: Verily ſhee ought to have the maiſtry and

preheminence given her in matters of ſpeech. A Poet (ſaith Plato) ſeated on the Muſes footeſtoole, doth in a furie powre-out whatſoever commeth in his mouth, as the pipe or cocke of a fountaine, without conſidering or ruminating the ſame: and many things eſcape him, diuerſe in colour, contrary in ſubſtance, and broken in courſe. Ancient Divinitie is altogether Poeſie (ſay the learned) and the firſt Philoſophie. It is the originall language of the Gods. I vnderſtand that the matter diſtinguiſheth it ſelfe It ſufficiently declareth where it changeth, where it concludeth, where it beginneth, and where it rejoyneth; without enterlacings of words, joyning ligaments & binding ſeames wreſted-in for the ſervice of weake and vnattentive eares: and without gloſſing or expounding my ſelfe. What is he, that would not rather not be read at all, then read in drowſie and curſorie manner: Nihil eſt tam vtile, quod in tranſit
                                 •
                               profit. There is nothing ſo profitable, that being lightly paſt over, will doe good. If to take bookes in hand were to learne them: and if to ſee, were to view them▪ and 
                              •
                           f to runne them over, were to ſeize vpon them, I ſhould be to blame, to make my ſelfe altogether ſo ignorant as I ſay▪ Since I cannot ſtay the readers attention by the weight: Manco male, if I happen to ſtay him by my intricate confuſion: yea but he will afterward repent, that ever he ammuſed himſelfe about it. You ſay true, but hee ſhall have ammuſed himſelfe vpon it. And there be humors, to whom vnderſtanding cauſeth diſdaine, who becauſe they ſhall not know what I meane will eſteeme mee the better, and will conclude the myſterie and depth of my ſenſe by the obſcuritie: Which, to ſpeake in good earneſt, I hate as death, and would ſhunne it▪ if I could avoid my ſelfe. Ariſtotle vaunteth in ſome place to affect the ſame. A vicious affectation. Forſomuch as the often breaking of my Chapters, I ſo much vſed in the beginning of my booke, ſeemed to interrupt attention, before it be conceived: Diſdaining for ſo little a while to collect and there ſeat it ſelfe: I have betaken my ſelfe to frame them longer; as requiring propoſition and aſſigned leaſure. In ſuch an occupation, he to whom you will not grant one houre, you will allow him nothing. And you do nought for him, for whom you doe, but in doing ſome other thing. Sithence peradventure I am particularly tied and preciſely vowed, to ſpeake by halves, to ſpeake confuſedly, to ſpeake diſcrepantly. I therefore hate this trouble-feaſt reaſon: And theſe extravagant projects, which ſo much moleſt mans life, and theſe ſo ſubtle opinions, if they have any truth; I deeme it over-deare, and find it too incommodious. On the other ſide, I labour to ſet forth vanitie and make ſottiſhneſſe to prevaile, if it bring me any pleaſure. And without ſo nicely controlling them, I follow mine owne naturall inclinations. I have elſewhere ſeene ſome houſes ruined, ſtatues overthrowen, both of heauen and of earth: But men be alwaies one. All that is true: and yet I can not ſo often ſurvay the vaſt 
                              •
                           oombe of that Citie ſo great, ſo populous and ſo puiſſant, but I as often admire and reverence the ſame. The care and remembrance of evils is recommended vnto vs. Now have I from my infancie beene bred and brought vp with theſe: I have had knowledge of the affaires of Rome, long time before I had notice of thoſe of my houſe. I knew the Capitoll, and it's platforme, before I knew Lovure, the pallace of our Kings in Paris; and the River Tiber, before Seyne. I have more remembred and thought vpon the fortunes and conditions of L
                                 •
                              cullus, Metellus and Scipio, then of any of our countrey-men▪ They are deceaſed, and ſo is my father, as fully as they: and is as diſtant from me and life in eighteene yeeres as they were in ſixteene hundred: Whoſe memorie, amitie and ſocietie, I notwithſtanding omit not to continue, to embrace and converſe withall, with a perfect and moſt lively vnion. Yea of mine owne inclination, I am more officious toward the deceaſed. They can no longer help themſelves; but (as me ſeemeth) they require ſo much the more my ayde: There is Gratitude, and there appeareth ſhe in her perfect luſtre. A benefit is leſſe richly aſſigned, where r
                              •
                           trogradation and reflexion is. Arceſilaus going to viſit C
                                 •
                              eſibius that was ſicke, and finding him in very poore plight, faire and ſoftly thruſt ſome mony vnder his boulſter, which he gave him: And concealing it from him, left and gave him alſo a qnittance for ever being beholding to him. Such as have at any time deſerved friendſhip, or love or thanks at my hands, never loſt in the ſame, by being no longer with me. I have better paid and more carefully rewarded them, beeing abſent and when they leaſt thought of it. I ſpeake more kindely and affectionately of my friends, when there is leaſt meanes, that ever it ſhall come to their eares, I have heretofore vndergone a hundred quarrels for the defence of P
                                 •
                              mpey and Brutus his cauſe. This acquaintance continueth to this day betweene vs. Even of preſent things wee have no other holde, but by our fantazie. Perceiving myſelfe

vnfit and vnprofitable for this age, I caſt my ſelfe to that other; And am ſo beſotted with it that the ſtate of the ſaid ancient, free, juſt and floriſhing Rome, (for I neither love the birth, nor like the old-age of the ſame) doth intereſt, concerne and paſſionate me. And therefore can I not ſo often looke into the ſituation of their ſtreets and houſes, and thoſe wondrousſtrange ruines, that may be ſaid to reach down to the Antipodes, but ſo often muſt I ammuſe my ſelfe on them. Is it Nature or by the errour of fantaſie, that the ſeeing of places, wee know to have beene frequented or inhabited by men, whoſe memory is eſteemed or mencioned in ſtories, doth in ſome ſort moove and ſtirre vs vp as much or more, than the hearingCi
                                 •
                              . ſ. de fin. of their noble deeds, or reading of their compoſitions? Tanta vis admonitionis ineſt in locis: Et id quidem in hac vrbe infinitum; quacunque enim ingredimur, in aliquam hiſtoriam veſtigium ponimus. So great a power of admonition is in the very place, And that in this Citty is moſt infinite; for which way ſoever we walke, we ſet our foote vpon ſome History. I am much delighted with the conſideration of their countenance, port and abilliments. I ruminate thoſe glorious names betweene my teeth, and make mine eares to ring with the ſound of them. Ego illos veneror, & tantis nominibus ſemper aſſurgo. I do reverence them, and at their names I do riſe and make curtefie: Of things but in ſome ſort great, ſtrange and admirable, I admire their common parts. I could wiſh to ſee them walke and ſuppe together, and heare their diſcourſes. It were Ingratitude to deſpiſe, and impiety to neglect the reliques or images of ſo many excellent, honeſt good men, and therewithall ſo valiant, which I have ſeene live and die: And who by their examples, had we the wit or grace to follow them, affoord vs ſo many notable inſtructions. And Rome as it ſtands now, deſerveth to be loved: Confederated ſo long ſince, and ſharing titles with our Crowne of France: Being the only common and vniverſall Citie: The Soveraigne Magiſtrate therein commanding, is likewiſe knowen abroad in divers other places. It is the chiefe Metropolitan Citie of all Chriſtian Nations: Both French and Spaniards, and all men elſe are there at home. To be a Prince of that ſtate, a man needs but be of Chriſtendome, where ever it be ſeated. There's no place here on earth, that the Heavens have embraced with ſuch influence of favors and grace, and with ſuch conſtancie: Even hir ruine is glorious with renowne, and ſwolne with glorie.
                        
                           Laudandis precioſior ruinis.
                           Ev'n made more honourable.
                           By ruines memorable.
                        
                        Low-levelled as ſhe lieth, and even in the tombe of hir glory, ſhe yet reſerveth the lively image and regardfull markes of Empire. 
                              Ʋt palam ſit vno in loco gaudentis opus eſſe natur
                                 •
                              . So as it is cleere, in one place is ſet-forth the worke of Nature in her iollity. Some one would blame himſelfe, yea and mutinie, to feele himſelfe tickled with ſo vaine a pleaſure. Our humors are not over vaine, that be pleaſant. Whatſoever they be, that conſtantly content a man capable of common vnderſtanding, I could not finde in my heart to moane or pitty him. I am much beholding to fortune, in aſmuch as vntill this day, ſhe hath committed nothing outragiouſly againſt me, or impoſed any thing vpon mee, that is beyond my ſtrength, or that I could not well beare. It is not haply her cuſtome, to ſuffer ſuch as are not importunate or over buſie with hir, to live in peace.
                        
                           Quanto quiſque ſibi plura negaverit,
                           A Dijs plura feret, nil cupientium,
                           Nudus caſtra peto, multa petentibus,Hor c
                                    ••
                                 
                                 ▪ lib. 3. 
                                    •
                                 d▪ 16▪ 2
                                    •
                                 . 42.
                           
                           Deſunt multa.
                           The more that men ſhall to themſelves denie,
                           The more the Gods will give them: threed-bare I
                           Follow the campe of them that nought deſire,
                           They ſtill want much, that ſtill doe much require.
                        
                        If ſhe continue ſo, I ſhall depart very well content and ſatisfied.
                        
                           —nihil ſupra
                           
                           Deos laceſſo.—Hor. c
                                    ••
                                 . l. 2. 
                                    •
                                 d. 18. 11.
                           
                           More than will ſerve, to have
                           Of Gods I doe not crave.
                        
                        But beware the ſhocke: Thouſandes miſcarry in the haven, and are caſt away being neerest
                           
                           home. I am eaſily comforted with what ſhall happen heere when I am gone. Things preſent trouble me ſufficiently, and ſet me thorowly a worke.
                        
                           Fortunae caetera mando.Ovid. Metam 
                                    •
                                 . 2. 140.
                           
                           The reſt I doe commit
                           To Fortune (as is fit.)
                        
                        Beſides, I am not tied with that ſtrong bond, which ſome ſay, bindes men to future times, by the children bearing their names, and ſucceeding them in honors. And being ſo much to be deſired, it may be I ſhall wiſh for them ſo much the leſſe. I am by my ſelfe but overmuch 
                              ••
                           ed vnto the world, and faſtned vnto life: I am pleaſed to be in Fortunes hold by the circumſtances properly neceſſary to my ſtate, without enlarging her juriſdiction vpon me by other waies: And I never thought, that to be without children, were a defect, able to make mans life leſſe compleat and leſſe contented. A barren ſtate or ſterill vacation, have alſo their peculiar commodities. Children are in the number of things, that need not greatly bee deſired; eſpecially in theſe corrupted daies, wherein it would bee ſo hard a matter to make them good. Bona iam nec na
                                 •
                              ci licet, ita corrupta ſunt ſemina. We cannot now have good things ſo much as grow, the ſeeds are ſo corrupt. Yet have they juſt cauſe to moane them, that having once gotten, loſe 
                              •
                           hem vntimely. He who left me my houſe in charge, conſidering my humor, which was to ſtay at home ſo little, fore-ſaw I ſhould be the overthrow of it. He was deceived: I am now as I came vnto it, if not ſomewhat better. And that, without any Office or Church-living; which are no ſmall helpes. As for other matters, if Fortune have offred mee no violent or extraordinary offence, ſo hath ſhe not ſhewed me any great favour or extraordinary grace. Whatſoever I have belonging to it, that may properly be termed her gifts, was there before I came vnto it; yea and a hundred yeeres before. I particularly enioy no eſſentiall good, or poſſeſſe no ſol
                              •
                           d benefit, that I owe vnto her liberalitie: Indeed ſhee hath beſtowed ſome wind-pufft favours vpon me, which may rather be termed titular and honorable in ſhew, then in ſubſtance, or materiall: And which, in good truth, ſhe hath not granted, but offered me. God he knowes, to me, who am altogether materiall; not ſatisfied but with realitie, which muſt alſo be maſſie and ſubſtantiall: And who, if I durſt confeſſe it, would not thinke avarice much leſſe exc
                              •
                           ſable then ambition: nor griefe leſſe evitable, then ſhame: not health leſſe deſirable, then learning: or riches, leſſe to be wiſhed, then nobilitie. Amongſt her vaine favours, I have none doth ſo much pleaſe my fond ſelfe-pleaſing conceit, as an authenticke Bull, charter or patent of denizonſhip or borgeouſhip of Rome, which at my laſt being there, was granted me by the whole Senate of that Citie: gariſh and trimly adorned with goodly Seales, and written in faire golden Letters: beſtowed vpon me with all gracious and free liberalitie. And forſomuch as they are commonly conferred in divers ſtiles, more or leſſe favourable: and that before I had ever ſeene any, I would have beene glad to have had but a paterne or formular of one; I will for the ſatisfaction of any, if he fortune to be poſſeſſed with ſuch a curioſitie as mine, here ſet down the true copy or tranſcript of it: and thus it is.
                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       Quod Horatius Maximus, Martius Cecius, Alexander Mutus, almae vrbis conſervatores de Illustriſſimo viro Michaele Montano, Equite ſancti Michaëlis, & à Cubiculo Regis Chriſtianiſſimi, Romana civitate donando, ad Senatum retulerunt, S. P. Q. R. de care ita fieri cenſuit.
                                       
                                          CƲm veteri more & inſtituto cupidè illi ſemper ſtudioſ
                                                •
                                             
                                             
                                                
                                                   
                                                
                                                que
                                              ſuſcepti ſint, qui virtute ac nobilitate praeſtantes, magno Reipublicae noſtrae vſui atque ornamento fuiſſent, vel eſſe aliquando poſſent: Nos maiorum noſtrorum exempl
                                                •
                                              atque auctoritate permoti, praeclara
                                                •
                                              hanc Conſuetudinem nobis imitandam ac ſervandam fore cenſemus. Quam
                                                •
                                             brem cùm Illuſtriſſimus Mich
                                                •
                                             el Montanus 
                                                •
                                             ques ſancti Michaelis, & à cubiculo Regis Chriſtianiſſimi; Romani nominis ſtudioſiſſimus, & familiae laude at
                                                
                                                   
                                                
                                                que
                                              ſplendore & proprijs virtutum merit is digniſſimus 
                                                •
                                             it, qui ſumm
                                                •
                                              Senatus Populi
                                                
                                                   
                                                
                                                que
                                              Romani iudicio ac ſtudio in Romanam Civitatem adſciſcatur, placere Senatui P. Q. R. Illuſtriſſimum Michaelem Montanum rebus omnibus ornatiſſim
                                                •
                                             m, at
                                                
                                                   
                                                
                                                que
                                              
                                             
                                                •
                                             uic inc
                                                ••
                                             to Pop
                                                •
                                             l
                                                •
                                              chariſſimum, ipſum poſteroſ
                                                
                                                   
                                                
                                                que
                                              in Rom. civitatem adſcribi, ornari
                                                
                                                   
                                                
                                                que
                                              omnibus & praemijs & hon
                                                •
                                             ribus, quibus illi fruuntur, qui Cives Patritij
                                                
                                                   
                                                
                                                que
                                              Romans nati aut iure optimo facti ſunt. In quo cenſere Senatum P. Q. R.
                                          
                                          ſe non tam illi Ius Civitatis largiri quàm debitum tribuere, neque magis beneficium dare quàm ab ipſ
                                                •
                                              accipere, qui hoc Civitatis munere accipiendo, ſingulari Civitatem ipſam ornamento atque hon
                                                •
                                             r
                                                •
                                              affecerit. Quam quidem S. C. auctoritatem ijdem Conſervatores per Senatus P. Q. R. ſcribas in acta referri atque in Capitolij curia ſervari▪ privilegium
                                                
                                                   
                                                
                                                que
                                              huiuſmodi fieri, ſolito
                                                
                                                   
                                                
                                                que
                                              vrbis ſigillo communiri curarunt.
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                Anno ab vrbe condita CX
                                                      •
                                                    CCC XXXI. poſt Christum natum M. D. LXXXI. III. Idus Martij.
                                             
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                                Horatius Fuſcus ſacri S. P. Q. R. ſcriba.
                                                Vincent. Martholus ſacri S. P. Q. R. ſcriba.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       AT the motion of Horatius Maximus, Martius Cecius, Alexander Mutus, who are Conſervators of this beautifull Cittie▪ concerning the endenizing and making Cittizen of Rome the noble Gentleman Michaell de Montaigne, Knight of the Order of Saint Michaell, and one of the Chamber of the moſt Chriſtian King, the Senate & people of Rome thought good thereof thus to enact. Whereas by the antient cuſtome and good order, they have ever and with good will beene entertained, who excelling in vertue and nobilitie have been, or at any time might be of any great vſe or ornament vnto our common-weale: Wee, mooved by example and authoritie of our Aunceſters, decree, That this notable cuſtome, by vs ſhould be enſued and obſerved. Wherefore, ſithence the right Noble Michael de Montaigne, Knight of Saint Michaels Order, and one of the chamber of the moſt Chriſtian King, both is moſt affectionate vnto the Roman name, and by the commendations and ſplend
                                             •
                                          r of his pedegree, as alſo by the merites of his proper vertues, moſt worthy to be adopted and inſerted into the Romane Cittie with a ſpeciall judgement and good will of the Senate and people of Rome: It pleaſeth the Senate and people of Rome that the right noble Michael de Montaigne, adorned in all complements, and well-beloved of this famous Communaltie, both himſelfe and his ſucceſſours ſhould be aſcribed and 
                                             •
                                          nfranchized into this Romane Cittie, and be graced with all rewards and honours, which they enjoy, who either have been borne, or elected, either Citizens or Noble men of Rome. Wherein the Senate and people doe decree, That they doe not ſo much vouchſafe him the right of their Cittie, as give him that is due vnto him; nor doe they rather give him a benefite, than receive it of him, who by accepting this gift of the Cittie, doth countenance the Citty with a ſingular ornament and honour. Which Act and authoritie of the Senates Decree, the ſaide Conſervators cauſed by the Clearks of the Senate and people to be regiſtred and la
                                             •
                                          de-vp in the Capitoll Court, and this Priveledge to be made and ſigned with the Citties vſuall Seale.
                                       
                                          
                                             In the yeare ſince the building of the Cittie CX
                                                   •
                                                 CCC XXXI▪ after the birth of Chriſt a thouſand five hundred eighty and one: the Ides of March.
                                          
                                          
                                             Horatius Fuſcus, and
Vincent Martholus Clarks of the ſacred Senate and people of Rome.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        Being neither Burgeois nor Denizon of any Cittie, I am well pleaſed to bee ſo, of the nobleſt and greateſt that ever was heretofore, or ever ſhall be hereafter. If others did ſo attentively conſider and ſurvay themſelves as I doe, they ſhould as I doe, finde themſelves full of inanitie, fondneſſe or vanity. I can not be rid of it, except I rid and quit my ſelfe. Wee are all poſſeſſed and overwhelmed therewith, as well one as the other. But ſuch as have a feeling of it, have ſomewhat the better bargaine: And yet I am not ſure of it. This common opinion and vulgar cuſtome, to looke and marke elſewhere then on our ſelves, hath wel provided for our affaires. It is an object full-fraught with diſcontent, wherein we ſee nothing but miſerie and vanitie. To th'end we ſhould not wholly be diſcomforted. Nature hath very fitly caſt the action of our ſight outward: Wee goe forward according to the ſtreame, but to turne our courſe backe to our ſelves, is a painefull motion: the ſea likewiſe is troubled, raging and diſquieted, when t'is turned and driven into it ſelfe. Obſerve (ſaith every one) the motions and branſ
                              •
                           es of the heavens: take a ſurvay of all: the quarrell of this man, the pulſe of that man, and anothers laſt teſtament: to conclude, behold and marke ever, high or low, right or oblique, before or behinde you. It was a paradoxall commandement, which the God of Delphos laid heeretofore vpon vs; Saying: 
                              Ʋiew your ſelves within; know your ſelves; and keepe you to your ſelves: Your minde and your will, which elſewhere is conſumed, bring

it vnto itſelfe againe: you ſcatter, you ſtragle, you ſtray, and you diſtract your ſelves: call your ſelves home againe; rowze and vphold your ſelves: you are betrayed, you are ſpoiled and diſſipated; your ſelves are ſtolne and taken from your ſelves. Seeſt thou not how all this vniverſe holdeth all his ſights compelled inward, and his eyes open to contemplate it ſelfe? Both inward and outward it is ever vanitie for thee; but ſo much leſſe vanitie, by how much leſſe it is extended. Except thy ſelfe, Oh man, (ſaid that God) every thing doth firſt ſeeke and ſtudy it ſelfe, and according to it's neede hath limites to her travells, and bounds to her deſires. There's not one ſo ſhallow, ſo empty, and ſo meedy as thou art who embraceſt the whole world: Thou art the Scrutator without knowledge, the magiſtrate without juridiſdiction: and when all is done, the vice of the play.
                     
                     
                        The tenth Chapter.
                        
                           How one ought to governe his will.
                        
                        IN regard of the common ſort of men, few things touch mee, or (to ſpeake properly) ſway me: For it is reaſon they touch, ſo they poſſeſſe-vs not. I have great neede, both by ſtudy and diſcourſe, to encreaſe this priviledge of inſenſibilitie, which is naturally crept farre into me. I am not wedded vnto many things, and by conſequence, not paſſionate of them. I have my ſight cleare, but tied to few objects: My ſenſes delicate and gentle; but my apprehenſion and application hard and dull: I engage my ſelfe with difficulty. As much as I can, I employ my ſelfe wholly to my ſelfe. And in this very ſubject, I would willingly bridle and vphold mine affection, leſt it be too farre plunged therein; Seeing it is a Subject I poſſeſſe at the mercy of others, and over which fortune hath more intereſt then my ſelfe. So as even in my health, which I ſo much eſteeme, it were requiſite not to deſire, nor ſo carefully to ſeeke it, as thereby I might light vpon intolerable diſeaſes. We must moderate our ſelves, betwixt the hate of paine, and the love of pleaſure. Plato ſets downe a meane courſe of life betweene both. But to affections that diſtract me from my ſelfe, and divert me elſewhere; ſurely, to ſuch I oppoſe my ſelfe with all my force. Mine opinion is, that one ſhould lend himſelfe to others, and not give himſelfe but to himſelfe. Were my will eaſie to engage or apply it ſelfe, I could not continue: I am over tender both by nature and cuſtome,
                        
                           
                              
                                 •
                              ugax rerum, secur áque in otia natus.
                           Avoiding active buſineſſe,Ovid. trist. li. 3. 
                                    ••
                                 . 
                                    •
                                 . 9.
                           
                           And borne to ſecure idleneſſe.
                        
                        Conteſted and obſtinate debates, which in the end would give mine adverſarie advantage, the iſſue which would make my earneſt purſuite aſhamed, would perchaunce torment mee cruelly. If I vexed as other men, my ſoule ſhould never have ſtrength to beare th'alaroms and emotions, that follow ſuch as embrace much. She would preſently be diſplaced by this inteſtine agitation. If at any time I have beene vrged to the managing of ſtrange affaires, I have promiſed to vndertake them with my hand, but not with my lunges, and liver; to charge, and not to incorporate them into mee; to have a care, but nothing at all to bee over paſſionate of them: I looke to them, but I hatch them not. I worke enough to diſpoſe and direct the domeſticall troubles within mine owne entrailes and veines, without harbouring, or importune my ſelfe with any forraine employments: And am ſufficiently intereſſed with my proper, naturall and eſſentiall affaires, without ſeeking others buſineſſes. Such as know how much they owe to themſelves; and how many offices of their owne they are bound to performe, ſhall finde that nature hath given them this commiſſion fully ample and nothing idle. Thou haſt buſineſſe enough within thy ſelfe, therefore stray not abroad: Men give themſelves to hire. Their faculties are not their own, but theirs to whom they ſubject themſelves; their inmates, and not themſelves, are within them. This common humour doth not pleaſe me. We ſhould thriftily husband our mindes liberty, and never engage it but vpon juſt occaſions; which if wee judge impartially, are very few in number. Looke on ſuch as ſuffer themſelves to be tranſported and ſwayed, they doe it every where. In little as well as in great

matters; to that which concerneth, as eaſie as to that which toucheth them not. They thruſt themſelves indifferently into all actions, and are without life, if without tumultuary agitation. In negotijs ſunt, negotij cauſa. They are buſie that they may not be idle, or elſe in action for actions ſake. They ſeeke worke but to be working. It is not ſo much becauſe they will goe, as for that they cannot 
                              ••
                           and ſtill. Much like to a rowling ſtone, which never ſtayes vntill it come to a lying place. To ſome men, employment is a marke of ſufficiency and a badge of dignity. Their ſpirits ſeeke reſt in action, as infants repoſe in the cradle, They my be ſaid, to be as ſerviceable to their friends, as importunate to themſelves. No man diſtributes his mony to others, but every one his life and time. We are not ſo prodigall of any thing, as of thoſe whereof to be covetous would be both commendable and profitable for vs. I follow a cleane contrary courſe, I am of another complexion: I ſtay at home and looke to my ſelfe. What I wiſh for, I commonly deſire the ſame but mildely; and deſire but little: ſo likewiſe I ſeldome employ and quietly embuſie my ſelfe, What ever they intend and act, they doe it with all their will and vehemency. There are ſo many dangerous ſteps, that for the more ſecurity, wee muſt ſomewhat ſlightly and ſuperficially ſlide through the world, and not force it. Pleaſure it ſelfe is painefull in it's beight.
                        
                        
                           —incedis per ignes,
                              Hor. car. l. 2. od. 1. 7.
                           
                           Subpoſitos cineri doloſo.
                           You paſſe through fire (though vnfraid)
                           Vnder deceitfull aſhes laid.
                        
                        The towne counſell of Bourdeaux choſe me Maior of their Citty, being farre from France; but further from any ſuch thought. I excuſed my ſelfe and would have avoided it. But they told mee I was to blame; the more, becauſe the kings commandement was alſo employed therein. It is a charge, ſhould ſeeme ſo much the more goodly, becauſe it hath neither fee nor reward, other then the honour in the execution. It laſteth two yeares, but may continue longer by a ſecond election, which ſeldome hapneth. To me it was, and never had beene but twice before: Some yeares p
                              •
                           ſt the Lord of Lanſac; and lately to the Lord of Biron, Marſhall of France. In whoſe place I ſucceeded; and left mine to the Lord of Matigon, likewiſe Marſhall of France. Glorious by ſo noble an aſſiſtance.
                        
                           Vterque bonus pacis bellique miniſter.
                           Both, both in peace and warre,
                           Right ſerviceable are.
                        
                        Fortune would have a ſhare in my promotion by this particular circumſtance, which ſhee of her owne added thereunto; not altogether vaine. For Alexander diſdained the Corinthian Ambaſſadors, who offred him the freedome and Burgeoiſe of their Cittie, but when they told him that Bacchus and Hercules were likewiſe in their regiſters, hee kindely thanked them and accepted their offer. At my firſt arrivall, I faithfully diſciphered and conſcientiouſly diſplaied my ſelfe, ſuch as I am indeede: without memorie, without diligence, without experience and without ſufficiencie; ſo likewiſe without hatred, without ambition, without covetouſneſſe and without violence: that ſo they might bee duely inſtructed what ſervice they might, or hope, or expect at my hands. And forſomuch as the knowledge they had of my deceaſed father, and the honour they bare vnto his memory, had mooved them to chuſe me to that dignitie, I told them plainely, I ſhould be very ſorie, that any man ſhould worke ſuch an opinion in my will, as their affaires and Cittie had done in my fathers, while he held the ſaid government, wherevnto they had called mee. I remembred to have ſeene him being an infant, and he an old man, his minde cruelly turmoiled with this publike toile; forgetting the ſweete aire of his owne houſe, wherevnto the weakeneſſe of his age had long before tied him; neglecting the care of his health and family, in a maner deſpiſing his life, which as one engaged for them, he much endangered, riding long and painefull journeies for them. Such a one was he: which humor proceeded from the bountie and goodneſſe of his nature. Never was minde more charitable or more popular. This courſe, which I commend in others, I love not to follow: Neither am I without excuſe. He had heard, that a man muſt forget himſelfe for his neighbour: that in reſpect of the generall, the particular was not to bee regarded. Moſt of the worldes-rules and precepts hold this traine, to drive vs out of our ſelves into the wide world, to the vſe of publike ſociety. They preſumed to worke a goodly effect, in diſtracting and withdrawing vs from our ſelves: ſuppoſing wee were by a naturall inſtinct,

too-too much tied vnto it: and to this end have not ſpared to ſay any thing. For to the wiſe it is no novelty, to preach things as they ſerve, and not as they are. Truth hath her lets, diſcommodities and incompatibilities with vs. Wee muſt not often deceive others, leſt we beguile our ſelves. And 
                              •
                           eele our eyes, and dull our vnderſtanding, thereby to repaire and amend them. Imperiti enimiudicant, & qui frequenter in hoc ipſum fallendi ſunt, ne errent. For vnskillfull meniudge, who muſt often even therefore bee deceived, leſt they erre and bee deceived. When they preſcribe vs, to love three, foure yea fifty degrees of things before our ſelves, they preſent vs with the Arte of ſhooters who to come neerer the marke take their aime far above the ſame. To make a crooked ſticke ſtraight, we bend it the contrary way. I ſuppoſe that in the times of Pallas, as we ſee in all other religions, they had ſome apparent myſteries, of which they made ſhew to all the people; and others more high and ſecret, to bee imparted onely to ſuch as were profeſſed. It is likely, that the true point of friendſhip, which everie man oweth to himſelfe, is to be found in theſe. Not a falſe amitie, which makes vs embrace glorie, knowledge, riches and ſuch like, with a principall and immoderate affection, as members of our being; nor an effeminate and indiſcrecte friendſhip; Wherein hapneth as to the Ivie, which corrupts and ruines the Wals it claſpeth: But a ſound and regular amity, equally profitable and pleaſant. Who ſo vnderſtandeth all her duties and exerciſeth them, hee is rightly endenized in the Muſes cabinet: Hee hath attained the tipe of humane Wiſedome and the perfection of our happineſſe. This man knowing exactly what hee oweth to himſelfe, findeth, that he ought to employ the vſe of other men and of the world vnto himſelfe; which to performe, he muſt contribute the duties and offices that concerne him vnto publike ſociety. He that lives not ſomewhat to others, liveth little to himſelfe. Qui ſibi amicus eſt, ſcito hunc amicum omnibus eſſe; He that is friend to himſelfe, know, he is friend to all. The principallSin. epiſt. 6. f. charge we have, is every man his particular conduct. And for this onely wee live heere. As he that ſhould forget to live well and religiouſly, and by inſtructing and directing others, ſhould thinke himſelfe acquitted of his duty; would be deemed a foole: Even ſo, who forſaketh to live healthy and merrily himſelfe, therwith to ſerve another, in mine opinion taketh a bad and vnnaturall courſe. I will not, that in any charge one ſhall take in hand, hee refuſe or thinke much of his attention, of his labour of his ſteps, of his ſpeech, of his ſweat, and if need be of his blood,
                        
                           —nonipſe pro charis amicis,
                           
                           Aut patria timidus perire.Hor. car. l. 4. od. 9. 51.
                           
                           Not fearing life to end
                           For Country or deare friend.
                        
                        But it is onely borrowed and accidentally; The mind remaining ever quiet and in health: not without action, but without vexation or paſſion. Simply to moove or be dooing, coſt's it ſo little, that even ſleeping it is mooving and dooing. But it muſt have it's motion with diſcretion. For the body receiveth the charges impoſed him, juſtly as they are: But the ſpirit extendeth them, and often to his hinderance makes them heavy; giving them what meaſure it pleaſeth. Like things are effected by divers effortes and different contentions of will. The one may goe without the other. For, how many men doe dayly hazard themſelves in warre which they regard not, and preſſe into the danger of battells, the loſſe wherof ſhall no whit breake their next ſleep? Wheras ſome man in his own houſe, free from this danger, which he durſt not ſo much as have look't towards it, is for the Wars iſſue more paſſionate, and therewith hath his minde more perplexed, than the ſoldier, that therein employeth both his blood and life. I know how to deale in publike charges, without departing from my ſelfe the breadth of my naile; and give my ſelfe to an other, without taking mee from my ſelfe: This ſharpeneſſe and violence of deſires hindreth more, then ſteade the conduct of what we vndertake, filling vs with impacience to the events, either contrary or ſlow: and with bitterneſſe and jealouſie toward thoſe with whom wee negotiate. Wee never governe that thing well, wherewith we are poſſeſſed and directed.
                        
                           —Malè cuncta miniſtrat
                           
                           Impetus.—
                           Fury and haſte doe lay all waſte;
                           Miſplacing all, diſgracing all,
                        
                        He who therein employeth but his judgement and direction, proceeds more cheerefully:

he faines, he yeelds, hee deferres at his pleaſure according to the occaſions of neceſſity: hee failes of his attempt, without torment or affliction: ready and prepared for a new enterpriſe. He marcheth alwayes with the reines in his hand. Hee that is beſotted with this violent and tyrannicall intention, doth neceſſarily declare much indiſcretion and injuſtice. The violence of his deſire tranſports him. They are raſh motions, and if fortune helpe not much, of little fruit. Philoſophie wills vs to baniſh choller in the puniſhment of offences; not to the end revenge ſhould be more moderate, but contrary, more weighty and ſurely ſet on: whervnto this violence ſeemeth to bee a let. Choller doth not onely trouble, but wearieth the executioners armes. This paſſionate heat dulleth and conſumes their force. As in too much ſpeede, feſtinatio tarda eſt; Hastineſſe is ſlow. Haſte makes waſte, and hinders and ſtayes it ſelfe: Ipſa ſe velocitas implicat; Swiftneſſe entangles it ſelfe. As for example, according as by ordinarie cuſtome I perceive, covetouſneſſe hath no greater let, then it ſelfe. The more violent and extended it is, the leſſe effectuall and fruitfull. Commonly it gathers wealth more ſpeedily being masked with a ſhew of liberality. A very honeſt Gentleman and my good friend, was likely to have endangered the health of his body, by an over paſſionate attention and earneſt affection to the affaires of a Prince, who was his Maiſter. Which Maiſter hath thus deſcribed himſelfe vnto me: That as another, hee diſcerneth and hath a feeling of the burthen of accidents: but ſuch as have no remedie, hee preſently reſolveth to ſuffer with patience: For the reſt, after hee hath appointed neceſſary proviſions, which by the vivacitie and nimbleneſſe of his wit hee ſpeedily effects, hee then attends the event with quietneſſe. Verily, I have ſeene in him at one inſtant a great careleſneſſe and liberty, both in his actions and countenance: Even in important and difficult affaires. I finde him more magnanimous and capable, in bad then in good fortune. His loſſes are to him more glorious, than his victories; and his mourning than his triumphs. Conſider how in meere vaine and frivolous actions, as at cheſſe, tennis and ſuch like ſports, this earneſt and violent engaging with an ambicious deſire to winne, doth preſently caſt both minde and limmes into diſorder and indiſcretion. Wherein a man doth both dazle his ſight and diſtemper his whole body. Hee who demeaneth himſelfe with moſt moderation both in winning and looſing, is ever necreſt vnto himſelfe, and hath his wits beſt about him. The leſſe hee is mooved or paſſionate in play, the more ſafely doth he governe the ſame, and to his greater advantage. We hindet the mindes ſeazure and holdfaſt, by giving her ſo many things to ſeize vpon. Some wee ſhould onely preſent vnto her, others faſten vpon hir, and others incorporate into hir. Shee may ſee and feele all things, but muſt onely feede on hir ſelfe: And bee inſtructed in that which properly concerneth hir, and which meerely belongeth to her eſſence and ſubſtance. The lawes of nature teach vs what is iuſt and fit for vs. After the wiſe-men have told vs, that according to nature no man is indigent or wanteth, and that each-one is poore but in his owne opinion, they alſo diſtinguiſh ſubtilly, the deſires proceeding from Nature, from ſuch as grow from the diſorders of our fantaſie. Thoſe whoſe end may be diſcerned are meerely hers; and ſuch as flie before vs and whoſe end we cannot attaine, are properly ours. Want of goods may eaſily be cured, but the poverty of the minde, is incurable.
                        
                        
                           Nam ſi, quod ſatis eſt homini, id ſatis eſſe poteſſet,
                           Hoc ſat erat; nunc, quum hoc non est, qui credimus porro
                           Divitias vllas animum mi explere poteſſe?
                           If it might be enough, that is enough for man,
                           This were enough, ſince it is not, how thinke we can
                           Now any riches fill
                           My minde and greedy will?
                        
                        
                           Socrates ſeeing great ſtore of riches, jewells and pretious ſtuffe carried in pompe through his Citty: Oh how many things (quoth he) doe not I deſire! Metrodorus lived daily with the weight of twelve ounces of foode: Epicurus with leſſe: Metrocles in winter lay with ſheepe, and in ſummer in the Cloiſters of Churches. Sufficit ad id natura, quod poſcit. Nature is ſufficient
                           Sen. epiſt. 90. 
                           for that which it requires. Cleanthes lived by his handes, and boaſted, that if Cleanthes would, he could nouriſh another Cleanthes. If that which Nature doth exactly and originally require at our handes, for the preſervation of our being, is over little (as in truth what it is, and how good cheape our life may be maintained, cannot better bee knowne or expreſſed than by this conſideration. That it is ſo little, and for the ſmalneſſe thereof, it is out of

                           
                              〈1 page duplicate〉
                           
                           
                           
                              〈1 page duplicate〉
                           
                           
Fortunes reach, and ſhe can take no hold of it) let vs diſpenſe ſomething els vnto ourſelves, and call the cuſtome and condition of every▪ one of vs by the name of Nature. Let vs taxe and ſtint and feede our ſelves according to that meaſure; let vs extend both our appurtenances and reckonings therevnto. For ſo farre, me ſeemes, we have ſome excuſe: Cuſtome is a ſecond Nature, and no leſſe powerfull▪ What is wanting to cuſtome, I hold it a defect: And I had well nigh as leefe one ſhould deprive mee of my life, as refraine or much abridge me of the ſtate wherein I have lived ſo long. I am no more vpon termes of any great alteration nor to thruſt my ſelfe into a new and vn-vſuall courſe, no not toward augmentation: it is no longer time to become other or bee transformed. And as I ſhould complaine if any great adventure ſhould now befall me, and grieve it came not in time that I might have enjoyed the ſame.
                        
                           Quo mihi fortuna, ſi non concedit ur vti?H
                                    •
                                 rl. 1. epiſt. 5. 12.
                           
                           Whereto ſhould I have much,
                           If I to vſe it grutch?
                        
                        I ſhould likewiſe bee grieved at any inward purchaſe: I were better in a manner, never, than ſo late, to become an honeſt man: and well practiſed to live, when one hath no longer life. I who am ready to depart this World, could eaſily be induced, to reſigne the ſhare of wiſedome I have learn't, concerning the Worlds commerce, to any other man new-come into the world. It is even as good as Mustard after dinner. What neede have I of that good, which I cannot enioy? Whereto ſerveth knowledge, if one have no head? It is an injury and diſgrace of Fortune, to offer vs thoſe preſents, which, forſomuch as they faile vs when we ſhould moſt neede them, fill vs with a juſt ſpite. Guide me no more: I can go no longer. Of ſo many diſmembrings that Sufficiency hath, patience ſufficeth vs. Give the capacity of an excellent treble to a Singer, that hath his lungs rotten; & of eloquence to an Hermit confined into the Deſerts of Arabia. There needes no Arte to further a fall. The end findes it ſelfe in the finiſhing of every worke. My world is at an end, my forme is expired. I am wholly of the time paſt. And am bound to authorize the ſame, and thereto conforme my iſſue. I will ſay this by way of example; that the eclipſing or abridging of tenne dayes, which the Pope hath lately cauſed, hath taken me ſo low, that I can hardly recover my ſelfe. I follow the yeares, wherein we were wont to compt otherwiſe. So long and antient a cuſtome doth challenge and recall me to it againe. I am thereby enforced to be ſomewhat an hereticke: Incapable of innovation, though corrective. My imagination ma
                              •
                           gre my teeth runnes ſtill tenne dayes before, or tenne behinde; and whiſpers in mine 
                              •
                           ares: This rule toucheth thoſe, which are to come▪
                            If health it ſelfe ſo ſweetely-pleaſing, comes to me but by fittes, it is rather to give me cauſe of griefe then poſſeſſion of it ſelfe. I have no where left mee to retire it. Time forſakes mee without which nothing is enjoyed. How ſmall accompt ſhould I make of theſe great elective dignities I ſee in the world, and which are onely given to men, ready to leave the world! wherein they regard not ſo much how duely they ſhall diſcharge them, as how little they ſhall exerciſe them: from the beginning they looke to the end. To conclude, I am ready to finiſh this man, not to make another. By long cuſtome, this forme is changed into ſubſtance, and Fortune into Nature. I ſay therefore, that amongſt vs feeble creatures, each one is excuſable to compt that his owne, which is comprehended vnder meaſure. And yet all beyond theſe limites, is nothing but confuſion.
                        It is the largeſt extenſion we can grant our rights. The more wee amplifie our neede and poſſeſſion, the more we engage our ſelves to the croſſes of fortune and adverſities. The cariere of our deſires muſt be circumſcribed, and tied to ſtrict bounds of neereſt and contiguous commodities. Moreover, their courſe ſhould be managed, not in a ſtraight line, having another end, but round, whoſe two points hold together, and end in our ſelves with a ſhort compaſſe. The actions governed without this reflection, I meane a neere and eſſentiall reflection, as theſe of the covetous, of the ambitious and ſo many others, that runne directly point-blancke, the courſe of which carrieth them away before them, are erronious and crazed actions. Moſt of our vacations are like playes. Mundus vniverſus exercet histrioniam. All the world doth practiſe stage-playing. Wee muſt play our parts duly, but as the part of a borrowed perſonage. Of a viſard and apparance, wee ſhould not make a reall eſſence, nor proper of that which is another. Wee cannot diſtinguiſh the skinne from the ſhirt. It is ſufficient to diſguiſe the face, without deforming the breaſt. I ſee ſome transforme and

tranſubſtantiate themſelves, into as many new formes and ſtrange beings, as they vndertake charges: and who emprelate themſelves even to the heart and entrailes; and entraine their offices even ſitting on their cloſe ſtoole. I cannot teach them to diſtinguiſh the ſalutations and cappings of ſuch as regard them, from thoſe that reſpect either their office, their traine or their mule. Tantum ſe fortunae permitunt, etiam vt naturam dediſcant. They give themſelves ſo much over to Fortune, as they forget Nature. They ſwell in mind and puffe vp their naturall diſcourſe, according to the dignity of their office. The Maior of Bourdeaux, and Michaell Lord of Montaigne, have ever beene two, by an evident ſeparation. To bee an advocate or a Treaſurer, one ſhould not be ignorant of the craft incident to ſuch callings. An honeſt man is not comptable for the vice and folly of his trade, and therfore ought not to refuſe the exerciſe of it. It is the cuſtome of his country; and there is profite in it. Wee muſt live by the worlde, and ſuch as we finde it, ſo make vſe of it. But the judgement of an Emperour ſhould be above his Empire; and to ſee and conſider the ſame as a ſtrange accident. Hee ſhould know how to enjoy himſelfe apart; and communicate himſelfe as Iames and Peter; at leaſt to himſelfe. I cannot ſo abſolutely or ſo deeply engage my ſelfe. When my will gives me to any party, it is not with ſo violent a bond, that my vnderſtanding is thereby infected. In the preſent inteſtine trouble of our State, my intereſt hath not made mee forget neither the commendable qualities of our adverſaries, nor the reproachfull of thoſe I have followed. They partially extoll what ever is on their ſide: I doe not ſo much as excuſe the greater number of my friends-actions. A good Oratour looſeth not his grace by pleading againſt me. The inticrateneſſe of our debate remooved, I have maintained my ſelfe in equanimity and pure indifferency. Neque extra neceſſitates belli, praecipuum odium gero, Nor beare I capitall hatred, when I am out of the neceſſitie of warre. Wherein I glory, for that commonly I ſee men erre in the contrary. Such as extend the choller and hatred, beyond their affaires (as moſt men doe) ſhew that it proceedes elſewhence, and from ſome private cauſe: Even as one being cured of an vlcer, and his fever remaineth ſtill, declareth it had another more hidden begining. It is the reaſon they beare none vnto the cauſe, in generall: and forſomuch as it concerneth the intereſt of all, and of the ſtate: But they are vexed at it, onely for this; that it toucheth them in private. And therefore are they diſtempered with a particular paſſion, both beyond juſtice and publicke reaſon. Non tam omnia vniverſi, quàm ea, qua ad quemque pertinent, ſinguli carpebant. All did not ſo much finde fault withall, as every one with thoſe that appertained to every one. I will have the advantage to be for vs, which though it be not, I enrage not. I ſtand firmely to the 
                              •
                           ounder parts. But I affect not to be noted a private enemy to others, and beyond generall reaſon, I greatly accuſe this vicious forme of obſtinate conteſting: He is of the League, becauſe he admireth the grace of the Duke of Guiſe: or he is a Hugonote, forſomuch as the King of Navarres activity amazeth him: He findes fault in the Kings behaviours, therefore he is ſedicious in his heart. I would not give the magiſtrate my voice, that he had reaſon to condemne a booke, becauſe an hereticke was therein named and extolled to be one of the beſt Poets of this age. Dare wee not ſay that a theefe hath a good leg? if he have ſo indeede; If ſhe be a ſtrumpet, muſt ſhe needes have a ſtinking breath? In wiſer ages, revoked they the prowd title of Capitolinus, they had formely given to Marcus Manlius, as the preſerver of religion and publicke liberty? Suppreſſed they the memory of his liberality, his deeds of armes and military rewards granted to his vertues, becauſe to the prejudice of his countries lawes, he afterward affected a Royalty? If they once conceive a hatred againſt an Orator or an advocate, the next day he becommeth barbarous and vneloquent. I have elſewhere diſcourſed of zeale, which hath driven good men into like errours. For my ſelfe, I can ſay: that he doth wickedly, and this vertuouſly. Likewiſe, in prognoſtickes or ſiniſter events of affaires, they will have every man blinde or dull in his owne cauſe: and that our perſwaſion and judgement, ſerve not the truth but the project of our deſires. I ſhould rather erre in the other extreamity; So much I feare my deſire might corrupt me. Conſidering, I ſomewhat tenderly diſtruſt my ſelfe in things I moſt deſire. I have in my dayes ſeene wonders, in the indiſcreete and prodigious facility of people, ſuffering their hopes and beliefes, to bee led and governed, as it hath pleaſed and beſt fitted their leaders: above a hundred diſcontents, one in the neck of another: and beyond their fantaſies and dreames. I wonder no more at thoſe, whom the apiſh toyes of Apollonius and Mahomet have ſeduced and blinded. Their ſence and vnderſtanding is wholly ſmothered

in their paſſion. Their diſcretion hath no other choiſe but what pleaſeth them and furthereth their cauſe. Which I had eſpecially obſerved in the beginning of our diſtempered factions and factious troubles. This other which is growne ſince, by imitation ſurmounteth the ſame. Whereby I obſerve, that it is an inſeparable quality of popular errours. The firſt beeing gone, opinions enterſhocke one another, following the winde, as waves doe. They are no members of the body, if they may renounce it; if they folow not the common courſe. But truely they wrong the juſt partes, when they ſeeke to helpe them with fraude or deceipts. I have alwayes contradicted the ſame. This meane is but for ſicke braines: The healthy have ſurer and honeſter wayes to maintaine their reſolutions and excuſe all contrary accidents. The Heavens never ſaw ſo weighty a diſcord and ſo harmefull a hatred, as that betweene Caeſar and Pompey; nor ever ſhall heereafter: Mee ſeemeth notwithſtanding, I ſee in thoſe noble and Heroicall mindes, an exemplar and great moderation of the one toward the other. It was a jelouſie of honour and emulation of command, which tranſported them, not to a furious and indiſcreete hatred; without malice or detraction. In their ſharpeſt exploites, I diſcover ſome reliques of reſpect and cinders of well-meaning affection. And I imagine, that had it beene poſſible, either of them deſired rather to effect his purpoſe without overthrowing his competitour, than by working his vtter ruine. Note how contrarie the proceeding was betweene Sylla and Marius. We muſt not runne headlong after our affections and private intereſts. As in my youth, I ever oppoſed my ſelfe to the motions of love, which I felt to vſurpe vpon me; and laboured to diminiſh it's delights, leſt in the end it might vanquiſh and captivate me to his mercy: So do I now in all other occaſions, which my will apprehendeth with an over great appetite. I bend to the contrary of my diſpoſition, as I ſee the ſame plunged and drunke with it's owne Wine. I ſhunne ſo farre foorth to nouriſh hir pleaſure, as I may not revoke it without a bloody loſſe. Thoſe mindes which through ſtupidity ſee things but by halves, enjoy this happineſſe, that ſuch as be hurtfull, offend them leaſt: It is a ſpirituall leproſie, that hath ſome ſhew of health; and ſuch a health, as Philoſophy doth not altogether contemne. But yet it may not lawfully bee termed wiſedome; as we often doe. And after this manner did in former times ſome body mocke Diogenes, who in the dead of Winter, went all naked, embracing an image of ſnow, to try his patience; Who meeting him in this order, ſaid thus vnto him; Art thou now very colde; Nothing at all, anſwered Diogenes. What thinkeſt thou to doe then, that is either hardor exemplar by ſtanding in the colde? replied the other: To meaſure conſtancy, we muſt neceſſarily know ſufferance, But ſuch minds as muſt behold croſſe events, and fortunes injuries in their height and ſharpneſſe, which muſt weigh and taſte them according to their naturall bitterneſſe and charge; let them employ their skill and keep themſelves from embracing the cauſes, and divert their approaches. What did King Cotys? He payed liberally for that goodly and rich Veſſell, which one had preſented vnto him, but forſomuch as it was exceeding brittle, hee preſently brake it himſelfe, that ſo betimes he might remoove ſo eaſie an occaſion of choller againſt his ſervants. I have in like ſort ſhunned confuſion in my affaires, and ſought not to have my goods contiguous to my neighbours, and to ſuch as I am to be linked in ſtrict friendſhippe: Whence commonly enſue cauſes of alienation and vnkindneſſe. I have heeretofore loved the hazardous play of Cardes and Dice; I have long ſince left it, onely for this that notwithſtanding any faire ſemblance I made in my loſſes, I was inwardly diſquieted. Let a man of honour, who is to take a lie or endure an outragious wrong, and cannot admit a bad excuſe for paiment or ſatisfaction, avoid the progreſſe of contentious altercations. I ſhunne melancholike complexions and froward men, as infected. And in matters, I cannot talke-of without intereſt and emotion, I meddle not with them, except duty conſtraine mee therevnto. Melius non incipient, quam deſinent. They ſhall better not beginne, than leave off. The ſureſt way, is then to prepare our ſelves before occaſion. I know that ſome wiſemen have taken another courſe; and have not feared to engage and vehemently to inſinuate themſelves into diverſe objects. Thoſe aſſure themſelves of their owne ſtrength, vnder which they ſhrowd themſelves againſt all manner of contrary events, making miſchiefs to wreſtle one againſt another, by vigor and vertue of patience:
                        
                           Velut rupes vaſtum quae prodit in aequor,Virg. Aen. l. 10. 693.
                           
                           Obvia ventorum furijs, expoſtáque ponto,
                           
                              Ʋim cunctam atque minas perfert caelique mariſque,
                           
                              ——ipſa immota manens.
                           
                           Much like a rocke, which but's into the Maine,
                           Meeting with windes-rage, to the Sea laid plaine,
                           It doth the force of skies and Seas ſuſtaine,
                           Endure their threats, yet do th vnmoov'd remaine.
                        
                        Let vs not imitate theſe examples, we ſhall not attaine them. They opinionate themſelves reſolutely to behod, and without perturbation to bee ſpectatours of their Countries ruine, which whilome poſſeſſed and commaunded their full will. As for our vulgar minds, therin is too much effort and roughneſſe. Cato quit thereby the nobleſt life that ever was. Wee ſeely-ones muſt ſeeke to eſcape the ſtorme further off: We ought to provide for apprehenſion and not for patience, and avoid the blowes wee cannot withſtand. Zeno ſeeing Chremonides a yoong man whom he loved, approach to ſit neere him; roſe vp ſodainely. Cleanthes asking him the reaſon? I vnderſtand (ſaid hee) that Phyſitions above all things preſcribe reſt, and forbid emotion in all tumors. Socrates ſaith not; yeeld not to the allurements of beauty; maintaine it, enforce your ſelves to the contrary: Shunne her (ſaith hee) runne out of her ſight and companie; as from a violent poiſon, that infecteth and ſtingeth farre-off. And his good Diſciple, faining or reciting, but in mine opinion, rather reciting then faining, the matchleſſe perfections of that great Cyrus, deſcribeth him diſtruſting his forces to withſtand the blandiſhments or allurings of the divine beautie of that famous Panthea his Captive, committing the viſitation and guarde of her to an other, that had leſſe liberty then himſelfe. And likewiſe the Holy-Ghoſt ſaith ne nos inducas in tentationem,
                           Matth. 6. 13. 
                           and lead vs not into temptation. We pray not that our reaſon be not encountred and vanquiſhed by concupiſcence: but that it be not ſo much as aſſayed therewith: That we bee not reduced to an eſtate, where we ſhould but ſuffer the approaches, ſollicitations and temptations of ſinne: and we entreat our Lord, to keepe our conſcience quiet, fully and perfectly free from all commerce of evill. Such as ſay they have reaſon for their revenging paſſion, or any other minde-troubling perturbation: ſay often truth, as things are, but not as they were. They ſpeake to vs, when the cauſes of their error are by themſelves foſtred and advanced. But retire further backeward, recall their cauſes to their beginning: there you ſurpriſe and put them to a non plus. Would they have their fault be leſſe, becauſe it is more ancient; and that of an vnjuſt beginning, the progreſſe be juſt? He that (as I doe) ſhall wiſh his countries wellfare, without fretting or pining himſelfe, ſhall be grieved, but not ſwoune, to ſee it threatning, either his owne downefall, or a continuance no leſſe ruinous. Oh ſeely-weake barke, whom both waves, windes and Pilote, hull and toſſe to ſo contrary deſſeignes!
                        
                           —in tam diverſa, magiſter,
                           
                           
                              Ʋentus & vnda trahunt.—
                           Maiſter the wave and winde
                           So diverſe wayes doe binde.
                        
                        Who gapes not after the favour of Princes, as after a thing without which hee cannot live; nor is much diſquieted at the coldneſſe of their entertainment or frowning countenance nor regardeth the inconſtancy of their will. Who hatcheth not his children or huggeth not honours, with a ſlaviſh propenſion; nor leaves to live commodiouſly having once loſt them. Who doth good, namely for his owne ſatisfaction, nor is much vexed to ſee men cenſure of his actions againſt his merite. A quarter of an ownce of patience provideth for ſuch inconveniences. I finde eaſe in this receit: redeeming my ſelfe in the beginning, as good cheape as I can: By which meanes I perceive my ſelfe to have eſcaped much trouble and manifold difficulties. With very little force, I ſtay theſe firſt motions of my perturbations: And I abandon the ſubject which beginnes to moleſt me, and before it tranſport mee. Hee that stops not the looſe, ſhall hardly ſtay the courſe. He that cannot ſhut the dore against them, ſhall never expell them being entred. He that cannot attaine an end in the beginning, ſhall not come to an end of the concluſion. Nor ſhall hee endure the fall, that could not endure the starts of it. Etenim
                           Cic. Taſc. q
                                 •
                              . l. 4. 
                           ipſae ſe impellunt, vbi ſemel à ratione diſceſſum est; ipſá
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               ſibi imbecillit as indulget, in altumque provehitur imprudens: nec reperit locum conſistendi. For they drive themſelves headlong, when once they are parted and past reaſon; and weakeneſſe ſoothes it ſelfe, and vnawares is carried into the deepe, nor can it finde a place to tarry in. I feele betimes, the low windes, which are forerunners

of the ſtorme, buzze in mine eares and ſound and trie mee within:
                        
                           —c
                                    ••
                                  flamina prima
                           
                           Cùm deprenſa fr
                                 •
                              munt ſylvis, & c
                                 •
                              ca volutantVirg. Aen. l. 10. 97.
                           
                           Murmura, venturos nautis prodentia ventos.
                           As firſt blaſts in the woods perceiv'd to goe
                           Whiſtle, and darkely ſpeake in murmurs low,
                           Foretelling Marriners what windes will grow.
                        
                        How often have I done my ſelfe an apparant injuſtice, to avoide the danger I ſhould fall into, by receiving the ſame, happily worſe, from the judges, after a world of troubles, and of foule, and vile practiſes, more enemies to my naturall diſpoſition, then fire or torment? Convenit a litibus quantum licet, & neſcso an paulo plus etiam quam licet, abhorrentem eſſe; Eſt
                           C
                                 ••
                              . off. lib. 
                           enim non mo
                                 ••
                               liberale, paululum non nunquam de ſuo iure decedere, ſed interdum etiam fructuoſum. As much as wee may, and it may be more then we may, we ſhould abhorre brabling and lawing; for it is not onely an ingenious part, but ſometimes profitable alſo at ſometimes to yeeld a little of our right. If we were wiſe indeede, wee ſhould rejoyce and glory, as I heard once a yonggentleman, borne of a very great houſe, very wittily and vnfainedly, rejoyce with all men that his mother had loſt her ſute; as if it had beene a cough, an ague, or any other yrkſome burthen. The fauours, which fortune might have given mee, as aliances and acquaintances with ſuch as have Soveraigne authority in thoſe things; I have, in my conſcience done much inſtantly to evoide imploying them to others prejudice, and not over-value my rights above their worth. To conclude, I have ſo much prevailed by my endevours (in a good houre I may ſpeake it) that I am yet a virgin for any ſutes in law, which have notwithſtanding not omitted gently to offer mee their ſervice, and vnder pretence of lawfull titles inſinuate themſelves into my allowance, would I but have given eare vnto them. And as a pure maiden from quarrels; I have without important offence, either paſſive or active, lingred out a long life, and never heard worſe than mine owne name▪ A rare grace of heaven. Our greateſt agitations, have ſtrange ſprings and ridiculous cauſes. What ruine did our laſt Duke of Burgundie runne into, for the quarrell of a cart-load of ſheepes-skinnes? And was not the graving of a ſeale, the chiefe cauſe of the moſt horrible breach and topſie-turvy, that ever this worlds-frame endured? For, Pompey and Caſar are but the new buddings and continuation of two others. And I have ſeene in my time, the wiſeſt heads of this realme aſſembled with great ceremonie and publike charge, about treaties and agreements, the true deciding wherof depended in the meane while abſolutely and ſoveraignely of the will and conſultations held in ſome Ladies pate or cabinet; and of the inclination of ſome ſillie woman. Poets have moſt judiciouſly look't into this, who but for an apple have ſet all Greece and Aſia on fire and ſword. See why that man doth hazzard both his honor and life on the fortune of his rapier and dagger; let him tell you whence the cauſe of that contention ariſeth; he can not without bluſhing; ſo vaine and ſo frivolous is the occaſion. To embarke him, there needes but little adviſement, but being once-in, all parts doe worke; Then are greater proviſions required, more difficult and important. How farre more eaſie is it not to enter, than to get forth? We muſt proceed contrary to the brier, which produceth a long and ſtraight ſtalke at the firſt ſpringing; but after, as tired and out of breath, it makes many and thicke knots, as if they were pawſes, ſhewing to have no more that vigor and conſtancie. Wee ſhould rather begin gently and leaſurely; and keepe our ſtrength and breath for the perfection of the worke. We direct affaires in the beginning, and holde them at our mercie, but being once vndertaken, they guide and tranſport vs, and we muſt follow them. Yet may it not be ſayd, that this counſell hath freed me from all difficulties, and that I have not beene often troubled to controle and bridle my paſſions: which are not alwayes governed according to the meaſure of occaſions: whoſe entrances are often ſharpe and violent. So is it, that thence may be reaped good fruit and profit. Except for thoſe, who in well doing are not ſatisfied with any benefit, if their reputation be in queſtion. For in truth, ſuch an effect is not compted of but by every one to himſelfe. You are thereby better ſatisfied, but not more eſteemed, having reformed your ſelfe, before you come into action or the matter was in ſight: yet not in this onely, but in all other duties of life, their courſe which aime at honour, is diverſe from that, which they propound vnto themſelves, that follow order and reaſon. I finde ſome, that inconſiderately and furiouſly thruſt themſelves into the liſtes and growe

ſlacke in the courſe. As Plutarke ſaith, that Such as by the vice of baſhfulneſſe are ſoft and tractable to graunt whatſoever is demaunded, are afterward as prone and facile to recant and breake their word: In like manner, he that enters lightly into a quarrel, is ſubject to leave it as lightly. The ſame difficultie which keeps me from embracing the ſame, ſhould encite me, being once mooved and therein engaged, to continue reſolute. It is an ill cuſtome. Being once embarked, one muſt either goe-on or ſinke. Attempt coldly (ſayed Byas) but purſue hotly. For want of judgement, our harts faile vs; Which is alſo leſſe tolerable. Moſt agreements of our moderne quarrels, are ſhamefull and falſe: Wee onely ſeeke to ſave apparances, and therewhilſt betray and diſa-vow our true intentions. We ſalve the deede: We know how wee ſpake it, and in what ſence the by-ſtanders know it: yea and our friends to whom wee would have our advantages knowne. It is to the prejudice of our libertie and intereſt of our reſolutions-honour, that we diſ-avow our thoughts and ſeeke for ſtarting holes in falſhood, to make our agreements. Wee belie ourſelves, to ſalve a lie we have given to another. We muſt not looke whether your action or word may admitte another interpretation, but it is your owne true and ſincere conſtruction, that you muſt now maintaine; whatſoever it coſt you. It is to your vertue and to your conſcience that men ſpeake; parts that ought not to be diſguiſed. Leave we theſe baſe courſes, wrangling ſhifts and verball meanes, to petty-fogging Lawyers. The excuſes and reparations, or ſatisfactions, which dayly I ſee made; promiſed and given to purge indiſcretion, ſeeme to mee more foule than indiſcretion it ſelfe. Better were it for one to offend his adverſarie againe, than in giving him ſuch ſatisfaction, to wrong himſelfe ſo much. You have braved him mooved by choller, and now you ſeeke to pacifie and flatter him in your cold and better ſence: Thus you abaſe your ſelfe more, than you were before exalted. I find no ſpeech ſo vicious in a Gentleman, as I deeme any recantation he ſhall make, diſhonorable; eſpecially if it be wreſted from him by authoritie: Forſomuch as obſtinacie is in him more excuſable, than cowardize. Paſſions are to mee as eaſie to be avoyded, as they are difficult to be moderated. Excinduntur facilius animo, quàm temperantur. They are more eaſilie rooted out of the minde, than brought to good temper. Hee that can not attaine to this noble Stoicall impaſſibilitie, let him ſhrowde himſelfe in the boſome of this my popular ſtupiditie. What they did by vertue, I inure my ſelfe to doe by Nature. The middle region harboureth ſtormes; the two extreames containe Philoſophers and rurall men, they concurre in tranquillity and good hap.
                        
                           Foelix qui potuit rerum cognoſcere cauſas,Virg. Georg. l. 2 490.
                           
                           Atque metus omnes & inexorabile fatum
                           Subiecit pedibus, ſtrepitúmque Acherontis avari.
                           Fortunatus & ille, Deos qui novit agreſtes,
                           Panáque, Silvanúmque ſenem, Nympháſque ſorores.
                           Happy is he that could of things the cauſes finde,
                           And ſubject to his feete all fearefulneſſe of minde,
                           Inexorable fate, and noiſe of greedy Hell.
                           And happy he, with Countrie Gods acquainted well,
                           
                              Pan and old Silvan knowes,
                           And al the ſiſter ſhrowes.
                        
                        The beginnings of all things are weake and tender. We muſt therefore be cleare-ſighted in beginnings: For, as in their budding wee diſcerne not the danger, ſo in their full growth wee perceive not the remedy. I ſhould have encountred a thouſand croſſes, daily more hard to be diſgeſted in the courſe of ambition, than it hath bin vneaſie for me to ſtay the naturall inclination, that led me vnto them.
                        
                           —iure perhorrui,
                              Hor. car. l. 3. 16. 18.
                           
                           Latè conſpicuum tollere verticem.—
                           I have beene much afraid for cauſes right.
                           To raiſe my foretop far abroad to ſight.
                        
                        
                           All publike actions are ſubiect to vncertaine and divers interpretations: For, too many heads judge of them. Some ſay of this my Citty employment (whereof I am content to ſpeake a word; not that it deſerves it, but to make a ſhew of my manners in ſuch things) I have demeaned my ſelfe like one that is to ſlowly mooved and with a languiſhing affection: And they are not altogether void of reaſon. I ſtrive to keepe my minde and thoughts quiet. Cum
                           
                           ſemper Natura, tum etiam aetate iam quietus. Both ever quiet by Nature, and now becauſe of yeeres. And if at any time they are debauched to ſome rude and piercing impreſſion, it is in truth without my conſent. From which naturall ſlackneſſe, one muſt not therefore inferre any proofe of diſabilitie: For, Want of care and lacke of iudgement are two thinges: And leſſe vnkindneſſe and ingratitude toward thoſe Citizens, who to gratifie me, employed the vtmoſt of all the meanes they could poſſibly; both before they knew me and ſince. And who did much more for me, in appoynting me my charge the ſecond time, then in chooſing me the firſt. I love them with all my heart, and wiſh them all the good that may be. And truly if occaſion had beene offered, I would haveſpared nothing to have done them ſervice. I have ſtirred and laboured for them, as I doe for my ſelfe. They are a good people, warlike and generous; yet capable of obedience and diſcipline, and fit for good employment, if they be well guided. They ſay likewiſe, that I paſſed over this charge of mine without any deede of note or great ſhew. It is true. Moreover, they accuſe my ceſſation, when as all the world was convicted of too much dooing: I have a moſt nimble motion, where my will doth carrie me. But this point is an enemie vnto perſeverance. Whoſoever will make vſe of mee, according to my ſelfe, let him employ me in affaires, that require vigor and liberty: that have a ſhort, a ſtraight, and therewithall a hazardous courſe: I may peradventure ſomewhat prevaile therein. Whereas if it be tedious, craftie, laborious, artificiall and intricate, they ſhall doe better to addreſſe themſelves to ſome other man. All charges of importance are not difficult. I was prepared to labour ſomewhat more earneſtly, if there had beene great neede. For it lyes in my power, to doe ſomething more than I make ſhew-of, and than I love to doe. To my knowledge, I have not omitted any motion that duty required earneſtly at my hands. I have eaſily forgotten thoſe, which ambition blendeth with dutie and cloketh with her title. It is they, which moſt commonly fill the eyes and eares, and ſatisfie men. Not the thing it ſelfe, but the apparance payeth them. If they heare no noiſe, they imagine we ſleepe. My humours are contrary to turbulent humours. I could pacifie an inconvenience or trouble without troubling my ſelfe, and chaſtiſe a diſorder without alteration.
                        Have I neede of choller and inflammation; I borrow it, and therewith maske my ſelfe: My maners are muſtie, rather wallowiſh then ſharpe. I accuſe not a Magiſtrate that ſleepeth, ſo they that are vnder it ſleepe alſo. So ſleepe the lawes. For my part, I commend a gliding, an obſcure and repoſed life: Neque ſubmiſſam & abiectam, neque ſe efferentem. Neither too abiect and ſubmiſſe, nor vaunting it ſelfe too much. But my fortune will have it ſo; I amCic. off. lib. 1. deſcended of a family that hath lived without noiſe and tumult: and of long continuance particularly ambicious of integritie. Our men are ſo framed to agitation and oſtentations that goodneſſe, moderation, equitie, conſtancie, and ſuch quiet and meane qualities, are no more hard-of. Rough bodies are felt, ſmooth ones are handled imperceptibly. Sickeneſſe is felt, health little or not at all: nor things that annoint vs, in regard of ſuch as ſting vs, It is an action for ones reputation and private commoditie, and not for the common good, to refer that to be done in the market place, which a man may do in the counſel-chamber: & at noone day, what might have beene effected the night before: and to be jealous to doe that himſelfe, which his fellow can performe as well. So did ſome Surgeons of Greece ſhew the operations of their skill, vpon ſcaffolds, in view of all paſſengers, thereby to get more practiſe and cuſtome. They ſuppoſe, that good orders cannot be vnderſtood, but by the ſound of a trumpet. Ambition is no vice for pettie companions, and for ſuch endevours as ours. One ſaide to Alexander: your father will leave you a great commaund, eaſie and peacefull: the boy was envious of his fathers victories, and of the juſtice of his goverment. He would not have enjoyed the worlds▪ Empire ſecurely and quietly. Alcibiades in Plato, loveth rather to die yong, faire, rich, noble, learned, and all that in excellence, then to ſtay in the ſtate of ſuch a condition. This infirmitie is happily excuſable, in ſo ſtrong and full a minde. When theſe pettie wretched ſoules, are therewith enveagled; and thinke to publiſh their fame, becauſe they have judged a cauſe rightly, or continued the order in guarding of a Citties gates; by how much more they hoped to raiſe their head, ſo much more doe they ſhew their ſimplicitie. This pettie well-doing, hath neither body nor life. It vaniſheth in the firſt moneth; and walkes but from one corner of a ſtreet to another. Entertaine therewith your ſonne and your ſervant, and ſpare not. As that ancient fellow, who having no other auditor of his praiſes & appla
                              •
                           ding of his ſufficiency, boaſted with his chamber-maide,

exclaiming: Oh Perette, what a gallant and ſufficient man thou haſt to thy maiſter! If the worſt happen, entertaine your ſelves in y
                              •
                           ur ſelves: As a Counſellour of my acquaintance, having degorged a rable of paragraphes, with an extreame contention and like fooliſhneſſe; going out of the counſell-chamber, to a piſſing place neere vnto it; was heard very conſcientiouſly to vtter theſe words to himſelfe: Non nobis, Domine, non nobis, ſed nomini
                           Pſal. 115. 1. 
                           tuo da gloriam. Not vnto vs, O Lord, not vnto vs, but vnto thy name give the glory. He that cannot otherwiſe, let him pay himſelfe out of his owne purſe. Fame doth not ſo baſely proſtitute it ſelfe, nor ſo cheape. Rare and exemplar actions, to which it duly belongeth, could not brooke the company of this innumerable multitude of vulgar petty actions. Well may a piece of marble raiſe your titles as high as you liſt, becauſe you have repaired a piece of an olde Wall, or cleanſed a common ditch; but men of iudgement will never doe it. Report followeth not all goodneſſe, except difficulty and rarity be joyned therevnto. Yea ſimple eſtimation, according to the Stoikes, is not due to every action proceeding from vertue. Neither would they have him commended, who through temperance abſtaineth from an old blearey'd woman. Such as have knowen the admirable qualities of Scipio the Affrican, renounce the glory which Panaetius aſcribeth vnto him, to have abſtained from gifts, as a glory, not his alone, but peculiar to that age. We have pleaſures ſortable to our fortune; let vs not vſurpe thoſe of greatneſſe. Our owne are more naturall. They are the more ſolide and firme, by how much the meaner. Since it is not for conſcience, at leaſt for ambition let vs refuſe ambition. Let vs diſdaine this infaciate thirſt of honour and renowne, baſe and beggerly, which makes vs ſo ſuppliantly to crave it of all ſortes of people: Quae est ista laus quae poſſit è
                           Cic. d
                                 •
                               fin. l. 2. 
                           macello peti? What praiſe is this, which may bee fetcht out of the Shambles? By abject meanes, and at what vile rate ſoever. To be thus honoured, is meerely a diſhonour. Learne we to bee no more greedie of glorie, then we are capable of it. To be proud of every profitable and innocent action, is it fit for men to whom it is extraordinary and rare. They will value it, for the price it coſt them. According as a good effect is more reſounding; I abate of it's goodnes: the jelouſie I conceive, it is produced more becauſe it is ſo reſounding, than becauſe it is good. What is ſet-out to ſhew, is halfe ſolde. Thoſe actions have more grace, which careleſſely and vnder ſilence, paſſe from the handes of a Workeman, and which ſome honeſt man afterward chuſeth and redeemeth from darkeneſſe, to thruſt them into the worlds-light; Onely for their worth. Mihi quidem laudabiliora videntur omnia, quae ſine venditatione, & ſine populo
                           Cic. Tuſc. qu. l. 2. 
                           teſte fiunt: All things in ſooth ſeeme to me more commendable that are performed with no ostentation; and without the people to witneſſe. Said the moſt glorious man of the World. I had no care but to preſerve and continue, which are deafe and inſenſible effects. Innovation is of great luſtre: But interdicted in times, when we are moſt vrged, and have to defend our ſelves but from novelties; Abstinence from doing, is eften as generous, as doing: but it is not ſo apparant. My ſmall worth is in a manner all of this kinde. To be ſhort, the occaſions in this my charge have ſeconded my complexion; for which I conne them harty thanks. Is there any man that deſireth to be ſicke, to ſee his Phyſition ſet a worke? And Should not that Phyſition be well whipped, who to put his arte in practize, would wiſh the plague to infect vs? I was never poſſeſſed with this impious and vulgar paſſion, to wiſh that the troubled and diſtempred ſtate of this Citty, might raiſe and honour my governement. I have moſt willingly lent them my hand to further, and ſhoulders to aide their eaſe and tranquillity. He that will not thanke me for the good order and for the ſweet and vndiſturbed reſt, which hath accompanied my charge; cannot at leaſt deprive me of that part, which by the title of my good fortune belongeth vnto me. This is my humour, that I love as much to be happy as wiſe: And attribute my ſucceſſes as much to the meere grace of God, as to the meane furtherance of my operation. I had ſufficiently publiſhed to the World my inſufficiency: in managing of ſuch publicke affaires: Nay, there is ſomething in me, worſe than inſufficiency: Which is, that I am not much diſpleaſed therewith: and that I endevour not greatly to cure it, conſidering the courſe of life I have determined to my ſelfe. Nor have I ſatisfied my ſelfe in this employment. But have almoſt attained what I had promiſed vnto my ſelfe: Yet have I much exceeded, what I had promiſed thoſe, with whom I was to negotiate: For I willingly promiſe ſomewhat leſſe, then I can performe, or hope to accompliſh. Of this I am aſſured, I have never left offence or hatred amongſt them: To have left either regret or deſire of me. This know I certainely, I have not much affected it.
                        
                           
                           —Méne huic conſidere monſtre,
                           
                           Méne ſalis placidi vultum, fluctúſque quietosVirg A
                                    •
                                 n. lib. 5 849.
                           
                           Ignorare?—
                           Should I this monſter truſt? Should I not know
                           The calme Seas counterfait diſſembling ſhew,
                           How quietly ſometimes the flouds will go?
                        
                     
                     
                        The eleventh Chapter.
                        
                           Of the Lame or Cripple.
                        
                        TWO or three yeares are now paſt, ſince the yeere hath beene ſhortned tenne dayes in France. Oh how many changes are like to enſue this reformation▪ It was a right remooving of Heaven and Earth together, yet nothing remooveth fromit's owne place: My Neighbours finde the ſeaſon of their ſeede and Harveſt time, the opportunity of their affaires, their lucky and vnlucky dayes, to anſwer juſt thoſe ſeaſons to which they had from all ages aſſigned them. Neither was the errour heeretofore perceived, nor is the reformation now diſcerned in our vſe. So much vncertainty is there in all things: So groſſe, ſo obſcure and ſo dull is our vnderſtanding. Some are of opinion, this reformation might have bin redreſſed after a leſſe incommodious maner; ſubſtracting according to the example of Auguſtus, for ſome yeares, the biſſextile or leape day: Which in ſome ſort, is but a day of hinderance and trouble: Vntill they might more exactly have ſatisfied the debt: Which by this late reformation is not done: For wee are yet ſome dayes in arrerages: And if by ſuch a meane, we might provide for times to come, appoynting that after the revolution of ſuch or ſuch a number of yeares, that extraordinary day might for ever be eclipſed: ſo that our miſreckoning ſhould not henceforward exceede foure and twenty houres. Wee have no other computation of time, but yeares: The World hath vſed them ſo many ages: And yet is it a meaſure, we have not vntill this day perfectly eſtabliſhed. And ſuch, as wee dayly doubt, what forme other Nations have diverſly given the ſame; and which was the true vſe of it. And what if ſome ſay, that the Heavens in growing oldecompreſſe themſelves towards vs, and caſt into an vncertainty of houres and dayes? And as Plutarke ſaith of moneths; that even in his dayes, Aſtrologie could not yet limite the motion of the Moone? Are not we then well holp-vp, to keepe a regiſter of things paſt? I was even now plodding (as often I doe) vpon this, what free and gadding inſtrument humane reaſon is. I ordinarily ſee, that men, in matters propoſed them, doe more willingly ammuze and buſie themſelves in ſeeking out the reaſons, than in ſearching out the trueth of them. They omit preſuppoſitions, but curiouſly examine conſequences. They leave things, and runne to cauſes. Oh conceited diſcourſes! The knowledge of cauſes doth onely concerne him, who hath the conduct of things: Not vs, that have but the ſufferance of them. And who according to our neede, without entering into their beginning and eſſence, have perfectly the full and abſolute vſe of them. Nor is wine more pleaſant vnto him that knowes the firſt faculties of it. Contrariwiſe; both the body and the minde, interrupt and alter the right, which they have of the Worldes vſe and of themſelves, commixing therewith the opinion of learning. The effects concerne vs, but the meanes, nothing at all. To determine and diſtribute, belongeth to ſuperiority and regency; as accepting, to ſubjection and apprentiſeſhippe. Let vs re-aſſume our cuſtome. They commonly beginne thus: How is ſuch a thing done? Whereas they ſhould ſay: Is ſuch a thing done? Our diſcourſe is capable to frame an hundred other Worldes, and finde the beginnings and contexture of them. It needeth neither matter nor ground. Let it but runne on: It will as well build vpon emptineſſe, as vpon fulneſſe and with inanity as with matter.
                        
                           Dare pondus idonea fume,Perſ. ſat. 5. 20.
                           
                           That things which vaniſh ſtraight
                           In ſmoke, ſhould yet beare weight.
                        
                        
                           I finde, that wee ſhould ſay moſt times: There is no ſuch thing. And I would often employ this anſwer; but I dare not: for they cry; It is a defeature produced by ignorance and weakeneſſe of ſpirite. And I muſt commonly juggle for company ſake, to treate of idle ſubjects and frivolous diſcourſes. which I believe nothing at all. Since truely, it is a rude and quarelous humour, flatly to deny a propoſition. And few miſſe (eſpecially in things hard to be perſwaded) to affirme, that they have ſeene it: Or to alleadge ſuch witneſſes, as their authoritie ſhall ſtay our contradiction. According to which vſe, we know the foundations and meanes of a thouſand things that never were. And the world is in a thouſand queſtions deſcanted and bandied too & fro; the pro and contra of which is meerly falſe. Ita finitima ſunt falſaveris,
                           Cic. Acad qu. lib 4. 
                           vt in praecipitem locum non debeat ſe ſapiens committere. Falſehood is ſo neere Neighbour to trueth, that a wiſeman ſhould not put himſelfe vpon a ſlipperie downefal. Truth and falſehood have both alike countenances, their port, their taste and their proceedings ſemblable: Wee beholde them with one ſame eyes. I obſerue that we are not onely ſlowe in defending ourſelves from deceipt, but that wee ſeeke and ſue to embrace it. Wee love to meddle and entangle ourſelves with vanity, as conformable vnto our being. I have ſeene the birth of divers miracles in my dayes. Although they be ſmoothered in their firſt grouth, wee omit not to foreſee the courſe they would have taken, had they lived their full age. The matter is to finde the end of the clue; that found, one may winde-off what he liſt: And there is a further diſtance from nothing to the leaſt thing in the World, than betweene that and the greateſt. Now the firſt that are embrued with the beginning of ſtrangeneſſe, comming to publiſh their hiſtory, finde by the oppoſitions made againſt them, where the difficulty of perſwaſion lodgeth; and goe about with ſome falſe patch, to botch vppe thoſe places. Beſides that, Inſita h
                                 •
                              minibus libidine alendi de induſtria rumores: Men having a natural deſire to nouriſh reports. We naturally make it a matter of conſcience, to reſtore what hath beene lent vs, without ſome vſury and acceſſion of our encreaſe. A particular errour, doeth firſt breede a publike errour: And when his turne commeth, A publike errour begetteth a particular errour. So goeth all this vaſt frame, from hand to hand, confounding and compoſing it ſelfe; in ſuch ſort that the furtheſt-abiding teſtimonie, is better inſtructed of it, then the neareſt: and the laſt informed, better perſwaded then the firſt. It is naturall progreſſe: For, whoſoever beleeveth any thing, thinkes it a deede of charity, to perſwad it vnto another: Which, that hee may the better effect, hee feareth not to adde ſomething of his owne invention thereunto, ſo farre as hee ſeeth neceſſary in his diſcourſe, to ſupply the reſiſtance and defect, hee imagine
                              •
                           h to bee in anothers conception. My ſelfe, who make an eſpeciall matter of conſcience to lie, and care not greatly to ad credit or authority to what I ſay, perceive nevertheles, by the diſcourſes I have in hand, that being erneſted, either by the reſiſtance of another, or by the earneſtnes of my narration; I ſwell and amplifie my ſubject by my voyce, motions, vigor and force of wordes: as alſo by extenſion and amplification, not without ſome prejudice to the naked truth. But yet I doe it vpon condition, that to the firſt that brings mee home againe, and enquireth for the bare and ſimple truth at my hands: I ſodainely give over my hold, and without exaggeration emphaſis or amplification, I yeeld both my ſelfe and it vnto him. A lively, earneſt and ready ſpeech as mine, is eaſie tranſported vnto hyperboles. There is nothing whereunto men are ordinarily more prone, then to give way to their opinions. Where ever vſuall meanes faile vs, wee adde commandement, force, fire and ſword. It is not without ſome ill fortune to come to that paſſe, that the multitude of believers, in a throng where fooles doe in number ſo farre exceede the wiſe, ſhould bee the beſt touch-ſtone of truth. Quaſi verò quidquam
                           Cic. de divin. l. 2 
                           ſit tam valdè, quàm nilſapere vulgare. Sanitatis patrocinium eſt, inſanientium turba. As though any thing were ſo common as to have no wit. The multitude of them that are mad, is a defence for them that are in their wits. It is a hard matter for a man to reſolve his judgement againſt common opinions. The firſt perſwaſion taken from the very ſubject, ſeizeth on the ſimple: whence vnder th'authority of the number and antiquity of teſtimonies, it extends it ſelfe on the wiſer ſort. As for me, in a matter, which I could not believe being reported by one: I ſhould never credite the ſame, though affirmed by a hundred. And I judge not opinions, by yeares. It is not long ſince one of our Princes, in whom the gowt had ſpoiled a gentle diſpoſition and blithe compoſition; ſuffered himſelfe ſo farre to bee perſwaded or miſ-led, by the report made vnto him of the wondrous deedes of a Prieſt, who by way of charmes, ſpells and geſtures cured all diſeaſes; that hee vndertooke a long-tedious jonrny to finde him

out: and by the vertue of his apprehenſion did ſo perſwade, and for certaine houres ſo 
                              •
                           ull his legs aſleepe, that for a while hee brought them to doe him that ſervice, which for a long time they had forgotten. Had fortune heaped five or ſix like accidents one in the necke of another, they had doubtleſſe beene able to bring this miracle into nature. Whereas afterward there was ſo much ſimplicity and ſo little skill found in the architect of theſe workes, that he was deemed vnworthy of any puniſhment: As likewiſe ſhould bee done with moſt ſuchlike things, were they throughly knowen in their nature. Miramur ex intervallo fallentia: Wee wonder at thoſe things that deceive vs by distance. Our ſight doth in ſuch ſort, often repreſent vs a farre-off with ſtrange images, which vaniſh in approaching neerer. Nnnquam ad liquidum fama perducitur. Fame is never brought to be cleare. It is a wonder, to ſee how from many vaine beginnings and frivolous cauſes, ſo famous impreſſions doe ordinarily ariſe and enſue. Even that hindereth the information of them: For, whilſt a man endevoureth to finde out cauſes, forcible and weighty ends, and worthy ſo great a name, hee looſeth the true and eſſentiall. They are ſo little, that they eſcape our ſight. And verily a right wiſe, heedy and ſubtile inquiſitor is required in ſuch queſtings; imparciall and not preoccupated. All theſe miracles and ſtrange events, are vntill this day hidden from me: I have ſeene no ſuch monſter, or more expreſſe wonder in this world, then my ſelfe. With time and cuſtome a man doth acquaint and enure him ſelfe to all ſtrangeneſſe: But the more I frequent and know my ſelfe, the more my deformity aſtonieth me: and the leſſe I vnderſtand my ſelfe. The chiefeſt priviledge to produce and advance ſuch accidents, is reſerved vnto fortune. Travelling yeſterday thorough a village, within two leagues of my houſe, I found the place yet warme of a miracle that was but newly failed and diſcovered, wherewith all the country thereabout had for many months beene ammuſed and abuſed; and diverſe bordering Provinces began to liſten vnto it, and ſeverall troupes of all qualities ceaſed not thicke and threefold to flocke thither. A yong man of that towne, vndertooke one night in his owne houſe (never dreaming of any knavery) to counterfeit the voice of a ſpirit or ghoſt, but onely for ſport, to make himſelfe merry for that preſent, which ſucceeding better then he had imagined; to make the jeſt extend further, and himſelfe the merrier, he made a country-maiden acquainted with his deviſe; who becauſe ſhe was both ſeely and harmeleſſe, conſented to beeſecret and to ſecond him: In the end they got another, and were now three, all of one age and like ſufficiency: and from private ſpirit-talking, they beganne with hideous voices to cry and roare aloud, and in, and about churches hiding themſelves vnder the chiefe Altar, ſpeaking but by night, forbidding any light to bee ſet vp: From ſpeeches tending the worldes ſubverſion, and threatning of the day of judgement (which are the ſubjects, by whoſe authority and abuſive reverence, impoſture and illuſion, is more eaſily lurked) they proceeded to certaine viſions and ſtrange geſtures, ſo fooliſh and ridiculous, that ther is ſcarſe any thing more groſſe and abſurd vſed among Children, in their childiſh ſports. Suppoſe I pray you, that fortune would have ſeconded this harmeleſſe deviſe or jugling tricke; Who knoweth how farre it would have extended, and to what it would have growen? The poore ſeely three Divels are now in priſon, and may happily e're long pay deere for their common ſottiſhneſſe; and I wot not whether ſome cheverell judge or other, will bee avenged of them for his. It is manifeſtly ſeene in this, which now is diſcovered; as alſo in divers other things of like quality, exceeding our knowledge; I am of opinion that we vphold our judgement, as well to reject, as to receive. Many abuſes are engendered in the World; or to ſpeake more boldly, all the abuſes of the World are engendered vpon this, that we are taught to feare to make profeſſion, of our ignorance; and are bound to accept and allow, all that wee cannot refute. Wee ſpeake of all things by precepts and reſolution. The Stile of Rome did beare, that even the ſame, that a witnes depoſed, becauſe he had ſeene it with his owne eyes; and that which a Iudge ordained of his moſt aſſured knowledge, was conceived in this form of ſpeech, It ſeemeth ſo vnto me. I am drawen to hate likely things, when men goe about to ſet them downe as infallible. I love theſe wordes or phraſes, which mollifie and moderate the temerity of our propoſitions: It may be: Peradventure: In ſome ſort: Some: It is ſaide: I thinke, and ſuch like: And had I beene to inſtruct children, I would ſo often have put this manner of anſwering in their mouth; enquiring, and not reſolving: What meanes it? I vnderſtand it not: It may well bee: Is it true? that they ſhould rather have kept the forme of learners, vntill three ſcore yeeres of age, than preſent themſelves Doctors at ten; as many doe. Whoſoever
                           
                           will be cured of ignorance, muſt confeſſe the ſame. Iris is the daughter of Thaumantis. Admiration is the ground of all Philoſophie: Inquiſition the progreſſe: Ignorance the end. Yea but there is ſome kinde of ignorance ſtrong and generous, that for honor and courage is nothing beholding to knowledge: An ignorance, which to conceive rightly, there is required no leſſe learning, than to conceive true learning.
                        Being yong, I ſaw a law-caſe, which Corras a Counſellor of Tholouſe cauſed to bee printed of a ſtrange accident of two men, who preſented themſelves one for another. I remember (and I remember nothing elſe ſo well) that me thought, he proved his impoſture, whom he condemned as guilty, ſo wondrous ſtrange and ſo far-exceeding both our knowledge and his owne, who was judge, that I found much boldnes in the ſentence which had condemned him to be hanged. Let vs receive ſome forme of ſentence that may ſay: The Court vnderſtands nothing of it; more freely and ingenuouſly, than did the Areopagites; who finding themſelves vrged and entangled in a caſe they could not well cleare or determine, appointed the parties to come againe and appeare before them a hundred yeares after. The witches about my countrie, are in hazard of their life, vpon the opinion of every new authour, that may come to give their dreames a body. To apply ſuch examples as the holy word of God offreth vs of ſuch things (aſſured and irrefragable examples) and joine them to our moderne events; ſince wee neither ſee the cauſes nor meanes of them, ſome other better wit then ours is thereunto required. Peradventure it appertaineth to that onely moſt-mightie teſtimony, to tell vs: This here, and that there; and not this other are of them. God muſt be beleeved; and good reaſon he ſhould be ſo. Yet is there not one amongſt vs, that will be amazed at his owne narration (and he ought neceſſarily to be aſtoniſhed at it, if he be not out of his wits) whether he employ it about others matters; or againſt himſelfe. I am plaine and homely, and take hold on the maine point, and on that which is moſt likely; avoiding ancient reproches. Maior em fidem homines adhibent ijs quae non intelligunt. Cupidine humani ingenij libentius obſcura creduntur. Men give more credite to things they vndeſtand not: Things obſcure are more willingly beleeved through a ſtrange deſire of mans wit. I ſee that men will be angry: and am forbid to doubt of it vpon paine of execrable injuries. A new manner of perſwading. Mercie for Gods ſake. My beliefe is not carried away with blowes. Let them tyrannize over ſuch as accuſe their opinion of falſehood; I onely accuſe mine of difficulty and boldneſſe. And equally to them I condemne the oppoſite affirmation: if not ſo imperiously. He that with bravery and by commaundement will eſtabliſh his diſcourſe, declareth his reaſon to bee weake: For a verball and ſcholaſticall altercation, that they have as much apparance as their contradictors. 
                              Ʋideantur ſanè, non affirmentur modò. Indeede let them ſeeme, ſo they bee not avouched. But in effectuall conſequence they draw from it, theſe have great ods. To kill men; there is required a bright ſhining and cleare light. And our life is over- reall and eſſentiall, to warrant theſe ſupernaturall and fantaſticall accidents. As for drugges and poiſons, they are out of my element: they are homicides, and of the worſt kinde. In which nevertheleſſe, it is ſaid, that one muſt not alwayes relie vppon the meere confeſſion of thoſe people: For, they have ſometimes beene ſeene to accuſe themſelves, to have made away men which were both ſound and living. In theſe other extravagant accuſations, I ſhould eaſily ſay that it ſufficeth what commendations ſoever he hath, a man be believed in ſuch things as are humane: but of ſuch as are beyond his conception and of a ſupernaturall effect, hee ought then onely be believed, when a ſupernaturall approbation hath authorized him. That priviledge it hath pleaſed God to give ſome of our teſtimonies, ought not to bee vilified, or ſlightly communicated. Mine eares are full of a thouſand ſuch tales. Three ſaw him ſuch a day in the Eaſt; three ſaw him the next day in the Weſt, at ſuch an houre, in ſuch a place; and thus and thus attired; v
                              ••
                           ily in ſuch a caſe I could not beleeve my ſelfe. How much more naturall and more likely doe I finde it, that two men ſhould lie, then one in twelve houres, paſſe with the windes, from Eaſt to Weſt? How much more naturall, that our vnderſtanding may by the volubility of our looſe capring minde be tranſported from his place? then that one of vs ſhould by a ſtrange ſpirit, in fleſh and bone, be carried vpon a broome through the tunnell of a chimny? Let vs, who are perpetually toſſed too and fro with domeſticall and our owne illuſions, not ſeeke for forraine and vnknowen illuſions. I deeme it a matter pardonable, not to beleeve a wonder, ſo farreforth at leaſt as one may divert and exclude the verification by no miraculous way. And I follow Saint Auguſtines opinion, that a man were
                           
                           better bend towards doubt, than encline towards certainetie, in matters of difficult triall and daungerous beliefe. Some yeares are now paſt, that I travelled through the country of a ſoveraigne Prince: who in favour of mee, and to abate my incredulity, did mee the grace, in his owne preſence, and in a particular place, to make mee ſee tenne or twelve priſoners of that kinde; and amongſt others an olde beldam witch; a true and perfect forcereſſe, both by her vglines and deformity; and ſuch a one as long before was moſt famous in that profeſſion. I ſawe both proofes, witneſſes, voluntary confeſſions, and ſome other inſenſible markes about this miſerable olde woman; I enquired and talked with her a long time, with the greateſt heed and attention I could; yet am I not caſily carried away by preoccupation. In the end, and in my conſcience, I ſhould rather have appointed them Helleborum, than Hemlocke. Captiſque res magis mentibus, quàm conſceleratis ſimilis viſa. The matter ſeemed liker to mindes captivate then guiltie. Law hath her owne corrections for ſuch diſeaſes. Touching the oppoſitions and arguments, that honeſt men have made vnto mee, both there, and often elſe-where, I have found none that tie mee; and that admit not alwayes a more likely ſolution, than their concluſions. True it is, that proofes and reaſons grounded vpon the fact and experience. I vntie not: for indeede they have no end; but often cut them, as Alexander did his knotte. When all is done, it is an over-valuing of ones conjectures, by them to cauſe a man to be burned alive. It is reported by diverſe examples (and Praestantius ſaith of his father) that being in a ſlumber much more deeply, then in a full-ſound ſleepe, he dreamed and verily thought himſelfe to be a Mare, and ſerued certaine ſouldiers for a ſumpter-horſe, and was indeede what he imagined to bee. If ſorcerers dreame thus materially: If dreames may ſometimes be thus incorporated into effects: I cannot poſſibly believe, that our will ſhould therefore be bound to the lawes and juſtice: which I ſay, as one who am neither a Iudge, nor a Counſellor vnto Kings, and furtheſt from any ſuch worthineſſe: but rather a man of the common ſtamp, and both by my deedes and ſayings, borne and vowed to the obedience of publique reaſon. Hee that ſhould regiſter my humours, to the prejudice of the ſimpleſt lawe, or opinion, or cuſtome of this village, ſhould greatly wrong himſelfe, and injury me as much. For in what I ſay, I gape for no other certainty, but that ſuch was then my thought. A tumultuous and wavering thought. It is by way of diſcourſe that I ſpeake of all; and of nothing by way of adviſe. Nec me pudet, vt iſtos, faterineſcire, quod neſciam. Nor am I aſhamed, as they are, to confeſſe I know not that which I doe not knowe.
                        
                        I would not bee ſo hardy to ſpeake, if of duty I ought to bee believed: and ſo I anſwered a great man, who blamed the ſharpeneſſe and contention of my exhortations. When I ſee you bent and prepared on one ſide; with all the endevour I can, I will propoſe the contrary vnto you; to reſolve and enlighten your judgement, not to ſubdue or binde the ſame: God hath your hearts in his handes, and hee will furniſh you with choiſe. I am ſo malapert, as to deſire, that my opinions alone, ſhould give ſway to a matter of ſuch importance. My fortune hath not raiſed them to ſo powerfull and deepe concluſious. Truely, I have not onely a great number of complexions, but an infinite many of opinions, from which, had I a ſonne of mine owne, I would diſſwade him, and willingly make him to diſtaſte them. What? If the trueſt are not ever the moſt commodious for man; he being of ſo ſtrange a
                              •
                           d vntamed a compoſition: Whether it be to the purpoſe, or from the purpoſe, it is no great matter. It is a common Proverbe in Italie, that He knowes not the perfect pleaſure of Venus, that hath not laine with a limping Woman. Either fortune, or ſome particular accident have long ſince brought this by-ſaying in the peoples mouth: and it is as well ſpoken of men as of women: For the Queene of the Amazons anſwered the Scithian, that wooed her to loves-embracements. 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , The croked man doeth it beſt. In that feminine common-wealth of theirs, to avoyde the domination of men, they were wont in their infancy to maime them, both their armes and legges and other limmes, that might anyway adventage their ſtrength over them, and made onely that vſe of them, that we in our World make of our Women. I would have ſaide, that the looſe or disjoynted motion of alimping or crooke-backt Woman, might addeſome new kinde of pleaſure vnto that buſineſſe or ſweet ſinne, and ſome vn-aſſaid ſenſuall ſweetneſſe, to ſuch as make triall of it: but I have lately learnt, that even ancient Philoſophy hath decided the matter: Who ſaith, that the legs and thighs of the crooked-backt or halting-lame, by reaſon of their imperfection, not receiving the nouriſhment, due vnto them, it followeth that the Genitall partes, that are above

them, are more full, better nouriſhed and more vigorous. Or elſe, that ſuch a defect hindring other exerciſe, ſuch as are therewith poſſeſſed, do leſſe waſte their ſtrength and conſume their vertue, and ſo much the ſtronger and fuller, they come to 
                              Ʋenus ſportes. Which is alſo the reaſon why the Graecians deſcribed their Women-Weavers, to bee more hotte and earneſtly-luxurious, than other Women: Becauſe of their ſitting-trade, without any violent exerciſe of the body. What cannot we diſpute of according to that rate? I might likewiſe ſay of theſe, that the ſame ſtirring, which their labour, ſo ſitting doth give them, doth rouze and ſollicite them, as the jogging and ſhaking of their Coache, doth our Ladies. Doe not theſe examples fit that whereof I ſpake in the beginning? That our reaſons doe often anticipate the effect, and have the extenſion of their juriſdiction ſo infinite, that they judge and exerciſe themſelves in manity, and to a not being? Beſides the flexibility of our invention, to frame reaſons vnto all manner of dreames; our imaginations is likewiſe found eaſie to receive impreſſions from falſehood, by very frivolous apparances. For, by the onely authority of the antient and publicke vſe of this word or phraſe, I have heretofore perſwaded my ſelfe, to have received more pleaſure of a Woman, in that ſhe was not ſtraight, and have accompted hir crookedneſſe in the number of hir graces. Torquato Taſſo, in the compariſon he makes betweene Italy and France, reporteth to have noted, that we commonly have more ſlender and ſpiny legges, than the Italian Gentlemen; and imputeth the cauſe vnto our continuall riding and ſitting on horſe-backe. Which is the very ſame, from which Suctonius draweth another cleane contrary concluſion: For, he ſaith, that Germanicus had by the frequent vſe of this exerciſe, brought his to be very big. There is nothing ſo ſupple and wandering, as our vnderſtanding. It is like to Theramenez ſhooe, fit for all feet. It is double and diverſe, and ſo are matters diverſe and double. Give me a Dragma of Silver, ſaid a Cinike Philoſopher vnto Antigonus: It is not the preſent of a King, anſwered he; Give then a talent: It is no gift for a Cinike, quoth he:
                        
                           Seu plures calor ille vias, & caeca relaxatVirg. Georg. li. 1 89.
                           
                           Spiramenta, novas veniat qua ſuccus in herbas:
                           Seu durat magis, & venas astringit hiantes,
                           Ne tenues pluviae, rapidive potentia ſolis
                           Acrior, aut Boreae penetrabile frigus adurat.
                           Whether the heate layes open holes vnſeene,
                           Whereby the ſappe may paſſe to hearbs freſh-greene:
                           Or rather hardens and bindes gaping vaines,
                           Leſt ſharpe power of hot ſunne, or thinning raines,
                           Of piercing North-cold blaſte,
                           Should ſcorch, conſume and waſte,
                        
                        
                           Ogni medagalia ha il ſuo river ſ
                                 •
                              io; Each outſide hath his inſide, ſaith the Italian. Lo why C
                                 ••
                              tomachus was wont to ſay, that Carneades had ſurmounted the labours of Hercules; becauſe he had exacted conſent from men; that is to ſay opinion and temerity to judge. This fantaſie of Carneades, ſo vigorous (as I imagine) proceeded antiently, from the impudency of thoſe, who make profeſſion to know; and from their exceſſive ſelfe-overweening. Aeſope was ſet to ſale, together with two other ſlaves; a Chapman enquired of the firſt, what he could doe: he to endeare himſelfe, anſwered, mountaines and wonders, and what not? For he knew and could doe all things. The ſecond anſwered even ſo for himſelfe, and more too: But when he came to Aeſope, and demaunded of him what he could doe: Nothing (ſaid he) for theſe two have foreſtaled all, and know and can doe all things, and have left nothing for mee. So hath it happened in the ſchoole of philoſophy. The raſhnes of thoſe who aſcribed the capacity of all things to mans wit, through ſpight and emulation produced this opinion in others, that humane wit was not capable of any thing. Some holde the ſame extremity in ignorance, that others hold in knowledge. To the end none may deny, that man is not immoderate in all and every where: and hath no other ſentence or arreſt, than that of neceſſity, and impuiſſance to proceede further.
                     
                     
                        
                        The twelfth Chapter.
                        
                           Of Phiſiognomy.
                        
                        ALmoſt all the opinions we have, are taken by authority, and vpon credit: There is no hurt. We cannot chuſe worſe, then by our ſelves, inſo weake an age. This image of Socrates his diſcourſe, which his friends have left vs, we only approve it, by the reverence of publicke approbation. It is not of our owne knowledge: they are not according to our vſe. Might ſuch a man be borne now adayes, there are but few would now eſteeme him. Wee diſcerne not graces inlie or aright; We onely perceive them by a falſe light ſet out and pufft vp with arte: Such as paſſe vnder their naturall purity and ſimplicity, doe eaſily eſcape ſo weake and dimme a ſight as ours is. They have a ſecret, vnperceived and delicate beauty: he had neede of a cleere, farre-ſeeing and true-diſcerning ſight, that ſhould rightly diſcover this ſecret light. Is not in genuity (according to vs) coſin-germaine vnto ſottiſhneſſe, and a quality of reproach? Socrates maketh his ſoule to moove, with a naturall and common motion. Thus ſaith a plaine Country-man, and thus a ſeely Woman: Hee never hath other people in his mouth, than Coach-makers, Ioyners, Coblers and Maſons. They are inductions and ſimilitudes, drawen from the moſt vulgar and knowen actions of men: every one vnderſtands him. Vnder ſo baſe a forme, wee ſhould never have choſen the noble worthineſſe and brightneſſe of his admirable conceptions: Wee that eſteeme all thoſe but meane and vile, that learning doth not raiſe: and who have no perceiving of riches, except ſet out in ſhew and pompe. Our World is framed but vnto oſtentation. Men are puffed vp with winde, and moved or handled by bounds, as Baloones. This man propoſeth no vaine fantaſies vnto himſelfe. His end was, to ſtore vs with things and furniſh vs with precepts, which really more ſubſtantially and jointly ſerve our life:
                        
                           —ſervare modum, finémque tenere,
                              Lucan. b
                                    •
                                 l. ci
                                    •
                                 . lib. 2. 380.
                           
                           Naturámque ſequi.
                           To keepe a meane, to hold the end,
                           And natures conduct to attend.
                        
                        So was he ever all one alike: And raiſed himſelfe to the higheſt pitch of vigor, not by fits, but by complexion. Or to ſay better; he raiſed nothing, but rather brought downe and reduced all difficulties, or ſharpeneſſe to their originall and naturall ſtate, and therevnto ſubdued vigor. For, in Cato, it is manifeſtly ſeene, to be an out-right proceeding, far-above & beyond the common: By the brave exploites of his life, and in his death, hee is ever perceived to be mounted vpon his great horſes. Whereas this man keepes on the ground, and with a gentle and ordinary pace, treateth of the moſt profitable diſcourſes, and addreſſeth himſelfe both vnto death and to the moſt thorny and crabbed croſſes, that may happen vnto the courſe of humane life. It hath indeede fortuned, that the worthieſt man to be known, and for a patterne to be preſented to the world, he is the man of whom we have moſt certaine knowledge. He hath beene declared and enlightned by the moſt cleare-ſeeing men, that ever were; the teſtimonies wee have of him, are in faithfulneſſe and ſufficiency moſt admirable. It is a great matter, that ever he was able to give ſuch order vnto the pure imaginations of a childe, that without altring or wreſting them, he hath thence produced the faireſt effects of our minde. He neither repreſents it rich nor high-raiſed; but found and pure: and ever with a blithe and vndefiled health. By theſe vulgar ſprings and naturall wards: by theſe ordinary and common fantaſies, ſans mooving or without vrging himſelfe, hee erected not onely the moſt regular, but the higheſt and moſt vigorous opinions, actions and cuſtomes, that ever were. Hee it is, that brought humane wiſedome from heaven againe, where for a long time it had beene loſt, to reſtore it vnto man: where her moſt juſt and laborious worke is. See or heare him pleade before his judges; marke with what reaſons hee rouzeth his courage to the hazards of warre, what arguments fortifie his patience againſt detraction, calumniation, tyranny, death, and againſt his wives peeviſh head: therein is nothing

borrowed from arte, or from learning. The ſimpleſt may there know their meanes and might: it is impoſſible to goe further backe or lower. He hath done humane nature a great kindeneſſe, to ſhew what and how much ſhe can doe of her ſelfe. Wee are every one richer then we imagine, but we are taught to borrow, and inſtructed to ſhift; and rather to make vſe of others goods and meanes, then of our owne. There is nothing whereon man can ſtay or fix himſelfe in time of his neede. Of voluptuouſneſſe, of riches, of pleaſure, of power, hee ever embraceth more, then hee can graſpe or hold. His greedineſſe is incapable of moderation. The very ſame I finde to bee in the curioſity of learning and knowledge: he cuts out more worke then hee can well make an end of: and much more then he neede. ExtendingSen epiſt. 106. f the profit of learning, as farre as his matter. 
                              Ʋt omnium rerum, ſic literarum quoque intemperantia laboramus. Wee are ſicke of a ſurfet, as of all things, ſo of learning alſo. And Tacitus hath reaſon to commend Agricolaes mother, to have brideled in her ſonne an over-burning and earneſt deſire of learning. It is a good, being neerely looked vnto, that containeth as other humane goods, much peculiar vanitie and naturall weakeneſſe: and is very chargeable. The acquiſition and purchaſe whereof is much more hazardous, then of all other viandes and beverage. For, whatſoever elſe wee have bought, we carry home inſome veſſell or other, where wee have law to examine it's worth: how much, and at what time wee are to take-it. But Sciences, wee cannot ſodainely put them into any other veſſell, then our minde: we ſwallow them in buying them and goe from the marketh either already infected or amended. There are ſome, which inſteade of nouriſhing, doe but hinder and ſurcharge vs; and other ſome, which vnder colour of curing, empoiſon vs. I have taken pleaſure in ſome place, to ſee men, who for devotions ſake have made a vow of ignorance, as of chaſtity, poverty and penitence. It is alſo a kind of guelding of our inordinate appetites, to muzzle this greedineſſe, which provoketh vs to the ſtudy of bookes, and deprive the minde of that voluptuous delight, which by the opinion of learning doth ſo tickle vs. And it is richly to accompliſh the vow of poverty, to joine that of the minde vnto it. Wee neede not much learning for to live at eaſe. And Socrates teacheth vs, that wee have both it, and the way to finde and make vſe of it, within vs. All our ſufficiency, that beyond the naturall, is wellnigh vaine and ſuperfluous. It is much, if it charge and trouble vs no more, then it ſteads vs. Paucis
                           Sen ibid. 
                           opus eſt literis ad mentem bonam. Wee have neede of little learning to have a good minde They are febricitant exceſſes of our ſpirit: a turbulent and vnquiet inſtrument. Rowze vp your ſelfe, and you ſhall finde forcible arguments againſt death to bee in your ſelfe; moſt true and very proper to ſerve and ſteade you in time of neceſſity. T'is they which induce a peaſant ſwaine, yea and whole nations to die as conſtantly as any Philoſopher. Should I have died leſſe merrily before I read the Thuſculanes? I thinke not. And when I finde my ſelfe in my beſt wits, I perceive, that I have ſomewhat enriched my tongue; my courage but little. It is even as nature framed the ſame at firſt. And againſt any conflict, it ſhields itſelfe, but with a natural and common march. Bookes have not ſo much ſerved me for inſtruction, as exercitation. What if learning, aſſaying to arme vs with new wardes and fences, againſt naturall inconveniences, hath more imprinted their greatneſſe and weight in our fantaſie, then her reaſons, quidities and ſubtilities, therewith to cover vs? They are ſubtilities indeed; by which ſhe often awaketh vs very vainely. Obſerue how many ſleight and idle arguments the wiſeſt and cloſeſt authours frame and ſcatter about one good ſound: which if you conſider neerely, are but vaine and incorporall. They are but verball wyles, which beguile vs. But forſomuch as it may bee profitable: I will not otherwiſe blanch them. Many of that condition are ſcattered here and there, in diuerſe places of this volume; either borrowed or imitated. Yet ſhould a man ſomewhat heed, he call not that force, which is but quaintnes; or terme that which is but quipping ſharpe, ſolide; or name that good, which is but faire: quae magis guſtata quàm potata delectant, which more delight vs being but taſted, then ſwild and
                           Cic. Tuſc. qu
                                 •
                              . 5 
                           ſwallowed downe. All that which pleaſeth, feedeth not; vbi non ingenij ſed animi negotium agitur. Where it is no matter of wit, but of courage. To ſee the ſtrugling endevours which Seneca giveth himſelfe, to prepare himſelfe againſt death; to ſee him ſweate with panting; to ſee him bathe ſo long vpon this pearch, thereby to ſtrengthen and aſſure himſelfe: I ſhould have made queſtion of his reputation, had he not moſt vndantedly maintained the ſame in his death. His ſo violent and frequent agitation, ſheweth that himſelfe was fervent and impetuous. Magnus animus remiſſius loquitur, & ſecurius: Non eſt alius ingenio, alius animo color.
                           Sen. epiſt. 115. 
                                 •
                              l.. 1.
                           
                           A great courage ſpeakes ſoftly but ſecurely. Wit hath not one colour, and courage another. He muſt be convicted at his owne charges. And ſheweth in ſome ſort, that hee was preſſed by his adverſary. Plutarkes maner by how much more diſdainefull and farre-extending it is (in my opinion) ſo much more manlike and perſwaſive is it: I ſhould eaſily beleeve, that his ſoule had her motions more aſſured and more regular. The one more ſharpe, pricketh and ſodainely ſtarts vs: toucheth the ſpirit more. The other more ſolide, doth conſtantly enforme, eſtabliſh and comfort vs: toucheth more the vnderſtanding. That raviſheth our judgement; this doth gaine it. I have likewiſe ſeene other compoſitions and more reverenced, which in purtraying the combate, they endure againſt the provocations of the fleſh, repreſent them ſo violent, ſo powerfull and ſo invincible, that our ſelves, who are caſt in the common mould of other men, have as much to admire the vnknowen ſtrangeneſſe and vnfelt vigor of their temptation, as their conſtant reſiſtance. To what purpoſe doe we ſo arme and ſteele ourſelves with theſe labouring-efforts of learning? Let vs diligently ſurvay the ſurface of the earth, and there conſider ſo many ſeely-poore people as wee ſee toyling, ſweltring and drooping about their buſineſſe, which never heard of Aristotle, not of Plato, nor ever knew what examples or precepts are. From thoſe doth nature dayly draw and affoord vs effects of conſtancy and patterns of patience, more pure and forcible, then are thoſe, we ſo curiouſly ſtudy-for in ſchooles. How many do I ordinarily ſee, that miſacknowledge poverty; how many that wiſh for death, or that paſſe it without any alaram or affliction? A fellow that dungeth my gardine, hath happily this morning buried his father or his childe. The very names whereby they call diſeaſes, doe ſomewhat mylden and diminiſh the ſharpenes of them. With them a Phthyſique or conſumption of the lungs, is but an ordinary cough: A dyſenterie or bloody flix, but a diſtemper of the ſtomacke: A pleuriſie but a cold or murre: and as they gently name them, ſo they eaſily endure them. Grievous are they indeed, when they hinder their ordinary labour or breake their vſuall reſt: They will not take their beds but when they thinke they ſhall dy. Simplex illa & aperta virtus in obſcuram & ſolert
                                 •
                              m ſcientiam verſa est. That plaine and cleare vertue is turned into obſcure and cunning knowledge. I was writing this about a time that a boiſtrous ſtorme of our tumultuous broiles and bloody troubles, did for many months ſpace, with all it's might and horrour, hang full over my head. On the one ſide, I had the enemies at my gates; on the other, the Picoreurs or free-booters, farre worſe foes. Non armis ſed vitijs certatur. We contend not with armour, but with vices. And at one time felt and endured all manner of harme-bringing military injuries:
                        
                           Hostis adeſt dextra laev
                                 •
                              que à parte timendus,Ovid. P
                                    •
                                 nt. l. 1. 
                                    •
                                 l. 4. 55.
                           
                           Vicinóque malo terret vtrúmque latus.
                           A fearefull foe on left hand and on right,
                           Doth with his neighbour harmes both ſides afright.
                        
                        Oh monſtrous Warre: Others worke without; this inwardly and againſt himſelfe: And with her owne venome gnaweth and conſumes her ſelfe. It is of ſo ruinous and maligne a Nature; that together with all things els, ſhe ruineth her ſelfe: and with ſpitefull rage, doth rent, deface and maſſacre it ſelfe. Wee doe more often ſee it, by and through hir ſelfe, to waſte, to deſolate and diſſolve hir ſelfe, then by or through want of any neceſſary thing, or by enemies force. All manner of diſcipline doth ſhunne and flie it. She commeth to cure ſedition, and hir ſelfe is throughly therewith infected: She goeth about to chaſtize diſobedience, and ſheweth the example of it: and being employed for the defence of Lawes, entreth into actuall rebellion againſt her owne ordinances. Aye me, where are we? Our Phyſicke bringeth infection.
                        
                           Noſtre mal s'empoyſon
                                 •
                              e
                           Du ſecours qu'on luy donne.
                           Our evill is empoyſond more
                           By plaiſter they would lay to th'ſore.
                           —exuperat magis aegreſcit
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  medendo.
                              Virg. Aen. l. 12. 46.
                           
                           It riſes higher, quicker,
                           And growes by curing ſicker,
                           Omnia fanda nefanda mal
                                 •
                               permiſta furore,Catul. Arg
                                    ••
                                  v. 405.
                           
                           Iuſtificam nobis mentem avertere Deorum.
                           
                              Lawfull vnlawfull deedes with fury blended,
                           Have turn'nd from vs the Gods juſt minde offended.
                        
                        In theſe popular diſeaſes, one may in the beginning diſtinguiſh theſcund from the ſicke: but if they chance to continue any time, as ours hath done and doth ſtill, all the body, yea head and heeles feele themſelves the worſe: no part is▪ exempted from corruption. For, there is no aire a man drawes ſo greedily, or ſucks ſo gluttonnouſly; and that more ſpreds it ſelfe, or penetrates more deepely, then doth licentiouſneſſe. Our Armies have no other bond to tie them, or other ciment to faſten them, then what commeth from ſtrangers: It is now a hard matter to frame a body of a compleate, conſtant, well-ordred and coherent Army of Frenchmen: Oh what ſhame is it? We have no other diſcipline, then what borrowed or auxiliar Souldiers ſhew vs. As for vs, wee are led
                              •
                           on by our owne diſcretion and not by the commaunders▪ each man followeth his owne humour: and hath more to doe within, then without. It is the commaundement ſhould follow, court and yeeld vnto: hee onely ought to obey: all the reſt is free and looſe. I am pleaſed to ſee, what remiſneſſe and puſilanimitie is in ambition, and by what ſteps of abjection and ſervitude, it muſt arrive vnto it's end. But I am diſpleaſed to ſee ſome debonaire and well-meaning mindes, yea ſuch as are capable of iuſtice, dayly corrupted, about the managing and commanding of this many-headed confuſion. Long ſuffrance begets cuſtome; cuſt
                                 •
                              me, conſent and imitation. We had too-too many infected and ill-borne mindes, without corrupting the good, the ſound and the generous. So that, if we continue any time, it will prove a difficult matter to finde out a man vnto whoſe skill and ſufficiencie, the health or recovery of this ſtate may bee committed in truſt, if fortune ſhall happily be pleaſed to reſtore it vs againe.
                        
                           Hunc ſaltem everſo inven
                                 •
                              m ſuccurrere ſcclo,
                           Ne prohibete.
                           Forbid not yet this youth at leaſt,
                           To aide this age more then oppreſt.
                        
                        What is become of that antient precept; That Souldiers ought more to feare their Generall than their enemie? And of that wonderfull exampleleſſe example: That the Romane army having vpon occaſion encloſed within her trenches, and round-beſet an apple-orchard; ſo obedient was ſhee to her Captaines, that the next morning, it roſe and marched away without entring the ſame or touching one apple, although they were full-ripe and very delicious: So that when the owner came, he found the full number of his apples? I ſhould bee glad, that our Youths, in ſteade of the time they employ about leſſe profitable peregrinations, and leſſe honourable apprentiſhippes, would beſtow one moyty, in ſeeing and obſerving the warres that happen on the ſea, vnder ſome good Captaine or excellent Commaunder of Malta; the other moyty in learning and ſurveying the diſcipline of the Turkiſh armies. For it hath many differences and advantages over ours. This enſueth, that heere our Souldiers become more licentious in expeditions, there they proove more circumſpect and fearefully wary. For, ſmall offences and petty larcenies, which in times of peace, are in the common people puniſhed with whipping or baſtonadoes, in times of warre are capitall crimes. For an egge taken by a Turke without paying, hee is by their law to have the full number of fifty ſtripes with a cudgell. For every other thing, how ſleight ſoever not neceſſary for mans feeding, even for very trifles, they are either thruſt through with a ſharpe ſtake, which they call Empaling, or preſently beheaded. I have beene amazed, reading the ſtory of Selim, the cruelleſt Conqueror that ever was, to ſee, at what time hee ſubdued the Country of Aegypt, the beauteous-goodly gardines round about the Citty of Damaſco, all open and in a conquered Country; his maine armie lying encamped round about, thoſe gardines were left vntouched and vnſpoyled by the handes of his Souldiers, onely becauſe they were commaunded to ſpoyle nothing, and 
                              •
                           ad not the watch-word of pillage. But is there any malady in a Common-weale, that deſerveth to bee combated by ſo mortall drugge? No ſaide Favonius, not ſo much as the vſurpation of the tyrannicall poſſeſsion of a Commonwealth. Plato likewiſe is not willing one ſhould offer violence to the quiet repoſe of his-Countrys no not to reforme or cure the ſame; and alloweth not that reformation, which diſturbeth or hazardeth the whole eſtate; and which is purchaſed with the blood and ruine of the Cittizens. Eſtabliſhing the office of an honeſt man, in theſe cauſes, to leaue all there: But onely to pray God, to lend his extraordinary aſſiſting hand vnto it. And ſeemeth to be offended

with Dyon his great friend, to have therein proceeded ſomewhat otherwiſe. I was a Platoniſt on that ſide before ever I knew there had beene a Plato in the world. And if ſuch a man ought abſolutely be baniſhed our commerce, and refuſed our ſocietie: (hee who for the ſincerity of his conſcience, deſerved by meane of divine favour, athwart the publique darkeneſſe, and through the generall ignorance of the world wherein hee lived, ſo farre to enter and ſo deepely to penetrate into chaiſtian light) I doe not thinke, that it befitteth vs, to be inſtructed by a Pagan. Oh what impiety is it, to expect from God no ſuccour ſimply his, and without our co-operation. I often doubt, whether amongſt ſo many men, that meddle with ſuch a matter, any hath beene found of ſo weake an vnderſtanding, that hath earneſtly beene perſwaded, he proceeded toward reformation, by the vtmoſt of deformations; that hee drew toward his ſalvation, by the moſt expreſſe cauſes, that wee have of vndoubted damnation: that ouerthrowing policy, diſgracing magiſtrates, abuſing lawes, vnder whoſe tuition God hath placed him; filling brotherly mindes and loving hearts, with malice, hatred and murther; calling the Divels and furies to his helpe; he may bring aſſiſtance to the moſt ſacred mildneſſe and juſtice of divine Law. Ambition, avarice, cruelty and revenge have not ſufficient proppes and natural impetuouſity; let vs allure and ſtirre them vppe by the glorious title of juſtice and devotion. There can no worſe eſtate of things bee imagined, than where wickedneſſe commeth to bee lawfull: And with the Magiſtrates leave, to take the cloake of vertue: Nihil in ſpeciem fallacius, quàm prava religio, vbi deorum numen praetenditur ſceleribus. There is nothing more deceiptfull to ſhew, than corrupt religion, when the power of Heaven is made a pretence and cloake for wickedneſſe. The extreame kinde of injuſtice (according to Plato) is, that that which is vnjuſt, ſhould be held for juſt. The common people ſuffered therein greatly then; not only preſent loſſes.
                        
                           —vndi
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    que
                                  totis
                           
                           
                              Ʋſ
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               adeo turbatur agris.—
                           Such revell and tumultuous rout
                           In all the country round about.
                        
                        But alſo ſucceeding dommages. The living were faine to ſuffer, ſo did ſuch as then were ſcarſe borne. They were robbed and pilled, and by conſequence ſo was I, even of hope: ſpoiling and depriving them of al they had to provide their living for many yeares to come.
                        
                           Quae nequeunt ſecum ferre aut abducere, perdunt,
                           Et cremat inſontes turba ſcelesta caſas:
                           Muris nulla fides, ſquallent popularibus agri.
                           They wretch-leſſe ſpoyle and ſpill what draw or drive they may not,
                           Guilty rogues to ſet fire on guilt-leſſe houſes ſtay not.
                           In wals no truſt, the field
                           By ſpoile growes waſte and wilde.
                        
                        Beſides theſe miſchiefes, I endured ſome others. I incurred the inconveniences that moderation bringeth in ſuch diſeaſes. I was ſhaven on all handes: To the Chibelin I was a Guelf, to Guelf a Ghibelin. Some one of my Poets expreſſeth as much, but I wot not where it is. The ſituation of my houſe, and the acquaintance of ſuch as dwelt round about me, preſented me with one viſage; my life and actions with another. No formall accuſations were made of it; for there was nothing to take hold of. I never oppoſed my ſelfe againſt the lawes; and who had called me in queſtion, ſhould have loſt by the bargaine. They were mute ſuſpicions, that ranne vnder hand, which never want apparance in ſo confuſed a hurly-burly, no more than lacke of envious or fooliſh wittes. I commonly affoord ayde vnto injurious preſumption, that fortune ſcattereth againſt me; by a faſhion I never had, to avoid juſtifying, excuſing or interpreting my ſelfe; deeming it to be a putting of my conſcience to compromiſe, to pleade for hir, Perſpicuitas enim, argumentatione elevatur: For the cleering of a cauſe, is leſſened by the arguing. And as if every man ſaw into mee as cleare as I doe my ſelfe, in lieu of withdrawing, I advance my ſelfe to the accuſation and rather endeare it; by an erronious and ſcoffing confeſſion: except I flatly hold my peace, as of a thing vnworthy any anſwer. But ſuch as take it for an over-proud confidence, doe not much leſſe diſeſteeme and hate me for it, than ſuch as take it for weakeneſſe of an indefenſible cauſe. Namely the great, with whom want of ſubmiſſion, is the extreame fault. Rude to all juſtice, that is knowen or felt: not demiſſe, humble or ſuppliant. I have often ſtumbled againſt that piller.

So it is, that by the harmes which befell mee, an ambicious man would have hanged himſelfe; and ſo would a covetons churle. I have no care at all to acquire or get.
                        
                           Sit mihi quod nunc eſt, etiam minus, vt mihi vivam
                           Quod ſupereſt aevi, ſi quid ſupereſſe volent dij.Hor lib. 1 epiſt. 18. 107.
                           
                           Let me have, that I have, or leſſe, ſo I may live
                           Vnto my ſelfe the reſt, if any reſt God give.
                        
                        But loſſes that come vnto me by others injury, be in larceny or violence, pinch mee, in a manner as one ſicke and tortured with avarice. An offence cauſeth vndoubtedly more griefe and ſharpeneſſe, than a loſſe. A thouſand ſeverall kindes of miſchiefes fell vpon mee one in the necke of another; I ſhould more ſtoutly have endured them, had they come all at once. I bethought my ſelfe, amongſt my friendes, to whom I might commit a needy, a defective and vnfortunate olde age: But after I had ſurveyed them all, and caſt mine eyes every where, I found my ſelfe bare and far to ſeeke. For one to ſowſe himſelfe downe headlong, and from ſo great a height, hee ſhould heedily forecaſt that it may be in the armes of a ſolide, ſtedfaſt, vigorous and fortunate affection. They are rare, if there be any. In the end I perceived the beſt and ſafeſt way, was to truſt both my ſelfe and my neceſſity, vnto my ſelfe. And if it ſhould happen to be but meanly and faintly in Fortunes grace, I might more effectually recommend my ſelfe vnto mine owne favour, more cloſely faſten and more neerely looke vnto my ſelfe. In all things men relie vpon ſtrange props, to ſpare their owne: onely certaine and onely powerfull, know they but how to arme themſelves with them. Every man runneth out and vnto what is to come, becauſe no man is yet come into himſelfe. And I reſolved, that they were profitable inconveniences: forſomuch as when reaſon will not ſerve, we muſt firſt warne vntoward Scholars with the rod; as with fire and violence of wedges, we bring a crooked peece of wood to be ſtraight. It is long ſince I call, to keepe my ſelfe vnto my ſelfe, and live ſequeſtred from alience and ſtrange things notwithſtanding I daily ſtart out and caſt mine eyes aſide. Inclination, a great mans favourable word, a kind looke doth tempt me. God he knowes whether there bee penury of them now-adayes, and what ſenſe they beare. I likewiſe, without frowning, liſten to the ſubornings, framed to drawe mee to ſome towne of merchandiſe or city of trafficke; and ſo coldly defend my ſelfe, that it ſeemes I ſhould rather endure to be overcome, than not. Now to a ſpirit ſo indocile, blowes are required: and this veſſell, that of it ſelfe is ſo ready to warpe, to vnhoope, to eſcape and fall in peeces, muſt be cloſed, hooped and ſtrongly knockt with an adze. Secondly, that this accident ſerved me as an exercitation to prepare my ſelfe for worſe, if worſe might happen: if I, who both by the benefite of fortune and condition of my maners, hoped to be of the laſt, ſhould by this tempeſt be one of the firſt ſurpriſed. Inſtructing my ſelfe betimes, to force my life and frame it for a new ſtate. True-perfect liberty, is, for one to be able to doe and worke all things vpon himſelfe. Potentiſſimus eſt qui ſe habet in poteſtate. Hee is of moſt power, that
                           Sen. epiſt. 9. 
                           keepes himſelfe in his owne power. In ordinary and peacefull times, a man prepares himſelfe for common and moderate accidents: but in this confuſion, wherein wee have beene theſe thirty yeeres, every French man, be it in generall or in particular, doth hourely ſee himſelfe vpon the point of his fortunes over-throw and downefall. By ſo much more ought each one have his courage ſtored and his minde fraughted, with more ſtrong and vigorous proviſions: Let vs thanke Fortune, that hath not made vs live in an effeminate, idle and languiſhing age: Some, whom other meanes could never bring vnto it, ſhall make themſelves famous by their misfortunes. As I reade not much in Hiſtories, theſe confuſions of other ſtates, without regret, that I could not better them preſent; So doth my curioſity make me ſomwhat pleaſe my ſelfe, with mine eies to ſee this notable ſpectacle of our publike death; her ſymptomes and formes. And ſince I could not hinder the ſame, I am content to bee appointed as an aſſiſtant vnto it, and thereby inſtruct my ſelfe. Yet ſeeke we evidently to know in ſhadowes, and vnderſtand by fabulous repreſentations vpon Theaters, to ſhew of the tragicke revolutions of humane fortune. It is not with out compaſſion of that wee heare, but wee pleaſe our ſelves to rowze vp our diſpleaſure, by the rareneſſe of theſe pitifull events. Nothing tickles, that pincheth not. And good Hiſtorians avoid calme narrations, as a dead water or mort-mere; to retreeve ſeditions & finde out warres, whereto they know we call them. I doubt whether I may lawfully avow, at how baſe a rate of my lifes reſt and tranquillity, I have paſt it more than halfe in the ruine of my Country. In accidents that touch mee not in

my freehold, I purchaſe patience very cheape; and to complaine to my ſelfe, I reſpect not ſo much what is taken from mee, as what is left me both within and without. There is comfort, in ſometimes eſchewing one, and ſometimes another of the evills, that one in the necke of another ſurpriſe vs, and elſewhere ſtrike vs round about. As matters of publike interreſts, according as my affection is more vniverſally ſcattred, ſhe is thereby more enfeebled. Since it is halfe true: Tantum ex publicis malis ſentimus, quantum ad privatas res pertinet. Wee feele ſo much of common harmes as appertaine to our private estate. And that the health whence wee fell was ſuch, that her ſelfe ſolaceth the regret we ſhould have for her. It was health, mary but in compariſon of the contagion, which hath followed the ſame. Wee are not falne very high. The corruption and the brigandage, which now is in office and dignity, ſeemes to me the leaſt tolerable. Wee are leſſe injuriouſly robbed in the midſt of a wood, then a place of ſecurity
                              •
                            It was an vniverſall coherency of members ſpoiled avie one another; and moſt of them, with old-rankled vlcers, which neither admitted nor demaunded recovery. Truely this ſhaking-fit did therefore more animate then deterre me, onely by the aide of my conſcience, which not onely quietly, but fiercely carrîed it ſelfe; and I found no cauſe to complaine, of my ſelf. Likewiſe, as God never ſends men either evils or goods abſolutely pure; my health held out well for that time, yea againſt her ordinary: And as without it I can do nothing, ſo with it, there are few things I cannot doe. She gave me meanes to ſummon and rouze vp all my proviſions, and to beare my hand before my hurt, which happily would have gone further: And proved in my patience, that yet I had ſome hold againſt fortune; and that to thruſt me out of my ſaddle, ther
                              •
                            was required a ſtronger counterbuffe. This I ſpeake not, to provoke her to give me a more vigorous charge. I am her ſervant, and yeeld my ſelfe vnto her: For Gods ſake let her be pleaſed. Demaund you whether I feele her aſſaults? I doe indeede. As thoſe whom ſorrow poſſeſſeth and overwhelmeth, doe notwithſtanding at one time or other ſuffer themſelves by intermiſſions to be touched by ſome pleaſure, and now and then ſmile. I have ſufficient power over my ſelfe, to make mine ordinary ſtate quiet and free from all tedious and irkeſome imaginations; but yet I ſometimes ſuffer my ſelfe by ſtarts to be ſurpriſed with the pinchings of theſe vnpleaſant conceits, which whilſt I arme my ſelfe to expell or wreſtle againſt them, aſſaile and beate mee. Loe here another huddle or tide of miſchiefe; that on the necke of the former came ruſhing vpon mee. Both within and round about my houſe, I was overtaken, in reſpect of all other, with a moſt contagious peſtilence. For, as ſoundeſt bodies are ſubject to grievous diſeaſes, becauſe they onely can force them: ſo the aire about me being very healthy, wher in no mans momory, infection (although very neere) could ever take footing: comming now to be poiſoned brought forth ſtrange effects.
                        
                           Miſta ſenum & iuvenum denſantur funer a nullumH
                                    •
                                 r. car. l. 1. 
                                    •
                                 d. 28. 19.
                           
                           Saeva caput Proſerpina fugit.
                           Of old and yoong thicke funerals are ſhared;
                           By cruell Proſerpine no head is ſpared.
                        
                        I was faine to endure this ſtrange condition, that the ſight of my houſe was irkeſome vnto me. Whatever was therein, lay all at randon, no man looked thereunto; and was free for any that had a minde vnto it. I who have ſo long beene a good houſekeeper, and vſed to hoſpitality, was much troubled and put to my ſhifts, how to finde out ſome retreate for my family. A diſmaied and ſcattered family, making both her ſelfe and her friends afraide, and breeding horrour where it ſought to retire for ſhelter; being now to ſhift and change her dwelling, ſo ſoone as any of the company beganne to feele his finger ake, all the reſt were diſmaied. Every ſickeneſſe is then taken for the plague: none hath leaſure to conſider them. And the miſchiefe is, that according to rules of arte, what danger ſoeuer approcheth, a man muſt continue forty dayes in anxiety or feare of that euill; in which time your owne imagination doth perplex you as ſhee liſt and infect your health. All which had much leſſe toucht mee, had I not beene forced to beare other mens burthens and partake all their grieuances, and for ſix months ſpace, in miſerable maner, to be a woefull guide to ſo greatconfuſed a Caravane. For I euer carry my preſeruatives about me, which are reſolution and ſufferance. Apprehenſion doth not greatly preſſe me; which is particularly feared in this ſickeneſſe. And if being alone, I ſhould have taken it, it had beene a ſtronger and further flight: It is a death in mine opinion, not of the worſt: It is commonly ſhort and ſpeeding voide of lingring giddineſſe, without paine, comforted by the publike condition; without

ceremonie without mourning, and without thronging. But for the people about vs, the hundreth part of ſoules cannot be ſaved.
                        
                           —videas deſertáque regna
                           
                           Paſtorum, & longe ſaltus latéque vacantes.
                           Kingdomes of Shepheardes deſolate forlorne,
                           Parkes farre and neere lie waſte, a ſtate all torne.
                        
                        In that place, my beſt revenue is manuall: what a hundred men laboured for me, lay fallow for a long time. What examples of reſolution ſaw we not then in all this peoples ſimplicitie? Each one generally renounced all care of life. The grapes (which are the countries chiefe commoditie) hung ſtill and rotted vpon the vines vntouch't: all indifferently preparing themſelves, and expecting death, either that night or the next morrow: with countenance and voice ſo little daunted, that they ſeemed to have compromitted to this neceſſitie, and that it was an vniuerſall and inevitable condemnation. It is ever ſuch. But what ſlender hold hath the reſolution of dying? The difference and diſtance of ſome few houres: the onely conſideration of the company yeelds the apprehenſion diverſe vnto vs. Behold theſe becauſe they die in one ſame month, children, yoong, old; they are no more aſtonied, they are no longer wept▪for. I ſaw ſome that feared to ſtay behinde, as if they had beene in ſome horride ſolitude: And commonly I knew no other care amongſt them, but for graves: it much grieved them, to ſee the dead carcaſſes ſcattered over the fields, at the mercie of wilde beaſts; which preſently began to flocke thither. Oh how humane fantaſies differ and are eaſily diſio
                              •
                           ned! The Neorites, a nation whilome ſubdued by Alexander the Great, caſt out their dead mens bodies into the thickeſt of their woods, there to be devoured: the grave onely eſteemed happy among them. Some in good health digged already their graves, otherſome yet living did goe into them. And a day-labourer of mine, as he was dying, with his owne hands and feete pulled earth vpon him, and ſo covered himſelfe. Was not this a lying downe in the ſhade to ſleepe at eaſe? An enterpriſe in ſome ſort as highly noble, as that of ſome Romane Souldiers, who after the battell of Canna, were found with their heads in certaine holes or pits, which themſelves had made, and filled vp with their hands, wherein they were ſmothered. To conclude, a whole nation was preſently by vſe brought to a march, that in vndantedneſſe yeelds not to any conſulted and fore-meditated reſolution. The greateſt number of learnings inſtructions, to encourage vs have more ſhew then force, and more ornament then fruit. Wee have forſaken nature, and yet wee will teach her her leſſon: Shee, that lead vs ſo happily, and directed vs ſo ſafely: And in the meane while, the traces of her inſtructions and that little, which by the benefit of ignorance, remaineth of her image, imprinted in the life of this ruſticall troupe of vnpoliſhed men; learning is compelled to goe daily a borrowing, thereby to make her diſciples a patterne of conſtancie, of innocencie and of tranquillitie. It is a goodly matter to ſee how theſe men full of ſo great knowledge, muſt imitate this fooliſh ſimplicitie; yea in the firſt and chiefe actions of vertue. And that our wiſedome ſhould learne of beaſts, the moſt profitable documents, belonging to the chiefeſt and moſt neceſſari: parts of our life. How we ſhould live and die, husband our goods, love and bring vp our children, and entertaine juſtice. A ſingular teſtimonie of mans infirmitie: and that this reaſon we ſo manage at our pleaſure, ever finding ſome diverſitie and noveltie, leaveth vnto vs no maner of apparent tracke of nature. Wherwith men have done, as perfumers doe with oile, they have adulterated her, with ſo many argumentations, and ſofiſticated her with ſo diverſe farre-fetcht diſcourſes, that ſhe is become variable and peculiar to every man, and hath loſt her proper, conſtant and vniuerſall viſage: whereof we muſt ſeeke for a teſtimonie of beaſts, not ſubject to favor or corruption, nor to diverſitie of opinions. For it is moſt true, that themſelves march not alwayes exactly in natures path, but if they chance to ſtray, it is ſo little, that you may ever perceive the tracke. Even as horſes led by hand doe ſometimes bound and ſtart out of the way, but no further then their halters length, and nevertheleſſe follow ever his ſteps that leadeth them: And as a Hawke takes his flight but vnder the limites of hir cranes or twyne. Exilia, tormenta, bella, morbos, naufragia meditare, vt nullo ſis malo tyro. Baniſhments, torments, warres; ſickneſſes, ſhipwracks, all theſe fore-caſt and premeditate, that thou maiest ſeeme no novice no freſhwater Souldier to any miſadventure. What availeth this curioſitie vnto vs, to preoccupate all humane natures inconveniences, and with ſo much labour and toyling againſt them, to prepare our ſelves, which peradventure

ſhall nothing concerne vs? (Parem paſſis triſtitiam facit, patipoſſe. It makes men as ſad that they may ſuffer ſome miſchiefe, as if they had ſuffred it. Not onely the blow, but the winde and cracke ſtrikes vs) Or as the moſt febricitant, for ſurely it is a kinde of fever, now to cauſe your ſelfe to be whipped, becauſe fortune may one day chance to make you endure it: and at Mid-Sommer to put-on your furr'd Gowne, becauſe you ſhall neede it at Chriſtmas? Caſt your ſelves into the experience of all the miſchiefes, that may befall you, namely of the extreameſt: there try your ſelfe (ſay they) there aſſure your ſelfe. Contrarywiſe, the eaſieſt and moſt naturall, were even to diſcharge his thought of them. They will not come ſoone enough, their true being doth not laſt vs long enough, our ſpirit muſt extend and lengthen them, and before hand incorporate them into himſelfe, and therewith entertaine himſelfe, as if they lay not ſufficiently heavy on our ſenſes. They will weigh heavy enough, when they ſhall be there, (ſaith one of the maiſters, not of a tender, but of the hardeſt Sect) meane while favour thy ſelfe: Beleeve what thou loveſt beſt: What availes it thee to collect and prevent thy ill fortune: and for feare of the future, loſe the preſent; and now to be miſerable, becauſe in time thou maieſt bee ſo? They are his owne wordes. Learning doth vs willingly one good office, exactly to inſtruct vs in the demenſions of evils.
                        
                           Curis acuens mortalia corda.
                           Mens cogitations whetting,
                           With ſharpe cares inly fretting.
                        
                        It were pitty, any part of their greatneſſe ſhould eſcape our feeling and vnderſtanding. It is certaine, that preparation vnto death, hath cauſed more torment vnto moſt, than the very ſufferance. It was whilome truely ſaid, of and by a moſt judicious Authour: Minus afficit ſenſus fatigati
                                 •
                              , quàm cogitatio. Wearineſſe leſſe troubleth our ſenſes, then penſi
                                 •
                              eneſſe doth. The apprehenſion of preſent death, doth ſometimes of it ſelfe a
                              •
                           nimate vs, with a ready reſolution, no longer to avoide a thing altogether inevitable. Many Gladiators have in former ages beene ſeene, having at firſt fought very cowardly, moſt couragiouſly to embrace death; offering their throate to the enemies ſword, yea and bidde them make haſte. The ſight diſtant from future death hath neede of a ſlowe conſtancy, and by conſequence hard to bee found. If you know not how to die, take no care for it; Nature her ſelfe will fully and ſufficiently teach you in the nicke, ſhe will exactly diſcharge that worke for you; trouble not your ſelfe with it.
                        
                           Incert am fruſtra mortales funeris horamCatul. 
                                    •••
                                 g. 1. 29. 16.
                           
                           Quaeritis, & qua ſit mors aditur a via:
                           Pana minor certam ſubitò perferre
                                 ••
                              inam,
                           Quod time as, gravius ſuſtinuiſſe di
                                 •
                              .
                           Of death th'vncertaine houre you men in vaine
                           Enquire, and what way leath ſhall you diſtraine:
                           A certaine ſodaine ruine is leſſe paine,
                           More grievous long what you feare to ſuſtaine.
                        
                        We trouble death with the care of life, and life with the care of death. The one annoyeth, the other aſſrights vs. It is not againſt death, we prepare our ſelves; it is a thing too momentary. A quarter of an houre of paſſion without conſequence and without annoyance, deſerves not particular precepts. To ſay truth, we prepare our ſelves againſt the preparations of death. Philoſophy teacheth vs, ever to have death before our eyes, to fore-ſee and conſider it before it come: Then giveth vs rules and precautions ſo to provide, that ſuch foreſight and thought hurt vs not. So doe Phyſitians, who caſt vs into diſeaſes, that they may employ their drugges and skill about them. If we have not knowen how to live, it is injuſtice to teach vs how to die, and deforme the end from all the reſt. Have wee knowen how to live conſtantly and quietly, wee ſhall know how to die reſolutely and rep
                              •
                           ſedly. They may bragge as much as they pleaſe. Tota Philoſophorum vita commentatio mortis eſt. The whole life of a Philopher is the meditation of his death. But me thinkes, it is indeede the end, yet not the ſcope of life. It is her laſt, it is her extremity; yet not her object. Hir ſelfe muſt be vnto hirſelfe, hir aime, hir drift and her deſigne. Hir direct ſtudie is, to order, to direct and to ſuffer hir ſelfe. In the number of many other offices, which the generall and principall Chapter, to know how to live containeth, is this ſpeciall Article, To know how to die. And of the eaſieſt, did not our owne feare weigh it downe. To judge them by their profit and by the naked

truth, the leſſons of ſimplicity, yeeld not much to thoſe, which Doctrine preacheth to the contrary vnto vs. Men are different in feeling, and diverſe in force: they muſt be directed to their good, according to themſelves and by divers waies:
                        
                           Quò me cumque rapit tempeſtas, deferor hoſpes.Hor l. 1. epiſt. 1. 15.
                           
                           Where I am whirld by winde and wether,
                           I gueſt-like ſtraight am carried thether.
                        
                        I never ſaw meane paiſant of my neighbours, enter into cogitation or care, with what aſſurance or countenance, hee ſhould paſſe this laſt houre. Nature teacheth him never to muze on death, but when he dieth. And then hath hee a better grace in it, than Ariſtotle; whom death perplexed doubly, both by her ſelfe and by ſo long a premeditation. Therefore was it Caeſars opinion, that The leaſt premeditated death, was the happieſt and the eaſ
                                 •
                              est. Plus dolet, quàm neceſſe est, qui ante dolet, quàm neceſſe est. He grieves more than he need, That grieves before he neede. The ſharpeneſſe of this imagination, proceedes from our curioſity. Thus we ever hinder our ſelves; deſiring to fore-runne and ſway naturall preſcriptions: It is but for Doctors being in health, to fare the worſe by it, and to frowne and ſtartle at the image of death. The vulgar ſort, have neither neede of remedy nor comfort, but when the ſhocke or ſtroke commeth. And juſtly conſiders no more of it, than hee ſeeleth. And is it not as we ſay, that the vulgares ſtupidity and want of appr
                              •
                           henſion, affoorde them this patience in private evils, and this deepe careleſnes of ſiniſter future accidents? That their mind being more groſſe, dull and blockiſh, is leſſe penetrable and agitable? In Gods name, if it be ſo, let vs hence forth keepe a ſchoole of brutality. It is the vtmoſt fruit that Sciences promiſe vnto vs, to which ſhe ſo gently bringeth her diſciples. We ſhall not want good teachers, interpreters of naturall ſimplicity. Socrates ſhall be one. For, as neare as I remember, he ſpeaketh in this ſence vnto the Iudges, that determine of his life: I feare me my maiſters (ſaith hee) that if I intreate you not to make me die, I ſhall confirme the evidence of my accuſers; which is, That I profeſſe to have more vnderſtanding than others; as having ſome knowledge more ſecret and hidde of things both above and beneath vs. I know I have neither frequented nor knowen death, nor have I ſeene any body, that hath either felt or tried her qualities, to inſtruct me in them. Thoſe who feare her, preſuppoſe to know: As for me, I neither know who or what ſhee is, nor what they doe in the other worlde. Death may peradventure be a thing indifferent, happily a thing deſirable. Yet is it to bee beleeved, that if it be a tranſmigration from one place to another, there is ſome amendement in going to live with ſo many worthy famous perſons, that are deceaſed; and be exempted from having any more to doe with wicked and corrupted Iudges. If it be a conſummation of ones being, it is alſo an amendement and entrance into a long and quiet night. Wee finde nothing ſo ſweete in life, as a quiet reſt and gentle ſleepe, and without dreames. The things I know to be wicked, as to wrong or offend ones neighbour; and to diſobey his ſuperiour, be he God or man, I carefully ſh
                                 •
                              nne them: Such as I know not whether they bee good or bad, I cannot feare them. If I goe to my death, and leave you alive; the Gods onely ſee, whether you or I ſhall proſper beſt. And therefore, for my regarde, you ſhall diſpoſe of it, as it ſhall beſt pleaſe you. But according to my faſhion, which is to counſell good and profitable things, this I ſay, that for your owne conſcience you ſhall doe beſt to free and diſcharge mee: except you ſee further into mine owne cauſe than my ſelfe. And iudging according to my former actions, both publike and private, according to my intentions, and to the profit, that ſo many of our Cittizens, both yoong and olde, draw daily from my converſation, and the fruit, all you reape by me you cannot more iuſtly or duely diſcharge your ſelves toward my deſertes, than by appointing (my poverty conſidered) that I may live, and at the common charge bee kept, in the Brytan
                              •
                           o: which for much leſſe reaſons, I have often ſeene you freely graunt to others. Impute it not to obſtinacy or diſdaine in mee, nor tak
                                 •
                               it in ill part, that I, according to custome proceede not by way of in
                                 •
                              r
                                 •
                              atie, and moove you to commiſeration. I have both friends and kinsfolkes, being not (as Homer ſaith) begotten of a blocke or ſtone, no more than other men: capable to preſent themſelves humbly ſuing with teares and mourning: and I have three deſolate wailing children to moove you to pittie. But I ſhould make your Cittie aſhamed, of the age I am in, and in that reputation of wiſedome, as now I stand in prevention to yeeld vnto ſo baſe and abiect countenances. What would the worlde ſay of other Athenians? I have ever admoniſhed ſuch as have heard me ſpeake, never to purchaſe or redeeme their life, by any diſhonest or vnlawfull act. And in my countries warres, both at Amphipolis, at Potidea, at Delia, and others, in which I have beene, I have ſhewen by effects, how farre I was from warranting my ſafety by my ſhame. Moreover, I ſhould interest your duty, and
                           
                           preiudice your calling, and perſwade you to feule vnlan full things; for, not my prayers, but the pure and 
                                 •
                              olide reaſons of iuſtice ſhould perſwade you. You have ſw
                                 •
                              rne to the Gods, ſo to maintaine your ſelves. Not to beleeve there were any, might ſeeme I would ſuſpect, recriminate or retorte the fault vpon you. And my ſelfe ſhould witneſſe againſt my ſelfe, not to beleeve in them as I ought: diſtructing their conduct, and not meerely remitting my affaires into their handes. I wholly truſt and rel
                                 •
                              e on them; and certainely holde, that in this, they will diſpoſe as it ſhall bee noceteſt for you, and fittest for me. Honeſt men, that neither live, nor are dead, have no cauſe at all to feare the Gods. Is not this a childiſh pleading, of an inimaginable courage; and in what neceſſity employed? Verily it was reaſon, hee ſhould preferre it before that, which the great Orator Lyſia
                                 •
                              
                            had ſet downe in writing for him; excellency faſhioned in a judiciary Stile; but vnworthie of ſo noble a criminall. Should a man have heard an humbly-ſuing voice out of Socrates his mouth? Would that prowde vertue have failed in the beſt of her ſhew? And would his rich and powerfull nature, have committed her defence vnto arte, and in her higheſt Eſſay, renounced vnto trueth and ſinceritie, the ornaments of his ſpeech, to adorne and decke himſelfe with the embelliſhment of the figures and fictions of a fore-lern'nt Oration; Hee did moſt wiſely, and according to himſelfe, not to corrupt the tenure of an incorruptible life, & ſo ſacred an image of humane forme, to prolong his decrepitude for one yeere; and wrong the immortall memory of ſo glorious an end. He ought his life, not to himſelfe, but to the worlds example. Had it not beene a publike loſſe, if he had finiſhed the ſame in ſome idle, baſe and obſcure manner? Truely, ſo careleſſe and effeminate a conſideration of his death, deſerved, poſteritie ſhould ſo much more conſider the ſame for him: which it did. And nothing is ſo juſt in juſtice, as that, which fortune ordained for his commendation. For the Athenians did afterward ſo deteſt and abhorre thoſe, which had furthered and cauſed his death, that of all they were l
                              •
                           athed and ſhunned as curſed and excommunicated men: what ſoever they had but touched was held to bee polluted: No man would ſo much as waſh with them in bathes or hot-houſes: no man affoord them a ſalutation, much leſſe accoſt or have to doe with them: ſo that being in the end no longer able to endure this publike hatred and generall contempt, they all hanged themſelves. If any man thinkes, that amongſt ſo many examples, I might have choſen for the ſervice of my purpoſe, in Socrates his ſayings, I have choſen or handled this but ill: and deemeth this diſccurſe, to be raiſed above common opinions: I have done it wittingly: for I judge otherwiſe. And hold it to bee a diſcourſe, in ranke and ſincerity, much ſhorter and lower, then vulgar opinions. It repreſenteth in an vn-artificiall boldneſſe, and infantine ſecuritie, the pure impreſſion and firſt ignorance of nature. Becauſe it is credible, that wee naturally feare paine, but not death, by reaſon of her. It is a part of our being, no leſſe eſſentiall than life. To what end would Nature have elſe engendred the hate and horror of it, ſeeing it holdes thererein and with it a ranke of moſt great profit, to foſter the ſucceſſion, and nouriſh the viciſſitude of her works? And that in this vniverſall Common-weale, it ſteadeth and ſerveth more for birth and augmentation, then for loſſe, decay or ruine.
                        
                           Sic rerum ſumma novatur.Luer. l. 2 73.
                           
                           So doth the ſumme of all,
                           By courſes riſe and fall.
                           Mille animas vna necat a dedit.
                           We thouſand ſoules ſhall pay,
                           For one ſoule made away▪
                           
                        
                        The decay of one life, is the paſſage to a thouſand other lives. Nature hath imprinted in beaſts, the care of themſelves and of their preſervation. They proceede even to the feare of their empairing; to ſhocke or hurt themſelves: and that wee ſhould not ſhackle or beate them, accidents ſubject to their ſence and experience: But that we ſhould kill them, they cannot feare it, nor have they the faculty to imagine or conclude their death. Yet is it reported, that they are not ſeene onely to embrace and endure the ſame joyfully (moſt Horſes neigh in dying, and Swannes ſing when it ſeiſeth them.) But moreover, they ſeeke it when they neede it; as by divers examples may be prooved in the Elephants. Beſides, the manner of arguing, which Socrates vſeth here, is it not equally admirable, both in ſimplicitie and in vehemency? Verily It is much 
                                 •
                              aſier, to ſpeake as Ariſtotle, and live as Caeſar, than ſpeake and live as Socrates. Therein conſiſts the extreame degree of difficultie and perfection;

arte cannot attaine vnto it. Our faculties are not now ſo addreſſed. We neither aſſay, nor know them; we inveſt our ſelves with others, and ſuffer our owne to be idle. As by ſome might be ſaide of me: that here I have but gathered a noſ
                              •
                           gay of ſtrange floures, and have put nothing of mine vnto it, but the thred to binde them. Certes, I have given vnto publike opinion, that theſe borrowed ornaments accompany me; but I meane not they ſhould cover or hide me: it is contrary to mine intention, who would make ſhew of nothing that is not mine owne, yea and mine owne by nature: And had I believed my ſelfe, at all adventure I had ſpoken alone. I dayly charge my ſelfe the more beyond my propoſition and firſt forme, vpon the fantaſie of time, and through idleneſſe. If it miſ-ſeeme me, as I thinke it doth, it is no great matter; it may be profitable for ſome other. Some aleadge Plato, and ſome mention Homer, that never ſaw them, or as they ſay in Engliſh, many a man ſpeakes of Robin hood, that never ſhot in his how: And I have taken diverſe paſſages from others then in their ſpring. Without paine or ſufficiency; having a thouſand volumes of bookes about me, where now I write, if I pleaſe, I may preſently borrow from a number of ſuch botcherlypatchcotes (men that I plod not much vpon) wherewith to enamell this treaty of Phiſiognomie. I neede but the liminary epiſtle of a Germane to ſtore me with allegations: and we goe queſting that way for a fading greedy glory, to couſin and delude the fooliſh world, Theſe rapſodies of common places, wherewith ſo many ſtuffe their ſtudy, ſerve not greatly but for vulgar ſubjects, and ſerve but to ſhew and not to direct vs: A ridiculous-fond fruite of learning, that Socrates doth ſo pleaſantly enveigh and exagitate againſt Euthydemus. I have ſeene bookes made of things neither ſtudied nor ever vnderſtood: the authour comming to diverſe of his learned and wiſe friends the ſearch of this and that matter, that ſo he might compile them into a booke, contenting himſelfe for his owne part, to have caſt the plot and projected the deſſeigne of it, and by his induſtry to have bound vp the fagot of vnknowne proviſions: at leaſt is the inke and paper his owne. This may bee ſaide to bee a buying or borrowing, and not a making or compiling of a booke. It is to teach men, not that one can make a booke, but to put them out of doubt, that hee cannot make it. A preſident of the law, in a place where I was, vanted himſelfe, to have hudled vp together two hundred and od ſtrange places in a preſidentiall law-caſe of his: In publiſhing of which, hee defaced the glory, which others gave him for it. A weake, childiſh and abſurde boaſting in my opinion, for ſuch a ſubject and for ſuch a man. I doe cleane contrary; and amongſt ſo many borrowings, am indeed glad to filch ſome one; diſguiſing and altering the ſame to ſome new ſervice. On hazard, to let men ſay, that it is for lacke of vnderſtanding it's naturally vſe, I give it ſome particular addreſſing of mine owne hand, to the end it may be ſo much leſſe meerely ſtrange. Whereas theſe put their larcenies to publike view and gariſh ſhew. So have they more credite in the lawes, then I. We other naturaliſts ſuppoſe, that there is a great and in comparable preference, betweene the honour of invention and that of allegation. Would I have ſpoken according to learning. I had ſpoken ſooner: I had writen at ſuch times as I was neerer to my ſtudies, when I had more wit and more memory; and ſhould more have truſted the vigor of that age, then the imperfection of this, had I beene willing to profeſſe writing of bookes. And what if this gratious favour, which fortune hath not long ſince offered mee by the intermiſſion of this worke, could have befalne me in ſuch a ſeaſon, in liew of this, where it is equally deſireable to poſſeſſe, and ready to looſe?
                        Two of mine acquaintance (both notable men in this faculty) have, in my conceit, loſt much becauſe they refuſed to publiſh themſelves at forty yeares of age, to ſtay vntill they were three ſcore. Maturity hath her defects, aſwell as greeneneſſe, and worſe. And as in commodious or vnfit is old age vnto this kinde of worke, as to any other. Whoſoever put's his decrepitude vnder the preſſe, committeth folly, if thereby he hopes to wring out humors, that ſhall not taſte of dotage, of 
                              •
                           oppery, or of drouſineſſe. Our ſpirit becommeth coſtive and thickens in growing old. Of ignorance I ſpeake ſumptuouſly and plentiouſly, and of learning meagerly and pitiouſly: This acce
                              ••
                           orily and accidentally; That expreſſely and principally. And purpoſely I treate of nothing, but of nothing; nor of any one ſcience but of vnſcience. I have choſen the time, where the life I have to ſet forth, is all before mee, the reſt holdes more of death. And of my death onely ſhould I finde it babling, as others doe, I would willingly, in diſlodging, give the World adviſe. Socrates hath been a perfect patterne in all great qualities. I am vexed, that ever he met with ſo vnhanſome and crabbed

a body, as they ſay he had, and ſo diſſonant from the beauty of his minde. Himſelfe ſo amorous and ſo beſotted on beauty. Nature did him wrong. There is nothing more truly ſemblable, as the conformity or relation betweene the body and the minde. Ipſi animi, magni refert, quali in copore locati ſint: multa enim è corpore exiſtunt, quae acuant mentem: multa, quae obtundant. It is of great import in what body the minde is beſtowed: for many things ariſe of the body to ſharpen the minde, and many things to dull and rebate it. This man ſpeakes of an vnnaturall ill-favourdneſſe, and membrall deformity: but we call ill-favourdneſſe a kinde of vnſeemelineſſe at the firſt ſight, which chiefely lodgeth in the face; and by the colour worketh a diſlike in vs; A freckle, a blemmiſh, a rude countenaunce, a ſower looke, proceeding often of ſome inexplicable cauſe, may be in well ordered, comely and compleate limmes. The fouleneſſe of face, which inveſted a beauteous minde in my deare friend La Boitie, was of this predicament. This ſuperficiall ill-favourdneſſe, which is notwithſtanding to the moſt imperious, is of leſſe prejudice vnto the ſtate of the minde: and hath ſmall certainty in mens opinion. The other, by a more proper name called a more ſubſtantiall deformity, beareth commonly a deeper inward ſtroke. Not every ſhooe of ſmooth-ſhining leather, but every wellſhapen and hanſome-made ſhoe, ſheweth the inward and right ſhape of the foot. As Socrates ſaid of his, that it juſtly accuſed ſo much in his mind had he not corrected the ſame by inſtitution. But in ſo ſaying, I ſuppoſe, that according to his wonted vſe, he did but jeſt: and ſo excellent a mind, did never frame it ſelfe. I cannot often enough repeate, how much I eſteeme beauty, ſo powerfull and advantagious a quality is ſhe. He named it, a ſhort tyranny: And Plato the priviledge of Nature. We have none that exceeds it in credit. She poſſeſſeth the chiefe ranke in the commerce of ſociety of men: She preſents itſelfe forward: ſhe ſeduceth and preoccupates our judgement, with great authority and wonderfull impreſſion. Phryne had loſt her plea, though in the hands of an excellent lawyer, if with opening her garments, by the ſodaine flaſhing of hir beauty, ſhe had not corrupted her judges. And I finde, that Cyrus▪ Alexannder and Caeſar thoſe three Maſters of the World, have not forgotten or neglected the ſame in atchieving their great affaires. So hath not the firſt Scipio. One ſame word in Greeke importeth faire and good. And even the Holy-Ghoſt calleth often thoſe good, which he meaneth faire. I ſhould willingly maintaine the ranke of the goods, as imployed the ſong, which Plato ſaith to have beene triviall, taken from ſome auncient Poet; Health beeuty and riches. Aristotle ſaith, that the right of commaunding, doth of duty belong to ſuch as are faire; and if haply any be found, whoſe beauty approached to that of the Gods images, that veneration is equally due vnto them. To one that asked him, why the faireſt were both longer time and oftner frequented? This queſtion (quoth he) ought not to bee mooved but by a blinde man. Moſt, and the greateſt Philoſophers, paide for their ſchooling and attained vnto Wiſedome, by the intermiſſion of their beauty, and favour their comlines. Not onely in men that ſerue me, but in beaſtes alſo, I conſider the ſame within two inches of goodneſſe. Yet me thinkes, that the ſame feature and manner of the face and thoſe lineaments, by which ſome argue certaine inward complexions, and our future fortunes, is a thing that doth not directly nor ſimply lodge vnder the Chapter of beauty and ill favourdneſſe; no more than all good favours, or cleereneſſe of aire, doe not alwayes promiſe health; nor all fogges and ſtinkes, infection, in times of the plague. Such as accuſe Ladies to contradict the beauty, by their manners, gueſſe not alwayes at the truth. For, In an ill favourd and ill compoſed face, may ſometimes harbour ſome aire of probitie, and truſt. As on the contrary, I have ſometimes read betweene two faire eyes, the threats of a maligne and dangerous ill-boding nature. There are ſome fauourable Phyſiognomies; For in a throng of victorious enemies, you ſhall preſently ammiddeſt a multitude of vnknowen faces, make choiſe of one man more than of others, to yeeld yourſelfe vnto and truſt yòur life; and not properly by the conſideration of beauty. A mans loòke or aire of his face, is but a weake warrant; notwithſtanding it is of ſome conſideration. And were I to whippe them, I would more rudely ſcourge ſuch as maliciouſly bely & betray the promiſes, which Nature had charactred in their front. And more ſeverely would I puniſh malicious craft in a debonaire apparance and in a mild promiſing countenance. It ſeemeth there bee ſome lucky and well boding faces, and other ſome vnlucky and ill preſaging: And I thinke, there is ſome Arte to diſtinguiſh gently-milde faces, from nyaes and ſimple; the ſevere from the rude; the malicious from the froward; the diſdainefull from the melancholike and other neighbouring qualities. There are ſome

beauties, not onely fierce-looking, but alſo ſharpe-working, ſome others pleaſing-ſweete, and yet wallowiſhly taſtleſſe. To prognoſticate future ſucceſſes of them, be matters I leave vndecided. I have (as elſewhere I noted) taken for my regard this ancient precept, very rawly and ſimply: That We cannot erre in following Nature: and that the ſoveraigne document is, for a man to conforme himſelfe to her. I have not (as Socrates) by the power and vertue of reaſon, corrected my naturall complexions, nor by Arte hindered mine inclination. Look how I came into the World, ſo I goe-on: I ſtrive with nothing. My two Miſtris partes, live of their owne kindeneſſe in peace and good agreement; but my nurſes milke, hath (thanks be to God) beene indifferently wholeſome and temperate. Shall I ſay thus much by the way? That I ſee a certaine image of bookiſ
                              •
                            or ſcholaſticall preud'hommie, only which is in a maner in vſe amongſt vs, held and reputed in greater eſteeme than it deſerveth, and which is but a ſervant vnto precepts, brought vnder by hope, and conſtrained by feare? I love it ſuch as lawes and religions make not, but over-make and authorize; that they may bee perceived to have wherewith to vphold her ſelfe without other aide: ſprung vp in vs of her owne proper roots, by and from the ſeed of vniverſall reaſon, imprinted in every man that is not vnnaturall. The ſame reaſon, that reformeth Socrates from his vicious habite, yeelds him obedient both to Gods and men, that rule and commaund his Citty: couragious in his death; not becauſe his ſoule is immortall, but becauſe hee is mortall. A ruinous inſtruction to all common-weales and much more harmefull, than ingenious and ſubtile, is that which perſwadeth men, that onely religious beliefe, and without manners, ſufficeth to content and ſatisfie divine juſtice. Cuſtome makes vs ſee an enormous diſtinction betweene devotion and conſcience. I have a favourable apparence, both in forme and in interpretation.
                        
                           Quid dixi habere me? Imò habui Chreme:
                           Heu tantùm attriti corporis oſſavides.Ter H
                                    •
                                 a
                                    •
                                 
                                 ▪ act. 
                                    •
                                  ſc
                                    •
                                 . 1.
                           
                           I have; what did I ſay;
                           I had what's now away.
                           Alas, you onely now behold,
                           Bones of a body worne and old.
                        
                        And which makes a contrary ſhew to that of Socrates. It hath often betided me, that by the ſimple credite of my preſence and aſpect, ſome that had no knowledge of me, have greatly truſted vnto it, were it about their owne affaires or mine. And even in forraine countries, I have thereby reaped ſingular and rare favours. Theſe two experiments, are hapily worthy to be particularly related. A quidam gallant, determined vpon a time to ſurpriſe both my houſe and my ſelfe. His plot was, to come riding alone to my gate, and inſtantly to vrge entrance. I knew him by name▪ and had ſome reaſon to truſt him, being my neighbour and ſomewhat alide vnto me. I preſently cauſed my gates to be opened, as I do to all men. He comes-in all afrighted, his horſe out of breath; both much haraſſed. He entertaines me with this fable; that within halfe a league of my houſe he was ſodainely ſet-vpon by an enemie of his, whome I knew well and had heard of their quarrell: that his foe had wondrouſly put him to his ſpurres; that being ſurpriſed vnarmed, and having fewer in his company then the other, he was glad to runne away, and for ſafety had made haſte to come to my houſe, as to his ſanctuary: That he was much perplexed for his men, all which he ſuppoſed to be either taken or ſlaine. I endevoured friendly to comfort and ſincerely to warrant and refreſh him. Within a while came gallopping foure or five of his Souldiers, amazed, as if they had beene out of their wits, haſting, to be let-in: Shortly after came others, and others▪ all proper men, well mounted, better armed, to the number of thirty or there abouts, all ſeeming diſtracted for feare, as if the enemie that purſued them had beene at their heeles. This myſterie beganne to ſummon my ſuſpicion. I was not ignorant of the age wherin I lived, nor how much my houſe might bee envied: and had ſundry examples of others of my acquaintance, that had beene ſpoiled, beſet and ſurpriſed thus and thus. So it is, that perceiving with my ſelfe, there was nothing to be gotten, though I had begunne to vſe them kindly, if I continued not, and being vnable to rid my ſelfe of them and cleare my houſe without danger and ſpoiling all; as I ever doe, I tooke the plaineſt and naturall well meaning way, and commaunded they ſhould be let in and bid welcome. And to ſay truth, I am by nature little ſuſpicious or miſtruſtfull, I am eaſily drawen to admit excuſes and encline to mild interpretations. I take men according to common order, and ſuppoſe every one to meane as I doe, and

believe theſe perverſe and tretcherous inclinations, except I be compelled by ſome autenticall teſtimonie, no more then monſters or miracles. Beſides, I am a man that willingly commit my ſelfe vnto fortune, and careleſly caſt my ſelfe into her armes: Whereof hitherto I have more juſt cauſe to commend myſelfe, then to complaine. And have found her more circumſpect and friendly▪ carefull of my affaires, then I am my ſelfe. There are certaine actions in my life, the conduct of which may juſtly be termed difficult, or if any be ſo diſpoſed, prudent. And of thoſe, ſuppoſe the third part of them to be mine owne; truely the other two are richly hirs. We are to blame, and in my conceit we erre, that we doe not ſufficiently and ſo much as we ought, truſt the heavens with ourſelves. And pretend more in our owne conduct, then of right appertaines vnto vs. Therefore doe our deſſeignes ſo often miſcarry, and our intents ſo ſeldome ſort to wiſhed effect. The heauens are angry, and I may ſay envious of the extenſion and large priviledge we aſcribe vnto the right of humane wiſedome, to the prejudice of theirs: and abridge them ſo much the more vnto vs, by how much more we endeuour to amplifie them. But to come to my former diſcourſe. Theſe gallants kept ſtill on horſebacke in my court, and would not alight: their Captaine with me in my hall, who would never have his horſe ſet-vp, ſtill ſaying that he would not ſtay, but muſt neceſſarily withdraw himſelfe, ſo ſoone as he had newes of his followers. He ſaw himſelfe maſter of his enterpriſe, and nothing was wanting but the execution. Hee hath ſince reported very often, (for he was no whit ſcrupulous or afraid to tell this ſtory) that my vndaunted lookes, my vndiſmaide countenance, and my liberty of ſpeech, made him reject all manner of treaſonable intents or trecherous deſſeignes. What ſhall I ſay more? He bids me farewell, calleth for his horſe, gets vp, and offreth to be gone, his people having continually their eies fixed vpon him, to obſerve his lookes and ſee what ſigne he ſhould make vnto them: much amazed to ſee him be gone, and wondring to ſee him omit and forſake ſuch an advantage. An other time, truſting to a certaine truce or ceſſation of armes, that lately had beene publiſhed through our campes in France, as one ſuſpecting no harme, I vndertooke a journey from home, through a dangerous and very tickliſh country; I had not rid far, but I was diſcovered, and behold three or foure troupes of horſemen, all ſeverall wayes, made after me, with purpoſe to entrap me: One of which overtooke mee the third day; where I was round beſet and charged by fifteene or twenty Gentlemen, who had all vizardes and caſes, followed aloofe-off by a band of Argoletiers. I was charged, I yeelded, I was taken and immediately drawne into the boſome of a thicke Wood, that was not far-off; there puld from my Horſe, ſtripped with all ſpeed, my truncks and cloke▪ bags rifled, my box taken; my Horſes, my equipage and ſuch things as I had, diſperſed and ſhared amongſt them. We continued a good while amongſt thoſe thorny buſhes, conteſting and ſtriving about my ranſome, which they racked ſo high, that it appeared well I was not much knowen of them. They had long conteſtation among themſelves for my life. and to ſay truth: there were many circumſtances, threatned me of the danger I was in.
                        
                           Tunc animis opus. Aenea, tunc pectore firme.Virg. A
                                    ••
                                 . l. 6.
                           
                           Of courage then indeed,
                           Then of ſtout breſt is need.
                        
                        I ever ſtood vpon the title and priviledge of the truce and proclamation made in the Kings name, but that availed not: I was content to quit them whatever they had taken from me, which was not to be deſpiſed, without promiſing other ranſome. After wee had debated the matter to and fro, the ſpace of two or three houres, and that no excuſes could ſerve, they ſet me vpon a lame jade, which they knew could never eſcape them, and committed the particular keeping of my perſon to fifteene or twenty harque-buſiers, and diſperſed my people to others of their crew, commaunding we ſhould all divers wayes bee carried priſoners; and my ſelfe being gone two or threeſcore paces from them,
                        
                           Iam pr
                                 •
                              ce Pollucis, iam Castor is implorata.
                                 
                                    〈…〉
                                 
                                 ▪ 4. 65.
                           
                           
                              Pollux and Castors aide,
                           When I had humbly praide.
                        
                        behold a ſodain & vnexpected alteration took them. I ſaw their Captaine comming towards me, with a cheerfull countenance & much milder ſpeeches then before: carefully trudging vp and downe through all the troups, to find out my goods againe, which as he found all ſcattred he forced every man to reſtore them vnto me; and even my boxe came to my handes againe.

To conclude, the moſt precious jewell they preſented me, was my liberty; as for my other things, I cared not greatly at that time. What the true cauſe of ſo vnlockt for a change and ſo ſodaine an alteration was, without any apparent impulſion, and of ſo wonderfull repentance, at ſuch a time, in ſuch an opportunity and ſuch an enterpriſe, fore-meditated, conſulted and effected without controlement, and which through cuſtome and the impiety of times was now become lawfull, (for at the firſt brunt I plainely confeſſed, and genuinly told them what ſide I was of, where my way lay, and whither I was riding) I verily know not yet, nor can I give any reaſon for it. The chiefeſt amongſt them vnmasked himſelfe, told mee his name and repeated diverſe times vnto me, that I ſhould acknowledge my deliverance to my countenance, to my boldneſſe and conſtancy of ſpeech, and be beholding to them for it, inſomuch as they made me vnworthy of ſuch a misfortune; and demanded aſſurance of me for the like curteſie. It may be, that the inſcrutable goodneſſe of God would vſe this vaine inſtrument for my preſervation: For, the next morrow it alſo ſhielded mee from worſe miſchiefe or amboſcadoes, whereof themſelves gently forewarned me, The laſt is yet living, able to report the whole ſucceſe himſelfe; the other was ſlaine not long ſince. If my countenance had not anſwered for me, if the ingenuity of mine inward intent might not plainely have beene diſciphered in mine eyes and voice, ſurely I could never have continued ſo long, without quarrells or offences: with this indiſcreete liberty, to ſpeake freely (be it right or wrong) what ever commeth to my minde, and raſhly to judge of things. This faſhion may in ſome ſort, (and that with reaſon) ſeeme vncivill and ill accomodated in our cuſtomary manners: but outragious or malicious, I could never meete with any, would ſo judge it, or that was ever diſtaſted at my liberty if he received the ſame from my mouth. Words reported againe have, as another ſound, ſo another ſenſe. And to ſay true, I hate no body; And am ſo remiſſe to offend, or ſlow to wrong any, that for the ſervice of reaſon itſelfe, I cannot doe it. And if occaſions have at any time vrged me in criminall condemnations to doe as others, I have rather beene content to be amearced then to appeare. 
                              Ʋt magis peccari nolim, quàm ſatis animi, ad vindicanda peccata habeam. So as I had rather men ſhould not offend, then that I ſhould have courage enough to puniſh their offences. Some report, that Aristotle beeing vpbraided by ſome of his friends, that hee had beene over mercifull toward a wicked man: I have indeede (quoth he) beene mercifull toward the man, but not toward his wickedneſſe. Ordinary judgements are exaſperated vnto puniſhment by the horror of the crime. And that enmildens me. The horror of the firſt murther, makes me feare a ſecond. And the vglineſſe of one cruelty, induceth me to deteſt all maner of imitation of it. To me, that am but a plaine fellow and ſee no higher then a ſteeple, may that concerne, which was reported of Charillus King of Sparta: He cannot be good, ſince he is not bad to the wicked. Or thus; for Plutarke preſents it two wayes, as he doth a thouſand other things diverſly and contrary; Hee muſt needes be good, ſince he is ſo to the wicked. Even as in lawfull actions, it grieves me to take any paines about them, when it is with ſuch as are therewith diſpleaſed. So, to ſay truth, in vnlawfull, I make no great conſcience, to employ my ſelfe or take paines about them, being with ſuch as conſent vnto them.
                     
                     
                        The thirteenth Chapter.
                        
                           Of Experience.
                        
                        THere is no deſire more naturall, then that of knowledge. We attempt all meanes that may bring vs vnto it. When reaſon failes vs, we employ experience.
                        
                           Per varios vſus artem experientia fecit,
                           Exemplo monſtr ante viam.Manil. lib. 1. a
                                    ••
                                 . 61.
                           
                           By diverſe proofes experience arte hath bred,
                           Whilſt one by one the way examples led.
                        
                        Which is a meane by much more, weake and vile. But trueth is of ſo great conſequence, that wee ought not diſdaine any induction, that may bring vs vnto it. Reaſon hath ſo many
                           
                           ſhapes, that wee knowe not which to take holde of. Experience hath as many. The conſequence wee ſeeke to draw from the conference of events, is vnſure, becauſe they are ever diſſemblable. No quality is ſo vniverſall in this ſurface of things, as variety and diverſity. The Greekes, the Latines, and wee vſe for the moſt expreſſe examples of ſimilitude, that of egs. Some have nevertheleſſe beene found, eſpecially one in Delphos, that knew markes of difference betweene egges, and neuer tooke one for another. And having diverſe Hennes, could rightly judge which had laid the egge. diſſimilitude doth of it ſelfe inſinuate into our workes, no arte can come neere vnto ſimilitude. Neither Perozet nor any other carde-maker can ſo induſtriouſly ſmoothe or whiten the backeſide of his cardes, but ſome cunning gamſter will diſtinguiſh them, onely by ſeeing ſome other player handle or ſhuffle them. Reſemblance doth not ſo much make one, as difference maketh another. Nature hath bound herſelfe to make nothing that may not be diſſemblable- Yet doth not the opinion of that man greatly pleaſe mee, that ſuppoſed by the multitude of lawes, to curbe the authority of judges, in entting out their morſells. He perceived not, that there is as much liberty and extenſion in the interpretation of lawes, as in their faſhion. And thoſe but mocke themſelves, who thinke to diminiſh our debates and ſtay them, by calling vs to the expreſſe word of ſacred Bible. Becauſe our ſpirit findes not the field leſſe ſpacious, to controule and checke the ſenſe of others, then to repreſent his own: and as if there were as litle courage and ſharpeneſſe to gloſeas to invent. Wee ſee how farre hee was deceived. For wee have in France more lawes then all the world beſides; yea more then were needefull to governe all the worlds imagined by Epicurus: Vt olim flagitijs, ſic nunc legibus labor amus. As in times paſt we were ſicke of offences, ſo now are we of lawes. As wee have given our judges ſo large a ſcope to moote, to opinionate, to ſuppoſe and decide, that there was never ſo powerfull and ſo licentious a liberty. What have our lawmakers gained with chuſing a hundred thouſand kindes of particular caſes, and adde as many lawes vnto them? That number hath no proportion, with the infinite diverſity of humane accidents. The multiplying of our inventions ſhall never come to the variation of examples. Adde a hundred times as many vnto them, yet ſhall it not followe, that of events to come, there be any one found, that in all this infinite number of ſelected and enregiſtred events, ſhall meete with one, to which hee may ſo exactly joyne and match it, but ſome circumſtance and diverſity will remaine, that may require a diverſe conſideration of judgement. There is but little relation betweene our actions, that are in perpetuall mutation, and the fixed and vnmooveable lawes. The moſt to be deſired, are the rareſt, the ſimpleſt and moſt generall. And yet I believe, it were better to have none at all, then ſo infinite a number as wee have. Nature gives them ever more happy, then thoſe wee give our ſelves. Witneſſe the image of the golden age that Poets faine; and the ſtate wherein wee ſee diverſe nations to live, which have no other. Some there are, who to decide any controverſie, that may riſe amongeſt them, will chuſe for judge the firſt man that by chance ſhall travell alongeſt their mountaines: Others, that vpon a market day will name ſome one amongſt themſelves, who in the place without more wrangling ſhall determine all their queſtions. What danger would enſue, if the wiſeſt ſhould ſo decide ours, according to occurrences and at firſt ſight; without being tied to examples and conſequences? Let every foote have his owne ſhooe. Ferdinando King of Spaine ſending certaine Collonies into the Indies, provided wiſely, that no lawyers or ſtudents of the lawes ſhould bee carried thither, for feare leſt controverſies, ſutes or proceſſes ſhould people that new-found world. As a Science that of her owne nature engendreth altercation and diviſion, judging with Plato that Lawyers and Phiſitions are an ill proviſion for any countrie. Wherefore is it, that our common language ſo eaſie to bee vnderſtood in all other matters, becommeth ſo obſcure ſo harſh and ſo hard to bee vnderſtood in law-caſes, bills, contracts, indentures citations, wills and teſtaments? And that hee who ſo plainely expreſſeth himſelfe, what ever hee ſpake or write of any other ſubject, inlaw matters findes no manner or way to declare himſelfe or his meaning, that admits not ſome doubt or contradiction: Vnleſſe it be, that the Princes of this arte applying themſelves with a particular attention, to invent and chuſe ſtrange, choiſe and ſolemne words, and frame artificiall cunning clauſes, have ſo plodded and poized every ſillable; canvaſed and ſifted ſo exquiſitely every ſeame and quidity, that they are now ſo entangled and ſo confounded in the infinity of figures and ſo ſeverall-ſmall partitions, that they can no more come within the compaſſe of any order, or preſcription or certaine vnderſtanding.

                           Confuſum eſt quidquid vſque in pulverem ſectum eſt. Whatſoever is ſlicedinto very powder is confuſed.
                        
                        Whoſoever hath ſeene children, labouring to reduce a maſſe of quicke-ſilver to a certaine number, the more they preſſe and worke the ſame, and ſtrive to force it to their will, ſo much more they provoke the liberty of that generous mettall, which ſcorneth their arte, and ſcatteringly diſperſeth it ſelfe beyond all imagination. Even ſo of lawyers, who in ſubdividing their ſuttleties or quiddities, teach men to multiply doubts: and by extending and diverſifying difficulties; they lengthen and amplifie, they ſcatter and diſperſe them. In ſowing and retailing of queſtions, they make the World to fructifie and abound in vncertainty, in quarrels, in ſutes and in controverſies. As the ground the more it is crumbled, broken and deepely remooved or grubbed vp, becommeth ſo much more fertile. Difficultatem facit doctrina. Learning breedes difficultie. Wee found many doubts in 
                              Ʋlpian, wee finde more in Bartolus and Baldus. The trace of this innumerable diverſity of opinious ſhould never have beene vſed to adorne poſteritie, and have it put in her head, but rather have beene vtterly razed out. I know not what to ſay to it; but this is ſeene by experience, that ſo many interpretations, diſſipate and confound all trueth. Ariſtotle hath written to bee vnderſtoode: Which if he could not, much leſſe ſhall another not ſo learned as he was; and a third, than he who treateth his owne imagination. We open the matter, and ſpill it in diſtempering it. Of one ſubject we make a thouſand: And in multiplying and ſubdividing we fall againe into the infinity of Epicurus his Atomes. It was never ſeene, that two men judged alike of one ſamething. And it is impoſſible to ſee two opinions exactly ſemblable: not onely in divers men, but in any one ſame man, at ſeverall houres. I commonly find ſomething to doubt-of, where the commentary happily never deigned to touch, as deeming it ſo plaine. I ſtumble ſomtimes as much in an even ſmooth path; as ſome horſes that I know, who oftner trip in a faire plaine way, than in a rough and ſtony. Who would not ſay, that gloſſes increaſe doubts and ignorance, ſince no booke is to bee ſeene, whether divine or profane, commonly read of all men, whoſe interpretation dimmes or tarniſheth not the difficulty? The hundred commentary ſends him to his ſucceeder, more thorny and more crabbed, than the firſt found him. When agreed wee amongeſt our ſelves, to ſay, this booke is perfect, there's now nothing to bee ſaid againſt it? This is beſt ſeene in our French-pedling Law. Authoritie of Law is given to infinite Doctours, to infinite arreſts, and to as many interpretations. Finde we for all that any ende of neede of interpretors? Is there any advauncement or progreſſe towards tranquility ſeene therein? Have wee now leſſe neede of Advocates and Iudges, then when this huge maſſe of Law was yet in hir firſt infancy? Cleane contrary, we obſcure and bury vnderſtanding. We diſcover it no more but at the mercy of ſo many Courts, Barres, or Plea-benches. Men miſ-acknowledge the naturall infirmity of their minde. She doth but queſt and firret, and vnceſſantly goeth turning, winding, building and entangling her ſelfe in hir owne worke; as doe our ſilke-wormes, and therein ſtiffleth hir ſelfe. Mus in pice. A Mouſe in pitch, Hee ſuppoſeth to note a farre-off I wot not what apparence of cleereneſſe and immaginary truth; but whileſt he runneth vnto it, ſo many lets and difficulties croſſe his way, ſo many empeachments and new queſtings ſtart vp, that they ſtray looſe and beſot him. Not much otherwiſe than it fortuned to Aeſops Dogges, who farre-off diſcovering ſome ſhew of a dead body to flote vpon the Sea, and being vnable to approach the ſame, vndertooke to drinke vp all the Water, that ſo they might drie-vp the paſſage; and were all ſtifeled. To which anſwereth that, which one Crates ſaid of Heraclitus his compoſitions, that they needed a Reader, who ſhould be a cunning ſwimmer, leſt the depth and weight of his learning ſhould drowne and ſwallow him vp. It is nothing but a particular weakeneſſe, that makes vs contend with that which others or wee our ſelves have found in this purſuite of knowledge. A more ſufficient man will not bee pleaſed therewith. There is place for a follower, yea and for ourſelves, and More wayes to the Wood than one. There is no ende in our inquiſitions. Our end is in the other World. It is a ſigne his wits grow ſhort, when hee is pleaſed; or a ſigne of wearineſſe. No generous ſpirit ſtayes and relies vpon himſelfe. Hee ever pretendeth and goeth beyond his ſtrength. He hath ſome vagaries beyond his effects. If he advaunce not himſelfe, preſſe, ſettle, ſhocke, turne, winde and front himſelfe, hee is but halfe alive; His purſuites are termeleſſe and formeleſſe. His nouriſhment is admiration, queſting and ambiguitie: Which Apollo declared ſufficiently, alwayes ſpeaking ambiguouſly,

obſcurely and obliquely vntovs; not feeding, but buſying and ammuſing vs. It is an irregular vncertaine motion, perpetuall, patterneleſſe and without end. His inventions enflame, follow and enter produce one another.
                        
                           Ainſi voit-on en vn ruiſſeau coulant,
                           San fin l'vne eau, apres l'outre roulant,
                           Et tout de rang, d'vn et ernel conduict,
                           L'vne ſuit l'autre, & l'vne l'autre fuit.
                           Par cette-cy, celle-là eſt pouſſée,
                           Et cette-cy, par l'autre eſt devancée:
                           Touſiours l'eau va dans l'eau, & touſiours est 
                                 •
                              e
                           Meſme ruiſſeau, & touſiours eau diverſe.
                           As in a running river we behold
                           How one wave after th'other ſtill is rold,
                           And all along as it doth endleſſe riſe,
                           Th'one th'other followes, th'one from th'other flyes.
                           By this Wave, that is driv'n, and this againe,
                           By th'other is ſet forward all amaine.
                           Water in Water ſtill, one river ſtill,
                           Yet diverſe Waters ſtill that river fill.
                        
                        There's more a doe to enterprete interpretations, than to interprete things: and more bookes vpon bookes, then vpon any other ſubject. We doe but enter-gloſe our ſelves. All ſwarmeth with commentaries: Of Authours their is great penury. Is not the chiefeſt and moſt famous knowledge of our ages, to know how to vnderſtand the wiſe? Is it not the common and laſt ſcope of our ſtudy? Our opinions are grafted one vpon an other. The firſt ſerveth as a ſtocke to the ſecond; the ſecond to the third. Thus we aſcend from ſteppe to ſteppe. Whence it followeth, that the higheſt-mounted hath often more honour, than merite. For, hee is got-vp but one inch above the ſhoulders of the laſt ſave one. How often and peradventure fooliſhly, hove I enlarged my Booke to ſpeake of himſelfe? Fooliſhly if it were but for this reaſon: That I ſhould have remembred, that what I ſpeake of others, they doe the like of me. That thoſe ſo frequent glances on their workes, witneſſe their hart ſhivereth with their love they beare them; and that the diſdainfull churliſhneſſe wherewith they beate them, are but mignardizes and affectations of a motherly favour. Following Ariſtotle, in whom, both eſteeming and diſ-eſteeming himſelfe, ariſe often of an equall aire of arrogancy. For mine excuſe; That in this I ought to have more liberty than others, forſomuch as of purpoſe, I write both of my ſelfe and of my writings, as of my other actions: that my theame doth turne into it ſelfe: I wot not whether every man will take it. I have ſeene in Germanie, that Luther hath left as many diviſions and altercations, concerning the doubt of his opinions, yea and more, than himſelfe mooveth about the Holy Scriptures. Our conteſtation is verball. I demaund what Nature voluptuouſneſſe, circle and ſubſtitution is? The queſtion is of words, and with words it is anſwered. A ſtone is a body: but he that ſhould inſiſt and vrge; And what is a body? A ſubſtance: And what a ſubſtance? And ſo goe-on: Should at laſt bring the reſpondent to his Calepine or wittes end. One worde is changed for another word, and often more vnknowen. I know better what Homo is, then I know what Animall is, either mortall or reaſonable. To anſwere one doubt, they give mee three: It is Hidraes head. Socrates demaunded of Memnon what vertue was; There is anſwered Memnon, the vertue of a Man, of a Woman, of a Magiſtrate, of a private Man, of a Childe, of an olde Man: What vertue meane you? Yea marry, this is very well, quoth Socrates; we were in ſearch of one vertue, and thou bringeſt me a whole ſwarme. Wee propoſe one queſtion, and wee have a whole huddle of them made vnto vs againe. As no event or forme doth wholly reſemble another, ſo doth it not altogether differ one from another. Oh ingenious mixture of Nature. If our faces were not like, wee could not diſcerne a man from a beaſt: If they were not vnlike, we could not diſtinguiſh one man from another man. Al things hold by ſome ſimilitude: Every example limpeth. And the relation, which is drawen from experience, is ever defective and imperfect. Compariſons are nevertheleſſe joyned together by ſome end. So ſerve the Lawes, and ſo are they ſorted and fitted to all our ſutes or affaires; by ſome wire-drawen, forced and collaterall interpretation. Since the morall Lawes

which reſpect the particular duty of every man in himſelfe, are ſo hard to be taught and obſerved, as we ſee they are: It is no wonder, if thoſe which governe ſo many particulars, are more hard. Conſider the forme of this Law, by which we are ruled: It is a lively teſtimony of humane imbecility; ſo much contradiction and ſo many errours are therin contained. That which we thinke favour or rigour in Law (wherein is ſo much of either, that I wot not wel whether we ſhal ſo often find indifferency in them, are crazed-infected parts and vnjuſt members of the very body and eſſence of Law. Certaine poore Country-men came even now to tell me in a great haſte, that but now in a forreſt of mine, they have left a man wounded to death, with a hundred hurts about him, yet breathing, and who for Gods ſake hath begged a little water and ſome helpe to raiſe himſelfe at their handes. But that they durſt not come neere him and ran all away, for feare ſome officers belonging to the Law ſhould meete and catch them; and as they doe with ſuch as they find neere vnto a murthered body, ſo they ſhould bee compelled to give an account of this miſchance, to their vtter vndooing; having neither friends nor mony to defend their innocency. What ſhould I have ſaid vnto them? It is moſt certaine, that this Office of humanity had brought them to much trouble. How many innocent and guilt-leſſe men have wee ſeene puniſhed? I ſay without the Iudges fault; and how many more that were never diſcovered? This hath hapned in my time. Certaine men are condemned to death for a murther committed; the ſentence, if not pronounced, at leaſt concluded and determined. This done, The Iudges are advertiſed by the Officers of a ſub-alternall Court, not far-off, that they have certaine priſoners in hold, that have directly confeſſed the foreſaid murther, and thereof bring moſt evident markes and tokens. The queſtion and conſultation is now in the former Court, whether for all this, they might interrupt, or ſhould deferre the execution of the ſentence pronounced againſt the firſt. They conſider the novelty of the example and conſequence thereof, and how to reconcile the judgement. They conclude, that the condemnation hath paſſed according vnto Law, and therefore the Iudges are not ſubject to repentance. To be ſhort, theſe miſerable Wretches are conſecrated to the preſcriptions of the Law. Philip, or ſome other, provided for ſuch an inconvenience, in this manner. He had by an irrevocable ſentence condemned one to pay another a round ſumme of money for a fine. A while after, the truth being diſcovered, it was found, he had wrongfully condemned him. On one ſide was the right of the cauſe, on the other the right of judiciary formes. He is in ſome ſort to ſatisfie both parties, ſuffering the ſentence to ſtand in full power: and with his owne purſe recompenced the intereſt of the condemned. But hee was to deale with a reparable accident, my poore ſlaves were hanged irreparably. How many condemnations have I ſeene more criminall, than the crime it ſelfe? All this put me in minde of thoſe auncient opinions; That Hee who will doe right in groſſe, muſt needes doe wrong by retaile; and iniuſtly in ſmall things, that will come to doe iuſtice in great matters; That humane iuſtice is framed according to the modell of phyſicke, according to which, whatſoever is profitable is alſo juſt and honeſt: And of that the Stoickes hold, that Nature her ſelfe in moſt of her workes, proceedeth againſt iuſtice: And of that which the Cyreniaques hold, that there is nothing juſt of it ſelfe: That cuſtomes and lawes frame juſtice. And the Theodorians, who in a wiſe man allow as juſt, all manner of theft, ſacriledge and paillardiſe, ſo he thinke it profitable for him. There is no remedy: I am in that caſe, as Alcibiades was, and if I can otherwiſe chuſe, will never put my ſelfe vnto a man that ſhall determine of my head; or conſent that my honour or life, ſhall depend on the induſtry or care of mine atturney, more then mine innocency. I could willingly adventure my ſelfe, and ſtand to that Law, that ſhould as well recompence me for a good deed, as puniſh me for a miſ-deede: and where I might have a juſt cauſe to hope, as reaſon to feare. Indemnitie is no ſufficient coyne for him, who doeth better than not to treſpaſſe. Our Law preſents vs but one of hir hands, and that is her left hand. Whoſoever goes to Law, doth in the end but looſe by it. In China, the policy, arts and government of which kingdome, having neither knowledge or commerce with ours; exceed our examples in divers partes of excellency; and whoſe Hiſtories teach me, how much more ample and diverſe the World is, than either we or our forefathers could ever enter into. The Officers appointed by the Prince to viſite the ſtate of his Provinces, as they puniſh ſuch as abuſe their charge, ſo with great liberality they reward ſuch as have vprightly and honeſtly behaved themſelves in them, or have done any thing more then ordinary, and beſides the neceſſity of their duty: There, all preſent

themſelves, not onely to warrant themſelves, but alſo to get ſomething: Not ſimply to be paid, but liberally to be rewarded. No judge hath yet, God be thanked, ſpoken to me as a judge, in any cauſe whatſoever either mine or another mans; criminall or civill. No priſon did ever receive me, no not ſo much as for recreation to walke in. The very imagination of one, maketh the ſight of their outſide ſeeme irkeſome and loathſome to mee. I am ſo beſotted vnto liberty, that ſhould any man forbidde me the acceſſe vnto any one corner of the Indiaes I ſhould in ſome ſort live much diſcontented. And ſo long as I ſhall finde land or open ayre elſewhere, I ſhall never lurke in any place, where I muſt hide my ſelfe. Oh God, how hardly could I endure the miſerable condition of ſo many men, confined and immured in ſome corners of this kingdome, barred from entring the chiefeſt Citties, from acceſſe into Courts, from conuerſing with men, and interdicted the vſe of common wayes, onely becauſe they have offended our lawes. If thoſe vnder which I live, ſhould but threaten my fingers end, I would preſently goe finde out ſome others, whereſoever it were. All my ſmall wiſedome, in theſe civill and tumultuous warres, wherein we now live, doth wholly employ it ſelfe, that they may not interrupt my liberty, to goe and come where ever I liſt. Lawes are now maintained in credit, not becauſe they are eſſentially juſt, but becauſe they are lawes. It is the myſticall foundation of their authority; they have none other; which availes them much: They are often made by fooles. More often by men, who in hatred of equality, have want of equity; But ever by men, who are vaine and irreſolute Authours. There is nothing ſo groſſely and largely offending, nor ſo ordinarily wronging as the Lawes. Whoſoever obeyeth them becauſe they are juſt, obeyes them not juſtly the way as he ought. Our French Lawes doe in ſome ſort, by their irregularity and deformity, lend an helping hand vnto the diſorder and corruption, that is ſeene in their diſpenſation and execution. Their beheſt is ſo confuſed, and their commaund ſo inconſtant, that it in ſome ſort excuſeth, both the diſobedience and the vice of the interpretation, of the adminiſtration and of the obſervation. Whatſoever then the fruit is wee may have of Experience, the ſame which we draw from forraine examples, will hardly ſtead our inſtitution much; if we reape ſo ſmall profit from that wee have of our ſelves, which is moſt familiar vnto vs: and truely ſufficient to inſtruct vs of what wee want. I ſtudy my ſelfe more than any other ſubject. It is my ſupernaturall Metaphiſike, it is my naturall Philoſophy.
                        
                           Qua Deus hanc mundi temperet arte domum,Propert
                                    ••
                                  3. 
                                    ••
                                 . 4. 26.
                           
                           Qua venit exoriens, qua deficit, vnde coact is
                           Cornibus in plenum menſtrua luna redit:
                           
                              Ʋnde ſalo ſuperant venti, quid flamine capt
                                 •
                              t
                           Eurus, & in nubes vnde perennis aequa.
                           Sit ventura dies mundi quae ſubruat arces,
                           This Worlds great houſe by what arte God doth guide.
                           From whence the monethly Moone doth riſing ride,
                           How wane, how with clos'd hornes returne to pride.
                           How windes on ſeas beare ſway, what th'Eaſterne winde
                           Would have▪ how ſtill in clowdes we water finde;
                           If this worlds Towers to raſe a day be ſignde.
                           Quaerite quos agitat mundi labor:
                           All this doe you enquire
                           Whom this worldes travailes tyre.
                        
                        In this vniverſality I ſuffer my ſelfe ignorantly and negligently to be managed by the generall law of the world. I ſhall ſufficiently know it when I ſhall feele it. My learning cannot make her change her courſe: ſhee will not diverſifie herſelfe for me; it were folly to hope it: And greater folly for a man to trouble himſelfe about it; ſince it is neceſſarily ſemblable publicke and common. The governours capacity and goodneſſe, ſhould throughly diſcharge vs of the governments care. Philoſophical inquiſitions and contemplations ſerve but as a nouriſhment vnto our curioſity. With great reaſon doe Philoſophers addreſſe vs vnto natures rules: But they have nought to doe with ſo ſublime a knowledge: They falſifie them, and preſent her to vs with a painted face, too-high in colour and overmuch ſophiſticated; whence ariſe ſo many different pourtraits of ſo vniforme a ſubject. As ſhee hath given vs feete to goe withall, ſo hath ſhe endowed vs with wiſedome to direct our life. A wiſedome

not ſo ingenious, ſturdie and pompous, as that of their invention, but yet eaſie, quiet and ſalutarie. And that in him who hath the hap to know how to employ it orderly and ſincerely, effecteth very well what the other ſaieth: that is to ſay naturally. For a man to commit himſelfe moſt ſimply vnto nature, is to doe it moſt wiſely. Oh how ſoft, how gentle, and how ſound a pillow is ignorance and incurioſitie to reſt a well compoſed head vpon. I had rather vnderſtand my ſelfe well in my ſelfe, then in Cicero. Out of the experience I have of my ſelfe, I finde ſufficient ground to make my ſelfe wiſe, were I but a good proficient ſcholler. Whoſoever ſhall commit to memorie the exceſſe or inconvenience of his rage or anger paſt, and how farre that fit tranſported him, may ſee the deformity of that paſſion, better then in Aristotle, and conceive a more juſt hatred againſt it. Whoſoever calleth to minde, the dangers he hath eſcaped, thoſe which have threatned him, and the light occaſions that have remooved him from one to another ſtate, doth thereby the better prepare himſelfe to future alterations, and knowledge of his condition. Caeſars life hath no more examples for vs, then our owne; Both imperiall and popular; it is ever a life that all humane accidents regard. Let vs but giue eare vnto it, we recorde all that to vs, that wee principally ſtand in neede of. He that ſhall call to minde how often and how ſeverall times hee hath beene deceived, and miſaccompted his owne judgement: is hee not a ſimple gull, if hee doe not for ever afterward diſtruſt the ſame? When by others reaſon, I finde my ſelfe convicted of a falſe opinion, I learne not ſo much, what new thing he hath told me; and this particular ignorance; which were but a ſmall purchaſe; as in generall I learne mine owne imbecilitie and weakeneſſe, and the treaſon of my vnderſtanding: whence I draw the reformation of all the maſſe. The like I doe in all my other errours: by which rule I apprehend and feele great profite for, and vnto my life. I regarde not the ſpecies or individuum, as a ſtone whereon I have ſtumbled. I learne every where to feare my going, and endevour to order the ſame. To learne that another hath either ſpoken a fooliſh jeſt, or committed a ſottiſh act, is a thing of nothing. A man muſt learne, that he is but a foole: A much more ample and important inſtruction. The falſe ſteps my memory hath ſo often put vpon mee, at what time ſhe ſtood moſt vpon her ſelfe, have not idly beene loſt: ſhe may ſweare and warrant mee long enough; I ſhake mine eares at her: the firſt oppoſition made in witneſſe of her, makes me ſuſpect. And I durſt not truſt her in a matter of conſequence; nor warrant her touching others affaires. And were it not, that what I doe for want of memorie, others more often doe the ſame for lacke of faith, I would ever in a matter of fact rather take the truth from anothers mouth, then from mine owne. Would every man prie into the effects and circumſtances of the paſſions that ſway him, as I have done of that whereunto I was allotted; hee ſhould ſee them comming; and would ſomewhat hinder their courſe and abate their impetuoſitie: They doe not alwayes ſurpriſe and take hold of vs at the firſt brunt, there are certaine forethreatnings and degrees as forerunners.
                        
                           Fluctus vti p
                                 •
                              imò coepit cùm albeſcereponto,
                           Paulatim ſeſe tollit mare, & altius vndas
                           Erigit, inde imo conſurgit ad aethera fundo.
                           As when at ſea, floods firſt in whiteneſſe riſe,
                           Sea ſurgeth ſoftly, and then higher plies
                           In waves, then from the ground mounts vp to skies.
                        
                        Iudgement holds in me a preſidentiall ſeate, at leaſt hee carefully endevours to hold it: He ſuffers my appetites to keep their courſe: both hatred and love, yea and that I beare vnto my ſelfe; without feeling alteration or corruption. If he can not reforme other parts according to himſelfe, at leaſt he will not be deformed by them: he keepes his court apart. That warning-leſſon given to all men, to knowe themſelves, muſt neceſſarily be of important effect, ſince that God of wiſedome, knowledge and light, cauſed the ſame to be fixed on the frontiſpice of his temple: as containing whatſoever he was to counſell vs. Plato ſaieth alſo, that wiſedome is nothing but the execution of that ordinance: And Socrates doth diſtinctly verifie the ſame in Zenophon. Difficulties and obſcuritie are not perceived in every ſcience, but by ſuch as have entrance into them: For, ſome degree of intelligence is required, to be able to marke that one is ignorant: and wee muſt knocke at a gate, to knowe whether it bee ſhutte. Whence enſueth this Platonicall ſubtiltie, that neither thoſe which knowe have no further to enquire, forſomuch as they knowe already: nor they that knowe not, becauſe to enquire, it is
                           
                           neceſſary they know what they enquire after. Euen ſo in this, for a man to know himſelfe: that every man is ſeene ſo reſolute and ſatisfied, and thinks himſelfe ſufficiently inſtructed or skilfull, doth plainely ſignifie that no man vnderſtands any thing, as Socrates teacheth Euthydemus. My ſelfe, who profeſſe nothing elſe, finde therein ſo bottomleſſe a depth, andinfinit a varietie, that my apprentiſage hath no other fruit, than to make me perceive how much more there remaineth for me to learne. To mine owne weakneſſe ſo often acknowledged, I owe this inclination which I beare vnto modeſtie; to the obedience of beliefes preſcribed vnto mee; to a conſtant coldeneſſe and moderation of opinions; and hatred of this importunate and quarellous arrogancie, wholy beleeving and truſting it ſelfe, a capitall ennemie to diſcipline and veritie. Doe but heare them ſway and talke. The firſt fopperies they propoſe, are in the ſtile, that Religions and Lawes are compoſed in. Nihil eſt turpius quàm cognitioni
                           Ci
                                 •
                               Acad. qu
                                 •
                              . 
                                 ••
                              b. 1. f. 
                           & praeceptioni, aſſertionem app
                                 •••
                              ationem
                                 •
                               praecurrere. Nothing is more abſurd, than that avowching and allowance ſhould runne before knowledge and precept. Ariſtarchus ſaide, that in ancient times, there were ſcarce ſeven wiſe men found in the world: and in his time, hardly ſeven ignorant. Have not we more reaſon to ſay it in our dayes, than he had? Affirmation & ſelfe-conceit, are manifeſt ſignes of fooliſhneſſe. Some one, who a hundred times a day hath had the canvaſe and beene made a ſtarke coxcombe, ſhall notwithſtanding be ſeene to ſtand vpon his Ergoes, and as preſumptuouſly-reſolute as before. You would ſay, he hath ſince ſome new minde and vigor of vnderſtanding infuſed into him. And that it betides him, as to that ancient childe of the Earth, who by his falling to the ground and touching his Mother, ſtill gathered new ſtrength and freſh courage.
                        
                           —cui cùm tetigere parentem,A
                                    •
                                 t
                                    •••
                                 .
                           
                           I am defect a vigent renovato robore membra.
                           Whoſe failing limmes with ſtrength renew'd regrow,
                           When they once touch his mother Earth below.
                        
                        Doth not this indocile, blocke-headed aſſe, thinke to reaſſume a new ſpirite, by vndertaking a new diſputation? It is by my experience I accuſe humane ignorance, which (in mine opinion) is the ſureſt part of the Worldes ſchoole. Thoſe that will not conclude it in themſelves, by ſo vaine an example as mine, or theirs, let them acknowledge it by Socrates, the Maiſter of Maiſters. For the Philoſopher Antiſthenes, was wont to ſay to his Diſciples: Come on my Maiſters, let you and me goe to heare Socrates. There ſhall I bee a fellow Diſciple with you. And vpholding this Doctrine, of the Stoickes Sect, that only vertue ſufficed to make a life abſolutely-happy; and having no neede of any thing, but of Socrates his force and reſolution, he added moreover: This long attention, I employ in conſidering my ſelfe enableth me alſo to judge indifferently of others: And there are few things whereof I ſpeake more happily and excuſably. It often fortuneth me to ſee and diſtinguiſh more exactly the conditions of my friends, than themſelves do. I have aſtonied ſome by the pertinencie of mine owne diſcription, and have warned him of himſelfe. Becauſe I have from mine infancy enured my ſelfe to view mine owne life in others lives; I have thereby acquired a ſtudious complexion therein. And when I thinke on it, I ſuffer few things to eſcape about me, that may in any ſort fit the ſame; whether countenances, humour or diſcourſes. I ſtudiouſlie conſider all I am to eſchew and all I ought to follow. So by my friends productions I diſcover their inward inclinations. Not to marſhall or range this infinite varietie of ſo diverſe and ſo diſtracted actions to certaine Genders or Chapters, and diſtinctly to diſtribute my parcels and diviſions into formes and knowne regions.
                        
                           Sed neque quàm mult
                                 •
                               ſpecies, & nomina qu
                                 •
                               ſint.Virg. Georg lib. 1. 103.
                           
                           Eſt numerus.
                           But nor how many kindes, nor what their names:
                           There is a number of them (and their frames.)
                        
                        The wiſer ſort ſpeake and declare their fanſies more ſpecially and diſtinctly: But I, who have no further inſight then I get from common vſe, without rule or method, generally preſent mine owne, but gropingly. As in this: I pronounce my ſentence by articles, looſe and diſioynted: it is a thing cannot be ſpoken at once and at full. Relation and conformity are not eaſily found in ſuch baſe and common mindes as ours. Wiſedome is a ſolide and compleate frame; every ſeverall piece whereof keepeth his due place and beareth his marke. Sola ſapientia in ſe tota converſa eſt. Onely wiſedome is wholy turned into it ſelfe. I leave it to Artiſts,

and I wot not whether in a matter ſo confuſed, ſo ſeverall and ſo caſuall, they ſhall come to an end, to range into ſides, this infinite diverſity of viſages; and ſettle our inconſtancy and place it in order. I doe not onely finde it difficult to combine our actions one vnto another; but take every one aparte, it is hard, by any principall quality to deſſeigne the ſame properly: ſo double, ſo ambiguous and party-coloured are they to diverſe luſters. Which in Perſ
                                 •
                              us the Macedonian King was noted for a rare matter, that his ſpirit faſtning it ſelfe to no kinde of condition; wont wandring through every kinde of life: and repreſenting ſo new-fangled and gadding maners, that hee was neither knowen of himſelfe nor of others, what kinde of man hee was: mee thinkes may well-nigh agree and ſute with all the world. And above all, I have ſeene ſome other of his coate or humour, to whom (as I ſuppoſe) this concluſion might alſo more properly be applide. No ſtate of mediocrity being ever tranſported from one extreame to another, by indivinable occaſions: no maner of courſe without croſſes, and ſtrange contrarieties: no faculty ſimple: ſo that the likelieſt a man may one day conclude of him, ſhall be, that he affected and laboured to make himſelfe knowen by being not to be knowen. A man had neede of long-tough eares, to heare himſelfe freely iudged. And becauſe there be few that can endure to heare it without tingling: thoſe which adventure to vndertake it with vs, ſhew vs a ſingular effect of true friendſhip. For, that is a truely-perfect love, which, to profit and doe good, feareth not to hurt or offend. I deeme it abſurd, to cenſure him, in whom bad qualities exceede good conditions. Plato requireth three parts in him that will examine anothers minde: Learning, goodwill, and boldneſſe. I was once demanded, what I would have thought my ſelfe fit-for, had any beene diſpoſed to make vſe of me, when my yeares would have fitted ſervice:
                        
                           Dum melior vires ſanguis dabat, aemula necdumVirg. A
                                    ••
                                 . lib. 5 415.
                           
                           Temporibus geminis canebat ſparſa ſenectus.
                           While better blood gave ſtrength, nor envious old yeares
                           Ore-laid with wrinckled temples grew to hoary haires.
                        
                        I anſwered, for nothing. And I willingly excuſe my ſelfe that I can doe nothing which may enthrall mee to others. But had my fortune made me a ſervant, I would have told my maiſter all truths; and, had he ſo wild it, controled his maners: Not in groſſe, by ſcholaſtical leſſons, which I cannot doe: beſides, I ſee no true reformation to enſue in ſuch as know them: but faire and ſoftly and with every opportunity obſerving them; and ſimply and naturally judging them diſtinctly by the eye. Making him directly to perceive, how and in what degree hee is in the common opinion; oppoſing my ſelfe againſt his flatterers and ſycophants. There is none of vs, but would be worſe then Kings, if as they are, hee were continually corrupted with that raſcally kinde of people. But what? if Alexander that mighty King and great Philoſopher, could not beware of them? I ſhould have had ſufficient fidelity, judgement and liberty for that. It would be a nameleſſe office, otherwiſe it ſhould loſe both effect and grace; And is a part, which cannot indifferently belong to all. For, truth it ſelfe, hath not the priviledge to bee employed at all times, and in every kinde▪
                            Bee her vſe never ſo noble, it hath his circumſcriptions and limites. It often commeth to paſſe, the world ſtanding as it doth, that truth is whiſpered into Princes eares, not onely without fruit, but hurtfully and therewithall vnjuſtly. And no man ſhall make me beleeve, but that an hallowed admonition may be viciouſly applied, and abuſively employed: and that the intereſt of the ſubſtance ſhould not ſometimes yeeld to the intereſt of the forme. For ſuch a purpoſe and myſtery I would have an vnrepining man and one contented with his owne fortune▪
                        
                        
                           Quod ſit, eſſe velit, nihilque malit:Mart. lib. 10. epigr. 47. 12
                           
                           Willing to be as him you ſee,
                           Or rather nothing elſe to bee:
                        
                        and borne of meane degree: Forſomuch as on the one ſide, hee ſhould not have cauſe to feare, lively and neerely to touch his maiſters heart, therby not to loſe the courſe of his preferment: And on the other ſide, being of a low condition, hee ſhould have more eaſie communication with all ſorts of people. Which I would have in one man alone; for, to empart the priviledge of ſuch liberty and familiarity vnto many, would beget an hurtful irreverence. Yea, and of that man, I would above all things require truſty and aſſured ſilence. A King is not to bee credited, when for his glory, hee boasteth of his constancy, in attending his enemies encounter: if for his good amendment and profit, hee cannot endure the liberty of his friends words,
                           
                           which have no other working power, then to pinch his learning: the reſt of their effect remaining in his owne hands. Now, there is not any condition of men, that hath more neede of true, ſincerly-free and open-hearted advertiſements, then Princes. They vndergoe a publike life, and muſt applaude the opinion of ſo many ſpectators, that if they be once enured, to have that concealed from them, which diverteth them from their courſe, they at vnawares and inſenſibly finde themſelves deepely engaged in the hatred and deteſtation of their ſubjects; many times for occaſions, which had they beene forewarned, and in time gently reformed, they might no doubt have eſchewed, to no intereſt or prejudice of their private delights. Favorites doe commonly reſpect themſelves more then their maſters. And ſurely it toucheth their free-hold, forſomuch as i
                              •
                           good truth, the greateſt part of true friendſhip
                              •
                           -offices, are towards their ſoveragne in a crabbed and dangerous Eſſay. So that, there is not onely required much affection and liberty, but alſo an vndanted courage. To conclude, all this gal
                              •
                           emafrie which I huddle-vp here, is but a regiſter of my lives-Eſſayes: which in regard of the internall health are ſufficiently exemplare to take the inſtruction againſt the haire. But concerning bodily health, no man is able to bring more profitable experience, then my ſelfe; who preſent the ſame pure, ſincere and in no ſorte corrupted or altred, either by arte or ſelfewill'd opinion. Experience in her owne precinct, may juſtly be compared to Phiſicke, vnto which, reaſon giveth place. Tiberius was wont to ſay, that whatſoever had lived twenty yeares, ſhould be able to anſwere himſelfe of all ſuch things as were either wholeſome or hurtfull for him; and know howe to live and order his body without Phiſicke. Which hee peradventure had learned of Socrates; who induſtriouſly adviſing his diſciples (as a ſtudy of chiefe conſequence) to ſtudy their health, told them moreover, that it was very hard, if a man of vnderſtanding, heedefully obſerving his exerciſes, his eating and drinking, ſhould not better then any Phiſition diſcerne and diſtinguiſh ſuch things as were either good or bad or indifferent for him. Yet doth Phyſicke make open profeſſion alwayes to have experience for the touch-ſtone of her operation. And Plato had reaſon to ſay, that to be a good Phyſition, it were requiſite, that he who ſhould vndertake that profeſſion, had past through all ſuch diſeaſes as hee will adventure to cure, and knowen or felt all the accidents and cricumstances hee is to iudge of. It is reaſon, themſelves ſhould firſt have the pox, if they will know how to cure them in others. I ſhould ſurely truſt ſuch a one better then any elſe. Others but guide vs, as one who ſitting in his chaire paints ſeas, rockes, ſhelves and havens vpon a boarde, and makes the modell of a tale ſhip, to ſaile in all ſafety: But put him to it in earneſt, he knowes not what to doe, nor where to beginne. They make even ſuch a deſcription of our infimities as doth a towne-crier, who crieth a loſt horſe, or dog, and deſcribeth his haire, his ſtature, his eares, with other markes and tokens, but bring either vnto him, he knowes him not. Oh God, that phyſicke would one day affoord meſome good and preceptible helpe, how earneſtly would I exclaime.
                        
                           Tandem efficaci do manus ſcient
                                 ••
                              ,
                           I yeeld, I yeeld at length,
                           To knowledge of chiefe ſtrength.
                        
                        The Artes that promiſe to keepe our body and minde in good health, promiſe much vnto vs; but therewith there is none performeth leſſe what they promiſe. And in our dayes, ſuch as make profeſſion of theſe Artes amongſt vs, doe leſſe then all others ſhew their effects. The moſt may be ſaid of them, is, that they ſell medicinable drugs; but that they are Phyſitians, no man can truly ſay it., I have lived long enough, to yeeld an accoont of the vſage that hath brough mee to this day. If any bee diſpoſed to taſte of it, as his taſter I have given him an aſſay. Loe here ſome articles, digeſted as memory ſhall ſtore me with them. I have no faſhion but hath varied according to accidents: I onely regiſter thoſe I have moſt beene acquainted with; and hetherto poſſeſſe me moſt. My forme of life is ever alike, both in ſickeneſſe and in health: one ſame bed, the ſame houres, the ſame meate, the ſame drinke doth ſerve me. I adde nothing to them but the moderation of more or leſſe, according to my ſtrength or appetite. My health is to keepe my accuſtomed ſtate free from care and trouble. I ſee that ſickeneſſe doth on the one ſide in ſome ſort divert me from it, and if I beleeve Phyſitians, they on the other ſide will turne mee from it: So that both by fortune and by arte I am cleane out of my right bias. I beleeve nothing more certainely then this; that I cannot be offended by the vſe of things, which I have ſo long accuſtomed. It is in the hands of cuctome to give our life what forme it pleaſeth: in that it can do all in all. It is the

drinke of Circes, diverſifieth our nature as ſhe thinkes good. How many nations neere bordering vpon vs imagine the feare of the ſereine or night-calme to be but a jeſt, which ſ
                              •
                           o apparantly doth blaſt and hurt vs? and whereof our Mariners our watermen, and our countriemen make but a laughing-ſtocke? You make a Germane ſicke, if you lay him vpon a matteras, as you diſtemper an Italian vpon a fetherbed, and a Frenchman to lay him in a bed without curtaines, or lodge him in a chamber without a fire. A Spaniard can not well brooke to feede after our faſhion, no
                              •
                            wee endure to drinke as the Swizzers. A Germane pleaſed me well at Augusta to raile againſt the commodity of our chimnies, vſing the ſame reaſons or arguments, that wee ordinarily imploy in condemning their ſtoves. For, to ſay truth, the ſame cloſe-ſmothered heate, and the ſmell of that oft-heated matter, whereof they are compoſed, fumeth in the heads of ſuch as are not accuſtomed vnto them; no
                              •
                            ſo with me. But on the other ſide, that heate being equaly diſperſed, conſtant and vniverſall, without flame or blazing, without ſmoake, and without that winde which the tonnells of our chimnies bring vs, may many wayes be compared vnto ours. Why doe we not imitate the Romanes architecture?
                        It is reported that in auncient times they made no fire in their houſes, but without and at the foote of them: Whence by tonnells, which were convaide through their thickeſt walls, and contrived neere and about all ſuch places as they would have warmed; ſo that the heare was convaied into every part of the houſe. Which I have ſeene manifeſtly deſcribed in ſome place of Seneca, though I can not well remember where. This Germane, hearing mee commend the beauties and commodities of his Citty (which truely deſerveth great commendation) beganne to pitty mee, becauſe I was ſhortly to goe from it. And the firſt inconvenience hee vrged mee withall, was the heavineſſe in the head, which Chimnies in other places would cauſe mee. Hee had heard ſome other body complaine of it, and therefore all eadged the ſame againſt mee, beeing wont by cuſtome to perceive it in ſuch as came to him. All heate comming from fire doth weaken and dull mee: Yet ſaide Evenus, that fire was the beſt ſauce of life. I rather allow and embrace any other manner or way to eſcape cold. Wee feare our Wines when they are lowe; whereas in Portugall, the fume of it is counted delicious, and is the drinke of Princes. To conclude, each ſeverall Nation hath divers cuſtomes, faſhions and vſages; which, to ſome others, are not onely vnknowne and ſtrange, but ſavage, barbarous and wondrous. What ſhall wee doe vnto that people, that admit no witneſſe, except printed; that will not believe men, if not printed in Bookes, nor credite truth, vnleſſe it bee of competent age? Wee dignifie our 
                              •
                           opperies, when wee put them to the preſſe. It is another manner of weight for him, to ſay, I have ſeene it, then if you ſay, I have heard it reported. But I, who miſ-believe no more the mouth, than the hand of men; and know that men write as indiſcreetly, as they ſpeake vnadviſedly; and eſteeme of this preſent age, as of another paſt; alleadge as willingly a friend of mine as Aulus Gellius or Macrobius, and what my ſelfe have ſeene, as that they have written. And as they accoumpt vertue to bee nothing greater by being longer, ſo deeme I truth to be nothing wiſer 
                              •
                           y being more aged. I often ſay it is meere folly that makes vs runne after ſtrange and ſcholaſticall examples. The fertilitie of them is now equall vnto that of Homer and Platoes times. But is it not, that we rather ſeek the honour of allegations, than the truth of diſcourſes? As if it were more to borrow our proofes from out the ſhope of 
                              Ʋaſcoſan or Plantin, than from that we dayly ſee in our village. Or verely that wee have not the witte to blanch, ſift out or make that to prevaile, which paſſeth before vs, and forcibly judge of it, to drawe the ſame into example. For, if wee ſay, that authority failes vs, to adde credite vnto our teſtimony, wee ſpeake from the purpoſe. Forſomuch as in my conceit, could we but find out their true light Natures greateſt myracles and the moſt wonderfull examples, namely vpon the ſubject of humane actions, may bee drawen and formed from moſt ordinary, moſt common and moſt knowen things. Now concerning my ſubject, omitting the examples I know by bookes; And that which Ariſtotle ſpeaketh of Andron of Argos, that hee would travell all over the ſcorching ſands of Lybia, without drinking: A Gentleman, who hath worthily acquitted himſelfe of many honourable charges, reported where I was, that in the parching heate of Summer, hes had travelled from Madrill to Lisb
                                 •
                              ne, without ever drinking. His age reſpected, he is in very good and healthy plight, and hath nothing extraordinary in the courſe or cuſtome of his life, ſaving (as himſelfe hath told me,) that hee can very

well continue two or three moneths, yea a whole yeere, without any manner of beverage. He ſometimes finds himſelfe thirſty, but let's it paſſe; and holds, that it is an appetite, which will eaſily and of it ſelfe languiſh away: and if he drinke at any time, it is more for a caprice or humor, than for any need or pleaſure. Loe here one of another key. It is not long ſince, that I found one of the wiſeſt men of France, (among thoſe of ſo meane fortune) ſtudying hard in the corner of a great Hall, which for that purpoſe was hung about with tapiſtrie, and round about him a diſordered rable of his ſervaunts, groomes and lackeys; pratling, playing and hoyting: who tolde me (as Seneca in a manner ſaith of himſelfe) that he learn'd and profited much by that hurly-burly or tintimare: as if beaten with that confuſed noyſe, he did ſo much the better recall and cloſe himſelfe into himſelfe, for ſerious contemplation; and that the ſaid tempeſtuous rumours did ſtrike and repercuſſe his thoughts inward. Whilſt he was a ſcholler in Padua, his ſtudy was ever placed ſo neere the jangling of bells, the ratling of coaches and rumbling tumults of the market place, that for the ſervice of his ſtudy, he was fame, not onely to frame and enure himſelf to contemne, but to make good vſe of that turbulentnoiſe. Socrates anſwered Alcibiades, who wondered how hee could endure the continuall tittletattle and vnceſſant ſcoulding of his Wife: even as thoſe who are accuſtomed to heare the ordinary creaking of the ſqueaking wheeles of welles. My ſelfe am cleane contrary, for I have a tender braine, and eaſie to take ſnuffe in the noſe, or to be tranſported. If my minde be buſie alone, the leaſt ſtirring, yea the buzzing of a 
                              ••
                           ie doth trouble and diſtemper the ſame. Seneca in his youth, having erneſtly vndertaken to follow the example of Sext
                                 •
                              us, to feede on nothing that were taken dead: could with pleaſure (as himſelfe averreth) live ſo a whole yeere. And left it, onely becauſe he would not bee ſuſpected to borrow this rule from ſome new religions, that inſtituted the ſame. He therewithall followed ſome precepts of Attalus, not to lie vpon any kinde of carpets or bedding that would yeeld vnder one; and vntill he grew very aged, hee never vſed but ſuch as were very hard and vn-yeelding to the body. What the cuſtome of his dayes makes him accoumpt rudeneſſe, ours makes vs eſteeme wantonneſſe. Behold the difference betweene my varlets life and mine: The Indians have nothing further from my forme and ſtrength. Well I wot, that I have heretofore taken boyes from begging and that went roaguing vp and downe, to ſerue mee; hoping to doe ſome good vpon them, who have within a little while after left mee, my fare and my livery; onely that they might without controule or checke follow their former idle loytring life. One of which I found not long ſince gathering of muskles in a common ſincke, for his dinner; whom (doe what I could) I was never able, neither with entreaty to reclaime, no
                              •
                            by threatning to withdrawe, from the ſweetneſſe hee found in want, and delight he felt in roaguing lazineſſe. Even vagabonding roagues, as well as rich men, have their magnificences and voluptuouſneſſe, and (as ſome ſay) their dignities, preheminences and politike orders. They are effects of cuſtome and vſe: and what is bred in the bone, will never out of the fleſh. Both which have power to enure and faſhion vs, not onely to what forme they pleaſe (therefore, ſay the wiſe, ought we to be addreſſed to the beſt, and it will immediately ſeeme eaſie vnto vs) but alſo to change and variation: Which is the nobleſt and moſt profitable of their apprentiſages. The beſt of my corporall complexions, is, that I am flexible and little opiniative. I have certaine inclinations, more proper and ordinary, and more pleaſing than others. But with ſmall adoe and without compulſion, I can eaſily leave them and embrace the contrary. A yong man ſhould trouble his rules, to ſtirre-vp his vigor; and take heede he ſuffer not the ſame to grow faint, ſluggiſh or teaſty: For, there is no courſe of life ſo weake and ſottiſh, as that which is mannaged by Order, Methode and Diſcipline.
                        
                           Ad primum lapidem vectari cum placet, horaIuven. Sat. 6. 477.
                           
                           Sumi
                                 •
                              ur ex libro, ſi prurit frictus ocell
                                 •
                              
                           
                           Anguibus, inſpecta geneſi collyria qu
                                 •
                              rit.
                           Liſt he to ride in coach but to Mile-end,
                           
                           By th'Almanacke he doth the houre attend:
                           If his eye-corner itch, the remedy,
                           He 
                                 •
                              et's from calculation of nativity.
                        
                        If he beleeve mee, he ſhall often give himſelfe vnto all manner of exceſſe: otherwiſe the leaſt diſorder will vtterly overthrow him; and ſo make him vnfit and vn velcome in all converſations.

                           The moſt contrary quality in an honeſt man, is nice-delicateueſſe, and to bee tied to one certaine particular faſhion. It is parcular, if it be not ſupple and pliable. It is a kinde of reproch, through impuiſſance not to doe or not to dare, what one ſeeth his other companions doe or dare. Let ſuch men keepe their kitchin. It is vndecent in all other men, but vitious and intollerable in one profeſſing Armes: who (as Philopoemen ſaid) ſhould faſhion himſelfe to all manner of inequality and diverſity of life. Although I have (as much as might bee) beene enured to liberty and faſhioned to indifferency, yet in growing aged, I have through careleſneſſe relied more vpon certaine forms (my age is now exempted from inſtitution, and hath not anie thing elſe to looke vnto, but to maintaine it ſelfe) which cuſtome hath already, without thinking on it, in certaine things ſo well imprinted her character in me, that I deeme it a kinde of exceſſe to leaue them. And without long practiſe, I can neither ſleepe by day; nor eate betweene meales; nor breake my faſt; nor goe to bed without ſome entermiſſion; as of three houres after ſupper) nor get children, but before I fall aſleepe, and that never ſtanding; nor beare mine owne ſweate; nor quench my thirſt, either with cleere water or wine alone; nor continue long bare-headed; nor have mine haire cut after dinner. And I could as hardly ſpare my gloves as my ſhirt: or forbeare waſhing of my handes, both in the morning and riſing from the table; or lie in a bed without a teſterne and curtaines about it, as of moſt neceſſary things: I could dine without a table-cloth, but hardly without a cleane napkin, as Germans commonly doe. I foule and fully them more than either they or the Italians: and I ſeldome vſe either ſpoone or forke. I am ſory wee follow not a cuſtome, which according to the example of Kings I have ſeene begunne by ſome; that vpon every courſe or change of diſh, as we have ſhift of cleane trenchers, ſo we might have change of cleane napkins. We reade that that laborious ſouldier Marius, growing olde, grew more nicely delicate in his drinking, and would taſte no drincke, except in a peculiar cuppe of his. As for me, I obſerve a kinde of like methode in glaſſes, and of one certaine forme, and drinke not willingly in a commonglaſſe: no more than of one ordinary hand: I miſlike all manner of mettall in regard of a bright tranſparent matter: let mine eyes alſo have teſte of what I drinke according to their capacity. I am beholding to cuſtome for many 
                              〈◊〉
                            niceneſſes and ſingularities. Nature hath alſo on the other ſide beſtowed this vpon mee, that I can not wel brooke two ful meales in one day, without ſurcharging my ſtomacke; nor the meere abſtinence of one, without filling my ſelfe with winde, drying my mouth and dulling my appetite: And I doe finde great offence by a long ſereine or night-calme. For ſome yeeres ſince, in the out-roades or nightſervices that happen in times of warres, which many times continue all night, five or ſixe houres after my ſtomacke beginnes to qualme, my head feeleth a violent aking, ſo that I can hardly hold-out till morning without vomiting. When others goe to breakefaſt▪ I goe to ſleepe: and within a while after I ſhall be as freſh and jolly as before. I ever thought that the ſerein never fell, but in the ſhutting in of night, but having in theſe latter yeeres long time frequented very familiarly the converſation of a Gentleman, poſſeſſed with this opinion, that it is more ſharpe and dangerous about the declination of the Sunne, an houre or two before it ſet, which he carefully eſcheweth, and deſpiſeth that which falles at night: he hath gone about to perſwade and imprint into mee, not onely his diſcourſe but alſo his conceit. What if the very doubt and inquiſition, woundeth our imagination and changeth vs? Such as altogether yeelde to theſe bendings, draw the whole ruine vpon themſelves. And I bewaile diverſe Gentlemen, who being yoong and in perfect health, have by the ignorant fooliſhnes of their Phyſitians brought themſelves into conſumptions and other lingering diſeaſes; and as it were in Phyſickes fetters. Were it not much better to be troubled with a a rheume, than for ever through diſcuſtome, in an action of ſo great vſe and conſequence, looſe the commerce and converſation of common life? Oh yrkeſome learning! Oh Science full of moleſtation; that waſteth vs the ſweeteſt houres of the day. Let vs extend our poſſeſſion vnto the vtmoſt meanes. A man ſhall at laſt, in opinionating himſelfe, harden and enure himſelfe for it, and ſo correct his complexion: as did Caeſars the falling ſickneſſe, with contemning and corrupting the ſame. A man ſhould apply himſelfe to the beſt rules, but not ſubject himſelfe vnto them: except to ſuch (if any there bee) that duty and thraldome vnto them, be profitable. Both Kings and Philoſophers obey nature, and goe to the ſtoole, and ſo doe Ladies: Publike lives are due vnto ceremony: mine which is obſcure and private, enjoyeth all naturall diſpenſations. To be a Souldier and a Gaſcoyne, are qualities ſomwhat

ſubject to indiſcretion. And I am both. Therefore will I ſay thus much of this action; that it is requiſite we ſhould remit the ſame vnto certaine preſcribed night-houres; and by cuſtome (as I have done) force and ſubject our ſelves vnto it: But not (as I have done) growing in yeeres, ſtrictly tie him ſelfe to the care of a particular convenient place, and of a commodious Aiax or eaſie cloſe-ſtoole for that purpoſe: and make it troubleſome with long ſitting and nice obſervation. Nevertheleſſe in homelieſt matters and fowleſt offices, is it not in ſome ſorte excuſable, to require more care and cleanelineſſe? Natur
                                 •
                               homo mundum & elegans
                           Sen epiſt. 92. 
                           animal eſt. By nature man is a cleanely and neate creature.
                        
                        Of all naturall actions, there is none wherein I am more loath to be troubled or interrupted, when I am at it. I have ſeene divers great men and ſouldiers, much troubled and vexed with their bellies vntune and diſorder, when at vntimely houres it calleth vpon them: whilſt mine and my ſelfe never miſſe to call one vpon another at our appointment: which is, as ſoone as I get out of my bed, except ſome vrgent buſines or violent ſickeneſſe trouble mee. Therefore (as I ſaide) I judge no place where ſicke men may better ſeate themſelves in ſecurity, then quietly and wiſht to holde themſelves in that courſe of life, wherein the have beene brought vp and habituated. Any change or variation ſoever, aſtonieth and diſtempereth. Will any beleeue, that Cheſtnuttes can hurt a Perigordin or a Luquo
                                 •
                              s, or that milk▪ or whitmeates are hurtful vnto a mountaine dwelling people? whom if one ſeeke to divert from their naturall diet, he ſhall not onely preſcribe them a new, but a contrary forme of life: A change which a healthy man can hardly endure. Appoynt a Bretton of three ſcore yeeres of age to drinke water; put a Sea-man or Mariner into a Stove; forbid a lackey of Baske to walke: you bring them out of their element, you depriue them of all motion, and in the end, of aire, of light and life.
                        
                           —an vivere tanti eſt?
                              Cor. Gal. el. 1. 155.
                           
                           Doe we reckon it ſo deare,
                           Onely living to be here?
                           Cogimur à ſuet is animum ſuſpendere rebus.
                           Atque vt vivamus, vivere deſinimus:
                           From things erſt vs'd we muſt ſuſpend our minde,
                           We leave to live that we may live by kinde.
                           Hos ſupereſſe reor quibus & ſpirabilis a
                                 •
                              r,
                           Et lux quaregimur, redditur ipſa gravis.
                           Doe I thinke they liue longer, whom doth grieve
                           Both aire they breathe, and light whereby they live.
                        
                        If they doe no other good, at leaſt they doe this, that betimes they prepare their patients vnto death, by little vndermining and cutting-off the vſe of life. Both in health and in ſickeneſſe, I haue willingly ſeconded and giuen my ſelfe over to thoſe appetites that preſſed mee. I allow great authority to my deſires and propenſions. I loue not to cure one evill by another miſchiefe. I hate thoſe remedies, that importune more then ſickeneſſe. To be ſubject to the cholike, and to be tied to abſtaine from the pleaſure I have in eating of oyſters, are two miſchiefes for one. The diſeaſe pincheth vs on the one ſide, the rule on the other. Since we are ever in danger to miſdoe, let vs rather hazard our ſelves to follow pleaſure. Moſt men doe contrary and thinke nothing profitable, that is not painefull: Facility is by them ſuſpected. Mine appetite hath in diuerſe things very happily accommodated and ranged it ſelfe to the health of my ſtomake. Being yong, acrimony and tartneſſe in ſawces did greatly delight me, but my ſtomake being ſince glutted therewith, my taſte hath likewiſe ſeconded the ſame. Wine hurts the ſicke; it is the firſt thing that with an invincible diſtaſte, brings my mouth out of taſte. Whatſoeuer I receiue vnwillingly or diſtaſtefully hurts me, whereas nothing doth it whereon I feede with hunger and relliſh. I never receiued harme by any action that was very pleaſing vnto me. And yet I have made al medicinall concluſions, largely to yeeld to my pleaſures. And when I was yong.
                        
                           Quem circumcurſans huc atque huc ſaepe Cupido
                           Fulgebat crocina ſplendidus in tunica,C
                                    •
                                 t
                                    •
                                 l. el. 4. 131.
                           
                           About whom Cupid running here and there,
                           Shinde in the ſaffron coate which he did weare.
                        
                        I have as licentiouſly & inconſiderately as any other, furthred al ſuch deſires as poſſeſſed me;
                        
                           
                           Et militavi non ſine gloria.
                           A Souldier of loves hoaſt,Hor. c
                                    •
                                 r. l. 3. 
                                    •
                                 d. 26. 2.
                           
                           I was not without boaſt.
                        
                        More notwithſtanding in continuation and holding out, then by ſnatches or by ſtealth.
                        
                           Sex me vix memini ſustinueſſe vices,
                           I ſcarſe remember paſt
                           Six courſes I could laſt.
                        
                        It is ſurely a wonder accompanied with vnhappineſſe, to confeſſe how yoong and weake I was brought vnder it's ſubjection. Nay, ſhall I not bluſh to tell it? It was long before the age of choiſe or yeares of diſcretion: I was ſo yoong, as I remember nothing before. And fitly may my fortune bee compared to that of Quartilla, who remembred not her mayden-head.
                        
                           Inde tragus celereſ
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               pili, mirandá
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               matri Barba me
                                 •
                              .
                           Thence goatiſhneſſe, haires over-ſoone, a beard
                           To make my mother wonder, and afear'd.
                        
                        Phyſitians commonly enfold and joine their rules vnto profit, according to the violence of ſharpe deſires or earneſt longings, that incidently follow the ſicke, No longing deſire can be imagined ſo ſtrange and vicious, but nature will apply herſelfe vnto it. And then how eaſie is it to content ones fantaſie? In mine opinion, this part importeth all in all; at leaſt more and beyond all other. The moſt grievous and ordinary evills are thoſe, which fancy chargeth vs withall. That Spaniſh ſaying doth every way pleaſe me: Deffienda me Dios de my. God defend me from my ſelfe. Being ſicke, I am ſory I have not ſome deſire may give mee the contentment to ſatiate and cloy the ſame: Scarſly would a medicine divert me from it, So doe I when I am in health: I hardly ſee any thing left to be hoped or wiſhed-for. It is pittie a man ſhould be ſo weakned and enlanguiſhed, that hee hath nothing left him but wiſhing. The arte of Phyſicke is not ſo reſolute, that whatſoever wee doe, wee ſhall bee void of all authority to doe it. Shee changeth and ſhee varieth according to climates; according to the Moones; according to Fernelius; and according to Scala. If your Phyſitian thinke it not good that you ſleepe, that you drinke wine, or eate ſuch and ſuch meates: Care not you for that; I will finde you another that ſhall not be of his opinion. The diverſity of phyſicall arguments and medicinall opinions, embraceth all manner of formes. I ſaw a miſerable ſicke man, for the infinite deſire he had to recover, ready to burſt, yea and to die with thirſt; whom not long ſince another Phyſitian mocked, vtterly condemning the others counſell, as hurtfull for him. Had not hee beſtowed his labour well? A man of that coate is lately dead of the ſtone, who during the time of his ſickeneſſe vſed extreame abſtinence to withſtand his evill; his fellowes affirme that contrary, his long faſting had withered and dried him vp, and ſo concocted the gravell in his kidnies. I have found, that in my hurts and other ſickeneſſes, earneſt talking diſtempers and hurts me as much as any diſorder I commit. My voice coſts me deare, and wearieth me; for I have it lowd, ſhrill and forced: So that, when I have had occaſion to entertaine the eares of great men, about weighty affaires, I have often troubled them with care how to moderate my voice, This ſtory deſerveth to bee remembred and to divert me. A certaine man, in one of the Greeke ſchooles ſpake very lowde, as I doe; the maiſter of the ceremonies ſent him word, hee ſhould ſpeake lower: let him (quoth he) ſend mee the tune or key in which he would have me ſpeake. The other replied, that hee ſhould take his tune from his eares to whom he ſpake. It was well ſayd, ſo hee vnderſtood himſelfe: Speake according as you have to doe with your auditory. For if one ſay, let it ſuffice that he heareth you; or, governe your ſelfe by him: I do not thinke he had reaſon to ſay ſo. The tune or motion of the voyce, hath ſome expreſſion or ſignification of my meaning: It is in me to direct the ſame, that ſo I may the better repreſent my ſelfe. There is a voyce to inſtruct one to flatter, and another to chide. I will not onely have my voyce come to him, but peradventure to wound and pierce him. When I brawle and rate my lackey, with a ſharpe and piercing tune; were it fit he ſhould come to me and ſay, Maſter ſpeake ſoftly, I vnderſtand and heare you very well? Eſt quaedam vox ad auditum accomod
                                 •
                              ta non magnitudine ſed proprietat
                                 •
                              . There is a kinde of voyce well applied to the hearing, not by the greatneſſe of it, but by the propri
                                 •
                              tie. The word is halfe his that ſpeakeh, and halfe his that harkoneth vnto it. The hea
                           
                              •
                           er

ought to prepare himſelfe to the motion or bound it taketh. As betweene thoſe that play at tennis, he who keepes the hazard, doth prepare, ſtand, ſtirre and march, according as he perceives him who ſtands at the houſe, to looke, ſtand, remoove and ſtrike the ball, and according to the ſtroake. Experience hath alſo taught mee this, that wee loſe our ſelves with impatience. Evills have their life, their limites; their diſeaſes and their health, The conſtitution of diſeaſes is framed by the patterne of the conſtitution of living creatures. They have their fortune limited even at their birth, and their dayes allotted them. Hee that ſhall imperiouſly goe about, or by compulſion (contrary to their courſes) to abridge them, doth lengthen and multiply them; and inſtead of appealing, doth harſell and wring them. I am of Crantors opinion, that a man muſt neither obſtinately nor frantikely oppoſe himſelfe againſt evills; nor through demiſſeneſſe of courage faintingly yeeld vnto them, but according to their condition and ours, naturally incline to them. A man muſt give ſickeneſſes their paſſage: And I finde that they ſtay leaſt with mee, becauſe I allow them their ſwinge, and let them doe what they liſt. And contrary to common-received rules, I have without ayde or arte r
                              •
                           dde my ſelfe of ſome, that are deemed the moſt obſtinately lingring, and vnremoovably-obſtinate. Let nature worke: Let hir have hir will: Shee knoweth what ſnee hath to doe, and vnderſtands hir ſelfe better then wee doe. But ſuch a one died of it, will you ſay; So ſhall you doubtleſſe; if not of that, yet of ſome other diſeaſe. And how many have wee ſeene die, when they have had a whole Colledge of Phyſitians round about their bed, and looking in their excrements? Example is a bright looking-glaſſe, vniverſall and for all ſhapes to looke-into. If it be a luſhious or taſte-pleaſing potion, take it hardly; it is ever ſo much preſent eaſe. So it be delicious and ſweetely taſting, I will never ſtand much vpon the name or colour of it. Pleaſure is one of the chiefest kindes of profite. I have ſuffered rheumes, gowty defluxions, relaxions, pantings of the heart, megreimes and other ſuch-like accidents, to grow old in me, and die their naturall death; all which have left me, when I halfe enured and framed my ſelfe to foſter them. They are better conjured by curteſie, then by bragging or threats, We muſt gently obey and endure the lawes of our condition: We are ſubject to grow aged, to become weake and to fall ſicke, in ſpight of all phyſicke. It is the firſt leſſon the Mexicans give their children; When they come out of their mothers wombes, they thus ſalute them: My childe, thou art come into the world to ſuffer; Therefore ſuffer and hold thy peace. It is injuſtice for one to grieve, that any thing hath befallen to any one, which may happen to all men. Indignare ſi quid in te iniquè propriè conſtitutum est. Then take it ill, if any thing bee decreed vniuſtly against thee alone. Looke on an aged man, who ſueth vnto God to maintaine him in perfect, full an vigrous health, that is to ſay, he will be pleaſed to make him yong againe:
                        
                           Stulte quid haec frustra votis puerilibus opt as?Orid. Triſt. l. 3. el. 8. 11.
                           
                           Foole why doſt thou in vaine deſire,
                           With childiſh prayers thus t'aſpire?
                        
                        Is it not folly? his condition will not beare it. The gowt, the ſtone, the gravell and indigeſtion are ſymptomes or effects of long continued yeares; as heates, raines and windes, are incident to long voyages. Plato cannot beleeve, that Aeſcu
                                 •
                              apius troubled himſelfe with good rules and diet to provide for the preſervarion of life, in a weake, waſted and corrupted body: being vnprofitable for his country, inconvenient for his vocation. & vnfit to get ſound and ſturdy Children: and deeme not that care inconvenient vnto divine juſtice and heavenly Wiſedome, which is to direct all things vnto profite. My good ſir, the matter is at an end: You cannot be recovered; for the moſt, you can be but tampered withall, and ſomewhat vnder-propt, and for ſome houres have your miſery prolonged.
                        
                           Non ſecus inſtantem cupiens fulcire ruinamCorn. Gal. el. 173.
                           
                           Diverſis contrà nititur obicibus,
                           Donec certa dies omni compage ſolutâ
                           Ipſum cum rebus ſubruat auxilium.
                           So he that would an inſtant ruine ſtay,
                           With divers props ſtrives it to vnderlay,
                           Till all the frame diſſolvd a certaine day,
                           The props with th'edifice doth overſway.
                        
                        
                           A man muſt learne to endure that patiently, which he cannot avoyde conveniently. Our life is compoſed, as is the harmony of the World, of contrary things; ſo of divers tunes, ſome pleaſant,

ſome harſh, ſome ſharpe, ſome flat, ſome low and ſome high: What would that Mu
                              ••
                           tition ſay, that ſhould love but ſome one of them? He ought to know how to vſe them ſeverally and how to entermingle them. So ſhould we both of goods and evils, which are conſubſtantiall to our life. Our being cannot ſubſiſt without this commixture. whereto one ſide is no leſſe neceſſarie than the other. To goe about to kicke againſt naturall neceſſity, were to repreſent the folly of C
                                 •
                              eſiphon, who vndertooke to ſtrike or wince with his 
                              •
                           ule. I conſult but little about the alterations which I feele: For theſe kinde of men are advantagious, when they hold you at their mercy. They glut your eares with their Prognoſtications, and ſurpriſing mee heretofore, when by my ſickeneſſe I was brought very lowe and weake, they have injuriouſly handled me with their Doctrines, poſitions, preſcriptions, magiſtrall fopperies and proſopopeyall gravity; ſometimes threatning me with great paine and ſmart, and othertimes menacing me with neere and vnavoydable death: All which did indeede move, ſtirre and touch me neere, but could not diſmay, or remoove mee from my place or reſolution: If my judgement be thereby neither changed nor troubled, it was at leaſt hindred: It is ever in agitation and combating. Now I entreate my imagination as gently as I can, and were it in my power I would cleane diſcharge it of all paine and conteſtation. A man muſt further, help, flatter and (if he can) cozen and deceive it. My ſpirit is fit for that office. There is no want of apparances every where. Did he perſwade, as he preacheth, he ſhould ſucceſſefully ayde me. Shall I give you an example? He tels me, it is for my good, that I am troubled with the gravell: That the compoſitions of my age, muſt naturally ſuffer ſome leake or flaw: It is time they beginne to relent and gaine-ſay themſelves: It is a common neceſſity: And it had beene no new wonder for mee. That way I pay the reward due vnto age, and I could have no better reckoning of it. That ſuch company ought to comfort me, being fallen into the moſt ordinary accident incident to men of my dayes. I every where ſee ſome afflicted with the ſame kinde of evill; whoſeſociety is honourable vnto mee, forſomuch as it commonly poſſeſſeth the better ſort of men: and whoſe eſſence hath a certaine nobility and dignity connexed vnto it: That of men tormented therewith, fewe are better cheape quit of it: and yet, it coſts them the paine of a troubleſome dyet, tedious regiment, and daily loath ſome taking of medicinall drugges and phiſicall potions: Whereas I meerly owe it to my good fortune. For, ſome ordinary broths made of Eringos or Sea-Holme, and Burſtwort, which twice or thrice I have ſwallowed downe, at the requeſt of ſome Ladies, who more kindely then my diſeaſe is vnkind, offred me the moity of theirs, have equally ſeemed vnto mee as eaſie to take, as vnprofitable in operation. They muſt pay a thouſand vowes vnto Aeſculapius, and as many crownes to their Phyſition, for an eaſie profluvion or aboundant running of gravell, which I often receive by the benefite of Nature. Let mee bee in any company, the decency of my countenance is thereby nothing troubled; and I can hold my water full tenne houres, and if neede bee, as long as any man that is in perfect health: The feare of this evill (ſaith hee) did heeretofore affright thee, when yet it was vnknowen to thee. The cries and deſpaire of thoſe, who through their impatience exaſperate the ſame; bred a horror of it in thee. It is an evill that comes and falles into thoſe limmes, by, and with which thou haſt moſt offended: Thou art a man of conſcience:
                        
                           Quae venit indignè paena, dolenda venit.Orid. e
                                    •
                                 iſt. 5. 8.
                           
                           The paine that comes without deſart,
                           Comes to vs with more griefe and ſmart.
                        
                        Conſider but how milde the puniſhment is, in reſpect of others, and how favourable. Conſider his ſloweneſſe in comming: hee onely incommodeth that ſtate and encombreth that ſeaſon of thy life, which (all things conſidered) is now become barren and loſt, having as it were by way of compoſition given place vnto the ſenſuall licenciouſneſſe and want on pleaſures of thy youth. The feare and pitty, men have of this evil, may ſerve thee as a cauſe of glory. A quality, whereof, if thy judgement be purified and thy diſcourſe perfectly ſound, thy friends doe notwithſtanding diſcover ſome ſparkes in thy complexion. It is ſome plea
                           
                              •
                           ure for a man to heare others ſay of him: Loe there a patterne of true fortitude; loe there a mirrour of matchleſſe patience. Thou art ſeene to ſweate with labour, to grow pale and wanne, to wax red, to quake and tremble, to caſt and vomite blood, to endure ſtrange contractions, to brooke convulſions, to trill downe brackiſh and great teares, to make thicke, muddie blacke, bloody and fearefull vrine, or to have it ſtopt by ſome ſharpe or rugged ſtone, which

pricketh and cruelly wringeth the necke of the yarde: entertaining in the meane while the by-ſtanders with an ordinary and vndanted countenance, by pawſes jeſting and by entermiſſions dallying with thy ſervants: keeping a parte in a continued diſcourſe; with wordes now and then excuſing thy griefe, and abating thy painefull ſufferance. Doſt thou remember thoſe men of former ages, who to keep their vertue in breath and exerciſe, did with ſuch greedineſſe ſeeke after evills? Suppoſe Nature driveth and brings thee vnto that glorious Schoole, into which thou hadſt never come of thine owne accord and freewill. If thou tel me, it is a dangerous and mortall evill,: what others are not ſo? For, it is a kinde of phyſicall couſenage, to except any, and ſo they goe directly vnto death: what matter is it, whether they goe by accident vnto it; and eaſily ſlide on either hand, toward the way that leadeth vs therevnto? But thou dieſt not becauſe thou art ſicke; thou dieſt becauſe thou art living. Death is able to kill thee without the helpe of any ſickeneſſe. Sickeneſſes have to ſome prolonged their death; who have lived the longer, inaſmuch as they imagined they were ſtill dying. Seeing it is of woundes, as of diſeaſes, that ſome are medicinall and wholeſome. The chollike is often no leſſe long-lived than you. Many are ſeene, in whom it hath continued even from their infancy vnto their extreameſt age, who had they not forſaken hir company; ſhe was like to have aſſiſted them further. You oftner kill her, than ſhe doth you. And if ſhe did preſent thee with the image of neer-imminent death, were it not a kinde office for a man of that age, to reduce it vnto the cogitations of his end? And which is woorſe, thou haſt no longer cauſe to be cured: Thus and howſoever, common neceſſity calles for thee againſt the firſt day. Conſider but how artificially and how mildely ſhe brings thee in diſtaſte with life, and out of liking with the world; not forcing thee with a tyrannicall ſubjection, as infinite other diſeaſes doe, wherwith thou ſeeſt olde men poſſeſſed. which continually holde them fettered and enſnared, and without releaſe of weakeneſſe nor intemiſſion of paines but by advertiſements and inſtructions, repriſed by intervalles: entermixing certaine pawſes of reſt, as if it were: to give thee meane, at thy eaſe, to meditate and repeate her leſſon. To give thee leaſure and ability to judge ſoundly, and like a man of a corage to take a reſolution, ſhee preſents thee with the ſtate of thy condition perfect, both in good and evill, and in one ſame day, ſometimes a moſt pleaſing, ſometimes a moſt intolerable life. If thou embrace not death, at least thou ſhakest her by the hand once a moneth. Whereby thou haſt more cauſe to hope, that ſhe will one day ſurpriſe thee without threatning. And that being ſo often brought into the haven; ſuppoſing to be ſtill in thy accuſtomed ſtate, one morning at vnawares, both thy ſelfe and thy confidence ſhall be tranſported over. A man hath no reaſon to complaine againſt thoſe diſeaſes, which ſo equally divide time with health. I am beholding to Fortune, that ſhee ſo often aſſailes mee with one ſame kinde of weapon: ſhee by long vſe doth faſhion and enure mee vnto it, harden and habituate mee therevnto: I now know within a little which way and how I ſhall bee quit. For want of naturall memory I frame ſome of paper. And when ſome new ſymptome or accident commeth to my evill, I ſet it downe in writing: whence it proceedeth, that having now (in a manner) paſſed over and through all ſortes of examples, if any aſtoniſhment threaten mee; running and turning over theſe my looſe memorialles (as Sybillaes leaves) Imiſſe no more to finde to comfort me with ſome favourable prognoſtication in my former paſt experience. Cuſtome doth alſo ſerve mee, to hope the better heereafter. For, the conduct of this diſtribution, having ſo long beene conſtituted, it is to be ſuppoſed that Nature will not change this courſe, and no other worſe accident ſhall follow, then that I feele. Moreover, the condition of this diſeaſe is not ill ſeeming to my ready and ſodaine complexion. When it but faintly aſſailes mee, it makes mee afraid, becauſe it is like to continue long: But naturally it hath certaine vigorous and violent exceſſes. It doth violently ſhake me for one or two dayes. My reines have continued a whole age without alteration, an other is now well-nigh come, that they have changed ſtate. Evilles as well as goods have their periodes: this accident is happily come to his laſt. Age weakeneth the heate of my ſtomacke: his digeſtion being thereby leſſe perfect, heeſendeth this crude matter to my reines. Why may not, at a certaine revolution, the heat of my reines be likewiſe infeobled: ſo that they may no longer petrifie my fleagme; and Nature addreſſe her ſelfe to finde ſome other courſe of purgation? Yeares have evidently made me drie vp certaine rheumes: And why not theſe excrements, that miniſter matter to the ſtone or gravell? But is there any thing ſo pleaſant, in reſpect of this ſodaine change,

when by an extreame paine, I come by the voyding of my ſtone, to recover, as from a lightning, the faire Sunne-ſhine of health; ſo free and full, as it happeneth in our ſodaine and moſt violent cholliks? Is there any thing in this paine ſuffered, that may be counterpoiſed to the ſweete pleaſure of ſo ready an amendment? By how much more health ſeemeth fairer vnto me after ſickenes, ſo neere and ſo contiguous, that I may know them in preſence one of another, in their richeſt ornaments; wherein they attyre themſelves avy, as it were confront and counterchecke one another: Even as the Stoickesſay, that 
                              Ʋices were profitablie brought in; to give esteeme and make head vnto vertue; So may we with better reaſon and bold conjecture, affirme, that Nature hath lent vs griefe and paine, for the honour of pleaſure and ſervice of indolency. When Socrates (after he had his yrons or fetters taken from him) felt the pleaſure or tickling of that itching, which their weight and rubbing had cauſed in his legges; he rejoyced, to conſider the neere affinity that was betweene paine and pleaſure: how they combined together by a neceſſary bond; ſo that at turnes they enter-engender and ſucceede one an other: And cry out to good Aeſope, that hee ſhould from that conſideration have taken a proper body vnto a quaint fable. The worſt I ſee in other deſeaſes, is, that they are not ſo grievous in their effect, as in their iſſue. A man is whole yeare to recover himſelfe; ever full of weakeneſſe, alwayes full of feare.
                        There is ſo much hazard and ſo many degrees before one can be brought to ſafety, that heee is never at an end. Before you can leave off your cover-chiefe and then your nightcappe; before you can the ayre againe, or have leave to drinke Wine, or lye with your Wife, or eate melons, it is much, if you fall not into ſome relapſe or new miſery. The gravell hath this priviledge, that it is cleane carried away. Whereas other maladies, leave ever ſome impreſſion and alteration, which leaveth the body ſuſceptible or vndertaking of ſome new infirmity; and they lend one an other their hands. Such are to be excuſed, as are contented with the poſſeſſion they have over vs, without extending the ſame, and without introducing their ſequell: But courteous, kind and gracious are thoſe, whoſe paſſage brings vs ſome profitable conſequence. Since I have had the ſtone-chollike, I finde my ſelfe diſcharged of other accidents: more (as me thinks) then I was before, and neuer had ague ſince. I argue, that the extreame and frequent vomites I endure, purge me; and on the other ſide, the diſtaſtes and ſtrange abſtinences I tolerate, disgeſt my offending humours: and Nature voydeth in theſe ſtones and gravell, whatſoeuer is ſuperfluous and hurtefull in her. Let no man tell me, that it is a medicine too deere ſold. For, what availe ſo many loathſome pills, ſtincking potions, cauterizings, inciſions, ſweatings, ſetons, dyets and ſo divers faſhions of curing, which, becauſe we are not able to vndergoe their violence and brooke their importunity, doe often bring vs vnto our graves? And therefore, when I am ſurpriſed, I take it as phyſicke: and when I am free, I take it as a conſtant and full deliverance. Lo here an other particular favour of my diſeaſe, which is, that he in a manner, keepes his play a-part, and let's mee keepe mine owne; or elſe I want but courage to doe it: In his greateſt emotion, I have held out tenne houres on Horſe-backe with him. Doe but endure, you neede no other rule or regiment: Play, dally, dyne, runne, be gameſome, doe this, and if you can, doe the other thing, your diſorder and debauching will rather availe than hurt it. Say thus much to one that hath the pox, or to one that hath the gowt, or to one that is belly-broken or codburſt. Other infirmites have more vniverſall bonds, torment farre-otherwiſe our actions, pervert al our order, and engage all the ſtate of mans life vnto their conſideration: Whereas this doth only twitch and pinch the skinne, it neither medleth with your vnderſtanding, nor with your will, tongue, feete nor hands, but leaves them all in your diſpoſition; it rather rouzeth and awaketh you, then deterre and drouzie you. The mind is wounded by the burning of a feaver ſuppreſſed by an Epilepſie, confounded by a migrane, and in concluſion, aſtonied and diſmayed by all the diſeaſes that touch or wound the whole maſſe of his body, and it's nobleſt partes: This never medleth with it. If therefore it go ill with it, his be the blame: ſhe bewrayeth, ſhe forſaketh and ſhe diſplaceth herſelfe. None but fools will be perſwaded, that this hard, gretty and maſſie body, which is concocted and petrified in our kidneis, may be diſſolved by drinks. And therefore after it is ſtirred, there is no way, but to give it paſſage▪ For if you doe not, he will take it himſelfe. This other peculiar commodity I obſerue, that it is an infirmity, wherein we haue but little to divine. We are diſpenſed from the trouble, whereinto other maladies caſt vs, by the vncertainty of their cauſes, conditions and progreſſes.

A trouble infinitly painfull. We have no neede of doctorall conſultations, or collegiall interpretations. Our ſenſes tell vs where it is, and what it is. By, and with ſuch arguments, forcible or weake (as Cicero doth the infirmity of his old-age) I endevour to lull aſleepe, and ſtudy to ammuſe my imagination, and ſupple or annoynt her ſores. If they growe worſe to morrow; to morrow we ſhall provide for new remedies or eſcapes. That this is true: loe afterward againe, happly the lightèſt motion wrings pure blood out of my reines. And what of that? I omitte not to ſtirre as before, and with a youthfull and inſolent heate ride after my hound. And find that I haue great reaſon of ſo important an accident, which coſts me but a deafe heavineſſe and dombe alteration in that parte. It is ſome great ſtone that waſteth and conſumeth the ſubſtance of my kidneis and my life, which I avoyde by little and little: not without ſome natural pleaſure, as an excrement now ſuperfluous and troubleſome. And feele I ſomething to ſhake? Except not that I ammuſe my ſelfe to feele my pulſe or looke into my vrine, thereby to finde or take ſome tedious prevention. I ſhall come time enough to feele the ſmart, without lengthening the ſame with the paine of feare. Who feareth to ſuffer, ſuffereth already, becauſe he feareth.
                        
                        Seeing the doubt and ignorance of thoſe, who will and do meddle with expounding the drifts and ſhifts of nature, with her internall progreſſe; and ſo many falſe prognoſtications of their arte ſhould make vs vnderſtand her meanes infinitly vnknowen. There is great vncertainty, variety and obſcurity, in that ſhee promiſeth and menaceth vs. Except oldage, which is an vndoubted ſigne, of deaths approching: of all other accidents, I ſee few ſignes of future things, whereon we may ground our divination. I onely judge my ſelfe by true-feeling ſenſe and not by diſcourſe: To what end? ſince I will adde nothing therunto except attention and patience. Will you know what I gaine by it? Behold thoſe who doe otherwiſe, and who depend on ſo many diverſe perſwaſions and counſelles; how oft imagination preſſeth them without the body. I have diverſe times being in ſafety and free from all dangerous accidents, taken pleaſure to communicate them vnto Phiſitions, as but then comming vpon me. I endured the arreſt or doome of their horrible concluſions, and remained ſo much the more bounden vnto God for his grace, and better inſtructed of the vanity of this arte. Nothing ought ſo much be recommended vnto youth, as activitie and vigilancie. Our life is nothing but motion, I am hardly ſhaken, and am ſlow in all things, bee it to riſe, to goe to bed, or to my meales. Seaven of the clocke in the morning is to me an early houre: And where I may commaund, I neither dine before eleven, norſup till after ſix. I have heretofore imputed the cauſe of agues or maladies, whereinto I have falne, to the lumpiſh heavineſſe or drowzy dulneſſe, which my long ſleeping had cauſed me. And ever repented mee to fall aſleepe againe in the morning. Plato condemnes more the exceſſe of ſleeping, then the ſurfet of drinking. I love to lie hard and alone, yea and without a woman by me: after the kingly manner: ſome what well and warme covered. I never have my bed warmed; but ſince I came to be an old man, if neede require, I have clothes given me to warme my feete my ſtomacke. Great Scipio was taxed to bee a ſluggard or heavy ſleeper (in my conceit) for no oother cauſe, but that men were offended, hee onely ſhould bee the man, in whom no faulte might juſtly bee found. If there be any curioſity in my behaviour or manner of life, it is rather about my going to bed, then any thing elſe; but if neede bee, I generally yeeld and accommodate my ſelfe vnto neceſſity, as well and as quietly, and any other whoſoever. Sleeping hath poſſeſſed a great parte of my life: and as old as I am, I can ſleepe eight or nine houres together. I doe with profit withdraw my ſelfe from this ſluggiſh propenſion, and evidently finde my ſelfe better by it. Indeede I ſomewhat feele the ſtroke of alteration, but in three dayes it is paſt. And I ſee few that live with leſſe (when neede is) and that more conſtantly exerciſe themſelves, nor whom toyling and labour offend leſſe. My body is capable of a firme agitation, ſo it be not vehement and ſodaine. I avoide violent exerciſes, and which induce mee to ſweate: my limbs will ſooner be wearied, then heated. I can ſtand a whole day long, and am ſeldome weary with walking. Since my firſt age, I ever loved rather to ride then walke vpon paved ſtreetes. Going a foote, I ſhall durty my ſelfe vp to the waſte: and little men, going alongſt our ſtreetes, are ſubject (for want of preſentiall apparence) to be juſtled or elbowed. I love to take my reſt, bee it ſitting or lying-along, with my legs as high or higher then my ſeate. No profeſſion or occupation is more pleaſing then the military; A profeſſion or exerciſe, both noble in execution (for, the ſtrongest, most generous and prowdest
                           
                           of all vertues, is true valour) and noble in it's cauſe. No vtilitie, is either more juſt or vniverſall then the protection of the repoſe, or defence of the greatneſſe of ones country, The company and dayly converſation of ſo many noble, young and active men, cannot but be well-pleaſing to you: the dayly and ordinary ſight of ſo diverſe tragicall ſpectacles: the libertie and vncontroled freedome of that arteleſſe and vnaffected converſation, maſculine and ceremonileſſe maner of life: the hourely variety of a thouſand ever changing and differing actions: the couragious and minde ſtirring harmonie of warlike muſike, which at once entertaineth with delight and enflameth with longing, both your eares and your minde: the iminent and matchleſſe honour of that exerciſe: yea the very ſharpeneſſe and difficulty of it, which Plato eſteemeth ſo little, that in his imaginary commonwealth, he imparteth the ſame both to women and to children. As a voluntary Souldier, or adventurous knight you enter the liſts, the bands or particular hazards, according as your ſelfe judge of their ſucceſſes or importance: and you ſee when your life may therein be excuſably employed,
                        
                           pulchrúmque moriſuccurrit in armis.Virg. Aen. lib 3 317.
                           
                           And nobly it doth come in minde,
                           To die in armes may honor finde.
                        
                        Baſely to feare common dangers, that concerneſo numberleſſe a multitude, and not to dare, whatſo many ſortes of men dare, yea whole nations together, is onely incident to baſe, craven and milke-ſop-hearts. Company and good fellowſhip doth harten and encourage children. If ſome chance to exceede and outgoe you in knowledge, in experience, in grace, in ſtrength, in fortune, you have third and collateral cauſes to blame and take hold-of; but to yeeld to them in conſtancie of minde, and reſolution of courage, you have none but yourſelfe to find fault with. Death is much more abiect, languiſhing, griſly and painefull in a downe-bed, then in a field-combate; and agues, catarres or apoplexies, as painefull and mortall, as an harquebuſado. He that ſhould be made vndantedly to beare the accidents of common life, ſhould not neede to bumbaſt his courage, to become a man at armes. 
                              Ʋivere, mi Lucilli, milis are eſt. Friend mine,
                           Se
                                 •
                              . epiſt. 96. f. 
                           to live is to goe onwarre-fare. I can not remember that ever I was ſcabbed: yet is itching one of natures ſweeteſt gratifications, and as readie at hand. But repentance doth over-importunately attend on it. I exerciſe the ſame in mine eares (and by fits) which within doe often itch. I was borne with all my ſenſes ſound, almoſt in perfection. My ſtomake is commodiouſly good; and ſo is my head: both which, together with my winde, maintaine them ſelves athwart my agues. I have outlived that age, to which ſome nations have not without ſome reaſon preſcribed for a juſt end vnto life, that they allowed not a man to exceede the ſame. I have notwithſtanding ſome remyſes or intermiſſions yet: though vnconſtant and ſhort, ſo ſound and neate, that there is little difference betweene them and the health and indolencie of my youth. I ſpeake not of youthly vigor and chearefull blithneſſe; there is noreaſon they ſhould follow mee beyond their limites:
                        
                           Non haec amplius eſt liminis, aut aquaeHor. car. lib. 3. 
                                    •
                                 d. 10. 15.
                           
                           Coeleſtis, patiens latus.
                           Theſe ſides cannot ſtill ſuſtaine,
                           Lying without dores, ſhowring raine.
                        
                        My viſage and eyes doe preſently diſcover me. Thence beginne all my changes, and ſomewhat ſharper then they are in effect. I often moove my friends to pitty, ere I feele the cauſe of it. My looking glaſſe doth not amaze me: for even in my youth it hath diverſe times befalne me, ſo to put-on a duskie looke, a wanne colour, a troubled behaviour and of ill preſage, without any great accident; ſo that Phiſitions perceiving no inward cauſe to anſwer this outward alteration, aſcribed the ſame to the ſecret minde or ſome concealed paſſion, which inwardly gnawed and conſumed mee. They were deceived, were my body directly by mee, as is my minde, we ſhould march a little more at our eaſe. I had it then, not onely exempted from all trouble, but alſo full of ſatisfaction and blitheneſſe, as it is moſt commonly, partly by it's owne complexion, and partly by it's owne deſſeigne:
                        
                           Nec vitiant art us aegrae contagia mentis.Ov
                                    •
                                 d. Triſs. l. 3. 
                                    ••
                                 . 8. 25.
                           
                           Nor doth ſicke mindes infection,
                           Pollute ſtrong joynts complexion.
                        
                        I am of opinion, that this her temperature hath often raiſed my body from his fallings: he is often ſuppreſſed, whereas ſhe, if not laſciviouſly wanton, at leaſt in quiet and repoſed

eſtate. I had a quartan ague which held me foure or five moneths, and had altogether diſviſaged and altered my countenance, yet my minde held ever out, not onely peaceably but pleaſantly. So I feele no paine ot ſmarte; weakneſſe and languiſhing doe not greatly perplex me. I ſee divers corporall defailances, the only naming of which breede a kind of horror, and which I would feare leſſe then a thouſand paſſions and agitations of the mind, which I ſee in vſe. I reſolve to runne no more: it ſufficeth me to goe-on faire and ſoftly; nor doe I complaine of their naturall decadence or empairing that poſſeſſeth me,
                        
                           Quis tumidum guttur miratur in Alpibus?I
                                    •••
                                 n. ſat. 13. 152.
                           
                           Who wonders a ſwolne throate to ſee,
                           In thoſe about the Alpes that be?
                        
                        No more, then I grieve that my continuance is not as long and ſound, as that of an oske. I have no cauſe to finde fault with my imagination. I have in my life had very few thoughts or cares, that have ſo much as interrupted the courſe of my ſleepe, except of deſire, to awaken without diſmay or afflicting me. I ſeldome dreame, and when I doe, it is of extravagant things and chymeras; commonly produced of pleaſant conceits, rather ridiculous then ſorrowfull. And thinke it true, that dreames are the true interpretors of our inclinations: but great skill is required to ſort and vnderſtand them.
                        
                           Res quae in vit a vſurpant homines, cogitant, curant, vident,
                           Quae
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               agunt vigilantes, agitánt que ea ſicut inſomno accidunt
                           Minus mirandum eſt.
                           It is no wonder if the things, which we
                           Care-for, vſe, thinke, doe oft, or waking ſee.
                           Vnto vs ſleeping repreſented be.
                        
                        
                           Plato ſaith moreover, that is the office of wiſedome to draw divining inſtructions from them, againſt future times. Wherein I ſee nothing but the wonderfull experience, that Socrates, Xenophon and Ariſtotle relate of them: men of vnreproovable authority. Hiſtories reporte, that the inhabitants of the Atlantique Iles never dreame: who feede on nothing that hath beene ſlaine. Which I adde, becauſe it is peradventure the occaſion the dreame not. Pythagoras ordained therefore a certaine methode of feeding, that dreames might bee ſorted of ſome purpoſe. Mine are tender, and cauſe no agitation of body or expreſſion of voice in mee. I have in my dayes ſeene many ſtrangely ſtirred with them. Theon the Philoſopher walked in dreaming; and Pericles his boy went vpon the tiles and top of houſes. I ſtand not much on nice choice of meates at the table: and commonly beginne with the firſt and neereſt diſh: and leape not willingly from one taſte to another. Multitude of diſhes, and varietie of ſervices diſpleaſe mee as much as any other throng. I am eaſily pleaſed with few meſſes and hate the opinion of Favorinus, that at a banquet you muſt have that diſh whereon you feede hungerly taken from you, and ever have a new one ſet in the place: And that it is a niggardly ſupper, if all the gueſts be not glutted with pinions and rumps of divers kindes of fowle: and that onely the daintie bird heccafico or ſnapfig deſerveth to bee eaten whole at one morſell. I feede much vpon ſalte cates and love to have my bread ſomewhat freſh: And mine own Baker makes none other for my bord; againſt the faſhion of my countrie. In my youth, my overſeers had much adoe to reforme the refuſall I made of ſuch meats as youth doth commonly love beſt, as ſweete-meates, confets and marchpanes. My Tutor was wont to finde great fault with my lothing of ſuch dainties, as a kinde of ſqueamiſh delicacie. And to ſay truth, it is nothing but a difficultie of taſte, where it once is applied. Whoſoever remooveth from a childe a certaine particular or obſtinate affection to browne bread, to bakon, or to garlike, taketh friandize from him. There are ſome, that make it a labour, and thinke it a patience to regret a good piece of powdred beefe, or a good gammon of bakon, amongſt partridges. Are not they wiſe men in the meane time? It is the chiefe daintie of all dainties: It is the taſte of nice effeminate fortune, that will bee diſtaſted with ordinarie and vſuall things. Per quae luxuria divitiarum taedio ludit. Whereby the laviſtineſſe of plentie; playes with tedious pleaſure. To forbeare to make good cheare, becauſe another doth it; for one to have care of his feeding, is the eſſence of that vice.
                        
                           Si modica caenare times olus omne patella.H
                                    •
                                 rd. 1. ep
                                    •
                                 . 5. 2
                           
                           If in a ſorry diſh to ſup
                           You brooke not all th'hearbe pottage vp.
                        
                        
                           Indeede there is this difference, that it is better for one to tye his deſires vnto things eaſieſt to be gotten, yet is it a vice to tie himſelfe to any ſtricktneſſe. I was heeretofore wont to name a kinſman of mine over delicate, becauſe, whileſt hee lived in our Gallies, hee had vnlearn't and left to lie vpon a bedde, and to ſtrippe himſelfe to goe to bedde. Had I any malechildren, I ſhould willingly wiſh them my fortune. That good Father, it pleaſed God to allot me (who hath nothing of mee but thankefulneſſe for his goodneſſe, which indeed, is as great as great may be) even from my cradle ſent mee to be brough-vp in a poore village of his, where he kept me ſo long as I ſuckt, and ſomewhat longer: breeding mee after the meaneſt and ſimpleſt-common faſhion: Magna pars libertatis eſt benè moratus venter. A mannerly
                           Sen epiſt. 123. 
                           belly is a great part of a mans libertie. Never take vnto your ſelfe, and much leſſe never give your wives the charge of your childrens breeding or education. Let fortune frame them vnder the popular and naturall Lawes: Let cuſtome enure them to frugality, and breed them to hardneſſe: That they may rather deſcend from ſharpeneſſe, than aſcend vnto it: His conceipt aymed alſo at another end; To acquaint and re-aly me, with that people and condition of men that have moſt neede of vs: And thought I was rather bound to reſpect thoſe which extend their armes vnto me, than ſuch as turne their backe toward me. And that was the reaſon he choſe no other goſſips to hold me at the ſo
                              •
                           , than men of abject and baſe fortune, that ſo I might the more be bound and tied vnto them. His purpoſe hath not altogeher ſucceded ill. I willingly give and accoſt my ſelfe vnto the meaner ſort; whether it bee becauſe there is more glorie gotten by them, or through ſome naturall compaſſion, which in me is infinitely powerfull. The faction which I condemne in our ciuill warres, I ſhall more ſharpely condemne when it proſpers and flouriſheth. I ſhall in ſome ſort be reconciled vnto it, when I ſee it miſerably-depreſſed and over whelmed. Oh how willingly doe I remember that worthy humour of Chelonis, daughter and wife to Kings of Sparta. Whileſt Cleombrotus hir husband, in the tumultuous diſorders of his Citty, had the vpper hand of Leonidas her father, ſhee played the part of a good daughter: alliyng her ſelfe with her father, in his exile and in his miſery, mainely oppoſing hir ſelfe againſt the Conquerour: Did fortune turne? So chaunged ſhe hir minde, couragionſly taking hir husbands part: Whom ſhe never forſooke, whether-ſoever his ruine or diſtreſſe carryed him. Having (in my ſeeming) no other choiſe, than to follow that ſide, where ſhee might doe moſt good, where ſhee was moſt wanted, and where ſhe might ſhew her ſelfe moſt truely pittifull. I doe more naturally encline toward the example of Flamineus, who more and rather yeelded to ſuch as had neede of him, than to thoſe who might doe him good: than I bend vnto that of Pyrrhus, who was ever wont, demiſſely to ſtoope and yeeld to the mighty, and inſolently to grow proud over the weake. Long ſitting at meales doth much weary and diſtemper mee: for, be it for want of better countenance and entertainment, or that I vſed my ſelfe vnto it when I was a child, I ſeede as long as I ſitte at the table. And therefore, being in mine owne houſe, though my board be but ſhort, and that wee vſe not to ſit long, I doe not commonly ſit downe with the firſt, but a pretty while after others: According to the forme of Auguſtus: yet I imitate him not in his riſing before others. Contrary, I love to ſit a great while after, and to heare ſome diſcourſe or table-talke. Alwayes provided I beare not a part my ſelfe, for, if my belly bee full, I ſhall ſoone bee weary, and hurt my ſelfe with talking: and I finde the exerciſe of lowde-ſpeaking and conteſting before meate very pleaſant and wholeſome. The auncient Graecians and Romanes had better reaſon than wee, allotting vnto feeding, which is a principall action of mans life (if any other extraordinary buſineſſe did not let or divert them from it) divers houres, and the beſt part of the night: eating and drinking more leiſurely than we doe, who paſſe and runne over all our actions in poſt-haſte: and extending this naturall pleaſure vnto more leiſure and vſe: entermixing therwith divers profitable and mind-pleaſing offices of civill converſation. Such as have care of me, may eaſily ſteale from me what ſoever they imagine may be hurtfull for me: inaſmuch as about my feeding, I never deſire or find fault with that I ſee not: That Proverb is verified in me; What eye ſeeth not, the heart rueth not. But if a diſh or any thing elſe be once ſet before me, they looſe their labour, that goabout to tell me of abſtinence: ſo that, when I am diſpoſed to faſt I muſt be ſequeſtred from eaters, and have no more ſet before me, than may ſerue for a ſtinted and regular collation: for if I but 
                              •
                           itte downe at a ſett table, I forget my reſolution. If I chance to bidde my cooke change the dreſſing of ſome kinde of meate or diſh, all my men know, I inferre my appetite

is wallowiſh and my ſtomacke out of ordeer, and I ſhall hardly touch it. I love all manner of fleſh or ſowle but greene roſted and rawe ſodden, namely, ſuch as may beare it without danger; and love to have them throughly mortified; and in divers of them the very alteration of their ſmell. Onely hardneſſe or toughneſſe of meate doth generally moleſt me (of all other qualities. I am as careleſſe, and can as well brooke them, as any man that ever I knew) ſo that (contrary to received opinion) even amongſt fiſhes, I ſhall finde ſome, both too new and over-hard and firme, It is not the fault or want of teeth, which I ever had as perfectly-ſound and compleate as any other man: and which but now, being ſo olde, beginne to threaten mee. I have from my infancie learnd to rubbe them with my napkin, both in the morning when I riſe, and ſitting downe and riſing from the table. God doth them a grace, from whom by little and little he doth ſubſtract their life. It is the onely benefite of old age. Their laſt death ſhall be ſo much the leſſe full, languiſhing and painefull: it ſhall then kill but one halfe or quarter of a man. Even now I loſt one of my teeth, which of it ſelfe fell out, without ſtrugling or paine: it was the naturall terme of it's continuance. That part of my being, with diuerſe others, are already dead and mortified in mee, others of the moſt active, halfe dead, and which, during the vigor of my age held the firſt ranke. Thus I ſinke and ſcape from my ſelfe. What fooliſhnes will it be in my vnderſtanding, to feele the ſtart of that fall, already ſo advaunced, as if it were perfectly whole? I hope it not; verely I receive a ſpeciall comfort in thinking on my death, and that it ſhall be of the moſt juſt and natural: and cannot now require or hope other favor of deſtinie, concerning that, then vnlawfull. Men perſwade themſelves, that as heretofore they have had a higher ſtature, ſo their lives were longer; But they are deceived: for Solon, of thoſe ancient times, though he were of an exceeding high ſtature, his life continued but 70. yeeres. Shal I, that have ſo much & ſo vniverſally adored, that 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , a meane is beſt, of former times; and have ever taken a meane meaſure for the moſt perfect, therefore pretend a moſt prodigious and vnmeaſurable life? whatſoever commeth contrary to Natures courſe, may be comberſome, but what comes according to her, ſhould ever pleaſe. Omnia quae ſecundum naturam fiunt, ſunt habenda in bonis. All things are to be accompted good, that are donne according to nature. And therefore (ſaith Plato) is that death violent, which is cauſed either by woundes or ſickneſſes; but that of all others the eaſieſt and in ſome ſort delitious, which ſurprizeth vs by meanes of age. 
                              Ʋitam adoleſcentibus vis aufert, ſenibus maturitas. A forcible violence takes their life from the yoong, but a ripe maturitie from the old. Death entermedleth, and every where confounds it ſelfe with our life: declination doth preoccupate her houre, and inſinuate it ſelfe in the very courſe of our advauncement: I have pictures of mine owne, that were drawne when I was five and twenty, and others being thirty yeeres of age, which I often compare with ſuch as were made by mee, as I am now at this inſtant. How many times doe I ſay, I am no more my ſelfe; how much is my preſent image further from thoſe, then from that of my deceaſe? It is an over-great abuſe vnto nature to dragge and hurry her ſo farre, that ſhee muſt bee forced to give vs over; and abandon our conduct, our eyes, our teeth, our legges and the reſt, to the mercy of a forraine help and begged aſſiſtance: and to put our ſelves into the hands of arte, wearie to followe vs. I am not overmuch or greedily deſirous of ſallets or of fruites, except melons. My father hated all manner of ſawces; I love them all. Overmuch eating doeth hurt and diſtemper me: but for the qualitie I have yet no certaine knowledge that any meate offends me: I never obſerve either a full or wained Moone, nor make a difference betweene the Spring time or Autumne. There are certaine inconſtant and vnknowne motions in vs. For (by way of example) I have heeretofore found rediſh-rootes to be very good for mee, then very hurtfull, and now againe very well agreeing with my ſtomacke. In diverſe other things, I feele my appetite to change, and my ſtomacke to diverſifie from time to time. I have altred my courſe of drinking, ſometimes from white to claret wine, and then from claret to white againe.
                        I am very friand and gluttonous of fiſh; and keepe my ſhroving dayes vpon fiſh dayes; and my ſeaſts vpon faſting-dayes. I believe as ſome others doe, that fiſh is of lighter diſgeſtion than fleſh. As I make it a conſcience to eate fleſh vpon a fiſh day, ſo doth my taſte to eate fiſh and fleſh together. The diverſity betweene them, ſeemes to mee over-diſtant. Even from my youth I was wont now and then to ſteale ſome repaſt, either that I might ſharpen my ſtomake againſt the next day; for, (as Epicurus was wont to faſt, and made but ſparing

meales, thereby to accuſtome his voluptuouſneſſe, to neglect plenty: I, contrarie to him to enure my ſenſualitie to ſpeede the better, and more merrily to make vſe of plentie) or elſe I faſted, the better to maintaine my vigor for the ſervice or performaunce of ſome bodily or mentall action: for both are ſtrangely dulled and ideled 
                              ••
                            me, through over-much fulneſſe and repleateneſſe. (And above all, I hate that fooliſh combination, of ſo ſound and buckſome a Goddeſſe, with that indigeſted and belching God all puffed with the 
                              •
                           ume of his liquor) or to recover my crazed ſtomake, or becauſe I wanted ſome good companie. And I ſay as Epicuria ſaid, that A man ſhould not ſo much respect▪ what he eateth, as with whom hee eateth. And commend Chilon; that he would not promiſe to come to Periander's feaſt, before he knew certainely who were the other bidden g
                              ••
                           ſts. No viends are ſo ſweetely pleaſing, nor no ſauce ſo taſtefull, as that which is drawne from converſable and mutuall ſocietie. I thinke it wholeſome to eate more leiſurely, and leſſe in quantity, and to feede oftner: But I will have appetite and hunger to be endeared: I ſhould finde no pleaſure, after a phiſicall maner, to ſwallow three or foure forced and ſpare meales a day. Who can aſſure me, if I have a good taſte or ſtomake in the morning, that I ſhall have it againe at ſupper? Let vs old men; let vs, I ſay, take the firſt convenient time that commeth: Let vs leave hopes and prognoſtikes vnto Almanacke-makers. The extreame fruite of my health, is pleaſure: Let vs hold faſt on the preſent, and to vs knowne. I eſchew conſtancie in theſe Lawes of faſting. Who ſo will have a forme to ſerue him, let him avoyd continuance of it: but wee harden our ſelves vnto it, and therevnto wholy apply our forces: ſixe moneths after, you ſhall finde your ſtomake ſo enured vnto it, that you ſhall have gotten nothing but this, to have loſt the liberty to vſe it otherwiſe without domage. I vſe to goe with my legges and thighs no more covered in Sommer than in Winter; for I never weare but one paire of ſingle like-ſtockins. For the eaſing of my rheume and helpe of my chollike, I have of late vſed to keepe my head and belly warme. My infirmities did in few dayes habituate themſelves thereunto, and diſdained my ordinary proviſions. From a ſingle night-cappe, I came to a double coverchef, and from a bonnet, to a lined and quilted hat. The bum baſting of my doublet, ſerves me now for no more vſe then a ſtomacher: it is a thing of nothing, vnleſſe I adde a hare or a vultures skin to it; and ſome warme wrapping about my head. Follow this gradation and you ſhall goe a faire pace, I will do no ſuch thing. If I durſt I could find in my hare to revoke the beginning I have given vnto it. Fall you into any new inconvenience? This reformation will no longer availe you. You are ſo accuſtomed vnto it, that you are driven to ſeeke ſome new one. So are they overthrowne, that ſuffer themſelves with forced formalities or ſtrict rules, to be intangled, and do ſuperſticiouſly conſtraine themſelves vnto them: they have neede of more, and of more after that: they never come to an end. It is much more commodious both for our buſineſſe and for our pleaſure (as did our forefathers) to looſe our dinner, and deferre making of good cheere, vnto the houre of withdrawing and of reſt, without interrupting the day: So was I wont to doe heretofore. I have for my health found out ſince by experience, that on the contrary, it is better to dine, and that one ſhall digeſt better being awake. Whether I be in health or in ſickeneſſe, I am not much ſubject to be thirſty: indeede my mouth is ſomewhat dry, but without thirſt. And commonly I vſe not to drinke, but when with eating I am forced to deſire it, and that is when I have eaten well. For a man of an ordinary ſtature I drinke indifferent much. In Sommer, and at an hungry meale, I not onely exceede the limites of Auguſtus, who drunke but preciſely three times: but, not to offend the rule of Democritus, who forbade vs to ſtay at foure, as an vnlucky number; if need be, I come to five: Three demiſextiers, or there abouts. I like little glaſſes beſt; and I love to empty my glaſſe: which ſome others diſlike, as a thing vnſeemely. Sometimes, and that very often, I temper my wine one halfe, and many times three partes with water. And when I am in mine owne houſe, from an antient cuſtome, which my fathers phiſitian ordained both for him, and himſelfe, looke what quantity of Wine is thought will ſerve mee a meale, the ſame is commonly tempered two or three houres before it be ſerved in, and ſo kept in the ſeller. It is reported, that Cranaus King of the Athenians, was the firſt, that invented the mingling of Wine with Water. Whether it were profitable or no, I will not now diſpute or ſtand vpon. I thinke it more decent and more wholeſome, that children ſhould drinke no Wine, vntill they be paſt the age of ſixteene or eighteene yeares. The moſt vſuall and common forme of life, is the beſt: Each particularity, doth in mine opinion impugne it. And I ſhould as much deteſt a Germane, that ſhould put Water in his Wine, as a French-man, that ſhould drinke it

pure. Publike cuſtome giveth Law vnto ſuch things. I feare a foggy and thicke ayre, and 
                              •
                           hunne ſmoke more than death; (the firſt thing I began to repaire when I came to be maiſter of mine owne houſe, was the chimnies and privies, which, in moſt of our buildings, is a generall and intolerable fault) and miſchiefs and difficulties attending on Warre, there is none I hate more, than in hot-ſweltring wether, to ride vp and downe all the day-long in ſmokie duſt, as many times our Souldiers are faine to doe. I have a free and eaſie reſpiration, and doe moſt commonly paſſeover my murres and colds without offence to my lungs, or without coughing. The ſoultry heate of ſommer is more offenſive to me, than the ſharpneſſe of Winter: for, Beſides the incommodity of heate, which is leſſe to bee remedied, than the inconvenience of cold; and beſides the force of the Sunnes beames, which ſtrike into the head, mine eyes are much offended with any kinde of glittring or ſparkling light; ſo that I cannot well ſit at dinner over againſt a cleare-burning fire. To allay or dim the whiteneſſe of paper, when I was moſt given to reading, I was wont to lay a piece of greene glaſſe vpon my booke, and was thereby much eaſed. Hitherto I never vſed ſpectakles, nor know not what they meane; and can yet ſee as farre as ever I could, and as any other man; true it is, that when night comes, I begin to perceive a dimnes and weakeneſſe in reading; the continual exerciſe whereof, and ſpecially by night, was ever ſomewhat troubleſome vnto mine eyes. Loe-heere a ſteppe-backe, and that very ſenſible. I ſhall recoyle no more, from a ſecond to a third, and from a third to a fourth, ſo gently, that before I feele the declination and age of my ſight, I muſt bee ſtarke blinde. So artificiall doe the Fates vntwiſt our lives-threede. Yet am I in doubt, that my hearing is about to become thicke: and you ſhall ſee, that I ſhal have loſt it halfe, when yet I ſhall finde fault with their voyces that ſpeake vnto mee. The minde muſt be ſtrained to a high pitch, to make it perceiue howe it declineth. My going is yet very nimble, quicke and ſtout; and I wot not which of the twoo I can more hardly ſtaie at one inſtant, eyther my minde or my body. I muſt like that preacher wel, that can tie mine attention to a whole ſermon. In places of ceremonies, where every man doth ſo nicely ſtand vpon countenance, where I have ſeene Ladies hold their eyes ſo ſteady, I could never ſo hold out, but ſome part of mine would ever be gadding: although I be ſitting there, I am not well ſetled. As Chryſippus the Phyloſophers chamber-maide, ſaide of hir Maſter, that he was never drunke but in his legges; for wherſoever he ſate, he was ever accuſtomed to bee wagging with them: and this ſhe ſaide at what time ſtore of Wine had made his companions cuppe-ſhotten, and yet he felt no alteration but continued ſober in minde. It might likewiſe have beene ſaide of mee, that even from mine infancie, I had either folly or quicke-ſilver in my feete, ſo much ſtirring and naturall inconſtancy have I in them, where ever I place them. It is vnmannerlineſſe, and prejudiciall vnto health, yea and to pleaſure alſo, to feede groſely and greedily, as I doe. I ſhall ſometimes through haſte bite my tongue and fingers ends. Diogenes meeting with a childe, that did eate ſo, gave his tutor a whirret on the eare. There were men in Rome, that as others teach youth to go with a good grace, ſo they taught men to chew, with decency, I doe ſometimes looſe the leiſure to ſpeake, which is ſo pleaſing an entertainment at the table, provided they be diſcourſes ſhort, witty and pleaſant. There is a kinde of jeloſie and envy betweene our pleaſures, and they often ſhocke and hinder one an other. Alcibiades, a man very exquiſitely-skilfull in making good cheere, inhibited all manner of muſicke at tables, becauſe it ſhould not hinder the delight of diſcourſes, for the reaſon which Plato affords him: that it is a cuſtome of populare or baſe men to call for minſtrels or ſingers at feaſts, and an argument, they want witty or good diſcourſes, and pleaſing entertainement, wherewith men of conceipt and vnderſtanding knowe how to enterfeaſt and entertaine themſelves. 
                              Ʋarro requireth this at a bancket: an aſſemblie of perſons, faire, goodly and handſome of preſence, affable and delightfull in converſation, which muſt not be dumbe nor dull, ſullaine nor ſlovenly: cleanlineſſe and neatneſſe in meates: and faire wether. A good minde-pleaſing table-entertainement, is not a little voluptuous feaſt, nor a meanly artificiall banquet. Neither great or ſterne commaunders in Warres, nor famous or ſtrict Philoſophers have diſdained the vſe or knowledge of it. My imagination hath bequeathed three of them to the keeping of my memorie, onely which▪ fortune did at ſeveral times, yeeld exceedingly delightſome vnto me. My preſent ſtate doth now exclude me from them. For, every one, according to the good temper of body or mind, wherein he findes himſelfe, addeth either principall grace or taſte vnto them. My ſelfe, who but grovell on the ground, hate that kinde of inhumane wiſedome, which would make vs diſdainefull and enemies of

the bodies reformation. I deeme it an equall injuſtice, either to take naturall ſenſualities againſt the hart, or to take them too neere the hart. Xerxes was a ninny-hammer, who enwrapped and given to all humane voluptuouſneſſe, propoſed rewards for thoſe, that ſhould deviſe ſuch as he had never heard-of. And he is not much behinde him in ſottiſhneſſe, that goes about to abridge thoſe, which nature hath diviſed for him. One ſhould neither follow nor avoyde them: but receiue them. I receive them ſomewhat more amply and graciouſly, and rather am contented to follow naturall inclination. We neede not exaggerate their inanity: it will ſufficiently be felt, and doth ſufficiently produce it ſelfe. Godamercy our weake, crazed and joy-diminiſhing ſpirit, which makes vs diſtaſte both them and himſelfe. Hee treateth both himſelf and whatſoever he receiveth ſometimes forward and othertimes backeward, according as himſelf is either inſaciate, vagabond, newfangled or variable.
                        
                           Sincerum est niſi vas, quod cún
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               infundis, acceſcit.Hor l. 1. epiſt. 2 54.
                           
                           In no ſweet veſſell all you poure,
                           In ſuch a veſſell ſoone will ſowre.
                        
                        My ſelfe, who brag ſo curiouſly to embrace and particularly to allow the commodities of life; whenſoever I looke preciſely into it. I finde nothing therein but winde. But what? we are nothing but winde. And the very winde alſo, more wiſely then we, loveth to bluſter and to bee in agitation: And is pleaſed with his owne offices: without deſiring ſtability or ſolidity; qualities that be not his owne. The meere pleaſures of imagination, as well as diſ pleaſure (ſay ſome) are the greateſt: as the ballance of Critolaüs did expreſſe. It is no wonder, ſhee compoſeth them at hir pleaſure, and cuts them out of the whole cloth. I ſee dayly ſome notable preſidents of it, and peradventure to be deſired. But I, that am of a commixt condition, homely and plaine, cannot ſo throughly bite on that onely and ſo ſimple object: but ſhall groſely and careleſly give my ſelfe over to the preſent delights, of the generall and humane law. Intellectualy ſenſible, and ſenſiby-intellectuall. The Cyrenaique Philoſophers are of opihion, that as griefes, ſo corporal pleaſures are more powerfull; and as double, ſo, more juſt. There are ſome (as Ariſtotle ſaith) who with a ſavage kinde of ſtupidity, will ſeeme diſtaſtefull or ſquemiſh of them. Some others I knowe, that doe it out of ambition. Why renounce they not alſo breathing? why live they not of their owne, and refuſe light, becauſe it commeth of gratuitie; and coſts them neither invention nor vigor? That Mars, or Pallas, or Mercurie, ſhould nouriſh them to ſee, inſteade of Ceres, Ʋenus, or Bacchus. Will they not ſeeke for the quadrature of the circle, even vpon their wives? I hate that we ſhould be commanded to have our minds in the clowds, whilſt our bodies are ſitting at the table: yet would I not have the minde to be faſtned thereunto, nor wallow vpon it, nor lie along theron, but to applie it ſelfe and ſit at it. Ariſtippus defended but the body, as if wee had no ſoule: Zeno embraced but the ſoule, as if wee had no body. Both viciouſly, Pythagoras (ſay they) hath followed a Philoſophie, all in contemplation: Socrates altogether in maners and in action: Plato hath found a mediocritie betweene both. But they ſay ſo by way of diſcourſe. For, the true temperature is found in Socrates; & Plato is more Socraticall then Pythagorica
                                 •
                              , and it becomes him beſt. When I dance, I dance; and when I ſleepe, I ſleepe. And when I am ſolitarie walking in a faire orchard, if my thoughts have a while entertained themſelves with ſtrange occurrences, I doe another while bring them to walke with mee in the orchard, and to be partakers of the pleaſure of that ſolitarineſſe and of my ſelfe. Nature hath like a kinde mother obſerved this, that ſuch actions as ſhee for our neceſſityes hath enjoyned vnto vs, ſhould alſo be voluptuous vnto vs. And doth not onely by reaſon but alſo by appetite envite vs vnto them: it were injuſtice to corrupt her rules. When I behold Caeſar and Alexander in the thickeſt of their wondrous great labours, ſo abſolutely to enjoy humane and corporall pleaſures, I ſay not, that they releaſe thereby their minde, but rather ſtrengthen the ſame; ſubmitting by vigor of courage their violent occupation, and laborious thoughts to the cuſtomary vſe of ordinary life. Wiſe had they beene, had they beleeved, that that was their ordinary vocation, and this their extraordinary. What egregious fooles are we 
                              •
                            Hee hath paſt his life in idleneſſe, ſay we; alaſſe I have done nothing this day. What? have you not lived? It is not onely the fundamentall, but the nobleſt of your occupation. Had I beene placed or thought fit for the managing of great affaires, I would have ſhewed what I could have performed. Have you knowen how to meditate and manage your life? you have accompliſhed the greatest worke of all. For a man to ſhew and exploite himſelfe, nature hath no neede of fortune, ſhee equally ſhewes herſelfe vpon all grounds, in all ſutes, before and behinde, as it

were without curtines, welt or guarde. Have you knowen how to compoſe your manners? you have done more than hee who hath compoſed bookes. Have you knowen how to take reſt? you have done more then he, who hath taken Empires and Citties. The glorious maister piece of man, is, to live to the purpoſe. All other things, as to raigne, to governe, to hoard vp treaſure, to thrive and to build, are for the moſt part but appendixes and ſupportes thereunto. It is to mee a great pleaſure, to ſee a Generall of an armie at the foote of a breach, which he ere long intendeth, to charge or enter; all whole, vndiſtracted and careleſly to prepare himſelfe, whilſt he ſits at dinner with his friends about him, to talke of any matter. And I am delighted to ſee Brutus, having both heaven and earth conſpired againſt him and the liberty of Rome, by ſtealth to take ſome houres of the night from his other cares and walking of the round, in al ſecurity to reade, to note and to abbreviate Polibius. It is for baſe and petty mindes, dulled and overwhelmed with the weight of affaires, to be ignorant how to leave them, and not to know how to free themſelves from them; nor how to leave and take them againe.
                        
                           O fortes peior áque paſſi,Hor. 
                                    •••
                                  l 1. 
                                    ••
                                 . 7. 30.
                           
                           Mecum ſ
                                 •
                              pe viri, nunc vino pellite curas,
                           Cras ingens iterabimus aequor.
                           Valiant compeeres, who oft have worſe endured
                           With me, let now with wine your cares be cured:
                           To morrow wee againe
                           Wil launch into the maine.
                        
                        Whether it be in jeſt or earneſt, that the Sorbo
                                 •
                              icall or theologicall wine, and their feaſts or gaudy dayes are now come to bee proverbially jeſted-at: I thinke there is ſome reaſon, that by how much more profitably and ſeriouſly they have beſtowed the morning in the exerciſe of their ſchooles, ſo much more commodiouſly and pleaſantly ſhould they dine at noone. A cleare conſcience to have well employed & induſtriouſly ſpent the other houres, is a perfect ſeaſoning and ſavory condiment of tables. So have wiſe men lived. And that inimitable contention vnto vertue, which ſo amazeth vs, in both Catoes, their ſo ſtrictly-ſevere humour, even vnto importunity, hath thus mildely ſubmitted my ſelfe, and taken pleaſure in the lawes of humane condition, and in 
                              Ʋenus and Bacchus. According to their Sects-precepts, which require a perfectly wiſe man, to bee fully-expert and skilfull in the true vſe of ſenſualities, as in all other duties or devoires belonging to life. Cui cor ſapiat, ei & ſapiat palatus.
                           Cic fin. l. b. 2. 
                           Let his palate be ſavory, whoſe heart is ſavory. Eaſie-yeelding and facility doth in my conceit, greatly honour, and is beſt befitting a magnanimous and noble minde. Epaminondas thought it no ſcorne, to thruſt himſelfe amongſt the boyes of his citie, and dance with them, yea and to ſing and play, and with attention buſie himſelfe, were it in things that might derogate from the honor and reputation of his glorious victories, and from the perfect reformation of manners, that was in him. And amongſt ſo infinite admirable actions of Scipio the grandfather, a man worthy to be eſteemed of heavenly race, nothing addeth ſo much grace vnto him, as to ſee him careleſly to dally and childiſhly to trifle, in gathering and chuſing of cockle-ſhells, and play at coſt caſtle alongſt the ſea-ſhoare with his friend L
                                 •
                              lius. And if it were fowle whether, ammuſing and ſolacing himſelfe, to repreſent in writing and commedies the moſt popular and baſe actions of men. And having his head continually buſied with that wonderfull enterpriſe againſt Hanniball and Affricke, yet hee ſtill viſited the ſchooles in Cicilie, and frequented the lectures of Philoſophie, arming his enemies teeth at Rome with envy and ſpight. Nor any thing more remarkeable in Socrates, then, when being old and crazed, hee would ſpare ſo much time as to be inſtructed in the arte of dancing and playing vpon inſtruments; and thought the time well beſtowed. Who notwithſtanding hath beene ſeene to continue a whole day and night in an extaſie or trance, yea ever ſtanding on his feete, in preſence of all the Greeke armie, as it were ſurpriſed and raviſhed by ſome deede and minde-diſtracting thought. Hee hath beene noted to be the firſt, amongſt ſo infinite valiant men in the army, headlong to ruſh out, to helpe and bring-of Alcibiades, engaged and enthronged by his enemies: to cover him with his body, and by maine force of armes and courage, bring him off from the rout: And in the Deliane battell, to ſave and diſingage Xenophon, who was beaten from his horſe. And in the midſt of all the Athenian people, wounded, as it were with ſo vnworthy a ſpectacle, headlong preſent himſelfe to the firſt man, to recover Theramenes, from out the hands of the officers and ſatelites, of the thirty tyrants of A
                                 •
                              hens, who were leading him to his death; and never deſiſted from his bold attempt, vntill

hee met with Theramenes himſelfe, though hee were followed and aſſiſted with two more. He hath beene ſeene (provoked therevnto by a matchleſſe beauty, wherewith he was richly endowed by nature) at any time of neede to maintaine ſevere continency. Hee hath continually beene noted to march to the warres on foote; to breake the ice with his bare feete; to weare one ſame garment in ſummer and winter, to exceede all his companions in patience of any labour or travell; to eate no more, or otherwiſe at any banquet, then at his ordinary: He hath beene ſeene ſeaven and twenty yeares together with one ſame vndiſmaide countenance, patiently to beare and endure hunger, poverty, the indocilitie and ſtubberneſſe of his children, the frowardnes and ſcratchings of his wife; and in the end malicious detraction, tyranny, empriſonment, ſhakles and poiſon. But was that man envited to drinke to him by duty of civility? he was alſo the man of the army, to whom the advantage thereof remained. And yet he refuſed not, nor diſdained to play for nuts with children, nor to run with them vpon a hob by-horſe, wherein he had a very good grace: For, all actions (ſaith Philoſophy) doe equally beſeeme well, and honour a wiſe man. We have good ground and reaſon, and ſhould never bee weary to preſent the image of this incomparable man, vnto all patterns and forme of perfections. There are very few examples of life, abſolutely full and pure. And our inſtruction, is greatly wronged, in that it hath certaine weake, defective and vnperfect formes propoſed vnto it, ſcarcely good for any good vſe, which divert and draw vs backe; and may rather be termed Corrupters then Correctors. Man is eaſily deceived. One may more eaſily goe by the ſides, where extremitie ſerveth as a bound, as a ſtay and as a guide, then by the mid-way, which is open and wide; and more according vnto arte, then according vnto nature: but therewithall leſſe nobly and with leſſe commendation. The greatneſſe of the minde is not ſo much, to drawe vp and hale forward, as to knowe how to range, direct and circumſcribe it ſelfe. It holdeth for great whatever is ſufficient. And ſheweth her height, in loving meane things better then eminent. There is nothing ſo goodly, ſo faire and ſo lawfull as to play the man well and duely: Nor Science ſo hard and difficult, as to knowe how to live this life well. And of all the infirmities we have, the moſt ſavage, is to deſpiſe our being. Whoſo will ſequeſter or diſtract his minde, le
                              •
                            him hardily doe it, if hee can, at what time his body is not well at eaſe, thereby to diſcharge it from that contagion: And elſewhere contrary; that ſhee may aſſiſt and favour him, and not refuſe to be partaker of his naturall pleaſures, and conjugally be pleaſed with them: adding therevnto, if ſhee bee the wiſer, moderation, leaſt through indiſcretion, they might be confounded with diſpleaſure. Intemperance is the plague of ſenſuality; and temperance is not her ſcourge, but rather her ſeaſoning. Eudoxus, who thereon eſtabliſhed his chiefe fecility, and his companions, that raiſed the ſame to ſo high a pitch, by meanes of temperance, which in them was very ſingular and exemplar, ſavoured the ſame in her moſt gracious ſweetenes. I enjoyne my minde, with a looke equally regular, to behold both ſorrow and voluptuouſneſſe: Eodem ènim vitio eſt effuſio animi in laeri
                                 ••
                              a, quo in dolor
                                 •
                               contractio.
                           Cic. Tuſc. qu. l. 
                                 •
                              
                            
                           As faultie is the enlarging of the minde in mirth, as the contracting it in griefe; and equally conſtant: But the one merrily, and the other ſeverely: And according to that ſhee may bring vnto it, to bee as carefull to extinguiſh the one, as diligent to quench the other. To have a perfect inſight into good, drawes with it an abſolute inſight into evill. And ſorrow hath in her tender beginning ſomething that is vnavoydable: and voluptuouſneſſe in her exceſſive ende, ſomething that is evitable. Plato coupleth them together, and would have it to bee the equall office of fortitude, to combate againſt ſorrowes, and fight againſt the immoderate and charming blan
                              •
                           iſhments of ſenſuality. They are two fountaines, at which whoſo draweth, whence, when and as much as hee needeth, bee it a cittie, be it a man, be it a beaſt, hee is very happy. The firſt muſt be taken for phyſicke and neceſſitie, and more ſparingly: The ſecond for thirſt, but not vnto drunkenneſſe. Paine, voluptuouſneſſe, love and hate, are the first paſſions a childe feeleth: if reaſon approach, and they apply themſelves vnto it; 
                                 •
                              hat is vertue. I have a Dictionary ſeverally and wholly to my ſelfe: I paſſe the time when it is foule and incommodious; when it is faire and good, I will not paſſe it: I runne it over againe, and take holde of it. A man ſhould runne the badde, and ſettle himſelfe in the good. This vulgar phraſe of paſſe time, and, to paſſe the time, repreſents the cuſtome of thoſe wiſe men, who thinke to have no better account of their life, then to paſſe it over and eſcape it: to paſſe it over and bawke it, and ſo much as in them lieth, to ignore and avoyde it, as a thing of an yrkeſome, tedious, and to bee diſdained quality. But I know it to bee otherwiſe; and finde it to be both priſeable and commodious, yea in her laſt declination; where I holde it. And

Nature hath put the ſame into our handes, furniſhed with ſuch and ſo favourable circumſtances, that if it preſſe and moleſt vs, or if vnprofitably it eſcape vs, we muſt blame our ſelves. S
                                 ••
                              lti vita ingrata est, trepida est, tota in ſuturum fertur. A 
                                 •
                              ooles life is all pleaſant, all fea
                                 ••
                              f
                                 ••
                              l▪ all fond of the future. I therefore prepare and compoſe my ſelfe, to forgoe and loſe it without
                              S
                                    ••
                                 
                                 ▪ ep
                                    •
                                 ſt▪
                               15▪
                            grudging; but as a thing that is loſeable and tranſitory by it's owne condition: not as troubleſome and importunate▪ Nor beſeemes it a man not to be grieved when he dieth, except they be ſuch as pleaſe themſelves to live ſtill. There is a kinde of husbandry in knowing 
                              ••
                           ow to enjoy it: I enjoy it double to others. For, the meaſure in 
                                 •
                              oviſſance dependeth more or leſſe 
                                 〈…〉
                               the application we lend it. Eſpecially at this inſtant, that I perceive mine to be 
                              ••
                           ort in time, I will extend it in weight: I ſtill ſtay the readineſſe of her flight, by the promptitude of my holefaſt by it: and by the vigor of cuſtome recompence the haſte of her fleeting. According a
                              •
                            the poſſeſſion of life is more ſhort, I muſt endevour to make it 
                              •
                           ore profound and full. Other men feele the ſwe
                              •
                           tneſſe of a contentment and proſperity. I feele it as well as they; but it is not in paſſing and gliding: yet ſhould it be ſtudied, taſted and ruminated, thereby to yeeld him condigne thankes, that it pleaſed to graunt the ſame vnto vs. They enjoy other pleaſures, as that of ſleepe, without knowing them. To the end that ſleepe ſhould not dully and vnfeelingly eſcape me, and that I might better taſte and bee acquainted with it, I have heeretofore found it good, to bee troubled and interrupted in the ſame. I have a kinde of contentment to conſult with my ſelfe: which conſultation I doe ſuperficially runne over, but conſiderately ſound t
                              •
                           e ſame, and apply my reaſon to entertaine and receive it, which 
                              ••
                            now become froward, peeviſh and diſtaſted. Doe I finde my ſel
                              •
                           e in ſome quiet moode? is there any ſenſuality that tickles me? I doe not ſuffer the ſame to bu
                              ••
                           e it ſel
                              •
                           e or dally about ſenſes, bet aſſociate my minde vnto it: Not to engage or plunge it ſelfe therein, but therein to take delight: not to loſe, but therein to finde it ſelfe. And for her part I employ her, to view her ſelfe in that proſperous eſtate, to ponder and eſteeme the good fortune ſhe hath, and to amplifie the ſame. She meaſureth how much ſhe is beholding vnto God, for that the is at reſt with her conſcience, and free from other inteſtine paſſions, & hath her in body hernatural diſpoſition: orderly & competently enjoying certaine flattering and effeminate functions, with which it pleaſeth him of his grace to recompence the griefes, wherewith his juſtice at his pleaſure ſmiteth vs. Oh how availful is it vnto her, to be ſo ſeated, that whatever ſhe caſteth her eyes, the heavens are calme round about her; and no deſire no feare or doubt troubleth the ayre before her: there is no difficulty, either paſt, or preſent, or to come, over which her imagination paſſeth not without offence. This conſideration takes a great luſtre from the compariſon of different conditions. Thus doe I in a thouſand ſhapes propoſe vnto my ſelfe, thoſe whom either fortune, or their owne errour doth tranſport and torment. And theſe nearer, who ſo ſlackely and incuriouſly receive their good fortune. They are men which indeed paſſe their time: they overpaſſe the preſent and that which they poſſeſſe, thereby to ſerve their hopes with ſhadowes and vaine images, which fancy ſets before them,
                        
                           Morte oblit â quales fama eſt volit are figur asVirg. 
                                    ••
                                 p. l. 10. 641.
                           
                           Aut quae ſopitos deludunt ſomnia ſenſus.
                           Such walking ſhapes we ſay, when men are dead,
                           Dreames, whereby ſleeping ſenſes are miſſe-led.
                        
                        Which haſten and prolong their flight, according as they are followed. The fruit and ſcope of their purſuit, is to purſue: As Alexander ſaid, that The end of his travell, was to travell.
                        
                        
                           Nilactum credens cùm quid ſupereſſet agendum.
                                 
                                    •
                                 ucan. l. 
                                    •
                                 . 656.
                           
                           Who thought that nought was done,
                           When ought remain'd vndone.
                        
                        As for mee then, I love my ſelfe and cheriſh it, ſuch as it hath pleaſed God to graunt it vs. I deſire not hee ſhould ſpeake of the neceſſity of eating and drinking. And I wouldeSe
                                 •
                              . epiſt. 119. thinke to offend no leſſe excuſably, in deſiring it ſhould have it double. Sapiens divi
                                 •
                              iarum naturalium quaeſitor acerrimus. A wiſe man is a most eager and earneſt ſearcher of thoſe things which are natural. Nor that we ſhould ſuſtaine our ſelves by only putting a litle of that drugge into our mouth, wherewith Epimenides was wont to alay hunger, and yet maintained himſelfe. Nor that wee ſhould inſenſibly produce children at our fingers endes or at our heeles, but rather (ſpeaking with reverence) that wee might with pleaſure and voluptuouſneſſe produce them both at our heeles and fingers endes. Nor that the body

ſhould bee voyde of deſire, and without tick-ling delight. They are vngratefull and impious complaints. I cheerefully and thankefully, and with a good heart, accept what nature hath created for me; and am therewith well pleaſed, and am prowde of it. Great wrong is offred vnto that great and all-puiſſant Giver, to refuſe his gift, which is ſo abſolutely good; and diſanull or disfigure the ſame, ſince hee made perfectly good. Omnia quae ſecundum naturam
                           Cie. sin▪ 
                              
                                 •
                              on. l. 
                           sunt; estimatione dignaſunt. All things that are according to nature, are wothy to bee eſteemed. Of Philoſophies opinions, I more willingly embrace thoſe, which are the moſt ſolide: and that is to ſay, ſuch as are moſt humane and moſt ours: My diſcourſes are ſutable to my manners; lowe and humble. She then brings forth a childe well pleaſing mee, when ſhe betakes herſelfe to her Quiddities and Ergoes, to perſwade vs, that it is a barbarous aliance, to marry what is divine with that which is terreſtriall; wedde reaſonable with vnreaſonable; combine ſevere with indulgent, and couple honeſt with vnhoneſt: that voluptuouſneſſe is a brutall quality, vnworthy the taſte of a wiſeman. The onely pleaſure he drawes from the enjoying of a faire yong bride, is the delight of his conſcience, by performing an action according vnto order; As to put on his bootes for a profitable riding. Oh that his followers had no more right, or ſinuewes, o
                              •
                            pithe, or juice, at the diſ-maydening of their wives, than they have in his Leſſon. It is not that, which Socrates, both his and our Maſter, ſaith; Hee valueth rightly as he ought corporall voluptuouſneſſe: but he preferreth that of the minde, as having more force, more conſtancy, facility, variety and dignity. This according to him, goeth nothing alone, he not ſo fantaſticall; but onely firſt. For him, tempe
                              •
                           ance is a moderatrix, and not an adverſary of ſenſualities. Nature is a gentle guide: Yet not moreIbid. l. 5. gentle, then prudent and juſt. Intrandum eſt in rerum nauram, & penitus quid ea poſtulet, pervidendum. Wee muſt enter into the nature of things, and throughly ſee what ſhee inwardly requiers. I queſt after her track; we have confounded her with artificiall traces. And that Academicall and Peripateticall ſummum bonum or ſoveraigne felicity, which is, to live according to her rules: by this reaſon becommeth diff
                              •
                           cult to be limited, and hard to bee expounded. And that of the Stoickes, couzin germane to the other, which is, to yeeld vnto nature. Is it not an errour, to eſteeme ſome actions leſſe woorthy, forſomuch as they are neceſſary? 
                              •
                           et ſhall they never remooue out of my head, that it is not a moſt conuenient marriage, to wedde Pleaſure vnto Neceſſity. With which (ſaith an ancient Writer) the Gods doe ever complot and conſent.
                        To what end doe wee by a divorce diſmember a frame contexted with ſo mutuall, coherent and brotherly correſpondency? Contrariwiſe, let vs repaire and renue the ſame by enterchangeable offices: that the ſpirit may awake and quicken the dul heavineſſe of the body, and the body ſtay the lightneſſe of the ſpirit, and ſettle and fixe the ſame. Qui v
                                 •
                              lut ſummum
                           Aug. verb▪ apoſtol. ſer. 13. c. 6 
                           bonum, laudet animae naturam, & tanquam malum, naturam carnis accuſat, profectò & animam carnaliter appetit, & carnē incarnaliter fugit, quoniam id vanitate ſentit humana, non veritate divina. He that prai
                                 •
                              eth the nature of the ſoule, as his principall good, & accuſeth nature of the fleſh as evill, aſſuredly he both carnal
                                 •
                              y affecteth the ſoule and carnally eſcheweth the fl
                                 •
                              ſh, ſince hee is of this mind not by divine verity, but humane vanitie. There is no part or parcell vnwoorthy of our care in that preſent, which God hath beſtowed vpon vs: We are accoumptable even for the leaſt haire of it. And it is no commiſſion for faſhion ſake for any man, to direct man according to hir condition: it is expreſſe, naturall and principall: And the Creator hath ſeriouſly and ſeverely given the ſame vnto vs. Onely authority is of force with men of common reach and vnderſtanding; and is of more weight in a ſtrange language. But here let vs charge againe. Stul
                                 •
                              i
                                 •
                              iae proprium quis non dixerit, ignavè & contumaciter facere quaefacienda ſunt: & aliò c
                                 •
                              rpus impellere, alio animum, distrahique inter diverſiſsimos motus? Who will not call it a property of folly to doe ſloathfully and frowardly, what is to be done, and one way to drive the body and another way the minde, and himſelfe to bee distracted into moſt divers motions? Which, the better to ſee, le
                              •
                           ſuch a man one day tell you the ammuſements and imaginations, which he puts into his owne head, and for which he diverteth his thoughts from a good repaſt, and bewaileth the houre, he employeth in feeding himſelfe: you ſhall finde there is nothing ſo wallowiſh in all the meſſes of your table, as is that goodly entertainment of his minde (It were often better for vs to bee ſound 
                                 •
                              ſleepe, than awake vnto that wee doe) and you ſhall finde, that his diſcourſes and intentions are not worth your meaneſt diſh. Suppoſe they were the entrancings of Archimedes himſelfe: and what of that? I here touch not, nor doe I blend with that rabble or raskality of men, as wee are, nor with that vanity of deſires and cogitations,

which divert vs, onely thoſe venerable mindes, which through a feruency of devotion and earneſtneſſe of religion, elevated to a conſtant and conſciencious meditation of heavenlydivine things, and which by the violence of a lively and vertue of a vehement hope, preoccupating the vſe of eternall ſoule-ſaving nouriſhment; the finall end, only ſtay and laſt ſcope of Chriſtian deſires; the onely conſtant delight and incorruptible pleaſure; diſdaine to rely on our neceſſitous, fleeting and ambiguous commodities: and eaſily reſigne, the care and vſe of ſenſuall and temporall feeding vnto the body. It is a priviledged ſtudy. Super-celeſtiall opinions, and vnder-terreſtriall manners, are things, that amongſt vs, I have ever ſeen to bee of ſingular accord. Aeſope that famous man, ſaw his Maſter piſſe as he was walking: What (ſaide he) muſt wee not &c. when wee are running? Let vs husband time as well as wee can. Yet ſhall wee employ much of it, both idely and ill. As if our minde had not other houres enough to doe hir buſineſſe, without diſaſſociating hirſelfe from the body in that little ſpace which ſhee needeth for hir neceſſity. They will bee exempted from them and eſcape man. It is meere folly: inſteade of transforming themſelves into Angells, they tranſchange themſelves into beaſts: in lieu of advauncing, they abaſe themſelves. Such tranſcending humor
                              •
                            affright me as much, as ſteepy, high and inacceſſible places. And I finde nothing ſo hard to be diſgeſted in Socrates his life, as his extaſies and communication with Daemones. Nothing ſo humane in Plato, as that which they ſay, hee is called divine. And of our ſciences thoſe which are raiſed and extolled for the higheſt, ſeeme to me, the moſt baſeſt and terreſtriall. I finde nothing ſo humble and mortall in Alexanders life, as his concepts about his immortalization. Philotas by his anſwere quipped at him very pleaſantly and wittily. Hee had by a letter congratulated with him, and rejoyced that the Oracle of Iupiter Hammon had placed him amongſt the Gods; to whom he anſwered, that in reſpect and conſideration of him, he was very glad; but yet there was ſome cauſe thoſe men ſhould bee pittyed, that were to live with a man and obay him, who outwent others, and would not bee contented with the ſtate and condition of a mortal man.
                        
                           —Dijs te minorem quòd geris, imperas.
                              H
                                    •
                                 r. car. l. 3 
                                    •
                                 d. 6.
                           
                           Since thou leſſe then the Gods
                           Bear'ſt thee, thou rul'ſt with ods.
                        
                        The quaint inſcription, wherewith the Athenians honored the comming of Pompey into their Citty, agreeth well, and is conformable to my meaning.
                        
                           D'autant es tu Dieu, comme
                                 
                                    •
                                 lut. 
                                    •
                                 it. Po
                                    •
                                  p
                           
                           Tuter
                                 •
                              cognois homme.
                           So farre a God thou mai'ſt accompted be
                           As thou a man dooſt re-acknowledge thee.
                        
                        
                           It is an abſolute perfection, and as it were divine for a man to know how to enioy his being loyally. We ſeeke for other conditions becauſe we vnderſtand and not the vſe of ours: and goe out of our ſelves, forſomuch as we know not what abiding thereis. Wee may long enough get vpon ſtilis, for be wee vpon them, yet muſt wee goe with our owne legges. And ſit we vpon the higheſt throne of the World, yet fit we vpon our owne taile. The beſt and moſt commendable lives, and beſt pleaſing me are (in my conceit) thoſe which with order are fitted, and with decorum are ranged to the common mould and humane model: but without woonder or extravagancy. Now hath old age neede to be handled more tenderly. Let vs recommend it vnto that God, who is the protector of health, and fountaine all wiſedome: but blithe and ſociall:
                        
                           Frui paratis & valido mihiH
                                    ••
                                 . car. l. 1. 
                                    •
                                 d. 31. 17.
                           
                           Latoe dones, & precor i
                                 •
                              tegra
                           Cum mente, nec turpem ſenectam,
                           Degere, nec Cythara carentem.
                           
                              Apollo graunt, enjoy health I may
                           That I have got, and with ſound minde, I pray:
                           Nor that I may with ſhame ſpend my old yeares,
                           Nor wanting muſike to delight mine eares.
                        
                     
                  
                  The end of the third and laſt Booke.
                  
               
            
         
      
   