
      
         
            
            A TRVE DISCOVRSE HISTORICALL, OF THE SVCCEEDING GOVERNOVRS IN THE NETHERLANDS, AND THE Ciuill warres there begun in the yeere 1565. with the memorable seruices of our Honourable Engliſh Generals, Captaines and Souldiers, eſpecially vnder Sir IOHN NORICE Knight, there performed from the yeere 1577. vntill the yeere 1589. and afterwards in Portugale, France, Britaine and Ireland, vntill the yeere 1598.
            TRANSLATED AND COLLECTED BY T. C. ESQVIRE, AND RIC. RO. OVT of the Reuerend E. M. of Antwerp. his fifteene bookes Hiſtoriae Belgicae; and other collections added▪ altogether manifesting all martiall actions meete for euery good ſubiect to reade, for defence of Prince and Countrey.
            AT LONDON Imprinted for Matthew Lownes, and are to be ſold at his ſhop vnder S. Dunſtons Church in the Weſt. 1602.
         
         
            
            TO THE RIGHT NOBLE AND RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR EDVVARD SEYMOVR, KNIGHT, BARON Beauchamp, Erle of Hartford, and Lord Lieutenant generall for the Queenes moſt excellent Maieſtie in the Counties of Somerſet and Wiltſhire: Thomas Churchyard Eſquire, wiſheth long life, happie health, with increaſe of Honour temporall, and the fruition of heauenly beatitude in Chriſt Ieſus eternall.
            
               IN CALLING TO minde (Right Honourable) the manifold fauours of your moſt noble father, ſhewed me in the raigne of the rare Imp of grace King Edward the ſixt,1547. 1. Edw. 6. and weighing I ſerued vnder him, at the battel of Muſcleborough, your father then Lord Lieuetenant Generall of the Engliſh Armie: I found my ſelfe for ſundrie cauſes much bound to all his moſt noble houſe and familie. And ſo a long ſeaſon watching opportunitie to doe ſome acceptable ſeruice to his noble children, I could not happen on any matter (touching my pen) worthie acceptation. Then reading

of a booke in Latine, written by a graue writer, called Emanuell Meteranus: who wrote fifteene bookes de Historia Belgica. I found ſo great profunditie in the man and matter, chieflie becauſe hee exactlie (without adulation) wrote of martiall affaires, and exployts done by mightie Gouernours and valiant ſouldiers: that not onlie attained honour in the field (ſome of them honourablie borne) but alſo wanne euerlaſting fame by their proweſſe and ſeruice. A while conſidering the conſequence and worth thereof, I thought God would be offended, my countrie diſhonored, and worthie men ſhould be in time to come forgotten and diſcouraged: whereon I took in hand to reuiue dead men and their actions (for fames ſake which all men ſhoote at) that time paſt and time preſent ſhould be ſo remembred, as time to come, and all ages ſhould admire on, and meruaile at the moſt manlie enterpriſes (make Sir Frauncis Ʋere and the true Captaines of Ostend an example) that couragious ſouldiers dare aduenture, take in hand, and accompliſh. I being pricked on

with their incredible valour, diuine vertue of mind, & manly reſolution (conſidering mine own profeſsiō long that way) I took it as an iniurie done to all Souldiers: if I a poore plaine writer ſhould not as much honor them with my pen, as they haue honored God & Prince with their ſword: So in my great age I clapped on a youthfull corage (imagining I ſaw all the worthines of men) and ſtoutly ſtept into the tranſlation of Meteranus workes of Historia Belgica: but often falling ſick, and like to paſſe from world, I called vnto me one Richard Robinſon (a man more debaſed by many then he merits of any, ſo good parts are there in the man) one whom I might commanud and keepe a long while for this purpoſe, and who tooke great paines (I being ſicke) in the tranſlation, and in writing the other Collections of this booke: but my ſtudie, knowledge, experience, and eye witnes for all or moſt actions in this book, perfected euerie point and peece of matter pertaining to the truth of al here in this volume printed: my ſelfe beholding herein a world for a great perſonage to

patronage, bethought me of your honorable Lordſhip. So aduiſedly & ſomewhat fearefully to preſume, I haue humbly preſented my paines to the wel liking of your honor: accepting my good wil & boldnes as far as my honeſt regard leads me. I proteſt neither matter of State, nor vaine inuentions drew my muſe to this hard attēpt and preſumption: but the loue and laudation of Lordlie minded ſouldiers, loyall ſubiects, vnconquered courages, and aſpiring mindes, that dare fight with fortune, flie in the face of all forraine enimies, and daunt the pride of all falſe harted people of the whole world whatſoever. So for the commendation of an infinite number of Lyonlike champions, this work was compiled, printed, & preſented: hoping it ſhal purchaſe fauour of your Lordſhip, and of all noble minded perſonages, that prefer euerie excellent exerciſe aboue al ſlouthfull droniſh idlenes.
            
               Your good Lordſhips in all at commandment, THOMAS CHVRCHYARD.
            
         
         
            
            STRENVO, FORTI, SPLENDIDO, GENEROSO, atque Illuſtri D. D. IOHANNI NORICEO, Equiti Aurato, & Anglorum Militum in Inferiori Germania Colonello Generali, & in abſentia Illuſtriſs. Comitis Leyceſtriae Supremi Gubernatoris ibidem Praefecto fideliſſimo, & Vigilantiſſimo, Viro ex veteri Proſapia oriundo, & ſumma quadam Integritate, Iuſtitia, Prudentia, Temperantia, & rei bellicae gloria, in eaque (quod minimè in multis reperiri eſt) faelici ac fortunato, admodum Inſigni atque conſpicuo: In quo ſunt omnes Imperatoriae Virtutes, nempe, labor in negotijs, fortitudo in Periculis, Induſtria in agendo, celeritas in conficiendo, & Conſilium in prouidendo. PETRVS BIZARVS, cum nihil aliud in praeſentiarum habeat, in quo ſuam (erga Ipſius Illuſtrem Dominationem) obſeruantiam & ſummiſſi animi promptitudinem teſtetur, hoc breue Carmen dedicauit.
            
               
                  VT primum Genitrix hanc te produxit in aurā,
               Lactauit tenero caſta Minerua ſinu;
               Mox ſolido victu pauit, menſa
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Deorum.
               Atque inſtillauit iuſſa Verenda Iouis.
               Addidit & pectus ſapiens plenum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   decoro,
               Facundum eloquium, Conſilium
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   graue:
               Mars verò vt vidit, quanta ſapientia & arte
               Formaſſet Pallas, qui ſibi Alumnus erat,
               In Natum accepit, Diua rogitata, & amorem
               Indidit armorum, ac bella ſubire dedit.
               
                  Et ſimul oſtendit, quo pacto Caſtra locanda,
               Quid
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   etiam proſit, Vel nocuiſſe queat.
               Bellica quid ratio, ſeu diſciplina requirat,
               Sedulus vt perſtet Miles in officio.
               Quinam acies media & Cornu dextrum atque ſiniſtrum
               Inſtrui & aptari, legitimè deceat:
               Vtque acie inſtructa procedere longius auſit,
               Incenſiſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   animis totus in Armaruat;
               Quo tormenta loco diſponi & quid faciendum,
               Vt Polyorcetes quis queat eſſe breui.
               Quando itidem Fabij exemplo cunctandum & inani
               Spepugnae facta, continuiſſe iuuat.
               Infectis donec rebus in Peſte prematur.
               Vel Fame diſſoluit Caſtra domum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   redit.
               Num dolus an metus potior ſit, quidue petiri
               Succeſſu efficiat, commodiori Via.
               Quando Equite aut Pedite eſt vtendum, quidue moretur,
               Euentum; Induciae an Pax ſit habenda magis,
               Num pugnare die, Nocturnoue tempore, quid
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
               
               Multos an paucos praeſtat habere bonos.
               Quidue agat interea Miles dum ceſſat ab Hoſte
               Ne ſe deſidiae dedat, Inerſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ſiet,
               Denique faelici postquam fera praelia dextra
               Egeris, & volitas clara per ora virûm:
               Parcere num victis deceat, vel perdere prorſus:
               Quid
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   horum illustret, nobilitet
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   prius.
               Haec tibi MARS plene oſtendit, docuit
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   vt Alumnum,
               
                  PALLADIS vt fueras ante in amore pari.
               Et quoniam in bello multum ſibi vendicat Ipſa,
               
                  FORTVNA hanc flexit, quo tibi adeſſe velit;
               Annuit, haec ſiquidem fausto tibi Numine & olim,
               Praeſenti ac prompta ſe fore dixit ope.
               Ergò vt caepiſti pergas DVX Inclyte bellum,
               
                  Quod nunc prae manibus prouehere atque ſequi,
               Donec ad optatum finem perduxeris: aqua
               Cum ſit cauſa DEO grata & amica bonis.
            
            
               Idem. Ad Eundem.
               FOrtunae donum eſt, generis quod Clara propago
               Te Illuſtrem efficiat, nobilitet
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Domum,
               Quod verò proprijs meritis virtute
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   adeptus,
               Longe praecellit, ſplendidiuſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   nitet:
               Nam
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   tua in bello Generoſa & fortia facta,
               Fermè Orbis totus nouit, ad Aſtra vehens.
               Haec te perpetua decorabit gloria, laude,
               Et tibi poſt obitum Vita perennis erit:
               Tu, interea PYLII tranſcendas Neſtoris Annos
               Et placidos habeas ac ſine nube dies;
               Vt Patriae, atque Orbi praeſis victricibus armis
               Et cum Pax fuerit, Conſilio atque fide.
            
            
               In illuſtriſsimi eiuſdem D. Effigiem depictam.
               MAgnanimi effictam quicunque conſpicis arte
               
                  NORICEI, effigiem, nobile cernis opus:
               Sed ſi animum videas, quem picta oſtendit Imago,
               Dices nil toto magis in Orbe micat.
               Omne Inſigne huic vni fata ſimul dedere,
               
                  DII ſuperi, vnde hominum conſtat tutela,
               Hunc tegite & veſtris accumulate bonis:
               Vt Victor referat multos ex Hoste triumphos,
               Semper
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   aeterna gloria Illuſtris viuat.
               
                  Petrus Bizarus Belga.
               
            
         
         
            
            A Table of the principall contents in this Booke.
            
               THe Tranſlatours Collection of the ſucceeding Gouernours in the Netherlands, and the originall cauſes of the ciuill warres there 1565. page 1.
               The Originall warres there vnder the Dutcheſſe of Parma. page 4.
               Captaine Churchyards ſeruice. page 5.
               The ciuill warres there vnder the Duke of Alua. pag. 15.
               The warres there vnder Don Lewis Requiſenſius. pag. 20.
               The warres there vnder Don Iohn de Austria. p. 24.
               The warres there vnder Alexander Prince of Parma againſt the Arch-Duke Mathias for the States. p. 30.
               Maiſter Henrie Knowles ſeruice. p. 46.47.
               Sir Iohn Norice knight, his firſt comming into the Netherlands 1577. p. 27.
               His proceedings there vntill 1588. p. 102.
               The warres there vnder Francis Duke of Aniow for the States, againſt Alexander Prince of Parma. p. 43.
               Captaine Edward Stranges ſeruice. p. 45.
               The warres there vnder Parma againſt the Prince of Orange. p. 54.
               Fiue ſeuerall meſſengers ſent to murther the Prince of Orange. p. 55.
               His death and funerall. p. 59.
               His Title and Epitaph. p. 65.
               The warres there vnder the Prince of Parma and the States. p. 67.
               The warres there vnder the Prince of Parma & the Erle of Leycester. p. 74.
               
                  Captaine Thomas Louel, Captaine Charles Blunt, now L. Mountioy, Captaine Thomas Vauiſer, now Sir Thomas Vauiſer. p. 74.
               Captaine Iohn Pryſes ſeruice. p. 79.
               Sir Phil. Sidneyes ſeruice there, his death & funerall. p. 88.
               The Erle of Eſſex his ſeruice at Zutphen. p. 89.
               The Lord Willoughbie his ſeruices there. p. 88.103.104.
               Sir Thomas Cicil now Lord Burley. p. 84.
               Sir Henrie Norice. p. 88.89.
               Sir William Ruſſels ſeruice there. p. 95.
               In Ireland. p. 145.
               The wars there vnder the Prince of Parma againſt Count Maurice. p. 103.
               The death of Parma where the Belgick hiſtorie endeth. p. 111.
               The ſeruice of Sir Thomas Morgan p. 18.19.32.41.47.106.
               The ſeruice of Sir Roger Williams. p. 38.42.97.98.
               His ſeruice in the Portugale voyage. p. 113.
               The voyage to Portugale. p. 112.
               Sir Edward Norice his ſeruice there. 113.116.
               A Iournall of Sir Iohn Norices ſeruice in Fraunce. 1591. p. 119.
               His memorable ſeruice at Breſt in Britaine 1594. p. 134.
               A briefe diſcourſe of his ſeruice in Ireland againſt the Arch-rebell Tyrone 1595. p. 144.
               Sir Thomas Baskeruil, Sir Francis Vere, and Colonell Huntley. p. 98.
               Sir William Pelham. p. 101.
               Sir Thomas Knowles. p. 74.138.
            
            FINIS Tabulae.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE TRANSLATORS COLLECTION OF THE ſucceeding Gouernours in the Netherlands, and originall cauſes of the warres there.
            
               BEfore I come to the Conſequent, I muſt begin with the Antecedent; before I frame the vpper building,
                  Exordium de quatuor circumstantijs.
                I muſt fixe a foundation: ſo before I come to the cauſes of the Ciuill warres in the Netherlands, I muſt by due courſe of the Dutch and Latin Hiſtorie (which I fellow) ſet downe the ſucceeding Gouernours in thoſe Countries, by foure circumſtances, briefly gathered out of my Authors firſt booke Hiſtor. Belgic. as he largely by ſubſtance deliuereth for former cauſes of later conſequents.
            The firſt circumſtance is this: The deriuation of the gouernment of thoſe Countries,
                  The firſt circumſtance. Historia Belgica lib. 1.
                by proceſſe of time for many yéeres vnder foure Dukes of Burgundy, and as many Archdukes of Auſtrich: of which, that Philip was the later Archduke, who (being ſonne of Maximilian, before Archduke of Auſtrich, and Emperour of Germany, and ſonne in law to Ferdinando King of Spaine, leauing behind him his two ſonnes, Charles the elder, and Ferdinando the younger, with foure daughters ſuruiuing) deceaſed out of this mortall life in the yeere of our Lord. 1505.
            
            
               
               
                  The ſecond circumſtance.
               The ſecond circumſtance is this: That the ſaid Charles (as elder brother Archduke of Auſtrich and King of Spaine) ſailing by ſea thence into the Netherlands Anno 1517. taking poſſeſſion of thoſe Countries for his owne behoofe,
                  
                     Historia Belgica lib. 1.
                within two yéeres after (that is to ſay Anno 1519. on the 28. of Iuly) was elected at Frankford in Germanie, both King of Romanes and Emperour of Germanie, by the name of Charles the 5. Emperour: and ſo continuing in magnificent and memorable honour and renowne many yeeres gouerned thoſe Countries: yet, not without ſome ſeueritie, as it is ſaid: Much like the Eagle, which (ſeeming naturally to affect her young ones) will yet nouriſh them with great auſteritie. Although euen in his time (for the Religion of the Goſpell) the ciuill broyles beginning in Germanie, he ſought by his great wiſedome and grauitie to appeaſe the ſame: yet happily liued he after this in great honour and felicitie: for he liued and ſaw his foreſaid younger brother Ferdinando choſen Caeſar at Colen Anno 1530. and on the fift of Ianuary 1531. crowned King of the Romanes, who became an earneſt fauourer and furtherer of the Goſpell. He liued alſo and ſaw the felicitie of his lawfull begotten ſonne Philip, both Duke of Burgundy, Archduke of Auſtrich and King of Spaine Anno 1542. but he liued not to ſee the life and death of his baſe begotten ſonne Don Iohn de Auſtria, who died (as afterwards ſhall appeare in this hiſtorie) Anno 1578. To be ſhort, he liued yet to ſee his ſaid ſonne Philip married with Mary Quéene of England on the 19. of Iuly 1554. and in the next yéere following 1555. he gaue this his ſaid ſonne Philip full poſſeſſion and principalitie ouer the ſaid Countries of the Netherlands, which hee had himſelfe ſo gouerned (not without ſome ſeueritie) 38. yeeres. Finally, omitting larger diſcourſes of this Charles the 5. Emperour, (of his ſo many notable and memorable expeditions in in his life time performed) let theſe few words ſuffice; that he made nine into Germanie, ſeuen into Spaine, ſeuen

into Italy, tenne into the Netherlands, foure into France, and two into England, which in all were nine and thirtie. After all this (to make an end of his memorials) he reſigning vp the Empire and iuriſdiction thereof vnto the Princes Electors of the ſame, in the yeere of our Lord 1557. and ſo leauing Germanie departed into Spaine, where he finiſhed the race of his mortall life on the 20. day of September in the yeere of our Lord 1558. hauing been Emperour for the full ſpace of nine and thirtie yeeres.
            The third circumſtance is this: That his aforeſaid younger brother Ferdinando,
               
                  The third circumſtance.
                ſucceeding him in the Empire, on the 18. day of March 1558. did ſo godly, and ſo religiouſly gouerne the ſame,
                  
                     Historia Belgica lib. 1.
                from his firſt inauguration thereunto, that he had much adoe to be confirmed in this Imperiall dignitie, by Pope Paul the 4. of that name Biſhop of Rome; becauſe he this good Emperour granting peace vnto the Churches of Germanie, & preferring the Goſpell, the ſame Pope Paul withſtood him in Italy, and thwarted him with warlike forces out of France, to come of purpoſe to Rome, there to diſgrace and diſanull his gouernment euen in that ſame very yeere 1558. aforeſaid. This good Emperour notwithſtanding perſeuering an Imperiall ſincere Patrone of the ſacred religion (to his great comfort) ſaw his ſonne Maximilian alſo choſen and crowned King of Romanes, in the moneth of Nouember 1564. And ſo he himſelfe hauing been Emperour ſixe yeeres and vpwards, was by the God of peace called out of this troubleſome world on the 25. of Iuly Anno 1565.
            
            The fourth and laſt circumſtance, yet not the leaſt which I gather out of my Authors firſt booke is this:
                  The fourth circumſtance.
                That as the ſaid King Philip of Spaine had been from the yeere of our Lord 1555. aforeſaid,
                  
                     Historia Belgica lib. 1.
                poſſeſſed in his ſoueraigntie ouer the Netherlands, vntill this yeere 1565. aforeſaid; ſo his father Charles the 5. Emperour in his time was not ſo ſeuere an Eagle, but this his ſonne now

becomes as ſore a Lion, ioyning hands as it were with the Pope of Rome: And whereas they two made other Chriſtian Princes beléeue they became right reſtorers of Chriſtian policie; in proceſſe of time they prooued themſelues to be deſtroyers of the peace and weale publike of a good gouernment, in ſending foorth the Spaniſh Inquiſition, as the ground of al the griefe in the Netherlands, and the originall cauſe of the ciuill warres there, now following.
            
               The originall ciuill Warres in the Netherlands vnder the Ducheſſe of Parma.
               
               
                  FOr firſt by the ſaid Inquiſition ſent from the Pope and the Spaniſh King into the Netherlands,
                  
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 2.
                   againſt the profeſſors of the Goſpell, or of the reformed religion, thus it fell out: That the King hauing choſen new Biſhops for the purpoſe,
                     
                        Anno 1566.
                   ſent them thither to execute the ſaid Inquiſition amongſt them.
                     The States finding thēſelues greatly iniuried and grieued by ye Spaniſh Inquiſitiō, do exhibit vnto the Regent a iuſt proteſtation of their cauſe.
                   They of the reformed religion hereupon exhibit to the Lady Margaret Ducheſſe of Parma and Placencia (ſent by the King thither for their Regent and Gouerneſſe vnder him) a little printed booke: wherein they craue mitigation of the Kings Decrée, hoping (as they alleaged) that he would not infringe and fruſtrate their ancient priuiledges and franchiſes in thoſe points, and for that cauſe they were reputed and called Geuſij, viz. poore men. Which thing being interpreted to

the worſt in Spaine, and ſore ſtomacked by the King, they of the reformed religion perceiuing the ſame fire euery day more and more to burſt foorth (to quench,
                     The keyes and cuſtodie of Antwerpe in Churchyards hands at this vprore, witnes Maſter Ioſeph and his brother Maſter Richard Candeler.
                   or at leaſt as it were to auoide the ſame) by publike aſſemblies at Sermons, and conuenient places, doe prouide for their profeſſion and for protection of their particular eſtates. Hereupon on the other ſide began Idolatrie to outface and diſanull their doings by the Papiſts: yet for all this the ſaid Ladie Margaret Ducheſſe of Parma, then Regent, was commaunded by the King, to graunt ſecuritie vnto the Nobilitie of the profeſſors (who had béen before ſuiters vnto her for the ſame) that they might fréely haue their aſſemblies and Sermons, till further order were taken therein. Then they of the reformed religion laid away their weapons, and ſome Idolatrous perſonages were put to death. Meane while the Regent hauing gathered vnder her ſome forces,
                     Churchyard Captaine of 30. thouſand in this time at Antwerpe.
                   began to ſow diſcord and debate amongſt the reformed Nobilitie: whereof the leſſer part being ſtirred vp, or rather enforced by her menacings and threatnings, doe againe take them to their weapons: whereupon at Antwerpe did ſedition and tumult ariſe. To auoide future daunger, William Prince of Orange and Counte Naſſaw hereupon departeth out of the Netherlands in happie time.
                     The Prince of Orange and Counte Naſſaw departeth out of the troubled Low Countries in happie time.
                   Againe at Antwerpe was commandement giuen in certaine places that Sermons ſhould be prohibited; and ſo all things ſeeme to ſtand in vncertaintie, though ſome hoped that the Kings diſpleaſure would be pacified. To conclude, yet ſo many as were ſuſpected of the reformed religion were taken and violently put to death: many others taken endured long impriſonmēt: many others fearing worſe to come,
                     Churchyard then fled to England in a Prieſts apparell, and came to ye Queene.
                   fled theſe Low Countries, diſperſing themſelues into diuers parts of Europe. And all this continued vnder the ſaid Ducheſſe of Parma, Regent for the ſpace of twentie moneths.
               In the time of theſe troubles and graunt of an Interim (to haue frée libertie in preaching the Goſpell) there

fell out a bloodie conflict neere Antwerpe, at a place called Auſteruile: for one Monſieur de Toloze a Proteſtant (ſuſpecting bad practiſes of the Regent) gathered and aſſembled two thouſand ſouldiers in a fortification, not fullie accompliſhed at the ſaid Auſteruile, meaning with that force to aide them of Antwerpe, if ill meaſure were offered them; which the Regent went cunningly about: for ſhe (in all ſecret manner) raiſed a thouſand horſe and foure thouſand footemen, and gaue the charge of them to a gallant Captaine called Monſieur Beauvois (albeit a cruell man) who immediatly marched priuily towards this new fortification, and before Monſieur Toloze could make himſelfe ſtrong to withſtand his enemies, the Regents power in the breake of day ſet vpon the vnreadie and féeble force of Toloze, and charged them ſo furiouſly and hotly, that they entred the weake fortifications, & ouerthrew the whole companie of Toloze, ſauing a few that eſcaped dangerouſly into Antwerpe; among which ſouldiers Captaine Churchyard ſaued himſelfe and entred Antwerpe. Notwithſtanding Toloze being ſlaine, and almoſt all his men, the enemie (after the victorie gotten) marched with all poſſible ſpéede towards Antwerpe, where fortie Enſignes of the Regents power were in battell on the Market place readie to receiue them, and kept the Towne gates as open as they could for that purpoſe: but the Proteſtants fearing miſchiefe and miſerie, ran to the gates in all haſte and ſhut them faſt, carying away the keyes into the hart of the towne. The Prince of Orange, the Counte de Horne, and Counte Hoſtraet, with Monſieur Decardes, and many more Seigneurs and Noblemen beholding the daunger they were in, knew not what to doe, nor durſt make any reſiſtance, for offending the Regent, and loſſe of liues, goods and lands: and ſo refuſing all charge againſt the Regent, they left the common people in a great vprore and hazard: to auoide which extremitie, the Commoners began to clap on armour, and made a moſt reſolute mutinie,

crying Viue les gueulx, that is to ſay, liue poore men: and beholding ouer the walles Monſieur Beauvois and his people proudly marching (after ſo much bloodſhed) within a mile of Antwerpe, the Proteſtants reſolutely determined to encounter Beauvois in the fields: but wanting a generall Captaine, and horſemen to match againſt horſemen, they fell in a great murmuring, and knew not what was beſt to take in hand: yet ſeeing all their gouernours refuſe them, called courage to themſelues, and ſo reſolued to make a ſtranger their Captaine, they being enterlarded with many valiant ſouldiers (that came from the ſiege of Valenciana) came ſuddenly to Captaine Churchyards lodging and burſt open his doore, commaunding him in all haſte to come out, and take the charge of thoſe that would fight for the Goſpell, which attended his comming well armed in the ſtréetes: Churchyard told them he would ſerue among them,
                     The Proteſtants chuſe Churchyard their Captaine
                   but was vnable to gouerne a multitude. Whereon they bent their pikes on him, and threatned to kill him if he did refuſe their louing offer. He thereupon gaue his promiſe to obey, and ſo without any armour came into the ſtréet, where was raiſed ſuch a ſhout and noiſe of people (and ſo many caps flung vp) that it was a wonder to heare and ſee it: he preſently geſſed their number was great and their quarell good, ſo in a few words he deſired that ſuch as would not fight, to depart to their wiues and children: whereat all the people ſhouted and cried, Goe forward and we will follow. Then vnto the gates goes the aſſemblie of 25. thouſand, ſauing the ſouldiers were left by direction to make head and beard the fortie Enſignes in the Market place: ſo the Proteſtants breaking with barres of yron a poſterne gate (becauſe the keyes were hidden) their Leader ſtill aduancing his Enſigne full in the enemies view, their horſemen ſomewhat ſlacke (for the rifling Tolozes Campe) caſt in the Reregard: and not readie to charge the forefront of the Proteſtants, made the Proteſtants vſe the more aduantage both of ſhot and

ſeruice, whereby they gat ſo much blood and victorie, that their Leader (of ſome great conſideration) made his people retire into the towne againe, the number that ſallied were eight thouſand. They were no ſooner entred but the Prince of Orange and Noblemen welcomed (with embracings) the Leader and all his followers, promiſing great matter for their boldnes. But the Captaine and his people hoping to rid the whole towne of Spaniards, marched with the aduantage of the time (the gates faſt ſhut) towards the Market place, order being giuen that fiue thouſand ſhot ſhould enter at the backes of the enemies, when one ſhot of Canon ſhould be diſcharged againſt the Proteſtants from the Market place (where 24. great pieces were rammed full of ſtones and chaines) and reſolutely the Proteſtants holding this courſe, marching thorow Cooper ſtrote in as great brauerie and terror as may be imagined, they approched néere the enemies with ſuch a thundring noiſe and crie as ſeemed marueilous. The Prince and great Earles before named, pitying the great ſlaughter that might follow this bold attempt, on horſebacke (as all the Nobilitie were) the Prince preſented peace to the Proteſtants: who diſdaining his offer cried kill him, and ſo bent their pikes on him. What, what (quoth the Captaine) will you kill your gouernours, fie for ſhame, hold ſtill your weapons: but the Prince and the reſt with him, drew backe their bridles ſo hard and ſo diſorderly, that downe came the Prince and his companie all flat backward in the place. The enemie then amazed at that ſight (beſides regarding the priuie ſtratagem or practiſes at their backes neere the riuers ſide) began after their muſing and amaze to diſcourage themſelues, in ſo much that the Cannons they would haue ſhot off, and the ſeruice they intended was vtterly forgotten, ſo that ſuddenly they let fall their pikes, and at the Proteſtants approch then at hand, the enemies cried (to ſaue their owne liues) Viue le gueulx aloude, and in ſuch ſort that they ſuffered all their Captaines

and Leaders to the number of ſixe ſcore to be taken priſoners, loſing all their Cannons and Munition, putting euery thing they had into the Leaders hands of the Proteſtants, he vſing victorie in the great aduauntage of that ſeaſon, cauſed all their Cānons to be drawne with ropes from the Market place to the Méere brugge, a great ſtréete néere the Burſe, and filling euery window full of ſhot to flanke each part and corner of the ſtréetes and Burſe, he chained carts together with ſhot in them, and thereon pitched ſtraight waies a Campe full vpon the Méere-brugge, hauing then at commaund thirtie thouſand reſolute ſouldiers, for the ſpace of thrée daies and nights: all which time the Generall appointed Captaines and officers for euery companie, and all warlike orders ſet in ſtay, he thought all had been well and in ſuretie: but a vile cunning and vnchriſtian brute was raiſed, that the Caluiniſts would cut the Martiniſts throtes: on which falſe brute, in one night the Proteſtants loſt much more than ten thouſand men, who ioyned as they might with the Papiſts: yet God mouing the mindes of good men, made the Proteſtants and their Generall couragiouſly to plucke vp their hearts, and the Generall with fiue hundred ſhot, match fired in cocke, marched to the Prince of Orange his preſence, and told him that this drift of the Martiniſts going from the Proteſtants, ſmelled of two much ſuttle ſmoke, the ſmoother thereof might ſet all Antwerpe on a flaming fire, deſiring him to ſee a quicke redreſſe herein, or elſe preſently the Proteſtants would giue all the enemies a battell, to the whole ſpoyle and ouerthrow of the towne: and therewithall he departed from the Prince, and vſed his fiue hundred ſhot, to houſe and driue in all the Martiniſts into their lodgings: for as yet they had not ioyned with the enemies force, they were ſo wearie with watching before, and ſo glad of reſt, libertie, and companie of their wiues and friends at that preſent.
               The Prince then with great prudence and policie,

ſent word to the Proteſtants that they ſhould haue free acceſſe to Sermons and preachings, which they ſought, (for the which was a goodly preaching place built) and further the Prince promiſed that the Martiniſes and all other enemies ſhould lay downe their weapons and paſſe quietly euery man to his lodging, requiring that the Proteſtants would make no further ſtirre, but as quietly as were poſſible to march by euery mans owne doore, and there to leaue the townes men in their dwelling places as they marched: which requeſt of the Prince was to Gods glorie and his honour in perfit order performed, alwaies the Proteſtants kept them ſtrong till the enemie were all lodged, and then each man went home in peace. All theſe things being done and brought to a good end, without ſhedding of blood or ſpoyle of any Chriſtian creature: yet the Prince was after forced to flée to Breda, as the ſtorie now ſhall ſhew you following.
               The noble Prince of Orange in Breda (his owne towne) ſeeing his ſonne and heire taken from Louaine at ſchoole, by the crueltie of the Duke of Alua, and throughly conſidering the calamitie of Flaunders (by the dealing of a tyrannous gouernour): this warlike wiſe Prince with a fatherly regard and true affection to Gods word and the Netherlands, began to ſtomacke the wrongs receiued whē he gouerned Antwerpe (and the imminent danger that Flanders ſtood in) and calling to minde al promiſes were broken that were ſolemnly made by the late Regent, he conſulted and communed of this matter with the States of Germanie and his friends there, who counſelled him to take armes in hand and raiſe a power, at his owne houſe in Dillenbrough, a parcell of Germanie (ten great leagues from Colen) and theſe great Captaines and worthie Germanes promiſed not only in perſon, but alſo in purſe and munition to aſſiſt him, which they performed with great expedition, at the time when he ariued at Dillenbrough, where Churchyard being ſent (from the Lord high Chamberlaine of England) ſaw the méeting

of all this mightie aſſemblie, and ſerued vnder Monſieur de Lume (Counte de la March) as Cornet-bearer to two hundred and fittie light horſemen all that warres, which was againſt the Duke of Alua in his firſt comming to Flanders. The Prince paſſed his muſters beyond the Rhine, betweene an Abbey and Andernake, a walled towne in Germanie, and had in his Armie two and twentie thouſand foote, and thirtéene thouſand horſe, all Swartrutters: ſo paying his ſouldiers with Dollars two moneths pay afore hand, he paſſed this great armie in boates very néere Andernake, marching from thence towards Aken, a ſtrong towne: but by the way was a great mutinie betweene the Almaines and Burgonians, who ſaid the Almaines had loſt the battell of Groning, where Counte Lodwick and all his power was ouerthrowne, thoſe words made many a man be ſlaine: but the broyle was pacified by the Prince, who marched ſtraightwaies to Aix, a great Citie, and the Armie encountred anon after the Duke of Aluaes ſouldiers, horſemen, ſome valiant of minde, and ſome by ſorcerie with words and characters in their doublets, more mad than manly, yet hoping in ſorcerie ventured too farre, and could not be killed with ſhot; a deſperate royſter beholding the boldnes of theſe enchaunted perſons againſt ſhot, drew his ſword and ſtroke one of theſe men on the face, who quickly yéelded himſelfe (as after his fellowes did) to the mercie of the ſword. The matter marſhally a long while pleaded and orderly by Marſhall law diſputed, the enchaunted men were all condemned to be hanged, becauſe againſt the law of Armes they had vſed vnchriſtian and vnlawfull meanes to murther men and ſhed Chriſtian blood. Theſe men executed the Princes armie (after a good ſumme of money paied for the raunſome of Aix the great towne) departed towards Senttro, another walled towne, which redéemed it ſelfe in like manner. All this while the Duke of Alua with thirtie thouſand ſhot and foure thouſand horſe, waited on the Princes power,

ſtill ſkirmiſhing with braue ſouldiers againſt the Princes forces. But almoſt forgotten at the entring of the Princes armie, he bruted that he would paſſe thorow Liege, a marueilous mightie towne, where the Duke aduertiſed by eſpiall, attended the Prince his comming: ſuddenly without ſound of Drumme the Prince parted a contrarie way towards a foord on the Maze néere Maſtricke, marching all the whole darke night very faſt, (which loſt ſome men) and at breake of day came to a bare Village where the foord was, to enter into Flanders: ſo in all haſte poſſible the horſemen paſſed, bearing a croope behinde them each one a ſouldier: but the horſes ſo many, and their legges holding vp the water, the riuer roſe ſo hie that many footmen were drowned, and much victuall wet and loſt: yet before night all the armie left aliue were landed in as great ſafetie as could be wiſhed. But reſting thrée daies there, the Duke was in Maſtrick (not very farre off) to giue the Prince battell: ſo God ſent a moſt faire day for that cauſe, in his gracious pleaſure. The Prince ranged and ſet in battell, marched on a goodly plaine towards Maſtrick, and the order of the field by excellent ſouldiers ſet and ranged in the moſt princelieſt manner that might be (Churchyard at all this): The vangard, battell and reregard ſo ſhining in armour, and other awfull troupes of horſemen, which ſeemed a great wood and terror to behold, that in very deede the ſhow and fight thereof would haue delighted any man liuing to behold: for the march and order of the field was miraculous to conſider on, and moſt fearfull to match withall and encounter. Yet the Duke of Alua (a great noble ſouldier) determined (as it was thought) valiantly to fight with all this braue armie, ſo in ſhort time the very ſame day the Prince came within ſhot of Cannon (and at the length of Muſket) ſo néere the Duke, that he ſent a number of horſemen to make a brauado, and plied it ſo faſt with ſmall ſhot out of the trenches (for he was intrenched) that it was thought a great ſlaughter would enſue.
               
                  Thus continuing all the latter end of the day in ſkirmiſh and great ſeruice, at night the Prince was faine to lodge his power néere the very face of the Dukes army, farre from water or wood: but in the night ſeaſon the Duke remoued his Campe, and a farre off waited on the Prince daily, who neuer did march backward, but came (as afore is ſaid) to Aix, Senttro, Tongre, and other townes of good moment, making his profit as he might euery where, becauſe ſome had broken promiſe with him in a moſt odious manner. For ſome had falſified their faith, beſides odde trumperies they deuiſed, and otherſome poyſoned the ſtanding waters and pooles: yea and in ſome places milke and drinke was infected, Milles were all broken downe, and no corne to be grinded: by which Heathenlike & foule helliſh practiſes, the Princes armie was like to periſh: yet a ſhift was found to bring the armie by little & little from theſe miſeries: but forced to ſkirmiſh with Alua oftē. The Prince came cunningly to a towne called Tongre, finding there much of the Dukes prouiſion, and a number of waggons full of corne and other neceſſaries, ſuccoured and made ſomewhat in ſtrength, and in hope of good fortune: the armie meant to paſſe ouer a little riuer néere Tielmount, but by the way were ſharply encountred with the whole power of the Duke of Alua, where in hazard the Count de Hoſtraet was ſhot in the legge, of which wound he died andn after. The Duke likewiſe (a politike ſouldier and great gouernour) bearded the Prince a while with hot and cruell countenance, and ſo ſent Iulian Romero to lie in ambuſh betwéene a bridge and paſſage, full in the face of the Princes Campe, marching to paſſe the water: which Romero moſt like a rare great ſouldier, in a fine warlike ſort, couched his force flat on the earth behinde the Forlorne hope, ſent from the Prince to view and make place for his armies paſſage: Romero came before as one that knew the aduantage of time, couching cloſe as flat as they might, and ſo the day conſuming, all was in reſt, and

both parties in a great wood lay as cloſe as they could. The Duke maintaining ſkirmiſh, followed ſtill after the Réergard of the Prince. Romero ſuffered both the Carriage, Vaungard and Battell to paſſe the bridge: and as the Reergard aduaunced themſelues to march ouer the paſſage, Romero deſcried his power of ſixe thouſand ſhot, and ſo put al the Forlorne hope to flight, or ſlew the moſt of them. A noble Frenchman called Monſieur de Malberg, and all his companie of foure thouſand braue ſouldiers were there defeated, with others to the number of eight thouſand men: which fight and ſlaughter endured in great and bloodie broyle till the very night approched, and compelled both the Camps to lodge within Cannon ſhot one of another, and in the night the Duke priuily ſtole away, for ſome hidden cauſe and policie: for the next morning Monſieur Ianlis and ſeuen thouſand footemen, with fiftéene hundred horſe, marched ful vpon the Dukes power in a faire plaine néere vnto Namur. The Duke dreading Ianlis boldnes (and the Princes Camp not farre off) turned him backe another way, and made his march very faſt, for feare of a blow: then Ianlis and all his noble troupe ioyned with great ioy with the Princes power. Immediatly the Prince prepared to beſiege a towne called Chaſteau Cambreſi, and marching thitherwards, the Duke waited at hand, but the towne was ſtrongly beſieged: notwithſtanding the Duke (as the Prince had intelligence) minded to diſturbe him: the eſpials of the Dukes Campe were by the Prince taken, which declared in what diſorder the Dukes Campe lay: whereon without ſound of Drumme (moſt ſecretly) the Prince marched to méete the Duke, and the barking of dogs vnder the Ruitters waggons, gaue warning how both the armies were almoſt mingled together (the night being dark) whereat a great alarme aroſe on both ſides: but the Dukes Campe within two houres was intrenched, and ſo a great encounter of horſemen a long time paſſed out the morning in ſkirmiſhing, with many ſlaine and hurt.

The Prince then departing from Flaunders came into France néere Guiſe and S. Quintins, and marched after to diſperſe his armie towards Strasborogh: in the which way Churchyard (departing frō the Prince to England) ſo leaues this true teſtimonie for a witnes, that the author which wrote the other hiſtorie (which Robinſon tranſlated) left partially out of his booke, whereas theſe matters at that ſeaſon were worthie of memorie.
               
                  
                     Written fom pag. 5. hitherto by Thomas Churchyard.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The ciuill Warres proceeding in the Netherlands, vnder Don Ferdinando Aluares de Toledo Duke of Alua: ſent thither by the King of Spaine as Commander Generall.
               
                  AFter all this, King Philip ſtill proſecuting his former purpoſe with further extremities, in the yeere of our Lorde 1567. ſent thither Don Ferdinando Aluares Duke of Alua, by the title of the Kings Commaunder Generall: a noble perſonage no doubt, but a notable cruell Tyrant, tall of perſonage, leane of bodie (like vnto Brutus or Caſſius whom Caeſar cenſured to be feared) ſtrong of members, vpright in ſtature, long and leane faced, hollow eyed, of fierce and grim countenance, with a long and gray beard, haughtie of minde, ſtoute of courage, and (as my

Author ſaith) Magnus Aulicus, Inſignis Diſſimulator: yet of ſurpaſſing ſkill and knowledge in feates and policies of warre,
                     The Duke of Alua ſent as Gouernour ouer the Low Countries vnder King Philip.
                   excéeding therein all Spaniards of his time: who as he exerciſed moſt ſeuere martiall diſcipline in his warres, ſo vſed hee great iudgement in leading foorth his armies, pitching his Tents, and pointing out harbours for his ſouldiers, becauſe he was of long time a continuall practitioner in warres defenſiue and offenſiue: and ſo bold he was and of ſuch ſtout ſelfe-conceit, as one fearing no daunger, that he would take vpon him no charge of any armie, except he might haue the chiefe place and prerogatiue of Commendator Generall, as the Spaniards call it. As certainly he ſerued both the father Charles the 5. Emperour before remembred, and Philip the ſonne now mentioned, in chiefeſt place or calling of Martiall affaires, and that in moſt important and difficult enterpriſes:
                     
                        Lib. 3.
                   managing their warres in Italy, Spaine, France, Hungary, Germany, Africk and the Netherlands: who now entring there in perſon all armed, found all things in peaceable ſtate: But within a yéere after, he began to be ſtirre him in the ininoyned Inquiſition afreſh, euery where grieuouſly vexing and perſecuting the inhabitants with new impoſitions, mutinies, confiſcation of goods, impriſonment, ciuill warres, and vnmercifull death: daily inueighing againſt them, that they had broken their alleageance to the King and his ſupreame authoritie, and that they had loſt all priuiledge of libertie, life and poſſeſſions: therefore he calleth a generall new Councell of the States, abrogating old, and eſtabliſhing new lawes, quite contrarie to the ancient former cuſtomes of thoſe countries; vrging daily the new Biſhops to be diligent in executing the ſaid Inquiſition, Summo iure (or rather Summa iniuria) according to that ſaying, Sic volo, ſic iubeo, ſtet pro ratione voluntas: he himſelfe ſetting all things in order for ciuill wars, fortifieth old and erecteth new fortreſſes, Caſtles and muniments, making prouiſion for priſons, and other ſuch

preparations. This being in the yéere 1569. our Engliſh Merchants and Marriners (amongſt whom, my ſelfe a poore Clerke trauailing towards Antwerpe, for my preferment) they ſome in one place, ſome in another, I at Fluſhing (vpon Chriſtmas éeue) were taken out of our beds,
                     He made a general reſtraint of Engliſhmēs ſhips & goods.
                   and (our ſhips and goods by the Kings commaundement imbargued) ſo carried to the Geuarghen huiſe, as they called it. The cauſe whereof was, that certaine ſhips with the Kings treaſure driuen néere the coaſt of England by tempeſt of weather, were taken by the Quéenes Maieſties ſhips & brought into the Themes: by meanes whereof both Engliſh Merchants and Marriners were detained in priſon, and their ſhips and goods reſtrained as well in all the Spaniſh Kings dominions; as alſo on the other partie the King of Spaines ſubiects and goods were areſted in the Quéenes Maieſties kingdomes of England, Wales and Ireland: which continued for the ſpace of two yéeres following, till that order was then taken for the ſame: when the Merchants, Marriners and their ſhips were releaſed and diſmiſſed, but the goods liable to the value of the Spaniſh Kings treaſures was anſwered accordingly.
               Thus the crueltie of the time and ſtate in the Netherlands increaſing moſt odious vnto other Chriſtian princes,
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 4.
                   it was Gods good pleaſure to put into the mindes of the States of Germanie,
                  
                     
                        Anno 1569.
                   alſo of Charles the 9. King of France (for mitigation of theſe calamities) to enter a league with William Prince of Orange and Count Naſſaw,
                  
                     Certain Chriſtian Princes aſsiſt ye Prince of Orange to fortifie the Low Countries.
                   to leuie forces of men and munition vnder conduct of the Count Lodwicke of Naſſaw brother to the ſaid Prince, being alſo aſſociated with the two valiant Captaines, Ienliſij and the Lord of Laxone: who (with their ſaid forces part Germans, part Frenchmē, part Dutchmen,
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 3.
                   and part Engliſh voluntaries) bending their endeuours to the ſurpriſing of the ſtrong towne of Mounts in Henault, on the 24. of May in the foreſaid yéere obtained

the towne by fight, and poſſeſſed the ſame by ſtrong fortification thereof. In that yéere (ſaith my author) King Philip vpon ſuſpition that he had of his only ſon Charles Prince of Spaine (that hee ſhould prepare himſelfe with habiliments by ſea to ſtep away into the Netherlands,
                  
                     King Philip impriſoneth his owne ſon.
                   and ioyne with the States, vz. the Prince of Orange, Count de Egmont, Graue van Horne and others, to manage ciuill warres againſt his father and his Commander before named) for that cauſe caſt his ſaid ſonne into priſon, where continuing a certain time he died, yet as it was thought by bléeding. The foreſaid Gouerneſſe Ducheſſe of Parma and Placencia departed about the end of Iuly home into Italy,
                  
                     The Ducheſſe of Parma departeth into Italy.
                   being conducted vpon the way to the ſea ſide by the Commander Generall: who returning to his Court at Bruxels, cited thither the ſaid Prince of Orange,
                  
                     The King of Spaine proſcribeth the Prince of Orange, and two other eſtates.
                   Count de Egmont and Count Horne (hauing before proſcribed them) to appeare vpon their alleageance to the King, before him as his Lieutenant generall ouer all thoſe Countries. The Prince of Orange kept him aloofe out of his daunger: the other were taken, laid in priſon, and afterwards beheaded in the Market place at Bruxels. In that yéere alſo was Tergoas beſiged the ſecond time by Tſeratius for the Prince and the States,
                     Tergoas beſieged.
                   who was afterwards made Gouernour of Fluſhing: there at Tergoas hauing made his ditches and plotted his ſtations for his Ordinance to be diſcharged, by and by made he a breach in two places of the walles. At the which aſſault the French ſouldiers vnder Monſieur and the Engliſh ſtipendarie hired ſouldiers vnder Captaine Thomas Morgan and others, néere vnto the chiefeſt gate of the towne, being 25▪
                   paces broade, about midnight made entrance into the Citie: whileſt Creitius the Colonell, being by his Frenchmen greatly furthered therein, beſtirs him to ſcale the other ſide of the gate: but being countermaunded by the ſouldiers within ſufficiently defending that place, both hée

and they were repulſed, and forced to giue back frō that aſſault. Whereby Mondragon the Spaniſh Captaine (newly thereupon come thither) reſerued T
                        ••
                     goas from any further ſiege (himſelfe and his ſouldiers wading thorow déepe waters, ſent thither in great oportunitie by the Commaunder Generall) as it were to reſiſt the aſſault and reſcue the towne, which was performed with the loſſe of two hundred Engliſh and French ſouldiers ſlaine and fallen into the waters there.
               
                  Frederick the ſonne of the Duke of Alua,
                  
                     Frederick the ſonne of Ferdinando beſiegeth Zutphen.
                   hauing béen with his ſaid father very forward in all actions, about the 21. of Nouember 1572. with the forces which he had vnder him from his father, beſieged Zutphen in Gelderland, and ſhortly after tooke it. Thus the Duke of Alua hauing with great crueltie gouerned for the King, making hauocke of all with little mercie whereſoeuer hée came, caſting downe ſtrong holds, and killing man, woman and child: to make an end of his miſchiefes, when now the citie of Harlem in Holland had for her own beſt ſafegard receiued the Garriſon of the ſaid Prince of Orange, pitched there his Tents,
                     
                        Harlem fortified by the Prince of Orange.
                     
                     
                        Captaine Barnabey Rich his notes.
                     
                   bringing thither his armie, conſiſting of Wallons and Frenchmen, vnder their Captaines: alſo Engliſhmen and their Captaines, by name Captaine Turner, who ſerued there ſome 8. yéeres, Captaine Cotton, Captaine Chriſtopher Hunter, Captaine Candiſh, Captaine George Gaſcoyne and others, which were all voluntaries; and of certaine Scottiſh Regiments, ſending thither alſo all kindes of neceſſarie victuals, furniture and prouiſion for the ſaid armie: thither then came the ſaid Frederick ſonne to the ſaid Duke of Alua, and with his freſh forces of diuers countries (ſent thither by the King of Spaine) laieth great and long ſiege vnto the ſame:
                     The ſame beſieged by Fredericke the Duke of Alua his ſonne.
                   which enduring from the ſaid yéere 1572. néere at ende, till the 15. of Auguſt 1573. hée at length preuailed ſo farre, that profligating the Princes armie, and diſperſing them here and there, he entred the ſame citie, and obtained and kept it in poſſeſſion for the

King, vſing the inhabitants thereof with no little extremitie.
                     
                        Anno 1573.
                   About the 20. of Auguſt in the ſaid yéere 1573. his ſaid father Don Ferdinando Duke of Alua (partly his crueltie being by the King perceiued,
                     The Duke of Alua departeth out of the Low Countries.
                   and partly by the States of the Netherlands complai
                     ••
                  d vpon, leauing his ſaid ſonne to gouerne and bea
                     •
                  e armes for the King) with a conuenient retinue departeth out of thoſe Countries, not without many a curſe, banning and exclamation made vpon him for his farewell, whē he had ſo there tyrannized about the ſpace of 6. yéers little more or leſſe. Vide Hieronymū Conneſtagium in Hiſtoria Portugaliae.
               
            
            
               The Warres in the Netherlands, vnder Don Lewis Requiſenſius Gouernour for the Spaniſh King.
               
                  ABout the beginning of October 1573. ſuccéeding the ſaid Duke of Alua, came thither ſent by the King of Spaine another Noble man named Don Lewis Requiſenſius,
                  
                     Don Lewis de Requiſenſius a Spaniard ſucceeded in that gouernment.
                   he taking gouernment vpon him, ſmally enterpriſed to purpoſe in the latter end of that yéere. In the next yéere following 1574. he beſtirreth him by all meanes poſſible to leuy his forces to beſiege diuers townes,
                     
                        Anno 1574.
                   and to fortifie ſome others: amongſt which when the Zelanders had attempted to beſiege Midleborow, they ſo farre proceeded that the towne ſuffered great penurie and diſtreſſe of all things both by ſea and by land;
                     Midleborow yeelded to the Prince of Orange.
                   and by meanes thereof was in the end yéelded vnto the ſaid Zelanders for

the Prince of Orange, who ſupported their powers and forces therein.
               What time in the yéere aforeſaid 1574. this newcome Commaunder brought his forces to beſiege the citie of Leyden, one of the chiefeſt cities in Holland,
                  
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 5.
                   the ſaid Prince of Orange ſent thither for ſafegard thereof vnder Lieutenant Edward Cheſter an Engliſhman, ten Enſignes or companies of Engliſh ſouldiers, all voluntaries, who appointing certaine of them for a garriſon in the citie,
                     Leydon beſieged by Spaniſh forces.
                   procureth the citizens to make ſpeedie prouiſion of corne and graine for the neceſſarie ſuſtentation of his ſouldiers. But finding the want thereof at his comming, and their ſlownes in preparing the ſame at that time, he complaineth greatly yt they the leſſe regarding or foreſeeing the ſame in time, do not ſo ſpéedely prouide for the premiſſes: and ſtill he earneſtly calleth vpon thē to looke well to the preſent neceſſitie in time, & ſo for their ſafetie and defenſe he doth the part of a good carefull Captaine,
                     Lacke of looking to neceſſitie in time, loſeth all in fine.
                   that in the meane time they reſiſted and repelled the enemies forces for thrée moneths. And he telleth them they ſhould lack no helpe that he could performe or procure any way: notwithſtanding they of the citie being to too negligent and ſlow in following his aduice in time, ſhortly after (for want of better prouiſion in due time) fiue Enſignes of thoſe Engliſh ſouldiers were conſtrained to ſtep aſide to the enemie, contrarie to their promiſe to the States. This towne was reſcued by cutting certaine bankes and letting in the ſea, which drowned many of the enemies troupes.
               In the beginning of the next yéere 1575. the King of Spaine hauing victualles,
                     
                        Anno 1575.
                   manned and rigged a Nauie of ſouldiers purpoſely ſent to inuade the Netherlands, a great part of the ſame Nauie ariued by contrary winde and weather vpon the coaſts of England: all for the moſt part of theſe ſhips were ſuch as they call Aſſabres, Pinaſſes, ſo ſmall as that they might paſſe thorow the narrow and deepe riuers of thoſe countries: who when

they chanced vpon the coaſt of the Ile of Wight in England, ſuch a friend was the Quéens Maieſtie vnto them, that by the helpe of certaine her Highnes and ſubiects ſhips, they were wafted ouer to Dunkerke, where (after they had landed their ſouldiers and conueied their treaſure which they brought to the Commaunder) ſtaying vpon thoſe coaſts the latter part of that winter,
                     The Spaniſh kings Armado ſent into the Low Countries, caſt away by tempeſt.
                   theſe ſhips (with thoſe that were left in them) by huge and terrible tempeſts there ariſing, were (one fruſhed with the other) quite ſunke and caſt away; a thing ſurely reputed for Gods wonderfull worke.
               This yeere alſo the States of Holland and Zeland (by the chiefe perſwaſion of the Prince of Orange) after much and graue conſultation, with no leſſe aduice and deliberation determined, condeſcended, and agreed to make ſuite vnto ſome forreine Prince, to protect and defend them from the horrible furies and outragious tyrannies of the Spaniſh gouernment.
               In that yeere 1575. was Zirickſea alſo beſieged by the enemies forces,
                     Zirickſea beſieged.
                   which continued for nine moneths ſpace: where when the Prince of Orange had reſiſted the enemie what he could with men, munition and money, to his power, it was afterwards (ſore againſt this good Princes will) yeelded vp vnto the Spaniſh King and his forces in the next yeere following 1576.
               
               The ſame next yeere following 1576. what time the ſaid Commaunder Generall with his Spaniards and others,
                     
                        Anno 1576.
                   
                  
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 6.
                   bent their forces to inuade Antwerpe: there then the Marques of Hauery being General, and Champigny another valiant Captaine for the States, ioyned their forces to the full reſiſting of that inuaſion, and valiantly withſtood the enemie. But then the Earle Oberſteyn making haſte from the Offerlings houſe in Antwerpe (being purſued by the Spaniards) thinking by flight to eſcape that daunger, ruſhed into a Flemmiſh ſhip in the riuer, where by the way (through the heauines of his armour borne downe) he fell from that ſhips ſide and

was drowned. At that inuaſion alſo were miſſing (purſued by the Spaniards) certaine others of the chiefeſt perſonages of authoritie and valour in Antwerpe: There then alſo the young Count Egmont was taken priſoner in the Abbey of S. Michael, and with him Capreyſe and Gogneyſe two Noble men, and ſo caried captiues away. Then the Spaniards thus inuading the noble citie of Antwerpe, entring it with fire and ſword moſt furiouſly ſacked, ranſacked and ſpoyled the ſame citie in horrible manner: ſo that they were Lords and conquerours of the ſame by the fourth day of Nouember in the yeere aforeſaid 1576. where I note (by the way) that on the ſelfe ſame day when the noble citie of Antwerpe moſt tyrannouſly and moſt lamentably was thus taken, burnt and ſpoyled by the Spaniards, euen then the ſame day Don Iohn de Auſtria the baſtard ſonne of Charles the 5. Emperour before remembred, and new ſent Commander Generall for the King of Spaine, came into the Netherlands to gouerne the ſame. As for the late Commander Don Lewis Requiſenſius, when he had ſo ſerued his Prince King Philip as Generall of the Netherlands foure yéeres, he deceaſed at Bruxels: vpon whoſe death by the author were written theſe verſes following.
            
            
               IN MORTEM LVDOVICI REquiſenſ. Regis Hiſpan. Commendatoris magni praedicti in Belgia. 1576. Carmen.
               ILle Requiſenſus Regi percharus, & ipſi
               Vrbis Quirini flaminis,
               Nunc chlamydem, quando
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   togam, quando
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   cucullum
               Triplex Chymera gestitans:
               Belgarum genti Rector datus, ante faeraci
               Praefectus & Inſubriae.
               
                  Mitis & Horrenaus, turgens abdomine, Praedo
               Prouinciarum ſubdolus;
               Emunctor populi, Procerum Calcator, Aſylum
               Raſis, Piorum Carnifex.
               Numen Iberorum, Batauorum terror, Iniquus
               Belli atque Pacis Arbiter.
               Ad generum Caereris ſubito ſe contulit, illuc,
               Citatus à Vitellio:
               O ſtupidos Belgas, paſsi qui talia Monſtra,
               Adhuc ſupini ſtertitis?
               FINIS.
            
            
               The ciuill Warres there vnder Don Iohn de Auſtria.
               
                  
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 6.
                  
                  IN Ianuary following the next yeere 1577. (after he was there ſetled a certaine ſpace▪) the Prince of Orange and diuers of the chiefeſt of the States (by a certaine humble endeuour to doe all things for the beſt) doe offer him in friendly manner for his preſent intertainment,
                     The offer made by the Prince and States vnto Don Iohn of Auſtrich.
                   vſe and benefit, the poſſeſſion of Louaine and Machlin, to the intent to haue ſome treatie of pacification confirmed by him: The ſaid Prince and States (at his requeſt firſt demaunding the ſame) on their parts giuing for hoſtages the before named Marques of Haury, the Burgraue of Gaunt, and the Abbot of S. Gertrude. He accepteth

their proffer made, receiueth the hoſtages, and bearing them in hand (if he might be beleeued) he would remaine either at Machlin or at Louaine, where he would further procéede in treatie according to their former requeſt to him ſo made.
               In ſo much as the ſame being on the 5. of Ianuary 1577. condeſcended, confirmed & publiſhed by the aforeſaid Prince of Orange and the States at Bruxels: Don Iohn (then as it ſeemed) being moued by many reaſons to make vnitie with the States, promiſed them firſt to ſend away and quite diſmiſſe the Spaniſh Kings forces out of thoſe Countries, and after that maketh them many faire promiſes on his part to be performed, to the number of 19. Articles,
                     The pretended contract of Don Iohn with ye Prince of Orange, proueth in fine fraud in frendſhip.
                   which were on the other partie likewiſe by and for himſelfe and his Councell on the 17. of February 1577. condeſcended, confirmed, exhibited and publiſhed. But howſoeuer this appeared in outward ſhew (as the Poet ſaith) it fell out Exitus acta probat, caret ſucceſſibus opto: For the Prince of Orange and the States looking into his water more iudicially and prudently preuenting the worſt, ſought by al meanes to prouide in time for their owne ſecuritie and ſafetie, and like proſpecting Patriotae for the protection of themſelues and their countrie, fortified themſelues and the ſame euery where. Notwithſtanding on the 7. Ides of Aprill Anno Dom. 1577. King Philip confirmeth this as a perpetuall decree: Hereupon the Prince and the States doe call vpon the new Gouernour (Don Iohn the Baſtard of Auſtrich) for money, and hauing receiued ſome certaine pay, doe ſatiſfie in part the ſouldiers there ſo long ſoiourning. So the Spaniſh, Italians, and Burgundian ſouldiers, as well footmen as horſemen, on the 11. of May doe forſake and depart from Vtrich, and from all the Caſtles and Fortreſſes thereabouts. About the ſame time the before named Countie Egmont captiue, with the other two Noblemen taken by the Spaniards the laſt yéere, and beſides theſe, Valdeſius with fiue or

sixe others taken by the States, were all diſmiſſed and ſent home, and at length all other ſtrangers alſo, vnto whom (their promiſed pay being now made) Countie Maunsfeld Gouernour of Luxenberg performeth ſafe-conduct, departing out of Luxenberg into Italy very rich and paſſing ioyfull. To conclude, Don Iohn who (before the departure of the Spaniards out of the Netherlands,
                  
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 6.
                   could not be made gouernour of the ſame) now in the meane time prepareth himſelfe to take vpon him that gouernmēt at Louaine:
                  
                     Don Iohn made Gouernour Generall for the Spaniſh King.
                   where (when very many Noblemen came to congratulate his thither comming on the Calends of May, this ſaid yéere 1577) he with a great number of Noblemen of his traine, in great ſolemnitie, honour and triumph went to Bruxels: where on the 4. of May he was enſtalled Gouernour General for the Spaniſh King ouer all thoſe Netherlands: The people verely perſwading themſelues, that henceforth now perfect ſtabilitie of peace would poſſeſſe their expectations.
               
                  
                     
                        Anno 1577.
                  But within a while after he (ſeeing the gouernment of the Countrie in his abſolute power and poſſeſſion) began forthwith to execute that authoritie,
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 7.
                   which in ſecret manner he had from the King enioyned him: And hereupon priuily conferreth out of hand with the Germane ſouldiers (as yet ſtaying in the Netherlands) to this end eſpecially, that he may haue certaine chiefe Cities there by ſome ſuttle ſleight or cunning deuice rendred into his hands.
                     The double dealing of Don Iohn diſcouered and defeated.
                   But his Letters mentioning thoſe ſecret deuices, were intercepted (as God would haue them) in France: and ſo his fraude or guile being now diſcouered, he aforehand taketh the citie of Namur. But when he attempted the like thing againſt Antwerpe, his enterpriſe had no ſucceſſe: for the Caſtle being fortified and defended by Bourſius in the behalfe of the States, this meanes, policie and power ſufficiently preuailed againſt the enemies enterpriſe. Againe alſo Bergen opt Zome, Breda, and Shertogenbuſch, this Don Iohns forces were diſcomfited by Champigny in the States behalfe,

valiantly encountring and ouermatching the enemie at all aſſates.
               Hereupon the Prince of Orange and the States doe write vnto the Spaniſh King,
                     The States write to the Spaniſh King of Don Iohns indirect dealing.
                   accuſing the ſaid Don Iohn of his indirect dealing, contrarie to the confidence they repoſed in him: They alſo certified his Maieſtie that this Don Iohn faining peace, and the procuring thereof amongſt them, would not ſticke to depart the countrie, if he were ſure to bring it to paſſe thereby that the Catholike Religion (as he termeth it) and the kings authoritie might ſo reſt in ſafetie. And yet in the meane time after all this proteſtation, this Don Iohn ſendeth for the Spaniſh and other diſmiſſed ſouldiers to come backe againe. To croſſe him therefore another way, preuenting his purpoſe the States doe caſt downe the Caſtle of Antwerpe, miſtruſting he would forth with be their euill neighbour there firſt of all: and incontinently they prepare them to warre againſt Don Iohn. Therefore they ſend ſpeedely for the Prince of Orange, not farre off as then, whom they condiſcend to make the chiefe Gouernour of Antwerpe. Hereupon groweth a ielouſie, whereby many of the Noblemen being mooued in ſome manner contrarily, doe ſend for the Archduke Matthias,
                  
                     The Archduke Matthias ſent for by the States.
                   brother to the then & now ſtill Emperour Rodolphus 2. and ſonne of Maximilian before Emperour, hoping vnder his authoritie to haue particular iuriſdiction in the ſeuerall Prouinces there: which thing when they of Gaunt did heare of, they take the Duke of Aſcot with others of that faction, and commit them to ſafe kéeping.
               Here it is eſpecially to be remembred, that on the 17. day of Iuly that yéere 1577. came firſt to the Prince of Orange,
                  
                     Sir Iohn Norice his firſt comming into the Netherlands.
                   a worthie and forward ſouldier Master Iohn Norice, ſecond ſonne to the Lord Henry Norice, Baron of Rycot in Oxfordſhire, a Gentleman of great courage and dexteritie, who (as Captaine Peter Cripſe, a follower of him in this his firſt ſeruice, and in all others afterwards

for a long time, ſaith) landed firſt at Dunkirke with thrée hundred Engliſhmen,
                     Captain Cripſes note.
                   where he arming thē, marched toward Antwerpe with them, where the ſaid Prince of Orange remained: and ſo from thence to Brokam, where he made pay to all his ſouldiers the laſt day of that moneth of Iuly 1577. aforeſaid.
               Duke Matthias being come into thoſe countries, and at the firſt thus forſaken of them whom he ſhould haue had his aſſiſtance, by the perſwaſion yet of the Prince of Orange, is by the States choſen and ordained their chiefe Gouernour for the King: and Don Iohn is publikely proclaimed an enemie to all the Low Countries, Datum Bruxellae 7. Decemb. 1577.
               
               The States in this yéere ſend their Ambaſſadours vnto diuers Monarchs and Princes of diuers kingdoms and countries, to excuſe themſelues and accuſe Don Iohn of the miſgouernment of the Netherlands: In France they were offered by the King his brother and Quéene Mother both fauour and furtherance for their defence.
               And here it is to be remembred, that whereas (by reaſon of the ſame requeſt of the States made vnto the Quéenes Maieſtie of England) certaine euill diſpoſed perſons flattering the King of Spaine, bore him in hand that the Quéenes Maieſtie did ambitiouſly ſeeke to vſurpe the gouernment of thoſe Low Countries, contrarie to his good pleaſure: Her Maieſtie therefore being giuen to vnderſtand of thoſe ſlanderous and falſe bruites giuen out againſt her (to purge her ſelfe of ſuch ſiniſter dealing,
                     Enuie and ſlander euermore enemies to good enterpriſes.
                   and of that falſe and vndeſerued ſurmiſe ſuggeſted to the ſaid King, and diſperſed abroad to blemiſh her Highnes credit and eſtimation with other Chriſtian Princes) to the intent ſhe would rather be knowne to God and the whole world, To eſchue euill and doe good, to ſeeke peace and inſue it, Pſal. 34.13. and not to be an intruder into thoſe troubles (as it was falſely ſurmiſed) to nouriſh the ciuill warres in thoſe Countries, laboureth by princely and friendly meanes of perſwaſion to

the Spaniſh King for carefull conſeruation and preſeruation of the ſame: and likewiſe in Chriſtian and friendly manner exhorteth the Prince of Orange and States of thoſe Countries to ſubmit themſelues to their ſoueraigne Lord and King in all humilitie and obedience, and ſo ceaſing from ciuill diſcord, if that they would reiect their weapons, and practiſe to appeaſe thoſe troubles with patience, no doubt of it God would worke in the Kings heart to forget and forgiue all that was paſt,
                     Iohn Stow pages 1167.1168.1169.
                   to remedie all euils preſent, and prouide for the beſt to come. Theſe friendly motions made by her Maieſtie for both the King and his ſubiects, written in Latin and in Engliſh, ſeuerall copies were ſent from her Maieſtie to the King of Spaine by a wiſe and learned Gentleman named Maſter Thomas Wilks, on the 20. day of December Anno 1577.
               
               In the beginning of the yéere following 1578. the ſaid Don Iohn brought in a new,
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 7.
                   
                  Alexander Farneſius (the ſonne of Lady Margaret before named, Ducheſſe of Parma and Regent of the Low Countries) now by the name and title of Prince of Parma,
                  
                     Alexander Duke of Parma brought into the Low Countries by Don Iohn.
                   as another enioyned Generall for the Spaniſh King, with his Spaniſh and Italiſh ſouldiers come into thoſe countries: In whom Don Iohn hauing great confidence, proclaimeth open warres againſt the Prince, the States and thoſe Countries. The Pope Gregorie (alias ante Hugo) the 13. of that name on the other ſide, ſendeth his Croſſe, and denounceth his curſe againſt the Prince of Orange, all the States and their partakers in thoſe warres. Hereupon Don Iohn taking great encouragement vnto himſelfe,
                     The States forces then at Gembleu ouerthrowne by Don Iohn▪
                     
                   and thoſe whom he had in charge vnder him, ſet vpon the armie of the States at the towne of Gembleu in the County Namure: and there diſcomfited them with great ſpoyle and ouerthrow of them on the 30. day of Ianuary 1578. And ſo ſtill proſecuting his purpoſe in hope of further victorie, he ſubdueth afterwards, Louaine, Phillipville, Limburge, and certaine other townes; which he

together with the Duke of Parma his forces had accompliſhed before Iuly following.
               
                  
                     Duke Iohn Caſimire commeth into England.
                  In that Ianuary, vz. on the 22. day about 7. of the clocke at night, Duke Iohn Caſimire Countie Palatine of Rhene and Duke of Bauaria, landing at the Tower-wharfe in London, was there by diuers Noblemen and others of England, honourably receiued and conueied to Sir Thomas Greſhams houſe, the Queenes Agent, in Biſhops gate ſtreete in London, where he was feaſted and lodged till Sunday next, that hee was honourablie brought to her Maieſties Court royall at Whitehall, and after lodged at Sommerſet-houſe on the 8. of February following; he was made Knight of the Garter: and on the 14. of February hee departed homewards with great rewards, giuen by the Quéenes Maieſtie, the Nobilitie and men of honour. This noble Duke being a valiant Martialliſt, became afterwards a ſtipendarie warriour of great valour and accompt, and did much good ſeruice againſt the Spaniards, for the Prince of Orange and the States of the Low Countries.
            
            
               The Warres in the Netherlands, vnder the Prince of Parma for the King, and the Archduke Matthias for the States.
               
                  VPon the firſt day of Auguſt (amongſt vs Engliſh commonly called Lammas day) in the yéere of Chriſt our Sauiour 1578. (which day the Spaniards doe highly honour,
                     Captaine Whitſtocks note.
                   eſpecially Don Iohn, who as this day ouercame the Turks in a battell by ſea) they endeuoured by all meanes to enterpriſe ſome great exploite: ſo as they ſent out of Louaine two ſcoutes or

eſpials in very baſe apparell, to prie about and deſcrie the Prince of Orange his Tents,
                     The battell on Lammas day betweene Louaine and the Leger.
                   at that time remaining in the Leger: which two ſouldiers ſhould indéed vſe al their endeuour to burne vp the houſes neere vnto thoſe Tents: and whileſt they ſhould ſo ſet the inhabitants on worke to quench the fire, al the whole Spaniſh hoſt, which conſiſted of foure thouſand horſemen and ſeuen thouſand footemen,
                     
                        Anno 1578.
                   vnder conduct of Mondragon a Spaniſh Captaine (although Don Iohn the Baſtard of Auſtrich,
                  
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 8.
                   and Alexander Ferneſius Duke of Parma were both in perſon there alſo) ſhould ſuddenly and at vnwares ſurpriſe and ſuppreſſe the Prince of Orange his armie.
               But (as it was Gods good pleaſure and fauour to the contrarie) thoſe ſame two Spies were taken, and the enemies were diſappointed of their purpoſe, being valiantly encountred by the Engliſh,
                     A fierce fight for 7. houres.
                   Scottiſh & Frenchmen, from nine of the clocke in the morning vntill foure of the clocke in the afternoone of the ſame day: and that with a hot and fierce fight (fortune ſo fauouring the States and their forces) that they put their enemies to flight, and purſued them to the vtmoſt the ſpace of thrée miles and more.
               The firſt of the Engliſh Captaines which ſet vpon the enemies, was that valiant Lieutenant William Marckham, a Nottinghamſhire man, ſterne of countenance, ſtrong of hands, and couragious of heart, like a Lion caſting downe, ouerthrowing, and ouermatching whomſoeuer he met with: In whoſe commendations the States themſelues ſent diuers Letters into England. But in truth the greateſt glorie of this fight fell to the then couragious Colonel Norice, who comming that Lammas day from Brokam (aforeſaid) very early in the morning to Remingham Leger,
                  
                     Captain Cripſes note.
                   where the States armie were in fight with Don Iohn of Auſtrich (the Graue van Buſſhy being Generall of the States armie) he the ſaid Colonell Norice ioyning with eleuen companies

of Engliſhmen more, vz. of Colonel Candiſh, Colonel Morgan, and Colonel Cotton (who ſpent fifteene ſeuerall barrels of powder vpon the enemies at that time, before they entred the Campe of the States) euen there the ſaid Colonell Norice hauing three ſeuerall horſes one after another ſlaine vnder him,
                     Generall Norice hath the honour of the field.
                   with greateſt valour purſued and ſubdued his enemies, being only weaponed with ſingle ſword and his piſtols which he vſed: euen ſo ſurely, as who had ſeene how couragiouſly he laid about him on euery ſide, might well haue ſaid he had ſeene a new Hector, another Alexander, or rather a ſecond Caeſar foyling his enemies euery where. There were alſo preſent at this conflict three Engliſh valiant Gentlemen, by name Bingams, all brethren, valiantly behauing themſelues,
                     Three Binghams brethrē.
                   vntill two of them, vz. Roger and Thomas, were purſued by the enemie vnto the very death: but the third (which was Richard Bingham, as it pleaſed God ſo to fauour him, ſafely then eſcaping the enemies danger) ſuruiued,
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 8.
                   a man of good valour, for his ſeruice afterwards in Ireland was knighted, and there preferred to the gouernment of Connaugh: of whoſe proweſſe and fame they that wil may reade more amply both in Iohn Stowes Chronicle,
                     Sir Richard Bingham deceaſed in Anno 1598.
                   and in the Hiſtorie of the warres in Ireland. In this fight for ſeuen houres ſpace were ſlaine of the enemies fiue hundred, beſides a number drowned:
                     Fiue hundred Spaniards slaine.
                   and of our Engliſhmen and of the Scots were ſlaine to the number of one hundred at the moſt: yet it was thought the Camp of the States would haue been vtterly ouerthrowne that day, if the Engliſh forces had not come in as they did.
               Towards the latter end of the yeere 1578. after all theſe troubles and broyles,
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 9.
                   
                  Don Iohn de Auſtria hauing thus made his laſt mounting vpon the ſtage (ſummoned by Death to ſound a Cataſtrophen) ſickened in his Tent at Namours about the Calends of October:
                     The death of Don Iohn.
                   and died (as ſome thinke) of the plague: others (rather beleeuing) haue giuen it out that hée (being ſore grieued

with a certaine odious diſeaſe) what for ſorow in minde conceiued at ye hatred of the countrie vpō bruiting of his baſe birth, & what for ſtomacking and furiouſly fretting at his euill ſucceſſe in gouernment, tooke ſuch extreame thought, that it ſhortened his life ſo much the ſooner. This Don Iohn (as my Author ſaith) was a luſtie young man of thirtie yéeres of age, of meane ſtature, haſtle,
                     His birth and properties deſcribed.
                   raſh and proud: yet at length manifeſting his malicious minde and furious fierce outrage in vndeſerued troubles which he brought vpon the inhabitants of thoſe Low Countries: becauſe he ſaw he was deſpiſed of them for his baſe and vnlawfull birth. For indeed the high and low Germanes doe moſt of all others deſpiſe and diſdaine baſtards: and the rather for that his mother which bare him was a Germane, at that time dwelling in the Low Countries (whoſe report being not ſo good) the Emperour Charles the 5. father bruited of this Don Iohn, cauſed her to be the ſooner conueyed thence into Spaine, that ſhe might there leade a new life, and appointed her a Nurſe there to attend vpon her and the childe: where notwithſtanding perhaps the mother afterwards growing malecontent, would rather name another man to be Don Iohns father, then that he was begotten by the ſaid Emperour.
               In the yéere following 1579. the ſaid Colonell Norice, with other Engliſh Captaines and their forces,
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 9.
                   had many ſmall ſkirmiſhes with the enemie in Brabant and Holland: but neither part attempted any notable exploite for game or loſſe of that which they had hitherto gotten, but watching their oportunitie from time to time, paſſed forth this yéere without any memorable thing done.
               In the winter of this yéere the before named Duke Iohn Caſſimire (for a certaine time before retained by the States as a worthie warriour) came with his forces to Teene and Areſchot, and lay there in campe all that winter, and now and then ſkirmiſhed with the ſaid Prince of

                  Parmaes other forces. But the Prince being too ſtrong for him, driue him to the worſe, ſo that with very little or no great glorie the Duke departed againe into high Germanie, and left his owne ſouldiers in the Netherlands, ſome vnder one Captaine, ſome vnder another: but in the end they followed their firſt Captaine with better contentment to goe then to ſtay any longer.
               
                  
                     
                        Anno 1580.
                  
                  Anno Dom. 1580. when the Lord George Lelain Erle of Renenbergh, ſo commōly called (in times paſt) a faithfull conſort of the States,
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 10.
                   and a valiant Leader: but afterwards (his fates ſo framing, or rather frowning) being taken priſoner by this Alexander Prince of Parma, became a Reuolt or Apoſtata: he thenceforth made Lieutenant generall vnder the ſame Duke of Parma, when (I ſay) he ſhould take his iourney on the 18. day of October this yéere 1580. towards the citie of Steenwick to beſiege it (then being vnder the States) comming with his forces againſt the ſame, he found the Citie of very little abilitie or ſtrength to reſiſt him, and very ſlenderly manned with one ſmall companie in garriſon: yet (as he thought) if he might winne this, he perſwaded himſelfe it would be for his ſpeciall aduantage, ſeruing to ſtrengthen Drent, and ſo in his paſſage to Frizland fit him for the defence of Vallenhoue. Therefore this Countie Renenbergh laid ſiege to Steenwick, bringing to the field 28. Enſignes or companies of ſouldiers, euery one hauing two hundred footemen, ſeuered in this manner, that is, foureteene bands of Frizlanders, nine bands of new Gelders, and fiue bands of his owne prouince of Renenbergh: all which 28. Enſignes or bands contained ſixe thouſand footmen and moe, and he had moreouer of horſemen twelue hundred ſpeciall choſen Lanſiers. There was for the States within this citie a man of good valour named Olthoff, as chiefe gouernour, hauing but one Enſigne or band of men lying there in the garriſon. There was alſo another worthie man and a notable good Leader named Corruput,
                  
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 10.
                   with his band or companie,

and with theſe were alſo two companies of Germanes vnder conduct of the Lord Hohenlo, commonly called Countie Hollock, whoſe vnder Captaines were Plat and Stuper, with their Leader Iohn Berenbrooke gouernour of Gelders:
                  
                     The Garriſon in Stenwick.
                   but the ſouldiers of theſe two laſt companies were in manner Nouices, and vntrained to the warres. There were ouer and beſides theſe about thrée hundred citizens, but yet amongſt them ſcarſe fiftie perſons which a man might well truſt vnto: They had not as yet any Generall ſent vnto them, neither had they any great Ordenance, nor any horſe; only the officers of the bands had ſome twelue or foureteene horſes for thē
                  ſelues: All theſe adiuments or helpes thus here recited, were the beſieged citizens vtterly voide and deſtitute of, wherewith they might the better reſiſt and repulſe their approching enemies. Wherefore in this preſent diſtreſſe, the Gouernours, Captaines and Burghers (ſending ſpéedely Letters vnto the States) doe humbly and earneſtly entreate them to ſend them ſpéedie ſuccour and reſcue.
                     The Gouernours of Stenwick ſend to the States for ſupplie.
                   But yet onely the ſaid couragious Corruput and prudent Leader (before named) was after a ſort againſt this intendement: for he conceiuing and pondring with himſelfe another thing, with great héede and foreſight ſheweth and ſeeketh other meanes otherwiſe how to defend the citie: whoſe opinion the foreſaid Captaine Plat and his ſouldiers doe alſo well allow of. In the meane time, notwithſtanding while the Noblemen of Frizland ſent thither for ſuccour and reſcue foure Enſignes or companies of footemen and a few horſemen,
                     The firſt ſupplie ſent, ſurpriſed and ſet vpon.
                   Countie Renenbergh addreſſeth certaine of his ſouldiers againſt them: They which were ſent for reſcue, defending themſelues what they could, were by the way ſet vpon and ſlaine of the Renenbergers, few or none eſcaping.
               Once againe the graue counſell and aduice of the ſaid Corruput the ſecond time giuen in preſence of the Gouernours, Captaines and Burghers, touching the cities

ſafetie (as aforeſaid) being ſtill contemned or neglected: certaine of the chiefeſt perſonages in the citie by writing make and diſpatch another motion to the States to haue yet againe more helpe ſent vnto them,
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 10.
                   and that the citie with all poſſible ſpéede might be deliuered from the enemies ſiege. But now Corruput and the ſaid Berenbrook by their letters perſwade the States to deale more aduiſedly, leaſt they afterwards repent themſelues againe, as they had done once erſt before. The States then willing to ſatiſfie the citizens expectation,
                     The ſecond ſupplie ſent alſo ſurpriſed by the enemie.
                   yet for all this ſend another freſh ſupplie of ſixe Enſignes of footemen vnder Heighmans conduct, and appoint them for S. Iohns Campe, a place ſo called, not farre from Stenwick: But or euer theſe came thither they alſo were ſet vpon by the Renenbergers; and although they manfully defended themſelues, yet were they by the enemies taken, ſlaine, and put to flight. Hereupon the enemie ſeeing his aduantage, marcheth with great courage to the citie, fireth the ſuburbs and ſcaleth the walles. The citizens ſeeing the fire fiercely flaming in diuers places, as men out of their wits, be ſtir them by all meanes (yet little enough) to quench the ſame, and the ſouldiers reſiſt the enemie here and there what they can, and with their Ordenance beate the enemie backe from the walles: they ſo gathering ſtrength and taking courage vnto them, doe for a certaine ſeaſon keepe out the enemie and fortifie themſelues.
               Theſe things thus befalling, the States (more aduiſedly conſulting how to deliuer Stenwick) goe now another way to worke: Here at length preuaileth their purpoſe: they therefore with all poſſible ſpéede hauing prepared a ſtronger power wherewith to deliuer this 
                     ••
                  ſtreſſed citie,
                     The States better aduiſing thēſelues, ſend now thither Colonell Norice.
                   leuying and gathering money for their ſouldiers: for this new prepared ſupplie, doe ordaine the before named Colonell Norice chiefe conductor and Generall of their troupes, ſending him with them to raiſe the ſiege. Who ſo ſoone as he came with his Regiments

to Swart Sluce, found there a certaine freſh band of the enemies newly ariued vnder Othon Sanches a Spaniard: Theſe he ſetteth vpon, killeth moſt of them, and putting the reſt to flight, burneth vp the Village on the 15. of December. From thence he marcheth to Meppell with 24. Enſignes, which ſcarſely contained ſixteene hundred fighting men,
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 10.
                   with whom were ioyned a few horſemen: and ſo leaueth at Sluce thrée Enſignes only for a Garriſon by the way as he paſſeth.
               
                  Renenberg ſendeth thither eleuen Enſignes of footemen, and ſixe troupes of horſemen, which by a conuenient paſſage through the yce,
                     The now Generall Norices victorie ouer the Renenbergers beſieging Stenwick.
                   ſet vpon Generall Norice his ſouldiers. But when they had couragiouſly defended themſelues for a long time againſt the Renenberg, in the meane ſeaſon the Generall in perſon (hauing good oportunitie to ſuccour & reſcue his people) with all ſpéede ſuddenly ruſheth vpō the Renenbergers, and putteth them to flight, in ſuch ſort as many of them were ſlaine, and many amidſt the broken yce were drowned. So the ſaid worthie Generall departing with victorie, hauing taken two of the enemies chiefe Enſignes, and gotten ſo much armour as might well ſerue for furniture of fiue hundred ſouldiers, ſendeth one of thoſe Enſignes into the citie of Stenwick aforeſaid, accompanied with fortie ſouldiers,
                     This affirmed by Captaine Strange.
                   which caried into the ſame Citie alſo 570. pounds weight of gunne powder put in leather bagges, very néedfull and neceſſarie as the time preſent then required.
               The day before the Calends of Ianuary, the ſaid Generall againe with his forces made an aſſault vpon the enemie, ſtill beſieging the citie, iſſuing vpon them hard at their backs beyond the marriſh ground: and euen then the very Garriſon themſelues with a great force fell out of the towne alſo, who ſet vpon the enemies in ſuch ſort, as they made them to giue ground and runne away, yea and with Smithes hammers brake in peeces certaine Ordenance and field cariages, left there by the enemies

at their fleeing away. The ſaid Renenbergers not perceiuing how they could by any meanes preuaile againſt the townes men, doe yet (in a bragging brauerie take a kinde of courage vnto them) deuiſe to paſſe away the time with ſome ſports: whereupon it happened that a certaine Captaine amongſt others of Countie Renenbergs ſouldiers, named Thomas of Alba, chiefe Captaine of thoſe which came from Albania,
                  
                     The enemies bragging chalenge.
                   preſumed inſolently to challenge the ſaid Generall Norice at the ſingle combat hand to hand with Launce and Sword: vpon whoſe behalfe that renowmed Captaine and ſouldier Sir Roger Williams (ſince that time for his worth and valour knighted) replied, as Lieutenant generall of the horſemen vnder the ſaid Generall Norice, that he in his ſtéede would defend the cauſe againſt the challenger,
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 10▪
                     
                   and fight with him hand to hand. Which being determined by both parties in certaine preſcribed Articles, the day is appointed, each of theſe champions enter the liſts betweene both the Armies, they marched forth and fall to buckling one with the other; where after certain fierce blowes giuen and taken by either partie (yet neither of them being hurt) the one drinkes a carouſe, and the other pledgeth, and ſo both of them depart the place.
               After this, on the 24. of Ianuary this yéere 1580. while the ſaid Generall Norice with his armie was ſetled in S. Iohns Campe aforeſaid: againſt him thither commeth Countie Renenberg in perſon with all his moſt ſtrong power, and beſieging him round about with great ſhot,
                     The fight in S. Iohns Camp betweene Generall Norice and Countie Renenberg.
                   aſſaileth and forceth him mightily. Here the ſaid Generall and his ſouldiers enduring great danger, and ſuffering great penurie for lacke of victuals (neceſſitie ſo compelling them) were enforced to feede vpon horſe fleſh: vntill ſuch time as the Lord Nienort (ſent from the States with his owne ſouldiers, and ſixe other Enſignes of Frizlanders) furniſhed with wagons loaden, brought thither all kinde of prouiſion to ſtrengthen and relieue the beſieged perſons: which Renenberg well

perceiuing, ſecretly and ſuddenly breaking vp the ſiege,
                     This affirmed by Captaine Strange.
                   leauing his ſouldiers there ſome hurt and ſome ſlaine, fled away with great abundance of all things neceſſarie.
               And here now this one thing thus happening worthie of memorie, may well be tolde for a miracle, as in truth it proued, that in the time of th
                     ••
                   ſiege, three Partridges flying ouer the citie of Stenwick on the 4. of February in the morning, were taken and brought to the before named Captaine Corruput. He interpreting it for a good preſage, ſaid: That God in Trinitie who in the old time gaue Quailes (ſuch like foode as theſe) vnto the fainting Iſraelites,
                  
                     Exod. 16.13.
                   
                  would alſo euen now without doubt feed and relieue the beſieged and diſtreſſed citie of Stenwick. Theſe words ſpake he, who little knowing what certaintie be fore ſignified; found not long after the aſſured euent of his ſpeech.
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 10.
                   For of truth firſt the aforeſaid Generall Norice on the 20▪
                   of that February, ſendeth from out of his Campe certaine ſouldiers which brought to Stenwick ſo beſieged one hundred and fiftie Cheeſes,
                     Generall Norice relieueth Stenwick (beſieged) with victuals, the 20. day of Februarie 1580.
                   three hundred and fiftie loaues of bread, and ſome quantitie of gunpowder. Secondly, euen the very ſame day betwéene thrée and foure of the clocke in the afternoone, he ſent thither alſo by certaine huſbandmen a great number of horſes loaden with corne, branne and gunpowder, and certaine of his footemen with ſpeede caried more Chéeſes and loaues of bread into the ſaid citie.
               In Aprill following that yeere 15
                        •
                     0. the ſaid General Norice, accompanied with Monſieur Charles Leuen, alſo Monſieur Temple gouernour of Bruxels, and their bands of horſemen and footemen marching in good order with manly courage, leauing Liere in Brabant,
                  
                     Captaine Whitſtocks note, confirmed by Captaine Cripſe.
                   where they had béen before, doe now attempt to beſiege Machlin in Brabant: on the 9. of that moneth very early in the morning they ſkaled the walles and fired the port in ſuch ſort, and ſo valiantly behauing themſelues, that before breake of day they entring with their forces ſurpriſed

the towne, got great booties ſhared amongſt the ſouldiers, and that with no little ſlaughter of the enemies, which had ſo before reſiſted them within the towne. Amongſt whom (as ſaith my Author, and which alſo others affirme) that Generall Norice encountring with a Spaniſh Frier (a tall and ſtout fellow in armes) named Pedro Lobo (who had before cauſed all the great Ordenance in the towne to be ſhot off againſt him and his forces) after a while bickering with him hand to hand, gaue him his deaths wound, whereof the ſaid Frier died preſently. Confirmed alſo by Captaine Cripſe, that after the ſaid Generall Norice with his forces had lien there fiftéene daies, ſacked the towne and taken the ſpoyle, they were commanded by the States to deliuer the towne to Monſieur Famoiſe: who then to take the charge of the towne (with his Dutch ſouldiers and Monſieur Temples Wallons) perceiuing the Engliſh forces to depart away very rich out of the towne, fell vpon them ſuddenly for the ſpoyle, where they killed moe of the Engliſh then were killed at the winning of the towne: where Generall Norice himſelfe was ſhot thorow the buttocke, and had his horſe killed vnder him: and euen then Captaine Price a braue ſouldier forſooke his owne horſe, and mounted him vpon the ſame: and ſo altogether they marched out of the towne toward Antwerpe.
               
               The States againe ſend the Lord Nienort with his companie thither: he in his owne perſon with the ſame companie of ſouldiers boldly aſſaileth Renenberg with often ſkirmiſhing, he killeth a great number of the enemies, putteth them to flight, and as they were flying purſueth them hard at the héeles euen to the very walles of Groning, giuing them a great ouerthrow, where hée ſlew aboue ſixe hundred of the Renenbergers:
                     The Lord Nienort his victorie ouer the Renenbergers the 9. day of Iuly 1580.
                   ſo as there was left for the ſaid General Norice foure of the enemies Braſſe péeces of Ordenance, a great number of fardels, and very many horſes. This victorie by the Lord Nienort, thus gotten the 9. of Iuly 1580. he pitcheth his

Tents not farre from the towne of Groning, there reſting in better ſecuritie for a ſeaſon. And ſo the citie of Stenwick, after foure moneths ſiege, was in this manner at length by Gods good prouidence deliuered. And within a little while after,
                     Renenbergs death.
                   namely on the 23. of the ſaid moneth of Iuly Countie Renenberg himſelfe (after he had béen certaine daies ſick) deceaſed in his Campe, as ſome ſuſpect by poyſon.
               After all this on the 17. of September this yéere 1580. a conſultation was had at Lewarden in Frizland:
                  
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 11.
                   where it was decréed (on the behalfe of the States) to ſend the ſaid Generall Norice to reſiſt the enemie. Spéedie diſpatch herein was made, and an armie was furniſhed out againſt a Spaniſh Generall named Verdugo: They (I meane the States) hauing leuied and armed certaine bands of horſemen and footemen, alſo muſtering their companies, and paying them one moneths pay aforehand, doe make the ſaid Generall Norice chiefe Gouernour of them. He with conuenient ſpéede (hauing theſe his forces well fortified with ſixe Braſſe peeces, marcheth manfully to méete the ſaid enemie.
                     Generall Norice marcheth to meete Verdugo.
                   But it fell out ſo that in both armies the plague was very contagious, whereby many officers of this armie died in their Tents. Here for a certaine ſpace, while both armies were thus ſetled, afterwards Verdugo pitcheth his Tents at Northorne: Him purſueth hard the ſaid Generall Norice, vnto whom came eleuen Enſignes of Engliſhmen, vnder the conduct of the valiant Colonell Sir Thomas Morgan: he himſelfe hauing vnder his charge ninetéene Enſignes of all theſe countries, vz. foure of Naſſawes Regiment, nine of Monſieur Sannoy, and ſixe of Nienorts Regiment: ſo being vnder them thirtie Enſignes, which made in all ſcarſely thrée thouſand footemen. To theſe were ioyned the troupes of horſemen vnder their ſeuerall Captaines, as the Colonell Gore, Captaine Elenborne, and Henry van Eky, who were in number ſcarſe fiue hundred: So then with ſuch a braue

armie marcheth forwards the ſaid worthy General Norice on the 30. day of September that yéere 1580. towards Newziel,
                  
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 10.
                   a place in Frizland.
               
               Now Verdugo ſetting his forces in order and battell aray, had got (to his greateſt aduantage) for his ſtation the vpper ground néere the ditches: where the valiant worthie ſouldier Captaine Roger Williams (before named) with the Engliſh horſemen vnder his charge, together alſo with Elenbornes horſemen aforeſaid, doe ſet vpon one great band of Verdugoes footemen, of whom they killed many, and put many to flight. But as euen then one Wingard a Captaine & companion of Verdugo, made towards them with certaine eſpeciall troupes (while the horſemen of the States had the enemie in chace) Verdugo with two troupes of Lanſiers by maine force charged into the armie of the States:
                     The battaile at Northorne.
                   and ſo aſſailing them, not only found Munition, prouiſion, wagons, and other neceſſaries, but alſo caried them quite away, and tooke alſo from them many Enſignes, where many of the States ſouldiers were ſlaine and taken priſoners: but few of Verdugoes company (of any reputation) were then either ſlaine or taken. And ſo afterwards Verdugo himſelfe confeſſed, that (if this armie of the States had forborne and prolonged a few daies more from this fight) a great number of theſe enemies had departed determinately, and would otherwiſe haue prouided for their ſafetie elſewhere, without any field there fought at that time.
               Here in this conflict had the ſaid Generall Norice his right hand hurt with a bullet, and many of his ſouldiers which eſcaped the enemies hands, were for the moſt part ſpoyled of their armour and weapons: very many of them leauing their armour in thoſe places, where neceſſitie compelled them either to leape or ſwimme ouer thoſe ditches. This alſo confirmed by Captaine Cripſe, who being there an actor, was in eight ſeuerall places hurt at the leaſt. Thus much my author mentioneth of the conflict

at Northorne: and thus farre he writeth of the warres managed betwéene Alexander Prince of Parma for and in the behalfe of the Spaniſh King, and the Archduke Matthias for and in the behalfe of the States of the Netherlands: which Archduke by occaſion of diſpleaſure of the King, departed ſhortly after towards Auſtrich,
                  
                     The Archduke departeth the Netherlands, the Prince of Orange ſucceedeth.
                   leauing the gouernment of thoſe Low Countries and the ordering of the warres vnto the Prince of Orange, who by generall conſent of all the States, ordering all things with wiſedome and prouident foreſight, held the enemie at the ſword point for one whole yéere, from the end of 1580. to the beginning of the ſecond yéere after 1582. at what time Monſieur the Duke of Aniow and brother to Henry the 3. King of France, was ſent for and choſen to ſuccéed in gouernment of thoſe Countries and ordering of the warres, in manner and forme following.
            
            
               The Warres in the Netherlands, vnder Francis Duke of Aniow againſt Alexander Pr. of Parma.
               
                  AFter that the ſaid Monſieur,
                  
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 11.
                   with other Noblemen of France ariuing in Kent on the firſt of Nouember 1581. had beene honourably receiued at London, and intertained at her Maieſties Court at Whitehall,
                     Francis Duke of Aniow cōmeth into England.
                   with princely feaſtings and banquettings all that Chriſtmas: and being accompanied with the Quéenes Maieſtie of England, ſhe with her Nobles brought him on his way to Canterbury, feaſted

him there alſo, and each of them tooke leaue of other: And after that the Quéenes Maieſtie had ſent with him in fiftéene ſhippes the Right Honourable Robert Erle of Leiceſter, Henry Lord Hunſdon, Charles Lord Howard Baron of Eſſingham Knights of the Garter, the Lord Willowby, the Lord Windſor, the Lord Sheffield, Maſter Philip Sidney, Maſter George Cary, and Maſter Iohn and Maſter Robert Cary his brethren, with many other Gentlemen, who ariued at Fluſhing in Zeland, where he withall theſe Nobles of England and his owne and their traine in princely and friendly manner was receiued, by the aforeſaid noble Prince William Countie of Naſſaw,
                  
                     Captaine Churchyard was with the Duke all that while.
                   and the other Nobles of the Low Countries, conducting them from thence to Midleborow and ſo to Antwerpe in Brabant, where on the 19. of February Anno 1581. the ſaid Duke of Aniow was created Duke of Lothier and Brabant with great ſolemnitie: which being ended, the Nobilitie of England returned home againe, and left him there Gouernour of thoſe Countries, he repaired with his traine of French Noblemen and Gentlemen into France, where the King his brother Henry the 3. of that name furniſhed him with men, money and munition, for the better ſupportation and countenancing of his princely port and new attained authoritie in the Low Countries aforeſaid: And ſo on the 27. day of Auguſt in the yéere following 1583. for greater ſecuritie of himſelfe and his charge now taken vpon him, he returned into Brabant with thoſe forces, containing in all companies foure thouſand fighting men.
                     The preparation of the Prince of Parma and Duke of Aniowes forces for the fight.
                   Theſe being placed in a certaine Village neere vnto the citie of Gaunt: ſtraightway the Duke of Parma hereof vnderſtanding, and hauing in a readines a great number of his moſt valiant ſouldiers, with their cariages and furniture maketh all haſte poſſible to encounter him. Again, his cōming being no ſooner perceiued by the Duke of Brabants eſpials, but aduertiſed vnto him, the Lord Pierri a noble Frenchman, Campe-maſter of

the Duke of Brabant, commandeth his companies quickly to arme and encounter:
                     
                        Lib. 11.
                   and with all carefull diligence and ſkilfull experience he aduiſeth them of due obſeruations in their warlike order of fight, and how to march ſoftly and fight ſlowly with the enemie. Martialling his men on this manner: firſt in the front of his battell next vnto the enemies were the band of Engliſh ſouldiers, and to them were ioyned the troupes of Germanes, next theſe were the bands led by Bouquoy, and after theſe marcheth the worthie Generall Norice in the Rereward with thrée troupes of Engliſh horſe, & foure troupes of French horſemen: after theſe followed thrée troupes of French horſemen, with certaine footebands of Flemmings and of Scots: and laſt of all in the Rereward marched a band of Engliſh footemen, and a great companie of pikemen. Contrariwiſe againe the Duke of Parma had in his Vaward or front all Spaniards, a great multitude whereof were very many footmen, and more then a thouſand horſemen: for whom euery where by the way the Duke of Aniowes eſpials lay in ambuſh, ſo as not a few enemies were ſlaine with the ſhot of the Ambuſh; only of the Duke of Aniowes companie amongſt others were wanting thrée or foure Captaines of hundreds.
               After this welcōming made by the Duke of Aniowes ſouldiers vnto the Prince of Parmaes and his forces thus approching towards him, which was ſhort of Gaunt two Dutch miles, being ſixe of our Engliſh miles:
                     Captaine Edward Stranges relation of the ſeruice at Gaunt.
                   the Duke of Aniow and the Prince of Orange thought good to ſend Sir Iohn Norice to the Campe where the forces lay: and thither he came with the thrée troupes of Engliſh horſemen, and foure troupes of French horſemen (as aforeſaid) for his conuoy into the Campe about twelue of the clock at night aforeſaid, where there were of all nations, Engliſh, French, Dutch and Scottiſh ſome ſixe thouſand men. And comming into the Engliſh quarter, he enquired where his quarter was, and where

Capaine Edward Strange lay, who had the commaund of all his houſe and his horſes: where finding him lying in a little cabbin hard by his Tent, he aſked him how he had beſtowed all things, for the enemie was hard at hand. To whom Captaine Strange anſwered, he had deliuered all vnto Captaine Peter Cripſe to ſend it away to Gaunt. Then ſaid the General: We haue the Vauntgard to day, but I thinke the French are fled from vs, and wee muſt then haue the Rereward in ſpight of our hearts. So he hauing a ſquadron of horſe, lay from the Camp a quarter of an Engliſh mile, where one William Winter a tall ſouldier, being one of the Corporals, and commanding the ſquadron,
                     The enemies forces diſcouered at hand.
                   ſent out a very good watch, ſo as the enemie muſt of force come by them, and by no other way. Two houres before day there came from the Prince of Parma certaine troupes of horſe Albanoyſes and Italians talking together: and being within hearing of ye watch, thoſe which ſtood Sentinell diſcouered them, and preſently ſent word to their guard lying in a houſe hard by, to certifie the Generall that the enemies forces were at hand. The word comming to the Generall, he preſently commaunded that euery companie ſhould be ready to anſwere the alarme: but it was found that as well others as the French were marched and retired towards Gaunt. There the Generall ſtood faſt vntill his owne companie came vnto him: and preſently thrée companies of Albanoyſes came thither and offered to charge him, he being accompanied with Maſter Henry Knowles (a moſt worthie and gallant Gentleman) all that day. So the Generall marched from the quarter downe the hill, and at the foote of the hill, by the counſell of the ſaid Maſter Knowles, he armed himſelfe, aſking Captaine Strange where the Turney horſe was, for he would ride vpon him that day, hauing thrée other horſes led, euery one by two groomes a péece to ſerue for that day: and being firſt mounted vpon the Turney horſe, the ſaid Albanoyſes durſt not come downe themſelues,

but ſent againſt him thoſe Engliſh Rebels, which a little before ranne away from before Bridges. They being both Targatiers and Muſquetiers came downe the hill, as the Generall made his retreit towards his owne battell of Pikes, the Engliſh Rebels very hardly aſſaulted him: amongſt whom one of them calling to the Generall as he was in retreit,
                     Generall Norice and Sir W. Knowles foure engliſh miles from Gaunt, aſſailed by Engliſh Rebels.
                   which he could not long endure, but turning vpon that Rebell with his Rapier, he ſtrooke the Rebell on the head with ſuch a force, that his Rapier bowed to his very hand: vpon this came downe the troupes of the enemies horſe, and charged the Generall thrée waies, vz. vpon the Rereward, ſo that he and Maſter William Knowles were both faine to put their horſes among their pikes for their ſafegard, and ſo marching at the puſh of the pikes foure Engliſh mile they continued the fight ſtill, and none but this Generals Regiment conſiſting of ſeuen Enſignes, which might be in number ſome one thouſand ſtrong, vntill they came to the very walles of Gaunt. The enemie forcing them ſo néere that they came and attempted to pill the waggons, putting the whole force of the Campe ſo néere as the very towne ditch: vntill ſuch time as the Ordenance plaied ſo faſt out of Gaunt, that thereby the enemies were enforced to retire from thoſe places:
                     Coronell Cotton and Coronell North.
                   Where the Engliſh forces, vz. Colonell Thomas Morgan, Colonell Cotton, and Colonell North with their forces ioyned themſelues together by the Generals direction in continuall fight, from the Sunne riſing vntill the Sunne ſetting: within which time about foure of the clocke in the afternoone Monſieur Rochpot the Duke of Aniowes Lieutenant, and Monſieur Byron Marſhall of the ſame Dukes Campe, came foorth vnto the ſaid Generall, who ſaid vnto him:
                     Generall Norice honoured by the French forces.
                   
                  The Duke of Aniow our Maſter hath ſent vs vnto you, to giue you the honour of this ſeruice this day, as moſt worthie thereof aboue all other Commanders. The Generall gaue them thankes, praying them to doe his humble dutie vnto his Alteze, and to the Prince

of Orange, and ſo continued his ſeruice till after Sunne ſet, as is aforeſaid. And beſides this, there came voluntarily diuers braue French Gentlemen out of the towne of Gaunt vnto the ſaid Generall,
                     The offer of the French Nobles to the Engliſh Generall Norice.
                   and beſought him to vouchafe to accept of their ſeruice, that they might traile their pikes vnder his Colours: of which offer he curteouſly accepted at their requeſt: they alſo paſſing through the whole companie, deſired the ſouldiers to accept of them as their companions, vowing to liue and die vnder thoſe Colours.
               While they were thus bickering both Armies together, the Duke of Aniow and with him the Prince of Orange ſtand vpon the walles of Gaunt beholding them,
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 11.
                   and encouraging their ſouldiers to the fight, commaund them politikely to goe ſomewhat aſide, to the end that their enemies purſuing them, might be the better beaten and foyled with the ſhot from of the Rampiers and Bulwarkes of the Citie. Here againe with hot ſkirmiſhing a number were ſlaine on both ſides, as alſo diuers hurt and killed within the towne with the enemies ſhot, at which time one Iohn Iux (then ſeruing the Duke of Aniow,
                  
                     The Prince of Orange and Duke of Aniow behold the fight.
                   and now the Quéenes Maieſties Trumpeter) ſtanding by the Duke vpon the walles of Gaunt, was ſhot in at the mouth, and Parmaes forces were compelled with the ſhot of their great Ordenance to retire. So did the Duke of Aniowes armie couet in ranging to approch néere the citie ſtill, and the enemie returning with ſome breathing freſhly aſſailed them: From the wailes ſtill was the Ordenance diſcharged with horrible ſhooting, to the great ſlaughter of the enemies. Here were ſlaine very many of Parmaes companie, but very few of the Duke of Aniowes ſouldiers were either hurt or ſlaine. In the euening Parma with his wearied remnants making haſte out of the field, as he that might haue done more harme if he had béen more diligent then he was: néere vnto the citie he burieth about two hundred of his ſlaine ſouldiers; the wounded perſons hée

gathereth vp where he can finde them, carrieth them away in wagons, and ſo departeth the field without more fight at that time.
               That night the Engliſh were appointed to lie in a little Iland or péece of ground enuironed with water, and had Réedes to make them cabbins for their ſuccour. Then the towne of Gaunt ſent them very great ſtore of victuals, and Sir Iohn Norice at his owne charges ſent them a pipe of Rheniſh wine, and thrée hogſheads of Claret wine to make merie withall: And vpon this Monſieur the Duke of Aniow made his retreit for Antwerpe in Brabant, and all the forces went after him, where happened as followeth.
               Now come we to the end of this Comedie, interlaced, with an interchaunge Tragicallie metamorphoſed, I meane of this Duke of Aniowes faire flouriſh at the firſt, where, in his faire ſhew and ſunne ſhine he ſaid of his honour; Sol diſcutit & fouet; now contrariwiſe, nubibus obtenebratur & fallit in the end. The hiſtorie affirmeth what time this Duke of Aniowes forces by conduct of Byron the french Marſhall came firſt out of France (as before we haue mentioned) after ſpéeches and conſultations had with him of diuers waightie enterpriſes,
                     The Duke of Aniowes metamorphoſed minde and manners.
                   amongſt others he deliberately aduiſed himſelfe how he might attempt to take into his iuriſdiction manie of the Cities in Brabant, Holland, and Zeland: hee determined to loſe no opportunitie nor occaſion to accompliſh his deſire, and vſe his abſolute authoritie herein: So as firſt he tooke Dunkerke, for that was in his way out of Fraunce, next after that Dixmew, and afterwards Dendermond: in proceſſe of time he attempted further, but that enterpriſe brought him euill ſucceſſe at Bruges, Aloſte, Newport, and Antwerpe; eſpeciallie at Antwerpe he had his hardeſt ſucceſſe, and greateſt diſhonour, growne by his minde alienated from his oth, and metamorphoſed in his manners. For where before he ſmothered his affections with a kind of hote friendſhip, now the ſparkes

flie firſt, and the flame followeth of his fraudulent infidelitie. For ambition had kindled the fire, vaine glorie blowne the bellowes, and hypocriſie had made way for the flame: So as attempting to rule all things after his ſenſualitie, when he went further in wilfulnes then wiſdome required,
                     The Citie of Antwerpe all on a tumult by the Dukes diſpleaſure.
                   the Citizens of Antwerpe ſpying the flame of his furious outrage to burſt out againſt them, whereby the Citie was in an vprore, they ſeeking their owne ſecuritie doe ſtrengthen themſelues by force of armes to withſtand his wilfulnes: inſomuch, as euerie ſtreet and gate was out of quiet, and a quarell thus begun was not ſo ſoone ended till this Duke had ſéene the ſlaughter both of many a Citizen and manie a ſouldier: who before féeding the humour of their graund Duke and Captaine, by their vnbridled wilfull boldnes, mooning a moſt cruell tumult in the Citie (ſpurred forth with hope of rich ſpoiles) as if they all had béene of one miſchieuous minde, with one & the ſame voice, making a clamorous outcrie vpon the Citizens, they ruſh and runne againſt them in hoſtile manner with their weapons ſhaken in their hands,
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 11.
                   terriblie thus crying, Ville Gaigne, Viue la Meſſe, tue, tue: the towne is wonne, the Maſſe preuaile, kill, kill. The cauſe hereof as it might beſt be imputed to the ſaid Dukes diſpleaſure conceiued againſt the Citie; ſo a little after all this tumult, he rode in a hot choler out of the City into his Pauilion which he had prepared for himſelfe without in the fields: whom when a certaine noble French man accompanied, as hée went with the Duke out of the gate called Kipdorp, he (fayning to haue broken his owne legge by miſchance) the more exaſperated the Dukes anger againſt the Citizens, & cauſed here another tumultuous terrible ſlaughter of Citizens and ſouldiers within the ſaid gate called Kipdorp; inſomuch as 1500. French ſouldiers were there, and at that time ſlaine, amongſt whom were about 320. Noblemen and Gentlemen of great name and authoritie.
               
                  The Duke of Aniow hearing the thundering thumps of the gunnes of the Citie, ſuppoſing that this ſhould ſignifie ſome euill preſage to him and his retinue, making haſte away into his Tents, and next day after remouing them thence, got him and his retinue to the Caſtle of Bercheny, a lodging place ſcarce fit enough for him, altogether deſtitute of houſhold furniture, victuals and other prouiſions néedfull: from thence yet verie greatlie abaſhed at his owne doings and with penurie of all things diſtreſſed, he takes his way towards the Abbey of S. Bernard; from thence purpoſing to paſſe ouer the riuer Schaldis and Dermonde, the Citizens of Antwerpe with all feſtination, ſending their ſhippes of war againſt him, doe ſtoppe the way at Macklin in Brabant.
               
               Hereupon alſo forthwith was the noble Generall Norice addreſſed with 23 Enſignes of Engliſh men and Scots into the countrie of Waſte to withſtand his paſſage that way,
                     Generall Norice ſent to meete the Duke.
                   who out of hand drowneth a great part of the countrie néere vnto Dermond with the waters there abouts: but the Duke (neceſſitie ſo conſtrayning him) with great hazard paſſeth at Duffle ouer the riuer Nete; and ſo with no little ſhame returned home into Fraunce,
                  
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 11.
                   where he afterwards for very ſorrow (ſore repenting him of theſe things) ended his life in ſuch manner, as I ſhall declare truelie reported in the hiſtorie thus procéeding.
               This Duke of Aniow and late Duke of Brabant by the Sates ſo created as before you haue heard, thus being ſore abaſhed at his owne indirect dealing, and returning (as he came firſt with his powers) by Dunkerke into Fraunce: when he was there ariued, the Duke of Parma preſentlie beſéegeth the ſame towne of Dunkerke, and taketh it with certaine other Cities left at all aduentures, being therein aided by the Citizens of Gaunt, and by the Prince of Chymay the Gouernour. And the ſaid Duke of Aniow then being in Fraunce, notwithſtanding all former inconueniences tolerated by the

States,
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 11.
                   they yet once againe ſéeke for mutuall reconciliation with him, and offer their friendſhips to receiue him againe, vpon good aſſurance of better expectation: but he (newlie returned with his ſouldiers,
                     Comming into France he falleth ſicke.
                   diſmiſſed, ſcattered abroad and diſcouraged) as well falling ſicke in bodie, as wearied in minde with thinking vpon his former great miſfortunes, ſaw in himſelfe now yt which he loathed; being laughed to ſcorne of his aduerſaries, and beſids that little accounted of with manie others, by reaſon he was at ſome diſcord and ods with the King his brother. Againe, the Quéene mother a woman of moſt ſubtill wit and perillous mind (who had firſt foſtered the diſcord betwéene theſe her two ſonnes, to the end ſhée might preuaile in her purpoſe otherwiſe) then practized to reduce them to vnitie,
                     Practiſe of Queene Mother.
                   and brought the matter to that paſſe that the Duke as humble ſuter for fauour, acknowledging his fault, ſhould craue pardon of the King his brother. Being conſtrained ſo to doe that hée might againe inſinuate a renued mind into the affections of the States to make the former breach a more firmer knot of amitie, concord and league with them: who had by experience well learned that the Duke without the king his brothers countenance and ſupportation, could not well accompliſh any thing anſwerable to their expectation: for they hoped hereby only the French forces ſhuld the rather returne vnto them, and by his more carefull conſideration all ſhould yet againe be amended which before was farre amiſſe. And in this behalfe the States beforehand prudentlie prouiding for their ſecuritie do ſend the Lord Schonwalley as their Ambaſſadour vnto the French king and the ſaid Duke his brother:
                     They prouide for their ſafetie.
                   but or euer this ambaſſage could take effect, or once be ſolicited, the ſaid Duke of Aniow remouing himſelfe to the Caſtle of Theodor, incontinentlie fell moſt grieuouſlie ſicke, the blood guſhing out of all the pores of his bodie, as if his veines had béene burſt with too much vehement ryding: So as at length refuſing naturall ſuſtenance, after

the fortieth day of his ſicknes come & gone, he died on the 10. of Iune in the yéere of our Lord 1584. At his death being in good mind & memory, it is affirmed, he would not haue anie Monke or ſuch other perſon for his Confeſſor. He acknowledged, profeſſed, and proteſted to ſuch as were preſent at his death, That hee repoſed all his hope in the bloodſhedding of Ieſus Chriſt onelie, as his onelie and alone Sauiour; which thing for certaine the author of this hiſtorie had related vnto him by credible perſons then preſent: which his death ſome ſay was not without ſuſpition of poyſoning. His deſire before he died was to be buried as Gouernour and Duke of Brabant, with his coate armour, ſhields of armes and ſuch other appurtenances to the ſame dominions vſuall and accuſtomed: but his brother the French kings Counſellors thought it not ſo conuenient,
                     His deſcription and properties.
                   for fauour that they bare to the king of Spaine. He was ſomewhat aboue the meane ſtature of men, well compact of bodie, of a ſwart complexion, blacke eyed, blacke head curled, of a hie forehead, a greater noſe then anie his anceſtors had, he was very fierce of nature, wittie, eloquent, affable, nobly minded, bountifull, ambitious, nothing blood thirſtie or deſirous of reuenge, but mercifull and curteous: not contemning anie man for religion ſake, yet vnquiet, quicke and haſtie in his doings, but for all this, as his diſpoſition ſufficientlie well ſhewed) a peaceable perſon, as appeared by his indeuours when hee went vnto the king of Nauarre (now king of Fraunce) as then being his aduerſarie, the Ambaſſadors of the Low-countries then thither accompanying the ſaid Duke.
               Men ſay that he (two dayes before his death) ſent a copie of his teſtament vnto the king his brother, and therein declared the great ſorrow of his heart in that he had offended his Maieſtie with his doings and enterpriſes: he requeſted of him manie things, eſpeciallie, he humbly beſéecheth him to bee gratious Soueraigne Lord vnto many his retained Nobles and Officers at

armes lately ſeruing him in the Low-countries,
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 11.
                   and there impoueriſhing themſelues. And further, where he in conſcience was touched with conſideration of a certaine debt to the ſumme of 300000. Florens which he had not yet ſatiſfied, he humblie beſought his Maieſtie of all brotherly loue betwéene them, to take ſome order for the payment thereof: acknowledging touching his preſentabilitie, that he could not leaue behinde him ſufficient reſtitution or ſatiſfaction, neither ſhould he carrie away with him out of this world into his graue anie other riches, but the teares and ſighes of ſorrowfull perſons: to conclude he deſired neither ſumptuous nor ſtatelie funerall but wiſhed the monument of his memorie to be founded and fixed in the mindes of his friends and vaſſals. Whoſe funerall in decent and honourable maner the king his brother accordingly accompliſhed within the Citie of Paris in the month of Auguſt that yéere,
                     His funerall.
                   
                  1584. Thus much for the manner of the gouernment, actions, life and death of the ſaid Duke of Aniow after he was Gouernour in the Low-countries, being for the ſpace of two yéeres and a halfe, as before is declared.
               You haue heard hitherto what interchange of Gouernours haue béene on both ſides, as well for and vnder the king of Spaine, as for the States; what wars, what ſlaughters of men, and what infinite charges and troubles it hath béene for all parts; and yet no placart of peace purchaſed at the Pope and King of Spaines hands: but rather the one more like blood thirſtie Baalac curſing the Iſraelites, and the other more like Pharao perſecuting and oppreſſing them;
                     Numb. 22.5. Exod. 7.3.31. Prou. 28.15.
                   but both of theſe moſt like the roring Lyon, and hungrie Beare which Salomon ſpeaketh of, ſéeking now more and more the pray and ſpoile of the chéefe godlie Gouernour the Prince of Orange now ruling the Low-countries, and defending their warres with the States, whom the Pope and Spaniſh King had proſcribed certaine yéeres agone, and could no way come by his bodie to bring it into thraldome by

wars, threatnings nor ſubtil ſleights to circumuent him. Now therefore they the ſaid Pope and king of Spaine, practiſe ſubornation of murdering meſſengers to hunt and haunt his Court vnder colour of ſome far fecht and deare bought falſe friendſhip:
                     The firſt meſſenger ſent to murther the Prince of Orange 1582.
                   as in the laſt yéere 1582. one Iohn Iaureg with full purpoſe ſent from the Pope and Spaniſh King to murder this good and godly Prince and Father of his Countrie, then kéeping his Court within the Caſtle of Antwerpe, accompanied with the foreſaid Duke of Aniow, the Councell of the States and the noble Generall Norice, with others his faithfull friends: euen then the ſaid murthering meſſenger when he had diſcharged a dagge at the good Prince, the wound (as God would) was not ſo deſperate but that he recouered within a while after: & the malefactor in the very déed doing was apprehended, ſtabbed with 27. wounds, and afterwards beheaded, bowelled and quartered in the market place of Antwerpe. And praiſed he God (who preſerueth his Elect) the ſaid good Prince ſo recouering liued afterwards full two yéeres.
                     The ſecond 1583. one Peter Dordoigne Lib. 11.
                   Although euen in the next yéere following 1583. another caitiue of Caines crew named Peter Dordoigne a Spaniard, ſent from that Romiſh Babylon and Spaniſh Periander comming in the month of May to Antwerpe about the like purpoſe, was taken at Antwerpe before he could doe the déed as God would haue it: who being thereupon impriſoned, confeſſed that he was ſent out of Spaine from the king himſelfe, with whom he had ſecret conference and encouragement to doe that miſchéefe vpon the Princes perſon: but the king concealing it not to be his fault, commaunded him to lay the fault vpon one of his Secretaries, and ſo this meſſenger had his iudgement and was put to death at Gronyng, as guiltie in minde, will, and purpoſe to kill the ſaid Prince.
               But now in this yéere 1584. the good Prince being aſſaulted by thrée other ſeuerall champions of Sathan, might ſeeme to haue ſufficient warning by the former

perſons, whom he ſhould ſimplie ſuffer to be brought vnto his preſence, when that ſubtill Serpent the Diuell, that old craftſmaſter of theirs, deuiſeth ſundrie meanes to worke miſchiefe by:
                     The third 1584 one Iohn Ianſon. Lib. 11.
                   As here by the firſt of theſe thrée whom I am to ſpeake of, vpon the 13. of Aprill one Iohn Ianſon a rich Merchant (vpon hatred which he conceiued againſt the good and harmeles Prince) comming into a ſeller néere vnto a place where the Prince was then lodged, had prouided with gunpowder to blow vp and deſtroy the Prince and all his retinue: but though the Prince ſaw not the perſon, yet he ſmelt the rat, found him and laid hold vpon him (as God would) or euer he had power to performe that miſchiefe, and ſo the malefactor was headed, bowelled and quartered for the ſame.
               
                  
                     The fourth 1584. a French man. Lib. 11.
                  The ſecond of theſe thrée and fourth in number of the murthering meſſngers hitherto ſent, was a Frenchman and Captaine of a band named Gottus, who being captiued a little before by the Marques of Rombaſe, one of the Duke of Parmaes Generals, promiſed the ſaid Marques if he would ſet him at libertie, he would worke ſuch way, being very well acquainted with the Prince of Orange, that he would with all poſſible ſpéede diſpatch him out of his life: ſaying, that as he was very familiar with him, and could eaſily vpon any occaſion come to his preſence, and haue full conference with him; ſo eſpecially (ſaith he) if I ſhall be inuited to the Princes table, to eate of his meate, I can ſubtilly caſt (that few ſhall perceiue) into ſome Eele broth (which the Prince loueth very well) ſuch a powder, as infecting the whole diſh of meate, ſhall (if he eate thereof) without long delay deſtroy him. But this French Captaine Gottus, hauing gotten himſelfe at libertie, haunting the Princes preſence, yet not ſo farre put in truſt nor ſo much made of as he made account to haue béen, and yet imployed in ſeruice for the Prince and States in a certaine Sconce (before he either put his purpoſe in practiſe,

or performed his promiſe to the before named Marques) was by Gods good will no doubt preuented, and in defending that Sconce, being ouerſeene with drinke, was ſhot into the head by a Muſquet, and ſo died preſently in the ſaid Sconce.
               The laſt of the thrée miſſiue Manquellers this yéere ſent, being the fift and laſt of all yt were ſent hitherto,
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 12.
                   and moſt miſchieuous ſouldier of Sathans curſed crew, was a yong fellow named Balthazar Gerard a Burgunnian,
                     The fift and laſt meſſenger which murthered the Prince of Orange, Anno 15
                           •
                        5.
                   of ſeuen and twentie yéeres old, of ſhort ſtature, hard fauour, and baſe conſtitution (diſſembling himſelfe otherwiſe to be called Francis Guyon the ſonne of one Peter Guyon, put to death for preferring the reformed religion) when indeede this is that meſſenger of Sathan, here of all others chiefly tranſforming himſelfe, as Saint Paul ſaith, into an Angell of light:
                  
                     2. Cor. 11.14.
                   This villaine commeth in the beginning of the moneth of May in the foreſaid yeere 1584. vnto the Prince of Orange his Court, (O that he had here béen ſo ſimple as the Doue to haue ſhunned by flight this miſchiefe at the firſt;
                     Matth. 10.16.
                   or as wiſe as the Serpent, to haue vanquiſhed the wiſedome of the viperous wretch at the laſt) and pretending to bring letters vnto the ſaid noble good Prince, importing great and rare newes out of France, vſing a certaine proteſtation in expreſſe words of his zealous mind vnto the Goſpell, and adding for that cauſe he came farre to preferre his ſeruice vnto the Prince himſelfe, aboue all other Princes; bringing with him and ſhewing forth alſo vnto the Prince certaine writings ſigned by Countie Maunsfeld (called commonly flying ſeales) vnder colour of friendſhip purporting enmitie, namely how Luxenburge and the cities of other Prouinces might craftily be taken by the Prince of Orange his ſouldiers. The Prince peruſing ouer the writings, and marking well the ſeales, ſaying, there could be no great matter performed by them; commaunded him for a while to depart away. Here before he went, this villaine begged of the

Prince ſome money to buy him hoſe and ſhooes: wherevpon the Prince commanded his Secretarie to giue him ſome money for his ſaid neceſſitie,
                     
                        Lib. 12.
                   vpon the 8. of Iuly that yéere 1584: which he no ſooner receiued, but incontinently going his way from the Princes preſence, and comming to the vttermoſt court, he bought with that money of two ſtipendarie watchmen two hand-dags. But when this villaine had bought them,
                     The Caitiues deceitfull doings.
                   calling to minde (as hee afterwards being taken confeſſed) what the Prince of Parma and one other named Aſſonuil had before ſaid vnto him concerning this his miſchieuous act (they as it ſeemed ſetting him on thereunto) he then on the tenth of that Iuly about dinner time repaireth vnto the Prince, and as one falſehearted and fearefull to ſpeak, deſireth letters of paſport and ſafeconduct. Within a while after the Prince had dined, he went through the Court and ſtood at the gate (forgetting, or at leaſt miſtruſting not that miſchiefe which this Iudas was now meditating, nor yt 
                  Ioabs congée which was conſulted of before againſt his perſon) for notwithſtanding all the faire ſhew of thoſe writings and their ſeales, yet it fell out this falſe concluſion:
                     Virgil. Ecloga ſecunda.
                   
                  O formoſe puer nimium ne crede colori; Alba liguſtra cadunt, vaccinia nigra leguntur. He good Prince beléeuing all for the beſt, ſtanding (as I ſaid) at the gate, then comes this villaine vnto him, and faining his falſe purpoſe vnder a faire ſhew of requeſting his ſaid letters of paſport and ſafeconduct, he crowcheth and créepeth néere the Prince (not then ſo well aware of him) where ſuddenly he diſchargeth one of his new bought dagges, hauing thrée bullets in it, full vpon the Prince: who féeling the wound, lift vp his hands and eyes, ſaying: Lord God be mercifull vnto my ſoule, I am ſore wounded: Lord God be mercifull vnto me and vnto this thy afflicted people. Within a while after, being borne into his parlour (where he had a little before dined) he was laid vpon his bed, and ſo gaue vp the ghoſt, to the inſpeakable ſorrow and lamentation of

the Princeſſe and her people. The murthering meſſenger and curſed caitife of Caine,
                  
                     The villanous murthering of the Prince of Orange.
                   or rather of Tubalcains crew, hauing perpetrated this villanous act, tooke his heeles and fled thereupon through the poſterne gate of the Princes palace with all haſte he could: and caſting away his other dagge out of his hands, running by the ſtréete néere the ditch of the citie of Delph, as he prepared himſelfe with two bladders to ſwimme ouer, he was taken by two of the Princes ſeruants, brought backe againe to the Princes palace, and caried to priſon. Where he (being of the Senate or chiefe men of the citie examined) writ and affirmed his intention and confeſſion full and whole: adding moſt deſperately and diuilliſhly,
                     
                        Lib. 13
                   that if the déede were againe to be done vpon the ſaid Prince, he would yet doe it, yea if the Prince were guarded with 500000. men round about. For the which cauſe,
                     The execution of the villanous murtherer.
                   ſentence of law and iudgement definitiue being giuen vpon this his miſchieuous act, he was condemned to be caried to a gibbet, ſet vp before the Towne-houſe or Senate-houſe of that Citie: here firſt he had his right hand with a hot yron ſeared and cut off, which did the déede, and caſt into the fire: next of all, with firie hot pincers he had his fleſh torne and pluckt off from ſixe parts of his bodie which were moſt fleſhie, vz. of his breaſt, armes, legs and buttocks, and thoſe caſt into the fire, and his body beginning from the lower part was with an axe chopt in péeces, his belly was ripped, his heart was pluckt out & caſt at the villaines face (yet in ſome life) and afterwards his head being chopt off, was (with other foure parts of his bodie, as armes and féete ſet vpon foure poles on foure turrets or ports of the citie) faſtened vpon a long pole ſet vpon the turret of the Schoolehouſe, on the backſide of the Princes lodging; and whatſoeuer he had in his life time about him was taken from him and giuen away. This execution was done vpon Saturday the 14. of Iuly Anno 1584. within the citie of Delph in Holland.
               
               Now, not without ſorrow and lamentation for the

loſſe of ſo noble and painfull a Prince,
                     The funerall and ſolemne order of the Princes buriall.
                   let vs returne to deſcribe the manner of ſolemnitie vſed, and the whole order of his funerall, which in ſo few words and as briefly as I can I will ſet downe.
               Vpon Friday the third day of Auguſt 1584. the bodie of the Prince was buried at the ordering of the States of Holland, Zeland, Frizland and Vtrecht, in magnificent manner, according to the dignitie of his excellencie; and ſpecially in remembrance of his honourable vertues and moſt princely deſerts towards them: for he was the fourth of fiue brethren of the houſe of Naſſaw, which loſt their liues in the faithfull defence of the States and of thoſe Countries.
               The order of his buriall or funerall was thus obſerued:
               
                  1 Firſt went the Citizens of Delph in armour, with long mourning cloakes.
               
                  2 The dumbe ſhew of the Trumpetters in mourning apparell likewiſe.
               
                  3 Then followed eight horſes couered with blacke mourning cloathes, euery of which horſes were led by two Noblemen, one on the one ſide, and the other on the other ſide going on foote: and behinde euery horſe was alſo borne the Militarie Enſigne of ſo many ſeuerall Countries as the Prince in his life time had vnder his gouernment, which Enſignes were borne by eight other ſeuerall Noblemen in mourning cloakes downe to the féete.
               
                  4 After them went the Lord Manſert, bearing the Militarie Trumpet. Next to him the Lord Rihouius with the Princes Standerd, and next to him the Lord Naelwik with his Militarie Enſigne, each of them bearing in them ſeuerall Armes emblazoned.
               
                  5 Then followed the foure ſeuerall Shields with their ſeuerall Armes of the Prince deceaſed, which other foure Noblemen mourners bare likewiſe.
               
                  6 After them two other Lords, whereof one bare all

his whole Armes, with his Helmet and his Creſt: the other being Captaine of his Guard bare his ſword of warre, both mourning alſo.
               
                  7 Then followed the funerall Horſe couered all ouer with blacke Veluet downe to the ground: being led forth by the Lord Bredroed on the one ſide, and the Lord Maldre on the other ſide, two ſtately perſonages mourning in foote ſide cloakes.
               
                  8 Next vnto them went two other Noblemen tall and ſtately perſonages: the one bearing the Princes naked Sword, the other his golden Coronet, both mourning in long ſide gownes likewiſe.
               
                  9 And laſt of all went the Princes thrée chiefe Stewards of his retinue in mourning cloakes, each of them going with a blacke ſtaffe in his hand.
               
                  10 After all theſe was borne the bodie of the deceaſed Prince in a coffin, embalmed, ſeared and couered with blacke Veluet hanging downe néere vnto the ground: where about were fired diuers ſcutcheons of Armes, and penants of the Princes honours and dignities: The bodie being borne vpon twelue tall Gentlemens ſhoulders, all bareheaded and in long mourning cloakes.
               
                  11 Next vnto the bodie went the foure principall Lords of the States, as Iohn of Burgundy Lord of Fruymont, &c. Walraeffe of Bredroed Lord of Loredwod, &c. Iohn of Merode Lord of Soeterwould, &c. with hoods couered ouer their faces, which were the chiefe Mourners for the Low Countries.
               
                  12 After theſe followed Erle Maurice of Naſſaw, ſecond ſon to ye deceaſed Prince, in a long black fine mourning cloake, the traine whereof was borne by another Lord: on the right hand of Prince Maurice went the Prince Elector of Colen, by name Truckſes: on the left hand of him went the Erle of Hoghenlo. There followed theſe perſonages, thrée other Lords, vz. William Erle of Naſſaw, Philip Erle of Naſſaw, and the Erle of

                  Solmes, which were the laſt of the chiefe Mourners for this deceaſed Prince.
               
                  13 Then came after theſe the Generall States.
               
                  14 After them the Councell of thoſe States.
               
                  15 Next vnto them the States of Holland, 16. and their Councell.
               
                  17 Then followed the Prouinciall Councell.
               
                  18 The Preſident of Holland.
               
               
                  19 Then the high Councell and the Preſident.
               
                  20 The Secretaries of the States.
               
                  21 The Conſuls and Senatours of Delft.
               
               
                  22 The learned Preachers.
               
                  23 The Captaines of the Guard.
               
                  24 The Captaines of the warres.
               
                  25 The chiefe officers of publike authoritie in the Common wealth, whom laſt of all followed a multitude of common people innumerable.
               With this ſolemne, ſorrowfull and mournfull funerall was the good Prince of Orange buried in the chiefe Church of the citie of Delft on Friday the third of Auguſt 1584. as aforeſaid. He liued almoſt 52. yéeres, vz. 51. yéers 11. moneths and 25. daies, accompted from his birth.
                     The time of his life, and deſcription of his perſonage.
                   He was of bodie well compact, of ſtature little more then meane, of good complexion, aburne beard, ſomewhat full faced. Who ſo will deſire to know his ſharpnes of wit and diſpoſition of minde, may beſt diſcerne them by his honourable actions and godly gouernment ſo many yéeres.
               
                  26 His title was this. William by the grace of God, Prince of Orange,
                  
                     
                        Lib. 12.
                   
                  Earle of Naſſau, Catzenelenburg, Dietſt. Viand, &c. Marqueſſe of Der Vere, and Fluſhing, Burgraue of Antwerpe,
                  
                     His Stile.
                   
                  Barron of Brede, Dyeſt, Grymberg, Arkize, Nozeroy, &c. Lord of Caſtebelyne, &c. Gouernour Generall of the Low Countries, viz. of Brabant, Holland, Zealand, Vtrecht, and Frizland, Admirall of the ſeas in the lower Germanie.
               
               
                  
                  27 His matrimoniall ſtate was firſt ioyned with the onlie daughter and heire of Maximilian of Egmond,
                  
                     His Matrimoniall eſtate.
                   and Erle of Buren and Leerdam, &c. of whom he begot Phillip Erle of Buren, which in the yeere 1577. was captiued by Duke de Alua, & ſent into Spaine, who is now Prince of Orange: Alſo by the ſame wife he had one onlie daughter named Marie, married to the Erle of Hohenlo. He had to his ſecond wife the Ladie Anne onelie daughter of Maurice Duke of Saxonie & Prince Elector, by her he had one onelie ſonne named Maurice, at this preſent Generall of the vnited Prouinces, and Admiral of their ſeas: and by his ſaid ſecond wife he had alſo two daughters, the one named Anne, and the other Emilia.
                  
                     His Iſſue.
                   He had to his third wife Charlot of Burbon daughter to the Duke of Montpenſyer, of whom he begat ſix daughters, namelie, Ludouica, Iuliana, Elizabetha Flandrina, Katherina Belgora, Charlot Brabantina, & Aurelia Antwerpiana. And he had to his fourth and laſt wife the Lady Loyſe daughter of Iaſpar de Coligni, Lord Chaſtillion and high Admiral of Fraunce ſlaine at Paris in the yéere 1572: of her he begat two ſonnes, the one named Frederick, the other Henry of Naſſau: and he left begotten of an vnknowne woman his baſe ſonne named Iuſtine of Naſſau, at this day Admirall of Zealand. Theſe twelue ſonnes and daughters left the ſaid deceaſed Prince of Orange behind him as aforeſaid.
               
                  28 His progenie was this,
                     His Progeni
                           •
                        
                     
                   he was the ſonne of William of Naſſau the brother of Henry of Naſſau, who had both to father Iohn brother of Enghelbert: both which had for their father alſo Iohn Earle of Naſſau, and the Ladie Leona his wife to their mother.
               
                  29 His brethren were theſe.
                     His Brethren.
                   This Prince William of Naſſau was the eldeſt of fiue brethren, with himſelfe, namelie the foure other were Lodwicke, Adolphe, and Henrie, which three were ſlaine in theſe wars of the Low Countries: the fourth being Iohn the ſecond ſonne of Naſſau as yet liuing at Dilemberge. This Lord hath liuing alſo manie ſonnes and daughters, of which ſonnes the two

eldeſt Earle William and Earle Phillip did beare armes in the Low Countries, ſtoutlie againſt the Spaniſh forces.
               
                  
                     His Siſters.
                  
                  30 His ſiſters were many, married to many & mighty perſonages, full of iſſues: ſo as Iulian mother of this Prince William Counteſſe of Sheerenbergh, a chaſte wife and painefull Ladie, when ſhe had liued ſeauentie fiue yeeres, in the yeere of Chriſt 1578. ſaw (which came of her and her iſſue) Earles Sonnes and Nephewes, to the number of 123. perſonages. A goodlie, great, and moſt rare bleſſing of God no doubt, and a token of Gods great louing fauour and comfort vnto thoſe noble Parents in their life time, and a ſingular great comfort and mutuall conſolation, vnto the poſteritie after their death, vpon which Princes death the authour of this Belgicke hiſtorie hath written both this title, Epitaph, and verſes in Latine following.
            
         
         
            
            ILLVSTRISS MEMO GVLIELMI PRINCIPIS AVRAIci, Comitis Naſſouiae, Cattorum, Dietzii, Viandae, Marchionis Verae & Vliſſingae; Burgraui Antwerpiae,
                  Historia Belgica lib. 12. Vicecomitis Biſontij; Baronis Bredae, Dieſtij, Grinbergae, Arlei, Nozereij▪ &c. Domini Caſtrobellini, &c. Propraeſidis Generalis per vniuerſam Belgiam; Praeſidis Brabantiae, Hollandiae, Zelandiae, Vltraiectini Friſiorum, &c. Admiralij;
            HEROIS FORTISSIMI, ORTHODOXAE Eccleſiae propugnatoris, literatorum maecenatis; Patris Patriae; Belgarum Aſſertoris, pro quibus nec ſibi, nec ſuis pepercit; Delphis ſclopi ictu tranſuerberati: Ioh. Eſychius
            Quod habuit extremum in Dominum ſuum Clementiſſ: Honoris Monumentum, cum luctu poſuit.
            Vixit Annos, LI. Menſes, II. Dies, XXV, obijt Anno Chriſti, M.D.XXCIV. Sexto Idus Iulij.
            
               CARMEN EPITAPHIVM.
               QVem non Hiſpani imperioſa potentia Regis,
               Dirùm tot annos fulminantis impulit;
               Quem non inſidiae, ſcelerum noxâ, ante recluſae,
               Terruere; non tot Principum inconſtantia
               
                  Princeps Auraicus Belgarum aſſertor & vltor
               
               
                  Eccleſiae; Ille terror inquirentium
               
               
                  Horriſonis (praeſente Deo) Tranquillus in Vndis
               Burgundio ſuperatur à 
                     Qui falſis ſubſcriptionibus inſinuatus Aulae.
                   Falſario.
               Oppetit & Quartus pulchram per vulnera mortem
               
                  Naſſouiorum, qui iacent pro Belgica.
               
               Vah Satan? ad facinus quem Auri ſitis alta coêgit,
               Os dum latice 
                     Quae promulgata A.C. M.D.XXC. propoſito percuſſori praemio 25000. coron.
                   Proſcriptionis proluis.
               Infaelix de morte 
                     Andegauenſis qui obierat eodem die menſis praecedentis.
                   
                  Ducis modò nuntius: atra
               Nox tequé & Auctorem premant oblivia
               Sicut agit penna ſolvi metuente ſuperſtes,
               (Rumpatur Invidens Iberus) Gloria.
               
                  Auraicum ſummis certantem Heroibus & iam
               Dijs fidelium Triumphis inſtitum.
               Vnum hoc, O Proceres, advertite, quemlibet iſta
               Scelesto ab vno poſſe tolli machina:
               Infestam Hiſpanus capitis ſeptemplicis Hydram
               Quo iure, quáve iniuria, dum promo vet.
            
            
               AD MAVRITIVM NASSOVIVM. G. F.
               VLturus Patrem & Patruum, Virtutibus, annos,
               Olim Africanus antevenit Scipio:
               
                  Mauriti, Patrias ſi vis vlciſcier Vmbras,
               Paterna ſtringe Scipio, Veſtigia.
               FINIS.
            
         
         
            
               
               The Ciuill Warres there vnder the Prince of Parma and the States.
               
                  MAnifeſtlie thus it appeareth in the ſight of God and all the world, what impietie, malice, miſchiefe and crueltie the Pope and Spaniſh king hath with foxlike ſubtiltie, & lyonlike force practiſed againſt the nobles and States of the Low Countries, infringing their ancient priuiledges, breaking fidelitie in contracts, violating the bonds of amitie, and violentlie oppreſſing al integritie of loyal ſubiects and faithfull ſeruants of God, ſeeking to make hauocke of high and low, rich and poore, young and old, with more then Turkiſh tyrrany in thoſe dominions moſt vntollerable. Neither reſt theſe two there contented with the great effuſion of innocent blood like conquerours, preying on, or ſpoyling euery ſillie ſhéepe with their iawes imbrued, waxing euer more hungrie, neuer reſt raging hither and thither, caſting down Bulles, threatning ſilly lambs, ſwift of foote, and gréedie of tooth to teare in péeces the chriſtian members, and to quaffe vp their blood in their vnquenchable thirſt in thoſe Countries: but this Anti-Chriſt and his adherent vniuſtlie without cauſe giuen them (as the iuſt God iudge and reuenger of all wrongs knoweth) doe now alſo bend all their forces euen in this yéere, againſt the moſt lawfull, naturall, chriſtian, and religious Phenix of feminine ſexe, and the moſt peereleſſe Paragon of true profeſſing Princes, Elizabeth Quéene of England her gratious Royall perſon, her noble lawfull

kingdomes, naturall faithfull ſubiects, and happie peaceable eſtate and gouernment. This Antichriſt, I ſay this Romiſh ſeauen headed, tenne horned, and triple crowned Dragon (whoſe taile draweth the third part of the ſtarres from heauen and caſteth them to the earth) preſumeth to approch néere the woman,
                     Reuel. 12.
                   the Church of God, the defender of the faith, and watcheth wililie with inward and outward Serpentine malice to deuour the innocent & harmeleſſe child:
                     
                        Lib. 13.
                   whereupon although this Dragon ſend forth his angels to war with the woman, though he ſend forth his Ieſuits the Engliſh fugitiues, whom he hath nu
                     •
                  led vp in Popiſh abhomination manie yéeres, and though he againe likewiſe infect,
                     Reu. 15.14.16.
                   and enforce the Locuſts and Scorpions of the bottomleſſe pit with his infernall furie: ſuch as Francis Throgmorton, and manie other vipers, which would haue wrought inteſtine warres, and ciuill bloodſhed againſt their naturall moſt gracious Prince, their countrie and friends by forraine confederacies of the Pope and Spaniſh King, their abbetters, ſubborners, and ſupporters, yet to the perpetuall glorie of God, theſe wicked Angels, Locuſts, and Scorpions (hauing no power to hurt anie good or godlie member, but ſuch as themſelues which haue not the ſeale of God in their forehead) were ouertaken by Gods power and prouidence, and caſt out into the earth: and ſo the Lord of hoſts fought for our Quéene and vs in peace & mercie to our comforts, but in his iuſtice and iudgement againſt our inward and outward enimies, for which God make vs thankefull to his glorie for euer.
               
                  
                     
                        Historia Belgisa lib. 13.
                  After the death ſo ſought for, and procured of the aforeſaid noble Prince of Orange by the ſaid Pope and Spaniſh king as afore mentioned, the ordering of the affaires both ciuill and politike, reſted in the wiſedome of the Nobilitie and States of the Low Countries: who ſeeing themſelues like ſheepe left without a Shepheard, a nation without a Gouernour, and a bodie without a head, plucking vp their ſpirits vnto them, taking heart and chriſtian courage vnto them, in their godlie, iuſt, and lawfull cauſe

for defence of Gods true religion, of their auncient priuiledges, themſelues, their wiues, children and countrie; and for eſchewing the horrible tyranny of the forraine vſurping Pope and Spaniard, their Idolatrie, vniuſt exactions, oppreſſions, vnmercifull vexations, and horrible deſolations: doe with moſt carefull conſideration take oportunitie of time, and with mature deliberation to conſult vpon ſome peculiar and ſpeciall protection of themſelues and their countries thus grieuouſlie diſtreſſed. Whereupon in the next yéere following 1585. (after conference had amongſt themſelues in the month of May that yeere) they diſpacht into England an honourable Embaſſade, which ariued at London on the 26. day of Iune, being perſonages of great account in the Netherlands: Namelie, the Lord Iames Gryſe, the Lord Roger Harſellus in the behalfe of Gelderland, Maiſter Noelus Caronus, Lord of Schonwall: (who at this day is reſiant in England, Agent for the Eſtates) and Iohn Douſta Lord of Nortwich for the ſouth part of Holland with eight others, men of great account, which for breuitie I doe here omit: whom they ſubſtitute as their deputies to ſollicite their cauſe vnto the Queenes Maieſtie of England: theſe were lodged about the Tower ſtreet, and had their diet in worſhipfull manner appointed at Clothworkers hall in London vpon her Maieſties owne charges. On the 29. of Iune they repaired to the Court at Greenewich, where they preſented vnto her Maieſtie, the Soueraignetie of thoſe Countries, which being ratified contained at large 31. ſeuerall Articles, as to the Duch hiſtorie I referre the Reader.
               With godlie and neighbourlie commiſeration,
                     The articles contained the yeelding of certaine townes as pledges to the Queenes Maieſtie.
                   whereof her Maieſtie being pittifullie moued to put forth her helping hand, to ſaue that which was in extreme perill; conſidering well by former accidents how ſiniſter a minde the Spaniſh king by the Popes inſtigation had of long time vniuſtlie borne, of late put in practiſe, and would now likelie proceed further if God and good regard in due time were not her beſt friends: her excellent Highnes therefore

to preuent the worſt, prouideth firſt for her own ſafetie and her ſubiects at home, trayning and muſtering of able men in all places of the realme for neceſſarie domeſticall defence whatſoeuer might befall; and afterwardes in the month of Iulie, preſſeth out of the Citie of London certaine conuenient companies of Souldiers furniſhed for the warres, at the charges of the Fraternities, or Societies of the ſame Citie, and on the 13. of Auguſt following, with certaine ſpecial braue Knights, approued Captains, and worthie Seruitors ouer them, tranſporteth all theſe into Holland, Zeland, Brabant, &c. as other the like Souldiers had beene before time ſent out of other parts and places of the realme. Of theſe ſeuerall Companies at this time, was ſent the before named valorous Generall Norice chiefe Commaunder (who comming from thence for that purpoſe a little before) taking his leaue of her Maieſtie and her Nobilitie, embarked himſelfe and his retinue on the 24. of Auguſt this yeere 1585. and with a proſperous winde ariued in Holland about the 26. of the ſame, where his forces being before ariued, he diſpoſed of them as was moſt conuenient, till time and opportunitie ſerued for their purpoſe.
               About this time the Right noble by birth and for vertue renowmed Knight Sir Philip Sidney (ſonne and heire of that moſt noble Sir Henry Sidney Knight,
                     Sir Philip Sydney ſent ouer and made Lord Gouernour of Fluſſhing. Lib. 13.
                   ſometime Lord Deputie of Ireland, and then Lord Preſident of Wales) was by her Maieſtie ſent ouer after the ſaid Generall Norice on the tenth day of October in the yéere aforeſaid: who ariuing in ſafetie at Fluſhing, was on the ninetéenth of that moneth by the States eſtabliſhed Lord Gouernour of Fluſhing in Zeland: where by his valour, wiſedome and great diligence he ſurpriſed the towne of Axel in Flaunders, and at Doesburgh in Gelderland,
                  
                     His honourable actions in the Lowe countries this yeere 1585.
                   made manifeſt proofe of his valour and magnanimitie. But as he had liued alwaies in honour, excelling by the Lawrell and the Launce (I am but Paruus Laodocus in re tam magna, to deſcribe his demerits of

fame condignely) ſo yet amongſt others, féeling in his life time his honourable fauour, and finding after his death the want of his furtherance vnto my poore diſtreſſed Muſe) I cannot but in dutie honour his vertuous, godly and learned life, and with dolour deplore his vntimely death, with his honorable actions then laſtly performed, as in the next yéere following hereafter ſhall appeare.
               But to returne to the order and procéeding of the hiſtorie for this yéere 1585. aforeſaid, after that the ſaid Generall Norice had diſpoſed thoſe ſeuerall companies vnder their ſeueral Colonels and Captaines, and placed conuenient Garriſons in the frontier Townes before reſigned to her Maieſtie, namely Briel, Fluſhing, Oftend, and Berghenoptzome, the very entries into Holland, Zeland, Flanders and Brabant: the ſaid Generall departed with his forces into Gelderland, where by the ſpeciall helpe of God, his owne great valour and diligence of his ſouldiers, he tooke the Sconce by Arnhem called Iſelwerdt, erected where the Iſel falleth out of the Rhine: wherein for better ſucceſſe in the enterpriſe he placed fiue Ships and two Hoyes, which ſped very ill for that they were on ground and in the enemies reach, knowing no way to eſcape the imminent daunger. Which Captaine Hunnings on the ſaid fifteene of Nouember that yéere 1585. perceiuing, and ſeeking to eſcape the enemies hands (being alreadie hurt very ſore) thinking to leape out of a ſhip into a boate; but by reaſon of his armour ſomewhat heauie, and lighting ſhort, hée was vnfortunately drowned. Notwithſtanding the ſaid Generall Norice ſtill continued his ſkirmiſh on land (in a Sconce which he had butted againſt them) ſo manfully, that hauing ſore diſcomfited them by meanes of his Fort and that hot aſſault, the day drawing néere to an end, they reſted without any more adoe.
               On the next day the Generall, both in reſpect of his owne valour and his countries credit, continued in his

determination and purpoſe to giue a new aſſault. But the enemies knowing the want of abilitie to withſtand his force, and being without hope of helpe, voluntarily appealed to the law of Armes, that they might depart with bagge and baggage: and ſo they ſurrendring the Sconce into his hands, the ſaid Generall with no ſmall credit to his countrie and honour to his name, yéelding humble and heartie thankes vnto God for his clemencie, entred the ſaid Sconce of Arnhem: in the which hée placed ſuch a Garriſon, as was fit and conuenient for the kéeping thereof.
               
                  
                     
                        Histor. Anglica Anno. 1585.
                  Moreouer, the ſaid Generall Norice determining to leaue no thing vnattempted that might any way annoy the enemie, and profit his Prince and Countrie, with a minde vnconquerable marched with his forces towards the citie of Nimeghem; where by honourable force and Knightly chiualrie ſubduing another of the Enemies Sconces, he partly cléered the Riuer Rhine: by which déede he opened the paſſage from Colen and all the high Countries, which was a very profitable and readie helpe to all the Engliſh Campe. This done, by ſerious paines and induſtrie (as a wiſe and politike Generall, letting ſlip no occaſion that might profit his purpoſe) he raiſed a mount before the citie, and that of ſuch a height and ſtrength, that thereon he planted his Ordenance: for that the ſituation of the towne was ſuch, that otherwiſe he could haue done it ſmall hurt, but by meanes of this new raiſed mount: On the morrow he ſhot furiouſly into the Market place, greatly terrifying the enemies and all the inhabitants of the citie.
               The Prince of Parma hearing what had happened, preſently marched toward the ſuccour of the citie, purpoſing fully to haue giuen the ſaid Engliſh Generall the repulſe: who for the better and more eaſie accompliſhment thereof intēded to trauell ſecretly in the night, thinking thereby to take the Engliſhmen vnprouided for their comming. As indéede ſo they had done, if the

commendable and diligent care of our Eſpials had not preuented that inconuenience,
                     The Prince of Parma marcheth to meet Generall Norice.
                   by fore warning the Campe of their comming, who at that inſtant were not farre off. At length the enemies approching, hauing for their guide and gouernour the ſaid Prince of Parma (a man of great force and dexteritie in feates of warres) and the Engliſh hauing for their Gouernour the ſaid noble Generall Norice, a man of no leſſe courage then actiuitie, he with a moſt valiant heart and cheerefull voyce encouraged his ſouldiers to the encounter: wherein he himſelfe,
                     The battell bidden by the Prince, but the Generall had the victorie.
                   for better emboldening of all vnder his charge, and for their only euident example of valour and courage, gaue the firſt charge, and that ſo terrible to the enemies, that turning their backs they fled away as mē amazed, not being able to ſuſtaine the force of his hands: which the Engliſhmen well perceiuing, moſt venturouſly followed their fleeing fainting foes, with ſuch furie that the Spaniards were by heapes laid leuell with the ground. In which conflict were ſlaine of the enemies, to the number of thrée thouſand: at what time alſo there was taken from them in the field nine Enſignes, which loſſe was no ſmall griefe to the enemies, greatly bewayling their vnfortunate ſucceſſe: which was done with very ſmall loſſe of the Engliſh, as it was found by the due ſuruey and view made of ſuch as were then miſſing.
               This ſkirmiſh was ſought on Monday the 15 day of Nouember in the ſaid yéere 1585. after our Engliſh Generall, with thoſe worthie Knights, Colonels and Captaines were employed in the ſaid Low Countries as aforeſaid. For which gracious victorie by God giuen vnto them at this preſent, great and memorable thankes and praiſe with ſingular ioy and comfort as well by the actors as by the inhabitants of thoſe Countries, were rendred vnto Almightie God, and made manifeſt amongſt them with mutuall conſolation inſpeakable. And not thereabouts only where this honourable exploit

was performed, but alſo where and when the ſaid Generall and the Campe returned thence to Briel (being made Gouernour thereof vnder and for her royall Maieſtie) he was in moſt honourable manner receiued by all the States and Burghers with great triumph and ioy:
                     Generall Notice made gouernour of Briel.
                   who in euery corner of the Citie made great bonfires, in euery Church rung their bels, and many a great volley of ſhot for to welcome him into the Citie: where all the people with lowd voyces euery where ſaid, God ſaue good Queene Elizabeth, God ſaue the good Queen of England.
               
               The names of ſuch Captaines as were hurt before this conflict at Arnhem Sconce were theſe:
                     Captaine Thomas Louels note.
                   Captaine Thomas Louell Sergeant Maior, Captaine Borowes, Captaine Thomas Knowles, now Sir Thomas Knowles, Captaine Charles Blunt, now Lord Mountioy, Captain Vauiſor brother to the now Sir Thomas Vauiſor, and Captaine Thomas Wilſon. In all ſixe Captaines hurt at that time. The number of the Engliſh ſlaine at this conflict at Nemeghem, as Captaine Thomas Louell told me, was ſome 60. perſons and not aboue.
            
            
               The ciuill Warres there vnder the Prince of Parma, and the Erle of Leiceſter.
               
                  
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 13.
                  
                  AFter the ſaid Ambaſſade ſent by the Eſtates of the Netherlands vnto the Quéenes Maieſtie of England Anno 1585. (as before by compoſition in 31. ſeuerall Articles contained) which for breuitie I omit: And alſo after the memorable enterpriſe by the noble Generall

                  Norice and the Engliſh forces happily atchieued againſt the Enemie at Arnhem and Nemeghem, laſt before recited in the ſame yéere: it pleaſed her gracious Highnes to ſend now ouer into the Netherlands the moſt nobly renowmed Lord Robert Dudley Erle of Leiceſter, Baron of Denbigh, and one of her Maieſties moſt honourable priuie Councell, &c. with a magnificen
                     •
                   and worthie traine of Noblemen and Gentlemen attending vpō 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   into thoſe Netherlands: where he (ariuing at Fluſhing in Zeland the 19. of December Anno 1585.) was of the Magiſtrates and Towneſmen moſt honourably entertained, and alſo with him the Lord Robert Deuoreux Erle of Eſſex, and other Engliſh Nobles and Gentlemen to the number of ſeuen hundred horſe. From thence out of Zeland they ſailed into Holland, where in all Cities and places as they paſſed they were ioyfully receiued, vntill they came vnto the Haghe in Holland, in the moneth of Ianuary 1585: and there the Eſtates generall and Prouinciall came vnto his Excellencie, friendly embraced him, and honourably intertained him, and all his traine with ſurpaſſing ioy and welcome: and on the Calends of February following ſurrendred vnto him (as to her Highnes Lieutenant Generall of all her forces there) the gouernment of thoſe vnited Prouinces, vz. of the Duthcie of Gelders, Counties of Zutphen, Holland and Zeland, the Seigniouries of Vtrecht, Frizland, and Oueriſſel, and of other Townes and places which as yet they poſſeſſed in Flanders and Brabant. Promiſing and binding themſelues by vertue of their oth in all and euery degrée from the higheſt to the loweſt, by land and by ſea to yéeld and performe al diligence, obedience and fidelitie for their and our generall good of peace and warres, from time to time during his gouernment: His Excellencie making like promiſe of his part for the defence of the ſaid Eſtates, people and Prouinces accordingly. Actum Hagae in Hollandia Cal. Februarij 1585. Subſcripſit Aerſius.
               
               
                  According to the rule and forme of theſe ordenances the ſaid Erle Generall taketh vpon him the ſaid gouernment:
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 23.
                   confirmed in full and abſolute authoritie thereunto by common conſent of the ſaid Eſtates in generall, there bearing publike offices with the ſeuerall Gouernours of thoſe Prouinces, Colonels, Captaines & ſouldiers vnder their charge: for whom and in whoſe name eſpecially Countie Maurice of Naſſaw and Countie Hoghenloe, with other Martiall Gouernours, doe promiſe to performe all poſſible endeuours, aſſiſtance, defence and ſupportation in all points.
               The Quéenes Maieſtie of England receiuing newes hereof, was moued in minde, and (thinking theſe things chiefly done to the end ſhe ſhould be more bounden or tyed to inconuenience then ſhe determined) ſendeth foorthwith thither Sir Thomas Hennage Knight her Vizechamberlaine with letters the 13. of February Anno 1585. aforeſaid:
                     The Queenes Maieſties letters vnto the States of the Netherlands.
                   wherein ſhe ſignified her ſelfe hardly to allow the abſolute gouernment of thoſe Countries ſo ſurrendred vnto the Erle of Leiceſter, and that it ſeemed very abſurb vnto her, for as much as her Highnes had refuſed ſuch proffer to be made vnto her: and to lay the burthen of that gouernment vpon her Miniſter or Officer (before refuſed of her Maieſtie) without her Counſell, ſeemed indéede to be a great ſigne of manifeſt ignominie or iniurie done vnto her Highnes: as though her Maieſties wiſedome and iudgement were wanting, and could not diſcerne what were to be receiued nor what to be refuſed. So as that thing was quite contrarie and repugnant eſpecially to the Declaration publiſhed in print, as touching theſe affaires: wherein was openly teſtified, that her Highnes gaue only ſuccour vnto the Netherlands, and vnto her Neighbours, and not indéede to intrude or thruſt her ſelfe into abſolute protection or ſupreme gouernment of thoſe people and Prouinces. For theſe things being ſo done, now would euery man take occaſion to thinke and iudge otherwiſe then

her Highnes meant herein: eſpecially ſuch perſons would doe that, who thinke they may lawfully cenſure and iudge vpon Princes doings as they liſt,
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 10.
                   and after their ſenſualitie, ſo as thereby her Maieſties fame and honour might chiefly be detracted.
                     Note here her Maieſties meaning and commandement.
                   And therefore that all the world might know, how iuſtly and vprightly in this behalfe ſhe determined to procoode; her Highnes pleaſure is, and ſhe commaundeth the ſaid authoritie to be reuoked, and forbiddeth that the Erle ſhall not vſe any other authoritie, then is contained in the mutuall Contract made and publiſhed. And that thing being ſo obſerued, no doubt it would be profitable to the Common-wealth in time to come. And her Maieſtie further addeth, ſhe made not refuſall for that cauſe that ſhe had not any care of the welfare of thoſe Prouinces, but for that ſhe had prouident care of her owne Honour, and how to ſtop the mouthes of the malignant, and ſuch as were her enemies. The reſidue which were to be ſpoken herein, were expreſſed in her Highnes letters ſo written.
               The Eſtates ſeeing theſe letters were in much doubt, and doe ſend anſwere vnto her Maieſtie touching the ſame on the 25. of March 1586. out of the Citie of Amſterdam:
                  
                     The anſwere of the States to her Maieſties letters.
                   and excuſe the ſame authoritie ſo giuen to be with all humilitie and commoditie for both parts, and affirme that theſe things were not done to burthen or binde her Maieſtie more then the Contract contained, but (as cauſe of neceſſitie ſo required) they were thus done and paſſed. They alleage how that authoritie muſt eſpecially be neceſſarie, and better it was the Prouinces to haue but one, then two Gouernours, and it ſeemed farre ſafer for them to entertaine her Maieſties ſubiect and Deputie, then to chuſe and authorize another: and ſuch a one as they had before, and ſuch authoritie to giue him, as the ſame might be reuoked at any time.
                     The word Abſolute interpreted
                   But for the word (Abſolute) they alleage, that was only added to diſtinguiſh the gouernment, that the ſame might be

diſcerned from others, that they (by a Prouiſo) might be ordered, and by commaundements and inſtructions might be bounden and tyed the better to performe their duties: and for better execution of Martiall diſcipline, and not that ſole and ſoueraigne rule might be giuen him. That it was by example of the Romanes, and other people (Salua dignitate Principatus & Dominij,
                  
                     Exemplum Romanorum.
                   
                  quae remanſit penes populū) ſauing the dignitie of the Principalitie and ſoueraigntie which remained in the power of the people: and moreouer to the end they might more eaſily withſtand and reſiſt the enemies practiſes and enterpriſes, and that the peoples hearts troubled and altogether brokē with feare and furious outrage, might be the better ſuccoured and comforted. And ſo they beſeech her Maieſtie not to forſake them now, in their diſtreſſe; and promiſing all dutie anſwerable to her Maieſties moſt royall expectation, they returne other moe words of anſwere by the ſaid Sir Thomas Hennage, to be related vnto her Maieſtie at large by word of mouth. Actum Amſterdami in Hollandia, 25. die Martij Anno Chriſti 1586.
               
               This was the manner of the anſwere made by the Eſtates to the Queenes Maieſtie, concerning the authoritie wherwith they had inueſted the Erle of Leyceſter as Gouernour Generall in thoſe countries, and although her Highnes was with this excuſe ſomewhat pacified, yet (ſaith my Authour) the Erles authoritie was amongſt manie by reaſon hereof little empaired or diminiſhed.
               
                  
                     The Erle Generall receiueth contributions, &c.
                  In the Erle Generall his name, were receiued all manner of contributions, payments, taxes, and tallages leuied for maintenance of the warres, and for defence of thoſe people and Prouinces: which might amount yeerelie to the ſumme of 2500000. Florens, beſides the commodities of licences and other common prouiſion made for the ſeruice by ſea, and the aſſiſtance or help of the Queenes Maieſtie: but vnto the Erle for his ordinarie expences, the

Prouinces allowed 100000. Florens to be leuied and deliuered yeerelie.
               After this be publiſheth orders of militarie diſcipline, and by a decree of the 4. of Aprill 1586. at Vtrecht, hee forbiddeth the tranſporting or carrying away of all manner prouiſion of corne, armour▪ and munition, or any marchandiſe vnto the enimies and their confederates: yea, and to the places or ports of ſuch others as were neutrall.
                     The Generall maketh orders for Militarie Diſcipline.
                   Moreouer he forbiddeth all traffique and naturall trade by letters, contracts, or whatſoeuer other couenants with the enimies to the Queenes Maieſtie, and to the Eſtates and people of the Netherlands. Beſides all this, he leuieth impoſitions, and contributions vpon all Marriners and Shipmaiſters of whatſoeuer forraine Nation comming thither into anie Port within the vnited Prouinces, for their priuate affaires.
               Here I am now to report of a Honourable, true and rare peece of ſeruice performed immediatlie after the Erle of Leciſter had taken his oth at Haghe,
                  
                     Captaine Iohn Pryſe his relation of the ſeruice performed at the Citie of Graue. Anno 1586.
                   and then comming to Vtrecht for ſpecial ſeruice of the land, which the States moſt earneſtlie required for the releefe of the Citie called the Graue being a key into Gelderland: which was betweene the months of Aprill and May Anno 1586. The ſaid Erle of Leyceſter with the conſent of the States, ſent for that honourable great ſouldier Sir Iohn Norice from Arnhem, demanding of him his opinion of the ſaid releefe of Graue: To be ſhort his anſwere was, that if it would pleaſe his excellencie to ſend him with a ſufficient force of Foote, he would be readie to performe the vttermoſt of his ſeruice therein. Whereupon Counte Hollock was appointed to goe vp the riuer of Graue with certaine Ships of war for that ſeruice, a little higher then Battenborow, and there ſtaid, vntill Sir Iohn Norice then colonell Generall of the ſaid land forces came vnto the ſame Iland on this ſide Battenborow: bringing with him ſome eight Enſignes all Engliſh, and ſending for Captaine Iohn Pryſe, who was at that preſent Sergeant Maior of the Armie.

he came from the City of Amerſford with eight Enſignes moe, al Engliſh, marching towards Sir Iohn Norice. And ſo ſoone as Captaine Pryſe was come ye ſaid Sir Iohn Norice roſe with his troupes, & marched within halfe a mile of Battenborow Caſtle, which the enimie then poſſeſſed, which was vpon a dike for moſt part, and there the campe ſet downe for a day or two, vntill they had further direction. Preſentlie the ſaid Sir Iohn Norice went aborde of Counte Hollocks Ship, where they tooke counſaile how they ſhould relieue the Graue:
                     Generall Norice taketh counſell with Count Hollocke how to relieue Graue.
                   for the enimie was ſet downe being 12000. ſtrong before it, and had alſo chained vp the riuer with a bridge made ouer for their men to paſſe to and fro, and a ſconce at eyther end of the bridge. The ſaid Count Hollocke & Generall Norice concluded, that there ſhould be a certaine Loope ſconce ſet vp within a little Engliſh mile of the enimies bridge, and ſo to come nearer and nearer to the enimie: whereupon the ſaid Generall ſent vnto the ſaid Captaine Pryſe (who in his abſence had the commaund of the troupes) to bring him 200. Pioners, and 200. choſen ſouldiers. Who ſo ſoone as they came fell to worke and caſt vp the ſaid Sconce, and working moſt part of that night, and the next day, the enimie (imagining and ſeeing plainelie that they were about ſuch a matter) ſent out 2000. men, and procured a ſmall ſkirmiſh with vs, wee hauing aduantage vpon the ſaide ditch: but what with Counte Hollocks men of war, playing vpon them, and the land forces they were enforced that afternoone to retire to their Campe. But this great ſouldier Sir Iohn Norice knew very well it was needfull to fall to his worke againe very hard, for he knew well that the next day the enimie would be doing with him againe,
                     The Generall appoynteth Captatne Pryſe to his charge.
                   and would not ſuffer him there to reſt, and therefore he called vnto him the ſaid Captaine Pryſe, and willed him to goe backe againe to the Campe and to chooſe out 300. mo ſouldiers out of the 8. Enſignes of the beſt and choiſe men, which the ſaid Captaine did ſend him with his owne Lieutenant called Anthonie de Boys. And beſides all this the

ſaid Generall Norice ſent to the ſaid Captaine Pryſe that he ſhould come himſelfe, and bring with him 7. whole Companies, which were in all 800. men, and be with him by breake of day or there abouts. But before the ſaid Captaine Pryſe could come with theſe Companies, the enemie was approached and come to the ſaid Generals ſconce with 4000. braue choiſe men of his Armie, the ſaid Generall being in the Sconce with 500. choiſe men, and a braue Captaine with him named Sir Iohn Burgh, mother to the late Lord Burgh, the enimie and Generall Norice being in fight a long houre vpon the Sconce at the puſh of the pike, there were manie ſlaine on both ſides: ſo as the ſaid enimie getting the Sconce, the ſaid Generall was hurt, Sir Iohn Burgh loſt one of his fingers, and was hurt verie ſore beſides: alſo the enimie following in chaſe, and killing our men▪ vntill ſuch time as the ſaid Captaine Pryſe came with his 7. Enſignes, who hauing great care in placing of his men to gaine all the vantage of the dike, had put with a Sergeant 50. Muſketiers on the one ſide of the dike, which was of ſome good bredth, and 50. moe with another Sergeant below the dike on the other ſide,
                     Captaine Iohn Pryſes good ſeruice againſt the enemies.
                   and alſo placed two or three Officers in the Reareward, giuing them ſtreight charge that if anie man ſhould retire or runne away to kill him. Preſentlie the ſaid Captaine Pryſe met with the ſaid Generall Norce all bloodie about his mouth, which was no ſmall griefe to the ſaide Captaine to ſee the ſame. Quoth the ſaid Generall, O Captaine Pryſe, welcome, now for the honor of England, behold there is the enimie, which was hard at his heeles. Captaine Pryſe hereupon commanded all his Shot couragiouſlie to deliuer a vollie in the verie teeth of the enimie: and preſentlie came vpon them with their pikes, ſo that the enimie retired with the loſſe of a great number of men, for the ſaid Captaine Pryſe and his ſouldiers had the killing of them euen at his will the ſpace of two Engliſh miles and a halfe, vntill he came vnto a place where a windmill ſtood, whither were ſent by the enimie a thouſand

freſh men to ſecond the others: the ſaid Captaine Pryſe being formoſt went ſo faſt, and the reſt behinde ſtill following the execution of the enimie and wearie, had not with him at the encounter with this ſupplie aboue 50. or 60. men at the moſt: whereupon this freſh companie of the enimie deliuered a vollie of ſhot upon the ſaid Captaine, and ſhot him through the thigh, and killed ſome of his men: but the ſaid Captaine by the help of ſome ſpecial men about him was reſcued from the enimie, and preſently the ſaid Generall Norice ſent him a horſe to carrie him away downe to the water ſide. Then the enimie following and killing ſome few of our men, the ſhips of warre played vpon them ſo hotlie, that they made them to retire to their Armie. The Generall and Sir Iohn Broughe were carried into Counte Holloks Ship, where being verie wearie and wounded, they reſted vntill the next day, where there was a generall reuew what men were ſlaine on both ſides,
                     A view of the loſſe of men on both parts.
                   & there was found by the reuew taken by the Counte Hollocke and the Engliſh Officers of the enimy aboue 700. men ſlaine at the ſecong charge: beſides them which were ſlaine by the ſaid Generall Norice, at the Fort before the comming of the ſaid Captaine Pryſe, being ſome hundred or there abouts. There were ſlaine of our men that day, not fullie 150. men, as was found by a generall reuew of the ſaid Officers. And ſo the next day the ſaid Citie of Graue was releeued, the enimies bridge broken, and Counte Hollocke ſent into the towne ſeauen horſes laden with butter, cheeſe, munition, and other neceſſaries: which was to the great honour of our Engliſh nation, and the great comfort of that diſtreſſed gariſon.
               The Belgicke hiſtorie maketh this report of the field fought at Battenborow aforeſaid,
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 13.
                   & of the ſiege of Graue, viz. Parma in the beginning of winter, Anno 1586. by Counte Charles Maunſfield, cauſeth the Citie of Graue to be beſieged and compaſſed about with foure Bulwarks or Forts, and entring vpon the bridge of Naia neere the riuer, he cauſeth all the paſſages to be made ſure within,

and without, and all manner of victuals to be kept within the Citie. In the Bulwarks he had placed ſome 1500. ſouldiers for a gariſon, and beſides 5000. Spaniards more or leſſe, the reſt were ſeruing in the Tents, almoſt halfe a mile from the Citie. After theſe had for 3. months ſpace and more beſieged the Graue, the Erle Generall came from Haghe by Harlam and Amſterdam in Holland vnto Vtrecht, and ſent about 400. horſemen into Velonia or Velna as farre as Niekerke to help the Citizens of the Graue.
               
               Generall Norice and Counte Hoghenlo marched vnto them with 2000. footemen which carried victuals and prouiſion into the Citie, for with their horſemen they could do no good. Theſe footmen at the firſt inuade the Bulwarke called the Molenſconce halfe a mile from the Graue, and after that fortifie themſelues in a new ſconce not farre from the Spaniards Bulwarks: which they perceiuing came fiercelie vpon them with 3000. of their choſen ſouldiers to ſurpriſe them, and at the ſecond or third aſſault driue away their workemen euen in the verie erecting of their Sconce, who meete ſome 900. of the gariſons, and there make a ſtand: which the Spaniards perceiuing, charged them a freſh, and droue them away to the next Sconce, though the Spaniards ſo doing fiue hundred of them were ſlaine, & manie were wounded: amongſt whom were ſeauen Captaines of companies, and two men of great account, from whom the Engliſhmen tooke away a braſſe peece of Ordinance. And thus was the field fought at Battenborow, as that hiſtorie mentioneth: ſo of the ſiege of Graue when Parma had beaten it with 24. peeces of batterie, he ſo battered and rent the walles thereof, that hee compelled the Citizens and their gariſons to yeeld the Towne vnto him: who entred the ſame with his forces, and gaue them leaue to depart with wife and children and all that they had, whither ſoeuer they would with bagge and baggage.
               Immediatly after the ſeruice ſo done at the Graue, and

ſurrendring or yéelding the ſame vnto the enemie, the Erle Generall cauſed the Lord Hemert a Martiall gouernour, with certaine others, to be apprehended, caried to Vtrecht, proſecuted by order of law, and put to death in the preſence of al the Captaines for moſt part & of the ſouldiers lately ſeruing at the Graue: although (ſaith my Author) they had done no treaſon, nor made any ſecret confederacie with the enemie. But through a certaine youthfull want of ſkill in Militarie ſeruice, had rendred vp the towne of Graue vnto the enemie: which act of the Generall (ſaith my Author) turned away the hearts of many Noblemen, and inhabitants there from him, eſpecially becauſe they ſaw one Welſh, ſometimes a Captaine of the Engliſh forces▪ and a notable Traytor (before taken by Countie Hoghenloe) which with others moe ſuch as himſelfe was, betrayed the citie Aloſto in Flanders, and deliuered it vnto the Enemie) was not put to death, but preferred in Militarie ſeruice: and alſo Sir William Stanley and Rowland Yorke, two notable fugitiues and falſe forſworne Traytors to their Prince and Countrie, eſcaping vnpuniſhed likewiſe.
               The Erle Generall in the moneth of Auguſt 1586. hauing gathered a conuenient armie of Engliſh, Dutch and other Nations, ſent the firſt companie vnder Sir Iohn Norice and Sir Thomas Cicill,
                  
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 13.
                   now Lord Burley, Knights, who placed them neere vnto Seuenter in Cleueland, purpoſing to march towards the Prince of Parma and his forces. But the Erle Generall himſelfe the 6. of September Anno 1586▪
                   departeth from Arnhem in Gelderland towards Eltem in Cleueland,
                  
                     The Erle Generall marcheth to meet the Prince of Parma.
                   honourably accompanied with Prince Emanuel ſonne of Anthony King of Portugale, the Lord Truxſis the Prince Elector of Colen, Countie Maurice of Naſſaw, Countie Philip of Naſſaw nephew to the deceaſed Prince of Orange, the Counties Solmes and Oberſteyn, the Erle of Eſſex Generall of the horſemen, the Lord Peregrin Bartu Lord Willoughby, the Lord Iohn North Baron of Kirtlington,
                  
Sir Philip Sidney Lord Gouernour of Fluſhing, and others of great authoritie. And hauing taken a view of his hoſte, his Excellencie numbred his footemen to be about 7000. and his horſemen 1400. But this armie ſeemed vnto him inſufficient to giue Parma the repulſe (who was ſaid to haue 12000. footmen and 3500. horſemen). And for that he would deliuer the citie of Berck upon the Rhine from the preſent ſiege of the Enemie, he determined therfore firſt by policie to aſſault Doesburgh in the Countie of Zutphen, to withdraw the Prince of Parma from the ſiege of Berck aforeſaid.
               This towne of Doesburgh was in times paſt called of Druſus the ſonne of Tiberius Caeſar Romane Emperour, Drusburg, who cauſed the Riuer of Rhine from a very ditch to be digged and inlarged beyond Arnhem aforeſaid, into an Iland at the towne of Drusburg, which at this day is now alſo called Druſus Ditch. The citie is high walled, after the old manner, and inuironed with large and déepe Ditches. There were within the ſame thrée hundred Wallons in garriſon ſent from the prince of Parma thither, and alſo armed citizens fiue hundred more or leſſe. The Erle Generall ſendeth Countie Hoghenlo, Sir Philip Sidney, and others the Leaders of the forces with fiue hundred horſe and eight hundred footemen in the night time to diſcouer and beſet the citie about: himſelfe with the reſt of the armie came after them the ninth day of September: his Excellencie commands them in warlike wiſe quickly to intrench themſelues, and to make prouiſion for a batterie. On the Thurſday fiue péeces of Ordenance were mounted, which made two great breaches: which the Townes men with all poſſible haſte and diligence made vp againe and fortified. And whereas the Ditch being thrée foote broad and more, and thirtie foote high encompaſſed the Citie, the aſſault ſéemed very difficult to be made: but the ſouldiers being thereunto encouraged, the Erle Generall determined to trie the aſſault: whereunto he appointed

Countie Hoghenlo with his Germanes and Scots, and Sir Iohn Norice with his Engliſhmen and Zelanders to giue the aſſault. When ye beſieged townſmen ſaw that, they offered to yéeld vpon certaine conditions: which being refuſed, they yéeld vp the citie (only with ſafetie of their liues) the Lord Borough and Sir William Stanley (the gouernment being giuen vnto the Lord Borough) entred both into the towne.
               And to the end his Excellencie might now next of all withdraw the Prince of Parma from the ſiege of Berck, he taketh his iourney towards Zutphen, one of the foure chiefe cities in Gelders, famous by name in reſpect of other cities, populous and well defended: when he vnderſtood it lacked victuals, he went about either to take it, or elſe to withdraw the Prince of Parma from Berck, which thing ſo happened. Zutphen was in the kéeping and defence of Iohn Baptiſta Taxis, a man couragious in fight, the Lieutenant Colonell to Verdugo Gouernour of Groning: and ſéeing euen from this citie there ſituate ouer the Riuer of Iſſell all the countrie of Velue and Holland were troubled and moleſted with the Enemie (and therefore the Eſtates not long before had builded a Fort or Sconce of defence: but by reaſon of the great floods and too much violence of water there increaſing, incontinently after they were driuen away from thence) therfore the citizens of Zutphen ſtrengthened and fortified the ſame againe. And becauſe they of Zutphen extorted ſpoyling exactions throughout all the Velue, by reaſon of the commoditie of theſe their new erected Fortreſſes, the Hollanders two yéeres paſſed beſieged the ſame in vaine almoſt for ten moneths ſpace. The Erle Generall now increaſing his armie, ioyneth a great part of thoſe ſouldiers (which vnder the Lord Rihouias and Coſmus Peſcarengio were gathered to inuade Flaunders) and forthwith pitcheth his Tents by the Riuer ſide and before Zutphen it ſelfe, on the 18. day of September 1586: and with boates chained together croſſe the Riuer almoſt

a mile from the citie made a bridge to paſſe from the one ſide to the other.
               When his Excellencie had thus pitched his Tents there, he tooke his iourney thence with all ſpéed towards Deuenter in Ouer-Iſſell (for as yet there were iarres and diſcords within the Citie) and though the citie alſo did contribute with other cities, yet did it refuſe to conſerue or kéepe orderly mutuall league with them: he entreth into the city, hauing for his guard about foure hundred footemen, and two troupes of horſemen: and when he had receiued newes that Parma had left Berck, hée made towards his Tents with all ſpéede that he could, and ſtrengthened them ſo ſoone as poſſible might be, the more confidently to beſiege the ſaid citie of Zutphen aforeſaid. The Prince of Parma fearing leſt the Erle Generall ſhould preuaile againſt Zutphen, and vnderſtanding that the towne of Berck aforeſaid, was well defenſed and hard to be wonne: when he had alreadie fortified the Iſle before the towne in the Riuer of Rhene, and blocked and beſieged it about with other Forts and Sconces, and thought he had ſufficiently furniſhed it with victuals and all other neceſſaries, departing from thence on the 22. ot September Anno 1586. he marcheth towards Weſel in Cleueland and the Caſtle there, and making a bridge of ſhips had paſſed ouer the Riuer of Rhene, and had made Forts from the other part of Reſa vpon the Rhine and other places, whereby he might both fortifie the Bridge & defend himſelfe in his iourney more ſafely, he came to Bercklo, and from thence he ſendeth his prouiſion to be conueyed into Zutphen aforeſaid.
               The Erle Generall ſo ſoone as he perceiued that the Prince of Parmaes prouiſion ſo caried in was not ſufficient for the Garriſon there, the next day he determined to ſet vpon the Garriſon: and committed that ſeruice to Sir Iohn Norice and Sir William Stanley, with a great number of footemen, and to certaine others with a great number of horſemen. And when on the 23. of September

the Prince of Parma had againe commaunded ſome more prouiſion to be that morning conueyed into the towne,
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 13.
                   guarded with ſeuen troupes of horſemen, and two thouſand Harquebuziers, they performed his commaundement: and in a certaine well fenced place néere the Village called Warresfeld (in the way almoſt a mile off from the Citie) they made a ſtand. In the meane time while the cariages and waggons doe enter into the citie, preſently the Erle of Eſſex, the Lord Willoughby, Sir William Stanley, Sir Philip Sidney, Sir William Ruſſell,
                  
                     The Engliſh forces ſuddenly aſſaile their enemies.
                   Sir Henry Norice, and his brother the Generall Sir Iohn Norice, hauing with him about two hundred horſemen, alſo fiftéene hundred Muſquetters, and Sir William Stanleys Regiment, with as much ſpéed as they could marching thither, doe ſuddenly and fiercely charge the enemies ſooner then they thought for, by reaſon of a great miſt which dimmed and darkened their eyes at that time. But euen theſe Engliſh forces were by and by encountred by certaine troupes of the enemies footebands out of a very commodious place like vnto a Fort: and yet did the Engliſh very couragiouſly and valiantly paſſe through and endure the manifold ſtormie hot batterings of the bullets, and yet not one of them once brake his order: all keeping themſelues conſtantly together in a wonderfull manner. Then the enemies not knowing what number of Engliſhmē theſe were whom they ſaw approch néerer vnto them, they quickly ſend out vnder Captaine George Creſſy Albanoys a troupe of horſemen: which being well beaten and diſperſed here and there (whereof many were ſlaine and taken) they ſend out againe Countie Hannibal Gonzaga with his troupe,
                     The enemies well beaten and ſcattered.
                   which in like caſe were ouerthrowne, and hée himſelfe by a deadly wound there ſlaine. So the victors preſſing through the thickeſt of the Harquebuziers, there the third troupe being a troupe of the Enemies horſe, ſéemed as if they would reſiſt them: but by and by they turne their backes, runne away, and ſo depart the

field, after two victorious troupes of the Engliſh forces had ſlaine and ſore wounded 180. of the enemies: themſelues hauing of theirs onely but thirtie perſons of all their companies ſlaine and wounded: amongſt whom was that right nobly renowmed Knight Sir Philip Sidney before remembred, of whoſe action and manner of death at large I haue thought good here, according to the report of George Whetſton and others, actors and eyewitneſſes there, thus to declare the ſame.
               I haue before (by occaſion miniſtred vnto me) made mention of the vertuous life and valorous ſeruice of that renowmed Knight Sir Philip Sidney, the laſt yéere in the Low Countries, ſpent to the aduancement of Gods glorie, honour of his Prince, and benefit of Gods Church and of the kingdome of Chriſt: now is occaſion giuen me to ſet downe his honourable enterpriſe a little before his death, and ſo thereby to make his vertuous life, valorous ſeruice, and honourable death more rightly renowmed vnto the poſteritie. Thus it happened in the latter end of the next yéere following 1586. the Engliſh Nobles,
                     The Engliſh forces approching towards Zutphen.
                   
                  vz. the Right Honourable Robert Erle of Eſſex, by his valour reuiuing his fathers fame; the Lord Willoughby, the Lord Generall Norice, Sir William Ruſſell, and Sir Thomas Parrot, Sir Henry Norice, with diuers others both Knights and Gentlemen of good accompt ſeruing then on horſebacke; this famous worthy Knight Sir Philip Sidney as forward as the beſt (all theſe being mounted againſt the enemie, and his power approching on the 22. of September 1586. vnto the towne of Zutphen in Gelderland:
                     Sir Philip Sydney mortally wounded.
                  ) This noble Knight like Caeſar charged the enemie ſo ſore, that firſt an enuious Muſquetier from the ſpitefull Spaniards eſpying his oportunitie ſlew his horſe vnder him: who getting to horſe againe, was with a poyſoned bullet from the enemie ſhot in the thigh, wanting his Cuiſſes, which might haue defended him. The wound being déepe and ſhiuering the bone, yet his heart was good, and his courage

little abated, one Vdal a gentleman alighted and led his horſe ſoftly, to whom he thus ſpake: Let goe, let goe till I fall to the ground: The foe ſhall miſſe the glorie of my wound. And ſo riding out of the field with a rare and conſtant courage, his wound was ſearched, no ſalue too deare but was ſought, no ſkill ſo curious but was tried to cure, eaſe, and recouer this noble Souldier languiſhing in paine, all remediles. Who féeling death drawing on, deſired yet (were it Gods will ſo to be) that he might liue to doe his Countrie more good ſeruice: alleaging that he feared not death, but lamented that his yéeres as yet (being but gréene) brought foorth but leaues, the bloomes being faire, no fruite yet appearing, his life could not be lengthened for the enlargement of that good, which both in heart he wiſhed, and in power he would haue performed towards his Prince and countrie, had he liued here longer: who being demaunded if he feared not any whit to dye, anſwered: No whit becauſe I liue thereby.
               
               Touching the honour of the field there fought, as all our Engliſh Lords and Knights by their valours much diminiſhed the enemies force and daunted his courage: ſo amongſt them Sir Thomas Parrot ſtroake downe Gonzaga at a blow, Countie Hannibal was left for dead in the field, and Captaine George one of the enemies commanders, was by the worthie Lord Willoughby taken priſoner: onely Captaine Thomas and Captaine Martin amongſt our Engliſh were ſlaine in that fight, and not any moe of accompt miſſing. So by this honour enſued the vntimely death of this renowmed noble Knight on the 17. day of October 1586. liuing iuſt 25. daies after his receiued hurt, in hope by death to inherit with Chriſt the Crowne of life and glorie. Whoſe mortall death how greatly it was lamented of all ſorts, from the higheſt to the loweſt, who ſo pleaſe may looke and reade in the Reportarie of this action, afterwards penned by George Whetſton Gentleman: where he declareth

how the corps of this noble deceaſed Knight being brought ouer in the Blacke Pinnis, ſo called, was ſhrined in a Hearſe within the Mynories in London: and his funerall day being appointed vpon Tueſday the 16. of February next after following in that yéere 1586. The ſolemne order of the ſame was thus martialled in honourable manner, vz. hauing thrée Erles and other Lords of the States his chiefe mourners, with all their traine as they followed the Corps. After them went Sir Wolſton Dixi Knight then Lord Maior of London, and the Aldermen mourning in their purple robes. And laſt of al a warlike band of worthy Citizens his welwillers, with weapons trailed in ſolemne wiſe, brought the Corps from out of the Quier of the Cathedrall Church of S. Paul in London (after a learned Sermon there made) to the vpper Northeaſt end of the Iſle aboue the Quier by the ſecond piller, where with ſolemne honourable ceremonie vſuall, the corps was laid to his reſt in Chriſt Ieſus: which done, the ſaid ſouldierlike Citizens beſtowed for their laſt farewell of their beloued noble friend and Captaine, two volleys of ſhot, and ſo returned home euery man to his houſe, heauie, mournfull and ſad for the loſſe of ſo vertuous, honourable and true renowmed perſonage: vpon whoſe death the aforeſaid George Whetſton made this Epitaph.
               HEre vnder lyes Phillip Sydney Knight,
               True to his Prince, learned, ſtaid and wiſe:
               Who loſt his life in honourable fight,
               Who vanquiſht death, in that he did deſpiſe
               To liue in pompe, by others brought to paſſe:
               Which oft he tearm'd a Dyamond ſet in Braſſe.
               
                  There is another Epitaph vſuallie pendant at the ſaid piller vnder his Creſt, Cote Armour, and colours there fixed.
               ENgland, Netherland, the Heauens and the Arts,
               The Souldiers, and the World, haue made ſix parts
               Of the Noble Sydney; for none will ſuppoſe,
               That a ſmall heape of ſtones can Sydney incloſe.
               His bodie hath England, for ſhe it fed,
               
                  Netherland his blood in her defence ſhed:
               The Heauens haue his ſoule, the Arts haue his Fame,
               All Souldiers the griefe, the World his good Name.
               After the death of this noblie renoumed Knight Sir Philip Sydney, ſo greatlie lamented as well in the Netherlands as in England,
                  
                     
                        Hiſtoria Belgica lib. 13.
                   the Erle Generall maketh attempt to take the Fort on the other ſide of Zutphen, placing his Tents in che Velawe; there is a little Iland before the Towne of Zutphen, whereunto out of the Citie, there is an open paſſage almoſt on drie foote, by a Ford which now and then hath beene kept by a garriſon of thirtie ſouldiers onlie,
                     Anno 1586.
                   this he battereth with his Ordinance and taketh it.
               The Prince of Parma ſeeing this Iland taken, marcheth to the ſaid Citie of Zutphen, on the fourteenth of October following Anno dicto with a ſtrong power, furniſht with great ſtore of all manner of prouiſion, and the next day after returneth backe two miles from Zutphen, vnto Barcklo, from thence to Weſel and ſo to Burck: then making a bridge ouer the Rhene, he falleth ſick in his way comming to Bruxels, & there being enféebled by ſicknes, be ordaineth the Marqueſſe of Renty,
                  
                     Parma falleth ſicke.
                   Lord of Montigni (diſcended of the houſe of Lalaigne) chiefe Gouernour of the Armie in his ſteed.
               The Erle Generall battereth with his Ordinance (on the 16. of October anno dicto) the leſſer Fort towards

the North and commaundeth it (after dinner) to be razed to the ground, and in this place there were 300. in garriſon: but in the greater Fort were 800. and in the Citie 2000. when the Prince of Parma himſelfe was abſent from thence ſcarce two miles.
                     The Erle Generall aſſaileth the little wing neere Zutphen.
                   So as what time neither out of the Citie it ſelfe, nor out of the Fort anie man came to reſiſt or withſtand the Erles forces, this was by them ſharplie aſſailed: in the aſſailing thereof Edward Standley an Engliſh Gentleman (together with Sir William Standley being a Colonell) behaued themſelues verie couragiouſlie. For maiſter Edward Standley climed vp the rampere of the Fort, out of which one ſuppoſing to ſtrike him through with a pike, the ſaid Edward tooke it perforce out of his hands, and held it ſtoutlie, and the more the enimie ſtroue to wreſt it from him againe, the higher hee raiſed the ſaid Edward Standley ſo much more out of his reach: whereby he eſcaped the enimies daunger,
                     Maſter Edward Stanley Knighted.
                   which deed was the chiefe cauſe of the victorie. For which enterpriſe the Erle Generall dubbed him Knight, as by deſert, and gaue him a yeerely penſion of 600. Florens: in this aſſault there were no moe but eight of the Generals men ſlaine, and there the Counte Hoghenlo was wounded in the face.
               His Excellencie on the next day after this battereth, and ſo taketh the ſaid greater Fort by commoditie of the leſſer Fort, and the Ile on the north part aforeſaid, ſo as thereby he might vtterlie ſtoppe the paſſage betwéene the great Fort and the Citie: and while the garriſon were in feare thereof, leauing their Ordinance there at randome,
                     The Erle taketh certaine Caſtles.
                   before the Engliſhmen had placed their Ordinace, they fled into the Citie, and ſo theſe Forts together with the Caſtels of Newbeken, Boxburgh, and other places néere adioyning were taken, whereby all the Countrie of the Velawe was deliuered from the violent extortions, and burning ſpoilers there before raging.
               His excellencie thought not good to aſſaile the City of Zutphen, becauſe it was ſtronglie fenced, encompaſſed

with waters, enuironed with walles, and ſituate betwéene Deuenter, Doesburgh, Lokam, Doeterum and the ſaide Fort: for he hoped they would then eſpeciallie yeeld vnto him: if penurie ſo conſtrained them by a little and a little. Therefore almoſt in the midſt of winter he remoueth his Campe (which thing alſo Parma doing) the Erle Generall diſpoſeth his gariſons in good order euerie where, aduaunceth certaine Leaders, and Engliſh Nobles for their approued valours with great honour, and made ſome others of them Knights.
               And ſo the Erle Generall hauing performed all theſe ſeruices in the Netherlands, was worthilie, well, honourablie & highly reputed of them hitherto: but after this (he is ſaid by my Authour lib. 13. fol. 391. pag. 2. (whether and how he deſerued it I know not) to incur the diſliking of the Eſtates in ſome points, as alſo in that he placed Rowland Yorke aforeſaid Gouernour of the Fort at Zutphen;
                     The Erle incurreth the States diſpleaſure.
                   for although they had vſed him in diuers ſeruices for his benefit before time, yet he was not found ſo faithfull to them in thoſe cauſes as he ought to haue bin, and as was expected. Alſo for that the ſaid Erle Generall made Sir William Srandley knight, giuing him charge ouer 1200. Engliſh and Iriſh footmen, and ouer 200. horſemen: into whoſe doings the Eſtates Generall aduiſedlie looking, found him alſo farre more vnfaithfull then eyther he ſhould haue bin, or they worthilie deſerued at his hands.
               The Erle Generall when in the deepe of winter he vnderſtood that Parma was departed out of Gelderland, and knowing for certaine that the ſouldiers appointed in the Oſteland (by the confederacie and ſecret conſpiracie of certaine falſe forſworne ſouldiers which he had in his gouernment) had reuolted from him, yea and to their great ſhame (no neceſſitie vrging them) to runne away from him: and when hee now alſo ſaw, that neither time nor place was giuen him for performance of anie further ſeruice, and the Towne Berck was deliuered latelie from the ſiege (from whence Colonell Thomas Morgan was now

returned) the Erle General I ſay now departeth towards Haghe in Holland. But whē his ſouldiers leauing at randome the Ile before Zutphen, remoued their Tents, they were ſodainelie & fiercelie charged by Iohn Baptiſta Taxus the Spaniſh Colonell: but they eſcaped away from the enimie,
                     
                        Lib. 13.
                   with the loſſe of ſome ſixe or ſeauen of the Engliſhmen and no moe.
               At that time the Eſtates finding themſelues agreeued at the Erles indirect doings (as my Author ſaith) in thoſe countries, doe make and exhibite vnto him certaine requeſts for diuers reſpects: whereof the whole reformation was reſerued vntill his returne againe out of England, when God and her Maieſtie ſhould ſo permit. And ſo his Excellencie taking his leaue of the Eſtates Generall (not ſufficientlie contented with his doings) he taketh ſhipping at Fluſhing paſſeth into England, and ariueth at London on the fourth of December Anno 1586.
               
               About this time (for as much as Sir Philip Sidney late Gouernour of Fluſhing was ſlaine at the ſiege of Zutphen,
                  
                     1586.
                   
                  
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 14.
                   as before is ſaid) the Queenes Maieſtie of England, in his place gaue the gouernment thereof to Sir William Ruſſell Knight (ſonne to the Erle of Bedford) a man of great accompt and worthines:
                     Sir William Ruſſel.
                   He ariued there at Fluſhing, and with him Monſieur Tyrlone, ſometime Admirall of Zeland, who for ſuſpitions in ſome points, was a long time kept in priſon: but being afterwards ſet at libertie, and diſcharged of all matters, went into England to render his due and condigne thankes vnto the Quéenes moſt excellent Maieſtie.
               Before that the Prince of Parma purpoſed to beſiege Sluce in Flaunders, he leuied an armie throughout all the Prouinces of his iuriſdiction, making as though he would take his iournie through that part of Flaunders, which we call the land of Waſte: Theſe forces about the beginning of the month of May next following, which was in Anno 1587. were diſperſed into ſundrie parts about Bridges by little and little encreaſing. And to the end they ſhould the

leſſe ſuſpect them, they giue out ſpeeches that they were ſent with Mounſier de Lamot to the Towne of Oudenburgk in Flaunders,
                  
                     Anno 1587.
                   to the end they ſhould repreſſe the outragious ſpoyles of the Souldiers at Oſtend and of Sluce: when now all his hoaſt was in a readines,
                     
                        Lib. 14.
                   and as well the Bands come out of Germanie as out of the Netherlands, and other Nations were gathered, they paſſed on forewards to the ſiege of Sluce. The Prince of Parma himſelfe on the ſeauenth of Iune departeth out of Bruxels, and the next day came to Bruges leading with him 9. Troupes or Companies, after whom the reſt of his whole hoſt followed:
                     Parmaes preparation to march towards Sluce.
                   the comming of theſe, and the forerunning fame of their prepartion throughout Flaunders greatlie amazed the minds of them at O
                        •
                     tend, and Sluce. Inſomuch as from the Gouernours of both townes, diuers meſſengers were ſent into Zeland and Holland to prouide themſelues of ſouldiers, victuals, armour, and other neceſſarie warlike furniture againſt the comming of the enimie towards them.
               I haue ſeene (ſaith my Authour) amongſt others the letters of Arnold Greeneveld then Gouernour of Sluce, written to the foreſaid Sir William Ruſſell newlie made Gouernour of Fluſhing dated the 9. of Iune 1587. wherin he ſignified vnto him,
                     Sir William Ruſſel made Generall of Fluſhing.
                   that he (hauing made diligent ſearch and view as well throughout all the publike magazin or garners of the Citie, as through all the priuate garnets within the inhabitants houſes of the Citie) could not yet find any more ſtore of corne, and graine in them all, then might ſerue for ſuſtentation of their owne families euen for a verie few dayes.
               Sir William Ruſſell being with the reports of theſe letters throughlie moued, had a few dayes before ſent for certaine companies of footemen from the gariſon of Berghen, which within a while after came timely enough: and moreouer on the 11. of Iune dicto he writ vnto the States for ſouidiers alſo. But for corne, and graine, and warlike munitions, he writ vnto the States of Zeland onlie,

by Peter Vanhela, a Netherlandiſh gentleman, together with Nicholas Meetkirck Liuetenant Gouernour of Sluce, ſent thither for that verie purpoſe: of whom when they receiued but onelie promiſes for their anſwere (becauſe the Zelanders denyed that the danger was not ſo much as they made report of in writing.) Sir William Ruſſell therefore by theſe meſſengers,
                     Sir William Ruſſels care for prouiſion.
                   inſtanteth the Zelanders on the tenth and eleuenth of that Iune for ſpeedie diſpatch of the requiſite prouiſion, and yet (fearing in meane time their wonted delayes) expreſlie commaundeth Vanhela, that (taking vnto him the Magiſtrate of Fluſhing for his helper in this caſe) hee would finde out ſome ſtore of corne and graine whereſoeuer he could get it, and that he without all delay ſhould ſend it ouer to Sluce: who the verie ſame day (by diligent ſearch made) commaunded by authoritie ſo giuen him, a Ship which he found laden with corne to depart with all ſpeed vnto Sluce, which hereby was ſufficientlie prouided of corne and graine for, and during the whole time of the ſiege.
               The ſame day ariued three Companies in Zeland which came from the gariſon of Berghen, to whom Sir William Ruſſell adding one of his Companies with certaine choſen ſouldiers, made vp foure iuſt cōpanies,
                     Sir Roger Williams.
                   which were in all verie neere 800. men: there ariued then alſo out of England, that worthie ſouldier Sir Roger Williams, and certaine other Engliſh gentlemen come thither, by reaſon of the rumors of the enimies approch, daylie about Oſtend. So the garriſon of Sluce by this meanes increaſed to the number of about 1600. men.
               For by this time the Prince of Parma had pitched his Tents in Cadſandt, an Iland in Faunders,
                  
                     
                        Lib. 14.
                   & had there the greater part of his hoſt, which was at Berſquin in Flaunders: ſo that all along that part of the Country they might be ſafe from the Engliſh forces at Oſtend: the garriſon of Sluce ſo beſieged, made often and ſtout ſallies vpon the enimie, wherein although they made great Skermiſhes to the foyle of the enimie, yet lacked they manie of their

companie. Amongſt the nobilitie and gentrie of the Netherlands great commendation for their valour gayned Nicholas Meetkirck, from whoſe ſide his youngeſt brother Adolphus neuer departed: alſo Charles Herogier, Nicholas Mandy, and very manie other Captaines: amongſt the Engliſh warriours Sir Roger Williams, Sir Thomas Baskeruile,
                  
                     
                        Hiſtoria Belgica lib. 14.
                   Sir Frauncis Vere, and Colonell Huntley, deſerued alſo moſt worthie and memorable commendations.
               In the meane time when no ſufficient power came to ſuccour the Sluſians, nor anie preparation (before written for) was made by the Eſtates, al men had then their voyces at large towards the before named Erle of Leyceſter, their late Gouernour Generall: ſaying, that of dutie his preſence and authoritie was now requiſite, that he might the better ſuccour and defend them in this their preſent daunger.
               The Erle Generall then being in England well vnderſtanding theſe things,
                     The Erle Generall returnes into the Netherlands.
                   and thinking occaſion was now giuen him to gaine praiſe and glorie, meanes being made thereunto, he embarketh himſelfe with a good number of new ſouldiers for Zeland: and ariuing at Fluſhing on the 6. day of Iuly 1587. was there receiued with great expectation and ioyfull welcome of all men. By this helpe of his preſence and of the Engliſhmen ariued with him, the Erle (beſtirring him by all meanes poſſible to deliuer Sluce from the preſent ſiege) prepareth all neceſſarie adiuments and muniments by ſea and by land to repell and raiſe the enemie from the ſiege thereof.
               Countie Maurice of Naſſaw when he had intelligence of the Erle Gouernour Generall his returne out of England into Zeland, came vnto him, leauing Countie Hoghenlo in Brabant with thrée thouſand men, hoping greater helpes would come out of Gelderland, Frizland and Vtrecht, to ſuccour him, which came not ſo well to paſſe.
               
                  In the meane time the Prince of Parma with his forces ſo mightily battered the towne of Sluce, that he firſt taking the Fort, battered continually the walles of the towne with thirtie péeces of Cannon, and eight Culuerings. To be ſhort, ſpending vpon them 17400. ſhot (of which on S. Iames day from thrée of the clocke in the morning vntill fiue in the afternoone, were foure thouſand ſhot made) ſo that the Prince of Parma himſelfe confeſſed, that (to his remembrance) he neuer performed againſt any others in one day ſuch violent force and continuall aſſault. By which great and vehement aſſault giuen and excéeding batterie of his Ordenance, there was a breach made in the walles of 250. paces long: into which breach the beſieging enemies oftentimes with all their forces made aſſault vpon the towneſmen, but were of them with Pikes,
                     The reſiſtance of the Slucians.
                   Halberts and other weapons ſo worthily entertained, that after a great ſlaughter made of them, the reſt were glad to retire into their Trenches againe.
               In which aſſault, which laſted from nine of the clocke in the morning one day vntil eleuen of the next at noone, the Marques of Renty was hurt,
                     The loſſe on both partes.
                   
                  Monſieur Lamot loſt his right arme, Strippen the Leader of the Burgundians, with many Captaines of great accompt, beſides others, were ſlaine, and (as the Enemie himſelfe afterward confeſſed) as many hurt alſo: when they of Sluce ſo beſieged loſt but 150. men only, as was found by a iuſt reuiew taken thereof. And although that the Prince with his Pioners often and dangerouſly annoyed the inhabitants of Sluce, yet ſuch vigilancie and diligence they vſed, that they met with their enemies in like manner; almoſt euery houre fighting with them continually for nine daies ſpace, with Swords, Targets and Harquebuziers, ſo long, vntill of the 1600. (which were at the firſt there placed for garriſon) there were in fiue but ſeuen hundred left aliue in the garriſon, as hereafter more plainly ſhall appeare.
               
                  When the towne had thus béen beſieged now full ſeuen weeks, the Erle Generall hauing gathered his forces euery where by ſea and by land, he entreth into conference with the Eſtates, taking counſell of his Leaders how to relieue Sluce with all poſſible ſpeed. A great Nauie was then prepared,
                     The Erle Generall prepareth forces to relieue Sluce.
                   furniſhed with ſouldiers by the ſaid Eſtates. To him came Iuſtine or Naſſaw Admirall of Zeland, and other Netherlandiſh Gouernours by ſea. The Erle Generall with 31. companies of footmen and ſixe troupes of horſemen paſſeth out of Zeland vnto Oſtend: where the Right Honourable Lord Charles Howard Lord high Admirall of England, and the Right Honourable George Erle of Cumberland with certaine ſhippes, wherein went a great part of the Nobilitie of England, ſailed into Zeland, purpoſely as well to helpe his Excellencie, as to ſee how he did.
               His Excellencie had determined to inuade the Port or Hauen of Sluce in the very entrance thereof with certaine ſhippes, well and ſtrongly furniſhed, at a certaine déepe place vnder the towne where the ſhips might ride ſafely. But the Sea-gouernours, Shipmaſters, and others experienced in marine affaires (eſpecially they of Zeland) were of a contrarie opinion, thinking it not ſo conuenient a thing to attempt that which they could not accompliſh, but in ſo doing ſhould rather bring their ſhips into aſſured danger. Touching this enterpriſe diuers were the opinions, which with great diſlike troubled their mindes.
               Therefore the Erle Generall ſéeing he could not ſo do any good with his ſhips by ſea, ſéeketh now by what deuice he can to trie the enterpriſe by land. Wherefore when he ariued at Oſtend on the 30. day of Iuly 1587. and vnto him were come many Engliſh Nobles, beſides fiue thouſand men which he brought ouer with him this later time (though he had not ſo great a power with him as néedfull it was for him to haue) yet with thoſe which he had going out of Oſtend, he giues aſſault to the Fort

of Blanckberg in Flanders, and with determination to haue taken Blankenburgh,
                  
                     The Erle aſſaulteth the fort of Blanckberg.
                   he ſent from Oſtend ſome fiue thouſand foote, and certaine troupes of horſe, with two ſmall field péeces, vnder the commaund of the Lord Willoughby Colonell general, and Sir William Pelham Lord Marſhall, his Excellencie went in a Pinnaſſe by ſea: where when they came they found the Sconce too well manned and prouided to be aſſailed, but with great loſſe: wherefore his Excellencie commaunded them to retire to Oſtend, where the next day they embarked, and ſailed to the entrance into Sluce, where they lay ſeuen daies.
               In the meane time the beſieged towne of Sluce (which had ſo valiantly endured with ſo little helpe ſuch and ſo great ſtormes with the Enemie, as before is ſaid) now alſo ſtill for two moneths ſpace fully continuing, and ſaw not any man come to help them (but two only Engliſhman named Captaine Allen and Captaine Hart, which twice or thrice ſwam ouer from Sluce
                  ▪ to make relation vnto the Erle Generall and the Eſtates of the preſent eſtate of the towne): They I ſay, now halfe deſpairing of any helpe, by reaſon the Erle Generall was at ſome iarre with the Eſtates, began to waxe faint and féeble both in courage and power. For the enemie was now lodged in the Counterſcarfe, and had ſapped into the Rampart, daily vndermining further into the town, ſo as there went a noiſe amongſt them that he was alreadie come into the citie. Beſides theſe things, of twentie péeces of Ordenance (which they had at firſt in the towne) they had now but foure only left, which the Enemie with his vehement ſhot had not yet broken, neither had they ſo much powder left them wherwith they were able to hold out fight euen for halfe a day. Wherefore by all mens iudgements they were not able to endure the enemies aſſault twelue houres longer together, no, not by all meanes they could poſſibly deuiſe.
               Therefore incontinently after, hereupon they receiued

compoſitions from Parma worthie of their valours, vz. That with their bagge and baggage, with their Enſignes flying, the match in cocke and bullet in mouth, they ſhould alſo preſently depart out of Sluce, and march away downe to the ſhips in Zeland:
                  
                     The yeelding vp of the Sluce.
                   And all theſe were in number only but ſeuen hundred (as I ſaid before) reſidue of that ſixtéene hundred, which ſo left the towne of Sluce, yéelded vp vnto Parma and his forces on the 4. day of Auguſt Anno 1587. aforeſaid.
               So the Erle departing on the 17. of Auguſt 1587. out of Zeland by ſhip, he came the next day vnto Bergen, where foorth with he ſent away all the forces which hée brought with him, to take the Caſtle of Hochſtrate in Brabant. But that enterpriſe had no ſucceſſe.
               On the 24. of Auguſt he paſſeth from Bergen to Dordrecht in Holland, where the Eſtates doe méete him and take their leaue of him. The 14. of Nouember returning into Zeland to viſit the Cities there, and ſo at Vere in Zeland reconciling vnto him certaine Captaines of the Garriſon in ſecret manner,
                     The Erles laſt returne into England.
                   he departeth thence the 21. of Nouember, and at length taking ſhip at Fluſhing the 17. of December Anno 1587. he returneth the ſecond and laſt time into England.
               
               The Erle of Leyceſter (late Gouernour Generall, as before remembred) returning into England, liued vntill September following 1588. in which time the Eſtates were about once more to entertaine him as Gouernour Generall againe amongſt them. But he dying on the 14. of that moneth Anno 1588. within a homely houſe in a certaine wood néere Langley in Oxfordſhire at 63. yéeres of age,
                     The death of the Erle Generall.
                   was buried the 20. day of October Anno 1588. at Killingworth, trying all fortunes.
               In the meane time from the Erles ſaid departure out of the Netherlands, let vs leaue him ſo dead and buried, and returne to the gouernment of thoſe Prouinces againe by Countie Maurice, againſt Alexander Prince of Parma.
               
               
                  And concerning the remedie of thoſe euils in the Netherlands, her Highnes ſendeth her expreſſe Letters vnto the Lord Willoughby &c. (who had then béen in the Netherlands her Maieſties Lieutenant generall vnder Countie Maurice, ſince the Erle of Leyceſters firſt returne into England) of whoſe ſeruice from time to time I haue here fit place, occaſion and time now offered me, to ſet downe all occurrents, as the order of the preſent hiſtorie requireth.
               This noble Gentleman by birth, and vertuous Lord by his life, Lord Peregine Bartu (by his title Lord of Willoughby, Eresby and Beck) the only ſonne and heire apparant of the Right Worſhipfull, or rather Right Honourable (for his birth, vertue and learning) Maſter Richard Bartu, deſcended of the Noble houſe aforeſaid (who maried the Right noble and vertuous Ladie Katherin Ducheſſe of Suffolke,
                  
                     The Lord Willoughby his birth.
                   widow of that nobly renowmed Souldier Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolke) being borne at Weſell in Duchland in Quéene Maries time (his parents making their iourney out of England for the profeſſion of the Goſpell) by the tender care and good education of his parents being named Peregrine (as borne in a ſtrange countrie) in proceſſe of time from his youth forwards to his manhood proued pregnant in wit, prompt in knowledge, and practiſed eſpecially in Martiall or Militarie actions: whereby he became the moſt rare, and ſurpaſſing ornament of his noble progenie, and a moſt honourable and worthie Inſtrument for the ſeruice of his Prince and Countrie.
               In ſomuch as his firſt ſeruice wherein the Queenes Maieſtie employed him, was when in his Adoleſcencie he was ſent her Ambaſſadour vnto Fridericke the ſecond of that name king of Denmark,
                  
                     His ſeruices from time to to time.
                   towards whom he ſo wiſely behaued himſelfe, & from whom he ſo diſcreetly demeaned himſelfe towards her Highnes in his returne and anſwer, that ſeldome a better or the like Ambaſſade hath beene in the like caſe found in one of ſo young yeeres for her Royall

Maieſtie vnto any forraine parts, either before or ſince his time.
               Next after that his Heroicall ſpirit, yet further affecting Militarie affaires, as one more deſirous to ſerue his Prince and Countrie, it pleaſed her Highnes with the aduiſe of her moſt Honourable priuie Counſell (vpon the great good opinion and liking they had conceiued of his dexteritie) when the Erle of Leyceſter was the firſt time returned into England, to ſend him ouer to the Netherlands as Lieutenant Generall of the Engliſh forces there,
                     His ſeruice in the abſence of the Earle Generall.
                   
                  Anno 1586. where his noble courage ſo conioyned with dexteritie, and his forwardnes with ſuch fortune, that he himſelfe was formoſt in all attempts and enterpriſes of his forces, fiercelie like a Lyon he aſſayled the enimies, fought with them, ſpoyled them, and foyled them, whereſoeuer he came. So verilie and in ſuch ſort, as the Duke of Parma then himſelfe confeſſed of this worthie Lord Willoughbie and his ſeruice (for foure yeers ſpace in thoſe Countries) neuer anie Engliſh man enterpriſed more boldlie to meete his enimies in the face, more brauelie encountered them, nor more painefullie purſued and ſought them out neere and farre off, to their diſgrace, ſpoile, and foyle, whereſoeuer he found them.
               At Sutphen (as before is mentioned) when the Prince of Parma came thither to releeue that Town, this worthy Lord Lieuetenant Willoughbie (vnder the Erle of Leyceſter who came not into the fight) being in place more forward then the reſt, marched well mounted, met the enimies couragiouſlie, brake his Launce in the middeſt of them, made way with his ſword euerie where, and ſo forciblie aduentured his noble perſon through the thickeſt of them:
                     His ſeruice at Zutphen.
                   that all his men neareſt him much feared, when his baſes were bereued from his bodie, his plumes pluckt awaie from his head, & his Armes be battered with blowes, (except God would then mightilie preſerue and protect him aboue all expectation) he ſhould vtterlie haue beene foyled in the fight, and ſpoyled both of life and all things els about

him, he was ſo deſperately endaungered euery way.
               Yet ſo mightilie God himſelfe doubtles preuailed with him, and for him in the inſtant hazard of his life, that hee preſſed through the thickeſt of them without any bodilie harme, and in this hot broile, with his owne hands caught hold of Seignior George Creſ
                        •
                     yonyer Albanoys before mentioned page. 88. one of Parmaes ch
                     •
                  ef
                     •
                   Commaunders of his horſe, carried him away priſoner perforce,
                     He taketh an Albanoys Captiue.
                   and (maugre all reſiſting force of the enimies) ſent him to the Eſtates to be kept their Captiue.
               No Conuoy could at anie time eſcape his victorious hands, neyther durſt anie enimie approch the Towne of Berghen, where and while he was then Gouernour. Such by the fauour of God was his vertue ioyned with his fortune in his ſaid gouernment,
                     He challengeth the Marques of Guaſto.
                   that he was highlie honoured of his owne garriſon, and alſo greatlie feared of his enimies: when he often times made chalenge of the braueſt of them, as namelie the Marqueſſe of Guaſto (a Nobleman of chiefeſt account with the Duke of Parma) who yet for all that refuſed to encounter with him hand to hand.
               After the returne of the Erle of Leyceſter Generall of her Maieſties forces in the Netherlands, this worthie Lord Willoughbie (as Leiutenant) with great wiſedome, circumſpection, diligence, & fidelitie diſcharged his dutie ſo honourablie and vprightly in all points, and at al times, that he withſtood the enimies attempt, gained the good will of the people of thoſe Prouinces, appeaſed their troubles, and ended all controuerſies in the Townes of Medenblick and Narden in Holland, and alſo of Camphere and Armude in Zeland to the great peace and common quiet of the ſame Townes and Countries.
               For when Counte Maurice and the Eſtates had with their forces enſconced the Towne of Medenblick aforeſaid, and had oppoſed their forces againſt the ſouldiers in that Towne, they did what they could to ſurpriſe, and take the ſpoile of the Towne from Mounſier Snoy Gouernour thereof: but little therein did they and their forces preuaile,

vntill (by her Maieſties moſt Princelie care, and chargeable expences) this worthie Lord Willoughbie treated a reconciliation betweene the States and thoſe townes: ſo as thoſe townes were rendred into the States hands againe without bloodſhed.
               After all this the Enemies hauing vainly inuaded the Iſle of Thole,
                  
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 15.
                   loſt foure hundred of their men: They then marched with their forces towards Berghen opt Zome, néere the Riuer of Schalde,
                  
                     Parma marcheth toward Berghen opt Zome.
                   which citie they prepared to beſiege, ſeeing they could not obtaine the Iſle of Thole, being therein hindred, by the watchfulnes, vertue and valour of the Count Solme, who in his owne perſon watched night and day in the Fortreſſe all the time that the Duke of Parmaes ſouldiers beſieged Berghen.
               
               This citie or Marquiſate of Berghen opt Zome hath a dignitie, which (after the death of the laſt Marques of that houſe named Iohn, being poyſoned in Spaine Anno 1567.) deſcendeth vnto his Siſters daughter begotten by the Lord of Merode and Peterſon: who is maried to the Lord of Berſole Baron of Brabant, a follower of the Spaniſh Kings warres and his adherents, yea though he dwelt at Leyden.
               
               This citie is ſituate in Brabant by the Riuer of Schalde, and is very large and commodious, builded at the flood Zoma, now by ouerflowings ſomewhat diſtant from Schalde; but with a fit Hauen ſtretching toward Schalde, where it hath a certaine head or foreland, which (being inuironed with ſtrong Ramparts and munitions) a Garriſon did vſe to kéepe the ſame ſometime.
               There was the ſame time Gouernour of that Citie a certaine Colonell named Sir Thomas Morgan (ſince for his valour knighted) a Welſhman borne, he ſuccéeded that worthie Knight Sir William Drury in that gouernment:
                     Colonel Drury. Colonel Morgan.
                   The Garriſon in that Citie were Engliſhmen, vnto whom were adioyned ſome few Netherlandiſh horſemen; & amongſt all theſe certaine aduenturers which made great ſpoyle and tooke many booties from

the enemie, and therefore were called Boot-halers,
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 15.
                   in Duch Buythaillers. Theſe daily made excurſions into Brabant, ranſacking all places penetrable, making hauocke of all they could lay their hands on,
                     Outragious ſpoylers.
                   beſetting the high waies to Antwerpe, Bruxels, and Machlin, by land and by water: yea they robbed and ſpoyled trauellers by high waies (although they were guarded with conuenient companies of ſouldiers) and miſerably bereaued them of al that they had about them, carying away back with them into the Citie of Berghen great riches and ſpoyles euery day. Moreouer, they tooke very many Merchants and citizens of great accompt as their Captiues, which gaue them for their raunſomes, ten or twentie thouſand Florences a péece.
               The Duke of Parma therefore on the 24. day of September Anno 1588. ſets his ſouldiers on worke to fall to the ſiege: and for ſpéedier diſpatch of the matter he cauſeth ſome to conuey thither warlike engins, and great Ordenance for aſſault and batterie:
                     The Prince of Parma layeth ſiege to Berghen.
                   and others he maketh to bring thither great and ſmall gabions, Maſts, Dealeboords, ſparres and boates. He alſo ſendeth thither Carpenters and Smithes with their neceſſarie tooles: And firſt he ſets vpon the Fortreſſe on the foreland of Berghen, which is called the North Sconce, to caſt it downe, placing his Ordenance vpon a banke, and ſo battereth the ſame Fortreſſe with many ſore blowes: and withall he practiſeth by ſubtiltie alſo to further the enterpriſe by ſuborning two Engliſhmen to ſerue his purpoſe (as he made accompt by playing a falſe caſt) whom he knew long ſince when he kept them his captiues. Theſe making themſelues moued by Parmaes requeſt, tooke vpon them (vnder colour that moſt of the garriſon were Engliſhmen) as they bare him in hand to betray the Citie vnto him:
                     A pretie practiſe of two Engliſhmen to beguile Parma.
                   and to the end they might more probably performe this action, they alleaged vnto him that the Garriſon were for many cauſes growne malecontēted. Theſe two were called the one William Grimſton,
                  
and the other Robert Redhead (both of them being before inſtructed of the Gouernours of Berghen,
                  
                     The politike deuiſe of Redhead and Grimſton.
                   how they ſhould herein demeane themſelues) with whoſe priuitie they performed all this ſeruice. They handled the matter ſo cunningly, that they had by this time gotten of Parma rich chaines of gold, and withall large and liberall promiſes. This politike deuice was ſo farre forwards brought, that what was promiſed vnto Parma from ſuch perſons of the Garriſon within Berghen, ſhould be performed on the 24. of October that yere 1588. in the chiefe Fortreſſe which was on the North ſide of the citie: and to the end Parma ſhould be in the greater ſecuritie and aſſurance hereof, Redhead pledged vnto him his owne perſon, and was bound hand and foote to be killed outright, if he brought not Parmaes ſouldiers within that Fortreſſe.
               Now there were ſome thirtie or fortie of his ſouldiers receiued into the gate, amongſt whom was the ſaid Robert Redhead, when the Lord Willoughby Gouernour of the towne and of the Engliſh Garriſon let downe the Port Cullis of wood ouer the gate. But the Captaines and Leaders of the enemies ſeeing themſelues preſſed and thruſt at their backes by foure thouſand of their companie, whereof fiftéene hundred were Spaniards, (and that in a very narrow place) determined with courage and manhood to aſſaile the Fortreſſe.
                     The enemies 
                           •
                        ntrapped, ſlaine, and drowned.
                   Vſing the occaſion of the low water, and the ebbe of the ſea, they paſſed through the Ditch, and comming to the Rampart pulled downe the Palliſado, and fought with our men at puſh of pike vpon the top of the Rampart. But al things were there prepared for Parmaes comming, in ſuch ſort that they which gaue the aſſault, were to their great loſſe beaten backe. Whereunto alſo happened that the ſide of the ſea comming in againe vpon them many were drowned in the Ditch, whoſe number being added to the multitude of thoſe which were ſlaine, aroſe to many hundreds, and amongſt others were taken there eightéene

or twentie Spaniards Gentlemen of ſome accompt. This heauie hap and miſaduenture Parma tolerating ſo patiently as he could, all ſad and melancholike in minde,
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 15.
                   cauſed his forces by a little and a little to raiſe the ſiege from Berghen, and ſo to depart towards Bruxels.
                  
                     Parma raiſeth his ſiege, and departeth from Berghen.
                   By this meanes was Berghen deliuered from the ſiege of the enemies, to their great ouerthrow and detriment, many of whoſe chiefe men of warre and of the Nobilitie were left there behinde captiued: and the towne of Berghen it ſelfe from thence-forth became in farre much better and ſafer ſtate, vz. both better fortified and more largely reedified with new and beautifull buildings.
               After the ſiege ſo raiſed from Berghen, Count Maurice of Naſſaw being inaugurate the Marques of Der Vere in Walchern, in the prouince of Zeland,
                  
                     Count Maurice inaugurate the Marques of Der Vere.
                   on the 20. day of Nouember 1588. there in that ſolemnitie, cauſed new Coynes of ſiluer money to be made, which hée caſt abroad vnto the people, hauing the Armes of Naſſaw and of Der Vere ſtamped vpon them with this inſcription: on the one ſide; Nodus Indiſſolubilis: and on the other ſide; Ie Meyntiendray. Other péeces of money were by him alſo caſt abroad, hauing two hands the one ioyning with the other, holding betwéene them Mercuries Scepter or Rod, with this inſcription: Auxilia humilia, firma conſenſus facit.
               
               
                  In obſidionem Bergenſium ſolutam, Carmen Numerale.
                  Hostes, Auſoniâ vt Rapina par Ma;
                  Zonae Berga tuae auferatur, instant;
                  Cunctas Dux ad istud adhibetque artes:
                  Queis, & te & tua poſſit occupare;
                  Frustra hos vertere Berga terga cogit.
               
               In the moneth of May 1589. three troupes of horſemen which were of Count Maurices and of the Marſhall Villers now deceaſed, and of Chymſcies Regiments iſſuing out for aduenture, fell amongſt the Garriſons of

                  Gertrudenberg, and others their companies, which put them to flight ſo farre as the towne of Oſſe in Brabant:
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 15.
                   There were taken (amongſt others of the Netherlanders) Captaine Riſcier, and the Lieuetenant of Skymsky with many others.
               When now Parmaes hoſte by the ſiege of Hewſden, the ouerthrow of Hyemert, the yéelding vp of Heyl and other Fortreſſes vnto them, they thought themſelues now ſtrong and ſafe enough in that part of Brabant: Their Leaders determined in the moneth of September to paſſe ouer the Riuer Moza, with a purpoſe to inuade the countrie of Tyle in Gelderland, from whence they would paſſe either to Buren in Gelderland, or to Vtrecht. But the Spaniards by occaſion of a ſedition or mutinie riſen betwéene them and the Italians (which thing the Duke of Paſtrana & the Duke of Aſcoly were had in beléefe to maintaine againſt the Duke of Parma) they refuſed to paſſe ouer the Riuer, crying alowd, Viue il Re, fuora il mal gouerno: that is, God ſaue the King, let vs caſt off euill gouernment.
                     A ſedition amongſt the chiefeſt of the Spaniards.
                   And when Count Maunsfeld went about to take them, they ſhot at him with their dagges and great péeces, put him to flight, and droue him into the Garriſon of the Citie of Graue. And when Count Maurice hauing now gathered ſome forces about him, endeuoured to ſtop their paſſage euery where againe, planting his Ordenance and Munitions round about Heyl to beſiege it: ſo it happened that Parma was conſtrained (winter comming on) to diſmiſſe his hoſte, and furniſhing with conuenient forces of their Garriſons the Caſtles of Heymert and Heyl and other his defences, he departed to the mouth of the Riuer Deynſa, adioyning néere vnto the towne of Sherteghanbuſch.
               
               The Duke of Parma in this yéere 1589. was ouertaken by a grieuous diſeaſe or ſicknes, many were the cauſes ſuppoſed to be thereof; namely and firſt that on the tenth day of Nouember 1588. as he was riding from

                  Berghen to Machlin, he fell off from a bridge into the water. Vnto which chance happened many other euils,
                     
                        Historia Belgica lib. 15.
                   ſuch as were the ſorrow which he conceiued by the euill ſucceſſe of the Spaniſh Nauie in the inuaſion of England a little before in that laſt yéere 1588.
                  
                     The Prince of Parma falleth into many griefes.
                   And the ſiege of Berghen, from whence hee was enforced to depart without any thing done by him. Alſo that by the Duke of Paſtrana and the Prince of Aſcoly many things were ſpoken and done to his reproch and diſdaine. And again, becauſe he vnderſtood that certaine letters of Exchange (as they call them) ſent by him into Spaine (by the inſtigation of ſome euill willers which perchance he there had) were neither receiued, nor yet the money for them paid: when thoſe letters mentioned that the money amounted vnto 100000. Ducats: wherefore he laboureth greatly by ſome meanes to ſatiſfie the Italian Merchants, and about the ſame time deceaſed his Vncle by his fathers ſide called the Great Cardinall Farneſius, by whom he had great helpe and furtherance.
                     The Prince of Parma his death.
                   To be ſhort therefore, he falling ſicke in the moneth of May 1589. all vnhealthie and heauie in plight, then departed to Spada a Fountaine in the land of Luke, there to vſe the benefit of a Bath, taking his lodging at Montfort, or in the towne adioyning: where he dranke the waters of Spada or Spau for his health ſake, and liued after that vntill the 12. day of Nouember 1592. and then died in the citie of Arras in Artoys one of the ſeuenteene Prouinces of the Netherlands.
            
            Thus farre tranſlated out of Emanuel Meteranus, his Belgic Historie.
         
         
            
            A BRIEF DISCOVRSE OF THE MEMORABLE VOYage to Portugall, Anno 1589. by Sir Iohn Norice and Sir Francis Drake Knights, with the Engliſh forces.
            
               
                  INprimis, to the glory of God and honour of her Maieſtie be it ſpecially remembred, that the two Generals aforeſaid made certaine orders in number 14. for the Souldiers and Mariners going to ſea: and other 54. orders for the Captaines, Souldiers and Sailers, during the voyage, to be by them and euery of them duly and dutifully obſerued and performed.
            Their Nauie conſiſting of Shippes great and ſmall, and of men, ſet forward from Plimmouth the 17. of Aprill Anno 1589. to the ſea.
            The Admirall, The Arke: Sir Iohn Norice, Sir Francis Drake two Generals.
            The Vizadmirall, The Golden Lyon: Captaine Thomas Fenner.
            
            The Rereadmirall, The Dreadnot: Captaine William Fenner.
            
            The ſixe principall Maſters of the Quéenes Ships: Thomas Weſt, Robert Wignald, Iohn Bennet, Robert Hart, Roger Tallent, Richard Burnet.
            
            The fiue Colonels of the fiue Regiments in the Nauie and Armie: Sir Iohn Norice, Sir Francis Drake,
               
Sir Roger Williams, Sir Edward Norice, and Captaine George Fenner.
            
            The fiue Lieutenants Colonels of the fiue Squadrons: Captaine Thomas Drake, Captaine Sachuile, Captaine Garton, Captaine Goring, and Captaine Winter.
            
            The fiue Captaines of the Watch of the fiue Squadrons and their Corporals: Captaine Web of the Reuenge, Captaine Champernoune of the Non per illa, Captaine Gifford of the Dreadnought, Captaine Norwood of the Foreſight, Captaine George Drake of the Swiftſure.
            
            Corporals: Captaine Young, Captaine Seigar, Captaine Thomas Baker, Captaine Wilde, Captaine Cripſe.
            
            The ſeuen Commiſſioners: Iohn Sachuile, William Winter, Alexander Muſgraue, William Fenner, Thomas Drake, Iames Lancaſter, Iohn Goring.
            
            The Secretary of the Nauie, Maſter Anthony Aſhly.
            
            The Surueyor generall of the victuals, Maſter Marmeduke Daryell.
            
            The Treaſurer of the Nauie,
            The Viztreaſurer, Maſter Stalling.
            
            The Surueyor of the Nauie, Captaine Ro. Flicke.
            
            The Lieutenant of the Ordenance of the Nauie, Captaine Iames Lancaſter.
            
            Captaine generall of the Watch, Captaine Bowyer.
            
            The Maſter of the Diſcoueries and Lieutenant Colonell of the Pinnaſſes, Captaine Foxcroft.
            
            The Tranſport Maſter, Captaine Alexander Muſgraue aforeſaid.
            The Clerke of the ſtore, Maſter Aldridge.
            
            The fiue Corporals of the fiue Squadrons: Captaine Young of the ſquadron of the Reuenge Captaine Seigar of the Non perilla, Captain Thomas Baker of the Dreadnought, Captaine Wilde of the Swiftſure, Captaine Peter Cripſe of the Foreſight.
            
            
               
               A Journall of the Portugall Voyage Anno 1589.
               WEdneſday the 17. of Aprill 1589. they embarked at Plimmouth.
               
               Tueſday the 23. of Aprill they fell with the Coaſt of Galizia.
               
               Wedneſday the 24. of Aprill they landed at a little Hermitage Eaſt ſide of the Corunna or Groyne, ſuppoſed 12000. ſtrong. From thence to Andyas, where they had a ſmall ſkirmiſh with no loſſe to the Engliſh.
               The 25. of Aprill being Thurſday, our men waſted and burned in the countrey what they could with fire and ſword.
               Saturday the 27. of Aprill they aſſaulted the baſe Towne of the Corunna and wonne it, with ſmall loſſe to them: and the Enemie retired into the high Towne, not aboue ſeuen Enſignes ſtrong as was thought.
               Sunday the 28. of Aprill they ſo battered a great Galeaz (wherein Ricaldo ſerued the laſt yéere 1588. as Vizadmirall of that Nauie ſent into England) that the Spaniards now not able to kéepe her, diſcharged her Ordenance, fired her, and ranne her on ground, with no hurt to vs at all.
               The ſame day they went from Andyas to the baſe Towne of the Corunna, where they found much Béefe, Salt, Meale, Wheate, Oyle, Fiſh and Wines as was thought to victuall 40000. men a quarter of a yéere: beſides Gables, Hempe, Roſen, Waxe, Pitch, Tallow, and other things for ſhipping ſtore: which was leuied for a new force to haue come into England this Summer. But in fourtéene daies there was hardly one bit of bread, wine or other victuals to be had in any quarter of

the Towne, except by ſome priuate officer or Captaine.
               The ſame day the Enemie lying not farre off thence, preſented a Brauado before the Towne gates: againſt whom when our men ſallied foorth, without more adoe or any encounter they fled, and twelue of them were ſlaine.
               Monday the 29. of Aprill our men ſummoned the high Towne, who refuſed all parley. There all the Spaniards that our men could gather (after they had taken them) they ſlew, to the great amazing of the Enemie beholding the ſame.
               That night the Spaniards deſired parley, and not long after fired certaine houſes néere their vpper towne walles.
               Wedneſday the firſt of May 1589. our Engliſh laid their battery vnto la Corunna the great, where through the weakenes of the Rampier betwéene our great Ordenance and the Enemie (which fell downe with oft ſhaking) they were driuen from their péeces by the enemies Muſquet ſhot from the towne wall. There was ſlaine Captaine Spencer, and ſome few others, and Captaine Goodwin ſhot through the face. The ſame day (in parley time) a Spaniard ſhot at an Engliſhman, and was hanged therefore by the Enemie: In this parley the Enemie deſired to haue faire warres with vs.
               Saturday the fourth of May they made a breach in the Weſt ſide of the Corunna, foure of our men making an aſſault retired againe without hurt. The ſame day Captaine Young being dangerouſly ſhot died ſoone after.
               Sunday the fift of May they aſſaulted the breach, filled vp by the Enemie, to the hurt of ſome of our armed men. Two Captaines ſhot thorow, and Captaine Breyton hurt, Captaine Sydenham ſlaine, and one Cuckfoot an Enſigne to Sir Francis Drake.
               
               Monday the ſixt of May Iohn Kempſton Marſhall of the Ordenance was ſlaine with a ſhot from the high Tower.
               
                  Tueſday the 7. of May we marched foorth nine Regiments vpon the Enemie, which had encamped themſelues at a towne called Faro, foure Engliſh miles from the Corunna, our men charged on them being eight thouſand, and tooke their bridge there. On either ſide the bridge our men entred the water, draue them away, killed ſome Colonels, wanne their Towne, victuals and prouiſions, fired the reſt of their Villages néere, draue them to retreite, purſued them in chaſe thrée miles or more, and ſlew of them in all thrée hundred at leaſt: of vs Captaine Cooper was ſlaine, and not aboue thrée moe. There were only hurt of our chiefe Commanders Sir Edward Norice, and Captaine Hender, who recouered both thereof, and Captaine Fulford who died thereof. Of thoſe Spaniards at Faro was chiefe Don Iuan Pacheco Marques de Guaſto, and Gouernour of all Galizia, who fled on horſebacke with the formoſt.
               Wedneſday the 8. of May our Sailers went on ſhore, ranged the countrie, burned and ſpoiled aboue fiue miles, returning with ſome victuall and pillage, without any reſiſtance.
               The ſame night the Non per illa was fired about fiue of the clocke by negligence in the harbour of Corunna, and about twelue of the clocke that night the Merchant Royall was fired, ſixe men blowne vp with powder, and ſome few hurt beſides, without more harme, praiſed be God.
               Thurſday the 9. of May we raiſed our ſiege from the Corunna, fired ſome of their ſhips in the harbour, burnt and raſed the baſe towne and Mils vp to the high towne, and ſo embarked away thence that night.
               Friday the 10. of May we ſet ſaile from the Corunna, and that day about noone met with vs againe ſixe ſaile of our Fléete, which at our ſetting foorth parted from vs about the Coaſt of France.
               
               Tueſday the 14. of May we doubled Cape finiſter, the winde then at the Eaſt.
               
                  Saturday the 22. of Iune we departed from Vigo in Galizia to goe towards Peniche. From Peniche the Armie came to Lisbon, where they ſtaied ſome two or thrée daies expecting the comming of the Fleete to Liſbon: of which preparation and ſtay there Sir Anthony Wingfield writeth thus: It may be demaunded (ſaith Sir Anthony Wingfield, writing vpon this voyage) why a matter of ſo great moment ſhould be ſo ſlenderly regarded, as that the Generall ſhould march with ſuch an Armie againſt ſuch an Enemie, before he knew either the fulnes of his owne ſtrength, or certaine meanes how he ſhould abide the place when he ſhould come to it. Wherein (ſaith he) I pray you remember the decrées made in the Councell at Peniche, and confirmed by publike proteſtation the firſt day of our March. That our Nauie ſhould méete vs in the Riuer of Lisbon, in the which was the ſtore of all our prouiſion, & ſo the meane of our tariance in that place: which came not though we continued till we had no munition left to entertaine a very ſmall fight. We are alſo to conſider that the King of Portugall (whether caried away with imagination by the aduertiſements he receiued from the Portugals, or willing by any promiſe to bring ſuch an Armie into his countrey, thereby to put his fortune once more in triall) aſſured the Generall that vpon his firſt landing there would be a reuolt of his ſubiects: whereof there was ſome hope giuen at our firſt entrie to Peniche, by the manner of the yéelding of the Towne and Fort: which made the Generall thinke it moſt conuenient ſpeedely to march to the principall place, thereby to giue courage to the reſt of the Countrey. The Friers alſo and the poore people that came vnto him promiſed that within two daies the Gentlemen and others of the countrey would come plentifully in: within which two daies came many moe Prieſts & ſome very few Gentlemen on horſebacke: but not till we came to Torres Vedras, where they that noted the courſe of things paſſed,

might ſomewhat diſcouer the weakenes of that people. There they tooke two daies more, and at the end thereof referred him till our comming to Lisbon, with aſſurance that ſo ſoone as our Armie ſhould be ſeene there, all the inhabitants would be for the King and fall vpon the Spaniards.
               After two nights tariance at Lisbon, the King promiſed a ſupplie of thrée thouſand foote and ſome horſe: but all his appointments being expired euen to the laſt of a night, all his horſe could not make a Cornet of 40. nor his foote furniſh two Enſignes fully, although they caried three or foure Colours: and theſe were altogether ſuch as thought to enrich themſelues by the ruine of their neighbours: for they committed more diſorders in euery place where we came by ſpoyle, then any of our owne.
               So while wée ſtaied at Lisbon wée both failed of the aide which the King Don Anthony promiſed vs, and wée expected, and alſo becauſe our Engliſh Fléete came not vnto vs thither to Lisbon, wée roſe vp thence and went for Caſcayes: where méeting with our Fléete wée returned altogether into England, where ſome of vs ariued at Plimmouth, others at Portſmouth, and others at London in the beginning of the moneth of Iuly Anno 1589. aforeſaid.
            
            Here endeth the Iournall of the Portugall Voyage.
         
         
            
            A Iournall of the Honourable ſeruice by the renowmed Knight S. Iohn Norie, Generall of the Engliſh and French forces, performed againſt the French and Spaniſh Leaguers in Fraunce. 1591.
            
               THis morning being Sonday, my Lord Generall with Sir Henry Norice,
               
                  Aprill. 11▪
                Captaine Anthonie Shirley, Maiſter William Deuoreux, &c. tooke Poſthorſes at London to ride to Southhampton: where (in taking order for ſhipping & for diuers conſiderations) his Lordſhip ſtaid vntill Sonday the 25. day.
            Monday the 26. dict. we embarked and fell downe with the ſhipping to Porteſmouth: where his Lordſhip ſtaid that night at Captaine Richard Wingfields houſe.
            Tueſday morning the 27. dict. we ſet ſayle being of vs in all 23. ſhips and other ſmall veſſels, and hauing a ſcant ſhifting winde at north and north eaſt, we caſt an anchor before Saint Helenes poynt in the Wight.
            
            Wedneſday morning about ten of the clocke (being vntill then becalmed wee hapned of a ſmall gale of wind blowing N. N. weſt, wherewith we recouered the Haigue.
               28.
            
            Thurſday about ten of the clocke at night,29. we anchored before the Caſtle of Gernſey: and my Lord Generall and ſome other Gentlemen with him lay at the Caſtle that night.
            Friday morning we ſet ſaile from thence,30. and about fiue

of the clocke in the euening we put into the road of Iarſey.
            
            Monday my Lord Generall expecting the Companies out of the Low Countries,1591. were this daye ariued with Captaine Anthonie Wingfield Sergeant Maior of the Campe:
                  May. 3. his Lordſhip went abord, and lay at anchor in the road all that night.
            Tueſday in the morning we looſed from thence, and hauing a fine winde at North and by Weſt, about eight at night we anchored in the road of Pimpowle ariuing in the road called Lemoys de Guelle neere Pimpoule.
            
            Wedneſday ye 5. of May we diſcouered diuers ſhippings and botes that came from Brehake, and made towards S. Malowes: whereof we tooke one laden with ſalt and fiſh. It is to be remembred that thoſe of Brehake and of the Caſtle taking knowledge of our approch abandoned the Caſtle, and yeelded themſelues to the kings authoritie.
            Not long after the enimie fled from the Caſtle of Lantegard, which was fortified for the king by the Prince Dumbeez now Duke Mountpenſer at this day.
            My Lord diſpatched letters into England from the Abbey of Beauport.
            
            Thurſday the 6. of May was ſpent in vnſhipping the horſes, munition and ſouldiers.
            This day alſo the Prince Dombeez ſent 20. Moyles laden with bread to the Abbey for prouiſion of the ſouldiers.
            Wedneſday the army marched towardes Guyngamp, and lodged in a ſmall village in the way (neere the Abbey) and this night the Guyngampiers hearing of our approches,12. ſet fire on their ſuburbes, which we might plainelie diſcerne.
            This night likewiſe my Lord Generall rode before to the Towne to take view, and to ſaue as much as might be of the ſuburbs for the lodging of the troupes.
            
               13.Thurſday, our troupes being with the French accompanied, were lodged in ſuch houſes and other places of the ſuburbs as were left vnburned: the ſame day the enimie ſallyed out of the towne in purſuyng vs, Captaine Wolfe
               
an Engliſhmans colours were taken, which we recouered againe at the winning of the towne and deliuered to him.
            Fridaie,
                  May. 14. thoſe within the towne (not beleeuing that we had any Cannon with vs) ſent out diuers ſpies to diſcouer, which we tooke: This day our Artillerie (being a Cannon and two Culuerings) came to vs.
            Saturday, it pleaſed my Lord Generall to put them within the Towne out of doubt;15. for the Artillerie being planted, our firſt ſhot was ſo exceeding well made, as that it diſmounted a peece which the enimie played withall from a ſteeple: the Prince Dombeez beeing preſent.
            Sonday, Monday, and Tueſday were ſpent in drawing plat-formes, and in planting the Ordinances.
            Wedneſday the Canons were readie to play being plā
               ted in a Cloyſter in the French quarter on the north ſide of the towne.19.
            
            Thurſday morning we hauing expected certaine Artillerie of the Princes to haue come from Breſt, (which came not to vs) we began the batterie with our owne 4. peeces: continuing the ſame all that day, and the next vntill three of the clocke in the afternoone to the number of 400. ſhot: at which time, notwithſtanding that the breach was verie vnaſſaultable and ſmall (the wall being paſſing ſtrong) yet the French humour vrged my Lord Generall verie hotlie to an aſſault. Which vpon ſo ſmall a poſſibilitie of doing anie good, his Lordſhip was hardlie drawne vnto: onelie (in regard of the honour of our nation) he made choiſe of certaine out of diuers companies, wherof Captaine Iackſon, Captaine Heron, and Captaine Hayes, to haue the leading: and afterwards (the dice being caſt) the chaunce fell to Captaine Iackſon and Captaine Heron to haue the point of the aſſault, and to be ſeconded by Captaine Hayes, as occaſion ſhould ſerue: who being accompanied with Captaine Catesby and manie other Engliſh gentlemen (although the breach was very vnaſſaultable as before, and

exceeding troubleſome by reaſon of the height thereof, and the light falling of the moulder of the wall, and the great number of the fetherbeds,
                  May.
                and ſuch like (which the Cannon had beaten downe) yet a great part of our men perforce obtained the verie top of the breach, where they endured a hot and long aſſault: Captaine Heron receiuing a puſh with a pike vnder his gorget was there ſlaine, and about ſome tenne or twelue of the common ſouldiers, and beſides thirtie hurt with ſtones, the reſidue not being able to maintaine the aſſault any longer (for the cauſes before remembred) were driuen to retire. The Baron Monluc (hauing in this ſeruice the conduct of certaine French) ſhewed himſelfe verie couragious, and gayned at that time vnto himſelfe great reputation: but the reſidue (for the moſt part) came forwards verie coldlie. It was thought good that Captaine Hayes and his companie ſhould not at this time come forwards, but be reſerued vntill the next day, at what time the finiſhing of a Myne (then in hand) was appointed: during this aſſault Captaine Dennis an Engliſh man (offering a Scalado on the other ſide of the towne) was ſhot with a Muſket in the bellie, whereof he died ſhortlie after.
            
               23.Sonday next following (being Whitſonday) beginning againe to play (after a three or foure tyer) the enimie ſummoned a Parley: which in fine grew to a capitulation in this ſort viz. That the next day the horſemen in the towne ſhould depart with their horſes and Harquebuſſes (leauing the Cornet behinde the footemen with their ſwords) and the Towneſmen to Fine 40000. crownes to the Prince.
            
               24.Monday, they came forth accordinglie, to the number of 200. horſe and 260. foote: and the towne poſſeſt Mounſier de Cargamart, being appointed Gouernour of the ſame. There was found in the towne (being yéelded vp) foure Enſignes, one Cornet, one Cannon perier, one demy Culuering, ſixe Sacres, and of Mynions 2000. weight.
            The towne was found to be verie ſtrong, defenſible and

ſufficient able to haue kept the ſame for a far longer time, if they within had bin honeſt men:
                  May.
                my Lord General doubted not but to haue drawen them of the towne to far ſtrickter conditions then is ſaid, had not the Prince Dombeez ſeemed to be verie glad of this, and that his hap ſorted to ſo good ſucceſſe, and therefore would not further ſtand vpon it.
            Wedneſday then next following my Lord Generall diſpatched letters to certaine the Lords of her Maieſties moſt Honourable priuie Counſell,26 to my Lord Norice his father and to my Ladie his mother, and other his friends in England.
            
            Thurſday the 27. dicto a Muſter was taken of the Armie.
            Tueſday the firſt of Iune anno dicto, vpon the taking of Guyngamp,
               
                  Iune. 1. it was purpoſed that we ſhould haue gone for Morlayx, but (by certaine after Counſels) that intent was altered: for that it was ſaid that the Duke Mercoeur was remoued from Pontiny, where he ioyned with 4000. Spaniards vnder the leading of Don Iohn de Laguna, who was marching towards Morlayx by the way of Corlay.
            
            Monday next following the Duke Mercoeur, ariued at Corlay (a Caſtle pretending to hold for the King) but in the poſſeſſion of Madam de Guyneny, whoſe brother Mounſier de Bodolphin is the Dukes Lieuetenant: ſo the partie being made before hand, the Caſtle was rendered without one ſhot of the Cannon.
            Tueſday we diſlodged towards the enimie and lay at Chateau Lodune. To this place the Duke ſent a Trumpeter to the Prince with letters; whereunto he anſwered, vt patet per copias: here likewiſe the Prince ſent an other Sartell to the Duke, wherewith he ſeemed ſo moued, that he vowed to offer battell to the Prince.
            Wedneſday the Duke diſlodged and encamped at Queremen a village diſtant a league and a halfe from Chateau Lodune, ſcituate on the foote of a hill: which (by deepe

ditches, encloſures and hedges) confronted a little heath of two miles compaſſe. To which heath (vpon diſcouerie of the approch of the enimie, by my Lord Generall (who then with the Prince was ridden to take view of a place conuenient) our battell was drawen.
            Thurſday the enimie within one quarter of a league of the heath ſheweth his whole Armie in order of battell vpon the top of a hill:10. whereupon my Lord Generall diſpoſed the troupes into three battailions, whereof the infantry Engliſh made two, and the Launce Knights the third. This day was ſpent in ſome ſleight ſkermiſhes.
            Friday the enimie drew his Armie to the foote of the hill,11. and placed his Artillerie vpon: he ſight of the heath in a place of ſuch aduantage, as it commaunded in the nature of a Caualier the whole heath: where he bordered all the hedge with ſhot. Now my Lord Generall ſent out 200. footmen to ſee the countenance of the enimie, who droue them to their ſtrengths, put them to their hedges and Baricadoes, and ſlew diuers of them vpon the retreit: to theſe the Duke put forth 500. French and 300. Spaniards to repoſſeſſe the place, whom he followed with the Armie. Which being perceiued by the Prince remouing in the heath with Mounſier de la Hunnaday commaunding the auantgard, and hauing his regiment of horſe in battell: (my L. Generall, with Mounſier de Pogny, de Pruneanx, Momartin, Baſtinay) order was giuen to put forward 300. foot commaunded by Captaine Anthony Wingfield, Captaine Moreton, & the Engliſh horſe led by Captaine Anthony Sherley: this direction was valiantlie proſecuted by ours, but ſpeciallie by the Engliſh: ſo as the enimies horſe and foot which were in the playne were enforced to flee, manie ſlaine, and the reſt driuen to ſaue themſelues within their Artillery: being taken in this charge Mounſier de Guybreun Colonell of the foot of the Armie, and ſlaine Don Rodrigo chiefe Marſhall of the Spaniards, one Spaniſh Captaine, alſo the number of 200. French, and 60. Spaniards.
            
               This reſolute charge ſo amated the enimie,
                  Iune.
                as that they ſuffered within 200. paces of their Cannon to diſarme the dead, and to retire at their eaſe.
            In this charge Captaine Anthonie Sherley gaue ſuch an example to the French horſe as was admired, and the Companies on foote performed their parts with no leſſe valour: namelie the Sergeant Maior and Lieuetenant Long, who receiued in his bodie fiue Harquebuz ſhot: the reſt of the day was ſpent in ſkirmiſhes.
            Saturday the enimie made a great ſhew to come forth,12. and ſent out ſome number of ſhot: againſt whom Captaine Anthonie Sherley with fifteene horſe, and ſome few foote made them quicklie take their heeles, purſuing them to their Baricadoes, where his horſe was ſhot in the head, and ſome ſmall hurt done.
            Sonday, little was performed that day.13.
            
            Monday being S. Iohns day (as they write after the Roman Kalender) with them it was thought ſomewhat would haue bin done in the honour of the day, but in deed nothing at all: for the Duke vſed it rather as a colour whereby to runne away, hauing that night withdrawen his Cannon, and retired himſelfe to Queremen.
            
            Wedneſday the 16. of Iune, Mounſier de la Noë with the troupe of the Counte Mongomery conſiſting of 100. Curaces, and the Counte de Comburg came vnto Chateau Laudra: whoſe ariuall promiſed ſome good ſucceſſe to the kings affaires.
            Thurſday being Midſomer day the Natiuitie of S. Iohn Baptiſt, we diſlodged to Quintine.
               24
            
            This night the enimie being lodged at Corlay within 3 ſmal leagues of vs, an enterpriſe was made vpon ſome of their light horſe that lay wide of their Campe: which for that it was not attempted by footmen (as my Lord Generall earneſtlie perſwaded them vnto) it tooke no great effect: ſauing that there were killed ſome 16. of a Corps du Guarde, and their horſe taken. The reſt might eaſily haue bin had as good cheape, if the horſemen would haue lighted

and forced their Baricadoes: the French thought they had done wonderous well,
                  Iune.
                and ſo that ſeruice ended.
            Mounſier Tremblay (who had the commaund of the French Light horſe) was now ſleightlie ſhot in the thigh: other hurt we receiued none.
            Friday the 25. day the Enemie attempted a reuenge, and came forth with ſome horſe and foote, and gaue vs an alarme: which was performed ſo fauourably, as they neither hurt man nor beaſt.
            Tueſday being S. Peters day, my Lord Generall diſpatcheth certaine letters by Peter Browne to certaine the Lords of her Maieſties moſt Honourable priuie Councell,29. to my Lord Norice his father, and to other his friends in England.
            
            
               
                  Iulie. 2.Friday the ſecond of July Anno 1591. the armie diſlodged to Pleu or Pleſſue.
            
            Tueſday the ſixt day we marched towards Lamball, and lay in a ſmall Village in the way.
            Wedneſday about ten of the clocke in the morning the towne of Lamball was entred at the Weſt Southweſt, and by Captaine Symmes and Captaine Richard Wingfields Enſigne, who led two hundred ſhot: The Southſide of the towne was entred by Captaine Hall and Captaine Gueſt with other two hundred ſhot. Both theſe were ſeconded by Captaine Dolphin with one hundred Pikes, whom Captaine Mayne was appointed to haue followed, if occaſion had ſo ſerued. But the aforeſaid Captaines Symmes and Hall with their troupes came ſo reſolutely vpon the Baricadoes of the Towne, that the enemie was forced to abandon the ſame, and to make a haſtie retreit into the Caſtle. From whence Captaine Baynton and Barbar Lieutenant to Captaine Symmes were both ſhot, and died that day: Captaine Richard Wingfields Enſigne bearer hauing receiued from the walles of the Caſtle a ſhot through both his thighes at that time.
            Thurſday there were two of our Cannons mounted

on the Southweſt ſide of the Caſtle; and that day the Enemie made ſome proffer of a ſallie vpon Captaine Halles quarter.
            Friday,
                  Iuly. 9. a Spurre which couered the Gate of the Caſtle was made aſſaultable: by two of the clock in the afternoone two Frenchmen were ſent to diſcouer the breach; and it was appointed that other French ſhould haue entred the ſame, who ſhould haue been ſeconded by the Lieutenants one Gueſt and Braconbury. But the firſt of the French performing but badly, and the ſecond flatly denying, Monſieur de Mo Martin was enforced to aduance himſelfe ſomewhat further then his place required: whereby he receiued a Harquebuze ſhot in the thigh. Being iudged by my Lord Generall and Monſieur de la Noë, that the Spurre (when it ſhould haue beene taken) was not aſſaultable, it was thought good that certaine ſhot ſhould be ſent out in the ſmoke of the Cannon, to lodge themſelues directly vnder a Bulwarke vpon the right hand of the gate, whereby the breach might in ſome ſort be flanked: Whiles Monſieur de la Noë ſtood behinde a Baricado, to beholde how thoſe that were ſent performed this ſeruice, he was ſhot in the head with a Muſquet, whereof he died ſoone after.
            At the time of this ſeruice one Monſieur de Boa Captaine of a Companie of Light horſe, was ſlaine with a ſmall ſhot.
            My Lord (well weighing the ſlow ſucceſſe of this enterpriſe) thought it beſt to deferre the ſeruice vpon the Spurre, vntill the darknes of the night following: His Lordſhips purpoſe was to aſſault with ſome thirtie ſhot and Pikes well armed (if the height of the breach would haue béen taken) whereof little doubt was made.
            The leading of theſe men was committed to Lieutenant Gueſt: it was further reſolued, that Captaine Hender with other thirtie ſhot and Pikes ſhould lodge himſelfe vnder the great Baricado on the right hand of the Gate; and to aſſay by all meanes he could to worke himſelfe

further vnder the very foundation thereof.
            
               
                  Iuly.
               In the darknes of the night my Lord Generall cauſed two with firelocke péeces and two Pikes to diſcouer the breach, who made their way without any great difficultie: Lieutenant Gueſt followed with two Pikes only, and ſixe Muſquetiers, who winding to the height of the breach (beſides many ſore blowes with ſtones) receiued two ſhot vpon his armour, whereof one was a very daungerous wound, and ſo retired from the place which was ſo flankered, as it could not well be kept.
            Sunday the 11. day of Iuly 1591. Maſter Danyel deſirous to ſee out of the height of a Tower, receiued a ſhot in the ſhoulder with a Harquebuz: And in the ſame place one Maſter Pawlet was ſhot in the head, whereof he died preſently.
            Vpon an aſſured intelligence that Duke Mercoeur with his whoſe force was come to Pleny Ingot with a reſolution to raiſe our ſiege; my Lord Generall at the inſtance of the Prince (moſt of our French hauing at that time forſaken vs) thought good to diſlodge and to méete the Enemie. We diſlodged, and that night the Armie came to Queymer, where we continued vntill the laſt of Iuly preſent.
            
               26Monday fourtnight following my Lord Generall ſent letters to the Lords of the Councell by Maſter Browning.
            
            Tueſday the 27. Monſieur de la Verdune came to the Prince with 220. horſe, and 700. foote: The Marques de Villeures did accompany him.
            
               30Friday the Armie diſlodged and lay that night at Brehake.
            
            
               
                  Auguſt.
               Sunday the firſt of Auguſt, the Prince Dombeez, my Lord Generall,1 
               Monſieur de la Verdune, and the principall Commanders amongſt the French being followed with twelue hundred ſhot, whereof foure hundred were Engliſh (twentie being taken out of euery Companie) and all the Cauallerie did march from the armie at Brehake
               
towards the Enemie encamped by Ingon.
               
                  Auguſt.
                The intention was to haue cut off thrée Cornets of the Enemies horſe which lay at a little Village about a mile and a halfe off from the ſtrength of the Armie. But (vpo an aduertiſement taken) it was found that they diſlodged themſelues that morning, and had drawne themſelues to another Village, not fiue hundred paces from their Armie: We comming to the firſt place and miſſing the Enemie, ſought them in the ſecond, from whence likewiſe (vpon their alarme giuen by their Sentinels) they had withdrawne themſelues to the armie. Yet in this ſecond place ſome ſmall reſiſtance was made by French ſhot: which being ſoone ouerthrowne, and ſome 25. of the Enemies horſe taken (which in a haſtie feare they left behinde) Monſieur Tremblay ſeeing ſome thrée or foure ſcore of the enemies horſe begin to make a head and proffer to paſſe a Riuer, determined to charge the firſt that would attempt the ſame. In which charge, being leaſt of all the reſt (foure only excepted) that charge with him, his horſe ſtumbling and ſo falling with him, he was taken priſoner, after a ſleight hurt receiued in his face with the ſhot of a Piſtoll.
            Tueſday our Armie diſlodged to Kerſo.
            
            Thurſday to Monconter.
               3.
            
            Saturday from thence to S. Brieux.
               5. 
               7.
            
            Sunday my Lord Generall diſpatched letters into England by Peter Browne the Poſte.8.
            
            Saturday we remoued to Ville Rabel.
               21.
            
            To this place place came Maſter Barker with my Lords horſes out of the Low Countries.
            At this place conſiderations were drawne by the Prince and his Councell, which implied a neceſſitie for the marching of the Armie in the high parts of Britany, whereunto my Lord Generall in writing anſwered his opinion.
            Tueſday the 24. of Auguſt dicto,
               24. the Armie came to Collinee.
            
            
               
               
                  The 26. of Auguſt.
               Thurſday the Armie diſlodged, and becauſe the Prince was certainly enformed that Mounſier de Mercouer came to Benne, it was certainly reſolued that the Armie ſhould that day march to S. Meyn: but through the vnredines of all things apperteyning to the Cannon, and diſtance of place, that courſe was altered, and for that night we lodged at Medrimak a reaſonable faire village in the mid way betweene Collinee and S. Meyn. Here the Prince Dombeez vnderſtood that Mounſier de Mercoeur had in all ſecrecie diſlodged that night before from Diuant and was come to Pleumalan, with a reſolution to preuent vs of our lodging at S. Meyn: Pleumalan is two leagues from Diuant, and foure from S. Meyn; from Medrimak to S. Meyn but three leagues. Whereupon it was concluded, that Mounſier de la Verdune accompanied with 80. Curaſſes, 300. Harquebuz, a Cheuall, and 400. Engliſh ſhould diſlodge about midnight: and aſſay (if by a ſpeedie march towards S. Meyn they could) before the enimie ſhould inueſt the towne with thoſe forces.
            
               27.Friday we diſlodged verie timelie, and (in our march) were certified that S. Meyn was inueſted with thoſe forces, ſent the night before with Mounſier de la Verdune: and that it was not heard that the enimie had anie ſuch intention as before.
            
               31.Tueſday the thirty one, and laſt of Auguſt we diſlodged to Yfendit. Here Mounſier de la Verdune left the Prince.
            
               
                  The ſecond of September.
               Thurſday the ſecond of September anno dict. the Armie remoued to Breal.
            
            
               3.Friday the third, from thence to Moyal.
            
            Saturday from Moyal to Chaſteauieron.
            
            Sonday my Lord Generall was inuited by the inhabitants of Rheyas, to viſite their Citie.
            Thurſday we diſlodged to Chaſteau burg.
            
            
               11.Saturday from thence to S. Hulbin.
            
            At this place lay the Armie when the Caſtle of Chaſtileon was taken in by aſſault.
            
               Friday my Lord Generall ſent letters into England by Captaine Maxie.
               24▪
               
            
            Tueſday we remoued to Feynes.
               28.
            
            Thurſday the ſeauenth of October anno dict. we diſlodged to Bauongie Simples.
               
                  The ſeauenth of October.
               
            
            Fridaie from thence to S. Ouen.
               15▪
               
            
            Sonday from S. Ouen to Ferie.
            
            Monday we remoued to Bauongie.
            
            Monday from Bauongie to S. Hillarie.
            
            Monday the eight of Nouember dict. we diſlodged to Tilyel.
            
            Thurſday the eleuenth day we diſlodged from Tilyel to Fugeralles.
            
            Wedneſday to the Caſtell of Dorec.
            
            This fort ſeemed of ſuch ſtrength vnto the Prince Dombeez, and ſome of his Counſell (as Mounſier la Verdune) that they thought it not meet to be vndertaken without ſpeciall meanes, ſuch as we wanted: hauing neyther munition nor any other thing fit for ſeruice, ſauing two or three ſmal iron peeces for batterie. Our men (ſuch as were reſerued from the extremitie of the then late ſickneſſe amongſt vs) being verie weake and feeble, hauing wanted of long time before both clothes and money: yet it pleaſed God that by the moſt politicke and circumſpect direction of my Lord Generall, the enimy was drawen to abandon the ſame this preſent night, to the great freeing of thoſe parts there abouts: and Captaine Latham was put in as Gouernour of the ſame.
            The ſame Sonday at night my Lord Generall ſent Mounſier Carmarak with letters to the Lords of the Counſell.
            Friday the Armie diſlodged to Pyboray.
            
            Monday from thence to Ernye.
            
            Thurſday the ſecond of December anno dict. the Armie diſlodged from Erny to Gorrone.
               
                  The ſecond of December.
               
            
            From this place my Lord ſent letters into England by Captaine Richard Wingfield, Captaine Moreton, and

Captaine Dennis, who had licence to repaire thither.
            
               19Sunday our Armie diſlodged to Ambrizer, where my Lord Generall kept his Chriſtmas.
            
               28.Tueſday we diſlodged from thence to S. Georges.
            
            
               29.Wedneſday, and ſo from S. Georges to S. Germyns.
            
            
               
                  Ianuary.
               Saturday the eight day of Ianuarie anno dicto the Armie remoued to S. Iohn ſur le Meyne.
               8.
            
            Sonday from thence to Baconiere.
            
            
               9.Monday from Baconiere to Bourne en le Foreſt.
            
            
               10. 
               11.Thurſday the Lord Generall road to Vi
                     •
                  terie, where the Princes of Condy and Dombeez (by commandement from the king) met together for the determining of ſome preſent ſeruice againſt the league, which was concluded: and in fine, Sir Henry Norice (at the requeſt of the Prince Dombeez) was ſent ouer with letters to the Lords of the Councell, to my Lord his father, and my Ladie his mother, and others his friends in England: and withall to know her Maieſties reſolution, whether for the reenforcing of the troupes in Britanie, or for the diſpoſing of them elſwhere.
            
               28.Monday Sir Henrie Norice departed from Laual, to imbarque himſelfe at Cane.
            
            
               
                  Februarie. 1.Monday the firſt of Februarie anno dicto, at night M. Carmerek returned with letters to my Lord Generall: wherein his Lordſhip had licence to come ouer.
            
               18Thurſday the Lord Generall departed from Goron (where the Campe at that time lay) for England: leauing Captaine Anthonie Wingfield Sergeant Maior ſufficientlie authoriſed till his returne.
            Sunday the Lord Generall came to Cane, where for want of ſufficient tyde he was driuen to ſtay vntill the laſt of this moneth.21.
            
            
               
                  March. 1.Monday the firſt day of March anno dict. his Lordſhip finding a Barque of M. Champerneyes, hee imbarqued himſelfe in the ſame, whom Colonell Sherly, and Captaine Lo with others alſo accompanying, they had a verie good gale blowing full Southweſt, which continued vntill

three of the clocke the next morning: after which time we were very much becalmed, vntill ten of the clocke. When hauing a reaſonable faire winde at weſt ſouthweſt, we recouered the Iles of Wight: where wee had very much foule weather. So yt his Lordſhips horſes being in a ſmal Fleebote, ſome doubt was here of the ſafetie of them: which afterwards (God be thanked) obtained ſafelie the harbour: we being within the point, there anchored, and the next morning his Lordſhip landed at Porteſ-mouth.
            
            
               Here endeth the Iournall of the ſeruice in Fraunce againſt the Leaguers. Anno. 1591.
         
         
            
            THE MEMORABLE SERVICE OF THE NOBLE Generall Sir Iohn Norice Knight, performed Anno Dom. 1594. at Breſt in Britaine.
            
               THe firſt of September our worthie Generall Sir Iohn Norice, landing with new forces out of England at Penpole, receiued letters preſently from Marſhall D'Aumond and Sir Thomas Baskeruil, who commanded in his abſence the Engliſh troupes, being then before the Caſtle of Morlayx, in what termes they ſtood expecting euery day to be fought withall by the enemie Duke Mercoeur, who was aduanced for the ſame purpoſe within thrée leagues of them, and did but onely attend the comming of Monſieur Boiſdolphin, with ſome French horſe to ioyne with them: but this their temporizings in the end coſt them the Caſtle, for immediatly the very next day after the Generals landing with great expedition, to wit, the ſecond of September he put himſelfe vpon the way to Morlayx, and vpon the fift of the ſame moneth ariued there, being fourtéene leagues diſtant.
            His comming was generally ioyed at by all the Britons, but eſpecially by the inhabitants of Morlayx, whoſe good or ill eſtate depended on his comming: for both the Caſtle (a cruell neighbour) held againſt them, and the Duke Mercoeur was at hand to reſcue the defendants, who in aſſurance of reliefe from him acquitted themſelues

manfully, namely the Gouernour himſelfe Monſieur Rochempoul, the Count Magnion, and Monſieur Roſtin, with diuers other gallants. But the Generall ſo amated the Enemie, that the Duke Mercoeur not onely ſtayed from marching néerer vnto vs, but the tenth of the ſame retired with all his forces both French & Spaniſh, aſſuring himſelfe that he could expect of Sir Iohn Norice nothing but blowes. They of the Caſtle acquainted therewith, within two daies after the Dukes retreit yéelded vp the Caſtle. So that only his preſence without the hazard of any of her Maieſties ſubiects, both enforced the Duke to retire, and the Caſtle to yeeld.
            This Caſtle thus rendred, we ſtaied there ten daies, in reſpect that the Marſhall wanted money for the ſatiſfying of his people: whereof at the laſt he was fourniſhed by thoſe of the towne of Morlayx. Then Mounſieur de Lyſcot, a wonderfull braue man, and the Baron of Molac were ſent before with ſome Harquebuziers, to the end they might blocke vp the Fort of Croyzon by Breſt, and preſerue the quarters about, who were further aſſiſted with foure hundred men out of our ſhips by Sir Martin Fourbyſher who commaunded the Engliſh ſhippings. And preſently the armie diſlodged to a place called Iuez, thence to a Village called La Fou, next to Chaſtrau-lin, the next day to Lacornan a village thrée leagues from Quinper-Corentin which was held hy the Enemie.
            The ſame night the Marſhall with foure hundred French, and Sir Iohn Norice with as many Engliſh marched to Quinper-Corantin, and on a ſudden ſurpriſed the ſuburbs, and poſſeſſed them with ſmal reſiſtance. The towne was willing to yéeld, but that the Garriſon would not ſuffer them. But Sir Iohn Norice, whoſe minde was ſtill to doe ſome exploit againſt the Spaniards at the Fort of Coryzon, leauing this towne inueſted by the Marſhall and thrée of our Engliſh Regiments, commaunded by his brother Sir Henry Norice
               
our Lieutenant Generall,
                  October.
                himſelfe only with his owne Regiment, and his owne companie of horſe, marching towards the Fort, and lodged that night at Croyzon. And the next day ſate downe before the Fort.
            Thrée daies were ſpent in vnſhipping & bringing vp the Artillerie,2.3.4. which were fourtéene péeces (whereof the Marſhall furniſhed but two Culuerings) and in making of approches, which was greatly hindred by the want of Gabions, Pioners, and other prouiſions for the making of platformes, which we hoped by promiſe to haue had in a readines ſent vs from the Gouernour of Breſt: but our Generall could procure almoſt nothing from thence but with many difficulties by reaſon of the weather.
            
               5.The fift of this moneth we had newes that the Marſhall and Sir Henry Norice had Quimper yéelded vnto them.
            The ſixt of this moneth the Enemie made a ſallie out vpon our trenches,6. but were very brauely beaten home againe with the loſſe of ſeuen or eight of their men: but yet this their loſſe was very vnfortunately anſwered by the death of Captaine Anthonie Wingfield our Sergeant Maior generall,
                  Sir Anthonie Wingfield ſlaine with a Cannon.
                being ſhot with a Cannon out of the Fort, as he ſtood by the Gabions with his Rapier drawne, the which with the ſhot was beaten through his bowels. This man with great reputation had long time ſerued her Maieſtie both in the Low Countries, Portugall, and Fraunce: and at his laſt going into Britaine, ſo diſpoſed of his eſtate as if he were neuer to returne; and the ſame day, or the day before his death, tooke ſuch order for his debts, as if he had a preſage of his end.
            
               7.8.9.10.11.The next day the Marſhall D'Aumond and Sir Henrie Norice with our Engliſh Regiments, came to vs from Quimper, and were quartered at Croyzon & thereabouts. After whoſe comming foure daies were ſpent in mounting of the Artillerie, planting of our Ordenance, and making of platformes for them to play.
            
               On the 12. day the Enemie made a ſallie vpon the French trenches: who hauing not the leiſure to arme themſelues, loſt betwéene thirtie and fortie men, and as many hurt: and from thence they aduanced themſelues towards our trenches, where wee loſt in their defence ten or twelue men: but we did put them againe in poſſeſſion of their trenches.
            Hauing now all things readie for the batterie, I will as well as I can describe vnto you the Fort.
            You ſhall vnderſtand that more then two parts of the Fort was defended by the water, the reſt was made ſo excéeding ſtrong, as either by arte or charge could be done.
            On the South front thereof on each corner were two exceeding ſtrong Baſtions; that on the Weſt ſide was ſeuentéene paces in the front, that on the Eaſt ſide tenne paces: the Curtaine betwéene both was 37. foote thicke at the top; and within theſe they had made a very large intrenchment, and the Baſtions were excéeding well flanked from the Rocke by the water ſide, planting both on the flankers and baſtion ſome great Ordenance. We lay entrenched within thrée or foure paces of their Counterſcarp: the Frenchmen on the Eaſt ſide, and wée on the Weſt ſide, the batterie lay in the midſt betweene the trenches. Theſe things thus prouidently ordered by the Marſhall and our Generall; on the 23. our Artillerie began to play, and continued ſome ſeuen hundred Cannonodos, but did ſo little harme by reaſon of the ſtrength of the place, as ſcarſe any ſhew of a breach appeared, onely wee did beate away their parrapete and ſome of their flankers: whereupon ſome hundred men commaunded by Captaine Lyſter, were ſent to view and ſee if they could hold the Counterſcarp. Then many of our braue men and gallants thirſting after honour, deſirous to doe ſomewhat further, hauing poſſeſſed themſelues of the Enemies Counterſcarp, which onely they were commaunded to attempt, vndertooke the breach,

which they performed ſo well, as that notwithſtanding the vnſatiablenes of the place, and the great reſiſtance the enimie made. Yet the moſt part of them attained to the verie top thereof, which they held for a while, but were afterwards repulſed. This enterpriſe was with wonderfull great reſolution and valour ſeconded by S. Thomas Baſkeruil, who likewiſe got ſo farre as the point of the breach.
            
               There were loſt in this attempt manie braue men, namelie,
               
                  Slaine in the aſſault.
                  
                     Captaine Barker.
                  
                  
                     Captaine Prudder.
                  
                  
                     Captaine Iackſon, Sergeant Maior of Oſtend, who had no charge there.
                  
                  
                     Haynes. Enſigne to ſir Henry Norice.
                  
                  
                     Corporall Eſſex.
                  
                  
                     M. Throgmorton, and ſome 16. or 18. ſouldiers
                     ▪
                  
               
               
                  Hurt in the aſſault.
                  
                     Captaine Audley.
                  
                  
                     Captaine Bartley.
                  
                  
                     Captaine Couch.
                  
                  
                     Captaine Goodwins Lieutenant.
                  
                  
                     Captaine Williams Lieutenant.
                  
                  
                     Captaine Bucks Lieutenant, & other priuate men.
                  
               
               
                  Burned with Powder.
                  
                     Sir Thomas Knowles.
                  
                  
                     Captaine Aſhendon.
                  
                  
                     
                     Captaine Biſhop.
                  
                  
                     Lieutenant Larkeley.
                  
                  
                     Captaine Lopeley.
                  
                  
                     Maiſter Waineman, and diuers others.
                  
               
               You are to vnderſtand that this attempt was onelie made by the Engliſhmen on the baſtion of the weſt ſide, for the Frenchmen neuer attempted any thing againſt their Baſtion, aleaging that it was not Aſſaultable.
               The Marſhall and our Generall ſeeing the little effect that our Artillerie wrought,24 deuiſed to make a mine on one of the bulwarks, namelie on the Eaſt baſtion towards the French trenches in perfecting thereof ſome 17. or 18. dayes were ſpent.
               But on the 30. being an exceeding wet morning whereby our powder and match were not fit for ſeruice, the enimie againe found thereby oppertunitie to fall out vpon the French trenches, and killed ſo betweene twenty and thirty of them at the leaſt, among whom was Mounſier Lyſcot, a verie braue gentleman one of the Marſhals of the Campe, who was abandoned by the French and their trenches wholie poſſeſſed by the enimie, but our Engliſh men did preſentlie repoſſeſſe them of their trenches, and killed ſome of the Spaniards. Our nation loſt an exceeding great friend of this Mounſier Lyſcot, he exceedingly loued our Generall, as if he had bin his owne father, and generallie fauoured all Engliſh men, and gaue vs the reputation to be verie braue ſouldiers.
               By the ſeauenth of Nouember our mine was reaſonable well perfected,
                     Nouember. 7. and a determination held againe to begin the batterie, with a reſolution that ſo ſoone as the myne ſhould be blowne vp which was made towards the bulwarke by the French trenches, that the Frenchmen ſhould aſſaile that part, and the Engliſhmen their Baſtion, and that others with ſcaling ladders ſhould make attempts in euerie corner, ſo that the defendants ſhould be

on euery part aſſailed. But the Marſhall being that daie ſicke, ſent in the morning for our Generall, and ſhewed him his letters from the Gouernour of Rennes, and from diuers others, by which he was advertiſed that Iohn Don Ioan de la Auquilar Generall of the Spaniards, was marching towards Croyzon with all his Spaniſh forces to reſcue the fort, & was alreadie aduaunced to La-cornan a village within fiue leagues of vs, and therefore aduiſed our General to diſlodge to Croyzon, thinking it not fit to hazard any men, hauing ſo ſtrong an enimie at hand ready to ioyne battell with them. But Sir Iohn Norice hauing his courage nothing daunted with the approch of the enemies, his heart ſeruing him both to win the fort by aſſault, and to encounter his enemie in the field: ſhewing what a diſhonour and diſreputation it were to abandon the ſiege, and alſo what little cauſe the enemie ſhould haue to aduance himſelfe farther if the fort were gotten, his comming being onelie to reſue it. He ſo much importuned the Marſhall, that he gaue him wholie the ordering of that dayes ſeruice. Immediatlie our Generall gaue order to the Cannoniers for the batterie, and cauſed the Artillerie to play. Euerie man was aſſigned his charge, ſome to the aſſault, other with ſcalados to attempt to enter, and by 12. of the clocke he cauſed fire to be ſet to the mine: which albeit did not ſo much as was looked for, yet it made the acceſſe ſo eaſie vnto the French, as that a man might haue ridden vpon horſe backe: and our men, namely Captaine Latham, Captaine Smith, and Captaine Iohn Norice, with diuers other gallant gentlemen gaue vp on the other bulwarke, and continued the aſſault without loſing one pace of the height vntill halfe an houre paſt foure, and in the end firſt entered the ſame, and ſeaſed vp on three Enſignes that were there, and put euerie man they found in the fort (ſauing one alferez) to the ſword: ſome of the Spaniards leapt from the rocke to the water, but our Marriners with their ſmal boats met with them and ſlew them: ſome three or foure others being taken eſcaped with their

liues, no man was found, Au ſang Froyd.
               
               Sir Thomas Baskeruil ſerued this day with great valour and induſtrie, to the admiration of all men. Our ſeamen and Marriners this day acquited themſelues wonderfull brauelie, and were exceeding forward in all attempts, as may well appeare by that valiant Knight Sir Martin Fourbiſher, who in the aſſault receiuing a hurt, is thereof now dead.
               The chiefeſt of the French men, namelie ſuch gentlemen as ſeruing on horſeback, putting themſelues that day on foote, did exceeding g
                     •
                  llantlie, namelie. Mounſier Roumege, Vn Maiſtre du Camp, a man of great courage, and who moſt intirelie loued our Generall, was ſlaine vpon the rampart, and his Enſigne by him: who if they had bin well ſeconded, vndoubtedly they had caried it firſt, and had got the reputation of the firſt entrie. As for the reſt I hold them nothing worthie of commendations in this action.
               
                  Slaine in the aſſault.
                  
                     Captaine Edge once Captaine of our Generals Gaurd.
                  
                  
                     Lieutenant Flud.
                  
                  
                     Captaine Smiths Lieutenant.
                  
                  
                     Enſigne to Captaine Brett.
                  
                  
                     Eight Gentlemen of our Generals own company.
                  
                  
                     Manie other Gentlemen, and betweene twenty or thirty priuate men.
                  
               
               
                  Hurt in the aſſault.
                  
                     Sir Thomas Baskeruil.
                  
                  
                     Sir Martin Fourbiſher, who is now dead.
                  
                  
                     Captaine Iohn Norice.
                  
                  
                     Captaine Brett.
                  
                  
                     Captaine Smith.
                  
               
               
                  The victorie being thus gotten by the great vertue and admirable induſtrie of our Generall, the fort being appointed to be raiſed,1. we diſlodged the next day to Croyzon to ioyne with the reſt of our troupes, to attend there what the enimie durſt doe, who within two dayes after, found reaſon to retire themſelues fiue leagues further from vs.
               Thus haue I finiſhed I aſſure you truelie, although not largelie: all that was moſt remarcable in this dayes ſeruice.
               It may be I giue not namelie to euerie man the honour he deſerued, but therein I excuſe my ſelfe with my ſhortnes in writing, & alſo my ſelfe being herein an Actor, my eye was not at leaſure to note euerie mans deſert. There was found in the fort 29. barrels of powder, ſome match, and verie few ſmall ſhot: and of meate, biſket, wine and beefe reaſonable good ſtore. I muſt a little commend the defendants, for an enimie deſerueth his iuſt praiſe, eſpeciallie the chiefe Commaunder. He neuer in all theſe attempts ſhewed himſelfe daunted, he made ſundrie ſallies, but moſt vpon the French, to his great aduantage and reputation. He loſt before this laſt dayes ſeruice 60. men, ſome at his ſallies, ſome with our Cannon, and ſome at our firſt attempt vpon the breach, alſo this very laſt day our Cannon playing inceſſantlie vpon the maine courtaine, betweene the two baſtions ſlew fiftie of his men. This laſt aſſault continued almoſt fiue houres without intermiſſion, they neuer quailed vntill he was ſlaine, which was a ſmall time before the entrie, and then the greater part being ſlaine, the reſt ouer tired and hurt, were forced by our Gallants to retire, and ſo there were ſlaine of Spaniards in this fort almoſt 400. I note another ſigne of his great reſolution, for if he found anie willing onely to ſpeake of yeelding, he would cauſe him to be bound to a ſtake or poſt, and expoſed him to the breach, leauing his armes at libertie to fight for his defence. I hope no man will diſlike if I commend the valour of the enimie which was conquered, for the greater is the honour of them that were the Conquerours.

This their vaine reſolution might well haue ſerued their turnes, if they had not dealt with our Generall who was as reſolute as they, and therein ouermacht them. For the next day, Don Ioan de l'Aquilar ſending a trumpet for the redeeming of priſoners, our Generall ſent him anſwere that their ranſomes were payed, and that hee was now as readie and at leaſure to fight with him. This victory achiued, he ſent the three Spaniſh Enſignes into England, and preſented them to her Maieſtie, who as a moſt ſacred and gratious Prince, moſt highlie eſteemed, and louinglie accepted them. God of his infinite mercy ſend her daylie ſo to triumph ouer her enimies, and that it will pleaſe him to protect our Generall for her greater ſeruices.
               FINIS.
            
            
               Here endeth the memorable ſeruice of S. Iohn Norice knight, at Breſt in Britaine. 1594.
         
         
            
            THE MEMORABLE SERVICE OF THE NOBLE Generall Sir Iohn Norice Knight, in Ireland (after his returne from Breſt) 1595. with his death there, and buriall here in England 1597.
            
               THis noble Knight and renowmed Generall of her Maieſties forces in Britaine (immediatly after the ſaid ſeruice done by him at the Fort of Breſt in that Prouince) ariuing in England in the moneth of March Anno 1595. after he had ſtayed at London a moneth or thereabouts,
                  March. 1595. 
               
                  Generall Norice departeth for Ireland.
                was thence by her Maieſtie commaunded ouer into Ireland: and with him to embarke his forces appointed directly ouer thither vnder the conduct of his brother Sir Henrie Norice Knight; there to haue his Commiſſion drawne, as Generall of her Maieſties forces in that kingdome.
            After his landing at Waterford (which was about the fift or ſixt of May Anno dict.) he diſpatched letters to Sir William Ruſſel Knight,
                  May. 5. Lord Deputie of Ireland, ſignifying his landing at Waterford aforeſaid, and withall crauing leaue for the eaſe of his bodie, that he might ſtay in his gouernment of Munſter for ſome ſhort time: which as it ſeemed was granted him,
                  He landeth at Waterford.
                in regard that he ſtaied there about thrée wéekes, and then remooued thence to Dublin, to the ſaid Lord Deputie there reſident.
            
               Immediatly after the ſame ſtay there,
                  Iulie.
                his Commiſſion was drawne, his counſell vſed, and hee required to accompanie the ſaid Lord Deputie into the field,
                  Sir William Ruſſel Lord Deputie.
                together with his owne Companie of horſe and foote. The place appointed for the Rendezuous of the Armie was by Dundalk a towne bordering on Vlſter, from whence the ſaid Lord Deputie, Sir Iohn Norice, and others of the Councell with the Armie, marched altogether vnto Armah, where they found a ruined Church or Abbey. But afterwards by the aduice of the Lord Deputie and his Councell, that place was thought fit for a Garriſon, in regard that it bordered vpon the entrance of Hugh Onele the Erle of Tyron that Archrebels countrey, and was ſituate within two or thrée miles of the Blackwater in the countrey of Tyrone, where her Maieſtie had heretofore a Fort. So this place was forth with made defencible, and there were left in Garriſon thrée or foure of the Companies which came out of Britaine.
            
            Now after the fortifying and victualling of that Garriſon, and other neceſſaries fit for the holding of it, the Deputie, with Sir Iohn Norice and the reſt of the Armie, marched to Monohan, another warde bordering vpon the ſaid Archrebels countrey, and held as then by Sir Iohn Dowdal an Engliſh Knight and his company. So after order taken for the victualling of that place, and other neceſſaries,
                  The Lord Deputie comming forwards, Tyrone returned backe.
                the Armie marched backe towards the Newry in the Prouince of Vlſter, where Sir Henrie Bagnal Knight (the Marſhall) commaunded fiue Companies which lay there continually in garriſon. But the Archrebell Tyrone hearing of the Lord Deputies returne backe, did purpoſe (as it was thought) to haue poſſeſſed himſelfe of the pace before him, that lieth betwéene the Newry and Dundalk aforeſaid, thereby to offend him in his paſſage. Word being brought to the Lord Deputie hereof, and he knowing that the ſaid Archrebell purpoſed to paſſe within foure or fiue miles of the place where the Lorde Deputie encamped: the next night

thereupon there were Scoutes ſent out, & word brought by them that they had deſcried the ſaid Archrebels army. Whereupon order was giuen, that there ſhould be certaine horſe and foote made readie, to attend the Lord Deputie and Sir Iohn Norice, who went forwards with thoſe men, vntill they came within ſight of the Archrebels whole armie, being then reputed foure thouſand ſtrong of horſe and foote. But whether the Lord Deputie were ill guided, or whether the enemie in feare to ſaue himſelfe made more haſte then the Engliſh could follow, I know not, but for that time they eſcaped. But it ſeemed that feare ſerued to ſome good purpoſe: for afterwards in our paſſage through the place we were not at all intercepted, although the Enemie might haue done it with great aduantage.
            Now, after leauing ſome companies at the Newry and Calingford,
               1595. the Engliſh returned to Dundalke, where (after the eſtabliſhing of that Garriſon,
                  Auguſt.
                and others in the Engliſh pale) the Lord Deputie, with Sir Iohn Norice and the reſt of the Councell, went to Dublin. Shortly after their being there, it was concluded vpon, that Sir Iohn Norice then Generall ſhould draw an armie into the field. The place for the companies to ioyne was appointed, and other preparations for the armie, as cariages, Pioners, victuals, &c. ſparingly prouided. Not fully ſo well prouided, as when the Lord Deputie went himſelfe, and therefore not ſo much expected to be performed by him, as by the Deputie) although the numbers of men were left vnto himſelfe for to name: it was giuen out that the Generall ſhould goe to victuall Armah, whatſoeuer was beſides pretended: and indéede that charge was faithfully performed by him, and as much for the Queenes honour, as any thing that hath béen done ſince the Archrebell Tyrone firſt entred into his rebellion.
            
               
                  September.
               For after that by a tedious trauell with the whole army to and fro about foure or fiue times from the Newry
               
to Armah (which the Generall was faine to doe in regard he was but ſparingly furniſhed of Cariages, beſides his armie which were but thirtéene hundred ſtrong thereby much weakened) at this time did the ſaid Tyrone take all the aduantage he could. And at the Generals laſt returne from Armah, the Enemie ſent thrée hundred of his beſt ſhot to lodge in a place, where our Engliſh armie ſhould paſſe thorough, to méete the Generall and intercept him in his paſſage. But it fell out that our men in their march had poſſeſſed themſelues of that pace before the Enemie: which the Generall perceiuing, and withall knowing himſelfe followed in the arriere of our armie both with horſe and foote of the enemies, made a halt in the place where he perceiued them to follow, and ſo ſtaied vntill two hundred of the archrebels horſe came vp to charge him. But they (finding him as readie to ioyne as they) retired backe to the archrebell, who was readie with other horſe to haue ſeconded them, if they had attempted any thing to any purpoſe.
            Hereupon Tyrone ſent down of his foote 200. Scots and 300. ſhot to haue galled the Generals troupe of horſe: but he (although vnarmed) made good that place where he firſt made a ſtand (which was with the loſſe of ſome of his beſt horſe) vntill he had ſent for thrée or foure wings of ſhot from the Colours; himſelfe in this ſtand (which was in effect againſt Tyrones whole army) was ſhot in the arme, and in the bellie, his horſe vnder him ſhot in thrée or foure places. His brother Sir Thomas Norice ſhot thorow the thigh: Sir Richard Wingfield Commander of the Generals horſe had his arme broken with a ſhot (no other man hurt of any name) only of horſe and foote about eightéene ſlaine, beſides ſome twentie or thirtie hurt. This ſtand ſo honourably made by him was to good purpoſe, otherwiſe it could not be but that our whole armie had been ouerthrowne: but how Tyrone (vpon the ſlaughter of two hundred of his Scots, beſides ſome of his beſt ſhot) was followed, he

liueth to make report of it, if he liſt: but I am ſure (ſo botly) that in foure daies he could not heare of twentie of his men together in a companie, they had ſo diſperſed themſelues in the purſuite.
            
               
                  October.
               After this ſeruice done by the Generall, within ſhort time he came to Dublin: where after a moneth of ſixe wéekes ſtay there he went downe to his gouernment of Munſter. Tyrone oftentimes after this conflict, did ſend a fained ſhew of ſubmiſſion vnto the Lord Deputie, (namely whiles that the Generall was in Munſter) and thereupon he was hearkened vnto,
                  Nouember.
                and Commiſſioners were ſent from the Lord Deputie to talke with him vpon ſome Articles: beſides, Sir Henry Warren Knight was employed in that ſeruice, and had free acceſſe to Tyrone. The cauſe why Sir Iohn Norice the Generall retired himſelfe from thoſe publike affaires, after his good ſeruice done, is knowne to many, and euery priuate man could ſpeake of the croſſings betweene the Deputie and him, whoſoeuer was faultie: But the ſtate (whiles they gouerned) ſtood in better termes, then it hath done ſince, howſoeuer it hath bin thought that the treating of peace did preiudice any good procéedings.
            At this time Munſter was quiet and moſt part of Lemſter (except Feaugh Mack-Hughes countrie) kept in good termes: In Conacht, the miſerie that they had indured before,
                  Munſter in good quiet.
                taught them to deſire quietnes, onelie they would ſpeake reprochfullie and bitterlie againſt Sir Richard Bingham their Gouernour. The townes vpon the borders of the North, and thoſe of the Engliſh pale were defended by gariſon, ſo that there was no great harme done to the Engliſh pale, but by the incurſions of ſome of the Orrelyes, who were continuallie prayed and ſeaſed vpon by our gariſons: all Vlſter both at that time, and now continueth ſtill rebellious, and this was the ſtate of the countrie at that time, when Sir Iohn Norice withdrew himſelfe into Munſter.
            
            After his being at Munſter, the ſaid Generall Norice
               
came to Dublin, where ſtaying ſome two months, there came order out of England,
               1596. that he and Sir Ieffrey Fenton ſhould be ioyned in Commiſſion to treat with Tyron vpon ſome Articles of peace.
                  Aprill.
                There was (as I haue formerlie ſaid) Commiſſioners appointed by the deputie to treat concerning the ſame buſineſſe: but after the order came out of England that Commiſſion ceaſed,
                  Meſſengers appointed betweene the Commiſſioners and Tyrone.
                and the ſaid Sir Iohn Norice, and Sir Ieffrey Fenton were authoriſed in their places. Thoſe that were appointed as meſſengers betweene the Commiſſioners & Tyrone were Sir Warram Sellenger, and Captaine William Warren, both of them ſufficient men, and of Tyrones old acquaintance, and thoſe who faithfullie proceeded according to their inſtructions. Theſe men brought to that paſſe by the direction of the Commiſſioners, that he was to haue his pardon: and no queſtion had he meant to be loyall, thoſe ſleight doubts that he made of his ſafetie would neuer haue made him vnmindfull of ſo high and merciful a grace and fauour, after his moſt vile and trecherous offence.
            It may be doubted becauſe there was ſome priuate croſſings betweene men of high place, that their croſſings would haue hindered his hope of deſeruing well hereafter: It was reported that he ſhould ſay ſo much, ſurelie (which if he did) it was but to excuſe his intended trecherie, as he hath often done ſince. Now during the Commiſſioners ſtay on the borders, Tyrone ſent his owne ſubmiſſion in by the aforeſaid two Agents: and beſides ſent into Dundalk (for to make the better ſhow of his fained ſubmiſſion) ſome of the chiefeſt men of Vlſter. As namely, Mack Gwyer, Mack Mahun, the Orrelyes and others to deliuer their ſubmiſſions to the Commiſſioners: ſo after the receiuing of them in,
                  May.
                the Commiſſioners repaired to Dublin to the State, and ſo ſhortlie afterward from thence, they went towards Conacht, according to their Commiſſion. Where they were to meet with Odonele, and others of his countrie, there to receiue them into ſubmiſſion, as they had thoſe of Vlſter.
            
            
               Sir Iohn Norice being chiefe Commiſſioner with Sir Ieffrey Fenton, held notwithſtanding his place as Generall of the Armie, and did carrie the ſame into Conacht, moſt part of which Armie, continued in the Prouince all the time of his being there: At his comming thither hee found all the countrie in rebellion, and in great miſerie, yet moſt part of the beſt men in the countrie were readie to receiue her Maieſties gratious pardon, moſt of them did come in verie ſubmiſſiuelie, and made offer to doe her Maieſtie good ſeruice.
            Sir Richard Bingham was growne ſomewhat grieuous amongſt thoſe of Conacht, and they would bitterlie complaine againſt him, alleaging that he was the cauſe of their reuolt: but that is their cuſtome, and he muſt be a man of verie rare gouernment, that ſhall euerie way ſatiſfie, or giue content to their rebellious affections. Vpon the countries complaint, Sir Richard Bingham was ſequeſtred from the gouernment of that Prouince, & they were hearkened vnto in whatſoeuer they could alleadge againſt him: ſo gratious and iuſt is her Maieſtie in euerie way, righting a nation,1596. which notwithſtanding proue moſt diſloyall and rebellious.
            
               
                  Nouember.
               Now during Sir Richard Binghams ſequeſtration, Sir Iohn Norice had abſolutelie the commaund of his ſaid Prouince, and did (during his time) verie good ſeruice: namelie, in bringing into her Maieſties obedience manie of the beſt gentlemen of the countrie, and continuallie praying, ſpoyling, and killing of the reſt, who (being deſperatelie obſtinate) held themſelues ſtill in rebellion. This his good ſeruice ſo performed againſt thoſe perſons, was ſometimes by the gariſons, and ſometimes by the Armie, as they marched through the countrie: inſomuch, that at the Generals departure forth of the countrie, hee left it in good termes.
            So about December, hee was called from thence to Dublin, where (after ſome ſtay there) the State hauing notice, that the gariſon of Armah was like to be diſtreſſed

(if they were not preſenlie releeued) the Generall was appointed to draw an Armie into the field, for the victualling of that place: but it ſhould appeare he was authoriſed to treate with Tyrone, about the victualling of it. For the Armie being drawne together by Dundalk, and readie to march, there was ſuch order taken, that he the ſaid Tyrone ſhould ſuffer it to be victualled by two or three Companies from the Newry: which was performed,
                  Ianuarie.
                and ſo the Armie diſpoſed into the gariſons againe.
            It ſhould ſeeme, that beſides the victualling of that place, it was appointed that the ſaid Tyrone ſhould ſpeake perſonallie with the Commiſſioners: for that after it was agreed, that he ſhould ſuffer it to be victualled, he appointed a day to ſpeake with the Commiſſioners, Sir George Bowſer being then ioyned with the others in Commiſſion. What their conference was when they met, I know not altogether: but the manner of their meeting was this.
            
               Tyrone hauing his Armie neere vnto the place appointed for the Parley, cauſed foure or fiue hundred of his ſhot, together with his beſt horſe, to lie within a mile of the ſame his Armie, who were then encamped on the ſide of a hill nere Dundalk: there was ſixe gentlemen of the Generals troupe of horſe appointed to ſtand on the one ſide of the forde of a little riuer there, where the parlie was, and ſixe others of Tyrones to ſtand on the further ſide with him in ſight of the Commiſſioners: he ſeeing the Commiſſioners come downe from our Armie, began to come forward himſelfe, not ſuffering any other to come with him, ſo ſaluting Sir Iohn Norice, told him he was glad to ſee him, being of his old acquaintance. Sir Iohn Norice likewiſe told him, that he would be glad to ſee him become a faithfull ſubiect: withal remembring him of the great fauours that her Maieſtie had ſhewed him heretofore, and that (yet) her Highnes was mercifullie enclined to haue him receiued into grace, if there were anie hope he would forſake his trecherous courſe, and become a faithfull obedient ſubiect.
            
               He anſwered with great proteſtations, that he was ſorie for his offence, and that there was no Prince in the world, whom he did or would more honour and reuerence, then her Maieſtie; neuer naming her Highnes, but with his hat off:
                  Tyrones anſwere.
                all which ſhewes of obedience in him, made many beléeue that he meant to become otherwiſe, then ſince he hath proued himſelfe. But thoſe that haue liued long in that countrey amongſt them, know by experience, that they are a people full of malecontentment, inconſtancie, rebellion and treaſon: deſiring no other gouernment, but their owne rude barbarous and diſordered kinde of life and manners, moſt horrible and odious to all that feare God, obey their Prince, and loue their Countrey.
            It was euer doubted by Sir Iohn Norice, and to be beleeued of euery one that know the Rebell Tyrone, that he neuer meant to be faithfull in his word: wherefore his trecherous delaies could not be imputed to any remiſſe courſe held by Sir Iohn Norice towards Tyrone. But there is no queſtion,
                  Sir Iohn Norices doubt of Tyrone.
                had Sir Iohn Norice liued, he would haue made it appeared vnto the world (as he hath done heretofore) that the zeale he did beare to doe her Maieſtie and his Countrey ſeruice, was ſuch, as that priuate malice in croſſing him ſhuld neuer haue had power, either to make him faile in the leaſt point of his alleageance, or to burie any of his honourable intended enterpriſes.
            
               1597.I haue heard him ſay my ſelf, and ſo haue others which now liue in Ireland,
               
                  Aprill.
                that if he could but hope, that the Rebel Tyrone would vnfainedly accept of her Maieſties grace and mercie towards him, and that he the ſaid Sir Iohn Norice might haue béen the inſtrument to haue perſwaded him to become a faithfull ſubiect, he would not haue cared what labour or paines he endured to be aſſured thereof.
            It was thought that the proſecuting of Feugh Mac Hugh was contrary to the Articles agreed vpon betweene

the Commiſſioners and the Rebell Tyrone; and it ſhould appeare that he diſliked thereof. For after his pardon was ſent him by Sir Edward Moore, and he in all things (to the ſhew of the world) readie to haue accepted thereof: on the ſudden his pardon was brought backe, and he returned excéedingly diſcontented. After the time of this laſt treatie with Tyrone, which was in the latter end of Ianuary aforeſaid, he remained vpon the borders of the North, ſtill expecting direction how to procéed in thoſe Northerne affaires, which continued from the moneth of Ianuary aforeſaid 1596. vntill the moneth of May in the yéere 1597. following,1597. for the ſpace of foure moneths.
                  May.
                At which time he the ſaid Generall Norice receiued aduertiſement out of England, that the Lord Borowes ſhould come ouer Deputie into Ireland: So vntil his comming the Generall kept himſelfe vpon the borders of the North.
            It was thought at the Lord Borowes comming ouer, the old grudge would be renewed: but I think that matter was carried into England, before the Lord Borowes departed thence. For that after their méeting (contrarie to the expectation of many) Sir Iohn Norice caried himſelfe very diſcréetly and reſpectiuely towards him: beſides that, he made knowne vnto him the ſtate of the countrey at that preſent, together with his beſt counſell and aduice, for the reforming of the deſperate eſtate that then the kingdome was left in. In ſo much as it was thought, before Sir Iohn Norice his going into his gouernment of Munſter, that they were both good friends.
            But now vpon the Lord Borowes his receiuing of the Sword, Sir Iohn Norice was abſolutely ſequeſtred from all commaund, except that of the Prouince, and ſo ſent downe into Munſter, with an opinion to get leaue to paſſe into England: But that fell out contrary to his expectation. So he haſt ouer three moneths, with a ſhew of his health, although inwardly he felt his owne griefe.
                  Generall Norice conceiueth a griefe.
                And thus the cauſe of his conceiued griefe was the haſtening

of his death, and ſo iudged of by moſt men which knew the ſame.
            The manner of his death was anſwerable to his honourable life,
                  The good Generall Norice deceaſed in Ireland 1597. at his brothers houſe at Mayallo.
                and knowne to ſome of his ſeruants and followers, who now with great griefe muſt rew it. He died the third day of September 1597. at his Brother Sir Thomas Norices houſe in the towne of Mayallo in the Prouince of Munſter within the kingdome of Ireland, at the 50. yéere of his age: hauing ſpent 26. of them (being the moſt flouriſhing time of his life) in her Maieſties ſeruice againſt her enemies, in the Netherlands, Spayne, Portugall, France, Britaine and Ireland, as particularly before and here finally is mentioned.
            The Honourable Lord Henry Norice Baron of Rycot, father of the ſaid Lord Generall, had fiue ſons moe all Martiall men, vz. Maſter William his eldeſt ſonne ſeruing in Ireland, and there deceaſed: Sir Edward his third ſonne ſeruing laſtly at Oſtend, now liuing: Sir Henry Norice his fourth ſonne, and Sir Thomas his fift ſonne, both ſeruing laſtly in Ireland, hurt and died there, but buried in England: and Maſter Maximilian his ſixt and youngeſt ſonne died in France. The honorable Ladie Margerie Mother to all theſe died at London 1599. The ſaid honourable Lord Henry their father died at Rycot Anno 1601.
            Thus being intreated to ſet downe what I knew that paſſed vpon Sir Iohn Norices ſide, at his latter daies in Ireland; I haue (although not iournally) yet of my certaine knowledge truly and duly deſcribed all the notable occurrents that paſſed from his laſt comming out of Britaine, to the time of his death in Ireland, as before is ſaid. All this ſeruice in Ireland was ſet down by Daniel Gyles, ſometime Page, and after lately ſeruant to the ſaid Generall Norice at his death, as aforeſaid.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   