
      
         
            
            
            An expoſicion vpon the ſonge of the bleſſed virgine Mary, called Magnificat.
            
            Where vnto are▪ added the ſonges of Salue regina, Benedictus and Nūc dimittis.
            
            ¶Tranſlated out of latine into Englyſh by Ihon Hollybuſh.
            1538.
         
         
            
            
            To the renowned and mooſt noble prince & lorde Ihon Frederyke, duke of Saxony, county of Durynge and marques of Myſen my gracious lorde and defender.
            
               I Haue (mooſt doughty prince) receaued your graces letters at the laſt, the whych (accordynge to my deutye) I haue humbly taken in my handes, and chearefully and wyth entyer conſyderacyon thoughte vpon theyr argument and meanynge. But ſeynge I haue lōge ſence promyſed vnto your hyghneſſe the declaracion of the virgins ſonge of prayſe called Magnificat, (frō yt whych purpoſe of myne, the wycked enterpryſes of many myne aduerſaryes haue ofte wythdrawē me,) I haue thought now at the laſte to anſwer your hyghneſſe letters wyth this treatyſe, (fearynge leſt the farther delaye therof myght be to my reprofe, and that farther ex
               
                  •
               uſaciō ſhulde be of no value) that your hyghneſſes noble yonge corage were ſteared to the loue of ſcripture, & by farther exercyſe

in the ſame myght be more feruenter & ſtablyſhed, to the whyche thynge I praye God to ſende his grace & to helpe, for it is greatly neceſſary: ſeynge that in the perſone of ſo great a prince, the whych beynge wythdrawen frō himſelfe, is gouerned by Gods grace, ye ſaluacion of many one cōſyſteth: & agayne ye perdiciō and damnacion of many one yf he beynge permitted to hymſelfe, is gyded with out grace. For though it be ſayd of al mens hartes: that the kynges harte is in ye hande of God, whych can wende it where it pleaſeth hym: yet is it not for nought ſayd of kynges and prynces▪ Where by God wyll beate hys feare in the ſuperiours, that ſo they may learne and be ſure, that they can not once thynke ought in theyr mynde, wythout God do geue it ſeuerally in theyr myndes. The dede of other men doth ether hurte or profit only them, or a fewe beſyde: but princes and ſuperiours only be ſet in that rowme, that they ether profyte or hynder ſo many more, as theyr dominion doth reach farther. For the whych cauſe doth ſcripture call the godly and fearynge God princes, angels of God, yee goddes alſo, as in the .vii. chap. of Exo: I haue made the a God ouer Pharao. And in the .xxii. Chapter: Thou ſhalte not ſpeake euell

of the Goddes. And agayne, ye wycked & vngodly princes ſhe calleth Lions, Draggōs and furious beaſtes: whom God alſo calleth one of hys .iiii. plages whan he rehearſeth them, namely: peſtilence, derth, warre and furious beaſtes. Becauſe then that the hart of man, beynge naturall, fleſhe and bloude doth preſume euery thynge lyghtely, & coueteth therby dominion, ryches & honoure, he is ſteared out of reaſon by ſuche occaſion to a raſh tranquillite and reſte, ſo that he forgetteth God, and careth nothynge for hys ſubiectes, and vſynge the brydle to hys pleaſure in ſynnynge, he becōmeth a wodde & furious beaſte. It chaunceth alſo, that a prince takynge hys pleaſure only, and vſynge hys affecciōs, by name he is a lorde, but in dede he is a beaſte, ſo that it was well ſayde of Bias one of the ſeuen ſages of Grece: Magiſtratus uirum oſtendit, that is: Authorite or rule of a cōmunalte declareth what a man is. For dominion doth vtter a man what he is, ſeynge alſo that the commune people darre not wythſtande for feare of punyſhment the cōmaundementes of theyr heades, though they were wycked and vngodlye. For thys cauſe ought the ſuperiours greatly to drede God, ſeynge they nede to

feare men ſo lytle, and to knowe hym & hys workes perfectly, and wyth greate care and diligence to walke and exercyſe hymſelfe therin, as Paul doth exhorte in the .xii. chapter to the Romaynes, ſayenge: Let hym that ruleth, be diligent.
            Moreouer ther is nothynge in all the ſcripture that doth ſo greatly concerne the ſuperiorite, as thys mooſt holy ſonge of the bleſſed virgyne & mother of God, the which ought to be well learned and exercyſed of all them that wyll rule well and be good gouernours. For the mother of God ſyngeth here mooſt pleaſauntly of the feare of God, what LORDE our God be, & what hys workes be in hygh and lowe eſtates. Let other geue ear to theyr paramours, ſyngyng ſome wanton worldly ſonge: but vnto thys ſo manered virgine becōmeth a prince & lorde to geue eare, yt whych ſyngeth a ſpiritual, chaſt and wholſome ſonge. Nother is it a coſtume reprouable, that in all churches thys ſonge is dayly ſonge at euenſonge, & that wyth a ſundery & honeſt tune (yf ye vnderſtandynge therof were alſo ſo earneſtly declared) Now wolde God ye ſprete of the ſame beawtyfull mother of God were geuen me, whych may ſo pythfully & profytably declare hyr ſonge,

that your princely grace, & all we may ſucke therout a healthfull vnderſtandynge, a lawdable lyfe, & after this lyfe, to ſynge the euerlaſtyng Magnificat in the lyfe to come. Amē
            
         
      
      
         
            
               ¶The ſonge of Mary called Magnificat.
               My ſoule magnifyeth the LORDE.
               
               And my ſprete reioyceth in God my Saueoure.
               For he hath loked vpon the lovve degre of hys handmayden.
               Beholde, from hence forth ſhal al generacions call me bleſſed.
               For he that is myghty hath done great thynges vnto me, and Holy is hys name.
               And hys mercy endureth thorovv out all generaciōs, vpon them that feare him.
               He ſhevveth ſtrength vvyth hys arme, and ſcattereth them that be proude in the imaginacion of theyr harte.
               He putteth dovvne the myghty frō the ſeate, and exalteth them of lovve degre.
               He fylleth the hungry vvith good thinges, and letteth the rych go empty.
               He remēbreth mercy, and helpeth vp hys ſeruaunt Iſrael.
               Euen as he promyſed vnto our fathers, Abraham, and to hys ſede for euer.
            
            
               
               ¶The prologe.
               
                  THat we maye the better vnderſtāde thys ſonge of prayſe, it is to be marked that ye laudable virgine Mary ſpeaketh by hyr owne experiēce, where by ſhe is taughte & illumined of the holy gooſt. For no man may perfectly vnderſtande the worde of God, wythout he haue it of the holy gooſt wythout ony meanes. And no mā cā haue it of the holy gooſt, wythout he proue and ſearche it: and in the ſame tryenge and ſearchynge doth the holy gooſt teach, as in hys ſcoole. Wythout the whyche ther is nought taughte ſaue onely a ſhadowe, wordes and multiplyenge of wordes. Euen ſo lykewyſe (whan the bleſſed virgine had proued by herſelfe that God hadde wrought ſo great thynges in her, whych not wythſtandynge was vyle, poore and deſpyſed,) dyd the holy gooſt teach her thys ryche doctrine and wyſedome, namely: that God is ſuch a LORDE whych hath nought to do ſaue to exalte it that is lowe, to depreſſe & to put downe that is exalted, to breake it that is made, and to make it that is broken. For as in the begynnynge of all creatures

God dyd create the worlde of nought: (wherof he is called a creatoure and almyghtye) euē ſo abydeth the ſame nature in hym ſtyll vnchaunged. And all hys workes haue ben, & ſhalbe done ſo vnto the worldes ende, that he ſhal make of ye whych is nothyng, vyle, deſpyſed, ſmall, myſerable and dead in compariſon, ſome ſpecyall, coſtly, honorable, healthfull and lyuynge thynge. And agayne al that is ſōwhat, coſtly, honorable, lyuely, to make it nought, ſmall deſpyſed, myſerable, mortall and tranſitory. After whych faſhion and maner no creature can nor maye worke, that is, of nought to make ought, ſo that hys eyen are toward the depth, and not to the heyght as the .iii. chyldren ſayde, Daniel the thyrde Chapter. Bleſſed be thou that lokeſt thorowe the depe, and ſytteſt vpon the Cherubins. And alſo Dauid Pſalm. C.xxxvii. Thoughe the LORDE be hyghe, yet hath he reſpecte vnto the lowly: as for the proude he beholdeth hym afarre of. Item Pſalm. C.xi. Who is lyke vnto the LORDE our God, that hath hys dwellynge ſo hyghe, whyche humbleth hymſelfe to beholde that is in heauen and earth? For ſeynge he is the ſupreme and mooſt hygheſt of all, and nothynge aboue hym, therfore maye he

not loke aboue hym: nother maye he loke beſydes hym, ſeynge none is to be cōpared wt hym. Thus muſt he nedes behold hymſelf, & loke vnder hym. And euē ſo ye deper a mā loketh vnder hym, ye better he ſeyeth hymſelfe.
               But the worlde & mans eyen do the contrary, they loke only aboue themſelues, they wyll mount on hygh as Salomon ſayeth: Pro. xxx. Ther are people which haue hygh lokes, & caſt vp theyr eyelyddes. Thus we ſe dayly that euery one loketh only vpward to ryches, honoure, authorite, ſcience, eaſy lyfe and to all that is greate and hygh in thys worlde. And where ſuch are, to thē doth euery man cleue, to thē runneth euery man, thē is euery mā glad to pleaſe and to ſerue, with them wyll euery man ioyne hymſelfe and be partaker of theyr exaltacion & hygh eſtate: ſo that it is not ſayde for nought in ye ſcripture that few kynges and princes haue ben good and vertuous.
               Agayne nomā wyl loke downward, where are pouerte, deſpyſyng, anguyſh, myſery and ſorow, frō thence doth euery man wende his eyen. And where ſuche people is, frō thence doth euery man runne, they be ſhuned, nother doth ony man aſſyſte nor helpe thē, and prouyde ſo for thē, that they maye be able alſo:

but muſt abyde ſtyll in the depth and low eſtate. For ther wyll noman be ſuch a creatoure amōge men, that wyl make ony thyng of that nothynge, accordynge to ye leſſon of S. Paule Ro. xii. ſayenge: Be of one mynde amonge youre ſelues. Be not proude in your owne conceates, but make your ſelues equall with them of the lowe ſorte.
               And for thys cauſe doth ye ſyght of God cō
                  tinue of one faſhiō, which beholdeth ye depth, nede, and myſery, & is neare vnto all ſuch as are in that depth & anguyſh, and (as ſayeth S. Peter) wythſtandeth the hyghmynded, but geueth mercy vnto the lowly.
               Out of thys grounde now ſpryngeth loue and ye prayſe of God: for nomā cā thanke and prayſe God, without he fyrſt loue hym: nother may ony mā loue hym without he confeſſe & knowlege hym in the beſt & ſyncereſt maner he can. Nother maye he ſo be cōfeſſed and vttered, ſaue by hys worke, which is remembred, felte & tryed in vs. Wherfore now whan he proueth & knoweth God to be ſuch one which loketh towarde the depth, and helpeth only the poore, deſpyſed, wretched, myſerable, forſaken & them that are nothynge, than is he ſo inflamed in loue, that his hart euen floweth ouer in ioye, leapeth and

for delyte that he hath gotten in God. And euen there is than the holy gooſt that teacheth ſuch vnſpeakeable connynge and luſt at the twynklynge of an eye, whan a man is ſo tryed.
               For thys cauſe alſo hath God charged vs all with death, and the croſſe of Chriſte, and with innumerable paynes and ſufferynges, charged hys ryght welbeloued chylderen the Chriſtians, ſufferynge them ſomtyme to fall in ſynne, that he maye ſe ſo much the deper, that he maye helpe many, worke muche, ſhewynge hymſelfe a true creatoure thereby, that he maye knowe hymſelfe thereby, and maye cauſe hymſelfe to be louynge and mooſte laudable. Where contrary wyſe the worlde (God amende it) wyth his hygh and ouerſeynge eyes is alwaye repynynge wythoute ceaſſynge, and letteth the ſyghte, workes, helpe, knowlege, loue and prayſe of God, robbynge it ſelfe of ſuch honoure, frute, ioye and ſaluacion. After thys maner hath he alſo throwen his only beloued ſonne Ieſu Chriſte in the depth of all myſerye, and euydently declared hys ſeynge, worke, helpe, nature, counſell and wyll, that it myghte 
                     〈…〉
                   to what intent he ſuffereth it to 
                     〈◊〉
                  . Therfore remayneth in Chriſte

ſuche notable prouynge, full knowlege, loue and prayſe of God foreuer, as ſayeth the .xv. Pſalme: Thou ſhalt make me full of ioye wyth thy countenaunce. (that is,) That he ſeyth and knowlegeth the. Of thys ſpeaketh Dauid alſo in the .xliiii. Pſalme, ſayenge: that all ſayntes ſhall do nothynge but prayſe God in heauē, for lokynge vpon thē in theyr depth, and hath made thē thankfull, louynge and prayſynge in the ſame.
               Lykewyſe alſo doth here the beloued mother of Chriſte, which wyth the enſample of hyr prouynge, and wyth hyr wordes, teacheth vs how we ſhulde knowlege, loue and prayſe God. For ſeynge ſhe reioyceth and thanketh God here wyth a ioyfull and leapynge ſprete, that he hath loked vpon her, though ſhe were lowlye and nothynge in hyr owne and mens ſyghte: therfore is it to be beleued that ſhe hath had ſymple frendes poore, and rather of the loweſt ſorte. And thys wyll we now ſo ſaye, becauſe of them that be ſymple and of the loweſt ſorte themſelues. At Ieruſalem doutleſſe were the doughters of the hyghe preſtes, and of the counſellers, fayre, yonge and bewtyfull virgines taught and brought vp after ye mooſte honeſt maner before all the contry, as nowe

are alſo the doughters of many kynges princes and other noble and rych mē. Notherſemeth ſhe to haue ben the doughter of the chefe ruler of Nazareth hyr natyfe cōtry, but rather of a meane poore cyteſins, where vnto was not geuen greate hede or force. Yee ſhe was rekened amōge hir neghboures and theyr chyldren for none other ſaue a ſeruyng mayde, vnto whome the charge of houſwyfery and the cattel was committed: as poore maydens do, whome lyke charge is cōmitte to be faythfully executed.
               For thus prophecyed Eſaye in hys .xi. chapter: Ther ſhall a rodde come forth of ye kynred of Ieſſe, and a bloſſome out of hys rodde, and the ſprete of the LORD ſhal lyght vpon it. The ſtocke and roote of the kynred of Ieſſe or Dauid is the virgine Mary, the rodde and bloſſome is Chriſte. Now lyke as it is not ſene, yee incredible that out of a ſeere and rottē ſtocke or roote ſhulde growe a fayre rodde or bloſſome: euen ſo was it not to be loked for nor lykely, that Mary the virgine ſhulde be ye mother of ſuch a chylde. For I thynke Mary was not called a ſtocke and a roote therfore only, becauſe that aboue nature & vnſtayned flore of hyr maydenheade ſhe became a mother, as it is alſo aboue nature

ye a rodde ſhuld ſpringe of a dead blocke: But alſo becauſe that ſhe was of a kynglye ſtocke and of Dauids kynred, which was ſō
                  tyme buddynge, floryſſhyng, honorable, puyſſaunte, rych and happy, both in hys and Salomons tyme, and a thynge greatly ſet by amonge men. But at the laſte, whan Chriſte ſhulde come, dyd the hygh preſtes vſurpe and take to themſelues that dignite, hauyng the rule alone, and the kyngly progeny or kynred was fallē to extreme prouerte, and deſpyſed as a deade blocke, ſo that ther was no hope nor lokynge for more, that ony kyng of great worſhyp and renowne ſhulde ſprynge of it. And whā it was in thys ſtate, and euē come to ye loweſt, thā doth Chriſte come of a ſmall ſtocke, borne of a ſymple and poore virgine, and ſo the rodde and bloſſome of ſuch a perſone, as the doughters of my lorde Annas & Caiphas wolde not haue wyteſafe to haue done the vyleſt ſeruice of theyr handmaydē. Thus go the workes of God and hys ſyghte in the depthes, and the workes and lokes of men only in the heyghte. And thys is the cauſe of hyr loude ſonge of prayſe, which we wyll now heare from verſe to verſe.
            
            
               
               
                  
                     My ſoule magnifieth the LORDE.
                     
                  
                  That worde bruſteth out of a vehemente heate and ouerflowynge ioye, wherewyth hyr mynde and conuerſacion heaue it ſelfe wholy in ſprite inwardly: Wherfore ſhe ſayeth not: I do magnifye the LORDE, but my ſoule. As yf ſhe wolde ſaye: My lyfe and all my thoughtes dryue, compelle and ouerflowe in the loue and prayſe of God and exceadynge gladneſſe, ſo that I (euen beſydes my ſelues) ame rather heaued than do heaue to prayſe God. Euen as it chaunceth alſo vnto them that be endued wyth godly ſweteneſſe and ſprete: ſo that they fele more, than they can vtter and expreſſe wyth wordes. For it not mans worke to geue thankes vnto God wyth ioye. It is rather a ioyfull mynde, and the only worke of God, the whiche is not perceaued by vtteraunce, but by experience, as ſayeth Dauid in the .xxxiii. Pſalme: Tayſte and ſe how good the LORDE is, happy is the mā that truſteth in hym. He ſayeth fyrſte: Tayſte, and than ſe, becauſe he can not be knowen wythout a mans owne experience: wher vnto neuertheleſſe noman commeth, wythoute he do wholye and fullye truſte in God, whan he is into the depthe and anguyſhe:

and for thys cauſe doth he adde continently and ſayeth: Happy is the man that truſteth in hym. For ſuch one ſhall perceaue ye worke of God in hymſelfe, and by thys waye he ſhall come to the perceaueable ſweteneſſe, and therby come to all vnderſtandynge, and knowlege.
                  Now let vs marke & weye euery worde in order: The fyrſt is, My ſoule. Scripture dealeth man in thre partes, as Paule the fyrſt to the Teſſalonians the laſt Chapter ſayeth: The very God of peace, ſanctifye you thorow out. And I praye God that your whole ſprete, ſoule and body be kepte blameleſſe vnto the commynge of our LORDE. And euery one of theſe thre, wyth al the mā, is agayne dealte another waye in two, namely: the fleſhe, and the ſprete. The whyche particion is not of the nature, but of the beynge or properneſſe. That is to ſay: Nature path .iii. partes, namely: the ſprete, the ſoule, and the body, and all thre maye altogether, be ether good or bad, and is than called the ſprete and the fleſhe, wherof we wyll not ſpeake at thys tyme.
                  The fyrſt part (that is) the ſprete, is the mooſt excellente, the depeſt and the mooſte nobleſt parte of man, wherewyth he is apte

to vnderſtande incomprehenſible, inuiſible and eternall thynges: and to be ſhorte, it is the houſe wherin fayth and ye worde of God are conteyned, wherof Dauid ſpeaketh in ye L. pſalme ſayenge: LORDE renewe a ryght ſprete in myne intrayles, that is, a ſtrayght and not bowed fayth. And agayn in ye .lxxvii. pſal. ſpeakyng of the vnfaythful, he ſayeth: A frowarde & ouerthwart generaciō, a generacion that ſet not theyr harte aryght, & whoſe ſprete was not true towarde God.
                  The ſeconde part, the ſoule; is euen the ſame ſprete after the nature, but after another operaciō. Namely, in that it quyckeneth the body and worketh by the ſame, and is oftentymes taken in ſcripture for lyfe. For the ſprete maye lyue well ynough wythout the body, but ſo maye not the body. Thys parte ſe we alſo that euen as we ſlepe it doth lyue and worke wythout ony ceaſſynge. And hys cōdicion or properte is not to perceaue thinges that be incomprehenſible, but ſuche, as reaſon can haue knowlege of and meaſure: And reaſon is the chefe lyght in thys houſe. Yee wythout the ſprete beynge lyghtened wyth fayth, or a greater lyght do rule & gyde thys lyght of reaſon, it can not be wythoute errour: for it is to vyle, to beare ony ſwynge

in godly buſyneſſe. Vnto theſe two partes doth ſcripture attribute much: but chefelye wyſedome and knowlege: wyſedome vnto ye ſprete, and knowlege vnto the ſoule. Beſydes theſe attributeth it alſo, hate, loue, pleaſure, lothſomnes, and ſuch lyke.
                  The thyrde is the body wyth hys membres, whoſe workes are mere exercyſe & vſe of ſuch thynges as the ſoule knoweth, and ye ſprete doth beleue. And to confirme thys by a wytneſſe of the ſcripture: Moſes made a Tabernacle with a threfolde and ſeuerall manſion: The fyrſt was called Sanctū ſanctorum, in the which God dwelled, and this had no lyght. The ſecond was called Sanctum, wherin was the candelſticke wyth the ſeuen ſhaftes and lampes. The thyrde was called the forecourte, whych was vnder the open ſkye, and bare to the Sonne beames. In thys fygure is euery Chriſten man featly deſcribed: For hys ſprete is ye Sanctū ſāctorū, ye is, the mooſt holy, ye dwellyng of God in a ſecrete & (as a mā myght ſay) in a darke fayth: for he beleueth it yt he cā not perceaue with his eyeſyght, nother feleth, nor yet doth comprehende. The Soule is the Sanctum, (that is ye holy) there be the .vii. lampes, that is, all maner of vnderſtandynge, ye differēce and knowlege of corporal & viſible thynges.

The bodye is the forecourte, whych is bare to euery man, ſo that they maye ſe what he doth, and how he lyueth.
                  Therfore now prayeth Paule & ſayeth: The very God of peace ſanctifye you thorowout. Not only in one parte; but thorowe out, that the ſprete, ſoule, bodye, and altogether be holy. Here were many thynges to be ſpoken, of the cauſe of thys prayer, but I wyl brefely rehearſe ſome of them: Yf the ſprete be not holy, ther ſhall nothynge els be holy. Than is the mooſt ieoperdy and buſyneſſe in the holyneſſe of the ſprete, whych conſyſteth only in a pure fayth: that is, yf ye ſprete be not combred wyth comprehenſible thynges, as it is ſayd. In the meane tyme than come falſe teachers, whych entyſe the ſprete forth of it, whan the one ſeketh to be ryghteous by theſe workes, another by that waye and maner. Yf the ſprete be not here wel prouyded and wyſe, then falleth it out and followeth, and cōmeth to leane vpon outward workes & coſtumes, whereby it imagineth to be ſaued. Lo ſo ſoone is fayth loſt, & the ſprete dead before God.
                  Vpon thys grewe ſectes and orders, ſo that ye one becōmeth a Charterhouſe mōke, another a Grayfrere: the one endeuoureth

to be ſaued wyth faſtyng, ye other wyth prayenge, & another by this maner & faſhiō: one by this & another by ye worke procure to flye euerlaſtynge damnacion. And yet are they all euen but mēs inuēcions, euē ſuch as one mans choſynge hath foūded. Reade therof ye treatyſe of orders & ſectes. Nother are they commaunded by God, but inuented by mē: aboute the whych the vayne ianglers haue no reſpecte of fayth, but teach alwaye the cō
                     fidence of workes, ſo longe tyll they be at variaunce wythin themſelues: Euery mā wyl be neareſt the marke, & deſpyſe the other, as our obſeruaūtes do nowe a dayes ſwell and heaue thēſelues. Agaynſt theſe workers and good men in ſyght, or rather hypocrites doth Paule praye, ſayeng: that God is ye God of peace, of whom theſe varienge hypocrites, & haters of peace are not partakers, nor hauynge hym, can holde ye ſame, wythout they byd farewell theyr ſtatutes, rules & ceremonies, & be all one mynded in fayth & ſprete, knowlegynge that workes cauſe variaunce, ſynne & diſſencion, & onely fayth maketh honeſt, one mynded & peaceable mē, as wytneſſeth the .lxvii. Pſal, ſayenge: He is the God yt maketh mē to be of one mynde in ye houſe. And agayne in ye .C.xxxii. Pſalme: Beholde

                        〈2 pages missing〉
                     
                     
Euen ſo ſheweth Mary wherof hyr ſonge of prayſe ſhall ſynge and treate, namely: of the renowmed & excellent workes of God, the comforte of our fayth, to cōforte ye lowly and to fraye all the hygheſt of the earth. And to theſe thre vſes or cōmodities is it neceſſarye for me to directe thys virgyns ſonge of prayſe, that ſhe haue not ſonge it only to herſelfe, but to vs all, that we ſhulde coūterfayt her. Nother is it poſſible that ony man ether ſhulde be afrayed, or receaue conſolaciō out of ſo great workes of God, wythout he not onely beleue that God can & knoweth to do great thynges, but alſo he muſt beleue that he wyl do them, and hath pleaſure in doynge them. Nother is it ynough to beleue yt God wyll do great thynges wyth other, and not wyth you, and by thys meanes to auoyde your ſelues from the workes of God. Euen as they do, whych beynge in proſperite or ſet in authorite, feare not God: and they that be feblemynded tremble and be abaſhed of hym in theyr aduerſyte. For ſuch fayth is no thynge and euen dead, lyke vnto an opinion cōceaued of ſome tale. But ye muſt ſet hys wyl ſurely & ſtedfaſtly afore your eyes, thynkyng wythin your mynde yt he both wyl now & hereafter alſo do great thynges wyth you.

Thys fayth is lyuely, growynge, pearſynge through and chaungynge a man, and makynge hym euen a newe creature: and cō
                     pelleth hym to feare, yf he be hygh: and conceaue conſolacion, yf he be lowly. Yee the hygher he is, the more ought he to feare: and the lower he is, to haue the more conſolacion, the whiche none other fayth doth. But what muſt he do in extreme neceſſite, or daunger of death? Surely than muſte he not onlye beleue that God can, and knoweth how to helpe hym, but alſo that he wyl helpe hym: where a ſtraunge and an vnſpeakeable thynge muſt be done, namelye, that he delyuered from the death euerlaſtynge, do becōme the chylde of ſaluacion, & the ſonne and heyre of God. Thys fayth (as wytneſſeth Chriſte hymſelfe) is able to do all thynges. Thys fayth doth abyde, and cōmeth to the knowlege of the godly workes, from thence into the loue of God, and forthe from thence into the prayſynge and thankynge of God: ſo that a man doth than make much of God, and conceaue a good opinion of hym.
                  For God in his nature is not magnifyed of vs, ſeynge he is immutable, but in oure knowlege and mynde: that is, yf we

holde muche of hym, or ſet muche by hym, ſpecially for hys godneſſe and mercy. For thys cauſe doth not the bleſſed mother ſay: My voyce, my mouthe, myne handes, my thoughtes, nor my reaſon and wyll do magnifye the LORDE, (for ther are manye one, that prayſe God wyth loude voyce, prayſynge and preachynge hym with preciouſe and godlye wordes, ſpeakynge, diſputynge, wrytynge and payntynge muche of hym, and alſo many that haue greate meditacions, and by the gyde of reaſon haue greate ſearchynges of hym: fynally ther are ſome that wyth fayned religion and intente make muche of hym.) but ſhe ſayeth of thys wyſe: My ſoule magnifyeth God, (that is) my whole lyfe, ſenſes, and powers haue a greate opinion of God: ſo that as though ſhe were rauyſhed vp to hym, ſhe felte ſome rayſynge and rauyſhynge in hys goodneſſe, the whiche the verſe followynge doth declare. Of thys wyſe ſe we alſo, that yf ony man doth vs good, that euen all our wyttes be moued and bended to hym, ſo that we ſaye Oh how greate and good opinion do I conceaue of thys man? And euen thys is the verye ſygnifycacion of the ſayenge: My ſoule magnifyeth the Lorde.
                     
Howe muche more ſhall ſuche lyuelye ſtearynge be cauſed, what tyme as we perceaue the goodneſſe of God, the whyche is verye greate in hys workes, ſo that euen wordes and thoughtes ſhal fayle, and the whole lyfe and ſoule ſhall be neceſſarelye ſteared, and euen as though all that is quycke and lyuely in vs wolde ſynge and prayſe God.
                  Now are ther two falſe ſpretes, whiche can not ſynge the Magnificat aryght: The fyrſte that prayſe not God before he haue fyrſte done them good, as Dauid ſayeth: They ſhall prayſe the whan than haſt done good vnto them. Theſe ſeme to prayſe God very earneſtly, but ſeynge they neuer wyll ſuffre the depth, the makynge lowe,, and ſubduynge, they can neuer fele and perceaue ye ryght wayes of the LORDE, and ſo conſequently nother loue nor prayſe God truly. Hereby commeth it that the worlde now a dayes is full of diuine ſeruices (as they call them) and laudes, wyth ſyngynge, preachynge, playenge on the organes and other inſtrumentes of muſike: Yee and this ſonge of prayſe called Magnificat alſo. But thys is to be pytyed, namely, that ſo precious a ſonge is handled ſo vnfrutefully & wythoute pyth

of vs, the which we do not ſynge, wythoute all thynges go well wyth vs: for yf ony myſchaunce do happen vnto vs, than hath oure ſyngynge an ende, nother is ther ony regarde or eſtimacion more of God, thynkynge that nother he can nor wyll worke wyth vs, and therfore haue both ſyngynge, and the Magnificat alſo done wyth vs.
                  The other be yet more peryllous, which leane to the other ſyde, the which be proude of the gyftes of God, and do not thanke the pure wyll of God for it, wyllyng parte both of the prayſe and hygh eſtimacion to be aſcribed vnto themſelues. Such wyll be ſene aboue other, and beholdyng the great good that God hathe done wyth them, ſtomble thereat, vſynge it as theyr owne, auaūcyng and heauynge themſelues aboue ſuche as haue not thoſe gyftes, as though they were ſome ſtraunge or peculiare thynge. Thys veryly is a brykle and yeoperdous hauen for ſhyppes, it is a daungerous eſtate. The gyftes of God be ſuche that they make men proude & to ſtande in theyr owne conceate and opinion: and therfore it is requyred that the laſte worde be conſydered, namely, the Lorde. For Mary ſayethe not: My ſoule magnifyeth herſelfe, or ſetteth greate

pryce by herſefe, yee ſhe wold haue nothyng to be holden of her: but ſhe doth exalte and lyfte vp God only, vnto hym ſhe geueth glory, robbynge herſelfe thereof, and aſcribeth and referreth all thynges vnto hym. And though ſhe perceaued the mooſt plenteous workes of God in herſelfe, yet was ſhe of that mynde and abode therin, that ſhe dyd not exalte herſelfe aboue the mooſt vyleſt and pooreſte man on earth: and yf ſhe had done ſo, than hadde ſhe fallen wyth Lucifer into the loweſt bottome of hell.
                  Nother hath ſhe thought otherwyſe than yf ſuche goodneſſe of God hadde happened vnto another handmayden, ſhe wold haue ben euen as wel content, & wyſh it her ſo well, as herſelfe: yee ſhe hath coūted herſelfe vnworthy, & al other worthy of ſuch honoure, nother wold ſhe finally haue ben miſcontent yf God takynge agayn frō her ſuch gyftes, had geuen them vnto another in hyr preſence. So lytell dyd ſhe drawe all thys to herſelfe, and left Gods gyftes fre, whole and proper to hymſelfe, vſynge herſelfe as a glad hoſpitall and a gladde ooſteſſe of ſuche a geſte: and therfore hath ſhe alſo kepte it foreuer. Lo thys is ſayde to magnifye God, of thys wyſe to haue a great opinion and

hyghe eſtimacion of hym, and of vs nothynge.
                  Hereby now is it euident in what greate yeopardy of fallynge and ſynnynge ſhe was, ſo that it is no leſſe maruayll how ſhe dyd ſo refrayne herſelfe that ſhe dyd not pryde and ſwell for the exceadynge plentye of goodes, nother dyd aſcribe ought to herſelfe: than that ſhe dyd receaue them. Thynkeſt thou not that to be a wonderous harte? She ſeyeth herſelfe a mother of God, excited farre aboue all men: yet neuertheleſſe doth ſhe remayne in that lowlyneſſe, ſimplicite, vpryghtneſſe and courteouſy that ſhe hath not counted the leeſt handmayden to be vnder her. O we mooſt wretches, whome yf a fewe goodes, a lytle authorite or honoure, or a lytle more bewty than another do befall can not counte vs equal with them of the lower ſorte: nother cā we make an ende of ſuche opinion and ſtandynge in oure owne conceate: what wolde we do yf we had great and hygh gyftes?
                  Wherfore God letteth vs remayne ſtyll in pouerte and wantynge, becauſe we kepe not hys bewtyfull goodes vndefyled, & can vſe vs as we dyd before we dyd receaue them. But we let oure myndes increaſe

or decreaſe, as the goodes ether growe or minyſh. But the harte of the virgine Mary remayneth euer ſtedfaſte in one mynde and equalite, ſhe letteth God worke in her accordynge to hys wyll and pleaſure, takynge therby nomore ſaue an earneſt conſolacion, ioye and truſte to Godwarde, and euen ſo ought we to do alſo: for that were truely to ſynge the Magnificat.
                  
               
               
                  
                     And my ſprete reioyceth in God my Saueoure.
                  
                  What the ſprete be, haue we ſhewed a lytle before, namely, it that perceaueth thynges incomprehenſible by fayth. And therfore ſhe calleth God hyr Saueoure or ſauynge health, the whiche fayth ſhe had conceaued by the worke that God declared to her. And verely ſhe begynneth after a comly order in that ſhe calleth God fyrſte hyr LORDE, and than hyr Saueoure, and fyrſte hyr Saueoure before ſhe rehearſe his workes. Where wyth ſhe teacheth vs, howe after a ryghte order we oughte to loue and to thanke God onlye and purely, nother ſeke ought of oure owne. Nowe doth he loue and thanke God purely, ſyncerelye and truely, whyche prayſeth hym for none

other cauſe, ſaue that he is good: ether beholdeth noughte in hym, but only hys bare goodneſſe, and in the ſame only he hath hys ioye and delyte. And thys is the hygheſt and mooſt fayreſt maner to loue & prayſe God, which agreeth very well vnto ſuch an excellente and demure ſprete, as the holy virgins is.
                  The vncleane and frowarde louers, which are nothynge but vſurers, ſekynge in God that is theyr owne, ſuche nother loue nor prayſe hys bare goodneſſe. For they do beholde themſelues, countynge only howe good God be to them, that is, howe muche he doth declare hys goodneſſe towarde thē and doth well by them, euē that they do fele it: the whiche do alſo conceaue greate and hyghe thynges in theyr myndes of hym, and ioyfully do ſynge of hym and prayſe hym, as longe as they fele the benefites of God. But whan God doth hyde hymſelfe, or withdraweth a lytle the beames of his goodneſſe, ſo that they ſeme bare and banyſhed, than hath the loue and prayſe an ende, nother can they loue or prayſe the bare and vnfeleable goodneſſe hydde in God: whereby they declare, yt theyr ſprete dyd not reioyce in God theyr Saueoure, & that there was

no true loue, no prayſe of the bare goodneſſe of God, but that they delyted more in the ſauynge health, than in the Saueoure, in the gyftes thā in the geuer, in ye creatures more then in the creatoure. Nother can they remayne of one mynde in plentyfulneſſe and in ſcarſeneſſe, in abundaunce of goodes and in wantynge the ſame, in ryches and pouerte: contrary to ſaynt Paule, whych ſayde to the Philippians the .iiii. Chapter: I haue learned in whatſoeuer eſtate I am, therwith to be contente. I can be lowe and I can be hygh. Euery where and in all thynges I am mete, both to be full, & to be hungry: to haue plenty, and to ſuffre nede. I can do al thynges thorow Chriſt, whych ſtrengtheth me. Of thys thynge ſpeaketh the .xlviii. Pſalme on thys wyſe: He ſhall ſpeake good of the, ſo longe as thou doeſt hym good. As though he wolde ſaye: He ſeketh his, and not thyne. Yf they had receaued pleaſure and riches of thyne hande, thou ſhuldeſt be lytle ſet by of them, they wold make lytle of the. As Chriſt alſo ſayd Ioh. vi. vnto them that ſought hym Verely, verely I ſaye vnto you: Ye ſeke me not becauſe ye ſawe the tokens, but becauſe ye dyd eate of the loaues and were fylled. Suche vncleane falſe ſpretes ſtayne and defyle

all Gods gyftes, lettynge hym to geue more, and to worke more luckelye wyth them. Wherof let vs heare a proper enſample:
                  A certayne honeſt woman and fearyng God dyd ſe .iii. virgins ſyttyng by an altare, and at maſſynge tyme, a goodly boye lepte from the altare vnto ye fyrſt virgyne, vſynge her very frendly, claſpynge her aboute the necke, and ſmylynge vpon her. After that wente he to the ſeconde, but he dyd not behaue hymſelfe ſo familiarly to her, neuertheleſſe he lyfte vp hyr vayle, and ſmyled vpon her. Vnto the thyrde he ſhewed no ſygne of loue at al, but bet her on the face, haled her by the heere, trode her wyth hys fete, & vſed her very vncourteouſly: and ſodenly lepte agayne vpon the altare, & vanyſhed awaye.
                  Then was the interpretacion of that ſyght ſhewed vnto the woman. The fyrſte virgyne ſignifieth the vnclenly ſpretes, ſekynge theyr owne, vnto whome God muſte geue many good thynges, and rather accomplyſh theyr mynde and wyll, then hys owne, whyche wyll wante nothynge, and euer haue comforte and pleaſure of God, not beynge ſuffiſed wyth the goodneſſe of God. The ſecond ſygnifieth thoſe ſpretes, whych

haue begonne to ſerue God, and can ſuffre ſome ſcarceneſſe, yet neuertheleſſe are not wythout loue of themſelues and theyr profyte. Vnto them muſte he ſometyme ſhewe a ſmylynge countenaunce, lettynge them aſſaye hys goodneſſe, that thereby they myght learne to loue hys bare goodneſſe, and hyghly to prayſe it. The thyrde virgine, poore, wretched and cleane forſaken hath nothyng but myſery & ſmarte, ſhe ſeketh no profyt ſhe is content therwyth yt God is good, though ſhe ſhulde neuer aſſaye it (the whych neuertheleſſe can not be) the ſame abydeth of one faſhion and of both the ſydes, ether to loue or to prayſe ye goodneſſe of God, as wel whā it is felt, as whā it is not felt: nother doth ſhe fal vpon ye goodes whā they fal to her, nor falleth frō thē whā they fayle. And this is ye true ſpouſe of Chriſte, whych ſayeth to hym: I wyll not it that thyne is, but thyſelfe: I loue the no better whyle all thynges go proſperouſly, than I do hate the whyle it goeth cō
                     trary wyth me.
                  Wyth ſuch maner of ſpretes is it fulfylled that is wrytten: Thou ſhalte not turne from the ryghte waye of God, nother to the ryght, nor to the left hande. That is, Ye ſhal loue & prayſe god aryght & ſtraightly, nother

bended to your ſelues, nor youre profytes. Suche ſprete had Dauid, whan he beynge dryuen from Ieruſalem by hys ſonne Abſalon, was of that mynde▪ that he beynge caſt awaye for euer, wolde neuer loke for to come agayne, nother in the kyngdome, nor in the fauoure of God, ſo that he ſayde (as it is wrytten in the ſeconde boke of Samuel the fyftenth Chapter:) Yf I ſhal fynde grace before the LORDE, he ſhall fetch me agayne, and let me ſe it (meanynge the Arke) and the houſe of it. But yf he ſaye thus: I haue no pleaſure to the, beholde, here am I, let hym do wyth me as it pleaſeth hym. O what a pure ſprete was that, whych dyd not ceaſſe to loue, prayſe and to obey the pleaſure of God, no not in extreme neceſſite. Suche ſprete alſo doth the holy mother and virgine Marye ſhewe, whan ſhe ebbynge and flowynge in the myddeſt of al ouerflowynge and excellent goodes dyd not ſtomble nor fall at them, nother ſeketh hyr owne, but kepeth hyr ſprete pure and wythout blame in the loue and prayſe of the mere goodneſſe of God, glad and wyllynge to take in good worth, yf God wyll ſpoyle her of the ſame agayne, and leaue her a poore, naked and faylynge ſprete.
                  
                     Moreouer as it is more ieopardous to refrayne hymſelfe in wealth, ryches & great worſhips, than in pouerte, ſhame and wretchedneſſe, ſeynge ryches myniſtre great occaſion to wyckedneſſe: euen ſo is thys pure and wonderfull ſprete of Mary ſo muche more to be allowed, that ſhe beynge endued wyth ſo exceadyng hygh honoures, doth not for all them ſet vp hyr combe, behauyng her ſelfe as though ſhe ſawe it not, remaynynge ſtrayght & ryght in the hygh waye, leanynge to the goodneſſe of God only, the whych ſhe nother feleth nor ſeyth, ſettynge lytle ſtore by ſuch goodes as ſhe feleth, nor taking pleaſure in them, nother ſekynge it that is hyr owne, ſo that out of a true and ryght fundament ſhe doth ſynge: My ſprete reioyceth in God my Saueour. It is truly a ſpret that ſpryngeth of fayth only, and reioyceth not for the goods of God whych the bleſſed virgine dyd fele, but for God onely, whom ſhe felte not, and is glad of hyr ſaluacion, whych ſhe now knewe by fayth. Theſe lo are the true, lowly, empty, and hungry ſpretes, of ye whych we ſhall ſhortly ſpeake.
                  By thys now maye we knowe & iudge how ful thys preſent worlde is of falſe preachers, and ſayntes, whych do beate in much

of good workes vnto the ſymple people. And though ther be fewe that preach earneſtlye the very thynge, namely, how good workes ought to be done, (for many one do preache mans tradicions and workes, that they thē
                     ſelues haue inuented & ſet vp) yet are many of thē (& that alas of ye beſt of them) ſo farre wyde out of the ſtrayght and ryghte waye, that they dryue the commune people alway vpon the ryght hande. For they teach good workes and the wholſome lyuynge, not for the mere goodneſſe of God, but for theyr auauntage. For yf ther were no heauen nor no hell, and yf they loked for no grace of the goodneſſe of God, they ſhulde ſoone leaue the goodes of God vnloued and vnprayſed. Thoſe are ſekers of themſelues, hyrelinges, bondmen, ſtraungers and not heyres, which make an Idoll of themſelues, and aſke loue and prayſe of God, wyllyng God to do that vnto them, that they neceſſarylye ſhulde do vnto hym. They haue no ſprete. Nother is God theyr Saueoure, but Gods gyftes ſaue them, where wyth he muſte ſerue them as a ſeruaunte. They be the chylderen of Iſraell, vnto whom it ſuffiſed not to be fedde wyth heauenly Manna, but luſted alſo after fleſhe, onyons and garlyke: and as they peryſhed,

and attayned not the londe of promyſe, ſo ſhall ſuch falſe ſpretes do alſo.
                  Now (God amende it) is all the worlde, all cloyſters and temples full of ſuche kynde of men, whyche all throughe falſe, wycked and croked ſpretes do walke, driue, chaſe and heaue good workes ſo hygh, that finally they imagyn to deſerue heauen by them: where before all thynges the goodneſſe of God ſhulde haue bene declared. And it became vs to knowe, that lyke as God ſaued vs and made vs happye, wythout ony of oure meryte or workynge: ſo lykewyſe ſhulde we ſeke to worke wythout reſpecte of all profyte or rewarde, workynge good onely for the goodneſſe of God, ſekynge nothinge but that is pleaſynge to hym: not hauynge an eye to the rewarde, whyche of hys owne ſwynge ſhall befall vnto vs, though we do not ſeke nor loke for it. For it can not be but the rewarde muſte followe vs yf we do worke of pure and vpryghte ſprete, wythout lokynge for rewarde or profyte. God refuſeth a ſprete that ſeketh hys owne profyte, nother wyll he euer geue hym ony rewarde. Moreouer, as a chylde ſerueth hys father gladly and frely as an heyre, only for ye fathers wyl: (for yf he ſerueth him only

for the goodes and heretage, he is vnkynde, and worthye to be diſhereted:) euen ſo muſte they do that knowlege Chriſte to be theyr father and brother.
               
               
                  
                     For he hath loked vpon the lovve degre of hys handmayden. Beholde, from hence forth ſhall all generacions call me bleſſed.
                  
                  The worde lowe degre haue ſome drawen to humilite, as though the holy virgine had referred ought to herſelfe, of hyr honeſt behaueoure, iuſtice and worke, and dyd reioyce therin: Whereby it is come that ſome prelates, and ſpecially the Antichriſtes do call themſelues humiles or lowly, whych is farre wyde from the truth. For in the ſyghte of God can no mā boaſt of ony good thynge wythout ſynne and damnacion. Before him muſt a man reioyce only of hys pure goodneſſe and grace ſhewed vnto vs vnworthy, that not oures, but Gods loue and prayſe remayne in vs, & kepe vs: whych thynge Salomon doth alſo teach Pro. xxv. ſayenge: Put not forth thyſelfe in ye preſence of ye kynge, & preaſſe not in the place of great mē. Better it is that it be ſayde vnto the: Come vp hether, thā thou to be ſet downe in the preſēce

of the prynce. How ſhulde than ſuch boaſt & preſumpcion be aſcribed vnto thys chaſte virgine, that ſhe ſhulde auaunce hyr humylite in the ſyght of God, which is the mooſt worthyeſt of all vertue? Nother doth onye man thynke or boaſte hymſelfe to be lowly, wythout he be the mooſte proudeſt. Only God doth knowe, iudge and open the lowe degre or lowlyneſſe, ſo that mā neuer knoweth leſſe of it, than whan he is mooſt lowly.
                  The vſe of ſcripture is to call Humiliare to caſt downe, to preaſſe downe and to brynge to nought: wherfore Chriſten men alſo in ſome place of the ſcripture are called poore, vyle and brought lowe, as in the .C.xiiii. Pſalme: I was brought downe, & he helped me. Humilite than is nothynge ſaue a deſpyſed, vyle, depreſſed or caſt down thynge or eſtate: of the which kynde are the nedy, ſycke, hongry, thyrſty, preſoners, troubled & dyenge creatures: as Iob whā he was proued, Dauid as he was chaced & dryuen out of hys realme, and Chriſte wyth all the true Chriſtians in theyr nede. And thys is the depth, whereof we haue ſpoken before, namely: that the eyes of the LORDE beholde the depthes, but mans eyen loke only in the heyghte: that is, the outwarde appearaunce

and ſhynynge eſtate or condicion. And for this cauſe is Ieruſalem called a citie where vpon Gods eyen do beholde. After thys maner lyeth the Chriſten congregaciō or church in the depth, and is of no reputation before the worlde: wherfore God doth loke vpon it, and wendeth hys ſyghte alway vpon the ſame, as Dauid wytneſſeth in the xxxi. Pſalme, ſpeakynge in the perſone of God: I wyll enfourme the and ſhew the the waye wherein thou ſhalt go, I wyll faſten myn eyes vpon the.
                  Of lyke faſhion ſpeaketh. Paule .i. Corin. i. ſayenge: That folyſh is before the worlde hath God choſen, that he myght confounde the wyſe: and that weake is before ye worlde hath God choſen, that he myght confounde the myghty: and the vyle and deſpyſed before the worlde hath God choſen, yee and that which is nothynge, that he myghte deſtroy that, whiche is ought, that no fleſhe ſhulde reioyce in hys preſēce. By thys meanes maketh God the worlde folyſh, with all hys wyſedome and ſtrengthe, and geueth another wyſedome and power. Seyng than that thys is the mynd of God, to loke downwarde, and to the thynges that are nothyng therfore haue I englyſhed ye word Humilitas
                     
for a thynge of no price or regarde, ſo that thys be the mynde of Mary: God hath wended his eyen vpon me that ame a poore, vyle and a mayden of no regarde, which myghte eaſyly haue founde ryche, renowned, noble quenes and of great lynage, ether myght he haue choſen ye doughters of prynces & great eſtates, yee he myght haue choſen ye doughters of Annas or Cayphas rulers of thys cō
                     try: But he hath faſtened vpon me the eyes of hys mere goodneſſe, and vſed me that ame ſo vyle and deſpyſed an handmayden, becauſe none ſhulde boaſte herſelfe to haue ben worthy of ſuch an office: & I alſo muſte nedes graunte that it is only of pure grace and goodneſſe that ſuch doth happē vnto me and not for my merites or worthyneſſe, wherof I ame bare.
                  Thus haue we now ſufficiently ſhewed here aboue, how ye holy virgine vnloked for is come to thys honoure, out of a deſpyſed eſtate: and how God hath ſo graciouſly loked vpon her. And for thys chaunce ſhe doth not boaſt & auaunce hyr worthyneſſe or vnworthynes: but only ſhe reioyceth of ye ſyght of God, which is ſo bounteous & gracious, yt he hath loked vpō ſo ſlender a maydē, & that ſo greatly, honorouſly and worſhypfully.

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
Wherfore they that ſaye ſhe dyd not auaūce hyr virginite, but hyr lowlyneſſe, do her iniury. For ſhe nother dyd auaunce hyr virginite, nor lowlyneſſe, but the only, the godly and gracious ſyghte of God. Wherfore ther is no pyth or wayghte in the worde lovve degre, but in the worde he hath loked. For hyr ſurrendrynge is not to be prayſed and commended, but the lokyng of God vpon her. Euen as yf a noble prince ſhulde reach hys hande vnto a wretched begger, ye beggers hande is not to be alowed therfore, but the prynces gentlyneſſe and familiarite.
                  But that the wronge opinion maye be auoyded, and the true lowlyneſſe maye be knowen from the fayned, we wyll make a lytle digreſſion, and treate of humilite or lowlyneſſe: for many one haue erred not a lytle therin.
                  
                     Humilite do we cal communely a wyl to ſmal and deſpyſed thynges. Now are ther many that brynge water to the wel, namely they, that alwaye cōbre theyr myndes wyth vyle clothyng, perſons outwarde geſtures, townes, wordes and places, vpon them do they thynke, in them is theyr conuerſacion, but to that intente, that by theſame they

myght be counted and eſtimed greate, rych, learned, holy, yee alſo God, as ſuch that loue to be conuerſaunte in lowly thynges. But yf they knewe, mē dyd not ſet thereby, they wolde ryght ſoone leaue them. Thys is a fayned lowlyneſſe, for theyr wycked eye beholdeth nought ſaue the rewarde, auayle and prayſe of humilite. Nother beholde they the vyle thynges, not lokynge for rewarde and profite, nomore than a kooke doth to rooſt meate that doth not droppe: wherfore whan the rewarde and prayſe do nomore appeare, than hath humilite done with thē. Such haue no affection to the vyleneſſe, becauſe they be not of one harte and mynde in vyle thynges, they haue only the thoughtes, handes, mouth, clothynge and outward behaueoure in vyleneſſe, but theyr harte loketh to hygh thynges, to the which they do imagine to come: and ſuch are they that counte themſelues lowly holy ſayntes.
                  They that be lowly in dede, turne not theyr eyen to the rewarde and prayſe of humilite, but wt a ſimpel hart do they beholde the vyle thynges, beynge glad to be occupied in theſame, nother do they at ony tyme perceaue theyr lowlyneſſe. Here ſpryngeth the water out of the fountayne, here followeth

it of hys owne ſwynge, wherfore they do vſe vyle veſtures, geſtures, wordes, places and perſones, though they do euery where ſhone gorgious and hyghe thynges: which thynge Dauid alſo wytneſſeth in the .C.xxix. Pſal. ſayenge: LORDE I ame not hygh mynded, I haue no proude lokes. &c. And Iob in the .xxii. chapter: Whoſo humbleth hymſelfe, ſhalbe ſet vp: and whoſo loketh mekely, ſhalbe healed. Hereby commeth that vnto ſuch doth honoure befal vnwares, and theyr heauynge vp wythoute foreknowlege or deliberacion. For they were content wyth theyr lowe eſtate and ſimple condicion, nother thought they once vpon hygh thynges. But ye fayned lowly maruayle greatly that theyr exaltacion & honoure taryeth ſo longe, nother is theyr falſe and fayned pryde contente with theyr vyle condicion, but ſecretly cōſydereth hygher eſtates in theyr myndes.
                  Therfore dyd I ſaye that true humilite or lowlynes doth not at ony tyme perceaue that ſhe is lowly, (for yf ſhe dyd knowe it, ſhe wolde be proude wyth the ſyghte of ſo greate a vertue) but wyth harte, mynde and all hyr wyttes is ſhe pyght vpon ſleghte and lowly thynges, whiche alwaye preſente themſelues to hyr ſyghte. Theſe are hyr

images, wherein ſhe hath hyr conuerſacion and paſtyme: and as lōge as ſhe hath them in ſyghte, ſo longe can not ſhe beholde herſelfe nor be combred with herſelfe: much leſſe be rauyſhed and haue pleaſure in the contemplacion and ſyghte of hygh and greate thynges, or geue hyr mynde therto. For thys cauſe than muſt the honoure and dignite be fall vnto her vnwares, & fynde her in thoughtes cleue contrary to honoures and dignityes: for after thys maner doth Luke ſaye, that the Angels gretynge was ſtraunge vnto the virgine, for it came ſodenly and vnloked for. Yf theſame gretynge hadde chaunced vnto Cayphas doughter, ſhe wolde not haue thought: What maner of gretynge is thys, but wolde ſoone haue accepted it, and wolde haue ſayde wythin herſelfe: Ah howe well and happely doth thys befall?
                  And agayne fayned lowlyneſſe doth neuer know that ſhe is proud: for yf ſhe dyd, ſhe ſhulde quickely be refrayned wyth the ſyght of the haynous faute, but ſhe faſteneth hyr harte, mynde and thoughte vpon hyghe thynges, the whyche ſhe hath in ſyght wythoute ceaſſynge. Theſe are hyr ymages, wherewyth ſhe is alwaye combred, and as longe as ſhe ſetteth hyr mynde on thē, ſhe cā
                     
nother beholde nor conſydre herſelfe. Wherfore the honoure commeth nother vnwares nor vnthought vpon, for it fyndeth thoughtes therto agreynge: but ſhame and enpoueryſhynge come vnloked for vnto ſuch: for they were mynded to ſayle with another & more luckelyer wynde.
                  For thys cauſe is it not good to learne lowlyneſſe after thys maner, that he haue in ſyghte and imagine vyle and deſpyſed thynges or perſons. Nother contrarywyſe waxeth ony man proude becauſe he ſeyeth hygh and greate thynges. The images are not to be auoyded, but the eyē
                     ▪ muſt be weened therefrom. As longe as we lyue vpon earth, we muſt lyue both wyth the hygh and lowe thynges or eſtates: but (as Chriſt ſayeth) the eye muſt be put out. Geneſis the .iii chapter ſayeth not Moſes, that Adam and Eue ſawe other thynges after the preuaricacion, thā they dyd ſe before it, but yt theyr eyen were opened, that they myght ſe theyr nakedneſſe, where as they were naked before alſo, and yet dyd not conſyder it. The quene Heſter dyd weare a verye coſtlye crowne vpon hyr heade, yet dyd it ſeme but a ſtayned cloth in hyr ſyght. Here were not the hygh images taken away from her, but

rather were ſet before her, as vnto a mooſte puiſſaunt quene, and no ſleyght or vyle thynges were before her: but the ſyght was wended therfrom, and hyr harte and mynde dyd not beholde the hye thynges and gloriouſe: Wherfore God wroughte alſo ſtraungely wyth her. After thys faſhion muſt not ye outwarde thynges be altered, but we muſt be altered in our mynde and wyttes: for thā ſhal we eaſely learne to deſpyſe and flye hyghe thynges, to ſet much by and to ſeke ſleyght & lowly thynges. For there is humilite or lowlyneſſe founde and ſtedfaſt for all chaūces, & yet neuer are ware of it. This is done with delyte and the harte remayneth alwaye one and of one faſhion, howſoeuer other thynges do befall or chaunge, ether to the heyghte or depth.
                  But (LORDE God) what pryde ſkoulketh vnder the vyleneſſe of clothynge, wordes and behaueoure? wherof the world now a dayes is full. The whych viſures and diſſemblers do ſo ſubmytte themſelues, yt they wyll be deſpyſed of no man: they do ſo flye honours, that they notwithſtandynge wyll be chaced therwyth: they do ſo ſhone hyghe thynges, yt neuertheleſſe they be not myſpraiſed, nor theyr poſſeſſions myniſhed, ye whych

they couet alwayes to haue of the beſt and pycked out. But thys virgine vttereth nothynge but hyr vyleneſſe, wherin ſhe lyued & abode wyllynglye, ſhe neuer coueted nor thought vpon honoure and heyght, nother dyd ſhe conſyder and behold hyr lowlyneſſe. This humilite is ſo fayre and precious, that ſhe can not abyde hyr owne countenaunce but that image is reſerued vnto the face of God, as wytneſſeth the .C.xii. Pſalme, ſayenge: Who is lyke vnto the LORDE oure God that hath hys dwellynge ſo hygh, which humbleth hymſelfe to beholde that is heauē and earth. For he that can beholde hys lowlyneſſe, the ſame can iudge hymſelfe worthy of eternal bleſſe, & ſo were Gods iudgement at an ende, ſeyng we know ſurely that God doth ſaue the lowlyones. Therfore muſte God reſerue and kepe the ſame for hymſelfe to knowe and to iudge, and hyde them from vs wyth the fence of exercyſe in lowly thynges, by beholdynge of the whych we alſo do forget ourſelues. To thys now ſerue many perſecucions, deathes & al kynde of trouble on earth, in ye which is trauayle & payne, ye wt thēwe may put out ye falſe & deceatful eye.
                  Thus is it euidēt vnto vs by thys word humilite or lowlyneſſe, that Mary the virgyne

was a deſpyſed, vyle, and a mayden of no eſtimacion, & in thys lowe degre to haue ſerued God, and not to haue knowen, that hyr low eſtate was much worth before God Whereby we are taught and cōforted, that though we ought wyllyngly be deſpyſed and brought low, yet ſhuld we not deſpayre therfore, as though God dyd hate vs: but rather truſt that he ſhalbe mercyful vnto vs. Only thys ſhal we beware, leſt we be not wyllyng ynough in thys ſubduyng & caſtyng downe, leſt oure wicked eye be to much open, and ſo deceaue vs wyth preuy lokynge vpon hyghe thynges, or ſearchynge out of our pleaſures, wherwyth the humilite or lowlyneſſe do peryſh. For what helpeth it ye dāned to be caſt downe to the nedermoſt & loweſt, ſeyng they do not ſuffre ye aduerſite gladly and wyth a good wyll? And agayne what hurteth it the angels to be hyghly exalted, ſeyng they conceaue no falſe luſt and preſumpcion therby?
                  Finally, to be ſhorte, thys verſe doth teach vs to know God truly, ſeynge it wytneſſeth that God doth behold lowly thynges and perſons. And he knoweth God aryghte, that knoweth yt he bēdeth hys eyen to ye lowly, as we haue ſufficiently declared: & of the ſame knowlege followeth the loue & truſt to

Godwarde, ſo that a man do yelde hymſelfe and followe hym wyllyngly. Of thys haue we a goodly place in the .ix. Chapter of Ieremy, ſayeng: Let not the wyſeman reioyce in hys wyſedome, nor the ſtronge man in hys ſtrength, nother the rych man in hys riches: But who ſo wyll reioyce, let hym reioyce in thys, that he knoweth and vnderſtādeth me. Thys doth Paule confirme in the .ii. epiſtle to the Corinthians the .xi. Chapter, ſayeng: Let hym that reioyceth, reioyce in ye 
                     LORD
                  
                  After than that the mother of God had in ſuch wyſe prayſed hir God and Saueour wyth a bare pure ſprete, & aſcribed none of the goodes to herſelfe, and therfore had ſōge truly vnto hym of hys goodneſſe: now dothe ſhe fynally and orderlye go to the prayſe of hys workes & goodes. For (as we haue ſayd before) we ought not to rūne headlynges to ye goodes of God, nother ought we to aſcribe and drawe them to vs: but by thē as by ſteppes we muſte pearſe vnto the author & cauſe of all goodneſſe, we muſt cleue vnto hym onely, and make much of hym. And after that prayſe and thanke hym in hys workes, wherin he hath ſhewed vs ſuche goodneſſe, that we maye truſte, loue and prayſe hym: ſo that hys workes are nothyng ſaue a great

occaſion to loue and to thanke ye mere goodneſſe that raygneth ouer vs.
                  She begynneth fyrſt wyth her ſelfe, and ſyngeth what God hath done for her, wherin ſhe teacheth vs two thynges: Fyrſt, muſte euery man marke diligently what God worketh wyth hym, more than all the workes yt he doth wyth other. For thy bleſſe conſyſteth not in that he worketh wyth other, but wyth the. As (Ihon the .xxi. Chapter) whan Peter ſayd of S. Ihon: LORDE, but what ſhall he do? Chriſt ſayd vnto hym: Yf I wyll that he tary tyll I come, what is that to the? Followe thou me. As thoughe he wolde ſaye: Ihons workes ſhall not auayle ye, thou muſt go to thy ſelfe, and take hede what I wyl do wyth the. Neuerthleſſe a great myſuſe of ſellynge good workes doth raygne in ye worlde now a dayes. For ſome preſumptuous ſpretes wyl helpe other, chefely ſuch as lyue and dye wythout Gods owne workynge: euē as though they had to many good workes. Where Paul .i. Corin. iii. ſayeth: that euery mā ſhalbe rewarded accordynge to his workes: ergo not after another mans workes.
                  It myght be ſuffred yf they dyd pray for other, or brought theyr workes as meanes & interceſſiōs to god. But ſeyng they come to

God therwyth, as wyth ſome gyfte or preſēt it is a wycked and haynous intent. And (that mooſt abominable is) they deale and geue theyr workes vnto other, the whych neuertheleſſe they knowe not howe acceptable they be vnto God. For God doth not beholde the workes, but the harte and fayth, by the whych he worketh wyth vs. Whereof they do not force, leanynge vpon ye workes only, wyth the whych they do deceaue themſelues and other alſo. And ſo farre is ye matter come, that they perſwade men that be at the poynte of death, to put on a freres rayment, ſayenge: that yf ony mā dye in ſo holy an habyte, al his ſynnes ſhalbe forgeuē hym, and get eternall bleſſe. Thus do they not only ſaue men wyth ſtraūge good workes, but alſo wyth ſtraunge garmentes. I thynke (yf ther were no hede taken therto) that the deuell wolde brynge ſuch men ſo farre, yt they wolde thynke to brynge the people to heauē wyth religious meates, dwellynge, and buryenge. Good LORDE how feleable is thys darkneſſe, namely: that a coole or religious abyte may iuſtify and ſaue a man? for what nedeth fayth than? Let vs thā become al freres, let vs all dye in frerely abites: & by that meanes ſhall cloth wante to make freres.

Beware, bewar of wolues, walkyng in ſuch ſhepes clothyng, for they do begyle the & tear the, & thynke that God doth worke with the, & thy ſaluacion, & that by the worke yt he worketh in the: nother put thy truſt in ony other as thou ſeyſt ye holy virgine Mary do here. And though thou doeſt vſe to thys the interceſſion of other, thou doeſt not euell: for we all ought to praye the one for the other. And no man ſhall truſt vnto other mēs workes, wythout the owne & proper workes of God: but wyth great diligēce take hede to thyſelfe & Gods workes, euen as though God & thou were one in heauē & earth, and though God dyd worke wyth noman but wyth the, and ſo forth loke vpon other mens workes alſo.
                  The ſecōd that Mary teacheth, is, that euery mā wyl be ye fyrſt in the prayſynge of God, & to recyte the workes done to hym, & after ye yrayſe hym alſo in other workes. After thys maner do we reade ye Paule & Barnabas dyd ſhewe vnto the apoſtles the actes that God wrought by thē: & agayne ye apoſtles ſhewed thē what God had wroughte by thē alſo. Lyke vnto this dyd they (in the laſt Chap. of Luke) ſhewyng ech other of ye reſurrecciō of ye 
                     LORD & appearyng to thē. Euen there doth finally begyn a cōmune ioye and

prayſe of God, wher euery one prayſeth the grace of another, and his mooſt of al, though he be vyler than another: nother doth he couete to be the chefe in the goodes, but in the loue and prayſe of God. For euery mā hath ynough of God, & hys mere goodneſſe, how ſlender that euer hys gyfte be, ſo ſymple an harte hath he. But the hypocrites, ſekynge theyr owne auayle loke a ſquynte and playe the luſkes: whych whan they ſe they be not the chefeſt nor beſt in the goodes, they murmure in ſteade of prayſe, and ſaye: that they be ether lyke or vnder other, lyke as they dyd wherof we reade Math. xx. that murmured agaynſt the huſbandman, not that he dyd thē wronge, but that he coūted the laſt lyke worthy of the dayes hyre wyth them.
                  After thys maner are ther many foūde that do not prayſe the goodneſſe of God, yf they ſe that they haue not receaued ſo much as Peter, or ony of the other ſayntes, ether thys or that holy man alyue on earth: thynkynge that yf God had geuen them ſo many good gyftes alſo as he hath geuen to other, they wolde prayſe and laude hym lykewyſe, ſettynge it lyght to be endued of God wyth ſuch goodes, as they do not perceaue, as be: the body, lyfe, reaſon, ſubſtaunce, honoures,

frendes, the ſeruice of the Sonne, wyth al other creatures. The which perſons, yf they had all the goodes that Mary had, yet wolde not they knowlege nor prayſe God in them, For as ſayeth Chriſte Luke .xvi. He that is faythfull in ye leeſt, is faythful alſo in much: and he that is vnryghteous in the leeſt, is vnryghteous alſo in muche. Therfore are not they worthy of the greate and much, becauſe they deſpyſe the ſmall or lytle. Yf they dyd prayſe God in the leeſt, they ſhuld haue abundauntly the greate: wherof the cauſe is they haue theyr ſyghte aboue them, and not vnder them. For yf they had theyr ſyght bowed downwarde, they ſhulde ſe ſome, which perchaunce haue not halfe ſo manye goodes and gyftes, and yet be at reſt and cō
                     tente, prayſynge God. A byrde hoppeth for ioye and ſyngeth yf it can, beynge contente wyth it that it poſſeſſeth, and murmureth not becauſe it can not ſpeake. A dogge leapeth and waggeth hys tayle, ſhewynge a ioyfull countenaunce, nother is he myſcontente that he wanteth reaſon. All maner of beaſtes are contente wyth theyr goodes, & ſerue God wyth theyr endeuoure & prayſe. But the onlye wycked and louynge it ſelfe eye of man is vnſatiable, nother doth it endeuoure

itſelfe to be ſaciate by reaſō of hys vnkyndneſſe and pryde, ſeynge it coueteth euer to be the chefeſt & beſt, preferred aboue other: nother wyll it prayſe and glorify God but rather loke for honoure of hym.
                  Of thys maner do we reade that in the tyme of the councell holden at Conſtaunce in Germany, two Cardinals rydynge vpon coſtlye mules ouer the feldes by the waye, dyd ſe a ſhepeherde ſtāde wepyng. The one of them a more meker mā and moued wyth pytie, wold not paſſe by hym that was ſo ſorowfull, approched to comforte hym, and aſked fyrſt what hym ayled. The ſhepeherde after he had wepte bytterly, and holden hys peace a greate whyle, ſo that the Cardinall was greued and ſorowfull alſo. At the laſte he ſhewed hym a tode and ſayde: For thys cauſe do I wepe, namely, that God hath ſhapen and created me ſo fayre a creature, and not lyke thys euell fauoured worme, and that I dyd neuer conſydre thys by myſelfe, nor thanked hym therfore. Of thys was the Cardinall ſo abaſhed, that he fell from hys mule, and was boren in the councell houſe, where he cryed and ſayde: O Auſtine howe truely was it ſayde of the: The vnlearned ryſe vp and take in the kyngdome of heauē,

but we wyth oure learnynge do wander in fleſh and bloude. Now do I thynke that the ſhepeherd was not ſo rych nor fayre, yet dyd he ſo hyghly & earneſtly conſyder the gyftes of God in hym, and rendre thankes therfore, that he dyd fynde more in hymſelfe, thā he coulde well attayne & perceaue with hys ſyghte.
                  The fyrſte worke of God towarde the holy virgine doth ſhe confeſſe to be the lokynge vpon her, the which alſo is the chefeſt, of the which al the reſte hange & flowe. For yf it be come ſo farre that God wende hys ſyght to ony man to beholde hym, that is nothynge but grace and mercy, and there muſt nedes followe all gyftes and workes. As we reade Gene. iiii. that God dyd loke vpon Abell and hys gyftes, and not ſo vpon Cayn nor hys offerynge. Of thys come the prayers cōmunely in the pſalter, that God wyll lyghten hys countenaunce vpon vs, and not hyde hys ſyghte, but directe it vpon vs, and ſuch lyke. And that ſhe doth thynke thys to be the chefeſt, ſhe doth ſufficientlye ſhewe, ſayeng: Lo, for thys beholdyng of me ſhall al chyldes chyldren call me bleſſed.
                  
                  Marke the wordes, ſhe ſayeth not ye hyr prayſes ſhall be ſpred abrode, ye hyr vertues

ſhalbe commended, that hyr virginite or humilite ſhalbe extolled, or that hyr excellente dedes ſhalbe ſonge and vttered wyth ſome ſonge or ballade, but ſhe doth only often repete and ſaye: that God hath loked vpō her, and that thereby ſhe ſhalbe called bleſſed. And that is to geue the honoure and prayſe to God ſo holyly and purely, that ther is no thynge more holy nor pure. And therefore poyntynge vpon the beholdynge or lokynge vpon of God, as wyth a fynger ſhe ſayeth: Beholde from hēce forth novv ſhall they call me bleſſed. That is, from the tyme that God hathe beholden my vyleneſſe, I ſhalbe called happy. Wherein not ſhe, but ye grace of God in her is prayſed: yee ſhe is made lytle, and maketh herſelfe lytle, whan ſhe ſayeth that hyr vyleneſſe is loked vpon of God. And for thys cauſe doth ſhe fyrſte auaūce hyr ſaluacion, before ſhe recyte the workes of God declared toward her, and attributeth the lokynge vpon hyr vyleneſſe al together vnto the ſyght of God.
                  By thys now is it euident, & we maye geſſe by thys whyche be the true honoure, wherewyth ſhe muſt be honoured, yf ſhe per chaunce hath nede of it. But howe ſhall we ſaye to her▪ Loke vpon hir wordes, and they

ſhall teache the to ſaye thus: O thou bleſſed virgine and mother of God, howe vyle and deſpyſed wereſt thou? yet not wythſtandynge God dyd wende ſo mercyfullye and rychely hys ſyghte towarde the, and hathe wrought great thynges in the, wherof thou wereſt neuer one worthy: and the ouerflowynge grace of God in the is farre aboue thy deſeruynges. Happy arte thou & bleſſed arte thou from that tyme forth for euer, the which haſt founde ſuch a God. Nother nedeth ony man to thynke that ſhe wyl not be pleaſed, yf ſhe be ſayde to be vnworthy of ſo greate fauoure: veryly ſhe fayled not, whan ſhe graunted of hyr owne mynde yt ſhe was vyle and vnworthy, that God dyd loke vpon her for none of hyr merites or deſeruynge, but of hys mere and only grace.
                  She hath no delyte to heare ſuch vayne ianglers, as both preach and wryte manye thynges of hyr merytes, wherewyth they crake and auaunce theyr greate learnynge: not conſyderyng how greatly they derogate the Magnificat accuſe the mother of God of lyenge, and minyſh the grace of God. For ſo much worthy merite as is geuen vnto Mary, ſo much is the grace of God robbed of, and the virginis ſonge is robbed of

truth. The angell dyd only grete her on the grace of Gods behalfe, and that the LORD was wyth her, wherfore ſhe is bleſſed amonge wemen. Wherfore they that attribute her ſo many prayſes and honoures, and let them ſo ſtyck and cleue vpon her, they be not farre from makynge an idol of her: euē as though ſhe ought be worthely worſhypped and truſted vnto, where as ſhe doth reiecte and render all vnto God, & wyll haue God to be prayſed in her, labourynge and endeuourynge fynally to cauſe euery man to haue truſte and confidence in Gods fauoure by hyr enſample.
                  Whoſoeuer therfore wyll honoure the virgine Mary aryght, theſame muſt not ſet her nexte hys harte, and by God, but farre beneth hym, makynge her bare and naked, and ſo (as ſhe ſayeth herſelfe) behold hyr nakedneſſe. After that muſt he maruayle of the vnſpeakeable and abundaunte grace of God, whyche ſo rychely and bountyfully both loke vpon, loue, and bleſſe ſo vyle, vnworthy and deſpyſed a perſone: that ſo beholdynge he be moued to prayſe & loue God in lyke gyftes, and ſo he be occaſioned euer to truſt & to hope ſome greate goodneſſe of God, and that of ſuch a God, as doth not deſpyſe

the poore, deſpyſed & vyle, but wyteth them ſafe of hys owne ſyghte, that ſo hys harte be ſtablyſhed in fayth, hope and charite. What more acceptable thynge ſuppoſe ye can befall vnto her, than that ye come to God by her after this maner, and learne to truſte and hope in God by hyr enſample, whan ye lykewyſe are deſpyſed and ſet at nought, what maner of waye that euer it be, ether in lyfe or death: She wyll not haue the to come to her, but by her to God.
                  Agayne, that ye learne to eſchue al hygh eaſte and condicion, the which euery man enuyronneth to obtayne, ſeynge that God nother fande nor dyd wyll theſame in hys mother. But thoſe paynters and counterfayters, the whych do ſo paynte and ſet out the bleſſed virgine vnto vs, that ther be no vyle thynge ſene in her, but all excellente thynges, what do they els but teach vs to ſet our ſyght on the mother of God, & not her in the ſyght of God: Whereby they do fraye vs, & nearehāde do cauſe vs to deſpayre, & darken vnto vs the ymage full of conſolacion, euen as they do ſtoppe the ſayntes in Lente. For ſeyng ſhe is drawen aboue all enſāples & patrones, ther is nothynge lefte whereof we maye

take ony cooſolacion or cmnforte, where ſhe ought and wyth a good wyl wolde be a principall enſample of grace, to ſteare all the world to the grace, loue and prayſe of God, that the hartes of all men myght conceaue ſuch an opinion of her towarde God, which with all confidence myghte ſaye: Ah bleſſed virgine and mother of God, what greate comforte dyd God geue vs by the, becauſe he dyd wyth ſo gracious a coūtenaunce beholde thyn vnworthyneſſe and lowe degre, whereby we are admonyſhed henceforth to truſt, that after thyn enſample he wyll alſo loke vpon vs wretches.
                  Thynkeſt thou not that yf Dauid, S. Peter, Paule, Mary Magdalene and ſuch lyke for the greate grace that they vnworthely dyd obtayne, are become enſamples to comfirme the Godly fayth and hope, that ye bleſſed mother of God doth not couet lykewyſe gladly and worthely to be an enſample and patrone vnto all the worlde? But now can not that be for the ſuperfluous blowers out of hyr prayſe and vayne ianglers, which do not declare by thys verſe how the abundaunte ryches of God were vnyed and made one wyth hyr ſlender pouerte, ye godly worſhyppe wyth hyr humilite, the Godly

worthyneſſe with hyr vyleneſſe, the Godly power wyth hyr febleneſſe, the Godly goodneſſe, wyth hyr merite of no value, the Godly fauoure wyth hyr vnworthyneſſe: where of luſt, delyte and loue towarde God wyth all confydence do growe. To the whych intent the lyues and ſayenges of all ſayntes be wrytten alſo. But ther are now a dayes ſome that ſeke helpe and comforte at her, as at ſome God, ſo that I feare me ther raygne more Idolatry in the worlde in oure dayes, than euer dyd. Let thys ſuffiſe at this tyme.
                  Theſe two wordes: All generacions do ſignifye as much as: Chyldes chylderen, and it is ſo darkly ſpoken, and ſo profoundly, that ſome haue buſely combred themſelues, thynkynge whych waye thys ſhulde be true, ſeynge that the Iewes, Turkes, Saracens, and other Heythen, beſyde no ſmall nombre of falſe Chriſtians do not only refuſe to cal her bleſſed, but deſpyſe and curſe her. The cauſe of thys is that they vnderſtande the worde Generacions of the congregacion of men, wher as it ſtretcheth farther in this place. As namelye: the degrees or membres of the naturall yſſue, where the one euer followeth or ſuccedeth another: the father, the ſonne, the coſyn, and ſo forth, whereof euery

membre is called a Generacyon. So that the mynde of the holy virgine, whā ſe ſayeth that hyr prayſe ſhall laſte from generaciō to generaciō, is, that ther ſhalbe no tyme, wherin hyr prayſes ſhall not be publyſhed. And that doth ſhe meane whan ſhe ſayeth: Lo from henceforth ſhal all generacions, that is, it begynneth now and ſhall endure in all generacions or kynreds that ſhall ſuccede hereafter.
                  Moreouer ye worde to call bleſſed hath a larger ſygnificacion in the Greke thā that it can ſo be expreſſed. For it ſygnifyeth alſo to make happy or bleſſed, ſo that it is not done with tunge only, or wordes, or makyng courteſy, or bowynge of the heade, or vaylynge of the bonet, or ſettynge vp of ymages or pictures, wyth buyldynge of temples or chappels, the which wycked men can do alſo: but wyth all thy ſtrengthe, truly and hartely. And that is done, whan the harte (as it ſayde before) with beholdynge of hyr lowlyneſſe, and lokynge of the Godly grace vpon her doth conceaue an inwarde ioye and delyte towarde God, and ſaye or thynke thus from the very entrayles and bottome of the harte: O how happy is thys virgine? Such bleſſynge is hyr true honour and worſhyppe,

as we haue ſayde before.
               
               
                  
                     For he that is Myghty hath done greate thynges vnto me, and Holy is his name.
                  
                  Here doth the bleſſed virgine ſynge atonce and in a ſemely order all the workes that God hath wrought in her. In the laſte verſe hath ſhe ſonge of the lokynge graciouſly of God and hys bounteous and mercyfull wyll towarde her: the which is the chefe and principall parte of mercy and grace (as is ſayde:) and here ſhe ſyngeth of gyftes and workes. For God though he geue many one greate gyftes, and ſtrowe hys goodes in cō
                     mune, yet doth not he therfore ſtrayght way loke vpon and beholde them. The worldly and temporall goodes are good: but the grace, fauoure and ſyghte of God, are the heretage that doth laſt euer: as ſayth Paule Ro. vi. The gyfte of God is euerlaſtynge lyfe in oure LORDE Ieſu Chriſte. In the goodes geueth he that is hys, but in the ſyght and grace doth he geue hymſelfe. In the goodes is hys hande receaued, but in the ſyght of grace vpon ye harte, hys ſprete, mynd and wyll are receaued there in. Wherfore the holy virgine doth geue the mooſte thankes vnto the ſyghte of God. Nother ſayeth ſhe fyrſte: All chyldes chyldren ſhall call me

bleſſed, becauſe he hath done ſo great thynges vnto me, wherof thys verſe maketh mē
                     cion: But becauſe he hath loked vpon me that am vyle and of no reputacion, and to my lowe degre, wherof the fyrſt verſe doth ſpecifye. Where a gracious beholdynge is, there are gyftes alſo, but not contrary wyſe is there a gracious ſyght, where gyftes are. For thys cauſe doth thys verſe or parte of this ſonge duely follow the fyrſt verſe. After thys maner do we reade Geneſis .xxv. that Abraham gaue gyftes vnto the chylderen of the concubines, but vnto Iſaac hys true and lawfull ſonne by Sara hys lawfull wyfe, he gaue the whole heretage. After thys maner is it the mynde of God, that hys chyldrē take no conſolacion of the gyftes, ether ſpirituall or temporall, be they neuer ſo great, but of hym and hys goodes, yet not deſpyſynge the gyftes.
                  Nother doth ye mother of God rehearſe ony goodneſſe ſeuerally, but wyth one word doth ſhe comprehende them all, ſayenge: He hath done great thynges vnto me, that is, all that he hath done vnto me is greate. Whereby ſhe teacheth vs, that the hygher the contemplaciō in ſprete be, the leſſe wordes ought we to make. For ſhe feleth well

ynough that ſhe can not vtter wyth wordes the thynge, that ſhe thynketh in hyr mynde, and wolde fayne expreſſe. Wherfore ſuch fewe wordes of the ſprete are ſometyme ſo weyghtye and profounde, that no man can vnderſtāde them, wythout he ſomdeale fele the ſame ſprete. But vnto them that be voyd of the ſpret do ſuch wordes ſeme very ſleght and clene wythout ſwetneſſe or tayſt, which diſpatch theyr taxe wyth many wordes and greate noyſe. Chriſte in the .vi. Chapter of Mathew, teacheth vs to eſchue the multiplyenge of wordes in oure prayer, ſeynge the Heythen men do euen the ſame, whyche therby do thynke to be herde. As now a dayes alſo in many churches ther is plenty of ryngynge of bels, playenge on organes and other inſtrumentes of muſyke, of ſyngynge, cryenge, and readinge: but ſcarceneſſe of prayſynge of God, the whyche is to worſhip God in ſprete and truth. Ioh. iiii.
                  Salomō ſayth in the .xxvii. chap. of ye Pro. He that is to hayſty to prayſe his neghboure aboue meaſure, ſhalbe taken as one that geueth hym an euell reporte. For he cauſeth ye matter to be ſuſpect, ſo that euery man doth thynke it a fayned matter, whych he buſyeth ſo earneſtlye to ſtuffe with hys gorgious

prayſes, and maketh neuertheleſſe the matter worſe therewyth. And contrarywyſe he that lacketh hys neghboure, and ryſeth early, (that is, is not ſlack, and ſpedely doth ryd the matter) theſame is to be taken for a prayſer. For men do thynke: it is not as he doth ſaye, and he doth it of an hatynge and euelwyllynge harte, ſo that he doth make hys cauſe worſe, and hys neghboures better. On thys wyſe do they that endeuoure to prayſe God with multiplyenge of wordes, with cryenge and ianglynge. They do as though he were deafe, or knewe nothynge, and that we muſt wake or teach hym. Such opinion of God is rather a diſprayſynge of hym, than a prayſynge. But he that thynketh vpon the workes of God aryght euen from the bottō of hys harte, and beholdeth theſame wyth wonderyng and geuynge of thankes, ſo that for very feruentneſſe he bruſte out, and ſygh rather thā ſpeake, and the wordes that flowe by themſelues, not fayned nor connynglye deuyſed do ſo rolle oute, that euen the ſprete do alſo comme oute: Yee that the wordes haue euen handes, fete and lyfe, ſo that finally the whole bodye, the whole lyfe and all the members do longe to ſpeake, that is, to prayſe God truly in ſprete and verite. There

are the wordes very fyre, lyghte and lyfe, as wytneſſeth Dauid in the .C.xviii. Pſalme, ſayenge: LORDE thy wordes are fyry. And agayne: My lyppes ſhall ſet forth thy prayſe: euen as water in a ſethynge potte runneth ouer and fometh, ſo that it can not retayne it ſelfe therein, for the vehemente heate in the potte. Of thys kynde be all the wordes of the virgine Mary in thys ſonge, the whiche be fewe, yet both greate and hygh. Such prayſers of God doth ſaynt Paule vnto the Romaynes the .xii. chapter call: Feruente of ſprete, the whych chafe and burne in ſprete, teachynge vs to be of theſame ſorte: and ſuch were ye fyry tunges, that the holy gooſte deſcēded in vpō the diſciples.
                  The greate thynges be nothynge els ſaue that ſhe is become the mother of God, by the whyche thynge ſo greate goodes and ſo excellent are geuen vnto her, that paſſe all the vnderſtondynge of ony man. For frō hence floweth all honoure and bleſſe, ſo that amonge all mankynde ſhe be euen one perſone, excedynge all other and pereleſſe: becauſe ſhe hath only the heauenly father with the ſonne cōmune with her. And hereby commeth that ſhe herſelfe can not name theſe greate thynges, for the abundaūte excellēcy

of them: but muſt reſt there, and breſte oute in prayſynge wyth a feruent affeccion, ſayenge: He that is myghty, hath done great thynges vnto me. For thys cauſe is all hyr honoure comprehended in one worde, namely yf ſhe be called the mother of God: for no man can ſaye greater thynges by her, nor to her, though he had as many tunges, as the earth hath herbes and floures, the ſkye hath ſtarres, or the ſee ſondes. Moreouer it muſt be cōſydered wyth a depe harte, what it meaneth to be the mother of God.
                  She doth alſo featly aſcrybe and attrybute thys thynge vnto the grace of God, and not hyr merite. For thoughe ſhe was wythout ſynne, yet was that grace ſo greate, that ſhe was in no wyſe worthy of it. For howe coulde a creature be worthye to be the mother of God? Although ſome vayne iāglers, and not wryters, do bable very much of hyr worthyneſſe and deſeruynge of thys office. But I geue more credence vnto the bleſſed virgine, than vnto thoſe vayne wryters and bablers. She ſayeth that hyr lowe degre was loked vpon, and that God hath not rewarded her therfore, but that he hath done greate and myghty thynges vnto her. He hath done greate thynges vnto me (ſayeth

ſhe) not for my deſeruynges: For ſuche a thynge dyd the holy virgine neuer thynke vpon, muche leſſe than dyd ſhe prepare herſelfe to it, that ſhe myght be the mother of God. The meſſage came ſodenly and vnwars vnto her, (as ſayeth Luke the euangeliſte.) As for a deſeruyng abydeth and loketh not for the rewarde to come ſodenly, but of a redyneſſe and ſet purpoſe.
                  Now it that is in the ſonge called, Regina coeli letare. &c. (namely: Vvhome thou deſeruedeſt to beare. And in another ſonge: Vvhome thou vvereſt vvorthy to beare) is nothynge to purpoſe. For ye ſame wordes are alſo ſonge of the holy croſſe, the whiche not wythſtandynge was a tre, and coulde deſerue nothynge. And euen ſo is thys alſo to be vnderſtande. Yf it than of neceſſite muſt haue ben the mother of God it was requyred agayne, that it ſhulde haue ben a woman kynne, a virgine, of the tribe or kynred of Iuda, and to beleue the meſſage of the angell, that iudged her apte to theſame, as the ſcripture had wytneſſed of her. The preciouſneſſe or worthyneſſe of the woode was none other, ſaue that it was mete to be a croſſe, & was ordyned of God to theſame vſe: Euē ſo had the holy virgine

none other worthyneſſe to be the mother of God, ſaue that ſhe was comly and ordyned therto: that ſo it myght be a mere grace and no deſeruynge or duety, that in no caſe it were preiudiciall and mynyſſhynge ether the fauoure or the glorye of God. It is more ſemely to abayte to much from her, than frō the glory of God. Yee ther cā not be abayted to much frō her, ſeynge that ſhe (as all other creatures) is created of nought. But vnto the grace of God is to much derogated, the which is daungerous, nother is the mother well apayed therewyth. It is nedefull alſo, that we paſſe not the markes that Gods glory doth admitte, in vſurpyng of callyng her: as whan we grete her a quene of heauen, yet is ſhe not an idoll thereby, that ether ſhe maye geue or helpe, as they do, which call vpon her, deſyre her to be gracious, and finally flye vnto her rather than vnto ye rych treaſures of God. She geueth nothynge, onlye God geueth all as it followeth: He that is myghty, wherwt ſhe robbeth all creatures of theyr ſtrēgth & power. O what greate hardyneſſe is thys, and what ſpoyles of ſo tender and yonge mayden? whiche can make deſtiſtute all myghtye and ſtronge men of theyre ſtrengthe, al puyſſaunt men of theyr power,

all wyſe men of theyr wytte, and all boaſtynge and glorious men can ſhe brynge to ſhame, attributyng al ſtrength, noble actes, wyſedome and glory vnto God only. For the ſayenge: He that is myghty, is ſo much to ſaye, as ther is noman that can do ought, ſaue only God, as wytneſſeth S. Paule ſayenge in the .i. chapter to the Epheſians: that God worketh all thynges after the counſell of hys owne wyll, and that the workes of all creatures, are the workes of God: the which thynge we alſo acknowlege in oure Crede, ſayenge that we beleue in God almyghtye. He is ſo Almyghty, that in all thynges, by all thynges, and aboue all thynges, nothyng doth worke, ſaue only hys ſtrength and puyſſaunce. After thys maner ſayde Anna the mother of Samuel, in the .i. boke of Regum, the .ii. chapter: Ther is noman that can do ought of hys owne power. And Paule ſayth alſo in the .ii. Epiſtle to the Corinth. the .iii. chapter: Such truſt haue we thorow Chriſt to Godwarde, not that we are able of oure ſelues to thynke ony thyng, as of ourſelues, but oure ableneſſe cōmeth of God. Thys is an hygh & worthy artycle, cōteynynge very much, alayenge atōce al pryde, curioſite, preſūpciō, raſhnes, boaſtyng, falſe cōfidēce, & exalteth

only God: yee and ſheweth the cauſe alſo why he oughte to be exalted, euen becauſe he worketh all thynges. It is eaſy to be ſpoken, but to refourme and redreſſe oure lyfe accordynge to it, that is laborious, and full of payne. For they that leade theyr lyfe in ſuch thynges, are louers of peace, geuen to God, and ſimple men, attributyng nothyng to themſelues, certifyed that God hath all thynges, and they nothynge.
                  Thys is than the meanynge of Gods mother in theſe wordes: Of all theſe greate goodes is nothynge myne, but he that worketh all thynges alone, and whoſe power alone worketh in all thynges, he it is that hath done ſo greate thynges vnto me. For the worde Myghty ſygnifyeth not a workeleſſe, ydle, and reſtynge power, (as we ſaye of a worldly kynge that he is myghty, which neuertheleſſe is ſtyll, and worketh not) but a workyng power and continually doynge, which without intermiſſion doth procede & worke. For God doth not holde vp, but procedeth in workynge, as wytneſſeth Chriſte Ioh. v. My father worketh hetherto, and I worke alſo. Of thys wyſe alſo ſayeth Paule Epheſ. iii. that God is able to do exceadyng abundauntly, aboue all that we axe or vnderſtonde

accordyng to the power that worketh in vs. That is: He euer geueth greater thynges than we requyre, as hys nature is to do, ſo doth hys power worke. For thys cauſe dyd I ſaye, that Mary wolde be no Idoll, and that God doth all, & ſhe nothynge.
                  For thys cauſe doth ſhe adde and ſaye: And holy is hys name. That is: As I do not take the worke to me, euen ſo do not I aſcribe the honour thereof vnto me nother. For he only ought to haue ye prayſe & name, that fulfylleth ye worke. It is vnſemely ye one ſhall do the worke, and another ſhall drawe the name and prayſe thereof vnto hymſelfe. As for me, I ame the workehouſe only, wher in he worketh, and therfore is no prayſe nor honoure due vnto me, that I ame the mother of God, but God and hys excellent worke are to be prayſed and honoured in me. It is ynough for me that I reioyce with hym, and ſaye: Happy ame I, that God hath ſeparate me, in whome it hath plaſed him to accomplyſh ſuch hys workes.
                  Lo how purely doth ſhe wende all to Godwarde, how wholye doth ſhe drawe no honoure, no worke, no glory to herſelfe, and behaueth herſelfe as before whan no ſuche thynge had happened vnto her, ſettynge nomore

                     
                        •••
                     are, or makyng more ſearche for honoure, than ſhe dyd before: nother doth ſhe ſwell, auaunce, or crye out that ſhe is become the mother of God: nother doth ſhe fynally requyre ony worſhyp therfore, but goeth hyr waye, and doeth hyr buſyneſſe as before, mylketh the kyen, dyghteth the meat, waſheth the dyſhes, ſwepeth the houſe, and doeth all that a handmayden or huſwyfe becōmeth to do in ſuch vyle workes, as though ſuch plenteous gyftes of grace dyd not pertayne vnto her Amonge women & hyr neghbures was ſhe eſtymed no greater, than ſhe was afore, ſhe requyred nomore nother, and remayned a poore cyteſin amonge the commune people. O what a ſimple & poore hart is that? O what wonderfull virgine? what greate thynges are hyd vnder a lowly behaueoure? How many haue felte her, ſpoken to her, eaten and dronken wyth her, whych perchaunce haue counted her to be deſpyſed, of the commune ſorte, a poore and ſimple cyteſin, whych wolde haue be nabaſſhed and maruayled, yf they had ben aware of ſuche in eſtimable gyftes in her: and that is hys name to be holy. For holy is it called, that is ſundered and appropriate to God, whych noman maye touch nor defyle, but worſhyp

it. And name is called a good fame or renowne, glory, prayſe and worſhyppe. Nowe muſte euerye man than abſtayne from the name of God, ſo that he nother touch it, nor drawe it to hymſelfe, the which is alſo ment Exod. xxx: where Moſes was commaunded by God to make precious oyntmēt, & it was ſtraytelye forbydden onye man to anoynte hys bodye therewyth. That is: Noman ſhall be ſo hardye as to appropriate the name of God to hymſelfe, for that is ſayd to vnhalow and to deſpyſe it, yf we reioyce in oureſelues, or take onye honoure vpon vs, ether haue pleaſure in oureſelues, or auaunce oure goodes or workes, as the worlde dothe vnhalowe and defyle the name of God with out ceaſſynge. For as the workes are onlye Gods, ſo is the name lefte hym onlye alſo. Moreouer as many as hallowe ſo his name makynge themſelues voyde of prayſe and honoure, worſhyppe it aryght, wherfore they alſo be halowed of it: whiche the precious oyntment that is ſpoken of in the thyrtyeth chapter of Exodus doth ſignify wt the which all that was touched, was clenſed. Thys oyntment is ye worde of God, halowed of vs. For whā we do attribut vnto vs no workes, no 
                        •
                     oaſtynge, nor loue of ourſelues thereof,

thā is it honoured aryghte, thā doth it touch and hallow vs.
                  For thys cauſe ought we to beware, ſeynge that we can not be on earth without the goodes, name and honoure of God, that yf we be prayſed of ony man, or get a name, that than we vſe thys example of the mother of God, beynge ready to anſwer them wyth thys verſe, vſynge the honour & prayſe aryghte, confeſſynge openly, or at the leaſte thynkynge thus in oure mynde: LORDE God, it is thy worke that is prayſed & auaū
                     ced, I beſeke the let it be thyne name alſo. Not I LORDE, but thou haſt wrought it, which workeſt all thynges myghtely, and holy is thy name. After this maner oughte noman to refuſe the prayſe and honoure as wronge, nor to diſprayſe them as nothynge worth: but he ought not to aſcribe it to hym ſelfe, as a thynge to percious and noble, referrynge them to hym, whoſe they be truly in heauen. Thys lo teacheth thys noble verſe, wherewith he is anſwered alſo that demaundeth, whether one do not owe reuerence vnto another. Yee Paule ſayeth, Ro. xii. In geuyng honour let one go before another. Neuertheles nomā ſhal take ye honour vpon him, as though it dyd befall vnto hym:

nother ſhall he ſuffre it to remayne vpō hym ſelfe. But he ſhall hallowe and reſtore it vnto God, vnto whome it belongeth, wyth all the good and worke, from whence ye honoure floweth. Nother ſhall ony man leade an vnhoneſt lyfe. Yf he lyue honeſtly, than muſte honoure be there. But as an honeſte lyfe is the gyfte and worke of God, ſo let his name alſo be holye and vndefyled from delytynge and hauynge delectacion in hymſelfe. This do we alſo deſyre in ye pater noſter, whan we ſaye: Hallovved be thy name
                     ▪
                  
               
               
                  
                     And hys mercy endureth thorovvout al generacions, vpon them that feare hym.
                  
                  It is nedefull for vs to knowe the maner of the ſcripture, whiche calleth the naturall linage or yſſue a progeny or generacion by the whych one man is euer ſucceſſiuelye borne of another. Wherfore thys englyſhe worde generacion or progeny doth not ſuffyſe to expreſſe the meanynge thereof, yet do I knowe none better than it. For a progeny do we call the company that belongeth vnto vs, ether by reaſon of bloude or mariage. But in thys place it ſignifyeth the naturall yſſue and ſucceſſion from father, tyll chyldes chylde, and euery membre of theſame

is called a progeny, and I thynke it be not wronge Englyſhed of thys faſſhion: namely, and hys mercy endureth from chylde to chylde vpon them that feare hym. And thys phraſe of the ſcripture is very ryfe, hauynge hys begynnynge and originall of the wordes that God ſpake vnto Moſes and all the people vpon mount Syna, ſayenge Exo. xx. I the LORDE thy God ame a gelous God, viſitynge the ſynne of the fathers vpō the chyldren, vnto the thyrde and fourth generacion, of them that hate me: and do mercy vpon many thouſandes, that loue me, and kepe my commaundementes.
                  After that Mary the mother of God had fyniſhed the prayſe of God, and of hys goodneſſe towarde her, ſhe wandreth nowe al amonge the workes, whych God worketh generally in all men, and ſyngeth of them alſo, teachyng vs featly to knowe the workes, kynde, nature and wyll of God. Many ingenious and wytty philoſophers haue attēpted the ſame alſo, that they myght knowe what God were, wrytynge much of the ſame, the one thus, another ſo. But they were all blynde in that behalfe, and coulde not perceaue the true ſhynynge. And verely ye greateſt thynge, both in heauen and earth, is to

knowe God aryghte, yf it do befall vnto ony man. And that doth the bleſſed virgine teach very properly by hyr owne enſample, as is ſhewed aboue. But how can he be knowen more eaſyer or better than by hys workes? for he that perceaueth thys duely, the ſame muſt nedes knowe hys nature, wyll, harte & mynde: Wherfore it is connynge to knowe hys workes. And that we myghte marke it the better, ſhe rehearſeth orderlye in theſe foure verſes ſyxe godly workes in ſyxe kyndes of men, and parteth the worlde in two, ſettynge on ech ſyde thre maner of workes, and thre kyndes of men ſo, that a continuall debate doth remayne amonge ye partyes, by reaſon of the feate oppoſition one agaynſt ye other: wherby ſhe doth deſcrybe hym ſo goodly, as can not be amended.
                  Moreouer, thys particion is duely and orderly comprehended in ſundery places of the ſcripture, as namely Ieremye the nynth Chapter, where he ſayeth: Let not ye wyſe man reioyce in hys wyſedome, nor ye ſtrōge man in hys ſtrength, nother the ryche man in hys ryches: But who ſo wyll reioyce, let hym reioyce in thys, that he vnderſtandeth and knoweth me: for I am the LORDE whych do mercy, equite and ryghteouſneſſe

vpon earth: Therfore haue I pleaſure in ſuch thynges, ſayeth the LORDE. Thys is a noble texte, and agreable to thys ſonge of the bleſſed virgine. By thys place alſo do we ſe that the ſpirite of the prophet dealeth the worlde in thre, as namely: in Vvyſedom Povver and Ryches, the which he doth ouerthrowe whan he ſayeth that nomā ſhuld reioyce in them: for God is not founde in them, nother can he haue pleaſure in them. Moreouer he ſetteth thre other agaynſte theſe, namely: Mercy, Iudgemente and Ryghteouſneſſe. In theſe is myne endeuoure (ſayeth he,) ye
                        •
                      I myſelfe do all theſe. So neare ame I, that I do theſe thynges, not in heauen, but vpon earth, there ame I founde. He that knoweth me of thys maner, theſame maye reioyce truely and make hys boaſte boldely therof. For yf he be not wyſe, but poore ſpreted, than is my mercye wyth hym: Yf he be not myghty, but vyle & lowlye, than is my iudgement ready for hym: Yf he be not ryche, but poore and nedy, than is my ryghteouſneſſe ſo much the more raygnyng wyth hym.
                  By wyſedome he vnderſtandeth al hygh ſpirituall goodes, whereby man maye get a delyte, reioycynge and a good opinion, (as

the verſe followynge doth ſpecifye,) as be: vnderſtandynge, reaſon, prudence, knowlege, vertuouſneſſe, an honeſt conuerſacion: finally, all that is called in the ſoule holy or ſpirituall, how greate gyftes that euer they be, ſo that none of them be God hymſelfe.
                  By power he vnderſtandeth all power, noblyneſſe of byrth, frendes, dignityes, worſhyppe, whether they concerne temporall or ſpiritual goodes or men (though in ſcripture ther be no ſpirituall ſuperiorite, but onlye a ſeruice and occupyenge of a lowe rowme) wyth all hys ryghte, lyberte and priuilege. &c
                  By ryches are 
                        ••••
                     te health, bewtye, pleaſure and all that maye chaunce vnto the body outwardly. Agaynſte theſe are thre other ſet of the prophete, namely: the pooreſpreted, the oppreſſed, and the nedy. But we wyll loke orderly vpon the ſyxe workes and partes.
               
               
                  The fyrſt worke of God is Mercy.
                  Of thys worke ſpeaketh thys preſente verſe, ſayenge: Hys mercy endureth from chylde to chyldes chylde, or frō 
                     progeny to progeny vpon them that feare hym.
                  She begynneth at the greateſt, namely, at the ſpirituall or inwarde goodes, whyche

make men here vpon earth the mooſt proudeſt, hyghmynded and hardnecked. Ther is no rych man, no myghtye lorde ſo proude or hygh mynded, that is not ouercome of ſuch a wyſe man: the whych perceaueth and douteth not at all that he doth pleate or defende a iuſte cauſe, vnderſtande the matter well, and that he is wyſer than other folke. Specially, whan it is come ſo farre yt ether he muſt auoyde, or els knowlege hys cauſe to be vniuſt, than becommeth he ſo raſh and voyde of the feare of God, that he wyll not be aſhamed to boaſt and ſay, that he can not erre, that God is wyth hym, and other be accurſed, yee he is not aſhamed to call the iudgement and daye of dome to wytneſſe: and yf occaſion be ioyned to hys power, than breaketh he forthe wyth hys malepartneſſe where it pleaſeth hym, he perſueth, iudgeth, vexeth, ſlayeth, dryueth away and waiſteth all them that wythſtande hym, and thys affirmeth he to be done to the prayſe, glorye and ſeruice of God. And is ſo ſure of a great deſeruynge and plenteous grace by God, that the angels of heauen be ſcarce ſo ſure. O what a great burble is this? O how much doth ye ſcripture treate of ſuch kynde of mē? how dredfull thynges doth ſhe threaten thē?

but they fele it leſſe than the anuylt doth the hammer ſtrokes. And thys thynge is ryfe and plenteous of matter.
                  Of ſuche ſpeaketh Chriſt in the .xvi. of Ihon, ſayenge: The tyme cōmeth, that who ſo euer putteth you to death, ſhal thinke that he hath done ſeruyce to God. And Dauid ſayeth lykewyſe of ſuch on thys wyſe: He doth preuayle agaynſt all hys enemyes, ſayenge: Ther ſhall no euell aproche me. As though he wolde ſaye: I defende a ryght quarell, I do well, God ſhall rewarde me hyghly Such do Eſay in the .xvi. Chapter, and Ieremye in the .xlvii. ſay
                        •
                      that the Moabites were, wrytynge on thys wyſe: As for Moabs pryde, we haue herde of it, ſhe is verye hygh mynded. I know hyr ſtoutneſſe, hyr boaſtynge, hir arrogancy, and the pryde of hyr ſtomacke, ſayeth the LORDE. For hyr furiouſneſſe maye nother vpholde her wyth ſtrength, nor dede. We ſe ſuch mē take thynges vpon them paſſynge theyr power, for the great pryde. Such were the Iewes agaynſt Chriſte and hys apoſtles. Suche were Iobs frendes, whyche reaſoned aboue meaſure wyſely agaynſte hym, and commended and prayſed God vehemētly. But ſuch kynde of men heare no man, they can be perſuaded

of no man, nother can onye man brynge them therto, that yf theyr cauſe be wronge, they wyll graunte it, or to geue place, but ſtyck to it that they haue begonne and procede therein, though the world ſhulde peryſh therfore. Nother can the ſcripture ſufficiently reprehende ſuch naughty packes, callynge them ſometyme an adder, ſtoppynge hys eare, leſt he heare the charmers voyce, ſomtyme a roarynge lyon, ſomtyme an vnmoueable rocke, ſomtyme a draggon, & ſo forth other names.
                  But thys kynde of men is no where better ſet forthe in hys colours, than in the .xl. and .xli. chapters of Iob, where they be called Behemoth. Nowe Behema in Hebrue is as much to ſaye as a beaſte, and Behemoth the plurall nombre ſygnifyeth beaſtes, that is: a vmbremente or multitude of men, leadynge a beaſtly lyfe, and not permittynge themſelues to be guyded by the ſprete of God. Thys kynde doth God in the ſame place ſaye to haue eyen lyke the mornynge ſhyne: for ther is no ende of hys wyſdome. Hys ſkynne alſo is ſo harde, that no wapen can pearſe thorowe it, ether ſhot or ſtycked at, that is: yf the worde of God be preached agaynſt thē to theyr reprofe, they

laugh it to ſcorne: for they iudge theyr matter ſure ynough: The ſkales alſo do ſhycke ſo faſte together, that the leeſt ayre can not entre, that is: they agre ſo, and be ſo one mynded, that they wyll not admitte the leeſte breth of Gods ſprete. As for hys harte (ſayethe God) is hardened lyke an anuylte. It is the Deuels body, and therfore doth he in thys place attribute it all vnto theſame. Suche a people aboue all other is the Byſhoppe of Rome, wyth all his vmbremente, and hath ben a greate ſeaſon. For they do lykewyſe, and that of ſuch a faſhion, as is euidente that neuer was ſene: they heare no body, ther is no redreſſynge and amendynge of lyfe: No perſuadynge, no prayenge, no threatenynge wyll helpe. Shortelye, they nother ſaye nor ſynge, ſaue: We defende a good quarell, thus muſt it be, auaunte they whome thys doth not pleaſe, yee though it were the whole worlde.
                  Here myght ſome body ſaye: How ſhall thys agre? ſhal we not kepe the lawes? ſhall we let go the truthe? Is it not commaūded vs euen to dye in the truthes quarell & ryghteouſneſſe? haue not the holy martyres of God ſuffred much for ye Goſpel? Wolde not Chriſt himſelfe haue ryght? For it chaūceth

oftymes, that ſuch men defende a iuſte quarell, (yee and before God alſo, as they do boaſte,) and that they handle themſelues ryghteouſly and truely. I Anſwere: Here is it due to haue the eyes opened, and alſo neceſſary, here is the knot: It reſteth only in that, that a man haue the true learnynge in the lawe. It is true veryly that we muſt ſuffre much for the truthe and ryghteouſneſſe, & not to denye theſame, howe ſlender ſoeuer ſhe be. Moreouer, it maye be that the other parte haue ryght, but they do amyſſe in that they execute the lawe vniuſtely, and handle not the matter with feare, nother haue they God before theyre eyen, but thynke it to be ynough that the matter is ryghte, and therfore he both wyll and muſt procede by hys power, and make an ende of the game: wher by they make of theyr ryght, wronge, though it were true in dede and vnblameable. But it is mooſte perrillous, whan they thynke themſelues to be in the ryght waye, and yet be not ſure what oughte to be done in matters that concerne God and hys iudgementes. But we wyll fyrſt ſpeake groſly and ſet forth a commune and blonte enſample:
                  Are not mony, goodes, the body, honoure, a wyfe, chylderen, frendes and ſuche lyke

good creatures, created and geuen of God▪ Now that they are the gyftes of God, and not thyne, and God wyll proue the, whether thou canſte fynde in thyne harte to loſe thē to auaunce hys glory, and hange more vpon hym only, than vpon theſe creatures: and therfore ſhulde rayſe one that ether ſhulde take parte of them from the, or altogether, ether hurte the or by bodylye death wolde cauſe the to loſe them: Thynkes thou not here were a iuſte cauſe to be wytleſſe, to rage, to recouer theſame agayne by force and ſtronge hande, or to be vnpaciente vntyll thou haddeſt recouered thē agayne, layenge for the that they be good creatures of god? And becauſe yt all the ſcripture iudgeth the thynges to be good, therfore thou alſo wylt kepe the worde of God, and defende or requyre agayne theſame goodes both wyth body and lyfe, orels to forbeare them or let them go agaynſte thy wyll: Were not thys a ioly viſure? Yf thou wylt therfore do well in thys behalfe, thou mayeſt not runne headlynges after thyne owne brayne. But howe ſhall I do than? ye ſhall feare God, and ſaye on thys wyſe: LORD they be good thynges and thy gyftes, as thyne owne worde and ye ſcripture do wytneſſe. Neuertheleſſe I doue

whether thou doeſt enuye me them. Yf I knewe I ſhulde not vſe them, I wolde not beſtowe one heare vpon the hauynge agayn of them: but yf I knewe thou woldeſt them to be in my power, I wolde (obeynge thy wyll) beſtowe both body and goodes to haue them agayne. But ſeynge nowe I ſtande in doute of ether of theſe thy wylles, and I ſe what now is don, namely, that thou ſuffreſt them to be taken from me, I commytte the matter vnto the, and wyll wayte vpon thy pleaſure in thys behalfe, redy ether to kepe them, or to forgo them.
                  Thys (lo) is a faythfull ſoule, and fearynge God, by whome is mercy, as the mother of God ſyngeth of. And here by maye it be euident, of what fundament and ſprete Abraham, Dauid, and all Iſrael dyd warre and ſlaye ſo many in tymes paſt. For they toke the matter in hande at the commaundement and wyll of God, and wyth feare: not fyghtynge for ryches, but becauſe God dyd requyre it of them, ſhewynge otherwhyles the commaundement of God in that behalfe, as the holy ſcripture maketh mencion ſomtyme. Now maye ye ſe that the truth is not denyed, whych ſayeth yt theſe be good creatures: Yee the ſame truth alſo doth ſaye

and teach that thou do forſake, and ready at all tyme to forgo the ſame goodes, yf it pleaſe God, and ſo hange onely vpon God, The truth doth not compell the to requyre the goodes agayne, in that ſhe ſayeth they be good: nother doth ſhe conſtrayne the to ſaye they be not good, but renouncynge the ſame ſaye that they be not euell.
                  Lykewyſe muſt be done wyth the lawe, and all maner of goodes ether of wytte or reaſon. Iuſtice is a good thynge, geuen of God, who douteth therin? Gods worde it ſelfe doth confeſſe that the lawe is good. Nother maye ony man ſaye that hys ryghteous cauſe is euell, but ſhall rather dye the death, and forgo al that is not God. For that were to denye God and hys worde, the whych teſtifyeth that the lawe is not euell, but good. Wylte thou therfore crye out, rage, playe ye madde man, and kyll all the worlde, becauſe ſuche ryghte or lawe is taken from the? As ſome do whyche lyfte vp theyre voyce vntyll heauen, cauſynge great myſery, wayſtyng people and contryes, fyllynge ye world wyth warre and bloudſheddynge. What knoweſt thou whether God wyl leaue thoſe gyftes and ryghte to thy gouernaunce? they be hys, he can take them from the, ether to day

or to morowe, he cā depriue the of them, and reſtore the to theſame agayne whan it ſhall pleaſe hym by frendes or enemyes, euen as it pleaſeth him. He doth proue, whether thou wylte loſe thy ryghte for hys loue, ſuffre wronge and iniurye, ſuffre rebuke for hys name, and cleue only to hym. Yf thou than arte dredynge God, and ſayeſte thus within the: LORDE, it is thyne, I wyll not haue it in my power & ſubiection, wythout I know that thou do wyſh it me, than ſhal this verſe haue rowme: And hys mercy endureth thorovv out all generacions, vpon them that feare hym, which wyll worke nought, but it be accordynge to hys wylle.
                  Here (lo) is the worde of God kepte on both partes: fyrſte, that thou graunteſt thy ryght, reaſon, vnderſtandynge, wyſdom, and all thyne opinion to be good and iuſte, the which euen the worde of God doth alſo ſay. Secondlye, that thou arte contente to forbeare ſuch gyfte for the loue of God, to be wrongefully condemned, yee to be a mockage and a gaſynge ſtocke to the worlde, the which Gods worde alſo doth teache. Ther be .ii. thynges: to confeſſe the thynge that is iuſte and good, and to obtayne or ouercome. It is ynough for the to knowlege and

confeſſe that thou haſt a good cauſe. Yf thou canſte not ouercome, committe the matter vnto God. It is thy parte to knowlege, to ouercome hath God reſerued vnto hymſelfe. Yf he wyll haue the to ouercome, he ſhall do it, ether ſhall he ſo brynge the thynge to pas, wythout thy counſell or thoughte, that thou muſte nedes take the matter in hande and ouercome, and that after ſuch faſhiō, as thou neuer woldeſte haue thought or deſyred. Yf he wyll not, let hys mercy ſuffyſe the. Yf the victory of thy ryghteouſneſſe be taken from the, yet can not the knowlegynge of theſame be taken from the. Lo, here muſte we ſtande backe, not from the goodes of God, but from the wycked and euell geuynge of to muche mynde to theſame, that we can ryght well both vſe and forgo them, ſo that in all chaunces that befall, we cleue only to God. Wolde God all princes and powers (as theyr duety is) were not ignoraūte of thys, whiche be not contente to confeſſe that they haue ryghte, but wyll nedes ouercome and wynne, ſettynge aſyde all feare of God, and fyllynge the worlde wyth bloude and myſery thynkynge they do ryght therin ſeynge they haue a ryghtfull cauſe, a true matter and a ryghteous quarell, or at the

leeſt ſuppoſe it to be ſo. What is that els ſaue the proude and hyghmynded Moab? whiche counteth and maketh hymſelfe worthy of the noble and bewtyfull poſſeſſion of Gods gyfte, namely, the Law: where as he (yf he beholde hymſelfe well in the ſyghte of God) is not worthy that the grounde do beare hym, and that he do eate the cruſtes of breade, becauſe of the vnclēneſſe of hys ſynnes. O blyndneſſe, blyndneſſe, who is worthy of the leeſte creature of God? yet wyll we not only haue the chefe creatures, as iuſtice and wyſedome and theyr honour, but alſo wyth outragious ſheddyng of bloud and wyth all miſfortune do procure & endeuoure to kepe the ſame: and forthwyth we go praye, faſte heare maſſe, founde churches, wyth ſo bloudy and ragynge mynde, that it were no wonder though the ſtones ſhulde leape in oure faces.
                  Her
                        •
                      ryſeth now agayne a queſtion, namely: Shall not a prince than defende hys lande and people from iniury? Shall he ſyttynge ſtyll and reſtynge, ſuffre all thynges be taken from hym? What ſhulde become in the worlde of thys at the laſte? Here vpon wyll I brefely ſhew my mynde: The power of the ſwearde or ſuperiorite muſt & nedeth

to defende hys ſubiectes, as I haue oftymes ſayd. For that cauſe beareth he the ſwearde, that ſuche as receaue the worde and admonicion of God, and do not obey the ſame, be retayned in feare, that ſo they maye let other be in reſt and peace. And here in ought he not to ſeke hys owne auaūtage, but of other, and the honoure of God, beynge contente to be at reſt, and to lay vp the ſweard, had not God ordined the ſame to the punyſhynge of the wycked, and defence of ye good: ſo that ſuche proteccyon and defence be not done wyth farther dammage, as namely, for takyng vp a ſpowne, a platter be broken. It is but a ſlender proteccion, yf an whole cytie be brought in daunger for one perſone: or yf for one vyllage or caſtell, all the prouince be diſquieted: wythout God doth commaunde it ſeuerally, as ſometyme he was was wont to do. A ſouldyer doth robbe ſome cyteſyn, and for to auēge the ſame, thou rayſeſt an hooſt, and gathereſt a taxe of ye whole contry: who hath the mooſt harme, the lorde or the ſouldyer? Dauid dyd wynke oftymes, whan he coulde not punyſh wythout ye great dammage and harme of other. Euē ſo muſt all powers order themſelues, and agayn the indweller muſt forbeare and ſuffre ſomwhat

for ye cōmunite, & not wyſh, that for hys ſake, all other ſuffre great loſſe and hurte. Equalite can not be had alwaye. Chriſt wold not that the taxes ſhulde be plucked vp, leſte the wheate were plucked vp alſo. Yf men ſhulde warre for euery aſſaulte, and wynke at nothyng, ther ſhuld neuer be peace, but cōtinuall waiſtyng. Therfore is ryghteouſneſſe or vnryghteouſneſſe neuer a ſufficient cauſe to punyſh or to warre wythout diſcreciō: neuerthereſſe it is cauſe ſufficient to punyſhe in ſeaſon, wythout the vndoynge of another For a lorde or prynce muſt ſpecially ſe what is expedient rather vnto a cōmunalte, than vnto one or other. To ſpeake of warre is here no conuenient tyme.
                  Of thys wyſe muſt be done in godly matters, namely: Fayth and the Goſpell, which are ye beſt goodes, nother may ony mā leaue them. But ye ryghteouſneſſe, fauoure, and honoure befallyng & belōgynge to ye ſame muſt be weyed, & cōmytted to God. The care is to be taken not for ye victory, but for ye cōfeſſynge & knowlegynge, & to ſuffre wyllyngly though a mā were reuyled as a wycked deceauer, an heretyke, an erronious or raſh fellowe, though a man were perſecuted, dryuē away, burnt or kylled, or ony other meanes: for the mercy of God is nye vnto ſuch. For

the fayth and truth can not be takē frō hym, though he be depriued of hys lyfe. Yet neuertheleſſe ought nomā to rūne of hys owne accorde, & to brynge or kepe ſuch ryghte of the goſpell by force or vnlawful meanes: but to ſubmytte hymſelfe in ye ſyght of God, as one ye perchaūce is vnworthy, ye ſuch exceadynge goodneſſe ſhulde happē thorow hym, & wyth complaynynge and prayenge to commende the matter vnto hys mercy.
                  Beholde thys is ye fyrſt worke of God, namely: yt he is mercyfull vnto thē, yt wt a good wyl forgo theyr intent, ryghteouſneſſe, wyſedom & what ſoeuer ſpiritual goodes ther be & gladly remayne poore of ſprete. Thoſe are ye true fearers of God, that iudge thēſelues worthy of nothynge, be it neuer ſo lytle, & be naked wt a good wyll both before God & mē. And ye goodes, whych they haue vnworthely receaued of ye pure grace, do they vſe wyth prayſe, thākeſgeuyng & feare, euē as thoughe they were other folkes go
                        •
                     des, not ſekynge theyr own wyl, pleaſure, prayſe, or glory but hys whoſe they be. Wherof ye bleſſed virgin taketh occaſiō to ſhewe howe God delyteth more in exerciſyng this hys bewtyful work, namely mercy, thā ſtrength: whā ſhe ſayeth, that thys worke of God ſhal laſt cōtinually, from chylde to chyldes chylde, vpon thē that

feare hym, where as the other worke laſteth only vntyl the thyrde or fourth generacion, and in thys verſe followynge is nother ſtent nor tyme ſet.
               
               
                  The ſeconde ſpirituall worke, is to ſubdue the proude.
                  
                     He ſhevveth ſtrēgth vvyth hys arme and ſcattereth them that are proud in the ymaginacion of theyr harte.
                  
                  Let no mā be moued wyth thys my true tranſlacion, in that I haue tranſlated aboue vvorketh myghtely, but here I ſay: he ſhevveth ſtrength. For the cauſe why I ſo do, is that the wordes myght be the playner & eaſyer to vnderſtande, whych oughte not to be bounde ether to tyme or place: but that ye nature and workes maye be more frelyer vttered, the whych he alwaye hath done, doth, and ſhall do, ſo that it is as much as though I had ſayd: God doth ſo playe the LORDE, that hys workes proſpere ſo myghtely, that he ſcattereth the proude, and geueth mercye vnto them that feare hym.
                  The arme of God is taken in ſcripture for hys owne power, by ye whych he worketh wythout ony meane of the creatures: the whyche is done priuelye and vnloked for, ſo

that noman is ware of it, before it be diſpatched: and that no man can knowe the ſame arme or power, ſaue onely by fayth. Wherfore, few do geue fayth therevnto, as Eſaye doth cōplayne in the .liii. Chapter, ſayenge: Who geueth credence vnto our preachyng? Or to whō is the arme of the LORD knowen? Al thys is done (as it followeth in ye ſame place) becauſe ye al thinges ar wrought pryuely vnder an vnequall appearaūce of ſuch power. Abac. the prophet ſayeth alſo in hys .iii. Chapter that God hath hornes in hys handes, meanynge thereby hys great ſtrength: yet notwythſtandynge doth he ſaye that the ſame power is hyd. But how is thys done? namely after thys maner:
                  Whan God worketh by the meane of creatures, than is it euidentlye ſene where ſtrength or febleneſſe is: wherof is ryſē this prouerbe: God doth ayde the ſtronger part. Whatſo euer prynce therfore vanquyſheth the other, the ſame is he, thorow whom God doth ſtryke the other. Yf a wolfe teare ony man, or he get ony dāmage otherwyſe, that ſame is done by ye creatures. Of thys wyſe doth God make or deſtroye one creature by another. He that ouercōmeth, ouercōmeth: he that abydeth, abydeth. But where as he

hymſelfe worketh wyth hys arme, there goeth it otherwyſe to worke: for there is ye matter deſtroyed or made agayne, contrary to our opinion, no man perceauynge it. Thys kynde of workynge doth he vſe in two ſortes of men, namely good and wycked: for ye good he ſuffreth to be ſo feble, ſtrengthleſſe and oppreſſed, that euery man wold thynke it were all done wyth them, and that they were at theyr latter meace, & at the very ſame tyme is he ſtrongly by them, and that ſo ſecretly, that they themſelues that ſuffre can not tell therof, but beleue it. There is ye ful ſtrength and arme of God. For whan the ſtrength of man fayleth, than cōmeth the power of God in: yf fayth only be there, waytynge for the ſame. Now whan the trouble is come to an ende, then doth it appeare what ſtrength lay hyd vnder the febleneſſe. Of thys wyſe (lo) was Chriſt deſtitute of ſtrength on ye croſſe and euen than wrought he exceadyng great thynges, vanquyſſyng ſynne, death, ye world, hell and all euell. After thys maner were all martyres ſtronge and ouercame: and after thys maner do all ſuch as be troubled nowe a dayes ouercōme. For the which cauſe Ioel ſayeth in the .iii. Chap. Let the weake man ſaye, I am ſtrōge, but in fayth, not in felyng,

vntyll it be nearehande come to an ende.
                  Agayne, the other parte ſuffreth God to heaue and exalte it ſelfe, wythdrawynge hys power from them, and letteth them be puft vp by reaſon of theyr owne ſtrength. For whan mans power cōmeth in, than goeth the power of God out. But whan the bladder is full, & euery mā thynketh to haue the better hande, then commeth God ſodenly, and prycketh the bladder, whereby all is daſhed. Thoſe fooles knowe not, that euen whan they ryſe and proſpere, they are forſaken of God, & that Gods arme is not wyth them. Therfore doth theyr endeuoure laſte an appoynted ſeaſon, and after that doth it ſayde and vanyſh, lyke a burble, and becommeth as though it neuer hadde ben, wherof Dauid (maruaylynge in the .lxxvii. Pſalme how it happened that the wycked and vngodly became ſo rych, careleſſe and myghtye) at the laſt doth ſay: I coulde not know this, vntyl I wēte into ye Sāctuary of God, & conſydred ye ende of theſe mē, namely: how yu haſt ſet thē in a ſlyppery place, that thou mayeſt caſt them downe headlynges, & deſtroye thē O how ſodenly do they cōſume, peryſh, and come to a fearfull ende? Yee euen as a dreame whan one awaketh, ſo makeſt thou theyr

ymage to vanyſh out of ye cytie. And agayne in the .xxxvi. Pſal. he ſayeth: I my ſelfe haue ſene ye vngodly in great power, & floryſhyng lyke a grene Baye tre: but whā I went by, lo, he was gone: I ſought hym, but he coulde no where be founde.
                  Lacke of fayth is only the cauſe that we can not alſo abyde a lytle, or els ſhulde we ſe ſeatly how the mercy of God is wyth them that feare hym, and the arme of God alſo agaynſt the proude wyth all force & ſtrength. We faythleſſe grope blyndfeld with our fyſt after the mercy of God and hys arme. The whych yf we do not continently fele, thā do we euen thynke all be loſt of our parte, and oure enemyes to haue gotten the felde: as thoughe both Gods mercy and grace were wythdrawen from vs, and hys arme to be agaynſt vs. And that cōmeth therby, becauſe we knowe not hys workes, wherfore we know not hym, hys mercy, nor hys arme. It is neceſſary, and he wyl be knowen by fayth Therfore muſt ye wytte & reaſon be ſhut vp, theyr eye offendeth vs, we muſte therfore plucke it out, and caſt it awaye.
                  Lo theſe are the two workes of God repugnaūt ech to other, wherin we are taught that to be the mynde of God, that he be

farre from the wyſe and prudente, but be neare vnto the foolyſh, whiche muſte ſuffre wronge. Thys maketh God to be loued and prayſed, and conforteth the ſoule, body and all powers.
                  Now conſydre the wordes: He ſcattereth them that are proude in the imaginacion of theyr harte. Thys ſcatterynge or wayſtynge is done (as it is ſayde) whan they are wyſeſte of all, and mooſte fulleſt of theyr owne wyſedome, for than ſurely is the wyſdome of God gone. But what waye can he ſcatter them better, than wyth depriuynge them of hys eternall wyſedome? and by permittynge them to be fylled wyth worldly & tranſitory wyſedome. It is pythy that ſhe ſayeth: them that are proude in the imaginacion of theyr harte, that is, ſuche as theyr owne mynde, vnderſtandynge (the which not God, but theyr harte doth miniſtre) doth greatly playſe, as though they only were the mooſt iuſteſt, wyſeſt and beſte: whereby they auaunce themſelues aboue ſuch as feare God, myſprayſynge theyr opinion and ryghte, reuylynge & perſecutynge them to the vtermooſte, ſo that theyr cauſe only muſt be iuſte and abyde. The which whan they haue optayned, they heaue them

ſelues vnto the cloudes, as the Iewes 
                        〈◊〉
                     , that wythſtode Chriſte, and yet perceaued not that theyr matter came to nought thereby, and was deſpyſed, and Chriſt contrarywyſe to be exalted and ſet vp vnto an exceadynge glory. Thus do we ſe than that thys verſe ſpeaketh of ſpirituall goodes, and teacheth by what meanes the workes of God are knowen on both partes, and teacheth vs alſo to embrace wyllyngly the pouerte of ſprete, and to ſuffre iniury, to permitte vnto oure aduerſaryes theyr requeſt, for they ſhal not longe reioyce. Herein is a ſtronge and ſure promyſe that the proude ſhal not eſcape Gods arme, they muſte be throwen downe, though they heaue themſelues neuer ſo ſore, yf we at the leeſt be fully ſo perſuaded. For where ſuch fayth is not, there doth God not worke ſuch greate workes, but leauynge thē he worketh openly by creatures as is declared before. But theſe are not true workes whereby he maye be knowē, for the powers of the creatures are ioyned to them alſo: Nother are they the bare workes of God, which ought be to ſuch, as he worketh alone, wtout ony foren helpe, which is done whan we are oppreſſed for oure opinion and ryghte, and ſuffre ye power of God to vſe hyr wyll in vs.

Theſe are hys noble workes.
                  Moreouer, Mary doth connyngly checke the vngodly hypocrites here, and loketh nother to theyr handes nor eyen, but to the harte, and ſayeth: them that are proude in the imaginacion of theyr harte, where wyth ſhe doth ſpecially meane the enemyes of the truth, euen as the Iewes were ſometyme agaynſte Chriſt, and as ſome are now a dayes lyke vnto them. For ſuche holy and learned men are not proude in clothynge and behaueoure, they praye, faſte, preache, ſtudy, ſaye maſſe oft, they go doukynge with theyr heades, and thynke nomā to be a greater enemy vnto pryde, couetouſneſſe, or hypocriſy than themſelues, and that noman be a greater frende of God than they themſelues. How coulde they hynder and hurte the truth, were not they ſo holy, honeſte & learned mē? For ſuch theyr vtter apperaūce, glyſtereth, ſhyneth and bleareth the eyes of the cōmune people. Good LORD how wel are they perſuaded, callynge vpō God, and take pytie vpon poore Ieſus that doth ſo euell, is proude, and finally not lyke vnto thē in ryghteouſneſſe & honeſty▪ Of them ſayeth Chriſt in the .xi. of Mathew: that wyſedome is iuſtifyed of hir chyldren, that is, they are wyſer

and more ryghteous than I myſelfe, whyche ame the godly wyſedome. Whatſoeuer I do that is nought, and muſt be checked and correcte of them.
                  Theſe are the mooſt wycked and poyſoneſt men on earth, whoſe pryde of harte is ſo depe and deuellyſh, that ſhe can brouke no medecyne nor wholſome counſell. For they heare not what is ſayde, yee they reken it not to be ſpoken vnto them, but vnto the wretched ſynner, which hath nede of it, they nede it not. Ihon baptiſte doth call them the generacion of vipers Mathew .iii. and Luke the thyrde: and euen ſo doth Chriſte alſo Mathew the .xii. and .xvi. Theſe are they that do not truely feare God, do & ſerue to be deſtroyed of God wyth theyre pryde and arrogācy. But ſeynge ther is noman that ſo perſueth ye truth & ryghteouſnes as theſe do, (though they thynke it be ongods behalfe as we haue ſayde before) therfore amonge the thre enemyes of God muſte they go before and beare the ſtandarde, the ſeconde & leeſt are the rych, whome the greate men and rulers, the thyrde enemyes do paſſe in executynge power. But theſe learned men excell ether of the other farre beyonde the nocke, for they do hurte on both partyes with theyr

bloudy entyſynge. The rych men quenche ye truthe by themſelues only: The men of authorite chace her from other: But theſe learned men quenche her cleane out in themſelues, & in ſteade thereof they brynge forth ye imaginacion of theyr owne harte, ſo that ſhe can neuer ryſe agayne. Now as the truth is better in herſelfe than men, in whome ſhe hath hyr dwellynge, ſo much are the learned men worſe than the greate men, or rych mē. O how doth God abhorre and hate ſuch, as they be worthy?
               
               
                  The thyrde worke is to ſubdue the proude.
                  
                     He putteth dovvne the myghty from the ſeate.
                  
                  Thys worke wyth the other followynge maye eaſely be perceaued by the two workes aboue rehearſed. For lyke as he deſtroyeth the wyſe and ſuttyll in theyr imaginacions and good meanynges: (where vnto they ſticke, and vſe theyr pryde agaynſte ſuche as feare God, whiche muſt ſuffre wronge, and theyr wytte and ryghteouſneſſe muſt be cō
                     demned, the whiche all is chefely done for ye loue of Gods worde.) Euen ſo he deſtroyeth

and putteth downe the myghty & great men wyth all theyr power and dominion, where vpon they leanynge, vſed theyr crueltye and pryde vpon theyre inferiours, and on the good lowlyones, the whiche muſt ſuffre punyſhmente, death and all euell of them. And as he comforteth thē that muſt ſuffre wrōge and ſhame for ryghteouſneſſe, the truth, and hys wordes ſake, euen ſo ſtrengtheth he thē, that ſuffre hurte and wronge: but the more he cōforteth thoſe that muſt ſuffre wronge, ſo much the more frayeth he the other. But thys all muſte be perceaued and loked for in fayth. For he deſtroyeth not the myghty, as ſoone as they haue deſerued it, ſufferyng them ſometyme vntyl theyr power or authorite be fyniſſhed: for than doth God kepe thē nomore, nother can they kepe themſelues, but do vanyſhe & fayde of theyr owne ſwyng wythout ony rumoure or ſedicion: and than ſuch as are oppreſſed comeforth and reioyce without ony vprour or noyſe. For the power of God is in them, which only abydeth.
                  Marke that ſhe ſayeth not, he deſtoyeth the ſyes or trones, but he putteth the myghty dovvne out of the ſeates: nother ſayeth ſhe, that he leaueth the oppreſſed vnder foote, but ſetteth them vp. For as longe

as thys worlde doth endure, ſo longe muſte Superiorite, Rule, Power & the Trones continue. But that they are euell vſed, contrary to the wyll of God, in doynge iniurye and wronge vnto ſuch as are good, and that they do alſo delyte therin, and exalte themſelues therein, and vſe it not with the feare of God, to his prayſe, and defence of iuſtice: that can he not ſuffre longe. As experience here of maye be ſene in all ſtoryes, how that God ſetteth vp one kyngdome and putteth downe another: howe he rayſeth one prouince, and putteth downe another howe he multiplyeth one nacion, and deſtroyeth another: as maye be ſene in the Aſſyrians, Babylonians, Perſes, Grekes and Romanes, which neuertheleſſe imagined theyr raygnes to endure euer. Euen ſo lykewyſe doth he not deſtroye reaſon, wyſedome and lawes, for they muſte be had, yf ye worlde ſhalbe mayntayned: but pryde, & the hyghmynded, which ſerue themſelues wt theſe gyftes, feare not God, perſecute ye good and gods lawe, & abuſe ſuch bewtyful giftes of god againſt hī.
                  Gods buſyneſſe is in that caſe now, that the wyſe and proude meaners, (yf I maye ſo call them) do mooſte communely ioyne themſelues with mē of authorite, and ſteare

them agaynſt the truthe, as Dauid wytneſſeth in the .ii. Pſalme, ſayenge: The kynges of the earth ſtande vp, & the rulers are come together, agaynſt the LORDE and agaynſt hys anoynted. Becauſe the lawe and ryght haue alwaye the wyſe, myghty and ryche agaynſte them, that is: the worlde, wyth hys greate and valeaunt powers: therfore doth the holy gooſte conforte them by the mouth of hys mother, that they be not abaſſhed nor doute, but let theſe wyſe, myghty and ryche alone, ſeynge they ſhall not longe endure. Yf the holyones and learned, takynge to thē the myghty, wyſe, rulers, gouernours and ye rych ſhulde all not ſtande agaynſt the truth, but be of hyr ſyde, where ſhulde vnryghteouſnes remayne? who ſhuld ſuffre wrōge or euel? Not ſo. For the holyones, myghty, ſuperious, the ryche and the beſte of the worlde, muſte fyghte agaynſt God and hys ryghteouſneſſe, and be the Deuels darlynges, as wytneſſeth the prophet Abacuc in the fyrſte chapter, ſayenge: Hys meate is pycked and deynty. That is: the wycked ſprete hath a denty touth, he loueth to eate of the ſweteſt, mooſt deyntyeſte and coſtlyeſt dyſhes, as ye Beer alſo doth hony. Therfore are the learned, the holy phariſes, the Herodes and the

rych euen the deuels deynties. Agayn what ſo euer the worlde doth refuſe, as the poore, lowly, ſymple, vyle, and deſpyſed, that dothe God choſe, (as wytneſſeth S. Paule .i. Cor. i.) that he maye ſuffre the vyleſt of ye worlde to be myſhādled of the beſt of the ſame: that ſo it be euidently knowen, that our ſaluaciō doth not ſtande in mans power, but only in the power & handes of God, as Paule doth alſo teſtify. Hereof cōmeth that theſe by wordes are cōmunely vſed: They that be learned, are peruerted. And a ruler is venyſon in heauen. And here rych, there poore. For the learned alaye not theyr hartes pryde: the myghty theyr oppreſſynge: nother do the rych deſpyſe theyr pleaſures, and fynally is it done that maye be done.
               
               
                  The fourth worke, is to exalte thē of lowe degre.
                  
                     And exalteth them of lovve degre.
                  
                  They of lovve degre are not to be taken here for thoſe that be lowly, but ſuch as be vnderlynges, and of no reputacyon befor the worlde. For it is euen the ſame worde ye ſhe ment, whan ſhe ſayd: For he hath loked vpon the lowe degre of hys handmayden. Neuertheleſſe, they that of theyr fre wyl are

nought & abiecte of harte, not ſekyng hyghe thynges, they are lowly in dede. Moreouer thys exaltynge is not to be vnderſtande, as that he ſhulde ſet them in the thrones & places of them that be putte downe, as he doth not ſet them that feare hym in the rowme of the learned that is proude, another whā he ſheweth mercy vpon them: but he geueth thē ſuch gyftes as do farre paſſe thoſe, namely: yt they beyng exalted in God ſpiritually, are ſet as iudges aboue all thrones, powers and knowlege, both here in thys worlde, and in the worlde to come: for they are better learned than al the learned and rulers. But how thys commeth to paſſe haue I ſhewed aboue in the fyrſt worke of God, nother nedeth it to be rehearſed here. But it is al ſaid to the comforte of them that ſuffre, and to ye frayenge of the tyraūtes, yf we had ſo much fayth as to conſyder it well.
               
               
                  The fyft and ſyxte workes.
                  
                     He fylleth the hongry vvyth good thynges, and letteth the rych go empty.
                  
                  It is ſayd aboue that they of lovve degre are not to be called thoſe that are of a vyle & lowly eſtate, but ſuch as are contente to be ſo taken, ſpecially whan they are compelled

therto for mayntaynynge the worde, ryght, & law of God. Euen ſo ought to be called hongry, not they that haue lytle or no meate, but they that wyllyngly do wante it, ſpecially yf they be cōpelled therto of other for Gods or hys truthes ſake. What is more abiecte, vyle, vayne or myſerable then the deue
                        •
                     l, them that be damned, or them ye be racked, famyſhed & hanged for theyr myſdedes, or what ſo euer they be ye are brought lowe agaynſt theyr wyll? Yet doth not God helpe them, but rather augmenteth theyr myſery. Of ſuch doth not the mother of God ſpeak, but of them that agre wyth God, which are one wyth God, & God is one wyth them.
                  Agayne, what hyndered Abrahā, Iſaac & Iacob ye they were ryche? What hyndered Dauid hys kyngly ſeate? ether Daniel ye power of Babilō? or who ſoeuer was or is in hygh degre & wealth, yf theyr harte doth not ſet ſtore by thē, or ſtandeth in hys owne conceate? Salomō ſayeth in ye .xvi. Chap. of the Prouerbes: It is the LORD that weyeth ye ſpretes or myndes, that is: he iudgeth not after ye vtter appearaūce, whether he be rych, poore, in authorite or abiecte: but after the ſprete and hys behaueoure in the aforeſayd eſtates. The difference of ſtates, maners &

perſones muſt remayne in earthe, as longe as we lyue: but the harte may not cleue vnto nor flye: not cleue vnto them of hygh eſtate and rych, nor flye the abiecte▪ deſpyſed and nedy. After thys maner ſayeth Dauid alſo in the .vii. pſalme: Maynteyne the iuſte thou ryghteous God, that tryeſt ye very hartes and the reynes. But mē iudge after the vtter appearaunce, wherfore they erre ofte.
                  And theſe workes are wrought ſecretly alſo (as is ſayde aboue of other) ſo yt no man feleth them vntyll they be ended. The rych man doth not perceaue hys vanite & myſery before he dye, or peryſh otherwyſe, as teſtifyeth the .lxxv. pſal. on thys wyſe: The proude ſhalbe robbed & ſlepe theyr ſlepe, & the myghty ſhalbe able to do nothyng wt theyr hādes. Contrarywyſe yt hongry can not tel how ful they be, before they come vnto ye ende of honger, for thā do they fynde the word of Chriſt in ye .vi. of Luke: Bleſſed are ye yt hōger here for ye ſhalbe ſatiſfyed, & thys cōfortable promyſe of Gods mother: He fylleth the hongry vvyth good thynges. It is ſo impoſſible that God ſhulde ſuffre ony hongry man to peryſh by famine whych truſteth in hym, that euen ye angels muſt come & fede hym. Helias the prophet dyd a rauen fede, & wyth

ſo muche meele as coulde be holden in one hande was he ſuſtayned a great whyle by ye wedowe of Sarepta. For he can not forſake them that put theyr truſt in hym, as wytneſſeth Dauid in the .xxxvi. pſal. ſayeng: I was yonge, & now am olde: yet ſawe I neuer the ryghteous forſakē, nor hys ſede to ſeke theyr breade. Who ſo truſteth in God, is ryghteous. And in the .xxxiii. pſal. ſayeth Dauid alſo: The rych ſhall wante and ſuffre honger: but they whych ſeke the LORDE, ſhal want no maner of thynge that is good. Lykewyſe alſo ſayde Anna the mother of the prophete Samuel. i. Reg. ii. They that were fylled afore, are ſolde for bread: and they that were hongry, are ſatiſfyed.
                  But the curſed infidelite doth alwaye wythſtand & let, yt God can not worke theſe thynges in vs, & that we can not perceaue & haue experience of it. We wyl be ful & haue plenty of al, before honger & neceſſite do cō
                     ſtrayne vs, prouydynge vs aforehande, yt we be not greued wt the nede & pouerte to come that ſo we nede none of Gods workes or grace. What fayth is yt wherby thou truſteſt in God, whan yu feleſt & knoweſt ſtoare ynough, wherwyth yu mayeſt helpe thyſelfe? Infidelite is ye cauſe yt we ſe ye word of God,

the truth, & ryght to lye vnder, and iniury to haue ye vpperhāde, & yt in the meane ſeaſō we kepe our peace, punyſhe nothynge, ſaye nothynge to it, nor forbyd ought: but let euery man haue ye brydel & rūne at large, ſuffryng hym to do as it pleaſeth hym. But what is the cauſe: Euen becauſe we feare to be attached alſo, & brought to pouerte, & ſo finally dye for hōger, & remayne euer an vnderlyng And yt is ſayd to ſet more by tēporal goodes, then by ye feare of God, & to worſhip thē as Idols in his ſteade: whereby we are vnworthy to heare or to vnderſtande this promyſe of God, full of cōforte, namely: that he exalteth the oppreſſed and of lovve degre, and putteth dovvne the proude: that he fylleth the poore vvyth good thynges, and letteth the rych go empty. And ſo come neuer to yt knowlege of hys workes, wythout ye whyche neuertheleſſe ther is no bleſſe, but muſt be dāned for euer, as ye .xxvii pſal. doth teſtifye, ſayenge: For they regarde not ye workes of ye 
                     LORD, nor ye operaciō of hys hādes: therfore ſhal he breake thē down, & not buyld thē vp. And yt ryghtfully, for they beleue not hys ſo many promyſes, coūtynge hym a lyght & faylyng God, vpō whoſe word they darre begynne nought: ſo lytle felynge

haue they of hys truth. Ye muſt aduenture & put your ſelues in haſarde vpon hys worde. For he ſayeth not: He hath fylled the ful, and ſet vp the hygh: but he hath fylled the hōgry, & hath exalted the lowly & vnderlynges. Ye muſte fyrſte come by honger in the myddes of nede, & know what hōger & nede do meane, ſo yt ye haue nought to truſt vnto, or yt ye may vſe hereafter, or whereby ye may be holpen hereafter, nother by yourſelfe, nor of other, but only of God: ſo that the worke yt is impoſſible vnto other, be only Gods. Thus muſt ye not only thynke & ſpeake of lowlyneſſe, but alſo come therto, ſticke faſt therin, be helpeleſſe & deſtitute and forſaken of euery man, that God onely maye worke there: or at the leeſt to deſyre ſuche and not ſho
                        •
                     e it yf we can attayne it wyth the dede. And for thys cauſe are we called Chriſtians, and haue the Goſpell (whyche the deuel and mē can not beare) that thereby we beynge come to anguyſhe and lowlyneſſe, God maye entre in to hys workes. Thynke ye by your ſelues, yf he ſhuld fyl you, before ye were hōgry or exalte you before ye were brought lowe, he ſhuld be fayne to playe the iuggler, not beynge able to fulfyl his promyſe, & ſo ſhuld his worke be nothyng ſaue a mockage, whā the

                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
neuertheleſſe doth ſay in the .C.x. Pſalme▪ The workes of hys handes are verite and iudgement, al hys cōmaundemētes are true Yf he ſhuld be fayne to helpe you at the intraūce of your anguyſh & lowlyneſſe, ether in euery ſmal ſuppreſſion & nede, than ſhuld hys workes be ſlenderer thā becōmeth hys maieſte: Where as it is ſayd in ye ſame pſal. that the workes of the LORDE are greate, ſought out of al them ye haue pleaſure therin
                  Let vs now loke vpon ye contrary parte alſo. Yf he ſhuld deſtroy and put downe the hygh & rych before they became hygh & rych how ſhuld he behaue hymſelfe therin? They muſt fyrſt come ſo hygh & ſo paſſynge in ryches, that euery mā, & they themſelues alſo muſt be perſuaded, (yee & yt it be ſo in dede) that no mā cā deſtroy, wtſtande, or roote thē out, & be ſo ſure of theyr cauſe, ye they ſay it ye Eſaye dyd prophecy in his .xlvii. chap. of the Babilonians, ſayeng: Heare now therfore thou wylfyl, that ſytteſt ſo careleſſe, & ſpeakeſt thus in thyn hart: I am alone, and with out me is ther none: I ſhal neuer be wedow nor deſolate agayne, (that is wythoute ſtrength and ayde.) And yet both theſe thynges ſhall come vnto the in one daye, in the the twynckelynge of an eye. &c.

There hath God than an occaſion to worke hys worke. Of thys wyſe dyd he ſuffre Pharao to heaue hymſelfe aboue the chyldren of Iſraell, and to oppreſ
                        •
                     e them, as God doth teſtifye of hym in the .ix. chapter of Exodus, ſayenge: I haue 
                        ••
                     ered the vp for thys cauſe, euen to ſhew my power vpon the, and that my name myght be declared in all landes. Of ſuche enſamples is the Bible euen full, which teach nothynge els ſaue God wor
                        •
                     es and workes, and refuſe both the workes and doctrines of men.
                  Beholde now thys ſtronge cōforte, that is, that not man, but God hymſelfe, geueth not only ſomewhat, but fylleth and ſatiſfyeth. And in that ſhe addeth vvithgood thynges, ſhe ſignifyeth that ſuch fyllyng ſhal not be hurtefull, but profytable and wholeſome, ſo that it ſhall do good both to body & ſoule. By this is ſhewed moreouer that they were empty, and full of all nede. For (as is ſayde before) by ryches are vnderſtāde all faydyng and tranſitory thynges, that concerne the body, wherewyth the ſoule is alſo reioyced. Euen ſo alſo by honger ought to be vnderſtande in this place, not only wāte of meate but of all tranſitory thynges: for ſomtyme maye a mā forbeare al thynges ſaue meate

ſo that for the mooſt parte all tranſitory go
                        •
                     
                     des and occupyenges are for theſame. With oute meate can noman lyue, thoughe they maye lyue without clothynge, houſe, mony goodes and men, therfore doth ſcripture here comprehende the temporall goodes for the mooſt neceſſaryeſt, profitableſt and mooſte vſualleſt, that can leeſt be forborē, inſomuch that ſhe calleth couetous mē and them that be ſo gredy vpon the vnſtable ryches, belly ſeruaūtes, and Paule doth call ye belly theyr God. How coulde than ony body entyce vs ſo earneſtly and with more comforte to wyl full honger and pouerte, than theſe vehemēt wordes of Gods mother, namely that God wyl fede euery hongry ſoule with good thynges? Whome ſuch comfortable wordes, ſuch honoure and prayſe of pouerte doth not perſuade and entyce therto, he is ſurely wythout fayth and confidence as an Heythen.
                  Agayne, how can ony man blame ryches more, and fraye the rych more, than wt thys one clauſe, that God letteth the rych go empty? O what greate and plentifull thynges are theſe both: the fyllynge of God and the lettyng go empty? how lytle cā ony creature helpe or geue counſell therein? A man is abaſſhed whan he heareth hys fathers defiaunce,

or his mayſters diſpleaſure, and we hygh & rych are not diſmade whan God doth defy vs. And not only proclameth warre, but threateneth alſo deſtruccion, abiection and rootynge out: Contrary wyſe is it a ioye whan the father is meke, and the mayſter mylde, ſo that many aduenture theyr lyfe & al that they haue there vpō. And we hauyng ſuch promyſe, and ſuch ſtronge cōſolacion, cā
                     not vſe and brooke it, we can not geue thankes for it, nor yet reioyce therein. O thou lamentable vnbelefe, whiche paſſeſt the ſereneſſe of a blocke, and the hardnes of a ſtone, that thou cāſt not perceaue ſuch great thynges. Let thys now be ſufficiently ſpokē of the ſyxe workes of God.
               
               
                  
                     He remēbreth mercy, and helpeth vp hys ſeruaunte Iſraell.
                  
                  After the rehearſynge of Gods workes both in her and in other, doth Mary nowe come agayne to the begynnynge and fyrſte, and cloſeth the Magnificat wyth ye greateſt and chefe of all the godly workes, which is ye incarnacion of the ſonne of God, and confeſſeth here frely that ſhe is a handmaydē & ſeruaunte of all the worlde, ſeyng the worke is accōplyſhed in her, the which is profitable not only to her, but vnto all Iſraell. Yet dealeth

ſhe Iſraell in two, and bryngeth that parte only that ſerueth God. Nother doth ony mā ſerue God, ſaue he that letteth hym be hys God, and ſuffreth hym to worke hys worke in hym wherof we haue ſpoken before: Although that worde Gods ſeruice (alas for pytie) is brought into ſo ſtraunge vnderſtandynge and vſe, that whoſo heareth it, doth thynke nothynge, vpon ſuch workes, but rather vpon ryngynge, vpon the ſtone worke and tymber of the temple, vpō the cenſoure, vpon the burnynge of the lyghtes, vpon the blarynge, the golde, the ſyluer, the whyte clothes, the pearles, the veſtimentes and ſurplyſes, the chalice, the pyre, the organes & tables, the proceſſion and ſtations, and that mooſt of all is, vpon the bablyng and talyng wyth God vpon beede ſtones. Foo (alas) Gods ſeruyce is come hetherto, whereof he knoweth nothynge. And we alſo know none other ſaue thys. We ſynge the Magnificat dayly, and ye with great ſolemnite and lowd, and yet kepe ſecrete the true vnderſtādynge thereof more and more. But yet doth thys text ſtonde ſtyfly: Yf we do not learne theſe workes of God, and ſuffre them in vs, than ſhall ther be no Gods ſeruice, no Iſraell, no grace, no mercye, nor no God, though we

crye out in temples, and rynge tyll we bruſt and gaue therto all the goodes of ye worlde. For God hath geuen no commaundemente concernynge that, & therfore douteleſſe can he haue no pleaſure therein.
                  The incarnacion therfore of Chriſte doth auayle vnto ſuche an Iſraell, that ſerueth God. Such one is hys owne and beloued people, for whoſe ſake alſo he is become man, to delyuer them from the thraldome of the Deuell, ſynne, death and hell, and to brynge them vnto ryghteouſneſſe and euerlaſtynge lyfe and blyſſe: that is the helpyng vp that ſhe ſyngeth of here. And Paule doth alſo proclame thys, ſayenge in the .ii. chapter vnto Titus, that Chriſte gaue hymſelfe for vs, to redeme vs from all vnryghteouſneſſe & to purge vs, to be a peculiar people vnto hymſelfe. And Peter alſo in hys fyrſt epiſtle the .ii. chapter, ſayeth: Ye are that choſen generacion, that kyngly preſtholde, that holy nacion, that peculiar people. &c. Theſe are the godly ryches, and the greate mercyes of God, the whych we haue optayned by none of oure deſeruynge, but of the only mercy and grace. Wherfore ſhe ſayeth alſo: He remembreth mercy. She ſayeth not: He remebreth oure merite and worthyneſſe, for we

were in neceſſite and vnworthy. Of this thā doth hys prayſe and honoure ſpringe, & oure boaſte and preſumptiō is ſuaged. He had nothynge at whoſe ſyghte he myght be moued, ſaue only hys owne mercy, the whiche alſo was therfore to be ſhewed on all nacions.
                  But wherfore ſayeth ſhe more: He remembreth mercy, than he loked vpō hys mercy? Euen becauſe he had promyſed theſame, as the verſe followynge doth declare. Moreouer, he wytheld ye ſame mercy ſo lōge, that he ſemed nearehande to haue forgotten it: (euen as all hys workes do ſeme to haue no care for vs) neuertheleſſe whā he came, it was euidently knowen that he had not forgotten vs, but that he was euer mynded to fulfyll hys promyſes.
                  Truth it is, that by Iſraell the Iewes only are ment, and not the Gentiles: but ſeyng they refuſed hym, he choſe a few of them, and ſatiſfyed the name of Iſraell therewith, and made a ſpirituall Iſraell. Thys is figured Gen. xxxvii. by the patriarke Iacob wraſtlynge wyth the angel, whoſe thygh the angell touched, and made hym to halte. For therby was ſignifyed that the chylderen of Iſraell ſhulde not from thenceforth boaſte theyr carnall byrth, (as the Iewes do) where

he alſo obtayned the name Iſraell, that he thenceforth ſhulde ſo be called, as a Patriarke, which were not only Iacob, the father of carnall chyldren, but alſo Iſrael the father of ſpirituall chylderen. To thys doth agre alſo the name Iſrael, the which is as muche to ſaye, as, the LORDE of God. That is ſurely a very holy & hygh name, cōteynynge in it ſelfe that great mirakle, that a man by the Godly fauour, hath in a maner brought God in his power, ſo that God do accōplyſh all mans requeſtes: as we ſe alſo that the church is made one wt God thorow Chriſte, euē as a bryde vnto the brydegrome, which hath power of hyr brydegromes body and all that he hath. All this is done by fayth, whereby a man obeyeth the wyll of God, and God agayne agreeth vnto mans wyll, ſo that Iſrael be ſo conformable to God, and of ſuche power ouer hym, yt in God, wt God & by God he do all thynges, & be able to do all thynges
                  Thys (lo) ſignifyeth Iſraell. For Schar in Hebrue is as muche to ſaye, as a lorde or a prince, and El ſignifyeth God, & ioynynge them together, maketh Iſrael. Such an Iſraell wyll God haue, wherfore whan Iacob hadde wreſtled wyth the angell & ouercome him, ye angel ſayd: Thou ſhalt nomore be called

Iacob, but Iſraell: for thou haſt ſtryuē wyth God and with men, & haſt preuayled. Many thynges more were to be ſayde hereof, for Iſraell is a hygh myſtery.
               
               
                  
                     Euen as he promyſed vnto oure fathers, Abraham and to hys ſede for euer.
                  
                  Here are all merites and preſumpcion ouerthrowen, and the grace and mercy of God are lyfte vp. For God hath not holpen vp Iſraell for hys owne merites, but for hys owne promyſe. Of only and mere grace hath he promyſed, and of mere grace alſo hath he fulfilled it. Therfore ſayeth Paule in the .iii. chapter to the Galathians that God dyd bynde hymſelfe to Abraham foure hundreth yeare before he gaue the lawe by Moſes, leſt ony man myghte ſaye or boaſt that he had deſerued or obtayned ſo greate grace and promyſe by the lawe or the workes of theſame: Thys ſame promyſe doth the mother of God laude and prayſe aboue all thynges, attributynge the mooſte cleare worke of the incarnacion vnto the pure, vndeſerued, godly and fre promyſe made vnto Abraham.
                  Thys promyſe of God vnto Abraham is ſpecially wrytten in the .xii. and .xxii. chapters of Geneſis, and diuerſe other plades,

ſoundynge on thys maner: In thy ſede ſhall all the naciōs of the earth be bleſſed. The which wordes of God, S. Paull and al Prophetes (as they be worthy) lyfte vp vnto the cloudes, for in thoſe wordes both Abraham and all hys poſterite are ſaued, becauſe that Chriſte is comprehended in theſame, and promyſed to be the Saueoure of all the worlde. Moreouer thys is Abrahams boſome, wherein all they that were ſaued before Chriſtes natiuite, dyd remayne. Nother was ony man euer ſaued without theſe wordes, though he had done all the good dedes that euer were done, the which we wyl loke vpon continently.
                  Fyrſt doth it fellowe by theſe wordes, that all the worlde, excepte Chriſte, was in thraldome and daunger of ſynne, damnacion and curſe wyth all hys workes and connynge. For whan he ſayeth, that not ſome, but all nacions ſhalbe bleſſed in Abrahams ſede, it is manifeſte, that wythout theſame ſede; ther ſhalbe no bleſſe. What neded God to promyſe the bleſſe wyth ſo earneſte, ſo greate and ſo preciouſe, an oth, yf the bleſſe and not rather the curſe had ben in the worlde? Out of thys place haue the Prophetes ſucked and concluded many thynges

as namely: that all men are euell, vayne, lyars, fayners, blynde and brefely Godleſſe or wythout Godlyneſſe: ſo that it be no worſhyppe in ſcripture to be called a man. For that name is nomore worth by God, than yf a man were called before the worlde a lyar or periured. So wholy dyd he peryſh by Adams fall, yt the curſe beynge borne wt hym, was nearehāde become one nature wt hym.
                  Secondely it followeth, that that ſede of Abraham neded not to be borne by naturall ſede of man and wyfe: For ſuche byrth is curſed, and bringeth forth curſed frutes, as is ſayde euen now. Yf now all the worlde was to be delyuered from thys curſe by Abrahams ſede and to be bleſſed, it was requyred that ye ſede were bleſſed before, and vntouched or vndefyled of ſuche a curſe, and to be a mere bleſſe, full of grace and truthe. Agayne, yf God that is no lyar doth promyſe (and that wyth an oth) a naturall ſede vnto Abraham, that is a naturall and lawfull chylde, whyche ſhalbe borne of hys fleſh and bloude: it was neceſſary that ſuch one ſhulde be a true naturall man, borne of the fleſhe and bloude of Abraham. Now do theſe two thynges ſtryue together: To be the naturall fleſhe and bloude of Abraham,

and yet not to be borne by man and wyfe after the courſe of nature. And therfore vſeth he thys worde, thy ſede, and not thy chylde or thy ſonne: that ſo it were clere and euident, that it muſt be hys naturall fleſhe and bloude, as it is alſo hys ſede.
                  Who wyll now here attayne a meane, that the worde and oth of God be true, wherin thynges ſo contrary do mete? That ſhall God ſurely do, whiche can accomplyſh that he hath promyſed, though noman couet it before it be done. Therfore do hys wordes and dedes requyre no naturall wytte, but a fre and pure fayth. Lo how he hath vnyed theſe two thynges: He geueth vnto Abrahā a naturall ſede, of one of hys doughters, the pure and chaſte virgine Mary, by the holy gooſte, wythout the workynge of man. There was not the naturall concepciō and generacion wyth hyr curſe, nother coulde it ſtayne the ſede: and yet neuertheleſſe is thys the naturall ſede of Abraham as well, as all other Abrahams yſſue. Beholde than, thys is the bleſſed ſede of Abraham, whereby all the worlde is delyuered of hys curſe. For from hym that beleueth on thys ſede, calleth vpon it, confeſſeth it,

and cleueth there vnto, is the curſe taken awaye and forgeuen as a cryme, and al bleſſe is geuen him, for the ſounde of the word and oth of God, namely: In thy ſede ſhall all nacions be bleſſed. That is, Loke what is to be bleſſed, that ſhal be bleſſed, by thys ſede and none other. Lo thys is ye ſede of Abrahā, the which is borne of none of hys chylderen, (as the Iewes haue alwaye loked for to haue ben) but of hys only doughter the virgine Mary.
                  That ſame meaneth here the bewtyful mother of God whan ſhe ſayeth that God hath taken vp Iſraell, accordynge to the promyſe made vnto Abraham: vnto Abrahā (I ſaye) and all hys ſede. Veryly ſhe ſawe that the promyſe was than fulfylled in her, and therfore ſayd ſhe: It is now fulfylled, he hath now taken hym vp, he hath accōplyſhed hys worde by the only callynge to mynde hys mercy. Here do we beholde the fundamente of the goſpell, wherfore all doctrines & preachynges of hym do dryue vnto Chriſtes fayth and Abrahams boſome. For ther is no counſell, nor helpe yf thys fayth is wantynge, whereby ye bleſſed ſede maye be vnderſtand. And veryly ❧ all the ſcripture hangeth vpon thys oth. For all that is wrytten in ye whole

Bible, doth behold and concerne Chriſt. Beſydes thys do we ſe that al the fathers of the olde teſtamente, and all Prophetes alſo had theſame fayth, and theſame goſpell that we haue, as Paule doth teſtifye .i. Corinth. x. For in thys teſtamente of God & Abrahās boſome dyd they all remayne by ſtedfaſte fayth, and therfore are ſaued: ſauynge that they beleued in the ſede that was promyſed and for to come, but we beleue in ye ſede that hath appeared and is geuen. Neuertheleſſe the truth of the promyſe remayneth on both partes, it is all one fayth, one ſprete, one Chriſt, one LORDE that was at that tyme and is now, and ſhall be for euer, as the .xiii. chapter to the Hebrues doth beare witneſſe.
                  But that the Iewes had a lawe geuen them afterwarde, that is not lyke vnto thys promyſe, for it was done therfore, that by ye lyght of the lawe they myghte knowe theyr curſed nature, and that they ſhulde more feruently and wyth more whoter deſyre ſygh and longe for thys promyſed ſede of bleſſyng in the whiche they had a prerogatiue before all nacions on earth. But they haue turned the prerogatiue into hurte and dammage, & haue thought to accomplyſh and fulfyll the lawe by theyr owne ſtrength, and therfore

haue not they ſene theyr wretched myſery. And after thys maner haue they ſhut ye dore to themſelues, ſo that ye ſede promyſed muſte nedes go by them, in ye which opiniō they remayne yet, God geue it be not longe. Amē. Thys hath ben the debate that all the Prophetes haue had wyth them, for ſeynge the Prophetes knew wel ynough the meanyng of the lawe, namely: that thereby the wyckedneſſe of our nature ſhulde be knowē, and to learne how Chriſte ſhulde be called vpon, therfore refuſed they all the workes & lyues of the Iewes, that wente not in that waye: for the whych cauſe the Iewes cōceaued an anger agaynſt thē, & ſlew thē, as thoſe that refuſed ye gods ſeruice, good workes, and the good lyuyng, as ye hypocrytes and graceles ſayntes d
                        •
                      ſometyme. Of whome ther were not a lytle to be ſpoken.
                  That ſhe ſayth: and to hys ſede foreuer, is to be vnderſtāde, ye ſuch grace ſhall laſte in Abrahams bloud (which are ye Iewes) frō that tyme forth, thorow all tymes, vntyll the laſte daye. For though ye mooſt parte be hardened, yet are ther ſomtyme parte of them (though but a fewe) that turne vnto Chriſt, & beleue in hym, ſeynge thys promyſe of God both not fayle, namely: ye the promyſe was

made vnto Abraham & hys ſede, not for one, nor for a thouſande yeares, but for euer, that is: from one mās tyme vntyll another without ceaſſynge. And for thys cauſe ought not we to intreate ye Iewes ſo vncourteouſly, for amonge thē are yet ſome that ſhalbe Chriſtians and dayly do ſome of thē turn to Chriſt. Moreouer, they only, and not we Gentiles haue the promyſe made vnto thē, that ther ſhalbe euer ſome Chriſtiās in ye ſede of Abraham, that ſhall knowlege ye bleſſed ſede. Our matter is founded vpō the mere grace with out the promyſe of God, who knoweth how and whan? Yf we lyued godly & Chriſtenly, and with mekeneſſe brought them to Chriſt, that veryly were the beſte maner and way.
                  Who wolde become a Chriſtian, whā he ſeyeth Chriſten men deale ſo cruelly wt mē? Not ſo ye welbeloued Chriſtiās. Let ye truth be ſhewed them after a good maner, ye which yf they refuſe, leaue thē alone. Howe many Chriſtiās are ther now adayes, that regard not Chriſt, nother heare hys worde? beynge worſe thā ye Gentiles or Iewes, whome neuertheleſſe they do let be in reſte, yee do thē reuerēce, makyng nearehand an Idol of thē.
                  Here wyll we reſt at thys tyme, prayng god for ye true vnderſtādyng of thys virgins ſōg of prayſe called Magnificat, ye which not only

do ſhyne and ſpeake, but alſo inflame & lyue in the body and ſoule: the which oure Saueoure Chriſte graunte vs. Amen.
                  Now do I returne vnto you mooſt boū
                     teous prince, deſyrynge youre hyghneſſe to take my boldeneſſe in worth. Though I know that your goodneſſes youth hath many inſtructers and dayly admonicions, yet coulde I not repreſſe the care of my ſubiection and due faythfulneſſe, and beſydes this the charge of my conſcience, and the exhortacion of your hyghneſſe. Seynge we all do hope, that in tymes to come, the rule of the commune welth (the which oure mercyfull god geue to proſper) ſhall come to your hyghneſſe handes: the which is a greate thyng, yf it do well befal: and agayne a peryllous and myſerable thynge, yf it do befall otherwyſe. But vnto vs it becōmeth to loke and praye for the beſte, neuertheleſſe carefully to feare is the worſt of all.
                  Let your hyghneſſe call thys to mynde, namely: That God neuer ſuffred one Gentile kynge or prince in all the ſcripture to be cōmended, no not ſence ye worlde was created, but cauſed them alwaye to be rebuked: the whiche is a dredefull enſample vnto all ſuperiorites. Nother dyd he fynde moreouer

ony laudable and blameleſſe kyng amonge hys peculyare people of Iſrael. Beſydes all thys among the Iewes, whych were ye chefe and heade of all mankynde, lyfted vp and beloued aboue all creatures, were but a fewe, nother aboue ſyxe kynges prayſed. Finally that deare part and precious prince Dauid, whych left none nother behynde nor by him that was lyke hym in worldly polycye: the whych though he beynge full of the feare & wyſedome of God, dyd rule and iudge all thynges by the only cōmaūdement of God, and not by hys reaſon, yet neuertheleſſe ſtō
                     bled ſometyme. So ye ſcripture alſo, becauſe ſhe coulde not blame hys gouernaunce, and yet muſt recyte ye hurte of the people, where by Dauid was cloyde, dyd not impute it vnto Dauid, but vnto ye people, ſayenge: That God was wroth wyth ye people, and ſuffred Dauid the holy man to be ſteared of Sathā, whyche gaue hym in hys mynde to nōbre ye people, for the whych dede .lxx. thouſand mē dyd dye of the peſtilence.
                  All thys hath God ſo brought to paſſe to fraye the ſuperiorite, to retayne thē in feare and to admonyſh them of theyr daungers. For great ryches, great honours, great power, greate fauoure, and beſyde thys many

flatterers, (from whom no lorde is fre) do ſo of all partes beſege and aſſaulte the hart of a prynce, and dryue hym ſo to pryde, to the forgetfulneſſe of God, to not carynge ether for the people or commune wealth, to pleaſure, to raſhneſſe, to curioſite, to ydelneſſe: brefely to all vnryghteous thynges and vyces, that no cytie nor ſtronge holde can ſo be beſeged & aſſaulted. Now he that beyng warned by the aforeſayd enſamples wyll not anoyde, and vſe the feare of God for a banke or fence, where (I pray you) ſhall he become? For yf ony lorde or ſuperioure do not loue his people, & do not apply therto his mynde, not how he lyue deyntely, but how by hys enſample hys ſubiectes maye be ſteared to goodneſſe, all is done wyth hym, and ye ſtate of hys dominion ſhall thence forth be onely to the loſſe of hys ſoule: nother ſhall it auayle him that he doth foūde great moneth-means, trentals, diriges, and yeare tydes, buylde great monaſteryes, altares, or thys or that. God ſhall requyre of hym an accōpt of hys eſtate and offyce, nother ſhall he care for ony thynge els.
                  Wherfore mooſt boūteous lorde and prince I commende thys Magnificat vnto your hyghneſſe, but ſpecially ye fyfte & ſyxte

verſes, aboute ye whych I haue cōprehended it, prayenge & requyrynge your hyghneſſe to drede nothynge ſo ſore all your lyfe tyme on earth, (no not hell) as it that ye bleſſed mother of God callth here the imaginacyō of the mynde. For ye ſame is ye greateſt, ye fearceſt, the myghtyeſt and the moſt hurtfulleſt enemye of all kynde of men, ſpecially of ſuperiours. Hys names are: Reaſon, good opinion or intent, wherof muſt come all counſels and gouernaunces. Nother can youre hyghneſſe be in ſauegarde, yf ye haue not thys alwaye ſuſpecte, and wyth the feare of God followe not only the reaſons, not only of your peres and ſenatours, but alſo of all them that be of your hyghneſſe counſell. No mans coūſel is to be deſpyſed, nother agayne is it only to be truſted vnto.
                  But what muſt be done than? Thys verely: that your hyghneſſe do not ſende away your prayer in cloyſters vnder monkes, chanons and freres cooles, ether vnder chalices as it is a wycked maner now a dayes to do, to buyld vpon other mēs prayers & to truſte therin, & to ſet lytle ſtore by theyr own. But your hyghnes muſt take a fre, hardy & a mery corage, & ſettynge aſyde ye feble mynde cal vpon God, ether in your harte or els where

ſecretlye, layenge at hys fete the keyes, and conſtraynynge hym wyth hys owne ordynaunce, on thys wyſe: Behold my God and father, thys is thy worke, thys is thyne ordinaunce that I ſhulde be borne and gendred to rule in thys ſtate, the whych noman wyll denye, and thou thyſelfe knoweſt whether I be worthy or vnworthy of it, neuertheleſſe here am I ready as thou ſeyſt, and as euery man knoweth. Graunt therfore my father and LORDE, that I maye rule thys people to thy prayſe and theyr wealth: and I beſeke the ſuffre me not to ſtāde in myne own conceate and to myne owne reaſon, but be thou my reaſon and appoynted marke.
                  Let hym begyn vpon lyke ſentence and procede in what thynge ſo euer he haue in hande, cōmēdyng it to God. Moreouer, how well God be appayed wt ſuche a prayer and mynde, doth Salomō, (yt in lyke maner dyd praye) declare: yt whyche prayer I haue alſo ioyned hereto, the your hyghneſſe maye be ſteared gladly to truſt in the grace of God, that both hys feare & mercy maye byde with you. And herwyth I cōmende me vnto your hyghneſſe, the whych I praye God to preſerue vnto a lucky gouernaunce. Amen.
               
            
         
         
            
            The prayer that kynge Salomon prayed, a patron for all princes, taken out of the .iii. chapter of the iii. boke of the kynges.
            
               THe LORDE appeared vnto Salomon at Gibeon in a dreame of the nyght, & God ſayd: Are what I ſhall geue the. Salomon ſayde: Thou haſt done greate mercy vnto my father Dauid thy ſeruaunte, ſo that he walked before the in faythfulneſſe & ryghteouſneſſe, and in a true harte wyth the, and thys mercy haſt thou layed vp for hym, and geuen hym a ſonne to ſyt vpon hys ſeate, as it is now come to paſſe.
            Now LORDE my God, thou haſte made thy ſeruaunt kynge in my father Dauids ſteade: As for me, I am but a ſmal yōge man, knowynge nother myne outgoyng nor ingoynge. And thy ſeruaunt is amonge the people whome thou haſt choſen, whych is ſo great, that no man can nombre them nor deſcribe thē for multytude. Geue thy ſeruaūte therfore an obediente harte, that he maye iudge thy people, and vnderſtande that

what is good or bad: for who is able to iudge thys thy myghty people?
            Thys pleaſed the LORDE well, that Salomon axed ſuch a peticion. And God ſayd vnto Salomon: For ſo muche as thou axeſt thys, and deſyreſt not lōge lyfe, nother ryches, nother the ſoules of thyne enemyes, but vnderſtandynge to heare iudgement, beholde therfore haue I done accordyng to thy wordes. Beholde I haue geuen the an harte of wyſedome and vnderſtandynge, ſo yt ſuche one as thou, hath not ben before the, nother ſhal ryſe vp after the. Yee and that thou haſt not prayed for, haue I geuen the alſo, namely: ryches and honoure, ſo that amonge the kynges of thy tyme ther is not ſuch one as thou. And yf thou wylt walke in my wayes, ſo that thou kepe myne ordinaunces and lawes, as Dauid thy father hath walked, than wyll I geue the a longe lyfe.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            ¶A confutaciō of the ſonge called Salue Regina, prouyng by ſcriptures layed therto, that it is rather Idolatry, than lawfull to be ſonge of true Chriſten men.
            
               ¶Grace, mercy and ſtrength of ſprete that commeth of God the father and our LORD Ieſu Chriſt do I wyſh vnto the gentle reader.
               
                  SEynge welbeloued brethren and ſyſters that nowe by the boūteous goodneſſe & mercy of God, the mooſt clere and ſhyninge lyght of the Goſpel is declared vnto vs agayne in thys preſēt world, therfore may we ryght well thanke & prayſe God that he hath wytſafe vs to come vnto the ryghte vnderſtandynge & knowlege by ye power of hys lyuyng worde: Namely, that we knowe perfectlye now how and after what faſhiō we ought to prayſe and to thanke God, & how to vtter &

declare thankfully our fayth, (whych nother can, nor ought be ſloggyſh) not only inwardly, but alſo outwardly, (as Dauid ye prophete dyd) thankynge and prayſynge the LORDE Ieſus wyth ſonges and melody: as Paul exhorteth hys Coll. iii. to do. For yf a man beleue from the harte, he ſhalbe made ryghteous: and yf a mā knowlege wyth the mouth, he ſhalbe ſaued. Rom. x.
               By thys is it lykely that the ſonges whiche are nowe vſed in churches euery where were fyrſt inſtitute of the fathers for thys intēt: namely, ſo to declare & boldlye to exercyſe openly the inwarde fayth. For it is manifeſt that we haue no commaundemēt concernynge thys in all the new teſtament. And for thys cauſe ought we Chriſtians to haue ſuch ſonges and ballades now alſo, wherewyth the name of God be auaunced and magnifyed, and not diſhonoured nor blaſphemed.
               But alas thys coſtume is not only come to ſuch myſuſe, that Chriſtes honoure is not vttered therin, but alſo that Lucifer ye prince of thys worlde hath thereby confirmed and fortifyed hys kyngdome: ſo yt ther is noughte vſed therin now ſaue only the byſhop of Romes fayres: and the thynge wherein the ſeruice

and honoure of God was ſuppoſed to haue conſyſted, haue ben occupyed wyth nothynge ſaue byenge and ſellynge, choppynge and chaungynge, yee playne vſury. Euen as Eſay doth featly prophecy of them, ſpeakyng in the perſone of almyghtye God on thys wyſe: It is ye that haue burnte vp my vyneyard, the robbery of ye poore is in your houſe &c. vpon whom Chriſt alſo geueth a fearfull ſentēce ful of dredful curſes, ſayenge: Wo vnto you ſcrybes & phariſes, ye hypocrites, that deuoure wedowes houſes, and that vnder the coloure of prayenge longe prayers: therfore ſhall ye receaue the greater damnacyon. As though he wolde ſaye: wyth youre great howlynge do ye deceaue the poore innocentes, of whoſe ſweate and bloude ye fyll your paunches, ſo ful that one wolde thynke ye had eaten euen the poore innocentes houſes alſo. But ſeynge they ſtudy nothynge ſo earneſtly as to ſerue theyr God ye belly, therfore do not they care for ye worde of God, but do ruffle it vpon an heape: yee & ſell Chriſte and hys worde, as it may be wel perceaued of them that take diligent hede vnto it. But what nede more wordes hereof, ſeyng we ſe dayly one bayte▪ after the other put at the angle to catch and to ſeduce the ſymple people

the more, whyche now is partely delyuered from the Babilonicall captiuite. For the pardōs (where by they were wonte to ſcrape a good ſumme of pens) that once were refuſed begynne now to preaſſe in agayne in an other hue & vyſoure, namely that they ſhall be had frely. Neuertheleſſe the ende wyll declare to what intente thys be inſtitute.
               I counſell therfore euery Chriſten brother and ſyſter, that deſyreth to be a membre of Chriſte, to abyde by theyr heade Ieſus Chriſte lokynge for the true pardons of his merites, ſuckynge the pardonynge and forgeuynge of theyr ſynnes out of hys paſſion & woūdes only. I wyll paſſe ouer to ſpeake of thys matter at thys tyme, for it is not now myne 
                     •
                  ntent ſo to do, leſt I go to farre fro my purpoſe: that is, ye I wolde haue euery man to geue diligent hede vnto the ſonges that be vſually ſonge in our churches or temples, and ſpecially of one, the whyche by the inſpiracyon of the deuel is ſo ryfe and ſo corrupped, ye God is therby depryued of his honoure, (contrary to the fyrſt commaundement) and it is geuen vnto a creature. This maye be proued in the ſonge of prayſe that is ſonge to the bleſſed virgine Mary the mother

of Chriſt, wherin we imagine to do her hygh ſeruice and worſhip, whyche notwythſtandynge is pytefully diſhonoured & mocked therewyth: for therin is great ydolatry, ſo that no greater ſpyte can be done to her, than to ſynge ſuch ſonges of prayſe vnto her, wherin hyr ſonne Ieſus Chriſte, by whome ſhe receaued all mercy▪ grace, vertue, goodneſſe and holyneſſe, accordyng to hyr owne confeſſion Luke in the fyrſt chapter, ſayeng▪
                  
                     My ſoule magnifyeth the LORDE.
                     
                     And my ſprete reioyceth in God my Saueoure.
                     For he hath loked vpon the lovve degre of hys handmayden.
                     Beholde, from hence forth ſhal al generacions call me bleſſed.
                     For he that is myghty hath done great thynges vnto me, and Holy is hys name.&c.
               
               In the whych wordes ſhe confeſſeth God to be hyr Saueoure, whych muſt ſaue vs all alſo, or els we ſhall be damned for euer. We ought therfore to go to hym aſkynge mercy and grace of hym, for he is our hope, aduocate and ſaluacion.
               Wyll ye therfore worſhippe Mary aryght, worſhip her in Ieſu Chriſt hir ſonne, thankynge and prayſynge him for workynge

ſo wonderfull power (whyche he tofore had promyſed vnto the fathers) in that veſſell. Now yf thy contemplacion or inwarde deuocion doth chaūce vpon the maydē, (which thorowe hyr conſtaunte fayth dyd brynge forth our Saueoure the ſonne of God, with out ony ſpot of nature, only by the ouerſhadowynge of the holy gooſt, remaynyng pure virgyn & mother as the ſcripture doth playnly beare wytneſſe) than may ye ſalute her with the ſame ſalutacion, that the angel Gabriel ſaluted her: but ye ſhall worſhyp God only in the trine of perſons, namely ye father ye ſōne and holy gooſt. Thys doynge, ye ſhal do the hygheſt worſhippe vnto Mary yt can be done, accordynge to the iudgement of the ſcripture.
               And that we maye be the more aſſured and certifyed of thys, we wyll conferre this ſonge of Salue regina wyth the ſcripture, & ſe how they accorde. But yf it doth not agre wyth Gods worde, I requyre you for the honoure of God to leaue it, and cleue vnto the worde of God: & ſo doynge ye ſhalbe the brethren and ſyſters of Chriſte, accordynge to hys owne wytneſſe. Luke .viii. And what ſo euer is not hys, that is agaynſt hym, and venyme of the ſoule, for the whyche we oughte

earneſtly to beware, leſt after thys tranſitory lyfe we be robbed of the eternal glory, the which God omnipotent raygnynge for euer graunt vs all. Amen.
            
            
               ¶A refutacion of the ſonge called Salue regina.
               
                  BLeſſed be God and the father of our LORDE, Ieſus Chriſt, which accordynge to hys greate mercye hath begotten vs agayne vnto a lyuely hope, by the ryſynge agayne of Ieſus Chriſt from the dead vnto an vncorruptible and vndefyled enheritaunce, whyche neuer ſhall fayde awaye. &c. Thus wryteth Peter in hys fyrſt canonicall epiſtle the fyrſt chapter, wyllynge vs to thanke, prayſe and bleſſe God alwaye, for delyuerynge vs from death euerlaſtynge thorowe hys only ſonne Ieſus Chriſte. Thys hygh and mooſt laudable benefyte as no tunge can expreſſe it, ſo can no tunge alſo prayſe it ynough. And therfore doth Paule exhorte & warne vs of the abuſe of thys benefite, ſayenge .i. Corin. vii. Ye are dearly bought (namely, wyth the bloude of Ieſus Chriſt) be not ye ſeruaūtes of mē. &c. Now to ſynge, cenſe, praye and to do lyke reuerence

vnto a creature, or an ymage of wood or ſtone, and vnto that ymage to attribute ſuch prayſe, thanke and worſhip as belōgeth vnto God only, what is that els ſaue a ſeruice of men, whereby God & his worde are blaſphemed, denyed and ſet at nought? as it ſhalbe brefely declared hereafter.
               
                  ¶Fyrſt we ſynge Salue regina miſericordiae, that is to ſaye: Hayle quene of mercy.
                  Here is fyrſt denyed the ſayeng of Eſay recyted of S. Paule Rom. xiiii. As truly as I lyue (ſayeth the LORDE) all knees ſhall bowe vnto me, and al tunges ſhal knowlege vnto God. And agayne the ſayenge of Moſes Deuteronomy the .vi. Chapter. Heare O Iſraell, the LORDE our God is one LORDE only. And thou ſhalte loue the LORDE thy God wyth all thyne harte, wyth all thy ſoule, wyth all thy myght. The ſayenge alſo of the prophete Eſaye in the .xlii. Chapter is here denyed, where God ſayeth: I my ſelfe, whoſe name is the LORDE, whych geue my power to none other, nother myne honoure to the goddes. &c.
                  Marke now earneſtly how featly & wel

theſe ſayenges agre wt thys ſalutaciō or gretyng of Mary: verely as wel as day & nyght Marke how our carnall deuocion and good meanyng accordeth with God & hys worde: euen ſo wel, that God ſayeth by the prophet Eſay in the .lv. chapter: My thoughtes are not youre thoughtes, and youre wayes are not my wayes: But as farre as the heauēs are hygher than the earth, ſo farre do my wayes excede youres, & my thoughtes, youres. Hereby maye it be ſene what thys ſaluacion is, namely that God doth not geue hys honoure to none of the goddes. Now conſyſteth hys honoure in nothynge ſo greatly, as in thankefulneſſe and prayſynge hym for hys infinite mercy & goodneſſe ſhewed vnto vs in ſuffrynge for vs that were in thraldom and the deuels daunger, and ſo delyuered vs therout: whyche nother the bleſſed virgine Mary, Peter, nor Paule, nor none of al the ſayntes hath done. It followeth than that ſhe is not the quene of mercy.
               
               
                  ¶Secondarely we ſynge: Vita, dulcedo et ſpes noſtra ſalue
                     ▪ that is: Hay
                        •
                     e our lyfe, our ſwetneſſe and our hope.
                  The cōtrary to thys wytneſſeth Chriſt hymſelfe Ioh. xiiii. ſayeng: I am ye waye, the

truth and the lyfe. &c. And Eſaye ſayeth lyke wyſe in the .xlv. Chapter in the perſone of God: Turne you vnto me all ye endes of ye worlde, and ye ſhalbe ſaued: for I am God, and ther is els none. To thys agreeth alſo Paule .i. Cor. iii. ſayenge: Other foundamēt can no man laye, than that whyche is layed already, whych is Chriſt Ieſu. Theſe confortable wordes do we nother kepe nor beleue, ſeynge we confeſſe wyth our mouthes, and wyth the dede ſeke another lyfe or ſaluacion thā the true and only lyfe and ſaluacion, namely Ieſus Chriſte. Yee thus doynge we make not God true in hys promyſe, that he ether can not or wyll not do for vs as he ſayeth euery where in the ſcripture: or els do not we beleue ye ſayenge of ye boke of wyſedome the .xv. Chapter, where it is thus written: Thou (our God) arte ſwete, longe ſufferynge, & true, & in mercy ordreſt thou al thinges, & ſo forth. And Chriſt ſpeakynge of hym ſelfe Ioh. vi. ſayeth: Who ſo cōmeth vnto me, hym wyll not I caſt out. And agayne in the x. chapter he ſayeth: My ſhepe heare my voyce, and I knowe them, and they followe me, and I geue them euerlaſtyng lyfe, & they ſhal neuer peryſh. Where is ony ſuch worde of comforte, lyfe, hope or ſwetneſſe ſpoken of

in the ſcriptures of God of the bleſſed virgine Mary or ony creature? and yf ther be not, what madneſſe is it of vs ether to cal or to take them for our hope and refuge, which do ſo lowly alway ſubmitte themſelues both to God and hys creatures? Yf we wolde a lytle ponder theſe wordes of the ſalutation of Mary, conferrynge them with the ſayeng of Dauid Pſalm. C.ii. where he ſayeth: Lyke as a father pytyeth hys owne chylderen, euē ſo is the LORDE mercyfull vnto them that feare hym: we ſhulde eaſyly ſe howe farre & abtrunnynge we be both from God and his true worde. We ſe than welbeloued brethrē and ſyſters, that yf we beleued theſe foreſayd wordes aryghte, we ſhulde nede none other ſaluacion, hope nor lyue ſaue only Chriſte, which is geuen vs of the father to be a mediatour betwene him & vs, as ye ſhal heare hereafter. But alas it is come to ye poynte wyth vs, that we aſke lyfe of them, that do not lyue themſelues, as Salomon ſayeth in hys boke called the boke of Wyſedome, the .xiii. Chapter.
                  
                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
               
               
                  
                  God ſayeth in the .li. chapter of Eſay: I ame he that in al thynges geueth you conſolatiō. What arte thou than that feareſte a mortall man, the chylde of man, which goeth awaye as doth the flore? and forgetteſt the LORD that made the? In the boke of wyſedome the xvi. chapter it is thus written: It is thou O LORDE that haſte the power of lyfe and death, thou leadeſte vnto deathes dore, and bryngeſt vp agayne. This is he in whome only ye ought to hope, & to haue confidence, hym only ſhall ye feare, to hym only muſte ye ſygh & ſobbe: for ther is but one only that is mooſte hygheſt creatoure of all thynges, mooſt puyſſaūt and myghty, that is greatly to be feared and dradde, as Ieſus Sirak exhorteth vs to do, in the fyrſt chapter of Eccleſiaſticus, ſayenge: Ther is one, euen the Hygheſt, the maker of all thynges, the Almyghty, the kynge of power (of whome men ought to ſtande greatly in awe,) whiche ſytteth vpon hys trone, beynge a God of dominion, and ſo forth. Thanke therfore & prayſe hym only, feare and drede hym, and thā ſhall not ye be deceaued. For yf ye truſt in men, or ony creature, callynge vpon them, than veryly ſhal ye be deceaued, vnhappy & accurſed as teſtifye both Ieremy in the .xvii. chap.

and Dauid in the .C.xiii. Pſalme ſayenge: Curſed be the man, that putteth hys truſt in man. Let therfore thē that feare the LORD, put theyr truſte in hym: for he is theyr ſuccoure and defence, and thynke, yee be aſſured, thys kynde of worſhyp to be nought but a deuyce and imaginacion of men only, the which are ydle and vayne as ſayeth Ieremy in the .x. chapter. And Chriſte alſo ſayeth Mathe. xv. that he is worſhypped in vayne, whyle they teach ſuche doctrines as are nothynge but the commaundementes of men. Though they approche neare vnto me with the Pater noſter, callynge me father, LORDE and God: yet do they runne to other fathers, gods and ſaueoures in thys vale of teares. Drawe therfore backegood brethren and ſyſters your ſtrayenge ſteppes & wende them in the wayes of the LORDE, yeldyng you rather to hym and hys worde: for ye haue more aſſuraunce to be herde when ye call to hym, yf ye ſo do, than ye haue of followynge mans voyce. Dauid ſayeth Pſalm. xlix. in the perſone of God: Call vpon me in the tyme of trouble, ſo wyll I heare the, that thou ſhalt thanke me. Where is ther ony ſuch promyſe or comfortable worde in all ye ſcripture of the bleſſed virgine, or ony other

                        〈2 pages missing〉
                     
                     
name, he ſhall geue it you. Yf ye therfore beleue theſe wordes ſtedfaſtlye, than nede ye none other meane. Or thynk ye that he wyl lye ether for you, or for youre ſynnes, whych only is the truth hymſelfe, and hath taken a waye the ſynnes of the worlde, as Eſaye doth expreſſely wryte of hym in the .liii. chapter, and Ihon baptiſte doth by mouth?
               
               
                  ¶Syxtly it followeth in the ſonge Et Ieſum benedictum fructum uentris tui nobis poſt hoc exilium oſtende. that is: And ſhewe vs Ieſu ye bleſſed frute of thy wombe after thys exilyng & bannyſhynge.
                  Yf you wyll haue her to ſhewe you Ieſus, than muſt ye fyrſte let hym ſhewe you her in thys myſery and heare what ſhe ſayd Luke in the fyrſt chapter, where it is wryttē: He remembreth mercy, and helpeth vp hys ſeruaunte Iſrael. Euen as he promyſed vnto oure fathers, Abraham and to hys ſede for euer. Here ſayeth Mary that vnto Abraham and hys ſede was promyſed ſaluacion thorowe Chriſte Ieſu, which thynge is

playnly declared in Geneſis the .xxii. Chap. where God ſayd to Abraham: In thy ſede ſhall all nacions be bleſſed: and Abraham beleuynge thys was ſaued thereby. And Geneſis. xvii. was Iſaac promyſed vnto Abraham and Abraham beleuynge the ſame lykewyſe was ſaued thereby. Vnto Dauid was lyke promyſe made .ii. Regum the .vii. chapter on thys wyſe: Whan the tyme is fulfylled that thou ſhalte ſlepe wt thy fathers, I wyll rayſe thy ſede after the. I wyll be hys father, and he ſhalbe my ſonne, and wyll ſtablyſh ye ſeate of hys kyngdome for euer. This dyd Dauid beleue, and was alſo ſaued. Beholde, thus hath now Abraham receaued hys chylde ſayeth Mary, as it was promyſed vnto Abrahā and hys poſterite. Wyll ye now therfore be alſo ſaued, then muſt ye let Ieſus be ſhewed vnto you, as Mary doth ſhewe hym here in the Magnificat: namely that he is the bleſſynge of all nacyons, and ſo to beleue & faythfully to truſt in Ieſu Chriſt only: for by thys fayth only ſhall ye be ſaued. Yee muſt haue thys fayth only in hym in thys vayle of teares, and ſo ſe hym here: and not let hym be ſhewed vnto you by other meanes after this myſerable exilynge, as it is ſunge in thys ſonge of prayſe. Thus muſt we haue hym

ſhewed vnto vs in thys vayle of teares, as he was ſhewed vnto ye patriarkes, and prophetes, that we maye knowe hym in thys mortall lyfe & beleue in hym, as they haue done: and than ſurely ſhall he ſhewe hymſelfe wel ynough after thys exilynge and banyſhmēt. Yf els hys wordes be true that he hath ſpoken. Ioh. xi. I am the reſurreccion and ye lyfe. He that beleueth on me, ſhall lyue, thoughe he were dead already. And Ioh. iii. He that beleueth on me ſhal not be condēned. Thus muſt thou than knowe Ieſu Chriſte as one that taketh awaye thy ſynnes, dyenge ye bytter death for them. But yf ye know hym not here, than maye he not be ſhewed you after thys partynge of bodye and ſoule, nother of Mary, nor of ony body els.
               
               
                  ¶Seuenthly we ſynge in thys ſonge, O clemens, O pia, O dulcis uirgo Maria, that is: O bounteous, O good, O ſwete virgine Mary.
                  Theſe wordes were wonte to be cryed out loude, but Baals preſtes cryed out louder, whereof it is wrytten in the thyrd boke of the kynges the .xviii. Chapter of thys maner: And they cryed loude and prouoked thē
                     
ſelues wyth knyues and 
                        •
                     otkens (as theyr maner was) tyll the bloude followed, but no anſwere was herde. Wherfore the prophete Elias mockyng them ſayd: Crye loude. For he is a God, peraduēture he is muſynge, or hath ſōwhat to do, or is gone ſome iourney, or happly he ſlepeth, ſo that he wolde be waked vp. &c. They cryed farther yet: yee that euen theyr throte ſemed to haue braſten aſū
                     der, but what they optayned thereby, that maye ye reade there. And much leſſe ſhal ye optayne wyth your loude blaryng. For God geueth no eare to loude cryenge, but to loue and mercy. Beſydes thys aſcrybeſt thou ſweteneſſe, goodneſſe, and ryghteouſneſſe vnto a creature whyche is to be referred vnto none but vnto God onely. Of thys ſweteneſſe ſayeth ſcripture in the boke of wyſedome the .xii. Chap. on thys wyſe: O LORDE how gracious and ſwete is thy ſprete in all thynges. And Ioel in the .ii. Chapter: Turne you vnto the LORDE youre God, for he is gracious and mercyfull longe ſufferynge and of great compaſſion, and ready to pardon wyckedneſſe and to forgeue ſynnes. &c. Dauid doth lykewyſe exhorte vs in the .xxxiii. Pſalme, ſayeng: Tayſte and ſe howe frendely the LORDE is, happye is

the man that truſteth in hym. Marke well now that ye muſt ſeke and loke for all goodneſſe, ſweteneſſe, mercy and vertue at hym only, yf ye ſhall optayne ought, and that ye can do nought wythout hym. Thys confirmeth the prayer of Anna the wyfe of Helcana in the fyrſte doke of the kynges, the ſeconde chapter, where ſhe ſayeth: Ther is no man holy as the LORDE, for wythout the is nothyng and ther is no comforte lyke vnto oure God. And euen ſo noman can, nor maye be holy or come to the father, but thorowe the ſonne Chriſt Ieſu as he wytneſſeth hymſelfe.
                  To conclude good brethren and ſyſters I beſeke you for the vnſpeakeable mercy of God to remembre and to thynke that God is wyſer than ye: and ſo doynge geue youre wytte and wyſedom captiue vnto the worde of God, and than ſhal happen vnto you both health and ſaluacion. But alas it is happened vnto vs (God amende it) that is ſpoken of in the .xiiii. Chapter of the boke of wyſedome, namely that thorowe the bewty of the worke, the commune people was deceaued, inſomuche, that they toke hym now for God whyche a lytle afore was but honoured as man. Lyke vnto thys maye ye reade Deuteronomy

the .vi. Baruch the laſte, and in the boke of wyſedom the .xiii. and .xiiii. chapters beſides other places innumerable mo in the bible. Yf ye loke vpon theſe places, ye ſhall eaſely ſe what Idolatrye is vſed daylye in Chriſtendome before the paynted blockes & ſtockes. Whych I truſte ſhall once be redreſſed by the power of the word of God, though to ſome it ſeme to be vnpoſſible by the reaſō of the depe rootynge of it in ſome ſuperſticious hartes. But let ſuche call to mynde the power of God ſpecifyed in theſe wordes of God by hys prophete Eſaye in the .l. chapter Why wolde no man receaue me whan I came? and whan I called, no man gaue anſwere. Was my hande clene ſmytten of, that it myght not helpe? Or had I not power to delyuer? Sende therfore the pure & playne vnderſtādynge of thy Godly worde into oure hartes, that the lyght of the clere vnderſtandynge of thy worde maye dryue out the darkeneſſe of Idolatry and ſo thyne honoure be reſtored vnto the agayne. AMEN.
               
            
            
               
               ¶The true Salue Regina, grounded vpon the ſcripture.
               
                  HAyle Ieſu Chriſt kynge of mercy, oure lyfe, our ſweteneſſe and oure hope, hayle. Vnto the do we call the wretched chyldren of Eua: vnto the do we call and ſyghe, wepynge & waylynge in thys valley of teares. Turne therfore thy mercyfull eyen to vs warde thou ſpechman and aduocate of oures, and ſhewe vs the viſage of thy bleſſed father in the euerlaſtynge glory, as thou haſt promyſed vs, O gracious, O ſwete Chriſte and ſonne of the virgine Mary.
            
         
         
            
            
               ¶The ſonge of Zachary called Benedictus, vſually ſonge at Mattins, brefely declared.
               Bleſſed be the LORD God of Iſrael, for he hath redemed and viſited hys people.
               And hath ſet vp an horne of ſaluacyon in the houſe of hys ſeruaunt Dauid.
               Euen as he promyſed afore tyme by the mouth of hys holy prophetes.
               That he vvolde delyuer vs from oure enemyes, and from the hande of all ſuch as hate vs.
               And that he vvolde ſhevve mercy vnto our fathers, and thinke vpon his holy conuenaunte.
               Euen the oth that he ſvvare vnto oure father Abraham, for to geue vs.
               That vve delyuered out of the hande of oure enemyes, myght ſerue him vvithout feare all the dayes of oure lyfe, in ſuche holyneſſe and ryghteouſneſſe as is accepte before hym.
               
                  And thou chylde ſhalte be called a prophete of the hygheſt: for thou ſhalt go before the LORDE to prepare hys vvayes.
               And to geue knovvlege of ſaluaciō vnto hys people, for the remiſſiō of ſynnes.
               Thorovv the tender mercy of our God vvhereby the daye ſprynge frō on hygh hath viſited vs.
               That he myght geue lyght vnto them that ſyt in darkeneſſe and ſhadovve of death, & to gyde our fete in to the vvaye of peace.
            
            
               
                  THys ſonge of Zacharye the prophete, the father of Ihon baptiſte washe occaſioned to ſyng for ioy that he was reſtored agayne to hys ſpeche, the whych he loſt, becauſe he dyd not beleue the angell ſhewynge hym of hys ſonne Ihon baptiſte that ſhulde be borne of hym: ſo that (as the angell ſayde vnto hym) the token whereby he ſhulde be aſſured ther of was, that he ſhulde be domme, vntyll the tyme of the chyldes natiuite. Wherfore at hys natiuite beynge reſtored agayne vnto hys ſpeche, he is forthwyth fylled alſo wyth the holy gooſte, and prophecyeth: not that he was not fylled afore wyth the

ſprete of Gods chyldren, wherby he walked vnblameably in the commaūdementes and ryghteouſneſſes of God: but that than he was euē rauyſhed and ſpecially fylled with the ſprete, ſo that Luke the Euangeliſt (who doth deſcribe theſe wordes in his .i. chapter) ſayeth: that he was fylled with ye holy gooſte and prophecyed. Now is to prophecy, to vtter thynges, ether to come, or that he paſte already, or els to open the ſcriptures and prophecyes, the whiche all thys ſonge doth conteyne, and is diuided in .xii. verſes and two partes. In the fyrſte doth Zachary cōmende and prayſe the truth of Gods promyſes, that God doth kepe & fulfyll thoſe thynges, which he dyd promyſe by hys prophetes of Chriſte. In the ſeconde doth he declare the office and ſeruice of Ihon baptiſte. Let vs therfore kepe and handle thys ſonge of Zachary, not only as a rehearſall and abrygmente of all ſuche promyſes as are ſpoken of Chriſte, but alſo as a large commentary and vtteraunce of ye goſpell of Ieſu Chriſte. But alas thys ſonge is haynouſly abuſed, euen as is alſo ye ſonge of prayſe that Mary the bleſſed virgine dyd ſyng, called Magnificat, ſeynge it is roared out dayly rather than ſonge wythout faythe or deuocion. God auenge hys worde from

the blaſphemyes of the wycked. Now let vs go to the ſonge:
               Bleſſed be the LORDE God of Iſrael.
               Zachary doth bleſſe and thanke God, which (accordynge to the promyſe made vnto the holy mē in olde tyme) dyd ſend Chriſt the Saueoure of Iſrael, whereby he doth alſo ſtrenghten the weaklynges in fayth and feble harted. And with thys ſyngynge & opē
                  ly confeſſynge of his name is he wellapayed yf the harte and mouth do accorde. Though he do call God the God of Iſrael, it is not therfore to be vnderſtande that he is not the God of the Gētyles, but he is ſo called, fyrſt becauſe of the promyſe made vnto Abraham in the .xvii. chapter of Geneſis, where God ſayde vnto hym: I wyll make wy cōuenaunt betwene me and the, and thy ſede after the, thorowe out theyr poſterites, that it may be an euerlaſtynge conuenaunte, ſo that I wyl be the God of ye, and of thy ſede after the. &c. Secondly, becauſe he gaue them, Patriarkes, Prophetes, the lawe, the Gods ſeruice, and the promyſes of Chriſte that was tocome. Thyrdly, becauſe that of thys people ſhulde Chriſte be borne after the fleſh: But after that Chriſte was come, he was nomore

called Iſraell truely, that was borne of that kynred, and of the fleſh of Iſrael: but he that is borne by the fayth of Ieſu Chriſte. Wherfore, though the LORDE by hys power and rule be the LORDE of all nacions yet is he properly called the God of thē that beleue in Ieſus Chriſte, becauſe that them only be knowlegeth for ye heyres of hys kyngdome.
               
                  Bleſſed is than the God of Iſrael. But wherfore? Euē becauſe he hath viſited and redimed hys people.
               
               
                  And hath ſet vp an horne of ſaluaciō in the houſe of hys ſeruaunte Dauid.
                  Euen as he promyſed afore tyme by the mouth of hys holy prophetes.
               
               Thys pertayneth vnto the fyrſte parte of the ſonge, wherin God is commended for hys faythfulneſſe and fulfyllynge of hys promyſe. He hath viſited and redimed hys people, ſayeth Zachary, the whiche be both one thynge, and be as much to ſaye as: he is come vnto vs, to brynge and to ſet afore vs the wholſome worde, whereby we are ſaued For to viſite is, to be myndefull, to care for, or to make an ende of trauyll and thraldom, as God dyd whā he delyuered ye chyldrē of Iſrael out of Egipte, though it be ſōtyme takē for

euell, as to punyſh or to chaſtiſe. Now is ther is no viſitacion to be cōpared vnto thys that Zachary ſpeaketh of here. For by it he hath redemed vs from the daunger of ye Deuell, Death and Hell, and made vs fre Iſraelites and a peculiare people to hymſelfe and hath ſet vp an horne of ſaluacion in the houſe of hys ſeruaunte Dauid.
               A horne in ſcripture is taken for victory, doughtyneſſe, a rodde, a kyngdome, greatneſſe, power, maieſtye or excellencye, ether becauſe that fourefooted beaſtes haue theyr chefe ſtrength in theyr hornes, orels be cauſe that kynges beynge conſecrate in olde tyme were anoynted wyth the oyle that the prophetes had in hornes, as we reade of Samuel .i. Reg. xvi. Therfore ſayeth Zachary, that God hath rayſed and ſet vp an horne, that is, a ſauynge power, namely by Ieſus Chriſte, the Saueoure of all thē that beleue in hym, vnto whome is geuen power of all thynges, both in heauē and earth. Yf I ſhulde brynge ſorth the ſcriptures bearynge wytneſſe of thys, I feare me to be cloyde with ye abundaunce of theſame. The horne than is ſet vp in the houſe of Dauid, for Chriſte is borne of the poſterite of Dauid, not only after the ſprete, (as the ſwaruynge ſpretes of

the Anabaptiſtes do ſaye) but alſo after the fleſh, the which he toke of the virgine Mary. Yf thys Dauid (of whoſe fleſh and bloude Chriſte was borne after the manhode) had ben no man, than had not Zachary mēt him whan he ſayde: In the houſe of Dauid hys ſeruaunte. For Chriſte is equall wyth hys father after the Godheade, and the ſede or poſterite of Dauid after ye manheade which he toke of the virgine Mary, that was of Dauids kynred, & that by the ouerſhadowynge of the holy gooſt. Yf they therfore wyl ſwage theyr raſhneſſe and malepartneſſe, and confeſſe the truth accordynge to the ſcriptures, than ſurely ſhall they ſe, that ſcripture vſeth ſomtyme to ſpeake myſtically of hym, and ſo is he the true Salomon, that is: the kynge of peace, whoſe dominion ſhalbe augmented, and ther ſhalbe no ende of hys peace. Eſa. ix. And ſometyme after the fleſh, as we maye ſe in the .lii. and .liii. chapters of Eſay. More ouer, Yf they wyl vnderſtande the prophecy of Ieremy in hys .xxii. chapter, where he promyſeth to rayſe vp the ryghteous braūche of Dauid only ſpritualy, than muſt they denye the article of oure belefe that we cōfeſſe in, that he is borne of the virgine Mary, and agayne that hys manhode glorifyed is not in

heauen, the whiche God forſende ony man ſhulde beleue, ſeynge the whole ſcripture is contrary to it, though all the worlde dyd affirme it. Thys is than the very Chriſte God and mā, (of whome the prophetes and the euangelyſtes haue ſpoken) that Zachary or the holy gooſte in hym meaneth whan he calleth hym the horne of ſaluacion in the houſe of Dauid hys ſeruaunte. How bewtyfull are theſe fete of Zachary, bryngynge ſo good tydynge, preachyng ſo peaceable Chriſt by whoſe horne of ſaluacion all they that ſat in ye region of Deathes ſhadowe were delyuered. But though Zachary in the thre fyrſte verſes dyd comprehende the ſumme of thoſe promyſes that were fulfylled in Chriſt Ieſu, yet is he not contente to haue brefely runne ouer them, but of a feruent ſprete he doth now dilate and declare them more largelyer in the other fore verſes followynge, and ſayeth:

                     That he vvolde delyuer vs from oure enemyes and from the hande of all ſuche as hate vs.
                     And that he vvolde ſhevv mercy vnto oure fathers, and thynke vpon hys holy conuenaunte.
                     Euen the oth that he ſvvare vnto our

father Abraham, for to geue vs.
                     That vve delyuered out of the hande of oure enemyes, myght ſerue hym vvyth oute feare all the dayes of oure lyfe, in ſuch holyneſſe and ryghteouſneſſe as is accepte before hym.
                  
               
               What tyme as the chylderen of Iſraell were come into the lande of promyſe, & had taken poſſeſſion of it, they had no kynges, but were ruled by rulers. Now as they forſoke the LORDE theyr God, and fell to Idolatry God dyd punyſhe them, and ſente ſtraunge nacions vpon them, the which vexed them: wherfore they called vpō God, and he delyuered them, ſendynge them a ruler or captayne that diſcōfited the enemyes, as the boke of iudges doth ſpecyfy. On lyke maner prophecyeth here Zachary that God will do, in ſendynge hys ſonne Ieſus Chriſte, of the ſede of Dauid, to delyuer the true Iſraelites and to rydde them frō the hande of ſuch enemyes, as oppreſſed them. Lo (ſayeth he) howe true is God, and how well abydeth he by his promyſes. For he kepeth not only theſe promyſes that he made by the prophetes, but alſo the teſtamentes and cōuenauntes that he made vnto the Patriarkes, namelye:

Abraham and Dauid, ye which he dyd bynde wyth an oth. The oth that he made wyth Abraham is thys: I wyll bleſſe thē that bleſſe the, and curſe them that curſe the: and in the ſhall all generacions of the earth be bleſſed. And agayne: Thy ſede ſhall poſſeſſe the gates of hys enemyes, and in thy ſede ſhall all nacions on earth be bleſſed. Gene. xxii. And of Dauid is wrytten in the .lxxxviii. pſalme: I haue ſworne once by my holyneſſe, that I wyll not fayle Dauid. Hys ſede ſhall endure for euer, and hys ſeate alſo lyke as the Sōne before me. &c. Theſe and ſuch lyke promyſes made vnto Abraham and Dauid of the victory of theyr enemyes, of the ſureneſſe and quyetneſſe of theyr lyfe, of the cōtinuance of theyr happy kyngdome, ſounde to be ſpoken only of outwarde bleſſynges, and ſhulde be fulfylled after the meanynge of thys worlde: But by thys ſonge of Zachary, whiche is an vtteraunce of the promyſes made vnto Abraham and Dauid, it is euidente, that theſe bleſſynges concerne mooſt chefely the ſpirituall bleſſynges. For he ſayeth that the promyſes made vnto the Patriarkes, and confirmed wyth an oth concernyng the victory of theyr enemyes, of ye peceableneſſe of lyfe, of the happy ſtate of the kyngdome, are to

be vnderſtande of theſe enemyes, whych are vanquyſhed by Ieſus Chriſte, and of ye tranquillite, of that happy and peaceable lyfe, ye whych is purchaſed for vs by Chriſt. Chriſt hath not ſubdued or ouercome the Egipcians, or Babiloniās, or ye Romanes, (though the Iewes had ben partely oppreſſed, & partely were yet ſo oppreſſed of them, that they coulde not quietly vſe the ſeruice of God cō
                  maunded in the lawe in theyr owne lande, although they ſhulde not haue obtayned the true health nor ryghteouſneſſe thereby, had they ben delyuered of theyr enemyes,) but he ouercame and delyuered hys people frō theſe enemyes, wherof Paul ſpeaketh Eph. vi. ſayenge: We wreſtle not agaynſt fleſhe & bloude, but agaynſt rule, agaynſt power, namely: agaynſt the rulers of the world, of the darkneſſe of thys worlde, agaynſt the ſpretes of wyckedneſſe vnder ye heauē. Amōge theſe enemyes is the chefeſt of al Satan, ye which as he is a murthurer▪ euē ſo goeth he euer aboute roarynge lyke a Lion, ſekynge whom he maye deuoure. The ſeconde is Synne, wherin Adam, by the enticynge of the deuel dyd fall, the whych is cropen in al mākynde from Adam, whereby alſo they be prouoked vnto all maner of wyckedneſſe. The thyrde

enemye are: Affliccions, Death, and Hell. Theſe are the mooſte haynouſe enemyes yt can be. Nother is it to be thought that theſe enemyes although they do enuy mē in dede, yet are they farre from them, but it is to be marked that theſe enemyes haue mē wholy in theyr clawes. For naturally are we the chyldren of wrath, that is, the deuels owne, borne in ſynne, and by reaſon of ſynne, we be in daunger of troubles of thys worlde, bodyly death & alſo hell. Theſe enemyes hath Chriſt ſo ouercome (though they ſomtime do repyne and gnaſh, threatnynge men many thynges) that they can in no wyſe hurt them that beleue in Chriſte Ieſu. Moreouer Chriſte hath not reſtored hys people vnto ſuch ſureneſſe and tranquillite, wherin they myght vſe at Ieruſalem theyr ſeruyce, preſcribed vnto them in the thyrde boke of Moſes called Leuiticus, (for that ſeruyce, as it was to be obſerued and kept for a ſeaſon only, as the lawe wytneſſeth: euen ſo was it only an introduccion and ciuile holyneſſe to Chriſtwarde,) but he forgaue them theyr ſinnes. By the which knowlege, the conſcience is ſo quieted by fayth, that ſhe nowe feareth nother the deuell, death, nor hel. And becauſe that the holy gooſt is geuen by faythe, therfore,

whoſoeuer hath the forgeueneſſe of ſynnes by fayth, the ſame ſerueth the LORDE quyetly at all tymes in ſuche holyneſſe and ryghteouſneſſe as he can, wythout ony fear of the cruell enemyes death or hell. Wherfore as the promyſes made vnto Abraham and Dauid are to be vnderſtande of the ſpirituall enemyes, and of the true and ſpirituall holyneſſe, the whych we haue by Chriſt: euen ſo is thys ſonge of Zachary alſo to be vnderſtande ſpiritually, and of the inwarde victory by the fayth of Ieſus Chriſte oure LORDE. For to poſſeſſe the gates of the enemyes, is, to be lorde of all thynges wyth Chriſt, the whych ſhall begyn by fayth, & ſhal finyſh whan Chriſtes kyngdome ſhall ende, the whych ſhal neuer be, for ſeynge Chriſtes kyngdome is euerlaſtynge, and he eternall, therfore ſhall we raygne and reioyce euerlaſtyngly wyth hym in hys kyngdome.
               That God than dyd promyſe vnto Abraham and Dauid, that he dyd confirme & ſtablyſhe wyth an oth, namely: to remēbre hys cōuenaūt, to ſhewe ye mercy promyſed vnto the fathers, ye we ſhulde be delyuered of our enemyes, & from the hāde of all ſuch as hate vs, & ſo we delyuered from the hādes of our enemyes, maye ſerue hym wythout feare:

that ſayeth Zachary that God hath done very wel, whan he ſent Chriſt hys ſonne in the fleſh. The whych as he ſhall clenſe vs from all our ſynnes, and reconcyle vs agayne to God the father, euē ſo ſhall he alſo cōmaūde that we do becomme holy and ryghteous before God by the fayth in hym, and be endued wyth the holy gooſt, that ſo we do obeye hys callynge by fayth, wyth great reſt and peace of conſcience.
               Holyneſſe ſignifyeth the clenneſſe from al ſynne, ryghteouſneſſe, a cōlyneſſe of all ye lyfe, & a ſeruiable loue vnto all men. Wyth theſe is God truly ſerued, ſo doynge, we do him an hygh pleaſure, repreſentyng hys image & lykeneſſe, the whyche is mooſt cleaneſt from all euell, and the mooſt beneficial and weldoynge vnto all thynges. Thys ſeruice & worſhip only doeth he alowe, therfore ſayeth he: As is accept before hym. For he dyd requyre it of hys people, whā he brought thē out of Egipte: ſayenge: Be ye holy, for I am holy. Moreouer, becauſe it is not truly good that taketh an ende, therfore ſayeth he alſo: All the dayes of our lyfe. For it is no godlyneſſe ye hath an ende. God is eternall & is not chaunged, whom who ſo knoweth truly can neuer be drawen from hys ſeruice:

for he ſhall fynde nothynge better than him. Thys is now the fyrſte parte of the ſonge, wherin the truth of God is cōmended, wherby the promyſes of Chriſte are kepte, where by alſo we be admoniſhed of thoſe benefytes that are happened vnto vs by Chriſt. Now followeth the other parte:

                     And thou chylde ſhalt be called a prophete of the Hygheſt: for thou ſhalte go before the LORD to prepare hys vvayes
                     And to geue knovvlege of ſaluacion vnto hys people, for the remiſſiō of theyr ſynnes.
                     Thorovv the tēder mercy of our God, vvherby the daye ſprynge from on hygh hath viſited vs.
                     That he myght geue lyght vnto them that ſytte in darkeneſſe and ſhadovve of death, and to gyde our fete in to the vvay of peace.
                  
               
               In thys other parte of the ſonge is declared and ſet forth the offyce of Ihon baptiſte. Nother is it declared wyth vayne dreames, but wyth the wordes that the prophete Malachy, and the angell that appeared vnto Zachary dyd teſtifye of hym. Thou (ſayeth he) chylde ſhalte be called a prophete of the Hygheſt? That is, thou ſhalte be the chefe

preacher in Gods church or congregacion, for of the hath Malachy prophecyed on this wyſe: Beholde, I ſende my meſſaunger before thy face, whych ſhall prepare thy waye before the. And agayne: He ſhall turne ye hartes of the fathers vnto the chyldren, and the harte of the chyldren vnto the fathers: & for thys cauſe ſhalt thou go before the LORDE, that is, before that Chriſt do openly begyn hys offyce, thou ſhalte do thyne appointed buſyneſſe. For what intent? Fyrſt, that thou prepare the waye vnto Chriſt. Nowe hath Ihon prepared the waye vnto Chriſte, as is ſayd aboue, not only in that he rebuked the people of theyr ſynnes, but rather becauſe he declared opēly that thys is the true Chriſte, and ſente hys diſciples vnto the ſame Chriſte, ſayenge: Beholde the lambe of God, whych taketh awaye the ſynnes of the worlde. Secondely, that thou geue knovvlege of ſaluacion vnto hys people, for the remiſſion of theyr ſynnes. That is, that thou wyth thy doctrine ſhewe vnto the people the true waye and maner, where by they maye obtayne ſaluacion, the whych conſyſteth not in the delyueraunce from the tyranny of the Romanes, nother in the felicite or happyneſſe of thys worlde, but in the

remyſſion of ſynnes. Though thou wareſt rydde of all tyrauntes and enemyes in this worlde, and haſt obtayned all the felicite of thys worlde: yet arte thou in the deuels daū
                  ger, an enemye mooſt cruell, and not onely hys, but alſo of Death and Hell, whyche are vtter deſtructions: Thou arte in daunger of them by reaſon of ſynne, for Paule ſayeth vnto the Romaynes the .v. Chapter: that by one man ſynne entred in to ye world and death by the meanes of ſynne: euen ſo wente death alſo ouer all men, in ſo muche as they all haue ſynned. Wherfore, that we maye be delyuered from the cruelte of the deuel, and from the power of death and hel, it is requyred that we be delyuered fyrſte of all from ſynne. Ihon was the fyrſt that preached Ieſus Chriſte, that we for hym onely haue the forgeueneſſe of ſynnes, by the fayth in hym. Nother is there ony other waye to obtayne the true ſaluacion, thā by the fayth in Chriſte Ieſu, nor yet alſo is ther geuen vnto men ony other name, wher in we be ſaued. Actu. iiii. For the glory of God is to ſaue as many as are ordined ther to, and that glory geueth he to none other Seynge than Ihon dyd opē, ſhewe, & declare Ieſus Chriſt, the doer away of our ſynnes▪
                  
he is ryghtfully ſayd to haue geuē or to haue taught the people ſuche knowlege, whereby they obtayne the remiſſion of theyr ſynnes, that is, ryghteouſneſſe and lyfe euerlaſtyng. But for what deſeruynges or merites ſake hath ye people obtayned ſuch benefites, that they ſhulde learne the waye of ſaluacion, & get the remiſſion of theyr ſynnes? Veryly, not for the circumciſion, nor ſacrifices, nor ciuile honeſty, the whych though they haue a worthyneſſe in theyr kynde, yet were they not ſuch thynges before God, that therfore he ſhulde beſtowe on vs the benefyte of forgeueneſſe of ſynne. What are then the thynges wherfore we haue ſuch benefyte beſtowed on vs? Thorovv the the tender mercy (ſayeth he) of our God. He ſayeth not onely by the mercy▪ but by the tender mercy, that is thorowe the great and vnſearcheable mercy: for thorow the ſame, and for none of mās merites dyd the daye ſprynge frō on hygh viſite vs. For as the remiſſiō of ſynnes happened vnto vs for none of our merites, but only of the mere grace and tender mercy of God, euen ſo doth thys fayth alſo. The day ſprynge doth Zachary call here Chriſte, as thoughe he were buddynge and ſpryngynge, lyke a braunch of a tre, alludynge to the ſayenge

of Ieremy in hys .xxiii. chap. ſayenge: I wyll rayſe vp the ryghteous braunch of Dauid, which ſhall beare rule, & diſcuſſe matters with wyſedom, & ſhal ſet vp equite and ryghteouſneſſe agayne in the earth. And alſo to the prophecy of Zachary in hys .vi. chap. ſayenge: Beholde, the man whoſe name is ye braunch, and he that ſhall ſprynge after him, ſhall buylde vp the temple of the LORDE.
               
               Thys braunch than or daye ſprynge is ryſen from aboue, and hath viſited vs, whā Ieſus Chriſt came into thys world, & ſente Ihō baptiſte before, to beare opē wytnes of him. To what intente? That he myght geue lyghte vnto thē that ſyt in darkneſſe, and ſhadovve of death, and to gyde oure fete into the vvaye of peace. Theſe wordes of Zachary concerne the prophecy of Eſaye in his .ix. chap. ſayenge. The people that haue dwelte in darkneſſe, ſhall ſe a great lyght: & to thē that dwell in the lande of the ſhadowe of death, to thē ſhall the lyght ſhyne. And agayne in ye .lx. chap. And therfore get ye vp by tymes, for thy lyght cōmeth, and the glory of the LORD ſhall ryſe vpon ye. In the darknes and ſhadovv of death do they ſyt, whiche are ſo wrapped in wretchedneſſes, yt they ſe nought ſaue euē euerlaſtyng dānaciō. That

is done whan the ſynnes are vttered, and ye conſcience knoweth the iudgement of ſynne. Therfore whan Ihon dyd ſhew Chriſte takynge awaye the ſynnes of the worlde, ſurely he ſhewed vs ſuch a lyghte, whereby we maye not only auoyde the darkeneſſe of infelicite or wretchedneſſe and the ſhadowe of death, but alſo to gyde our fete into ye way of peace, ſo to obtayne ye true ſaluaciō & felicite For ther is none other way of peace or felicite, ſaue Ieſus Chriſt our LORD, by whoſe faythe we beynge iuſtifyed haue peace to Godwarde.
               A foote in ſcripture is takē oftymes for ye affection, deſyre & wyll of the harte, as in ye .xxxv. Pſal. Let not the foote of pryde ouertake me. That is, the affections & thoughtes of pryde, leſt I conceaue a proude opinion of meſelfe in my mynde, of my ryghteouſneſſe, wyſdom, ſtrength & wyll: leſt I coūte meſelfe ſomewhat, where I ame nothynge, ſeynge I fynde no good thynge in my fleſh.
               The clauſe wherwith Zachary doth ende hys ſonge is veryly a pythy one, namely: into the vvay of peace. For yf we walke not in the wayes of God, in hys commaundemē
                  tes, in the lyfe that is bleſſed and happy becauſe of the aſſuraunce of Gods goodneſſe,

wherby ſuch tranquillite & reſt of conſcience is procured, yt we take all thynges in worth, and (as neare as we can) haue peace wyth al men: than veryly do we wander in darknes goynge aſtraye as ſhepe hauyng no ſheperd. He doth worthely cal the ignoraunce of god the ſhadowe of death, wherwith are holdē all thoſe, into whoſe hartes Chriſte the true Sonne of ryghteouſneſſe hath not ſpred hys beames, ſeynge ye true knowlege of God is lyfe euerlaſtynge. What tunge cā expreſſe ye miſery of thē that want ye knowlege of God? For in thys lyfe they haue a cōſcience captiuate, reſtleſſe & marked wyth a whote yron, ſekynge now thys waye to be ſaued, thā puttynge ye body to ſuch payne to deſerue heauē ſo yt it can nomore reſte, thā Euripus the ryuer, which ebbeth and floweth .vii. tymes in a daye and nyghte. And agayne what tunge can vtter the felicite & happineſſe of ſuch as haue thys knowlege, that Ihon is come to geue? for they beynge ſuffyſed ye God is theyr God, that he careth for thē, that he forgeueth thē theyr ſynnes thorow the tēder mercy of theyr God, wherewyth the daye ſprynge [or braūch] frō on hygh hath viſited vs, they kepe an euerlaſtyng Sabbat, cōmyttyng al ye care ether of lyuelode, of clothyng, or of ryddaūce and

delyuerynge frō al theyr enemyes, both bodyly and gooſtly, to hym only that hath created and gouerneth all thynges, truſtyng in him, that as he is only good, ſo cā not he do other wyſe but good vnto them. Thys veryly is a peace paſſynge the peace of ye worlde. Thys peace maye be felte inwardly, but can be vttered ſufficiently with no tunge outwardly: Yee noman can ſynge nother thys nor lyke ſonges worthely & frutefully, wythout he be contrite of harte, & endued wt the holy gooſt. Therfore is it a haynous iniury vnto God, to ſynge thys & lyke wholſome ſonges only for auauntage, wythout ony conſyderaciō of the benefites that God hath ſhewed vs, as it teſtifyeth. God graunte that abuſes may be redreſſed by the breth of hys holy worde. ¶Thys is the ſonge of prayſe that Zachary dyd ſynge at hys chyldes natiuite, whereby (ſeynge the truth & mercy of God and the benefites, which we haue gottē thorow Chriſt whome Ihon by by hys preachyng & teſtimony doth auaūce, are chefely prayſed,) let vs ſtablyſh our fayth, & declare our thankfulnes towarde God, that we maye kepe & retayne with thankfulneſſe ye godly benefites, which of liberalite we haue receaued by Ieſus Chriſte. AMEN.
            
         
         
            
            
               ¶The ſonge of the aunciente father Simeon, called: Nunc dimittis, the whyche he dyd ſynge whan Mary was puryfyed.
               
                  LORDE, novv letteſt thou thy ſeruaunte departe in peace, accordynge to thy promyſe.
               For myne eyes haue ſene thy Saueoure, vvhome thou haſt prepared before all people.
               A lyght for the lyghtenynge of the Heythen, and for the prayſe of the people of Iſrael.
            
            
               
                  THis ſonge hath .iii. verſes, & it was ſonge what tyme Chriſt was borne, to the conſolaciō of Mary and Ioſeph, wyth diuerſe other electe. Moreouer, lyke as Zachary and Mary, and before them Moſes, Debora, Anna the mother of Samuel, Dauid & diuerſe other dyd vtter theyr thankefulnes towarde

God wyth ſonges, nor coulde fynde more pleaſynge thynge to thanke hym for hys benefites, than ſuch open prayſes, wherein the glory of Gods name is recyted: Euē ſo doth here Simeon by the holy gooſt bruſte out in a ſonge, wherewyth he declareth hys thanke full mynde towarde the goodnes of God. He ſetteth forth Chriſte in thys ſonge, & decketh hym with great prayſes goodly tytels. He teacheth alſo by hys owne enſample wherof the true peace of conſcience doh cōme, and whereby it cōmeth that we loke readely and gladly for death, yee euen ouercōme death. Novv (ſayeth he) LORD letteſt thou thy ſeruaūt departe in peace, accordynge to thy promyſe. That is, I haue nought in me, wherof I may boaſt at thy iudgemēt, ſaue only thys, that thou arte my LORD, & I thy ſeruaunte: not ſuche one that haue done all thy wyl, but ſuch one, as ſeynge I haue not done thy wyll, & ought therfore worthely to haue ben condemned, yet neuertheleſſe am graciouſly ſaued of the. It was veryly a feruent prayer and deſyre that the ryghteous & dredynge God ſage Simeon prayſed God with as he ſawe the LORDE in the temple, and toke hym in hys armes. The harte of ye aged man reioyced ſo ſore at that tyme, yt he could

kepe the prayſe of God no longer hyd in hys harte: yee yf it had ben poſſible, ye harte wold haue bruſten for ioye, ſayeng: LORD, novv letteſt thy ſeruaunt departe in peace accordynge to thy promyſe. As though he wolde ſaye: Let me now departe, I ame now glad to dye, death ſhalbe now acceptable vnto me for it is fulfylled, yt was promyſed vnto me. It myght alſo be vnderſtāde, yt Simeons deſyre was not only to be delyuered of ye bodyly death, but alſo frō all pynyng and vnquietneſſe of conſcience, the which can be apeaced with no workes, before we haue ſene the anoynted of the LORDE, that is: before that our conſcience knoweth Chriſt aryght. For thā waxeth a man fyrſt mery, thā dyeth a man gladly, and than dryueth ye holy gooſt awaye all grefe of conſcience alſo, whyche maketh a man reſtleſſe. God geueth ſome men a greate peace inwardly at the fyrſte, as Mary brought forth hir ſonne with great ioye But ſuch muſt ſuffre greatly afterward as Mary dyd alſo afterward. Some ſuffreth God to haue grefe and pynyng of conſciēce vntyll theyr bodely death, as he dyd thys Simeon, but than are they contented with auauntage for all that they dyd forgo ſo lōge: ye which is a paynful lyfe, but very precious.

Nother were it poſſible for a man to endure (yf Gods worde dyd not ſuſtayne hym, whervpon he wayteth) vntyll that tyme, that God hath choſen to theſame. Now whan God veryfyeth the promyſe, than is it aboue meaſure ſwete vnto man, and ſo thanketh & prayſeth God for it. For he learneth than by true experience, that God doth veryfy hys pro, myſes, howe longe ſo euer he differreth it. Than is the goodneſſe of the LORDE, (yee the LORDE hymſelfe) very ſwete, and he hymſelfe is very wyllynge to dye. In that Simeon calleth hymſelfe the ſeruaunte of the LORDE, he fyrſte prayſeth ye goodneſſe of God, that ſeyng he myght haue deſtroyed hym for his wyckedneſſes, yet hath he wyte ſafe to ſpare hym mercyfully. Secondly he confeſſeth hys extreme vileneſſe and lowlyneſſe, ſo that he haue nought in hymſelf that is ought worth in the ſyght of God, but that God hath all power ouer hym, ether to ſlay or ſaue, and that he be vnworthy to be counted for a man before God. Ther is nothyng more ſtronger to ſteare God to mercy, than ſo to knowlege before God, and to ſubmitte thēſelues to hym, callyng vpō hym by fayth. Wherfore Dauid ſtearynge God to ſhewe mercy, doth ſo ofte repete the name ſeruaūt:

as though he wolde ſaye: Lyke as he that is taken in battayll or in tyme of warre, and ſo beynge ſolde is a bondman and ſeruaunt vnto hym, that bought hym: Euen ſo I alſo beynge redymed by thy precious bloude from the daūger of the deuel, death and hell, am euen altogether thyne owne, thy ſeruaūt, thy bondman, hauynge no ryght to my ſelfe.
               Moreouer that Simeon ſayeth: accordynge to thy promyſe, therein doth he prayſe and commende the truth of Gods promyſes. For the worde or promyſe made vnto Simeon was, that he ſhulde not ſe death, before he had ſene the LORDES Chriſt. Now though ther appeared many thynges contrary to thys worde or promyſe, and though it ſemed to haue ben a vayne and fayned tayle neuertheleſſe, ſeynge all men are lyars, but thou LORDE my God arte true, thou fulfylleſt it at the fulleſt that thou haſt promyſed, and letteſt me now go in peace. Hether to haue I carefully abyden thy commynge, and that thys many yeares, and what myſtruſtynge dyd not the fleſhe in the meane ſeaſon ſteare me vnto? What infidelite dyd not Satan inſpire me wyth? And becauſe thou dyddeſt differre thy promyſe of ſeynge Chriſt, therfore was I nearehande cauſed to

thynke that all thy promyſes were vayne. And (good LORDE) what rumoure or vproure dyd than ryſe in my conſcience? With what engins dyd Satā aſſaulte my mynde? layenge now my ſynnes before me, than ſhe wynge me an hougle image of death, ſomtyme kyndlynge the horrible fyre of hell in myne entrayles, wherewyth I was ſo diſmade, that I was nearhāde in deſpayre. But nowe thou makeſte me an happye aged man LORDE, and letteſt thy ſeruaunt departe in peace, accordynge to thy promyſe. Now doeſt thou ſet my conſciēce at reſt, now ſhall I careleſſe wayte for the bodyly death, I wil now dye gladly.
               But what is happened vnto the good father, that thou arte ſo ſodenly chaunged, and where afore thou wereſt ſo ſorowfull, that thou arte now euē filled with ſo great ioye? For what cauſe doeſt thou now ſo leape for ioye, as though thou wereſt reuyued, which afore ſemedeſt to haue ben more than dead? Surely hys ioye is not for nought. Let vs therfore heare hymſelfe. For thys ſayeth he to be the cauſe of hys myrth, and gladneſſe, namely: For myne eyen haue ſene thy Saueoure, vvhome thou haſt prepared before all people.
               
               
                  Thys is the treaſure ye reioyceth me & maketh death acceptable to me, namely: That I ſe hym yt was vnder the law, & knowe hym for ſuch one as helpeth me, it can not be, but I muſt reioyce and not be afeared for death Behold now what is hyd in the harte of the olde grayheaded father, that he wyll nowe dye, and wyll departe in peace. To departe wyth ioye or dye in peace is a goodly worde in ye eares of hym that can ſo do. But where of hath he ſuch a pleaſaunt death? Euen of the chylde. Who hath euer ſene ſuche lyke death? But all they that put theyr truſte in ony other ſaue in thys chylde the Saueoure whan they ſhall dye, they tremble and quake and are very ſorowfull at the harte, & chaūge theyr coloure, theyr wytte, reaſon, vnderſtā
                  dynge and all theyr ſtrength faydeth euen awaye, death ouercōmeth them: Yee though all the kynges, princes & powers of ye world were by wyth theyr horſes & armes to helpe them, and the feare of death came vpon thē, they ſhulde ſtande as ſtyffe as a ſtake before death. But the good Simeon reioyceth yt he wyll departe in peace, as though ther were no death. He calleth not ye paſſynge a death, he diſdayneth to honoure it ſo much. He ſayeth: LORD novv letteſt thou thy ſeruaūt

departe in peace, & not, thou letteſt me dye. He calleth the paſſynge a ſwete & eaſy ſlepe.
               From whence hath he the connyng that he feareth not death, but counteth it a ſwete ſlepe, for the whych not wythſtandynge all the worlde is afrayed? Euen frō thence that ſynne, the law and death were banyſhed out of hys harte, he dyd not regarde them. For where the lawe is, there is alſo a conſcience of ſynne: but where ſhe is not, there is nothynge ſaue ryghteouſneſſe, and Moſes is exiled, and ſo wholy out of ſyghte, that hys ſepulture is not ſene nor knowen where it is. Where Moſes is gone, frō thence is ſynne taken awaye alſo, and ſo becommeth death a louely ſlepe.
               But whereby getteth he that? Veryly not by hys deſeruynges & workes, but onely by the beholdynge of the ſaueoure. For he ſayeth: Myne eyen haue ſene thy Saueour He maketh no mencion, nor is once thynkynge that he hath done or procured it wyth hys handes, but hath ſene it wyth hys eyen, though the outwarde ſyght wythout the inwarde do auayle ſo lytle as the handes.
               They are two poyntes, to ſe and the Saueoure. To ſe Chriſt perteyneth vnto a quiete and peaceable death. Yf we ſe hym, than

can we dye merely: but yf we ſe hym not, thā is he there in vayne vnto vs. Many haue ſene hym in the temple, but not aryght. Ioſeph, Marye, Anna, and Simeon haue ſene hym aryghte, but all the other that behelde hym not lykewyſe, they haue not ſene Chriſt nor the Saueoure. Caiphas, Annas, Pilate & Herode, dyd beholde hym in dede, but they ſawe not that he was the Saueoure. But where in is the faute, that they can not ſe hym? In the eyen of the harte, they muſt be cleare, that they may beholde ye yonge LORDE that is entred in to the wynepreſſe for vs, and hath ſuffred wronge for vs, ſettynge vs at lyberte, not for our merytes or deſeruynges, but for hys truth and loues ſake. Who ſo beholdeth him after thys maner, the ſame hath ouercome the law, ſynne, & death, deſpyſynge all theyr aſſaultes.
               The true ſeynge conſiſteth not in the bodely eyen, for many haue ſene hym after that maner, which were neuer the better for it: but in fayth in the harte. It maye well be that they haue ſene hym wyth bodyly eyen, but yet not beleued that he was the Saueoure, thynkynge on thys wyſe: Shulde thys chylde be he? it is ſcarce ſyxe wekes olde, nother can it lyfte vp the heade. The true Saueoure

(thought they) ſhal come wyth an armye, wyth horſes and al maner of weapens. But the good Simeon hath ſene hym other wyſe. He was warned in hys hart & a worde was geuen hym, ſayenge: The ſame is he▪ He had another lyght and another ſyghte. Euen ſo muſte we alſo not onely heare at Chriſtes mouth, but alſo beleue in the harte thorowe the holy gooſt, and ſo muſt ye harte be illumined by the holy gooſt: for it is naturally ſtony, hardened and darkened ſo ſore, that it can not knowlege ſuch ſaluacyon and ſe ſuch lyghte. Nother is it ynough that Mary, Ioſeph, Simeō and other haue ſene hym, I muſte ſe hym alſo, I muſte knowlege hym alſo, I muſte knowe alſo that he is the true Meſſias.
               Simeon myght wyth few wordes haue vttered the cauſe of hys ioy, and ſayd: Therfore letteſt thou me depart in peace, becauſe I haue ſene Chriſte. But that he myght declare the maieſty of Chriſte more clearelye, he leaueth the name of Chriſt, and in ſteade therof he ſetteth thre tytles, wherewyth Chriſt is ſet forth mooſt playnly, and his vſe is ſhewed mooſt manyfeſtly. The fyrſt tytle that Chriſt is declared wyth, is, Saueoure, ſayenge: Myne eyen haue ſene thy Saueoure,

vvhome thou haſt prepared before all people. Thys ſayenge ſemeth Simeon to haue taken out of the .lii. Chapter of Eſaye where he ſayeth: The LORDE wyll make bare hys holy arme, & ſhewe it forth in the ſyght of all the Gentyles, and all the endes of the earth ſhall ſe the ſauynge health of oure God. That Eſaye doth prophecy for to come, that ſayeth Simeon to be now fulfyllynge. That is, that our LORDE Chriſt whych as the true Saueoure is ſhewed in ye fleſhe, and ſet vp therfore, that he myghte be ſhewed vnto al nacions, both the Iewes and Gentyles. Yf the ſynnes do racke oure conſciences, and caſt them to the euerlaſtynge damnacyon, than is Chriſt oure Saueoure, the wholſome playſter, whyche layed to the ſores of our ſynnes, doth ſo drye vp, clenſe & heale the etter of them, that although he fele hymſelfe greued wyth ſynnes, and yet do beleue in Chriſte, yeldynge hymſelfe wholy to hys cure, yet is he for all that rekened clene from all ſynne, ryghteous and holy. And yf Chriſte be wholſome to clenſe and heale ſynnes, it followeth alſo that he is wholſome in al aduerſites, troubles, grefes and paynes of death and hell. For yf ony man be payned, or greued, than is Chriſte wholſome

vnto hym. For in forgeuynge ſynnes, he maketh the ſame grefe to be no inſtrumēt or accaſion of miſery vnto hym. Yf ony mā be caſt before death and hell in hys cōſcience, Chriſt is a Seueoure vnto hym, the whych ſeynge he hath ſatiſfyed hys father for our ſinnes, he chaungeth the feare of death and hell in a waye, not vnto perditiō, but vnto lyfe & euer laſtynge ſaluacion. Let vs therfore embrace thys Saueoure of God, the whych Simeon dyd beare in hys armes, and let vs lykewyſe beare hym by fayth, that we maye be letten go in peace lykewyſe.
               The ſeconde tytle that Simeō decketh Chriſt wyth, is, the lyght. For he ſayeth: A lyght for the lyghtenynge of the Heythē, he ſhall not onely be a Saueoure, but alſo a lyghte to lyghten the Heythen, that is: He is a lyght that ſhall not only ſhyne amonge the Iewes, but alſo, amonge the Gentyles, and lyghten them, that they alſo maye come to the eternall bleſſe oute of the darkeneſſe of death and hel. Thys part of ye ſonge ſemeth to be taken out of the .xlii. Chapter of Eſay, where he prophecieth of Chriſt on thys wyſe I wyll geue the for a conuenaunt of the people, and to be the lyght of the Gentyles, that thou mayeſt open the eyes of the blynde,

and let out the preſoners, and them that ſyt in darkeneſſe out of the doungeon houſe. And Chriſte ſayeth thus of hymſelfe, in the viii. chapter of Ihon: I ame the lyght of the worlde, He that followeth me, ſhal not walke in darkneſſe, but ſhall haue the lyght of lyfe. What are than thoſe darkneſſes that Chriſt the lyght doth dryue out? The darkeneſſe are fyrſt all mans power, wyſdom, and ryghteouſneſſe, the whiche, though they glyſter and ſhyne before men, yet to optayne the grace of God thereby, to apeace gods wrath to make ſatiſfaccion for oure ſynnes, and to get the true bleſſe wyth them, they are but euen darkneſſe. Secondly are the darkneſſe all doctrines of philoſophers, all lawes, ether of the Heythen, or of Moſes. For thoſe though they be profitable, and be neceſſarye to redreſſe maners by them, and to repreſſe the wycked, yet to put awaye ſynne with thē and to get the true ryghteouſneſſe before God, they are euen darkneſſe. Only Chriſt is the lyghte, becauſe that whoſo beleueth hys goſpell, hath the clenſynge and remiſſiō of ſynnes thorowe hym, the whiche is oure ryghteouſneſſe, conſiſtynge in the iudgemēt of God. Finally are oure ſynnes, death and hell darkneſſe, but Chriſte is the true lyght,

                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
For yf God hath not ſpared the naturall braūches, let vs beware, leſt he ſpare not vs alſo. God refuſed the Iewes for theyr wyckedneſſe, howe muche more ſhall he refuſe vs Gentiles, yf we be lyke vnto thē in wyckedneſſe? He refuſed the Iewes, not becauſe they crucifyed Chriſte, but becauſe they beleued not in hym whō they crucifyed, nother repented at the preachynge of the goſpell of Ieſu Chriſte: Euen ſo ſhall not God refuſe vs, becauſe we haue ſynned, (orels had we ben longe ſence refuſed,) but we ſhalbe refuſed, becauſe we wyll not beleue hys Goſpel agaynſte whome we haue ſynned, nother haue done penaunce by fayth, but partly perſecute the goſpel wyth tyranny, partly with deſpyſynge and lothſomneſſe. Therfore let vs be diligent by obedience vnto the goſpel, that the ſame glory of Chriſte that is come and tranſlated vnto vs, do abyde with vs for euer, and not be ſklaundered by oure miſbehaueoure and vngodly lyuynge. For better were it that a milſtone were hanged aboute oure neckes and we caſte into the ſee, than ony ſklaunder vnto God and hys holy worde ſhulde come by vs.
               
                  ¶Here is now (good reader) the ſonge of the ſage grayheaded Simeon, the whiche he beynge full of the holy gooſt dyd ſynge, to declare hys mynde to Godwarde. Wherein fyrſt by his owne enſample he ſheweth wher by the true peace and tranquillite of conſcience doth come, and whereby we become wyllynge to dye, namely thereby, that we knowe Chriſte to be the ouercommer and vanquiſher of ſynne and Death. For yf we do beholde the Death in vs and in herſelfe, ther is nothynge more haynous or dredeful. But yf we take Chriſte in oure armes of ſayth, and beholde the death in hym, than do we ſo lytle deſpayre wyth beholdynge the death, that we rather do ſaye, ether wyth Simeon: LORDE, Novv letteſt thou thy ſeruaunte departe in peace, accordynge to thy vvorde
                  : Orels wyth Paule: I deſyre to be lowſed and to be wyth Chriſte.
               Moreouer doth Simeon ſette forth Chriſte with thre goodly titles, callyng hym the Saueoure of all people, the lyght of the Gentyles, and the glory of Iſrael: that with theſe titles he myght ſo ſet forth the maieſty of Chriſte, that ether he myght prouoke the vnbeleuynge to the fayth, or ſtablyſhe the weake in fayth, or kepe them that be ſtronge
               
                  〈1 page missing〉
               
            
         
      
   