
      
         
            
            
            Chryſanaleia:
THE
GOLDEN
FISHING:
Or,
Honour of FISHMONGERS.
            Applauding the aduancement of M.
IOHN LEMAN, Alderman, to the dignitie
of Lord Maior of LONDON.
            Taking his Oath in the ſame authority at Weſtminſter,
on Tueſday, being the 29. day of October.
1616.
            Performed in hearty loue to him, and at the charges of
his worthy Brethren, the ancient, and right
Worſhipfull Company of FISHMONGERS.
            Deuiſed and written by A. M. Citizen and
Draper of LONDON.
            Printed at London by George Purſlowe.
1616.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
Worſhipfull, Iudicious, and truly
generous Gentlemen, the Maſter,
Wardens, and Aſsiſtants, of the auncient
and worthie Companie of
FISHMONGERS.
            
               IT vvere a mightie
iniury (in my poore
opinion) that you,
being the main Ocean,
feeding all
the riuolets of this
painfull employment, and directing the
courſe of any current that way tending:
ſhould not receiue the iuſt retribution
and dutie, which (by inſtinct of nature)
all Riuers elſe ſend duly to their nurſing

Mother the Sea. Therefore Gentlemen,
J doe but ſend you that, which in
right and equity belongs vnto you, the
Patronage and protection of this Orphan
childe, begotten in your ſeruice,
bredde vp hitherto by your fauour and
kinde cheriſhing, and not deſpayring
now to dye, through your want of regard.
Jt is your owne, welcome it in
loue and acceptance, and J haue as
much as I deſire, and will ſtudie hereafter
to deſerue.
            
               Yours in any ſeruice,
AN. MVNDY.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Chryſanaleia:
THE GOLDEN
FISHING.
            Or,
Honour of Fiſhmongers.
            
               I Finde it faithfully recorded in Authors
of reuerend Antiquity, that
when Godfrey, Duke of Boloigne
(beeing choſen Generall of the
Chriſtian Army, for the freedome
and deliuerance of Ieruſalem from
Saladine, and al his other heathen miſcreants;) Euery
Chriſtian Kingdome did ayde him with their beſt
aſſiſtance: becauſe it was a buſineſſe to Gods high
honour, and generall comfort of poore diſtreſſed
Chriſtians. As from all other Kingdomes, ſo from
England (among other bands of worthy men) went
the Merchants (trading in fiſh, oyle, flaxe, ſilkes and
other commodities) moſt frequently then termed
Fiſhmongers, and the Goldſmithes, then in a late begun
league of loue and amity, by many friendly
helpes and furtherances each to other, in diuers
dangerous aduentures, as well on the Seas, as the
land, no men being more forward in thoſe affaires,
and in thoſe times then they.
            
               
After the moſt glorious victory obtained againſt
the Pagans, & Ieruſalem regained, they ioined together
in as glorious an action, of helping to build the
ruined Wall againe, from the Water-gate of comfort,
to the Sheepe-gate of innocencie, or holineſſe.
And ſo much the rather, becauſe there was then
much neceſsity of their paines and endeuour, not
only (by Fiſhing and Shipping) to ſupply the daily
wants of the Souldiours: but alſo for bringing Gold
and Siluer thither, for beautifying Gods City and
Temple.
            And as this league of loue and fellowſhip began
vpon ſo good an occaſion: So they continued, and
declared it in Englands Ieruſalem, our famous Metropolis
London, building the Wall and two North
Gates therein, Moore-gate, and Cripleſ-gate, as yet
their Armes and Memories on them do ſufficiently
teſtifie. The one performed by Thomas Faulconer,
Fiſhmonger, and the other by William Shaw Goldſmith.
            
            Moreouer, Fiſh and Oyle, as well as Golde, Spices,
Silkes, &c. were firſt brought in by thoſe forenamed
Merchants: That the golden Lampe might
not want holy and precious oyle, nor rich and orient
Pearles (firſt found in ſhelles by painfull and induſtrious
Fiſhermen) faile to be ſet in Iewels & Rings
of Gold, as beeing the pureſt mettall that the earth
can affoord. And hereupon, honourable Antiquity
thought meete, to beſtow ſuch armory on them,
as (for euer) might continue their brotherly affection.
Firſt, Peters keies, he being called from the
condition of a poore Fiſherman, to be the prime Apoſtle:

and thoſe ſuppoſed keyes, the Fiſhmongers
beare in their Enſignes of Armes, not ſuperſtitiouſly
any way, but to declare an earneſt zeale, of
entring into heauens Kingdome. Next, Dauids Cup
of ſauing health, which the Gold-Smiths alſo beare
in their Banners. So much briefly, in approuing
their long continued loue and amity.
            
               The Reaſon of our preſent Shewe.
               
                  TIme hauing turned his yearely Glaſſe, for election
of a Magiſtrate, a Brother of the Fiſhmougers
Societie, comming (by right of
place, and general Sufferages of the Citizens) to the
high dignitie of Lord Maior of this Citie for the
yeere enſuing: our deuices for that ſolemne and Iouiall
day, were and are accordingly proportioned,
by the diſcreete and well aduiſed iudgement of the
Gentlemen, thereto choſen and deputed, in manner
and forme as followeth.
               Firſt therefore, becauſe Fiſhing is the abſolute
Embleme of our preſent intendement, and Fiſhmongers,
hauing beene ſuch worthy Merchants in
thoſe reuerend and authentique times: leauing
their matter of Commerce and Merchandiſe, and
ayming at their true Hierogliphical impreſſe for the
dayes intended honour, thus we marſhall the order
of proceeding.
               Our firſt deuice that vſhers and leades the way,
is a very goodly and beautifull fiſhing Buſſe, called;
the Fiſhmongers Eſperanza, or Hope of London: being
in her true old ſhape, forme and proportion, yet

diſpenſed withall in ſome beautie, for the dayes honour.
It may paſſe (by generall ſufferance) for the
ſame fiſhing Buſſe, wherein S. Peter ſate mending
his Nets, when his beſt Maſter called him from
that humble and lowly condition, and made him a
Fiſher of men. If not ſo; take her for one of thoſe fiſhing
Buſſes, which not only enricheth our kingdome
with all variety of fiſh the Sea can yeelde: but helpeth
alſo (in that kind) all other lands. Fiſhermen,
in this fiſhing Buſſe are ſeriouſly at labour, drawing
vp their Nets, laden with liuing fiſh, and beſtowing
them bountifully among the people.
               Next followeth a crowned Dolphin, alluding ſom
way to the Lord Maiors coate of Armes, but more
properly to the Companies, and therefore may
ſerue indifferently for both. But becauſe it is a Fiſh
inclined much (by nature) to Muſique: Arion, a famous
Muſicion and Poet, rideth on his backe, being
ſaued ſo from death, when Robbers and Pirates on
the Seas, would maliciouſly haue drowned him.
               Then commeth the King of Moores, gallantly
mounted on a golden Leopard, he hurling gold and
ſiluer euery way about him. Before, on either ſide,
and behinde him, ride fixe other his tributarie
Kings on horſe-backe, gorgeouſly attired in faire
guilt Armours, and apt furniutre thereto belonging.
They carry Ingots of golde and ſiluer, and each one
his dart, and in this order they attend on him: ſhewing
thereby, that the Fiſhmongers are not vnmindfull
of their combined brethren, the worthy Company
of Golde-Smithes, in this ſolemne day of triumph.
               
                  
We next preſent a ſingular Embleme, correſponding
with the Creaſt and Cognizance of the Lord
Maior, and bearing an eſpeciall Morality beſide.
A Leman tree, in full and ample forme, richly laden
with the fruite and flowers it beareth. Neere to the
ſtocke or roote thereof, a goodly Pellicane hath
built her neſt, with all her tender brood about her.
And becauſe her loue and care (according to the opinion
of Ariſtotle, Plinie, Geſner, and diuers other
good writers) makes her extraordinarily iealous of
them, as neuer daring to be abſent from them (the
ſuſtenance ſhe receiueth from the male Bird, being
inſufficient for their nouriſhing:) with her beake ſhe
launceth her breſt, and ſo ſupplieth that want with
her owne bloud. Our cited Authors variouſly affirme,
that this loue and cheriſhing of them laſteth
the ſpace of a whole yeare, by which time, they become
ſtrong, and able for flight; and then, though
they ſuruiue, the Damme dyeth. An excellent type
of gouernment in a Magiſtrate, who, at his meere
entrance into his yeares Office, becommeth a nurſing
father of the Family: which, though hee bred
not, yet, by his beſt endeuour, hee muſt labour to
bring vp.
               If his loue and delight be ſuch to the Commonwealth,
as that of the Pellican to her young ones, by
broken ſleeps, daily and nightly cares, that the very
leſt harm ſhould not happē to his charge: then doth
he iuſtly anſwere to our Embleme; and, as of her,
ſo of him, it may well be ſayd, his breſt and bowels
of true zeale and affection, are alwaies open, to feed
and cheriſh them (euen with his beſt endeuor and

diligence) to the expiration of his yeare. And
then, though the maine Authoritie of Gouernement
(in him) may be ſayd to dye: yet it ſuruiueth in
other Pellicans of the ſame brood, and ſo it reacheth
to them in the ſame manner. And becauſe the
Leman Tree (by the affirmation of Iulius Solinus
Polyhiſtor, Dioſcorides, Pomponius Mela, Petrus
Mexius and Antonius Verdierus) both in fruite,
flowers, rinde, pith, and iuyce, are admirable preſeruers
of the ſences in man, reſtoring, comforting
and relieuing any the leaſt decay in them: wee ſeated
the fiue Sences about the Tree, in their beſt and
liuelieſt repreſentations, as fitly iumping with our
Morall methode.
               Our next deuice, before it be marſhalled in due
ranke and order, is a goodly Bower, ſhaped in
forme of a flowrie Arbour, and adorned with all
the Scutchions of Armes of ſo many worthy men,
as haue beene Lord Maiors of the Fiſhmongers
Company, and each mans name truely ſet downe
on them. It is appointed firſt to ſtand in Paules
Church-yard: And at ſuch a place as is thoght moſt
conuenient. In this Bower is a faire Tombe, whereon,
in Armour lyeth the imaginary body of Sir
William Walworth, ſometime twiſe Lord Maior of
London, and a famous Brother of the Fiſhmongers
Company. The reaſon of this conceit, aimeth at
that tempeſtuous and troubleſome time of King
Richard the Second, and the fourth yeare of his
Raigne, whoſe life, Crowne and Dignitie (next vnder
Gods omnipotent power) were manfully defended
and preſerued, by that worthy man Walworth.
               
               
                  
Suppoſe his Marble Statue (after the manner of
Knightly buriall) to lye vpon the Tombe, and both
it and the Bower to be worthily attended, by thoſe
fiue Knights in Armour, and mounted on Horſebacke,
that were Knighted with Sir William in the
field, after he had ſlaine the proud inſulting Rebell,
Captaine and ring-leader to all the reſt. Sixe
Trumpetters well mounted and appointed, with
Trumpet banners of the Companies Armes, and a
gallant guard of Halberdiers, being 24. in number,
with watchet ſilke Coats, hauing the Fiſhmongers
Armes on the breſt, Sir William Walworths on the
backe, and the Citties on the left arme, white Hats
and Feathers, and goodly Halbards in their hands:
theſe likewiſe haue their rancke and place neere to
the Tombe and Bower. Londons Genius, a comely
Youth, attired in the ſhape of an Angell, with a
golden Crowne on his head, golden Wings at his
backe, bearing a golden Wand in his hand, ſits
mounted on Horſebacke by the Bower; with an
Officer at Armes, bearing the Rebels head on Walworths
Dagger. So ſoone as the Lord Maior is
come neere, and way made for his better attention:
the Genius ſpeaketh, the Trumpets ſound their ſeuerall
Surden flouriſhes, Walworth ariſeth, and is conuaid
on Horſebacke from the Bower, as you may
better perceiue by the ſpeeches apted for the purpoſe.
The Bower and Tombe are likewiſe borne
along before him, for his more conuenient returne
to reſt againe.
               Wee come now to our laſt inuention in this our
Triumphall Progreſſe, memorizing Londons great

day of deliuerance, and the Fiſhmongers Fame for
euer, in Anno 1381. and on Corpus Christi day
in Weſt Smithfield, where the like number of Rebels
(as then) were neuer aſſembled. Leauing the
matter, a caſe of deſperate Rebellion; the manner,
a moſt baſe and barbarous kinde of proceeding, to
the great diſturbance of the King and State, and
vnauoydable ruine of this Cittie, but for the good
Angell of defence then guarding it, and the worthy
Lord Maior made the ſecond inſtrument: let vs imagine
(though not in the magnificent forme as
then it was done, yet according to our compaſſe of
performance) that whatſoeuer hath formerly been
ſayd concerning Walworths reuiuing at the Tombe,
his Royall attending, and the beautifull Monument
following, is all but a ſhaddow of that triumphant
victorie in our apteſt alluſion.
               Our Pageant Chariot, is drawne by two Maremen,
& two Mare-mayds, as being the ſupporters to
the Companies coate of Armes. In the higheſt
ſeate of eminence, ſits the triumphing Angell, who
that day ſmote the enemy by Walworths hand, and
laid all his proud preſuming in the duſt. With one
hand (King Richard ſitting in a degree beneath
her) ſhe holds his Crowne on faſt, that neither forraine
Hoſtilitie, nor home-bred Trecherie ſhould
euer more ſhake it. In the other hand hee holds
his ſtriking Rodde, inferring thus much thereby:
By mee Kings reigne, and their enemies are ſcattered.
All the forefront is beautified with Royall Vertues,
as Truth, Vertue, Honor, Temperance, Fortitude,
Zeale, Equity, Conſcience, beating downe

Treaſon and Mutinie. Behind, and on the ſides,
ſits Iuſtice, Authority, Lawe, Vigilancy, Peace,
Plentie and Diſcipline, as beſt props and pillers to
any Kingly eſtate. Theſe, as all the reſt, are beſt
obſerued by their ſeuerall Emblems and properties,
borne by each one, and their adornments anſwerable
to them in like manner.
               Hauing thus briefly deſcribed the order of the
daies ſeruice, inſomuch as appertaineth to my
charge and place, (not omitting the Fiſhing-Buſſe,
Dolphine, Mer-man and Mer-mayd vpon the water
firſt, and afterward marſhalled in ſuch forme
as you haue heard on land:) wee come to ſet
downe the Speeches, according as they are appointed
to be ſpoken, beginning firſt at the Bower and
Tombe in Paules-Church-yard, after my Lords returne
from Weſtminſter, where the Citties Genius
thus beginneth.
            
            
               
               Londons Genius, at the Bower and
Tombe in Paules Church-yard▪
               
               GENIVS.
               
                  BY vertue of this powerfull wand,
                  Which in a minute can command
                  Graues, Vaults, and deepes yeeld vp their dead,
                  How late or long time buried:
                  Thou Image of that worthy man,
                  That Londons Knight-hood firſt began,
                  In Office of the Mayraltie,
                  (A high and gracefull dignitie,)
                  Though yet thou ſleep'ſt in ſhade of death;Here the Genius ſtrikes on him with his wand, whereat he begins to ſtir, and comming off the Tombe, looks ſtrangely about him.
                  
                  By me take power of life and breath.
               
               
                  The firſt ſound of Surden Trumpets.
                  
                     Londons Genius giues thee leaue,
                  An ayrie ſubſtance to receiue.
                  Speech like to Spirits rayſde from reſt,
                  Triumphs and pleaſures to digeſt
                  By power of ſacred Poeſie.
               
               
                  The ſecond Sound.
                  And ſeeing this dayes ſolemnitie
                  Honours thine owne Societie
                  Of Fiſhmongers, a worthy band,
                  Fam'd both to Citie, and the Land,
                  By thy rare deed of loyaltie,
                  Vpon the Kings proud enemy:
                  
                     
Sir William Walworth, doe what may
                  Remaine in thee, to crowne this day▪
                  
                  With generall fulneſſe of content:A full flouriſh without Surdens.
                  
                  For thereto all our hopes are bent.
               
            
            
               Sir William Walworth ſtanding before
the Tombe, and doing reuerence to
the Genius, ſpeaks this ſpeech.
               HE that aboue two hundred yeeres,
               (Free from diſturbance cares and feares,)
               Hath ſilent ſlept, and rayſd this day,
               To doe what gracefull helpe I may
               Vnto that band of worthy men,
               That were, and are my Brethren;
               And you graue Fathers of this State,
               Which I my ſelfe did propagate
               Twice, as L. Maior: Oh, yet to ſee,
               This ancient famous dignity
               Flouriſh ſo fairely: And (as then)
               Bleſt with as wiſe and worthy men;
               Mooues teares of ioy, and bids me call
               Gods beniſon light on you all.Here he doth reuerence to thē al,
               
               Your Charracter, Office and place,
               Well wot I by that Sword & Mace,
               With ſuch a difference, as before
               This day, once happened, and no more.Neuer any L. Maior a Bacheler before M. Iohn Leman but one, and that was Sir Hugh Clapton Mercer. An. 1491.
               
               The Genius ſpeakes you in mine eare,
               A Mayden-man, a Batcheler.
               You being the ſecond, let me ſay,
               This is a bleſſed marriage day
               Of you to that great dignity
               
               Of your dread Soueraignes Dep
                     •
                  tie,
               No doubt, but your chaſte thoughts and life,
               Will be as chaste to ſuch a Wife.
               All happy bleſſings crowne (I pray,)
               
                  Londons and Lemans wedding day.
               Obſeruing that faire Liuerie,Another full floriſh.
               
               You are of mine owne Company.
               How can I then, but ioy to ſee
               Such eminence and high degree:
               Grace ſtill our graue Society?
               And ſee (my Lord) this Bower relates,
               How many famous Magiſtrates,
               From the Fiſhmongers ancient name,
               Succeſſiuely to honour came
               In Londons Maioraltie. Theſe faire Coats.
               Their ſeuer all Armes and titles noates.
               
                  Turke, Louekin, Wroth, Pechie, Mordon,
               
               Theſe before me were euery one:Pointing to the Scutchiōs of Armes as they hang in order on the Bower.
               
               Then I. Next, Exton, Aſcham, Faulconer.
               
               
                  Michel, Parneis, Reinwall, Foſter,
               
               
                  Hulin, Hampton, Oſtridge, Remington,
               
               
                  Kneiſworth, Coppinger. Theſe being gon
               Succeeded Amcotes, Curtois, Allot,
               
               And now Iohn Leman, who well I wot,
               Welcome as any to this place,
               With our kinde Brethrens loue and grace.
               Aldermen we had many more
               That neuer this high Office bore,
               And therefore are not ranked heere;
               But only ſuch as Lord Maiors were.
            
            
               
               The Genius, as charming him againe with
his wand, proceedeth thus.
               GENIVS.
               
                  WAlworth, here ſtay: we may doe wrong,
               And hold this worthy man too long
               From thoſe great States, that at this 
                     •
                  eaſt
               Are euery one a welcome Gueſt.
               Thoſe Aldermen, that on the day,
               (When the proud Rebel thou didſt ſlay,)
               Were Knighted with thee in the field:
               Are rayſde by me their loue to yeelde
               With this faire Guard, and tend on thee,
               In honouring this Solemnity.
               Mount then thy Courſer, that we may
               (In the remainder of this day,)
               Doe more then time will now afford,
               Set on then, Honourable Lord.
            
            
               
               In the afternoone, when the Lord
Maior returneth to Paules, all the Deuiſes
being aptly placed in order neere to the little
Conduit, they are (by Sir William
Walworth) deſcribed to him in
this manner.
               
                  NOw worthy Lord, there is impos'd on me,
                  A briefe narration of each ſeuerall ſhew
                  Prouided for this Triumph, as you ſee,
                  In order to deſcribe them as they goe.
                  The Fiſhing Buſſe inſtructs you firſt to know
                  The toylſome trauell of poore Fiſher-men,
                  Subiected to all weathers, where and when.
               
               
                  In ſtormy tempeſts they omit no paine,
                  To bleſſe all lands with the Seas bounteous ſtore:
                  Their labour doth returne rich golden gaine,
                  VVhereof themſelues taſte leaſt by Sea or ſhore,
                  But (like good ſoules) contented euermore
                  VVith any benefit their toyle can bring;
                  The Fiſher well is term'd Contents true King.
               
               
                  This Embleme of the Dolphine, is the Armorie
                  Belonging to our brethren, and beſide
                  Speakes ſomewhat of that creatures qualitie,
                  By nature Muſicall, as hath been tryde:
                  Poeſie and Muſique therefore thus do ride
                  Vpon his back, in ſweete Arions ſhape,
                  VVho, by a Dolphine, thus did death eſcape:
               
               
                  The King of Moores thus mounted, and his traine,
                  Shewes your affection to that Company,
                  Which league with you in loue, and doth containe
                  The aptnes of your correſpondency
                  On either ſide, to hold inſeperably.
                  His Indian treaſure liberally is throwne:
                  To make his bounteous heart the better knowne.
               
               
                  
                  This Leman Tree, your Honour may conceit
                  More, then I ſpeake, becauſe myſteriouſly
                  Some hidden ſecret thereon doth awayte
                  Knowne to your ſelfe. It ſpeakes ingeniouſly
                  The Character of your authoritie:
                  Figur'd in that faire Bird, foſtring her brood:
                  Though with the deare expence of her owne blood.
               
               
                  Continuall cares, and many broken ſleepes,
                  Heart-killing feares, which waite on Eminence
                  Hard at the heeles, and (tortringly) ſtill keeps
                  VVithin the ſoule imperious reſidence,
                  As whippes t'afflict both hope and patience;
                  Theſe in the Pellicane are figur'd heere:
                  And theſe you hardly will auoide this yeere.
               
               
                  But as the Sences ſit about the Tree,
                  And ſhewe you how their vertues are ſupplyed
                  Still with freſh vigor: So (no doubt) will be
                  Your buſieſt troubles ſweetly qualified,
                  By thoſe fiue helpes that hold vp dignitie,
                  Diſcretion, Policie, and Prouidence,
                  Courage, Correction, theſe barre all offence.
               
               
                  Laſtly, looke on a figure of that day,
                  VVhen by Heauens helpe, and Walworths happy hand,
                  That ſwarme of Rebells, who fought all to ſway,
                  And haue both King and Country at command:
                  Euen in their height of pride, I made them ſtand,
                  And, in my Soueraigns ſight, there I ſtrooke dead
                  Their chiefeſt Captaine and commanding head.
               
               
                  The reſt of that baſe rout, diſmayd thereby,
                  And all tumultuous troubles calmely ceaſt,
                  King Richard, to requite true loyaltie,
                  His gracious fauour preſently expreſt
                  In Royall manner, Knighting me and the reſt
                  Of Aldermen, that were in fielde with me.
                  
                     London till then had not that dignitie.
               
               
                  
                  As I,1381. Richard the fourth, Sir Nicholas Bremlier, Sir Iohn Philpot, Sir Nicholas Twiford, Sir Iohn Standiſh, Sir Robert L
                           ••
                        nde. ſo theſe do repreſent the men
                  Knighted in field, on Corpus Chriſti day.
                  And as my Dagger ſlew the Rebell then,
                  So to renowne the deede; And I dare ſay,
                  To honor London more (if more it may)
                  The Red-Croſſe, in a Siluer-field before,
                  Had Walworths Dagger added to it more.
               
               
                  And now my Lord, this goodly Monument
                  Or▪ Chariot of Triumphall Victory
                  
                  Some ſhape of that daies honour doth preſent,
                  
                     By Heauens protection of True Maieſtie,
                  And beating downe Treaſon and Mutinie.
                  
                  Adorning all the Throne with thoſe faire Graces:
                  
                  That ought about a King to haue beſt places.
               
               
                  Truth, Vertue, Honour, ſober Temperance,
                  Fortitude, Zeale, Equitie, Conſcience,
                  Iuſtice, Authoritie, carefull 
                     Ʋigilance,
                  Peace, Plenty, Law, Councell, Obedience,
                  And Diſcipline, that whips all Errors hence,
                  Theſe (as beſt Pillars) do ſupport this State:
                  And euery Kingdome elſe doth propagate.
               
               
                  A bleſſed Bacheler are you my Lord,
                  By being your ſacred Soueraignes Deputie
                  In ſuch a State, where all theſe doe concord,
                  And truely do protect his Maieſtie
                  Figur'd in Richards great Authoritie.
                  As Walworth then, ſo Leman now may ſay▪
                  
                  Neuer had Man a happier Wedding day.
               
            
            
               
               Sir William Walworth his Speech at night, as
a farewell to my Lord.
               
                  PHoebus hath hid his golden head
               In Thetis lappe. And now are ſpred
               The ſable Curtaines of the night,
               Our Euenings purpoſe to delight.
               The twinkling Tapers of the Skie
               Are turn'd to Torches; and apply
               Their clearest radiance, to conuay
               Our Mayden Bridegroome on his way
               Home to his owne abiding place.
               Our Triumphs pompe ſhortens apace,
               That could affoord more time to ſpend,
               But gladly would no way offend.
               You mariage Rites ſolemnized
               Bequeathes you to the Bridall bed:
               Where you and your chaſtewife muſt reſt.
               
                  London (it ſeemes) did like you best,
               (Although you are a Bacheler,)
               To be her Husband for a yeere;
               Loue her, delight her. Shee's a Bride,
               Nere ſlept by ſuch a Husbands ſide
               But once before. She hath had many,
               And you may proue as good as any
               Haue gone before you in this place.
               Twill be your Brethrens ioy and grace,
               That Fiſhmongers liue still in fame,
               And ſtill renowned by your name.
               Their hearty loue by me they ſend yee,
               And pray the hand of heauen defend yee
               In all your actions. May your Fame,
               Crowne ſtill their ancient worthie name
               To all posteritie. So, Londons Lord
               And Virgin Husband, in a word:
               Old Walworth muſt to rest againe,
               Good-night to you, and all your trayne,
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   