
      
         
            
            
               
APPELLO CAESAREM. A IVST APPEALE FROM TWO VNIUST INFORMERS.
            BY RICHARD MOUNTAGU.
            
            LONDON, Printed by H. L. for Mathew Lownes. M. DC. XXV.
         
         
            
            
            TO HIS MOST SACRED MAIESTIE.
            
            
               MOST GRACIOUS AND DREAD SOVERAIGNE,
            
            
               BY a Miſsive, from a Papiſt I am ſure, and J ſuppoſe from a Prieſt, I was not long ſince forced upon the Controverſies of theſe times, betweene the Proteſtant and Romiſh Confeſsioniſts. And becauſe it hath bin ever truly counted

a readier way for the advancement of Piety, rather to leſſen and abate, than to multiply the number of many needleſs contentions in the Church: therefore when I firſt undertooke to anſwer that very worthleſs Author, The GAGGER of all Proteſtants mouthes for ever, I did it with a firmed purpoſe to leave all Private Opinions, and Particular Poſitions or Oppoſitions whatſoever, unto their owne Authors or Abbettors, eyther to ſtand or fall of themſelves; and not to ſuffer the Church of England to be charged with the maintenance of any Doctrine which was none of Her own, publickely and univerſally reſolved on. For we are at a great diſadvantage with our Adverſaries, to have thoſe Tenents put and preſsed evermore upon us, for the Generall Doctrine eſtabliſhed in our Church, which are but eyther the Problematic all Opinions

of Private Doctors, to be held or not held eyther way; or elſe the Fancies many of them of Factious men, diſclaimed and cenſured by the Church, not to be held any way, Such diſadvantages hath This Church too long endured: and out of juſt indignation againſt this Gagger and his Fellowes, I could not but ſo much the more labour to vindicate Her Freedom ex profeſſo, and to aſſert Her (as far as I was able) unto Her owne proper, true, and ancient Tenents, ſuch as be without any doubt or queſtion, legitimate and genuine, ſuch as Shee will both acknowledge and maintain for her owne. My direct dealing herein, MOST DREAD SOVERAIGNE, ſo reaſonable, ſo neceſsary (as I ſuppoſed) hath very much and highly diſcontented ſome Private Divines, who deſire to have thoſe Opinions, which are controverted among

ourſelves, to be taken and defended for the common and publicke Doctrine of the Church: but more eſpecially hath it incenſed thoſe Claſsicall Puritans, who were wont to paſse all their Strange Determinations, Sabbatarian Paradoxes, and Apocalypticall Frenſies, under the Name and Covert of The True Profeſſors of Proteſtant Doctrine; ſuppoſing, as it ſhould ſeeme, that in this caſe we were all lyable to the Statute, that is, bound to keepe and foſter their Conceits as our owne Doctrines, becauſe they have caſt them upon Us and upon Our Church, like Baſtards upon the Pariſh where they were borne, or Vagabonds on the Towne where they laſt dwelt, or were ſuffered to paſse without due correction. Such Irchins it was neceſsary to disband, and ſend them away to ſhift for themſelves, that our Mother the Church
               
might no more be troubled with them. And yet for this cauſe have ſome Informers Articled againſt me, and traduced me to the World for a Papiſt and an Arminian; though the world and themſelves know, I flatly defied and oppoſed the One; and GOD in Heaven knoweth that I never ſo much as yet read word in the other. It was my happineſs, MOST GRATIOUS SOVERAIGNE, that ſo meane a Vaſsall as my poore ſelfe was ſufficiently knowne to be nor So nor So, unto Him, who, if ever any of the Royall ranke, was indeed ſicut Angelus Domini to diſcerne, my late MOST SACRED LORD and MASTER of ever Bleſſed memory, unto whom that Information ſhould have beene repreſented; by whom, in his moſt able and impartiall judgement, I had my Quietus eſt,
               
and Diſcharge. But in regard their Clamours were ſo impetuous, and Accuſations ſo divulged, it pleaſed HIS MAIESTY, out of that Goodneſse which was ever eminent in his moſt bleſsed diſpoſition, not only to grant me leave humbly to Appeale from my Defamers unto His moſt ſacred Cogniſance in publicke, and to repreſent my just Defence against their Slanders and falſe Surmiſes unto the world; but alſo to give expreſse order unto Doct. VVHITE the Reverend Deane of Carlile, for the authoriſing and publiſhing thereof, after it had beene duly read over and approved by him, to containe nothing in it, but what was agreeable to the Doctrine and Diſcipline establiſhed in the Church of England, whereof HIS MAIESTY was most tender. It was read, approved,

and ſent to the Preſſe accordingly. Since which time, it hath pleaſed the King of Kings to call Him unto Himſelfe, and to Crowne Him with Glory and Immortality in Heaven, before I could returne the Booke into His Royall hands. But bleſſed for ever be the LORD GOD of Heaven, that hath preſerved YOUR MAIESTY, and ſet YOU upon His Throne as King in ſtead of HIM, to goe in and out before his People in his Place, and to execute Judgement in YOUR FATHER's room. What was then intended unto HIM, according to his Owne moſt Gracious and Royall direct appointment, I humbly crave leave upon my bended knees, to preſent unto YOUR MOST EXCELLENT and SACRED SELF; And in all lowly wiſe I cast both It and my Selfe, and the

beſt Service I ſhall be able to do in GODS Church, at YOUR MAIESTIES feet, deſiring no longer to live than I ſhall be and continue a moſt conformable and true member of this Church, and
            
               YOUR MAIESTIES moſt loyall and faithfull Subject and Servant, RICHARD MOUNTAGU.
            
         
         
            
            THE CONTENTS OF THE SEVERALL CHAPTERS.
            
            
               THE FIRST PART TOVching ARMINIANISME.
               
                  CHAP. I.
OF the Inſcription which the Informers made to their ſeverall Articles.
               
                  CHAP. II.
Of S. PETER'S FALL.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. III.
Of the loſſe of Faith and Iuſtification.
               
                  CHAP. IV.
Of FALLING FROM GRACE. The Tenet of Antiquity therein. The doctrine of the Church of England in the 16th
                   Article, the Conference at Hampton Court, the Book of Homilies, and the publick Liturgie.
               
               
                  CHAP. V.
Touching PREDESTINATION. Of Arminians, Lutherans, Calviniſts, forrain Divines. Of the Church of England: Submiſsion thereunto. The queſtion between them and us.
               
                  CHAP. VI.
Dangerous conſequents brought by Others, upon the irreſpective Decree.
               
                  CHAP. VII.
                  Lutherans averſe from the doctrine of Calviniſts. The moderation of the Church of

                  England in theſe great & unſearcheable myſteries. The Author's ſubmiſsion thereunto. The doctrine of Predeſtination. Man the Author of his owne deſtruction, and not GOD. The doctrine of Antiquity contemned by Novellers. The Synod of Dort no obligation to us. The Saying of DEODATE. The Articles of Lambeth forbidden by Authoritie. Forraine Doctrine maintained, to bring-in Forraine Diſcipline. The Church of England no Patroneſſe of novell opinions.
               
                  CHAP. VIII.
Touching Free-will, the III. point of Arminianiſme.
               
               
                  CHAP. IX.
Controverſies unneceſſarily multiplied: the AUTHOR no Favourer of them. Queſtions of obſcurity and ſpeculation, not fit for Pulpits and popular eares. Free-will made no ſuch controverſie among moderate men, either of the Pontifician or Proteſtant Side, as people are borne in hand withall.
               
                  
                  CHAP. X.
The Councell of Trent not wholly to be condemned. Man's Will not meerly paſsive, but active and free in the proper acts thereof. The memorable Saying of SCOTUS. The power of the Will in things divine.
               
                  CHAP. XI.
The fourth and laſt point of ARMINIANISME touching the Synod of DORT.
The Synod of Dort not our Rule. Private opinions no Rule. The Informers imputations nothing at all.
            
            
               THE SECOND PART touching POPERY.
               
                  CHAP. I.
THe Author uncharitably traduced. His profeſsion for the doctrine & diſcipline received and commanded in the Church of England. Conformable Puritans. Furious zeale. The Church of Rome not a ſound, yet

a true Church. Private opinions diſclaimed. The Church of England aſſerted to her owne publick and proper Tenents. The cauſe of all theſe Imputations.
               
               
                  CHAP. II.
The Church Repreſentative, and Points Fundamentall, what they are. All that Papiſts ſay, is not Poperie. Particular Churches, have and may erre. The Catholick Vniverſall Church hath not, cannot erre. Of Generall Councels. The Author farre from the Ieſuites fancy. The XXI Article of the Church of England explaned.
               
                  CHAP. III.
Strange accuſations. Antiquity reverenced, not deified. Fathers accuſed of ſome error by Ieſuites. The occaſion of their enlarged ſpeeches concerning Free-will. The Author acquitted of Popery.
               
               
                  CHAP. IV.
                  Private and publick doctrine differenced. In what ſenſe the Church is ſaid to be alwaies visible. The Author acquitted from Popery
                  
againe by others, learned Divines. Of the Church of Rome.
               
               
                  CHAP. V.
Touching ANTICHRIST.
The Pope and Prelacie of Rome, Antichriſtian. That he is Magnus ille Antichriſtus, is neither determined by the publick doctrine of the Church, nor proved by any good argument of private men. Difference among Divines, who The Man of ſinne ſhould bee. The markes of the great Antichriſt fit the Turkiſh Tyrannie every way, as well as the Papacy. The peace of the Church not to bee diſquieted through variety of opinions. No finall reſolution to be yet had in this point.
               
                  CHAP. VI.
Touching IUSTIFICATION.
The ſtate of a meere naturall man; who, to pleaſe GOD, muſt become a new creature. That newnes cannot bee wrought without a reall change of a ſinner in his qualities. In what ſence it may be ſaid, that there is an Acceſſe
                  
of Iuſtification, both by daily receiving remiſsion of new ſins, and by increaſe of grace, injoyning vertuous and good deeds unto faith.
               
                  CHAP. VII.
A change made in a juſtified man. The Author agreeth in part with the Councell of Trent, and therefore maintaineth Popery, no neceſſarie illation. The doctrine of the Church of England, and of other reformed Churches, in this point of Iuſtification.
               
               
                  CHAP. VIII.
Strange Popery. GOD onely and properly juſtifieth.
               
                  CHAP. IX.
Holineſſe of life added unto Iuſtification and Remiſsion of ſinnes. GOD juſtifieth originally, and Faith inſtrumentally.
               
                  CHAP. X.
An Acceſſe declaratory made to the act of Iuſtification by the works of a lively faith. S. PAUL and S. IAMES reconciled. The

old Prophets and ancient Fathers made new Papiſts by the Informers.
               
                  CHAP. XI.
The doctrine of MERIT ex condigno rejected as falſe and preſumptuous. Difference between the old and the new ſignification of Mereri.
               
               
                  CHAP. XII.
The quality and conditions of a good work, required by the Roman Writers, to make it rewardable (as farre as they are poſitive) no Proteſtant diſalloweth of. To thoſe conditions may others be added.
               
                  CHAP. XIII.
                  GOD ſurely rewardeth good works according to his promiſe, of his free bountie and grace.
               
                  CHAP. XIV.
The Church of England holdeth no ſuch abſolute certainty of ſalvation in juſt perſons, as they have of other objects of Faith expreſsly and directly revealed by GOD.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. XV.
Touching Evangelicall Counſailes.
                  Evangelicall Counſailes admitted according to the doctrine of the old Fathers, and many learned Divines of our Church. Popiſh doctrine concerning workes of Supererogation rejected.
               
                  CHAP. XVI.
S. GREG. NAZIANZ. defended from the touch of uncircumciſed lips.
               
                  CHAP. XVII.
The expoſition of the ſaying of our SAVIOUR. If thou wilt be perfect, &c. S. CHRYSOST. S. AUG. S. HIER. S. AMBR. make it no imperious precept. If it be, the Informers are the leaſt obſervers of it, and ſinne againſt their owne conſciences.
               
                  
                     CHAP. XVIII.
                  
Touching LIMBUS PATRUM.
The dreames of Papiſts about Limbus Patrum, related and rejected. The ſtate of mens ſoules after death. The place proportioned

to their ſtate. The ſoules of the bleſſed Fathers before CHRIST'S aſcenſion, in heavenly Palaces, yet not in the third and higheſt heavens, nor in that fulneſſe of ioy which they have now, and more of which they ſhall have heerafter. The opinion of old and new Writers. Our Canons not to be tranſgreſſed. The doctrine and faith of the Church of England concerning the Article of CHRIST'S deſcent into Hell. The diſadvantage wee are at with our Adverſaries. Every Novellers Fancie printed, and thruſt upon us for the generall Tenet of our Church. The plain and eaſie Articles of our CREED diſturbed and obſcured by the wild dreames of little leſſe than blaſphemous men; by new Models of Divinity; by Dry-fatts of ſeverall Catechiſmes. The Beleefe of Antiquity. The Author and It far from POPERY.
               
               
                  CHAP. XIX.
                  The ſeventh point of Popery touching IMAGES.
The Hiſtoricall uſe of Images maketh nothing for the adoring of them. Popiſh extravagancies.
               
                  
                  CHAP. XX.
                  S. GREG. doctrine concerning Images, far from Popery.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXI.
No religious honour or worſhip to bee given unto Images. They may affect the mindes of religious men, by repreſenting unto them the actions of CHRIST and his Saints. In which regard, all reverence ſimply cannot be abſtracted from them.
               
                  CHAP. XXII.
                  Popiſh doctrine and practice both, about adoration of Images, rejected.
               
                  CHAP. XXIII.
The Church of England condemneth not the hiſtoricall uſe of Images. The Booke of Homilies containes a general godly doctrine; yet is it not in every point the publick, dogmaticall, reſolved doctrine of the Church. The Homily that ſeemeth to condemne all making of Images, is to be underſtood with a reſtriction of making them to an unlawfull end. Many paſſages therein were fitted to the preſent times, and to the conditions of the people that then were. The finall reſolution of this controverſie.
               
                  
                  CHAP. XXIV.
                  Touching ſigning with the Signe of the CROSSE.
To ſigne with the ſigne of the Croſſe out of Baptiſme, or upon the breaſt, &c. no more ſuperſtition than to ſigne in Baptiſme, or upon the forehead. The practice of the ancient Church. The reaſons that moved them, that might move us to uſe often ſigning. They lived with Pagans, and wee with Puritans; both deriders of the ſigne of CHRIST'S Croſſe.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXV.
The practice of the primitive Church approved. Unadviſed Informers. Novellers rejected.
               
                  CHAP. XXVI.
The teſtimony of S. ATHANASIUS vilified by the Informers. The teſtimonies of other Fathers concerning the efficacie and power of the ſigne of the Croſſe.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXVII.
                  Popery is not the ſigning with, but the adoring of the Croſſe. Strange effects which GOD hath wrought of old adhibito ſigno CRUCIS; and may doe ſtill by vertue of CHRISTS Death and Paſsion, which that Signe doth repreſent.
               
                  
                  CHAP. XXVIII.
The Informers preſumption against the current of Antiquity.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXIX.
Touching the SACRAMENT of the ALTAR.
The Informers drawn low, when they leave matter, and take offence at words. The antiquity of Altars. A Sacrifice repreſentative and ſpirituall, acknowledged by all. The Author herein farther from Popery, than the Informers from Puritaniſme.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXX.
A reall preſence maintained by us. The difference betwixt us and Popiſh Writers is only about the modus, the maner of CHRIST'S preſence in the bleſſed ſacrament. Agreement likely to be made, but for the factious and unquiet ſpirits on both ſides. Beati pacifici.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXXI.
The Author's acknowledgement of his error. Conſecration of the elements cauſeth a change; yet inferrs no Popiſh Tranſubſtantiation. The Informers out of their element. Antiquity maintained. Figuriſts and Novellers condemned.
               
                  
                  CHAP. XXXII.
                  Touching CONFESSION.
Information againſt the expreſſe direction and practice of the Church of England. No new Popiſh cuſtome, but the ancient and pious manner of Confeſsion for the helpe and furtherance of mens true repentance, and for the continuing of them in amendment of life, is, may be, and ought to be urged. How Confeſsion of ſinnes to a Prieſt, is required by the Church before the Receiving of the LORDS Supper.
               
               
                  CHAP. XXXIII.
                  Touching the Sacrament of ORDERS.
                  The new religion full of exceptions, though but againſt words only. Ordination acknowledged to bee a Sacrament by M. CALVIN himſelfe. A Sacrament in lato ſenſu. What our Church meaneth in ſaying there are but TWO SACRAMENTS.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. XXXIV.
Information againſt the Church-Book of Ordination; which acknowledgeth the giving and receiving of the HOLY GHOST in ſacred Orders: ſo that Prieſts have that

                  interior grace and power conferred upon them for the diſpenſation of divine myſteries, which others have not.
               
                  CHAP. XXXV.
                  Touching power of Prieſthood to forgive Sinnes.
                  Prieſts have power to forgive ſinnes, not originally, but miniſterially. The doctrine of the Ordination and Communion-Booke for publick and private Abſolution. The Informers to loſe the profits of their livings, and to bee impriſoned without bayle, for declaring against it.
               
                  CHAP. XXXVI.
                  Prieſts only and none other have commiſsion from CHRIST to forgive ſins. The Extravagancies of Puritans and Papiſts both in this point.
               
                  CHAP. XXXVII.
                  THE CONCLUSION.
                  The iſſue of YATES and his FELLOW-Informers fond Accuſations. Other flying reports & defamations neglected: The Authors humble ſubmiſsion unto the Church of England and to HIS moſt ſacred MAIESTY.
                  
               
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            The Approbation.
            
               I FRANCIS WHITE, Doctor of Divinity, and Dean of Carlile, by the ſpeciall direction and commandement of His moſt excellent Majeſtie, have diligently peruſed and read over this BOOK, intituled, APPELLO CAESAREM, A juſt Appeale from TWO unjuſt Informers; by RICHARD MOUNTAGU: and finding nothing therein, but what is agreeable to the Publick Faith, Doctrine and Diſcipline establiſhed in the Church of England, I doe approove it as fit to be printed, Dat. 15. Febr. 1624.
            
            
               FRANCIS WHITE.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            APPELLO CAESAREM. AN APPEALE FROM THE BRETHREN.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. I. 
               
                  Of the Inſcription which the Informers made to their ſeverall Articles.
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  ERRORS delivered by M. RICHARD MOUNTAGU in his Booke intituled A new Gagg, &c. and publiſhed by Authority this preſent yeare, 1624.
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  
                     THeſe Informers, in this Frontiſpice before their ſeverall ſuggestions, impliedly undertake to make good Three Aſſertions. Firſt, that whatſoever They have challenged and articled againſt in their accuſation, hath been in terminis so Delivered by

M. R. MOUNTAGU in his book, as they have tendred it, and no otherwiſe. Secondly, that all particulars ſo deſigned by Them, and ſaid to have beene delivered by Him, were Publiſhed by warrant of Authoritie. Thirdly, that all things ſo Publiſhed, and ſo Delivered, and by Themſelves, the Informers, inſiſted on, and complained againſt, are Errors actuall in themſelves; and ſo ſtand reſolved and accounted of in the Doctrine of the Church.
                  The firſt of theſe three, that is to ſay, Whether, or not, whatſoever is ſo inſiſted on, as Error, hath beene ſo Delivered and Publiſhed as is ſuggeſted, muſt hereafter bee examined in convenient Time and Place. For haply all hath not beene ſo by Him Delivered, as They have ſurmiſed and informed: at leaſt, not in that ſenſe as is conceived. They may miſtake his meaning: why not? For have they aſſiſtance of Infallibility annexed unto their conceipts; eſpecially in a preſt and ſhort ſtyle by him enſued, and inclining to Scholaſticall Character? Or they may wilfully miſtake his meaning, to their owne advantage: for Faction and Affection are too frequently intereſſed in Oppoſitions. Or laſtly, they may well enough bee guiltie of miſreporting his words: I dare not truſt their conſciences in that point too farre. I know their Charitic is not too tranſcendent.
                  But for Publication by Authoritie, it may

touch them neerer than they are aware of. It is not unknowne not Authoritie, that Puriritanicall Selfe-conceit, and Preſumption, will ſquare Law and Goſpel too according unto that untoward Lesbian rule of their owne Private Spirit, and ſpeciall opinion: and dare challenge any Authoritie, old or new, for Errors; preaching, publiſhing, maintaining Errors; viz. whatſoever doth not conſort or run with the Tide of their Private Spirits motion. And it hath beene found by experience practiſed of ſuch male-content maligners at States in being, Civill as well as Eccleſiaſticall, that they ſeldome or never talke of anie misbeing, miſordering, miſdemeaning, in any point or caſe, but that ever and anon, directly or upon the By, they can lend a laſh unto, or pinch upon the credite of Authoritie, though moſt Sacred, that great Cordolium and Moate-in-the-eye unto popular irregularitie, and puritanicall paritie, the Idoll of our Godly Brethren. It is more than probable, theſe Informers are of this ſtamp and making. I have bin told, and am aſſured, they are two Grandees of the faction; as great and turbulent, as moſt bee in the Dioceſſe of Norwich (which is not improbably thought to have of that Sect mo than enow.) They hold Authoritie intereſſed (as farre at leaſt as connivency goeth) both for points of Poperie and Arminianiſme, if they could bee proved his againſt whom they are objected.
                  
                     
If it had not beene their purpoſe thus to have grated upon and galled Authority; with little ado, by the addition of but one poor word, they might have amended and cleered all. Had the Information beene carried and conceived thus: and SAID to bee publiſhed by Authority; the Errors of Popery and Arminianiſme, if any were, muſt have laid all and every one hard upon M. MOUNTAGU, intereſſed alone: no reflection could have reſulted, as now intentionally, upon Authoritie. For Publication, that gave life and living to theſe dangerous Errors, is ſaid to bee preciſely the Act of Authoritie; which is more than countenancing them, in my underſtanding; and I doubt not, according to their interpretation. Had this beene done, M. MOUNTAGU muſt have borne all alone: and, what had it been that Hee erred? He who may erre, (For in many things wee erre all) but will be no Hereticke, eſpecially againſt the Church of England; to the doctrine whereof eſtabliſhed, He hath more than once ſubſcribed: and therefore diſclaimeth all aſperſion of Poperie, and is farther from it than any Puritan in the kingdome. He is indeed well acquainted with ſuch Imputations, as Papist and Arminian, and I know not what, the ordinary language of of our preciſe Profeſſors, againſt any man that is not, as themſelves, MORE FURIOSO Calviniſta. And having had this meaſure often meted unto him from their verie great Zeale,
                     
and very no-Charitie, hee could have been contented to have contemned their malice (the rather, becauſe a Scold cannot any better way bee charmed than by contempt): but becauſe Authoritie was drawne in, to lye at the ſtake for conniving in points ſo dangerous (but God knoweth how); he could not poſſeſſe his ſoule in patience, but thought himſelfe in duetie and in conſcience bound to cleere thoſe points from Error which he delivered, leſt Sacred Authoritie might come in for Maintenance and Champetry, as they would have it. To come then to the Inſcription.
                  
                  
                     Errors delivered, muſt be his Tenents and avowed Propoſitions, one way of theſe twain; eyther by Affirmation or Negation. For Errare (ſaith S. AUGUST. if yet our Informers and the Side regard what S. AUG. ſaith) eſt verum putare quod falſum eſt, falſumque quod verum eſt, vel 
                     
                        Enchirid. c. 17. 
                     certum habere pro incerto; incertum pro certo, ſive falſum ſit, ſive verum. Howſoever, there paſſeth omni modo a reſolution for the thing erred in, by Affirmation or Negation: So or not ſo. And therefore we cannot juſtly ſay, He erreth, or at all taxe him for Erring, that neither denieth, nor affirmeth that which is imputed unto him; but only reporteth what he findeth. This is the caſe of M. MOUNTAGU in all, at leaſt in the major part of theſe imputed Errors. Hee is but a Narrator of other mens opinions, ſuſpending his owne judgement,

ſometime peradventure when hee ſhould not have ſo done, out of a due reſpect unto Peace and Quietneſſe in the Church, ſufficiently already diſturbed; and not the leaſt by theſe Brethren. and alſo becauſe hee would not ſtirre the Hornets neaſts of men affected otherwaies.
                  Secondly, Error is 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , reſpectively againſt ſomething which is right; as being an aberration from a Rule. Now I demand of theſe ſo forward Informers, thoſe delivered Errors by M. MOUNTAGU, and publiſhed Errors by Authoritie, againſt what common Tenent doe they offend? From what Rule are they an aberration? I doe not find it expreſſed by the Informers, Contrivers, or Subſcribers, why, in what, againſt whoſe concluſions they are erroneous. Againſt some Rule of Faith they muſt bee, if Errors in Doctrine. I know none: I am told of none; but the private opinions of the Informers, or ſome Claſſicall reſolutions of the Brethren. Through all the ſeverall XXI Articles, or what you will call them, of Popery and Arminianiſme, I finde no other proofe, but Ipſe dixit: my words are related onely, and you muſt take them, upon M. YATES and M. WARD'S bare words, to bee Popery and Arminianiſme: for other proofe you cannot finde, nor muſt expect. So Magiſteriall are our Purer Brethren, thoſe great Rabbines and Doctors in Iſrael; having annexed unto their Penns and Pulpits infallibilitie of
                     
                     judgement, (it ſeemeth) as well as the Pope of Rome unto his chayre. Popular Spirits have evermore great opinion of their owne ſingular Illumination. And you ſhall ever obſerve, that each ſimple Ignoránte, a claſſicall Dictator amongſt the Covent, tendereth his owne dreames and conceipts, Simulachra modis volitantia miris, no otherwiſe but as Oracles upon their owne bare words. And ſuch prevailing power have they upon their Proſelites (none living but Ieſuites ſo great as they) that their Sayings are held uncontroleable. And hence it is, that they vouchſafe us no proofe in their ſo many falſe Imputations. Better Popery, I will abide by it, than any one propoſition in M. MOUNTAGU. For what difference betwixt their Dictates and Papall Deciſions? an abortive Embryo of the much groned-for Monarchie of our Puritanicall Parochiall, would-be Popes over Kings and Kaeſars, and All that are called Gods.
                  
                  
                     Error then is ever againſt a rule. In points of Faith Error is, or ſhould bee, againſt the rule of Faith. Scripture is, they will not deny, the rule of Faith, as proceeding from Revelation divine, the true Conſtat and Canon of Faith and Manners. It is granted, aberration from Scripture is Error. The farther aberration, the greater Error. Bring mee in any one point, or all points, to this Rule: Tye mee to it: Try mee there. Submitto faſceis, I fall downe and adore it: I would not, I will not ſwerve from it.

But put the caſe, in application of any Queſtion unto that Rule, there be diſſents; that I ſay one thing, the Informers another, the Collectors a third: and in concluſion there bee quot homines tot ſententiae; how many men, ſo many minds. For the true and exact deciſion thereof, what ſhall we do? Firſt, in equity no man is to be his owne carver: and, Opinionibus vulgi in errorem rapimur. Popular poſitions are not ever paſſable. Nay, rather moſt commonly it is true, that Populus dicit, & ideò errat. Now Private Spirits are of much weaker aſſurance: therefore all that are not unlearnedly madde, or inſolently wedded unto their owne wills, grant, that as the Church is Cuſtos regulae; ſo doth it of right apply Examinanda unto that Rule. The Church univerſall in generall cauſes; each particular and private Church, for ſpeciall and particular and territoriall queſtions and querees. Theſe Informers againſt M. MOUNTAGU'S Errors, unto what Rule will they ſtand? or whither doe they appeale? I diſclaime, as incompetent, Popular Cantonings of diſmembred Scripture, and Private Interpretations of enforced Scripture. I will not bee put over unto Claſſicall deciſions, nor that Idoll of ſome mens Reformation, unto any Propheticall determinations in private Conventicles after Lectures. For when departed The Spirit of God from mee, or any other conformable Miniſter of the Church of England, to ſpeake unto them? But becauſe the

doubts hang in the Church of England, unto the Publicke Doctrine of the Church of England doe I appeale, contayned in thoſe two authoriſed and by All-ſubſcribed Bookes of the Articles and Divine Services of the Church. Let that which is againſt them, on Gods name, be branded with Error, and as Error be ignominiouſly ſpunged out: let the Author be cenſured, as he well deſerveth, by Authority; if there be any thing in that much maligned book of M. MOUNTAGU, either againſt the Rule immediate, the Word of God, or againſt the Rule applied or expounded in the Dictates of the Catholick Church in general, or the Tendries of our Engliſh Church in particular. If I ſo be taken with the fact, or evidence be cleer againſt me, or I be convicted per teſtes idoneos, to have erred thus, I will recall and recant whatſoever is ſo exorbitant; and further, will deal ſo with my owne writings as they did with their curious books, Act. 19. 19. Qui primas non habui ſapientiae, modeſtiae & poenitentiae habebo ſecundas.
                  
                  But to come at length up to, and joyne iſſue with this Information. Upon the Endictment, I pleade, Not guilty of both Accuſations, of Arminianiſme and Popery, and call therein for tryall for it by God and my Countrey; the Scriptures, as the Rule of Faith; the Church, interpreting and applying that Rule from time to time, againſt all Novellers: and ſignanter unto this Engliſh Church, againſt Forreyners. Dare any of the Brethren joine iſſue with mee upon this?

                     Abſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         hoc. They dare not. But to cloſe with them firſt in Generall, then in Particular; for Arminianiſme at large, & Arminianiſm in the ſeveral parts.
                  I disavow the name and Title of ARMINIAN. I am no more Arminian than they Gomarians; not ſo much in all probabilitie. They delight, it ſeemeth, to bee called after mens names. for anon they ſticke not to call themſelves CALVINISTS: which Title, though more honorable than Gomarian or Arminian, I am not ſo fond of, or doating upon, but I can be content to leave it unto thoſe that affect it, and hold it reputation to bee ſo inſtiled. I am not nor would be accounted willingly ARMINIAN, CALVINIST, or LUTHERAN, (names of Diviſion) but a CHRISTIAN. For my Faith was never taught by the doctrine of men. I was not baptized into the Beliefe, or aſſumed by grace into the Family of any of theſe, or of the Pope. I will not pin my Beliefe unto any mans ſleeve, carry he his head never ſo high; not unto S. AUGUSTINE, or any ancient Father, nedum unto men of lower ranke. A CHRISTIAN I am, and ſo glory to be; only denominated of CHRIST IESUS my Lord and Maſter: by whom I never was as yet ſo wronged, that I could relinquiſh willingly that royall Title, and exchange it for any of his meniall ſervants. And further yet I doe profeſſe, that I ſee no reaſon why any member of the Church of England, a Church every

way ſo tranſcendent unto that of Leyden and Geneva, ſhould lowt ſo low as to denominate himſelfe of any the moſt eminent amongſt them. But as thoſe two Townes and States, next unto God, have ſtood by ſupportance of the Crowne of England, for eſſe and benè eſſe in Temporalibus; ſo likewiſe if CHRIST IESUS muſt needs be divided, both One and Other, even the moſt eminent in one and other, ought to take name rather and denomination of Us or ſome of Ours, than wee be nicknamed ARMINIANS or CALVINISTS of ſome of them. Indignor, I avow for my owne part, to doe it; and will not doe my mother that wrong to admit it, nedum to ſeeke it.
                  Againe, for ARMINIANISME, I muſt and doe proteſt before God and his Angels, id
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         in verbo Sacerdotis, the time is yet to come that I ever read word in ARMINIUS. The courſe of my ſtudies was never addreſſed to moderne Epitomizers; but from my firſt entrance to the ſtudie of Divinity, I balked the ordinarie and accuſtomed by paths of BASTINGIUS'S Catechiſme, FENNERS Divinitie, BUCANUS Common places, TRELCATIUS, POLANUS, and ſuch like; and betooke my ſelfe to Scripture the Rule of Faith, interpreted by Antiquitie, the beſt Expoſitor of Faith, and applyer of that Rule: holding it a point of diſcretion, to draw water, as neer as I could, to the Well-head, and to ſpare labour

in vaine, in running farther off to Ciſternes and Lakes. I went to enquire, when doubt was, of the dayes of old, as God himſelfe directed me; and hitherto I have not repented me of it. I have not found anie Canon, Order, Act, Direction in the Church of England againſt it; for it I have found many. I never held it wiſedome to tyre my ſelfe with haling and tugging up againſt the ſtreame, when with eaſe enough I might, and with better diſcretion ſhould, ſecundo flumine navigare. We know, the further the current is, the more muddy, troubled, and at length brackiſh the water is. 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , Hym. 2. CALLIMACHUS ſaid well,
                  
                     Aſſyrius magnam Euphrates vim volvit aquarum:
                     At multâ illuvie, foeda
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         it turbidus ulvâ.
                  
                  If ARMINIUS in Tenents agreeth unto Scripture plaine and expreſſe: if he hath agreeing unto his opinions the practice, tradition, and conſent of the ancient Church, I embrace his opinions; let his perſon or private ends, if hee had any, alone: I nor have nor will have confarreation therewith. If CALVIN, ſo farre in account and eſtimation before ARMINIUS, diſſenteth from Antiquity and the univerſall ancient Church, I follow him not. No private man, or peculiar ſpirit ever did, or ever ſhall tyrannize upon my Beliefe. I yeeld only unto God and the

Church. Nor doe I wrong CALVIN, or any other in this, more than they have wronged the ANCIENT FATHERS. So much in generall for ARMINIANISME: now to particulars imputed by the Informers.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. II. 
               
                  Of S. PETER'S FALL.
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  
                     TOuching the Doctrine of Finall Perſeverance, theſe are his words: As S. PETER was a private man, Chriſt did pray for Him, that though his Faith fell totally for a Time, yet it might not fall eternally. CHAP. 8. FOL. 64.
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  TOuching the doctrine of Finall Perſeverance, I took not upon me to Touch it, much leſſe to Determine it all. I doe not there mention it, or meddle with it. I grant, theſe words remembred by the Informers, are found in my Booke in the quoted place of fol. and chapt. and mo words than theſe, to make up a perfect period; which they have diſmembred to their owne behoofe. My words indeed are theſe. Your Maſters (and my

addreſſe is unto the Gagger touching his Romiſh Teachers onely) conſider S. PETER two wayes, even in this Prayer made for him by our SAVIOUR. as a Private man, as a Publicke perſon; or, as they love to ſpeake, as Head of the Church. As a private perſon, CHRIST did pray for him, that though his Faith fell totally for a time, yet it might not fall eternally and for ever, as IUDAS failed and fell: and hee was heard in that he prayed for. Theſe are my words in publick Record. But can you ſay they are mine in due conſideration, that is, ex animi ſententiâ delivered? For all have reference, by as good Logick as ever PETER RAMUS taught you in Cambridge, unto thoſe words, Your Masters, &c. and ſo, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , as Artiſts ſpeake, muſt all and every paſſage be conceived. Not any man but Partiaries would have taken them ſpoken Dogmaticè, in courſe of determined reſolution: but Diegetice, by way of Narration onely; reporting the propoſals of ſome Romane Diſputers, not my determination for and in the point. But let them bee mine abſolutely every way. Yet ſecondly, any ingenuous Reader might conceive, that they are not Aſſertive, thus, His Faith did fall: but only Suppoſitive, Though his Faith did fall. In effect thus: To put the caſe that S. PETER fell away totally for a Time, from GOD and CHRIST, in denying CHRIST; yet hee fell not finally and for ever: for he recovered footing and

faſtneſſe againe, and held it out conſtantly unto the laſt, Why this, admitted an Error, ſhould bee reputed an Error of mine, I cannot ſee. For though it be Publiſhed, it is not Delivered; onely ſuppoſed, related, and no more. It may bee a cuſtome amongſt the Informers, and others of that Tribe, to dictate to their Popular Auditories out of their Pulpits, tanquam de tripode, though it be quicquid in buccam, and the ſame to be received upon their bare words, as divine Oracles. whereupon they need not make any ſuppoſitions, put no caſes to bee demurred on, ſeeing they are ubique and in omnibus peremptory, reſolved, and concluſive. But with us it is not ſo; we are not ſo happy to have our bare words paſſe: we muſt prove what wee ſpeake, and well is it if ſo, and then, we finde credence. They and the Ieſuites are rare men, to leade mens Faith and Beleefe ſo in a ſtring. In this paſſage againſt me (it being ad oppoſitum, and they like enough to bee demanded Proofes for what they ſay) all their accuſations of Arminianiſme and of Popery, though they bee falſe and ſlanderous, yet are they Magiſteriall. You cannot finde ſo much as any one proofe annexed unto any of the imputed Errors, or brought in to manifeſt, Ideò this or that is an Error. Their Stile runneth, Theſe are his words: or, Thus he writeth, &c. ſuppoſing all men will, at leaſt ſhould, take it upon their words, That what

hee ſo writeth, is an Error. Such Illuminates are our Claſſicall Brethren. May they be intreated a little to deſcend from this their Chaire of Infallibility, and yeeld ſomewhat, according unto reaſon, by producing that Rule againſt which touching Finall Perſeverance, the words produced, if ſo be they are mine every way, to all intents and purpoſes, doe offend, and for which they may juſtly bee ſtiled Errors. The Rule produced; upon tryall and application, M. MOUNTAGU muſt eyther ſtand or fall. Till then, he appealeth to all indifferent cenſures, for ſuſpenſion of their judgements concerning Errors thus by him Delivered and Publiſhed by Authority.
                  
                  In the Interim, to come ſomewhat neerer unto the Error heer informed againſt. Doth ARMINIUS maintaine touching finall Perſeverance, (you muſt tell mee, my good Informers, for I have not read him) that ſometime the Called and Elect of God, the Choſen ones and Iuſtified by Faith, ſuch as S. PETER was, though they doe fall totally for a Time, ſhall yet recover neceſſarily againe, and not fall away finally, or for ever? If this be Arminianiſme, and ſo his concluſion, then therein He holdeth with ARMINIUS. But I have bin aſſured, that ARMINIUS did hold as the Lutherans in Germany doe, not only Interciſion for a Time, but alſo Abſciſſion and Abjection too, for ever. That a man Called and Iuſtified

freely through the grace of GOD in CHRIST, might fall away again from Grace Totally, finally, and become a caſt-away, as IUDAS was, for ever. For S. PETER (upon admiſſion of this Paſſage, as your ſelves have related it in your calumniatory Information) by M. MOUNTAGU'S concluſion, did not, could not fall finally; for CHRIST prayed for him, that he might not fall; and CHRIST was ever heard in that hee prayed for. So that out of your owne mouthes M. MOUNTAGU is acquitted of Arminianiſme: for if He ſay any thing to the point, it is, that S. PETER could not fall finally from Faith, nor loſe it for ever irrecoverably. For, ſay you, Theſe are his words, Though S. PETER fell totally, he fell not eternally, that is, hee recovered and perſevered unto the end. and ſo touching finall Perſeverance, at leaſt, He teacheth, in your own confeſſion, no otherwiſe than your ſelves do. Thus Pure malice and indiſcreet zeale make men many times loſe their witts they know not where.
                  I adde, if M. MOUNTAGU be an Arminian, you are rather Papiſts: for I demand, In denying and forſwearing CHRIST, did S. PETER fall, or did he not fall? If abnegation, and abjuration, and execration will inforce a fall, he did. Now if he fell, he needs muſt fall totally or finally: for Cedo tertium, a man falleth not, who is not off or down from the Place

                        〈2 pages missing〉
                     
                     

Grace. Multi dantur ad gratiam receſſus: hee that falleth to day, may riſe againe to morrow, hold out unto the end, receive the reward of Righteouſneſſe, in finall Perſeverance bee crowned with glory and immortalitie. I ſay no more than you have ſubſcribed if you look unto it: 
                        Artic. 16. 
                     After we have received the HOLY GHOST, wee may DEPART FROM GRACE given, and FALL into Sinne, and by the grace of GOD wee may ariſe againe, and amend our lives, Artic. XVI. Nec beatum dixeris quenquam ante mortem; quamdiu enim vivimus, in certamine ſumus: quamdiu ſumus in certamine, nulla eſt certa victoria, was Catholick Doctrine of old.
                  But heer alſo, as in the former paſſage, theſe Informers miſtake me for their owne advantage: for I ſpeak but only repreſentatively, according to the opinion and Tenent of the Roman Schooles. I appeale unto their Honeſty, at leaſt wiſe Knowledge; are not my wordes laid downe directly thus? For in YOUR opinion, Iuſtifying faith may diminiſh, and may be aboliſhed and loſt. Now Iuſtification being in an inſtant, &c. If in their opinion it may be loſt, namely faith which juſtifieth; then Iuſtification, which is an Effect of faith, may alſo bee loſt; and may bee recovered after ſuch loſſe. For things tranſitory are in a like habitude unto being, and not being; may ceaſe to be, and be againe. After ſuch loſſe of Faith and Love, tranſitory in their opinion, they againe may revert

and finde a being, but yet ſtill in their opinion. So all heer Delivered, Errors or not Errors, ſo or ſo, is ſtill in their opinion, not the iudgement ſpecified of M. MOUNTAGU. My goodly Brethren, this is no faire play, to faſten that on me, as my Aſſertion, which preciſely I relate from anothers mouth; which I remember not but as the Doctrine of the Church of Rome; and upon that their Doctrine by Them maintained, by Him related, doe inferre againſt a Papiſt, a plaine Non ſequitur from his owne Tenents, unto an inconſequent Argument by Them inferred and oppoſed againſt the true and Catholick doctrine of the Church of England, touching Iuſtification by Faith alone.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. IV.
               
                  Of FALLING FROM GRACE: The Tenet of Antiquity therein. The doctrine of the Church of England in the 16th Article, the Conference at Hampton Court, the Book of Homilies, and the publick Liturgie.
                  
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  
                     ANd againe: Some hold that Faith may be loſt totally and finally, which is indeed

the Aſſertion of Antiquity. The Learnedſt in the Church of ENGLAND aſſent unto Antiquitie in that Tenet: which the Proteſtants in GERMANIE maintaine at this day, having aſſented unto the Church of ROME.
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  A Ntiquum obtinent: Theſe men are ſtill the ſame; Calumniators, and runne ſtill along with all one indirect dealing. Their Information in direct tearms ſtandeth thus: To make report, and no more but to make report of Arminianiſme (if yet it be Arminianiſme which is reported) is, in point of opinion, to bee an ARMINIAN; in point of Arianiſme, with theſe men, to be an ARIAN: for M. MOUNTAGU in this caſe hath done no more. The very ſuggeſtion, as it is by themſelves heere rendred, howſoever patched up of ſhreds cut out from ſeverall parts, and laid together againe for moſt advantage to their calumniation, will yet ſpeak no further, but onely to this purpoſe. For themſelves ſet it down, in ſtile not of Poſition but of bare Narration, with theſe tearmes of Some hold; It is the aſſertion; The learnedſt aſſent unto, &c. So that admit the points related were pure-pute Arminianiſme, yet ſo long as the Relator paſſeth no conſent upon them (I

appeale unto your owne, though never ſo much Cheverellized conſciences, my good Calumniators) can there be inferred a juſt accuſation? If ſo, upon as good ground, in theſe tearmes, I can informe againſt the moſt preciſeſt Puritan in the Kingdome, for as good Popery as any BELLARMINE hath; any, for as perfect blaſphemy with the Tongue, as ever The foole ſaid or conceived in his heart. I demand, can you finde any aſſent of mine annexed? nay, finde you not rather aſſent denied? Have you not read in that Paſſage theſe words, which any honeſt plaine man would have caſt into the Information, but your ſelves; I DETERMINE nothing in the queſtion POSITIVELY? If you did not ſee nor reade them, your eyes were not your owne. If you read them, but marked them not, your wits went on wooll-gathering at that inſtant. If you read and marked them, and yet did conceale them, what became of your honeſty in the interim? You foully abuſed the world with falſe Informations. Your deſerts therefore I meddle not with: onely I obſerve two pretty Presbyterian tricks of Legerdemaine; Firſt, to alter the property, by changing the ſtate; as if it were aſſerted and aſſented to, which is barely related, and no more. Secondly, to conceale that which is Poſitive, and would diſcharge Mr. MOUNTAGU from your calumniation, and leave a

juſt taxation upon your ſelves. For hee that profeſſeth Hee doth not DETERMINE, as Mr. MOUNTAGU in expreſſe and preciſe words doth, in my Logick, cannot bee ſaid to conſent nor concurre in opinion for himſelfe, but meerly ſuſpendeth his judgement in the caſe, and leaveth it indifferent, and as he found it.
                  But this is not all. I muſt yet convent your honeſty ſomewhat further. You have laid together into one Cento things broken and diſmembred like ABSYRTUS'S limbs; ſuch as in my Anſwer unto the Gagge do not cohere nor enſue, nor follow inſtantly upon each other. If the Gagger or his Copeſmates had dealt thus with me, I would have caſt in their teeth forgery and falſe-play, and what not? But you (my deare Brethren) are men of another ſtamp (and yet hard to ſay, whether barrell better herring), I hope you did it out of ſimplicity, with a good charitable pure intent to promote and ſet forward the Holie Cauſe; not of Puritanicall refined malice. So I take it. And yet for my owne diſcharge (Charity, you knowe, and practice, beginneth at home) take it not ill, if I lay your dealing to open view.
                  The Romiſh Gagger, whoſoever he was, laid downe his Propoſition, as hee would have it conceived, againſt the approved and eſtabliſhed Doctrine of the Church of England; not againſt

any either private fancie, or more publick opinion of any Faction on foot, or Sect prevailing in the Church of England: yet that hee might play faſt and looſe (a faſhion ordinary with thoſe of his party), hee propoſeth the imputation in ambiguous & involved tearms. In my Anſwer, becauſe I would draw the Queſtion unto an iſſue, and rightly ſtate it, I was to difference Opinions confounded by the Gagger, which in and touching this Subject are not a few, concerning the loſſe of, and falling away from faith; and therefore in the concluſion came home to diſtinguiſh them thus: Some ſuppoſe that Faith cannot bee loſt either totally or finally: ſome, that totally, but not finally: ſome, that both totally and finally; which is indeed the opinion of Antiquity and of your Schooles. Some, perceiving the Current of judgements, for the loſſe thereof both totally and finally; and withall conſidering the, at leaſt, probability of Scriptures therefore, put-in a new diſtinction of God and Man, of firſt and ſecond cauſes of Iuſtification. Having reported theſe diſtinct and ſeverall opinions of elder and moderne Divines, without naming the Parties, which I could have done without inlarging upon Particulars, no difficult thing; I demand of the Gagger, who in ambiguities lurketh poſt aulaea, Which of all theſe waies will you have the Propoſition to be underſtood, that Faith may bee loſt, &c? and ſo come up unto him thus: You
                     
                     meane, it may bee loſt both totally and finally in regard of GOD, who made no ſuch abſolute irreſpective decree; as alſo in reſpect of ſecond cauſes, in man, without man, about him, against him. All this is there, as any man may perceive, by way of bare narration. And then, for my owne opinion, I conclude thus: I DETERMINE nothing in this Queſtion POSITIVELY; that is, neither for TOTALLY not FINALLY, nor TOTALLY and FINALLY; nor, nor TOTALLY nor FINALLY; not with reference unto GOD, unto Man, unto ſecond Cauſes; but leave them all as I found them, unto their AUTHORS and ABETTORS: reſolving upon this, Not to go beyond my bounds, the conſented, reſolved, and ſubſcribed ARTICLES of the Church of England: in which, nor yet in the Booke of COMMON PRAYER and other DIVINE OFFICES, is there any Tye put upon me, to reſolve in this much-diſputed Queſtion, as theſe Novellers would have it: for, if there be any, it is for poſsibility of totall falling, as we ſhall heare anon. Thus ſtandeth this Paſſage diſmembred, miſ-ſhaped, and abuſed by my Oppoſers to their advantage and ſmall reputation, for dealing in the caſe ſo inſincerely and calumniouſly in their Informations.
                  
                  And concerning the Particulars; Wherein? whom have I miſ-reported? If I can bee convicted, I will reverſe it. They will not conteſt

for the Roman Schooles, I know; as little for the Lutherans, I ſuppoſe. It is confeſſed on all hands, that they hold falling from grace, and loſing of faith had, and deteſt the contrary opinion as hereticall. For the Tenet of Antiquity I cannot bee challenged. S. AUGUSTINE, and after him S. PROSPER, affirme more than Mr. MOUNTAGU hitherto hath done. Lib. de Bon. Perſev. CA. 6. Si autem regeneratus & juſtificatus in malam vitam ſuâ voluntate relabitur, iſte non poteſt dicere, Non accepi; quia ACCEPTAM GRATIAM DEI, ſuo in malum libero AMISIT arbitrio. Ibid. CA. 13. Credendum eſt, quoſdam de filijs perditionis, non accepto dono perſever andi uſque in finem in fide, quae per dilectionem operatur, incipere vivere, & aliquandiu IUSTE & FIDELITER vivere, & POSTEA CADERE, &c. IDEM de Civ. Dei. XI. XII. Licèt Sancti de ſuae Perſeverantiae praemio certi ſint, de ipsâ tamen Perſeverantiâ ſuâ reperiuntur incerti. Quis enim hominum ſe in actione profectúque justitiae perſeveraturum uſque in finem ſciat, niſi aliqua revelatione ab illo fiat certus, qui de hac re juſto latentique judicio, non omnes inſtruit, ſed neminem fallit? PROSP. Reſp. 7. ad Cap. GALLORUM: Ex REGENERATIS in CHRISTO IESU quoſdam, RELICTA FIDE & pijs moribus, APOSTATARE A DEO, & impiam vitant in ſuâ AVERSIONE finire, multis (quod dolendum eſt) probatur exemplis. But the greateſt queſtion will

be concerning the Learnedſt in the Church of England, ſaid to conſent unto Antiquity in this caſe of falling away from grace. Where firſt I will not deny, but that Many in the Church of England, reputed learned, are of that opinion, that Faith had cannot be lost. But if it ſhall appeare, that the contrary Tenet is the PUBLICK DOCTRINE of the CHURCH of England, then I have not wronged private men, in making this compariſon between them, and Thoſe whom themſelves will acknowledge to be their Superiours both in learning and authority. Now, to give them all due ſatisfaction, which may thinke themſelves wronged by my comparative ſpeech, I argue as followeth.
                  They were the learnedſt in the Church of England, that drew, compoſed and agreed the ARTICLES in 52. and 62. that ratified them in 71. that confirmed them againe in 604. that juſtified and maintained them againſt the Puritans at Hampton Court; that have read and ſubſcribed them at their Induction unto Benefices, and Conſecration unto Biſhopricks; that penned the Homilies read in Churches.
                  
                  But all theſe have, and all ſuch doe aſſent unto Antiquity in this Tenent, and ſubſcribe it truely or in hypocriſie.
                  
                  Therefore I may juſtly avouch it, The learnedſt in the Church of England aſſent therein to Antiquitie.
                  
                     
The Major I ſuppoſe no man will queſtion. The Informers themſelves are peradventure within that Pale. The Minor I make good particularly, and will prove it accordingly obſignatis tabulis. In the forenamed XVI. ARTICLE we reade and ſubſcribe this: After that we have received the HOLY GHOST, wee may DEPART AWAY FROM GRACE, and FALL into Sinne, and by the Grace of GOD we may riſe againe, and amend our lives. Now let me ask the queſtion, Have you ſubſcribed this Article, or have you not? If you be Beneficed men, you have read it and ſubſcribed it, profeſſed your aſſent and conſent thereto, before GOD and his CHURCH, or elſe by Act of Parliament you have forfeited your ſpirituall promotions, and are deprived IPSO FACTO within two moneths. If ſo; then have you ſubſcribed that Arminianiſme which you impute as an Error unto me. Haply you will be of his minde, one of your Tribe, who when he was told what hee had ſubſcribed (for, poore ignorant man, he underſtood it not) proteſted he would teare his ſubſcription if he could come by it; and ſo would have loſt his Benefice: which few of you will doe, if it be a Good one, for conſcience ſake; marry for a Poore one you will not ſtick. Haply you will quarrell the Senſe of the ARTICLES: but then you muſt remember, that the plaine words ſound to the meaning for which I have produced

them, and that untill the CHURCH it ſelfe expound otherwiſe, it is as free for me to take it according to the letter, as for you to deviſe a figure. The ARTICLE inſiſteth upon men Iuſtified, ſpeaketh of them after Grace received; plainly avoucheth, They may fall away, depart from that ſtate which once they had, they may by Gods Grace riſe againe, and become new men: Poſsible, but not Certaine or Neceſſary. But the meaning by you aſſigned cannot be good, being allied unto the ſtocke you are: for by your Tribe, the true meaning of the ARTICLE, and the Doctrine there Delivered and Publiſhed by Authority, eyther originall or derived, primary or ſecondary, was upon this very point challenged as unſound, becauſe againſt the current of their Inſtitutions. And had Arminianiſme then been a nickname, the challenge without doubt had faſtned there: but challenged it was in this Senſe as Vnſound at the Conference of Hampton Court, by thoſe that were Petitioners againſt the Doctrine and Diſcipline eſtabliſhed in the Church of England. And being ſo challenged before His ſacred Majeſty, was then and there Defended, maintained, avowed, averred for True, ancient, juſtifiable, good and Catholick, by the greateſt Biſhops, and learnedſt Divines then living in this Church, againſt that abſolute, irreſpective, neceſſitating and fatall Decree of your new Predeſtination; ſtiled by you, The Doctrine
                     
                     of YOUR DIVINES, commonly called CALVINISTS: as indeed it is YOURS, being never heard of in the world but of late; but ſtiled then and there by the Lord Biſhop of London, Dr. BANCROFT, in publick audience, with much vehemencie, without any check, diſlike, diſtaſte, diſſent (for we reade of none) a deſperate doctrine of Predestination. At what time alſo that Reverend Prelate, and moſt accompliſhed Divine (whoſe memorie ſhall ever be pretious with all good and learned men) the late Biſhop of Norwich then Deane of PAULS, Dr. OVERALL, upon ſome touch, by occaſion of mentioning the ARTICLES of LAMBETH, did relate unto his moſt SACRED MAIESTIE thoſe concertations which himſelfe had ſometimes had in Cambridge with ſome Doctors there, about this very point of Falling from Grace; and that it was his Tenet, and had beene, That a juſtified man might FALL AWAY FROM GRACE, and ſo ipſo facto incur GODS wrath; and was IN STATE OF VVRATH and DAMNATION, untill he did recover againe, and was renued after his fall. At which time, that Doctrine of the Church of England then quarrelled, now ſtiled Arminianiſme, accuſed of Noveltie, ſlandred as pernicious by theſe Informers and their Brethren, was reſolved of and avowed for True, Catholick, ancient and Orthodox, by that Royall, Reverend, Honourable and learned SYNOD. The Booke is extant (publiſhed by warrant, and re-publiſhed by command

this preſent yeer) of the Proceedings at that Conference, which will averre all that I ſay for truth againſt you heer. See the Book.
                  And for explication of that Authorized and Subſcribed doctrine, there is an Homilie in the Booke of Homilies firſt compoſed and publiſhed in King EDWARD'S time, approved and juſtified in Parliament in Queene ELIZABETH'S daies, and Authorized againe of late to be read in Churches, entituled OF FALLING AWAY FROM GOD. Which very TITLE is ſufficient warrant for the Doctrine or Error in this point imputed to M. MOUNTAGU. But that which is Delivered in the Homily, will juſtifie Him unto the full: for the Homily doth throughly and wholly inſiſt upon the Affirmation, That FAITH once had may againe be LOST. Out of the firſt part of that Homily, you may take this (my good Informers) for your edification: Whereas 
                     Page 54. of the laſt Edition. GOD hath ſhewed unto all them that TRULY do BELEEVE his Goſpell, his face of mercy in CHRIST IESUS: which doth ſo enlighten their hearts, that they be TRANSFORMED into his Image, be made PARTAKERS of the heavenly light, and of his HOLY SPIRIT; be faſhioned unto him in all goodnes requiſite unto the CHILDE of GOD: So if they doe afterward NEGLECT the ſame; if they bee unthankfull unto him; if they order not their lives according to his doctrine and example,
                     
                     and to the ſetting foorth of his glory, hee will TAKE FROM THEM his holy word, his KINGDOME whereby hee ſhould raigne in them, becauſe they BRING NOT FORTH THE FRUIT that he looked for. Can your Learning and Underſtanding make any other conſtruction of theſe words, than that a man may FALL away FROM GRACE; become NO childe of GOD at all? If you can, advance, and teach mee that which paſſeth my poor apprehenſion. They were TRULY called, that did TRULY beleeve; they were juſtified by faith, that were ſo called, as I conceive it; that beheld the face of GOD'S mercie in CHRIST; that had their hearts ſo enlightned with GOD'S SPIRIT, that they were meerly transformed from Darknes unto Light, into the Image of GOD reformed. If theſe be not attributes of Juſtified men, good Sirs teach us ſome new Divinity: yet in the Doctrine of the Church of England expounded in this Homily, theſe men may prove unthankfull, negligent, and loſe the Interest they had in that his Kingdome of grace by his holie word. And yet further, in the ſecond part of this Homily wee are ſent unto a concluſion more ad oppoſitum, not onely of TOTALL Lapſe for a time, but alſo of FINALL Separation, and for ever. Which is alſo according to the doctrine expreſſed in the ARTICLES: for he that ſaith, A man may fall away,
                     
                     and may recover, implieth withall, that ſome men may fall away, and may NOT recover; which the Homily declareth thus: They ſhall be NO LONGER governed by GOD'S HOLY Page 57. SPIRIT: they ſhall be PUT FROM the GRACE and BENEFIT which they had, and EVER MIGHT have enjoyed in CHRIST: they ſhall be DEPRIVED of the heavenly light and LIFE which they had in CHRIST while that they abode in HIM. They that thus fall away unto the state of damnation, were TRULY juſtified: for it is ſaid, They were in CHRIST; they continued ſometime in CHRIST: for they abode in him. But yet this is not all: for it followeth, They ſhall bee GIVEN UP unto the POWER of the DIVELL, who beareth RULE in all that are CAST-AWAYES from God, as he did in SAUL and IUDAS. I ſuppoſe this is plaine and home enough.
                  If you be acquainted with the LITURGY and publicke religious SERVICE of our Church (as to your ſhame few of you and your Divines are or will be, unleſſe it bee to oppoſe and cavill at it), there you ſhall find alſo as much as Falling from grace commeth to. In the Forme of holy Forme of private Baptiſme. 
                     Baptiſme we are taught (otherwiſe than your Maſters teach), that every child which is duly baptized, being before borne in originall ſinne, and in the wrath of God, is now by that Laver of Regeneration received into the
                     
                     number of the CHILDREN of GOD, and HEIRES of EVERLASTING LIFE. For our Lord IESUS CHRIST doth not deny his GRACE and mercy unto ſuch infants, &c. So heere they bee put into the ſtate of GRACE. And leſt it ſhould be left to mens CHARITY (as you uſe to tell the world), wee are there taught earnestly to BELEEVE, that CHRIST hath favourably RECEIVED theſe infants that are baptized, that he hath EMBRACED them with the armes of his mercy, that he hath GIVEN unto them the BLESSING of ETERNALL LIFE; and out of that BELIEF and PERSWASION, wee are to give thankes faithfully and devoutly for it, &c. To make which doctrine the more ſure againſt all Noveliſts, it is againe repeated in the Catechiſme, to the end that children might likewiſe bee nourſed up in it, and taught, that Catechiſme anſw. 2. 
                     in their Baptiſme they were made the MEMBERS of CHRIST, and the children of GOD,  and that Rubrick before the Catechiſme. 
                     it is CERTAINELY TRUE by the Word of GOD, that children being baptized have ALL things neceſſary for their ſalvation; and if they die before actuall ſinne, ſhall be UNDOUBTEDLY SAVED. According whereunto, all S. GREG. NYSSEN orat. de baptiſm. S. LEO de nat. Chriſt. ſerm. 5. OPTAT. cont. PARM. l. 5. TERT. de baptiſm. cap. 5. S. CYP. ep. 59. & ep. 2. CONCIL. CARTH. apud S. AUG. ep. 90. Quicunque negat parvulos per Baptiſmum Chriſti à perditione liberari, et ſalutem percipere aeternam, ANATHEMA ſit. S. AUG. epiſt. 157. S. CHRYS. hom. 40. in 1. Cor. PROSP. de vocat. Gent. lib. 1. cap. 5. S. BASIL. lib. de Baptiſmo. S. AMBR. de poenit. lib. 1. cap. 7. et ALII. Antiquity hath alſo taught us. Now let this bee acknowledged to bee the doctrine of our

Church, that children duly baptized are put into the STATE of GRACE and SALVATION (which you ſee you cannot, you muſt not deny), and both your and my experience will ſhew, that many ſo baptized children, when they come to age, by a wicked and leud life do fall away from God, and from that STATE of GRACE and SALVATION, wherein hee had ſet them, to a worſe STATE; wherein they ſhall never be ſaved. If you grant not this, you muſt hold, that all men that are baptized are ſaved; which I know you will never doe.
                  To make an end then. In my judgement this is the doctrine of the Church of England, not delivered according unto private opinions in ordinary Tracts and Lectures, but delivered publickly, poſitively, and declaratorily in Authenticall Records. And you cannot bee ignorant (for it is ſtill extant upon Record) that your prime Leaders have underſtood the Tenet of the Church of England to be as I have reported it, and accordingly they have complained againſt it (as you have againſt mee), and objected it as one of their reaſons why they refuſed to ſubſcribe. Let there then be added EXPRESSE SCRIPTURE, EZECHIEL XVIII. XXIV. and a common UNANIMOUS 
                        S. HIERON. cont. Iovin. l. 2. S. AUO. de cor. & grat. c. 8. IDEM. ep. 59. et ep. 107.
                        S. PROSP. ad cap. Gallor. p. 99 S. BERN. ep. 42. et alibi ſaepiſsimè.
                        
                        S. CYP. l. 1. de unit. Eccl. S. ATHANAS. cont. Arrian. rat. 4. S. BAS. ep. ad Chilonem.
                        
                      FATHERS expounding that and other places

of Scripture (which conſent our Church doth by open profeſſion maintaine in theſe Cap. de Concionatoribus. Canons which ſhe ſet forth to be ſubſcribed unto, together with the XXXIX. Articles, Anno M. D. LXXI) and I ſee no reaſon, wherefore I might not have been as confident in maintaining falling away from grace, as you and your Divines are upon weaker grounds in defending the contrary. But I have ever bin ſolicitous to preſerve peace, and to give as little occaſion of diſturbance thereof unto diſtempered humours, as was poſsible. Salus Eccleſiae non vertitur in istis: and therefore I thought it not tanti; and being not urged upon neceſsity in my Anſwer to the Gagger to handle this queſtion otherwiſe than I did, I ſuſpended mine owne judgement, and lay off aloof in a kind of neutrality. Neither doe I now ſay more than I am urged to doe by the PLAINE and EXPRESSE words of our ARTICLES and Doctrine publickly profeſſed and eſtabliſhed in our Church; which I hope your ſelves will give mee leave to doe, the rather, becauſe I knowe you have ſubſcribed the ſame with your Hands, though what became of your Hearts in the meane time, I cannot tell.
               
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. V.
               
                  Touching PREDESTINATION. Of Arminians, Lutherans, Calviniſts, forraine Divines. Of the Church of England: Submiſsion thereunto. The Queſtion between them and us.
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  
                     THe whole XXI. chapt. of his book ſavoreth ſtrongly of ARMINIANISME: wherin depraving & odiouſly reporting the Doctrine of OUR DIVINES commonly called CALVINISTS, and declaring himſelfe to conſent with the LUTHERANS; in this point he hath theſe words: That PETER was ſaved, &c.
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  MAy not your Senſe deceive you in the Savor? The Object we know is often repreſented unto the Senſe, not as it is, but as it ſeemeth. If your Senſe be out of frame, the Savor of Arminianiſme may deceive you; and you may ſtrongly ſent that which is but weak. Now who can help this?

Touching this point, I beeleeve, becauſe Iuſee the experience; ſuch as your ſelves can not reliſh nor ſavour any thing but only GOD'S ſecrets. For you, and men of your Company, are never at quiet with GOD'S Arcana Imperij; can never let his eternall Predeſtination alone. The moſt ordinarie Theame of your (as I am given to underſtand) and their popular Preachings, is touching that comfortable Doctrine of Election and Reprobation. M. MOUNTAGU rubbed ſomewhat upon this ſore, thus: That Men in Curioſity have preſumed farre upon, and waded deepe into the hidden ſecrets of the Almighty. And you, amongſt others, being galled, as guilty have winched at it. and hence it is that He ſeemeth ſo ſtrongly to SAVOR of Arminianiſme, who would not have you meddle beyond your Modell, but keepe and containe your ſelves within the bounds of Chriſtian ſobriety and moderation, and ſavor of S. PAUL'S counſell, Sapere ad ſobrietatem.
                  
                  He ſavoreth of Arminianiſme: but how ARMINIUS ſavoureth, we ſhall ſmell it if we can, and find it at leaſure. For, having but named Him, you fall hote upon Lutheraniſme, and of M. MOUNTAGU'S conſent with Them: as if Arminianiſme & Lutheraniſme were two words of one ſignification; or in this point Lutherans and Arminians were divided; or as if in your heate you rambled up and downe, and could not well reſolve what to faſten on. Will you

have the Imputation runne thus: The XXI. chap. ſavoreth ſtrongly of Arminianiſme, and, He declareth himſelfe therein to conſent with the Lutherans; two ſeverall acts upon different objects? Or ſhall it be, that He ſavoreth ſo of Arminianiſme, becauſe he declareth himſelfe to conſent with the Lutherans? If Lutheraniſme and Arminianiſme be diſtinct, heer is an Error committed by theſe Informers againſt Error, that I am not preſented upon point of Lutheraniſme in the Title, as well as upon point of Arminianiſme. If not different but the ſame, Lutherans were in being and in name, when ARMINIUS was not hatched, nor in the ſhell. And if it be an Error of ARMINIUS, which was the Poſitive Doctrine of Lutherans and LUTHER before ARMINIUS was born, why is ARMINIUS entituled unto that which is none of his, but M. LUTHER'S? Why is M. MOUNTAGU accuſed of Arminianiſme, ſaid to ſavor of Arminianiſme, rather than of Lutheraniſme? both in this being one and the ſame thing. There lyeth heer a padd in the ſtraw. I can gheſſe at the cauſe: a tricke of your Brotherly charity. Becauſe LUTHER'S opinions were not Dangerous; but ARMINIUS errors are Dangerous. For we are told in their Inſinuations, that THIS Arminianiſme hath infested, and had brought into great perill, the STATES of the Vnited Provinces, if the KINGS MAIESTY, by his gracious care and providence, had not helped to
                     
                     quench the fire. Scilicet, as of old the Pagan Idolaters accuſed Chriſtianity of all thoſe calamities which befell mankinde, Poſtquam eſſe in mundo Chriſtiana gens cepit, as ARNOBIUS ſpeaketh. Bleſſed bee the PEACE-MAKER amongſt men: the Generation of that faithfull One ſhall be ever bleſſed. And bleſſed be that MAN of PEACE in ISRAEL for ever. The reward of the righteous reſt upon his Royall Perſon and Poſterity; and the faithfull promiſe of that GRAND-PEACEMAKER betwixt Heaven and Earth, be ſevenfold returned into his boſome, whoſe Princely care and providence is not confined within the ſurroundry of the foure Seas, but enlarged ultra unto his neighbours, thoſe Vnited Provinces, primarily and before all. But for this particular, Sirs Informers, can you ſpeake upon knowledge (for I muſt confeſſe my ignorance and ſmall intelligence in matters of this kinde, both for action and ſpeculation) that there was no other Snake lurking in covert? nothing elſe but the ſimple difference about theſe School-points of Predeſtination, Freewill, Finall Perſeverance, which had ſo almoſt indangered the ſtate of thoſe Vnited Provinces? Did no craftie Interloper (are you ſure of that?) put in his Stocke among thoſe brawling Bankers? Did no wiſer men or man worke upon, perhaps, exaſperated mindes, or exaſperate minds to worke upon, as it hath hapned elſewhere, in points of controverted

Divinitie, called into queſtion or maintained on foote, that Religion may ſerve for a ſtalking horſe to catch fooles, and be pretended to ſerve turnes? Surely thoſe very points being Scholaſticall ſpeculations meerly, and as farre from State-buſineſſes, as Theorie is from Practice, are not of themſelves aptae natae to breed dangers: Thoſe ſo dangerous opinions in the Netherlands, have beene as freely quarrelled and as fiercely purſued in the Vpperlands, of as long time, without all danger but of Tonguetryall. And why ſhould they be ſo dangerous heer? Thoſe Claſsicall projects, Conſiſtoriall practices, Conventuall deſignes, and Propheticall ſpeculations of the Zealous Brethren in this Land, doe 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      aime at Anarchy, popular confuſion; Dangerous indeed to Prince and people. State Civill and Eccleſiaſticall may well come under this Information, as being active in Front, and not onely upon the Reare. Why informe you not againſt the Fomenters of them? Would you not take it ill if your ſelves were traduced as Dangerous indeed, who do more than upon the Bye incline unto them? But I am loth to touch heer, or to meddle beyond my ſlipper. The State is not the Subject of my Profeſsion. I pray for the proſperitie of Prince and Polity, but let their courſes alone to whom they concerne. I excuſe not ARMINIUS or Arminians in any miſdemeanor. onely let not

Innocency in different Opinions, bee calumniouſly traduced without cauſe. M. MOUNTAGU, in his owne particular, is knowne, hee giveth GOD the praiſe therefore, to better than your ſelves, or any of your Sect, be they who they will bee, to foment neyther Faction in State, whereof he is incapable; nor Schiſme in Church, whereto he is not inclinable: having all his Studies addreſſed, and Prayers directed to one end, to make up, if it were poſſible, the rents in the Garment of CHRIST IESUS, the breaches and ruines in the CHURCH: for which cauſe it is apparant, They cannot endure Him, Quibus quietamoveri magna merces: and live well, fare full and fatt by Fiſhing in troubled waters. There is One GOD, One Faith, One Hope, One Baptiſme: not dividing, but compoſing Chriſt in his Members and Profeſsion.
                  Compariſons are odious, yet ſometime neceſſary. Gall and Vineger are corroſive, but muſt ſometime bee uſed. There is never a Saint-ſeeming and Bible-bearing hypocriticall Puritan in the Packe, a better Patriot everie way, than the man that hath Delivered ſuch dangerous Errors. Your goodly glozings, and time-ſerving colludings with the State, are but like Water-men upon the Thames, looking one way, rowing another way. Your Holy cauſe, you ſee, will not ſucceed by oppoſition, therefore you come up, and ſeeme to cloze with

the Church of England in her Diſcipline, to uſe the Croſſe, and weare the Clothes: but for her Doctrine you wave it, preach againſt it, teach contrary to that which you have ſubſcribed: that ſo through FORRAINE DOCTRINE, being infuſed secretly, and inſtilled cunningly, and pretended craftily to bee the Churches, at length you may winde-in with FORRAINE DISCIPLINE alſo, and ſo fill Chriſtendome with Popes in every Pariſh for the Church, and with popular Democraties and Democraticall Anarchies in the State. God divide you firſt in IACOB, and ſcatter you in ISRAEL. In this preſent Paſſage, who or what directed you, writing in, and beeing of the Church of England, unto this Diviſion of OUR DIVINES commonly called CALVINISTS, and Lutherans, as membra dividentia and ad oppoſitum? YOUR Divines, forſooth. Of what Livery are you, or thoſe YOUR Divines? Separatiſts from others, Singular, a Part, a Faction, a Diviſion; or elſe, why YOUR Divines? Are not You and YOURS, Divines of the Church of England? If not; what make You meddling, neſtling, rooſting heer? Hy you hence to the Brethren of AMSTERDAM, where YOUR Divines are, if there be any ſuch. For there they ſay all religions may be met with: if a man have loſt his Religion, there he may finde it: there are all Divines, the Divels and all. If yea; what make you with that Title

of OUR Divines? why divide you non dividenda? Mine and Thine, Yours and Ours, are not for Vnity; are not, or ſhould not bee heard or once named in the Church of England. The Divines heer, are, or ſhould be all of them Divines who hold, or ſhould hold and maintaine the Doctrine eſtabliſhed, and commanded to bee taught in the Church of England; which was never taught nor directed by the precepts, or wills, or fancies, or factions, or forgeries of men, and is not to be ſtiled Lutheran or Calvinian, but by ſuch onely as mean to ſet up ALTAR againſt ALTAR, and to foment a Schiſme in the Church. Such be YOUR Divines it ſeemeth, who are cut out into Diviſion: Into their Secret let not my ſoule enter. I am none, I profeſſe, of that Fraternity, no Calviniſt, no Lutheran; but a Chriſtian. This I Declare, not that which you calumniate, that I adhere, firſt unto them, conſent unto them, All of them, and Only to them infallibly, who have been in their ſeverall times 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , taught of GOD; and 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , enſpired by GOD: ſecondly, unto thoſe that are 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , their true Succeſſors, and 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , their Lieutenants; and ſo 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , obſervers of the Rules and Traditions enjoyned of old according to deduction from that Prime Rule, interpreting the HOLY SCRIPTURES, the Rule of faith, in places controverted and obſcure (which is ever

in points of lower alloy), not according to the fancy and moſt-what preſumption of ſome one man, delighting commonly to oppoſe and thwart the ſtreame of Antiquity, but according to the ſenſe and meaning of thoſe Times that drew water neerer unto the Well head, that is, to the APOSTLES, and their Succeſſors immediately.
                  As for conſent with Lutherans, I doe no where declare it. Shew me the place where I preferre them, commend them, once name them to this purpoſe. You never were ſo privy unto any thought of mine, that you could ſpeake what I thought of them: concerning whom, I wiſh that they were men of more allayed ſpirits and calmer temper than they are, or doe ſhew themſelves in oppoſition. And yet why may I not in ſome things as well, as ſoone, as lawfully conſent unto them, as unto YOUR DIVINES, the commonly called CALVINISTS? IOHN CALVIN came after in time, and was but a Secondary unto MARTIN LUTHER; entring in upon his Labours and Reverſions: and why ſhould he challenge any priviledge of preferment above MARTIN LUTHER, that I may not as well and lawfully declare my ſelf for the one, as for the other? In this Church and Kingdome, doth any Rule, Canon, Law or Authority, tie or command me to reverence the one above the other? to follow the one rather than the other? I may,

why not? conſent with the Lutherans, rigid or mollified, in ſome things againſt the Calviniſts; and in ſome other differenced opinions with the, YOUR Calviniſts againſt them: why not? who tyed mee more to the one, than the other? or to eyther, more than to BELLARMINE in ſome things againſt them both? Truth hath latitude and extenſion. No man that I know of, hath infallibilitie from errors aſſigned unto him ex aſſe. Truth is truth whoſoever ſpeaketh it: and S. AUGUSTINE did embrace it from TYCHONIUS a Donatiſt in one particular, rather than the Tendries of Catholick Authors. What if I went thus far, or did ſo much declare my ſelfe to favour the Lutherans againſt YOUR Divines? Have I therein broken any Statute? tranſgreſſed any Canon? offended againſt Law? oppoſed Order? neglected any Authority? If I have, Declare againſt mee: let mee anſwer for it. If none of theſe take notice of YOUR Divines, what are private mens opinions unto me, who may bee as free in my opinions, as they are in theirs? But I doe not, as you informe, Declare any ſuch thing: for, to Declare importeth a publicke Act, an aſſent upon acknowledgement. Doe I in this CHAPT. profeſſe correſpondency in the point controverted with Lutherans? Doe I any where, with them or others, beſide the Church of England, the abſoluteſt repreſentation of Antiquitie this day

extant? What that Church beleeveth, I beleeve; what it teacheth, I teach; what it rejecteth, I reject: what it doth not tender, I am not tyed unto. I was bred a member of the Church of England, brought up a member of the Church of England; therein, by the meanes and Miniſtery of that Church, I received that Earneſt of my ſalvation, when by Baptiſme I was inſerted into CHRIST. In the Union and Communion of that Church I have lived, not Divided with Papiſt, nor Separated with Puritan. Through the aſſiſtance of the grace of GOD'S Spirit, which is never wanting unto any that ſeeke Him, I hope to live and dye in the Faith and Confeſsion of that Church; than which I know none, nor can any be named in all points more conformable unto pureſt Antiquitie in the beſt times: which I truſt to make good againſt any and all thoſe Brethren in evill, Papiſts and Puritans, whoſoever: who looking and running two ſeverall waies, doe like SAMPSON'S foxes joine together in the taile. If there bee in any writing, preaching, ſaying, or thought of mine, any thing Delivered or Publiſhed againſt the Diſcipline or Doctrine of THIS Church; I am ſory for it, I revoke it, recant it, diſclaime it. Vultu laeditur pietas; if I have done ſo in any thing unto my Mother, in all humilitie I crave pardon, and will undergoe Penance. But the preſumptions of ſervants, are not the Lords directions.

Every one that prateth, readeth, lectureth, preacheth or profeſſeth, muſt not look to have his Theſes, Lectiones, Harangues or diſcourſes taken as the Dictates or doctrines of our Church. Our Mother hath ſufficiently made knowne her minde in her publicke, promulgated, authorized ARTICLES and COMMUNION BOOK; with thoſe other, to which we have all ſubſcribed, that are publickly intereſſed in the Prieſthood and Function of this Church. Hic rhodus, hic ſaltus. Theſe are thoſe Paſſages, at which IEPHTHA'S ſouldiers are to try the liſping EPHRAMITES in their Sibboleth. If heer I be concluded with that abſolute Decree of Predeſtination, I yeeld. If no ſuch Preſcription or Tye be impoſed, then 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , by your leave, ringantur the Faction: I minde (I may ſo doe) to continue in the opinion I am of.
                  YOUR DIVINES, as you ſtile them, concerning Predestination, beleeve and teach, That in the order of the cauſes of ſalvation and damnation, Almighty GOD, primarily, and abſolutely, and IRRESPECTIVELY, did from all eternity decree and reſolve; and ſemblably brought it ſo to paſſe in time, concerning genera ſingulorum and ſingulos generum, to make them veſſels of honour or diſhonour, to bring them unto life, or caſt them off into death, to crowne them with glory and immortality, or plunge them into deſtruction and hell-fire

for ever. To bring this his Decree and unchangeable purpoſe to paſſe, it was neceſſary he ſhould, and ſo hee did, purpoſe, and ſo effect the creation of man and all mankinde, neceſſarily alſo, unto life or death. So that the major part of mankinde by farre, periſhing everlaſtingly from GOD, did ſo periſh, becauſe GOD had decreed irreverſibly and irreſpectively, that they ſhould ſo periſh, and indeed made them that they might ſo periſh inevitably. For the will of GOD is the neceſſity of things, ſay YOUR Maſters out of S. AUGUSTINE miſ-underſtood. This is no malicious relating of the doctrine of YOUR Side, that delight to be ſtiled Calviniſts. The firſt counſell, purpoſe, and decree of GOD was thus: Before the works of his hands of old, meerly and irreſpectively to declare his power (I cannot ſay his juſtice) and what hee might and would doe upon his creatures, for his glorie ſake, hee made the wicked AGAINST, nay FOR the day of vengeance. The meanes to bring this his purpoſe to paſſe, was Creation; and the cauſe of his creating man, was to effect it. Praedeſtinationem vocamus aeternum DEI decretum, quo apud ſe conſtitutum habuit, quid de unoquoque 
                     CALVIN, Inſtit. 3. 21. 5. 
                     homine fieri vellet. Non enim PARI conditione CREANTUR homines: ſed alijs vita aeterna, alijs DAMNATIO aeterna PRAEORDINATUR. Itaque prout in alterutrum finem quiſque CONDITUS EST, ita vel ad vitam, vel ad MORTEM

PRAEORDINATUM dicimus. Hanc Deus non modò in ſingulis perſonis teſtatus eſt, ſed ſpecimen ejus edidit in totâ ABRAHAE ſobole. Vnde palàm fieret, in ejus arbitrio eſſe qualis cujuſque Gentis futura ſit conditio. Thus the Founder of your fancies, in expreſſe words. Can you find this ſo ruled, ſo taught, ſo preſcribed in our Church? or articulated unto our Teachers? Predeſtination unto life (ſaith the XVII Article) is that everlaſting purpoſe of GOD, whereby, before the foundation of the world was laid, he hath conſtantly decreed, by his counſell ſecret unto us, to deliver from curſe and damnation thoſe whom he hath choſen in CHRIST, out of mankinde, and to bring them BY CHRIST, unto everlaſting ſalvation, as veſſels made to honour. In which, the Church ſpeaketh onely unto Election; toucheth not upon Rejection, Reprobation, or Deſertion and Dereliction rather: and in that alſo goeth no further than ad Eſſe rei; Firſt, that there is a Predeſtination by GOD unto life. Secondly, that it was an Act of his from everlaſting. Thirdly, that he founded it, and reſolved for it, in the Man and Mediatour CHRIST, both for the purpoſe and performance. Fourthly, that it is and was of ſome ſpeciall ones alone, elect, called foorth, and reſerved in CHRIST; and not generally extended unto all mankinde. Fiftly, the which purpoſe and counſell of his is like himſelfe, unchangeable, done according to the counſell

of his will. This is all that I can finde touching that Purpoſe and Decree of GOD. Then enſueth concerning the putting it in practice and execution; in their calling by grace, juſtification freely, and adoption of ſons; in conformity to Chriſt, ſtudy of good works; and then, when theſe are done, to finall conſummation in glory. All which I conſtantly profeſſe and beleeve: and I adde, that according unto this Doctrine, a curſe is preſuppoſed, a ſtate of damnation and wo intended; out of which they are delivered, whom hee electeth in CHRIST: into which how they came, how they were plunged, the ARTICLE doth not ſpeak. YOUR Teachers declare expreſſely, it was GOD'S poſitive, peremptory, prime, irreſiſtable Act: they were caſt into it by GOD irreſpectively, becauſe he would doe it: they were thereunto appointed by himſelf, for himſelfe, and his own pleaſure; and being ſo appointed by his will, were ABSOLUTELY NECESSITATED thereunto, that they could not poſſibly reſiſt his will, alter his purpoſe, prevent his Decree, nor avoid the effects of his pleaſure. For aditum vitae PRAECLUSIT, exitio DEVOVIT. Sect. 7. Now, what inferences and hideous Ibid. conſequences will enſue, the Papiſts and Lutherans doe not ſpare to ſpeak, and preſſe to purpoſe: and you cannot avoid, to my poor underſtanding, their concluſions. The Church of England is not heerto liable; cannot bee

charged with it; muſt not, for YOUR ſakes, be put to avow or juſtifie it, which in wiſe moderation ſitteth downe by this Temper; To have GOD'S promiſes in ſuch wiſe received, as they be GENERALLY ſet forth to us in holy Scripture, and doth not inſolently preſſe into GOD'S Secrets.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. V.
               
                  Dangerous conſequences brought by Others, upon the Irreſpective Decree.
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  
                     IN this point he hath theſe words: That PETER was ſaved becauſe God would have him ſaved Abſolutely; and reſolved to ſave him ſo, Neceſſarily; becauſe hee would doe ſo.
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  IT is true, in this point I have theſe words indeed; not as mine, but as yours. For, relating the doctrine briefly of YOU Calviniſts, as you are and would be called, I propoſe it exemplified, as you uſe it, ſo. but withall I added, which is alſo your Doctrine, and I go no

further there, that IUDAS was damned as neceſſarily, becauſe that GOD, as abſolute to decree, as omnipotent to effect his decree, did primarily ſo reſolve concerning him, and finally ſo conclude as touching him, WITHOUT RESPECT of any thing but his owne will. Is not this the manifeſt, direct, plain, and expreſſe doctrine of Him, whom you profeſſe to follow? of whom you glorie to be denominated? Nothing is by me aſcribed unto your Side and YOUR Doctors, but an abſolute and irreſpective neceſsitating Decree concerning man in utram
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         partem, and concerning all the effects of Predestination. I brought no inferences to preſſe you withall; ſuch as are commonly and odiouſly made againſt you by Oppoſites; Papiſts, Lutherans, Arminians, or if there be any elſe, whoſe virulent invectives and ſtrange, though too true, imputations I like not, I uſed not. I did not charge you with making GOD the AUTHOR OF SIN; nor that GOD, who calleth himſelfe, as he is, the Father of Mercies, made the greateſt part of mankinde, with intent and purpoſe, to PERISH eternally; to DAMNE them for ever into, and in Hell fire. That every man is, as he is Predeſtinate, a Sinner or Beleever, NECESSARILY, unavoideably. That the Reprobate are incited on, and PROVOKED to ſinne by GOD. That GOD was the Author of IUDAS treaſon, and the like. None of theſe dropped out of my pen againſt you: therefore that Depravation
                     
                     of YOUR Doctrine, or odious relating of it, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ? That which I relate, is confeſſed by your ſelves, That PETER could not periſh; IUDAS could not but periſh. Whether this be good Catholick doctrine, I did not touch.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. VII.
               
                  
                     Lutherans averſe from the doctrin of Calviniſts. The moderation of the Church of England in theſe great and unſearchable myſteries. The Author's ſubmiſsion thereunto. The doctrine of Predeſtination. Man the Author of his owne deſtruction, and not GOD. The doctrine of Antiquitie contemned by Novellers. The Synod of Dort no obligation to us. The ſaying of DEODATE. The Articles of Lambeth forbidden

by Authority. Forraine Doctrine maintayned, to bring in forraine Diſcipline. The Church of England no Patroneſſe of Novell opinions.
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  
                     BUt I make the world beleeve, that the Church of England doth oppoſe the doctrine of abſolute and irreſpective Election, which the SYNOD of DORT concluded upon and determined; and that it agreeth with the Lutherans in this point.
                  
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  DOE I make men Beleeve it? How can you tell, that the world is ſo perſwaded through my words? It is probable enough that the world thought ſo, and Beleeved ſo, before that my name or the Gaggers came into play among you, or were heard of in the world. And for the Lutherans, this is all I ſay; The Lutherans abhorre it. It, that is, That opinion, as I then ſpake indefinitely, not impoſing it on you, or YOUR Divines: as gently as I could, as tenderly as was poſsible. And I pray you, for the Lutherans, is it not ſo?

out of your knowledge or heare-ſay, doe not they deteſt it, as horribiliter in DEUM contumelioſum, & generi humano pernicioſiſsimum? and that ſo farre, with ſuch vehemency (as their cuſtome is, in every thing to be vehement and violent) that they ſticke not to profeſſe, they will rather come off roundly unto Poperie againe, than joine with YOUR Divines upon any termes, in theſe Queſtions of Preſcience, Perſeverance, Election, and Reprobation. wherein they ſay, that by your Tenents, Non Diabolus, ſed DEUS erit AUTHOR mendacij: GOD, not the Divell, is made AUTHOR of ſinne.
                  But concerning the Church of England's conſenting with the Lutherans, your Gloſſe corrupteth my Text. I ſay no ſuch matter. That which I ſay, is this. The Gagger objecteth unto us, as held by us, that which you call the Doctrine of YOUR Divines. My anſwer thereto, is Negative: Abſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         hoc, no ſuch matter. For the Lutherans in Germany doe deteſt and abhorre it: the Church of England hath not taught it. And yet this is not enough to inferre, that we conſent with the Lutherans, eyther in their Abhorring and Deteſting of it, or in thoſe Opinions which they hold againſt it; except there could be given, Nihil tertium. I adde: The Church of England doth not Beleeve it: and why may I not ſay ſo, except you ſhew the contrary, or bring me forth a Creed, a Canon, a Concluſion in being, for Beleeving

it, in the Church of England? What our Church reſolveth touching this, is 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      reſolved in the XVII Article: the very words of that Article being expreſſed in termes, as farre as concerned that Decree. But touching the execution of that eternall purpoſe, both for inchoation by Grace here, and conſummation in Glory hereafter, thus much is tendred in the ſelfe ſame place and Article: Therefore they that be endowed with ſo excellent a Benefite from GOD; be called according unto GOD'S purpoſe, by his Spirit working in due ſeaſon. They through GOD'S grace obey that calling: they be juſtified freely: they be made ſonnes of GOD by adoption: they be made like unto the Image of his only begotten Sonne IESUS CHRIST: they walke religiouſly in good works; and at length by GOD'S mercy attaine unto everlasting felicity. In all which paſſage, both containing GOD'S Decree, and execution of that Decree, is not one word, ſyllable, or apex touching your abſolute, neceſſarie, determined, irreſiſtable, irreſpective Decree of GOD, to call, ſave and glorifie, S. PETER for inſtance, infallibly, WITHOUT any CONSIDERATION had of, or REGARD unto, his FAITH, OBEDIENCE, REPENTANCE; and to condemn IUDAS, as neceſſarily, without any RESPECT had at all unto his SINNE. which, ſay I there, and I ſay truely, is the private fancy of ſome particular men: and, as I conjecture, you are profeſſedly of thoſe SOME. And whereas you

would make the World beleeve, that Eccleſia Anglicana Calviniſtat; as if he were the father and founder of our Faith; as if our Beleefe were to be pinned upon his ſleeve, and abſolutely to be taught after his Inſtitutions: ſhew mee good warrant for it, and I yeeld. I may rather ſay, that the Church of England hath oppoſed this doctrine, becauſe that many of the Learned (your ſelves will not denie) in that Church, and moſt conformable unto the Diſcipline and Doctrine of the Church, have mainly oppoſed it: and the Church it ſelf hath directly and in EXPRESSE words overthrown the ground therof, in teaching thus: that a Iuſtified man, and therefore Predeſtinate in your doctrine, may Fall away from GOD, and therefore become, not the Child of GOD. The truth is, our Church, in theſe deepe and high points, hath in great Wiſedeme and Prudence, gon on warily and ſuſpenſely; not preſuming, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , (as you and YOUR Divines have done and doe) to conclude upon GOD'S Secrets: not ſtraightning & narrowing of mens conſciences, by determining, ſpecially in thoſe Myſteries, at which that great Apoſtle ſtood at gaze, with 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : and, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . and, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ; Would you and your Party bee adviſed; I would counſaile you that, which I deſire to follow in this particular my ſelfe.
                  
                     
                        
                        Ne curioſus quaere cauſas omnium
                     
                     
                        Quaecunque libris vis Prophetarum indidit
                     
                     
                        Afflata caelo plena veraci DEO.
                     
                        Nec operta ſacri ſupparo ſtlentij
                     
                     
                        Irrumpere aude, ſed prudenter praeteri.
                     
                     NESCIRE VELLE QUAE MAGISTER MAXIMUS
                     DOCERE NON VULT, ERUDITA EST INSCITIA.
                  
                  I muſt confeſſe my diſſent thorough and ſincere from the Faction of novellizing PURITANS; men intractable, inſociable, incompliable with thoſe that will not aedificare ad diſſenſiones; but in no one point more, than in this their deſperate doctrine of Predeſtination. In which as they delight to trouble themſelves and others; in nothing more: ſo I profeſſe I doe love to meddle nothing leſſe. I have not, I did not deſire, nor intend to declare my owne opinion in that point (evermore with reſervation of my dutifull conſent with and unto my Mother): for I needed not doe it, being not forced ſo to do in following of the Gagger: but becauſe I am challenged for Dangerous Doctrine therein by the Informers, and for Arminianiſme or Popery, or I knowe not what; I ſhall as I can briefly, and plainly without ſcholasticall obſcurities, ſet downe what I conceive of this Act of GOD

(ſetting by all execution of purpoſe) or Decree of Predeſtination. Take it as I conceive it, and ſo ſhall profeſſe it, untill I am informed and aſcertained, that the Church of England, whereof I am a member, beleeveth and teacheth all otherwiſe than I conceive of it.
                  Firſt, whatſoever GOD willeth, cometh to paſſe in Heaven and in Earth. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      is poſſible with him. If it bee 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      once, or 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , it is alſo 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , or ſhall bee in due time. For accordingly as he willeth things ſhould, ſo doe they come to paſſe. And as they do come to paſſe in due time, ſo he would have them before all times ſo come to paſſe. The one is Originall of the other: and the one is Evidence of the other. GOD'S Decrees are eternall, from everlaſting, as all his purpoſes are, as himſelfe is; like himſelfe, who is Tota ſimul & perfecta poſſeſsio ſui. So, as in Him conſidered, there is nor prius nor posterius of his decrees: but conſidered in effects, and quoad Nos, one thing may be ſaid to be firſt, ſecond, or third; in nature, time, and being; before, or after another. GOD being ſibi ſolus, 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , from everlaſting, alone himſelfe, and beſide himſelfe nothing, the firſt thing he did, or poſsibly and conceiveably could doe, was to determine to communicate himſelf, and did ſo accordingly, primò, primùm, communicate himſelf out of his Aloneneſſe everlaſting unto ſomewhat elſe. For Communication is an

Act of Goodnes, the prime attribute of God reſpectively; as even the Heathen man could ſay, Deus eſt optimus & maximus, & quidem prius optimus quàm maximus. All communication CICERO, I. de Divin.
                      is, and needs muſt bee conceived to bee, at leaſt, betwixt two; being an effluxe, emanation, iſſuing from, and motion betwixt tearms. GOD alone could not communicaie ſe, ſua, or de ſuis, but by producing an Object communicable, to whom or which hee might impart as, and what, he pleaſed. Which, when nothing was at all but himſelfe, muſt and doth put us upon another purpoſe and Act of his, to Create; which is, framing of ſomething out of meer nothing: nor can poſſibly any other Act, or reſolution and counſell, prevent this, much leſſe that of Predeſtination, yet unheard of. As is the Cauſe, ſuch is the Effect; eſpecially, a Totall, Sufficient, Immediate Cauſe. The Created was then, and could not be but ſo, like the Creator, that is, good: and accordingly wee have that Elogium Creaturae, ALL things were exceeding good. But Good is, and muſt be of a double alloy; Changeably, or elſe unchangeably good. Thus good, is onely GOD; without beginning, not to have end; without change or ſhadow of change. Man thus made by GOD good, as otherwiſe than ſo he could not be, was yet made by him changeably good: in as much as, that being created, otherwiſe than ſo, hee muſt not nor could bee.

Good he was, but Bad he might be: Righteous, out of the hands of GOD; but left unto himſelf, in the hands of his owne counſell, unrighteous. That, changing ſtate of Being, if haply he ſhould change, his alteration might be his owne Act, imputable to himſelfe, not his Maker; his endowments muſt be ſuch, as, unleſſe himſelfe would, none elſe could hurt or annoy him. And ſuch indeed they were, ſo ſufficient in themſelves, able to hold out againſt oppoſition and aſſault, unleſſe baſely and cowardly hee would betray the Fort upon ſummons of a Foe. Thus he did: ſo he ſerved himſelfe. Uſing his freedome of will not well as he ought, he loſt his freedome, undid himſelfe, and his whole race then in his loins. EVE took up ſinne from the divell upon lone: ADAM by Conſent acknowledged the band, & uſura crevit Posteritas. For being the root and originall of all mankinde, hee received what he had, for himſelfe and his; and loſt what he forfeited, for them all. Falling thus from GOD, hee fell not alone: his poſterity were together with him plunged into one bottomleſſe pit of perdition, and maſſe of damnation, through their owne fault. Thither they fell: not there were they put. GOD made not man unto deſtruction: much leſſe did he make him to deſtroy him. As GOD'S Acts are in Production. ſo were they formerly in Intention. But Creation was before Fall or Reſtoring:

therefore ſo was it alſo in GOD'S purpoſe. Thus farre we have gone, and not a word of Predeſtination: for how could it bee in a Parity? There muſt needs firſt be a diſproportion, before there can bee conceived Election or Dereliction; unto which we are now comne in the maſſe of perdition, as they call it. Wherein all alike beeing plunged actually, GOD paſſeth by, looketh on, conſidereth intuitively, once, at once, ſingulos generum, genera ſingulorum, in that very wofull plight. Hee had compaſſion on them: ſo EZECH. phraſeth it. XVI. When he ſaw them in their bloud; and out of his mercy, in his love, motu mero, not otherwiſe, ſtretched out to them deliverance in a Mediatour, the Man IESUS CHRIST, and drew them out that took hold of mercy, leaving them there that would none of him: There whither they had fallen of Themſelves; not whereinto Hee had throwne them headlong, out of his meer irreſpecting will, becauſe hee would; through his abſolute power, becauſe he could; with the irreſiſtable neceſsitie of an inevitable Decree, creating them to periſh everlaſtingly. This is enough, abſolutely to free and to acquit GOD from being AuTHOR of SINNE, which hee ſo deteſteth; or Author of death, which hee made not; to which he is an enemy, as being Life: and from being Author of deſtruction, which is meerly of our ſelves; he being Pater miſericordiarum,
                     
and wholly, freely, and deſiredly, giving, occaſioning, procuring, effecting our ſalvation day by day. If this bee Arminianiſme, eſto. I muſt profeſſe it. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . For unleſſe it be ſo, and that, not according to unchangeable neceſsity, there is not any thing in our power at all, ſaith IUSTIN MARTYR in his Apol. Nay, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . If it be abſolutely 
                     
                        Pag. 151. edit. ROB. STEPH. 
                     determined, that one ſhould bee good, another bad; the one cannot be approved, nor the other rejected. For, juſtitia non erit juſta, ſaith FULGENTIUS, ſi puniendum reum non inveniſſe, 
                     
                        Ad MONIMUM 
                     ſed feciſſe dicatur DEUS. But praeſcivit peccaturos; non praedeſtinavit ad peccatum. The reaſon is irrefragable, ſtante the Nature of our GOD: Nunquam ad hoc hominem potuit praedeſtinare, quod ipſe diſpoſuerat, & praecepto prohibere, & miſericordiâ diluere, & juſtitiâ punire. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . But that inevitable neceſsity which wee have heard of, is, that they who make choice of the better part, have allotted them their portions according to their deſerts. and ſemblably thoſe that go on to do ill, have proportioned aſſignements deviſed unto them. Nam ſi omnem malignitatem, & ſi tantam malitiem excogitatam, DEUS, exactor innocentiae, odit, indubitatè, quaecun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         condidit, non in exitum operum conſtat condidiſſe
                     
                     quae damnat, licèt eadem opera, per ea quae condidit, adminiſtrentur. Quando haec ſit tota ratio damnationis, perverſa adminiſtratio conditionis à conditis, in the opinion of TERTULLIAN; and not any previous, NECESSITATING TERT. de ſpeetac. ca. z.
                      Decree. So that 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , GOD cannot be blamed nor accuſed, in the judgement of CLEMENS ALEXANDRINUS, becauſe 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , GOD is no cauſer of what is 
                     CLEM, ALEX. Strom. 5. pa. 261 
                     evill: which the Heathens ſaw and taught, as hee there at large diſcourſeth out of them. And children have read it in the Poet,
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     They accuſe GOD, but the cauſe is in themſelves. Their owne diſpoſedneſſe to evill, no neceſsitating Decree, maketh them ſo liable unto juſt puniſhment. As if he had read it in the wiſe man, GOD ECCLES. 7. 31. 
                     made man right, but he ſought out many inventions. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . We were made, ſaith NAZIANZENE, S. GREG. NAZ. Orat. 42. pa. 696. 
                     that we might be well and happy; and ſuch we were, being made, eſtated in Paradiſe, of Felicity there to enjoy pleaſure in aboundance: we forfeited our ſeiſure, upon our owne Tranſgreſsion. Home, and pithily as his ſtile and phraſe is, conciſe and ſententious, not diffuſed. His fellow and faithfull ACHATES, in courſe of life and ſtudies, Great S. BASIL, hath a Sermon to

the purpoſe, That GOD is not Author, or Cauſe 
                     S. BASIL. Hom. Quòd DEus non eſt Author malorum.
                      
                     of evill; neither poenae nor culpae, as they ſpeak. That malum poenae is from culpa meerly originally; that culpae malum is of man himſelfe, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . not out of any poſitive act of GOD upon him; which he inſtanceth in PHARAOH, whom GOD, ſaith he, found ſo, did not faſhion or make ſo: and having in long ſuffering forborne him long, ne ſic quidem morti illum tradidit, donec ipſemet ſe praecipitem dedit. And though we read (ſaith he) in the Apoſtle of Veſſels of wrath, fitted and diſpoſed unto Perdition, 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Let us not ſo conceive it, as if PHARAOH had been made an evill veſſell: for in ſo ſaying, or opining, we transfer the fault in Him, from Him, to HIM that made him. But reading in the Text of the Apoſtle, Veſſels, conceive it ſo, and beleeve it, that All we, and every one of us, were, and was made, 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , for and to ſome profitable and behoofefull uſe. S. PAUL ſaith, that veſſels of diſhonour, if they be purged, may become veſſels of 
                     2. TIM. 2. 20, 21. 
                     honour. which were impoſsible, if GOD had made them ſo, and inevitably decreed them to continue ſo for ever. Therefore S. BASIL might well bid us take heede of that ſenſe. And becauſe ADAM was the root of all, and ADAM'S caſe an exemplar of all mankinde, concerning ADAM he writeth thus: Erat prius ADAM in ſublimi conſtitutus, non loco quidem ſed arbitrio, cùm ſtatim animâ imbutus in Coelum
                     
                     laetus ſuſpexit, & majorem in modum ob illa viſa gaviſus, amore ardenti complecteretur cum, cujus munere tanto frueretur beneficio, & vita donandus eſſet immortali; ubi vocis divinae et commercij fruitus ſocietate cum Angelis ex aequo & Archangelis, aeternùm regnaret. Qui luxurians veluti prae ſatietate, corporea praetulit intellectualibus, at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ita excidit paradiſo, & depulſus est ſpe illâ immortalitatis. And then concludeth: 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . He became evill, NOT NECESSITATED ANY WAY, but through his owne miſadviſedneſſe. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Thus he fell to tranſgreſſe through his wicked owne-will; and becauſe of tranſgreſsion, was lyable unto death. Nor was there any abſolute decree paſſed upon IUDAS to make him a Traytor, 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Of his owne proper motion he undertooke the Treaſon, ſaith CHRYSOSTOME, to let us know, that of his owne accord and mind therto 
                     S. CHRYSOST. tom. 5. pa. 551. 
                     diſpoſed, he ran headlong upon that audacious tranſgreſsion, no way moved or cauſed, but onely that a wicked heart within Him iſſued out that Treaſon, into which he thruſt himſelfe. Unleſſe from damned Hereticks or ſtoicall Philoſophers, I never yet read in Antiquity of any prime, previous determining Decree, by which men were IRRESPECTIVELY denied grace,

excluded from glory, or enforced to ſalvation; as they muſt be, that cannot periſh if they would, nor can be ſaved though moſt they deſire. DEUS quippè, apud quem non eſt iniquitas, & cujus univerſae viae miſericordia & veritas; omnium hominum bonus Conditor, juſtus eſt ordinator. Neminem indebitè damnans, neminem debitè liberans. Noſtra plectens, cùm punit noxios; ſua tribuens, cùm facit justos. Nam nec damnati juſta quer monia, nec juſtificati verax eſt arrogantia: ſi vel ille dicat, non merüiſſe ſe poenam, vel iste aſſerat, merüiſſe ſe gratiam: ſaith PROSPER and what S. AUGUSTINE taught in this point, the PROSP. de vocat. Gent. l. 2. world knoweth.
                  But it mattereth not now (as it ſhould ſeem by theſe Promoters) what he or his compeers taught; nor much what the Church of England tendreth: we muſt be confined unto Forrayne opinions of ſome late Writers, and tyed to the Concluſions of Dort. I derogate nothing from that Synode, nor any particular man in that Synode. For thoſe Divines that were there of our Church, the principall of them ſometime was my worthy friend and acquaintance; ſince is my Reverend and much reverenced Dioceſan: the major part of them were my antient acquaintance likewiſe, and one of them brought up with me of a childe ſo that perſonall reſpects rather ſeem to affie me unto that Synod. And indeed I do reverence the Conveners for their places, worth, and learning;

but I have nothing at all to doe with their Concluſions, farther than they doe conſent and agree to and with the Concluſions and Determinations of that Synod of London, which eſtabliſhed the Doctrine of our Church, to which I am bound, and have ſubſcribed. If thoſe Concluſions goe along with theſe, I embrace them willingly, will ſtand unto them, and as I can propugne them. If they be Contra, I will none of them: if Praeter, I may chooſe to receive them. For I am not bound unto them: no Law directeth mee: the Church doth not compell me. The Synod was Forinſecus, and but partiall. I ſee no reaſon why any of thoſe worthy Divines of our Church there preſent, ſhould take any offence at my diſſenting, who had no authority, that I know of to conclude me; more than I do at them for differing from me in their judgements. Quiſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         abundet in ſenſu ſuo. For I am not yet acquainted with any obligatory or compulſory act for or to the contrary, whereby the Church in generall, or any man in particular, is bound or tyed to receive, abbet, maintaine or beleeve all, or any of the Articles concluded on in that Synod, farther than they agree with the AUTHORISED Doctrine of the Church of England, whoſe Diſcipline in that and in other 
                        Harm. Synod. Belg. cap. 13. can. 8. DUTCH Synods, is held unlawfull. What Ends men had in that Synod, I knowe not, nor am curious to enquire: how things were carried, I as little

underſtand or care. Whether any or all ſubſcribed abſolutely or with proteſtation, I cannot tell. Let them looke unto it, and anſwer for it, whom it doth concerne. This I am ſure; IOHN DEODATE, Miniſter and Profeſſor in the Church of Geneva, and imployed unto that Synod of Dort from his Countrey, being lately with me at Eaton, profeſſed there unto me his owne opinion in ſome points contrary to the concluſions of Dort; as alſo the diſſenſion of their Church at Geneva, from the PRIVATE opinions (as he called them) of CALVIN and BEZA. And I am as ſure, that the Church of England never ſo concluded nor determined it in her Doctrime. I am ſure it hath been oppoſed in the Church of England; otherwiſe taught and profeſſed in the Schooles when I was an Auditor there. It hath been prohibited to be enjoyned, and tendred, or maintained as the Authenticall Doctrine of our Church, by ſupreme Authority, with ſharp reproofe unto thoſe that went about to have it tendred, then, when thoſe Concluſions or Aſſertions of Lambeth, as they are called in the Conference at Hampton Court, were upon ſending downe to the Univerſitie of Cambridge; likely enough to have beene there applauded by ſome, through the opinion of the great worth and learning that they had of the then Profeſſor, a thorough man everie way upon YOUR Side, and an earneſt Promoter

of the novell opinions againſt other learned Divines, part dead, and yet part alive. Since which time, at the Conference of Hampton Court before HIS MAIESTY by Doctour BANCROFT, the then Lord Biſhop of London, it was ſtiled, againſt the Articles of Lambeth, then urged by the Puritans, a Deſperate doctrine (as I take it to be) without reproof or taxation of any. And can wee conceive, this ſhould have been acted, ſpoken or tolerated, againſt a Doctrine approved by the Church of England? Beſides, in all probability, the publick Doctrine of the Church of England, is not very likely to have beene, or to be upon the Party of a Faction that hath ſo long had a Schiſme on foot againſt it, to bring in Genevaniſme into Church and State, wholly, totally, were it poſsible; at leaſt ſo partially, that ſenſim ſine ſenſu it might creep upon us: not as once, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      by oppoſing the DISCIPLINE ex adverſo; but by complying with That, formerly oppugned cum infortunio, to winde in with the DOCTRINE point per point: that men, being ſo ſeaſoned and infected with the ONE, may at length more readily, willingly, and ſooner incline unto the OTHER. It being ſo in the nature of man, that opinion ſettled for the excellent worth, temper, deſert and conveniency of any one invention or propoſall of ſome one man, men may be diſpoſed unto him in any

or all other things, though of another nature. Conſidering then your Side, your Comportments, your Ends, it is not in reaſon probable, that you ſhould have the Doctrine of the Church on YOUR Side againſt Mr. MOUNTAGU; your affection to the Church, ſetting reaſon of profite and intereſt aſide, being ſuch as it is well knowne to be. Say I it is not probable? I ſay it is directly otherwiſe. For the Church holdeth and teacheth punctually, and that in the Opinion, and with the diſlike of the Learnedſt of Your Side, that Faith, true, juſtifying Faith, once had, may be loſt, and recovered againe: that a man endued with GOD'S holy Spirit, and enlightned with the Heavenly light, may LOSE that HOLY SPIRIT, have that Light put out, become like unto SAUL and IUDAS; may be brought into ſo vile a condition, that hee ſhall be thought meet for no other purpoſe, than to be condemned into Hell. Now, to your own underſtanding, my good Brethren, can the Church of England be thought to patronize YOUR Predeſtination; and ſo farre to croſſe and thwart YOUR Perſeverance? It is your own; GOD hath appointed them to Grace & Glorie; GOD according to purpoſe hath called and juſtified them: therefore it is certain, that they muſt and ſhall be ſaved infallibly. But if the Once juſtified by a lively Faith, may, in the opinion of our Church, loſe that juſtification, they are not ſaved by an abſolute neceſſitie,

IRRESPECTIVE, without relation unto their Repentance. For whatſoever thing may be otherwiſe than it is, is not neceſſarily to continue one way, and ever the ſame. DAVID and PETER, falling as they did, unleſſe they had repented, as alſo they did, ſhould have periſhed eternally; which, becauſe they repented, they did not. Certiſsimè liberantur, qui liberantur. No man taketh CHRIST'S ſheep out of his hand; none of GOD'S Elect doe periſh for ever. which although it be true, it is ſo true, upon ſuppoſition of the meanes, Faith, Repentance, and finall Perſevering in obedience: without which they are none of GOD'S Elect, nor belonging to CHRIST; theſe being the appointed inſtrumentall cauſes of all their ſalvation. as the proper immediate cauſe of the wicked's deſtruction, is their impenitencie, infidelity, and diſobeying GOD: which the very Synod of Dort denieth not, that define, the wrath of GOD to remaine on them that Beleeve not: That life eternall is for them that Beleeve: which calleth them Praeteritos, or non Electos, that periſh a Title that cannot accrue unto thoſe, that, as the Doctrine of YOUR Divines was at leaſt, were made by GOD to periſh everlaſtingly. Quod ante Gehennam mali pereunt, non eſt DIVINI operis, ſed HUMANI. Quòd autem in Gehenna perituri ſunt, hoc facit DEI aequitas, cui placere nulla poteſt Peccantis impunitas. with FULGENTIUS ſo I conclude.
               
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. VIII.
               
                  Touching Free-will, the III. point of Arminianiſme.
                  
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  
                     HE calles the Question of Freewil betwixt us and the Papiſts, in this point, a Queſtion of obſcurity.
                  
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  I CALL it ſo indeed: and in my poor underſtanding and ſmall capacitie, I ever took it to be a Queſtion, at leaſt as it is intangled, of perplexed obſcurity. You, my good Brethren, as it ſeemeth, eſteeme it not ſo;
                  
                     —Queis meliore luto finxit praecordia Titan. You can eaſily foord over all the depths therof, and cleerly còmprehend all the darkeſt mirkſomneſſe therin. Admiror, ſtupeo: why are you enraged againſt me, if I cannot attaine the meaſure of your tranſcendentneſſe, but confeſſe my diſability and imperfection? But cleere or obſcure; light or darkneſſe in the point of Free-will, in my Opinion, what is it to Arminianiſme in your information? Was ARMINIUS alſo in the ſame opinion, that the Queſtion of Free-will was obſcure? Surely ſo; and yet what meaned

thoſe dangers you talk of, for oppoſition? ſeeing men are not peremptory, but upon reſolution; and reſolution groweth not but upon perſwaſion: which is ever upon evidence to the underſtanding. If not ſo; then wherein doth N. MOUNTAGU Arminianiſe? But eſto, as you will, every way. What Error is in it? at leaſt, what danger conſequent unto Error? I ſhould thinke it a preſervative againſt danger rather; inaſmuch as the difficulty, and obſcurity pretended, will, in all probabilitie, keep men off from meddling in it above their Modell: and ſo, from any conſequent trouble or danger, if any ſuch can be, about it. I have not heard ARMINIUS taxed for any ſuch aſſertion. which if he had held, he had beene in the right. The Queſtion of Freewill, ſo canvaſſed and diſcourſed of up and downe, is indeed a point, and ſo ever hath beene held, of very great obſcurity; fitting rather Schooles, than popular eares or auditories If it bee not an obſcure Queſtion, what then meane thoſe many and manifold intricated and diſtracted diviſions amongſt men touching Freewill? the nature, ſtate, condition of it ſince ADAM'S fall? the power, efficacy, and extent thereof in naturall, morall, civill, divine, indifferent, good, bad, determined, indetermined acts? the concurrence and cooperation thereof with grace? the conſtitution and connexion thereof with neceſſity, preſcience, providence, predeſtination? the decrees, purpoſes,

and will of GOD? Proteſtants and Papiſts together by the eares? Papiſts at odds amongſt themſelves? and Proteſtants with Protestants upon no better tearms? To my capacity, that is obſcure, which is ſo much intangled with contradictory diſputations upon all hands, and ſo much perplexed with oppoſitions. BELLARMINE, a man, no diſparagement to your worth, of as ſtrong a braine, and piercing apprehenſion as eyther of you, M. WARD and M. YATES, or any new upſtart Maſter in Iſrael of the pack; confeſſeth, that the Concurrence of Grace and Free-will is Res omnino difficilis, & fortaſsè in hâc vitâ incomprehenſibilis. which ſaying of his, our Biſhop MORTON (I hope nor Papiſt nor Arminian) diſliketh not: and remembreth 
                        Appeale, lib. 2. ca. 1. §. 11. withall out of BENIUS this, De modo quo liberum arbitrium vel movetur vel movet ad exercitium boni, clamant alij, rem non poſſe in hâc vitâ percipi, ſed omnem ingenij humani captum ſuperare. OCHAM, & SA, & CAIETANUS, & ALII. This is ſtrange Arminianiſme, is it not?
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. IX.
               
                  Controverſies unneceſſarily multiplied: the AUTHOR no Favourer of them. Queſtions of

obſcurity and ſpeculation not fit for Pulpits & popular eares. Freewill made no ſuch controverſie among moderate men, either of the Pontifician or Protestant ſide, as people are borne in hand withall.
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  
                     BUt M. MOUNTAGU ſaith, It might better have beene omitted, and overpaſſed in ſilence: eſpecially the differences hanging as they doe upon ſuch niceties, and the controverted particulars being of no great moment upon due examination. CHAP. XVI. pag. CVII.
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  I Muſt and do confeſſe, I am of that mind, and thinke ſo ſtill; that the idle fellow the Gagger had done much better, had merited more at GOD and mens hands, to ſpeake in his owne language, and deſerved better of the Church, and have done better ſervice to GOD Almighty: as alſo might the major part by

much of his Side, if they would bee more ſparing in multiplying controverſies and diſputes; and ſo in diſquieting the peace of the Church in points of that nature, which doe not ſo concerne the ſtate of mans ſoule, or his walking in the waies of GOD'S commandement; or knowing of Him, the onely true GOD, and whom he hath ſent, IESUS CHRIST. Now was ARMINIUS alſo of that opinion? If he were not, how am I or can I bee an ARMINIAN for this? If he were of this opinion, then hath hee been deeply wronged by you and others, that make him an Incendiary, a Bontifeu, a Flabellum of faction and ſedition, ſo much undeſervedly, in both Church and State; that charge him ſo deeply as you have done with troubling the Netherlands, and endangering that State, by moving Diſputes about Preſcience, Perſeverance, Predeſtination, univerſall Grace, Free-will, and loſſe of Faith. And ſurely M. MOUNTAGU deſerved a more moderate and leſſe empaſsioned cenſure, than to bee informed againſt for moving of ſedition; which toucheth deep, and will beare (I trowe) an ACTION of the Caſe: who hath evermore deteſted that humour of Innovators, that take the diſquieting of things eſtabliſhed, a ſufficient hire to ſet them on work; who for feare of offending that way, concealed both his owne opinion often, and ſometime the doctrine of the Church, which haply he ſhould

not have done. Is hee therefore ſeditious, becauſe he refuſed to diſpute, diſcourſe or talke de omni Ente? to conteſt for every thing, ut pro aris & focis? to make a Caſe of faith or conſcience, of every ſpeculation? or becauſe hee profeſſeth his diſlike of multiplying controverſies in thoſe kindes, which increaſe rather diſcord and troubles in Church and in State, than ſerve to edification? It is ſtrange, that for wiſhing, adviſing, and in his owne particular uſing and enſuing that moderation, thereby not to engarboile the Church, and diſturb the courſe of piety, he ſhould ſo, by you and yours, be blamed, accuſed, and traduced for a PAPIST and an ARMINIAN; calumniated, almoſt in every Ordinary, by your means, for a dangerous driver at Popery and Sedition; being with one breath, in the ſelfe-ſame points, blamed for being ſo temperate, for ſaying no more; for not mooving, favouring, fomenting unneceſſary quarrels and diſunions, in queſtions of ſpeculation and of obſcurity; adviſing rather to reſerve them for, and referre them to the Schools (though your honeſt ſimplicity, or PURE charity, thought it fit to conceale this his moderate wiſh or advice), rather than to thunder and lighten in your Pulpits with them, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , by buzzing them into popular eares and capacities, incapacious of them, unable to comprehend them. O vertiginem! may I not well

ſay? that men ſhould have ſuch whirle-gigs in their brains, and be ſo farre at variance with their owne wits, as to imply contradiction in adjecto? to charge M. MOUNTAGU, becauſe he had delivered ſuch and ſuch errors in Doctrine; and yet to accuſe him becauſe he miſliketh the delivering of ſuch errors. For in ſuch and ſo great variety of errors or opinions touching free-will, it may be, that not one of them all is true; but that more than one of them ſhould be true, it cannot be, as CICERO ſpake in another caſe. If, OF the 
                     CICERO de Nat. Deor. 1. 
                     defenders of Free-will, ſome beleeved not the neceſsity of grace; which doctrine the IESUITES condemne of PELAGIANISME: ſome denied, that GOD can abſolutely determine the will; and are confuted by the most part: ſome diſliked, that GOD ſhould bee ſaid by his exciting grace to work phyſically in man; and are gaine-ſaid by BENIUS, as therein Adverſaries unto Fathers and Councels: ſome hold, that GOD doth not morally determine the will; and are excepted against by SUAREZ: ſome gave to mans will, in the Act of converſion, an equality with, yea a preeminence before grace; and are therefore contradicted by others, as repugnant unto Scriptures and to Fathers: and finally, ſome laboured to ſatisfie all doubts concerning the concurrence of grace and will, and yet confeſſe they cannot aſſoile them; as is confeſſed in theſe many words by the learned Biſhop of Lichfield, no Papiſt, 
                     APPEALE, pag. 214. I think, nor yet Arminian: Then (I truſt) you

will excuſe me for concluding, The point of FREE-WILL is a queſtion of great obſcurity. And then, might not that Gagger have ſpared his paines, and well paſſed over this point in ſilence? But if your fingers did ſo itch to be taxing Mr. MOUNTAGU, you ought not in common honeſty to have concealed his annexed quouſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
                      and limitation of the point. For he did not ſay, ſimply and abſolutely, to be ſilenced; but onely ſo farre, as from propalating of it in popular Paſſages and Auditories, which are therefore unfit, thereof uncapable; not apprehenſive of thoſe many niceties and quiddities, that are ſo many, and almoſt inextricable in it: to be ſilenced in Pulpits and in popular diſcourſes; to be diſcuſſed in Schools, which peculiarly are diſpoſed for ſuch purpoſes, and intricated queſtions of doubts.
                  But haply theſe things came in upon the Bye, to make up the muſter, and fill up the accuſation of ARMINIANISME, ut quae non proſunt ſingula, multa juvent. That which moſt offendeth, and is inexpiable, followeth in the Rere; The controverted particulars are of no ſuch great moment, upon due examination. And this is ARMINIANISME in the higheſt degree: becauſe, forſooth, the contrary hath often paſſed the hedge of your teeth; you have preached the contrary from your Pulpits, and often proclaimed in your Lectures and Sermons, that in the point of Free-will the Church of

                     Rome abſolutely and wholly Pelagianizeth, are enemies profeſſed unto the Grace of CHRIST, advancing naturall Indowments above, and preferring them before Grace: that they raze the foundation, make CHRIST none, or a partiall Mediator; Man beholding to none, but to himſelfe, for his ſalvation; and that we muſt for ever, upon paine of Damnation (ſtrange Bugbeares and Terriculamenta) diſſent from them, in this as in all things elſe, & have no PEACE at all with them. Indeed I wrote, The controverted particulars are of no great moment. I meant and meane, betwixt that Church and ours, for any materiality in this point, betwixt moderate and temperate men on eyther ſide: ſuch as CASSANDER for the Church of Rome; ANDREAS FRICIUS, yea and PHILIP MELANTHON for the Proteſtants. For it is memorable, but true, which ANDREAS VEGA hath, one of the beſt flowers in the garden of TRENT, Studere debemus omnes Concordiae, & 
                     
                        Lib. 2. cap. 18. 
                     quâcunque poſsimus viâ, omni vi & ope noſtrâ, veritati favere. And therefore in this point hee propoſeth a courſe, Si fateamur nos non habere ſufficientem libertatem ad opera ſpiritalia, & ſpectantia ad religionem, niſi Deus adjuvet: & eos interpretemur hac ratione dixiſſe eos, nos non habere libertatem reſpectu talium operum, quia non habemus libertatem ſine gratiâ Dei ad illam ſufficientem: inventa erit prorſus ratio, quâ illi nobiſcum, & nos cum illis in hoc Articulo conciliemur.
                  
                  
                     
The which hee the rather intended, becauſe then the difference was not great: for ſo he addeth; Et quidem ita ego eos video per DEI gratiam à prioribus erroribus reſipuiſſe, ut inter nos & illos nullam, de hoc Articulo, jam eſſe putem differentiam. and ſo goeth on to exemplification, out of MELANTHON'S Apology for the Auſperge Confeſſion; and the Interim preſented to CHARLES the Emperor. So I thought then, and ſo I thinke now, and thinke I thought not then amiſſe. Why I did think ſo; I gave my reaſons by ſpeciall reciting many Concordants inter partes. For further ſatisfaction in that point, unto thoſe that are not tranſported with Faction, I will now enlarge, to make it appeare I ſpake not then without reaſon, though I concealed them.
                  It is ſuppoſed by ſome, that the greateſt difference betwixt the Pontificians and us, conſiſteth in this, that they ſuppoſe the Will of man concurreth and cooperateth with divine Grace, in the firſt very inſtant and point of Converſion: wee teach, that the Will doth not cooperate in that firſt point with Grace, but in progreſſe of our Iuſtification. So KICKERMAN in his Syſtem. pag. CCLXIII. a better Logician than Divine, as once I heard him ſtiled in the Schooles at Cambridge. For, that many Pontificians and wee differ not in this point, appeareth by the expreſſe Doctrine of many the beſt learned amongſt them, and

moſt verſed in this Controverſie. Biſhop MARTINEZ relateth, that ANDREAS VEGA, as 
                        Diſp. 1. pa. 1. num. 4. great a Clerke as any came to TRENT, did yeeld, that Gratia excitans was motio, quam DEUS applicabat ad bonum: that excitatur homo à ſolo authore DEO: that fit in homine, activum concurſum non praebente, ſed illum tantummodo recipiente. which, to your underſtanding, what maine difference doth it containe againſt Proteſtant doctrine? And it is true, VEGA diſcourſeth thus: That GOD can, vel ſe ſolo, vel nostrae animae potentijs, omnes actus cauſare, quibus nos ad 
                     
                        Lib. 6. cap. 8. 
                     juſtificationem noſtram excitat. Hee diſclaimeth the opinion of CAIETAN and CAMERACENSIS, concerning the ability of the Minde in ſuch acts collaterally, as not to be activated unleſſe it alſo were active, and concludeth thus: Veruntamen penſatis omnibus, probabilius videtur, à DEO totaliter, vel per ſeipſum, vel per Angelos ſuos, & ſemper ſine nobis, produci vocationes, illuminationes, inſpirationes, ſeu bonos effectus, quibus DEUS nos per ſe vocat, & excitat ad poenitentiam. and in the v. chap. ejuſd. lib. thus he had premeditated (whom STAPLETON followeth 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ) Triplicia eſſe DEI opera circa juſtificationem. 
                     
                        Lib. 4 cap. 7. de Iuſtif.
                      
                     Primi generis eſſe tempore illam Antecedentia, as poſt praedeſtinationem, electionem, pulſare, ſtare ad ostium, admonere, inſpirare. Quae ſic DEI propria ſunt, ut NULLAM IN IIS PARTEM HABEAT LIBERTAS VOLUNTATIS NOSTRAE; non CONSENSUM, non COOPERATIONEM:

therefore in theſe we are meerely PASSIVE. A ſecond ſort are, Productiones qualitatum Naturam excedentium, as Faith, Hope, Charity, &c. Quia ad producendum tam praecellentes qualitates Natura noſtra pertingere non poteſt, habet ſe homo reſpectu earum PASSIVE; ſicut aer reſpectu luminis, cùm illuſtratur. Thirdly, ſunt alia quaedā medij generis, as Credere, DEUM diligere, poenitere, eidem obedire. Quae DEUS in Nobis NON exercet NISI NOBIS CONSENTIENTIBUS. unto which purpoſe is applyed that of S. PAUL, 1. Cor. XV. Gratia DEI mecum. and that of S. AUGUSTINE; generally COOPERANDO S. AUG, de grat. & libero arbitrio, cap. 17. 
                     perficit, quod OPERANDO incepit. which they learned of that grand Dictator of their Schooles, A QUINAS, in 1. 2ae. q. 3 in Corp. Artic. Gratiâ operante, mens noſtra eſt mota, non movens. DEUS autem SOLUS MOVENS. To whom accordeth SUAREZ, de Praed, lib. 1. cap. 8. Auxilia praevenientia incipiunt à DEO, & quantum ad tactum cordis, fiunt in nobis 
                     
                        •
                     INE NOBIS; and MOLINA himſelfe, cyted by LESSIUS, Omninò dicendum, concurſum DEI particularem gratiamve praevenientem, ſemper vel tempore; vel Naturâ antecedere influxum liberi arbitrij, ad actiones ſupernaturales; tanquam CAUSSA & PRINCIPIUM EFFICIENS in liberum arbitrium immiſſum. Quo mediante, DEUS ulterius, unà cum libero influxu ejuſdem arbitrij, in actiones ſupernaturales influit. So alſo as I have beene by a moſt learned friend admoniſhed,

CABRERA in 3. THO. qu. 26. Diſp. 6. art. 4. dub. 3. num. 17. CUMEI, var. diſp. part. 3. pag. 69. MARTINEZ. in 1. 2ae. qu. 10. ar. 4. dub. 1. & pa. 693. LORINUS in Pſal. 22. ver. 6. NAZARIUS in 1. part. THO. q. 23. art. 3. controv. 2. pa. 713. CLINGIUS in locis, p. 152. And ſo CAIETAN, FERRARIENSIS, ALVARES, SALAS, CURIEL, VIGUERIUS, LEDESM. MONTESINUS, and OTHERS.
                  Now let us alſo hear the PROTESTANTS ſpeak. WHITAKER, de peccato orig. pag. 149. Homo gratiam Dei LIBERE accipit. CHEMNIT. Loc. com. to. 1. pa. 508. Voluntas mota & adjuta à Spiritu ſancto, non recipit impreſsionem ſicut lapis, ſed incipit VELLE & COOPERARI. MOLLERUS in Pſal. 65. Voluntas non habet ſe ut TRUNCUS, ſed mota à Spiritu ſancto ACCEDIT & SEQUITUR vocantem DEUM, &c. Quarè, execrandae ſunt illae voces FLACCII (and are they not YOURS alſo?), Homo habet ſe in converſione REPUGNATIVE, HOSTILITER, ADVERSATIVE, PERKINS, reform. Cath, in Freewill: In the FIRST converſion of a ſinner, MAN'S FREE-WILL CONCURRETH with GOD'S grace, as a FELLOW or COWORKER in ſome ſort. Mans will is NOT PASSIVE in all and every reſpect, but hath an ACTION in the FIRST converſion and change of the ſoule, SNEGANUS and HEMINGIUS are confeſſed by WILLET, to bee of this mind; and if my Notes faile me not, for I have not now the

Book by me, diverſe other Proteſtants in Mr. FOX, pag. 1533. In the latter Helvet. Confeſſion: In regeneratione intellectus illuminatur per Spiritum ſanctum, ut & myſteria & voluntatem DEI intelligat. Et voluntas ipſa non tantùm mutatur per Spiritum, ſed instruitur facultatibus, ut SPONTE velit & poſsit Bonum. Niſi hoc dederimus, negabimus CHRISTIANAM LIBERTATEM, & inducemus SERVITUTEM. and in the Confeſſion of Saxony, Voluntas ſtatim accepto Spiritu NON EST IAM OCIOSA. Now if the Councell of TRENT intendeth to ſay no more, where is that vaſt difference imagined inter partes, thoſe of the Romiſh and Proteſtant Confeſsions? Theſe clamorous Promoters do not reade ſo much, it ſeemeth, as their owne ordinary Proteſtant Writers: and therefore in their Sermons, Lectures and Pulpits, they brawle at the ſhadow of their owne fancies, as dogs hark at the Moon; and in fighting the Lords battels, as they would ſeeme, and their ſilly Auditors conceive, they fight with Shaw-fowles of their owne ſetting up; abuſing the ſimple credulity of the unlearned; making themſelves ridiculous to the Papiſts; hardning them rather in their ſuperſtition, when they heare them talk ſo confidently, and traduce ſo virulently, as their manner is, and yet miſtake ſo ignorantly that which they do not underſtand. The Councell of TRENT reſolveth thus: Si quis dixerit liberum hominis arbitrium,
                     
                     à DEO motum & excitatum, NIHIL COOPERARI, aſſentiendo DEO excitanti at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         vocanti, ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
                      POSSE DISSENTIRE ſi velit; ſed veluti INANIME inſtrumentum NIHIL OMNINO agere, mere
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
                      PASSIVE ſe habere, Anathema ſit. Well, and what of this? Doe not WHITAKER, CHEMNITIUS, MOLLERUS, PERKINS, other Proteſtant Divines and Churches teach the very ſame concerning this firſt branch? and doth not MOLLERUS anathematiſe ILLYRICUS for holding ſo? The Councell addeth, A man may RESIST the grace of God. Admit: then, firſt, man hath Free-will againſt GOD: and what ſaid OUR SAVIOUR concerning Ieruſalem? HOW often would I, and THOU WOULDEST NOT! But S. STEPHEN in terminis hath the very word, Acts VII. LI. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , YOU RESIST, nay FALL CROSSE with the holy Ghoſt, not ſuffering him to worke the worke of grace in you. If the Councell meant it de gratiâ excitante, praveniente, operante, I thinke no man will deny it: if de gratiâ adjuvante, ſubſequente, cooperante, there is, without queſtion, in the naturall will of a regenerate man, ſo much of ADAM remaining, and carnall concupiſcence, as may make him RESIST and REBELL againſt the Law of the Spirit. And if a man juſtified may FALL AWAY FROM GRACE, wch is the doctrine of the Church of England, then without queſtion, your ſelves being Iudges, he may RESIST the grace of GOD offred.
                  
                     
Hitherto M. MOUNTAGU can ſee no ſuch difference inter partes. If you with your new learning (for old you have little or none) can teach me more than yet I know, I will yeeld, and thank you for ſuch inſtructions. But it may be objected, that Pontificians, hold, when the will of man is once informed, moved, incited, and holpen by divine grace, that then it concurreth, it is active, hath an efficiencie in the work of godlineſſe by the owne proper NATURALL force and condition. I anſwer; The moderate and diſcreet Pontificians (for there are Factious and Furious amongſt them as well as amongſt you, that will exceed) ſay no more than S. AUGUSTINE put into their mouthes: Vult DEUS omnes homines ſalvos fieri, & in agnitionem veritatis venire; non tamen ſic, ut ijs adimat liberum arbitrium. And therefore, vocante DEO, ſurgit 
                     S. AUG. de Sp. & Lit. tom. 3. cap. 33. 
                     de libero arbitrio, quod NATURALITER cùm crearetur accepit. VOLUNTATEM LIBERAM dediſti mihi: ſed SINE TE NIHIL EST conatus ejus. IDEM in Pſ. XXVI. therefore, DEO adjuvante, conatur, ambulat. And FULGENTIUS de Incarnat. ca. XXIII. Poteſt home, DEO donante, NATURALITER in DEUM credere. who intend this, That the WILL of man; beeing firſt informed, enlightned, healed by grace, and then aſsiſted continually by the ſame concurring grace, is Pediſſequa, an hand-maid and a ſubordinate AGENT with and under grace;

and that beleefe, repentance, and the like, are TRUE and REALL operations of MAN'S underſtanding and will; and proceed, as actions NATURALL, out of the powers of the reaſonable ſoule, elevated and ACTUATED to that height and actuality by GOD'S grace. Illud ſi qui dicant, ſufficere homini liberum arbitrium ad Dominica praecepta implenda, etiamſi DEI gratiâ, & Spiritus ſancti dono, ad opera bona NON ADIUVETUR, omnino ANATHEMATIZANDUM est, & omnibus execrationibus deteſtandum. Qui enim hoc aſſerunt, à gratiâ DEI penitus alieni ſunt: qui ignorantes DEI juſtitiam, ſicut de Iudaeis dicit APOSTOLUS, & 
                     ROM. 13. 10. 
                     ſuam volentes conſtituere, justitiae DEI non ſunt ſubjecti. Plenitudo quippe legis non eſt niſi charitas. Et utique charitas DEI diffuſa eſt in cordibus noſtris; NON PER NOS IPSOS, nec VIRIBUS PROPRIAE VOLUNTATIS, ſed per SPIRITUM SANCTUM qui datus eſt nobis. VALET itaque LIBERUM ARBITRIUM ad opera bona, SI DIVINITÙS ADIUVETUR: quod fit humiliter patendo & faciendo. Thus S. AUGUSTINE, and ſo diſcreet and S. AUG. tom. 2. epiſt. 89. moderate Pontificians. Sine DEI gratiâ NULLA poſſunt eſſe liberi arbitrij bona merita, ſaith the Controverſor. But wee need a ſupply continually of Divine Operation, Protection, Direction, and new Inſpiration, to goe on with Free-will, which is Comes, non Dux, Pediſſequa, non Praevia, as S. AUSTEN ſpeaketh, Epiſt. 106.

If this were not ſo, then faith and repentance were not the actions of man; neither could man be ſaid to beleeve or repent, but the holy Spirit that infuſeth grace. Now, Id agit gratia, ut ſanata natura, quod vitiata non poteſt, POSSIT per cum qui venit quaerere & ſalvare id quod perierat, S. AUGUST. Retract. 1. cap. XIII. We may, ſaith RUARD TAPPER, conſider in every 
                     R. TAPPERUS, art. 7. de lib. arb.
                      
                     vertuous action of man two things: the qualitie of goodneſſe, and the work it ſelfe. The qualitie of goodneſſe is WHOLLY from grace: the worke it ſelfe is wrought by the FREE-WILL of man, ASSISTED by grace. Opera pietatis, Credere, poenitere. &c. fiunt per NATURALEM virtutem liberi arbitrij, in quantum LIBERE fiunt, & OPERA ſunt: à gratiâ verò, ut PIETATIS opera ſunt. Tamen UT SIC, à libero arbitrio gratiâ informato, EFFECTIVE fiunt, non autem à SOLA gratiâ. He that ſaith thus, doth not ſay nor thinke, that man can by any NATURALL power EXCITE and prepare himſelf to grace, or apply himſelfe unto GOD, to the motions of his Spirit; as if GOD'S concurſe needed not, or that man by the power of his owne will, without any ſpeciall help of grace, could ſorrow for ſinne; or by his PURE NATURALS had power to love GOD above all, or to do works holy and acceptable unto GOD, as ſome have prodigiouſly thought and written: nay, not that the grace of GOD, and power of WILL, are ex aequo joint copartners

to goe paſsibus equis; much leſſe, that man's will can outſtrip the grace of GOD. This is denied, and cannot be inferred upon the activeneſſe intended, or actions inſiſted on, in and of our wills prevented and enabled by grace: all that is ſaid, is, COOPERAMUR,—SEQUIMURQUE PATREM, NON PASSIBUS AEQUIS; as that childe did his father in the Poet.
                  This is, I conceive it, the doctrine of the Protestant Schooles. Vbi interim DUO obſervanda eſſe docemus, ſay the Helvetians in their Confeſsion: PRIMUM, regeneratos in boni electione & operatione, non tantùm agere PASSIVE, ſed ACTIVE. Aguntur enim à DEO, ut AGANT IPSI quod agunt. Rectè enim AUGUSTINUS adducit illud, quòd DEUS dicitur noſter ADIUTOR: nequit autem ADIUVARI, niſi is, qui IPSE ALIQUID AGIT. S. PAUL, ſpeaking of Beleevers, ſaith, You have obeyed from the heart that forme of Doctrine whereunto you were received, ROM. VI. XVII. And SALOMON ſaith, PRO. IV. XXIII. Keepe thine heart with all diligence: for out of it are the iſſues of life. OUR SAVIOUR ſaith, A good tree bringeth foorth good fruit. The WILL of man is a true naturall faculty, given to man in his creation. In the ſtate of corruption, this naturall faculty is a true efficient cauſe of ſinne, and this naturall faculty is puniſhed for ſinne. In the ſtate of juſtification, the ſame naturall faculty

is truely and really endued with grace, and bringeth forth the works of righteouſnes, and ſhall be rewarded with glory and immortality. In both theſe ſtates the WILL is a TRUE Efficient; but differently: a PRINCIPALL Efficient in the firſt ſtate; a SUBORDINATE Efficient in the ſecond, becauſe the holy Ghoſt activateth and enableth it. For, By the grace of GOD wee are that wee are: and that grace is not in vaine in us, in the Doctrine of the Church of England, ARTIC. X. working with us when we have that good will. GOD'S preeminence in the worke of our ſalvation, his chiefe hand in the buſineſſe, his GRACE preventing, inſpiring, enlightning, exciting, upholding, ſuſtaining and concurring, doth not take away mans FREE-WILL in caſes where Will hath any intereſt at all. The STOICKS, amongſt others, held that Paradox of old, DEUM ire per omnes—Terras tractuſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         maris, coelum
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         profundum. they meant it ſubſtantially, and ſo impiouſly. CHRISTIANS doe hold and beleeve it too, but diſpoſingly, &c. in his providence, according to that Axiome of the wiſe, Perting it à fine, ad finem fortiter, diſponens omnia ſuaviter; according to the ſeverall natures and exigences of things, to which he gave being and power to worke ſo: not DESPOILING them of their OWNE by CONCURRING with them, nor by any acceſſe ANNIHILATING his former grants or

indowments conferred on them.
                  Thus having, with as great diligence as I could, examined this queſtion inter partes of FREE-WILL, ſo farre as was coïncident unto my purpoſe; I do ingenuouſly confeſſe, that I cannot find any ſuch MATERIALL difference between the Pontificians, at leaſt of better temper, and OUR Church. But if the Informers can make the contrary appeare, ſubmittam faſceis, and turne over a new leafe, even in this Article, oppoſing the Church of ROME as farre as any of the preciſer Cut or zealous Diſciples of THOMAS CARTWRIGHT'S Schoole whoſoever. Then then, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : I am a man reſerved, abhorring to multiply controverſies, where is no cauſe.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. X.
               
                  The Councell of Trent not wholly to bee condemned. Man's Will not meerely paſsive, but active and free in the proper acts thereof. The memorable ſaying of SCOTUS. The power of the Will in things divine.
               
               
                  
                  INFORMERS.
                  
                     IN the next page thrice hee approveth the Doctrine of the Councell of Trent touching Free-will.
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  WHolly, or in part? It would have beene explaned by honeſt men. For ſay, I beſeech you, will not your owne wiſedomes, or charity, or common ſenſe, or underſtanding, or what you will call it, commend and approve ſome Determinations of the Councell of TRENT? Saepè etenim eſt olitor valdè opportuna loquutus. And why not they, learned men at leaſt, reſolve ſome thing truely, where was no cauſe of Faction to be oppoſite? Secondly, whatſoever I approve in that Councell, is not thrice approved, as you doe enlarge in your ſuggestions; but twice at moſt nor yet twice, but by repeating the ſame thing, twice remembred occaſionally. That which is ſo approved, is this, Seſſ. VI. cap. V. Si quis LIBERUM hominis ARBITRIUM poſt ADAE lapſum amiſſum & extinctum eſſe dixerit, aut rem eſſe de SOLO TITULO, imò TITULUM SINE RE, FIGMENTUM denique A SATANA INVECTUM in Eccleſiam, Anathema ſit. And ſo ſay I: and ſo I hope, if your wits be your owne, will you ſay. Man ever ſince

the Fall of ADAM, is not ſenſeleſſe, a ſtocke, a ſtone; meerly PASSIVE in all things, active and AGENT voluntarily in nothing. That which hee doth, at leaſt ſomething that hee doth, he doth it willingly and freely, QUUM homini non ſit per peccatum adempta neque intelligendi neque volendi facult as, ſed duntaxat RECTE intelligendi & volendi facult as, ſaith THEOD. BEZA, opuſc. tom. 2. pag. 666. part. 1. quaeſt.
                      BEZA: at leaſt hee doth it according to his WILL, not compellable in the proper acts thereof; To will, though drawne to performe many acts in courſe of life, as willingly it could wiſh them to be otherwiſe. Thoſe in that Councell were Men, as well as Pontificians: learned men they were, at leaſt the major part, and ſpake as well like men, as for a factious party in the Church. In that place they ſpeak of Free-will in enlarged tearms, and not in reference unto actions of grace, of piety, of repentance, or regeneration, and godlineſſe toward GOD. Now it is, I take it, a ruled caſe with all reaſonable men, that in ADAM, and through his Fall, non amiſimus naturam, ſed gratiam. Indowments of grace above nature, or additaments unto nature, wee loſt in ADAM. Nature and naturall indowments were impaired, and not extinct and aboliſhed in his Fall. Nec qui à Spiritu DEI igitur, ideò ſe putet LIBERUM NON HABERE ARBITRIUM; quod ne tunc quidem perdidit, ſaith PROSPER, quando Diabolo voluntate ſuâ 
                     PROSP. de 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            Gent. 1. 3.
                     
                     ſe dedit, à quo IUDICIUM VOLUNTATIS DEPRAVATUM EST, NON ABLATUM. Quod ergo NON INTERFECTUM EST per vulnerantem, NON TOLLITUR per medentem: vulnus ſanatur, non natura removetur. In which ſenſe and regard, I inferred then and there a ſecond deciſion of that Councell; This branch of the TRID. Councell, is taken out of the ſecond ARAUS. Councell. Can. XXV. 
                     Liberum arbitrium non quidem EXTINCTUM eſſe, ſed viribus ATTENUATUM. The which I might have enlarged, and commented upon, by the XVI. Canon of the Synod of Dort, in the IIII. Deciſion, de converſionis modo: where the Conveners will in theſe words proove either themſelves Arminians, or you Ignorántees or malicious Calumniators; will they not? Sicuti verò per lapſum homo non deſiit eſſe homo, intellectu & voluntate praeditus: nec peccatum, quod univerſum genus humanum pervaſit, naturam generis humani ſuſtulit, ſed depravavit, & ſpiritualiter occidit. It a etiam haec divina regenerationis gratia non agit in hominibus, tanquam TRUNCIS & ſtipitibus, nec VOLUNTATEM EIUS QUE PROPRIETATES TOLLIT, aut INVITAM VIOLENTER COGIT. No otherwiſe than ſo ſaith M. MOUNTAGU, peradventure not ſo much as ſo. but you ſay, He concludeth this his Chapter thus: Our Concluſion and yours is all one: wee cannot, wee doe not deny freedome of will in man: whoſo doth ſo, is no CATHOLICKE: I adde, no nor PROTESTANT. For I did not conceive, that any Proteſtant, till you

profeſſed your ſelves ſo ſenſeleſſe, would have denied that Concluſion, There is FREE-WILL. We eat, we drinke, we ſleep, wee wake, wee walk, we reſt, wee runne, wee talk, wee hold our peace, we conſent, aſſent, diſagree; freely wittingly, willingly, without any conſtraint, out of the naturall power of our Free-will. And yet further for your ſakes I adde. It were well done, and worth the while, as SCOTUS ſaid well, to cudgell him well and thriftily, that 
                     
                        In 1. Sent. diſt. 38. 
                     ſhould deny FREE-WILL, ſo long, untill hee did confeſſe it to be in our power to goe on, to ceaſe, or hold our hands. And if he ſhould commence an action of battery, to put in this Barre; It was not I that beat him, it was FATALL NECESSITY; and I was thereby compelled to doe it. I had not any FREE-WILL to reſiſt: it was not in my power to doe, or not to doe otherwiſe.
                  But concerning Freewill, the power, poſsibility, and activity of the will in the things of GOD, towards GOD, in the ſtate of grace, I have ſet downe my Errors, as you call them, in two propoſitions, tendred unto mee, and unto you alſo, of the Church of England. Firſt, that Man in ſtate of naturall corruption cannot turne nor prepare himſelfe unto GOD, by or through his owne naturall and humane power and ſtrength. Secondly, that Prevented by grace, and by grace aſsiſted, hee putteth to his hand, to procure augmentation of that grace; as alſo, continuance
                     
                     unto the end in that grace. No man commeth unto GOD, but he is drawne: being drawne, hee runneth or walketh as his aſſiſtance is, and his owne agility and diſpoſition, unto the end. No man beareth fruit in CHRIST IESUS the Vine, unleſſe that by the Husbandman hee bee engraffed. To engraffe, is opus Hortulani ALONE. When as the branch is engraffed, that it may proſper and beare fruit, the root muſt ſupply; the ſlip ſucke and retaine ſap ſupplied from the root. This is enough: no more need bee curiouſly inſiſted on or diſputed of. The Church of England doth no way contradict this: it is the preciſe doctrine of our Church, ARTIC. X. The condition of man after the Fall of ADAM, it ſuch, that he cannot turne nor prepare himſelfe by his owne naturall ſtrength and good works, to faith and calling upon GOD. Wherefore we have no power to doe good works pleaſant and acceptable unto GOD, without the grace of GOD by CHRIST preventing us, that we may have a good will, and working with us when we have it. Man is heer in this paſſage, by the Church, conſidered two waies: as in Nature depraved; as in Nature againe by Grace reſtored. In Nature depraved, Freewill is totally denied, unto man, for any workes of righteouſneſſe, acceptable or pleaſing unto GOD, before converſion; or for works of actuall concurrency in the very act of firſt converting: but not for workes

of Nature or Morality; of which works only the Propoſition was to be underſtood. Si per morale opus virtutes intelligas Philoſophicas non neganius poſſe hominem, ſine ſpeciali gratiâ, multa 
                     
                        De pec. orig. 2. 3. 
                     fortiter, & temperanter, & juſte agere: ſaith D. WHITAKER. And that ſaying of DAMASCEN DAMASCEN, lib. 2. de fide orth. cap. 27. is denyed of no man that hath his braines in his head; 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Man being a creature endued with reaſon, doth rather leàde nature, than is led by nature; and upon appetite or deſire, may ſhake off, if he pleaſe, and acquit himſelf of that deſire, or cloſe in with it, and give conſent unto it. In ſtate of Grace repayring and reſtoring Nature, Free-will is not denyed man; but how? Not as in or unto naturall objects; hic mota movet. It worketh with us, we with it together with Grace, when wee have once that good will wrought in us. And ſurely if wee have it working at all, it is not titulus ſine re: nor is it inane nihil, as ſome, it ſeemeth, thought: which the Councell of TRENT condemneth very juſtly. This is not my ſingular fancy; as your opinions moſt-what are private imaginations of opiniative men, ignorant of others, wedded to their owne conceits. OPERATUR ille, COOPERAMUR nos: NON enim AUFERT, ſed ADIUVAT bone voluntatis arbitrium: 
                     S. AUG. ſaith S. AUGUSTINE, Quaeſt. XV. ſuper Deuteron. And againe, Quaeſt. L. In ſpirit ualibus conflictibus
                     
                     ſperandum eſt, et petendum eſt adjutorium DEI. Non ut NOS NIHIL OPEREMUR; ſed ut ADIUTI COOPEREMUR. And again, Retract. I. XXIII. Vtrum
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , Credere & velle, DEI eſt, & NOSTRÛM. utrum
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         eſt DEI: DEI eſt, quiae praeparat voluntatem: NOSTRÛM eſt, quia non fit niſi volentibus nobis. and Epiſt. CVII. Quomodo dicuntur negare liberum voluntatis arbitrium, qui confitentur omnem hominem, quiſquis credit in DEUM, non niſi SUA LIBERA VOLUNTATE credere? And PROSPER de vocatione gentium: SED etiam voluntas hominis 
                     PROSP. de voc. Gent. lib. 2. cap. 9. 
                     ſubjungitur ei (Gratiae) at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
                      CONIUNGITUR. Quae ad hoc praedictis eſt excitatae praeſidijs, ut divino in ſe cooperetur operi, & incipiat exercere ad meritum, quod ſuperno ſemine concepit ad ſtudium: de ſuâ habens mutabilitate ſi deficit, de gratiae opitulatione ſi proficit. And FULGENTIUS de Incarnat. cap. XX. Quâ gratiâ humanum non aufertur, ſed ſanatur; non adimitur, ſed corrigitur; non removetur, ſed illuminatur; non evacuatur, ſed adjuvatur, atque SERVATUR ARBITRIUM: ut in quo infirmitatem homo habuit, in eo habere incipiat ſanitatem; quo errabat, eodem in viam redeat; in quo caecus fuit, in eo accipiat lumen; & ubi fuit iniquus, ſerviens immunditiae & iniquitati ad iniquitatem, ibi gratiâ praeventus atque adjutus, ſerviat juſtitiae in ſanctificationem. To this purpoſe the words are ſo evident in the ARTICLE, there can be no tergiverſation or eluding of them. I could name you many that at leaſt doe write ſo: I content my ſelfe

with one, whom I dare ſay you will not reject. The learned Biſhop of Lichfield is the man I meane, in his Appeale, pag. XIII. Yet have they alſo (he ſpeaketh it of the Centuriators of MEYDENBURG) out of the cleere and ſound teſtimony of the ſame Father S. GREGORY, drawne a doctrine of Orthodoxall Truth in the doctrine of FREE-WILL; holding, that a man's will, in reſpect of any ſpirituall good, is not free in it ſelfe, untill that it be freed by grace. Then it is free in his opinion. And this opinion, he ſaith, is an Orthodoxall Truth: and his opinions, in your opinion, are neither Popiſh nor Arminian. How can the ſame opinion be Popery in M. MOUNTAGU, who goeth not any farther than that Biſhop hath gone? and hee had warrant from Antiquity. COOPERATORES ſumus gratiae DEI operantis in nobis. Non enim DORMIENTIBUS provenit regnum coelorum, ſaith LEO, nee OTIO S. LEO, ſer. 5. in Epiph.
                      DESIDIAQUE TORPENTIBUS beatitudo aeternitatis ingeritur. who yet denieth not, that without GOD wee can doe nothing: it is GOD that worketh the will and the deed. All our works thou haſt wrought in us; and the like. Quaeutique ſine DEO nulla eſt, nec proprietatem obtinet dignitatis (the righteouſneſſe hee meaneth of a regenerate man) niſi Spiritu ſui vegetetur Authoris. Dicente enim Diſcipulis ſuis Domino, SINE ME NIHIL POTESTIS FACERE, dubium non est, hominem bona agentem, à DEO habere & effectum operis, & initium voluntatis, LEO ſer. 8. Epiph.
                     
The freedome of will doth not exclude out GOD'S prerogative royall, nor circumſcribe it: and GOD'S preeminence in the work of our ſalvation, his chiefe hand in the buſineſſe, his grace preventing and concurring, doth not take away mans Free-will, in caſes wherein Will is intereſſed. Cauſes may be many and manifold unto ſeverall acts and particular ends. In this 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      and concatenation of cauſes, there is a progreſſe ordinary from the firſt to the laſt, and a reflection from the laſt unto the firſt. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Second cauſes and ſubordinate are reduced unto the originall, prime, and beginning cauſe of all; and agunt in virtute prime. If in no reſpect elſe, yet in this regard; It is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of GOD that giveth the encreaſe.
                  
                  To conclude then; That man hath FREE-WILL, is not by us gainſaid, ſaith that worthy and learned Biſhop of MEATH. Freedome of will, we know, doth as eſſentially belong unto man, as reaſon it ſelfe: and he that ſpoileth him of that power, doth in effect make him a very BEAST. Quis noſtrûm, ſaith S. AUGUSTINE againſt the Pelagians, dicit, quod primi hominis peccato perierit arbitrium de humano genere? Libertas quidem perijt per peccatum: ſed ILLA quae fuit in Paradiſo, habendi PLENAM cum immortalitate justitiam. To deny Freewill at all, is wilfull folly: but to give unto it that power and ſway

as many doe, is little leſſe than Blaſphemie. Truth is ever in the midſt betwixt two extreames; and ſo is it heer, moſt wiſely tempered and qualified with moderation in the doctrine of the Church of England; according to which I endevour to ſquare my beleefe and opinions.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XI. The fourth and laſt point of ARMINIANISME touching the Synod of DORT.
               
                  The Synod of Dort not our Rule. Private opinions no Rule. The Informers imputations nothing at all.
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  
                     HEe expreſly maketh the Church of England to caſt off the defence of ſundry points which the Synod of DORT maintayned and determined.
                  
               
               
                  
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  IN ALL my writing, to my remembrance, I name that SYNOD but once onely, and no more: That at DORT, and another Nationall Synod at GAPP in France; and that reſpectively, and in gentle, nay honourable termes, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , with the two laſt in the Church of Rome; the one at FLORENCE, the other at TRENT, and pronounce, not I hope in any diſgrace unto the Synod of DORT, that we may as well tender unto our Adverſaries, the Proteſtant concluſions and deciſions of thoſe TWO Synods; as they preſſe us with the ANATHEMATISMES of Trent or Florence. Beſide this one time and occaſion, I never name DORT. And for the particular points and paſſages of my Booke, I proteſt, that to my remembrance it came not ſo much as within the compaſſe of my thoughts, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      For what had I to doe with that Synod, not once named by the Gagger? I undertooke the defence of the publick doctrine of the Church of ENGLAND, of which I am; being not curious in alienâ republicâ, with which I had nothing to do. That fellow had, as the uſe and cuſtome of Papiſts is, ſchiſmatically dividing himſelfe from us, caſt upon the Church, as of PUBLICK allowance, many and ſome abſurd propoſitions of PRIVATE

                     Tenents; particular fancies of ſome idle conceits. I pleaded not guilty unto the Indictment, and tooke off the CHURCH, falſly charged, from that iſſue, wherein it may bee ſome other had joined, againſt right and reaſon. You, or any Puritan or Papiſt, make it plaine, that any thing by me diſclaimed for being the PUBLICKE, ESTABLISHED doctrine of our Church, is yet the doctrine of the Church, and I am ready to recant. If the Synode of DORT hath determined otherwiſe, let their determinations ſtand for me: I quarrell them not; I meddle not with them. Thoſe that like the Decrees of that Synod, or are bound to maintaine the Decrees of that Synode, let them maintaine them if they like them: Non equidem invideo. I have no part nor portion in them. I am not tied to uphold them, farther than they conſent unto that which I am bound to maintain, the doctrine of the Church of ENGLAND. And if it were true, which is moſt falſe, wherewith I am charged by theſe honeſt men, yet I might anſwer (and what if I doe?), Who bound the Church of England, or Me, a Prieſt and a Member of the Church of England, unto defence of all the Decrees or Determinations of that Synod? Hath Prince? or Parliament? or Convocation? Edict? Statute? or Canon? I knowe none: I have heard of none; nor ever ſhall, I hope. And till I heare of ſuch (quod 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ) I anſwer,

Let them that are intereſſed, plead for themſelves. For my part, I nor have, nor ever will ſubſcribe that Synode abſolutely, and in all points (for in ſome, it condemneth upon the Bye even the diſcipline of the Church of England), but ſo farre forth onely, as their Determinations ſhall bee found and made conformable unto the doctrine of OUR Church: nor I think will the Ferventeſt amongſt you ſubſcribe it in every point. For ſure I am, YOUR Divines, as you call them, have diſavowed ſometimes ſome things reſolved of in that Synod; as for inſtance: Cooperation of Free-will and Grace, Reprobation negative, rather than poſitive. But, as I ſaid, the Synod of Dort is not MY Rule, and your Magiſteriall Concluſions are NO Rule. I hope, all, not violently preciſe, will ſay, Ampliandum, upon your bare imputations; who bring nothing to prove me an ARMINIAN, but your 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , Hee ſaith thus and thus; and we ſay this is ARMINIANISME. Abſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         hoc
                  
                  And thus much for Arminianiſme.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            THE SECOND PART. TOUCHING POINTS OF POPERY IN GENERALL.
            
               
                  CHAP. I.
               
                  The Author uncharitably traduced. His profeſsion for the doctrine and diſcipline received and commanded in the Church of England. Conformable Puritans. Furious zeale. The Church of Rome not a ſound, yet a true Church. Private opinions diſclaimed. The Church of England aſſerted to her owne

                     publick and proper Tenents. The cauſe of all theſe Imputations.
                  
               
               
                  NOw come they to POPERY in a larger extent. A ſtrange imputation, in my opinion, conſidering the ſubject upon which they work: which may argue in them, with any indifferent Reader, an uncharitable, unchriſtian, fiery, Puritanicall zeale, malice, and indiſcretion too. For, did I prevaricate? was it a compact between Me and the Papiſts to collude? If I favoured them, would I ſo have handled them, as few have beſide me, in ſo exaſperating a ſtile? Sure, A Kingdome, I know, divided cannot ſtand. But the truth is, As with the IESUITE he is an Heretick, that is not furioſo more a Roman Catholick: ſo with the PURITAN he is a Papiſt, that will not run amadding with them. It is not the firſt time, for this very cauſe, I have been talked of, eſteemed of, traduced as a Papiſt: which I can the better brooke, becauſe they have meted this meaſure to the Church of England it ſelf, as ſympathizing with Papiſts in her Liturgy, Diſcipline and Doctrine too. It were to be wiſhed, that ſuch tranſported ſpirits were taught to be more ſubmiſſe and ſparing in their talk.
               I call GOD and all his holy Angels to witneſſe,

I nor am, nor have beene, nor intend to be heerafter, eyther Papiſt, or ROMISH Catholick; a Papiſt of State, or of Religion; but a Prieſt, a member, a follower of the Church, and Doctrine of the Church of ENGLAND. The Originall grounds of Popery, are, to my underſtanding, againſt Reaſon, have not their warrant from revealed Truth, ſtand not with the purer practice of prime Antiquity. I have been born, and bred, and brought up in the Confeſſion of the Church of England. I have learned, loved, admired, and propoſed unto my ſelfe to follow indeclinably, not onely the Diſcipline of the Church of England (whereunto the Puritans and Schiſmaticks themſelves, at leaſt the wiſer and ſubtiller ſort of them, come off roundly now, for ends beſt known amongſt themſelves, remaining quod erant, quoad doctrinam, & tantum non in EPISCOPATU Puritani) but the whole and entire Doctrine of that Church, propoſed in Synods, confirmed by Law, commanded and eſtabliſhed by Act of PARLIAMENT. This totall, both Doctrine and Diſcipline, I willingly and thoroughly embrace. In profeſſion thereof, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , I have lived, and will die; and will maintaine it, by GOD'S grace, to bee Antient, Catholick, Orthodox, and Apoſtolicall. I ſay it againe, a never was or will be a Papiſt, no not in heart; though many be arrant Puritans in heart, that onely for preferment do conforme; hold with

the Hare, and runne with the Hound: who ſo they might vivere and valere, would as willingly have up the Presbyterian Anarchie, as would THO. CARTWRIGHT, were he living; though many, once Puritans, turne often Papiſts. And no marvell: for fleeting is commonly from one extreme unto another. Men of moving, violent, Quick-ſilver, Gun-powder ſpirits, can never rely upon middling courſes, but, dum furor in curſu eſt, runne on headlong into extremes. And ſo, I may avow, I will not bee a Papiſt in haſte, becauſe I never was a Puritan in earneſt or in jeſt; having found it true, in my ſmall obſervation, that our Revolters unto Popery, were Puritans avowed or addicted firſt.
               And yet it muſt bee granted; All powder doth not take fire alike, nor are all Puritan Spirits of one diſpoſition. With ſome of them, more braine-ſick than the reſt, all my Booke againſt the Gagger is quickly branded with Popery or ſcurrility. With others, more diſcreet, I doe but walk upon the brinks of Popery; wherein is ſome allaying of that former fervency: for, upon their better advice, I am but 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , at the next dore unto it. What they thinke or ſpeake, I cannot hinder, nor doe I greatly care. I profeſſe my ſelfe none of thoſe furious ones in point of difference now-a-dayes, whoſe profeſſion and reſolution is, That the farther in any thing from communion

with the Church of Rome, the neerer unto GOD and Truth: that we ought to have no commerce, ſociety, or accordance with Papiſts in things divine, nor almoſt humane, upon pain of eternall damnation; but muſt bid defiance irreconcileable unto them for ever. I am abſolutely perſwaded, and ſhall bee till I ſee cauſe to the contrary, that the Church of Rome is a true, though not a ſound Church of CHRIST, as well ſince, as before the Councell of Trent; a part of the Catholick, though not the Catholick Church; which wee doe profeſſe to beleeve in our Creed: a Church, in which, among many tares, there remaineth ſome wheat. In Eſſentials and Fundamentals they agree, holding one Faith, in one Lord, into whom they are inſerted through one Baptiſme. Eccleſia Papalis (ſaith FRANCISCUS IUNIUS, neither Papiſt nor Arminian) quâ id habet 
                  
                     Lib. de Eccleſ. cap. 17. 
                  in ſe quod ad definitionem Eccleſiae pertinet, eſt Eccleſia. And I verily am perſwaded, that I ought not to goe farther from the Church of Rome in theſe her worſt daies, than ſhe hath gone away from her ſelfe in her beſt dayes. I hold it to bee furious zeale without diſcretion, iſſuing out of ignorance, or malice, or both, in them who proceed ſo farre in their extravagant aſſertions, as to profeſſe, that Turks and Turciſme is to be preferred before, and rather embraced than Papiſts and Popery: with whom the Puritan-Papiſt, the IESUITE, is quit.

For, they teach the like concerning Turkes and Heretickes, as they call us. But the truth is, haec non eſt illa HELENA, theſe opinions are not the things which offend them ſo much, or moved them to impute theſe calumnies unto M. MOUNTAGU: there is 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , and that is 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . For whereas the PURITANS were wont to bee ſhrowded under the covert of the CHURCH of ENGLAND, and to vent, publiſh, and tender their many idle dreames, fancies and furies unto the world, under pretext of the doctrine of OUR CHURCH; and our Oppoſites of the Romiſh Side did accordingly charge OUR CHURCH with them: M. MOUNTAGU, out of juſt indignation againſt that open wrong and injury done unto his Mother, and, as he doth aſſuredly hope, to the good ſervice of HIS MAIESTY and the CHURCH, hath diſbanded them from their ſhelter, taken them off from colluding under the CHURCHES protection, and ſent them to their owne home, to ſhrowd there if they could, and to anſwer for themſelves; to make good their own cauſe by and of themſelves: and likewiſe hath aſſerted the CHURCH unto her owne true Tenents, naturall and proper unto that doctrine which is publickly determined and authorized in her authentick Records, to the high diſpleaſure (no doubt) and diſtaſte of ſuch a porent overweening faction as they are. Hinc mihi ſola mali labes. This is the ground of all

the POPERY and ARMINIANISME with which I am aſperſed, The particulars whereof in the one I have wiped away aheady: the other will as eaſily off too. I take them in order, as they were propoſed in the copie that came unto my hands: in which they are digeſted without any good method or due order, as the 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   of angry and idle braines.
            
            
               POINTS OF POPERY IN PARTICVLAR.
               
                  CHAP. II.
               
                  The Church Repreſentative, and Points Fundamentall, what they are. All that Papiſts ſay, is not Popery. Particular Churches have and may erre. The Catholick univerſall Church hath not, cannot erre. Of Generall Councels. The Author farre

from the Ieſuits fancy. The XXI. Article of the Church of England explaned.
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  
                     HE ſaith, that the Church Repreſentative, true and lawfull, never yet erred in Fundamentals; and therefore that hee ſeeth no cauſe but to avouch, The Church Repreſentative cannot ERRE. pag. XLV.
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  IN this Accuſation are two Propoſitions diſtinct, though connexed and dependent: Firſt, The Church Repreſentative, true and lawfull, did never erre in Fundamentals. Secondly, The Church Repreſentative, ſo true and lawfull, cannot erre in Fundamentals. Now, whether Propoſition of theſe two is Poperie? or are both theſe Propoſitions, jointly or ſeverally taken, Popery? To explicate the tearms, and draw up to anatomize your confuſednes: The Church Repreſentative is a GENERALL COUNCELL; not titularly ſo, as the Conventicle of Trent; but plenarily true, generall, and lawfull. Points Fundamentall bee ſuch as are immediate unto faith: for inſtance, the

ARTICLES of our CREED; which only be thoſe Tenents and Points of faith, that have indeed, and ſo muſt have, Univerſality, Antiquity, Conſent, Knowledge. No man can be ſaved, that beleeveth them not; no man can be ſaved, that knoweth them not: which muſt bee underſtood de viâ ordinariâ, except that GOD himſelfe have diſpoſed otherwiſe, who may diſpenſe with his owne Ordinances as he will▪ as in caſe of Infants, Naturals, frantick perſons, which through invincible diſability are extra Cenſure Ordinariorum. Otherwiſe the knowledge and beleeving of them is abſolutely neceſſary, and required neceſsitate medij unto ſalvation. To ſay they are Fundamentals, to propoſe them for Fundamentals, that are thus required, and muſt bee knowne and acknowledged upon ſo great and dangerous an exigence, is no Popery, as I conceive; no not in your opinion. The Papiſts rather are ad oppoſitum. For they enlarge their Tenour, make their dignity and degree too common; abuſing that honour peculiarly due to them, by promiſcuouſly communicating it unto other points of inferiour rank and reckoning; eſpecially thoſe XII. new ARTICLES of the Tridentine CREED. Thus, upon explication of the tearms, we come unto the aſſertion.
                  It is, belike, Popery to ſay, that in them, in theſe Fundamentall Points, A true and lawfull generall Councell never erred de facto, becauſe

(forſooth) Papiſts ſay, that a generall Councell cannot erre. If this were right and regular, yet firſt, Bate me an ace. For all is not Popery that Papiſts ſay: but what they ſay as Papiſts, as a Faction divided, as in particular by themſelves, that haply is Popery. All is not Hereſie that Hereticks hold: nor is all Puritaniſme that PURITANS beleeve or maintaine. They hold many things right with the Church of England: but what they hold as PURITANS, that is, as a ſchiſmaticall Party divided from, and oppoſed againſt the doctrine, or diſcipline, or both, of the Church of England, that wee may be bold to call ſo. Semblably wee are to judge of Papiſts: and ſo, what is ſaid of Papiſts, is not preſently and indiſtinctly Popery; but may be ſaid in terminis by Proteſtants, and they be never a whit the more any Papiſts for ſo ſaying.
                  Againe, to ſay that this Propoſition, A true and lawfull Generall Councell never did Erre, is Popery, cannot ſinke into my underſtanding. For I demand, Quo warranto? hath any Claſsis, or Conſiſtory of Lay-elders, or others, concluded it ſo? It may be 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , a miſreport, an error in Storie, which goeth no farther than unto the thing done or not done. Hiſtoricall miſtakings, miſ-relatings; who made them Poperie? though I profeſſe, I neyther know nor acknowledge any miſ-report or error in point of Story in ſo ſaying. Let any

                     Puritan living ſhew me where, when, in what any Generall Councell, according to true acception, or Church repreſentative, hath ſo erred in the reſolution and deciſions of that Councell: for in the debating of doubts, queſtions, propoſitions, the caſe is otherwiſe, and not the ſame. I conceive and acknowledge but foure Councels of this kinde; that of Nice, of Conſtantinople, of Epheſus, of Chalcedon. Shew me in what Fundamentall point of Faith any of theſe Generall Councells have erred. But it is Popery peradventure to ſay, It never was; therefore in all probability it cannot be. If ſo, then inconſequences and Non ſequiturs in Logick, are, in your opinion, to be ranged under Points of Popery: and ſo, by this your aſſignement, Popery will extend it ſelfe very farre indeed; farther than ever any POPE or Papiſt did pretend or claime. And if you will grant the POPE this ſo univerſall and tranſcendent juriſdiction, yet M. MOUNTAGU'S Popery cometh not up ſo high as unto generality illimited. It cannot bee at all: it inſiſteth but upon ſome points onely; and that not by or with a generall vouchee neither, but thus only, I ſee no cauſe. Now there may be cauſe, though I ſee it not. It may be, though I think, and ſpeake, and write otherwiſe, or you eyther, yet both of us may bee deceived.
                  But ſomewhat there was which theſe men intended, and would have ſaid, if ſo bee they

could have hit upon it. It is a Concluſion of the Romane Schooles, The Church cannot Erre. which Propoſition, I may both affirme and deny, as it is propoſed. The Church CANNOT Erre. The Church CAN Erre. For firſt it i
                        •
                      ambiguous ſubiectivè; What the Church is, which cannot Erre. The word is 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , and muſt be diſtinguiſhed. And ſecondly we may conſider it obiectivè; In what things the Church cannot Erre; and Quouſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , that Not erring doth reach forth Extenſivè: To this purpoſe, I differenced Churches two wayes: into Topicall or Particular Churches; into Catholick or Vniverſall. I divided alſo the objects of erring or not erring, two wayes: into Fundamentalls, or ſuperstructives. For Particular locall Churches, ſuch as Corinth, Epheſus, Smyrna, Thyatyra, Laodicea, &c. it is in Confeſſo on both ſides, that They may Erre: for it is evident that they have Erred, both in inferiour and in higher points of Faith. And ſo have Erred oftentimes, that through their Erring in Fundamentalls in that ſort, they have ceaſed to be Churches any more. The Catholick or univerſall Church, I conſidered two wayes; conceiving it to be Diffuſive, or Repreſentative. and that diffuſion to runne out two wayes: into Vniverſality of ALL, both Time and Place; or into Vniverſality of Time alone. The firſt is ſo ample, that it fetcheth in the APOSTLES and all; and ſo includeth within the

Verge that part of the Catholick Church which is now regnant in heaven, and free from all Error, as partaking of that bliſſe which leadeth infallibly, holdeth inſeparably in all Truth. In this ſenſe and acceptation, the propoſition is not quarrelled: The Church ſo, hath not, cannot Erre. The ſecond divided part, ſtinted from ſo large an extent, is yet enlarged reſpectively, to all members, to every member in particular of the Catholick Church, living any where, at any one time. ſo that the whole aggregation of all Chriſtian profeſſors, make and compoſe this Church. And as yet, I thinke, the Informers doe not quarrell us for Popery. Their whole ſtitch is againſt the Church Repreſentative in a Generall Councell. In which, though I ſhould reſolve ſimply and punctually thus, A Generall Councell cannot Erre, yet could I not be counted a Papiſt. For the Tenent of the Papiſts, if you (my Informers) know it not, in their Schooles, is this; A Generall Councell can no way Erre in the Deciſions finall thereof, which is allowed by the POPE. By which they neceſſarily inferre, as alſo they ſtick not to expreſſe, that unleſſe the POPE give ratification, any Generall Councell whatſoever may erre in any point of Faith, of what nature ſoever. And therefore (ſuch is their Doctrine ſince the IESUITES have domineered in their Schooles) all the validity and aſſurance of not Erring, which a Generall Councell
                     
hath or can have, either in fide or moribus, is onely from that impoſſibility of Erring which the POPE hath, as Haeres ex aſſe unto S. PETER, to whom our SAVIOUR behighted that impoſſiblity alone. So that pretend the IESUITES as long as they will, that fair and ſpecious ſhew and title of the CHURCH never ſo much, have they nothing in their mouthes, but, The CHURCH, the CHURCH; the POPE is that Church: and their concluſion heer is not for the Church, but for HIM. Now, doth Mr. MOUNTAGU come up unto, nay, looketh he toward this Catholick Roman fancy and infallible madnes? Nothing leſſe. Hee directly pitcheth upon the Church Repreſentative in a generall Councell, WITHOUT the Pope; I meane, without the Pope as Head, or exceeding the bounds and limits of a Patriarchicall Biſhop. I go not unto all things diſcuſſed or determinable in a Councell, but reſt upon that which is Fundamentall. Nor doe I reſolve it as certum & de fide, or tender it unto others to be beleeved. I ſay no more but, I ſee no cauſe why I may not ſo reſolve: and that alſo but upon ſuppoſitions, if the Councell be truely GENERALL indeed: and of SUCH, none yet ever erred, that ever I yet read or obſerved, in Points Fundamentall. And therefore I ſaw and ſee no cauſe but a man may ſay, Such a Councell ſhall never erre in Fundamentals.
                  
                     
But concerning Fundamentals, if your ſtitch bee againſt them, I anſwer with B. MORTON in his Appeale, THE beleefe of ſome Articles is ſo abſolutely neceſſary for the conſtitution of a 
                     
                        Page 443. 
                     true Church, as a reaſonable ſoule is for the eſſentiall being of a man. In ſuch as theſe are, ſhew me an error. Dr. REYNOLDS himſelf, though maintaining the contrary, was not able in his VI. Concluſions, out of all his reading (and yet therein was his excellency), to afford us ſo much as a peece of an example in Antiquity, for a Generall Councell erring in FUNDAMENTALS: and I am perſwaded, no man living can inſtance it. Of ſuch onely doe I ſpeak, and in ſuch onely do I conceive infallibility: and ſo, as I conceive it, the promiſe of OUR SAVIOUR may and doth hold, HEE ſhall leade you into ALL TRUTH; as alſo that other to the ſame purpoſe, Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, I AM THERE in the MIDDEST of them.
                  
                  The Church of England may ſeem to have been of a contrary minde in her determinations; and to have taught, and preſcribed to be ſo taught, that ſuch Generall Councels, true and lawfull, not onely may erre for poſsibilitie, but alſo have erred in reality. For Artic. XXI. we reade thus: GENERALL Councels may not be gathered together without the commandement and will of Princes. And when they be gathered together, for as much as they bee an Aſſembly of
                     
                     men, whereof all be not governed with the Spirit and word of GOD, they MAYERRE, and ſometime HAVE ERRED, even in things appertaining unto GOD. Which deciſion of the Article is not home to this purpoſe. Firſt, the Article avoucheth, that GENERALL Councels have erred: which cannot be underſtood of my limitation, Fundamentals; becauſe there is no ſuch Extat of any Generall Councell, true and lawfull. Secondly, things appertaining unto GOD are not all Fundamentals; but points of Piety, GOD'S Service, and Religion, which admit a very large interpretation. For many things appertaine unto GOD, that are not of neceſſity unto ſalvation, both in practice and ſpeculation. In theſe haply Generall Councels have erred: in thoſe other none can erre. The Councell of Nice determined the controverſie of Eaſter: it was not Fundamentall. I put the caſe, that in it they erred. It was a thing appertaining unto GOD, in his ſervice: this may come under the ſenſe and cenſure of the Article; but this toucheth not my opinion, concerning only Fundamentals. Thirdly, the Article ſpeaketh at large concerning Generall Councels, both for debating and deciding. I onely ſpake of the determination: wherein it may be poſſible they nor can, nor ſhall erre, that may and have erred in the diſcuſsing. In that very Councell of Nice, it was an Error in debating, though not fundamentall, touching that yoke of ſingle life,
                     
which they had meant once to have impoſed upon the Church: but in concluſion they erred not. PAPHNUTIUS gave better advice, and they followed it. The Article may very well have aimed at this difference in Proſecution and Deciſion, in ſaying, ALL are not governed with the Spirit and word of GOD; which is moſt true. but ſome are: and thoſe ſome, in all probability, ever may prevaile, as ever hitherto in ſuch Councels in thoſe caſes they have prevailed, againſt the greater part formerly reſolved otherwiſe. Againe, the Article ſpeaketh of Generall Councels indefinitely, without preciſely determining wch are Generall, which not; what is a Generall Councell, what not: and ſo may and doth conclude reputed or pretended GENERALL Councels, univocè GENERALL, though not exactly and truely indeed (ſuch as was the Councell of Ariminum) whereof I did not ſo much as intend to ſpeak; my ſpeech being limitted with true and lawfull: of which ſort are not many to be found. Laſtly, the Article ſpeaketh of things that are controverſae fidei, and contentioſi juris. I ſpeak of things plainely delivered in HOLY SCRIPTURE: for ſuch are the Fundamentall points of our Faith. And that it is ſo, the enſuing words of the Article doe inſinuate; Things neceſſary unto Salvation, muſt bee taken out of SCRIPTURE alone. COUNCELS have no ſuch over-awing power and authority, as to tye men to Beleeve, upon paine of
                     
                     Damnation, without expreſſe warrant of GOD'S Word, as is rightly reſolved in the Article. They are but Interpreters of the Law; they are not abſolute to make ſuch a Law. Interpretation is required, but in things of doubtfull iſſue: our Fundamentals are no ſuch. COUNCELS are ſuppoſed not to exceed their commiſſion, which warranteth them to debate and determine queſtions and things litigioſi ſtatus. If they doe not hoc agere ſincerely, if they ſhall preſume to make lawes without warrant, and new articles of Faith (who have no farther authority than to interprete them) lawes without GOD'S word, that ſhall binde the conſcience, and require obedience upon life and death; our Church will not juſtifie their proceedings, nor doe I. Non debet ſe Eccleſia CHRISTO praeponere, cùm ille ſemper veraciter judicet; Eccleſiaſtici autem Iudices ſicut homines, plerun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         fallantur, ſaith S. AUGUSTINE againſt 
                        Lib. 2. cap. 27. CRESCONIUS the Donatiſt. but he ſpeaketh not there of Fundamentals; indeed not of the Church repreſentative, as I explaine my ſelfe. Nor doth that principall place of all make againſt me, which is in him contra Donatiſtas, concerning the erring of Generall Councells: Et ipſa Concilia, quae per ſingulas regiones & provincias 
                     
                        Lib. 2. cap. 3. 
                     fiunt plenariorum Conciliorum authoritati, quae ſiunt ex univerſo Chriſtiano orbe, cedunt; ipſa
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         plenaria saepè priora à poſterioribus emendantur: cùm aliquo experimento rerum aperitur, quod
                     
                     clauſum er at; & cognoſcitur, quod latebat. For he taketh Councells in a generall acception, as it is plaine by him: and hee ſpeaketh not of Fundamentall points of Faith; as both the cauſe it ſelfe argueth, and his aſſigning of better information in tract of time, to direct conſequent Councells in determining contrary to precedent. who, for any thing he ſaith to the contrary, might have truely determined, as things then ſtood. To conclude, this Information is a meer cavill. De tali Concilio, & ſaniori parte, & concluſionibus in fide, probabile est. No more.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. III.
               
                  Strange accuſations. Antiquity reverenced, not Deified. Fathers accuſed of ſome error by Ieſuites. The occaſion of their enlarged ſpeeches concerning Free-will. The Author acquitted of Popery.
                  
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  
                     AGaine, ſpeaking of the Fathers in generall, hee profeſſeth his opinion to bee, that
                     
Thoſe worthy Lights did not any way faile; nor did darkeneſſe poſſeſſe their cleere underſtandings. CHAP. XVI. pag. CXIII. The which is a ſaying more Popiſh than learned Papiſts durſt ever affirme.
                  
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  NAy more ſottiſh than any Puritan, but your ſelves, would ever quarrell. Malice and Ignorance, whither wilt thou? As if M. MOUNTAGU had affirmed, that no Father ever Erred in any point whatſoever. Maſters Informers, you may goe range this calumny under ſome other head: for Popery will not admit nor entertaine it. No ignorant Papist, leſſe learned than your ſelves, nedum LEARNED Papiſt, either taught or thought, that no Father ever Erred And as for M. MOUNTAGU, he utterly diſclaimeth it. Though no man living carrieth a more awfull regard, and reverent reſpect unto Antiquity than hee doth, yet never did hee ſo doate upon them. It is more than ever entred into the compaſſe of his thoughts, ſo to overlaviſh tranſcendently in their commendation, as to give them prerogative of not erring at all; and ſo to advance them unto their MAKERS ſeate. It belongeth not to theſe Ancients, but to the Ancient of Dayes, not to Erre. And ſo much M. MOUNTAGU had expreſſed in that former

paſſage of his penne: Take them at large, and they laviſh ſo farre ſometimes, that the greatest Patrons of the power and efficacy of Free-will, dare not joine iſſue with ſome of them. Then followeth that calumniated piece, by thoſe Pure Ones; Not as if thoſe worthy Lights had at any time failed, or darkeneſſe poſſeſſed their cleer underſtanding. Now, you Promoters, could your Chriſtian charity be ſo defective; or your common wit, ſenſe, or underſtanding at ſo low an ebbe; or your honeſty ſo little or none at all, as out of theſe premiſes ſo laid together, to inferre ſo miſhapen a calumny, that M. MOUNTAGU Delivered and Publiſhed this Error, that the Fathers, none of them, eyther did or could Erre at all? as if he had erected to himſelfe a new frame and fabrick of Popery, never heard of in the world. Whatſoever became of their Lights and Underſtandings, deep Malice poſſeſſed your malignant Paſsions, thus ſhameleſly to ſlander him with indeed more than the groſſeſt Popery. Thus it is; M. MOUNTAGU ſpeaketh not of all the Fathers in generall, nor of their opinions in any one point, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : but onely of their opinion in and concerning Free-will, who have meddled with, and written about Free-will. This then is the firſt untruth by falſe ſuggeſtion faſtned on him. Secondly, he profeſſeth plainly, that in and concerning this point of Free-will, thoſe Fathers did ſo farre outlaviſh; and ſpeak ſso inlargedly,

that the very IESUITES, poſt mot a certamina PELAGIANA, for feare of ſeeming to Pelagianiſe, dare not ſay ſo much as they have ſaid; at leaſt wiſe ſome of them: for which I have the warrant of Biſhop MORTON in his Appeale, to bee according to the confeſsion of moſt learned Papiſts; SIXTUS Senenſis, 
                     
                        Pag. cc1. MALDONATE, TOLET, and PERERIUS. His words are, that In the roote of the doctrine of Free-will, CHRYSOSTOME, CYRILL, THEOPHYLACT, EUTHYMIUS, OECUMENIUS, AMMONIUS, and moſt of others, eſpecially in the Greeke Church, did yeeld too much unto the power of Nature in the Free-will of man. Theſe tearmes are farre from acquitting and diſcharging the Fathers of all Error in that point. And theſe honeſt well-meaning Informers, if they had imagined indeed, that I did ſo acquit them, rather ſhould have challenged mee of contradiction, than of Popery. For it ſeemeth as much Popery to accuſe the Fathers of Errors, as to excuſe them of Erring, ſeeing thoſe three IESUITES (than whom, ſcarce were ever three more eminent in the Society) doe not excuſe or acquit them, but accuſe them rather for going ſo farre in applauding of Free-will. In this point it is plaine, my meaning was, that their Vnderſtandings were not ſo darkened, as their words at firſt apprehenſion may ſeeme to import, to erre ſo groſſely in the point as they ſeeme to doe: nor did then and in that particular,

                     thoſe worthie Lights of the Church of GOD, faile in diſcerning of the Truth of GOD in that particular, as (to uſe the words of the forenamed learned Biſhop) they inclined, contrary to Scripture, unto Pelagianiſme. For things muſt bee taken and conſidered as they are ſpoken, and upon what occaſion and ground they are ſpoken. If you were not ſo acute to conceive this (indeed ſo honeſt to expreſſe it) yet your dulleſt Readers would have obſerved it, had there beene in you ſo much ingenuity as to have added that, which enſueth in M. MOUNTAGU, thus: That they being to deale againſt fatall Neceſsity, urged by many PATNIMS, Philoſophers in thoſe dayes; as alſo against the execrable impiety of the MANICHEES, they extended the power of FREE-WILL unto the uttermoſt, and ſet it upon the Tenters; eſpecially having then no cauſe to fear anyenemy at home, unto the contrary, ante mota certamina PELAGIANA: There being yet no PELAGIANS ſprung up in the world, enemies to Grace, advancers of Nature and Naturall powers, beyond degree of Power, and of Poſsibility. In effect, M. MOUNTAGU, as touching freewill heer in this caſe, hath ſaid the ſame, and no more but the ſame, that before him Biſhop MORTON did in his Appeale, pag. CCII. THE occaſion of this difference we learne to have beene a whirlwind of contrary Hereſies, wherewith, in thoſe dayes, the Church of GOD was miſerably afflicted. Then
                     
                     the MANICHEES, and before them the STOICALL CHRISTIANS, had taught an abſolute fatall Neceſsity of every mans Actions, thereby taking from man the guilt of ſinne: For the overthrow of which peſtilent Hereſie, as is confeſſed concerning S. CHRYSOSTOME, ſome FATHERS did contrarily yeeld too much unto the power of will. This was the occaſion of their by-ſliding, who notwithſtanding did often recover their footing, and in their more intimate meditations gave direct acknowledgement of our Orthodoxall Defence. Iuſt to an haire, up and downe the ſame Popery that M. MOUNTAGU hath Delivered. That Biſhop, and my poor ſelf, ſay one and the ſame thing; and yet will even the Informers, I dare ſay, acquit Him of Popery: why not Me, as well in the ſelfe ſame caſe with him?
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. IV.
               
                  
                     Private and publick doctrine differenced. In what ſenſe the Church is ſaid to be alwaies viſible. The Author acquitted from Popery againe by others,

learned Divines. Of the Church of Rome.
                  
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  HE calleth the doctrine of the INVISIBILITY of the Church, a private opinion; no doctrinall deciſion, nor to bee imputed unto the reſolved doctrine of the Proteſtants. Nuſquam eſt, ſaith hee, quod nun quam videtur. CHAP. V. pag. XLVIII. And againe, pag. L. Moderate men on both ſides doe confeſſe, that this controverſie may ceaſe.
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  MY words were onely theſe; It may be, ſome private opinions have run upon Inviſibility of the Church. But ſince you put me to it, if there bee any ſuch doctrine as you ſpeak of, it is a private opinion; and I will now ſay expreſſely, I hold that doctrine a PRIVATE opinion: yet then and there I did not ponere, that any had ſo ſaid in terminis; or runne that way, but onely with reſtriction, by a May-be of conceſsion: that ſome men, ſingular from the doctrine of the Church, in their owne private opinions, had

fallen upon, and ſupported an Inviſibilitie. Now every man, but your ſelves, knowes that the doctrine of a Church, Publick and Authorized, is one thing; and your doctrine, or my doctrine and private opinion, is another thing. For ſuch doctrine as you talk of, I know none, I acknowledge none, but that of Libertines and Browniſts; with whom if you have any commerce, intercourſe, or confarreation, look unto it: the Church of England, as it deteſteth them, ſo is it for and of another ſtraine. ARTIC. XIX. touching the Church thus we read: The VISIBLE CHURCH of CHRIST is a congregation of faithfull men, in the which the pure word of GOD is preached, and the Sacraments be duely miniſtred, &c. Where Church and Viſible are convertible tearmes. That doctrine then, to which you ſhould, and would ſeeme to have ſubſcribed, talketh of no inviſible, but a viſible Church; tendreth no Inviſibility. And it is a Poſition drawne out from thence, and publiſhed, that there is a Church of CHRIST, not onely inviſible, but alſo viſible. Though for inviſible, it is more than that Article ſpecifieth; yet is it moſt true, that there is a Church alſo inviſible: which was never denied, or thought upon to be denied. Secondly, it is alſo concluded thence, that the viſible Church is a Catholick Church. So the Church is viſible, and the Church is inviſible: both which I beleeve and profeſſe, diſtinctly taken,

and as it ought to bee underſtood. For theſe, though ſeeming, are not contradictory Propoſitions. The Church is inviſible in her more noble parts; the Saints, both regnant in heaven, and militant in earth; ſuch as be ſecreti and occultè intus; ſuch as bee 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , the ſecret, hidden, the reſerved Ones of GOD, Pſal. LXXXIII. IV. as Iewels of price, of value, of account. I doe alſo beleeve and profeſſe a viſibility of the Church on earth, neceſſarily, toto ſui, though not totâ ſe: in ſome part or other at all times; though in all parts of the world, or it ſelfe, intire, at no one time. Nothing viſible in the ampleſt maner that can be, is ſo viſible, that there is nothing in it, or of it, but is viſible. It never was, it never ſhall be, it is wholly impoſſible to bee, that at ſome time or other there could not be found, in any one part or corner of the world, not any part viſible of that Church Catholick. The Divell never did, nor ever ſhall, ſo farre and fully prevaile againſt GOD and GOD'S Kingdome, as to effect or procure ſuch an abſolute deſolation. And ſo is it true (for of this onely reſtrainedly I ſpake), Non eſt, quod nuſquam videtur; not generally true, I grant, and without limitation. There ever was, and will bee ever, upon earth a viſible Church ſome where or other, with viſible cogniſances, marks and ſignes to be diſcerned by, ſuch as be aſſigned by the XIX. Article; to which men may

repaire to heare GOD'S Word; where Sacraments are miniſtred, and may be received unto ſalvation; where Prieſthood and Ordination is and may be had according to CHRIST'S miſſion and commiſsion. You cannot produce any time, out of any Records or Memorials, extant or remembred, in which and by which it may appeare, that theſe things were otherwiſe. The Churches of the Eaſt, Aſia, Greece, and Africa, were a long time viſible, eminent, and glorious. The Churches of the Weſt have held it out longer. Since there firſt was a Church in England, France, Spaine, and Rome, there hath not ceaſed to bee a Church there. And if in any of theſe places, or all theſe places, the Church ſhould ceaſe or not bee viſible, yet would it be ſtill viſible otherwhere, though not ever alike, nor to like purpoſe. Againe, I do call thoſe Some mens doctrines in this point, Private Opinions: and ſo well may I doe, in reſpect of the diſinvalidity and diſproportion of them; being private mens opinions, and no publick propoſals or reſolutions of the Church. I call them not ſo in regard of paucity of propoſers: for they may bee many, a ſtrong, potent, prevailing partie that thus opine, and runne a courſe to themſelves in their owne Tenents, againſt or beſide publick, enacted and authorized doctrine. And yet even private opinions alſo are againſt you. That worthy Divine, my deare friend while

he lived, D. RI. FIELD, lib. 111. pag. XIX. ſaith, It cannot bee, but they are the true Church, muſt, by profeſsion of the truth, make themſelves knowne, in ſuch ſort, that by their profeſsion and practice they may be diſcerned from other men. But without all queſtion, that Church muſt needs be viſible, the members whereof doe make open and publick profeſſion of their Faith, in ſuch ſort, that by their practice and profeſſion they may be knowne and diſtinguiſhed from other men. And therefore that learned man rightly reſolveth, That BELLARMINE laboureth in vaine to prove, that there is, 
                     
                        Page 11. 
                     and alwayes hath beene, a VISIBLE Church; and that not conſisting of ſome few ſcattered Chriſtians, without order, or Ministry, or uſe of Sacraments: for all this we do grant, and most willingly yeeld unto, howſoever perhaps SOME FEW have been of ANOTHER OPINION. Marke, my good Informers, D. FIELDS Popery to the purpoſe; and with all D. HUMFREYES, another 
                        Ieſuit. pag. 2. 
                     Papiſt: SECRET abodes are no Chriſtian Convocations, becauſe this communion of Saints, is an OPEN teſtification of Chriſtianity. and D. WILLET, no Papiſt I hope, unleſſe your ſelves be, 
                        Synop. pag. 69. ſaith, that The ONLY abſence of word and Sacraments doe make a nullity in a Church: therefore an exiſtence in a Church is made by their preſence. But how can you or any man poſſibly conceive, that the Word ſhould be preached, and Sacraments adminiſtred, in a Church

                     Inviſible? The L. Biſhop of LICHFIELD hath as much Popery in this point as M. MOUNTAGU hath. In his Appeale thus he writeth. Now Proteſtants and Romaniſts doe concarre in words, 
                     
                        Page 661. 
                     and almoſt in ſence. So that the difference is not ſo much in the poſition, as in the application of the Inviſibility of the Church. And before him, long ſince, that IEWELL of his time, hath uttered theſe expreſſe words: The generall or outward Church of GOD is VISIBLE, and may 
                     
                        Pag. 361. 
                     be ſeene; in his Defence againſt HARDING. And this Doctrine is ſufficiently and to this purpoſe explaned by that right worthy and learned Deane, Dr. WHITE, in his juſt Defence of his deceaſed Brother; againſt the cavills of a Ieſuite. And he that hath read moe Papiſts than ever you have heard of, concludeth thus; Whereunto our learned adverſaries for the greater part agree. Great Ignorance then it muſt be, or malice, or faction, or all, that by the Information of theſe poore Divines, M. MOUNTAGU is promoted for a Papiſt, for ſaying, that with moderate men on both ſides, this Controverſie might ceaſe. or, for calling the opinion of the INVISIBILITY of the Church, a private opinion. But as I ſaid, ſo I ſee it fareth ſtill now adayes: as with the Ieſuite and Ieſuited Papiſt, ſuch as be by farre the major part of that ſide, every man is an Heretick, a Lutheren, a Calviniſt, I know not what, that is not a deſperate Papiſt, to goe unto the Divell with

them, though it be upon a ſecond pouder-plot; ſo alſo with our Puritans, very Sibs unto thoſe Fathers of the Society, every Moderate man is bedaubed with theſe goodly habiliments, of ARMINIANISME, POPERY, and what not? unleſſe hee will be frantick with them for their Holy Cauſe. Yet well fare BELLARMINE, a man of a better ſpirit than ſome of the Paternitie, who ingenuouſly confeſſeth concerning this particular; Notandum eſt, multos ex noſtris tempus terere, dum probant, ABSOLUTE 
                        De Eccleſ. 3. 13 
                     Eccleſiam non poſſe deficere: nam CALVINUS, & caeteri Haeretici id concedunt. And that learned Deane of CARLILE, of late againſt FISHER, ſaith the ſame; It is but lost labour, to ſpend time in proving againſt us, that there is alway in the world a true Church; for we have ever acknowledged it: and have ever been Papists in opinion for ſo doing, or elſe theſe good Fellowes are and ever will bee; I know what. I could have produced many moe to purpoſe, and amongſt them diverſe whom they will not caſt off for Papiſts; as M. PERKINS, M. CLAPHAM, D. SPARKS, &c. I will yet adde a little more Poperie to the former, and ſo leave my friends and Informers to chew the Cud upon it, as they do after Lectures. The Church of Rome hath ever beene viſible. The Church of Rome is, and ever was a true Church ſince it was a Church: Therefore the true Church hath been viſible. I ſay, Remember it, leſt

you miſtake my ſaying, or maliciouſly miſtake it; a True Church ratione eſſentiae, and Being of a Church, not a Sound Church every way in their Doctrine.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. V. Touching ANTICHRIST.
               
                  The Pope and Prelacy of Rome Antichriſtian. That hee is Magnus ille Antichristus, is neyther determined by the publick doctrine of the Church, nor proved by any good argument of private men. Difference among Divines, who The Man of ſinne ſhould be. The markes of the great Antichriſt fit the Turkiſh Tyrannie every way, aſwell as the Papacie. The peace of the Church not to bee diſquieted

through varietie of Opinions. No finall Reſolution to bee yet had in this point.
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  
                     COncerning ANTICHRIST, thus hee writeth: I profeſſe ingenuouſly, I am not of opinion that the Biſhop of ROME perſonally is THAT ANTICHRIST; nor yet that the Biſhops of ROME ſucceſsively are THAT ANTICHRIST. Chap. X. pag. 74.
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  WHat if I am not of that opinion? what if ingenuouſly I profeſſe ſo much, that I am not of that opinion, as indeed I am not? I was occaſioned to ſhew my opinion in the point by the Gagger, who charged our Church in generall with the private Fancy and opinion of ſome men, that the Pope of Rome was that very Antichriſt mentioned and foretold in the Scripture. I muſt needs avow it, or diſclaime it. That I could not doe, without wronging the Church and my ſelfe: therefore I thought it an honeſt mans part, ingenuouſly to profeſſe what I thought. Sure it would be more

pleaſing unto GOD, and commendable with men, if your ſelves and ſuch Halfers in opinions, omnium horarum homines for your private ends, would openly avow what covertly you conceale; and publickly profeſſe that, in which animitùs, being rotten at the Core, you are diſſentients indeed from the Church of England: than to be and call your ſelves at leaſt Conformitants for faſhion ſake in ſome few and indifferent points of Ceremony; and to be oppoſites in Truth both from them and moſt points of Doctrine of the Church of England. For the point in queſtion, what if I for my part profeſſe ſo much? you may for your part profeſſe the contrary if you pleaſe, ſo be it you trouble not the Church with it, nor would pin my Faith unto your opinion. One thing I promiſe you; for my part I will not lightly talke of my opinion in Pulpits: will you ſay as much for your opinion? I thinke not I know nay. For your opinions muſt bee all THE LORDS HOLY TRUTH. I am not anie way offended with you for your opinion, that The Pope is Antichriſt: yet much rather might I, becauſe you preſume to determine ſo peremptorily of future Contingents; which being ever uncertaine quoad nos, thoſe things cannot but raſhly be defined, or abſolutely taught as true, the event whereof may hap afterwards to prove otherwiſe. Why ſhould you be angry with mee, in ſuch points of no aſſurance,

becauſe I doe not ſubſcribe unto you? I am not tyed unto you, more than you to me. Who concluded it, but your ſelves, to be flat Popery, not to Beleeve or Preach that the Pope is that Antichriſt? or to profeſſe the contrary, that he is not that Antichriſt? Who can finde it to be the doctrine of the Church of England? What Synod reſolved it? Convocation aſſented to it? What Parliament, Law, Proclamation, or Edict did ever command it to be profeſſed, or have impoſed penaltie upon repugnants, or non-conſentients unto it? Some Proteſtant Divines at home and abroad, I grant, have thought ſo, wrote ſo, diſputed ſo; in good zeale, no doubt, againſt that inſolent, and inſufferable, and outrageous Tyrannie and Pride of the Biſhops of Rome, and their infinite enormities in the Church: and out of that affection have been too violently forward, out of conjectures and probabilities, to pronounce, The POPE is that MAN OF SINNE, and SONNE OF PERDITION. The Synod of GAPP in France made it a point of their Beleefe, and concluded it peremptorily to be ſo. And let them and you beleeve it ſo, if you will. Their inducements doe not convince or perſwade me. I never yet ſaw proofe or argument brought, that was perſwaſive; much leſſe that was demonſtrative in the caſe. I never yet met with argument or reaſon to the point, but, at leaſt to my owne ſatisfaction, I was able to anſwer it. If you can give

better, I am like to yeeld. Till then, there being no conviction nor compulſion in foro externo or interiori, I would gladly know why it ſhould not be as lawfull for mee to opine, The Pope is NOT that Antichriſt; as for others to write, to preach, to publiſh, to tender unto Proceeders this Propoſition, The Pope Is Antichriſt. They thinke one way: I am of another minde; and ſo are infinite others with me. Why may not I ſedatè and tranquillè as well deliver my Negative, as M. GABRIEL POWELL publiſh and print (as if the Church of England were of his minde), out of violent and tranſported paſſion, no doubt, thus; I am as well aſſured, and as throughly perſwaded, that the POPE is THAT ANTICHRIST, as I am reſolved, IESUS CHRIST was the Sonne of GOD; or to that purpoſe: for I have not now the booke by mee. Surely, this man made it an Article of his faith; ſo will not I. And yet I will not deny, but the Pope is an Antichriſt. I doe not deny it: I doe beleeve it. Theſe honeſt Informers ſhould not ſo have dealt with mee, as by a knack of concealement to have done me ſo palpable a wrong, as if my meaning were, the Pope was no Antichriſt at all. So I might have walked, not onely upon the Brinks, but have come much within the Verge of flat Popery: and not injuriouſly, as now, have been ſlandered for, and ſtiled a Papist. For that imputation might more than

grate upon an univerſall approoving of the totall doctrine of the Church of Rome; in as much as there were of old, are now, and alway will bee, many Antichriſts: and hee that any way oppoſeth CHRIST in his Kingdom, his Word, his Church, is an Antichriſt; which, as ingenuouſly as the former, I profeſſe the Pope and the Church of Rome doth. And therefore, when out of my private opinion onely (for which I will not trouble the peace of the Church) I denied that the Pope was THAT Antichriſt, then yet and there I added withall, AN Antichriſt notwithſtanding I hold him or them, carrying themſelves in the Church as they doe. Which Paſſage and Propoſition had bin ſufficient, with men not partially addicted unto a Side, and maliciouſly bent to calumniate an Oppoſite, as it is too manifeſt my Informers bee, to have diſcharged mee from guilt or tincture of Popery. For will or can any Papiſt living ſay, that the Biſhop of Rome now is an Antichriſt? But ſo have I ſaid, and written, and profeſſed ſo, if theſe honeſt Informers had been pleaſed to have reported it ſo. But it ſtood not with their prime purpoſe of calumniating: directly it gave check unto their detraction in chief, and ſo they paſſed it ſlightly over.
                  But as concerning the maine, the queſtion on foot, Whether the Pope of Rome, or the Popes of Rome, either are, or may be accounted,

or is THAT Antichriſt, or Antichriſts, my irreſolution grew, as I have remembred, from the much inſufficiency of their proofes that tender it ſtoutly, ſtrongly, affectiouately, and tantum non, as a point of faith. Not any one of their arguments is, not all their arguments together are, convincing. Secondly, becauſe it is in Scripture every where tendred as a Prophecy; and therefore a Myſtery ſealed up, obſcure, not manifeſted, nor to bee underſtood, but by evident and plaine event, without divine revelation. How then (theſe are the very words of Biſhop MORTON in excuſe of the Fathers concerning their erring in this verie caſe of ANTICHRIST) can ignorance of thoſe things which cannot poſsibly be underſtood before the time of their accompliſhment in the laſt daies, be held prejudiciall unto the wiſedome of the Fathers of former times? I may adde thereunto, Or the cautelouſnes of ſuſpenders, and not forward concluders in theſe times? And yet farther; becauſe Proteſtants are divided in the queſtion. For all doe not determine or reſolve, that the Pope is THAT Antichriſt remembred in the Scripture: and yet none of them have hitherto at any time beene ſtiled or reputed Papiſts, no not by Puritanicall Oppoſites. The Scriptures, as is apparent, doe in this queſtion propoſe us two perſons: AN Antichriſt, one with many; THE Antichriſt, one eminent above all. All, and every one that oppugneth

or oppoſeth CHRIST and his Kingdome, his Word and Doctrine, is an Antichriſt. So was SIMON MAGUS, ELYMAS, MENANDER, the NICOLAITANS, and other Heretickes abroad, and riſen up in the very Apoſtles times: of whom S. IOHN himſelfe ſaid, And now are many Antichriſts. Theſe are all, more or leſſe, Antichriſts, as their oppoſition is more or leſſe unto CHRIST and his Kingdome, in points of higher nature or of lower Tenure. But beſide all theſe, more particularly and eſpecially there is deſigned out in Scripture an egregious, eminent, and tranſcendent ANTICHRIST, called there. THE MAN OF SINNE, THE SONNE OF PERDITION. Concerning him; not them, there is diverſity of judgements, diſcrepancie of opinion among Divines both old and new. Firſt, ſome of the antient Fathers, and moſt of the Writers in the preſent Church of Rome, underſtand the propheticall prediction of, and apply it unto one ſingular individuall man onely, and no otherwiſe; and him to bee an Hereticke in opinion, extreamly and with all vehemency oppoſing the ſaving truth of GOD; prodigiouſly impious, and beyond meaſure: who ſhall by all ſignes and wonders, with maine force and oppoſition, ſet himſelf againſt CHRIST IESUS and his Kingdome, towards the later end of the world, not long before the day of Doome. Other Divines, as namely the major part of Protestant Writers, not all,

underſtand the prophecy and prediction, not of any one man or ſingular perſon ſo much, as of any hereticall, wicked, tyrannicall State and Polity, directly oppoſing the Kingdome, State and Doctrine of CHRIST IESUS. But heer is ſome difference among them. For there are, that by Antichriſt doe underſtand MAOMET, or the Turkiſh State and Tyranny erected againſt CHRIST and Chriſtians directly; and the Pope and Papacie oppoſing the ſame indirectly and in oblique ſort; both combined in one confederacy and combination: that both theſe, though oppoſite ad invicem in Temporalibus, may and doe make one conjoyned oppoſition unto IESUS CHRIST, and his truth in Spiritualibus. And although that externally, and in regard of Civill Policy, they differ, and doe deadly hate each other, and mainly one oppoſe againſt the other; yet nihil impedit but they may, as indeed they do, conſpire in oppoſing CHRIST and his Goſpell, his Kingdome differently. Other, more preciſe Proteſtant Divines, do not nor yet will in any hand extend Antichriſtianiſme beyond the Papacy; nor yet will admit or hear of any other great Antichriſt, paſt or to come, but onely the Biſhop of Rome: which is, it ſeemeth, the opinion, or rather faith and beliefe, of theſe Informers, together with M. POWELL, and the Synod of GAPP; as it is of moſt, but not of all the Divines, whom theſe

men think it an honor to call CALVINISTS. I ſay not of all: for ZANCHIUS, ZEGEDINUS, GRYNAEUS, and FAIUS of Geneva himſelfe, are not ſo yet perſwaded. For my owne private opinion, I ſaid, and ſo I ſay ſtill, Though I cannot, nor yet will ſweare unto either, being but probable and conjecturall, yet I rather incline unto the more moderate and temperate Tenent; and rather of the two embrace that, The Turkiſh and Popiſh State, not ſeverall but conjoyned, and oppoſite unto CHRIST, though ſeverall waies, doe much rather, and may ſo, conſtitute THAT Antichriſt, than any one man or private perſon whatſoever, than either of the two States diſjoynedly: and of the two States, rather the Turke by much, than the Pope; rather the MAOMETAN iniquity, than the HILDEBRANDINAN impiety; at leaſt wiſe as much every way: becauſe the Signes, and Tokens, and Marks, and Cogniſances of that eminent and great Antichriſt, foretold, extant, and deſigned in Scripture, do all as much accrue unto, and fit the Turk, or rather and indeed more, Him and Them, than they doe the Popes, in their State and Government ad oppoſitum.
                  
                  Firſt, in Apoſtaſie they are both intereſſed: both are departed away; but rather the Turk than the Pope is entereſſed. For whether we take that Apoſtaſie to bee a departing away from CHRIST, and his Kingdome, and his

Doctrine, MAOMET himſelfe apoſtated, drew away his Followers and Sectaries, ſometime CHRISTIANS: and ſo they continue yet unto this day Reprobates, Renegadoes, Apoſtataes, Deniers of that faith which ſometime they did profeſſe. The Churches of Aſia, thoſe ſeven unto which S. IOHN ſometime wrote; thoſe which S. PAUL planted, and which APOLLOS watered; where S. PETER, S. ANDREW, and the reſt preached; thoſe manie famous Churches of Africa, and others, are fallen from GOD, his Kingdom, his CHRIST, the SPIRIT of his Grace, profeſsion of his Name, and received the marke and ſtampe of the Beaſt: Or whether we underſtand Apoſtaſie and defection from the Romane Empire, the Turke is entereſſed as much, or more than the Pope. both are growne great through the ruines thereof; but rather the Turke than the Pope. Indeed, both from the Scepter of CHRIST and the Romane Empire is this Apoſtaſie: and ſo the ſignes, marks, and tokens hold on either ſide; but upon due examination, rather upon the Turke than the Pope as yet.
                  Then for Deceiving ſignes and wonders; howſoever that cognizance holdeth in the Papacy and Sea of Rome, we are aſſured out of Story, that MAOMET tooke that courſe to beguile the ſimple, to inſinuate into the fancies of his deceived Proſelites, and to make himſelfe eſteemed a 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , being a falſe Prophet, a Deceiver,

a teacher of lyes, in regard of GOD and CHRIST. Such he pretended, he deſired to be accounted, ſo he was eſtemed and held in his time during life, and ſo is he reckoned of by his followers at this day. which hitherto ſecundum literam, and 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , was never verified in Pope or Biſhop of Rome perſonally; nor in ſucceſſion of Popes collectively.
                  Again, the number of the name of the Beaſt, doth agree unto one as much or more than unto the other: whether wee take DCLXVI. for the Number of the Name of a man, or for the Number of the Time aſsigned when he ſhould riſe. The time of MAOMETS riſing in the Eaſt againſt CHRIST and the Romane Empire, was in the ſixt Centurie. and Ieruſalem was taken in by HOMAR, ſucceſſor unto MAOMET, neere about the yeare DCLXVI. The name of MAOMET written in the Greek, that tongue in which S. IOHN wrote, and to which he had reference, doth make up that Number unto an haire, as well as 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      ſo much inſiſted upon, thus; 

                        
                           40
                           I
                           70
                           40
                           5
                           300
                           10
                           200
                        
                        
                           μ
                           α
                           ο
                           μ
                           ε
                           τ
                           ι
                           σ
                        
                      in all DCLXVI.
                  Fourthly, as the Learned have made obſervation, the word TURCA, the name of the chiefe Prince of Gog and Magog, doth ſignifie the ſame that doth Apollyon and Abaddon: which is a Name aſcribed and faſtned unto that man of Sinne in holy writ.
                  Fiftly, the Turkiſh MAOMETANS of theſe

dayes, and ſo the SARASINS of old are the grand profeſſed enemies of CHRISTIANS, Chriſtianity, CHRIST, quà tales; for that Name, that Profeſſion, that Religion, make warre againſt hate, deteſt, perſecute Chriſtians with all hoſtilitie, calling themſelves interim Muſulmans, that is, the right Beleevers: ſo that religion is openly pretended for hoſtilitie.
                  Furthermore, yet MAOMET perſonally, as a private man and a falſe Prophet, was truely and indeed a man of Sinne: not only for his morall parts in his looſe licentiouſneſſe, lewd carriage, abominable life, impietie, improbity, and impuritie every way unto the higheſt; but in his ALCORAN, that execrable Law of his damned Sect, he commendeth and tendreth unto, not only alloweth and tolerateth in, his Sectaries, all filthie carnall pleaſures and proſtitutions. and in reward of ſuch a life, a ſemblable recompence alſo after death, in a Paradiſe of that uaure, abounding withall beaſtlike brothelries.
                  Seventhly, hee directly and 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , without more ado, thruſteth himſelfe into the roome, place, ſtate, and office of CHRIST. He exalteth himſelfe above CHRIST, above the Prophets, Apostles, all holy men, all holy things. and his Succeſſors in State, arrogate and challenge unto themſelves abſolute, ſupreme, independent power over the Kings and Monarchs of the earth; calling themſelves in their

high-ſwelling ſtiles, Lords of Lords, GOD of the earth, &c. as is to bee ſeen in the Letters of SOLYMAN, AMURATH, and others, challenging abſolute, irreſiſtable, incontrouleable power to ſet up, pull downe, order, alter, and diſpoſe the world, and all things in the world, at pleaſure. That wretch MAOMET, like ANTICHRIST indeed, commandeth his ALCORAN, and moſt abominable Law, to bee received of all as the Meſſage of GOD, beeing nothing but a TYROTARICHON and hotchpotch of errors, fables, lies, impieties, impurities, blaſphemies, derived from, and made up out of Iewiſh, Paganiſh, Manichean, Arian, hereſies, religion, and ſuperſtition. He commendeth it unto his Followers, as comming downe from heaven, by the miniſtery of his familiar and old acquaintance, the Angell GABRIEL. He preferreth it before the Law, the Goſpell, all, or any Word of GOD. Hee threatneth torments eternall unto the deſpiſers of it; and unto the obſervers promiſeth his carnall Paradiſe, abounding with all ſenſuall delights and carnall pleaſures: and to conclude, as in effect in deſpight of GOD, conculcating and trampling under foot whatſoever is named GOD, advanceth his owne (blaſphemous reprobate and forlorne miſcreant as he is) divine power and authority forſooth, in the Divels name, above all things whatſoever in heaven and earth. If theſe be not certain ſignes

and remonſtrances of ANTICHRIST, I cannot tell what are, or may be thought to be.
                  Eightthly, the TURK is, and hath been long poſſeſſed of Ieruſalem and the Land of promiſe, that pleaſant Land and holy City. HOMAR, the ſucceſſor of MAOMET, took it: and ſince it hath been a neaſt of uncleane birds, in the hands of thoſe barbarous blaſphemous miſcreants, except for ſome few yeers under the French. The Iewes, when MAOMET firſt declared himſelfe, came flocking unto him, as unto their MESSIAS; the ſooner and rather, becauſe he was circumciſed, as bee all of his Sect at this day, receiving in their fleſh the marke, ſtamp, and character of the Beaſt. They greatly advanced and propagated his impiety. They paid him tribute, to the intent to incite him againſt CHRIST and Chriſtians; and having prevailed, and inſtigated him thereunto, aſſisted him readily in that enterprize.
                  Ninthly, the TURK fitteth 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : it is verified in him, take the meaning for, either IN the Church, or AGAINST the Church; in both which ſenſes it is expounded. Take Templum materially, or formally, or figuratively, any way, that note will alſo fit him. At Mechae was he buried in the Church there. HOMAR his Succeſſor enſhrined him there; appointed an Obit and Anniverſary for him there; made it meritorious to viſit his Sepulchre, to undertake Pilgrimages unto his

                     Reliques: which religion and cuſtome continueth yet unto this day. And yet more: The ſame HOMAR, having after two yeares ſiege taken in Ieruſalem, Templum exquiſivit, as writeth THEOPHANES cited by BARONIUS, quod SALOMON extruxerat, ad Blaſphemiae ſuae Oratorium conſtituendum. Which being done, and his Oratory erected in place of the Iewiſh Temple, SOPHRONIUS, the then Patriarch of Ieruſalem, took up this ſaying, as having reference unto ANTICHRIST; In veritate, iſta eſt abominatio deſolationis, quae dicta eſt à DANIELE Prophetâ, ſtans in loco ſancto. And yet farther: MAOMET the Great, having taken Conſtantinople, and ruined the Empire of the Greekes, ſate him downe, and made his Palace in the Cathedrall Church of SAN SOPHIA; and in the Cloſe and Cloiſters, the Biſhops and Prieſts lodgings thereabout, where is his Seraglia unto this day. Part of that large and admirableſt piece of worke, one of the wonders of the world, the Church of SAN SOPHIA, namely, the Chancell of that Church, where ſtood the High Altar or Communion-Table, and Patriarchall Throne, is now made, and ſo uſed as a Turkiſh Moſchie: whither the GRAUND SIGNIOR alſo himſelfe goeth often a Proceſſion unto their Service, or blaſphemous Rites and Ceremonies of their Religion. Spiritually & figuratively he ſitteth 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , againſt or upon the living Temples of GOD,

the Church of the Redeemed by the bloud of IESUS, becauſe hee hath demoliſhed, ruined, and brought unto confuſion, very many famous and renowned Chriſtian Churches in Syria, Paleſtina, Egypt, Perſia, Armenia, Arabia, Africa, and Aſia the Leſſe and the More, Graecia, Thracia, and many other Countries; Thoſe Churches, all but one, to which Saint PAUL wrote. Thoſe in the Revelation hee hath removed, put out, caſt off, their Candle and Candleſtick, bereft them of their ſpirituall life in CHRIST, of the power of his Kingdome in preaching the Goſpell; hath ſet the marke of the Beaſt upon them, circumciſed them in their fleſh, taught them to blaſpheme, and to open their mouthes againſt the GOD of heaven. He maketh and ever hath made warre againſt the Saints, that is, againſt the Chriſtians, called, according to the calling of grace, unto a profeſſion holy and ſanctified, eo nomine alone, becauſe they profeſſe the Name and Faith of CHRIST; that they acknowledge the Onely true GOD, and Him whom GOD hath ſent, CHRIST IESUS, the Saviour and Redeemer of all mankinde; and becauſe they deteſt thoſe execrable blaſphemies of that falſe Prophet and man of ſinne againſt GOD, againſt CHRIST, and true Religion; ſeeking by all meanes to make them, as they ſpeake, Muſulmans, that is, to deny CHRIST IESUS, and to goe to hell. And for this cauſe, one amongſt

many, hee extremely tyrannizeth upon their bodies and temporall ſtates: a note of ANTICHRIST to doe ſo. but in more cruell and wretched ſort upon their ſoules, eſpecially in that his barbarous and unheard of Tribute of CHRISTIANS children every third year, or as occaſion ſerveth oftner or ſeldomer, to be violently reſt away from their Parents, from their GOD, Redeemer, Religion, hope of Salvation, and everlaſting life, to become the Eunuchs in his Seraglia, worſe than thoſe in the Court of the King of Babylon; his Ianiſaries, Spahies, Beglerbegs, and Baſhaes, the publick meanes and inſtruments of his Tyranny and inſolences againſt GOD and his Church.
                  
                  Tenthly, he is ſeated in Conſtantinople, that is, alſo in Rome. For Conſtantinople is known to have been called New Rome; was ſo named by CONSTANTINE himſelfe the Founder; had in Church and Common-wealth, in both States, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , every way equalled priviledges with the elder Rome; Senators, and one of the yearely Conſuls. The adjacent country was then called Romania; and is ſo corruptly termed by the Turks at this day, Rumilio, or Rum-ili, that is, the Roman Country. It was the Emperiall Citie then when MAOMET that falſe Prophet and Antichrist aroſe, as well as Rome, indeed rather then Rome, ſince the time that CONSTANTINE, to the great advantage of barbarous nations, enemies unto the Roman
                     
State, tranſlated the ſtate of the Empire thither. And laſtly, this great and Emperiall CITY, bearing rule over the Kings of the earth, is likewiſe, as well as ROME, ſeated upon ſeven hills, at or neere unto the Sea: indeed in a Foreland or Landſtreight where two Seas meet; the only Seat in the world for an Emperiall See. For which cauſe it is called 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , by NICETAS, The City with ſeven tops; Vrbs ſepticollis, by PAULUS DIACONUS: ſo acknowledged by IANUS DOUZA a Gentleman of the Netherlands in his Iournall; and by M. RICHARD KNOLLS in his Turkiſh Hiſtory, with others.
                  Now upon theſe premiſed conſiderations, of the Marks of that Antichrist, ſo fitting the Turkiſh State and Tyranny every way, it may ſeeme probable, that MAOMET the falſe Prophet, and the Turkiſh State, as the Beaſt, may at leaſt be aſſumed into aſſociation with the Pope and Papacy, in making up that Antichrist and Antichriſtian Kingdome or State oppoſite unto the State and Kingdome of CHRIST and Chriſtians. which reſpectu finis may be accounted one in oppoſition againſt GOD and CHRIST; though the meanes of effecting it be many, different and diverſe: Turciſme one way may oppoſe CHRIST, as it doth, vi apertâ, by fiery force; and Ropery bee ad oppoſitum another way, fraude and inſidijs, as it is. In which reſpect, as DANIEL may well tell us of one horn;
                     
ſo S. IOHN remembreth a Beast with two Hornes: MAOMET in the Eaſt, the POPE in the Weſt; both Hornes puſhing fiercely againſt the Saints: yet ſo alſo, that it may be probable which ZANCHIUS hath, Miſcellan lib. III. and LAMBERT alſo upon the Apocalypſe, that beſide theſe two, after theſe both, it is not unlikely, out of both theſe impious oppoſite States, one notorious, ſingular, miſchievous Antichriſt may ariſe, towards the finall conſummation of the world; who in fradulent, colluding, malicious craftineſſe, in impious, execrable and tranſcendent wickedneſſe, through hereticall impoſtures and lying miracles, ſhall goe beyond all other that ever lived in the world, and bee fitted with all ſignes and markes of Antichriſt unto the full, ſo as no exception can bee taken againſt any in any one point. Surely if the Generall of the Ieſuites Order ſhould once come to be Pope, & ſit in PETERS chaire, as they call it, I would vehemently ſuſpect him to bee the party deſigned: for out of what neſt that accurſed bird ſhould rather come abroad, than out of that Seraphicall Society, I cannot gheſſe; and but gheſſe. For in reſolution, I ſay with that IEWELL of England in pag. CCCXCIII. I will not ſay the POPE is ANTICHRIST. GOD will reveale him in his time, and he ſhall be knowne: yet is it probable, hee may be of that rank. I will not ſay the TURKE is Antichriſt;
                     
though it bee probable, that Antichriſt may come from thence; the Turkes power being increaſed and inlarged by the Popes policy, as the ſame B. IEWELL hath obſerved it well, that it may not ſeem ſtrange, two oppoſite in State may conſpire in oppoſing Piety. For all theſe, and whatſoever is beſide theſe in this particular denoted, being all prophecies and predictions of things to come, obſcurely and myſtically delivered, are but opinions and conjectures; not intended, not to be received as finall reſolutions. For my part, I deſire not to conteſt with any man about them; nor would I willingly have mens mindes, or the peace of the Church diſquieted with them. It is an evill diſeaſe in the world among Divines, in things of indifferency they cannot endure diſſentients. He is not my friend, I will hold no correſpondency with him, that will not per omniae and in omnibus bee of my minde. There is a Rule of faith; we acknowledge it, commend it, and have recourſe unto it. Things that are ſtraight and direct, and according to that Rule confeſſedly, need not application, are not commonly brought to be applied to that Rule: but things of different or doubtfull ſtanding, theſe need application, and are applied confeſſedly by the perpetuall practice and tradition of the Catholick Church in conſent of Fathers. Wee apply things doubtfull unto Scripture, our Norma, and exact and abſolute

                     Rule of faith and manners. We conſent and agree, it is Antichriſtian to diſſent from, to reject that Rule; and him an Antichriſt that doth ſo, or propoſeth any thing as Credendum againſt that Rule. The Pope doth this. Let him then be an Antichriſt in S. IOHN'S acceptance: There are many Antichriſts. But whether hee bee THAT Antichriſt or not, I dare not preſume to determine, without ſpeciall warrant in ſuch a caſe. If you have any ſpeciall illumination, or aſſurance by divine revelation, or rather ſtrong perſwaſion through affection, much good may it do you: keepe it to YOUR ſelves: preſſe it not on others, that in ſuch caſes deſire ſapere ad ſobrietatem, rather than reſolve without good warrant.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. VI. Touching IUSTIFICATION.
               
                  The ſtate of a meere naturall man; who, to pleaſe GOD, muſt become a new creature. That newnes cannot be wrought without a reall change of a ſinner in his

qualities. In what ſenſe it may be ſaid, that there is an Acceſſe of justification, both by daily receiving remiſsion of new ſins, and by increaſe of grace, in joyning vertuous and good deeds unto Faith.
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  
                     TOuching Iuſtification, thus hee writeth: A ſinner is then iuſtified when hee is made iuſt, that is, tranſlated from the ſtate of nature to the ſtate of grace, as COLOS. I. XIII. which (Act) is motion, as they ſpeak, betwixt two terms, and conſiſteth in forgiveneſſe of ſinnes primarily, and grace infuſed ſecondarily. CHAP. XVIII. pag. CXLII.
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  AND this, all this, in generall, in particular, is our Informers Popery. Strange Popery. Of what religion are you, M. Informers, YATES and WARD? For in Chriſtian

Religion a man is and may be conſidered two waies, as I alſo have conſidered him, according unto a twofold ſtate: The ſtate of nature, to which hee was formed; and the ſtate of grace, to which he is reformed: as hee was in ADAM, depraved and loſt; as hee is in CHRIST IESUS, ſought out, found, and healed of his maladies. In his Being, Subſiſting, and Conſtitution, every man is firſt a naturall man: in that ſtate ſtanding, hee pleaſeth not GOD. He can doe nothing, ſaith CALVIN, that can pleaſe him, or be accepted of him. His very beſt works (you I hope will ſay ſo) are abomination unto GOD. Quando naturalibus dotibus cenſendi ſunt, à vertice capitis ad plantam uſque pedis, ſcintilla boni non reperitur; niſi fortè velimus inſimulare falſi SCRIPTURAM, dum hiſce Elogijs univerſes filios ADAE commendat, quòd pravo ſint & praefracto corde; quòd omne figmentum cordis corum pravum ſit à primis annis; quòd vanae ſint corum cogitationes, &c. breviter, quòd caro ſint: quo nomine intelliguntur opera illá omnia quae enumerantur à PAULO, Gal. V. XIX. So CALVIN, Inſtit. III. XIV. I. The reaſon then of that ſo great a diſtaſte which GOD hath of the beſt works of meer carnall and naturall men, is that great diſproportion betwixt GOD and man, that much diſcongruity betwixt HIM and us. The Fountain is impure from whence theſe works proceed; man himſelf not accepted, that is Author of them,

Agent in them. And why not accepted? Becauſe hee is uncleane. GOD is of pure eyes: hee ſeeth whatſoever ſo is moſt ſecret in the boughts, and turnings, and windings of the heart; ſo pure, that he cannot behold vanity, nor look upon that which is defiled and unclean. And as hee cannot endure vanity: ſo neither will he look upon iniquity, to approve it; or call him righteous, that is unholy and unſanctified before him. As he beholdeth the forms of things as they are: ſo hee calleth everie thing by the name it hath. Man by nature (as he is, and what he is) is wholly and altogether vanity. The perſon with GOD muſt be made acceptable, then accepted, before any work of his become approveable or approved. This is not, cannot bee, hee continuing ſtatu quo, a naturall man, unclean, defiled, as he was. For, Odio eſt ei impius & impietas ejus; ſo far, ſaith CALVIN, that quae vel ſummo ſplendore conſpicua ſunt opera, in hominibus nondum verè 
                     INST. 3. 148. 
                     ſanctificatis, tam procul abſint à juſtitiâ coram DOMINO, ut peccata cenſeantur. Ac proinde veriſsimè illi, qui non, conciliari perſonae apud DEUM, gratiam per opera tradiderunt: ſed è converſo, tum demum placere opera, ubi perſona gratiam prius in DEI conſpectu invenerit. This, I hope, is not Popery. Now, that hee may bee fully and thoroughly accepted with GOD; that himſelfe firſt, and then his workes, may pleaſe GOD, there muſt (as I conceive) bee a

                     change, an alteration in him and his: he muſt become a new man, a man renewed, a man changed, a new creature, and the like, I. Cor. V. XVII. Gal. VI. XV. Coloſ. III. X. Epheſ. IV. XXIII. II. Cor. IV. XVI. I. Cor. V. VII. Pſal. LI. X. Now, in common ſenſe and reaſon, as I take it, there nor is, nor can be, any renewing of the inward man, nor any the leaſt change of the minde, nor any new creature, nor any tranſlating from darknes to light, &c. without alteration; without deſtruction of the firſt, and privation of former Being, and induction of the ſecond; without aboliſhing of the body of ſinne, and induction of the Spirit of righteouſneſſe. Man cannot poſſible paſſe from one ſtate unto another, without ceaſing to bee what hee was, and becomming what hee was not before. If it can bee done otherwiſe, good Sirs let mee knowe the manner how, the place where, the time when, the parties in whom this alteration is made; and I ſhall wonder at it. For as yet, to my conceipt, this furpaſſeth humane capacity and underſtanding, that there ſhould be a new creature, a renewing, an alteration, and yet no change. CALVIN hath taught you otherwiſe, Instit. 111. 3. 9. If then there be granted a change in man, that of the childe of wrath becommeth the childe of GOD, renued in the ſpirit of his minde (as what childe can or will deny or doubt of that?), then this alteration muſt needs bee inter terminos; as I

thinke all mankinde, beſide your ſelves, will confeſſe and acknowledge with mee, out of grounds and experiments of even naturall reaſon. A ſicke man, recovered, is changed in ſtate and habitude of body, diſeaſe, and diſpoſition; ceaſing to be what he was, becomming what hee was not. When of a ſick man hee became whole and ſound, his change was from Sickeneſſe to Health: and this his changing was Motion. the termes betwixt which, Sickneſſe and Health. A dead man reviving (as the widows SONNE of Naim, or LAZARUS quadriduanus raiſed out of his grave) is changed in ſtate, conſtitution, &c. when of a dead man hee becommeth a living. Naturall men regenerated are in like caſe: In the opinion of ſome men, haply, ſick, not dead: in your opinion and in mine, dead unto GOD, and to good works, ſo long as they conſiſt in ſtatu quo; are neceſſarily changed, when they are revived and made alive unto GOD and Righteouſneſſe, heyres of promiſe, co-heyres with CHRIST. Et haec mutatio eſt dexterae Excelſi. If S. PAUL had come within theſe Informers fingers when the promoting humour was predominant in them, doubtleſſe they would have informed alſo againſt him for Error, Popery, and what not? For he telling the CORINTHIANS what they had been, 1. Cor. VI. XI. faith, even in terminis, as I have ſpoken of the regenerate man; But you are waſhed, but you are ſanctified,
                     
                     but you are juſtified, in the name of our Lord IESUS CHRIST, and by the SPIRIT of our GOD, which Text M. CALVIN Inſt. 111. 14. 6. gloſſeth thus: Si CHRISTI ſanguine in purificationem per ſpiritum aſpergimur, ne putemus nos alios eſſe, ante hujus modi irrigationem, quàm eſt ſine CHRISTO peceator. Here is a change admitted: from Being ſo and ſo; to Subſiſting thus, and thus, betwixt termes. Maneat ergo illud Principium noſtrae ſalutis, eſſe quandam, velut à morte in vitam, Reſurrectionem. Quia propter CHRISTUM, ubi nobis datum eſt in eum Credere, tunc incipimus demum tranſire à morte in vitam. Iuſt the Popery that M. MOUNTAGU in this point is informed againſt for; A ſinner is then juſtified, when he is made juſt, that is, when he is tranſlated from the ſtate of Nature unto the ſtate of Grace: as Coloſſ. 1. 13. And if this was not Actio inter terminos, though wrought in inſtanti, as alſo mutation and change is, and needs muſt be, for complement of the Act, I muſt confeſſe my owne dulneſſe, I cannot otherwiſe underſtand or comprehend it. To denic a principle of Reaſon, in practice of Religion, I dare not. Surely, if Popery be a maſſe of abſurdities, this Taxation of the Informers is rather extreme Popery, than any thing here avouched by M. MOUNTAGU looking toward Popery. They deny ſuch a Principle, that denie mutation to be betwixt two Termes; or that in the juſtified Sinner there is mutation

and change of former ſtate, and alteration of his ſometime Being.
                  But haply it is better Popery which enſueth; and it is indeed the point which with any colour can bee touched with this aſperſion by theſe men, that have ſet themſelves to calumniate where they are ignorant of the point they undertake againſt. I have in conſequence theſe words, And conſiſteth in forgiveneſſe of ſinnes primarily, and in grace infuſed ſecondarily. Which words if the Informers could have underſtood, or would have conſtrued according to my meaning, they might have obſerved out of my diſcourſe, that I made a great difference betwixt theſe two parts; and by Secondly, intended only Concomitanter: my purpoſe beeing to wipe off that odious Popiſh imputation, of which I ſhall ſpeake anon, in their calumniating our doctrine of Iuſtification: which becauſe theſe Informers either could not, or would not underſtand, I ſhall endevour to ſpeak ſomewhat more plainly and fully out unto their eares.
                  IUSTIFICATION, as I ſaid, is deduced of Iuſtifico; which hath or may have a threefold ſignification: To make juſt and righteous, to declare juſt and righteous, and to make more juſt and righteous; for the encreaſe and augmentation of Iuſtification. Apoc. XXII. XI. Qui juſtus est juſtificetur, by new acceſſe of GOD'S grace, and progreſſe in courſe of righteouſneſſe

every day more and more. Remiſsio peecati facit, ut Sanctit as incheate vires acquirat & r
                           ••
                        oretur; for the declaration of the Act of Iuſtification upon man as where S. IAMES ſaith, ABRAHAM was justified by workes that is, declared to be a righteous man, by the lively fruits of a true faith; and for abſolution, which is the Act of the Iudge, to speake according unto secular proceedings, from the uſe and practice where of the word is taken, and applied unto the proportionable Acts of GOD upon man, by whom wee are juſtified alone. If this bee Popery, M. PERKINS is a Papist 1 
                        In 2. ad Gal. 16 who hath in effect the very ſame Now I profeſſed at firſt, to take Iustification only in this acceptation and inferred there upon againſt the Gagger, no more than was enough to confute him and his, that we teach and beleeve, that when ſinnes are pardoned by GOD, GOD doth not change the minde of the ſinner ney that yet deſtroyeth in him the blot and body of ſinne; but that the ſame remaining in the ſoule of man, in like maner as it did before condonation, is only taken away by a not imputation of the guilt. For ſo BECANUS, Manet ergo homo in ſe peccator impius immundus, & ſolùm habetur pro juſtopio, mundo; & omnia ejus opera ſunt immunda, 
                           〈◊〉
                        , inquin
                           •
                        ta. But wee, ſaith that moſt learned and judictions D. WHITE, truely are Forre from this abſund opinion. how farre? how Pa. ib. in Def. ſo? for we teach ſaith he, that together with the
                     
                     Action of GOD remitting ſinne, concurreth another Action of divine grace, enabling man to forſake and mortifie every greater ſinne, which GOD hath pardoned. And M. PERKINS obſerveth, that many among us doe not hold CHRIST, or beleeve in him aright for their Iuſtification, becauſe they hold him without change of heart and life: for by S. PAULS concluſion, whom CHRIST quickneth, them hee juſtifieth; and whom he doth not quicken, he doth not juſtifie. 
                        In 3. Gal. ver. 22. And this is directly the doctrine of the Scripture, 1. Cor. VI. XI. Heb. IX. XIV. Rev. I. V. VI. 1. Pet. II. IX. Ezech. XXXVI. XXVI. Eſay LIII. V. Pſal. CIII. III. Fathers alſo are cyted to that purpoſe: BERNARD ſaith, Sinnes are not onely pardoned, but the gift of ſanctity is conferred. and CHRYSOSTOME ſaith, Delivering us from ſin, he engrafteth righteouſneſſe; yea, he extinguiſheth ſinne, and doth not ſuffer it to be. Sinne in the ſoule, is as a leproſie in the bodie. Now, as when NAAMAN was reſtored by waſhing in Iordan, his leproſie was removed, and his fleſh reſtored to that naturall health, vigour, and beautie it had: ſo when GOD pardoneth ſinne, he removeth away the guilt thereof by free pardon, and conferreth grace, to the deſtroying of ſinne, and healing of the foule. Mich. VI. XIX. and this is the meaning of S. AUGUST in Pſal. VII. Cum Iuſtifica
                           •
                        u
                           •
                         impius, ex impio fit juſtus; & ex poſſeſsione Diaboli, migrat in templum DEI. and Ser. XVI. de verbis Apoſtoli,
                     
ſumming up whatſoever I have ſaid in effect, and by theſe Ignorántes is traduced as Popery: Nos ſumus & de iustitia nihil habemus? Habemus omnino. Grati ſimus ex co quod habemus, ut addatur quod non habemus, & ne perdamus quod habemus. Iuſtificati ſumus, & ipſa iustitia cùm proficimus creſcit, & quomodo creſcit, dicam; & vobiſcum, quodammodo, conferam, ut unuſquiſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         vestrum iam in ipſa iustificatione constitutus, acceptâ ſcilicet remiſsione peccatorum per lavacrum regenerationis, accepto ſpiritu ſancto, proficiens de die in diem, videat ubi ſit, accedat, proficiat, creſcat donec conſummetur: incipit homo à fide. Quid pertinet ad fidem? Credere: ſed adhuc ista fides diſcernatur ab immundis ſpiritibus, alluding to that IAMES 2. Si tantum credis, & ſine ſpe vivis, vel dilectionem non habes, & Daemones credunt & contremiſcunt. A new life needs then muſt be conjoyned with Iustification. And this is the expreſſe doctrine of D. WHITAKERS: Remiſsio peccatorum facit, ut Sanctitas in nobis inchoetur. and of CALVIN himſelfe, who will have men to be taught this doctrine: Doceantur 
                     Lib. de reform. Eccleſiae. 
                     homines fieri non paſſe, ut juſti cenſecutur CHRISTI merito, quin renoventur eius ſpiritu in ſanctam vitam: fruſtra
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         grataitâ DEI adoptione gloriari omnes, in quibus ſpiritus regenerationis non habitat. Deni
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         nullos à DEO ricipi in gratiam, qui non iuſti quo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         verè fiunt. Now, if a man at all times, when he is truely iuſtified, be alſo ſanctified, what offence can there be, to allow

one common word to containe and expreſſe both theſe parts? But men that underſtand not the true ſtate of things, but ſcumme upon the ſurface, and take things up in groſſe, without due proportions, and come with prejudicate malice, to lay hold upon any thing for their owne advantage; no marvell if they make ſtrange Popery, and in indiſcreet zeale caſt forth they cannot tell what. CALVIN is not afraid, loco quo ſupra, to uſe the very terme of INHERENT righteouſneſſe. Nunquam reconciliamur DEO, quin ſimul donemur IUSTITIA INHERENTE. which ſpeech if that M. MOUNTAGU had uſed, no excuſe would have put by imputation of Popery.
                  
                  To conclude, and give them ſatisfaction, if they will take any; if not, jacta alea eſt, eatur. IUSTIFICATION is taken two waies in Scripture; Strictè magis, and extenſivè Preciſely, for remiſſion of ſinnes, by the onely merits and ſatisfaction of CHRIST, accepted for us, and imputed to us. and enlargedly, for that Act of GOD, and the neceſſary and immediate concomitants unto, and conſequents upon that, the whole and entire ſtate and quality and condition of man regenerate, changed; by which a ſinner guilty of death, is acquitted, cleanſed, made juſt in himſelfe, reconciled unto GOD, appointed to walke, and beginning to walke in holineſſe and in newneſſe of life, Remiſsion of ſinnes, and imputation of CHRIST'S Righteouſneſſe,
                     
ſaith M. PERKINS, is Iuſtification. a free pardoning and cancelling of all Bands and Obligations of tranſgreſſion for CHRIST'S ſake, through the only merit of his Death, Paſſion, and ſhedding of his bloud. Which Act, Pſal. XXXII. II. is called, Not imputing ſin. When and where GOD doth ſo pardon, and not impute ſinne, he addeth unto it, out of his love, a ſeconding Act of divine mercy and grace, enabling man to abandon everie mortall ſinne; thoſe ſinnes that doe hang ſo faſt on; that are more eminent, notorious, enormious, whoſe property is vaſtare conſcientiam; to the amoliſhing of the whole body of ſinne, that it raigne not in our mortall bodies: although that thoſe delicta ordinariae incurſionis, as TERTULLIAN nameth them, cannot ſo eaſily bee 
                        De pudic. c. 19. put away. Have I unto you ſeemed to confound Iuſtification with Sanctification, if yet you knowe the difference between them? or have I aſcribed, in your ſeeming, anie act of Sanctification unto Iuſtification? You may bee pleaſed to remember, that I went not moſt punctually to work, but è re natâ to confute the Gagger, deſcribed Iuſtification at large: never ſuſpecting, that any profeſſed enemies of Popery, as you would ſeem to bee, would ſo captiouſly have perverted my true ſenſe and meaning; my words, at leaſt my paſſage beeing warranted by YOUR owne Dictators, CALVIN, PERKINS, BEZA. For Iuſtificationis nomen
                     
                     largè accipio, ſaith BEZA; and imagine them to bee my words, ut complectitur quicquid à CHRISTO conſequimur, tam per Imputationem, quàm per Spiritus in nobis Sanctificationem, Annotat in Tit. 111. ver. VII. and in Opuſc. To. 11. pa. DCLXXVII. Otherwiſe be it known unto your Maſterſhips, that I beleeve, Iuſtification in ſtrictnes of tearms is neither Regeneration, nor Renovation, nor Sanctification; but a certaine Action in GOD, applied unto us, or a certaine reſpect or relation whereby we are pardoned and acquitted of our ſinnes, eſteemed righteous before GOD, and accepted by him in CHRIST unto life everlaſting: which wiſer men than you have ſo expreſſed, whom haply for my ſake you will hold to PERK. in Gal. 2 be Papiſts heereafter.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. VII.
               
                  A change made in a juſtified man. The Author agreeth in part with the Councell of Trent, and therfore maintaineth Popery, no neceſſary illation. The doctrine of the Church of England, and of

other reformed Churches, in this point of Iuſtification.
                  
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  
                     ANda little after: In the ſtate of grace a man is iuſt, when hee is changed. Which change muſt have concurrence of two things: Privation of Beeing to that which was, The body of ſinne; and ſecondly, a new conſtitution unto GOD in another eſtate. In which, he that is altred in ſtate, changed in condition, transformed in mind, renew'd in ſoule, regenerate & borne anew unto GOD by grace, is iuſt, in the ſtate of Iuſtification; ceaſing to bee what he was becoming what he was not before. In this maine point he accordeth fully with the Councell of TRENT, Seſſ. VI. cap. XXXVII. & contradicteth the Doctrine of the Church of England in the book of Homilies, ſerm. of ſalvation, and all other Reformed Churches.
                  
               
               
                  
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  HEER now at length wee have ſome, though very poore ſhew of a juſt and formall accuſation: the reſt are but meer calumniations. For heer is a charge of delivering Popery, and maintaining it; and withall an advancing of that charge, by pretending ſome ſeeming proofe, in a threefold branch: 1. of According fully with the Councell of TRENT; 11. Contradicting the Doctrine of the Church of ENGLAND; 111. Diſſenting from all other reformed Churches: which is done by this one Aſſertion, A change is made in a juſtified man; the ſubſtance in briefe of all the former ſuggeſtion: ſuch an one as maketh mee beleeve, that theſe informations were not gathered by any Scholars or Divines, but ſubſcribed unto unadviſedly, and collected by ſome other at odds with his owne little or frantick wits: for who can conceive, that a juſt and uniuſt, a carnall and ſpirituall man ſhould be the ſame? that one regenerate, and reformed in the ſpirit of his mind, ſhould be the ſame that hee was before? that a live man ſhould bee dead? I confeſſe I cannot conceive, LAZARUS in his grave, and ſitting at table with our SAVIOUR, to have undergone no change nor alteration; SAUL a Perſecuter, and Saint PAUL an Apoſtle, without

change; the Thiefe upon the Croſſe, no other man, than when hee robbed and killed upon the high-way. Was he called, juſtified, ſaved? then ſure he was changed. Had hee not been changed from what hee formerly was, hee had not entred into Paradiſe with our SAVIOUR. Hee, whoſe Diſciples YOUR Divines are aſſigned to be, never taught you this Learning. Fatemur, ſaith he, dum nos, intercedente CHRISTI juſtitiâ, ſibi reconciliat DEUS, ac gratuitâ peccatorum remiſsione donatos pro juſtis habet, cum ejuſmodi miſericordiâ conjunctam ſimul eſſe hanc ejus beneficentiam, quòd per Spiritum ſuum ſanctum in nobis habitet; cujus virtute, concupiſcentiae carnis noſtrae magis ac magis indies mortificantur, Inſtit. III. XIV. IX. You heare him to ſpeak of righteouſnes inhabiting in our hearts, by grace diffuſed from the HOLY GHOST; of a progreſſe in a new courſe of life, from grace to grace, from perfection unto perfection: which is not a phantaſie, but reall. Nos enim, ſo he addeth, ſanctifitamur, hoc eſt, conſecramur DOMINO in veram vitae puritatem, cordibus noſtris in legis obſequium formatis. And ſomewhat before, as hath been remembred already, he calleth it a reſurrection from death to life; and no reſurrection, but ſuppoſeth change: when this mortall ſhall have put on immortality, and this corruptible ſhall have put on incorruption: which is indeed the work of the right hand of the

Moſt High, and cannot be but betwixt terms: that à quo; and this, ad quem: which is the ſtrangeſt Popery that ever yet I was acquainted withall. But why go I about to proove, that there is Motion, unto thoſe that agree not upon common Principles? or bring proofs to ANAXAGORAS, for The ſnowe is white, who would not ſuffer himſelf to be perſwaded ſo? nay, becauſe he was otherwiſe by preconceit perſwaded, he ſaid it did not ſo much as ſeem white unto him. YOUR opinions are your owne: you will opine what formerly you have thought. So doe for mee, and there an end.
                  If yet you would there make an end, and be content to enjoy your conceits unto your ſelves, and make much of them at home: but we muſt come over and conforme our Faith unto your thoughts, or wee ſhall heare of it on both our eares. For inſtance, at preſent; Odiouſly and maliciouſly you advance this accuſation, to procure hate and envie unto the part and parties ad oppoſitum unto you. It is the Doctrine, you ſay, of the Councell of Trent, and M. MOUNTAGU agreeth fully with that Councell. But you miſtake on each hand, and knowe not what you ſay. I do not agree fully, but onely in part with the Councell of Trent. And is it not poſſible to accord in ſomething with the Councell of Trent, and to bee no Papist, nor maintaine Popery? What ſay you

to M. PERKINS in his Reformed Catholick, who profeſſeth conformity in many and different points with them, and even in this point of Iuſtification? is HEE a Papiſt? Even in your owne underſtandings, though not much, there are ſome Deciſions and Concluſions in that Councell, which you will imbrace as well as Papiſts doe. What ſay you to this? Si quis ADAE praevaricationem ſibi ſoli, non & ejus propagini, nocuiſſe aſſerit; acceptam à DEO ſanctitatem & juſtitiam, quam perdidit, ſibi ſoli, & non nobis, eum perdidiſſe; aut in quantum illum per inobedientiae peccatum mortem & poenas corporis tantùm in omne genus hominum transfudiſſe, non autem & peccatum, quod mors eſt animae; Anathema ſit: and your ſelves will ſay Amen, will you not, unto it? It is not therefore a neceſſary illation, M. MOUNTAGU holdeth ſomewhat determined in the Councell of Trent, he is therefore a Papiſt. That Councell, were it worſe than it was (and yet for my part I hold it (in ſome reſpect) peſtem Reipublicae Chriſtianae), yet reſolving upon ſuch a Truth, as is warranted in Reaſon, in Divinity, with generall conſent of all Ages, is not in that to be condemned. Now ſuch is the point there concluded, for which M. MOUNTAGU is called Papiſt: A man juſtified is changed from that ſtate wherein hee was borne, the childe of the firſt ADAM, unto the ſtate of grace and adoption of the Sonnes of GOD, by the ſecond ADAM,

IESUS CHRIST our Saviour; and of an unjuſt perſon, is made righteous; of an enemy, is made the friend of GOD: that ſo he may become heire of eternall life. Which is good Catholick Doctrine, non Romano, ſed antiquo more; Chriſtian and juſtifiable, if S. PAUL taught Catholick and Chriſtian Doctrine, Rom. V. X. when we were enemies, wee were reconciled unto GOD by the death of his Sonne: and being reconciled, wee ſhall bee ſaved by his life. And againe, Heb. IX. XIV. For if the bloud of Buls and Goats, and the aſhes of an Heifer, ſprinkling them that are unclean, ſanctifieth as touching the purification of the fleſh; how much rather ſhall the bloud of CHRIST, who through the eternall Spirit offred himſelf without ſpot unto GOD, purge your conſciences from dead works, to ſerve the living God! Can this bee conceived without a change? GOD pardoneth ſinne in man, for the death and paſſion of CHRIST his Sonne; in that very act and inſtant imputing unto him the righteouſneſſe of CHRIST, that all-ſufficient and well-pleaſing ſacrifice, for his juſtification. and doth he leave him there? his ſinnes belike remaining ſtill in being, as they were? himſelfe indeed the very man he was before? or rather (as, perfect are the workes of the mightie GOD, not done by halves, and to no purpoſe) doth hee not alſo waſh and clenſe his ſoule and conſcience from dead workes? doth he not wipe out his iniquities, when he cancelleth

the band, and maketh him become another man? doth hee not conferre upon him of his grace, for the aboliſhing of the bodie of ſinne, and enabling the ſoule againſt the aſſaults of ſinne? TERTULLIAN compareth man in the ſtate of Nature depraved, unto that Leproſie deſcribed Levit. XIII. where, as there is a change in the body made cleane and whole from the leproſie, ſo violent and infectious; ſo doth he, and that juſtly, acknowledge the like in the clenſing and purifying of the ſoule: Converſum enim hominem, de priſtino carnis habitu, in candorem fidei, quae vitium & macula aeſtimatur in ſaeculo, & totum novatum, mundum voluit intelligi, qui jam non ſit varius, non ſit de priſtino, & novo aſperſus. Si verò poſt abolitionem, in vetuſtatem aliquid ex ea re vixerit, rurſum in Carne ejus, quòd emortuum delicto habebatur, immundum judicari. I would TERTULLIAN TERT. de pud. cap. 20. had never written worſe than ſo. The reſt of the Fathers run the ſame way. CLEMENS ALEXANDRINUS in his Paedagog. pag. 96. and VII. Strom. pa. 319. commenting, as it were, upon that of the APOSTLE, But you are waſhed, but you are ſauctified. DOMINUS qui in mentes noſtras indulgentiae coeleſtis allapſu clementer influxit, in animi obteſtantis hoſpitio juſta operatione tenetur: ſaith S. CYPRIAN, and appealeth unto DONATUS for witneſſe. Scis, &c. 
                        Epiſt. 1. 
                     quid detraxerit nobis, quidve contulerit, mors iſta criminum, vita virtutum. which generally he had

a little before expreſſed thus: Sed poſtquam undae genitalis auxilio, ſuperioris avi labe detersâ, in expiatum pectus ac purum deſuper ſe lumen infudit: poſtquàm coelitus ſpiritu hauſto, in novum me hominem ſenſinativitate ſecundâ reparatum, mirum in modum protinus confirmare ſe dubia, patere clauſa, lucere tenebroſa, facultatem dare, quod prius difficile videbatur, geri poſſe, quod prius impoſsible videbatur ut eſſet: agnoſcere terrenum fuiſſe quod prius carnaliter natum, obnoxium delictis viveret; DEI eſſe coepiſſe, quod jam ſpiritus animaret. Nor doth the Church of England differ heerfrom, which never did ſo much as dreame of denying an alteration in ſtate, condition, life, manners, unto a man that is juſtified. How could our Church doe it, and make anſwer unto S. PAUL, Epheſ. 2. 11. 12, 13. Wherefore remember that you being in time paſt Gentiles in the fleſh, and called uncircumciſion of them which are called circumciſion in the fleſh, made with hands; that you were, I ſay, at that time without CHRIST, and were aliens from the commonwealth of Iſrael, and were ſtrangers from the covenants of promiſe, and had no hope, but were without GOD in the world: But now in IESUS CHRIST you which were farre off, are made neere by the bloud of CHRIST? So heer is variation of place and ſtation; and an alteration alſo in ſtate, ver. 19. Now you are no more ſtrangers and forreyners, but citizens with Saints, and of the houſhold of GOD. Not that only,

but, Two made one. As if, ſaith CHRYSOSTOM, two ſtatues were, the one of braſſe, the other of gold; and both being cast into the furnace, ſhould from thence come out gold. Such is the changed eſtate of men juſtified; that they are alſo regenerate and borne anew, that are juſtified. I will not juſtifie the Councell of Trent farther than needs; they have not deſerved it at the hands of any Proteſtants: but Truth is truth even from the Divels mouth. And if they meant no otherwiſe than thus, as I conceive they did not, I ſee no reaſon to quarrell them, or diſſent from them.
                  But yet one peg higher is this imputation ſtrained; namely, that I not onely agree with the Councell of Trent, but diſagree from the Church of England. I deny this abſolutely: prove it, and take all. If I diſagree from the Church of England, promote, informe againſt me: ſpare not. In Morboniam all the Councels of Trent in the world, if there were ten thouſand of them. I forſake them all reſpectively: ſuch regard and awfull reſpect doe I beare unto my Mother the CHURCH of England. You quote us the Homilies: but it is at randome, as if you ſpake it by Heare-ſay, having never read them; and no marvell: for I think you diſ-repute them, as all of your Faction doe. Serm. you ſay, of Salvation. There are three ſeverall Homilies, or, as you call them, Sermons, of that argument, with the Title of

                     Salvation. In all of them, in any one of them, ſhew me any contradiction unto any thing delivered againſt the Gagger, or unto this Error, as you call it, of the change made in a juſtified man, if you can. You cite no words, name no place, ſend me to no Text, Page, nor particular by any direction, that I may know where to finde what you intend. A meer trick of juggling companions. Marry I find ſome things in thoſe Homilies, which I dare ſay will not down, nor digeſt with you; as oppoſing ſome other dreames of your Side: but I let them alone till opportune time. But in the ſecond Sermon of Repentance, I finde directly in a man that is juſtified, a change made, faith the Homily. The fourth part of Repentance is amendment of life, or a new life, in bringing forth fruits worthy of Repentance. For they that doe truely repent them of their ſinnes, muſt be cleane abtered and CHANGED: they muſt become new creatures: they must be no more the ſame they were before. Now look and compare M. MOUNTAGU'S private Popery with this publick Popery of the Church, and goe give your ſelves the check for malice and indiſcretion. And afterward, having inſtanced this doctrine in that memorable example of ZACHEUS'S converſion from his evill way of covetouſnes and extortion, as a common Cuſtomer, the Homily concludeth with this Epiphonema concerning him thus: Heer we ſee, that after his repentance he was no more
                     
                     the ſame man he had been before, but was clean CHANGED and altered. It was ſo farre off, that he would continue and abide ſtill in his unſatiable covetouſneſſe, or take ought away fraudulently from any man, that hee was moſt ready and willing to give away his owne. Go now, and challenge M. MOUNTAGU for his Popery upon like caſe, in like tearms almoſt, delivered. In the ſtate of grace a man is just (and a juſt man I hope none is, but he that is already iuſtified) when he is changed. Which change of his conſiſteth in two things: Privation of Being to that which was formerly in a naturall man, the body of ſinne; and A new conſtitution unto GOD in another ſtate, namely, of holineſſe in life and converſation. I know well enough, what you are afraid of, what you would ſay, becauſe you neyther underſtand your ſelves, nor mee, that doe not make this change the ſame with Iuſtification in the act; but an incident, inſtant, neceſſarie conſequent thereupon. Goe then and befoole your ſelves, for confuſedly oppoſing common ſenſe and reaſon, and well knowne and confeſſed Divinity on all hands. No reaſonable man will denie a renewing in a juſtified man: where are evermore 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Without alteteration or any other the leaſt change of ſubſtance, old things are made new; ſaith ORIGEN in his Dialogue againſt the Marcionites, which I have manuſcript.
                  
                     
Nor do Reformed Churches diſſent or differ, as theſe Calumniators falſly ſuggeſt. The Confeſſion of Ausberge requireth novam vitam, which is obedientia mandatis DEI, and renovatio, according to S. PAUL; and that alſo ſo neceſſarily, that qui admittunt actiones contra Conſcientiam, ſint injuſti, nec SPIRITUM SANCTUM, nec fidem retinent. And for the maner, I finde it thus: Fide apprehenditur remiſsio Peccatorum; & quia per fidem accipitur SP. SANCTUS, jam corde renovantur, & induunt novos affectus: ſic AMBROSIUS. Fides bonae voluntatis & justae actionis genitrix est. In the confeſsion of Saxony more direct. In declaratione vocabuli juſtificari, uſitatè dicitur, Iuſtificari ſignificat ex injuſto juſtum fieri; quod rectè intellectum, hic quo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         quadrat. And what that right underſtanding is, enſueth (fully and wholly M. MOUNTAGU'S Popery): Ex injuſto juſtum, id eſt, abſolutum à reatu propter filium DEI, id eſt, apprehendentem fide ipſum CHRISTUM, qui eſt juſtitia noſtra; quia EIUS merito habemus remiſsionem, & DEUS juſtitiam ejus nobis imputat, & propter EUM nos juſtos reputat, & dato SPIRITU SUO SANCTO, nos vivificat & regenerat. a flat change. And in the Belgick Confeſſion yet fuller: Credimus veram hanc Fidem unicui
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         noſtrum inditam, nos regenerare, at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         veluti novos homines efficere, ut quos ad novam vitam vivendam excitet. And in the French likewiſe, Credimus nos qui Naturâ ſervi ſumus peccati, hac eadem fide intercedente, in novam
                     
                     vitam regenerari. Thus theſe Reformed Churches, and ſo all the reſt, acknowledge a change in juſtified perſons, by the grace of ſanctification. I remembred before out of the Reverend and learned Deane of Carlile, that we are farre from that abſurd opinion wherewith our adverſaries charge us, that GOD in juſtification doth not change the minde. You, it ſeemeth, are none of thoſe WEE he ſpeaketh of: for he meant it of the publick authoriſed Doctrine of the Church of England, and of Conformers unto the ſaid Doctrine of that Church. You have a Church, or Conventicles of your owne, and Conſiſtoriall fancies, it ſeemeth, thence derived: nor will you bee freed from that abſurd opinion, nor let the Church of England willingly be freed from it. For if a man liſt to beleeve you before that Learned Man (whoſe bookes the beſt amongſt you is not worthy to follow, or carrie after him) in juſtified perſons there is no change.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. VIII.
               
                  Strange Popery. GOD only and properly juſtifieth.
               
               
                  
                  INFORMERS.
                  PRoperly to ſpeake, ſaith he, GOD only iuſtifieth, who alone imputeth not, but pardoneth ſinne.
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  DEUS, propter ſolum CHRISTUM paſſum & reſuſcitatum, propitius eſt peccatis noſtris, nec illa nobis imputat. Imputat autem CHRISTI juſtitiam pro noſtrâ. It a ut jam ſimus non ſolùm mundati à peccatis, & purgati vel ſancti (good Popery, is it not? you ſhall have more of it) ſed etiam donati juſtitiâ CHRISTI, abſoluti à peccatis, morte, condemnatione, juſti deni
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ac haeredes vitae aeternae. Thus much the Helvetian Confeſſion, againſt your former Information. Now followeth expreſſely againſt this: Propriè ergo loquendo, DEUS ſolus nos iuſtificat (engliſh this, M. YATES) & duntaxat propter CHRISTUM juſtificat, non imputans nobis peccata, ſedimputans nobis ejus juſtitiam. And yet you ſhall need not to engliſh it; it is ready engliſhed unto your hands: for have you forgot, or rather have you read indeed, that Homily you but now alledged againſt me, of Salvation? In the ſecond Homily there I have read thus: Iuſtification is not the office of man, but the office of GOD. and againe, Iustification
                     
                     is the office of GOD onely; and is not a thing which we render unto him, but which we receive of him: not which we give to him, but which we take of him by his free mercy, and by the onely merits of his moſt deerly beloved Sonne, our Lord, our only Redeemer, Saviour, and Iuſtifier, IESUS CHRIST. And yet it is Popery in M. MOUNTAGU, to have ſaid and written, Properly to ſpeake, GOD only juſtifieth; who alone imputeth not, but pardoneth ſinne. En quo vaecordia caecos! For yet moreover, is it not your owne Beleefe and Profeſsion (for which, if he ſhould ſay otherwiſe, M. MOUNTAGU ſhould be cryed downe Papiſt) that Iuſtification conſiſteth in Remiſsion of ſinnes? or, not imputing of them unto the man juſtified? Ne poſthac dubites, ſaith CALVIN, Inſtit. III. XI. XXII. and you ſubſcribe it, quo modo nos DEUS juſtificet, cum audis, Reconciliare illum nos ſibi, non imputando delicta. and againe, Nos juſtificationem ſimpliciter interpretamur, acceptationem illam; quâ nos DOMINUS in gratiam receptos pro juſtis habet. Eam
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         in Peccatorum remiſsione ac juſtitiae CHRISTI imputatione poſitam eſſe dicimus. Sect. 2. to whom per omnia agreeth M. PERKINS in mo places, than ten, defining Iuſtification to be an Act of GOD abſolving, &c. And yet with you M. MOUNTAGU is a Papiſt for affirming, GOD only juſtifieth properly, when your ſelves confeſſe, that Iuſtification, at leaſt properly, conſiſteth in Remiſsion of ſinnes:
                     
and that none can forgive ſinnes properly but GOD. How this ſhould hang together, I profeſſe my ignorance, I cannot tell. For eyther Iustification, in your opinions, muſt not conſiſt in forgiveneſſe of ſinnes; or elſe others, beſide GOD, muſt have power of imputing or of not imputing ſinnes. And heere it is worth the while to obſerve, how theſe detracters doe croſſe their owne ſhinnes. It will not be long before that M. MOUNTAGU with them be accounted a Papiſt, for ſaying, A Prieſt, GOD'S Miniſter, in GOD'S place, can forgive ſinnes: and heer he is a Papiſt, for ſaying, GOD only juſtifieth properly, when themſelves will have Iuſtification to bee meerly forgiveneſſe of Sinnes, and yet hold, that none doth or can forgive Sinnes but GOD. May I not ſay well, ô vertiginem! In ſober (and not in madde Puritanicall) ſadneſſe, dare you ſay that ſome other beſide GOD, ſome creature over and above GOD, can forgive Sinnes? This is contrary to the doctrine of the Church of England, in that Homily which you remember indeed, but can produce no teſtimonie thence. Becauſe all men bee ſinners (ſaith that Homily) and offenders againſt GOD, and breakers of his Lawes and Commandements, therefore can no man by his owne acts, workes, or elſe deedes, ſeeme they never ſo good, be juſtified, and made righteous before GOD: but everie man, of neceſsity, is conſtrained to ſeek for another righteouſneſſe
                     
                     or juſtification. But where ſhall he find it? where is it to bee had? It is expreſſed according unto truth, To be received at GOD'S hand. It is GOD then that juſtifieth in this opinion of the Homily. And againe in the ſecond Homily of that argument, as is already remembred, Iuſtification is the office of GOD only: it is not the office of man Credimus SPIRITUM SANCTUM in cordibus noſtris habitantem, voram nobis fidem impertiri, ut hujus tanti myſterij cognitionem adipiſcamur; ſaith the Belgick Confeſsion. which is the POPERY of M. MOUNTAGU, as pleaſeth theſe Great Maſters in Iſrael, Lyars againſt their owne knowledge, in ſaying it contradicteth the Doctrine of the Engliſh Church. Or if this be not the thing they meane, what is it, That GOD imputeth not ſinnes unto the juſtified? or that Iustification is not in pardoning, and not imputing ſinnes? whereas the Papiſts doe clamour againſt us for maintayning, that Iuſtification to be received at GODS hands, is forgivenes of ſins and treſpaſſes, in ſuch things as hee hath beene offended in. I confeſſe, I am a Papiſt if this be Popery, or elſe that which followeth after Remiſſion of ſins: againſt which they informe in the next place.
               
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. IX.
               
                  Holineſſe of life added unto Iuſtification and Remiſsion of ſins. GOD juſtifieth originally, and Faith inſtrumentally.
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  
                     AGaine; WHO only can and doth tranſlate from death unto life, reneweth a right ſpirit, and createth a new hart within us.
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  WHo can doe this, but only GOD moſt high? It is a work of Omnipotencie to create: they ſay it is a greater work to recreate. Where ſinne is pardoned by GOD, and a man is become regenerate, borne anew, and in ſtate of Grace with GOD, there GOD by his HOLY SPIRIT worketh inward renovation. Where ſinne is graciouſly and freely pardoned, there holy

life and converſation doth eſt ſoones enſue. This is the divinitie that I have learned in our Protestant Schooles, touching this point. And to my underſtanding it is obſerved and tendred by DAVID in Pſal. L. X. Hide thy face from my ſinnes, and put away all mine iniquities; which is Remiſſion of ſinnes. Then followeth, to make up a complete worke, Create in mee a clean heart, O LORD, and renew a right ſpirit within mee: which to me ſeemeth an Infuſion of Grace. And S. PAUL doth everie where, after vocation unto, and acceptation of us with GOD, urge walking according unto vocation, in newneſſe and in holineſſe of life. But, becauſe GOD was moved thereunto by a true and a lively faith in him and his mercies in CHRIST, Faith is by mee ſaid to iuſtifie inſtrumentally. That GOD juſtifieth cauſally, hath beene ſuſpected of Popery, and challenged therefore. Now that Faith juſtifieth inſtrumentally, cannot avoide the ſame imputation. And yet the maine exception of all Papists againſt the doctrine of our Church, is, that we hold a man is iuſtified by Faith: which muſt be originally or instrumentally. THAT wee exclude with the forenamed Homilies. That we be iuſtified by Faith in CHRIST only, is not, That this our owne act to beleeve in CHRIST, or this our faith in CHRIST, which is within us, doth iustifie us: for that were to account our ſelves to be iuſtified by ſome act or
                     
                     vertue within our ſelves. For, ſaith S. PAUL, Rom. VIII. XXXIII. It is GOD that iuſtifieth. THIS we embrace, as alſo in the ſame Homily: Faith doth directly ſend us to CHRIST for remiſsion of our ſins. And by Faith given unto us of GOD, wee embrace the Promiſe of GOD'S mercie, and of Remiſsion of ſinnes: which accordeth with the traduced paſſage of M. MOUNTAGU, becauſe GOD was drawne unto it by our Faith; which laying hold upon his mercy in CHRIST, obtayneth this freedome, and newneſſe, and renewing from Him. Faith is therefore ſaid to juſtifie, that is, instrumentally, or applicatorily. And ſo I am content to paſſe for a Papiſt, with the CHURCH of England.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. X.
               
                  An Acceſſe declaratory made to the act of Iuſtification by the works of a lively Faith. S. PAUL and S. IAMES reconciled. The old Prophets and ancient Fathers made new Papiſts by the Informers.
               
               
                  
                  INFORMERS.
                  
                     HEe ſpeaketh of an Acceſſe of Iuſtification, or of a ſecond Iuſtification. His words are theſe: S. IAMES, Cap. 2. 24. meaneth that a man is juſtus declaratus, by his holy life and converſation; or that a man hath Acceſſe of Iuſtification, as it is alſo taught by your owne men. CHAP. XVIII. pag. 148.
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  HEe nameth indeed an Acceſſe unto Iuſtification, but it is as out of the mouth of Popiſh Writers; and not out of his owne opinion. Is there no difference, in your underſtanding, betwixt theſe two, Affirming poſitively, and relating reſervedly? Many Proteſtants give anſwer unto Popiſh objections ſatisfactorie, out of Popiſh Tenents; who yet I think ſubſcribe not unto thoſe their Tenents. B. MORTON is moſt frequent in this courſe, and yet I hope you hold him no Papiſt. But I farther adde: Though I ſaid not ſo in that place by you recyted, I may, and I doe alſo avow an acceſſe of Iuſtification, made unto it by workes of an Holy and a Lively Faith. Not as eſſentiall thereto, or ingredient intrinſically: for Iuſtification is properly the work of GOD,

and eatenus, without magis or minus; but as acceſſory and circumſiſtant, for deſtruction of the Body of ſinne, by contrary actions of new Righteouſneſſe, to ſpeake properly, is a worke of Sanctification, not of Iuſtification, according unto S. PAUL. But in what place do I ſpeake by name of a ſecond Iuſtification? Goe ſave your honeſt credits, and name mee the place: quote the very words. I diſtinguiſh indeed betwixt the phraſe of S. PAUL and S. IAMES: that HEE ſpeaketh of Iuſtification in attaining it; S. IAMES, of Iuſtification attained. which cannot be ſeparated from good works, as anon is declared, and cited out of the twelfth Article of our Confeſsion.
                  
                  In briefe, the Information is rather an inference upon the paſſage, than the paſſage expreſſed as it ſhould be. It is known unto all, that the Romane Profeſſors have ever in their mouths the Text of S. IAMES, What doth it profite though a man ſaith he hath Faith, and hath no Works? can his Faith ſave him? Unto this allegation, amongſt other things, this is anſwered: S. PAUL ſpeaketh of Iuſtification in the attayning it, That onely Faith doth juſtifie; and that it is the Act of Faith in regard of man. For properly, and cauſally, and originally, GOD doth onely Iuſtifie. But S. IAMES meaneth of Iuſtification had and obtained: the which neceſſarily is accompanied with good workes, and can bee no more ſeparate from good workes,
                     
than light from the Sunne. So that juſtus factus through Faith, by the grace of God, is alſo juſtus declaratus by his holy life and converſation, that is, the tree is knowne by the fruit it bringeth forth. Well may we beare the name of Christian men, ſay the Homilies, but we lacke that true faith which belongeth thereto: for true faith doth evermore bring forth good workes, as Saint IAMES ſpeaketh, Shew mee thy Faith by thy Workes. Thy deeds and workes must bee an open teſtimonie of thy faith: otherwiſe thy faith being without good workes, is but the Divels faith, the faith of the wicked, a phantaſie 
                     
                        Hom. 3. of Faith
                      
                     of faith, and not a true Chriſtian faith. This is the very declaration of the Homilies, for which, and no more, my Informers have promoted me for a Papiſt. For, that Acceſſe unto Iuſtification is not by me made eſſentiall unto Iuſtification, but onely declaratory; as I have plainly expreſſed in direct words. It nor is in it ſelfe, nor is delivered by mee, nor conceived of by mee, to bee any part of, or ingredient into the entire Act of proper Iuſtification. I ſay proper: for as your owne Divines acknowledge, the word being, as moſt words are, extenſive, ambiguous, and 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , doth ſometime extend it ſelfe unto all the naturall conſequents unto, and proper Acts of Iuſtification: and ſo it may be ſaid, there is a twofold Iuſtification. When S. PAUL ſaith (they are M. PERKINS his words) No man is juſtified
                     
                     by the Law in the ſight of GOD, he maketh a double Iuſtification: One, before GOD; the 
                     
                        Com. in 3. ad Gal. ver. 12. 
                     other, before men. Iuſtification before GOD, is, when GOD reputeth a man just, and that onely for the merit and obedience of CHRIST. Iustification before men, is, when ſuch as profeſſe faith in CHRIST, are reputed just by men. The firſt is peculiarly the act of GOD. Not long before: Iuſtification is a certaine action in GOD, applied unto us; which is wrought in inſtanti. Good Popery alſo: yet to be found in the ſame man. For if Faith juſtifieth by diſpoſing the heart (thus hee diſputeth againſt the Papiſts) then there 
                     
                        Ad Gal. cap. 2. pag. 209. 
                     muſt be a ſpace of time between Iuſtification and justifying Faith. But there is no ſpace of time betwixt them: for ſo ſoone as a man beleeveth, he is preſently juſtified. Doe you heare M. PERKINS ſpeak of Iuſtification in inſtanti, according to that old Rule, Neſcit tarda molimina Spiritus ſancti grantia? which was learned, I thinke, from S. AUGUSTINE; which place I will preſently report: who learned it of S. CYPRIAN, who Epiſt. 1. ſpeaketh thus: Accipe quod ſentitur antequam diſcitur: nec per mor as temporum longâ agnitione colligitur, ſed compendio gratiae maturantis hauritur. This he ſaith ſeemed to him at the firſt impoſsible; but in concluſion, being called and juſtified, he found it true. Vt repentè ac perniciter exuatur, quod vel genuinum, ſitu materiae naturalis obduruit; vel vſurpatum diu, ſenio vetuſtatis inolevit. I know Renovation,

Sanctification, or the ſecond Iuſtification (for why contend wee about words, that agree upon the point?) is diſtinct from Remiſſion of our ſins by GOD, and imputation of CHRISTS righteouſneſſe unto us; wherein is our Acceptance and Iuſtification: and for them both I conclude with S. AUGUSTINE, Sanè iſta renovatio 
                     
                        Lib. 14. de Trin. cap. 17. 
                     non momento uno fit, ſicut momento fit uno illa renovatio in Baptiſmo, remiſsione omnium peccatorum. Neque enim vel unum quantulumcunque remanet quod non remittatur. Sed quemadmodum aliud eſt carere febribus; aliud, ab infirmitate quae febribus facta eſt, revaleſcere: itemque aliud eſt, infixum telum de corpore demere; aliud, vulnus quod eo factum eſt, ſecundâ curatione ſanare: ita prima curatio eſt, cauſam removere languoris, quod per omnium peccatorum indulgentiam fit. Secunda, ipſum ſanare languorem, quod fit paulatim proficiendo in renovatione hujus imaginis. Quae duo monſtrantur in Pſalmo; ubi legitur, Qui propitius 
                        Pſal. 103. 2, 3. fit omnibus iniquitatibus tuis, quod fit in Baptiſmo. Deinde ſequitur, Qui ſanat omnes infirmitates tuas, quod fit quotidianis acceſsibus, cùm haec imago renovetur. De quae re Apoſtolus apertiſsimè loquutus eſt, dicens, Et ſi exterior homo noſter corrumpitur, ſed interior renovatur de die in diem. Renovatur autem in agnitione DEI, hoc eſt, juſtitiâ & ſanctitate veritatis. And ſo I leave you to quarrell with S. AUGUSTINE, the Prophet DAVID, and the bleſſed APOSTLE, and to inform againſt them at the next bought

for Popery, as you have already done againſt me; and paſſe on to the next, ſomewhat depending heeron, a fourth point of my Popery, concerning Merit.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XI.
               
                  The doctrine of MERIT ex condigno rejected as falſe and preſumptuous. Difference between the old and the new ſignification of Mereri.
                  
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  
                     HEe ſo extends Meritum ex condigno, that hee would make men beleeve, there is no material difference betwixt us and the Papiſts in this point.
                  
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  THe Church of Rome hath talked long and high, in ſtrange termes, concerning Merit in good works; and place much confidence in the worth of thoſe good works, which are done by men juſtified, and in the

ſtate of Grace. The Councell of Trent, in very ſurly maner, hath denounced Anathema againſt ſuch as do it not, or denie it: Si quis dixerit juſtificati hominis opera bona non verè mereri vitam aeternam, Anathema ſit. Seſſ. VI. Ca. XVI. can. XXXII. Their Schooles have aſsigned to this purpoſe, a twofold merit of theſe works (for the merit of the perſon, I meddle not with it) the one of Congruity, the other of Condignity, as they ſpeak; that is, eyther for the worth of the worke it ſelfe, or in reſpect of the promiſe of GOD made to reward the worke. Now as touching this, they talk not much amongſt their Proſelytes, or moderne writings. They do not trouble their diſcourſes with it, nor the world with their diſcourſes about it. neyther doe they preſſe it much: as if it were too gentle a conteſtation with GOD. But that other of Condignitie is much made of, as being a piece for the nonce of ſome importance: an oppoſite of ſome ſpirit to affront GOD, and peremptorily to challenge, This is my due. Opera bona juſtorum abſolutè eſſe bona, is their Aſſertion. and anſwerably BELLARMINE concludeth, Opera bona juſtorum abſolutè 
                     BELLAR. de Iuſtif. 5. 17. 
                     eſſe MERITORIA vitae aeternae EX CONDIGNO, non ſolùm ratione PACTI & acceptationis, ſed etiam ratione OPERIS. ita ut, in opere bono, ex gratiâ procedente, ſit quaedam proportio & aequalitas ad praemium vitae aeternae. But VASQUEZ the Ieſuite is moſt tranſcendent in advancing

the worth and validitie of Workes ex condigno, even againſt and without the grace of CHRIST, in 1. 2ae. Qu. 114. diſp. 214. cap. 5. 7. 8. for he teacheth, firſt, Opera bona juſtorum EX SEIPSIS, abſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ullo pacto, & acceptatione, digna eſſe remuneratione vitae aeternae, & aequalem valorem CONDIGNITATIS habere, ad conſequendam aeternam gloriam. ſecondly, that no Acceſſe of worth or dignitie doth accrue unto the works of juſt men, through the Merits, or Perſon of CHRIST: which the ſame workes ſhould not otherwiſe have had and be indowed withall, if they had beene wrought by the ſame Grace of GOD, by alonely GOD, in liberall ſort conferred, without CHRIST. And in the VIII. chap. That the Promiſes of GOD are indeed an acceſſory addition unto the works of good men, but yet doe they no manner way appertaine to the reaſon or being of Merit, but rather accrue unto the workes already made, not onely worthie or condigne, but alſo meritorious. And laſtly, he concludeth, diſput. CCXXII. cap. III. thus. Cùm opera juſti condignè mereantur vitam aeternam, taenquam aequalem mercedem ac praemium: non opus est interventu alterius meriti condigni, quaele eſt meritum CHRISTI, ut ijs reddatur vitae aterna. Quinimò aliquid habet peculiare meritum cujuſcunque juſti, reſpectu ipſius hominis juſti, quod non habet meritum CHRISTI, nempè, reddere ipſum hominem juſtum & dignum vitâ aeternâ, ut eam dignè conſequatur. But the
                     
                     merit of CHRIST, ſaith hee, though it be ſuch as may moſt worthily obtaine for us Glorie at GOD'S hands, yet hath it not this effectuall power and vertue, to make us formally juſt, and worthy of eternall Life: but through vertue derived from him, men obtaine this effectuall power reſiding in themſelves. And hereupon we never aske or deſire of GOD, that through and by the merits of CHRIST, the reward and wages of eternall Life be given to our workes worthy and meritorious: but this; that Grace may bee given unto us by CHRIST, whereby we may be enabled worthily to merit this reward. To ſuch an enormious exorbitancie are theſe Schooles grown ſince the IESUITES have ſwaggered and domineered in them, contrary to the naturall origination and ſenſe of the word, which was but to procure, to incurre, to purchaſe: as I obſerved out of CORNELIUS TACITUS, according to the phraſe of thoſe times; in which ſenſe the FATHERS, that lived after thoſe times, and ſpake according to the language of thoſe times, uſed it: and not as formerly the meaning of the word was in CICERO, TERENCE, PLAUTUS, &c. ſo the old Tranſlator in Gen. 3. hath it, Maior eſt mea iniquitas, quàm ut veniam MEREAR: Than that I may PURCHASE or PROCURE pardon. Nay farther, it is ſometime taken actively indeede; ſo much from Deſert, that it ſignifieth to Doe well unto. The Gloſſary of H. STEPHEN rendreth meritum to this purpoſe,

                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . That meaning of it, for, to Procure or incurre, was ſo frequent in thoſe times, that STAPLETON confeſſeth, Si quis veterum 
                     STAPLETON, Prompt. Cathol. pag. 245. 
                     Interpretum vocabulo PROMERENDI uſus eſt, non aliter intellexit, quàm conſecutionem de facto. and as contrarie to the doctrine of the FATHERS. Ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         enim talia ſunt hominum MERITA, ut propter ea vita aeterna debeatur ex IURE; aut DEUS injuriam faceret, niſi eam donaret: ſaith S. BERN. ſerm. 1. in Annun. Nay, Sufficit ad MERITUM, ſcire quòd non habemus MERITA. Vndè mihi tantum MERITI, cui indulgentia pro coronâ eſt? ſaith S. AMBROSE, exhort. ad Virgin. Hoc enim ipſum, quòd homo juſtè vivit, in quantum poteſt juſtè vivere, non MERITI eſt humani, ſed divini BENEFICII. AUG. in Pſal. 109. And ORIGEN will not be perſwaded to the contrarie, or very hardly at leaſt: Vix mihimet perſuadeo, quòd poſsit ullum opus eſſe, quod ex DEBITO remunerationem DEI depoſcat. Cùm etiam, hoc ipſum, quòd agere aliquid poſsimus, vel cogitare, vel proloqui, ex ipſius dono & largitione faciamus. Contrary alſo to the opinion of moderate men in the very Church of Rome: of whom wee have a Catalogue in that learned late worke againſt FISHER, written by the Deane of Carlile, pag. 172. of whoſe minde M. MOUNTAGU profeſſeth himſelfe directly to bee. And yet ſay theſe Informers (theſe falſe Informers, YATES and his brother WARD) he would make men beleeve there is no materiall
                     
                     difference betwixt us and Papiſts in this point. And this is proved ſubſtantially no doubt: for they ſay as followeth.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XII.
               
                  The qualitie and conditions of a good worke required by the Roman Writers, to make it rewardable (as far as they are poſitive) no Proteſtant diſalloweth of. To thoſe conditions may others be added.
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  THeſe are his words: This is your owne doctrine in the Romane Schooles: and ſo farre the Proteſtants, for theſe conditions, do go along with you.
                  
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  THis doctrine. And what doctrine is this? that there is merit of condignity? that it is ſo farre forth due unto good
                     
                     works, as that through and for the worke it ſelfe wrought and performed, we may deſerve, and challenge upon deſert (or elſe GOD ſhould wrong us), grace, goodneſſe, heaven, happineſſe, at GOD'S hands? 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . I never ſaid it, never thought it, doe deteſt it from my heart. That doctrine which is to be found in the ſpecified place, is, touching the quality, not the validity, concerning the condition, not the imputation or account of a good worke: which conditions, ſpecified and remembred by me, are, 1. That it be morally good, not ſimply evill. 2. Freely wrought, and not out of compulſion. 3. By man, yet in this life, not after death. 4. In the ſtate of grace, and not by any naturall man without GOD. Of theſe conditions (which doe not exclude other) what Proteſtants doe not allow? I adde (and may adde many more), Faith is neceſſarily required in the perſon, before that any thing hee doth can pleaſe GOD. For whatſoever is not of faith, is ſinne. Theſe Informers, it ſeemeth, are otherwiſe minded: for they traduce and calumniate me for a Papiſt, who require, as neceſſary, theſe conditions unto a good worke; which were never, to my knowledge, denied untill now. And theſe are the conditions concerning which only I write, So far the Proteſtants go along with you. Concerning which conſent in theſe particulars, I confeſſe I thought it was reall, and I think ſo ſtill. I never could finde, I never

did imagine, I doe not beleeve, any Proteſtant living, ſetting your ſelves aſide, ſo ignorant, peeviſh, or prophane, as to deny thoſe conditions ſpecified. Now it being (as I conceived) agreed upon on all ſides concerning the neceſsity of them, I did make this concluſion unto the GAGGER, If your texts doe contradict this, either expreſſely or obliquely, look you unto it, it concerneth you as much as us. And why might I not make it, when they oppoſe a Poſition in the Proteſtants hands, in which themſelves are as deeply intereſſed as Proteſtants are? But the men proceed to a ſpecification of my conſent more particularly.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XIII.
               
                  GOD ſurely rewardeth good works according to his promiſe, of his free bounty and grace.
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  
                     ANd in that very page his words are, If this be your Merit, wee contradict it not. And, this is the Merit you plead for.
               
               
                  
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  ANd ſo it is. For all the Gagger's Texts of Scripture plead for that Merit I ſpeak of, and no other. And that Merit is no more but this, Verily there is a REWARD for the righteous, doubtleſſe there is a GOD that judgeth the earth. A point of Popery put into my mouth by the Prophet DAVID; and that totidem verbis. And ſo King DAVID is become a Papiſt as well as I. For my words, upon which that inference is made, are, REWARD in heaven no man denyeth. REVVARD appointed for our good workes, all doe confeſſe. If this be your MERIT, we contradict it not. Doe you? Dare you doe it? that there is no REWARD for the righteous? Caſt the lye then into the Pſalmiſts throate, Pſal. XIX. XI. In keeping of them (GOD'S Commandements) there is GREAT REVVARD; and unto him that ſaid, GOD REVVARDETH everie man according to his worke: not onely according to the Qualitie of the worke, that he that ſoweth of the fleſh, ſhall of the fleſh reape Corruption; and, he that ſoweth in the ſpirit, ſhall of the ſpirit reape glory, and honour, and immortality: but according to the degree and proportion of his worke. He that ſoweth ſparingly, ſhall reape ſparingly; and he that ſoweth liberally, ſhall reape liberally. Not of works, or for works: but according
                     
unto works rather. For there is 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , and 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Alia eſt merces liberalitatis & gratiae; aliud virtutis ſtipendium, aliae laboris remuneratio: ſaith S. AMBR. ſpecially 
                        Epiſt. 1. lib. 1. in the intercourſe betwixt GOD and man, where Non debendo, ſed promittendo DEUS ſe fecit debitorem. S. AUGUST. And from this, no Proteſtant, I know, diſſenteth. I am ſure, a ſpeciall man in your bookes, though I hold him of another ſpirit and Sect than you (better by farre) preciſely ſetteth downe the ſame in his Comment. upon the Epiſtle to the Galathians. See then, Reader, the ſincere and honeſt dealing of theſe miſdeeming Informers, that accuſe me of Popery for poſitive Scripture (by a trick of concealement) in ſaying, GOD REWARDETH GOOD WORKES.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XIV.
               
                  The Church of England holdeth no ſuch abſolute certainty of ſalvation in juſt perſons, as they have of other objects of Faith expreſſely and directly revealed by GOD
               
               
                  
                  INFORMERS.
                  
                     TOuching the Doctrine of the certainty of ſalvation, having cited BELLARMINE'S opinion, he hath theſe words; This BELLARMINE aſsigneth, and this is enough. Faction may tranſport a man to wrangle for more; but when once they ioine iſſue, the difference will not be much CHAP. XXII. pag. 186.
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  
                     ET quid haec ad IPHICLI Boves? what hath this to doe with merit of good workes, whereto by the Informers it is conſigned? Neither in my opinion, nor yet in BELLARMINE'S judgement, doth Certaintie or Incertainty of ſalvation depend ſo neceſſarily upon Merit or Demerit of good workes. If a man continue conſtant in the courſe of good workes, he is ſure and certaine of ſalvation in BELLARMINE'S judgement, and in my opinion alſo, though differently. Cauſally in his, as procured by them; Conſequently in mine, as following of them. But whether hee that doth good workes, be certaine of. Salvation, that is, ſhall continue to the end, faithfull, conſtant in doing good workes, and ſo

obtaine Salvation, (the promiſe of GOD behighted unto thoſe that doe good) is another Queſtion of a different and diſparate Nature. But to leave theſe Extravagancies, and come to the point, unto aſſurance of which they ſpeake. It being by the Gagger faſtned unto our Church, ignorantly or maliciouſly, verie abſurdly, as almoſt everie particular in that Pamphlet is, That everie one ought infallibly to aſſure himſelfe of his Salvation, and to hold, that he is of the number of the Elect and predeſtinate unto eternall life; I tooke him ſhort for ſuch his concluſion ſo generall: that everie one ought, ſinguli generum (ſo the words intend) to aſſure himſelfe: whereas that aſſurance, upon which the poore fellow grounded his imputation, reſting upon the infallible purpoſe and decree of GOD'S predeſtination of the Elect, was by the So perſwaded in the Church of England (for the Church of England it ſelfe was not of that opinion) reſtrained unto ſome only, and not enlarged unto all; as the man hath it, Every one ought. Secondly, that concerning even thoſe ſome, the Church of England, in the publick, received, authoriſed doctrine thereof, did not tender nor preſſe any ſuch Tenet of Certaine aſſurance, to be ſubſcribed or received, but left it indifferent and at large. Of this minde I was: of this minde I profeſſe my ſelfe to be ſtill, and ſhall untill I ſee reaſon and evidence to the contrary. which

if the Informers can ſupply mee withall, I yeeld; otherwiſe, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , I ſee no cauſe to change. Thirdly, that if it had been ſo, as they pretend, tendred unto us by the Church to be received and beleeved: yet was it not a Doctrine ſo forlorne and uncouth, as the ſimple Gagger imagined; having Papists of name, and ranke, and reckoning, that propoſed it, and propugned it, both in, and alſo ſince the Councell of Trent. AMBROSE CATHARINE, and ANTONIUS MARINARIUS a Carmelite, being put unto it by oppoſition, ſo canvaſed the queſtion againſt SERIPAND, SOTO, and ANDREAS VEGA; that they, and other Oppoſites of certitude and aſſurance, overcome with the ſtrength of thoſe mens reaſons, acknowledged, firſt, a conjecturall probability; then came up unto a morall beleef; and laſtly, unto an experimentall faith. And VEGA, ſince that Councell, writeth thus: Maturè tamen omnibus hinc inde penſatis, probabiliùs profectò eſſe crediderim, poſſe aliquos viros ſpirituales tantopere in exercitijs ſpiritualibus proficere, & in familiaritate divinâ, ut abſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ullâ temeritate poſsint certò & abſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ullâ haeſitatione credere, ſe inveniſſe gratiam & remiſsionem peccatorum ſuorum apud DEUM. Thus VEGA, concerning certainty of Iuſtification. And BELLARMINE goeth not ſo farre off; for hee approveth S. AUGUSTINE and his Doctrine, which is enough againſt the Gagger. And this is that

great Bug beare, that of which ſo much adoe is made, that I approve the ſaying of BELLARMINE; which I ſay is enough, as indeed it is, againſt that ignorant fellow the Gagger, as anie man will diſcerne that is not maliciouſly peeviſh and Puritanicall; though ſimply it be not ſo, nor commeth home. Amongſt the Papiſts, many learned make Faith not only an intellectuall, but a fiduciall aſſent unto the Promiſes of GOD in the Goſpell; that Faith and Confidence are the ſame. And many of them confeſſe, that without miraculous revelation, by ordinarie help and particular aſſiſtance of Grace, a man may underſtand that he hath Faith, Hope, and Charitie: and that a juſtified man may have a true and a certain Aſſurance of his juſtification, without diſtruſtfull doubting. And they put a difference in this caſe betwixt Faith and Certainty of Faith, cui non poteſt ſubeſſe falſum. Marry you haply, men of other making, do know all things that belong, not only unto your preſent juſtification, as aſſuredly as you know that CHRIST IESUS is in heaven: but are as ſure of your eternall Election, and of your future Glorification, as you are of this Article of your Creed, that CHRIST was borne of the Virgin MARY. I profeſſe I am not of that opinion with you. And whatſoever you may reſolve for your crying ABBA FATHER, ſecundum praeſentem juſtitiam, I crave pardon. I cannot thinke, that you are, may or

can be ſo perſwaded ſecundum ſtatum futurum, and evermore cry ſo. which is an 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      of your other ſingularitie, that Faith once had, cannot be loſt totally, or finally and for ever.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XV. Touching Evangelicall Counſailes.
               
               
                  
                     Evangelicall Counſailes admitted according to the doctrin of the old Fathers, and many learned Divines of our Church. Popiſh doctrine concerning workes of Supererogation rejected.
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  
                     TOuching Evangelicall Counſailes, theſe are his words: I know no doctrine of our Engliſh Church againſt them.
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  SO I ſay ſtill, I know none. I doe beleeve there are, and ever were, Evangelicall Counſailes; ſuch as S. PAUL mentioneth

in his Conſilium autem do; ſuch as our SAVIOUR pointed at and directed unto in his Qui poteſt capere capiat; ſuch as a man may do or not do, without guilt of ſinne, or breach of Law: but nothing leſſe than ſuch as the Papists fabricke up unto themſelves in their works of Supererogation. It is an error in Divinitie, not to put a difference betwixt ſuch works, and workes done upon counſell and advice. If any man, not knowing or not conſidering the ſtate of the queſtion, hath otherwiſe written, or preached, or taught, what is that to me, or the Doctrine of the Church of England? His ignorance, or fancie, or miſunderſtanding, or miſapplying, is not the Doctrine of Antiquity, which with univerſall conſent held Evangelicall Counſailes; nor of our Church, in which our GAMALIEL hath told 
                        Ad Apol. TORT. pa. 196. us; Quis neſcit fieri à nobis multa liberè, & quae à DEO non ſunt imperata voveri & reddi? Theſe Promoters knew it not. B. MORTON in his Appeale ſaith (if he doe not ſay true, informe againſt him for it) that we allow the diſtinction of PRECEPTS and COUNCELS, lib. V. cap. IV. ſect. 3. For his ſake excuſe mee from Popery, who write no more than he did before me: what in GOD'S indulgence is a matter of Counſell; in regard of ſtrict juſtice, may come under Precept. Cap. IV. Sect. V.
               
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. XVI.
               
                  Saint GREG. NAZIANZENE defended from the touch of uncircumciſed lips.
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  
                     SO he citeth & approveth to this purpoſe the ſaying of NAZIANZENE: We have Lawes that do binde of neceſsity; others that be left to our free choice, to keep them or not: ſo as if we keep them, we ſhall be rewarded; if we keep them not, no feare of puniſhment or of danger is to bee undergone therefore. cap. XV. pa. 103.
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  
                     GRave crimen CAIE CAESAR, to cite and approve the ſaying of NAZIANZENE, one of the foure Doctors of the Greek Church; 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , in S. BASIL'S opinion; viri per omniae incomparabilis, as hee is ſtiled by RUFFINUS;

                     viri valdè eloquentis, & in Scriptur is valdè verſati, as S. HIER. his ſcholar ſpeaks. And to acquit him from the touch of your uncircumciſed lips, S. AUGUSTINE in commending him did not laviſh at all, where he ſaith that he was, as indeed he was, magni nominis & famâ celeberrimâ illuſtris adeò Epiſcopus: cujus eloquia, ingentis merito gratiae, etiam in Latinam linguam tranſlata, uſquequaque claruerunt. This man, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , whoſe books all the Puritans in Europe are not worthie to carrie, is phillipped off ſlightly by theſe our new Maſters, as if his ſaying were not worth the hearing, nor the man to bee made any more account of than Iack hold my ſtaffe, by theſe Rabbies. Sedeat ergo cum iſtis ſanctis patribus (from IGNATIUS downward, not worth the looking after) etiam ſanctus GREGORIUS, & cum eis veſtrae criminationis inanem patiatur invidiam, dum tamen cum eis contra novitiam pestem medicinalem proferat ipſe ſententiam. So ſpake S. AUGUSTINE of old in his commendation, againſt IULIAN the Pelagian Heretick, who ſlighted him then as much touching originall ſinne, as you doe now touching Evangelicall Counſails. And ſo ſpeak I at preſent in S. AUGUSTINE'S phraſe. I might have added unto that unskilfull Clerk NAZIANZENE, that great Papiſt S. CHRYSOSTOME in this point for companie, who Hom. VIII. de Poen. ſaith, a man may doe more than is commanded: who yet was indeed no Papiſt, though the

poore Capacity of theſe men, not apprehending what is Popery, and what is not, miſdeem, miſtake, miſname Popery. Qui ignorat ignoret adhuc. I will not ſeek nor go about to beetle it into their braines: as in caſe of Counſels, ſo I ſay, Qui potest capere, capiat: and who is hee that cannot, but he that will not, underſtand? This I will avow; If this bee Popery, or I a Papiſt, all antiquity held Popery, and were Papiſts. For name but one Writer of a contrary minde to this, There are Evangelicall Counſels.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XVII.
               
                  The expoſition of the ſaying of our SAVIOUR, If thou wilt be perfect, &c. S. CHRYSOSTOME, S. AUGUSTINE, S. HIEROME, S. AMBROSE, make it no imperious precept. If it bee, the Informers are the leaſt obſervers of it, and ſinne againſt their own conſciences.
               
               
                  
                  INFORMERS.
                  
                     ANd a little after, ſpeaking of that place, MATH. XIX. XXI. If thou wilt bee perfect, go ſell what thou haſt, &c. he hath theſe words. A counſell it is, I grant, no imperious forme of precept: left to choyce and liberty, to do or not to do. CHRIST tieth no man, but leaveth him to doe or not to doe. CHAP. XV. pa. 105.
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  IT is ſo, I have thoſe words. It is true; I doe grant it a counſell, and no imperious precept, at leaſt to all men. For I cannot conceive the meaning to be otherwiſe, where the words are ſo full, compleat, evident, and convincing. If thou wilt; left unto choice: not, Hoc fac & vives; upon price of thy head, paine of thy ſalvation, doe thus: which is ſtilus Curiae, the ſtile and tenor of thoſe imperious Lawes of the Lord of Hoſts, that require exact Obedience. If it were a Law and a Commandement (ſaith S. CHRYSOSTOME) he ſhould 
                     S. CHRYS. to. 5. pag. 322. edit. SAVIL. 
                     not have brought it in by way of counſell and of advice. For this very cauſe, hee ſaith not in plaine tearmes, Go ſell that thou haſt, leſt hee might ſuppoſe it a binding Law: but hee ſaith,
                     
If thou wilt be perfect, go ſell what thou haſt; to let us underſtand, it is in our choice to doe or not to do it. Thus S. CHRYSOSTOME; not ſo you. Pardon me if I preferre S. CHRYSOSTOME before you, or your betters: I meane, your Maſter, whoſe Diſciples you profeſſe your ſelves to be. Quod enim praecipitur, imperatur: quod imperatur, neceſſe eſt fieri: quod neceſſe eſt fieri, niſi fiat, poenam habet. Fruſtra jubetur, quod in arbitrio ejus ponitur, &c. So S. HIEROME: S. HIER. cont. IOVIN. l. 1. c. 7 and can you give better reaſons? S. GREGORIE NAZIANZENE diſpleaſed you: ſo will S. AUGUSTINE, I make no queſtion; but it mattereth not. Nec enim, ſicut Non moechaberis, non occides; it a dici poteſt, Non nubes. Illa exiguntur: iſta offeruntur. Si fiunt iſta, laudantur: niſi fiant illa, damnantur. In illis DOMINUS debitum imperat vobis: in hoc autem ſiquid 
                     
                        De S. Virg. c. 30 
                     amplius ſupererogaveritis, in redeundo, reddet vobis. So will S. AMBROSE for the ſame opinion, who maketh a difference betwixt Precept and Counſaile; and expoundeth that verie place of Counſaile, thus: Et ut intelligas diſtantiam Praecepti, at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
                      Conſilij, illum recorderis (he ſpeaketh unto you my Informers) cui in Evangelio antè praeſcribitur, ne homicidium faciat, ne adulterium admittat, ne falſum teſtimonium dicat. Praeceptum enim ibi eſt, ubi eſt poena peccati: At verò cùm ſe Praecepta Legis memorâſſet implêſſe, Conſilium ei datur, ut vendat emnia, & ſequatur DOMINUM. Haec enim non
                     
Praecepto imperantur, ſed Conſilio deferuntur. Duplex nam
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         forma mandati eſt: Vna praeceptiva, altera voluntaria. Vndè & DOMINUS in aliâ dicit, Non occides, ubi in aliâ praecepit, SI vis eſſe perfectus, vende omnia tua. Ergo hic liber eſt à Praecepto, cujus defertur arbitrio. Which Teſtimony of S. AMBROSE, together with that out of S. CHRYSOSTOME, doe withall inſinuate in what ſenſe TERTULLIAN in his booke de Monogamiâ, contrary unto the ordinary phraſe, doth terme it Praeceptum ſubſtantiae dividendae egenis, a Commandement to divide the ſubſtance unto the poor. namely ſo, as S. AMBROSE doth call it Mandatum: who yet ſaith it was no Imperious Precept to doe ſo, or ſo: but only Counſell and Advice; leaving it free unto his choice to do it or not to doe it. For every Counſell and Advice, is a kinde of mandate; though not properly, yet with condition. But my good Informers, if you will needs have it Popery to hold with any Evangelicall Counſailes, you will be found worſe by farre than Papiſts, that are convicted in your conſciences, to breake that willingly which you hold a Precept obligatory, and no Counſaile. For doe any of You all, the preciſest in the pack, obey CHRIST'S words in this his abſolute command, and going, ſelleth all that hee hath, and giveth it to the poore? I cannot yet name any one ſo obſervant. I beleeve I never ſhall ſee any ſo charitable; rather breaking

that negative commandement of the higheſt, Thou ſhalt not covet that which is thy neighbours. and that other, Thou ſhalt not ſteale from thy neighbour. And yet howſoever other men are not obliged to go ſell what they have, and give it to the Poore, you are tyed to doe it, upon that high Commanding forme, Doe this and live. It is ſinne to you, whatſoever it is to other men, not to doe it: for you are ſo perſwaded it is a Precept. Precepts, even affirmative, ligant ſemper, though not ad ſemper; require obedience and exact performance, at ſome time or other, where they are tendred. But you neyther obey it, nor will ſuffer others to obey it that would. For you would account and ſtile him a Papiſt, that ſhould doe it. You would begge him that ſhould put it in uſe and practice. For ſuch opinion you hold of the ancient Monkes and Aſcetae, as S. ANTHONY and others, that did practiſe it. Untill I may perceive that you ſhew forth your faith by your workes, and manifeſt your Beleefe by reall practice, you muſt give mee leave to thinke you diſſemble in the point, and would perſwade men of a caſe of Neceſsity, that your ſelves may feed fat upon their folly, and in vacuum veniatis. Till then, whatſoever your opinion be, give me leave to bee of S. AUGUSTINES minde: Aliud eſt Conſilium, ſaith he, aliud Praeceptum. Conſilium datur, ut Virginitas 
                     
                        Serm. LXI. de Temp.
                      
                     conſervetur, ut à vino & carnibus abſtineatur,
                     
                     ut vendantur omnia, & pauperibus erogentur. Praeceptum verò datur ut justitia custodiatur; ut omnis homo divertat à malo, & faciat bonum. Deni
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         de virginitate dicitur, Qui poteſt capere, capiat. De juſtitiâ verò non dicitur, Qui potest facere, faciat; ſed, Omnis arbor quae non facit fructum bonum, exſcindetur, & in ignem mittetur. Conſilium qui libenter audierit & fecerit, majorem habebit gloriam. Praeceptum verò qui non impleverit, niſi ſubvenerit poenitentia, poenam evadere non poterit. You cannot denie this conſtant reſolution of Antiquity. Change therefore your manners, or your minds. Be Papiſts with me, or Rebells without me. As for mee, you are like to be alone. I hold it no obligation: you doe. therefore you are tyed to obey. That commandement. Matth. v. you will not denie: Be you perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect. Now if this be a Precept, If thou wilt be perfect, go ſell all thou haſt and give it to the poore; it is a part of that perfection, being named in either place. But I leave you to bethinke your ſelves better. I conclude with S. CHRYSOSTOME: S. CHRYSOST. To. v. in illud, Salutate PRISCILLAM, &c. pag. 322. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Had this beene a Law and Commandement, it ſhould have beene tendred unto him at the firſt: it ought to have beene digeſted in forme of a commandement and law, and not have beene brought in, as it is, by way of counſaile and advice. For where he ſaith, Poſſeſſe nor Silver nor Gold; this ſpeech runneth in commanding forme. But when hee ſaith, If thou wilt be perfect, go and ſell; he ſpeaketh it as counſailing and adviſing only. Now, to Counſaile, and Command, are not one and the ſame thing: he that commandeth, will have the thing commanded obſerved upon any hand: he that counſelleth and adviſeth, leaving it to choice and election of a man, to doe or not doe it; maketh him Lord and Ruler of his owne actions. Thus, and much more to purpoſe, S. CHRYSOSTOME in that place, if you view him. If he and his fellow-Ancients be Papiſts, be it ſo. I am content to be ſo accounted. For I meane to be a Papiſt with them, rather than a Noveller with you. And ſo I proceed.
               
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. XVIII. Touching LIMBUS PATRUM.
               
                  The Dreames of Papiſts about Limbus Patrum, related and rejected. The ſtate of mens ſoules after death. The Place proportioned to their ſtate. The ſoules of the bleſſed Fathers before CHRISTS aſcenſion, in heavenly Palaces, yet not in the third and higheſt heavens, nor in that fulnes of joy which they have now, and more of which they ſhall have heereafter. The opinion of old and new Writers. Our Canons not to be tranſgreſſed. The Doctrine and Faith of the Church

of England concerning the Article of CHRIST'S deſcent into Hell. The diſadvantage we are at with our Adverſaries. Everie Novellers Fancie printed, and thruſt upon us for the generall Tenet of our Church. The plaine and eaſie Articles of our CREED diſturbed and obſcured by the wild dreames of little leſſe than blaſphemous men; by new Models of Divinity; by Dry-fats of ſeverall Catechiſmes. The Beleefe of Antiquitie. The Authour and It farre from POPERY.
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  
                     HOwſoever in words he denyeth Limbus Patrum, yet thus he writeth: The Patriarchs, Prophets, and Fathers that lived

and died before CHRIST; the Scripture reſolveth, that they were not there where now they are, in the higheſt heavens and glorious, there where the glorified body of CHRIST is now reſiding at the right hand of GOD. CHAP. XLI. pag. 277.
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  THUS hee writeth. And what if he write ſo? Why then hee upholdeth Limbus Patrum. His Words and Opinion are farre aſunder. So ſaid your LIMBOMASTIX concerning the Deſcent into Hell. As CHRIST was buried; ſo alſo it is to be beleeved, that CHRIST went into Hell, ſaith 
                        Artic. 3. the Church of England. Therefore hee went thither, ſaith that Ignoránte, according to this opinion, to fetch up the ſoules of the Fathers that were not there. Iuſt as you will have it, with M. MOUNTAGU in his opinion. But good Maſter Informers, bethinke your ſelves: go into your Studies again, and look better upon your books. You underſtand not the ſtate and condition of Limbus Patrum, nor yet the Deſcent of CHRIST into Hell. To aſſure you, I am for my opinion (dreame you what you will otherwiſe, and what you pleaſe) abſolutely of the mind of all Antiquity, that the ſoules of the Bleſſed Dead, ſeparated from their bodies,

and Gathered (as the Scriptures ſpeake) unto their Fathers, before CHRISTS Reſurrection from Death to Life, and his Aſcenſion into Heaven; that departed hence in the hope and aſſurance of GODS promiſes, and in the expectation of better things to come, were not yet then in Coelo propriè dicto ſummo illo & glorioſo, whereas now they are, in companie of all the holy Angels, with the glorified bodie of our SAVIOUR, farre above all things in heaven and earth. And yet for all this; I am not for him, that thereupon ignorantly and maliciouſly inferreth, I hold with, beleeve, or conceit anie ſuch Limbus Patrum, as the Church of Rome hath fancied unto her ſelfe, and tendred unto her Profelites, drawne and derived out of that negative opinion of Antiquity, ill underſtood, and ill applyed. As if becauſe they were not ſo in heaven, per omnia, as now they are, they muſt needs be ſo in hell as they conceive them to be. the ſtate whereof is imagined this.
                  LIMBUS Patrum is ſo called by the Papiſts à ſubjecto contento, which they doe imagine to be the uppermoſt Fringe, as the word ſignifieth, or the Verge of Hell. For, as if ſome of their Maſters had beene ſent thither to take a ſurvay thereof, they doe quarter out that infernall Clime into foure Regions; all agreeing in the particulars, though with ſome difference about the quartering and confining. That the

Regions are foure, they all agree: Hell, properly ſo called, of the Damned, Purgatory, Limbus puerorum, and Limbus patrum. For the uppermoſt and lowermost, they all agree; but differ about the ſite of Purgatory and Limbus puerorum: they cannot reſolve which is the uppermoſt of theſe two. In Hell of the Damned they imagine, and rightly, eternall loſſe of happineſſe in excluſion from GOD, as alſo moſt inſufferable eternall paine. In Purgatory, there is ſome queſtion, whether the loſſe be partiall or not: for they are conceited to have, at leaſt ſomtimes, the intervening ſociety of holy Angels, who cannot but impart unto them ſome glimmering of heavenly conſolation; and yet the pain, though not eternal, but only temporary, is ſet down to bee equall unto Hell torments. Unto the Limbus Infantum, they have faſtned eternall loſſe and deprivation of GOD, without ſenſible paine: in Limbus patrum, temporarie loſſe, but no paine. Limbus puerorum and Hell of the Damned, in their opinions, endure for ever. Purgatory ſhall ceaſe, and be no more, at the day of judgement: but for Limbus patrum, the date thereof is, and was long ſince, expired. Now there is no ſuch manſion or habitation of ſoules, they are reſolved: but what is become of it, or how imployed, they are not reſolved. Some imagine it now all one with that Limbus Infantum. And peradventure there was need to have the roome enlarged,

the inhabitants increaſing and growing on ſo faſt, more than they did in the dayes of old; as in popular Cities the multitude groweth greater every day and greater. So that Limbus puerorum, in their opinion, hath, and out of conveniency it was neceſſary it ſhould ſwallow up Limbus Patrum. ANTE adventum CHRISTI, ſaith one, ſancti Patres deſcendebant 
                     
                        Tractat. contra Graecos, edit. à P. STEVVARTIO, pag. 565. 
                     eò. Nunc verò pueri qui abſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Baptiſmo diſcedunt, ſine poenâ ſenſibili detinentur. Others do conceive of it as inane vacuum: and this is the commonly received opinion of the Romane Schooles. In effect, therefore, the Popery of Limbus Patrum is this: That in regard of ſtate, the Fathers who died before CHRIST, were, quoad locum, in a part of HELL, in the uppermoſt Region of Hell; and, quoad ſtatum, without all paine; as alſo without all joy, without fruition or ſeeing of GOD: That at CHRIST'S deſcent into Hell, which was locally only into this part of Hell, but virtually and powerfully into all places and regions of Hell, they were drawn out thence, led forth in triumph, and tranſlated into Heaven, in regard of place; unto ſeeing, enjoying, and fruition of GOD, in reſpect of ſtate. But this is not the Tenet of Antiquity. A man may deny their being in Heaven, and yet not inferre they were thus in Hell.
                  Now to come to the point; The queſtion is concerning their ſoules onely: for their

bodies, it is confeſſed, in ordinarie diſpenſation, doe ſleep in the duſt. It is confeſſed on both ſides, which is moſt materiall, concerning them, That being immortall in their better Part, after diſſolution and ſeparation, they ſtill have a Being, and are ſubſiſting in aliquo ubi: for though the nature of a ſoule is not to be circumſcriptively in place (as TERTULLIAN fancied) as M. YATES and M. WARD are when they are in their Pulpits, yet are they confined in their proper ubi, definitively and indiſtanter, as they ſpeake; that is, they have not, nor can have, an ubique-ſubſiſtence, but a determined and defined. Being heere, at that inſtant they are not there: for omnipreſence is the abſolute Peculiar of the ALMIGHTY. Truely then, and indeed, they muſt and doe ſubſiſt in place, or rather ubi; though where, and how, who can tell? For, the Scripture, content with their ſtate and beeing, is ſilent for particular touching their place. And accordingly the beſt learned of all times and places, have, if not declined quaeſtionem loci, yet not beene curious nor reſolved for it. So heere is a maine difference at the firſt betwixt the Papistry of Rome, and M. MOUNTAGU'S Popery. They de fide reſolving the place to have been thus: He returning Ignoramus, we are not aſcertained, we cannot tell.
                  AGAIN, in that their Vbi whereſoever, ſubſiſting, as they had Being and Subſiſtence, ſo

did they alſo performe actions of life and motion, congruous and convenient unto their nature and kind. And though they are ſaid to be at rest, yet is it qualified with, In what ſort; They reſt from their Labours, ſaith the SPIRIT. where the latter word, Labors, giveth ſpecies unto, and determineth the former word, Reſt. For all maner reſt is not predicated of them; not ſuch as that reſt of the bodie in the grave. They rest not, as in a ſleepe, out of minde, without motion, as not in action at all; as the frame of Nature did in the dayes of IOSUA; or as ADAM in that deepe ſleepe, wherein EVA was framed out of his ſide. Thus to reſt, is contrary to their nature and condition intellectuall; though it hath beene the opinion of ſome Popes, they ſay, and is of ſome Anabaptists at this day: ſuch as againſt whom M. CALVIN wrote his Pſychopannychia. But being now ſeparated from the bodie, they live, move, exerciſe, performe and put in practice, acts naturall and coïncident unto their proper kindes; underſtanding, conceiving, willing, judging, loving, rejoycing, and ſuch like proper acts of naturall, rationall, intellectuall creatures. Next, inaſmuch as there are, and have beene alway in this life, two ſorts amongſt the ſonnes of men; Beleevers in CHRIST, for their profeſſion; Holy in courſe, for their life and converſation: then Misbeleevers and faithleſſe in regard of GOD; Wicked miſ-agents in

reſpect of living: ſo proportionably there are, and have beene ever, two ſtates and conditions of the ſoules of men, in their ſeparation after death; ſome rewarded with happineſſe, in their being for ever with GOD; ſome condemned unto woe and wretchedneſſe, for ever eſtranged from GOD. All men when they dye (as, ſooner or later, all do and ſhall) in regard of that unchangeable Law of kinde, Thou ſhalt Dye the Death, are ſaid in SCRIPTURE To goe the way of all fleſh, or of All the Earth: for never man had a priviledge of abſolute or totall exemption. And in regard of their being or ſubſiſting after their death, are ſaid To ſleepe with their Fathers, touching their bodies, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : and to be gathered to their Fathers, or, their People, in reſpective of their ſoules, were they good or bad. For all are a ſociety, a collective people; eyther in happy or in a miſerable ſtate. The good goe to enjoying of happineſſe without end, the wicked to enduring of torments everlaſting. Thus is their ſtate diverſified to their deſerving. and herein the Scripture ſpeaketh plaine and evident. But now for Place, we are not reſolved ſo particularly. Certaine it is in common courſe of kinde, Place is ever fitted, diſpoſed, proportioned to ſtate and condition of the therein placed. And therefore, when this mortall ſhall have put on immortality: when thoſe that have won many unto righteouſneſſe, ſhall

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
ſhine as the Sunne, and be clothed with glory and immortality, in the day of the reſurrection of the juſt; then we reade of a fitted Place, a new heaven and a new earth. Now, fitting unto this two-fold ſtate and condition of ſoules after death, I beleeve and profeſſe, that evermore there was, is, and ſhall be two ſeverall, different, diſtinct, proportionable Places or Vbies for them, knowne ever commonly by that generall name of Hell and Heaven. I beleeve alſo, and profeſſe, that the ſoules of the Fathers, Kings, Prophets, Priests, Patriarchs, righteous and good men, that lived and dyed before CHRIST came in the fleſh, in eandem communem ſpem nobiſcum venerunt, expectantes CHRISTUM, as IGNATIUS ſpeaketh. and ſo when 
                        Ad MAGNES. they were gathered unto their people, went not into Hell locally in reſpect of Place, becauſe not to Hell interpretatively, that is, into wretchedneſſe in regard of ſtate. They went to Heaven locally, as to their proper Vbi: they went to Heaven figuratively, that is, into happineſſe and health, into joy in heavenly palaces; unto GOD, into the preſence of GOD, the Tabernacles of peace; into Paradiſe, ABRAHAMS boſome. Eadem eſt fides noſtra, quae fuit illorum: Hoc nos credimus eſſe factum, quod illi crediderunt faciendum. They hoped to be ſaved in, through, and by him, in whom we doe hope. They lived by that faith as well as we, though not in that evidence and fulneſſe as

we. They dyed in that CHRIST, in whom we, though not incarnate, and already come, as do we. But this their being, their living, their dying ſo, will not inferre that Place to have received them then, wherein now with us they bee, and where one day all GOD'S choſen ones ſhall be. For the ſame faith hath not ever the ſame meaſure, nor proportion in all, nor the ſame diſpenſation at all times. The ſame hope is more eminent in ſome than in others. The ſame perſons, inlarged in their Indowments or Atchievements, are likewiſe enhanſed and ennobled in their Accruments, Temporall or Eternall, Perſonall or Originall. Their bodies are not as yet reunited unto their ſoules, yet ſhall they be raiſed up out of the duſt, and bee made conformable in their Reſurrection unto life, to the now-glorified body of CHRIST our Saviour. Their ſoules, then departing and at Reſt, in Peace, in Happines, and Bliſſe, in the hands of GOD, yet were not in that degree of ſtate as now they bee in; had not that fulneſſe of joy which now they have, nor have as yet that meaſure and proportion that they ſhall have heerafter. They were then in Heaven, as they be now in Heaven, though not as now; nor yet where, as now for particular place: not in Hell, or any part of Hell, as the word and meaning is in Scripture.
                  
                  This is ſufficient againſt that dream of their

                     Limbus Patrum in the Roman Church: which is conceived and dreamed to have beene a Part and Region of Hell, far diſtant and removed from Heaven. Not then in that Heaven, where they are now; in that Part, that Site, that Region, thoſe Manſions of Heaven in which now they are. For Heaven, ſo ſpacious, extended, ſo capacious, as we both conceive and ſee, is not, nor hath beene ſo narrowed or ſtreightned in roomth, that there cannot bee diverſe Deſignations, Regions, Habitations, Manſions or Quarterings there, to ſpeak after the phraſe and language of men, remote, neer, different, diſtinct one from or to another; fitted, applied, diſpoſed, proportioned and accommodated unto the ſeverall ſtates, meaſures, times, qualities, habitudes and indowments of men, that were to bee carried and tranſlated thither before and ſince the comming of CHRIST; in the time of Promiſe, and of accompliſhment and performance of Promiſe; in the time of veiles, types, ſhadowes; and that other of Subſtance, Revealing, and Conſummation. They were in happineſſe, therefore not in any part of Hell: for no part of Hell is capable thereof, or fitted for any, no not the leaſt degree or participation of joy and happineſſe. I abſolutely ſubſcribe unto TERTULLIAN; Aliud Inferi, aliud ſinus ABRAHAE. TERT. contra MAR. IV. 14. and that which S. AUGUSTINE, Tom. 11. Epiſt.
                     
LVII. ſpake ſomewhat doubtingly; Non facilè alicubi Scripturarum Inferorum nomen poſitum reperitur in bono: that which Tom. III. de Gen ad literam, lib. XII. cap. XXXII. hee is peremptory in; Nondum inveni, & adhuc quaero, nec mihi occurrit, Inferos alicubi in bono poſuiſſe Scripturam duntaxat Canonicam. The Fathers then were not in the Popiſh LIMBUS Patrum. For their Limbus is, though the verge and uppermoſt region, yet a region and part of Hell. Whoſoever either commeth, or ever yet came within the fringe and confines of Hell (except the humane ſoule of our SAVIOUR, who finiſhed all ſuffrings and penalties upon his croſs) came thither to ſuffer torment and paine: whoſoever came thither, except him alone, who only was liber inter mortuos, returned not out any more from thence; but ſedet, aeternum
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ſedebit infelix. Between LAZARUS in ABRAHAM'S boſome, which was the Reſt of the Righteous before CHRIST, and DIVES in Hell, a place of woe and torment, was 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , a vaſt, void gulfe, immeaſurable; and that alſo 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , as ſaith the holy Text, ſo ſeated, fixed, faſtned for ever, that it was not removeable at any time. They cannot come thence, ſaith Father ABRAHAM: it is impoſſible that they ſhould. and he ſpeaks it before that imagined harrowing of Hell by our SAVIOUR; intimating ſufficiently, that they were not in Hell. But as they were not there: ſo were not they

likewiſe in Heaven STRICTLY taken for the THIRD Heaven; that receptacle of the righteous now, together with the glorified body of our SAVIOUR. For that place was not then, ſtantibus ut tunc, fitting or accruing to them. Such a royall habitation, the None-ſuch of GOD, did not befit their then inferiour ſtates and conditions. But then you will aske me, If neither in Heaven above, nor in Earth beneath, nor in Hell, where poſſibly could they conſiſt, or were they diſpoſed? A being they had; therefore an ubi for their ſubſiſting. To which, firſt, I anſwer, They had both: and in generall tearms the Scripture ſpeaketh, they had that ſubſiſtence in the hands of GOD, with GOD, in his holy Hill, in the Tabernacles of Peace, in Paradiſe, in ABRAHAM'S boſome with LAZARUS, with ABRAHAM, ISAAC, and IACOB, in the Kingdome of Heaven, and of GOD. Why then they were in Heaven at leaſt. Doubtleſſe yes, in a more generall notion. The word is ambiguous, as I have declared againſt the Gagger; put forth for condition alone, place alone, or place and condition together. In regard of ſtate and condition, they were in Heaven, that is, happie and bleſſed, as then was convenient. In regard of ubi alſo, they were in Heaven, in a more generall and enlarged ſenſe; in ſome part of Heaven, where GOD diſpoſed them. You will aske in particular, Where was that? I muſt

and doe anſwer negatively, I cannot tell: I dare not define: I have no warrant for reſolution. I anſwer poſitively, You ſhould not ask nor curiouſly enquire, but be content to be ignorant of that which GOD hath not revealed. And then farther, It is not profitable to knowe: for GOD elſe would not have concealed it. So that to enquire it preſſingly, is but curioſity; to determine it reſolvedly, is but preſumption at the beſt. Therefore M. CALVIN, and other Proteſtant Divines that I could name, content themſelves onely with the ſtate in ſpeciall of joy and reſt; with the ubi in generall to be Heaven: but preſume not to deſcend unto particular where, ſeeing GOD hath not been pleaſed to diſcover it. It is enough to knowe they were not in Hell as the Papiſts meane it: and it is more than probable they were not in Heaven as you conceit it.
                  For, firſt, no Scripture affirmeth it expreſly, that the Reſt of thoſe Righteous was there where now it is. Secondly, it is not, that I could ever reade or underſtand, collected out of any place of Scripture, by any one Orthodox Writer, for fifteene hundred yeeres after CHRIST. Thirdly, no Writer of any one confeſsion hath demonſtrated it to be ſo intended in any Scripture. Fourthly, no Article or Determination of our Church concludeth it, or ſo tendreth it to bee conceived and embraced: and therefore whatſoever my private opinion

otherwiſe might bee, I am tyed not to preach or publiſh it, according to the CANONS preſcribed 
                        Lib. Canonum, edit anno 1571 unto Miniſters in ſuch caſes; knowing it to be the reſolved doctrine of Antiquity, as I do. I am not excuſable, if I tranſgreſſe the CANONS. What your ignorance may pleade for you, I cannot tell: I leave it to them that muſt look unto it where you live, if you offend; as you are like enough to do, if it come in your way. But on the other ſide, there are Texts of Scripture that ſeem at leaſt to ſay, and have been ever taken, of Writers old and new, to ſay, that the ſoules of the Fathers that died before CHRIST, were not there whereas now they be; as, S. IOHN 111. 13. No man hath aſcended into Heaven. IOHN XIV. 3. I goe to prepare a place for you. PSAL. XXIV. 6. Lift up your heads, O you gates, and be you lift up you everlaſting doors and the King of glory ſhall come in. Which Text of that Pſalme, all Antiquity, from IUSTINE MARTYR downeward, doe expound of Heaven opened at the Aſcenſion of our SAVIOUR: according unto that which we daily profeſſe in our Engliſh LITURGIE, out of and with Saint AMBROSE; When thou hadſt overcome the ſharpnes of death, thou didſt OPEN the Kingdome of HEAVEN to all Beleevers. So Heb. IX. 8. 12. The WAY unto the HOLIEST OF ALL was NOT YET MANIFEST, while as the FIRST Tabernacle was ſtanding: and Heb. X. 20. & Heb. XI. 39, 40
                  
                     
UPON theſe grounds, and others that I now remember not, it hath been the common received opinion of all the FATHERS, Greek and Latin, that the ſoules of the Righteous before CHRIST, were not in the higheſt and moſt glorious Heavens locally; which is alſo the opinion of BULLINGER, PETER MARTYR, HYPERIUS, and others. BUCER and MUSCULUS directly write, that the Thief was the firſt, who with CHRIST entred into Paradiſe. Upon M. CALVIN it is impoſed by many, though injuriouſly, that he thought no righteous ſoule did, doth, or can goe into Heaven before the generall reſurrection: but indeed he declineth the queſtion of the place; and for the ſtate, againſt the Popiſh LIMBUS, averreth, that in reſpect of genericall happineſſe, they before CHRIST enjoyed the ſame that they doe now: but for accidentall beatitude and degrees of happineſſe, he putteth a difference; and reſolveth, that even now they are in profectu untill the day of Doome: untill which time, they expect in atrijs the conſummation of their beatitude. CHRISTUS, Sanctuarium Coeli ingreſſus, ad conſummationem uſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ſaeculorum, ſolus populi eminùs in atrio reſidentis, vota ad DEUM defert. Inſtit. 111. 20. 10. If a man ſhould preſſe his words as they will beare, the ſoules of the Righteous, and thoſe now that dye in the LORD, nedum of the Fathers before CHRIST, are not yet in Heaven: but I doe it not. This

is all; he favoureth the opinion of all Antiquity, that the ſoules of the FATHERS before CHRIST, were not in COELO SUMMO ET GLORIOSO: and yet I hope CALVIN did not maintaine Limbus Patrum.
                  
                  ALL this groweth for croſſing your newly invented Puritanicall conceit, and direct depravation of an Article of our Creed, the deſcent of our Saviour into Hell: and in anſwer unto the Gagger in this point, have I in this particular angred the generation of your fellowbrethren. The Popiſh Gagger objected unto the Church of England this TENET, that IESUS CHRIST deſcended not into Hell. Unto whom the ſubſtance of my Anſwer was, With what face, or what forehead, can he ſay that we teach ſo, that in our Creed repeat it openly, and ever in the Church profeſſe it in plaine and expreſſe words; that propoſe it in Baptiſme interrogatorily unto God-fathers and God-mothers, to be anſwered unto, avowed, and publickly beleeved; that teach it in our Catechiſme unto children; that ſubſcribe it in our Articles thus, THAT as CHRIST died for us, and was BURIED: ſo ALSO it is to bee beleeved, that HEWENT DOWNE INTO HELL, Artic. 111; that have publickly defended it againſt Puritanicall oppoſition; and laſtly, that with us more, more really and to purpoſe, doe beleeve it, than the Church of ROME doth, and thoſe that accuſe us of ſacrilege for violating an Article of our
                     
CREED? For they profeſſe, that CHRIST onely deſcended into the uppermoſt Region of Hell, LIMBUS PATRUM, really; into the other parts and continents virtually onely, or effectually, in the power of his GOD-HEAD, and his Paſsion. Non deſcendit ad INFEROS reproborum, ac in perpetuum damnatorum (ſaith their grand Dictator THOMAS AQUINAS), quoniam 
                     
                        In 3. ſent. d. 12. 
                     ex co nulla eſt redemptio: igitur ad eum locum deſcendit, qui vel ſinus ABRAHAE, vel communiter LIMBUS PATRUM appellatur.
                  
                  But the truth is, we are at ſome diſadvantage with our Romiſh Adverſaries. For as every one (through the greedineſſe of gaine) may write and print almoſt what hee will, eſpecially if it ſavor of the Lemannian Lake: ſo every private fancy, every wilfull opinion, ignorant aſſertion, and ſome blaſphemous dotages, caſt forth by any man that is, or hath been of our Confeſsion, or is any way divided in Communion from the Church of Rome, and us both, is by many men, and moſt an end by our Adverſaries, caſt upon the generall Tenent of all Proteſtants, and more ſpecially upon the Church of England: though that Church, in the generall and approved Doctrine thereof, doe deteſt it more than the Church of Rome doth. In this very point, the manifold dreames of new refined ſpirits are made ours; their little leſſe than blaſphemies, made ours; the tergiverſations, qualifications, diſturbing of

ſenſes from 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , anima, Shéol, Hádes, Inferi, Infernus, and what not, made ours; the toies, traſh, fables of Pagans, Poets, Philoſophers, Magicians, and who not, of what not, brought in, to trouble and diſturb our belief, by ſome that faine would bee, and yet are loth to be Puritans, made ours. The much urging of this Article not to be found in ancient Creeds; not to have been taught or beleeved of the Eaſtern Churches; not of that of Conſtantinople: & I know not what elſe, tending to make men firſt waver in their faith, then to doubt of their faith, and at length flatly to deny their faith. if in this, why not in other Articles that eyther are or may bee ſo ſerupulized, all made ours, laid unto our charge by our adverſary, and made the publick Doctrine of OUR Church? So the blaſphemy of CHRISTOPHER CARLILE, that made this Article an Error and a Fable, pag. XXVIII. & 77 againſt D. SMITH, is made ours. That horrible blaſphemy, that CHRIST indured the very torments of Hell, and went down to ſuffer there, as BANISTER and AEPINUS taught, is made ours. That CHRIST did, being yet alive, ſuffer in his humane ſoule INFERNI TREMENDA TORMENTA, not onely 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , (as the Greek Liturgies diſcrectly call them) but even deſperation and the ſecond death, as it is in HUMES Rejoinder unto D. HILL, in DEERINGS Catechiſme, in your new fangled Modell of Divinity, M. YATES (was it

not?) and I doubt not in others of that ſtamp, are all made ours. That by Hell is meant now this, now that, as almoſt in every Catechiſme, ſuch Pamphlets, whereof we have abroad ſo good ſtore, as I thinke would freight a Dryfat to the Mart: every man making and uſing, and printing a Catechiſme, a New Modell of his owne, according to his owne private motion, contrary to Order and Injunction, by which we are tyed unto One, the beſt of all. And laſtly, if any man leaning to your Doctrine, though not to your Diſcipline, ſay, That we know not the native and undoubted ſenſe of this ARTICLE; all is ſtill caſt upon the CHURCH of England. I confeſſe theſe are diſadvantages for us againſt the Papiſts; as it were ſo many thornes in our ſides: but yet they choake us not. For the Doctrine of the Church is plaine, direct, affirmative, as it ſhould be; without figures, allegories, far-fetched, obſcure interpretations, which never were intended to bee inſerted into, muſt not be tolerated in Articles of our CREED, eaſie, plaine, even and perſpicuous of themſelves; and made ſo purpoſely for the uſe, capacity, and inſtruction of the ſimple and ignorant, who are not capable of obſcurities.
                  
                  It was not impoſsible that the humane ſoule of CHRIST ſhould have been, or might be, or was, in triduo mortis & ſeparationis ſuae, really, truely, properly in Hell; that land of

darkeneſſe, abode and habitation of the damned. Not improbable, againſt Scripture, religion, piety, reaſon. No inconveniency, incompetency, abſurdity, much leſſe impiety: No compulſion drew Him thither. It was no needleſſe thing. I have given reaſons of it mo than one. He went not to deliver, to ſtay, to ſuffer; for all was finiſhed upon the Croſſe, quae praedicta, quae praefigurata. Therefore, according to the Church of England, I conclude in the words of Saint AUGUSTINE; DOMINUM quidem carne mortificatum, 
                     
                        Epiſt. 99. 
                     veniſſe in INFERNUM ſatis conſtat. Neque enim contradici poteſt IOEL Prophetae qui dixit, Quoniam non derelinques animam meam in Inferno. Quod ne aliter quiſquam ſapere auderet, in Apoſtolorum Actibus idem PETRUS exponit, vel ejuſdem PETRI illis verbis, quibus eum aſſerit ſolviſſe Inferni dolores, in quibus impoſsibile erat eum teneri. Quis ergo niſi INFIDELIS negaverit FUISSE APUD INFEROS CHRISTUM? But if it be urged, he went downe to free thoſe that were bound there, as intended by looſing the ſorrowes of Death, of which though it were impoſsible himſelfe ſhould be holden, yet others were then detained under, quibus alij tenebantur, quos ille noverat liberandos; S. AUGUSTINE will rejoine: admit it ſo. Quinam tamen iſti ſunt, temerarium eſt deſinire. Since him, men are growne wiſer, or more adventurous to reſolve. The truth is, he that will beleeve no more than hee ſeeth, nor embrace

but what he hath demonſtration for, or ſenſible apprehenſion; were better never meddle with the things of GOD, where Faith is the Evidence of what is not ſeene. Antiquity beleeved CHRIST went into Hell: they beleeved, when he aſcended into Heaven, he went a way nullius ante trita ſolo, and had the prerogative royall, as he well deſerved it, to be the firſt, that, removing the Cherubin at the gates of Paradiſe, made a way for himſelfe and for us into Heaven. and though 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , when he came up from the field of Blood, thouſand thouſands did attend him, and came up with him in his Royall Paſſe: yet they were not brought forth from Limbus Patrum of the Papiſts. The Fathers of old heard no newes thereof; the Protestants deteſt it as much as you: and be it knowne unto you, ſo doe I, as much as any Puritan in the Kingdome. And yet I am of opinion (for it is not of that nature or neceſsity, to come within my Creed) CHRIST was the firſt that entred Heaven. The ſoules of the Righteous were not there before Him, taking Heaven for that ſupreme and higheſt Heaven; though otherwiſe, in a more generall ſenſe and acceptance, they were in Heaven, enjoied Happines, did ſee good, though not viſione plenâ faciei. Many queſtions peradventure may ariſe heerabout; but fitter for Schooles, than popular cogniſance. I conclude all as I began: You underſtand not

the ſtate of Limbus Patrum, nor the depth of the Queſtion, but ſcumme upon the ſurface, and gibberiſh you cannot tell for what.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XXXIV. The ſeventh point of Poperie touching IMAGES.
               
                  The Hiſtoricall uſe of Jmages maketh nothing for the adoring of them. Popiſh extravagancies.
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  
                     TOuching Images, thus he writeth: IMAGES have theſe uſes aſsigned by your Schooles: ſtay there, goe no farther, and we charge you not with Idolatry. Inſtitutionemrudium, Commonefactionem Hiſtoriae, & excitationem Devotionis. You and we alſo give unto them theſe.
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  THAT for this, and no more than this, the Church of Rome is Idolatrous; you affirme, I deny: prove your aſſertion if

you can. Though that Church, for their enormities, deſerve no defence: yet is it, they ſay, a ſhame to bely the Divell. I doe not, I cannot, I will not denie, that Idolatry is groſſely committed in the Church of Rome. The ruder ſort, at leaſt, are not excuſable, who goe to it with downe-right Idolatry, without any Relative adoration; worſhipping that which they behold with their eyes, the Image of the B. VIRGIN, S. PETER, S. PAUL, the CRUCIFIXE; as if CHRIST IESUS were preſent. This Idolatry is ancient in their Schooles. THOMAS AQUINAS doth directly vouch it, Quòd eadem reverentia exhibeatur imagini CHRISTI, & ipſi 
                     
                        Par. 3. qu. 25. ar. 3. CHRISTO. Cùm ergo CHRISTUS adoretur adoratione latriae, conſequens eſt, quòd ejus IMAGO ſit adoratione LATRIAE adoranda. which is now an Article of Faith in the Romane Church, and the oppoſite Doctrine flat Hereſie: for ſo CABRERA upon that place of THOMAS writeth; who alledgeth, for his purpoſe and opinion, many old and later Divines of their Schoole. And AZORIUS the Ieſuite telleth us, 
                        To. 1. lib. 9. ca. 6 
                     Constans eſt Theologorum ſententia, Imaginem eodem honore & cultu honorari & coli, quo colitur id cujus eſt Imago. and becauſe DURAND of old oppoſed ſuch groſſe Idolatry in THOMAS and his Schollers, hee is cenſured to deliver Doctrine, dangerous, raſh, reliſhing Hereſies, nay plainely Hereticall, ſay they. But what hath Hiſtoricall uſe of Images to do with this ſo great extravagancy?

I know none, beſide your ſelves, that cenſure or condemne the Historicall uſe of Images, for Idolatry.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XX.
               
                  S. GREGORIES Doctrine concerning Images, farre from Poperie.
                  
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  
                     ANd again: Images in GREGORIES time were very much improved, to bee bookes for the ſimple and ignorant people. Hold you there, and wee blame you not.
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  NOT for Idolaters againſt the Firſt and Second Commandement: for, to bee Bookes for the ignorant and unlettered, will not reach home unto Idolatry. My words concerning S. GREGORY and his times, are theſe, XVII. pages after the foreremembred Imputation: S. GREGORIE is of later date than S. AUGUSTINE, and of leſſe credite by much in controverted points of Divinity. Images in his
                     
                     time were much improved; and yet not unto honour or adoration. Reverence and reſpect was given unto them; to be bookes for the ſimple and ignorant people; to be remembrances of things by repreſentation. Hold you there, and we do not blame you for any Idolatry. Words abuſed by the Informers, in leaving out that paſſage, To be remembrance of Things by repreſentation: of which that mitigation is to be underſtood eſpecially, Hold you there, and we blame you not. This is that improvement I ſpeak of in S. GREGORIES time; wherein Images, from no uſe in the moſt ancient times, were improved unto an Hiſtoricall uſe in S. GREGORIES time: whoſe time, as himſelfe, I under-valew unto S. AUGUSTINE. Theſe men ſeeme to take improved, through ignorance of the phraſe, for approved: which is alſo true. Before S. GREGORIE, I know no ſuch confeſſed employment for them. He was the firſt that gave ſuch publick approbation unto them declaratorily, though it was true doctrine in it ſelfe, before he ever profeſſed it ſuch. who yet did ever vehemently diſclaime and deteſt the worſhipping of them: as appeareth in his Reſcript unto SERENUS of Marſeils, about demoliſhing them in his Churches, upon miſuſe unto Idolatry. Now, had the Church of Rome gone no farther in practice or precept, than that which S. GREGORY recommendeth; our Church, I ſuppoſe (for ſo our doctrine is) would not blame them, nor

have departed from them about that point. Haply furious ones in our Church would proceed: but 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ; they are ſingular illuminates: let them gang alone. Inſtruct mee what Popery is in that hiſtoricall uſe of them, and then I will be of another opinion.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XXI.
               
                  No religious honour or worſhip to be given unto Images. They may affect the mindes of religious men, by repreſenting unto them the actions of CHRIST and his Saints. In which regard, all reverence ſimply cannot be abſtracted from them.
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  
                     ANd a little after, IMAGES are not utterly unlawfull unto Christians in all maner of religious imployment. The Pictures of CHRIST, the bleſſed VIRGIN,

and SAINTS, may bee made, and had in houſes, ſet up in Churches. The Proteſtants have them, they deſpight them not. Reſpect and honour may bee given unto them The Proteſtants do it, and uſe them for helps of piety.
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  BUt how, and how farre, you have very honeſtly left out. For hee hath added, In rememoration, and for more effectuall repreſentment of the Prototype: which is no more but the bare hiſtoricall uſe of them. And you, by leaving that out, would make men beleeve, that he intended a religious reſpect and pious honour to be due unto them; and ſo to draw on unto a downe-right worſhip of them. But this was not his meaning. He is in that caſe as jealous of Gods honour, as any gloyting Puritan in the Pack. In our Churches, for ought that I knowe, it is not forbidden to have them: for if ſo, then all Tombs Monuments, Statues, Pictures, Paintings, are to be demoliſhed and defaced. Nor are they utterly and abſolutely unlawfull for any religious employment. Our ſtricteſt Writers do not condemne or cenſure S. GREGORY for putting upon them that hiſtoricall uſe of ſuggeſting unto, moving or affecting the minde even in

                     pious and religious affections. For inſtance; in remembring more feelingly, and ſo being empaſsioned more effectually with the Death, Bloudſhed, and bitter Paſsion of our SAVIOUR, when we ſee that ſtory fully and lively repreſented unto us in colours or work by a skillfull hand. And I know not the man that is made of humane mould, but when he readeth on this Book his tragicall endurances for man, will reflect upon himſelfe, and his owne ſoule and conſcience, with a lively apprehenſion of mans ſinne, GOD'S love, CHRIST'S endeared charitie in undergoing theſe unknown ſufferings for our ſake. If this be Popery, let the B. of Lichfield ſay: For we ſee that the Church of Rome in the dayes of S. GREGORY (ſaith he) as their learned CASSANDER witneſſeth, as S. GREGORY'S owne writings do ſhowe, did allow of ſuch Pictures, as hiſtoricall Monuments, whereby the unlearned might bee put in remembrance of things done, but in no caſe ſuffered to worſhip them. Which how little it differeth from the doctrine of Proteſtants, their owne learned Cardinall may witneſſe, ſaying even of M. CALVIN, that hee doth not ſimply condemne the having of Images, but admitteth of them for an hiſtoricall uſe, that is, to this end, to repreſent the Acts of CHRIST and holy SAINTS, and not to worſhip them, lib. 1. cap. 2. ſect. 25. in his Appeale.
                  
                  But it hath diſtaſted ſome, that reſpect and honour ſhould be given unto them. Strange, it

ſhould diſpleaſe anie that can approve of any, be it but a civill uſe of them. I cannot tell; unleſſe men would inſtantly have them pulled downe in all places, demoliſhed, ſtamped to powder, whoſeſoever, whatſoever, whereſoever. The ſetting of them up, ſuffering them to ſtand, uſing them for ornaments, for helps of memorie, of affection, of rememoration, cannot be abſtracted, to my underſtanding, from reverence and honour ſimply, in due kinde. Can a man have the true repreſentation of his Prince, Parents, Patrons, &c. without awe, reſpect, regard, love, reverence, mooved by aſſpect, and wrought in him? I profeſſe my imperfection, or what they will call it, it is ſo with me. Vnco impacto in Latrinas, in Gemonias, in malam Crucem, the pictures, ſtatues, paintings, repreſentations of CHRIST, the VIRGIN, APOSTLES, MARTYRS, HOLY men and women; unleſſe the very having and preſerving of them, do in ſome ſort imply reſpect, regard, and honour done unto them, without offence juſtly given, without ſcandall, or inclination to impiety. IUNIUS was no Papiſt; 
                     
                        De Imag. c. 11. n. 1. not in your opinion, I hope. Hee, in his Animadverſ. upon BELLARMINE de Imaginibus, ſaith, Hoc nemo NOSTRÛM dicit, non eſſe colendas, nec ullo modo. SUO MODO COLI PROBAMUS, velut Imagines; at non religioſo cultu, qui aut ſuperſtitioſus est, aut impius. Nec cum aliorum ſcandalo, ſive cultus ſeparatus, ſive conjunctus
                     
                     cum torum cultu intelligatur, quorum ſunt Imagines. M. MOUNTAGU ſcarce ſaith ſo much, and yet he is a Papist.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XXII.
               
                  
                     Popiſh doctrine and practice both about adoration of Images, rejected.
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  
                     BUt hee concludeth with the Papiſts thus: Let your practice and doctrine goe together, we agree.
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  NO, my good Informers, he doth not ſo conclude. You miſinform againſt him for concluding with the Papiſts. You finde it not in him, Let YOUR Practice, and YOUR Doctrine: but, Let practice and Doctrine. Can you finde no difference betwixt theſe two? I can let men ſee a verie maine difference, and the not malignant eye will ſoone diſcerne it. YOUR Practice, and YOUR Doctrine, fetcheth in all, and runneth out into

the extravagant, Idolatrous, blaſphemous doctrine of religious adoration, eyther primary or ſecondarie, abſolute or reſpective; to that of THOMAS, CABRERA, VASQUEZ, the Divell and all. For with a trick of relative worſhip, VASQUEZ empaleth the very Divell within the bounds of worſhip, as well as that cautelous Doctrine of DURAND, that Images are to be worſhipped improperly, in as much as, They doe put men in minde of the perſons by them repreſented; who are then adored before the Images, as if they were then really preſent there. Or, as that honeſt concluſion of MARTIN AIALA. Nemo in Eccleſiâ dicit, qui rectè ſentit, Sanctos deberi adorari, ſed venerari, whether in themſelves or their repreſentations. But Doctrine, without limitation of YOUR, pointeth you unto, and putteth you backe unto no other but the precedently remembred Doctrine of Dulia and Latria. My words are, If this you call DULIA, and no more, we admit it, we give it too. But whatſoever you ſay, howſoever you qualifie the the thing with gentle words (terming it DOULIA or HYPERDOULIA) we ſay in your practice you far exceed, and give them that honour which you call LATRIA, and is indeed a part of DIVINE reſpect and WORSHIP: ſo doe not we. Let practice and doctrine goe together, and we agree, that is, give them no LATRIA, formall or interpretative, and we agree.
               
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. XXIII.
               
                  The Church of Engl. condemneth not the hiſtoricall uſe of Images. The Book of Homilies containes a generall godly doctrine; yet is not in every point the publicke, dogmaticall, reſolved doctrine of the Church. The Homily that ſeemeth to condemn all making of Images, is to bee underſtood with a reſtriction of making them to an unlawful end. Many paſſages therein were fitted to the preſent times, and to the conditions of the people that then were. The finall reſolution of this controverſie.
               
               
                  
                  INFORMERS.
                  
                     ALL directly contradicteth the doctrine of the Church of England in the Booke of Homilies.
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  YOu enlarge too much for all. For, in your opinion, doth the Engliſh Church condemn the Hiſtoricall or civill uſe of Images? which yet is a part of that all. It doth not in practice, all the world knoweth that; nor yet in Precept or Doctrine, that I know. Shew me that, & ponam manum meam ſuper os. Men as learned as anie of your Side, no diſparagement to 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      and ſelfe-conceit, are, I doe aſſure you, of a contrary minde. I have named Biſhop MORTON alreadie unto you. And yet, were it not ſo, you ſhew no great wiſedome in that Limitation which your ſelves put unto my contradicting the Church of England; namely, in ſaying that I doe it directly. For where can you finde, in any writings of mine, expreſſe words againſt any one point eſtabliſhed or delivered, in the authoriſed doctrine of the Church of England? and words are not direct, which be not expreſſe. Thirdly, to come unto the iſſue, you name the Homilies, and mean, I take it, the ſecond Tome of

                     Homilies, in the Sermon againſt the perill of Idolatry. If you had vouchſafed us any proofs of your aſſertions, we ſhould have gone directly to worke with your allegations: but becauſe you take a rounder courſe, to tender every thing in Magiſteriall Dictates, wee muſt ſhoote at Rovers after you, and come up to you as conveniently as we may.
                  I anſwer then, firſt, that I willingly admit the Homilies, as containing certaine godly and wholeſome exhortations to move the people to honour and worſhip Almighty GOD; but not as the publick dogmaticall, reſolutions confirmed of the Church of England. The XXXIII. Article giveth them to containe godly and wholeſome Doctrine, and neceſſary for theſe times: which they may doe, though they have not dogmaticall poſitions, or doctrine to be propugned and ſubſcribed in all and every point; as the Books of Articles and of Common Prayer have. They may ſeeme, ſecondly, to ſpeake ſomewhat too hardly, and ſtretch ſome ſayings beyond the uſe and practice of the Church of England, both then and now: and yet what they ſpeake, may receive a faire, or at leaſt a tolerable conſtruction and mitigation well enough. For you have read peradventure (it is not unlikely that you have heard by relation) how ſtrangely ſome of the ancienteſt Fathers do ſpeake, and how they hyperbolize ſometimes in ſome points in their popular Sermons:
                     
which in dogmaticall Deciſions they would not doe, nor avow the doctrine by them ſo delivered reſolutivè. as in caſe of Free-will, of Invocation of Saints, and others. S. CHRYSOSTOME eſpecially ſpeaketh ſtrangely of the Bleſſed Euchariſt: as good Popery 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , as ever Papiſt conceived of Tranſubſtantiation or orall manducation. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , To. VI. pa. 407. Then Angels aſsist the Prieſt at the Altar: the whole troopes of Heavenly Powers cry aloud, To. VI. pa. 46. and To. V. pa. 528. Doſt thou imagine, that at that time thou converſeſt with man? Sure it is a thought of a ſtonie heart, to thinke that thou art then upon the earth, and not rather following the Angels in their Quires. and Tom. V. pag. 511. Know you not that this Table is repleniſhed with fire? ſuch and ſo conſuming, that unleſſe GOD'S grace aſsiſted powerfully, men could not endure, but ſhould be conſumed with the violent heate thereof. Tom. 6. pag. 16. And a little before, home to the purpoſe a man would think, for Tranſubſtantiation. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ; When thou beholdeſt our LORD SACRIFICED there, and the Prieſt ſtanding by the Sacrifice, and praying ever it, and every one preſent BEREDDED with that moſt precious BLOOD, dost thou ſuppoſe thou converſest then with man, or haſt thy ſtation upon earth? Which ſpeeches cannot

all of them poſsibly bee true in the literall ſenſe, no not in the opinion of the Church of Rome; and were none of them literally true, no not in the opinion of S. CHRYSOSTOME himſelfe. Now, after this enforcing ſort may our Homilies ſpeake, and bee ſo interpreted. Things are not ever, of one and the ſame man, touching one and the ſame thing, at different times, unto diſtinct Auditories, upon divers occaſion, ſpoken after one and the ſame way. In verie Scripture there are many Hyperbolicall ſayings, that being literally taken, will not hold weight at the ballance of the Sanctuary. In the writings of the Fathers (as appeareth by that of S. CHRYSOSTOME) there are dogmaticall concluſions for reſolution in points, and retoricall inforcements to edifie affections, diſpoſed for and according to the Auditory. Now our Homilies are all popular Sermons, fitted unto the capacitie and conditions of the common people, to edifie them, to worke upon them, ever ſtrong in paſsion, but weake in underſtanding. The will is more in them to bee edified, than the judgement; the conſciences and hearts of men to be wrought upon for good life and converſation, than the underſtanding and apprehenſion for any peece of knowledge. and that alſo diſpoſed accordingly, as fitted for times, for perſons, and different occaſions, as they doe or may happen.
                  As the ancient Fathers of the primitive

times, had verie few or no Churches at all, at leaſt of note, dignitie, or of receipt, becauſe they lived in times of fierce perſecution, and were ſeldome, or few of them, ſtationarie, but compelled ſubindè mutare ſedes; ſo had they very few, I grant, or no pictures at all in publicke uſe amongſt them, not ſo much as for ornament ſake. And the reaſon was, becauſe they lived continually amongſt Pagans, and were themſelves, for the moſt part, ſuch as had abandoned and come over from Paganiſme unto CHRIST; that were bred in, brought up in, inured to, and faſt ſettled unto Idolatry in Image-worſhip. Therefore they ſpake againſt them with ſome tartneſſe, and inveighing ſort, leaſt happely by converſing with, or neighbouring upon Pagans, or through former uſe of being miſ-led by thoſe Pagans (which was the caſe of the Iſraelites in Egypt, and the bordering Nations upon Canaan) the novell and tender ſhoots of Chriſtianity might receive hurt, and learne to worſhip Idols, as thoſe Pagans did. In like ſort, peradventure, OUR Predeceſſors and Fathers comming late out of Popery, living neere unto Papiſts and Popiſh times, converſing with them, having beene nuzzled and brought up amongſt them, and knowing that Images uſed to be crept unto, incenſed, worſhipped, and adored amongſt them, might, if they were ſuffered to ſtand as they did, put them in minde of their former practice,

induce them to doe as they had ſometime done, at leaſt in heart to worſhip and adore them; therefore in a godly zeale, ſuch as moved EZECHIAS to deſtroy the braeſen ſerpent, they ſpake thus vehemently, and indeed hyperbolically againſt them. For the people, with whom they then dealt, were by all meanes to bee preſerved from the taint and tincture of their ſuperſtitious practices. And for this cauſe I ſay (it may ſeem) the Church-Governours of thoſe times in their popular Sermons tooke that courſe which the ancient Fathers did, and ſtretched their exhortations and enforcements, as alſo their dehortations, ſomewhat hard upon the Tentors. For in their dogmaticall reſolutions, and doctrinall poſitions, they are more reſerved, and goe not ſo farre. We may do well then to conſider why, wherefore, when, and to what manner men theſe popular Sermons were made, and doe ſpeake; and not preſſe everie paſſage hand over head, for advantage. I reſt in that judgement and cenſure which our Church hath paſſed upon them, Artic. xxxv. where it is ſaid in terminis, THEY containe a godly and wholeſome doctrine, neceſſary for THESE times: the times in which and for which, this Homily againſt Images and the perill of Idolatry, was ſpecially made. To conclude, Images may be had and made, but with ſome limitation. The Image of GOD Almighty is not to bee

made at all, and no Image is to bee made for religious worſhip; no not of relation, as they ſpeak; which yet is minimae Entitatis; but, ut ornatui ſint, ut memoriae, ut Historiae: and that they may bee made for ſuch ends, no law of GOD forbiddeth, ſaith our GAMALIEL. 
                        Pag. 203. ad Apol. BEL.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XXIV. Touching ſigning with the SIGNE of the CROSSE.
               
                  To ſigne with the ſigne of the Croſs out of Baptiſme, or upon the breſt, &c. no more ſuperſtition, than to ſigne in Baptiſme, or upon the forehead. The practice of the ancient Church. The reaſons that mooved them, that might moove us to uſe often ſigning. They lived with Pagans, and wee with Puritans; both deriders

of the ſigne of CHRIST'S Croſs.
                  
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  
                     OF ſigning our ſelves, not children onely in Baptiſme, with the ſigne of the Croſs, he ſpeaketh very ſuperſtitiouſly: We uſe ſigning with the ſigne of the Croſſe, both in the forehead and elſewhere. Caro ſignatur, ut anima muniatur, ſaid TERTULLIAN: and ſo we.
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  NOT onely in Baptiſme? Tell me then, are ye come ſo farre home unto the Church of England, as to allow ſigning with the Croſſe in Baptiſme? that Popiſh Ceremony, as your Forefathers and Patriarches of the ſchiſme were wont to exclaime againſt it? There is hope you may grow in time, upon better advice, in love and practice with ſome of M. MOUNTAGU'S Popery, with the ſigne of the CROSSE in the forehead, and elſewhere. If it be not ſuperſtitious to ſigne in the forehead, why is it to ſigne any other part of the bodie? why more out of Baptiſme, than in Baptiſme? Is one part of the body more ſubject

and liable to ſuperſtition, than another? the breſt, or belly, or armes, than is the forehead? Superſtition is in Subjecto, or in Actione. In that if you faſten ſuperſtition, you muſt give us ſome reaſon why one part is more ſubject and liable unto it, than another; and wherfore you put this difference betwixt the parts. And concerning actions: religious and pious actions are more liable to ſuperſtition to be committed in them, than common, civill, or ordinary actions be; nay, all ſuperſtition whatſoever reflecteth upon religion. It is not but in ſuch acts as bee of themſelves, or appliedly, acts of religion and piety. Therefore, in all probability, if it bee ſuperſtitious to ſigne the forehead without Baptiſme, it is more ſuperſtitious to do it in Baptiſme. Nor can the Injunction of the Church give any priviledge of immunity unto a ſuperſtitious action of it ſelf, to bee uſed in point of piety without ſuperſtition: for, if to ſigne with the ſigne of the Croſſe be ſuperſtitious in it ſelfe, as by your opinion it ſeemeth to bee; then cannot the Church command it to bee uſed on the forehead in Baptiſme, becauſe no act of the Church can acquit and diſcharge the action of that naturall and inherent property. If it be not ſuperſtitious abſolutely, originally, and in it ſelf, eat your words of ſuperſtition, and elſewhere; or give us ſome reaſon why extra Baptiſmum it ſhould bee ſuperſtition to

uſe it 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , or to ſigne the brest, forehead, legs, head, or any one part, or all the body, and not ſo in Baptiſme for the forehead.
                  
                  The ancient Church uſed it in Baptiſm as we do. TERTULLIAN ſpake of Baptiſm the words remembred; Caro ſignatur, ut anima muniatur: which he learned not of MARCION nor MONTANUS, as ſome have fabled; but of the practice of the Church before they were born. And you ſhall finde, if you overlook the place againe, that I remembred the words for Baptiſme, and not otherwiſe: you have chopt off the vinculum that tyed my words together, and relate them as if I cited TERTULLIAN in generall tearms for any ſigning with the Croſſe, in any place, at any time. For which action, though lawfull, I doe not alledge him. I ſay, though lawfull: for where is it forbidden? What hindereth, but that I may ſigne my ſelf with the ſigne of the Croſſe in any part of my body, at any time; at night when I goe to bed, in the morning when I riſe, at my going out, at my returning home? The ancient Church ſo uſed it out of Baptiſme ordinarily: and ſo may wee, for ought I knowe, without juſt ſcandall and ſuperſtition. The practice of Antiquity you will not deny: you cannot, if you knowe any thing in Antiquity. Therefore I will not trouble you with teſtimonies: you ſhall onely have ſome reaſons for their practice. Firſt, out of CYRIL

againſt IULIAN, remembred in the Apologie againſt Cardinall BELLARMINE. Quod omnia 
                     
                        Reſp. ad Apol. BEL. p. 198. CHRISTI beneficia recordari nos faciat. YOU need not that help. Happy men, that are ever in actu exercitato, and need no rubbing of your memory. And that worthy Divine, D. WHITE, in his Brothers Defenſe, pag. 61. hath theſe words: The SIGNING of the body with the SIGNE OF THE CROSSE, as it was anciently uſed by the prime Chriſtians to theſe ends; I. To profeſſe, that they were not aſhamed of CHRIST crucified; 2. nor of the perſecution and croſſes which befell them for his ſake; 3. that they hoped for redemption and ſalvation by CHRIST crucified, whom Iewes and Gentiles deſpiſed: our Divines acknowledge to be lawfull. What ſaith M. MOUNTAGU more in his So do wee? and then, remembring ſome abuſes of it in the Church of Rome, addeth; In regard of theſe abuſes, our Church obſerveth not ſo common an uſe of the ſigne of the Croſſe, as was in former Ages: nevertheleſſe we condemne not the ſame ſigne in regard of it ſelf. You do: I do not. And heerin you ſee I am not alone. IUNIUS, Animadv. c. BEL. de Imag. ca. 29. Reſpectus Crucis, etiam Crucis CHRISTI, ut historicus, non malus ſimpliciter, ſed bonus. Malus verò efficitur, ſi proficiſcatur ex animo praeſumente mereri ex opere operato. Nos in rebus ſacris non improbaremus planè SIGNUM CRUCIS, ſi abeſſet ſuperſtitio, &c. Rem non adeò fugeremus, ſi abeſſent
                     
                     vitia indignè rem illam fermentantia. Tolle errorem ſuperſtitionem
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , nemo veſtrum aut illorum factum improbaturus eſt. M. PERKINS in his Probleme, though he faine would puritanize it, and ſo goeth on, heawing hoofe againſt hoofe, yet confeſſeth, that the Fathers uſed to arme themſelves againſt the Divell with the ſigne of the Croſſe; but addeth, They did not aſcribe unto the outward ſigne any power, or to opus operatum any efficacy. As if we imagined ſo, we ſay with himſelfe, that it is an idle and fooliſh forgery. And one day you may reade if you will what M. MOUNTAGU hath written againſt ROSW. the Ieſuite to that very purpoſe. But ſetting this ſuperſtition aſide, neyther can any moderate Proteſtant diſallow the uſe of the Croſſe, as the Fathers uſed it; nor can Maſter PERKINS refell it. You are of THO. CARTWRIGHT'S minde, I make no queſtion, that great Apoſtle of Puritanicall Schiſme; That that reaſon which moved the Fathers to uſe, ſhould move us not to uſe the ſigne of the Croſſe. They lived with Heathens, who had the CROSSE of CHRIST in contempt; we, with ſuch as ADORE the CROSSE. Where firſt I anſwer with that incomparable HOOKER, You erre, not knowing the Fathers reaſons. This was one; but this reaſon was not all, becauſe they lived with Pagans that did deſpite it. Secondly, wee live not ſo with Papiſts, as they did with Pagans. For the State,

and Prince in State, is for us againſt the Papiſts: ſo was it not for Chriſtians againſt Pagans. But thirdly, I come home to you indeed. The ſame reaſon that moved them, may move us to uſe it more frequently than we are enjoyned, more ordinarily than wee doe. For wee live with Puritans, and oppoſite Factioniſts, that have the Croſſe of CHRIST in as great contempt and deſpight, as ever had IULIAN or any Pagan. But as the Fathers, when the CROSSE of CHRIST was in utter contempt, did not ſuperſtitiouſly adore the ſame, but rather did declare that they ſo eſteemed it as was meet: In like maner, if wee finde the Croſſe to have that honour which is due to CHRIST, is it not as lawfull for us to retaine it in that estimation which it ought to have, and in that uſe which it had of old, without offence; as by taking it cleane away, to ſeeme followers of their example, who doe cure wilfully by abſciſsion, that which they might both preſerve and heale? So that worthy HOOKER, moſt learnedly and rightly. For your reſolution; I am enjoyned to uſe it in Baptiſme: and ſo are you. I doe ſo uſe it: do you? I ſcarce beleeve you doe it willingly. I am not enioyned to uſe it in other actions, places or times. But am I inhibited to uſe it ſo? Shew where, how, by whom. I ſee reaſons to my ſelfe peradventure, to uſe it ſo, or ſo; and thus doe, or may other as well as I. It is ſuperſtition you ſay: pardon me if I

take not your words for Goſpell. Prove it ſuperſtition, and I yeeld. The rule of your conſciences, is not the ſquare of mine; nor ſhall be, except it were more regular, perfect, and exact, than it is. Enjoy your opinions to your ſelf: let me alone with mine, in things indifferent, that are not prohibited by lawfull authoritie any way. For, ſaith the XXX. Canon, and I embrace it, Things of themſelves indifferent doe in ſome ſort alter their natures, when they are eyther commanded or forbidden by a lawfull Magiſtrate, and may not be omitted at every mans pleaſure, contrary to the law, when they bee commanded; nor ùſed when they are prohibited, Till then, at leaſt, I may uſe the ſigne of the Croſſe. You ſay it is Popery; but you muſt remember, that all your words are not Goſpell, nor all Popery that diſpleaſeth a Puritan.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XXV.
               
                  The practice of the primitive Church approved. Vnadviſed Informers. Novellers rejected.
               
               
                  
                  INFORMERS.
                  
                     HEmentioneth and approveth the practice of the ANCIENTS. They ſigned, ſaith he, their foreheads, their hands, &c.
                  
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  IT Is true, he mentioneth that practice of Antiquity; it is falſe, that hee approveth it in that paſſage of his: for he barely relateth it, and no more. But you knew his heart peradventure by inſtinct. For though it then dropped not from his pen what hee thought thereof, yet ſeeing you put him to it to diſcover himſelfe, he hath done it, and doth aſſure you he doth approve it. And it ſeemeth ſtrange to him, that ſome few Pigmies of theſe times ſhould preſume to controll the practice of thoſe Ancient Heroes of former ages, and to doe it ſo with an high-hand: wherein unadviſedly they runne upon that rocke, which of all they cannot endure to fall upon. For they confeſſe therein, that Popery is ancient: which, M. MOUNTAGU ſaith, all the Papists in the world cannot prove. For they ſay in direct tearms, M. MOUNTAGU approveth the practice of the Ancients: and that which he approveth, is by themſelves cenſured

for Popery. Nay more, they profeſſe themſelves therein Papists, that give ſo much credit unto Popery, as to confeſſe it ſo directly to bee ancient. Out of this ground, è lege 
                           •
                        alionis, becauſe they have now more than once informed againſt mee for Popery, I might as well pay them in their owne coine. Howſoever, let all Novellers knowe, I had rather venture to approove a ſuppoſed error with thoſe Ancients, the learnedſt in the primitive Church of old, than an imaginary truth, or not ſo good, with theſe Younglings; according to that dictate of the Councell of Niee, 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XXVI.
               
                  The teſtimony of S. ATHANASIUS vilified by the Informers. The teſtimonies of other Fathers concerning the efficacy & power of the ſigne of the Croſſe.
                  
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  HE citeth and approveth the teſtimony of one of them. By the ſigne of the
                     
CROSSE of CHRIST, all Magick ſpells are diſappointed, ſorcery and Witchcraft commeth to nothing, all Idolls are abandoned and forſaken.
                  
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  
                     QVàm contemptim! One of them? And was not that One worth the naming? Deſerved hee no reſpect from your Great Selves? Your uncircumciſed lips might well be ſweetned with the name of that certaine quidam, as you call him out of contempt. Goe to it roundly, quid haeſitatis? and with thoſe prophane ones, call him without more adoe, SATHANASIUS: for ATHANASIUS was the man there named to your hand. A man deſerving better of GOD'S Church, than you and all YOUR Divines, put them all together. If you miſdoubt the Teſtimony to bee forged, becauſe it was forgotten to name the place; it is in his Book de Incarnatione verbi, pag. 61. and was formerly remembred by him in the Tract against the Gentiles, pa 1. If you call the truth of the Relation into queſtion, ATHANASIUS Word will paſſe where your Bond will not goe currant. But you ſhall have mo witneſſes to ſpeake to the ſame purpoſe. EPIPHANIUS relateth of a Christian young Gentlewoman, 
                        Haereſ. 30. quae eſt E
                           •
                         10. that was quitted from the wanton

aſſaults of a young man, by ſigning herſelfe with the ſigne of the Croſſe; 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , that in it GOD might remonſtrate his wondrous power. And againe the ſame Father ſaith, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . The Magicians and Sorcerers prevailed not: 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . for the woman found helpe in the SIGNE of CHRIST, and through faith in him. which is gladius 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      againſt Puritan and Papiſt: againſt him, for the bare ſigne; againſt you, for the ſigne. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . where the name of CHRIST was invocated, and the ſigne of the CROSSE made, there Sorcery and Witchcraft could do nothing. If you liſt to ſee more, and hear more evidence to this purpoſe, you may look upon that which NAZIANZENE hath of IULIAN the Apoſtata, in his firſt Invective. which THEODORET hath of a certaine Iew, lib. 3. cap. 3. which EPIPHANIUS of another 
                        Ho. 8. ad Rom.
                      
                     Iew, IOSEPHUS by name. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , ſaith CHRYSOSTOME, we have alſo ſpirituall conjurations, the Name of our Lord IESUS CHRIST, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , and the power of the CROSSE. Nec mirum eſt quòd haec ſigna valent, cùm à bonis Chriſtianis adhibentur; quando etiam, cùm uſurpantur ab extraneis, qui omnino ſuum nomen ad iſtam militiam non dederunt, propter honorem tamen excellentiſsimi Imperatoris, valent; faith S. AUGUST. or whoſoever wrote the LXXXIII. Queſt. to DULCITIUS. Now what ſay you to 
                        Qu. 79.
                     
that Teſtimony of one of them? If you will not admit the Doctrine, becauſe M. MOUNTAGU delivereth it, I can name you one will ſay and approove as much, whom you dare not deny to be of credit, or ſtile a certain one of them. The SIGNE of the CROSSE, ſaith B. IEWEL, was had in great regard among Chriſtians; and the more, both for the publick reproach and ſhame that by the common judgement of the world was conceived againſt it; and alſo for that moſt worthy price of our redemption that was offred upon it. Therefore the faithfull which beleeved in CHRIST, in all their talk, in their whole life and converſation, uſed ſo much the more to extoll and magnifie the ſame. Thus, as THEODORET reporteth, the Chriſtians every where, in their common reſorts and open market-places, publiſhed and proclaimed the victory and triumph of the CROSSE. The which, as CHRYSOSTOME ſaith, they were not aſhamed to ſet as a Poſie to any thing that they did, and to any thing that they poſſeſſed. Likewiſe GOD, that the world might more deepely thinke of the death of CHRIST, wrought oftentimes ſtrange miracles by the ſame. Now is not this as good Popery as M. MOUNTAGU'S alledging and approving ONE of them? See more, if you be ſo diſpoſed, in his XIV. Article againſt HARDING.
               
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. XXVII.
               
                  
                     Popery is not the ſigning with, but the adoring of the Croſse. Strange effects wch GOD hath wrought of old adhibito ſigno CRUCIS; & may doe ſtill by the vertue of CHRISTS-Death and Paſsion, which that Signe doth repreſent.
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  
                     HEe profeſſeth, that hee knoweth no cauſe of ſuch diſtraction and diſaffection betwixt us and the Papiſts, for the reverent uſe of ſigning with the ſigne of the Croſſe, &c.
                  
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  FOR this uſe, betwixt any, not alone, nay not at all, Vs and Papiſts. For he nameth no Papiſts, no more than Puritans. It is a Gloſſe of your owne, none of my Text:

and yet I will not deſire to have it expunged, though I might put it off unto that franticke Puritan PARKER and his furious Followers, that indite the poor Croſſe of felony, murder, adultery, and all the ſinnes againſt both the Tables. I knowe no reaſon why they ſhould charge us: marry thoſe of your ſhorter Cut they may both charge and challenge, for being ſingular in their owne conceit, againſt conſent of Antiquity. For, the reverent, pious and religious uſe of ſigning, ad omnem omtum, gestum, habitum, with the ſigne of the Croſſe, is no Popery; which is a grand abuſe and a ſacrilege committed by them, in adoring the Croſſe, and giving unto it divine worſhip, and aſcribing effects unto the bare ſigne ex opere operato: which Antiquity never did, not then when GOD ſhewed greateſt wonders, and magnified his power moſt of all at the uſe of it: which you cannot diſprove nor deny, though you ramble, and are ready to grinde the teeth at it. HELEN adored the KING of 
                     
                        Deobit. THEODOSII. 
                     heaven, and not the woodden CROSSE, ſaith S. AMBROSE. In regard of that great and prophane abuſe of it in the Roman Church, we doe abſtaine from the more frequent, ordinary, publick uſe of the ſigne; which otherwiſe is lawfull: and we might practice it much more than we do, were it not for ſcandall.
                  But I adde in the concluſion, I could tell ſome experimented effects thereof. You meane,

in my owne experience, by my ſelfe, or ſome other of my acquaintance. What I meane, IUNIUS, Animad. c. BEL. de Imag. ca. 29. Priſci illi Patres praeſentiā, virtutem, operationem ſalutarem CHRISTI implorabāt, profitebantur, occupabant, adhibito SIGNO EXTERNO CRUCIS: cujus ſimplicitate, omnia Daemonū Ethnicorum
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            Ludibria cluderent in DOMINO. you have no authoritie to examine me. Whatſoever you have given out amongſt the Brethren in this point, I may by all Law, in tearms of ambiguity expound my ſelfe. Therefore prate you in corners what you pleaſe: I may intend this, that I can out of my reading afford the Gagger (who hath related none) ſome examples of ſtrange works wrought by GOD, in the times of old, at the uſe of the ſigne of the Croſſe; and ſome I have formerly made you acquainted withall out of EPIPHANIUS, NAZIANZENE, CHRYSOSTOME, and others: whoſe much, grave, and reſpected authority in the Church, you, though aptly diſpoſed thereto, dare not trample under foot, as little account as you even now made of the Ancients. As I told the Gagger before, that I could afford him Fathers for the uſe thereof, hee having recited none: ſo heer I may bee ſuppoſed to tell him (why not?) that I could ſupply him with ſome experimented effects out of the ſame, or the like Fathers; whereunto his ſmall reading could not, I am ſure hath not led him.
                  And what if I meant ſome experimented effects of my owne knowledge? What then? Can you controll or convince me? I am not bound to confeſſe my ſelf to you: but what if upon diverſe extremities I have found eaſe

and remedy by uſing that ejaculatory prayer of our Letanie, PER CRUCEM, &c. By thy CROSSE (and when I ſaid it, what if, to teſtifie my faith, I made the ſigne of the Croſſe?) and by thy Paſsion, good LORD deliver us? I cannot tell what you will ſay: but you know well, that ſome of your lewd Forefathers have accounted this, and a great deal more of that heavenly Prayer, to be no better than conjuring. If you will bee rightly informed (Maſter-Informers), it is not by the bare ſigne of the Croſſe that any ſuch effect cometh, but by the vertue and force of CHRIST'S death and paſſion then remembred, and at that time repreſented by the ſigne of the Croſſe. It is true, miracles are ceaſed. But what if this be none? What if ſo ceaſed, that notwithſtanding GOD can, and may, and will, and doth ſometimes work even miracles in theſe dayes? CHRYSOSTOME ſaith they were ceaſed in his time, To. 5. pa. 605. yet hee elſewhere relateth many miracles done even in his daies. His meaning was, they were ceaſed from the frequent and ordinary uſe: ſome extraordinary uſe of them might then, and yet may bee, for ought you knowe, or are able to proove the contrary. The Croſſe of our SAVIOUR, in the externall ſigne thereof, beeing as much vilified and deſpiſed by furious Puritans in theſe daies, as ever it was by frantick Pagans in thoſe; why may not GOD, to teach men better manners,

and to check this exorbitancy againſt the ſigne of our deare REDEEMER'S death, antiquum obtinere, do now as hee hath done in the daies of old, and ſhew ſome ſigne and token, to magnifie the thing ſo much deſpiſed? Sed 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . You have enough. Take it which way you will, all is one to me. It commeth next in the Rere, which alſo formerly did advance in Front. Heare an argument of my Informers preſumption againſt almoſt the current of Antiquity, out of ignorance at leaſt, if not folly extreme.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XXVIII. The Informers preſumption againſt the Current of Antiquity.
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  IN another place hee ſaith, IOSUAH in fight prevailed againſt AMALEC, through the ſigne of the CROSSE, rather than by the ſword. Chap. VIII. pag. 66.
               
               
                  
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  ISAY ſo indeed; and were not you either ignorant or inſolent, you would not oppoſe or cenſure my ſaying ſo for Popery. For almoſt which of the ancient Fathers hath not ſaid it? To inſtruct your ignorance, or elſe to abate your arrogance, take a particular of ſome of them for the purpoſe. IUSTIN MARTYR againſt TRYPHO, pag. 95. and 99. edit. Graec. ROB. STEPHANI. TERTULLIAN, contr. Iudaeos, pag. 102. and lib. 3. againſt MARCION in the ſame words; and in other places. CYPRIAN, lib. 2. cap. 21. Teſtimon. adv. Iud. S. AMBROSE, Tom. 5. Ser. 52. in diem Paraſceves. HIERON. Tom. 5. in XII. OSEE, pag. 71. CHRYSOST. Tom. 5. pag. 662. and elſe where. NAZIANZ. Orat. 6. pag. 137. and thoſe remarkeable Verſes of his,
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  which was alſo intended by ATHANASIUS the Great, Tom. 1. pag. 406. in this cloſe couched maner: 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . who by his people ISRAEL, working by his ſecret and myſticall grace and power, did vanquiſh AMALECH in fight. In a point of this nature, I can be contented to be cenſured for a Papiſt, with theſe and the like Worthies: in the meane time, you may bluſh for your ignorance and preſumption.
               
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. XXIX. Touching the SACRAMENT of the ALTAR.
               
                  The Informers drawne low, when they leave matter, and take offence at words and phraſes. The Antiquitie of Altars. A Sacrifice repreſentative and ſpirituall, acknowledged by all. The Author herein farther from Popery, than the Informers from Puritaniſme.
                  
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  
                     OF the Sacrament of the LORDS Supper hee writeth very Popiſhly.
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  I Verily doth hee, indeed lo. Our deer Brethren are heere cleane out of Patience. Hitherto their progreſſe hath beene from ſavouring
                     
to ſaying and writing, marry it was but ſimple Popery. Now upon improvement, he writeth VERY Popiſhly. For, firſt, he calleth the Supper of the LORD in expreſſe tearms, not as uſing their phraſe, but his owne, The Sacrament of the Altar. Very Popiſh, forſooth, to uſe a word, no ſtranger in the world. And my good Brethren, have not your ſelves, as holy and preciſe as you would ſeeme, uſed the like phraſe? Have you not named the Maſſe, and Purgatory, and Tranſubſtantiation, and the like, without any adjection of, As they call it, or ſo? Mo times than you have fingers and toes, I doubt not. Then ſure, out of your owne mouthes, you ſpeak very Popiſhly; and, which muſt follow in your inferences againſt Maſt. MOUNTAGU, are very Papists, in ſuffering ſuch prophane words to flee over the hedge of your teeth. And yet M. MOUNTAGU ſpeaketh by way of conceſſion: you have let thoſe words ſlip from you abſolutely. Sir Carnifex of words, and tormentor of phraſes, I could anſwer you as TERTULLIAN and ATHENAGORAS did the elder Pagans; You draw low upon the lees of malice & detraction, when you have nothing left but words and phraſes to calumniate. But I rather chuſe to ſpeak in our B. MORTON'S words, apologizing for Proteſtants againſt Papiſts. It may be I have taken licence in uſe of tearmes; but no error in doctrine can you finde: for, to put off your imputation

from farther faſtning, I beleeve no ſuch Sacrifice of the Altar as the Church of Rome doth. I fancie no ſuch Altars as they imploy, though I profeſſe a Sacrifice and an Altar. In the ſame reverend Biſhops words: The LORDS Table, being called improperly an Altar, can no more conclude a Sacrifice underſtood properly, than when as S. PAUL calling TITUS his ſonne according to the Faith, which is improperly, a man may contend, S. PAUL was his naturall father according to the fleſh.
                  
                  So it is, The LORDS Table hath been called 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      from the beginning; not, as ſome falſly teach, by ſucceeding Fathers. S. PAUL himſelfe may ſeeme to have given authoritie and warrant to the phraſe, Heb. 13. 10. IGNATIUS, S. IOHNS Diſciple, uſeth the word in the Chriſtian uſe and Liturgie more than thrice. So doth CLEMENS, the APOSTLES Canons, DIONYSIUS AREOPAGITA. IRENAE us, lib. 4. cap. 20. ſpeaketh of the Miniſters of the New Teſtament, not the Old, that they doe DEO & ALTARI deſervire. Theſe Altars were not of Stone at firſt, untill the dayes of CONSTANTINE, that the Church came to have reſt and peace; nor then frequently and in ordinarie Churches, but in Cathedrall only, or in great Cities. But of Stone they were, it is certaine; and I prove it elſewhere, before that Popery 
                     
                        Contr. BARON. in Exerc. ined.
                      was heard of in the world, or in the Church of Rome it ſelfe. But the name of Altars was

given unto them when they were of Wood; as is plaine out of OPTATUS and others, as I have there collected. Now though you may ſtumble and break your ſhinnes at the Altar, yet I hope you will not overthrowe the Sacrifice. I have ſo good opinion of your underſtanding, though weak, that you will confeſſe the bleſſed Sacrament of the Altar, or Communion-table, whether you pleaſe, to be a Sacrifice; not propitiatory, as they call it (I will uſe this word, Call it, leſt you challenge me upon Popery for uſing propitiatory) for the living and dead; not an externall, viſible, true, and proper Sacrifice, but onely repreſentative, rememorative, and ſpirituall Sacrifice. Now if you grant a Sacrifice, why deny you an Altar? D. REYNOLDS and B. MORTON have granted, that though we have no proper Altar, yet Altar and Sacrifice have a mutuall relation and dependance one upon the other. The name of Priests is given not only unto all Chriſtians in generall, but alſo to the Miniſters of the new Teſtament in particular, by the confeſſion of D. REYNOLDS out of Eſay LXVI. 21. in his Conference, chap. VIII. Diviſ. 4. pag. 470. Indeed firſt to the Miniſters, and then to thoſe that are all a royall Prieſthood. They have authority, as he confeſſeth, to ſacrifice ſpiritually: good Sirs, why not then an Altar, at leaſt of the ſame making, to ſacrifice upon? And why then is it ſuch Popery to name the LORD'S Supper, The
                     
                     Sacrament of the ALTAR? Walk at random and at rovers in your by-paths, if you pleaſe. I have uſed the phraſe of Altar for the Communion-table, according to the manner of Antiquity, and am like enough ſometimes to uſe it ſtill. S. PAUL calleth the Pagan ALTARS (which were indeed and truely Altars) TABLES: and why may not wee name the LORD'S TABLE an Altar, by the ſame warrant? You cannot communicate, he ſaith, of the TABLE of the LORD, and the TABLE of Divels. Nor will I abſtaine, notwithſtanding your oggannition, to follow the ſteps and practice of Antiquity, in uſing the words Sacrifice and Prieſthood alſo, and yet bee farther from Popery in that practice, than you from Puritaniſme, or any Puritan is indeed from true Popery; being two birds of one feather.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XXX.
               
                  A reall preſence maintained by us. The difference betwixt us and popiſh writers is only about the modus, the manner of CHRIST'S preſence in the bleſſed Sacrament. Agreement likely to be made,

but for the factious and unquiet ſpirits on both ſides. Beati Pacifici.
                  
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  
                     AFterwards hee expreſſeth himſelfe more fully, and ſaith thus unto his adverſary: But that you were bred up in a faction, otherwiſe you would acknowledge there need be no difference betwixt the Papists and Us in the point of Reall Preſence. pag. 253.
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  MORE fully (you meane, to be a Papiſt) than before; and that in the point of Reall preſence: which Reall preſence, in your Divinitie, is flat Popery; but not in the Divinitie of the Church of England. Concerning this point I ſaid, and I ſay ſo ſtill, that if men were diſpoſed, as they ought, unto peace, there need be no difference. and I added a reaſon, which I repeate again heer: The diſagreement is only in de modo praeſentiae: the thing is yeelded to on eyther ſide, that there is in the holy Euchariſt a Reall preſence. God forbid, ſaith Biſhop BILSON, we ſhould deny that the
                     
                     fleſh and bloud of CHRIST are TRULY PRESENT, and truely received of the faithfull at the LORDS Table. It is the doctrine that we teach others, and comfort our ſelves withall. Pag. 779. of True ſubject. And the reverend and learned Anſwerer unto BELLARMINES Apologie, commeth home to the Faith, or Popery if you will, condemned in M. MOUNTAGU, who learned it of him and ſuch as hee is. Nobis vobiſcum de OBIECTO convenit, de modo lis omnis eſt. You underſtand not objectum and modum heer: take his owne application, to the purpoſe. PRAESENTIAM, inquam, credimus non minus quàm vos VERAM. De MODO PRAESENTIAE nil temerè definimus. And to them agreeth Biſhop MORTON, pag. 93. The queſtion is not concerning a Reall Preſence, which Proteſtants, as their owne Ieſuits witneſſe, do alſo profeſſe. FORTUNATUS a Proteſtant, holding that CHRIST is in the Sacrament, MOST REALLY: veriſsimè, realiſsime
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
                      are his words. CALVIN, teaching that the preſence of CHRIST'S Body, in reſpect of the ſoules of the faithfull, is TRLUY in this Sacrament, and SUBSTANTIALLY received. with whom BEZA and SADAEL doe conſent. If this be the Doctrine that the Church of England teacheth and profeſſeth, as it is indeed, I leave you to thoſe that muſt looke unto you. Yea but it is inexpiable that I ſay, Wee need not ſo diſſent from Papiſts. As if it were a ſacrilege, not to jarre and jingle infinitely without

cauſe. I may, I ſee, turne my ſpeech to you, and you will not refuſe to take it to your ſelves, which I uttered touching the Ieſuite Faction: But that the Divell bred you up in a FACTION, and ſent you abroad to do him ſervice in maintaining a FACTION, otherwiſe you might right well acknowledge, there is no ſuch cauſe why in this point of the SACRAMENT we ſhould be ſo diſtracted as WE and the PAPISTS are, ſeeing both confeſſe that which is enough, This is my body; and contend meerly about the MODUS, HOW it is my body. A point of faith undeniable, though it be unſearchable and incomprehenſible. Incomparable HOOKER, that Puritanomaſtix, might well ſay, and you in your right wits would ſubſcribe it, thus: Seeing that by opening the ſeverall opinions which have beene held, they are growne, for ought I can ſee, on all ſides at the length to a generall agreement concerning that which alone is materiall, namely, the reall participation of CHRIST, and of life in his body and bloud by meanes of this Sacrament, wherefore ſhould the world continue ſtill distracted (yes, to pleaſe the humours, and ſerve the turnes of Ieſuites and Puritans) and rent with ſo manifold contentions, when there remayneth now no controverſie, ſaving only about the ſubject, Where CHRIST is? yea, even in this point neyther ſide denyeth, but that the ſoule of man is the receptacle of CHRIST'S preſence. It was no bleſſed ſpeech, in my opinion; but unworthy

to be heard in an open Pulpit, and Publiſhed in Print, MALEDICTI PACIFICI; thoſe that endevour to make up ſuch rents. Be you of that family, if you pleaſe. I am for peace and reconciliation, and ſay ſtill, BEATI PACIFICI; as I have good warrant from CHRIST, and his bleſſed ſervant, King IAMES of moſt happie memorie.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XXXI.
               
                  The Author's acknowledgement of his error. Conſecration of the elements cauſeth a change; yet inferres no Popiſh Tranſubſtantiation. The Informers out of their element. Antiquity maintained. Figurists & Novellers condemned.
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  
                     ANd againe, No man denieth a change, an alteration, a tranſmutation, a tranſelementation, as they ſpeake.
               
               
                  
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  NO MAN denyeth: you doe. But pardon me, I meant it of diſcreet, moderate, underſtanding Divines. I ſhould have exempted you (I perceive my error) and ſuch as you, out of the number. Pardon mee this fault, I will commit it no more. If I have any occaſion hereafter to ſpeake of learned and moderate men, I will ever except and exempt you and yours. I muſt confeſſe my error and ſimplicity: for I would have thought, that in the Sacrament everie man would have confeſſed a change; that the conſecrated Elements had beene ſomewhat more than meere ordinary Bread and Wine. For I did conceive a ſacramentall Beeing of them, and not onely a naturall, in their uſe and deſignment. Vbi acceſſerit CONSECRATIO, de pane fit caro CHRISTI. And S. AUGUSTINES Saying is common and well knowne, Accedat Verbum ad elementum, & fiet Sacramentum. And CYRIL of Ieruſalem, Catech. v. ſaith to the ſame purpoſe: Precamur DEUM hominum amantem, ut emittat SANCTUM ſuum SPIRITUM in res propoſitas, ut FACIAT PANEM CORPUS CHRISTI, & VINUM SANGUINEM CHRISTI. For, quicquid contigerit SPIRITUS SANCTUS, illud ipſum 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , it is ſanctified and changed, ſaith S. BASIL in his Liturgie: and who is

not of the ſame minde? Speaketh he not unto the ſelfe ſame purpoſe? You never heard, it ſeemeth, of 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      in HIM; not of 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      out of THEOPHYLACT in MATTH. XXVI. not of 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      in GREGORY NYSSEN, nor of 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      in HIM, in CHRYSOSTOME, and others. For it appeareth you are not much verſed in Antiquity; and ignorantly imagine, that, if theſe be granted, Popiſh Tranſubſtantiation muſt needs enſue: which if it were ſo, then that Popiſh Minion, as Biſh. MORTON calleth it, were not, as it is, a Babe of yeſterdayes birth, never heard of in the world for MCC. yeers after CHRIST. but, a change of the elements, that is, Tranſmutation and Tranſelementation, do not inferre, you muſt knowe, Tranſubſtantiation. For in the other two the matter remaineth; but in this the matter is deſtroied: the quantity and accidents onely remain. There is a Converſion Sacramentall, that is, of ſignification, and of operation and uſe; as alſo in the Water of Baptiſm. And in Converſions that are ſubſtantiall, whether by divine power or courſe ordinary, there is evermore tertium quid, novum, noviter productum, out of that which is converted. But in their Tranſubſtantiation the Body of CHRIST is not produced anew, nor receiveth any ſubſtantiall change. Many be the differences that might be inſiſted upon: but I paſſe them over. The poor men that tendred this for Popery, were doubtleſſe out of their

element, and meddled beyond their latchet, or elſe they may goe to their bookes afreſh, ſtudie ſomewhat more ſtrongly; and then perhaps they will begin to ſent it, that Change, Tranſmutation, Tranſelementation, doe not conclude, as they ſimply beleeve, Tranſubstantiation. Then that ſpeech of S. CYPRIAN will not reliſh of anie Poperie; Iſte panis quem DOMINUS Diſcipulis ſuis porrigebat, non effigie ſed naturâ mutatus, omnipotentiâ verbi factus eſt caro. Et ſicut in perſonâ CHRISTI humanitas videbatur, latebat Divinitas; ita Sacramento viſibili inviſibiliter divina ſe infundit Subſtantia. Nor that Saying of S. AMBROSE, by theſe puny Divines cenſured for Popery; as alſo Maſt. MOUNTAGU for approving it, and ſubſcribing to it: Before Conſecration it was bread, common bread; but after Conſecration, it becommeth the FLESH OF CHRIST, becauſe then the Sacrament is conſummate. Which did not ſeem Popery unto Biſhop MORTON, pag. 106. The Fathers, ſaith he, doe note in Baptiſme a certaine change. AMBROSE, ſpeaking of the water in Baptiſme, ſaith: The nature thereof is by Benediction changed. And hee is produced in the like caſe for proofe of Tranſubstantiation in the Euchariſt. In the margin he ſetteth down his words thus: Fortè dices, meus panis eſt uſitatus: ſed panis iste, ante verba Sacramentorum, PANIS eſt: ubi acceſſerit Conſecratio, de pane fit CARO CHRISTI. The very words by mee

recited out of Lib. IV. cap. 4. de Sacram. Is this Popery in M. MOUNTAGU? Is it good Catholick Doctrine in Biſh. MORTON? Hee approveth it, and explaneth it thus; and yet S. AMBROSE (if you can light upon the right edition) ſaith alſo of the elements, Operatorius ſermo eſt, & ſunt quae erant, & in aliud commutantur. But, eſſe quod erant, doth utterly take away and aboliſh that fiction of Tranſubſtantiation unto another nature. They remained what they were indeed, yet changed in uſe, to be Inſtruments by Faith of Grace, as his owne ſimilitude doth illuſtrate. Tu ipſe eras vetus Creatura: poſtquam conſecratus es, nova Creatura coepiſti eſſe. Accipe igitur quemadmodum ſermo CHRISTI omnem Creaturam mutare conſuevit. It was intolerable inſolence in ſuch Ignaroes, to challenge this for Popery which they underſtood not; or elſe malice Puritanicall, to traduce me for Popery ſo publickly, which in that learned Biſhop they approve for good Divinitie. In concluſion, you manifeſt your ſelves meere Sacramentaries, or worſe, that denie CHRISTS Body and his Bloud to be in the Sacrament (I dare call it ſo in despight of detraction) of the Altar. For you informe againſt theſe words as Popiſh. Bee contented with, That it is the Body of CHRIST, and doe not ſeeke nor define how it is ſo, and wee ſhall not conteſt nor contend. Which GOD forbid the Church of ENGLAND ſhould maintain, ſaid Biſhop

BILSON. The Figurists, Significatiſts, Symboliſts, taught you this Doctrine, who acknowledge nothing, receive nothing, but naked and bare ſignes and figures. I muſt ſubſcribe unto our Church againſt you, and them, and Papiſts; all three. Tranſubſtantiation, or the Change of the ſubſtance of Bread and Wine in the Supper of the LORD, cannot bee proved by holy writ: but it is repugnant to the plaine words of Scripture, overthroweth the nature of a Sacrament, and hath given occaſion unto many ſuperſtitions. The BODY of CHRIST is given, taken, and eaten in the SUPPER only after an heavenly and SPIRITUALL maner; and the meanes whereby the BODYof CHRIST is received and eaten in the SUPPER, is Faith. ARTIC. XXVIII.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XXXII. Touching CONFESSION.
               
                  Information againſt the expreſſe direction and practice of the Church of England. No new Popiſh cuſtome, but the ancient and pious manner of Confeſsion
                     
for the helpe and furtherance of mens true repentance, and for the continuing of them in amendment of life, is, may be, and ought to be urged. How Confeſſion of ſinnes to a Prieſt is required by the Church before the Receiving of the LORDS Supper.
                  
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  WE require men, ſaith he, to make ſpeciall confeſsion of their ſinnes unto a Prieſt, if they finde their conſciences troubled with any weighty matter, eyther when they be ſick, or before receiving of the LORDS Supper.
                  
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  BALAM at laſt went not to fetch divinations, as at other times; but ſet his face toward the wilderneſſe: nor theſe men to caſt on me particular calumnies, but per ſatyram congeſted and conjected at a maſſe upon the Church of England, in pretence

of mee. My words are, It is confeſſed, that private confeſsion unto a Prieſt is of very ancient practice in the Church; of excellent uſe and benefit, being diſcreetly handled. We refuſe it to none, if men require it, if need be to have it: we urge and perſwade it in extremis: wee require it in caſe of perplexitie, for the quieting of men diſturbed, and their conſciences. This is my Popery per partes. For warrant whereof, I bring my witneſſe and authoritie, the Injunction, Direction and Practice of the Church, and of Biſhops accordingly in the Church. If I have miſalledged, falſified, or elſe miſapplyed my Authors and Authority, why am I not taxed for that, and charged with it? If I cyte them truly and faithfully, but they have erred into Popery, ſpeake it out, my good Brethren, that they to whom it appertaineth may ſtand up according, as I hope they will, as I am ſure they ſhould, to maintaine, according to their duetie and places, that which their Mother, Holy Church, hath commanded in that ſort and caſe to be obſerved. What that is, let Biſhop MORTON ſpeak, and Biſhop USHER deliver: no Papiſts I know; and I think none in your opinion. The Biſhop of LICHFIELD in his Appeale, lib. 2. cap. 14. ſaith thus: It is not queſtioned betweene us, whether it be convenient for a man burthened with ſin, to lay open his conſcience in private unto the Miniſter of GOD, and to ſeeke at his hands both
                     
                     counſell of inſtruction, and the comforts of GODS pardon: But whether there be, as from CHRISTS institution, ſuch an abſolute neceſsity of this private Confeſsion, both for all ſorts of men, and for every particular ſinne knowne, and ordinarie tranſgreſsion, ſo, as that without it there can be no remiſsion or pardon to bee hoped for from GOD. And hereupon he reduceth the Differences betwixt Papiſts and Proteſtants unto two heads. 1. the Neceſsity: 2. the Poſsibility. The PAPISTS impoſe a Neceſsity of Confeſſion abſolutè, de jure divino, of all ſinnes, with all circumſtances: which is a tyrannie, and impoſſible, and a torture to the conſcience. The PROTESTANTS doe acknowledge, ſaith he, the uſe of private Confeſsion, but with a double limitation and reſtraint: the firſt is the foreſaid freedome of conſcience; the ſecond, the poſsibility of performance. And to this end and purpoſe he reciteth out of BELLARMINE CALVIN'S judgement, thus. Admittit etiam CALVINUS privatam Confeſsionen coram Pastore, quando quis it a angitur & afflictatur Peccatorum ſenſu, ut ſe explicare, niſi alieno adjutorio, nequeat: ſed addit moderationem, ut libera ſit; nec ab omnibus exigatur, nec neceſſariò de omnibus. The Councell of TRENT, that Popiſh Cynoſura, hath decreed Auricular Confeſsion to be of abſolute Neceſsity, from Ordinance divine. and ſo wee muſt take it, or incurre their Anathema, if wee care for it. The Maſter of Sentences ſaith, Without
                     
                     it there is no way to heaven. In IV. diſt. 17. INNOCENTIUS 111. denieth Christian buriall unto the not confeſſed, when they dye. In Concil. Lateranenſi. C. XXI. HUGO, de potestate Eccleſiae, is bold, hee ſaith, to ſpeake it. Whoſoever commeth to Communion unconfeſſed, be hee never ſo repentant and ſorie for his ſinnes, doth, without doubt, receive to judgement. More bold than wiſe in ſaying ſo, I wis: for it is oftentimes a matter of impoſſibilitie to doe it; ever impoſſible to do it with particular enumeration of each ſinne, and ſpeciall circumſtance in each ſinne. Nor was it ſo rigidly practiſed of old, as appeareth by LYRA in XVI. XXI. of Levit. nor is there ſuch neceſſitie of abſolute uſe, nor anie ſuch originall impoſition. The learned Biſhop of MEATH ſetteth downe, in his Anſwer unto the Ieſuites Challenge, the ſtate of Confeſsion in the doctrine of OUR Church, thus. Wee tell him againe, that by the PUBLICK ORDER preſcribed in our Church, before the adminiſtration of the HOLY COMMUNION, the Minister likewiſe doth exhort the people, that if there be any of them, which cannot quiet his owne conſcience, but requireth further comfort or counſell, he ſhould come to him, or ſome other diſcreet and learned Miniſter of GOD'S Word, and open his griefe, that he may receive ſuch ghoſtly counſell, advice, and comfort, as his conſcience may be relieved; and that by the miniſtery of GODS Word hee may receive comfort, and the benefite
                     
                     of ABSOLUTION, to the quieting of his conſcience. Whereby it appeareth (ſaith that learned Biſhop) that the exhorting of the people to CONFESSE their ſinnes unto their GHOSTLY FATHERS, maketh no ſuch wall of ſeparation betwixt the ANCIENT Doctors and Us. And againe, Be it therefore knowne unto him, that no kinde of Confeſsion, eyther publick or private, is diſallowed by us, that is any way requiſite for the due execution of the ancient power of the Keyes, which CHRIST beſtowed upon his Church. The thing which we reject, is, that new pick-lock of Sacramentall Confeſsion, obtruded upon mens conſciences as a matter neceſſary to ſalvation. So that ſetting theſe late Romiſh aberrations aſide, which M. MOUNTAGU alſo hath excepted; In HIS opinion, as well as in M. MOUNTAGU'S, wee may, as wee doe, adviſe, and urge the uſe thereof. And leſt this phraſe ſhould be excepted againſt, Vrging doth not ever imploy conſtraint or imperium; it reflecteth as often upon argument, perſwaſion, and inducement. Therefore, you that are Informers againſt the Church and me, remember to bee more temperate hereafter, at leaſt for ſome mens ſakes, whom you dare not, cannot, will not cenſure for Popiſh errors, as you doe M. MOUNTAGU.
               
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. XXXIII. Touching the Sacrament of ORDERS.
               
                  The new religion full of exceptions, though but againſt words onely. Ordination acknowledged to be a Sacrament by M. CALVIN himſelfe. A Sacrament in lato ſenſu. What our Church meaneth, in ſaying there are but TWO Sacraments.
                  
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  
                     WHereas his Adverſary chargeth our Church to maintain, that no interior grace is given by impoſition of hands in the Sacrament of holy Orders, and that this our opinion is contrary to expreſſe words of our owne Bibles; hee taketh no exception to him for calling it, The SACRAMENT of holy Orders.
               
               
                  
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  THis is no poſitive, but negative Popery; a ſinne, not of commiſſion, but omiſſion. Not to take exception, no Peccadillo, but a capitall crime with Puritanicall quick-ſilver Spirits, whoſe ſervice unto GOD is performed by taking exception againſt all things that ſute not with their fancy. Elſe, what maketh it ſo hainous an offence with them, to take no exception at a terme, or a word? We brabble not for words; our difference is for, and about things. Contentions may be multiplied beyond all degrees of bounds, moderation or meaſure, and that in things needleſſe, and to no purpoſe oftentimes. You foment this humor more than you need, or ſhall have thank for of the PRINCE OF PEACE, that call us out ſtill unto direct Conteſtation, and cenſure us for Papiſts, becauſe wee are not ſo contentious nor brabbling as you would have us. For heer what need you quarrell the not excepting againſt the terme Sacrament? It was not propoſed whether Ordination were a ſacrament or not; but whether in that which they call the Sacrament of holy Orders, and the Church of England, at leaſt, holy Orders, any interior Grace were given by impoſition of hands. Iuſt as not long ſince you ſought a knot in a ruſh for uſing the like phraſe of ſacrament of the Altar:
                     
So, if being to ſay ſomewhat againſt Tranſubſtantiation, I doe not quarrell the word, I am a Papiſt, though I diſpute never ſo earneſtly againſt the thing. See how apt and diſpoſed men are, that love faction and diviſion, to take hold and faſten upon any thing to maintaine it.
                  But I can otherwiſe excuſe my ſelfe, and I beleeve ſhall not finde them in the excepting humor for it. Know then, Sirs Informers, I durſt not except againſt the phraſe, for feare of drawing more fiſts about my eares than my owne, viz. of all YOUR DIVINES (and they are 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ) whom you call CALVINISTS. For have you not read it? or doe you not remember it, what BELLARMIN hath ſaid, that CALVIN admitteth Ordination for a Sacrament? And BELLARMINE doth not belie CALVIN; for he doth ſo indeed. Theſe are his words, lib. IV. ca. 19. ſect. 31. Supereſt Impositio manuum: quam ut in veris legitimiſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ordinationibus Sacramentum eſſe concedo, ita nego locum habere in hâc fabulâ, &c. How that is, and in what ſort, he expreſſeth himſelf, lib. IV. cap. 14. ſect. 20. Nam impoſitionem manuum, quâ Eccleſiae Ministri in ſuum munus initiantur, ut non invitus patior vocari Sacramentum, ita inter ordinaria Sacramenta non numero. He admitteth it a Sacrament, but not an ordinarie Sacrament. No Papist living, I think, will ſay or deſire more. It is not for all, but for ſome. Which Saying of his is ſemblably expreſſed

in that ſhort, ſmall, but perfect Catechiſme in our Communion Book: where the Queſtion being asked, How many SACRAMENTS are there? the Anſwer is made, TWO onely as generally neceſſary unto ſalvation; not excluding others from that name and deſignation, though from the prerogative and degree. For, touching ſacramentall unction, it is obſerved out of M. HOOKER, that in the Writings of the antient Fathers, all Articles peculiar unto Chriſtian faith, all Duties of Religion contayning that which ſenſe or naturall reaſon cannot of it ſelfe diſcerne, are commonly called Sacraments. And this is not denied by B. MORTON. For if wee ſhould ſpeak of improper Sacraments, 
                     
                        Pag. 339. ſaith hee, which are mentioned by the antient Fathers, our Adverſaries would not deny, that not onely ſeven, but ſeventy times ſeven Sacraments might bee named. Therefore, for the Church of England's ſake, be good to Maſter MOUNTAGU in this ſinne of omiſſion; and unto the Church of England, for the antient Fathers ſakes; unto them and unto all, for B. MORTON'S and M. CALVIN'S ſake, who is the Father of your Divines called Calviniſts; who for Orders (will you ſuffer them to bee called Holy?) goeth as farre as may be, both for force, and for forme of adminiſtration: as if Ordination did, in his opinion, conſiſt in relation unto ſome ſuch gift or grace ſupernaturall, as onely GOD can beſtowe; being the

powerfull meanes of GOD, though in different degrees, unto eternall life. It followeth.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XXXIV.
               
                  Information againſt the Church-Booke of Ordination; which acknowledgeth the giving and receiving of the HOLY GHOST in ſacred Orders: ſo that Priests have that interior grace & power conferred upon them for the diſpenſation of Divine myſteries, which others have not.
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  
                     BUt denieth our Church to hold any ſuch opinion. Theſe are his words: This indeed is contrary to expreſſe words of our Bible, and therefore directly contrarie to our opinion, doctrine, & practice. CHAP. XXXVIII. fol. 269.
               
               
                  
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  COunterfeyting at length will be diſmaſked, and Hypocriſie appeare in the true comportment. For heer, Sorex ſuo ſe indicio. The Ape diſcovers himſelfe to bee ſo, by cracking of nuts: ſo doe theſe men, who, what, and what Side they are of; Puritans in Faction, and engrayned in their affection that way, howſoever pretending conformity by ſubſcription. For what is that, trowe ye, that M. MOUNTAGU denieth our Church to hold? which theſe Informers and their Abbetters hold not? which they deny? which in their opinion is Popery? The Gaggers imputation upon us and our Church, was, that in the doctrine of the Church of England, no interior Grace is given by impoſition of hands in the Sacrament of holy Orders: In effect, that when it is formally and ſolemnly ſaid, RECEIVE THE HOLY GHOST, this is but idle, and without effect. This imputation M. MOUNTAGU denieth to be true and juſt, and affirmeth, that in the reſolution and doctrine of the Church of ENGLAND, by impoſition of hands, internall Grace is conferred. Now this theſe good Informers have preſented to be a Popiſh error, namely, the publike and by Parliament eſtabliſhed and authoriſed doctrine of our Church. So ſaid their grand Patriarches and Fathers before them;

the Puritan Vndertakers, and Complayners unto Parliament alſo, againſt the doctrine and diſcipline of the CHURCH. Papiſticus quidam ritus, are their owne words, stultè quidem ab illis, & ſine ullo Scripturae fundamento inſtitutus, & à diſciplinae noſtrae authoribus, pace illorum dixerim, non magno primum judicio acceptus, minore adhuc in Eccleſiâ noſtrâ retinetur. Eccleſ. diſcipli. pag. 53. They ſay, Wee cannot give the HOLY GHOST, and therefore we doe fooliſhly to bid men RECEIVE it. And yet theſe men, that are of the Clergy, M. YATES and M. WARD, have ſubſcribed, I hope, That interior Grace is given, that is, the HOLY GHOST is given in Ordination; who preſent M. MOUNTAGU as a Papiſt for ſaying ſo. How can theſe Prieſts anſwer the one Act, or the other? When they entred into Priesthood, their profeſſion was then amongſt other things acknowledged and ſubſcribed, that the booke of ordering Biſhops, Priests, and Deacons, contayneth nothing contrary unto the Word of GOD: and yet now it contayneth. For this is expreſſely contayned there, which M. MOUNTAGU amongſt other points of Popery delivereth, That interior Grace, that is, the HOLY GHOST, is conferred in HOLY ORDERS; and that this is the opinion, doctrine, and practice of the Church of England. I may and do conclude with the VIII Canon againſt them; leaving the execution, which I hope will not be neglected, unto Authority.
                     
The Canon is, Whoſoever ſhall hereafter affirme or teach, that the forme and manner of making and conſecrating Biſhops, Prieſts, and Deacons, contayneth any thing in it contrary to the Word of GOD, let him be excommunicate IPSO FACTO. Theſe men have affirmed it in moſt publick maner: for Popery is contrary to the Word of GOD; and they have imputed Popery to me, for ſaying as I and they have ſubſcribed. I referre it to Them unto whom it belongeth, whether they ſtand not therefore excommunicate; not to bee reſtored untill they repent, and publickly revoke ſuch their wicked rerors: the Cenſure of the Canon. But I proceed from Ordination to Execution of Prieſthood; from the Originall denied, unto the Miniſteriall part rejected alſo by them: and ſo I ſhall have done with them.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XXXV. Touching power of Prieſthood to forgive Sinnes.
               
               
                  
                     Prieſts have power to forgive ſins, not originally, but miniſterially. The Doctrine of the Ordination
                     
and Communion Book for publick and private Abſolution. The Informers to loſe the profits of their livings, and to be impriſoned without baile, for declaring againſt it.
               
               
                  INFORMERS.
                  THis is the Doctrine, ſaith hee, of our Communion-Booke, and the practice of our Church accordingly, that Prieſts have power not only to pronounce, but to give Remiſsion of ſinnes. CHAP. XI. Pag. 78. 79.
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  FIRST be pleaſed, whoſoever ſhalt view or reade this Apologie, to take the true ſtate and Tenent in the point informed againſt by theſe Promoters. It was impoſed by the Gagger, as a doctrine authoriſed in our Church, None but GOD can forgive ſinnes, or retaine them. It was anſwered by me, that in ſome ſenſe it was true, None elſe can doe it, viz. by authority and right originall, becauſe all ſinne is properly committed againſt GOD;

                     Tibi ſoli peccavi: and that in ſome ſenſe alſo it was not true. For by delegation others alſo might doe it ministerially. GOD doth forgive them by the miniſtery of men. The Priest, to doe this, hath power conferred upon him by GOD in as ample ſort as he or any man can receive it. And that this was indeed the doctrine of our Church, I proved by the witneſſe of an enemy, and therefore the ſtronger; producing the verdict of a Papiſt, who confeſſeth, that Proteſtants hold, that Prieſts have power, not only to pronounce, but to give remiſsion of ſinnes. Which ſeemeth to bee the doctrine of the COMMUNION BOOKE in the viſitation of the fick. where the PRIEST ſaith, AND BY HIS AUTHORITY COMMITTED UNTO MEE, I ABSOLVE THEE FROM ALL THY SINNES. This is my relation hitherto, of what I finde. So that heer is committed crimen falſi by theſe Informers. I relate what one of that Side ſaith; I ſay it not my ſelfe, but only recognize the truth of his relation, which I could not deny. For in the viſitation of the ſick, in the Communion-Booke, the doctrine and practice is as hee relateth it. So that were it not juſtifiable which is heere reported, theſe honeſt, faithfull Brethren had put a trick upon mee, namely, an Aſſertion for a bare Relation; as if I had juſtified what I doe but report. But it is juſtifiable: it is the doctrine and practice of the Church of England.
                     
The Biſhop of Meath was of that opinion, Pag. 109. againſt a Ieſuites challenge; HE hath done us open wrong in charging us to deny, that PRIESTS HAVE POWER TO FORGIVE SINS. And hee giveth a reaſon irrefragable; Whereas the very formall words which our Church requireth to be uſed in the Ordination of a Minister, are theſe: WHOSE SINNES THOU DOST FORGIVE, THEY ARE FORGIVEN; AND WHOSE SINNES THOU DOST RETAINE, THEY ARE RETAINED. The execution of which authority accordingly is put in practice in the Viſitation of the ſick. And no man can ſay more, or come more fully home unto Popery in this point than Biſhop MORTON in his Appeale, Pag. 270. And indeed the POWER OF ABSOLUTION, whether it be GENERALL or PARTICULAR, whether in PUBLIKE or in PRIVATE, it is profeſſed in OUR CHURCH; where both in our PUBLIKE SERVICE is proclaimed pardon and Abſolution upon all penitents; and a PRIVATE applying of PARTICULAR ABSOLUTION unto Penitents by the office of the MINISTER. And greater power than this, no man hath received from GOD. In as much then as theſe Informers declare and ſpeake againſt ſome part of the Communion-Booke, in the Viſitation of the ſick, for Abſolution in remiſsion of ſinnes; and that they ſtand convicted thereof per evidentiam facti, by ſtatute of 1. of Elizab.
                     
                     they are to loſe the profits of all their ſpirituall promotions and benefices for one yeare, unto the KING; and without baile or mainepriſe, to ſuffer impriſonment for halfe a yeare. If they are not beneficed, their indurance is the longer: the puniſhment alotted, is, one whole yeares impriſonment. which it were not amiſſe, that Authority would deſervedly inflict upon them, to teach them better manners heereafter, than to call that a point of Popery, which is apparant, and confeſſed to be the expreſſe and avowed doctrine and diſcipline of the Church, confirmed for performance by Act of Parliament. I leave the cenſure of their deſerts unto Authoritie, whom it toucheth; and proceede to the next Information upon the ſame point, though with ſome addition.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XXXVI.
               
                  
                     Prieſts onely, and none other, have commiſsion from CHRIST to forgive ſinnes. The extravagancies of Puritans and Papiſts both in this point.
               
               
                  
                  INFORMERS
                  
                     ANd a little after; It is conſeſſed, that all Prieſts, and none but Prieſts, have power to forgive Sinnes. CHAP. XII. Pag. 83.
               
               
                  MOUNTAGU.
                  ANd is it not ſo confeſſed, when by publick warrant in Ordination, that power is given unto all Prieſts to do ſo, in thoſe ſolemne words of Ordination, WHOSE SINS YOU FORGIVE, THEY ARE FORGIVEN? and unto none but Prieſts, becauſe none have elſe ſuch Ordination? If this bee not confeſſed, I will put my ſelfe to you to ſchool, to learne and to know what is confeſſed. The fact is apparant, you cannot ſay nay: haply you will, nay, certainly you do queſtion, Quo jure, quàm rectè it is confeſſed. The truth is, you cannot deny the thing. But with you Puritans this doctrine and practice of the Church is held to be Popery. And heer you inferre neceſſarily, that Prieſts have no more power to doe this, than Lay-men have. For what elſe can you mean by, And none but Prieſts, but eyther, that neyther one nor other have that power; or elſe, that one
                     
as much and as great as other? To which you incline, I cannot ſay aſſuredly. No great difference: for both are exact Puritaniſine: you caſt Confeſsion upon both one and other. Any Lay-man may heare it as well as a Prieſt: and therefore it is probable, you will not be very preciſe for Abſolution, to conferre it on a Layman, as well as on a Prieſt. So the power of the keyes are to both alike in equall aſſiſe. But Sirs, Abſolution is a part of that Prieſtly power, which could not be given by Men or Angels, but onely and immediately by Almighty GOD himſelf; a part of that paramount power which the GOD of glory hath inveſted mortall men withall. In which reſpect, and not otherwiſe, as ſome claime, it hath beene ſaid, The head of the EMPEROR hath been ſubjected unto the PRIEST'S hands. In which regard, no earthly power is of equall value and aſſiſe unto it; as not onely the ANCIENTS (you ſhall have a Catalogue of them if you deſire it), but Biſhop MORTON confeſſeth. None can arrogate this power and authority unto himſelf: none can bee inveſted with it, but by commiſsion. Prieſts onely have this commiſsion from CHRIST; unto whom hee ſaid, As my Father ſent me, ſo ſend I you; and, Receive you the holy Ghost: whoſe ſinnes you remit, they are remitted, &c. This commiſsion (as they may doe any) thoſe that have it under ſeale

in good warrant, may abuſe. And ſo they have done in the Church of Rome: but that abuſe doth not evacuate the commiſsion; not in the Exceeders and Tranſgreſſers, much leſſe in them that exceed not. They have abuſed it: for ſaith one, Sacerdos utitur ipſiſsimâ CHRISTI poteſtate in remittendis peccatis. it is BULLENGER in Diatribis, Pag. 267. that is, Primaria, authoritativa, if it be ipſiſsima; not ſecundaria & delegata. For our late Maſters in the Church of Rome doe faſten the efficacie of forgiving ſinnes, unto the externall word pronounced by the Prieſt. For, ſaith SUAREZ, Sacraments have 
                     
                        To. 3. d. 2. § 2. 
                     a PHYSICALL efficacity in conferring grace, as CHRIST'S humanity had in working miracles. And therefore no marvell if they abate Contrition, by acquiring onely, as ſufficient and enough, a kinde of overly deſire to ſerve GOD anew; ſuch as the Schoolemen call vellëity: no full reſolved purpoſe, no matter for it; no deep ſorrow or Contrition. And therefore are they ſo facile in Abſolution, ſo eaſie and often childiſh in Satisfaction.
                  
                  We profeſſe and beleeve, that none can forgive ſinnes but GOD, by expiating, wiping out, blotting away, and purging; that no man can forgive them abſolutely, authoritatively, by primer and originall power; that Prieſts have delegated power from GOD to reconcile unto him, by preparing of them by the Word and

Sacraments to repentance, to bee capable of forgiveneſſe; firſt, to chafe and prepare the wax to receive the Seale; then, as Officers, to ſet to that Seale, to pronounce them abſolved in the name of CHRIST, and actually to abſolve them, ſo farre as Miniſteriall Power can extend, qui non ponunt obicem by unbeliefe or irrepentance. The phraſe of the Ancients, and even of the elder Roman Schooles, was this, and no otherwiſe: Sacerdos abſolvendo confitentem pronunciat abſolutum, non remittit peccatum. And again, Sacerdotes dimittunt ostendendo & manifeſtando. Habent ſe, ad modum demonſtrantis, non directè, ſed diſpoſitivè. And that becauſe ea adhibent per quae DEUS dimittit peccata, & dat gratiam. To conclude; the Master of their Sentences, their ancient Ritualls, their formall words of Abſolution, taught them better doctrine than now they teach. Aliter DEUS ſolvit vel ligat, aliter Eccleſia. Ipſe enim per ſe tantùm dimittit peccatum, quia animam mundat à maculâ interiori, & à debito mortis aeternae ſolvit. Non autem hoc Sacerdotibus conceſsit, quibus tamen tribuit ſolvendi & ligandi, id est, oſtendendi homines ligatos vel ſolutos, poteſtatem. Vnde DOMINUS leproſum ſanitati prius per ſe reſtituit: deinde miſit ad Sacerdotes, quorum judicio oſtenderetur ſolutus. Setting ſome rigorous Puritans aſide, that like no Religion but one of their owne making, and yet in all

probability would not hold that long, I think there are few Calviniſts, as you call your Divines, that will wrench at this. So that it muſt unavoideably be one of theſe two, The good men either know not the Tenet of their owne Doctors and Divines of the more temperate ſort, and that alſo eſtabliſhed in the Church of England; or covertly miſlike the one and other: but daring not doe it openly, and give the whole Church the affront ſo palpably with a brazen forehead, they undertake it by traducing M. MOUNTAGU for a PAPIST, whom they knowe to be no PURITAN. thus wounding their Mother through their Brothers ſides.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XXXVII. THE CONCLUSION.
               
                  The iſſue of YATES and his FELLOW-Jnformers fond Accuſations. Other flying reports and defamations neglected. The Author's

humble ſubmiſsion unto the Church of England, and to HIS moſt ſacred MAIESTIE.
               
               THus farre theſe Zealous Ones have uncharitably informed; and have made a great noiſe and hubbub in the Church and State, of Errors, Dangerous Errors, GOD knoweth how farre, or wherein; Arminianiſme, Popery, taught and delivered by M. MOUNTAGU. Much ſuſpected, nothing yet proved. Great clamors and outcries of I know not what, or wherefore: as if ANNIBAL were ad Portas, and Popery ready to be reſtated in Church and Common-wealth. So the Beacons are fired by certaine franticke fellowes that are frighted with Pannick feares, and by them the neighbouring countries are diſturbed without cauſe. A field of Thiſtles ſeemed once a battell of Pikes, unto ſome Diſcoverers of the Duke of Burgundy. You can apply what I exemplifie. I goe no farther, but leave you to your ſelves; and if it bee poſsible, unto more charitable conceits of thoſe that deſerve no other imputation, but, THEY ARE NO PURITANS: which GOD in goodnes keep out of this Church and State, as dangerous as Popery, for any thing I am able to diſcerne: the onely difference

being, POPERY is for Tyranny, PURITANISME for Anarchy: POPERIE is originall of Superstition; PURITANISME, the high-way unto Prophaneneſſe; both alike enemies unto Piety.
               Other Accuſations there are that walk in corners, and fly abroad by Owle-light, as Bats or Beetles do, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Nor would I have regarded thoſe idle ARTICLERS, thoſe that in their Informations have carried themſelves ſo magiſterially, upon Ignorance and Malice one way, but Preſumption and Opinion of their owne knowledge another way, being but 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , as TATIANUS would call them; but that they profeſſed themſelves publike Promoters, and exhibited Informations, ut de rerum ſummâ. It was my part and duty, not to neglect my owne innocencie, but to diſcover and lay open their predominant frenſies to view in ſome part, and ignorant ſtupidity in common Tenents.
               THEM, MY SELFE; whatſoever I have ſaid, or done, or ſhall heereafter doe any way; libens, merito, more Majorum, now and ever I have, I doe, I will referre and ſubmit, and in moſt lowly devoted, humble ſort, proſtate upon bended knees, unto this CHURCH of England, and the true DEFENDER thereof, his MOST SACRED MAIESTIE; humbly craving that Royall Protection

which ſometime WILLIAM OCKAM did of LEWES of Baviere the Emperor; DOMINE IMPERATOR, DEFENDE ME GLADIO, ET EGO TE DEFENDAM CALAMO.
               FINIS.
            
            
         
      
   