
      
         
            
            
            The 26. of Iuly. 1622.
            A TRVE, PLAINE, AND COMPENDIOVS DISCOVRSE OF THE BESIEGING OF BERGEN VP ZOME, Sh
                  •••
               ng the late Actions of SPINOLAS Forces before the ſame.
            With the Proceedings of the Prince of Orange before Sattingambus.
            
            As alſo what hath happened of late to the reſt of the Armies in the low Countries.
            LONDON: Printed by E. A. for Nicholas Bourne and Thomas Archer, and are to be ſold at their Shops at the Exchange, and the Popes-head-Pallace. 1622.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A true, plaine, and Compendious Diſcourſe of the Beſieging of Bergen vp Zome, ſhewing the late Actions of Spinola's Forces before the ſame.
            With the proceedings of the Prince of Orange before Sattingambus.
            
            As alſo what hath happened of late to the reſt of the Armies in the Low-Countries.
            
            
               THIS attempt of Spinola's vpon Bergen, makes me remember that famous Siege in 1590. or thereabouts, when the Prince of Parma came before it with 30000. and continued the battery almoſt halfe a yeare.
            But becauſe I would reuiue the memory of famous men to the good example of others, and relate ſome paſſages worthy the obſeruation to the renowne of vertuous and worthy exploites,

giue me leaue by way of introduction to ſpeake ſomething of thoſe times, and ſo by coherence of Story you ſhall ſee me fall into the matter now propoſed.
            It pleaſed the Prince of Parma in the behalfe of the King of Spaine, being then his abſolute Gouernour in the Low Countries, after that euer memorable Victory in 88. to lay ſiege vnto Bergen with aboue 30000. men, as if hee reſolued to doe ſome thing worthy of his Honour, and memorable to poſterity, as it were in recouery of thoſe loſſes and fortunes, which both hapned to him and his Maſter at that time: but ſo many Skirmiſhes, Stratagems, and encounters were then put in practice, that hee was compelled to riſe and leaue the Siege, till better opportunity and fairer dayes.
            I will not ſpeake a worde of neither Armies, nor their skirmiſhes, nor their Aſſaults, nor their Batteries, nor their Sallies, nor their ſtratagems, nor of Grimſton and Redhead, by whoſe pollicy and ſeruice, 400. of Parma's beſt Gentlemen loſt their liues: but of the brauery of the beſieged and the glory of the Engliſh, whoſe fame floriſhed ouer the world.
            For in this ſiege, that Sonne of Mars the Lord Willoughby was Generall of the Engliſh, and ſuch a Generall, that his authority extended in beſtowing of honour vpon well deſeruers, which appeared in Knighting thoſe famous Dutchmen

Sir Paul Buxe, and Sir Marcellus Buxe, who afterward proued Gouernour of Bergen, and ſo continued many yeares.
            But at this inſtant Sir Thomas Morgan a Colonell was Gouernour of the place, and had 6000. braue defendants in the Towne: there were alſo famous Commanders all Engliſh, the Lord Borough Gouernour of Brill, a ſpirit of vnmatchable Valour: Sir Nicholas Parker called Captaine of the blacke Lances: Sir William Drury, Sir William Pellam, and ſo many other, all Commaunders, that their well deſeruing commaunds me to ſilence, leaſt I ſhould by this my ſlender diſcourſe extenuate their Noble fame, and merit.
            There came likewiſe as Voluntiers, and ſpectators of this Theater of Warre, the Right Honorable Earle of Northumberland, Sir Iohn Boroughs and diuers others: yea heere were faire Ladies too, who were ſo farre from artificiall effeminatenes, that they ſcorned the ſmoake of powder, and knewe (beſides the iuſtification of their courages) that true beauty would not, nor could not be impaired with a little duſt, and vapours of a thickned ayre.
            All theſe endured this Siege, and in ſteed of Courtly muſicke had the roaring Cannon ſounding in their eares: in ſteed of ſumptuous imbroderings, and beſpangled Cloakes with golde and Pearle, or other dainty fights, many times beheld bloody Caſſocks, & wounded Soldiers:

and all the ſences both of men and women were here to ſuffer vnſauery obiects, and ſubiects, and to make tryall of their patience and conſtancy, which they did with perſeuerance to the end: yea this is moſt remarkeable, that when the Prince of Parma made his approaches, as if hee pretended a battery, and ſo a breach, the heroijck Lord Willoughby ſent him word to ſpare that labour, if he pleaſed: For he ſhould haue a Port open, enter if hee could: whereupon the Prince was much amazed, and ſo hauing a full halfe, yeares tryall of the buſines, and ſtill encombred with the dayly ſallies, and excurſions of the Soldiers, he thought it farre better to raiſe his ſiege with honour, and vpon equall tearmes, then aduenture ſo many liues, and yet (as he had beene in ſome caſes put to it) hazard his renowne with fearefull loſſe and detriment.
            Let vs therefore ouerlooke their actions to vnderſtand, which way this ſiege comes about, and how time hath brought them into this threatning and danger.
            After the taking in of Weſell and Gulick by Spinola, wherein the firſt they left Don Lewis de Valaſco for Gouernour: and in the laſt Henry Vande Bergen, the Army retired to their ſeuerall Gariſons, and ſurely meant to repoſe themſelues in ſome reſt and quietnes, had not contrary to cuſtome, and the time of the yeare to draw men into the fields. Don Ynigo, Gouernour of the Cittadell

of Antwarp, proiected to doe ſomething worthy of his renowne, and the ſeruice of his Miſtreſſe the Arch-Dutches, and this was the beſieging of Sluice: whereupon hee vndertooke the buſineſſe in the beginning of Aprill laſt, with ſeuen or 8000. Wallons and Spaniards, diſpierſing them ſome to Dyſendike: ſome to St. Kathevine, a Fort builded and poſſeſſed by the States, and ſome to ſuch places, where hee thought it moſt conuenient to beſtow them, reſoluing to enter vpon Caſſant, and other paſſages, whereby hee might with eaſe come vpon the bankes, and ſo bring his approches neerer the Towne, which to effect, he built a Fort, and put therein a Gariſon to come neerer and neerer, to ſet his deſigne on her beſt feet.
            This he firſt attempted, when Spinolas Army watched the Rhine, & the Prince of Orange ouerlooked his Army by Weſell: and this hee did of purpoſe, as I take it, to diuert his Excellencie from following him any further, ſuppoſing hee would returne to defend a Towne of ſuch importance, as Sluice was: but the States had leiſure and meanes (without troubling the Prince of Orenge at all) to ſupply their wants, & ſend more Companies into the Towne: ſo that Spinola got nothing, but the loſſe of men, with cold, hunger, and ſicknes all the Winter, and ſo conſumed his Army, that he tried many friends and Countries

to fill vp his troupes and Companies. At laſt, the Winter falling out ſo ſtrange, and Don Ynigo perceiuing all accidents to counter-checke his pretences; he tooke another courſe for the time, and returned to Antwarp, doing no great matter about Sluice, but raiſing a Fort a little neerer, which they ſay hee could not effect without the loſſe of 800. men.
            When my Lords the States vnderſtoode of this retreat, and that Caſſant and other Polders of land round about, were free from this threatning perill and diſpleaſure, they aduiſed themſelues for the beſt, and by a premeditated ſetled Councell, reſolued not to looſe Sluice, nor haue her hedges trodden downe round about her, that is, her Bulwarkes and Trenches demoliſhed, or poſſeſſed by Strangers: whereupon they concluded to cut all the ditches, and let in the Sea, which they did in the end of February, and in which worke the Contributory Boores were imployed: and although it turned much to their preiudice, as looſing both land, and dwelling by this courſe: yet when they ſaw, it was for the ſeruice of the States, and the preſeruation of the Towne, they quickly accorded, and played the Pyoners in the buſineſſe.
            They began behinde the Fort of St. Cateline, and ſo diſpierced themſelues to Crines, Saint

               Margarite, Saint Hieronimo, Saint Iames, the Hermitage, and many Polaers of land, with the other Forts and Holds round about, but when the tide came in a pace: they made ſure Rowfellares, Hollands dike, and many Fortifications on the other ſide, which might be preiudiciall to the maine buſineſſe, ſo that at laſt the Sea ſwelled almoſt as farre as Gaunt, and the Enemy was glad to ſecure themſelues by returning, and ſo the coaſt was in a manner cleared at this time: For Monſieur de Hautin the Gouernour of Sluice, made a ſalley with fifteene hundred, amongſt whom were ſufficient Commaunders, and well experienced Trenchers and Engineeres, who performed this worke in ſuch a manner, that the principall Fortreſſes, which ſerued for the defence of Sluice, were all ſecured and kept vpright; and although the Sea ſwelled as farre as Vedo and Buſcams Vell, yet was the land not comparable to the liues of ſo many braue Souldiers, who muſt needes periſh, if this had not beene done, and the ſiege of Sluice once attempted throughly.
            When Spinola vnderſtood, what was done, hee retired in his perſon to Bruſsels, from the clamours of the Army, who began to want their pay, and murmur for lacke of imployment, and ſatisfaction: whereupon hee gaue the Commaunders leaue to promiſe them faire, and threaten once againe the ſurpriſing of Sluice,

Breda, and Bergen, as though they would haue three Armies on foote at once, and meant to make an end of the Warre in one Summer, to which they were the rather animated, becauſe they heard of new ſupplies out of England, to fill vp the Regiments of the Earles of Tyrone and Argile, who were both heere entertained as Colonels vnder the Archdutches ſeruice.
            But when this threatning paſſed ouer without attempting any thing worthy of moment, the Prince of Orenges brother, Graue Henry, with fiue thouſand foot, and ſixe hundred horſe, enters into Brabant, burning Villages, ſpoyling Townes, and forraging all the Countrey, in ſo much that the fires were ſeene at Bruſſels, and the Inhabitants ranne into their walled Townes for their preſeruation: yea, when Spinola feaſted the Ambaſſadours, and attended the determination of the truce, was this braue Souldier reading his Subiects a leſſon of Warre and Slaughter, and tyed them to harder conditions then euer they learned in their liues; by which occaſion hee mightily enriched himſelfe, and returned to the Hage with great booty, ſpoile, treaſure, and priſoners.
            Whereby the Enemy grewe enraged, and thought vpon nothing but reuenge, which at laſt they effected vpon the ſurprizing of Bergen vp Zome, wherein failing, they fell into the courſe of

beſieging it, whereat they remaine at this houre; but becauſe many remarkeable thinges chanced in this preparation, I thinke it not amiſſe to order the Diſcourſe in this manner.
            The Towne of Bergen is of as great importance to the States in Brabant, as Sluice in Flaunders: For as this watcheth Oſtend, Newport, Dumkirke, and other maritine Townes, yea openeth a doore to Ipers, Gaunt and all the land Countrey, that keepeth the Riuers, and is the Key of the continent letting you in to the fieldes of Antwerpe, Thurmount, Auſchiroten, and all the great Townes of Brabant: It ſtandeth on the Eaſt ſide of the Riuer of Some, comming from Antwerpe, & Antwerpe is ſcituated within 15. Engliſh mile, and was one of the famous Marte Townes of the world: and as this Bergen is the very Gate or entrance into the Countrey, ſo is it in a manner the barre and hinderance of the Enemy into Zealand and Holland: The States haue likewiſe diuers Sconces in the Iland of Tole or Tertoll of great reſpect and neceſſity, and within Fiue mile of Bergen, they poſſeſſe a Towne called Steen Bergen, on the Weſt banke of another Riuer comming out of the Countrey, at the mouth whereof, they haue another Sconce and other Fortes.
            I will not ſpeake of Breda, and ſome places in

the States iuriſdiction, nor how the Townes are diuided, though the whole Countrey in a manner is in the Arch-Dutcheſſe poſſeſſion: but the truth is, that the Gouernour of Antwerpe taking aduantage of certaine Companies, which marched out of Bergen toward Breda, and vnderſtanding that the Gouernour of Bergen was alſo abſent, ſent Spinola word of the ſame, who preſently proiected to make vſe thereof, and take aduantage of their abſence: and the truth is, that the Gouernour being called as they ſay Rehonen, perceiuing his Commiſſion growing to an end, and vnderſtanding that the Prince of Orenge was comming with his Army toward Breda, tooke a Conuoy of 2000. and went thither with intent and purpoſe to renue his Patents, but ere hee came there, a Meſſenger was ſent vnto him to returne in all haſt to his Gouernment, for the Enemy was on foot and had ſome proiect in hand, which ſomewhat amazed him, conſidering as he thought hee had not full Authority to commaund the Garriſons: notwithſtanding this meditation, the neceſſity of the time ouerſwayed all nicety and exceptions, and hee returnes very opportunely with all his Company to the Towne.
            
               Spinola followes his firſt purpoſe, and appoints 3000. from Antwerpe to giue the attempt: among whom they will haue the Earle

of Argiles Regiment to bee thruſt: the charge and rule of this Company is committed into the hands of two Spaniards, the one called Borgia, the other Velaſco, ſome ſay Lewis de Velaſco Gouernour of Weſell, who vnderſtanding the reſolution of the Armies to quarter about Brabant, found occaſion to bee diſpenced withall, and attend the ſeruice nearer home.
            Well, let the Names paſſe, the Company march downe apace, and with all expedition take the ſame ſide of the Riuer where Bergen ſtands, but it ſhould ſeeme they came ſhort halfe a day at leaſt: For before they had marched 7. Engliſh mile, they vnderſtand how Bergen was ſupplyed (as you haue heard) yet they goe forward, and come at laſt to their Rendeyuous, where they grewe ſo angry and exaſperated, that they would needs giue an attempt in a rage both on the Wall, and at the Ports, where the Cannon from the Towne played ſo violently, and the Musket at reſt ſhot ſo effectually, that they loſt 600. men at the firſt aſſault, the moſt of them Iriſh and Engliſh newly come out of their Countries.
            This began on Wedneſday as I take it the Tenth of Iuly: the next day they attempted againe, and proffered another Aſſault, but heere

they were repulſed with a Salley, in which a valiant Colonell Scotchman loſt his life in the behalfe of the Towne, but it was a deare loſſe to the Enemy: For before the skirmiſh ended, there lay 200. on the ground, and they were enforced to retire, ſome will haue them fight the third day likewiſe, but I thinke that was imployed in another buſines, for the Enemy finding the reſiſtance of this ſtrong Towne, tooke another courſe and marched to a weaker, I meane Steen-Bergen, which not able to endure either battery or aſſault, they eaſily tooke by compoſition, as alſo a Sconce by it, which they obtained with finall repulſe.
            I haue yet ſaid little of the Prince of Orange, who thought as little of this attempt or enterpriſe, but onely ſuppoſed that Breda or Sluice might bee the obiect of his Sommers imployment, and ſo the Warre to continue either in Brabant or Flaunders, whereupon hee brought downe moſt of his Forces, and ſetled himſelfe a while about Schetogen Boſch, and was (as they ſaid) himſelfe gone toward Rees, where hee ſurueyed the Townes in the States poſſeſſion, and tooke order, that all the Garriſons ſhould bee ready to come into the Field at his appointment, for which purpoſe hee alſo ſent to the Commaunders and Captaines that were in England, to come ouer with expedition.
            
               In the meane while this was done, as you haue heard, the Gouernour Reehouen returned to his charge, and ordred Bergen againſt the Obſeſſion and expugnation, if Spinola ſo determined the matter.
            Now they will haue 2000. foote, and 300. horſe all ready in the towne, amongſt whom they haue named the companies of Sir Th. Winn, Sir Michaell Eueret, Captaine Appleton, who had married a Dutch woman and dwelt in the ſame place, with diuers others attending the ſeruice, and the iſſue of theſe troubles: the greateſt part of the army lying, as I ſayd, about Breda, a towne of their owne, and Schetogen Boſch belonging to the Arch-Dukes, which peraduenture they determined to beſiege, howeuer they may now be diſappointed, either in raiſing the enemy from Bergen, or imploying themſelues to ouer-looke their actions, if they continue there this Sommer.
            By this time Spinola vnderſtands what is done on both ſides, and how his forces haue beene diſappointed, which made him alter his purpoſe for a Rendez-vous at Maeſtrich, and draw all his Garriſons toward Antwarp out of Mechlin, Arſchot, Huſſet, Biſſell, and other townes and villages, where they had wintred: ſo that though he lay himſelfe ſtill in perſon at Bruſſels vpon greater matters of importance: yet he diſpoſed of his buſines, that the country was reſolued, he determined an abſolute ſiege: for 15. peeces of Ordnance were ſent out of Antwarp downe the Riuer, and 10000. more men marched by land to the new begun Campe. Hee

alſo ſent ſupplyes to the Gouernour of Gaunt, with a ſpeciall command to haue an eye vpon Sluiſe, and make ſome attempt that way, as occaſion ſhall ſerue. It is alſo ſayd that the Gouernours of Ipren and Liſſe in Flanders, who had loſt a ſonne in a skirmiſh in the Palatinate, deſired to bee at this ſeruice.
            All this while the ſiege is but preparing, for the army was not quite come downe, nor the prouiſion for the expugnation brought together, as Hurdles, Gabions, Cariages, Munition, Traces for horſes, Carts, Wagons, and ſuch like: yet was ſome extraordinary matter accompliſhed: for the Poſt of Antwarp reports, and the letters certifie as much that they heard the Cannon play thither: ſo that by all likelihood it is fully reſolued, and the Spaniards ſettle themſelues to the enterpriſe, although they want men to fill vp their companies, as hauing loſt this winter by caſualty at leaſt 6000.
            They ſay, that in the firſt attempt there were ſo many dead bodyes, that thirty Wagons at once haue come with them into Antwarp, and in the latter enterpriſes the towne was ſo ſtrong and well prouided, that they made diuers ſallies ere their enemies could be ſetled to their much preiudice, and retired themſelues to their faſtneſſe at pleaſure
            Other letters aſſure vs, that the country ſending in three hundred Wagons with prouiſion to ſupply the wants of the army, which began already to feele ſome inconueniences: they were ſet vpon by ſome of his Excellencies troopes and companyes lying about Breda, as they were going ouer the

Heathes, wide of Antwerp, and ſo after a skirmiſh ſurpriſed: for the Conuoy lagging behinde, and not keeping together with the reſt, ſmarted for the diſorder, and were compelled to ſhift for themſelues.
            When the States of Holland vnderſtood of all theſe proceedings, they beſtirred themſelues and ſent diuers men of warre to attend about Zealand, of which ſome of them ſtept into the riuer, to intercept ſuch boates, as ſhould come from Antwerp to the army: the reſt that kept the Sea behaued themſelues ſo well, that the Letters ſay, they tooke a ſhip full of Souldiers going to Dunckirke, whom they examined and finding that the Souldiers knew no other, but that they went into the Low Countries, they hanged vp the Lieutenant and carried all the reſt priſoners to Middleburgh, reſoluing to watch for thoſe companies which are cō
               ming out of England to ſerue the Archduches. For rumor cannot be ſo ſparing but that they know by name the Captaines of euery Countrey and the manner of raiſing their men.
            Amongſt other things the Marchants aſſure vs, that at this inſtant there lie fiftie or ſixtie ſayle of Hollanders and Pirates of Argier before Lisbone, who not onely watch the harbours and townes but the Sea it ſelfe, as hauing made a contract with thē of Tunis alſo to aſſociate and defend one anothers, both againſt Spaniards and Portugals, whom they reſolue to empoueriſh and damnifie all they can, as men reſolued to haue neither peace nor truce any longer with them.
            
               But to returne to the ſiege at Bergen, for all theſe attempts it is ſuppoſed that the ſiege will not lye long before it, nor the enemy continue with ſuch reſolution, as to make it a worke of ſuch conſequence, but euen doe as the Duke of Parma did in the beginning of this relation leaue it, and take ſome other enterpriſe in hand, and that for diuers reaſons at this inſtant.
            Firſt, becauſe they cannot command the Riuer, but the towne will be relieued at all times by Sea, which they cannot auoyde.
            Secondly, becauſe the ſeate of the warre is now as it were in their owne countrey, and the Prince of Orenges army muſt both be releeued and ſet on worke in Brabant, euen to the terrifying of the inhabitants.
            Thirdly, becauſe rumor hath played a womans part, and told them that ſome of Count Mansfields forces are come out of Alſatia, as farre as Loraine and Luizenberg: and either meane to bee their owne caruers of the bleſſings of theſe Prouinces, or vnite themſelues to the Prince of Orenge, if occaſion ſerue to increaſe his army, and remoue the ſiege.
            Fourthly, becauſe they are afraide to want momoney, conſidering their treaſure is ſo many waies exhauſted, and the Emperor muſt not be neglected in his deſignes.
            And laſt of all, becauſe there are many hollow hearts in Antwarp, and what know they whether (beſides the treaſon that may bee wrought) the Prince of Orenge if the peace of the Palatinate
               
thriue, will ſend for the Duke of Brunſwicke, and ſet him on worke on theſe good townes: ſo that whether Tilley follow or no, or that Gonzales come to Spinola againe, yet muſt a bloody warre enſue, and the 17. Prouinces in the end ſmart for all.
            FINIS.
         
      
   