
      
         
            
            
            
               A REMEDY FOR SEDITION, VVHERIN ARE CONTEYNED many thynges, concernyng the true and loyall obeyſance, that commēs owe vnto their prince and ſoueraygne lorde the kynge.
            ANNO. M. D.XXXVI.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A REMEDY FOR SEDITION.
            
               
                  VVHO SO EVER well conſidereth with hym ſelfe the hyghe commodyties, yt come of good lawes, he wyl, I am right aſſured, thynke as diuine Plato thought, all thoſe lawes that are made for the welthe and ſafegarde of mankynde, to be of god, all be it they be conſtituted by manne: on the otherſyde, he that wel pondereth the damages, that of neceſſitie muſt folowe, where eyther none be, that can rule, or fewe that wyll obeye, ſhall thynke as I doo, all realmes, regions, cities, and townes, that are not gouerned by lawes, to be foreſtes of wyld beaſtis, and not places habytable for men. We lacke noo good lawes, god be thāked: but what auayle they, whan as Diogenes ſayth, men that are good, nede them lyttell, and they that be euylle, are neuer the better for them? Surely in tyme of ſedition, lawes leſe their voyces, or to ſay better, in ſuche ragious outcries of ſouldiours, noyſe and brayeng of horſes, clutterynge and ienglynge of harneys, men waxe thicke of herynge. Iuſtyce hydeth her face, whanne ſhe ſeeth this to be alowed for a lawe, He that is the ſtronger, ſhall oppreſſe and ſpoylle the weaker, and no man ſaye he dothe euyll. Honeſtie canne not abyde, there where myght ſytteth aboue right, where wyll is ſkyll, where treaſon ſtandeth for reaſon. Whan euery man wyll rule, who ſhall obeye? Howe can there be any common welthe, where he that is welthyeſt, is mooſte lyke to come to woo? Who can there be ryche, where he that is

rycheſt, is in moſte daunger of pouertie? No no, take welth by the hande, and ſay farewell welthe, where luſte is lyked, and lawe refuſed, where vp is ſette downe, and downe ſette vppe: An order, an order muſte be hadde, and a waye founde, that they rule that beſte can, they be ruled, that mooſte it becommeth ſo to be. This agrement is not onely expedient, but alſo moſte neceſſary in a common welthe, thoſe that are of the worſer ſort, to be content, that the wyſer reule and gouerne them, thoſe that nature hath endewed with ſynguler vertues, and fortune without breache of lawe, ſet in hyghe dignitie, to ſuppoſe this done by the great prouydence of god, as a meane to engender loue and amitie, betwene the highe and the lowe, the ſmall & the great, the one beynge ſo neceſſary for thothers ſafegarde welthe and quietnes. For as there muſt be ſome men of polycie and prudence, to diſcerne what is meteſt to be done in the gouerment of ſtates, euen ſo there muſte be other of ſtrength and redynes, to do that the wyſer ſhall thynke expedient, both for the mayntenaunce of them that gouerne, and for theſchewyng of the infinite ioperdies, that a multitude not gouernid falleth into: Theſe muſt not go, arme in arme, but the one before, the other behynde, wyt and prudence muſte be as mayſters of a worke, and appoynt ſtrengthe and redyneſſe their taſke. For vndoutedly, boldnes dothe neuer well, excepte it come, and do as reaſon commaundeth it to do. Sertorius that prudent Capitayne, ſhewed this by a prety exaumple, he had two ſouldiours

in his campe, thone lyttell, weake, and in maner of no ſtrength, but very wyſe: thother high, bygge and full of bones, but voyde of brayne. He had alſo two horſes, thone galyarde, luſty, and of a thycke tayle, thother leane, lyttell, and almoſte without a tayle. He appoynted the lyttell man, to pull of the great horſe tayle, the bygge and ſturdy ſoudiour to pull of thoſe few heares, that the leane horſe tayle hadde. The weake and feble man, vnto whom god and good education, had gyuen wyt in ſtrengthes place, pulled by .iiii. and by .v. heares at ones, and ſo within a ſhorte ſpace, he had made of a longe tayle no tayle. Thother a good yomās body, tugged at the hole taylle, and ſweatte faſte, but he pulled of not a heare. Nowe, yf the ignorant ſouldiours, were here thus taught, a handful of witte to be moch more worth than a horſelode of ſtrength, and were contente in battayle, that they ſhulde rule: whiche were the wyſer, they obey, that were the ſtronger, howe moche more ought we to be moued with this exāple, ſpecyally in the gouernynge of a comon welth, in makyng lawes, in ſetlynge mattiers concernynge faythe and relygion, fynally in diſcuſſynge, what thynges maynteyne moſte the fauour of god towarde vs, and by what meanes a realme may beſt be kepte in welthynes? We loue to be diſceyued, we ymagyne a certayne common welthe in worde and in outwarde apparance, whiche if we baptyſe righte, and not nycke name it, we muſt nedes cal a comon wo. We think it is very euyll, that ſoo many of vs be poore, we

thynke it were a good worlde, if we were all riche. I pray you for a ſeaſon let it be as we deſyre, let vs imagine, we be al ryche, doth it not ſtreight folow, I as good as he, why goeth he before, I behynde? I as ryche as he, what nedeth me to labour? The mayde as prowde as her dame, who mylketh the cowe? The fermour hauing no more cauſe to toyle then he that loketh for the rentes, who ſhal tyll the grounde? His meny ye ſay. How ſo? why they more then he, if they be ryche to? What were more to be wayled, then ſuche welth, that ſhuld bryng eyther euery man, or the mooſte parte of men, to extreme confuſion.
            ¶The Romaynes after that they had wonne the citie of the Veiens, were at great contention, the commons of Rome, and many alſo of the gentylle menne, thoughte it very expediente, and hyghely profytable, that halfe Rome ſhoulde goo dwelle there, alledgyng, that many in Rome lacked, and that this citie was ryche, and of great welthyneſſe, gorgiouſly buylded, and alſo nigh vnto Rome, ſo that here many of them myght be enryched without any diſturbance of them, that had poſſeſſions in Rome, ye and myght alſo, bycauſe they were ſo nyghe, be at al aſſemblees, all parlyamentes, that ſhulde be kepte in Rome. Marke what folowed: The ſenatours in eſpecial thoſe that were wyſeſt, in no caſe wolde aſſent to this, noo they thought it moche better to abyde all perylle, then any ſuche matier ſhoulde paſſe theyr handes. In ſo moche, that whē this was had in deliberation, and hotely

diſputed, the comons were ſo kendled agaynſt the Senatours, that it was harde to kepe them from goynge togyther by the eares. But what is it that ſage and graue perſones can not perſwade, if they be harde of them that vtterly lacke not diſcretion? A fewe of theſe ancient fathers and eſtemed ſenatours, here ſtrayte brydled the rage of the people, and made them condeſcende vnto this, that all be it outwardely there ſemed gaynes in departynge, and loſſe in the abydynge at Rome, yet they ſhuld doo better to tary poore, than in goynge awaye to make them ſelfe ryche.
            ¶A comon welthe is then welthy and worthy his name, when euery one is content with his degree, gladde to do that, that he may laufully doo, gladder to do that, whiche he ſeeth, ſhalbe for the quietnes of the realme, all be it his priuate profite byddeth hym doo the contrary. The ſhypman ſayleth for other mens profyt, as moche as for his owne, but yet he ſturreth the ſterne, and turneth the ſayle as hym luſteth, he caſteth the ſhotte anker, when he wyll, and not when they bydde hym, that are in his ſhyp. The phiſition is called to do more good to other, then to hym ſelfe, and in dede oftymes he ſaueth the ſycke, and taketh the diſeaſe hym ſelfe, but yet he dieteth his pacient, not as the paciente deſyreth, but ſome tyme kepethe hym from meate, when he is hungry, ſome tyme from drynke, when he is ful thurſty, ſeldom geuynge hym that he calleth for. Gouernours in a common welthe, muſte loke to the comons profyte, but they muſte rule or

elles howe can they gouerne? They muſt make lawes, and not ſuche as euery man wolle, neyther eſteme that to be profytable to a fewe, whiche bryngeth damage to the hole. They onely oughte to be offycers, that are knowen to be diſcrete, polytique, wyſe, and of ſuche ſtomake, that yf nede be, they can ſette lyttell the hatrede and malyce of theym, that ſeldonie loue ſuche as are in greatteſt auctoritie, and not onely ſette lyttel by them, but alſo contemne their owne profyte, welthe, ye and lyfe to, ſooner than to ſeke prayſe at their tonges, that for the moſte parte, loue they wote not what, and hate they wote not why.
            ¶Anthiſtenes ſeing the lyghtnes of the people of Athens came one day amonges theym, and gaue them counſayle, that they ſhulde plowe their lande aſwell with aſſes, as with horſes. They lawghed at hym and ſayd, Aſſes were nothyng fytte for the tillage of the erth. Than let me laugh to, ſayth he, at you, which woll haue them rulers in the cōmon welth, that ſo lytell can ſkyll of thaffaires therof. ¶Demoſthenes, whan he was banyſſhed, by the conſent of the people of Athens, in his departure he turned towardes the citie, and made this exclamation, O Pallas, howe is it poſſible, that thou ſhouldeſt beare ſuche loue vnto theſe .iii. beaſtes, the nyght owle, the dragon, & the people? He was alſo wont to ſaye, If I had knowen the enuye, the feare, the falſe reportes, the iniuſt accuſatiōs, that they muſt ſuſteyne, whiche gouerne, where credite is gyuen to the fals iugementes of people, if of .ii.

I muſte nedes haue done the one, I wolde ſooner haue broken my necke, than haue had to doo in the common welthe of Athens.
            ¶One tolde Antiſthenes, The people ſpeke moche good of you, why ſaythe he, what hurt haue I done? as who ſhuld ſaye, they ſeldome prayſe, but ſuch as do euyl. I dare boldly affirme, yt there was neuer ethnicke more worthy lyfe, than Socrates was, the people wolde nedes haue hym deed. Who knoweth not, that knoweth any thynge, howe moche Rome was bounde to Scipio? This worthye Capitayne, dyed out of his countrey, banyſhed by them, whom he ofte had ſaued. I lette paſſe Phocion, Ariſtides, and many mo, whom all hyſtories bringe in, to ſhewe the lyghtnes and lewde iudgement of communes. Dante, that good Italyane poet ſayth full truely of them, It is ſeldome ſene, that the people crie not, Viua la mia morte, muoia la mia vita, That is, Let lyue my dethe, lette dye my lyfe, lette that go forthe, that bryngeth my diſtruction, lette that be banyſhed, that is my welthe and ſafegarde. Geffrey Chauſer ſayeth alſo ſomewhat in theyr prayſe, beare it▪ well away and lawde theym as ye fynde cauſe,
            
               O ſterne people vniuſte and vntrewe
               Ay vndiſcrete, and chaungynge as a fane
               Delytynge euer in rumours that be newe:
               For lyke the mone euer waxe ye and wane
               Your reaſon halteth, your iugement is lame
               Your dome is falſe, your conſtance euyll preuith
               A full great foole is he that on you leueth.
            
            
               ¶What can be more agaynſt their profyte, than to obteyne that they moſte deſire? They be angry, that vertue ſhulde be rewarded, whan ſhe cometh to men, that had no lordes to their fathers. They wyl that none rule, but noble men borne. Let them haue that they require, whome towcheth this ſoo ſoore, as them ſelfe, and al their poſteritie? What doo they leaue vnto theirs, whan they alſo take away the poſſibilitie of better fortune? I may ſaye trouth, and without blame, thanked be the knowlege of our mooſte gratiouſe ſoueraygne lorde the kynge, whiche hath euermore welle declared, that trewe nobilitie is neuer, but where vertue is: and hath euermore, frome the fyrſte of his reygne hytherto, bothe by his owne great ſtudye, to atteyne lernynge, wyſedome, and other pryncely qualities, and alſo in gyuyng offices, dignities, and honour, well teſtified, that he woll all his ſubiectes to contende, who may obteyne mooſte qualities, mooſte wytte, moſte vertue: and this onely to be the way to promotion, and here nobilitie to conſyſte. In all other thynges it lytell auayleth, whoſe ſonne a mā be. At runnynge he hathe not the beſte game, that leyeth for hym, My father ranne faſter than any other dyd: nor he that taketh a fall at wraſtlynge, hath that his father was wonte to haue, whan he gaue the fall. They muſte nedes here, and almoſte in all other thynges, contente them ſelfe, with that they be able to do, of what parentage ſo euer they be. There was one, whiche ſayd, Princis and noble men, were moche more bounde to theyr horſes,

than to many of their frendes. A horſe if the lorde ryde not well, layeth hym in the duſte, and tellethe hym playnely, he muſte lerne to ryde better, if he wyll take noo falle. All thynges telle trouthe but man. The bowe ſhooteth wyde, yf ye holde it not ſtreyghte. The arrowe ſaythe, I muſte nedes be ſhorte, excepte ye ſhote me hoome. I muſte nedes be goone, yf ye ſhote me to farre. They canne not flatter, they can not ſaye, My lorde ye ſhote nygh, excepte ye ſhote nygh in dede. It is no great hurte to fayle here, it is ſmalle loſſe if a lorde▪ ſhoote not well, or at the leaſt the loſſe hurteth but hym ſelfe. But gyue the gouerment of commune wealthes, into theyr handes, that can not ſkyll therof, howe many muſt nedes go to wracke? The hurte towcheth to many, to be but ſmally regarded. Agayn, what deſyre ſhall good wyttes haue, to employe them ſelf to the knowlege of thynges, and to paſſe thother, whome ſlouthe woll not lette growe any higher, whē good & euyl be equally eſtemed? what ſhall we nede to endeuour our ſelfes vnto, whenne what ſo euer we do, we muſt be tryed by our byrth, and not by our qualities? That comon welthe can not longe ſtande, ſaythe Plato, that vertue is not moſte honored in. Any Citie, ſaythe he, that wyll be longe ſaufe and in proſperitie, muſte diſtribute theſe two thynges well, Honour & Shame. They be well diſtributed, when the chiefe and prime honour is geuen vnto qualities of the mynde, the ſeconde to the bodye, the thyrde to external thynges, as nobilitie, poſſeſſions, and ryches. If ye breake

this order, and put thone in thothers place, that is, if ryches be chiefly eſtemed, the body next, and vertue laſte of all, here can be noo welthe. This cytie can not longe contynue, ſayth Plato. Nowe, as there is a difference, in theſe thynges, ſo muſte we put alſo, a difference in men that ar endewed with them. They muſt beſt be eſtemed, that haue mooſt gyftes of the mynde, that is, they that do excell in wyſedome, Iuſtice, temperauncy, and ſuche other vertues: they nexte, that haue moſte gyftes of the body, as helth, ſtrength, quycknes, beautie: They thyrdly, that haue ryches and poſſeſſions, the lawes not withſtandynge, hauynge euermore theyr full ſtrength, that is no man preſumynge, of what qualities ſo euer he be, to preferre hym ſelfe to any offyce or landes, but as the gouernours or lawes, ſhall call hym to. Iuſtyce muſte be in euerye acte. And therfore me thynke, Plato dydde wonderfull wel, to entitle his boke, that he writeth of a comon welth, de iusto, that is, of Iuſtice: Euery man muſt be ſure of his owne, and be cōtent that his neyghbour haue more than he, if that by honeſt wayes, he can atteyne vnto more. For welthe can not be, where rape is permytted, ne rape lacke, where order is broken. A comune welth is, as I thynke, no thynge elles but a certayne nombre of cities, townes, ſhires, that all agre, vpon one lawe, and one hed, vnyted and knytte together, by thobſeruation of the lawes: theſe kept, they muſt nedes floriſhe, theſe broken, they muſte nedes periſſhe. The heed muſte rule, if the body woll do well, and not euery

man make hym ſelfe ruler, where only one ought to be. Thynges be not doone in this worlde by chaunce, neyther ought to be gouerned by raſſheneſſe. God maketh kynges, ſpecyally where they reigne by ſucceſſyon. God toke awaye prynce Arthure, & wold king Henry the eyght, to be our heed, and gouernour. Woll we be wyſer than god? wol we take vpon vs, to know who ought to gouerne vs, better than god? God made hym kynge, and made alſo this lawe, Obey your kynge. Howe can ye obey hym, that refuſe his lawes? that ſeke his diſhonour? that hate theym, whom his grace can not choſe but loue? whome alſo ye wolde loue, yf ye dyd not ſooner vppon falſe reportes, than iuſte cawſe, hate. Who ſhall doo the kynge trewe ſeruyce, who ſhall deſyre, to ſtande mooſte in his fauour, if atte the malycious requeſtes of fonde and lyght people, his highnes ſhoulde without any other cauſe put downe them, whom his grace with the reſt of his counſayle, thynke moſte worthy fauour. we be but men, many of vs ignorant, many without knowlege, let vs thynke, that we knowe moch worſe then god, who ought to be our gouernour. Let vs cōtent our ſelfes, that he rule, whom god made our kynge, whome god preferred in takynge away Prince Arthure, his gracis elder brother. If we woll this to be our prince, heed, & gouernour, than we muſt alſo lette his grace gouern vs, by ſuche officers, as he ſhall knowe to be beſte for vs, and not we to appoynte hym, ſuche as we ſhall thynke meteſt, that ſeldome eyther ſee, what

is good for vs, or who moſt entendeth our profite. ¶A comune welthe is lyke a body, and ſoo lyke, that it can be reſembled to nothyng ſo conuenient, as vnto that. Nowe, were it not by your faythe a madde herynge, if the fote ſhuld ſay, I wyl weare a cappe, with an ouche, as the heade dothe▪ If the knees ſhulde ſay, we woll carie the eyes, an other whyle: if the ſhulders ſhulde clayme eche of them an eare: if the heles wold nowe go before, and the toes behind? This were vndoubted a mad heryng: euery man wold ſay, the fete, the knees, the ſhoulders, the heles make vnlaufull requeſtes, and very madde petitions. But if it were ſo in dede, if the fote had a cap, the knees eies, the ſhulders eares, what a monſterous body ſhuld this be? God ſend them ſuche a one, that ſhall at any tyme go about to make as euil a comune welth, as this is a body. It is not mete, euery man to do, that he thynketh beſt. The Locrians had a very good cuſtome amonges them, no man might there, come to ſpeke agaynſte a law, that was conſtituted by ſuche, as had auctorite to make it, except he came to the diſputation therof, with a corde about his necke. If he proued the lawe to be naughte, then he caſte of the corde, and was highly commended: but yf he dyd attempte it, and after fayled of his pourpoſe, he was forthwith truſte vppe. They thought hym worthy to dye, that dyd but ſpeake ageynſt a lawe: albeit he alſo thoughte therby, to doo good vnto his countrey, in ſpeakynge agaynſte that, that he iudged moche hurtefull to the comune welth.
            
               ¶Plato gyueth leſſe lybertie to his cytezens, he wyll no man ſhall diſpute any lawe, in the preſence of youthe, or comon people, that hath lytel iudgement in ſuche thynges. It is noo parte of the peoples play, to diſcuſſe actes made in the parliamēt. Euery man dothe well in his office, euery thynge ſtandeth well in his place. Socrates fyndeth this to be the only welth of all realmes, that euery man ſetle hym ſelfe to his owne affayres and buſines, and intermedle with no other mannes office. The handes are content the fete go, the tethe pleaſed, that the tongue tell the hole tale: the eare doth not deſire to ſee, nor the eie to here: a payre of ſhoes of viii. d. dothe better ſeruice to the fete, than a cappe of .v. s. though ye put theron a fether of forty pēce: a payre of gloues of lamme ſkynne, dothe moche better fytte the handes, than a payre of breches of right ſatyn: a freſe cote dothe better on his backe, that hath to do at the carte, or at the plowe, than a gowne of veluet, furred with ſables. To my purpoſe, Lordes muſt be lordes, comunes muſt be comunes, euery man acceptynge his degree, euery man contente to haue that, that he laufully maye come by. We muſt, if we pourpoſe euer to come to welthe, whiche we ofte leſe in wronge ſekynge for it, all agree, that the lawes haue their place. It is but an eaſy remedy, that maketh the ſore greatter. He knoweth not the way to quenche fyre, that powreth oyle into it. Cheſe is no medicine to driue awaye rattes: neyther ſedytion a meane to make men welthy. What ende of myſerie ſhall there be,

where no man wexeth ryche, but a nother is made a begger? Where no man is mery, but .ii. or .iii. be ſadde for it? what ende of robbynge and ſpoylynge ſhall there be, if the poore maye euermore rob the riche? If the ſtronger may pulle from the weaker? Muſt not you abyde the ſame lawe, that you make your ſelfe? muſt not you, whan you haue ſpoyled them that are ryche, and ſo made your ſelfes welthy, ſuffre that they now being pore, ſpoyle you riche? And than muſt not ye be poore ageyne? O lyghtnes of comunes, who can ſay ſo moche ageynſt the, but he may ſeme to haue ſayd nothing? I am aſhamed to reherce the blynde folye, that the comunes of Englande haue ſo ofte runne into?
            There can come no traytour, no rebell, of ſo baſe condicion, of ſo lyttell witte, but if he be bolde inoughe to take vppon hym, to be their capitayne, they are foolyſhe ynoughe to folowe hym. Howe ofte, and whom I praye you, and for what cauſes haue they made their capitaynes? Whom can they refuſe, whan ſmythes, coblers, tylers, carters, and ſuch other gay grekes, ſeme worthy to be theyr gouernours? who wyl not be aſhamed to ſee our cronycles in ſtraungers handes, they to ſe ſuche outragious madnes reigne in vs, we to rede ſuch temperancy, ciuilitie, and obedience to be amonges them? I wyll not compare vs to the beſt gouerned countreys, that be, I wyll goo to the Barberouſt nations that be, and ſee howe our ſhame encreaſeth theyr honeſtie, and good orders, layde before our faces.
            
               ¶Is there any nation, that hath ben more enfamed of barbarous conditions than the Scythes? any of leſſe ciuilitie than theſe? yet they haue ben euer ſo true to their princis, that there be fewe nations, that haue obteyned higher fame by batayle, than they haue. Theyr concorde and vnytie, their faythfulnes toward their kynges, made them, that they were neuer ouercome. They draue Darius, that redoubted kyng of the Perſians, to ſhamefull flyght: They kylled Cyrus and all his hoſte.
            Alexander magnus loſte bothe a good capitayne at their handes, and all the armye, that he ſente ageynſte them. They harde of the Romaynes valyantnes, but the Romaynes neuer durſt ſette vppon them. what reuerence bare they to theyr kyng? whan ſuche as were any thyng familiar with him, were wont at his deathe to cutte of their eares, to mangle their noſes and faces, and many of theym to dye with hym. They thought trewe obeyſaunce coulde not be ſhewed, neither the loyal hartis knowen, but at deth. Amonges theſe, the greateſt othe that they coude ſwere by, was by the kynges ſeate, he that forſware hym ſelfe by this, was ſtreyghte whypped to deathe.
            ¶Who wylle not meruayle, to ſee the Aethyops, men that neuer harde of goddis lawe, doo as they were wonte to do? there was no hangeman, none to cut of theyr hedes, that deſerued deth. Se theyr obedience, laye it with ours, if god were no god, if honeſty had neuer ben harde of, myght not ſhame brynge men from rebellion? Se theyr obedience.

The kynge, when he harde of any that was worthy dethe, was wont to ſende one of his ſeruantes with a token, whiche dyd no more, but telle hym, the kynges pleaſure is, you dye. This manne, of what ſo euer eſtate he was, without any furder delay, went into ſome ſecrete corner, and there found one waye or other to doo the kynges commaundement. They had their prynce in ſuche honour, that if he by any myſfortune loſte an eye, or by ſome fal broke a legge, al his houſeholde ſeruantis by their owne accord didde depriue them ſelfes of that part of theyr bodye, in whiche fortune hadde offended theyr kynge: thynkynge it moche vnſemely, that they ſhulde not halte, whan their kynge halted, moche vnmete, that they ſhuld not be content with one eye, whan theyr kynge hadde but one. They thought it a gret ſhame, if they bare hym not company whan he dyed. They toke it for a hyghe honour, to haue ſo glorious an ende, as to departe in the felowſhyp of a kynge.
            ¶The Perſians thought hym worthy great punyſhement, that dyd but neaſe, ſpyt, wype his noſe, or coughe in a kynges preſence: and are nat they wery of theyr lyues, that amonges chriſten menne ryſe agaynſte theyr prynce? Shal theſe capitaynes be ſuffred to lyue, that at any tyme ſhall ſtyre the people to ſuche outragious ryotte? Is it poſſyble that the people pull them not a pecys, and ſoo ſhewe both to god and theyr prynce, that they now knowe the greatnes of ſuche an errour, and that they muſte nedes hate hym, that brought them into

it? God hath euermore well teſtified, that he fauoreth no traytours, no rebelles. Theyr ende (excepte all hiſtories fayle) can be no better then their intentes. May not the rayne, that god ſent to part vs, and kepe vs from bloodſhedynge, well ſhewe, that goddis pleaſure is, we fyght not amonge our ſelues, that god loueth our prince, aloweth his lawes, and wyll that we be ſubiecte to theym bothe? God wylle not the bondes of nature to be broken, the charitie and loue that ſhoulde be betwene all men, moche rather betwene theym that are of one countrey, one ſhire, one citie, one howſe, one parē
               tage. Nature is forgotten, god is not harde, al humanitie is troden vnder the foote, where as is ciuile diſſention. Nature teacheth brute beaſtis, to loue them that gaue them life, that noriſhed them. God ſaythe, Honour thy father and mother, Loue thy neyghbour as thy ſelfe. Thus he ſayth, but he is nothynge harde, where as ſedition is. For what ſacryfice can the father offre to god and his countrey, more acceptable, than to kylle with his owne hādes his ſonne, now no lenger his ſonne, being a traytour? what act can be more worthy prayſe, thā the ſon to ſlee his owne father in ſuche caſe? He is none of myne ſaythe Chriſte, nor worthy to be my ſeruaunt, that can not, if iuſte cawſe require hym ſo to do, forſake his father & mother to do me ſeruyce. He is none of myne ſaythe Englande, that canne not hate his father and mother, that canne not kyll them bothe, ſooner than ones conſente to my deſtruction.
            
               ¶Damatria a woman of Lacedemon, after ſhe harde ſay, that her ſon had not ſo fought ageynſt the ennemies of his countrey, as it beſemed one borne in Lacedemon, ſhe ſtreyghte vppon his retourne from the warres, ſlewe hym with her owne handis, right glad, that ſhe had ſhewed her ſelf ſorye, to haue ben the mother of ſuche a ſon. What wolde ſhe haue done? what deathe wolde ſhe haue thought to ſhamful for him, if he had riſen ageinſt his prynce? if he had ſhewed hym ſelfe open ennemye to his countrey? if he hadde intended to pulle downe the lawes of the Lacedemoniens?
            ¶There be fewe or none that haue red any hyſtoryes, but they knowe, what Brutus iudged his ſonnes worthy to ſuffre, which by letters intended to call in Tarquinius againe. Theyr letters went not furthe, they weere intercepted, yet the father gaue ſentence agaynſte his ſonnes, and commanded them to be tyed at a ſtake, there to be whypte, and after to loſe theyr heedes.
            ¶It is more notable that Titus Manlius dyd, and moch more perteynynge vnto vs, which ſo oft haue broken our loyall obeyſaunce towardes our prince. This Titus bad, yt none of his ſouldiours ſhuld fyght, but whan he cōmanded them. Genutius Metius, oone of his ennemyes, prycketh out from his company, & chalengeth Manlius ſonne. The commaundement of his father was, that he ſhulde not fyght: but he beinge the conſuls ſonne, a romayne, thought his honour loſte, if he ſhulde not fyght. Youth, courage, nobilite, the renoume

of his father, the fame of his countrey, wolde not lette hym ſuffre his ennemye to make this vaunt, that he hadde chalenged a conſuls ſonne of Rome, and that he durſte not fyghte with hym. Wherfore Manlius cometh forth, they rūne togyther: within ſhorte ſpace Genutius Metius had thende, that crakers are wont to come to. Manlius ſlewe him, and was hyghely commended of all his fathers ſowldiours for it. But the Conſule, whanne he ſawe, that his ſonne hadde broke his commaunment, and hadde fought, where he badde, he ſhuld nat ſo do, Sonne ſayth he, ſeing that aſmoche as in the lyeth, thou haſte broke thorder that is to be kept in warre, by the whiche Rome hytherto, hath euermore ben aduaunced to great honour, and for as moch as thou haſt brought me into this choiſe, that I muſt eyther forgette the common welthe, or els depriue my ſelfe of that I toke priuately moſte pleaſure in, ſorye I am to doo it, but yet lette vs, that haue deſerued punyſſhement, be punyſſhed. I wyll by this exaumple, that the comune welthe take no hurte. I wyll thy death teche all other our citizens, that the Conſules of Rome wyll be obeyed. Go hangeman go, tye hym to a ſtake, whyppe hym, heed hym, handle hym, as it becometh them to be, whiche by euyl example hurte the diſcipline & obeyſance of ſouldiours. ¶What wold Manlius haue done, if a ſoudiour had taken vpon him, to haue corrected any decree of the ſenate? any plebiſcite? any lawe? what if he had ryſen agaynſt the ſenate? Ye may wel iudge, that he yt kylled his ſon

for ſuch a cryme, wherin alſo many excuſes might haue be founde, wolde not a made to moche of a ſouldiour, that ſhulde haue bene a traytour, that ſhulde for ſmall cauſe haue rebelled. what can we lay for our defence? we euermore crie we be poore. I admytte it be ſo, is ſedytion lawfully defended, where men lay pouertie for their excuſe? ſhal they, that be not ryche, by and by ſay, they wyll no more be ruled by their prince, by his coūſaylours, by his lawes? God ſende vs more grace, for leſſe wytte we can not haue. There is a way to ryches moche better, than in ſekynge goodes to leſe al goodnes. Moche nygher, than in ſekynge riches, to defye al regarde of honeſtie. There be handy craftes, there be honeſt occupations, whereby pouertie maye be dryuen away.
            ¶It was a wonderfull good lawe that Amazis kynge of Aegypte made, by the whiche euery man was cōmaunded yerely, to put his name in the comen boke, and at the yeres ende to ſhewe the gouernour of the place, where his abiding was, by what meanes he gote his lyuinge. Thus bothe ydlenes was baniſhed, and none or fewe put to iniury, but the euyll doer was knowen and punyſhed. Euery man had a crafte, they mooſte eſtemed, that were found moſte profitable to the comune welthe. The Atheniēs had the ſame law, they thought it a gret ſhame, menne to be of leſſe polycye, then beeſe are, whiche ſuffre none to tary amonges them, in their hyues, but ſuche as brynge ynough with them for their comens. They wyll no drane bees amonges

thē. Socrates alluding hither, ſayth, there be two ſortes of vnprofytable bees in a comune welthe, thone without ſtynges, thother with ſtinges. Vnto the fyrſte ſorte he lykeneth poore olde men, that can not labour, by reaſon of theyr age, feblenes, or ſome other iuſt impediment. Vnto thother he lykeneth theſe that be yonge and luſtye, and neyther haue, nor yet wyll lerne any honeſt occupation, to get heyr lyuynge in trouthe, but contynewynge in ydlenes, fall to ſtealynge, robbynge, murther, and many other myſchiefes.
            ¶Aeſculapius that famous phyſition, wolde beſtowe no medicines on them, that he thoughte vncurable, ſayenge it to be moche ageyne a common welthe, to kepe them alyue, that can doo nothyng, but be ſycke and combre the hole, and conſume the vyttaile of theym that labour. Socrates moche commendeth hym for it. This I do not brynge in, bycauſe I wolde any man ſhuld lacke cheriſhing, when he is ſycke, thoughe there be no hope of his recouerie: but that I wolde well ſhewe, howe all good ordred comune welthes, in tyme paſt abhorred theſe belyes, that haue no handes: theſe flyes, that fede vpon other mens labours: theſe that beinge ydle, without any occupation, without landes, fees, wages, doo nothynge but complayne of fortune, complayne of theym that be gouernours of the realme: And thus eyther ſow ſedition amō
               ges the people, or els be the feldes them ſelfe apt to brynge forth ſuch fruites, Theſe be they, that with their venomous tongue, ſtynge and poyſone the

fame of them that are ſet in office, to ſee that they do leſſe myſchiefe, then they wolde doo. They can not without feare of their lyues, do as they moſte deſire, excepte ſuche gouernours be putte downe. There was neuer ruler ſoo good, but the better he was, the more they that be ſette on riotte, robbery, murder, and rebellion, hate hym. Many & ſhamefull ſeditions haue ben in Englande, they haue all ben ſoore punyſhed: this remedy helpeth but for a ſeaſon.
            ¶Lucius Cinna, a noble man of Rome, conſpired, and vtterly entended the deathe of Auguſtus thēperour. Ceſar had ſure knowlege, bothe where, when, and after what facion he purpoſed to bryng his treſon to paſſe. His intent was open, yet Ceſar long douted, what was beſt to be done. He thought to banyſſhe hym, he thoughte to doo nowe this, now that. As he thus toke delyberation, Liuia his wyfe came in, and after ſhe had perceiued the mattier, ſayd thus vnto him: Sir, do as phiſitions do, whiche whan they ſee, that their accuſtomed medicines wyll not ſerue, they proue the contraryes. By punyſhment ye haue hitherto done lytel or nothynge, forgeue a nother whyle, and ſee what clemency may do. Cinna canne not nowe hurte your lyfe, he may ſet forth moche your honour. Themperour thynkynge her counſayle not the worſt, by and by ſente for Cinna to come ſpeake with hym. As ſoone as Cinna was come, Themperour cauſed a chayre to be ſet for hym. Than thus he began to reaſon the mattier with Cinna. This one thing

ſaythe themperour, I muſte require of you, that you do not interrupte my communication, ye ſhall haue tyme, when I haue ſayde my mynde, to ſaye what ye wyll. Here he began to reherce his benefittes towarde Cinna. Firſt that he had perdoned hym his lyfe, whan that he founde hym in his enemies tentis, and that he dyd reſtore him to his hole patrimony, that he had alſo gyuen hym great authoritie, many offices. If ye graūt all this, ſayth Ceſar, to be true, nowe I praye you tell me, what cauſe I haue gyuen you, to deſire my dethe? ye to go about your ſelfe to kylle me? Cinna here began to chaunge colour, to be troubled in coūtenaunce, he wolde haue layde ſomwhat for his defence. Auguſtus made an ende of his expoſtulation, & ſayde thus, Cinna, I gyue the ones ageyne thy lyfe: before I gaue the it, beinge myn ennemie, I giue it nowe to the, beinge a traytour, and a parricide. From this day forthwarde, lette frendeſhyp begin betwene vs, lette vs two contende, whyther thou mayſte ſhewe me more pleaſure, for perdonynge the thy lyfe, or I more gladde, that I ſaued the. And thus by and by Ceſar began with hym, and made hym conſul. Cinna was from that daye forwarde, as true a frende vnto Ceſar, as one man myght be vnto an other, in ſo moche that he made Cinna his heyre.
            ¶The kinge our moſte gracyous ſoueraine lorde myghte commemorate his benefyttes towarde all his ſubiectes. I wolde doo it for hym, but that I knowe I am farre vnmete, to take vppon me the

handelynge of ſoo weighty a mattier. His grace woll, I doubt not, folowe the clemency of Auguſtus. He ſeeth, his noble progenytours haue ofte puniſhed rebelles, and done no more, but cut awey the branches of ſedicion, for their tyme. His highnes intendeth to pull aweye the roote. He ſeeth, it is not poſſible to cure this ſore, which in dede Plato calleth the greatteſt ſyckenes, that can come to a comune welthe, excepte he ſerche out, bothe where it ariſeth, and what thing moſte nouriſheth it, and then do as phiſicions are wont, whiche oft tymes laye not their medicines to the parte, that is diſeaſed, but to that rather, from whens the diſeaſe firſt came, and is like to come ſtylle, oneleſſe it be there ſtopped. As for exaumple, when the eies be ſoore, firſt they ſeke, whether the diſeaſe grow in the eies, or is ſent from ſome other place nighe the eies, as from the heed, or els ſome other place further of, as the ſtomake. If it be not in the eies prīcipally, but cometh either from the heed, or from the ſtomacke, they begynne not at the eies, but firſte pourge the ſtomacke, and ſo the roote cutte awaye, the diſeaſe nowe no more maynteyned, can in no wyſe longe tary behynde. It is very true, that Zamolſis, king of Thrace was wonte to ſaye. Loke, ſayth he, as the eies can not be clenſed, excepte ye fyrſte clenſe the heed, neyther the heed, without ye pourge the hole body, euen ſo, neither the bodye, without the mynde be firſte netted. This kynge ſawe it lytell auayled, to rydde the body of noughty humours, oneles alſo a man ſo brydell his appetyte, that afterwarde

he can forbeare ſuche thinges, as dydde hurte hym before, and wyll do ageyne, excepte he moderate his affectiōs. The bote man I thinke, lacketh moche wyt, and loſeth moche labour, that ſtandeth all daye with a diſ ſhe ladinge out water, that nedes muſt come in agayne, oneles the bote be amended. The faut is in the breache of the bote, and not in the water. Surely, if it were any thing lyke to be brought to paſſe, it ſhulde be moche better to fynde a waye, that none might haue wylle to rebell, then to truſſe vp rebellious people. Wolde god ſome high wytte, ſome man borne to do ſuche good for his countrey, coulde aſwel bryng this to paſſe, as I thinke it myght nowe very lyghtly be done. For if euer the cauſe of rebellion may vtterly be taken awaye, we haue a prynce, god wyll we maye haue his grace longe, we haue a prynce, that ſayth, the tyme is now. Al men ought to endeuour them ſelfe, here to occupie theyr wyttes, that ſuche a thynge myght take effecte. I for my parte, wylle do what I can, which I know is very lyttell, how be it if I do it not ſo well as my deſyre is, I truſte good intent ſhall ſoo make myne excuſe, that loue of my countrey ſhall not moche hurte me.
            ¶Some ſay pouertie is the cauſe, that men come to be thenes, murderers, rebelles. But I thynke, nothynge ſo. For I knowe dyuers realmes, where pouertie raygneth moche more than in Englande, yet rebels there be none. The rote is lower, dygge deper, ye maye perchaunce fynde it. Education, euyll education, is a greatte cauſe of theſe and all

other myſchefes, that growe in a comune wel the. For where ſo many lacke honeſt occupatiōs, wherby al men, that can not otherwiſe lyue by their landes, ought to maynteyne them ſelues, howe canne we lacke any kynd of miſchief? No man is borne a craftis mā, youth muſt be beter brought vp, or euer the olde lyue welthely. The lacke, the lacke of honeſt craftes, and the habundauncie of ydlenes, all be it they be not the hole cauſe of ſedicyon, yet as they brede theues, murderers, and beggers, ſo not a lytle they prouoke men, or thynges lyke men to rebellion. There is a parte in man, whiche is named the mynde, that is of this nature, yf it be galyarde and luſty, either to do moche good, or cōtrary to do moche hurt. If this lacke good inſtitutiō, if this be not handeled and ordered as it ſhulde be, men maye lacke ſedition, but they can not lacke a thynge within them to ſtyre them to ſedition. This muſt be ſo taught, that there be no rebellion within our ſelfes, we muſte conquere our luſtes, and compell the appetites, to obeye all ſuche ſtatutes, as reaſon and honeſtie ſhall thynke worthye to be enacted. Euery man, ſome wyll ſay, can not clyme to ſuche perfection, Euery man can not be kept at ſkole. I graunt, But yet I thynke, al ye lordes ſonnes, and alſo the better parte of gentlemen, myght be as well brought vp, as it is neceſſary they be, if they had ſuche teachers, as oughte to inſtructe the nobles of a realme. Theſe wel brought vp, I wold nothynge doubte, but eyther we ſhulde be welthier than we be, or els moche better content with that,

that god ſhoulde ſende vs, all be it we had moche leſſe then nowe we haue. I longe haue ſuppoſed, that as the bryngyng vp of ye nobles, is the ſaulfegarde of a comune welthe, ſo theyr euill education is the ruyne therof. For as noble men be, ſo theyr ſeruantes are. The mayſter gyuen to ryot, the ſeruant muſt nedes thynke, that there is no thriuyng for hym, excepte he ſhewe hym ſelfe a ruffler. So that though the ſeruaunt be good of hym ſelfe, yet to wynne the fauour of his mayſter, he muſte coū
               terfaite their condicions, that his maiſter moſt lyketh. Thus in vſynge theym a monethe or two, he maketh theym his owne. He nowe diſſembleth no lenger, he is as they be, whom he hath longe folowed. I muſt nedes ſaye more, if the nobles be euyl taught in poyntes concernyng religion, as if they be popyſhe, to put one exaumple for many, Howe can theyr ſeruauntes choſe, but be ſo to? Howe can theyr tenantes, whiche muſte haue theyr lordes fauour, be of a nother religion, then theyr lorde is? Howe can they agre with their neighbours, if they bothe be not of one faythe and one beleue? The kynges grace ſhall neuer haue true ſubiectes, that do not beleue as his grace doth. For howe can they loue hym, as they ſhulde do, whiche beynge in errours them ſelfe, in darkenes and ignorancy, ſuppoſe his grace to be in a wronge faythe, and ſoo to ſeduce them, whiche entendeth nothynge ſo erneſtly, as the ſauyng of their ſowles? Howe can theſe obey his highnes, as it behoueth them to do, whan they thynke in obeyenge his commaundementes,

they diſobey goddis. This foreyne heed, that is in Rome, ye body being in England, hath brought the ſely braynes of many a poore manne, into depe errours. Alas what greatter ignorauncye can there be, then to take hym for hede, that neuer was with the body? Hym for the heed, that hitherto hath done nothynge, but conſumed the membres? The kyng is our heed, though popyſhe ſay nay, yet lette vs beleue the prophete Samuel, Lo ſaythe he vnto kynge Saul, God hathe anoynted the, and made the prince of all his inheritance. I pray you, think you that prieſtes, monkes, friers, and byſhops, be not a parte of goddis inheritaunce? Hath god no tytle, no right vnto them? If god haue, the kynge alſo, whom god hath made his holle heyre, muſte nedes haue. He is theyr prynce, and yet not heade, ſome ſay. Samuell is a prophete, he ſayth yes, he ſaythe vnto Saule, Nonne cum paruulus eſses
               1. Reg. 10. 
               in oculis tuis, caput in tribubus factus es? He that ſayth in the Tribes, I pray you doth he not meane in all the Tribes? He that is mayre of London, is he not mayre of all London? Yet there is, Paſce
               1. Reg. 15. 
               oues▪
                ſayde to Peter, and not to the kynge. Soo they ſaye, that alledgeth, but that that maketh for them. But you ſe, that god ſayd to kynge Dauid, Tu paſces populum meum, Thou ſhalt fede my2. Reg. 5. people, and thou ſhalt be theyr guyde. I ſhal ſpeke of this matyer perchaunce a nother tyme, at more leyſure, And in place more conueniente. Nowe I wyll not go from my purpoſe. We muſte agree in

in religion, we muſt ſerue but one mayſter, one body wyll haue but one heed. It is not poſſible men to agree longe, that diſſent in relygion. No more than it is poſſyble, chriſten men to agree with turkes. Howe be it, who wyll not thynke it moch better, to diſſent, then that we all agree, vpon pernytious errours? Whiche haue noo defence but this onely, that they haue reygned long, and that men hath long ben ſubiecteto them? The nobles muſte be of one beleue, of one fayth, of one religion, they muſt all agre vpon one heed. The gentylmen wyll folowe, the comunes can not tary longe behynde. And where I ſayde before, youthe muſte be welle brought vp, ſpecially in opinions of religion, here I ſay, the olde muſte begynne. It is harde for the ſonne to be agaynſt his father, in matters of faith. No, we ſe this thynge onely to be a defence for all argumentes: I beleue as my father did before me. Vndoubtedly, if the child lerne one thyng at ſcole, or of the preacher, and here his father at home, not onely ſaye, but ſee hym alſo doo the contrary, wordes are forgotten, dayly exaumple worketh faſte, ſpecially when it is euylle. Clitipho ſaythe, as all yonge menne wylle ſaye, My father byddeth me lerne of other honeſt mē, what becometh me to do, he commaundeth me to folowe them, but when he hath well dronke, what ſhamfull actes dothe he tel of hym ſelfe? when he ſayth, he hath doone thus, Can I thynke vppon that he byddeth me do? and not ſooner do as he hath done? No no he telleth a tale, to one that hath no eares, that commaundeth

the yonge to do well, when they ſee the aged do euyll. I haue ofte meruailed, to ſee the diligencye, that the Iewes vſe in bringynge vp their youthe, and bene moche aſſhamed to ſee howe neglygente chriſten men are in ſoo godly a thynge. There is neyther man, woman, nor chyld of any lauful age, but he for the mooſte parte knowethe the lawes of Moyſes: and with vs he is almoſt a good curate, that knoweth .vi. or .vii. of the .x. commandementes: amonges the Iewes, there is not one, but he can by ſome honeſte occupation, gette his lyuyng. There be fewe idell, none at al, but ſuch as be riche ynough, and may lyue without labour. There is not one begger amonges thē. All the cities of Italy, many places in Eecilia, many bourges in Germany, haue a great nombre of Iewes in them. I haue ben longe amonges them, that are in Italy, I neuer harde of a Iewe, that was a thefe, neuer that was a murderer. No I neuer hard of a fraye betwene them. I am aſhamed to ſaye as I nedes muſte ſaye, They maye well thynke their religion better than ours, if religiō be tried by mens lyues. Nowe if Moyſes lawe lerned in youthe, and but carnally vnderſtande, can ſo ſteye them, that fewe or none fall into other vice, than vſury, whiche alſo they do thynke permytted by Moyſes lawe, ſo yt they vſe it not one iewe to an other, as in dede they do not, but a Iewe to a ſtraunger. Might not we lerne ſo moche of Chriſtis lawe, as were able to kepe vs from rebellion? Maye not poore mennes chyldren come to the ſermons? maye they nothere preachers?

can they here goddis lawes, ye though they be but eaſily preached, and not abhorre ſedycyon and rebellion? Who harde euer, that the Turkes roſe againſt their prince? it is, it is vndoubted, one ſorte of relygion, though alſo it be not ryght, that kepeth men in concorde and vnytie. Turkes goo not agayne turkes, nor Iewes agaynſte Iewes, becauſe they bothe agree in theyr faythe. Chriſten men do ſo varye, Englande is ſo deuyded, that I wonder rather that ſedicion ſprange vp no ſooner, than that nowe men begyn to rebell. Englande is lyttell bounde vnto them, that at the fyrſt deuyded it ſo madly. This North and ſouth, eaſt and weſt, is a good particion of the hole worlde, it were wel in Englande, if we were all called Englyſhemen, of this countrey, or that, as of Yorke, of London, and ſuche other: and not theſe northern men, theſe ſoutherne, theſe weſtern. The very name maketh fooles out with theym, that they neuer ſawe. The northorn can not but beare haulfe a grudge to the ſouthern, ye for no nother cauſe, then that they be thus called. In Italie, Fraunce, Spayne, Germany, there is both north and ſouthe, eſt and weſt, yet they iudge nothynge by theſe, but the wynde. In Oxford I know the name of the northorn and ſouthorne proctour, hath ben the cauſe, that many men haue ben ſlayne. They that ſhulde rule thother, are out or euer they entre into their office. We can not get out of Paules churche, but we muſte paſſe by the northorn dore, or by the ſouthern. Chriſten men are to ſoore diuided. The fryers of ſaynt

Fraunces ſkace loue the domynycans, the Iacobites loue not the Brigetines, or if they doo loue, they wolde loue moche better, if they were al of one ſort. I do knowe, good men, of what order ſo euer they be, they wyll do well. But the euyll be mo in nombre, they bere the ſwynge: thother be ſofewe that ſkace they be ſene in the chapiter howſe. It is only Chriſtis religion, that can make Chriſtē men one of vs loue an other, as we ſhulde do. The preceptes of philoſophie, and good education, coude make many of the Grecians, mo of the Romans, not only to forſake riches, to banyſhe pleaſures, & to put them ſelfes in a thouſande perilles: but alſo to dye for their coūtrey. And can not the knowlege of the worde of god, the ſwete adhortations, the hyghe and aſſured promyſes that god maketh vnto vs, kepe chriſten men from contempning the iudgemente and lawes of god, frome vndoinge theyr coūtrey, from fyghtyng againſt theyr prince? If we were any thing wel inſtructed in the ioyes, that are prepared for them, that obey god and their prynce, in the ioyes that neyther mans eloquence can expreſſe, neyther harte fele, nor thought compaſſe: Who wyll thinke, that ſoo many of theym coude ſo frankely offre vp theyr liues, and that we ſhall not abhorre, ſuche as eyther wyll dye theym ſelfe, or bringe their countreye to ruine?
            ¶Who can prayſe Themiſtocles ſoo well, but he maye ſeme to haue lefte out a greatte parte of his prayſe? Who dyd more for his countreye then he? Who coude be worſe rewarded then he was? that

was not only banyſhed his countrey, but alſo driuen to ſeke ſuccour at Xerxes hande, whom he had not longe before diſhonored in batayle? who had a greatter cauſe to fall out with his countrey than he? who more commoditie to haue reuenged ſuche ingratitude? But ſe what good education can do? Se what is to be loked for of them, in whoſe breſtis vertue and deſyre of honeſte fame lodgeth. Xerxes interteyned hym highely, and ſhewed him all the fauour, that a myghtie prynce could ſhewe vnto one, whom he beſt loued. He gaue hym great poſſeſſions, in ſoo moche that Themiſtocles was wonte to ſaye, I had ben vndone, except the Atheniās had vndone me. Yet al this being thus, when Xerxes wold haue ſent hym agaynſt his countrey, with an hoſte of men, he forgot all theyr vnkyndenes, he forgot they had exyled him, and put him in ieoperdy of his lyfe, and thought it moche better to ſlee hym ſelfe, than to be a capitayne agaynſte his countrey. And thus at the laſte beinge weried with ofte callynge on of the kynge, and ſeynge no remedy, but eyther to kyll hym ſelfe, or to fyght againſt his countrey: he choſe of two the leſſe hurt, and with a drafte of Bulles bloudde finyſſhed his life. I wyll not ſpeake of Thraſſibulus, Codrus, Ancurus, Decii, and manye other, whiche all thought the welthe of theyr countrey, to be preferred to their lyues. I can not thinke, but if Chriſtis lawes were well preached, (they be well preached, whan the preacher ſayth as the goſpel is, and doth as the goſpell ſaith) I can not thinke, but if Chriſtis

promyſes were ſurely prynted in our hartes, that we ſhulde be, and that a great ſorte, to teſtifie the worde of god, to be of moche more puiſſaunce, then vaine fame. Goddis worde is potente, and to ſaye as I thynke, almoſt omnipotent, if it be well handeled, and of ſuche as it ſhulde be. It is moch that good men maye do. In Florence, the people were ſet parte agaynſte parte, as we were latelye here in Englande. The ſyde that hadde the better hande, came to ſet a fyre the palaice of their aduerſaries Capitayne, called Pagolantonio Soderini. As chaunce was, this capitaynes brother, the byſhop of Volterra, was than in his howſe, whiche as ſoone as he harde theyr noyſe, and perceyued where about they wente, caſt on his white rochet, and ſo came downe amonges them, he ſpake but few wordes, but by and by al that were in that rout, caſte awaye theyr fyer brondes. There was none ſo lewde, that coulde in ſo honeſte a prelates preſence do any hurte. This Machiauellus wryteth, as a thynge wonderfull, howe be it, if people were as obedient as they ought to be, and byſhops in ſuche reuerence as they haue ben in tymes paſt, for their good lyfe and lernynge, this wolde be no wonder. who was leſſe beloued in the northe, than my lorde Cardynall, god haue his ſowle, before he was amonges them? Who better be loued, after he had ben there a whyle? we hate oft tymes, whom we haue good cauſe to loue. It is a wonder, to ſee howe they were turned, howe of vtter ennemyes, they became his dere frendes. He gaue byſhops a

right good enſample, howe they myght wyn mens hartis. There was fewe holy dayes, but he wolde ride .v. or .vi. myle from his howſe, nowe to this paryſhe churche, nowe to that, and there cauſe one or other of his doctours, to make a ſermone vnto the people. He ſat amonges them, and ſayd maſſe before al the paryſhe. He ſawe why churches were made. He began to reſtore them to their ryght and propre vſe. If our byſhops had done ſo, we ſhuld haue ſene that preachyng of the goſpell, is not the cauſe of ſedition, but rather lacke of preachyng of it. He broughte his dinner with hym, and bad dyuers of the pariſh to it. He enquired whether there was any debate or grudge betwene any of theym, yf there were, after dinner he ſente for the parties to the church, and made them at one. Men ſay wel that do wel. Goddis lawes ſhal neuer be ſo ſet by, as they ought, before they be well knowen. Howe ſhall poore men knowe them, excepte they be ſyncerely preached? We muſt fyrſt lerne to kepe goddis lawes, or euer we erneſtly paſſe of the kynges ſtatutes. All be it he that kepeth thone, wylle alſo kepe thother. He that can fynde a better way, to auoyde ſedition, than fyrſte to brynge in the worde of god, which our moſt lerned kyng, and true lieutenant of god in this realme of England, hath holly intēded this many yeres, Secondarily the mynd welle pourged, that is reſtored into the good and pure nature, that fyrſt god made it in, to purge as Zamolſis thought beſt the body. He that can fynd a better way, ſhall do ryght wel to ſhew it, I fynde

none. Men after that the mynde is wel inſtructed, muſt ſe, that the body haue alſo a way to mainteyn it ſelf. Euery mā muſt haue an honeſt occupation, wherby in trouth he may get his lyuyng, without doinge iniury to his neyghbour. Idelnes ydelnes muſt be banyſſhed. It can not be choſen, but men wylle ſteale, thoughe they be hanged, excepte they may lyue without ſtelyng. How it may be brought to paſſe, that no man haue cauſe to ſtele, me thinke I haue eyther ſhewed it, or elles gyuen occaſion to ſome other to ſhewe it.
            ¶ Now that we content our ſelfes with that, whiche god ſhal ſend vs, or with that, we by our owne induſtry ſhall laufully gette, me thynke a greatte parte lyeth in the prelates of the Churche. They muſte begynne, thother can not leade this daunce. If religious men begyn, laye people wyll folowe, as ſoone as they ſhall haue lerned wel the fotynge of it. Religion toke a great falle, honeſtie was ſore wounded, that daye that richeſſe entred into theyr hartes, handes I wolde ſay, whom Chriſt left for to declare bothe in worde and lyfe, what rewarde they were ſure of, that here for his ſake wolde refuſe rycheſſe. It is noo meruayle, if a tapſter or a wyne drawer, recken a peny or two more than his duetie, whan they ſee religious menne ſoo imbrace money. Lette the poore laye people here them ſay, and lye not, God is our portion, God is our lādes, Our conuerſation is in heuen, They wyll vndoutedly take pouertie for noo ſuche thynge, that they ſhulde ſooner conſent to the diſturbaunce of theyr

countreye, then to be poore. I haue longe ſought, and can in maner fynde no cauſe of our pouertie, but the fertilite and welthynes of our countrey. Other men, that are borne in bare countreys, and can not lyue, onles they moche trauayle the world, auoyde myſerie by their great labour and toyle. In Englande the grounde almoſte nouriſheth vs alone. It is an incredible thynge, to ſee howe ſore men of other nations labour, howe moch we play, howe lytle they conſume on their belyes, howe moche we deuoure, howe poore they be, and how welthy we are, welthy I ſaye in compariſon of them. God hath gyuen vs to good a countrey, we maye here to many of vs lyue ydle. In many places of Germany, people are fayne to ſet theyr trees, that they vſe for theyr fewel. They ſowe corne on mountaynes, where neyther horſe nor plowe can come, They plowe with mattockes, and harrowe with ſpades. Howe moche grounde is loſt in England? Howe moche corne myght we carie into other coū
               treyes, if we wolde vſe the commodities of our realme? Howe manye hethes be there, that wolde beare other frutis, than ſhrubbes, brakes, bromes, and ferne, if they were welle handeled? howe many cities are decayed, howe many townes, that are nowe hamlettis, quyte downe, that wolde ſtande, if the thirde parte of Englande dyd not lyue idelly? Townes wolde vp ageyne, yf craftes were ſet vp. There is fewe nations, but many be ydell, yet I thinke there is not two of the greatteſt nations in chriſtendome, that hath halfe ſo many, that liue

without craftes, as lytle England hath. In Frāce ye ſhal ſee many men drawe cartis about the citie, laden with fagottes, and ſuche other ſmall wode. In Italy, there is no man ſo ryche, but he trauaileth in marchandiſe. Dukes that are there in kynges places, occupye marchādyſe. And yet are fain to kepe ſmall howſes. I wyll not compare our comynaltie with theirs. I wyl not handel this place as I mighte. This I am ſure, we that haue bene there, haue ſayde ones a weke, God ſaue the welthy comynaltie of England. I wyl not cōpare our kepyng of houſes with theirs, where frogges be a dayntie dyſſhe, ſnayles, a morſell for a lady, where muſſhrumpes ſtande for the ſeconde courſe. Ye wolde thynke it a madde ſyght, to ſee a quarter of a gooſe runne rounde for burnynge, the reſte powdered and kepte in ſtoore for holydays. I am aſſured, the fare in Venys is as good, as is in the moſte partes of Italie. Venys is as bygge, or very lyttell leſſe, than London with the ſuburbes: yet is there more fleſhe ſpent in two or thre monethes in London, than is there in a yere. We haue to many ſawces, to many ſhowynge hornes to drawe in meate. we knowe full lytel what we do, that make as though we cared not, who ruled in Englande. If a foreyne prince hadde the gouernynge of vs a whyle, thynke you, we ſhulde not be farre dyſceyued, if we loked to lyue, as we nowe lyue, to do as we nowe do? Thynke you Daces wold not come in? ye knowe not what daces be, no dates I warrant you? I pray god ye neuer knowe them. This

I am ſure, as longe as oure mooſte gracyouſe prince, kynge HENRY the. VIII, reygnethe ouer vs, whiche I praye god it be, vntylle his heires be of age, we ſhall nede feare no daces. They began properly to ſparſe pretye rumours in the North, that no man ſhulde eate whyte breade, no man eate pygge, goſe, or capon, without he agreed before with the kynge. They well bothe declared their malyce, and howe lytell they had to lay againſte the kynges grace, whiche were compelled ſhamefully to fayne, ſuche abhomynable lyes ageynſt his highnes. The kyng entendeth no ſuche thynge. Wolde god bothe his grace wolde goo about to gette vs a better name in ſtraunge countreys, and we alſo content our ſelfes to haue it. we be called, I wote where, engliſhe bealyes. Who can not but be ſorie, to ſe a man bye ſo dere ſo many hurtes, as come of to moch meate? Who knoweth not, that the englyſhe ſwette, no olde ſycknes, and twenty other diſeaſes more, come euery day of inordinate fedynge? Memorye, wytte, ye the verye mynde, whiche is immortall, almoſte is ſlayn with ſurfettis. The eyes, chaunge their colour, where they ſhulde be drye, they falle to droppynge, theyr ſyght departeth. The eares waxe dull of herynge, to be ſhorte, all the ſenſes be drowned with drinke, and cloyed with to moche fedyng. where as the belye is greatter than all the body beſyde, where the bealy raigneth, dothe not all honeſte craftes, all good inuentions want? what countrey hath inuē
               ted fewer thynges than Englande? Be our wittes

worſe than other mens be? No no, there is no faut but ours, that wyll haue them no better. Is it not a ſhame, that we can not be as diſcrete, as wyſe, as the brute beaſtes are? Doo they drynke, but whan they are a thurſte? Do they eate, but when they be hungrye? when dyd any man ſee a beaſt dye of a ſurfette? Men are ſome tyme in the faute, that beſtes dye of drynkyng, they being to hote after their labour. Put a beaſt at lybertie, lette hym be at his owne fedynge, it wyll be long or he hurt hym ſelfe eyther by eatyng or drinking? Amonges vs, what ſyckenes kylleth ſo many, as meate and drynke? what peſtylēce ryddeth more than ſuſtenance? Beſydes yt, for the more part peſtilēce cometh of outragious dyet, and doth lytel hurt, where mē can moderate their mouthes. Bibbers wil be offēded with hym, that ſhal go about to make them lyue better, to make them lyue longer, to make them rycher, to tourne theyr drynkyng money into ſtuffe of houſe holde. They enuye the duchemen, that drynke deper than they, why doo they not enuye the moyles aſwell, that drynke as moche as duchemenne, and yet fall not vnder the maunger, as they do vnder the bourde? We haue loſt bothe the good thynges, that antiquitie vſed, and chaunged alſo the names of theym that we haue. He is called a louer, that doth al he may, to make an honeſt womā naught. If her louer entend to take away her honeſtie, her good name, what ſhall he do that hateth her? Euen ſo we call that good fare, that doth vs mooſte hurt, and that euyl chere, that doth vs moſt good.

I thynke he ſuppeth euyll, that for his good ſupper kepeth his bedde a ſeuen nyght after. You wyl thynke I knowe London well, that make this offer vnto you. Blyndefelde me, ca
                  •…
               e me after to what place ye woll, I wyl lyttell faſle, to tel where ye ſet me, and before whoſe doore. They that know not my cunnynge, wyll ſkace beleue me. I praye you can ye ſet me in any place, but I may ſay, and lye lyttell, I am nowe before a Tauerne or an ale howſe? Fayle I maye, but farre I can not fayle. In Italy it is all moſte as moche ſhame for an honeſt man to come out of a tauerne betwene meles, as it is here to come frō the ba
                  •
               ke. In Venis there is no moo tauernes, thenne there be innes, neyther wyne is to be ſolde by the quarte, but in the innes, bicauſe it becometh none to bye after ſuch facion, but ſtrangers, & thoſe that can not tary longe in a place. How moch good myght a few good men do? a fewe myght ſo begyn to redreſſe this errour, that there ſhulde nede no lawe to cōpell men to do them ſelfe good. who was amonge the Romans, but he myght fynd in his hart to haue fewer dyſhes, whā Manius Curius, beyng dictatour, that is in the higheſt office, that any man coude beare in Rome, was contented, not onely to lyue with wortes, but alſo glad to ſtyrre the potte hym ſelfe, and to gyue Ambaſſadours theyr anſweres as he was kelynge the potte? We banyſhed the beſt thyng, that euer was with manne, when frugalitie was dryuen away. we kowe not what welth is in ſmal thinges, nor yet what ryches is in contented pouertie. Pouertye

hath ben the inuentrice of all good craftes, and of al other thynges, that eyther gyue ornamē
               tes, or brynge cōmodities vnto mans lyfe. Recken but one goodthynge, that a welthy perſon hath inuēted, a thouſād euyl I can reherſe. Pouertie hath ben the maker of al ryche realmes. What citie had a poorer begynnynge than Rome? what leſſe Ryches, then Venys? What kyng was porer, then the kynge of Portyngale?
            ¶ Socrates was axed, howe his comon welthe ſhulde withſtand the malice of a rycher, ſeing that he wolde the communes to haue very lyttell, and thother neuer a deale to moche. Howe they maye withſtande one, ſayth he, I nede not telle you, but I am ſure, they ſhalbe good inough to fyght ayēſt two, if they bothe be welthy and ryche ynoughe. Howe ſo ſaythe Adimanthus? Euer ſayth Socrates, one poore ſoudiour, is good inoughe for two ryche in batayle. He is quycke, theſe are dulle, he leane and luſty, theſe fatte and foggy, he made to hunger, thurſt, and hardenes, theſe delycate and deed, if they be a nyght or two out of theyr neſtes. Howe ſhall they fyghte well, that ii. or .iii. ſhildes woll ſkace couer theyr belyes?
            ¶ Who wyll beleue, that Scipio ſo worthy a capitayn of the Romayns, could leue his doughters nothyng to theyr mariages, but the comune welth fayne to gyue them their dowries? what Romaine coulde thinke pouertie to be refuſed, whan ſo noble a manne was contente with it? I can not tarye in exāples. Cincinnatus, Fabricius, and many other

I muſte not ſpeake of. It is ſkace credyble, that Plutarche wrytethe of a capitayne of the Lacedemonians. Euermore whan this wente to warfare, they were fayne to gyue hym money out of the comune hutche, to bye hym botis and ſhowes. what ſouldiour coulde thinke hym ſelfe poore, when he ſawe his capytayne haue ſo lytel? They were contented, with ſuche extreme pouertie: and doo we thynke it laufull, becauſe we be not ſo ryche as we wold be, to ryſe ayenſt our prince? & this our prince ſo louyng, ſo lerned, ſo made of nature to a kyngdom, ſo endued of god with all ſuch prīcely v
                  
                     
                  
                  er
               tues, as are to beautifie a comon welth? coude we, if we knewe what we dyd, go agaynſt kynge HENRY the VIII, of whom I wyll ſay nothynge but this, that his gracis fame and prayſe, can not falle, but when all good letters fall, which can not be before men leaue the erthe, and the erth men. I wyll ſaye nothyng of myn owne. Al be it me thynke it moch apperteyneth to hym, that wyll handel this mater well, bothe to ſhewe, howe moche Englande is bound to loue his grace, and howe moch we ought to hate all them, that wolde his grace any euyll: But I wyll let Eraſmus, the greatteſt lerned man of our tyme, ſpeke for me, Harke what he ſayth of our kynge.
            
               ¶ VVHAT REGION of this world is there, but it may reioiſe at the high felicitie of England, if it loue Englande? what nation, but it may enuy the welthe of Englande, if it loue not Englande? Vndoubted it is a kynge, that eyther makethe a

a Realme noble, or that obſcureth it: with whatte bookes, with howe many ſortes of tongues, ſhall the poſteritie teſtifie, that Englande in all kynd of vertue ſo flouryſſhed in kynge Henry the .viii. his tyme, a prince ſent of god vnto Englande, whiche may ſeme but euen nowe to be borne, euen now to be Englande, ſo clenſed of euyll cuſtomes and vices, ſo imbued with all excellent ordinaunces, that Maſſilia it ſelfe, may here take example of ciuilytie, ſoo inſtituted with Chriſtes faythe, that Rome nowe may come to ſkole to Englande: ſoo ſtuffed with lerned men, that Italye may enuy England, ſauynge that enuye hath no place, where good letters reigne? Englande hath a kynge, whiche may be a rule vnto all princis, that hereafter ſhall gouerne any comune welthe. Good lorde this this in dede is a kyngedome, This is a Princelyke court, that his grace kepethe. I lette paſſe the greatte gyftes, that god hath endued ſo abundantly bothe his gracis goodly perſonage and mynde, which al be it they come of god, rather than of our induſtry: yet they are hyghely profytable to a comune welth, whā they light on a good prīce. And although this many yeres, it hath ben ſmal praiſe in a prince to be well lerned, yet his hyghnes ſhall bring it to paſſe, yt as in time paſt it hath ben the chiefe ornament of a kynge, to be lerned, ſoo it ſhall here after, be iudged hyghe prayſe worthy, a kyng to excel in knowlege. His gracis ſinguler qualities ſhall declare them but fooles, that are wonte to ſaye, that noble courage of princely ſtomake, is moch defaced, moche

broughte downe by lernynge and ſtudye. For what kynge can they brynge forthe, that hath ben without letters, whiche had more dexteritie, in any feate that belongeth to a prince, than his hyghnes hath? ſo made of nature apte to euery thyng, that in rydynge, ſhotyng, and ſuche other common paſtimes, there be fewe, that are to be compared with hym. There be fewe kyndes of muſyke, but his grace hath a good knowlege in them. Wonderfully well ſeene in the ſciences Mathematycall. who can be more diligenter, in oppreſſyng vice: he hath dryuen out of his realme, thoſe that lyued by myſchiefe, he hath netted his realme of ydle vacabundes. (wold god his grace had done but the one, as welle as he hathe intended to doo bothe) He hath ſette vppe good lawes, and abrogated ſuche as were vnprofitable for his people. who is more prudent in conſultation? who can better forſee, that yt is lyke to chance, than he can? who can be of more actiuitie? and yet in letters, he hath gone ſo farre, perchaunce not by no great ſtudye, but by the rare quickenes of witte and boūtie of nature, that diuines, ye and thoſe that are amonges them beſte lerned, do admire, and hyghely commende the ryght iudgement, that his grace hath in ſoo many thynges. Then he hath alſo this vertue, as chiefe of al the reſt his mooſte pryncely qualities, that there is none more gentler, to be ſpoken vnto, none that hath leſſe dyſdayne, none that hath leſſe pryde, the maieſtie not withſtandynge of a prince, euermore ſafe and in no poynte diminyſſhed. The wyttes of

lerned men, whom his grace hath euermore ſo noryſhed, and hath ornated, wylle not ſuffre the memorie of ſuche his excellente vertues to decaye by any proces of tyme. No no bothe the eloquence of latyn menne and grecians, ſhall euer teſtifie, that there was one kyng Henry the eight in England, whiche alone had all the ornamentes, that al theſe prynces had amonges them, the ſtudy and loue toward good letters▪ yt Ptholomeus Philodelphus had, the good fortune of Alexander Magnus, the gentle affabilitie, that Philip kynge of the Macedons had, the noble courage of Iulius Ceſar, the helthe of Auguſtus, the clemencye of Traianus, the integritie of Alexander Seuerus, the lernyng and knowlege of Marcus Antonius Pius, the religion of Theodoſius, and to make an ende, where vertues ſkace letteth me fynd any ende, there was nothinge allmooſte in any of thoſe, whiche thantiquitie ſo highly praiſeth, that had any notable qualitie, but it may be found in this one prince. Thus ſayth Eraſmus.
            ¶ I myght bringe in many places of Ludouicus Viues, of al them that eyther haue ben lerned them ſelfe, or loued lerned men: but Eraſmus I thynke hath ſayd ynough, for to make al vs glad of ſuche a prince. I wyl ſay, that I am aſſured, all the lordes of Englande wyl grant me, that if they were all borne to be right enheritours of the Crowne of Englande, yet amonges them al, there is not one, whiche they myght thynke worthy to be kyng, his grace being alyue, Al be it their title were as good

as his gracis is. Nowe when god hath gyuen his highnes only good title, and made him theyr right and natural kyng, and them his Subiectes, what ſhal we thynke, they ought to do, in defence of his gracis right and honour? They knowe ryght wel, they haue declared their hartis towardes his highnes. The nobles haue well perceyued, as they be the ſtrength of the kynge, ſo he and his lawes, are their defence and ſaulfegarde. They know the fal of thone, is the fall of bothe. The dukes, worthy all hye prayſe, all honour, all rewarde, haue ſhewed them ſelfes, bothe wyſe, in ſeinge their owne hurtes, to be adioyned with the kynges, and faythfull, in defendynge theyr prynce. The lordes haue done ſemblable wiſe. Knyghtes lacked not of their parte. Gentlemen, and briefely al men, haue ſene, that ſedition, is ſooner to be ſtopped with loſſe of goodes, great expenſes, then that men of one nation, ſhulde cruelly one kyll an other. The kynges grace, both by his long experience, and alſo by his knowlege in good letters, wel perceyueth, that the chiefe honour, that a chriſten prince ſhulde ſeke, is the ſauynge of his people. His grace knoweth the ende of ciuyle diſcorde. He knoweth the commodities, that come of concorde and vnitie. In tyme of ciuile diſſention, men wander here and there, ſure in no place, truſtynge no man, ſuſpectyng all thinges, affrayed almoſte of their owne ſhadowe. Cities made for the welthe of then habitantes, are the diſtruction of all, or the moſte parte of them, that are within them. Walles made to kepe out ennemyes,

kepe vs from flieng our ennemies. Howſes, townes, ye hole cities, are hurled oft to the groūd, then foloweth the laſt parte of the playe. Hungre, thyrſte, lacke of lodgynges, lacke of other neceſſaries. Al craftes are diſtroyed, or at the leeſt hyndered for a longe ſeaſon: after horſe and oxen, that ſhuld tyll the erthe, are taken away. But the moſt hurte of all is, that we lerne to ſet god and his lawes at noughte. what ſhall he thynke vnlaufull, what vnhoneſt, that thynketh he maye weare harnes agaynſt his prynce? ſleye his countreye men? neyghbours? frendes? kynſfolke? ye brothern and ſyſterne? fathers and mothers? Whan Pyrrhus kynge of the Epirotes was ſettyng forthe ageynſt the Romayns, in defence of the Tarentins, Cineas a philoſopher, in moche fauour with hym, aſked Pirrhus what he wold do, whan he had ouercome the Romayns? All Italye ſayth he, ſhortely after ſhal be ours. Wel, whan Italy is vnder you, what wyl you than do▪ Than we wol ſayle into Secilia. This wonne, whether then? we wol into Spayn. This ouercome, is there any more to doo? Ye then we woll ſet vppon Carthago. Imagine ſayth Cineas, ye haue obteyned this alſo, Haue ye it, that ye deſyre? ye ſayth he, for then, we woll retourne to Epirus againe, and there paſſe the reſt of our life in myrthe and pleaſure. Then I praye you, why maye we not make mery nowe? why be we not afrayed, that ſomwhat chaunce in ſo many warres, that we leſe this, which we foolyſhely ſeke, hauing it in our handes?
            
               ¶ May not I ſay ſo vnto ours? Put you the caſe, as you woll ymagine, you haue the better hande, howe be it, better it is to be kylled, thanne to conquere, fightyng ageynſt your prince. Yet imagin, euery thinge go on your ſide as you deſire. Can it chance ſo well, but many of you muſte wayle? He that is ouercomme ſhall wepe, ye ſay. Trowe you they ſhall laugh that wynne? Thynke you myrthe can be within theym, that euermore ſhall thynke, god hateth them? the world abhorreth them? Lette vs agree, lette vs agree, let vs ſe, what good concorde amonges men doth. Concord brought them together, that wādered without places, euer in fere one of thother. Concord made lawes, cōcorde builded cities, increaſed and conſerued them. Concord brought in all honeſt craftes. Concorde bringethe riches, whiche by diſſention we ſeke maddely. In tyme of peace wittes atteyn vnto lernyng, vertue, and wyſedome. Concorde maketh vs the frendes of god, the inheritours of heuen, parttakers of al the ioyes, that god hath prepared for them, he beſte loueth. All that feare god, all that loue his fauour, wyl ſay as I do. we woll peace, we woll no diſſention, we haue oft ſene the good that cometh of rufflynge, the good that cometh of chaungynge. We haue ben ſome tymes tourned from Brytones into Saxons, frō Saxons into Danes. The Normans haue ben our gouernours. we haue euer chā
               ged for the worſe. we woll kepe our ſtrength for an other ſeaſon. We ſhall haue a better tyme, a worſe quarell we can not haue, to ſpende our bloode in.

we woll our ēnemies laughe not at our diſtructiō. we wol that they be not mery at our calamitie, whiche can not be mery, excepte they ſee vs ſadde. we woll be frendes, God ſaue Englande as it is, if al Englyſhe men ſay ſo to, I am ſure, God wyll ſaye Amen.
         
      
      
         
            LONDINI IN AEDIBVS THOMAE BERTHELETI REGII IMPRESSORIS.
            CVM PRIVILEGIO.
            
         
      
   