
      
         
            
            
            The original & ſprynge of all ſectes & orders by whome, whā or were they beganne.
            Tranſlated out of hye Dutch in Englyſh.
            1537
         
         
            
            To the reader.
            
               FOr as much as ther is in the worlde great diſputacyon & reaſonynge of ſectes, and ſo many alſo of the ſame ſectes and religions both contrarye to Chriſtes mooſt holy religion, and alſo among themſelues. To induce them therfore vnto thyne vnderſtandynge (mooſt gentle reader) and to deſcribe them vnto thy knowlege, we haue here gathered together the names, faſhions and maner of lyuynges of all ſuche ſectes and orders as are not onely vnder the B. of Rome but alſo both amonge the Chriſten and amonge ye Iewes, how and whan they came vp, with the maner alſo of theyr garmentes and ſundrye clothynges.
            Which treatiſe yf thou reade diligently, thou ſhalte thynke it no maruayll, that ther is now ſuche contencyon and diuiſion in ye worlde, in as much as ther was no tyme, no age, no generacyon ſence the begynnynge, but alwaye ther hath ben ſome ſectes, ſome diuerſite of opinion, and ſome ſundrye maner of belefe in ye ſame. The Iewes lacked not theyr Phariſees, theyr Saduces, theyr Effeies. &c. The communite alſo of Chriſtē
               
dome hath this lōge tyme not ben without innumerable ſectes and dyuerſe religions, ſtablyſhed by the B. of Rome. Yee euery lande nacyon and contrye, hath in a maner a ſundry faſſhion of lyuynge, a ſundry faſhion of doctrine, a ſundry faſſhiō of clothyng, &c. and hath had (I ſaye) this longe ſeaſon. And though ſome of them which be called ſeetes, are not farre frō Chriſt nor his fayth yet the mooſt parte (ſpecyally of them that be brought in by ye B. of Rome) are no leſſe contrary vnto Chriſt, then were ye falſe prophetes in tymes paſt, then were the phariſes, and then were the heretikes that haue ben ſens Chriſtes incarnacyon. For in as much as they wyll not onely be called other wyſe then Chriſten, but denye alſo ye power lyfe, fayth and merites of Chriſte, who can then be more contrary to hym: who are thē more worthy to be called brethren of ſectes and diuiſion, then ſuch are?
            As thou ſeyſt therfore ye theyr doctrine is contrary to Chriſtes, yt they preach lyes and dreames, that they deceaue the hartes of innocentes thorow fayre and flatterynge wordes. Rom. xvi. that they come to the but in ſhepes clothynge Math. vii. that they denye

the power of godlyneſſe. ii. Timo. iii. that they deuoure wydowes houſes vnder the pretence of longe prayers. Math. xxiii. So be thou ware of them, of theyr falſe doctrin, of theyr lyes & dreames, of theyr fayre and flattryng wordes, of theyr fayned holyneſſe. For all is not golde that ſhyneth, nether are they all of Chriſtes couent, that weare brode crownes, wide coules, and ſyde coates. And forget not that S. Paul ſayeth. The deuell can chaunge hymſelfe in to angell of lyght.
            Shute not thou thē at a wronge marke but holde the vnto Chriſt, and to the vnite of his doctrine, of his fayth and of his religion, that thou mayeſt here be fre from all falſe hypocriſy, and not only knyt vnto him herein this world, but inheritour alſo of his ioye in heauen.
            Amen.
         
         
            ¶ The contentes of thys treatyſe.
            
               
                  1 lxxxiiii. Orders, ſectes or religiōs vnder the byſhop of Rome.
               
                  2 xiiii. Faythes and ſectes of Chiſtēdom only, beſyde all other.
               
                  3 xvi. Sectes and ſuperſticiōs of the Iewes or Hebrues.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The nombre of this Table ſignyfyeth the leafe, A the fyrſt ſyde therof, and B the ſeconde.
            
               
                  
                     Auſtinians the fyrſt order vi  a
                  
                     Ambroſians two ſortes vi.  b
                  
                     Antonyes heremites ix.  b
                  
                     Auſtins heremites xi.  b
                  
                     Auſtins obſeruauntes xii.  b
                  
                     Armenians ſecte xlv.  a
                  
                     Ammonites and Moabites lix.  b
                  
                     Baſilius order iii.  a
                  
                     Benets order iiii  b
                  
                     Bernardes order xiiii.  b
                  
                     Barefooted freres xxxii  b
                  
                     S. Brigittes order xxvii.  b
                  
                     Beghartes or whyte ſpretes xxviii.  b
                  
                     Bemes fayth xlvii.  a
                  
                     Brethren of Ieruſalem xxxv.  b
                  
                     Brethren of S. Ihon de ciuitate xxxvi.  b
                  
                     Brethren of wylfull pouerte xxxvi.  b
                  
                     Cluniacenſis order iiii.  a
                  
                     Chanons of S. Auſtine vii.  b
                  
                     Charterhouſe order viii.  a
                  
                     Ciſtercienſis order xiii.  b
                  
                     Croſſe bearers or croſſed freres xviii.  a
                  
                     Carmelites or whyte freres xviii.  b
                  
                     S. Clares order xxii.  a
                  
                     Celeſtines order xxii.  b
                  
                     Camaldulenſis order xxxi.  a
                  
                     
                     Croſſe ſtarred brethrenxxxiiii.  a
                  
                     Conſtantinopolitanyſh order xxxiiii.  a
                  
                     Croſſe bearers xxxvii.  b
                  
                     Chapter monkes xxxviii.  b
                  
                     Dutch order xxii  b
                  
                     Eſſet li.  a
                  
                     Grandimontenſis order v.  a
                  
                     Gregorians v.  b
                  
                     Georges order xxix  b
                  
                     Guilhelmites xxxii.  a
                  
                     Grecians fayth xliii  a
                  
                     Georgians fayth xlviii  b
                  
                     Gerundinenſyſh order xxxix.  b
                  
                     Galilei or Galileans liiii.  b
                  
                     Heremites i.  b
                  
                     S. Helens brethren xxxv.  a
                  
                     Humiliati xvi.  b
                  
                     Hoſpitall brethren xli.  b
                  
                     Holy gooſt order xl.  b
                  
                     Ieroms order. ii. ſortes vii.  a
                  
                     Ihons heremites. x.  b
                  
                     S. Iuſtines order xi.  b
                  
                     S. Ihons order xxv.  a
                  
                     Inieſuati xxvi.  b
                  
                     Ieroms heremites xxx.  b
                  
                     Ioſephs order xxxii.  a
                  
                     Indian fayth xliii  b
                  
                     Indian fayth vttred by Mathew lxi.  a
                  
                     Iacobites ſecte. xliiii.  a
                  
                     
                     S. Iames brethren order  xxxv.  a
                  
                     S. Iames brethrē wt ye ſwearde xxxv.  a
                  
                     Indians order xxxvii.  a
                  
                     Iewes lii.  b
                  
                     Idumet lv.  a
                  
                     S. Katherine of Senes order xli.  b
                  
                     Keyed monkes xli.  b
                  
                     Lazarites or Mary Magdalēs xxxvi.  b
                  
                     Lordes of Ungary xl.  b
                  
                     Minores or Minorites xxi.  a
                  
                     Maryes ſeruauntes xxv.  a
                  
                     Monkes of mount olyuete xxix.  a
                  
                     Marouinyes ſecte xliiii.  a
                  
                     Moronites ſecte xliiii.  b
                  
                     Moſarabites fayth xlvi.  b
                  
                     Moſcouites fayth xlvii.  a
                  
                     Monachi and Monache xxxix.  a
                  
                     Morboney and Meriſtei l.  a
                  
                     Menelayſh & Iaſonyſh ſecte lix.  b
                  
                     New chanons of S. Auſtine xi.  a
                  
                     Neſtorini xliiii.  b
                  
                     Nolharte brethren xxxiiii.  b
                  
                     New order of oure lady xxxvi  a
                  
                     Nazarei liiii.  a
                  
                     Paules heremites x.  a
                  
                     Premonſtratenſis order xvi.  b
                  
                     Preacher order, or black freres xix.  a
                  
                     Peter the Apoſtles order xxx.  a
                  
                     Purgatory brethren xl.  a
                  
                     
                     Phariſei or Phariſets  l.  a
                  
                     Romane fayth xlii.  b
                  
                     Rechabites liii.  a
                  
                     Sarrabaites vii.  b
                  
                     Sambonites xvii.  a
                  
                     Scourgers the. i. ſecte xxii.  a
                  
                     Souldyers of Ieſus Chriſte xxvi.  a
                  
                     Scopetines xxvii.  a
                  
                     Specularii or the glaſſe order xli.  b
                  
                     Surian fayth xlvi.  a
                  
                     Sepulchrers order xxxiii.  a
                  
                     Sheere order xxxiii.  a
                  
                     Swearders order xxxiii.  a
                  
                     Starred monkes xxxiii.  b
                  
                     Starred freres xxxiii.  b
                  
                     Sclauony order xxxvi.  a
                  
                     Scourgers the. ii. ſecte xxxvii.  b
                  
                     Stoole brethren xxxix.  b
                  
                     Scotlande brethren order xl.  a
                  
                     Samaritani xlix.  b
                  
                     Saducei li.  a
                  
                     Sicarii, lvi.  b
                  
                     Templare Lordes xv.  a
                  
                     Templare knyghtes xvi.  a
                  
                     The vale of Ioſaphat order xxxv.  b
                  
                     Uallis vmbroſe iiii.  a
                  
                     Waldenſes ſecte xlviii  a
                  
                     Wentzelaus order xxxiiii.  b
                  
                     zelotes lv.  b
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Of ſectes and orders.
            ¶ A treatyſe of all ſectes and orders where, whan & by whom they are begōne, ſtablyſhed and confirmed.
            
               
                  ¶ Of the Byſhop of Rome, Cardinals and other of hys ſpiritualty in generall.
                  
                     IN thys regiſter or rehearſall of ſectes is the Byſhop of Rome (that vſurpatly called hymſelfe Pope) the fyrſt in ordre, as an heade & father of hys whole body, accompanyed wyth hys members, chylderen and creatures as a henne wyth hyr chekens, namely: Cardinals, Patriarkes, Byſhops, Curtiſans, Preſtes, Monkes, Freres, & hys whole ſpiritualty. Whoſe holyneſſe and lyfe (God be thanked) is ſo come to lyght, yt euen the chylderen vpon ye ſtrete do ſpeake and ſynge of it. And the deuell alſo doth ſhewe hym as though he were wery of hym

out of the worlde, but myddes of the deuels kyngdome, that is the worlde, to watch, and be ſober in all godlyneſſe. For God wyll haue hys to be abrode & in the lyght. Ioh. iii. and Math. v. and ſet them iudges ouer the whole worlde. He can ſeparate and kepe the roſes frō thornes welynough. I knowe none example in the whole ſcripture of bodely ſeparatynge frome the worlde, ſaue only of Chriſte, Moſes, and Helias, whiche nother toke vpon them to dwell in wylderneſſes, but only for a ſeaſon to faſte or commune wt God. Wherfore I cā not be perſuaded that thys lyfe is ſo acceptable to God. Chriſte knoweth how nedeful the true Chriſtēmen be in thys world. Fyrſt, that they may lyghten and ſhyne in the worlde: Secondarly, yt they maye teach and exhorte: Thyrdly that they may geue counſell and helpe, geuynge a good example to euery man, and ſtoppe ye mouthes of bacbyters with ye truth. Fourthly that God condemne the worlde with thē. Yf ony man wyll here allege Ihon Baptiſt I anſwer: Ihon fled not alwaye the company of men, but only whan he wold prayeor faſte, otherwhyles was he in Herodes courte, where he ſhoned no man as the heremites

do, but preached vnto them repentaunce, receauyng them that came to hym, and at tyme conuenient he wente agayne whether the ſprete led hym. Thus maye one beynge myddes in the worlde alſo, be out of the world, as all Chriſten men ought to be, and as Abraham in Canaan, Daniell in Babilon, Ioſeph in Egipte. Theſe foreſayde heremites were in ye tyme of Decius, Ualens, Theodoſius and Dicletian, from ccc. year after Chriſt vntyl. M. about what tyme monkes order beganne. Some ſaye they fled perſecution in the wylderneſſes of Egipte, and ſo were fayne to dwell there vnknowen loke vpon Otho byſhop of friſingen. the. vii. boke ye. xxv. chap. thorowout.
               
               
                  iii. Baſilius order.
                  ANno. ccc. lxxxiiii. in the tyme of Siricius B. of Rome began thy fyrſt monkyſh order, rayſed by Baſilius Magnus, byſhop of Ceſarea in Cappadocia. Theyr cote, cloke, cole, and cappe were all whyte. He preſcrybed them a rule mixte wyth manye tradicions and doctrines of men: Wherfore he is called of them a father and a begynner of relygyous people,

whoſe lyfe he alſo prayſeth, ſo that he optayned of the aforeſayde Syricius to confirme the order. He called them Monachi, that is, ſolitary or ſeparate from the worlde, and founded in Grece the fyrſt houſe or cloyſter How they be diuided and ſeparate from the world, we haue ſene and do ſe dayly.
               
               
                  iiii. Benedictus or Benets order.
                  SBenet a father of monks, whiche gathered together all ſtrowed religious men, dyd begynne a peculiar order Anno. M. xxiiii. in the tyme of Ihon ye i. B. of Rome vpon the mount Laſſinus, where he buylt ye mooſt renowned cloyſter, geuynge them there a rule, preſcripte, and forme of lyuynge, as though Chriſt had forgotten it. Now after he had longe ſhyned in a wylderneſſe, & muche reſorte was to hym by reaſon of hys Gods ſeruice, he buylt. xii. places and fylled them with religious men. Of thys order is reported to haue ben. xxiiii B. of Rome. c. lxxxiii. Cardinals. M. cccc. lxiiii. Archbyſhops and byſhops. xv. M. and lxx. renowned Abbots, and as ſayeth Ihon the. xxii. Byſhops of Rome. v. M. vi. c. lv. monkes canoniſate or ſayntes. Thys is

the. iii. broode that the B. of Rome hath hatchte. He rayſed alſo an order for hys ſyſter Scolaſtica, and made her abbeſſe: hyr clothynge was a black cote, cloke, cole, and vayle. And leſt the ſcripture ſhulde deceaue her and hyrs, it was commaunded that none ſhulde reade the holy ſcripture wythout conſente or permiſſion of theyr ſuperior. Here is to be ſene how God is ſought in all orders, which in hys worde is expelled.
               
               
                  v. Cluniacenſis order.
                  ANno. ix. c. xiii. hath S. Benets order begotten thys ſecte whoſe bygynner was Otho the abbot. For whan the monkes of S. Benets rule were nerehande decayed in godlyneſſe, thys Otho lyued ſo, that they were quickened agayne byreaſon of hys holyneſſe. Theyr clothynge and rule was as Saynt Benets. A duke of Aquitania Guillidinus by name relyued the Giginacy or Cluniacis cloyſters wyth greate ſubſtaunce, and yearly rentes.
               
               
                  vi. Uallis vmbroſe or Shadowed vale order.
                  
                     
ANno. M. cccc. or as ſome ſaye: āno. M. lxx. Ihon a Florentine, whoſe father called Gualbertus was a knyght, dyd begynne thys order vnder S. Benets rule wyth addynge therto, and chaungynge of black clothes into graye: whereof ther is many in Tuſcia and vpper Lōbardy. Thys Ihon after the tenoure of hys ſtory or legēd was come to the monkery or cole after this faſhion: He was at variaunce with an vplandyſh man, for ſlayenge of hys brother, wherfore as he vpon a tyme rode out of Florence to auenge hys brothers death, the manſlayer met hym euen in the teth, not farre from the cloyſter Minati in the moū
                     taynes, vpon whome he fell. Now whan the vplandyſh man ſawe no eſcapynge, he fell at hys fete, deſyrynge hym for the crucifyed Ieſus Chriſte to pardon and forgeue hym hys offence. Where vpon Ihon was ſo reconciled concernynge the manſlaughter, that he abatyng hys moode and leauynge hys fury, forgaue hym all the dette. Now as he wente from thence in the afore ſayde cloyſter, and fell downe bofore the crucifixe there ſhuld ye image haue moued & bekēned

with the heade, ſygnifyenge that God was pleaſed with the forgeueneſſe of the dette vnto the manſlayer: which croſſe is yet at this houre ſene by Florence vpon an hyll, where greatreuerence is ſhewed to it. Uppon this was he ſtyred to geue hymſelfe ouer vnto a ſpirituall conuerſacyon, gat him a none to an ende of the mount Apenninus where he buylded a cloyſter, and beganne this order. At ye laſt he dyed Anno M. lxxiii. after that the order was well encreaſed in perſones and cloyſters.
               
               
                  vii. Grandimonteſis order.
                  ANno. M. lxxvi. vnder Alexāder the. ii. B. of Rome dyd this newe order begynne, by one Steuen the ſonne of a gentylmā of Auernia: which trauayled many cōtries to ſeke out a ſolitary place, wher he myght ſerue God quyetly: at the laſte he came in Aquitania, where he founde a moū
                     tayne full of woodes, and ſpryngynge fountaynes, and an vntroden lande. There dyd this Steuē pytche, and beganne a ſtrayght lyfe wyth faſtynge, watchynge and prayeng to God. His meate was bread and water, his clothynge was a cote of males vpō his

bare body, and a black cloke ther vpō, where wt he dyd penaunce, & y magined to become ryghteous before God. With this lyfe he gathered many diſcyples, whom he exhorted to wylfull pouerte. Now thought the monkes of S. Auſtins order theyr tytle to be better to yt place: wherfore ye brethren wolde remyue wt a good wyl, prayenge God inſtātly to ſhew thē another cōuenient place. Wherfore vpon a tyme as Agnus dei was ſonge at maſſe, a voyce (whether it came frō God or ye deuel) was herde, ſayenge: In Grandimonte. Upon this they roſe & buylded there a cloyſter or place for them.
               
               
                  viii. Gregorians order.
                  IN the yeare. ccccc. xciiii. dyd Gregorius Magnus borne of a noble ſtock of Rome, very plenteouſly endued wt goodes of fortune forſake all, & choſe a relygious ſtate. After the deceaſſe of his father he builded. vi. religious houſes in Sicilia, geuynge thē a forme & rule of lyuynge: and he buylded another wtin Rome, in the name & honour of S. Andrew, wherin he dwelte wt many brethrē, whō he ſteared greatly to the ſubduyng & chaſtenynge of ye fleſhe. He dyd we are a copper coloured courſe cloth accordyng to his rule. His brethren (becauſe they

kept his rule as diligētly, as yf it had bē gods word) they wer called Gregoriās after hym.
               
               
                  ix. The fyrſt order of S. Auſtins.
                  IN the year. cccc. xc. dyd S. Auſtine (after yt his mother was departed) ſayle vnto Cartago wt his brethrē, diſtributed his patrimony amōge poore folke, & began in a houſe in ye woodes to take vpō him to folow the Apoſtles by a rule, hauynge a ſleght black garmēt: whether it was a cole, or not, I can not ſhew. I rekē it was in dede a blacke garmēt as ſhalbe ſpecifyed here after in ye order of ye chanōs: Ther is no order as it was inſtitut: Yee though ye foūders of thē had a fre & good meaning, (wherof I am not ſure) yet by addyng & abatynge more or leſſe thē Auſtyne or Benet & ſuch other inſtitut they are ſo ſore chaſiged, yt they ſhulde not now know theyr brethrē. I fynd nomore of S. Auſtin but yt he was feruēt to folow ye Apoſtles, couetyng & endeuouryng to lyue after theyr example, wherfore he called his rule ye goſpel. But I feare me leſt ye deuel alſo haue ſcoffed wt S. Auſtine & his good meanyng: For yf ye rule be his, wherfore calleth he her ye goſpel: yf ſhe is Chriſtes, wherfore calleth he yt rule yt is p̄ſcribed al mē his own?

as though euery Chriſtē man neded not to lyue after the enſample of Chriſt and his Apoſtles? Fynally in euery playe hath the deuell one parte. It paſſeth my capacyte to ſhewe the manyfold dyuerſite of the orders of S. Auſtyne. Yee I feare leſt Auſtyne him ſelfe ſhuld ſcarce know thē for his diſciples.
               
               
                  x. Ambroſius order, two ſortes.
                  OF S. Ambroſe that was in S. Auſtines tyme aboute the yeare of oure Lorde. cccc. xc. & dyd conuerte hym, I reade no mōkry. But I thynke ſome apes or counterfayters haue preſumed to folowe his lyfe, ſeynge he was coūted for a monſter of the worlde, & haue at ony tyme ſene hym haue on a graye or ruſſet garment, and ſo counterfayted hys clothynge and conuerſacyon: but the pyth wherin all cōſyſteth, that is, fayth in the hart, that haue they left him, hauynge a recheleſſe harte vnder a graye garment. An other order is ther rekened of S. Ambroſe, which weare whyte cotes, and a cloke theron, wherewith they foolyſhly ymagyne to do God an acceptable ſeruyce, and yet they (as all other) are playne heretykes: ſeynge they ſeke health and thynke to

meryte therby by God, whiche hath an eye to fayth onely. Iere. v. loketh vpon ye workemayſter and tre, and not vpon the frutes or workes. Gen. iiii. Pro. xxi. Math. vii. &. xii.
               
               
                  xi. Ieronimus order. ii. kyndes.
                  AFter Chriſtes byrth. cccc. xc. yeare or there about toke Ierome vpon hym ye religious or heremiticall clothynge, in the wylderneſſe of Syria, after he was conſecrate a preſt & cardinall at Rome. Afterwarde anno. M. cccc. viii. roſe a new beggynge order vnder the name of S. Ierome in the tyme of Innocentius the. vii. Anno M. cccc. v. a county Redo by name a religious man of the. iii. order of S. Fraunces in the lande of Etruria by the towne Feſulana, whoſe companion was Water Marſis. Theſe twayne dyd begynne, inſtitute and augmente this order of obſeruacyon. This order is brought vnder the rule of S. Auſtyne, by the reaſon of the excellent vowe of Gregory the. xii. B. of Rome, & endued with priueleges and lybertyes. Whan thys order now was decaied & neare hande come to nought, it was renewed and reſtored agayne by one Lupus a Spaynyard, general

of ye ſame order, which ordened new cōſtituciōs & orders, takē of ye ſayenges of S. Ierō, & was cōfirmed wt ſundry preuileges & franchiſes by Eugeniꝰ ye. iiii. B. of R. & wt a gray cloke ī remēbraūce of yt religiō of ye aforſayd iii. order. This was don anno. m. cccc. xxxvii
               
               
                  xii. Chanons or regular preſtes.
                  THis order began to floryſh agayne in yt tyme of Gregory ye. vii. & Hēry the iiii. emperour, an. M. lxxx. ī ye church of S. Quirin at Beulake ye which was firſt inſtitute by ye Apoſtles, after by S. Auſtine, & now by maſter Yuon proueſt of the ſame church, which was afterward B. of carnotū They weare a blacke gowne, & a ſcapulary wounde aboute the arme, they be halfe mō
                     kes and halfe preſtes.
               
               
                  xiii. The Sarrabaites order.
                  TO this ſecte ſurely belonge ſuche of ye ſpiritualty that by mouth profeſſe wylfull pouerte & not wt harte. For theſe Sarrabaites be ſayd not only to come of Ananias & Saphira by vntrue diſſimulacyon of retaynyng theyr goodes Actu. v. but alſo by lynage & kynred. Theſe vnder ye colour of wylful pouerte, wolde ſeme to haue forſaken & byddē al tēporal goodes farewel,

after ye inſtituciō of ye apoſtles: vnder ye which colour ye couetous wretches buſyed to gather great goodes & poſſeſſiōs, which they optayned. Of theſe doth S. Hierome wryte thryſe to S. Auſtine. They dwelt fyrſt in Egipt ī holes & caues, clothed wt oxē & ſuynes hedes, gyrded about wt halters vnſhod & bloudy went they oft to Ieruſalē at ye feaſt cōfeſſyng theyr wylful pouerte & deſpyſyng of al thynge, ſo lōge, tyl they were enryched therby. They pulled thēſelues by ye beerd ī ſight of al ye people, wherby they gat thēſelues a name of great holyneſſe, afterward returned home agayn ladē wt goodes, where they lyued at theyr eaſe S. Auſtine cōmaūded to flye theſe. They plated thornes in ye hēmes of theyr veſturs, wher wt they be blouded thē
                     ſelues. Finally they began many ſtraūge deuyces tyl they waxed rych & lyued ī ydelnes Read Bede & Aug. the. xxi. ſermō ad fres in Eremo.
               
               
                  xiiii. Charterhouſe order.
                  ANno. M. lxxxvi. dyd this order begyn in Gallia or Fraunce by Bruno the Philoſopher & diuine, whō Bernard calleth a fayre pyler of the church. This order is confirmed by Alexander the. iii. and the. iiii. Biſhops of Rome with many other This order ꝓſpered greatly not by reaſō of

tyme (as euery man knoweth) but becauſe of the ſtrayghtneſſe of lyuynge. On this fearful wyſe dyd the order begynne: Whyle the vniuerſite of Paris floryſhed, ther dyed one of it that was of great renowne both of learnynge and honeſty. Now whyle the Dirige was ſonge for hym, in the preſence of many doctours, maſters, & learned men, at theſe wordes: Quātas habeo īiquitates &c. as ye body roſe in the coffin, a voyce was herde ſayenge: By the ryghteous iudgemēt of God am I accuſed. At this voyce were they all abaſhed and concluded not to burye the coarſe. The ſecōde daye, was lyke voyce herde. On the thyrde daye was neare hande the whole cytie gathered to heare the voice and then dyd the coarſe ryſe agayne as before, with this voyce: By the ryghteous iudgement of God am I condēned. This pearſed thorow many hartes, but ſpecyally Brunos, borne at Colen, which then was deane and ruler of the vniuerſite, ſo that he ſayde to his diſciples: Lo how peteouſly and pyte fully peryſhed he, which notwithſtandynge was rekened of euery man a ſaynt for hys lyuynge. Here vpon wente he in a wylderneſſe with ſeuen men, and buylded there an

houſe purpoſynge in his mynde to leade a ſtrayght lyfe, euery frydaye to faſt breade & water: and neuer to eate fleſhe, were he neuer ſo ſycke, to weare heery clothes nexte his body, neuer to come in to the worlde, to kepe pertuall ſylence, and to ſpeake only wt God, to ſyt alone in a cell, & ſo wyth greate chaſtenyng to do penaunce for his ſynnes. Urbanus the. ii. B. of Rome is reported to haue ben this Brunos diſciple. Hugo alſo yt was as who ſaye an heremyte and charter houſe monke in this world, a very myrrour and example of all vertue, wolde haue takē vpon hym this order, but he could get no lycence of the B. of Rome. I paſſe ouer yt fable that is wrytten of hym. Lo good reader theſe deuelyſh practyſes vpon what fundament they are groūded. The deuell thought this ſhalbe my deuyſe: For the worlde can not iudge or diſcerne this lyuyng, they ſhall eſtyme it an holy lyuynge, all is golde wyth them yt ſhyneth, chefly in ſpiritual matters. Yf this lyuynge be of value, then are the Heithen, Turkes, & Calicutes vertues mē: for they haue mōkes of ſtrayghter lyuynge. But whoſoeuer the matter be, the worlde wyll haue monkes and freres.
               
               
                  
                  xv. Anthonyes order.
                  ANno. ccc. xxiiii. began Antony in Egipt a ſtrayght & ſolitary lyfe. He was the fyrſt hermite. His meat was only breade & water, & faſted vntyl Sōne ſet. He went wyllyngly in the wylderneſſe, where many reſorted vnto hym, ye which made him theyr Abbot. S. Ierome ſayth that he wrote vii. epiſtles or letters in ye Egiptian ſpeche, full of ſprete & myſteryes, which afterward were trāſlated into Greke. Athanaſius B. of Alexandria wryteth his lyfe in a cōplete boke. He dyed at Thebaida. ye. ccc. lvii. yeare after Chriſtes byrth, the. c. v. yeare of his age, whō nother I cā, nor wyll iudge, he hath one to iudge hym: but ye ſorte of apes yt endeuoure to folowe hym in clothynge, & not in fayth, makynge of his lyuyng a rule, ſo lyke to his lyfe, as ye deuell is lyke God, thoſe I ſay I coūte as heretykes & diſſardes. This coūterfaited order weareth only a black garment wt a blewe croſſe theron, they vſe beggynge, they haue a fraternite, wherein they threatē folke wt S. Antonis fyre, yee they haue brought ye matter ſo farre, yt in ſome parties they haue pygges fatted to thē, wher wt they fat theyr bellyes, & mock & maw at vs.
               
               
                  
                  xvi. Paulus or Paulins order.
                  THe yeare. ccc. xlv. was one Paulus an heremiticall monke or heremite in Egipte, a cōpanion to ye foreſayd Antony, which ſpent his lyfe in wilderneſſe Whan he was. xv. yeare of age, fleynge the promotynge of Ualerianus & Decius Emperours of Rome, though he was of noble progeny, yet left he all, & went in to wylderneſſe, where he dwelt in a lytel caue. xcviii. yeares vnknowen, to ony man, lyuynge in faſtynge & prayer wt water & breade, herbes & rootes ſuch as ye wilderneſſe dyd myniſter thus lyued Paule. But marke yt apes that haue yt name & order after hym, & yet haue nomore of hym, then ſome Chriſten men haue of Chriſt, that is, ye ſurname: For all his gooſtlyneſſe, lyfe, fayth, conſyſteth wyth them in theyr whyte garmētes or coules & kappes: The coloure of whoſe clothes we reade no where yt Paul dyd we are lyke, ſo yt I can not tell frō whēce they haue yt name. For Paul faſted, but they are fulbelyes: he was poore, but they are rych: he was ſolytary, but they rūne about: he had ſīple clothing & a clene hart, but theſe haue a whit garmēt & black hartes: ſo yt of Paule they haue no

black ſcapulary and a blacke kappe but they haue chaūged ye ſcapulary in to a whyt lynē rochet. This order is ſayde to haue many learned men.
               
               
                  xix. Of S. Iuſtines order.
                  THe year. M. cccc. xxxii. ſome ſay. M. cccc. xii. dyd one Lodwyck or Lewis Barbus a coūſeler of Uenice, rayſe vp a new order of S. Iuſtine, vnder S. Benets rule, in ye parties of Treuiſa, in ye cloiſter of S. Iuſtin by ye cytie Badua. This order hath Eugenius the. iiii. confirmed with many & great priueleges. Theyr clothynge can I not deſcribe.
               
               
                  xx. The heremites, of S. Auſtins. or Guiſhelmians order.
                  THe year. cccc. xviii. (as is ſaid before) began this order in a wood aboute ye citie Hippo by Cartago. Whā he had dwelte there. iii. yeare, he began to make a rule for thē after ye Apoſtles rule. Upō thys came ther ſo many to yt place, yt one wolde haue thought it had ſnowed mōkes, ſo yt many cloyſters were buylt of thē. Now whā ye Uādalies came in Aphrica, they ouercame neare hād ye. iii. part of ye world, ſo yt they quē
                     ched almooſt al ye Chriſtē name. Wherfore

certayn brethrē came in to Hetruria, endeuouryng there yt ye holy order ſhulde not be rooted out. But becauſe of ye perſecucyon yt ye Gothies & Lōbardes vſed, this hermetical order was clene deſtroied, & monkry nearehande clene rooted out. Thus is this order oft decayed & oft rayſed agayne, refourmed, & gotten many names, as now a dayes the Benedictines & Grayfreres, wherof ſome be called barefooted, ſome obſeruaūtes, ſom Franciſcanes, ſome Bernardines, ſome minores, ſome Amedei. As this order now had bē decayed a great whyl, ther roſe one Guyliame a duke of Aquitania & coūty of Lictania, which this youth was taught of ſ. Bernarde. This mā reſtored agayn S. Auſtins order both in wordes & dedes. For ye greater he was afore in ye worlde, ye lowlyer he was become ī ye wylderneſſe, whether he wēt of fre wyl to chaſtiſe his fleſh & ſubdue it, wt a cote of males on his bare body, alway watchyng, prayeng, & faſtyng: wherfore he was called a father & reſtorer of ye order. Whan Guyliam now ſaw ye decay of his order, but ye increace of ye ciſterciēſes order, he gat a gelouſy to this order, & buſyed hī to enlarge it, inſomuch yt he gathered a great nōbre of perſōs, which were called Guylelmites vntyl ye tyme of Innocētius ye. iiii. B. of Ro: For thē
                     
were they called to the cytie out of the wylderneſſe, and theyr name chaūged in to Heremites of S. Auſtine. This Guileame after the heremitiſh lyuynge by the conſente of Anaſtaſius & Adrian byſhops of Ro. dyd buylde aboute (or as ſome ſay wtin) Paris ye fyrſt beggynge order, the whiche was confirmed by Anaſtaſius the. iiii. So that thys is the fyrſt beggynge order that is brooded, chaūged from pouerte in to ryches, goynge ſo lōge about tyl they were nothyng worth. After yt buylded they with beggynge many other cloyſters, vntyll they haue fylled the worlde: & ſo is beggynge that once was forbyddē, become a gods ſeruice. This chaūge laſted from. M. c. l. tyll. M. c. lx. yeare.
               
               
                  xxi. The regular order of the obſeruaunces of S. Auſtine.
                  ANno. cccc. Whan S. Auſtine was choſen byſhoppe in Aphrica he was compelled to leaue the wylderneſſe and to wayte vpon his office: wherfore he buſyed to buyld alſo a cloyſter in his houſe, wherin he wyth his chyldren and houſholde myghte lyue after the Apoſtles rule, whiche were of one mynde to Godwarde, and to poſſeſſe all thynges in cōmune. But what maner of

clothynge they dyd weare, fynde I expreſſed by no credible ſtorywrytter. wherfor it is to be thought yt they haue vſed honeſt raymēt, accordyng to the faſhiō of the contrye, and not to haue knowen of ony cole, as the apes do imagyne. And yf it were ſo that he had vſed a cole, yet counterfayte his ſonnes and folowers hym in nothynge els ſaue that pagen, the whiche euery vyle and noughty fellow can do. As for hys holyneſſe of lyfe and fayth, that bequeeth they hym, as not pertaynynge to them. The clothyng of the Auſtins apes is not now a dayes alyke in all places, but oft chaunged after the vſe of the contryes, ſo that. x. ſortes of Auſtinians are in one cote. I wyll not ſpeake here of theyr fayth, ſeynge that euery one hath a ſundery fayth, and yet wolde be calſed an Auſtinian: they make, breake, make agayne, and mende, and that ſuch thynges as Auſtine wolde not once haue dreamed, yee whan he ryſeth, wyll not knowe. Some weare all white, ſome black cotes, ſome white rochets and a ſcapulary wyth a black cole, ſome otherwyſe. Ther be rekened to be xxiiii. kyndes of orders only vnder ſente Auſtins rule, wherof euery one hath his patrō,

in folowyng whoſe lyfe they thynk to pleaſe God: yet is ther none that wyl folow Chriſt
               
               
                  xxii. Ciſtercienſis order.
                  THe yeare. M. xcviii. after Chriſtes byrth begā in ye wylderneſſe of But gony thys order by Roberte the ſpirituall abbot and father of the ſame, whyche was afterwarde confirmed by Urbane the ii. B. of Rome, & brought vnder S. Benets rule. By reaſon of many fraūchiſes and priueleges vnder the ſhadowe of holyneſſe it is come ſo farre, that theyr abbots ſomtyme and heremites and dwellers in wylderneſſe are now Lordes and peres of realmes, yee drowned in the worlde and hys pompt, rydynge with ſo many horſes, that one wolde thynke ther came a worlde. Thys is a ſtraunge flyenge and deſpyſynge of ye world Some wolde thynke it were a mockage of heremiticall lyuynge. Whan I wryte of theyr order and begynnynge, and beholde them now, yf in my mynde I conpare them together that were than and be now, my thynke I wryte of Chriſte and take the deuell for an enſample, and make hym a brother of Chriſtes couente. For as the deuell

is Chriſtes ape and counterfayter, whyche foloweth hym euen vpon the heles, and wyl do all thynges after hym, euen ſo do the apes lykewyſe. The fyrſt founders though I ame not perfecte of theyr ſprete, with what intent they beganne, and ſeynge one maye well ſuppoſe that they were not dryuē therto by a good ſprete: (for theyr intent is to much geuen to ſectes, theyr owne eaſe and profite, yee and to hereſy alſo) yet haue they a better appearaunce and ſhyne of holynes. To go to farre in Gods iudgmentes is not permytted vnto man, yet maye euery tre be iudged by hys frutes. He that wyl not be reproued of hys wycked lyuynge, let hym endeuoure to redreſſe it. Whan thys. order of ſaynt Benet decreaſed, and decayed in vertue, than went Robert wyth. xxi. monkes as deſpyſers of earthly & louers of heauēly thynges into a wylderneſſe called Ciſtercium, and there iuſtitute them a newe order called Ciſtercienſiſh order. After warde by counſell and procuracion of ſome dukes, byſhops and legates, beganne they to chaunge the Heremytage into an abbaye, whych in ſhorte ſpace came to greate lorde ſhyppes. Steuen the whych was abbot

after Robert, was ſory that ſo few came to hys religion, forcauſe of the ſtraytneſſe of ye order. In the meane ſeaſon came Bernarde with hys bethren and made ye religion more eaſyer. They weare reed ſhues and whyte rochets on a black cote, all ſhoren, ſaue a lytell cirkle.
               
               
                  xxiii. Bernardes order.
                  ANno. M. c. xx. dyd Bernarde ſhyne, a Burgonion, the ſonne of a knyght of great lynage, the abot of Clareuall or Clereuale, wherof he was abbot. xxxvi. year In hys tyme he buylded. c. lx. Cloyſters.
                  Some ſaye that he hath chaūged ſomthynge in the Ciſtercienſyſh order, chefely in the garment, for they weare now black clokes vpon whyte cotes. Neuertheleſſe to declare theyr foundacion and originall they weare the Ciſterciēſiſh rochets vpō hygh and principall feaſte dayes. Theyr rule accordeth very well wt S. Benets. S. Bernard wrote many bokes which teſtifye of hys learnyng and holyneſſe. Thys order hath many cloyſters & ſwalowed vp innumerable goodes of the worlde, whoſe abbottes many one are Lordes, rydynge wyth many horſes, and ſay

maſſe wyth myter, croyſer and cope lyke a byſhop. They ſerue God many wayes, only they preach not lyke contemplatife fathers, orels very lytle, perchaunce it becommeth them not, or els theyr order wyll not ſuffre them to vſe ſo ſleght an office, or (yt I myght ſooneſt be perſuaded) they can it not & therfore commit it vnto vplandyſh preſtes, ſo yt I thynke one coulde not furnyſh one Bernarde out of ſo many cloyſters, though he bet them euen to a plate.
               
               
                  xxiiii. Templer order, theyr begynnynge and decaye.
                  AFter Chriſtes byrth the yeare. M. c. x. in the tyme of Gelaſius the. ii. begāne thys order at Ieruſalem and cōtinued nearehāde. cc. yeare, whoſe begynnyng was thus: After that Gotfraye duke of Lorayne conquered Ieruſalem, certayne knyghtes perceauyng that ſuch pylgroms as came to them of theyr denociō and were robbed and murthered by the waye, they made a bonde amonge them to ſerue God in chyualry. At the begynnynge they were but few & gaue themſelues to wylfull pouerte, and theyr chefe-mayſter was a keper of the tempell

bore, wherof they were called Templar lordes. They dwelte together, not farre frome the ſepulchre, lodgynge the pylgroms, kepynge them from myſchefe, and ſhewynge them much kyndneſſe, bryngynge thē from one holy cytie vnto an other. Theyr orders badge was a whyte cloke with are ede croſſe S. Barnarde made them a rule. They became very rych in few dayes by gyftes of greate men and pylgroms, wherfore pleaſure toke roote alſo amonge them, ſo that they came to decaye of vertue into al vyce, & were all deſtroyed vpōone daye in yt tyme of Clemēt the. v. B. of Rome, āno. M. ccc. x. becauſe that (as ſome ſaye) they were fallen to the Saracens, ſcornynge Chriſt with the infideles, for whoſe cauſe (notwithſtādyng) they were heyred to warre. Wherfore they were in one daye deſtroyed in fraūce (where they had theyr beynge) of Philip kynge of Fraunce and other lordes, by the conſent of the B. of Rome, wyth theyr graundmayſter both twnes, caſtels, treaſures, poſſeſſions & other goods all burnt & murthered, as was done alſo before in Aſia and Syrya. Theſe foreſayde Lordes and the kynge by the B. of Romes permiſſion dyd make an apoyntment

and bonde by a bull (and no man ſhuld diſcloſe thys priuite vnder damnaciō of hys ſoule) how that on one daye they ſhulde fall vpon them, and depryue them all of theyr lyues, and to wende the goods to other ſpituall vſes, hyrynge wyth them other defenders of the fayth. Thus peryſhed thys order all in one daye, and theyr goodes were partly turned to the knyghtes of Rhodis, which than beganne there, hauynge there theyr graundmayſter, partly was it beſtowed to the ſpiritualty in Englande. Some ſaye that thys rootynge out of them was more becauſe of enuy of theyr proſperite and royalte, than of gyltyneſſe. For as theyr graūdmayſter Iames Burgonion was burnte at Paris wyth many of hys brethren, he toke hys death theron that he was neuer gylty of the accuſacions layde to hym. But yf religions now ſhulde be deſtroyed for theyr ryches, or els becauſe they are gone from the fayth: I feare me ther ſhulde fewe cloyſters remayne ſtandynge for theyr lyuynge and hypocriſyes ſake.
               
               
                  xxv. The order of Temple knyghtes.
                  
                     
AFter the byrth of Chriſt. M. xx. began the order of temple knyghtes at Ieruſalem, called S. Ihons. Theſe lyue vnder S. Auſtines rule, and haue black lay clothynge, yet very lyke the rule, and there vpon a whyte croſſe on theyr breſt, they are inſtitute to fyght bodely agaynſt the infideles. Theyr chefe beynge is in the Ile Rhodis, where they be vnder a graundmayſter with all theyr houſes and churches. And though they be for the mooſt parte ſeculare, yet enioye they the fredomes of the church, fulfyllynge dayly theyr taxe of Pater noſters.
               
               
                  xxvi. Premonſtratenſis order.
                  AFter Chriſtes byrth. M. c. xix. beganne thys order in the byſhopryke of Laudunēſis. vnder S. Benets rule by one borne at Colē called Notohobertus or as ſome ſaye Norbertus. Of thys order can I fynde nothynge perticularly, but that they be clothed in whyte from toppe to toe to declare theyr vnſtayned virginite.
               
               
                  xxvii. Humiliatorum or the ſubmitted order.
                  
                     
AFter Chriſtes byrth the yeare. M. c. lxvi dyd thys order begynne, (Yet do ſome ſaye that it was vnder Henry the vi. anno. M. c. lxxxix) in the tyme of Alexander the. iii. The fyrſt ſaye that what tyme the Emperoure Frederike Barbaroſſa had troubled Italy, and ſpecially Gallia Ciſalpina, and had bannyſhed many, both men & women and chylderen into Dutchland: as they now cōtinued there a ſeaſon and were fylled wyth myſery, they clothed themſelues all in whyte, came to the emperoure, prayenge hym forgeueneſſe, and to let them go home agayne, the which was graunted and permitted vnto them. Now whan they were come home, they kepte thēſelues together, and promyſed to go in lowly clothynge, the men and wemen to be ſeparated ech from other, & to laboure euery one what he was ſkylde in, and had a commune purſe (Theyr heade called they a Proueſt, they kepte the rule of S. Benet. Thys order increaſed ſo both in goods and perſons, that it was confirmed and endued with many priuileges of the B. of Rome.
               
               
                  xxviii. The Sambonites or good brethren order.
                  
                     
THe yeare. M. c. xcix. dyd Ihon ſurnamed the goode a reſtorer of S. Auſtins order floryſh, which had ſuch a pryck of the fleſh, that he feared he ſholde haue ben fayne to forſake religion, and to haue turned agayne to the world: wherfore he toke ſharpe thornes, which he put vnder the nayles of hys handes, and put hys handes oft vnder a ſtone to preaſſe them, and chaſtyſed hym ſelfe ſo harde that he was oftymes beſyde hys wyt. He laye. iii. dayes ſpechleſſe, ſo that he knew nothyng of hymſelfe. At the which tyme a woyce ſhuld haue ſayde to hym: Ihon, thou haſt conquered, thou ſhalt nomore be aſſaulted of thy fleſh. Thus was he at the fyrſt a good mōke. After thys he rayſed vp the decayed order of ſaynte Auſtine, chaungynge lytell in garment, but makynge the order ſtrayghter. Upon thys came many to ſe hys holyneſſe, which were ſteared to forſake the world, to renounce all, and to accōpany themſelues to hym, yeldynge themſelues to the lyfe of S. Auſtine. They buylded many cloyſters, and ſurnamed themſelues Sambonites or the good brethren: for he was called ye good Ihon or Iohannes bonus. Such is the begynnynge

(good reader) of the orders that ſwalow vp landes and people, and deuoure wedowes houſes. It is a commune prouerbe: A yonge angell, and olde deuell.
               
               
                  xxix. The croſſebearers or Croſſed freres order.
                  IN the yeare of oure Lorde. M. cc. xv beganne thys order in the. lxviii. councell of Rome, it was begonne longe to fore, but ſometyme lefte agayne: at the laſte it was rayſed agayne and cōfirmed by Innocentius the. iii. in the. xviii. year of hys byſhopryke of Rome. The begynnyng was of thys maner: Amonge thē of Albania roſe a peſtilent hereſy, which cauſed a great diſſenſion amonge them of Rome. Wherfor ye B. of Rome ſente many agaynſt them marked wyth the croſſe, whiche were all ſlayne. Theſe laudable & prayſe worthy ſouldyers dyd he halow therfore, and rayſed the order agayne wyth geuynge of many fredoms & preuileges. Unto thys order dyd Innocētius ye. iiii. B. of Ro. geue a rule, cōmaundynge yt ye ſpirituall of thys order ſhuld alway weare a croſſe in theyr hondes. Quiriacus a B. & martyr in yt tyme of Helena the mother of

Conſtātine ye greate Emperoure is ſayd to be the founder of it: but it was come to ſuch decaye, that it was almooſt gone to nought. The yeare of oure Lorde. M. cc. xxii. ſhulde it haue ben refourmed: theyr clothynge is a black cope with a croſſe theron, the bygneſſe of an hande.
               
               
                  xxx. Carmelites or whyte freres order.
                  ANno. M. cc. xviii. dyd Alberte a patriarke of Ieruſalem rayſe agayne thys order in Syria by mount Carmelus geuynge of hys owne power therto many fraunchiſes and priuileges, and ordened a rule for it. Now whan thys order encreaſed and multiplyed thorowout the worlde it ſuffered much trouble. Wherfore Honorius ye iii. B. of Rome thought that thys order ſuffered vnworthely ſo much, by reaſon of hys holyneſſe (which yet was not greate) for the which cauſe he tranſlated thys order vnder yt tytle of oure lady of mount Carmelus, chaū
                     gynge ſomwhat theyr rayment. Some ſaye that thys holy order in hys fyrſt clothynge (that they ſayde was of Helias or Heliſeus) was greatly accepte to the Soldane, and

endued with many almeſſes of hym: but after they thaunged theyr rayment, he droue them out of hys kyngdome, ſo that of neceſſite they came in Europa. There haue they fallen to beggynge, ſo that in ſhort ſpace they grue greatly. They boaſt Cirill, Angelus, and Albertus to be theyr ſayntes. Lo good reader thys is the reaſonable grounde of theyr order, which was ſo good, that it pleaſed alſo the Heythen, whiche ſhame and rebule Math. x. Ioh. xv. xvi. they wyll in a maner boaſt where as the true Chriſten be alwaye perſued of the euell Chriſten: yee the properte, nature, and chaunce of the goſpell is, that it bryngeth hatred of the worlde wt it. Marke farther: thys holy cole brought them a croſſe and trouble, who euer herde ſuch lyke? Thys order is to begge, to take of euery man, and to do nothynge agayne for it. Theyr clothynge was wonte to be a whyte and blacke checkered cope, but now a black cote gyrded about thē, & a whyte cloke vpon yt. Theyr order is to drynke wyne and to begyle the people wyth much bablynge Math. xxiii.
               
               
                  xxxi. Preacher order or black freres of S. Dominike.
                  
                     
ANno. M. cc. xx. was Dominike Calaguritane a Spayniarde the begynner, leader and father of thys order: which yet beynge in hys mothers wombe was declared vnto her what he ſhulde be, on thys maner: She dreamed, that ſhe had a wolf in hyr wombe, which had a burnynge torch in hys mouth, the which the preachers do greatly auaunce and expoūde it to theyr orders glory, as they well can. Neuertheleſſe it is well knowen what beaſt a wolfe is, he is no ſhepe which ſignifyeth Chriſt and hys Ioh. x As for the torche, I take it for hys wolfyſh learnynge, wherewyth he hath ſet all the worlde on fyre and begyled, or els made thē ſhepe, that he myght deuoure them: for fyre and a torche do not alwaye ſygnifye ye holy gooſt. Now lytell doth it agre than with holyneſſe & the goſpell that theyr dreame doth ſygnifye, that ſhe bare a wolfe, where as Chriſten men are ſhepe, & in no place called wolues, nor yet is the wolfe ony where takē for goodnes? Thys Dominike was fyrſt a chanon regular, but wt great feruētneſſe of ſprete (as is well to be thought) foūded he thys order, & toke the cole, ye clothyng of hys order vpō hym, for he douted how to be haue

hymſelfe in the hereſy yt was ſpronge vp of the virgine Mary, yt he myght roote it out. As he now vanquiſſed & ouercame yt gayuſayers of the B. of Rome at Toloſſa, he optayned the cōfirmacion of hys order of Honorius the. iii. B. of Rome, the which afterwarde ouerwhelmed al contryes. Thys ſhynynge man dyed at Bononia, & was canoniſate of Gregory the. ix. Theyr order is to begge as the Carmelytes, and to forſake lytle by wylfull pouerte, wherby they take much and waxe rych. Theyr cote is whyte, theyr cope black. Theyr rule is S. Dominks and not Chriſtes, accordynge to the name. Marke good reader what ſtrawy & papiry foundaciō the orders haue, yee founded vpō a froſen yſe, ſo that whan the Sōne of truth doth ſhyne, than melteth theyr foundacion, & theyr buyldynge decayeth. What a lyke tale is thys yt an author of ſectes ſhal deſtroye ſectes and hereſyes? Yf one heretike maye driue out an other, thā were theſe hereticall dyuels alwayes the fearceſt. But Chriſt ſayeth. mat. xii. yt one deuel can not dryue out another, yet are they cōfirmed to roote out all hereſy, namely that is agaynſt the Popiſhneſſe. Afterwarde in a generall chap- 
                        〈…〉
                      Bononia it was concluded to geue

ouer all vnmoueable goodes and rētes that they myght ſo themore frelyer wayte vpon ye office of preachynge, but now they coulde be content to haue more than they haue in poſſeſſion. Innocentius B. of Rome ſaw in a dreame the church louſed and diſcharged vpon Dominikes ſhulder, wherfore he dyd confirme the order.
               
               
                  xxxii. The barefooted order.
                  ANno. M. cc. xxii. approbated Honorius the. iii. B. of Rome a good frerely father thys order alſo. The whiche was founded of one Frauncis an Italian which was a marchaunte and a worldly man vntyl he was. xxv. yeares of age. After that caſt he in his mynde to folow Chriſt, deſpyſyng all worldly thynges. And whan he was ſhod & gyrded wyth a duble gyrdell, he remēbred the wordes Chriſt: (Poſſeſſe nother two cotes, nor ſhues, nor yet a ſtaffe. &c. and: whoſo forſaketh not all thynges can not be my diſciple,) he caſte all thynges from hym euen alſo the gyrdell, and gyrded a coard aboute hym, and beganne contynently thys order. In the whyche he was ſo ſtrayght to hymſelfe, that to chaſtiſe hys

fleſhe in wynter ſeaſon he wolde couer his body with yſe and ſnowe. He called pouerte alwaye his lady, and loued rather to heare hymſelfe reuyled then prayſed, he kepte nothynge ouer nyght. His harte deſyred martyrdome, where vpon he wente in to Siria to the Soldane, which receaued hym honourably: wherby it is to be thought that ſurely he tolde hym not the trueth. For trueth is ſeldom welcome in courtes, and in ye world. I wyll here paſſe ouer the fable how Chriſt and his ſayntes dyd marke hym with the. v. woundes. As he had now thus chaſtiſed his fleſh. xviii. yeare, he dyed at Aſſis, and was canoniſed of Gregory the. ix. Thus haſt thou (good reader) deſcribed vnto the the goſpellyſh ape, the pyler, ſtaye and foundacyon of the barefooted order. Let it be ſo that he had a good meanynge, where be then his folowers? I maye ſe perchaūce his cole or garment, but his lyfe I ſe nowhere. I reade not that he nor his wente aboute wyth a boxe, ſayenge goſpell from houſe to houſe, and in euery gam were one played, nor yet that he ware cutte ſhues or patius.
               
               
                  xxxiii. The minorites of ſ. Fraūces.
                  
                     
                        〈2… pages missing〉
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  fyre and ſwearde.
               
               
                  xxxvi. The Celeſtines order.
                  THe yeare of our Lorde. M. cc. xcvli. was there a good B. of Rome, Celeſtine by name, which wyllyngly gaue ouer the byſhopryke, and wolde haue returned agayne to his hermitage (wherin he dwelty quyetly before his popyſhneſſe) had he not ben letted by Boniface the. viii. B. of Rome. Some apes counterfayted this holy B. takynge vpon thē an order vnder ye rule of S. Benet in a wylderneſſe, and called thē ſelues Celeſtines after Celeſtine. Theyr orders garment, cloke, cole, and kappe ſhuld haue ben blew, and Celeſtine ſhulde haue begōne it, but his ſtorye denyenge it accordeth not here with.
               
               
                  xxxvii. The Dutch order, or order of the lordes of Pruſſe.
                  ANno. M. cc. xvi. or as theyr rule ſpecyfyeth. M. c. xc. whan the Emperoure Frederike the. ii. hooſte laye in Pruſe to reſyſte the aſſaultes of the infideles, and that ther roſe a great diſeaſe amonge ye ſoul dyers, ſome of ye goodharted ſouldyers made

a cotage or tente of a ſhippe, wherin they caryed the diſeaſed, and with great tēdaūce ſerued them there, gatherynge an almeſſe amonge the hooſte, and whan they wente to felde, they were alwaye the fyrſt lyke feruēt ſouldyers: ſo that prynces and great mē had a great mynde to them. Amonge theſe were ſome rych and honeſt cyteſens of Lubeke & Breme which vndertoke by the Emperour to make a brotherheade amonge them, by ye which dede they dyd alure many to them.
                  They promyſed alſo yf the lande of Pruſe ſhulde be geuen them, they wolde lyke brethren and men of chyualrye, conquere it agayne. This was graunted them, geuē and regiſtred. Duke Conrade alſo of Moſauia that wrote hymſelfe lorde of it, gaue them ouer his tytle vnder a golden bull. Thus rayſed they a brotherhead amonge them to warre vpon lyke aduenture, ether to lyſe or to wynne, come who wolde, & procured in ye meane tyme a confirmacyon of this theyr brotherheade of the B. of Rome, which they gat and obtayned. Than proclamed they theyr order, and all ſuch as were wrytten in to it had a pece of ye ſayle of yt ſhippe where vnder they tended the ſycke and diſeaſed.

And vnderone they made a ſtatute, ye whoſo wolde ioyne hymſelfe to them, ſhulde weare a whyte lynnen cloth, caſt aboute hym, lyke the Egipcyans do, cloſed aboute the necke, leſt it fell from them, & a blacke croſſe theron. This brotherheade was called, ye Dutch order of ye hoſpitall of S. Mary at Ieruſalē: for they toke none therin, but Dutchmem. As for yt tytle knyghtes or lordes, yt they gat longe after. Now as they had cōquered & taken in Pruſe it was graūted them to go further, & what lande they toke in, yt to be theyr poſſeſſiō & heretage. Upon this they toke in euery one yt came to thē, ſaue thoſe maryed men yt had chyldren, yf he were maryed, and had no chyldrē, he myght be receaued welynough: For it was ordyned yt after his death al yt he had, ſhuld come to the orders be hofe Maryed men were marked wyth an halfe croſſe only, but ye other with a whole croſſe. They refuſed no kynd, for they toke alſo we men in to theyr order, yee & preſtes. This chyualry & knyghthode agaynſt ye Heythen, & theyr buſy cure to ye diſeaſed was a great ſhyne of goodneſſe: but whā they gat a lytel reſte, they made out a procture, wt a ſleght copper croſſe, & vnknowē relikes, to gather

in dyuerſe places, to the mayntenaunce of theyr order & hoſpitall. They obtayned alſo great pardon for them yt relyued thē wt theyr goodes, bodyes, ayde & counſell: ſo that they encreaſed greatly, foūded euery where hoſpitals, wherfore euery mā was redy to geue & to mantayne thē. Such alſo as were ſlayn in ye aforeſayd battayls, were holdē for martyrs, whervpō they cauſed many gētlemen, & ſouldyours to warre for thē at theyr owne coſtes, & to conquere landes & people. But what they gat wt conqueryng & lymytynge, yt drue they all to theyr owne, payeng theyr ayders wt thankes, & bought wt the goodes yt they gathered both thoſe waies, tributes tolles and one pece of lande after another: & as they increaſed in goodes and poſſeſſiōs, ſo decreaſſed theyr cure to the poore. At the fyrſt they led a ſtrayght lyfe with the chaſtifynge of theyr bodyes, but ſpecyally wt tendynge of the ſycke. Whan Dutch gentlemē came to vyſite them, they coulde ſcant finde an empty corner to put of theyr harneſſe, it was ſo full of ſycke folke, and of the brethren that prayed, whereof ſome ſcourged them ſelues naked wyth roddes, which foolyſhneſſe at that tyme had a great

ſhyne of holyneſſe. With this conuerſacyō and ſhyne of holyneſſe, as warrynge & beggynge obtayned they in ſhort ſpace. iii. lordſhippes, namely one in Dutchlande, (that they gat with beggynge) Pruſſe, and Eyflande or Lyfelande. Marke now the chaungynge and alteracyon: At the begynnynge was the order fre for euery man, and an hoſpitall of the poore, but now hath the gentlery bytten out the poore: the whole & ſoūde them that were ſycke and diſeaſed: the rych the poore, ſo that it is nomore called the hoſpitall of the poore, but of the gentlemen, & are called nomore brethren, but lordes and knyghtes of the Dutch order. Moreouer, it is not now fre for euery mā, for euē gentlemen themſelues muſt make labour & frendes to obtayne it. Thus well remayneth euery foundacyon in this wycked worlde, ſo that I counſell hym that wyl do good to his neghboure, to do it by his lyfe dayes, and let foundacyon be foundacion. Theyr heade now is called Comither.
                  The order of S. Ihōs or knyghtes of Rhodis hath lyke begynnynge, myddell and ende, wherin alſo are now only lordes, coū
                     ties, & other gentlemē: Unto whō the order

is not ſhewed before they be entred therin.
               
               
                  xxxviii. The order of Maryes. ſeruauntes.
                  ANno. M. ccc. iiii. was one Philippe a very ſpirituall and deuoute man the founder of the order of the ſeruaūtes of oure lady. He rayſed thys order vnder the rule of S. Auſtine, wyth euen lyke wordes and faſhion, makynge difference of it wyth certayne ordinaunces of the freres of oure lady: whiche order afterwarde was confirmed by thre B. of Rome, namely: Bene: ye xi. Boniface the. viii. and Urbane the. vi. & is rekened amonge the beggynge orders. At the laſt it was wholy ſanctifyed and halowed of Innocencius the. viii. and delyuered of the euell wyl that ſome cloyſters dyd owe them. Theyr garmentes are lyke oure ladyes brethren. Thys order begāne vnder Benet the. xi. B. of Rome, & ſhortly increaſed greatly in goodes, perſones & cloyſters, decreaſed only in ſprete.
               
               
                  xxxix. The order of ſaynt Ihons, or the Lordes of Rhodis.
                  
                     
ANno. M. ccc. viii. what tyme Ieruſalē the cytie was loſt, and ye Templars were deſtroyed, by reaſon they were fallen to a great Idolatry, certayne knyghtes with a great company of gentlemē and other vale aūt men made a compacte in the name and honoure of S. Ihō Baptiſt (wherfore they were called Iohannites.) Theſe toke vpon them to recouer agayne the loſte Ile of Rhodis yf it were geuē them to poſſeſſe it frely, orels wolde leſe theyr lyues. This beynge graunted to them they toke theyr iourney the therward, which was proſperous vnto thē, ſo that they recouered it, & droue out the Turkes of it, repayred again the deſtroyed cytie of Rhodis, and mended theyr nauye: ſo that not only they kepte the Ile for farther aſſaultes of the Heythen, but alſo ayded greatly the Chriſtē that were in Cipres & other Iles aboute them. For the which ayde and ſuccurre, the goodes of the Templars in the eaſt were geuen them by the B. of Rome and other Chriſtē princes. And euen ſo was the Ile Rhodis with all ye lorſhippe therof geuen vnto this order of S. Ihons. Afterward of theyr owne deuocyon & good mynde deſyred they ye rule of S. Auſtyne,

wherby they beynge endued of the B. of Rome wyth many priuileges & fraunchiſes, optayned many good dedes. The Soldane or Turkyſh Emperoure hath ſo longe warred vpon this Ile, tyll at the laſt Anno M. ccccc. xxii. he hath taken it in Neuertheleſſe he hath ofter had euel fortune before it then good. It is ſayd that ther was a caſtell in this Ile, called S. Peter, wherin ye Chriſten dyd oft flye the power of the Turkes, wherin are exceadynge curſte dogges that knewe Chriſten men by ſmellyng and were louynge to thē: but agaynſt ye turkes wolde they fal fearſly, bytyng & tearyng thē, ſo that they haue ben oft hurte of thē. Theyr head is called ye Graūdmayſter. Theyr clothyng is black, & a whyt croſſe theron. They wear alſo a ſwearde, in tokē of theyr knyghthode.
               
               
                  xl. The order of the ſouldyers of Ieſus Chriſt.
                  ANno. M. ccc. xxiii. dyd Ihō ye. xxii. rayſe this new order of Ieſus Chriſt, ſo that the brethren of this order ſhulde vſe chyualrye agaynſte the Saracens in Portingale. The chefe heade of the order is in the cytie Mirinū in the Syluēſiſh byſhopryke,

where theyr principall houſynge and caſtell is. Unto theſe ſouldyers by the conſent of ye kynge of Portyngale, be ye goodes geuē whych ye Tēplars had in Portingale, where wyth they ſhulde be ſuſtayned. The heade of the order is the abbot of the byſhoprycke Alchaſia, whiche hath power to admitte and depoſe ſuch ſouldyers. Of theyr clothyng haue I no where red. Theyr rule is to warre and to be wylde.
               
               
                  xli. The order of Inieſuates.
                  THe yeare after Chriſtes byrth. M. ccc lxv. dyd thys order begynne vnder Urbane the. v. B. of Rome, in the cytie of Hetruria called Sena. The founders of it beganne in houſes, in worldly rayment after the maner of ſpirituall men, ſeruynge God in the ſweate of theyr browes & theyr handycrafte, in greate loue & charite one wt an other. As now the foreſayd B. of Rome called thē to hym, he had a great pleaſure in theyr lyuynge, & gaue them a whyte cote to theyr orders habite, & a ſcornful cole to wear thervpō, & ordyned thē to a patrō or defēder a v
                        
                           
                        
                        er
                     tuous & holy mā (but ye B. of Ro. frende) i ſteade of a proueſt or abbot. The ſame (accordynge

as he was cōmaunded) gaue thē a graye garmēt to weare vpon ye whyte cote, & to go vnſhod. They were endued wt many pardons and priueleges, ſo that they greatly increaſed in few dayes in many cyties of Italy, beynge well accepted and counted for true enſamples & folowers of the Apoſtles. Theyr dayly ſeruice is a certayne taxe of Pai noſters. They haue no orders, yet are ther many learned men amonge them in Italy now a dayes. The begynnynge of the order was good, ſeyng that they ſerued god wyllyngly and frely wythout ony rule: but after that the Antichriſt of Rome had made an order for them alſo, than was the fredom of theyr ſprete bounde to a rule & clothynge & than had thys order alſo done before God. For Chriſt wyll be alone, he wyll nother be bounde hymſelfe, nor hys true diſciples nother, yee where he is truely receaued, there maketh he all fre: but ye Antichriſt of Rome wyll ſet hys ſeate alſo in mens conſciences, wherfore Chriſte and hys worde be fayne to geue place to hys wycked tyranny.
               
               
                  xlii. The Scopetines or S. Saluators order.
                  
                     
THe yeare after Chriſtes byrth. M. ccc. lxvii. dyd thys order be gynne by certayne ſpirituall fathers of ſaynt Auſtins order in the partyes of Sene in Italy: The which Gregory ye xi. B. of Rome dyd approbate, endue with priueleges, and aſſcribed them amonge the chanōs regular or quere preſtes. And for a memoriall of theyr fyrſt foundacion and ſpirituall eſtate, they weare a white garment wyth a whyte ſcapulary vpon a whyte rochet. They lyue of theyr rentes, and reuenues. They preach not, yet heare they confeſſions. Hetherto haue they ben in eſtimacion & greatly ſet by.
               
               
                  xliii. The order of S. Brigitte or Bryde.
                  ANno. M. ccc. lxx. ſhuld Baſilius haue ben founder and inſtituter of thys order in Grekelande, ſo that both men and wemen ſhulde lyue together ſpiritually vnder one rule. But becauſe ſome ouerthwarte men laughed thys ſpiritually to ſkorn the order was diſcharged, & afterwarde rayſed agayne be Brigitte, & inſtitute that they myght well haue theyr habitacion both

vnder one roofe, but mē & wemen ſeparated ech frō other, ſo yt the one myght not come to ye other, ſaue only whā nede requyred to miniſter the ſacramētes. The church ſhuld be cōmune to both, neuertheleſſe ye ſyſters ſhulde be cloſed aboue in a cloſet, & the brethren to be beneth, waytyng vpō the diuine ſeruice: & yt theſe ſhulde tende the altare, & they the quere. The Abbeſſe ſhulde haue the primacy on S. Brydes behalfe, & ye brethren to be vnder her: ſo yt ſhe ſhuld prouyde both man & womā meate, drynke & clothyng Amōge the brethrē ſhulde one be called Prior, warden or Cōfeſſoure, and be aboue ye other. The wemen ſhulde be cōſecreated and brought in by the byſhop. Theyr clothing is a graye cote wt a graye cloke therō, & a reed croſſe in a whyte cyrkle. They may weare no lynnen, after the tenoure of theyr rule.
                  Theyr rule is S. Auſtins, wt it that S. Bryde put therto, which God (yf it be at the leeſt waye true) dyd declare vnto her and confirmed by the B. of Rome. In Sweden and Germany are theyr cloyſters for the mooſt parte. Theſe brethren heare confeſſions and preache at hyghe feaſtes. They haue alſo laye brethren, as in many places

nto. Becauſe of foren occupyeng hath euery cloyſter hys certayne brethren & ſyſters.
               
               
                  xliiii. The whyte ſpretes or Beghart order.
                  ANno. M. ccc. xcix. or as ſome ſaye. lxxxix. roſe the Beghartes in Italy after a ſtraunge ryſyng of the people ſo that euery man wythyn the Alpes or mountaynes of Italy clothed hymſelfe in a whyte lynnen garmente, hauyng a cole lyke a freres abyte, and cōmynge downe euen to the toes: amonge whom were many noble men and women, princes, preſtes, mōkes & all kynde of ſpirituall men, which alſo clothed them of thys faſhion. Theſe all wente proceſſion wyſe, euer two and two together vnto the nexte cytie, and cryed with a mery noyſe for peace and mercy. They ſange and prayſed God. Noman wēt aboute to begyle ony mā by craftynes at thys tyme, no ſtraū
                     ger was oppreſſed, all hatred ceaſſed, and alenuy turned to peace: Thys cōtinued ye ſpace of. iii. monethes. Amōge theſe were ther. iii. M. of ye citie Luca, they wente to Florēce, ye men went before euer two & two, theyr wynes folowed them lykewyſe in the preceſſiō
                     
wyth theyr faces couered. The croſſe that wente before thē is yet at Luca, and is kept in great reuerence, to the which is a pylgrimage, and ymages of gold, ſyluer and waxe are offred vnto it. The occaſiō of thys was a preſt whiche was ſo paſſynge in viſage, wordes & behaueour, that of many he was taken for a ſaynte. Bonifact the. ix. B. of Rome cauſed hym to be taken at Uiterbiū
                     to brynge hym vp to hym, to burne hym lyke an heretike, and to caſte hys aſhes in the ayer: & thus vanyſhed thys ſwarme agayne alone by proceſſe of tyme.
               
               
                  lxv. The order of whyte monkes of mount olyuete.
                  ANno. M. cccc. vi. in the tyme of the ſciſma or diuiſion betwene Benet ye. xiii. and Gregory the xii. byſhops of Rome beganne thys order aboute Sena in Italy, by certayne cyteſens of the ſame. For many cyteſins fearynge God, as they ſaw thys diſcorde and diuiſion betwene theſe. ii. popesor B. of Rome, and other vnhappyneſſe in the worlde, gat a great grudge and myſpleaſure at it, drue together wyth one accorde, and a lytell frō the cytie vpon a hyll called olyue

hyll, or mount olyuete, here beganne they to diſcharge them ſelues of worldly care, and to ſerue God lyke contemplatife heremites By the enſample of thys were many noble and gentlemen with other ſteared and inflamed to ioyne themſelfes to them, & lyued in heauenly contemplacion. Now whan theyr good noyſe came to the B. of Romes eares, and theyr feruent contemplacion in godly thynges, he cauſed certayne of ye chefe of them to come to hym, to equire of theyr lyfe, and conuerſacion: wherin he had an exceadynge greate pleaſure, & confirmed thē wyth many priuileges. Theyr clothynge is all whyte. Theyr rule is S. Benets, wyth ſome addicions to it.
               
               
                  xlvi. S. Georges order.
                  ANno. M. cccc. vii. roſe alſo a new regular order of S. George of Alga, by Uenice, that was begonne by the ſpirituall man ye Patriarke Laurence Iuſtiniane of an increable ſtraytneſſe of lyfe. Thys gatheringe dyd Gregory the. xii. ſtablyſh vnder S. Peters rule & ye firſt order, wt certayn ordinaūces ioyned therto. Eugenius ye. iiii & many other notable byſhops and cardinals

were of thys order.
               
               
                  xlvii. S. Peters order or ye Apoſtles order.
                  THe yeare of oure Lorde. M. cccc. ix. dyd the order that was iuſtitute firſt of the Apoſtles, & afterwarde of S. Auſtine by the towne Hippo in Aphrica wō
                     derouſly increaſe, and decaye agayne. Afterwarde in the. xxii. yeare of Henry the. iiii ye Emperoure of Rome, (accordynge as many cronicles do ſpecifye) was it ſet vp and rayſed agayn by Iuo the byſhop of Burgony. Thys order, (namely to lyue after ye perfection of the goſpell) is oft decayed and rayſed agayne. Anno. M. ccc. xlii. in the tyme of Benet the. xii. B. of Rome ſhuld thys order haue ben rayſed, cōfirmed, & brought agayn to hys olde flore. Some cal it the regular or the obſeruaunt order of S. Auſtine. Thys order (yf it be els of the Apoſtles iuſtituciō) was fyrſt rayſed to God wtout ony rule or cōpulſion of theyr harte, beyng bound to no thynge, cleued to nothynge els but to God, poſſeſſynge al thinges as though they had & poſſeſſed them not, & lyued wtout ony differēce of meates & clothyng, beynge fre frō all pmyſe ſaue only baptyme: but after yt s. Auſtine cloſed it in a rule, & the B. of Ro. haue

patched many conſtitucyons and cōmaundementes to it, diſanullynge the preceptes of God, as namely: wyth choyſe & differēce of meates, clothynges, dayes, promyſes, perſons, places, tymes and with excludynge of mariage as an vnclenly thinge, is the order become the deuels order, and he abbot of it. The Apoſtles order ought to be commune vnto all Chriſten men, for they taught them alwaye in generall, and made no difference of Chriſten men. All Chriſtians haue one commune doctrine, law, baptyme, lorde, goſpell and Chriſt, but they haue ſo longe botched and cobled to it, tyl it is become the deuels. It is ſo often chaunged, (the whiche I can not now all ſhewe,) vntyll at the laſte they be clene diſpenſed from Chriſt, and his goſpel, to a Iewyſh ſpiritualty, and an order of theyr owne inuencyon.
               
               
                  xlviii. The order of the heremites of S. Ierome.
                  ANno. M. cccc. xii. is ther ryſen an here meticall order of S. Ierō by Lupus of Hiſpalū a prouīcial of the order, whoſt rule is drawen out of the wrytynges of S. Ieroine: the which rule beynge ſent to Martine the. v. B. of Rome to confirme, pleaſed

hym very wel. So that theſe monkes, which afore had lyued after S. Auſtins rule, dyd now take S. Ierome for a gyde and maſter. They haue graye clokes, and ſaye ſeruyce after the Romane vſe. We haue ſpoken of them afore alſo.
               
               
                  xlix. Camaldulenſis order.
                  ANno. ix. L. and. l. dyd this order begyn in the parties of Hetruria by one Romuldus an abbot of Rauenna. This wylderneſſe belonged to one Maduldus by name, which gaue it to Romuldus the holy man for a dwellynge place, after whom the holy man cauſed it to be ſurnamed for a perpetuall memory. He ordined his monkes to we are a whyte cole, to whom many gentlemen and other forſakynge the worlde dyd ioyne thēſelues. Amonge all other was one Petrus Urceolus duke of Uenice come to theyr company, which after his death declared the holyneſſe of the order wyth many tokens and myracles. Whyle Romuldus lyued he dyd augmēt the order wonderouſly, ſo that in ſome places. iii. or. iiii. cloyſters were buylt atonce, which increaſſed excedyngly in ryches, connynge, and perſons.

Theyr rule is vnknowen to me. Theyr cloke and all from toppe to toe is whyte. I doute in theyr opinion and mynde, and alſo in theyr virginite and behaueoure. For cronicles do prayſe many thynges that are to be diſprayſed, & agayne diſprayſe, yt is prayſe worthy, wherof parcialite is ſōtyme ye cauſe
                  ¶ Lo good reader ſuch thinges fynde I prayſed thorow out with vaine prayſe, as I wold rather blame yf I were requyred to be iudge: Wherfore counte many thynges to be ſpokē Ironice (that is not earneſtly & of a cō
                     trary me anynge) and than ſhalte thou ye better perceaue the trueth, and not my good-meanynge or iudgement wrytten agaynſte the B. of Romes heretykes, orders and Popyſh ſayntes. Yf I prayſe that which is not prayſe worthy, I do iniury to it that is good and laudable. Yf I ſaye ye ſtewes or brothelhouſe is good and to be admytted, becauſe of auoydynge farther inconuenience, I do iniury to Gods worde that extremely forbyddeth it, and preferre my good meanynge aboue Gods worde. Conferre only the. xvi. chap. of Ezechiel with theſe brothelhouſes for the better vnderſtandynge of thys.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  ¶ Here folowe ſome orders, whoſe tyme, founders, and begynners I coulde not hunte out, which orders neuertheleſſe haue ben ſene.
                  l. The order of Guilhelmites vnder Innocentius the. iiii. B. of Rome Anno. M. cc. xlvi.
                  
                     ANno. M. cc. xlvi. was this order brought forth vnder Innocentius the. iiii. whoſe founder and begynner was Guilhelme Duke of Aquitania, and county of Aluernia: whiche beynge without iſſue, gaue all his patrymony, lande and goodes, and buylded the Giginaciſh cloyſter, makynge Berno an Abbot therof, prouydynge it with many rētes and ſubſidies. Of hym hath this order the name Theyr clothynge is al blacke. Of this order haue we treated alſo in the. xi. order before.
               
               
                  li. The order of S. Ioſeph.
                  
                     
THe order of S. Ioſeph is vnknowen vnto me ſaue onely that they ſhulde we are an aſhcoloured cote & a whyt cole or hoode, wherwith they ymagyne to ſerue and folowe Ioſeph that is called Chriſtes father: But I cā not tel wherin, ſeynge I fynde of hym no where wrytten that he vſed ſuch a garment, but that he was a good ſymple man, a carpenter by his craft. Nowyf they wyll folowe hym in outwarde thynges, then muſt they take an are in theyr hā
                     des and laboure alſo. But yf they wyll folow hym in chaſtite of mariage, & by ye conſent of theyr wyues lyue chaſt, orels folowe his ryghteouſneſſe, wherof we reade Math ii. that may they do wel ynough in euery apparell, without excepcyon, lyke Ioſeph dyd. Wherfore I can not perceaue theyr ſhyne and appearaunce, why they ſet Ioſeph for a patrone: perchaunce they do it as the B. of Rome doth Chriſt. Some thynke becauſe they haue abſteyned frō theyr wyues, or els gone frō thē, wherof they haue no power wt out ye wyues wyll & cōſent. Yet I doute whether ye womā haue power to geue him leaue ſeynge they are commaūded (accordynge to theyr eſtate) to growe and multiplye. Ge. ii.
               
               
                  
                  lii. Sepulchrers order.
                  THe Sepulchre brethrē dyd fyrſt tēde the holy Sepulchre, and brought the Dutch brethren or pylgrems to and fro the holy Sepulchre: of whom they were well rewarded. They dyd weare longe beerdes, and a graye cote and a graye cloke theron, with a croſſe vpon it. Whether they be ſpirituall men and within orders, am I not certifyed: I reken they be laye brethrē, and that becauſe of theyr beerdes, which ar not comly for preſtes. Theyr dayly taxe is a ſtente of Pater noſters.
               
               
                  liii. The Sheere order.
                  THis order ſurely haue taylers inuented, for they weare for a bag a ſheere of yron coloure vpon a whyte cloke. What that do ſignyfye can not I tell, wyth out it were, becauſe they wolde ſeme to be cut and ſundered from the worlde. Theyr cloke and cole is whyte. Theyr founder is vnknowen to me. I reken it be the taylers order, inuented of theyr patron, where with they be mocked dayly.
               
               
                  liiii. The Swearders.
                  
                     
THis order weareth whyt alſo, &. ii. reede ſweardes croſſe waye vpon a whyte cole, which ſignify theyr bloudy knight hode, wherwith they fyght agaynſt the Deuell vntyl the bloude. Heb. xii. The whyte cloke perchaunce ſygnifyeth theyr clēneſſe, wherof they be as full, as a ſparowe full of chaſtite, or a foole is of wyſedome: and faſt with chaſtiſyng of theyr bodyes, vntyl they be fatte. How, whan, or where this order beganne am I not enfourmed of.
               
               
                  lv. The order of Starred mōkes
                  THe rule of this order haue no Cronicles, that I haue red hetherto ſhewed me, neuertheleſſe they weare an honeſt blacke garment wt a ſtarre ſewed theron, wherby they maye be knowen. The grounde of theyr order is as of al other, namely, therby to do penaunce for theyr ſynnes, and to be iuſtifyed: which thynge is the mooſt wycked thyng of all orders, for it maketh them Heythenyſh. ii. Petri. ii.
               
               
                  lvi. The order of Starred freres.
                  
                     
THeſe do not differ from the foreſayd in clothyng nor rule, ſaue that they haue no cole or hoode. Theyr clothynge is lyke coloured and faſhioned, with a croſſe theron. Theyr purpoſe is all one. The ſtarre ſygnifyeth theyr harte to be heaued on hygh.
               
               
                  lvii. The croſſe ſtarred brethren
                  UPon a blacke cloke do theſe weare a dubble ſtarred croſſe, ſo that ye crucifyenge of theyr fleſh is ſygnifyed by the croſſe, and the buryenge of theyr lyfe wt Chriſt in God is ſygnifyed by ye ſtarre. Item that they be folowers of the crucifyed Chriſt, whom with paunched bellyes, & blowen vp chekes, they helpe to bear his croſſe vpon a pylow, whyle theyr rentes do laſt.
               
               
                  lviii. Cōſtātinopolitanyſh order
                  AT Conſtantinople ſhulde this order haue ben begon. Theyr rule is to confeſſe Chriſt with the mouth, but to denye his power, in trueth, to abrenoūce him, and to truſt in theyr owne workes. Theyr cote is grene, theyrcole is reed, with two gelow croſſes ſewed theron: wherby is ſygnifyed theyr grene harte to Godwarde, and

ready wyll to ſhed theyr bloude for Chriſtes cauſe, the which perchaunce ſygnifye alſo ye golden croſſes that they eſteme ſo greatly. Yf ony man coulde optayne the ſygnifycacyon of theſe thynges without the clothyng that were good: but that the rayment ſhuld diſpatch it, that is falſe.
               
               
                  lix. The order of Wentzelaus.
                  WEntzelaus ſhulde haue founded this order, and compiled them a rule, with a whyte cloke, cole, coate and many ſhynynge workes of theyr owne inuentyng wherwith they thynke to do penaunce for theyr ſynnes and to become aungels, euen thoſe that be of the better or perchaunce of the worſt ſorte. But the other only therfore becauſe they be ſlouthfull and leade a careleſſe lyfe, to ſerue theyr god, yt is, theyr belly.
               
               
                  lx. The order of Nolhart brethren.
                  THeſe be hyred and inſtitute therfore in cyties that they (becauſe theyr neghboures and frendes do ſhune them) ſhulde aſſiſte the ſycke in theyr neceſſite, and to bury them, and do ſuch other buſyneſſe aboute the ſycke and dead. They

weare graye cotes, with a blacke ſcapulary vpon it, and a graye cloke ouer it. The wemen weare graye alſo, with whyte vayles.
               
               
                  lxi. The order of S. Iames brethrē
                  
                  AT S. Iemyes in Scotlonde ſhuld this order haue bene founded, they weare graye clothynge, and a muſkelſhel vppon theyr breſt, theſe haue ben ſene. They ſhulde haue theyr rule of S. Iames, and ſhulde be his folowers.
               
               
                  lxii. The order of the brethrē of S. Iames with the ſwearde.
                  THis order (to confirme the fayth of fooles) ſhulde a B. of Rome haue cō
                     firmed vnder a rule. They weare a blacke cote, with a whyte cloke without hoode ouer it, and a whyte cappe: And in tokē of theyr warre, they weare a ſwearde in theyr hande, theyr warre no doute is of ye fleſhe agaynſt the ſprete.
               
               
                  lxiii. The brethrē of S. Helēs order.
                  WHat tyme S. Helen floryſhed in holyneſſe, ther were certayne apes yt toke vpon them to counterfayte hyr lyfe,

lyke gelous ydle bellyes. Theſe grewe to a great multitude, whiche all toke vpon them to folowe and ſerue her, callynge themſelues hir brethren: but it is no where founde that ſhe ſhulde haue founded them. Theyr garment is all whyte.
               
               
                  lxiiii. The order of the brethren of Ieruſalem.
                  ANno. M. c. iii. whan Ieruſalem was deſtroyed roſe this order in the tyme of Gregory the. vi. They drue together at Ieruſalem, and began this ſecte, callynge themſelues brethren of Ieruſalem after ye cytie. Theyr habyte was a graye cote & a cloke wt a cole, & a reed croſſe vpon it, to ſygnify theyr bloudy knyghthode againſt the enemyes of the croſſe, which vāquiſhed thē dayly, & were deſtroyed of them.
               
               
                  lxv. The order of the valley of Ioſaphat.
                  IN the valley of Ioſaphat ſhulde this order be, and we are all reed, though ye bloudy beaſt of Rome, ye B. I meane haue forbyddē ony of ye ſpiritualty to we are reed, that onely becommeth hym and his

apoſtles. But what doth not mony: whiche alſo breaketh vowes, othes and promyſes, & diſpenſeth wyth all thynges. Theyr rule is vnknowen to me, ſaue onely that they as al other orders cracke & boaſt vpon theyr reed abyte, & theyr owne inuēted Gods ſeruice.
               
               
                  lxvi. The Sclauony order.
                  THeſe gatherynge themſelues from all partyes, & cōmyng in Sclauony, wear reed coles: in all faſhion lyke to ye Auguſtiniās, only the coloure excepte. No cronicle that I haue red ſpecifyeth of theyr mō
                     mynge, order or rule. Theyr purpoſe is as of all other, which theyr abyte wytneſſeth, though all other thynges were vnſpoken of: namely, that they ſeparatynge themſelues, wyll walke in perfection, deſpyſynge the cō
                     mune ſorte as euell Chriſten men.
               
               
                  lxvii. The new order of our Lady.
                  THis order is foūded vnder the Preachers order, which alſo call themſelues Maryes brethrē. Uerely it muſt haue ben a fruteful mother, that bare ſo many ſonnes. They we are a whyte cote, & a black cloke theron, with a black freres cole.
               
               
                  
                  lxviii. The order of the brethren of S. Ihon de ciuitate.
                  THeſe Iohannites or brethren of S. Ihon weare a reed cole, hoode and cote, with a chalice ſewed vpō theyr breſt, to ſignifye theyr holy preſthode. They haue a rule ſeuerall from all other. I fynde no where the begynnynge of this order.
               
               
                  lxix. The Lazarites, or Mary Magdalens brethren order.
                  LAzarus and Mary Magdalene haue theſe taken as patrones, whome they notwithſtandynge folow nother in penaunce, nor clothynge. For ſcripture knoweth nought of the blacke cote & the whyte cole theron, yet wyll they be theyr folowers and auaunce theyr name.
               
               
                  lxx. The brethrē of wilful pouerte
                  THe brethren of wylfull pouerte are knowen welynoughe to the Dutch nacyon: they went crouchyng nymbly by the ſtretes, and hadde on a cloke or mantel hangynge cloſe before & open in the ſyde, requyrynge breade for Gods ſake, hauynge a ſtaffe wyth a crucyfixe and alſo

a payre of beedes hangynge theron. They requyred no mony nor ryches, but only to be taken for the wyllynge poore. They ſpake to nomā, whereby they fayned theyr godlyneſſe and holyneſſe to ye people. They had plenteouſly geuen to them. The rych gaue them to drynke of theyr owne cuppes and cruſes of the beſt drynke, countynge the veſſel whereout they dranke euen halowed, and ye wyne alſo yt they left. Thus dyd they ſhyne to men, which thought all thynges to be well, & rekened thus to make ſatiſfactiō for theyr ſynnes, and to merite much wyth God: which meanynge quencheth Chriſte wholy. Some other that (after the worldes iudgment) were worſe, & perchaunce worſer yet by God, begyled mē on thys wyſe: They had in ye nexte vyllage or there about a fayre wyfe and other baggage, yt they caryed wyth them, ſo that they went not alone mōmyng and limlyftynge. After thys faſhion is the worlde begyled alwaye, for ſo is hys wyll.
               
               
                  lxxi. The order of the Indians.
                  IN Inde, in the londes of Preſter Ihō ſhulde alſo be an order which weare a black cote and a whyte cloke theron,

whoſe rule accordeth wyth all other, namely that they boaſt & auaunce theyr good workes, lettynge noman come to heauē but by them, whereby they become Mammalukes, maneyed theues and murtherers. Ioh. x.
               
               
                  lxxii. The croſſe bearers order.
                  THeſe wente ſtoupynge to the grounde with a longe whyte rochet, gyrded about them with a corde, they wente alwaye bareheaded and ſpake not, they laye on the bare grounde, they wente alway knelynge euen to the grounde, and hangynge down theyr heades: they dyd weare a croſſe of wood two ſpanne longe in theyr handes. Some dyd weare a boxe about theyr neckes wherin men put theyr almeſſes.
               
               
                  lxxiii. Another order of Scourgers or Flagellatores.
                  IAme credably informed of ſome, that at Rome ther is a ſecte, as in other places of Italy, which are called Flagellatores or Scourgers theſe go in longe whyte lynnen ſhyrtes hauynge an hole on ye blacke, & are open vpō the bare ſkynne, there vpon do they beate thēſelues wt ſcourges yt are made

therto, ſo longe, tyll the bloud doth rūne out both ouer the ſhulders and alſo downe to & fete. Theſe be admitted of the B. of Rome as penitēciares. They go barefooted in proceſſion two and two together on good frydaye, whan the paſſiō is preached. To theſe accompany themſelues many renowned cyteſins at that daye, which of great inwarde deuoci ō are alſo diſgyſed as the aforeſayde, ſo that ſomtyme. iii. or. iiii. hundre thare ſene in one proceſſiō: Neuertheleſſe the cyteſyns go ſome vpon ſlyppers, and the ſhyrtes put on aboue theyr hoſen, and haue a ſcourge in theyr handes, wherewith ſome ſtryke thē ſelues, ſome weare it only betwene theyr armes. But the true brethren of thys order go barefoote, and beate themſelues vpon the bare, ſkynne tyll the bloude foloweth. The whyte lynnen garment hath a hoode ſewed to it, that drawe they ouer theyr heades whan they wyll not be ſene, thys commeth ouer theyr faces, and it hath holes lyke a byſore, wherethorow they both ſe and drawe theyr breth. Such as force not whether they are ſene or not, or haue not dreth ynough, they draw downe the cole from theyr heades, & ſcourge thēſelfes ſo openly. Great

men vſe thys fantſy wyth them alſo, that they maye be partakers of theyr pardō, do penaunce for theyr ſynnes, & come to Gods fauoure. Of ſuch lyke haue we ſpoken another where, but I ame not ſure whether they be the ſame, forcauſe theyr order was cōdemned as hereſy, and thys now is permitted. Surely the one is as good as the other, it is one potage of one pot.
               
               
                  lxxiiii. Chapter monkes, or the chapter order.
                  AT Schunbach by Tubynge in ye duke dome of Wirtēborow is ther a cloyſter & order, which haue crownes, heer and gownes of all maner of colours, black, blewe and ruſſet, euen lyke ſeculare preſtes ſaue only that they haue rounde clokes lyke the vplandyſh men haue, whoſe hoodes they draw vp or let downe. Theyr heade do they call a father. Theyr rule is S. Auſtins, or as ſome ſaye S. Peters. At Buſchbach. iiii. myle from Frankforde was thys order refourmed, and made ſomwhat ſtrayghter. Theſe be of honeſt report amōg theyr neghbures. They haue a library wherin are Weſſelus and Wicklefs workes of theyr owne

handwrytynges & the fyrſte copyes. They are learned mē, they preach, heare cōfeſſions & ſerue ye paryſh yt they haue cure of. They call theyr head proueſt. They wyll not be called mōkes, nor theyr houſe a cloyſter, but ſyrs and brethren, and theyr houſe do they call a chapter houſe.
               
               
                  lxxv. The order of Monachi or Monache in Italy.
                  IN Italy do ſome orders perſuade the cyteſins both men and wemen to be partakers of theyr pardons and good dedes, although they be in ſtate of mariage and that with wearynge of theyr habites. Upon thys doth one weare hys lyfe longe a gyrdell of the barefooted freres, another a graye cote: ye one promyſeth to weare thys or yt gyrdell or rayment for ye orders loue, another maketh ſuch maner of vowe or clothynge. Thus are they than in fye and brotherheade wyth the holy fathers, whiche made them promes, to enioye al ſuch pardōs and good workes as they do and haue: theſe be called monachi or monache. And the conſyderaciō of the holy fathers in thys behalfe is, that they agayne be relyued wyth teſtamentes,

buryals, cōfeſſiōs, diriges and other aimeſſes, lyke brethren and ſyſters.
               
               
                  lxxvi. The Stooll brethren order.
                  IN ſome cyties and other places is a brother head founded, wherin are taken olde, aged mē paſt laboure, honeſt men and of good report, which communely haue beerdes. Theſe are aſſygned to ſaye dayly a ſumme and taxe of Pater noſters, for the foūders and benefactours ſoules and all Chriſtē ſoules. Theſe weare a fatherly cote of black, blew or ruſſet coloure, and a hoode with a flappe thangynge behynde.
                  Truth it is, that to helpe and relyue oldemē is a charitable dede, and worthy of great commendacion: but to lade them wyth an order or clothyng, and that founders require much to haue done for them, that is Heythenyſh. Yee in no place of the ſcripture is ſuch lyke red, ether of Abraham, Iſaak, Iacob, Ioſeph, Ioſue, Dauid or lyke holy and approbate men of God: no nor in the new teſtament nother.
               
               
                  lxxvii. The Gerundinenſiſh order.
                  A Byſhop of Gerundinū, Ihō by name had a dreame and viſiō (euē as many thynges are done & founded by dreamyng

and viſions, and becauſe noman doth proue the ſpretes, whether they be of God, but only do approbate it, that hath a good ſhew and appearaunce) vpon thys the myddayes deuell that chaungeth hymſelf into an aungell of lyght dyd eaſyly cauſe hym foūde & buylde a monaſtery. Thys he dyd, & gaue therto all hys goodes, and procured them an habite, rule, and maner of lyuynge of the B. of Rome. Theyr clothynge is all whyte, wyth the byſhops ſhylde ſewed therō whom he called after the partyes there about Gerūdinenſes. Theyr rule is todenye Chriſt in power, & to confeſſe him in mouth
               
               
                  lxxviii. The brethrē of Purgatorye.
                  WHether theſe be founded to haue theyr purgatory here in the ſtrayght order, or that they be appoynted to relyue thē yt be in purgatory, can I not ſhew: only they weare a croſſe ſewed vpō a ruſſet cloke & cote. Theyr fundamēt & intent is as of all other, namely to merite therby.
               
               
                  lxxix. The brethren of Scotlande.
                  IN Scotlande is a place or order whiche weare a grene cloke & cole or hood, wher by perchaunge they do ſygnifye theyr

grene and alway floryſhynge harte in God. The begynnynge of theyr rule and order is vnknowē to me, but ſure I ame that a wycked cōſcience and an vnfaythful harte hath founded them, that therby they myght helpe themſelues.
               
               
                  lxxx. The order of the keyed. monkes.
                  Thys order weareth two heauēly keys vpon a black cloke, to ſygnyfye that they haue power of heauē both to bynde and lowſe. Wherfore they boaſt to haue theyr ſprynge, rule, order and abite of S. Peter theyr founder and patrone, of whom they alſo haue receaued theyr keyes.
               
               
                  lxxxi. The order of the Lordes of Ungary.
                  IN Ungary are rych ſpiritual Lordes & an order which weare a white cote, & a reede cloke theron, where vpon they haue a grene croſſe. They haue alway a boke wyth them, to declare therby theyr ſpiritualty. Theyr fundament, rule and order is as of al other.
               
               
                  lxxxii. The order of ye holy gooſt,
                  
                     
AT Rome, at Gruningen in Wyrtē borow dukedom, and in other places is this order, clothed and ſhauen lyke other preſtes, onely do they weare a dubble whyte croſſe. Theſe haue authorite of ye B. of Rome to abſolue all crymes. Where ſo euer theſe come a viſitacyon or lymytynge, there muſt they be letten in. They haue alſo letters and ſeale, that whereſo euer they come to vyſite, al other muſte voyde & geue them rowme. At Gronyngen haue they a great ſtate by theyr beggynge. At Rome are the poore greatly relyued in the hoſpitall, yt it haue ſome ſhyne of holyneſſe to bleare mens eyen, & leſt men thynke theyr mony euell beſtowed. The lymetynge of S. Ualentine, Quirine, Antony and ſuch lyke are other brotherheades, wherwith muche mony hath ben pyckte out of realmes and contryes. For they haue ſuch vnmercyfull ſayntes, that without mony myghte no mercy nor brotherhead haue ben obtayned. Theſe are metely well knowen. Theyr order is to begyle the people, theyr garmentes preſtly. Theyr rule is to fray the people with theyr ſayntes, to lye, to prate, and preache all home. ii. Petri. ii. ii. Timo. i.
               
               
                  
                  lxxxii. Speculariorum Order.
                  THe order of Speculariorum, began in Italy. They weare a black croſſe vpō a whyte cloke, & vnder the croſſe is a blacke circle or a glaſſe, perchaūce they haue the ſame name becauſe they wolde be taken for a ſpectakle to all ye worlde in theyr lyuynge.
               
               
                  lxxxiii. The order of Hoſpitall brethren.
                  THeſe are founded in ſome places and hoſpitals to tende the ſycke, and to aſſiſt thē in ſykneſſes & neceſſite of death. Theyr garmentes are for the mooſt parte blacke.
               
               
                  lxxxiiii. The order of S. Katherine of Sene.
                  ANno. M. cccc. lv. dyd ſhyne S. Katherine of Sene a dyers doughter, which refuſynge the ſtate of Matrimonye toke vpō her yt. iii. order of ſaynt Dominike or preachers. Chriſt ſhuld haue maryed her with a rynge wherin were. iiii. pearles and one diamonde, and taken hyr harte from

her geuynge her his therfore. Of this ſaint Katherine that was canoniſate by Pius ye ii. hir contryman, B. of Rome is ryſen a great ſecte. They we are garmentes lyke blacke or preacher freres. Theyr cloke and vayle are blacke, theyr cote is whyte. They dyffer muche from all other orders in ceremonies, ſaue only in the Pſalter, ye whiche they bable without vnderſtandynge, and in truſtynge in theyr good workes.
               
               
                  ¶ Of all ſectes and orders in generall.
                  THe order of the B. of Rome, Cardinals, Patriarkes, Byſhops, Curtiſans, Preſtes, Deacons, and ſuch other is metely well knowen, & are therfore here paſſed ouer, ſo that the knowen orders do here ende. I paſſe ouerhere ſuch orders & gods ſeruice as euery one taketh vpon him of his owne choſynge, wherof ther are many thouſandes, and neare hande ſo many as are men in the worlde. As pylgrimage goers, Pſalter ſayers, oure Lady pſalterers, maſſehearers, faſters, kepers of ſylence. &c. For onely they yt be earneſt truſters & beleuers in God are Chriſten men, & prayers

thorow fayth all other good ſeruices and ſpiritualties that we take vpō vs of our owne choſynge and inuencyon, are ſectes, orders and rules.
               
            
         
         
            Fourtene faythes or ſectes of Chriſtendome onely, beſyde all other ſtraunge orders, and faythes.
            
               i. The ſecte, order and fayth of the Latines or Romanes, that is, the Byſhops of Rome.
               
                  THe fyrſt & princypall of al Romane Chriſtē is ye B. of Ro. wt al his mēbres & adherentes, wherfore he wyll be called heade of yt church, and vſeth the Latine tunge. This fayth or ſecte is torne in many thouſandes within it ſelfe, & hys kyngdome parted many wayes. Under this head are gathered in ye vnite of his ſprete al ye aforeſayd ſectes. Theyr faith & vſe is metely well knowen vnto vs, ſeyng we haue gone to ſcoole vnder hym, & haue bē rocked & lulled in his ceremonies. This

manyheaded fayth (I ſaye) hath noryſhed & brought forth all theſe doughters. Surely ther ſhalbe lytel lacke alſo in other faythes, ſeynge this onely fayth hath ſo many doughters diſagreynge within themſelues. This fayth hath a great deale of Europa tyll the weſte, & compaſſeth & reacheth to the Eaſte vntyll Hungary: (Bohemy or Beme is decyuered frō them.) Towarde the South vntyll Italy, Sicily & Naples: Towarde the Weſt vntyll Portingale, Spayne, Fraūce, and low Bermany. Theſe haue many kingdomes belongynge to theyr fayth, as namely: The kynge of Caſtyle, Arragony, Portingale, Nauerne, all theſe are in Spayne. Item Fraunce, Sicily, Naples, Hungary, Pole, Scotlande, Denmarke, Sueden, Norwaye, Sclauony. &c. with many other Dukes, Coūties, Marquiſſes & other, Uenice, ye Ile Cipres. &c. Al theſe be vnder ye iuriſdiction of ye B. of Ro. with the Emperour alſo, that duely ought to be a Germane.
            
            
               ii. Greci, the fayth, order and ſecte of the Grekes.
               THer is another ſorte of Chriſtians in the Eaſte, called Greci, that is Grekes: They haue had theyr Byſhoppe
               
                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
            
            
               
                  
MArouini holde in many poyntes wt the Iacobites, yet is ther ſome difference. Theyr ſpeche is Arabyſh. They dwel by and aboute the hyl Libanus. They are honeſt, but warrefaryng people, which are ofte aſſaulted of the Saracenes.
            
            
               vi. Neſtorini.
               THeſe alſo are ſeuerall Chriſtians, whiche are ſo taught and informed of Neſtorinus the heretike. This Neſtorinus was a Byſhop of Conſtantinople, & ſayd ther were. ii. perſones in Chriſt, the one the Godheade, the other the manhode: and ſayd that Mary ſhulde not be called the mother of God, but of the māhode, & bryngereſſe forth of Chriſt the man, or after ye māhode only. Theſe conſecrate the ſacrament in leuended bread, and vſe yt Chaldeyſh ſpech. They dwell in Tartary, and in greate India are alſo many of them.
               Theyr borders conteyne aſmuche in compaſſe, as Dutchlande and Italy, wherin they all haue this fayth, and holde with Neſtorinus.
            
            
               vii. The Moronites.
               
                  
THeſe Chriſtians haue theyr ſprynge and begynnynge of one Moron an heretike. They graunt onely one vnderſtandynge, worke, kynde, nature & wyll in Chriſte. Theſe dwell by Libia in the prouince of Phenicia, a great multitude, warfarynge men, quick with bowes & arowes & good archers. I beleue they be the ſame that aboue are called Morouini. They vſe after the maner of the Latines bels, byſhops ornamentes, cope, rynge, myter, croſyer. &c.
               Theyr ſcripture is Caldeyſh, but theyr natyfe ſpeche is Arabyſh. They haue ben vnder the B. of Rome, vntyll the tyme of Innocentius the. iii. for than was theyr Patriarke in a coūcell at Rome, but afterwarde whan he was at Cōſtantinople, in a coūcell that he helde, he fel frō the Romane church, he fel therto & from it agayne: But nowe do they ſtāde ſtedfaſtly vpō theyr own brayne.
            
            
               viii. The Armenians of ye greater Armenia.
               ARmeni are Chriſtiās in greater Armenia dwellyng by Antiochia, which cc. yeare agone were ſubdued of the Turkyſh Emperoure & made tributary to hym. Theſe Chriſtiās differ muche frō the

Romanes. They kepe no feaſte or holydaye ſaue only the Sondaye. They faſte not on Eaſter euen, they knowe nothynge of the Newyeare, Candelmaſſe & ſuch lyke dayes. They ſaye that Chriſt roſe on Eaſter 
                     〈◊〉
                   at euenſonge tyde. They eate fleſh euery frydaye betwene Eaſter and Wytſontyde. Neuertheleſſe they kepe and faſt lent thorowout, and that ſo ſtraytly, that on wedniſdayes and frydayes they nother eate fyſh, fleſh nor oyle, nor yet drynke wyne, coūtyng it more ſynne to vſe wyne on theſe dayes, thā yf they ſtayned thēſelues with goynge into an vnhoneſt houſe. Thre dayes in the weke do they abſteyne from all maner of meate, but two dayes they eate once. On ye Tewſdaye and Sondaye make they mery. They haue no maſſe all Lente, ſaue onlye on Satyrdayes and Sondayes. Nother ſay they maſſe on ony frydaye of the whole yeare: for they wyll not offer on that daye that the oblacion was made. They houſie yonge chylderen of two moneths & al other without excepcion. They mixe no water wyth wyne at theyr maſſe. They playe the Iewes wyth theyr vnclenly beaſtes, as hares, crowes and ſuche other beaſtes.

They conſecrate wyth wooden and glaſſy chalices, ſome wyth patine, ſome wythout ony maſſynge apparrel, ſome haue nomore but a cope on. Uſury and Simony are communely vſed amonge them both preſtes & laye people, euen as the Georgians do, wt whome they are alwaye at variaunce, and ech part counteth ye other heretikes. Theyr preſtes haue maryed wyues, but after hyr deceaſſe they renew not matrimony. They geue a man power to put frome hym hys wyfe that breaketh wedloke, and to take another. They vtterly denye purgatory, and ſaye ther are two natures in Chriſte. They ſhew the Georgians to erre in. xxx. artikles from the true fayth of Chriſte. Theyr preſtes are luſty, and ful, more than the laymē, and vſe nigromancy for the mooſt parte.
               They haue theyr owne ſpech and language wherin they execute all theyr Gods ſeruice preachynge and ſyngynge, ſo that both men and women do vnderſtande them. Theyr chefe or heade byſhop is called Catholicon, whome they worſhyp reuerently. Some ſay they eate fleſh all the yeare thorow.
            
            
               ix. The Surian order, or

Samaritan fayth.
               IN Syria or Aſſyria is the heade cytie Sur, whiche hath a ſundery fayth.
               They vſe in theyr maſſe and ſcriptur the greke tunge, but els, the Saracēs, theyr natyfe langage. They haue a byſhop, whoſe cōſtitucions they obey in all thynges. They conſecrate with leuended breade, wherein they holde wyth the Grekes agaynſt the Romanes. Some Chriſtians dwellynge in Iewry aboute Ieruſalem, called Samaritani do hold with theſe, the which were cōuerted fyrſt in the Apoſtles tyme. They differ frō ye churche of Rome in many artikles, which what tyme they were obedient to ye churh of Rome, they obſerued: but now they are 
                     •
                  ecyuered and parted from it.
            
            
               x. The Moſarabites, or Arabyſh Chriſtians
               THys ſecte dwelled ſomtyme in great nombre in Aphrica and Spayne, but now are there but a fewe. They kepe the vſe of the Chriſtians in Aphrica, nearehande in all poyntes. They ſay maſſe in latine, they obey ye churche of Rome they cōſecrate with vnleuended breade, yet vary

they in many thynges from the Romanes. The daye is diuided wyth them in. xxiiii. houres, and ſo many collets, Pſalmes or ſeruices haue, they to euery houre a ſeuerall, but not after ye latine faſhion. That the Latines ſaye in the begynnynge that do they ſaye in the ende. The ſacrament of altare do ſome diuide in. vii. or. x. peces. They are a very deuoute people. They mary none without they be of theyr nacion and fayth. Yf a man dye, ye woman marieth not agayn but remayneth in chaſtite & wedowheade.
            
            
               xi. The Moſcouites and whyte Ruſſes fayth.
               MOſcouites is a naciō in Aſia whoſe lande is called Moſcouia. Theyr kynge and gyde that now is, is called Baſilius, a quicke, victorious and fortunate man of warre. Which was in ye ſege with the Turkyſh Emperoure before Uienne in Eaſtenrich. anno. M. D. xxix He hath aboute a. xx. contryes vnder hym, accordyng as he auaunceth hym in hys tytle. Thys kynge with hys ſubiectes wyl be called a good Chriſtian: he boaſteth hym to be of ſaynt Paules fayth, whiche ſhulde haue preſcribed them theyr fayth, lawe and ordinaunce,

and to kepe and retayne thys vntyll hys returnynge. In thys lande (as in many other partyes of Grece) do the wyues wear alway a ſhewſole vpon theyr heades, but ye poore weare thē of cloth & the rych of gold & beluet, to ſignifye theyr ſubiection and obedience due to the man, ſo that ſhe is content ſo to ſubmitte herſelfe as thoughe the man ſhulde go vpon hyr heade, and knowledge hym for hyr Lorde. Thys fayth vſe the whyt Ruſſes alſo.
            
            
               xii. The fayth of the Bemes or order of the Huſſites.
               THough the Bemes haue ben vnder the B. of Romes iuriſdiction and accoſtumed wyth hys lawes and fayth, yet are they conuerted and ſeduced by Ihon Huſſe that was burnt in the councell of Conſtaunce. anno. M. cccc. xvi. ſo that they are deciuered and fallen from the ſye Rome. They geue the ſacramente of the altare vnto theyr laymē vnder both kyndes, agaynſte the commaundement of the B. of Rome: yee and vnſhryuen alſo. But in other thynges do they cleue to the Byſhop of Rome: for they nother do eate

fleſh on wedniſdayes, nor frydayes, they ſyng, hepe holy dayes and worſhyp ſayntes as in the byſhopryke of Rome. They kepe theyr faſtes very ſtraytly. It is a fearce people and enclyned to lyberte.
            
            
               xiii. The order of Waldenſes or Picardes.
               THe Picardes (that were ſeduced by Waldus the heretike) area ſeuerall kynde of Chriſten people in Beme. Theſe leade a very Chriſten and blamleſſe lyfe, they call vpon no ſayntes or creatures but only God. They ſweare not atall, countynge it to be vncomly for a Chriſten man ſo to do. They haue no image at all, they knele not afore them nor pray to thē. They ſay ye ſacramēt ought not be worſhipped, but Chriſt at ye ryghthād of hys father, & God in ſprete & truth. They haue no begger amōge thē, & helpe & coūſel ech other brotherly. Yet are they diuided in two, or as ſome ſaye, in thre partes: namely, ye greate, ye leſſe & ye leeſt of all. They hold greatly wt ye Anabaptiſtes they haue all thynges cōmune, they Chriſtē no chyldrē, they graūt not Chriſtes body to be in ye ſacramēt: neuertheles ye great heape beleue in ye ſacramēt. They pſue ech other, whereby

they vtter theyr ſprete, though they ſhyne neuer ſo fayre. They are alwaye at ye leaſt. lxxx. thouſande. They ſet nought by the B. of Romes fayth orders, ſpiritualty, faſtyng, holydayes, maſſe, prayenge, ſyngynge, readynge. &c. I paſſe ouer here the Taborytes, which alſo haue a ſeuerall fayth.
            
            
               xiiii. The Georgians ſecte and fayth.
               THeſe Chriſtians haue the Tartaries made tributaryes to them. two. C. yeare ago. They vſe the Grecians maner in many poyntes. They broder vpō the Perſes, reachynge from Paleſtina vntyll the mountaynes called Caſpy. They hadde. xviii. byſhoprykes, and one heade or chefe byſhop whome they called Catholicō. They were fyrſte ſubiecte vnto the ſye of Antiochia, a warrefarynge people. Theyr preſtes haue crownes ſhauen rounde, but ye layemen foreſquared. Theyr wyues be partly vſed to warre, and be hyred therto. Before they ſtryke ony felde they do drynke largely, that they maye fall on theyr enemyes with the better corage and more fearcely.
               Theyr preſtes & ſpiritualty kepe the walles

and fenſes, and vſe vſery, finaunces and ſymony. They are euer at debate with the armenians, whom they call heretikes. Both the Armenians and Georgians ar now ſubiecte to the Turke. Theyr name haue they of ſaint George theyr patron, in whoſe name they fyght, whom alſo they haue in theyr ſtandarde and banners. They border alſo vpon the Medes and Sirians, of whō they are greatly dradde, yee and of all the Eaſte partes alſo. Whan they go to the holy Sepulchre, they entre the cytie Ieruſalē with ſpled banners: for the Saracenes ſhune thē ſore, nother paye they ony where tribute. Theyr wiues haue heere & beerdes as ye mē, and go alſo to warre. They weare hygh toted hattes. What ſo euer they aſcribed ſome tyme vnto the Soudane, yt dyd he graūt thē agayne: for they were of great eſtimacyon by hym, & are greatly accepted euery where for theyr valeaunt dedes and worthyneſſe.
               Here do I paſſe ouer alſo the Gothyes and Wandalyes, whoſe landes and kyngdomes hath euery one his Chriſten fayth.
               Sclauony alſo hath in many thynges an other religion, Gods ſeruice and maner, ſeuerall from all other.
            
         
         
            
            Fyften orders ſectes or ſuperſticions of the Iewes.
            
               i. Samaritani.
               
                  IN the tyme of Sarabella or (as ſayeth Ioſephus the. xi. boke, ye. vii Chap. of antiquityes) Sanaballat the debite of Ieruſalem, roſe the fyrſt ſciſma or diſſencyon amonge yt Iewes, on this wyſe: Manaſſes the brother of Iadi the byſhop confederated hymſelfe with the debite or leutenaūt, which was an Hey then, & toke the doughter of the vncircumcyſed to wyfe agaynſt the lawe vpon the condicyon that he ſhulde make hym hygh preſt or byſhop. Now ſeynge that in this dede he dyd tranſgreſſe the lawe, he gat euell wyl of many of the Iewes, yee he was euen reiect and hated of them. Upō this dyd his father in lawe buylde hym a temple vpon mounte Gariſim, and ſet ye foreſayd Manaſſes ther in agaynſt Iadus his brother, geuyngt him a village therto: and they that helde on hys

ſyde were called Samaritans. Theſe diſpē
                  ſed with the lawe in many thynges, and yet wolde be called Iewes. This diſcencyon laſted vntyll the deſtruccyon of Ieruſalem by Titus and Ueſpaſianus.
            
            
               ii. iii. Morbonei and Meriſtei.
               ISidorus in the. viii. boke of the Ethimologyes wryteth, that amonge yt hereſyes of the Iewes ſome were called Saduces, ſome Morboneies, ſome Meriſteies: of the which two laſt ſectes and orders I coulde fynde nomore though I ſearched diligently for it, but that ye Meriſteies receaue not all the prophetes, ſayenge: that ſome haue not wrytten of a good ſprete. The Morbonet ſaye yt it is Chriſte yt hath taught them to kepe holy day in al thinges.
            
            
               iiii. The Phariſes both theyr ſecte and fayth.
               THeſe. iii. ſectes or ſuperſticyons folowynge, were alſo amonge the Iewes in Chriſtes tyme. The Phariſaicall ſecte was ſeparate from the commune lyuynge, and wolde be eſtimed the perfecte in the lawe (euen as by vs monkes and freres

are the choyſe of people,) which ſtacke in ye lawe ouer heade and eares, ſo that all that was ſene on them ſemed holy and iuſte: but onely the wycked hart, vnknowē to ye world but knowen to God, yt was enemy to God. This coulde not the world iudge, wherfore by reaſon of theyr ſhynynge holyneſſe they were in great eſtimacyon amōge ye Iewes. To be playne, it were the Iewes monkes, which in theyr and the peoples mynde were neareſt the prycke: theſe roſe in the tyme of Ptolomeus Philadelphus. They were called Phariſei, becauſe they were ſeparate & ſundered from the other people, both in clothynge and conuerſacyon, but had notwithſtandynge a lyke wycked harte & hatred to the lawe with the other. They lyued ſtraytly after the workes of the lawe, and meaſurable in meat, they dyd weare a ſcrol of parchement on theyr foreheades, and on theyr lefte hande the ten cōmaundementes wrytten for a remembraunce and continuall exercyſe. They dyd weare alſo brode gardes about theyr garmentes, wherin were boūde thornes and pryckes, that ſhulde cauſe them to remēbre Gods cōmaundementes. They aſcrybed all thynge to God & his predeſtinacyon.

They neuer anſwered theyr heade frowardly. They hoped a iudgemēt of god, and a reſurreccyon of the dead. They ſayd that a mans ſoule is immortal. Theſe good men were Chriſtes mooſte enemyes, and cauſers of his death, which they were beſt worthy.
            
            
               v. The Saducees ſecte.
               SAducei another ſect in Iſrael, which helde nothynge of the predeſtinacyon of God, ſayd yt God dyd beholde all thynges, but it is in mans choyſe ether to do good or euell. They denyed the reſurreccyon of the fleſh, and alſo that ther were ony aūgels. They beleued that the ſoule peryſhed with the body. They receaued onely the. v. bokes of Moſes. They accompanyed themſelues with noman, but led ſo ſtrayght and earneſt lyfe, that they were called Saducei, that is the ryghteous.
            
            
               vi. The Eſſeyes, and theyr religion.
               THe Eſſeyes led in all poyntes neare hande an heremiticall and monaſticall lyfe. They deſpiſed matrimony,

not of hatred that they had to the ſtate of it nor yet becauſe they dyd counte it vnholy, but to flye the luſtes and prouocacyō of we men, thynkynge that none kepeth hyr promyſe. They were ſo ioyned in loue, that as chyldren of one father, and deſpyſers of all tranſytory goodes they brought together al theyr ſubſtaunce and poſſeſſion, and had all thynges commune. They dyd counte it vncomly to go in ony other ſaue whyte garmē
                  tes. They had ſtewardes and officers in worldlye buſyneſſes, but they themſelues medled with nothynge ſaue onely the lawe of God. They had no certayne dwellyng, but were lo
                     •
                  ged in euery cytie. They ſhyfted no clothes nor ſhues tyll they were worne out. They were of great contēplacyon in Godly matters, they vſed few wordes. The daye dyd they euer begynne wyth prayenge, after that went they to worke euery one that he was ſkylled in, vntyll. v. of the clocke, at the which ſeaſon they came together to dyne. But afore they ſat thēſelues therto, they waſhed themſelues with colde water & gyrded a whyte lynnen cloth about thē: this done, they went to theyr meate, yt theyr preſt fyrſt bleſſed. After dyner & grace

ſayd they returned agayne to worke. No noyſe was herde ony where in theyr lodgynges, but kept great ſilence: They coūted an oth euē forſwearyng. They toke none in to theyr ſecte wtout he were proued one yeare, after the whiche they were ſworne to kepe theyr fayth to God, loue and ryghteouſnes to men, and to prynces to yelde due obedience: and yf it ſo fortuned that they ſhuld be choſen to gouerne other, yt then they ſhulde not vſe ye power to ye ſuppreſſynge of theyr ſubiectes. In theyr iudgemēt ſat no leſſe thē c. perſons, whoſe ſentence remayned vnmoueable. The ſabbath obſerued they ſo earneſtly, yt vpō it they nother dreſſed meat, nor kyndled ony fyre: yee dyd not theyr eaſemēt nother. On other dayes whā they wente to do theyr eaſement they toke a ſpade wt thē, dygged a pyt, wherouer they ſat to do theyr eaſemēt, lettyng downe theyr clothes about thē, leſt they dyd iniury to Gods ſhadowe, & couered it agayn wt ye digged vp earth. This muſt nedes be a righteouſneſſe: yet abydeth it an order, ſect & fylthyneſſe Eſa. lxiiii. both before God & mā, though they hyde theyr eaſement neuer ſo preuely, not onely before God & man, but alſo before the elementes.

Herodes Antipas had this ſecte in great reuerence vntyl his death, nother is ony euel reported therof in ſtoryes: yet is it nothing worth before God. Yf our religious myght auaunce this alſo, (fyrſte that theyr ſecte is Gods ordinaunce and commaundement, ſecondarely that they had ſo lyued therafter, that with the trueth they coulde not be blamed) how wolde they cracke and boaſt? yet doth God damne this ſecte alſo Ioh. vii. Rom. ix. x. Of theſe thre laſt rehearſed ſectes reade Ioſephum the. ii. boke of ye Iewes battayle the. vii. Chapter at large.
            
            
               vii. The Iewes ſecte and religion.
               THough theſe haue receaued the lawe of God vntyl ye tyme of fulfyllyng, yet are they now (ſeynge they haue refuſed the Meſſias and loſt the true lyght) rekened for a darkneſſe, ſecte and heretikes of S. Ierome and Auſtine: which beſyde ye Talmud (wherin is gathered together euē an v
                     ••
                  brement of vayne dreames) haue only in Moſes bokes. vi. C. lawes. It is ſurely a poore people, that with vayne hope doth ſo trouble itſelfe, and hath an harde order yf it wyll fulfyll the ſame wtout diſpenſyng.

Theſe are ſcattred amonge all nacions, and a very fleſhly people, which wyll vnderſtand all ſcripture after the letter, & ſcarce knowe whether ther be ony ſprete. They be diuided wythin themſelues ſo well as we, yet darre they not vtter it, left they be laughed to ſkorne of vs. Beſyde the lawe haue they alſo receaued many conſtitucions of men. Theyr order is well knowen to the nedy Chriſtiās, for they are vſurers, and in many places are theſe open robbers ſuffred, to the greate dammage of euery man.
            
            
               viii. Rechabite or Rechabites ſecte.
               REchabite or Rechabites are they ye toke vpon them to folow the cōmaū
                  mēt of ye Rechabites. And of yt which Ionadabs chylderen dyd of a fre wyll in obeynge theyr father, (wherby God prayſed them not for theyr workes ſake, but for theyr obedience) haue theſe apes and other Iewes coueted to obtayme ſuche prayſe, makynge themſelues a lawe and yock, the whiche is not acceptable to God. Upon thys haue other Iewes (that wolde alſo be Rechabites) gone to & drynke no wyne, buyld no houſes

ſowe no feldes, & plante no vynes foreuer: & whiche perchaunce they dyd not, becauſe they gat ynough with vſury. Wherfore I cal ſuch Iewes Rechabites, that wyll in dede conterfayte Ionadabs chylderen or the Rechabites in that, for the which they haue obtayned the bleſſynge of God: hopynge that God wyll bleſſe them alſo, ſeynge they do it that the chylderen of Ionadab dyd Of thys reade Ieremy the. xxv. Chapter. To be ſhorte and playne for thyne vnerſtandynge: Ionadab a ſonne of Rechab commaunded hys chylderen neuerto drynke wyne, buylde no houſes, ſowe no feldes, plante no vynes, but only to dwell in tentes. Thys dyd they of wyllynge obedience, though they nother were cōmaūded nor forbyddē it in the lawe. Thys obediēce of the good chylorē pleaſed God ſo wel, yt he wold haue other to take example by them, ſayenge: Lo that to the chylderen of Ionadab, how muche more ought ye to obey me whiche ame youre God & father? For thys cauſe he bleſſeth the houſe of Ionadab and Rechabs kynred, ſo that ther ſhall not fayle one to ſtande alwaye in the ſyght of God. Upon thys wente the Iewes to and toke vpon them alſo to be Rechabites

and wolde drynke no wyne, plante no vynes &c. as though God dyd not more regarde obedience than abſteynynge from wyne. Thus were the workes of the chylderen of Rechab or Ionadab acceptable to God, ſeynge they were done in obedience. But the ſame workes done of the apes and counterfayters, pleaſe God nothynge at all, for they haue no precept nor cōmaundement to do, or to leaue them, but they do thē of theyr owne heade. Wherfore God doth not regarde them, nother can they do thē in fayth ſeynge they ſtond in doute whether God be well apayed wyth them, or not. And all that is done wythout fayth and obedience, is playne ſynne, which yf it were done in fayth and obedience were iuſtifycacion. By thys commeth it that many folyſh Iewes drynke no wyne, counterfaytynge other therin, as we alſo playe the apes in oure orders: yee lyke Manaſſes dyd counterfayte Abraham in offrynge vp of hys chylde.
            
            
               ix. Nazaret or Nazarets ſecte.
               
                  
THe Nazarees confeſſe Ieſus of Nazareth to be the ſonne of God, yet kepe they all the lawes and ceremonyes of the olde teſtament. They refuſe the newteſtament, receauynge none but the olde, as more credible. They holde much wyth the Helonites, ſayenge that the fayth in Chriſte be good, but it is not ſufficient without the workes of the lawe, and kepynge of the commaundemēts of Moſes. Agaynſte the which is Paule Roma. ix. x. Gala. iii. iiii. v. vi.
            
            
               x. Galilei or Galileans.
               GAlilet be alſo Iewes, ſeparated from the Iewes in Iudea or Ieruſalem in many thynges. For as they differ in bodely faſhion and ſpech from them that dwell in Paleſtina, euen ſo differ they alſo in religion and fayth. Thys appeareth by S. Peter, whom hys ſpeche dyd bewraye as he was at Ieruſalem in the courte of Annas and Cayphas hygh preſtes. It is to be marked farthermore, that euery fayth and naciō hath hys religious, as aboue is ſpecifyed of ye Romanes. The Romanes before Chriſtes byrth had theyr Flamines, Prothoflamines and ſo forth, whiche were halowed or conſecrate

to theyr temples vſes. Beſydes theſe they had: Salios, Diales, Ueſtales. &c. that were as oure religious and cloyſterers.
               The Turke alſo hath hys ſpirituall and religious. So ſort is blyndneſſe, erroure and foolyſh ſpeculacion rooted in the world that it is euen the beſt coyne and valued mony, wherwyth the world wyll be payed. Yf one endeuoure to vtter thys plantacion of man wyth theyr golden and glyſterynge holynes conferrynge it wyth the infallible and pure worde of God in hys ſcripture: he is as wel herde and accepted, as yf he dyd caſte pearles before ſwyne, whiche yf thou wylt waſh of theyr walowynge in the myre, and dryue them to the cleare water, they drawe back, knorre, yee are euen ready to teare the. God graunte vs once to haue eyes to ſe: yf it be hys pleaſure.
            
            
               xi. Idumei or Idumeans.
               THe Idumeans the neghbures to the Iewes which ar a groſſe warrefaryng people, enclined to ſedicion and in ſurrectiōs, and therfore wolde be the Iewes fellowes, neuertheleſſe more in wyckednes than in obſeruynge the lawe. Theſe were

let in to Ieruſalem preuely be the zelotes, a lytle before the ſege that Titus layde there before it, whereby was cauſed much vnhappyneſſe and myſery at Ieruſalem the which Ioſephus treateth at large in the. vii. boke of the Iewyſh battayle the. xxviii. chapter. But how they beynge ouercomme of Hircanus, became Iewes and were circūcyſed reade ye. xiii. boke of antiquites of Ioſephus the. xvi. Chap. Thys Idumea bordereth vpō Egypte, and lyeth by the hylles of Arabia, which of the Hebrues was called Edom, but of other it is called Gobolitis and Amalechitis, whoſe kynge wythſtode the chylderē of Iſraell, and wolde not let them paſſe thorow hys londe.
            
            
               xii. zelotes or Gelous ſecte.
               THeſe were ſuttyll and ſedicious raſcals amonge the Iewes of Ieruſalem whiche gaue themſelues that name, as though they were gelous for the lawes of God (euen as ſuch wycked conſpiracions and ryſynges are wōt to be garnyſhed wyth clamyng & defendynge ſome good tytle) and were notwythſtondynge vyle & noughty fellous, that wolde fayne haue ben fre, & rulers thēſelues: yee it was all for ye good Māmon.

Theſe drue together, wyllynge to diſpatche many thynges (as the nature of ſuch frātike people is to take much vpō them) they wold defende Ieruſalem, whiche was rather the cauſe of deſtructiō therof. Thys heape now of the falſe Iewes that bended together and wolde haue no rulers ouer them, but wolde rule themſelues, and be called the fre Iewes yee by whome the deſtruction of Ieruſalem dyd come, were called zelotes, yt is gelous. The dyd often fyght wyth the cyteſins of Ieruſalem, diſquietynge euery man therof. They hadde alſo captaynes, but chefly one Ihon Giſcalenus a very traytoure. Theſe made a confideracy wyth the Idumeans, & ſent priuely for them to come to Ieruſalem and helpe them. But after that yt Idumeans ſawe theyr wycked dealyng, they forſoke thē and wente home agayne. The zelotes (as it fortuneth whan rude men wyll rule) yetted all the daye vp & downe the ſtretes ydle, robbynge all yt they coulde ſnatch, and foūde lyghtely an occaſiō to euery thynge. Thus was ther great treaſon: for ye cyteſins were fayne to kepe ſilēce, orels to flatter them, ſo yt vnoutſpeake able force was done to them. All ryghteouſneſſe, lawe and honeſtye was layde vnder foote. Ioſephus can ſcante

comprehende in. iiii. bokes all the myſery and force of the zelotes. Euery daye were ſcarmuſſynges, nother durſt ony man bewayle thys vnrighteouſneſſe and wronge: but euery man muſt be ſtyll, as though they were honeſte and louers of God and hys lawe, for whome the lawe dyd make. For thys cauſe haue I not vnaduiſedly ioyned thys ſecte to the other alſo. Loke farther of them in the. vii. boke of the Iewyſh battayle the. xxv. chapter.
            
            
               xiii. Sicarii or Swearders
               AFter the deſtruction of Ieruſalem, whan Cireneus was debite of Iewry certayne ſedicious Iewes, not vſed to bondes and ſeruice drue together, callyng themſelues Sicarii, of a murthure knefe called ſica. Theſe wold not obey the Romanes commaundementes, but lyke good Iewes (as they called themſelues) fyght agayne for theyr loſte fredome: and defyed vtterly all ſuch Iewes as denyed to helpe thē, robbinge and burnynge of ſuche Iewes all that they coulde come by. Thus beganne a pyteous murthurynge euery where. They ſayde alſo that whoſo wold not helpe to withſtonde the

Romanes, ſhulde be eſtemed lyke the Romanes. Iohānes Giſcalenus iuſtifyed ſuch as were adherentes to them, but as for thē that ether coūſelled for the beſt agaynſt thē, or otherwyſe withſtode them, they were ſlayne: for all theyr doynge was nothynge but force, ſo that the wanton horſe wanted only them yt wolde releaſe hym of ye brydle, that he coueted to be red of. The ſperſed Idumeans and zelotes dyd ſoone ioyne thē
                  ſelues to theſe, which were nearehande all rooted out, ſo that lyke came to lyke. After many robberyes and deſtruccyon of prouinces, both of theyrs and the Romanes they were rooted out & had a ſhameful ende (as communely all inſurreccyons and conſpiracyons do) vnder Feſtus and Albinus. Of theyr ſpirituall lyfe, dedes, robbery and ende reade Ioſephus the. xx. boke of antiquities, the. xiiii. and. xvi. Chapters. Item in the boke of the Iewyſh battayl the. vii. boke the. xxviii. and. xxix. chapters, wherof this is brefly the ſūme: Certayne of the forſayd Sicaryes that were fled the perſuynge of Albinus, fled vnto a ſtronge holde called Maſſada wherin one Eleazarus was captayne. Thys holde dyd the Romanes alſo beſege.

As for Maſſada was buylded vpon a hygh mountayne, by Ionathas a byſhop of the Iewes, and afterwarde by kynge Herode was it fenſed & made ſtrōge, prouyded plenteouſly with all maner of ordynaunce and vitayles. He layd alſo a wall of fre ſtone aboute the cytie. viii. myle compaſſe, whoſe heyght was. xii. cubytes, and the bredth. viii. cubites and vpon the wall he buylded. xxvii. towres, which were of, l. cubytes heyght. Two thynges occaſioned Herode to make this towne ſo ſtrōge: The fyrſt was that he feared leſt the Iewes wolde depoſe hym of the kyngdome, and reſtore his predeceſſoure in to it agayne. The other: that he feared Cleopatra ye quene of Egipte, which requyred hyr huſbande ofte to ſlaye Herode, and to geue her yt kyngdome of Iewry. Whā this towne now was beſeged of Flauiꝰ Syluanus captayne of the Romanes, and ſo ſore aſſaulted of them, that they within had no hope more of theyr lyues, or eſcapynge, they called to mynde how ye Romanes wolde hādle them, yf they toke the cytie, what fearfull martyr dom and payne they ſhulde put them to, or in what greueous bōdage they ſhuld be, yee and leſe the noble lyberte, wherfore they

wolde rather dye then leſe it: vpon this had Eleaſarus the captayne a goodly oracyon in the kynges palace, wherin he perſuaded the people to a wyllynge death, and a true conſtaūte hart in the lyberte, ſo that rather then the Romanes ſhulde haue power vpō them, they ſhulde preuēte them with gladly and wyllyngly to dye of theyr owne hādes. Some feble harted gaynſayd, pytyeng their wyues and chyldrē, whom Eleaſarus ſo perſuaded with many goodly reaſons and argumentes of the immortalite of the ſoule, yt as frantyke men they exhorted ech other to dye, countynge this a token of gelouſy and Gods ſeruyce, yt they onely as fre, obeyenge onely God and not the Romanes, wolde rather fall in the handes of God for theyr fredome, then to come in the handes of ye Romanes, and be vilanous ſlaues and bondmē of the Heythen. Upon this made they haiſt to dye, none wolde be the laſte, ſuche deſyre of deynge was come vpon them. He that grudged to ſlaye his wyfe or chyldren hymſelfe, toke them in his armes, kyſſed them, bleſſed them, and then prayed hys neghbure for to ſlaye them. Some other toke the chyldrē out of the mothers lappes, ſome

mothers offred them themſelues, as though they wolde ſo prouyde for them, ther was none that abhorred ſuch a debe. This wyſe ſlewe euery one his frende, requyred therto of frendſhippe, whiche myght not fynde in his harte to do it hymſelfe. Many leſt they ſhuld be the laſt, ſlewe themſelues. The laſt caryed all theyr goodes vpon an heape, to burne them, (leſt they ſhulde come in ye hā
                  des of the Romanes.) As for the corne and other vitayles dyd they leaue in theyr place that they ſhuld not be rekened ouercome, or cōſtrayned to this by famine or deſperaciō, but to teſtifye that they had done this of ſet purpoſe, and good and fre mynde. Whan al were kylled ſaue. x. perſons, they caſt lottes which of them ſhulde kyll the other. ix. and he hymſelfe at the laſt alſo. Whan he onely was lefte, he loked about whether ony were lefte that had nede of his hande. But whan he ſawe no body, he ſet the palace in fyre, & with a valiaūt hande ſlewe hymſelfe. Thus dyed they al in one nyght, whoſe nōbre was ix. c. and. lx. men, beſydes wyues & chyldren, thynkynge none to haue remayned. But. ii. wemen, and. v. boyes, hearynge the concluſion and agrement of this dredfull deuyce,

hyd themſelues in caues or pyttes vnder the earth. The Romanes that lay before the cytie maruayled that they ſawe nor herde ony enemyes, but only a fyre, thinkyng nothyng leſſe then this fearfull chaunce, came to the walles, gaue a ruſh at the wall with the battelrame, to ſe whether ony body wold come in ſyght. Upon this came forth the forſayde vii. perſons, and ſhewed the Romanes al the matter, which the Romanes wolde not beleue for the haynouſneſſe of it, vntyll they came in to the kyngly palace, and foūde all the coarſes on a heape: wherof they maruayled and were more abaſhed, then reioyced. After this lefte Flauius Syluius the captayne men of warre in the towne and fenſed it to his behofe. But the Sicarii left not of: for ſuche as were fledde to Alexandria and The be, rayſed a new inſurreccyon and conſpiracyon, perſuadynge the Iewes that were there to fyght for theyr fredom, and knowlege God onely to be theyr Lorde.
               Such as wolde not cōſente to them, but perſuaded the cōtrary, thoſe they ſlew. For this cauſe aſſembled the mooſt ſageſt and diſcre teſt Iewes ſuch of they: nacyon, as were in other places alſo, and diſcloſed the fury and

raſhneſſe of the ſycaries or ſwearders, ſhewynge what myſchefe and inconuenience ſhulde come, yf they folowed theyr mynde, and declared alſo what vnhappyneſſe had euer ben bred by theyr conſpiracyons. Upon this they fell vpon them, toke. vi. c. of them priſoners. Thus were theſe takē alſo, which were martyred and put to execucion with diuerſe tormentes, only was it required of them to graunte obedience to ye Emperour and call hyin theyr Lorde: the which none of them dyd, nor wolve graunte, but abode ſtyfly by theyr mynde and opinion, ſuffred death rather lyke brute beaſtes, than reaſonable men, yee euen chyldren alſo: of whoſe hardneckedneſſe and conſtaunce many one dyd wonder and maruayle.
            
            
               xiiii. Menelayſh & Iaſonyſh ſecte.
               IN the tyme of Antiochus Epiphanis ye tyraunte, turned many Iewes to thys ſecte (perchaunce for feare) & yet wold be called good Iewes. Theſe had two byſhops vntyll the tyme of the Machabees.
            
            
               xv. The Amonites and Moabitesſecte.
               
                  
THe Amonites and Moabites be ſuche as beſydes God worſhypped the Idoll Moloch, yt is mans wyſoome, & after the enſample of Abraham offced theyr chyldren vnto God, prouynge it featly with argumentes and wraſted ſcriptures, ſayenge on thys wyſe: All that God createth, doth pleaſe hym. Now it that pleaſeth hym done of the one, pleaſeth him alſo done of another ſeynge he accepteth no perſones: wherfore that we offer vp oure chylderen as Abrahā dyd, is hys wyll and pleaſure alſo.
            
            
               ¶ The concluſion of the Iewyſh ſectes and orders with all the other.
               BEholde (good reader) thys Babel or confuſion, and compare with thys the Heythenyſh and Turkyſh ſecte, and I doute not but thou wylt ſaye it is the Deuell, which goeth aboute, mommynge wyth ſo many viſores. Thou muſt confeſſe alſo that all ſectes, faythes and orders, excepte only the true and fre Chriſtendome and Newe teſtament (whiche is earneſt fayth, lyfe, holy gooſt, and no lawe or dead letter) are noughte els ſaue a fonde Iewyſhneſſe.

But it goeth thus to worke in the worlde, that they which be tryed ſhulde be manifeſt i. Cor. xi. nother was ye church euer in a better caſe, or more floryſhyng, then myddes amonge hyr fyndes, ſectes and wolues. For Chriſt is not come to geue an outwarde or worldly peace, but his peace: that is, of the conſcience. The church muſt growe tryed, & exercyſed amonge hyr fyndes. Wherfore let it go that wyl not abyde, for chaffe muſt be ſundered frō corne. This I ſaye, becauſe that ſo many ſectes be not only no hurte to Chriſtendome, but alſo profytable, an exercitacyon of theyr knyghthode and a cōqueſt of heauen. Sūma ſummarum it is called: Salutē ex inimicis noſtris, and not dānum or deſolacionem. Upon this ſayeth Chriſte Mat. xxiiii. that it is not poſſible the electe ſhulde be deceaued, but for theyr ſake ſhall ye peryllous dayes be ſhortened. He that hath once aſſayed the trueth, ſhall neuer fall frō it, without he be not of the trueth, and ſuch are letten go: for Chriſt muſte ſo clenſe and purge his floore, trye his & ſeparte ye corne from chaffe. i. Corin. xi. But ſuche ſhepe of Chriſte that belonge to God the father,

heare no voyce but theyr heerdmans, and can not ahyde the voyce of the ſtraunger. Ioh. x. God knoweth hys, and them cā nomā take out of hys handes. Ioh. x. Thus is Chriſtes prayer herde, namely: yt Peters fayth fayle not in them that be Peters. Luce. xxii But that God rebuketh falſe prophetes, ſayeng that they haue deceaued hys people, he ſheweth how the matter was with them: For that haue they done, ſo much as lyethin them, though God haue letted and not ſuffered it to be done to hys electe & choſen. Yet are they iuſtly blamed therfore. For theyr wyll & purpoſe was good. Now ſeynge that God iudgeth the harte and wyll, therfore haue they no wronge done to them, but ryght, whan they are iudged to be deceauers of the people.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            ¶ The fayth of the Indians, euen as one Mathew the embaſſadoure of Preſteriās dyd vtter it before Emanuel kynge of Portingale. Anno. M. D. xiii.
            1 Fyrſt do they beleue with vs the trinite of perſons, and one God.
            2 And ye ſame maruaylouſly to haue created heauen, earth, and all that is conteyned in both of nothynge.
            3 That Ieſus Chriſte, the anoynted kyng the ſaueoure and the Meſſias, ſo oft promyſed by the Prophetes, the very ſonne of the true God, was borne of Mary the virgine both before and after the byrth in Bethleem the cytie of Dauid.
            4 And that the ſame beynge iudged of Pilate the wycked debite or lewtenaunt of the Romanes in Iewry, dyed at Ieruſalem for oure ſynnes, and was buryed.
            5 And continently to haue gone downe to hell, whoſe gates he brake: and on ye thyrde

daye he roſe agayne alyue, wyth great victory of hys enemyes and death: and finally to haue aſcended vp to heauen by a wonder full aſcencion, from whence he came.
            6 They beleue alſo an vniuerſall and immortall reſurrecciō of the bodyes, after thys mortall lyfe.
            7 They beleue alſo in the ſame fayth, that Chriſt ſhall iudge both the good and euell, & that euery man ſhall receaue rewarde accordynge to hys dedes done in thys lyfe.
            8 After thys iudgmēt ſhall the godly haue euerlaſtynge ioye, but the wycked euerlaſtynge payne.
            9 They (as we) kepe the. x. commaundementes.
            10 They graunte. vii. deadly ſynnes alſo.
            11 They haue all the bokes of ſcrypture as we.
            12 They haue the. iiii. goſpels alſo.
            13 And of Paules Epiſtles do they want none.
            14 They approue all ye artikles of ye crede.
            15 They prefer the pater noſter before all other prayers.
            16 They make much alſo of ye Aue Mary.
            17 Theyr chyldren do they baptyſe wyth

holy water on the. vii. daye, and alſo circumciſe them after Moſes law, after ye coſtume and vſe of longe tyme.
            18 On twolftyde alſo doth all the people yearly profeſſe opēly theyr fayth with great ioye, and ſo are they baptyſed agayne.
            19 They ſaye maſſe alſo nerehande after our vſe, & that nother for lucre or auaūtage.
            20 The ſacramente of altare do they eſteme the chefe and principall, confeſſynge ſyncerely there to be the body and bloude of Chriſt, and cōmunicate vnder both kyndes.
            21 They confeſſe the holy oyle & anoyntyng to be ſacramētes.
            22 As ſoone as they haue ſynned, do they to ſhreue themſelues to a preſt.
            23 The penaunce do they diligētly fulfyl.
            24 Faſtynge do they accomplyſh wythout eatynge of fleſh or fyſh.
            25. Lent do they begynne on Septuageſima.
            26 The Sondaye and other holy dayes inſtitute of theyr byſhops, do they kepe reuerently.
            27 They haue the remembraunce of Chriſtes paſſion on the laſt weke of lent, as we.
            28 Palmeſōdaye do they vſe with vs alſo,

and Candelmaſſe.
            29 Proceſſion goynge do they vſe alſo.
            30 They kepe Alhalowtyde and alſoule daye alſo.
            31 Aſhwednyſoaye accordeth with vs, both in ceremonyes and tyme.
            32 They haue alſo monaſteryes, not only of men, but alſo of wemen, lyuynge in great abſtinence.
            33 Wherof ſome cloyſters haue. vii. or. viii. C. or a. M. perſons.
            34 One hyll is there, wheron dwell. xii. M. religious perſons, whiche maye in no wyſe begge, but laboure for theyr lyuynges: neuertheleſſe yf ony almeſſe be geuē them, that maye they take welynough, ſo that it be not craued.
            35 They haue preachers to teach Chriſtes fayth, and that of ye beſt learned amōge the preſtes and religious.
            36 There are many hoſpitals for the poore only to be lodged and tended.
            37 The churches are a centuary for myſdoers, but ſo, that he that is manſlayer be ſo ſlenderly fed that at the laſte he muſt dye of hungre.
            38 Theyr dead do they bury wyth no leſſe

ceremonyes than we, & alſo in churches.
            39 Holy men and of heauenly conuerſaciō do they canonizat, after they haue ſearched theyr lyfe diligently.
            40 Men mary but one wyfe at once, and that at the church dore.
            41 And after olde coſtumes & lawes they mary none wythin ye. vii. degre, nother may theyr Patriarke diſpenſe here wyth.
            42 They haue images of all ſayntes in theyr churches.
            43 Holy water do they kepe, and thynke ye it chaſeth awaye wycked ſpretes.
            44 They haue many churches, belles and holy veſtimentes for ſpirituall ſeruices.
            45 They kepe mydſomer mooſt ſolemly.
            46 They begynne the yeare at Septēbre.
            47 They knowe ther is an head byſhop of Rome, but the cauſe that they obey hym not, is the great diſtaunce from hym.
            48 Saynte Bartholomew the Apoſtle taught them fyrſt the fayth and goſpell.
            49 Theyr preſtes are maryed, but after the wyues deceaſſe they mary not agayne: neuertheleſſe theyr patriarke lyueth chaſte.
            ¶ Thys dyd ye aforeſayde Mathew confeſſe in the preſēce of the nobles & clargy of Portyngale.
            
               
¶ Here endeth the treatyſe of all ſectes, orders and religions, both of Chriſtendom and the Iewes: Tranſlated out of hye Dutch in Englyſhe.
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Printed in Southwarke by me Iames Nicolſon for Ihon Gough.
            Cum Priuilegio.
         
      
   