
      
         
            
            
            Paſquils Palinodia, AND His progreſſe to the Tauerne, Where after the ſuruey of the SELLAR, you are preſented WITH A pleaſant pynte of Poeticall Sherry.
            
            
               Nulla placere diu, nec viuere carmina poſſunt
               quae ſcribuntur aquae potoribus.
               
                  Horac: ad mecaenatem.
            
            
               Quem non
               Huc, huc pierides.
               Castalius or Vinum Hiſpanenſe
               depiction of muse and vintner
            
            LONDON: Printed by THOMAS SNODHAM, 1619.
         
         
            
            APPROBATIO.
            
               Jnnocuos cenſura poteſt permittere luſus,
               Laſciua eſt nobis pagina, vita proba eſt.
            
            Sic cenſeo M. Valerius Martialis.
         
         
            
            THE PRINTER To the Reader.
            
               
                  GENTLEMEN, I vnderſtand that the AVTHOR is ſo farre out of patience, to heare that this Paſquill is preſt for the publike view, which was entended onely for the priuate ſatisfaction of his peculiar friends, that hee will not greet the READER ſo much as with a Letter of Commendations; yet conſidering that in theſe dayes we are altother carryed away with Faſhions, and that it is quite beſide the cuſtome to put forth a Poem, without a Dedicatorie preamble, let mee I pray you make bold, for want of a better ſcholler, to ſalute the courteous Reader with a few words of Complement. Who the Author is I know not, & therefore on his behalfe I will be ſilent; yet I heare that hee is of the minde of that merry Huntſman, which would neither giue nor ſell his Hare, but when he ſaw the Trauailer gallop away with her, and that hee was out of hope to haue her againe, he cryed out, Take her, Gentleman, I will beſtow her on you. Concerning the Poem, although I ſhall be thought to be ſutor vltra crepidam, yet in my opinion, it is a tollerable Pint of Poeticall Sherry, and if the Muſes Seller afford no worſe wine, it will make Sacke better reſpected, and goe downe the merrier.
            
               What the peeuiſh, puritanicall, and meager Zoiliſt out of his malitious humour ſhall calumniate, it ſkils not, for as the Prouerbe is, aut bibat, aut abeat: This diſh was not dreſt to ſet his Dog-teeth on worke, and therefore if he like not theſe Lettice, let him pull backe his lips, for as the Poet ſaith,
                  Ʋirg. de Liuore.
               
                  Non lux, non cibus eſt ſuauis illi,
                  Nec potus iuuat, aut ſapor lyaei,
                  Nec ſi pocula Iupite, propinet, &c.
               
He was borne with teeth, and grynd when he firſt came into the world, he feedes vpon ſnakes, drinks ſmall-beere and vinegar, keepes no good company, liues without charitie, and dyes without honeſtie; hic finis Zoili. Notwithſtanding for the ingenious and candidous Readers, and all thoſe fat honeſt men which are of a franke and ſociable diſpoſition, I dare be bold to promiſe, that this diſh of drinke will not be diſtaſtfull vnto any of their ſtomackes, for as they haue bodies of a better conſtitution, ſo are their minds more fairely qualified, and their iudgements freer from corruption: and therefore to their taſte is this Pinte of Poetrie dedicated, which if it ſeeme pleaſant to their palate, let mee be well payd for preſenting them with it in paper, and I reſt ſatisfied.
         
         
            Libellus ad Lectorem ex Martiale.
            
            
               RVmpitur invidia quidam, chariſſime Lector,
               quod me turba legit, rumpitur invidia,
               Rumpitur invidia, quòd ſum iucundus amicis,
               quòd conviva frequens, rumpitur invidia;
               Rumpitur invidia, quod amamur, quod
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   probamur,
               rumpatur, quiſ quis rumpitur invidia.
            
            
               Non nimium cure: nam caenae fercula noſtrae
               malim conviuis quàm placuiſſe Cocis.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Paſquils Palinodia, OR, His Pynte of Poetrie.
            
               LOe. I the man whoſe Muſe whilome did play
               A horne-pipe both to Country and the Citty,
               Am now againe enioyn'd to ſing or ſay,
               And tune my crowde vnto another ditty,
               To comfort Moone-fac'd Cuckolds, that were ſad,
               My Muſe before was all in hornes yclad,
               But now ſhe marcheth forth and on her backe
               She weares a Corſlet of old Sherry Sacke.
               
            
            
               Therefore it is not as in dayes of yore,
               When bloud-ſhed and fierce battailes were her ſong
               And when her Trumpets did Tantara rore
               Till all her murth'ring Souldiers lay along,
               A milder tune ſhe now playes on her ſtrings,
               And Carrols to good company ſhe ſings,
                     The Dedication.
                  
               
               To all good fellowes that are wiſe in Seaſon,
               
               Liſten a while and you ſhall know the reaſon.
               
            
            
               Long had ſhe Chaunted for the horned Crew
               
               And reap'd no praiſe nor penny from their hands,
               Nor cup of drinke, which is a Fidlers due
               (As euery good companion vnderſtands)
               And therefore vnregarded being dry,
               My Muſe grew melancholy out a-cry,
               And angry forth ſhe runs into the ſtreetes,
               Curſing each churliſh Cuckold which ſhe meetes.
            
            
               
               When I beheld her in that moody vaine,
               Which wont to be ſo blythe and full of ſport,
               After I ran, to call her home againe,
               Leaſt ſhe might chaunce to meete ſome man of ſort,
               Some wealthy tradeſman, that had been Cornuted,
               
               Of whoſe large hornes it muſt not be diſputed,
               And in this crabbed humour fall to rayle,
               And ſo be had to Counter, without bayle.
            
            
               When I my ſullen Muſe had ouertooke,
               I gan reproue her for her wilde behauiour,
               And charg'd her to returne, as ſhe did looke
               Euer to be receiu'd into my fauour:
               But ſhe as mad, as is in March a Hare,
               
               Did like vnto a Bedlam ſtampe and ſtare,
               And for an houre her patience was ſo weake,
               And rage ſo preſt her, that ſhee could not ſpeake.
            
            
               At laſt when paſſion was a little ſway'de,
               And that the raynes of fury gan to ſlack,
               A thouſand curſes on the head, ſhe ſaid▪
               
               Of euery Cuckold, that cries What de'e lacke,
               
               May all their hornes grow viſible to ſight,
               May they proue Iealous, and their women light,
               And care not who looke on, that all may geere
               And laugh aloud when their Rams-heads appeare.
            
            
               And may diſcredit, ſcorne and fowle diſdaine
               Light on the hornes of euery Engliſh Goate,
               Vngratefull churles, that reward my paine
               Not with ſo much, as with a ſingle groat:
               Haue I wip'd off the ſcurrilous diſgrace
               Which euery Varlet caſt vpon their face,
               And righted all their wrongs, yet none ſo kinde,
               As with faire words to ſhew a thankefull minde?
            
            
               
               If I had Chroniceld the hungry Rats
               
               Which eate vp Corne, and made prouiſion deare▪
               
               Or Regiſtred what price a Cade of Sprats,
               
               And pickl'd Herrings, bare in ſuch a yeare,
               What grim-fac'd Collier ſtood vpon the Pill
                        •
                     ry,
               
               And who did march moſt brauely at Th'artillary
                  ▪
               
               Or how men walk'd on Thames the laſt great
                     〈…〉
                  oſt,
               Then I am ſure my paynes had not been 
                     •
                  oſt.
            
            
               But I haue labour'd to redeeme their fame,
               And lift their heads to honour with my pen,
               Diſolu'd all Clouds that did obſcure the ſame,
               And ranckt them with the worthieſt ſorts of men,
               I crown'd their horns with bayes, & grac'd thē more
               Then euer any Muſe hath done before,
               And yet no Cuckold from the forked rankes,
               Puts out his weathers-face to giue me thankes.
            
            
               If for their wiues I had my lampe-oyle ſpent,
               And in their ſeruice drawne my Inke-horne dry,
               Thoſe louing creatures would withall content
               Haue ſought me out, my loue to gratifie,
               Kiſſes and confects had falne with my wiſhes,
               And many other delicates in diſhes,
               And euen the pen, that writ in their defence,
               Should haue beene guilded for my recompence.
            
            
               Hapleſſe was I to leaue thoſe gentle Soules,
               
               Poore wormes, that ſuffer more then all men ſee,
               And take the part of peruerſe Iobornols,
               
               Void of good nature, loue, and courteſie,
               
               Now I perceiue my error, and repent
               That I againſt them was ſo vehement,
               And that the world may know that I am turned,
               Here I doe wiſh thoſe bitter lines were burned.
            
            
               
               For now I finde thoſe Doues are Innocent,
               And that the Cuckold chiefly is in fault,
               Whoſe ſtubborne carriage, and ſterne regiment
               Makes vpright women many times to halt:
               For when a man is of a ſowre condition,
               Churliſh and froward in his diſpoſition,
               It thruſts ſuch things into a womans minde
               As ſhe nere dream'd on, if he had beene kinde.
            
            
               And blame her not, for ſhe is not of Steele,
               
               Nor made of Iron, Braſſe, or ſuch hard Mettle,
               
               Neither ſo ſenceleſſe that ſhe cannot feele
               When ſhe is vs'd as Tinkers doe a Kettle,
               
               She is a tender thing, refin'd and pure,
               And harſh rough handling cannot well endure,
               But like a Venice-Glaſſe, ſhe breakes aſunder,
               When boiſtrous man will ſtriue to keep her vnder.
            
            
               Let the mad Cuckold ponder his wiues caſe
               In equall ballance iuſtly with his owne,
               And he ſhall finde, that ſhe doth onely trace
               His crooked footſteps; for if ſhe but frowne,
               Or ſomewhat ſharpely ſpeake a word or two,
               When good occaſion moues her ſo to doe,
               Then ſtraight he calls her halfe a dozen whores,
               And to the Tauerne gets him out of doores.
            
            
               And what is then his prattle with his mates
               His fellow Drunkards, ſitting or'e the pot?
               There he begins the ſtory, and relates
               What an infernall fury he hath got,
               An euerlaſting Scold, thats neuer quiet
               But checks him for his company and ryot,
               Why bang her well quoth one, for by this quart,
               If ſhe were my wife, I would breake her heart.
            
            
               
               Well, quoth another, fill a cup of Sacke,
               
               And let all Scolds be damb'd as deepe as hell,
               Abridge her maintenance, and from her backe
               Pull her proud clothes; for they doe make her ſwell.
               And thus in diueliſh counſell there they ſit,
               Till with old Sherry they haue drown'd their wit,
               Then druncke, at mid-night, home the knaue doth creep,
               And beats his wife, and ſpues, & fals aſleep.
            
            
               There lyes the beaſt vntill hee riſe againe
               Next day at twelue, when being not halfe well,
               A haire of Bacchus dog muſt cure the paine
               In which by laſt nights ſurfeiting hee fell:
               Then he at Tauerne, as hee did before
               Drincks himſelfe drunck that day & many more,
               And in this thriftles courſe his glaſſe doth runne
               Till he runne out at heeles, and be vndone.
            
            
               And what excuſe doth then the Bankrupt frame
               For his profuſe and prodigall expence?
               Mary forſooth, his Wife did cauſe the ſame,
               Againſt whoſe ſcolding tongue there's no defence:
               For when a man at home cannot be merry,
               Hee's forc'd to runne abroad to drinck old Sherry:
               Thus ſhee, poore Turtle, wrong and ſlander beares,
               Who ſits meane while at home in griefe & teares.
            
            
               Shall this moſt falſe and ſlandrous accuſation
               Be currant for the man, and his abuſe?
               And ſhall a woman ſuffer condemnation,
               And not be heard to ſpeake in her excuſe?
               It is too great a wrong, and moſt vniuſt,
               The weaker to the wall ſhould thus be thruſt,
               And when ſhe hath a more indifferent cauſe
               To be deny'd the fauour of the lawes.
            
            
               
               Shall a vaſt vnthrift with a falſe pretence
               Wrong his poore wife, and be exempt from blame?
               And ſhall a woman which hath iuſt offence,
               And forc'd by dogged vſage to her ſhame,
               If ſhe another friend doe entertaine,
               To giue her ſome content, and eaſe her paine,
               Shall ſhe be cenſur'd with diſgracefull ſpeeches,
               And he ſtand cleere becauſe he wears the breeches?
            
            
               
                  
                     Mars was the firſt Cuckold maker.
                  Awake great Mars, for ſure thou art aſleepe,
               Or ſuch iniuſtice thou would'ſt not let paſſe:
               There was a time, when thou didſt loue to keepe
               And in a corner kiſſe a pretty Laſſe:
               And therefore if within thy fiery breſt
               Any quick ſparke of warlike courage reſt,
               For old acquaintance ſake doe women right,
               And let them not be ouerthrowne with might.
            
            
               But Mars is deafe, and iuſtice will not heare,
               And lawes are partiall againſt womens ſide,
               And for becauſe the cruell lawes are cleere
               When women in another caſe are try'de,
               That by their booke they ſhall receiue no fauour,
               Which vnto wicked men is oft a Sauiour:
               They now ſuppoſe it is a great offence,
               If they be heard to ſpeake in their defence.
            
            
               But they ſhall ſpeake you forked Vnicornes,
               
               And you ſhall heare them to your ſmall content,
               And in deſpight of your ambitious Hornes,
               Ile ſtand as Champion for the Innocent:
               And ſo diſplay your baſeneſſe and diſgrace,
               That children ſhall deride you to your face,
               And Towne and countrie both, ſhall notice haue,
               That euery Cuckold is a foole or knaue.
            
            
               
               Peace idle Muſe, quoth I, and be content,
               Thou art too bitter, vehement and loud,
               Theſe rayling words will make vs both be ſhent,
               For Cuckolds are growne mighty, rich, and proud,
               And wiſe-men thinke it is the part of fooles
               
               To be too buſie medling with edge-tooles:
               And therfore be aduis'd, I doe implore thee,
               Leaſt with their horns, for barking, they doe gore thee.
            
            
               I care not for their greatneſſe, ſhe reply'de,
               Nor doe I feare them though their horns looke high,
               For preſently let come what will betyde,
               Into the Citty ſhall my Iourney lye;
               Where I will ring all Cuckolds ſuch a peale,
               As ſhall quite ſhame them in the Common-weale.
               Well then, ſaid I, if nought will bring thee backe
               Yet ere thou goe, lets drinke a pinte of Sack.
               
            
            
               For now I ſaw, that in this raging fit
               To vſe perſwaſion was but further folly,
               And that her paſſion bad exil'd her wit,
               And drown'd my Muſe ſo deepe in melancholy,
               That for to cure her was no other charme,
               But with a cup of Sack to make her warme,
               And heate her braines, which as all Poets finde,
               Doth quicken wit, and quallifies the minde.
            
            
               Betweene the Muſes and the God of wine,
               
               There is a league of kindeneſſe, peace and loue,
               There conſanguinity doth them combine,
               Being begotten both by luſty Ioue,
               
               So that, no Muſe well bred, and truly borne,
               Her naturall brothers companie can ſcorne,
               And by their crownes their amity is ſeene,
               One wearing Lawrell, th'other Iuye greene.
            
            
               
               And this to be the reaſon I ſuppoſe
               That euery Iouiall Poet loues good liquour,
               It is the Heliconian Butt, that ſweetly flowes
               With ſprightly Sack, which makes inuention quicker,
               And hee's no lawfull ſonne vnto the Muſes
               
               That loues ſmall beere, and better drinck refuſes,
               Nor can a watriſh wit the Lawrell win,
               His Muſe is lancke, and his conceit is thin.
            
            
               And not alone haue Poets theſe conditions,
               Merry conceited lads, and like their mothers,
               But all their ſeruants, Rymers and Muſitions,
               
               And red-fac'd Trumpetters, with many others
               Which haue with Crochets ſtuft their pericranions,
               
               Are ſtill reputed to be good Companions,
               And for this reaſon which is here preſented,
               My Muſe to ſee the Tauerne was contented.
            
            
               Yet to the Cittie faine ſhe would haue gone,
               Yeelding a reaſon for to draw me thither,
               As that their wine was better ten to one
               Neere to th'exchange, where Marchants meet together,
               But I halfe Iealous, where great numbers be
               That ſome grand Cuckold ſhe might chance to ſee,
               And in this heate of Furye fall to iarre,
               Drew her along at laſt through Temple-Barre.
               
            
            
               Keepe in your heads my Neighbours of the Strand,
               
               And looke not out vntill my Muſe be paſt,
               Your Wiues are good, for ought I vnderſtand,
               And yon may be no Cuckolds, and they chaſt,
               Yet leaſt my Muſe might chance for to diſcry
               Something might ſtirre her bile as ſhe walkes by,
               For peace-ſake, I entreate you euery one,
               You would pull in your heads, till ſhe be gone.
            
            
               
               Fairely we marched on, till our approach
               Within the ſpacious paſſage of the Strand
               
               Obiected to our ſight a Sommer-broach,
               
               Ycleap'd a May-pole, which in all our Land
               No Citty, Towne, nor ſtreete, can parralell,
               Nor can the lofty ſpire of Clarken-well,
               
               Although he haue the vantage of a Rock,
               Pearch vp more high his turning weather-cock.
            
            
               Stay quoth my Muſe, and here behold a ſigne
               Of harmeleſſe mirth and honeſt neighborhood,
               Where all the Pariſh did in one combyne,
               To mount the rod of peace, and none withſtood:
               Where no capritious Conſtables diſturbe them,
               Nor Iuſtice of the peace did ſeeke to curbe them,
               Nor peeuiſh Puritan in rayling ſort,
               Nor ouer-wiſe Church-warden ſpoyl'd the ſport.
            
            
               Happy the age, and harmeleſſe were the dayes,
               (For then true loue and amity was found,)
               When euery village did a May-pole raiſe,
               And Whitſon-ales, and May-games did abound:
               And all the luſty Yonkers in a rout
               With merry Laſſes daunc'd the rod about,
               Then friendſhip to their banquets bid the gueſts,
               And poore men far'd the better for their feaſts.
            
            
               Then raign'd plaine honeſt meaning, and good will,
               And neighbours tooke vp points of difference,
               In Common lawes the Commons had no skill,
               And publique feaſts were Courts of Conſcience.
               Then one graue Seriant at the Common-pleas
               
               Might well diſpatch the Motions at his eaſe,
               And in his owne hands though he had the Law,
               Yet hardly had a Clyent worth a ſtraw.
            
            
               
               Then Lords of Caſtles, Mannors, Townes & Towers
               Reioyc'd when they beheld the Farmers flouriſh,
               And would come downe vnto the Sommer-Bowers
               To ſee the Country gallants dance the Morris,
               And ſomtimes with his tennants handſome daughter
               Would fall in liking, and eſpouſe her after
               Vnto his Seruing-man, and for her portion
               Beſtow on him ſome Farme, without extortion.
            
            
               But ſince the Sommer-poles were ouerthrowne,
               And all good ſports and merryments decayd,
               How times and men are chang'd, ſo well is knowne
               It were but labour loſt if more were ſaid:
               And therefore Ile be ſilent, for I hold,
               They will not mend although their faults be told,
               Nor is it ſafe the ſpur-gal'd world to pricke,
               For ſhee's a luſty Iade, and Iades will kicke.
            
            
               Alas poore May-poles, What ſhould be the cauſe
               That you were almoſt baniſh't from the earth?
               You neuer were rebellious to the lawes,
               Your greateſt crime was harmeleſſe honeſt mirth;
               What fell malignant ſpirit was there found,
               To caſt your tall Piramides to ground?
               To be ſome enuious nature it appeares,
               That men might fall together by the eares.
            
            
               Some fierie Zealous Brother, full of ſpleene,
               That all the world in his deepe wiſedome ſcornes,
               Could not endure the May-pole ſhould be ſeene
               To weare a cox-combe higher then his hornes,
               He tooke it for an Idoll, and the feaſt
               For ſacrifice vnto that painted beaſt;
               Or for the wooden Troian Aſſe of ſinne,
               By which the wicked merrie Greeks came in.
            
            
               
               But I doe hope once more the day will come,
               That you ſhall mount and pearch your Cocks as high
               As ere you did, and that the Pipe and Drum,
               Shall bid defiance to your enemy;
               And that all Fidlers which in corners lurke,
               And haue beene almoſt ſtaru'd for want of worke,
               Shall draw their Crowds, and at your exaltation
               Play many a fit of merry recreation.
            
            
               And thou my natiue towne, which was of old,
                     Leede
                  
               
               (When as thy Bon-fiers burn'd, and May-poles ſtood,
               And when thy Waſſall-cups were vncontrol'd,)
               The ſommer-Bower of peace and neighberhood,
               Although ſince theſe went down, thou ly'ſt forlorn
               By factious ſchiſmes, and humors ouer-borne,
               Some able hand I hope thy rod will raiſe,
               That thou maiſt ſee once more thy happy daies.
            
            
               And now conceiue vs to be come as farre
               As the perſpicuous fabrick of the Burſe,
               
               Againſt which frame, the old Exchange makes warre,
               Miſdoubting that her trading would be worſe
               By the erection of that ſtately front,
               Which cryes what lack ye, when men looke vpon't:
               But for thy takings, Greſham; take no care,
               Thou wilt haue doings whilſt thou haſt good ware.
            
            
               Whil'ſt Coaches and Caroaches are i'th world,
               And women take delight to buy fond Bables,
               And o're the ſtones whilſt Ladies will be hurld.
               For which their horſes are ſtill kept i'th ſtables,
               And whilſt thy ſhops with prettie wenches ſwarm,
               Which for thy cuſtome are a kinde of charme
               To idle gallants, thou ſhalt ſtill be ſure
               To haue good vtterance for thy furniture.
            
            
               
               And therefore be not enuious, nor conſpire
               Againſt thy yonger Siſters ſmall beginnings,
               Thou art ſo rich thy trade cannot retyre,
               And ſhe ſo poore thou need'ſt not feare her winnings,
               If ought doe raiſe her head, (as who can tell?)
               It is her lowlineſſe will make things ſell,
               Her ſole humility will vent her wares,
               For if men wil not climb, ſhel'e come down ſtayers.
            
            
               If ſhe this open courſe had kept before,
               And out of ſight her ſhops had not withdrawne,
               Doubtleſſe her takings would haue been much more,
               For points, gloues, garters, cambrick-ſmocks & lawn.
               The man of trade which doth the world begin,
               Seldome growes rich if he keepe ſhop within:
               For by this meanes no cuſtome can be gotten,
               And ere he ſell his wares, they will be rotten.
            
            
               And therefore let a Tradeſman that would thriue,
               Firſt get a ſhop in ſome faire ſtreete of taking,
               My next aduice is, that he fairely wiue,
               For ſuch a toy, is many a yong-mans making,
               Then let his ſhop be ſtuft on euery ſide
               With new additions to increaſe vaine pride,
               And he ſhall ſee, great Gallants with huge Broaches,
               
               Light at his dore from Male and Female Coaches.
               
            
            
               The Burſe of Brittaine left behinde our backe,
               Wee now aproach the croſſe, ycleaped Charing,
               
               A weather-beaten peece, which goes to wracke,
               Becauſe the world of Charitie is ſparing,
               Hang downe thy head, O Weſtminſter for ſhame,
               And all you Lawyers which paſſe by the ſame,
               Bluſh (if you can) and are not brazen faced,
               To ſee ſo faire a monument diſgraced.
            
            
               
               Doe you not ſee how London hath repaired
                     The Croſſe in Cheape-ſide.
                  
               
               And trim'd her Siſter, with great charge and coſt?
               And though her head was from her ſhoulders pared
               Yet ſhe is now reſtor'd, and fairely croſt,
               
               Braue Free-men, I applaud you for this thing,
               And will one day your further praiſes ſing,
               Meane while my Muſe in commendation tels,
               You keepe your wiues moſt neate, and all things elſe.
               
            
            
               It is a ſhame you Gown'd-men of the Law,
               
               For tis with you that I muſt put the Caſe,
               
               Although I know you doe not care a ſtraw,
               What I doe tell you, yet vnto your face
               I ſay, it is a ſhame, and ill befits,
               That you ſhould ſell your ſhreds of Law & Writs
               
               At ſo deere rate, to many a poore mans loſſe,
               And not beſtow one Fee to mend this Croſſe.
               
            
            
               For many pious Acts and Monuments
               The Citie will for euer be commended,
               Many faire Colledges with goodly rents,
               From zeale of Kings and Biſhops are deſcended,
               And many priuate men, our ages wonders
               Haue vnto famous Hoſpitals beene founders:
               But where ſuruiues that worke of Charitie,
               That from a Lawyer drawes his pedigree?
            
            
               Redeeme your fame, you law-full Barriſters,
               
               And let the world ſpeake better of your zeale,
               The commons ſay, which are no flatterers,
               That halfe the riches of the Common-weale
               
               Is in your hands, or will be if you liue,
               Becauſe you alwaies take, and nothing giue,
               And that your Fees which certaine were of old,
               Are now vncertaine, like a Coppi-hold.
                     The Fynes.
                  
               
            
            
               
               And yet they ſay you are ſo honeſt growne,
               You will not take your Fee to plead a cauſe,
               Though once you had a Fee, you now haue none,
               That ſingle word accords not with the Lawes:
               It muſt come ſhowring in a golden flood,
               Or ſome of you will doe a man ſmall good,
               And whatſo'ere men giue, you'l not forſake it,
               Becauſe you know that by the Law you take it.
            
            
               Thus doe the vulgars talke, and you can tell
               Whether this fame be true, or elſe a lyer,
               But howſoere it be, you may doe well
               To let poore Charity come neere your fire
               And warme her ſelfe, that men no more may hold
               The charity of Lawyers to be cold:
               It will mens loud with admiration draw,
               To ſee ſome Goſpell ioyn'd with Common-law.
               
            
            
               And for the firſt good worke of your deuotion,
               When next you trample to the ſpacious Hall,
               Let Charing-croſſe entreat you heare her Motion,
               That for your ſuccour by the way doth call,
               Build vp her ruynes, and reſtore her glory,
               Which time and graceles hands made tranſitory.
               And let her be as faire to looke vpon,
               As is the ſtately Croſſe at Abington.
               
            
            
               Profit and honour certainely will ſpring
               Both to your ſoules and calling by this ſight,
               Into your minde good motions it will bring,
               As you paſſe by, to doe your Clyents right,
               To your vocation will ariſe from hence
               A good report, and greater reuerence,
               When with a croſſe ſhe's top'd, & faire caru'd vnder
               THIS IS THE LAWYERS WORKE, (good Reader wonder.)
            
            
               
               To leaue conceits, that vaniſh as a dreame,
               And which our age ſhall ſcarce report as true,
               Let vs proceede to our intented Theame,
               
               For now to Weſtminſter wee neerer drew,
               Which when I did conſider, and withall
               Into what danger we were like to fall
               If we went thither, I began to thinke,
               It were not beſt to goe ſo farre to drinke.
            
            
               The reaſon why thus farre I did proceed
               And traine my Muſe along from Temple-Barre,
               
               Was to auoid the obiect which did breed
               The raging paſſion that did Reaſon marre,
               Therefore I thought the further I conuaid her,
               From ſight of Cuckolds, which ſo furious made her,
               She would be ſooner pleaſ'd, becauſe we finde
               That out of ſight is quickly out of minde.
            
            
               But when I now conceau'd, that it might proue
               As dangerous to goe forward, as retyre
               (And that like to a Flounder I did moue
               Out of the Frying-pan into the Fire)
               Becauſe through Weſtminſter wild Courtiers range,
               And if there be no Cuckolds it is ſtrange,
               Forward I durſt not goe, but turned back,
               Greatly perplexed where to drinke our Sack,
               
            
            
               Whilſt thus I walk't, much troubled and diſmayde,
               A voyce I heard which from a window ſpake,
               And cald, come hither (ſo I thought it ſaid)
               And thereupon my ſpirit gan awake,
               And vpward I did lift mine eyes to ſee
               If that I knew the place, or who was he
               That did me call, when by the Signe I found,
               It was a ſhop whoſe wares lay vnder ground.
            
            
               
               It is a place whereas old Sherry ſacke
               
               Is kept in durance in a dungeon deepe,
               Attended by young Beagles at his backe,
               Whoſe yawling throats will neuer let him ſleepe,
               But when that he would take his reſt, they ſpowte him
               And grieuouſly they hoope & pipe about him,
               And for to let him bloud they neuer ſtint,
               Into a Gallon, Pottle, Quart, or Pint.
            
            
               There lyes he Priſ'ner to the God of Drinke,
               
               Entomb'd within a Coffin like a Barrell,
               
               Becauſe hee was ſo forward, as I thinke,
               With good ſtale Engliſh-Beere to picke a quarrell:
               For hee no ſooner came vpon our ſhore
               And met March-beere, which he nere ſaw before,
               But ſtraight perforce they two muſt try a fall
               Where both were caſt and ſpewd againſt the wall.
            
            
               Which thing when Bacchus heard, he for them ſent,
               And Sacke condemn'd to dungeon darke as night,
               Becauſe he was ſo bold and inſolent
               On Engliſh ground againſt March-Beere to fight.
               
                  Beere by his doome was barreld vp aliue,
               Becauſe that with a ſtranger hee would ſtriue,
               But was committed to a lighter vault,
               For in his owne defence he made th'aſſault.
            
            
               Not farre from Sherry ſacke in priſon lye
               Many braue Spirits, for the like offence,
               Whom Bacchus vſeth with great tyrannie,
               And for their liberty will not diſpence,
               Vntill the cruell Iaylour, with his ſpawne
               Of little Currs, in peeces hath them drawne,
               And many hundred times hath let them blood,
               Which he ſophiſticates, as he thinks good.
            
            
               
               In dreadfull darkeneſſe Alligant lies drownd,
               Which marryed men inuoke for procreation,
               Next vnto him briske Claret is faſt bound,
               Which addes to Veniſon more acceptation:
               Another corner holds pale colour'd White,
               
               Which to ſee Iordane doth a man incite,
               And feeble Reniſh on the Rack there ſtriues,
               And calls for helpe to Merchants and their wiues.
            
            
               Strong hoop'd in bonds are here conſtrain'd to tarry,
               Two kinſmen neere allyde to Sherry Sack,
               
               Sweet Malligo, and delicate Canary,
               
               Which warme the ſtomacks that digeſtion lacke;
               They had a Page whom, if I can make meeter,
               Ile let you know, they call'd him See mee Peter,
               
               But being found, he did no great offence,
               Paying his fees, he ſoone was drawne from thence.
            
            
               Farre in the Dungeon lyes a dainty youth,
               With his ſweet Brother, as their names make known,
               Vnlawfully begotten in the South,
               
               And therefore are cal'd Baſtards, white and browne.
               
               For loue to theſe haue women beene conuicted,
               And ſtill vnto them ſome are ſo addicted
               Although with other drinks their minds are pleaſed,
               Yet without Baſtard they are neuer eaſed.
            
            
               Within the vtmoſt limits of this Cell,
               Surrounded with great Hogs-heads like to burſt,
               Old Muſcadine without his egges doth dwell,
               And Malmſey though laſt nam'd, yet not the worſt:
               Yet theſe are better vſ'd then all the reſt,
               For ſeldome doe the Beagles them molleſt,
               But in a morne, for then our vſe is moſt,
               To call for theſe, and drinke them with a Toſt.
            
            
               
               Compaſt with fetters, theſe and many more
               Tumble in darkneſſe one vpon another,
               And neuer are in quiet, till the ſcore
               
               Kept by the Iaylors wife, an aged mother,
               Hath drawne them dry, and then againe they vent them,
               And in another caſe a new torment them,
               
                  
                     Porters.
                  And ſometime cruell Saraſins doe roll them,
               Which are ſo ſtubborn, that none dare controule them.
            
            
               Yet none of all theſe are more hardly vſed,
               Then is that true good-fellow Sherry Sack,
               
               If you ſhould heare how much he is abuſed
               You needs muſt weepe, or elſe remorſe you lacke,
               Trodden with feete, ſold like a ſlaue, rackt, iumbl'd,
               Let bloud, drawn dry, and by fell Porters tumbl'd,
               And leaſt al theſe baſe wrongs ſhould not prouoke him,
               With Yeſſo they him purge, with Lime they choake him.
            
            
               Thus colde and comfortleſſe is he confin'd,
               Vnto a hideous Caue, reſembling hell,
               Whereas the Suns bright beames yet neuer ſhin'd,
               Nor can he heare Cocke crow, nor ſound of Bell,
               
               Nor know how time doth paſſe, for all his light
               Is from a Candle, both by day and night,
               And all the company which doe frequent him,
               Are onely nimble Spirits that torment him.
            
            
               Late in the night when moſt men are aſleepe,
               And few are ſtirring, but theeues, catts, and crickets,
               Into the vault the Iaylor downe doth creepe,
               Where how he deales with bung-holes & with ſpickets
               
               I cannot tell, yet ſome men doe relate,
               He makes theſe ſtrangers proue adulterate,
               
               And thats the cauſe when women thereof taſt
               They fall to lewdneſſe and become vnchaſt,
            
            
               
               For to beget a wiſe well featur'd childe,
               Some haue preſcrib'd, that men muſt vſe good dyet,
               With vnſound meate the body is defilde,
               And with bad Wine the humours made vnquiet,
               Good wine doth breed good bloud which makes me thinke
               If wiues are naught, tis long of naughty drinke;
               For Woman, is by kinde a vertuous creature,
               If vicious potions doe not change her nature.
            
            
               From theſe cloſe-Seller iumblings doe ariſe
               Great harmes, and much annoyance to mans body,
               For falſe impoſtur'd wines doe hurt the eyes,
               And turne a wiſe man oft into a noddy,
               Within the braine vile excrements they gather,
               Which vnto moſt diſeaſes are the Father,
               As deafeneſſe, rheums, coughs, gouts, & diſtillations,
               Convulſions, palſies, itch, and inflamations.
            
            
               Theſe are the cauſe of quarrells and debate,
               Wrath, Wounds, Diſorder, Luſt, and fornication,
               For note, how long men drinke immaculate
               And honeſt Wine, without ſophiſtication,
               So long mad paſſion is ſtayde Reaſons ſlaue,
               But when the Drawer once doth play the knaue,
               And makes his Wine diſhoneſt, and turne whore,
               Then preſently the Boyes begin to rore.
            
            
               And now I call to minde a pretty Tale,
               My Tutor told me when I was a Boy,
               Of ſome old Souldiers (if I doe not faile)
               He cald them Greekes, that ſackd the Towne of Troy,
               
               The ſacking was by baſe compounded Sacks,
               
               Which laid the Troians ſenceleſſe on their backs,
                     Inuadunt vrbem vino.
                  
               
               And euer ſince good Fellowes for the ſame,
               True Troians and mad Greekes haue had to name.
            
            
               
               
                  
                     Troinoxant.
                  Where Troy did ſtand, I almoſt haue forgot,
               Vnleſſe it was where London now is ſeated,
               For ſure no Troian better lou'd the pot,
               Nor with old Sack hath oftner beene defeated
               Than hath our Citty-Troian; yet I gather
               It ſtood about the Ile of Tenet rather,
               For (as I well remember,) he did ſay
               The Iſland Tenedos ſtood in the way.
            
            
               But let the Poets place it where they will,
               And tell of doughty warriors cladin Steele,
               How ſtiffe Achilles did ſtout Hector kill,
               And drag'd his body beaſtly by the heele,
               Theſe are but fictions, for the truth is plaine,
               The Troians were but drunk, there was none ſlaine,
               And what wiſe man will ſay, they were not drunk,
               To fight ten yeares about a reſtie Punke?
            
            
               But when the Souldiers were with Sack ſuppreſſed,
               And ſome of them lay weltring in their goare,
               And ſome on Beds and Benches fowlie dreſſed,
               So gap'd for breath, that one might heare them ſnore,
               And all the drunken Troians were aſleepe
               In their diſgorged pickle laid to ſteepe,
               Homewards the merry Greekes returned ſinging,
               Yet hauing little cauſe to boaſt their winning.
            
            
               For hereupon blinde Homer tells a fable,
               Of wonders that befell in their retire,
               How Circe with a potion execrable
               Conuerted them to hogs be-dawb'd in mire,
               And how the Syren with her pleaſant laies,
               Sung ſweetly vnto them whom ſhe betraies,
               Whereas the Morall is, that wine compounded,
               At Mermaide, into ſwine thoſe Greeks confounded.
            
            
               
               Tis not the virgin liquor of the grape
               That turnes a man into a filthy ſwine,
               A Goate, an Aſſe, a Lyon, or an Ape,
               
               Such beaſtly fruits ſpring neuer from the Vyne,
               Brisk bluſhing Claret, and faire maiden Sherry,
               
               Make men couragious, louing, wiſe, and merry:
               It is adulterous wine that playes the Puncke,
               And robs men of their reaſon being drunke.
            
            
               By this time I ſuppoſe you may coniecture
               What this darke Dungeon is, and that the houſe
               Of which my Muſe hath read ſo long a Lecture,
               Is nothing but a Schoole where men carrouſe,
               And learne to drinke; a little common-wealth,
               Where euery man is free to drinke a health,
               And none denide that can diſcharge the ſcore:
               In briefe, it is a Tauerne, and no more.
            
            
               The ſtrangers there captiu'd you well diſcouer
               As being with them doubtleſſe well acquainted,
               And therefore vainely to recite them ouer,
               My Muſe of ſurpluſſage would be attainted,
               Yet of their Iaylor I muſt needes complaine,
               Which doth with ſo great ſtrictneſſe them reſtrain
               That without money none their ſight comes neer,
               And then attir'd in Pewter they appeare.
            
            
               The Buſh did wag, the Dog did ſhake his tayle,
               When firſt my Muſe and I approach'd the wicket,
               The Drawers bid vs welcome and al-haile,
               
               And ask't what was our pleaſures with the ſpicket,
               
               I cald for their directions how to finde,
               From whence the voyce was to mine eares inclin'd
               When ſtraight anon a nimble Mercurie,
               
               Brought vs vp ſtaires among good companie.
            
            
               
               It was the day of all dayes in the yeare,
               That vnto Bacchus hath his dedication,
               When mad braynd Prentiſes, that no men feare
               O'rethrow the dens of bawdie recreation,
               When Tailors, Coblers, Plaiſt'rers, Smiths & Maſons,
               
               And euery Rogue will beate down Barbers Baſons,
               
               Whereat Don Conſtable in wrath appeares,
               And runs away with his ſtout Halberdiers.
               
            
            
               It was the day whereon both rich and poore,
               Are chiefely feaſted with the ſelfe ſame diſh,
               When euery Paunch till it can hold no more,
               Is Fritter-fild, as well as heart can wiſh,
               And euery man and maide doe take their turne,
               And toſſe their Pancakes vp for feare they burne,
               And all the Kitchin doth with laughter ſound,
               To ſee the Pancakes fall vpon the ground.
            
            
               It was the day when euery Kitchin reekes,
               And hungry bellies keepe a Iubile,
               
               When Fleſh doth bid adew for diuers weekes,
               And leaues old Ling to be his deputie,
               Though carnall Libertines are ſo inclin'd,
               That ſtill they loue to taſt what is confin'd,
               For all their humors are ſo violent
               They'le rather faſt at Eaſter than in Lent.
               
            
            
               It was the day when Pullen goe to block,
               And euery Spit is fil'd with belly Tymber,
               When Cocks are cudgel'd down with many a knock,
               And Hens are thraſht to make them ſhort and timber,
               When Country wenches play with ſtoole & ball,
               And run at Barly-breake vntill they fall,
               And country Lads fall on them in ſuch ſort,
               That after forty weekes they rew the ſport.
            
            
               
               And on this day, the Feaſt to magnifie
               Of merry Bacchus, which did heare reſide,
               
               Within this Tauerne met a company
               Of true, kinde, honeſt hearts, quite void of pride,
               That good companions and good huſbands are,
               And know both how to ſpend and how to ſpare,
               That can be merry and yet neuer quarrell,
               Nor drowne their wits and reaſon in a Barrell.
            
            
               And heare with many welcomes were receiued
               My Muſe and I, and fell to drinking Sherry,
               
               Where after ſome few cups, as I conceiued,
                     Ille liquor docuit voces inflectere cantu.
                  
               
               So it fell out, my Muſe grew paſſing merry,
               And from her ſullen humour which did raigne,
               She was tranſported to a better vaine,
                     Qui canit arte canat, qui bibit arte bibat.
                  
               
               And gan to ſing, like to a Iouiall drinker,
               
               In praiſe of Sack, and tun'd it to the Tinker.
               
            
            
               COme hither learned Siſters,
               and leaue your forked Mountaine,Parnaſſus.
               
               I will you tell where is a Well,
               
               doth far exceed your Fountaine,
                  Caſtalius.
               
               Of which, if any Poet,
               
               doe taſte in ſome good meaſure,
               It ſtraight doth fill, both his head and quill,
                     Fruſtra poeticas fores compos ſui pepulit.
                  
               
               with ditties full of pleaſure,
               And makes him ſing giue me Sacke, old Sacke boyes,
               to make the Muſes merry,
               The life of mirth, and the ioy of the earth,
               Is a cup of good olde Sherry.
               
            
            
               
               Tis not the God of Appollo. 
                  Phyſicke,
               
               nor his Apothecary,
               
               Nor all his Drugs, that ſtand in Iuggs,
               with Potions ordinary,
               
                  
                     Exultatio animae & corporis vinū.
                  That now ſhall be regarded,
               or had in any wonder,
               His Vrinall againſt the wall,
               he now may piſſe aſunder.
               For we haue found old Sack, old Sack boyes,
               which makes a ſick man merry,
               The life, &c.
            
            
               
                  
                     Facit ad iucunditatem, ad anitatem corporis, ad vitae aequitaetem bonos mores.
                  It is the true Nepenthes
               
               which makes a ſad man frolicke,
               And doth redreſſe all heauineſſe,
               cold Agues and the Chollicke,
               It takes away the crutches,
               from men are lame and cripled,
               And dryes the poſe, and rheums of the noſe,
               if it be ſoundly tipled.
               Then let vs drinke old Sack, old Sacke boyes,
               which makes vs ſound and merry,
               The life, &c.
            
            
               
                  
                     Liberat ſeruicio iurarum animū, & aſſerit vegetiorem & aud aciorem in omnes conatus facit.
                  It is the Riuer Lethe,
               
               where men forget their croſſes,
               And by this drinke they neuer thinke,
               of pouerty and loſſes,
               It giues a man freſh courage,
               if well he ſup this Nectar,
               
               And cowards ſoft, it lifts aloft,
               
                  
                     In praelia trudit inermem.
                  and makes them ſtout as Hector,
               
               Then let vs drinke old Sacke, old Sacke boyes,
               which makes vs ſtout and merry.
               The life, &c.
            
            
               
               It is the well of Concord,
                  
                     Omnis animi aſperitas dulciori ſucco mitigatur leuit tranſitum ſpiritus, ac molliores efficit meatus.
                  
               
               where men doe take vp quarrells,
               When loue doth lacke, by drinking Sacke
               
               they draw it from the Barrells.
               
               If drunkards are vnruly,
               whom Claret hath enflamed,
               With a cup or two, this Sacke can doe,
                     Bibant & furoris ſui nonrecordentur.
                  
               
               they ſleepe, and ſo are tamed.
               Then let vs drinke old Sacke, old Sacke boyes,
                     Qui bene bibit bene dormit.
                  
               
               which makes vs kinde and merry,
               The life, &c.
            
            
               The Broth with Barly ſodden,
                     Multae allae potiones ſunt, quibus in penaria homines vt untur, tamen inter omnes hoc vinum tenet, quia datur nobis ad neceſſitatem, ad ſanitatem, & ad hilaritatem.
                  
               
               compares not with this licker,
               The Draymans Beere is not ſo cleere,
               and foggy Ale is thicker:
               
                  Matheglin is too fulſome,
               cold Cyder and raw Perry,
               
               And all drinks ſtand with Cap in hand
               in preſence of old Sherry.
               
               Then let vs drinke old Sacke, old Sacke boyes,
               which makes vs blythe and merry,
               The life, &c.
            
            
               No fiery red-fac'd Claret,
               
               attended with his Borrage,
               
               No Reniſh wine that's piſſing fine,
               nor white, that cooles the courage,
               No baſe begotten Baſtard,
               
               nor bloud of any Berry,
               Can raiſe the Braine to ſuch a ſtraine,
                     Hoc vinum acuit nigeium.
                  
               
               nor make the heart ſo merry.
               Then let vs drinke old Sacke, old Sacke boyes,
               which makes vs blythe and merry,
               The life, &c.
            
            
               
               The Citizen loues fidling,
               that he may friske and caper,
               The Scholler lookes vpon his bookes,
               and pores vpon a Paper.
               The gentle bloud likes hunting
               where dogs doe trace by ſmelling,
               And ſome loue hawks, ſome groues, & walks,
               and ſome a handſome dwelling.
               
                  Sacke ſapit omnia.
                  Yet all theſe without Sacke, old Sacke boyes,
               makes no man kindely merry.
               The life, &c.
            
            
               
                  
                     Vinum dicitur quia vinculum ſocietatis.
                  The knot of harty friendſhip,
               is by good Sacke combyned,
               They loue no Iarrs, nor mortall warrs,
               
               that are to Sacke inclined,
               
                  
                     Sine Cerere & Sacco friget Virtus.
                  Nor can he be diſhoneſt,
               whom Sacke and Sugar feedeth,
               For all men ſee, hee's fat and free,
               and no ill humour breedeth.
               Then let vs drinke old Sack, old Sacke boyes,
               that makes vs fat and merry,
               The life, &c.
            
            
               
                  
                     Vt cor per triſtitiam contrabitur & torpeſcit, ita per vini laeticiam laxatur & titillat.
                  A quart of Sacke well burned,
               and drunke to bed-ward wholly,
               I dare be bold doth cure the cold,
               and purgeth Melancholly,
               
               It comforts aged perſons,
               
                  
                     Rugaque frontis abit.
                  and ſeemes their youth to render,
               It warmes the braynes, it fils the vaines,
               and freſh bloud doth ingender.
               Then let vs drinke old Sack, old Sack boyes,
               which makes vs warme and merry,
               The life, &c.
            
            
               
               
                  Sacke makes a faithfull ſubiect,
               that doth no treaſon ſtudy,
               Nor doth he thinke, when he takes this drink,
               of plotting murthers bloudy,
               He loues his King and Country,
                     In vino verita 
                           〈…〉
                        .
                  
               
               from whom he neuer ſtarted,
               The great black Iack well fild with Sack,
               
               doth make the Guard true-hearted.
               Then let vs drinke old Sacke, old Sacke boyes,
               which makes true Subiects merry,
               The life &c.
            
            
               No care comes neere this fountaine,
                     Eluit curas, & ab imo animum mouet.
                  
               
               where ioy and mirth ſurpaſſes,
               And the God of drink ſtands vp to the brink,
                     Aliquando in exultationem & libertatem eſt animas extrahendus, triſtiſque ſobrietas remonenda pauliſper.
                  
               
               all arm'd in Venice glaſſes,
               And calls vpon good Fellowes,
               that are both wiſe and merry,
               That about this ſpring, they wold dance and ſing,
               and drinke a cup of Sherry.
               
               Then let vs drinke old Sacke, old Sacke boyes,
               which makes vs wiſe and merry,
               And about this ſpring, let vs dance and ſing,
               and drinke a cup of Sherry.
               
            
            
               Thus ſung my Muſe, and thus the ſtormes were laid,
               And ſhe grew debonaire and fairely calme.
               When any Muſe with rage is ouer-ſwaid,
               Let Poets learne it is a ſoueraigne balme,
               To wet their pipes with good facetious Sherry,
               
               Which makes them iocond & moſt ſweetly merry,
               And thus I brought her home, wher now ſhe reſts,
                     Foecundi calices quem non fecere diſertum?
                  
               
               
                  The feaſt is done, y' are welcome all my gueſts.
               
               
                  Aliquando inſanire iucundiſſimum eſt.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   