
      
         
            
            
               
AN EPISTLE OF THE PERSECVTION OF CATHOLICKES IN ENglande. Translated ovvt of frenche into Englishe and conferred vvithe the Latyne copie. by. G. T. To whiche there is added an epistle by the translator to the right honorable Lordes of her maiesties preeuie councell towchynge the same matter.
            
               
                  Psal. 105. Ver. 38.
               They shed innocent blood, euen the blood of theyr ovvne sonnes and of theyr ovvne daughters.
            
            
               Psal. 78. Ver. 2.
               
                  They lay the deade bodyes of thy seruantes (ô Lorde) for meate to the fovvles of the ayer and the fleshe of thy saintes to the beastes of the fielde.
               
            
            Imprynted at Douay in Artois.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE HONORABLE LORDES OF HER MAIESTIES PREEVIE COVNCELL.
            
               FINDINGE this epistle of the persecution of Englande, divulged in diuers foraine languages, Right honorable: I vvas moued bothe to translate it to my countrye men, vvhome properlye it concernethe: & to directe it to your Lordships, to vvhome principallye it appertaineth. My entent herein vvas simple and plaine: First to procure good mens prayers, by disclosinge our necessities, secondlie, to moue your honours at lenght, (if it might bee,) to some fauorable & mercifull consideration of our calamities: vvhiche perhaps in some parte are more particulerlye declared in this discourse, then euerie one of your honours hathe ether knovvē or cōsidered of heretofore.
            For albeit vve are not ignorant, that our afflictions and persecutions do passe vppon vs, bothe in name & authoritie as from your Lordships: yet knovv vve also, that you are not alvvayes precuie to euerye our particuler agreeuement and hard vsage, nor if you vvere, (beinge vvyse and honorable) vvoulde allovve of the same.
            VVherefore seinge the treatise follovvinge

ys vvriten by a man, bo the of greate modestie, as appeareth, by his style, and also of good intelligence in Englishe matters past, as it maye seme by the particulers by him alleaged: I doe most humblye beseeche your honours, to lend the labour of readinge ouer the same, and to consider in your ovvne cōsciences, before the dreadfull maiestie of our lord and Sauyour, to vvhose iustice bothe you and vve remaine accountable for our doinges in this lyfe, vvhether the sufferinges of Catholiques heere recited, deserue complaint of our syde and of your honours parte, consideration or no. It is a lavvfull and allovvable refuge deliuered vs by nature her selfe, to mourne and bevvayle in time of affliction, and to barre vs of this, ether by offence or punishement, vvere as harde as to prohibite the sicke man to grone, or the childe to pule vvhiche is greevouslye beaten. If vve grone vvithout greefe, or complayne vvithout cause: vve are vvnvvorthye of compassion, and deserue no redresse: but if our case be suche, as it moueth admiration to as manie as heare it, and no small horror to them vvhiche consider it: vve hope your Lordships, beinge our borne peeres and Nobles of our nation, vvil not alvvayes beare your selues more compassionles tovvards our miseries, then straungers vvho haue lesse cause in nature to affecte vs.
            Enter in (my good Lordes) I beseche you on my knees even for his sake of vvhome you also muste one daye craue mercye, enter in (I say) but to some small cogitation, vvhat you do: to vvhome: for vvhat cause to vvhat ende.
            You persecute heauylye, and that in suche

measure as the lyke hathe scarse ben mentioned in Christianitie before, albeit in some pointes Vvhat per secutiō Catholiques suffer. more couertlye then some other did. And as for the disciplyne of the Catholique Churche, vvhiche is commonlye accustomed to be laied againste vs, vvhereby she punishethe nevv fangled deuisers, and obstinate bringers in of nevv religion, it hathe no comparison at all vvithe this of yours: for first, that disciplyne is olde and auncient, and allovved by your ovvne practice of burninge other sectaries then of the parte of Caluine. VVhereby it follovvethe, that our Churche hauinge condemned as orderlie Iohn Calvine and his follovvers, in her late generall and most learned Councell, as she hathe donne other sectaries executed by your selues: yf she punishe also Calvinistes amonge other sectaries: she is no more to be blamed for the same in indifferē
               cie of reason, then your parte for burninge Anabaptistes familians or the lyke.
            Secondlye if vve compare the procedinges of Catholiques to protestantes generallie, or of Englishe Catholiques, tovvardes them of Caluins parte in Queene Maries tyme, (for that is The cōparison of this persecution to that in Queene Maryes tyme. most of all brought and vrged against vs:) vve shall finde that in all respectes, this far to surmounte and to ouer reache that, and to be bothe greater, and incomparablye more greuouse.
            For first ether fevv or none vvere tovvched then, but suche as vvere ether obstinate, or malitiouse, or vvilfull to intrude them selues: and hovve infinite manie vvere tollerated, and vvincked at, although they vvere knovven, some of your honours (I thinke) vvill not denie to geue

particuler testimonye. Secondlie they vvhiche vvere complained of, and attached, vvere ciuilye dealt vvithall, disputed vvithe at large bothe publiquelye and priuatelye, made to see their vveaknes, though not to cōfesse the same: and if sentence passed against them for obstinacie, yet vvas their execution, vvithe all fauorable compassion, vvhiche the lavve did permit, and mitigation of their paines vvithe shorte dispathe: the contrarie of all vvhiche is vsed tovvards vs. And as for tormentinge and rackinge and prohibitinge their frinds from sustaininge them, vvithe terrour to all those vvhiche shoulde bodilye releeue their pouertie: I thinke our aduersaries vvill not once charge vs vvithe it. It is not practized amongest vs, vppon the greatest heretiques that euer vvere: God for bid that it shoulde, it is to to cruell for Christian natures. VVe are Matth. 27. commaunded by our religion, to feede the hungrie, Esa. 58. as Christ him selfe, and muche more, not to barr them that vvoulde geue releefe, vvhen vve vvill not. Finallye, if vve confer numbers to numbers, men to men, prisons to prisons, vsage to vsage, there is no comparison. Differēces betvvixt the punished protestantes and Catholiques.
            
            And yet (good Lorde) vvhat kyn or liknes is there in the matter? they vvere punished by an auncient generall lavve, for brynginge in of nevv opinions, neuer hard of in England before, and condemned by the highe Consistorie and parlament of Christiandome, gathered together for the same purpose. Vve are persecuted by nevv nationall Statutes, for holdinge the auncient faithe of Christianitie, and onelie religion of our forefathers in England, vvithout either

tryall or publique disputation in our doctrine. They dissented not onlie from vs, but also from the first beginners of their ovvne side, and vvere By Luther: ar. 28. cont. Louā. to. 2. Vvitten. fo. 503. also by the Edict of the princes of māsfilde anno 1560. and by others. solemlye condemned for heretiques by the same. but no suche matter can be saied of vs. They agreed not amongest them selues vppon the pointes of anie one relygion, but eche man as he had receaued of some particuler teacher. So beinge asked (for Example sake) of the number of Sacramentes: He holdeth three in apolog. confes. August. cap. de sacra. And fovver in editione vl. loco. cō. some helde tvvo, vvithe Caluinistes, some three or fovver vvithe Melancthō. So me three or tvvo, or one vvithe So he holdethe in the beginninge and end of his captiuitie of. Babilō: Luther. And if they vvere demaunded of particuler sacramentes, as of penance: one vvoulde holde it no sacrament vvithe Caluin, an other a sacrament vvithe Melancthon, an other onelye a sacramentall signe vvithe So he holdeth in lib. de ca. Babi. Luther in one place, and in an other, a verye So he holdeth expresselie ar. 35 cont: Louan: trevv sacramēt hauinge annexed vnto it, the promise of grace. If they vvere asked of holy orders: one vvoulde deny it to be a sacrament vvith Luther and Melancthon in one place, and an other vvoulde holde it a trevv sacrament vvithe Melancthon in an in edi: vl: locorū cō. other place. Some other vvoulde holde it an vnordinarie sacrament vvithe li: 4: c: 14: Caluine, and thus as sheepe brought ovvt of their folde, and left amazed in the brode filde, not knovvinge vvhat vvaye or pathe to take, they stood giddie in their ovvne opinions, and yet vvith obstinacye euerie man to dye in the same: but vve stand all in one faithe consonant to it selfe in euerie point, not deuised by our selues, but left vnto vs by the generall consent of all antiquitie in Christian dome, and yet are vve more afflicted for the

same, then if vve vvere heretiques or deuisers of anie nevv religion.
            The persons punished by your honours are The persons persecuted. of your ovvne bloud, and nation, borne subiectes of the lande, and commonlye of suche lyfe and conuersation, as are not vvorst lyked in the places vvhere they dvvell: of quiet and ciuill behauyour most readie bothe vvithe lyfe & goods to serue their Princesse, and your honours, vvith all devvtifull and faithfull good vvill. They neither deale nor practise agaynst the state abrode, nor offer iniuries to their neighbours at home. But are most readye and vvillinge to concurre vvithe your Lordships, for the preseruinge theyr Countrye in peace and quiet, eche man The cause of persecution. accordinge to his povver & callinge. The onlie cause of their molestation, is their conscience in religion, vvhiche beinge setled vppon inuincible grounds, as it semethe to them, is not in their povver to alter at their pleasure, neither is any persecution in the vvorde, able to change the same, but rather confirmethe it more & more, bringinge alvvaies an argument vvithe it, of lacke of truthe in the persecutor, vvhiche seekethe to supply by externall terror the thynge he is not able to proue by argument.
            The ende therfore vvhiche your Lordships The ende of this persecution. pretende by this rigourouse course of austeritie to vvitt, to bringe men to conformitie in matters of religion, can neuer doubtles take effect by this meanes, but must nedes make greater disiunction, for the reasons by me declared before. And if your honoure shoulde vppon terrour bringe any fraile man to conforme him selfe

against his conscience, in suche externall actes, as you require: yet your vvisdomes can not but consider, that he is neuer the nearer gotten for this, but rather in his harte muche farther of then before, hauinge vvounded his sovvle and conscience vppon compulsion, vvhiche lyinge greuouse and festeringe vvith in his breast, must needes often put him in mynde of the iniurye receaued, and so more detest the thynge done, then before. VVherfore seinge there is nothinge gotten to your Lordships entent, by this mans dissimulation, but muche lost often tymes vnto him selfe, euen as muche as the price of his soule for doinge against his conscience and iudgemēt, vvherby he must be tried at the latter daye: there is no cause ether in respect of pollicie or religion, vvhich maie persvvade vs, that your honours vvill alvvayes holde this heauie and extreame rase tvvardes vs.
            And because I fall into the mention here of polycie, vvherunto I knovve your honours, (as Polycie. very vvise,) to haue a speciall eye and particuler regarde, albeit I presume not to pretende any part of that profounde iudgement, vvhiche your honorable vvisedomes by nature and longe practise haue attained in the same: yet to say that, vvhich common reason layethe oppen to euerye meane vnderstandinge: it appearethe no vvaie to impeache polycie (if respect of conscience vvere laide a side) to proceede some vvhat mylder vvithe the Catholique parte in Englande.
            I vvill not talke of intrinsecall and speciall by M: I: hovvlet: & M: D: Allen pointes, mentioned heretofore by some other,

& easie to be considered of by your Lordships, as the counterpesinge of other sectes, and daungerous factions, grovvinge and confirminge by the quiet they enioye through our onlie molestations. I vvill speake onlie of the nature of our Catholique religion, vvhiche as it vvas first plotted ovvt by the most highe vvisedome of God him selfe, that is, by his Sonne our Sauiour, and founded by them vvhiche immediatlye receaued their spirite from him, that is, by his Apostles, and disciples: so standeth it substantiallie, vvith all right vvisedome and polycie,) beinge giftes of God and litle sparkles of his infinite vvisedome) and establisheth the kingdomes vvherein it is receaued and executed accordinglie, in all honour, peace, tranquilitie and vvealthe, as may appeare by the longe continuance of other Realmes Catholique abrode, and especiallie by our ovvne, vvhiche hathe continued from the beginninge of her conuersion, for the space of more then a Thovvsande yeres, in greate prosperitie, riches, and renovvne by the same. Vvhereas in the meane space, diuers greate kyngdomes, states, and principalities, haue ben ouerthrovven by the occasion of heresie and alteringe this religion, as Asia, Greece, Egypt, Affrica, Hungarie, and the like: and vvhat vvill finallie become of diuers other countryes neere vnto vs and as yet lyinge vnder the tryall of Gods hande, though alreadie greately rased, spoyled, and impouerished, vve can not tell.
            And the reason of these different effectes The differēt effectes of heresie and Catholique religion to vvchinge the vveale publique. in heresye and in the Catholique religion, besydes the particuler prouidence of God, standethe

principallie in this one pointe, that vve haue a certayne and sure meane to kepe vnitie and consent thorovvgh ovvt the vvhole, by vnderstandinge scriptures accordinge to the expositions of our forefathers from tyme to tyme, and by obeyinge the determination of one Supreme pastor, vvith the generall Councells of Christian prelates, in all matter of stryfe that may fall ovvt. VVheras the heretique in the cōtrarye parte, obevinge no pastor, but at his pleasure, nor receauinge anie mans exposition of scripture but his ovvne, must nedes rayse and maintayne much contrarietie of opinions, and consequentlye muche deuision of people by the same: and then hauinge no place to rest, nor vvaye to end (for generall Councell or pastor he vvil not heare), also makinge the temporall prince hed of all, vvhiche often tymes is a childe, and may easelie be impelled to varietie of humours: must needes make greate innouations, vvhiche alvvaies are greate hazardes to kingedomes and states. And this in generall is betvvixt our religion and others tovvchinge the matter of Commonvvealthe.
            But novv, if vve looke into certayne particuler Particuler differences bettvvixt Catholique & protestant religion, for maintenance & continuance of the cōmonvvealthe. commodities and helpes vvhich our religion bringeth vnto a common vvealthe, and vvhiche the religiō of our aduersaries impugnethe and ouerthrovveth: vve shall easelie, see that permission of the Catholique, can not any vvay preiudicate the vvealepublique of any state. And for examples sake, vve vvill make our comparison in Englande it selfe, vvhere the practise and effect of bothe religiōs haue byn novv

experienced, and dyuers men yet alyue, that haue seene and proued the consequence of bothe, and can the easyer geeue iudgement of the comparison.
            First therfore, our religion teachethe actuall restitution of all goods vvhat so euer, ether 1. Restitution. vvrōgfullye or deceatfullye gotten, or taken by might or iniurye. And it teachethe this restitutiō in suche seuere manner, as no priest may absolue anie man from his sinnes duringe his lyfe, nor admitt him to any Sacrament, no nor at the extreame pointe of deathe it selfe, (vvhere not vvithstandinge all other matters are released) except he be content to make actuall restitution (accordinge to his abilitie) to the partie iniuryed: nether can anye mortall povver, or prelate of the Churche, dispense in this point, vvhere the vvill of restitution is not, but that suche a one dyinge, is accounted a reprobate and damned person, and not to be praied for by our Churche, of vvhiche thinge doe ensevv tvvo greate commodities to the common vvealth. Tvvo commodities of restitution.
            
            First that men knovvinge they must make this restitution againe, if euer they be able, are muche staied from extortion, thefte, bryberye, vserye, Simonie and the like offences, vvhiche temporall lavves of them selues can neuer thorovvghlie bridle. Secondlie that manie restitutiōs are made dailye to parties vvronged in our Churche, at leste vvise vvhen mē come to dye: & of this I could heere alleage bothe rare & maruelous examples.
            But for the protestant, he troubleth hym selfe litle aboute this matter, nether hathe he

any meanes in deed to do the same (confession beinge taken avvaie) and the practise is so strange amongest them, as you shall reade in the storye folovvinge, a good man punished fovver ye res in the Tovver of London, for restoringe of tvventie povvndes for an other man after his deathe.
            Secondlie our religion teacheth the obseruatiō 
               2. Obseruation of vovves. of vovves, that is, that vvhoe so euer hathe made a vovv to God, of a thinge, honest, lavvfull and possible: is bounde to keepe it, accordinge as the scripture biddeth vs: Vouete & reddite domino: 
               Psal. 75. vovv and paye your vovves to God. Of vvhiche our churche inferrethe, that seinge our promisse to our neighboure, is also a kinde of vovv, vve are bounde in like sorte to keepe that for cōscience sake: muche more then if vve stoode bounde to the same by obligation, and to make devve recompence and restitution, if vve breake the same. VVherof ensued suche The consequent of keepinge and breakinge of vovves. faithfull and trustie dealinges amongest our auncient forefathers. But novv the protestant teachinge, that vovves made to God may be broken, eche man inferrethe therof, if I maye breake a vovv to god, muche more a vvorde or promise to a man, and so vve see novv no promyse or bargaytne kept but onlie for commoditie, & there is no trust to mens vvordes any longer.
            Thyrdlye our religion vse the abstinence of 4 Abstinence from fleshe. fleshe and some other meates at certayne times and dayes, not condemninge the creatures, but forbearinge the vse ther of, for punishinge our bodies for more feruent seruinge of God, at certaine tymes more thē other: as ī lent, frydaies,

Saterdayes, and other, as is appointed by our churche, vvhiche daies beinge in number very neere 160. that is, almost the one halfe of the yere, besides the obseruances of religious people, vvherof many neuer eate fleshe at all, and besides the particuler deuotions of infinite priuate persōs vvhiche abstaine at certaine other times: doe brynge an inestimable commoditie vnto a vvealepublique. For that fishe, herbes, frute, and The publique cōmoditie by abstinēce frō flesh. the like, vvhiche Catholiques vppon these daies do vse, do not any vvaye impouerishe the lande, beinge taken the most parte from the vvater: But consuminge of fleshe dothe, beinge vvholye fed vppon the grounde, vvhiche fleshe, by thes daies of abstinence encreasethe greatlie, esspeciallie aboute the springe tyme, vvhen our lent fallethe out, at vvhat time, by the iudgemēt of skilfull men the forbearinge of fleshe for those onlie six vveekes, is sufficient for the maintenance of all the yere after. And vvhat auaile this abstinēce bringethe to a kingdome in one yere, it maie be gessed, if a man make but an estimate vvhat the fleshe is vvorthe, vvhiche vvoulde maintaine all Englande one daie, and then double the same eight score times in euerve yere, and consider vvhat it vvill amounte to in fevvyeres.
            And novv, albeit the protestant (for polycies sake onlie as he saithe) vvill seeme to commaunde the like abstinence at some of thes daies: yet seynge it is but an externall punishment onlie, and no matter of conscience to breake the princes lavve therin, as they affirme: hovve manye (trovv you) vvill breake the same? or hovv manie

protestantes them selues do obserue it? if you conuerse vvithe the preachers, you shall see them eate fleshe euerie daie, and inuite other men to do it, and iudge verie yuill of them, that vvyll not therin beare them companye. The temporall iudges also, vvhen in their lent circuite, thei publishe this verie proclamation of abstinence, do eate openlye fleshe them selues. Hovv then shall the people obserue the same, vvhen they see bothe their Ecclesiasticall and temporall gouernours to do the contrarye? the trueth is, that the exacte obseruinge of this lavv amongest higher estates, is onlie in Catholiques, as also amongest the common people, except some poore protestant that can get no fleshe, and therby is constrayned to make of necessitie a vertue, for other vvise he vvill eate it euen in despite of the tyme. So that this commonvvealthe point dependeth onlye in deed of the Catholique parte. Fovverthlye our religion, besides this abstinēce 4 Fastinge. aforesaide from fleshe, cōmaundethe alsomany of the same dayes to be kept in fast, to the number at least of a hundred euery yere in Englande. In vvhiche tymes there is but one meale to be made a daye, and the other to be spared, vvhiche one meale sauede beinge valued, but at alovv price thorough ovvt all the persōs aboue The sequel of fastinge. xvi yeres of age in Englande, (for after that tyme they are bounde to fast), amountethe to a greate summe of monye, and beinge doubled a hundred tymes euerie yere, arysethe to muche more, vvhiche greate summe is vtterlye lost by the protestant that faste the not, and ys saued by the Catholique to the vvealpublique. VVhiche

difference albeit it be not felt presentlye in a greate state (for greate palaces shrincke not at the beginnynge vvithe litle chvnkes:) yet in time it vvill shevv his effecte, vvhen greate multitudes of people shalbe by the same meanes of protestancie increased (as shalbe shevved in the next reason folovvynge) & the olde prouision of the lande by litle & litle consumed, as alredie I thincke in parte vve see it fulfilled.
            Fifthlye our religion commaundethe continencie and sole lyfe to all cleargie men, and to 5. Sole lyfe of cleargye men. all sortes of religious people, vvhiche (to omite all other respectes) profitethe greatlie the common vvealthe, and the libertie of marriage gyuen by the protestante, bringeth infinite inconueniences. For first if vve make an estimate of the number vvhiche lyued vnmarryed in Catholique tymes in England, allovvinge to euery parishe churche but tvvo pryestes one vvithe an other, vvithe other temporall offices dependinge of the spiritualtie, and therfore requiringe sole life: & if vve add to this, the greate numbers of all religious people, bothe men and vvomen in monasteries and other vvhere, vvhiche perhaps vvere tvvise as manye as the other: vve shall finde the number to arise verie greate. vvhiche all lyuinge then vnmaried and chast (or els shoulde haue donne) if vve novv allovv them to marye and accounte to euerye coople, but three or fovver children, and so consequentlye to their children, and childrens children? vve shall see that the encrease of people vvilbe huge in one age: and much more in manye ages follovvinge, vvhiche all beinge norished

by the commō vvealthe, must needes pester greatlie the lande, vvithe mayne multitude of people, and they, for the most parte ydle also (for so are clergie mens children commonlye) and consequentlye, muche empouerishe the same:
            Besides this, if vve consider the necessitie of temporall prouisiō, cast vppon clergye men, by their mariage, as to prouide first for the present needes, and then for the tyme to come: as iointer, dovvrye, or some portion for the vvife, lyuinges for the children, and the like: vve shall finde that they can nether keepe that hospitalitie for the poore, vvhiche vvas vvont, nor spare the leases, copieholdes, and other offalles of Ecclesiasticall lyuinges, to helpe other men, as in times past vvas accustomed: and muche lesse builde Colledges, Churches, and other suche monumentes of pietie, vvhiche their predecessours haue donne. Nay if the minister dye not, and leaue often a packe of orphanes vppon the poore parishe, it is more tollerable. So that vve see, that the mariage of the clergie men, dyuers vvayes spoileth the poore commonaltie and consequentlye impayrethe greatlye the vvealpublique.
            Sixthlye our religion prohibiteth landlordes to rayse their rentes, or anye other vvaie to 6 Raysinge of rentes. presse their tenantes, except it vvere vppon some greate cause and vvithe greate moderation, knovven and allovved of by spirituall men & learned diuines, and if they do it rashelie and immoderatlie, our Churche dothe solemly once a yere accurse them. VVhiche vvas the cause

that our good forefathers in tymes past, and esspeciallie In the bulle de caena domini, solemlye recited by the pope euerye yere on mā
                  dy thursdaye, in the tytle, de pedagiis nou is non imponendis: 7 Deuorcementes. Math. 19. 3. 6. 7. 8. all religious men, vsed to let their landes at a reasonable rate: vvhereby infinite men vvere sustained and holpen., as appearethe by our Abbayes in tyme past in Englāde, the vvante vvhereof the poore countries vvhiche dvvell aboute them, do novv feele.
            Seuenthlye our religion holdeth tovvchinge the state of mariage, that vvho so euer is once lavvfullye contracted in vvedlocke to another, albeit they maie be vppon cause deuorced from compaininge one vvithe an other: yet can the bāde of mariage neuer be so broken, as either partye maie marye againe, duringe the others naturall lyfe. And therfore they must ether reconcyle them selues together againe, or els lyue chast. VVhiche is a brydell to manye mischeefes that must nedes ensevv vppon our aduersaries contrarie doctrine and practise in this matter, vvho allovve the diuorced to marye againe, the other partie yet lyuinge. VVhiche libertie layed open to maryed people, geuethe occasion of easie mislyke and diuorce betvvixt them, vppō hope to marye agayne vvhere they like better, to the greate disturbance of common vvealthes in processe of tyme.
            Eightlie, our religion teachethe a pointe 8 Of obedience to magistrates abovvt magistrates, vvhich greatlie concernethe the common vvealthe, and the contrarye doctrine of our aduersaries, is very muche hurt full and daungeruose vnto the same. The point is this. That vve teache all lavves of magistrates (be the magistrate good or euill) vvhiche are of thinges ether good, or indifferent, or not expressely

against Gods commandement, doe binde the subiectes consciences to obedience, that Ro: 13. is, the subiectes are bovvnde in conscience, to obey them not onlie externallye, but also in priuate and secrete, and to accounte it as a syn before God, if they vvillinglye breake the same, for that the magistrate vvhat soeuer, is Gods minister. VVerof it folovveth that the lavves of the cōmon vvealthe are obeyed trevvlie, & syncerelye, as vvell in secret as in open shevve, vvithe loue also, and vvithout grudge or contempt to the magistrate.
            But the protestant theachethe that no lavv Caluin: l. 4. insti. c. 10. num. 5. of man byndeth the subiectes conscience to obedience, vvherof it muste needes follovv, that seinge the subiect obeyethe not of conscience but onelye for policie and in respect of externall punishement: vvhen so euer he is not in feare of that punishment, he vvithout scruple This is also the cause vvhye the prince is so infinitely at this day deceaued in hercustome of matchādise by all marchantes report. vvill contemne and breake that commaundement of his magistrate, as for example, he vvil eate fleshe in the lent, in suche places and companyes, vvhiche he is sure, vvill not accuse him, albeit the magistrates commaundement and proclamation be to the contrarie: and so in the lyke. VVhiche thinge is verye hurtfull & daungerous (as I haue saied) to the vveale publique. For besides the common breakinge of publique lavves in priuate, and secrete places, vvherby the magistrate grovvethe into contempt, & the state hurted: if at anie tyme the subiectes or any faction of them, shalbe so stronge and hardie, a Dangerous sequel as not to feare the magistrates punishement, vvhat shall cause them anye longer to obey▪
               
Feare of punishment there is none: In conscience (by this doctrine) they are not bounde: vvhy then maie not they as vvell prescribe lavves to the magistrate, as he to them? In this pointe therfore, Catholique religion more vpholdethe the vvealepublique, then that of our aduersaries.
            Ninthlye it is of no small importance vnto a Christian common vvealthe, (vvhose end is Of synne & concupiscence. to keepe men vvithin the limites of vertue and honestie) that vvhiche our religion teachethe of the difference of synnes, and of the nature of concupiscence. For tovv chinge the first, as vve holde, that as some synnes are greeuons and mortall: so some are lighter, called veniall, that is, suche as of their nature and by rigour of iustice, deserue not eternall damnatiō, and expell Iaco. 1. 15. not alvvaye grace, but may stande vvithe the same. Mortall vve call (for exāples sake) as to be droncke: veniall, to drincke a litle more then a man shoulde. Mortall, to geeue consentin a mans harte to an euill cogitation: veniall, to be negligent in expellinge the same, though he cō
               sent not.
            Our aduersaries holde that all synnes, be they neuer so litle, are mortall of their ovvne Caluin. in antid. concil. Tri. natures, and of them selues do deserue damnation. Secondlye tovv chinge concupiscence, vve holde, that in the regenerate, that is, in Christians after baptisme, the naturall inclination of lustinge, lefte in man, ad agonem, as the auncient fathers doe terme it, that is, to stryue vvithall, is Augu. li. 2. cont. Iuliā. & li. 1. de peccat. merit. c. vlt. not synne of it selfe, except vve geeue consent to the motion. Our aduersaries holde that the

verye motion it selffe though no consent be geuen vnto it, is syn.
            Of this diuersitie of doctrine flovvethe greate diuersitie of effectes into the common vvealthe. For ovvt of our doctrine ensuethe this, that seinge the naturall motion of concupiscence in me to euill, is not syn, except I yealde vnto it: I vvill striue against it, and not yelde consent, for sauinge of my soule. Againe, seinge there is a difference of synne, yf I should be caried avvaye a litle further then I ought: yet vvill I at least, striue to refrayne mortall syn vvithe all diligence, consideringe that this synne, bringeth damnation.
            But out of our aduersaries contrarie doctryne, ensevveth in contraryvvise, that seinge concupiscence mouethe one vvhether he vvill or no, to matters vnlavvfull, as to adulterie, theft, murther, and the like: and seinge vvhether he consent or no, he hathe alredye synned by the verye naturall motion: againe, seinge all sinnes are mortall and none veniall: vvhat shall let him to consent to the motion, and to accomplishe the same, at least in desire, seinge he can but syn mortallie, if he doe it, and so hathe he don alredye by the verie motion it selfe, vvhiche is not in his povver to staye. And by this meanes, seinge he must needes syn mortally vvhether he consent or not consent to the syn: vvho vvill not rather consent to the lust, vvithe pleasure, then stryue against the same vvithe greate payne, and yet to sinne neuer the lesse. And so this openethe an infinite gapp to syn & all levvd lyfe: for that no mā vvill stryue aboute

that vvhiche he can not auoide, that is, abovve the resistance of mortall synne.
            Tenthlie tovvchinge the revvarde of euill 10. The revvard of good, and euill and paynes for synne in this lyfe. and good lyfe in the next vvorlde, and tovvchinge expiation of syn in this lyfe, our religion teacheth, that a mortall syn, beinge once committed after baptisme, is not so soone dispatched agayne, but besides faithe, there is required first, hartie sorovv vvithe full purpose neuer to commit the same againe. Then humble confession Contritiō. of the same to the priest. Thirdlye, after the guylie of the synne remitted by the vertue Confession of Christes passion in the Sacrament of absolution, there is required some temporall punisshment Satisfactiō. and penance, for satisfaction of gods iustice: the vvhiche if a man fulfill not in this lyfe, he must paye it in the next vvith muche more payne.
            After this, vvhen he commethe to heauen, Purgatorie vve holde, that he shall receaue his degree of glorye accordinge to his perfection of life in this vvorlde, as also accordinge to his demerite and measure of vvickednes, he shall receaue the quantitie of his tormentes in hell, if he go thither. VVherof follovvethe bothe feare to commit syn, seinge a man must take suche paynes for the release of the same in this vvorlde: as also diligence in all the three vvorkes satisfactorie, to vvitt, prayers, almes, and affliction of our ovvne bodies, for preuentinge the paynes of purgatorie. Also zeale of perfection in good men, seinge their degree in glorye shalbe accordinge to their life heere. And finallye, some staye from ovvtrage in vvicked men, consideringe

that their tormentes in hell shalbe but accordinge to the measure of their vvickednes.
            But our aduersaries teachinge first, that there is no more payne to be taken for the expiation of synne committed after baptisme, but onlie to beleeue, vvhich is a verie easie poynte, especiallie to euerie man that vvill persvvade him selfe that he beleeuethe vvell: also teachinge that there is no place of purgation in the next lyfe, and that no vvorkes of satisfaction are heere needfull on our behalfe: thirdly teachinge, that all glorye is equall to all that are there, and all paine in hell as muche to the least offender as to the greatest: must needes open a gapp to an infinite sea of vvickednes, and licentiousenes in the common vvealthe. For euerye man persvvadinge him selfe, that hovv euill so euer he liue, yet if he holde a faithe in Christ, and beleeue he shall most certainelie be faued: that he, vvithout all paines ether in this life or in the life to come, shall presentlye goe to heauen, and there be in as greate glorye as Peter & Paule and other Sainctes, vvhiche led the straitest lyfe in this vvorlde. vvho vvill not let stande the painefull life of vertue, and take his pleasures, vvhiche naturall concupiscence inuiteh hym vnto, consideringe that he maie be saued as vvell vvithe them as vvithout? Againe vvhoe vvil spare (beinge once ouer the shoes) to runne in to any extremitie vvhat soeuer of vvickednes, vvhen he thinkethe that if he be damned, he must haue equall punishment vvithe the vvoorst?
            Eleuenthlie as thes opinions of our aduersaries,

are greate fovvntaines in deede to all kinde of libertie and loose behauiour, consideringe 11: VVorkes. Freevvill. & predestination the mightie inclination of our corrupted fleshe to the same: so their doctrine abovvt vvorkes ad predestination, pluckethe vp by the verye rootes all foundation of good lyfe, beatethe dovvne the vvhole hedge of feare, and laiethe all open to most daungerous dissolution. For vvheras vve teache that albeit, all sainctes of God be predestinate before the vvoorldes vvere layed: yet that extinguishethe not the libertie of mans freevvill, but that he maie (beinge preuented and assisted by the grace Eccl. 15: of god) doe anie good vvoorkes or refuse Luc: 13. them at his pleasure. VVhiche good vvoorkes Apoc. 3. beinge don for the loue of god, by a man that is in the state of grace, haue their revvarde and merit, euen to the least cuppe of vvater that a man can geeue, vvhiche is a greate pricke to Math. 5. & 10. & 12. incite men to the same, vsed by the holye Scriptures them selues. Heb. 13.
            
            But our aduersaries teachinge first that aman hathe no free vvill to thes thinges, and secondlie that if he doe them he shall haue no revvarde for them in heauen: mustes needes vtterlie discourage all men from the doinge of good vvoorckes. For vvhoe vvill studie aboute a thinge that is nether in his povver, nor yet necessarie or profitable vnto him: especiallye vvhen the thinge is bothe harde of it selfe, vnpleasant, and muche repugninge to our sensualitie? vvho vvill geeue his goodes to the poore? his landes from his ovvne kinred, to builde hospitals and colledges for straungers? vvhoe

vvill afflict his bodie vvithe fastinge and praier, vvhen he knovveth that he shall receaue no revvarde therfore in heauen? and that vvithout doinge the same he maye be saued by onlye faithe?
            Tvvelfthlie and lastlie (for I vvill tovvche no more,) our Catholique religion teacheth 12. Priuate confession. priuate cōfessiō of our sinnes vnto the pryest vvhich thinge is the verie hedge and vvall of all vertuous life, and the cheefest brydle of Lycentiousnes in a common vvealthe. For by this, infinite enormities are redressed, vvhiche by publique lavves can not be remedied. In confession Vtilities of confession: manye seruantes are made trustie to their masters, vviche before vvere false, and they are caused to make priuie restitution of manie thinges, vvhē their masters thynke not of it. Manye greate breaches betvvixt frindes, as vvife and husbande, father and sonne, and the like, are salued. Manye greate mischifes intended ether against the magistrate, priuate persōs, or the common vvealthe, are staied. Many provvde harte plucked dovvne and abated vvithe the exaggarations of his synnes to his face, by his ghostlye father. Many greatte synners brought to hartie repentance, and full purpose of amendemēt, and to promise also, and sometimes and in some cases to svveare, neuer to commit vvittinglye and vvillninglye the like enormimities againe. Many afflicted persons comforted vvithe particuler helpes for their greefes: manye desperate folckes mollified, and instructed in the vvayes of a nevv life. Manye Landlordes and superiours, brought to deale more

mildly vvithe their subiectes, and manye subiectes, to behaue them selues more obedientlie and devvtifullie tovvards their superiours: many restitutions made, many vvronges recompensed, many quarels ended: finallie, it is impossible to number vpp the infinite and singuler greate commodities vvhiche doe come to mans life, and consequentlye to the common vvealthe, by this spirituall courte & tribunall of God in earthe, that is, by confession.
            The vvhiche beinge taken avvaye, as it is novv by our aduersaries in Englande, (albeit Lutherans in Germanie yet vse it,) there must needes follovve in successe of tyme, intollerable inconueniences. For vvhat vvaye is there novv to deale vvithe the conscience of a childe if he be disobedient to his parentes? Or vvithe a seruant, if he be false or prodigall to his master? if you accuse him, he vvill denye it: if you vrge him, he vvill fall out vvithe you for it: but if him selfe shoulde confesse it to you, as he vvas vvonte to doe to his ghostlie father, askinge absolution at his handes, and pardon at Gods for the same: there is offered bothe fitt place & occasion, to entreate vvithe him for it: and he in disposition to heare good councell.
            So if a prince or greate personage, abuse him selffe in life, vvho vvill dare to tell him uerye fault in particuler, or rebuke him for the same? If a man (for examples sake) doe exceede in apparell, or other vanitie, vvho vvill goe and reprehende him for it, or vvithe vvhat hope of amendment? To conclude, this holye exercise of confession beinge taken avvaie, the verye

locke of good lyfe (vvherof not onlie the sovvle but also the vveale publique dependethe) is vtterlye burst and remoued from amongest Christians.
            Thes differences therfore beinge betvvixt our religion and that of our aduersaries, (right honorable) tovvchinge the maintenance, continuance, vvell doinge, and secure establishemēt of a common vvealthe: there appearethe no reasō in policie, that is, in respecte of the good estate of our countrie, (vvherof your honours haue the charge) vvhiche may prohibite your vvisedomes to shevv some more fauorable tolleration to the Catholique parte, if it might please God to instill so good and gratious a motion into your hartes.
            Nether is it for anye of our aduersaries to an obiectiō preuented. So D
                     •
                  ffulke hathe aunsvvered M. hovvlets reasons of refusall. Grauntinge the reasōs as they lye, but yet quarelinge at some matter of controuersie in the reason. stepp vp heere, and to impugne any of our former opinions in religion, (as they are vvont commonlye to eschevv the matter in hande, and to deale vvith impertinent pointes not intended in that place): for my purpose is not heere to handle matters of controuersie, vvhiche vve bothe offer dailye & desyer muche to trye vvithe our aduersaries at other tymes ether in vvritinge or publique disputation: but my onlye meaninge is, to shevv, that the practise of our doctrine as vve holde it, and of our aduersaries as they teache it, vvhether it be trevv or false, (vvhiche at other tymes and places is to be discussed): of ours (I saie) doe follovv infinite vtilities to a Christian commō vvealthe, vvhiche doe not from the doctrine of our aduersaries, but rather the cleane contrarye hurtes and damages,

and this is the state of our question in this place, vvhiche Ileaue open to anie of our aduersaries that can, to improue by reason, in the pointes before recited.
            Novv then, if our religion and the secret The kinge of Bungo in Iapan beinge a heathen hathe permitted & protected the catholique religion in his countries thes 28. yeres onlye for the commoditie he fee lethe his common vveal the to receaue thereof, in cp. Indic: the like dothe the greate Turcke and other Princes of Mahometes secte at this daye. exercise therof, be in no vvise hurtfull vnto your common vvealthe, (right honorable) but rather doe bringe greate commodities therunto: it maie be one motyue vnto your vvisdomes (as it hathe byn, and is to some other councellers els vvhere of the contrary religion) to tollerate more, or at least, to shevv lesse extremitie against the same, hovve muche so euer you thinke vs deceaued in not conforminge our selues to the protestantes religion. Albeit to saye myne opinion also herein, vvithe your honorable fauours, I can not thincke but that your vvisdomes beinge suche as they are, bothe greate and grovvnded, doe easelye see that our standinge in this pointe, is not vvithout substantiall cause and reason in vs, albeit not sufficient to moue your honours to the same opinion that vve are of.
            For first vvhoe dothe not see that the verie proceedinge of our aduersaries is a stronge reason to make vs staie, if there vvere nothinge els, vvhoe dare not admit anye equall triall, of their cause, nether in vvritinge, preachinge, or lavvfull disputation, they beinge so often requested by vs to the same: But are alvvaies at your honours elbovves to sturre vpp the temporall svvoorde against vs, If vve make anie The procedinge of ministers vvithe vs. reasonable offer, or neuer so orderlie and devvtifull attempt, for the obtaininge of this

thinge, euen at home vppon their ovvne grovvnde (for abrode they dare not apeare vvith neuer so muche securitie or curtesie inuited) to our ovvne greate toyle, labour, daunger, and disaduantage of our cause? And yet they are not ashamed for some colour of the matter, to Such vvas the disputation in the tovver vvith. M. campian & others vvher men vvere prohibited vvith billes & tipstaues to enter. And many a knock on the head receaued for offerīge to heare: and muche mony spent to geate places. creepe into a prison to some poore man miserablye racked, or othervvise pitifullie handled before, and there vvithout geeuinge the partie any vvarninge or tyme to forethincke him selfe, or allovvinge anie bookes, or permittinge equall notaries, or sufferinge hym to oppose one argument for his parte, to assault vvith iumpinge interrogátions, leapinge from pointe to pointe, from matter to matter, accordinge as they came prepared, or as anye litle shevve of aduantage vvas offered, vvith greate vvoordes, stearne countenance, bygg voyce, muche threatninge, and vnciuile reuilinge.
            VVhich proceedinge of theirs, declaringe manifestlie their feare and nakednes and vtter vvante both of trueth charitie and modestie: must needes in the iudgementes of all vvise men, dispute as muche for vs, as any argument in the voorlde that vve can make for our selues.
            Secondlye, hovv cleare so euer the matter The vncertaintie of temporall fauour in matters of religion: be made against vs, in vvordes, and ordinarie speech of men, as that vve resist the Ghospell and manifest vvoorde of god, and the lyke: yet your honours can not but thinke, that these speeches (vvhen all indifferent triall is refused) can not moue vs muche, especiallye seeinge that in other contries, vvhere other sectes doe raigne, no lesse differinge from vs, then this of

Caluine, they do orderlye saie the verie same of our Englishe protestantes, vvhich they doe of vs, vvherin I refer my selfe to a Lutherā Superintendents booke, intituled, Confessio purae doctrinae 
               Nicolaus Amffordiꝰ 
               Euangelicae. A confession of the pure doctrine of the ghospell, vvhere he geueth sentence (as a bisshoppe) of the doctrine novv taught in Englande, by this vvorde Damnamus: vve condemne it as dissonant from the pure ghospell. And I haue shevved ovvt of luther before, vvhere he saieth of the teachers and maintainers therof, Haereticos seriò censemus, & alienos ab Ecclefia dei. art. 28. contra louan. to. 2. vvittē. fo. 503. VVe doe censure them in earnest for heretikes, and remoued from the church of god. The like doe Anabaptistes, Trinitaries, and other sectes pronounce of them. So that in this common phrase and speeche of pure ghospell, there is litle importance that tovvcheth the matter.
            And surely, if after kinge henryes death the noble man vvhich thē could doe most, consultinge vvith his frindes to bringe in a nevv religion, had pleased to bringe in, tovv Lutherans, Anabaptistes, or of any othersecte, as he did tvvo Caluinistes, to reade in the tvvo vniuersities of Englande (as he might very easelye P. Martyr. M. Bueer. haue donne, for any resistāce or triall that then vvas vsed:) had not that religiō byn novv called the ghospell, the pure vvorde, the lavv of the lorde, the establissed religion, and the like, as novv this is called in Englāde, and as thes other sectes are called by their professors in the places vvhere they beare rule? And should not vve haue byn punished as muche for resistinge of them, as vve are novv for resistinge this? yes

verelye, and no reason to the contrary.
            VVherfore seinge a man may not alvvayes depende safelye of the seculer magistrate in religion, nor make repose of his sovvle, vppon the fovvndation of a temporall lavv: vve are in iustice to craue pardon of your honours, for not conforminge our opinions to yours in this matter: vve can not doe it vvithout dissimulation and most greeuouse remorse of an accusinge conscience. Yf your honours vvoulde graunte suche indifferent triall betvvixt the The petitiō of lavvfull disputation renevved. learned of bothe our sydes, as vve demaunde for our instruction and devv reformation in iudgement, if vve err: the matter perhaps might sone be ended: But that beinge denied, and the aduerse partye shevvinge manifest distruct therby, as it semeth to vs: vve remaine as before, of contrarye opinion in poyntes of beleefe: but in all other matters as becommeth devvtifull subiectes, most readie to serue her maiestie & your honours, to the vttermost of all our earthlye & mortall abilitie.
            Our desyre vve haue to be rightlye informed, may appeare, not only by our often and earnest petitions of lavvfull tryall in poyntes of controuersie: but also by this, that vve require not anye longe or tediouse satisfaction in matters, but onlye a demōstration of one necessarye pointe, vvherof our resolution in other thinges vvoolde soone ensevve.
            And this pointe is, that seinge the religion of Christ and his Apostles, vvas (by all partyes confession) the verie trevv religion for vvhich vve stryue, and vvherby vve must be saued, and

so for a hundred or tvvo hundred yeres after, vvithout contradiction of either partie, the religion vvas pure vvhich vvas deliuered by the Christian churche ouer all the vvolde: lett demonstration be made, vvhich of our religions beganne sence that tyme (for that must needes be false, hauinge not his beginninge from Christ and his Apostles,) and this maie be don (as it semeth to vs) bothe easely, apparentlye, and sensiblye in this manner.
            VVhen anie religion is once publiquelye planted and receaued, as the trevv religion vvas by our aduersaries confession, in the first tvvo An easye, short, and euidēt vvaie offered of tryall: or three hundred yeres after Christ: it is impossible to bringe in a nevv religion contrary to that, or any articles of faithe repugnant to these before, vvithout some cōtradiction or resistāce of them that then lyued, possessed in the former religion. This is a proposition euident bothe by experience and reason. For first, reason teacheth vs to be impossible, for one man or manye, to Reason. bringe in a nevv religion, contrarie to all, and to make it to be receaued generallie of all, vvithout resistance of some, especiallie the thinge beinge a manifest falshoode to vvchinge matter of saluation, as they saye our opinions are. This (I saye) is impossible in common reason. For if one citie vvould receaue it, yet an other vvould not: if one countrye or kyngdome vvould allovve it, yet an other vvoulde make resistance, atleast vvise for a tyme. And if no Citie nor countrye nor kyngdome had controlled it, yet some good man or other vvould haue donne it in the vvorlde abrode. Secondlye the same appearethe experience
               
by experience, for that there vvas neuer yet heresie or error that rose against any one clause or iote of the truethe before receaued, but it vvas controlled presently and resisted by voices and vvritinges of infinite men. And in Englande beinge but a litle corner in respect of the vvhole vvorlde there coulde neuer yet appeare anye one opinion contrary to the doctrine before receaued, but it vvas straight vvaie noted and rebuked: as the religion of Caluine, by the Catholiques before in possession: after that, the fansie of the puritane by the pretestant: after that, the deuise of the familie of loue, by bothe protestant and puritane: and generally there vvas neuer yet heresye offered to the church, or to any peece of the same, but that it vvas straight vvaie knovven, vvhoe vvere the beginners therof, at vvhat tyme, vvhat multitude first left the former religion and followed the same, vvhoe resisted, vvhoe spake and vvrote against it, and the like: and this is a trevvth more cleare than the Sonne it selfe.
            This then beinge so, the issevv vvhiche vve A verye reasonable issue offered. desyre to ioyne, is euident and plaine: to vvitt that of these articles vvherin vve dissent from them and vvhiche they call heresyes, as inuented by vs sence the Apostles tyme: as the reall presence, the sacrifice of the masse, purgatorye, prayer for the dead, intercession of sayntes, meritt of good vvoorckes, grace inherent, fyue sacramentes denyed by them, and the like: let thē shevve by anie one father, historiographer, or other autēticall testimonie, vvhen any of these pointes vvere brought first into the churche

and resisted by them that then lyued, (as they must needes be if they vvere contrary to the vniuersall doctrine then receaued in christianitie) and vve remayne satisfied vvithout any furder particuler tryall.
            This is a most reasonable demaunde, so one aunsvvered if the trevvth be vvith our aduersaries. For vve take vppon vs to shevv all thes particulers before recited in euery pointe of doctrine vvherin they dissent from vs: that is, vvhen it began to be first knovvē in the church by vvhat man, vvho first controlled it, and the like: but let them doe the same by vs, and the matter is ended.
            But if they can finde no one booke extant in the vvorlde against anie article of our difference from them, at the first commynge of the same into the church, nor can finde recorde of anye man that ether reprehended or controlled it vvhen it vvas first inuented (as they saye) by our forefathers, but that it vvas receaued vvithe silence and approbation, not onlye in one countrye, but thoroughovvt the vvorlde, not in one pointe, but in many, and they most important: as for example, the fayninge of fyue sacramentes together, (although vve holde in our doctrine that none but Christ can institute a sacrament, no not the vvhole churche together, nor all the Apostles vvhen they vvere alyue), if (I saie) they can finde no recorde at all, that any man resisted or controlled thes horrible & blasphemous poyntes at their first entringe into the churche, (if it be trevv that they entred in since the Apostles tyme) then must thei thincke that

men vvere senseles and madd at that time, that vvoolde suffer so manye, so grosse, & so important heresies, to passe vnchecked, and neuer to open their mouthes against them, vvheras at the verye same tyme, (that is, vvithin the first fyue hundred yeres after Christ, vvherin our aduersaries graunte thes heresies to haue bene crept in to the churche) the fathers and doctors that then lyued, vvrote most diligentlye against euerie other litle error that appeared. But novv vvhether it be reasonable to thinke so of those holye learned and vigilant men or els to thinke our aduersaries some vvhat shameles, in charginge them vvithe suche absurdities, I leaue to the indifferent reader to consider.
            And thus muche haue I bene bolde to laye dovvne to your vvisedomes, right honorable, both for the innocencie of our cause, the equitie of our demaunde, the reason of our offer, and the easie meanes of our satisfaction, if our aduersaries vvoolde agree to the same. VVhich all tendeth onlye to this end (as your honours right vvell can discerne) to mitigate the greate offence conceaued against vs, and consequentlie some parte of that extreame rigour vsed tovvardes vs and our cause of later dayes, vvhich beinge such, as in verie deed is intollerable: vve are constrained to make recourse to your honours to vvhome of devv our protection appertaineth and to doe, as a certaine afflicted man did vvith an Emperour in times past, that is, to appeale from your selues vnto your selues: from your selues, as offended by the instigation of our aduersaries: vnto your selues, mollified

vvith our iust defence and innocencie in crymes obiected.
            If by the rackinges, stretchinges, vvrestinges, and dreadfull tortures, vsed so often and to so many of our innocent afflicted brethren, and that in so rigourous & mercilesse manner, there hath bene any one thinge vvrounge out from them, of treason, conspiracie, or practises against the state, vvhervvith our aduersaries, vvithout conscience, do vse dailye to accuse vs in their bookes and sermons, therby to sturre her maiestie and your honours against vs: lett the partie guyltie be punished openly, vvith infamie also to our vvhole cause, albeit in this later, vve offer more than reason. But if after all this adoe, after all this fierse halinge, and pitifull pullinge of mē in peeces, nothinge hath bene founde at all, no one act, no vvorde, no cogitation of suche matters, but onlye innocencie and Zeale of religion in the tormented: then is our case muche more hard at home, in our ovvne countrye, vnder our ovvne Soueraigne, than it could be any vvhere els vnder the extremest aduersaries of our religion in the vvorlde.
            For I knovv your honours can not but consider, that the greatest enimyes of Christianitie this daie liuinge, as those of the secte of Mahomet, and many gētles besydes, ar so far of, from tormentynge Catholiques, as they permit vnto them the libertie and exercise of their cō
               science, in respect of the antiquitie and continuance therof. For vvhich cause also, the most of Christian princes, do tollerate vvithe the verie levves: and suche as possesse the Indes and

other places, vvhere gentiles inhabite, neuer vse to moleste, and muche lesse to torment them for their consciences, vvherī they vvere borne and bredd vp: for that, faithe beinge the guifte of God, and comminge by hearinge (as the scripture Rom. 12: saiethe) is not to be put in by tormentes & persecution. Rom. 10.
            
            Pitifull then and compassionable is our case (right honorable): if, of all other men, vve finde lesse rest and most extremitie, and that also there, and from those, vvhere, and from vvhome, manie greate considerations shoulde yealde vs hope of fauoure and mercie. No protestant prince of any other countrie did euer vse the like: and it is quyte contrarie both to the preachinges and protestations of all those of that religion in other places, as also of our aduersaries in Englande, before they came to beare rule them selues.
            Alas (my Lordes) vvhat impelleth your vvisdomes (for of nature I can not thinckc you sofiers & pityles) to exercise suche extremitie vppon poore people for that cause, vvherof your ovvne fathers vvere as guyltie as vve are, that is, for our conscience in the auncient religion? If you meane to vvīne mē therby to your opiniō, it is the cleane contrarie course, as I haue shevved. If you thinke by terrour to make those desist, vvhich of meere zeale after the apostolique manner doe offer them selues to daunger for maintenance of that faithe: you knovv the vvise counsaile of honorable Gamaliel: if it be of man, it vvill sone be dispatched: but if it be of Act. 5. God, humane terrour can not lett it, as hit herto

I am sure it dothe greatlie increase it.
            Your honours haue procured libertie of conscience for those of your religion in some other countries, vvhich must proceede (as vve interpret from a mercifull disposition tovvardes the afflicted, and that mens consciences are not to be constrained.
            VVe beseeche your Lordships then, that vve your poore afflicted subiectes, maye tast some parte of that your honorable disposition, vvherof straungers doe receaue so greate releefe and comforte.
            Consider (my good lordes.) in most humble manner I desire and requeste it, vvhat the end of all thes straininges, and most rigourous procedinges can arriuē vnto. In respect of the vvorlde, (I must speake playnelye) it can be nether honorable nor profitable, nor of anye secure cōtinuance, beinge subiect to infinite horrour, obloquie, grudge, and hatred, as also to diuers breaches and most daungerous vvoundes, as all extremities are vvonte to be. And in respect of God, hovv it is to be liked, eche man maie gesse vvhiche readeth the scriptures, detestinge euerye vvhere all mercilesse procedinge of mortall men vvith their brethren, and commendinge, most carefullie, compassion one tovvardes the other, vvith greeuous threates to them that vse the contrarie.
            Remember (right honorable), that hovv different so euer our degrees be in this vvorlde, yet must vve all be equall before the common iudge, at the later daie, and all those afflicted persons, these tormēted, these imprisoned, these

impouerished, these poore men, vvomen children, and seruauntes, vvhich lye novv in miserie by your meanes, ether lurkinge in corners or driuen from place to place, not daringe to appeare or shevv their countenance before your Lordships, must standby you vvithout feare at that daie, to geeue in euidence of thinges passed against them.
            Good Lorde, vvhat comfort can it be to any of your honours, at the daie vvhen you must depart this vvorlde, to haue vsed suche rigour, to your ovvne fleshe and bloode, for matter of conscience, vvhich you haue not don to any other most impious, haynous, or detestable malefactor. VVhat good or cōforte can the tormē
               ted members of your brethren, the stretched veines, the broken synovves, the dismembred iointes, the rented bovvels of your countrye mē, of your ovvne quiet subiectes, of most peaceable, modest, and innocent priests yelde vnto your soules at that daye? you must your selues crye for mercye in that dreadfull hovver, to hym vvhome these men, ether in trevvth, or in opinion do serue, and vvhy than may not vve aske some mercye at your honours handes novv, at the least, from thes horrible and seruile tormentes, vvhich Christian and ciuill hartes doe detest to thinke on? VVhat good can thes outragious meanes vvorke anye vvay vnto your cause, or vvhen you be dead, vvhat honour, estimation, loue, or securitie, can the eternall me morie of thes extreame dealinges, pourchasse vnto your posteritie.
            The cause beinge gods, as vve presume: if all

the earth shoulde rise against vs, vve may not geeue ouer, nor once shrincke in the confession and profession of this faith, though all vvrath of man vnder the cope of heauen shoulde rage and vvax tempestuous. For that, hauinge but one lyfe to yelde: vve knovve the vttermost that can be donne vnto vs. And if our tormenters vvoulde deferre the same, by longe, and often, and slovv tortures, to feede vppon our paines, as they seeme to doe: yet, at the last, they can afflicte vs no longer, than our breath vvill holde in: and finallie, the matter must haue an end, and both they and vve be transposed to a nevv iudgment seate, vvhere matters must be nevv trauerst agayne, and nevv sentence geeuen, & nevv tortures appointed, of other qualitie and continuance, Apoc. 21. than thes former vvere. At vvhat time, if vve suffer in a good cause, (as vve persvvade our selues vve doe) all our teares shalbe vvyped avvaye by our sauiour him selfe, all our molestations appeased, all our penuries releeued, all our paines assvvaged, all our racked members resetled, all our dispersed bovveles restored againe, Apoc. 21. and vve placed ovvt of all feare, sorovv, & affliction, for the time to come,
            In respect vvherof, and especiallye in consideration of the infinite paines and tormentes, vvhich our svveete Sauiour suffered for vs: vve are content to beare both this, and vvhat so euer further affliction, his holye hande shall please to lay vppon vs, beinge sorye that vve haue not moelyues than one, to leese in this his cause: for a thovvsande in eche man, can not be aunsvverable to his one deathe for vs, nor to

his greate loue and diuyne consolation, vvhere vvith he assisteth dayely, and confortethe the hartes and spirites of our afflicted brethren, euen in the middest of their greatest tortures, penuries, and miserable calamities.
            VVherfore, to conclude this vvofull matter, The conclusion. vvithout any further tediousnes vnto your honours, vve are in all humilitie and devvtifull submission, to beseeche and obtest your most honorable assemblye, euen for the loue of our Saueoure, in respect of our cause (vvhich vve protest before his diuine maiestie to be onlye our conscience in religion, and not any euill meaninge tovvardes his minister, our soueraygne): that you vvill at length take notice of our distresses, consideration of our calamities, and finallie, some mercifull inclination, tovvards our afflictions. VVhich if your honours doe, hovv so euer othervvise you thinke vs amisse, in our cause of conscience: yet, no doubt but you shall receaue the revvarde devv to mercie and clemencie, both from God & the vvorlde. But if this our supplication of mercie, finde no mercye, nor place at all: yet shall not vve cease to pray stil for your honours, confortinge our selues vvith the hope onlye of Gods mercie, vvhen man forsaketh vs, and also vvith this cogitatiō, that your Lordships are nether the first, nor the greatest, nor shalbe the last vvhich shall persecute this faith, & churche, for vvhich vve suffer. And hovv so euer the matter doe passe for our lyues and tymes, (vvherof vve make no greate accounte): yet our posteritie shall see, (as our auncestours haue seene before) that men

doē alter, passe and fade, and their cogitations come to chaungeable and vnexpected euentes, but the trevvth of our Lorde endureth for euer. Psal. 116.
            
            
               Your honours humble oratour and vnfavned hartie Beadesman. G. T.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            AN EPISTLE TOVVCHINGE THE PERSECVTION OF CATHOLICKES IN ENGLANDE.
To his verie louinge frinde. M. Gerarde at Bononie in Italie.
            
               I Haue receaued diuers and sundrye your lettres (my deare frinde) and all to lyke effecte and purpose. For you requyre most ernestlie at my handes, that I shoulde signifie to you the certaintie of our Englishe persecution vppon Catholickes, wherof you saye there is a greate brute with you, but yet dyuerslye reported, and of no constant creditt. Marye, to me you thinke it an easie matter, to write the verye trewth and the certaintie of thinges: for that I lye neere to the place where they are donne, and may learne dailye bothe by lettres and reports of suche as come thence, how they passe. The which thinge albeit I shoulde graunte, (for in deed I lyeneere and doe attende

with some diligence, bothe what is writen, or reported from thence:) yet whether I may put downe the same in writinge, and imparte it to our frindes there, most desyrous of the same (as you saye) especiallie withe the intēt it should be made publique: I can hardlye resolue my selfe. For you are not ignorant what a perylous point it is, to complayne of iniuries receaued from the mightie, whose fashiō is, not to pmitt free the wailinges of the afflicted, but rather to take reuenge of the very complaintes which are made of their doinges.
            VVherfore leste I shoulde hurte them whome I vvishe best vnto, and by recountinge their calamities, encrease the same, which I would rather ease if I coulde, though it were with the daunger of myne owne lyfe: I rest verie doutfull, not knowinge well what were best to determine. And yet, to say the trevvthe, I must confesse, that I finde inclination in my selfe to the satisfyinge of your demaunde, both for that the thinge semethe iust, which you aske, and also the reasons by you alleaged, sufficient to defend it from all cauill of the enemye. For thus you reason:

vvhat? is it not lawfull to committ to priuate lettres that which is openlye and publiquelye donne? and if they wold make this a fault: yet is it onlye your fault, not to be layed vppon the poore men alreadye in affliction: punishable vppon you, and not vppon them.
            VVhich reason of yours beinge takē in deed from the verye sense of nature her selfe, encourageth me much to satisfie your demaunde, seinge that the wisedome of our aduersaries ought to yelde vs this hope, (for they are not vnwise accordinge to fleshe & blood) that they will not attribute other mens offences, (if it be an offence) to suche as are innocent of the same, albeit trewly my endeuour shalbe so to write eche thīge as (by their owne iudgements) I may not offende. For I will speake nothinge odiouslye, nothinge bitterlye, but I will declare what hath bene donne: & yf the rigour of the matter dryue me at anye time into complaint: it shalbe without the reproche of any man.
            For I deeme it not the parte of Catholikes to recompence iniurie with iniurye, The parte of Catholiques. or to requyte iniustice with acerbitie

of speche. For that we haue a mercifull and mightie lorde to whose onlye arbitrement all iniuries, are to be referred: he hath care of vs, (as the scripture saith;) 1. Pet. 5. 
               to him let vs leaue reuenge. He him selff vvill 
               Rom. 22. 
               repaye: he vvill discerne our cause: he vvill deliuer vs from the vnholye nation, frō the vniust & 
               Psal. 42. 
               Psal. 74. 
               guylefull man: he, when time shalbe, vvill sit in iudgemēt vppon [our] iustice it selfe, & how muche more vppō the vniust psecutions, molestatiōs, & vexatiōs of his seruaūtes.
            In the meane space if we be afflicted; if we be trodden downe, if we suffer the spoyle of our worldlye goodes, if we be subiect to reproches, if we be pressed with prisons, if we be tyed with chaines, if we pyne awaie with hunger, colde, and want of necessaries, if we be whipped and burned in the eares as roags, if we be drawen hanged and quartered alyue, if we be consumed with diuers kindes' of deathes. (for all thes thinges Catholiques in England do sustaine:) and if, (which is a matter yet of more greefe,) we sustaine thes thinges in the middest of our brethren, in sight and hearinge of other Catholiques rownde about vs, they lookinge on, and takinge litle compassion of our

case, nor helpinge vs with their worde, when as perhaps they may: yet must not we be discouraged, nor forsake the holsome anchor of patience. For vve are not 
               4. Re. 19. (as the scirpture saith) better then our fathers 
               Heb. 11. 
               vvhich vvere hevved in peeces, racked, vvhipped, and imprisoned. And the Apostle addeth one thinge which I wolde haue you to marcke: and thesmen (saieth he) receaued no redemption: (that is, no ease of their afflictions in this lyffe) to the end they might finde a better resurrection. VVe beinge Scholers are not aboue our maister, vvhoe 
               Luc. 6. 
               1. Pet. 3. 
               doinge no iniustice in the vvorlde, yet vvas reputed amongest the vvicked, and suffered muche more crueltie for our sakes, and yet Esa. 53. did not he open his mouthe as the scripture Luc. 22. saithe before his persecuters. Esa. 33.
            
            Let vs then retaine still this aunciēt The propertie of heretikes. possession of holye sufferance, commended vnto vs by our saueour and conserued by our forefathers. Let vs leaue vnto our aduersaries, that disloyall kinde of reuenge, Rom. 9. Ep. iud. wherby they are woont to resist magistrates to sturre vp sedition, and wherby in thes our dayes they haue destroied partlye by violence and partlye by secret fraude, so manye noble men,

valeant capitaines, Holye priestes, stronge cities, and most noble and renowmed common wealthes and states. Let them vse the arme of mā, let them trust in their Hier. 17. 
               1. Cor. 3. craft and subtiltie of witt, let them feede of wickednes as muche as they list, our hope 
               Eph. 4. 
               is in god our lorde, vvhoe vvill saue them that 
               Psal. 61. 16. 113. 
               hope in him: all our healpe is in the name of our lorde, vvho made heauen and earth, and forgetteth not our pouertie and tribulation. It maie Psal. 45. please his diuyne maiestie, perhaps, to deliuer vs ouer to be chastened for our synnes, for that the kinges honour louethe iudgmēt. 
               Psal. 98. But certes he will not cast vs awaie, if we repent our synnes, and returne vnto hym, for that he is mercifull, and full of mercie, and there is no nomber of his mercyfull doynges. 
               Psal. 49. 77. 140. 144. VVhat could be spokem by him more expresselye than this?
            
               If his children for sake my lavv (saieth he 
               Psa. 88. 
               of David) & shall not vvalke in my iudgements: if they shall prophane my iustice, and shall not keepe my commaundementes:
            
            
               I vvill visit vvith the rodd their iniquities, and their sinnes vvith vvhippes:
            
            
               But yet I vvill not take my mercye from them, nether vvill I hurt them in my trevvth,
            
            
               I vvill not prophane my testamēt, nor make frustrate
               
               the vvordes, vvhich haue passed from my ovvne lyppes.
            
            
               I haue once svvorne in my holye, I vvill not lye, to Dauid, his seede shall remayne for euer and euer.
            
            This is the promisse, this is the firme protestation of god, to the seede of Dauid, that is, to the Catholique churche of Christ, towchinge her euerlastinge continuance, made by an othe, confirmed by his bloode, and establisshed by the experience of manye ages. VVherefore we must not dispaire but confidentlie endure, for vvhoe so euer indureth our lorde, shall neuer be confounded. And if he do flaie 
               Psal. 24. 
               some vvhat longe, yet let vs expect him, for that cōminge he vvill come, & vvill not forslovve it. 
               Abac. 2.
            
            To this tollerāce of aduersitie, when we in this our banishement for religion, doe often cohort one an other for our comfort: there is nothinge which we can propose more forcible, ether for our cō
               solatiō or imitatiō, thē the sufferinges of our deare bethren in England, so muche more greeuous and sharper then ours, by how muche the woundes doe more afflict, which are felt in a mans owne bodie, then those whiche are made vppon

externall temporalties. I meane that we whoe flyinge the handes of our persecutours, doe leade a banisshed life in strāge countries, albeit we are besett with manie incommodities, thorough lacke of our countrie and domesticall frindes, and by the losse of our goodes and possessions at home: yet we enioie the libertie of these two thinges, which of all other are of most importance, that is both of bodie and sowle, neither of which is permitted vnto our Catholiques at home.
            For first besides the taxes and aggrauations, which are laide vppon their temporall commodities, theire very bodies are subiect to a thowsande vexations, both of bondes, imprisonment, and also of tormentes. But to theire sowls there is nothinge left free or at libertie, not their religion not their internall feelinge or opinion of God & their consciēce, for thow must say as other men say, doe as they sweare, yf thow lyue there albeit thow thinke the playne contrarie in thy conscience.
            VVhich seruitude, and illiberall pressure and forcement of mynde, especiallye

in matters pertaininge to God, beinge the greatest and most greeuous affliction, that may be exercysed vppon man, maketh our state and conditiō, (albeit in other thinges very harde) to seeme much more tollerable than that of our brethrē at home. For whoe would not esteeme it more greeuous than all other incommodities, yea than death it selfe, to be wrested in conscience, to be forbidden all exercise of religion, to be enforced to sweare & make profession of new straunge opinions, which his hart doth reiect, detest, and abhorr: and yf by chance he should be taken seruinge god accordinge to his owne manner, and the manner of his fathers and auncestours, & of the most parte of Christianitie besides, (albeit it were alone, albeit it were preuilye, and in most secrete wise:) yet to be plucked owt, as an offender of the supreme maiestie of the prince, as an enymie of the cō
               mon wealthe, as a wicked and flagitious caitife, vnworthie of life, or the companye of mē? And that thes thinges doe so now passe in Englande (M. Gerard) it shall euidentlie appeare, by the narration followinge.
            
               
And first of all that the matter may The lavves of England against Catholiques. the better be vnderstoode, and you the easier coniect of the trueth of that I saye, it semeth to me no euill methode, to laye downe first, the publique lawes which England (borne, & instructed by Catholiques, in Christianitie,) hath now for their Christian faithe, set furthe againste Catholiques. For by thes lawes may be easelye cōceaued what Catholiques are subiect vnto, in respect of the power, malice, & iniquitie of priuate aduersaries when they list, seinge that publique lawes do yelde so muche authoritie, to euerye mā almoste, that woold seeke a cauill or sclaunder against them.
            To beginne therfore with thes lawes, it is first to be knowen that there are two kinde of lawes at dyuers times set furth in dissauoure and punishemēt of the Catholique Tvvo kindes of lavves. religion. The one which concerneth monye, possessions, and other goodes bothe of fortune & bodye, which I thinke maie be called penall or monye lawes. The other which maie rather be called bloodie or capitall lawes, for that thei inflicte deathe vnto the offenders. And to this diuision of lawes will I applye my

speeche folowinge.
            Amongest the penall lawes I will Penall lavves. put that as first, which was made amongest the last, for the punishement of those whiche for conscience sake refuse to come to the protestants churches. For this poynt the aduersarie vrgeth greatlie, that (all beyt the Catholiques be of an other religion, thoughe they detest Caluinisme in their harts, thoughe they abhorr all prayers and cōuenticles of the ministers, and accompt their seruice for most wicked & blasphemouse:) yet must they come to yt, they must assist and shewe them selues present, albeyt with a repynyng and resistinge conscience. And because Recusants. some do refuse to synn in such horrible wyse against god, and their owne consciē
               ces: therfore this lawe was made against these scrupulouse men for soothe: that 1. For refusing to go to churches of protestants. who so euer should refuse to come to the protestants churche, to heare diuine seruice (as they call yt) yf he be aboue the age of sixtene yeres: shall forfeyte twē
               tye powndes Englishe euerye monethe: and he which can not paye, to lye in prysō vntill he be of better habilitie to paye. The rest of those lawes folowe here in

order.
            VVho so euer shall be conuicted to haue hearde masse, though it were secretlye, shall fuffer imprisonement, the space of one whole yere, and so longe after, vntil he paye a hundrede marke. 2. For hearinge or sayeing masse.
            
            But as for the priest which celebrateth masse, he shall neuer be lett owte of prison till he haue payde two hundred marks. And that somme of money must be payd so oft as any offendeth herein. 3. For abiuration of religion.
            
            VVhat soeuer Ecclesiasticall persone shall not make publike detestation of the romane Religion, and openlie abiure the authoritie and iurisdiction of the byshopp of Rome: shall forfaite all his benefices and all his dignities ecclesiasticall what soeuer. 4. For othes in the vniuersities.
            
            No Scholer or student maye haue any place with in the Colleiges of the vniuersities, or be preferred to any degree of Learning, excecpt such as at his fyrst entry in to the Colleige, and at the taking of euerye degree, doth by solemne othe, denie the byshopp of Romes authoritie, in all causes Ecclesiasticall.
            None may haue any publique Office, 5. For othes of officers. or other ministerie, in the common welthe,

except he fyrst solemlye publishe, the self same abiuration of the byshopp of Rome.
            No warde comyngeto full age may enter 6. For othes of vvardes. in to his inheritaunce, or enioye any cōmodities there of, except he fyrst take the same othe.
            VVho so euer vnder degree of a Baron, 7. For othes of perleyament: men. shall be called (as ostentimes it hapneth) to be one of the parliamēt (in which courte voices were wont to be most free) must neuer the lesse haue no voice there, yf he will not take the sayde common othe against the Pope.
            VVhat persone so euer (vnder degree 8. For recusants. of a baron) to whome this othe hath bene twyse ministered, doeth the second time refuse the same, shall for fait all his goods and possessions, & be condemned to perpetuall pryson.
            VVho so euer denieth the quene to 9. For denienge of the quenes supremacie. be supreme heade of the Churche of England, in causes Ecclesiasticall, shall sustein the same Penaltie of losse of all his goodes, and of perpetuall imprysonment.
            VVho so euer receiueth or kepeth 10. For receiuers of halovved▪ thinges: any Agnus dei Rosaries, halowed graines, medalls, or anie other thnig which is halowed

by the Pope and broght in to England, shall endure the same punishement of losse of all his goods and of perpetuall imprysonment.
            Yf any kepe a Scholemaster in hys 11 For keping Catholique scholemasters. howse, to teache hys owne childeren or others, which dothe not haunt the churche of protestants, or is not by one of their by shopps alowed: he shall for that cause forfeit ten pounds for euerie month, vntill he haue remoued him.
            Yf anie do knowe one, whiche hathe 12. For cō
                  cealers of reconciled Catholiques. reconciled another, to the vnitie and cō
               munion of the churche of Rome, and yf he doe by any waye or meane ayde, eyther the reconciler or the reconciled, or do conceale thone or thother, in suche wise as he doe not discouer them bothe, to some publique magistrate, with in the space of twentye dayes, then next folowenige: he shall forfait all his good, as well mouable as vnmouable, and all his possessions whiles he lyueth: and his bodie shall remaine to be disposed, as pleaseth the queene.
            VVho so euer dothe know any persone, 13. For cō
                  cealing procurers. to haue procured an other, to be reconciled to the faith and religion of Rome,

thowghe he hymselfe be no reconciler, nor is reconciled, yet, yf suche a one doe by any way or meane releue or succoure the sayd procurer, or yf he doe conceall, or not discouer the same procurer to some magistrate (as is aboue sayde: (shall incurr the same punyshement.
            VVho so euer dothe know any persone 14. For cō
                  cealing of counselers to haue counseled an other to be recō
               ciled to the Romaine Religion, thowgh he hym self dyd not procure it at all: yet yf he any way ayde such a counsayler, or cōceale or not discouer hym (as is before sayd:) he shall haue the same punishmét.
            Yf one know any to haue persuaded, 15. For concealing such as obey the pope. procured, or counseled an other to obeye the byshopp of Rome, in causes Ecclesiasticall, and yet dothe ayde hym, cōceale or not bewraye hym (as is aboue say de:) shall endure the fame payne and punishement.
            VVho so euer knoweth any, which 16. For cō
                  cealing of promised obedientiaries. hathe suffered hym self to be perfuaded to obey the byshopp of Rome, in causes Ecclesiasticall, or which hathe promised, ani obediēce to him for the time to come, and yet dothe any way ayde, or conceale suche a one, or doeth not discouer hym

within twentie dayes (as is aforesayde) he shall suffer the same penaltie of losse of all his goods and possessions, and of imprisonment.
            He which knoweth anye priest, to haue absolued an other, and yet doeth 17. For conceling absoluors. ayde or conceale hym, or doeth not geue knowleige of hym, in sufficient tyme (as is aforesayd): shall be condemned in the same penaltye.
            Yf any know a priest to haue authoritie 18. For concealing such as haue authoritie to absolue. to absolue (albeit the priest exercyse not the same, nor absolue any) yf he eyther helpe or conceale hym, or do not discouer hym, (as is aforesayd) he shall abyde the same payne.
            VVho so euer knoweth any to pretēd to haue authoritie to absoluet (hough 19. For concealing pretensed absoluers. in dede he haue none) and yet doeth ayde or conceale hym, or not discouer hym, (as is aforesayd) he shall suffer the same punishement.
            Yf any knowe one to be absolued, were he willyngly absolued vppon his 20. For concealing the absolued. owne sute, or wittingly dyd but suffer hym selfe to be absolued, (thoughe he neuer desired it): yet yf he any waye succoure, or conceale hym, or do not geue

notice of hym, (as is aforesayde) he shall haue the same punishement.
            VVho so euer knoweth anie to haue 21. For concealing dissuaders, of caluinism, dissuaded an other frō the religiō nowe publiklie vsed in Englād, of intēt, to draw hym to the obedience of the bysopp, and religion of Rome: or knoweth any to haue bene a procurer, mouer or counseler, to such dissuadyng of any other: and doeth by any way or meane helpe, conceale, or not discouer hym to a magistrate withein the space of twentie dayes, (as is a foresayd): he shall endure the same penalties, punishements and paynes, so often now remembred, vvhiche is asmuche to saye in effect, as he shall lose all the ioyes, comforthes, & commodities which this mortall life can velde to mā.
            And thus muche (for so farras I now doe remēber) towching the penall lawes. By these onelye (though ther were no capitall lawes,) a man may easilye coniecture, in how hard termes, the Catholiques now in Englande doe stande, against whome, so many dredefull and moste perilous lawes are layed, lyke snares for their destructiō. who can haue a quiet mynde, whan he is withoute securitie to enioye

but one houre the verye necessaries wher with he showld lyue, beinge on euerie syde hedged and listed yn with so many menasing lawes, the dawngers whereof he is not able to eschewe, except he wold be come impiouse? how great a swaye doe cauills beare among these Lawes? how great force hath malice here? how muche oportunitie is geuen to iniquitye? Behold I praye you. Yf any persone do eyther ayd or cōceale the reconciler, or the reconciled, the absoluer or the absolued, the procurer, counceler dissuader, or suche like: he is guiltie (saith the law) of an haynouse crime, & worthie to be punished, with losse of al his goods, yea and of his libertie allso. Let the matter it selfe passe: consider but onelye how wyde open to all iniustice the Catholiques do lye by meanes of thes lawes, yf one by chaunce or vnwittingly should receaue in to his house, some of the a foresayd persones, and a quareling felow wold accuse hym, that he dyd yt wittinglie: how cowld he be hable in this case to defend him selfe, or what supportatiō might he finde for his owne innocēcye? If one wold dissuade a man from the heresie

of Caluin and neuer speake word at all of By the 21. Lavv before mencioned. the byshopp of Rome: howe shall it appeare that he is not guiltie of treason? I meane, how shall he be able to bring in euidence, that he dyd not dissuade with this intent, that the other should reiect the phātasies of Caluin, and submitt hym selfe to the bisshopp & churche of Rome? Yes (yow will say) the perill may be easilie auoyded, if this felow showlde plain lye moue one to the religion of puritanes, Anabaptists, Arians, or yet of Atheists: Eche heresie is more safely defended in Englād, than the Catholique faithe. In verie trueth I beleue it well: And surelie yt is not vnproblable that this same clause was so smothelye couched to the rest by the penner of the lawe, in fauoure and maintenance of these and suche like heresies. Oh how miserable is the condicion of these owre dayes?
            And thus muche touching cauillation The vnequalitie of the lavves aganist Catholiques. and surmise. Novv as to the vnequalitie of these lavves, what should a man say thereof, syth therbye at this daye in England the father is bownde to accuse hys sonne, the husband hys wyfe, the brother his brother, the penitent his ghostlie father, the seruant hys master, as yf it were for a myschoeuouse crime? And wherfore

I praye yow? forsoothe for the Catholique religion, vnder which we were borne, with which we were brought vpp, and instructed, and the verie same, whiche all other princes doe embrace and defende. The like to this withoute doubt, no age past hath tasted, no memorie of oure forefathers hathe heard, no antiquitie of former worldes hathe sene. These are the braynsick phantasies onlie of oure dayes, the variable innouacions of particular places, the flexible willfullnesse of mans mynde, the moste vaine cogitatiōs of fleshe and bloode, whereby men doe attempt to exchaunge the vnmutable truthe of Christ for their owne phantasies to serue their owne turnes in respect of their owne commodities.
            But let vs yet see mo of these seuere lawes, & that ys, the capitall lawes, whiche before, I haue called bloodye lawes, in The capitall lavves against the Catholiques of England. this respect, for that they lye in wayte of bloode, and doe assaile, the verie lyfe of man. And in these lawes, first of all, there is one thing not vnmete to be noted, that all thes lawes, doe concern religiō onlye, and yet neuer the lesse they doe inferr not only the payne of deathe, but suche a

payne, as ys prouided for offenses, committed against her maiesties persone, whiche of all other is a most greuouse & moste odiouse payne, as due for the most flagitiouse crime, and that ys treason or rebellion. And this course oure aduersaries doe take of speciall purpose, that the deathe of Catholiques, snoulde not seeme to be a martyrdome, but rather might be conueyed throughe the eares of the ignorāt people, vnder the infamouse blott of an haynouse crime: and to the intent allso that the prince might more easilie be persuaded, the Catholique religion to stand styfflie bent against her roiall scepter, and daungerous to the securitie ofher regiment. Now when this foundacion was ones laied, yt was no hard matter for thē, to procure what lawes they lusted against Catholiques: Albeit in verye dede, she of her owne disposition, abhorreth suche violence, and effusion of mans bloode. But nowe I come to the lawes, & thus the first beginneth.
            VVho so euer shall saye, write, affirme, 11. For admitting. dissuason. or by any maner of ciphar shall vtter, or yet being demaunded, shall confesse, that the byshopp of Rome is heade of the

churche of England, or hathe there anie Iurisdiction in causes ecclesiasticall: shall be reputed and taken for a traitor, and shall endure such pains of deathe, for faitures & penalties, as are prouided in cases of high treasō, cōmitted against the state.
            He which for any cause doth hereafter 2. For appellants to Rome. appeale to the Byssopp of Rome, and obtein from hym bulls or other instrumēts, and bring the same in to England: shall endure the punishement of highe treason.
            Yf any persone do hereafter bringe 3. For bringers in of. halovved thinges. in to Englande any Agnus Dei, (as they call thē) rosaries, hallowed grains, medalles, crucifixes, or any other thinge halowed of the Byshopp of Rome: shall be reputed demed and taken for a traitor.
            VVhat persone so euer beinge vnder 4. For recusants of the othe. the degree of a baron, to whome the othe or abiuration against the popes authoritie, and in the behalfe of the Quenes supreme powre ī causes ecclesisticall shall be thryse tendred, doe at the third tyme refuse to sweare: shall suffer the pains ordeined for highe treason. 5. For sayeing the quene is an heretique or scismitique.
            
            VVo so euer by anie waie or meane doethe from hensefourthe say, write, signifie, or beinge demaunded, doeth cō
               fesse,

that the quene is an heretique, or a Shismatique: shall be subiect to the same pains for high treason.
            If anie doe hereafter reconcile an 6. For recō
                  cilers. other to the vnitie & communion of the sea of Rome: he shall suffer the same paines & punishemēts prouided for treason.
            VVho so euer shal wittinglle and willinglie 7. For the reconciled▪
                be reconciled, to the same vnitie and communion: shall endure the same punishment.
            VVho so euer doeth hereafter procure 8 For procurers of reconciliation. any persone to be reconciled to the same vnitie and communion: shall be cō
               demned to the same punishement.
            VVhat persone so euer doethe from 9. For counsailers of reconciliation. henseforthe but onelie geue aduise or counsaille to anie to be reconciled to the same vnitie and communion, thoughe he doe not procure the same: shall neuer the lesse haue the same punishement.
            If anie persone doe hereafter persuade 10. For persuaders of obediens to the pope. an other to obeye the byshopp of Rome in causes ecclesiasticall: he shalbe condemned of the same crime of highe treason.
            If anie suffer hym selfe to be persuaded 11. For admitting persuasiō
                to suche obedience: he shall be demed

guiltie of the same crime of highe treason.
            If anie doe procure suche persuasion to be vsed with an other, or geue counsaill 12. For procurers and counsailers of such persuasion. thereunto: he shall suffer the same payne of highe treason.
            If anie do promise to vse in time to come, anie suche obedience to the sea of 13. For promisers of obediens. Rome in causes ecclesiasticall: he shall endure the penalties prouided for highe treason.
            If a pryeste doe absolue anie of the 14. For abfoluers. quenes subiects: yt shall be Iudged to be highe treason.
            If anie haue authoritie to absolue in England, thowghe he neuer doe in dede 15. For suche as haue authoritie to absolue. absolue anie: yet shall he neuer the lesse be demed and taken for a traitor.
            If anie doe make a pretense or showe that he hathe suche authoritie to absolue, 16. For pretenders of authoritie. though in truthe he haue none: yet shall he be reputed as a traitor.
            If anie persone wittinglie be absolued 17. Admitters of absolution. of an other, be yt that he eyther made sute for the same absolution, or withoute making anie sute for it, suffred hym selfe to be absolued: he shall be punished as a traitor.
            
               
Yf anie do procure absolution for 18. procurers of absolution. an other, he shall haue the same punishement.
            Yf any persone doe aduise or counsell an other to be absolued, thoughe he do 19. Counsailers of absolution not procure yt to be done: yet shall he therfore suffer as a traitor.
            Yf anie doe eyther procure or counsell an other generallye to be an absoluer, 20. Procurers or counselers to absolue. all be yt that he doe not moue hym to absolue any speciall persone: yet he shall neuer the lesse incurr the same punishement.
            Yf anye doe hereafter dehorte or dissuade an other frome the religion now 21. Disvvaders of caluins religion. publiklye vsed & professed in Englād, or doe procure any such dissuasion, of intent that the persone whiche is to be dissuaded may be drawne to the obedience and religion of the sea of Rome: he shall be reputed demed and iudged guiltie of highe treason: and shall endure the same punishemēt, whiche is dewe for that crime. And that punishement is suche as foloweth. The paine of Catholiques condemned as traitors for religiō
               
            
            First, that the persone condemned, and drawne a lōge by land to the place of execution, be (for his greater torment,)

halfe strangled with an haulter: then is he to be lett doune, that whyles he is cōminge to hym selfe, his priuie members may be cutt of and brent in the fyre before his face: by and by his bellye is to be vpript with a knyfe, his gutts haled owte, and whiles he lyeth yet pantinge and struglinge: his hart, lungs, liuer, and all his bowells & intrales must be plucked fourthe by the boucher, & throwne in to the fire there at hand: in thende, his bodye ys boyled, cut in peeces, & hanged by quarters at diuerse gates of the Citie. And as for his goods and possessions, they are all forfeited, and no parte thereof must descend to his vvyfe, children, or kynred: yea and they allso for this one mans sake are to be blotted with ignominie, and the whole posteritie of this dead creature vtterlie attainted, and disteined in bloode for euer.
            Are not these seuere enough? are they not (think yow my frinde Gerard) sufficient sharppe for the professors of a religion which they receiued of their grand fathers and forefathers? And yet, for soothe, The vneauen dealing of the ministers of Englād. oure ministers of Englād, those oure innouators, oure trōpett blowers of the

euangelicall doctrine, and resemblers (for soothe) of Christian myldenesse, doe daylie exclayme for the of pulpits, redouble thicke and threefold through their writen bookes, and beate in to the ears of the magistrate, yea and of the prince allso in daylie speeche, that to muche lenitie is vsed: that clemencie is daungerouse: that the toleration and forbearance, which is vsed in the whole course of that regimēt towards Catholiques, is blame woorthye, and not to be suffred. See nowe the vnaduised folie of spitefull and furiouse persones.
            Is there anie haynouse offense, or detestable acte, that can be more sharplye punished, than with these torments whiche here I haue sett downe? ys there anie forte of men so vngraciouse, as could be withe mo lawes lysted abowte, withe greater paines restreined, to mo perills subiected, to mo mischeues and inconueniences layde opē, than the Catholicks are in Englā
               de by theyse lawes? And yet, whan all is done, wherein haue these poore Catholiques offended? VVhat maner of crime ys to be imputed to the faithe and religiō of our grand fathers and auncestours? vvell,

theyse aduersaries vvere ones of one societie vvith vs, but novv, vvhan they haue taken hold of Caluines faithe, for saken Luthers religion, and contemned oures: they haue made them selues oure masters, they haue banished vs ovvt of our ovvne houses, and thrusten vs frome all degrees of honor and estimation. But for oure part, vve make no complaint thereof: let them take, and vse all at their moste libertie. Then vvhye are they not here withall content? whye procede they further sely poore mē? vvhat meane they to assaile oure soules? whye are they so rigorouse against oure bloode? howe is yt, that nothinge can satisfie them but oure deathe, or oure extreme calamitie? yf the quarell whiche they haue against vs, be for no other thinge, but onelye for oure faithe: alas, there are other petye sects no lesse ennemyes to Caluine thā we are: yet can they be content very frindlie to entertaine them, and to vse their fauorable ministerye. But yf a paddlye hyddin the strawe: yf Varres be affrayed to be called to accompte by order of lawe: behold, we are contēt to delyuer them from that trouble, to seale them an acquitance, and

to yelde of oure owne right and interest. Marye, this is the thinge which we onelie desire, that this be not to vs an ouerthrow, and an occasion of theyre perpetuall displeasure against vs, for that ones we enioyed oure natiue soyle, whiche nowe we want: for yf this hadd not hapned, their publique weale hadd now bene none.
            And thus muche of the lawes. Nowe, yow see how muche oure aduersaries are hable to doe against vs, vnder the pretense of theyse lawes: but how muche more they wolde fayne doe, the matter it selfe declareth euidentlye, in that they are not content with the seueritie now vsed, but earnestlie call for sharper & more painfull lawes euerye daye. And yet verylie I doe not thinke, that anie Christian can haue so hard and yroned a harte (onlesse he haue lost bothe feelinge of humanitie and faithe) but might be moued to compassion with theyse extremities, which oure poore Catholiques doe suffer. The termes vvhere in Catholiques doe stand in Englād.
            
            For no lamentable distresse can be imagined in anye kynde of calamitie, well nighe, which theyse men do not daylie

beare, no trouble in anye condition of men, can be thought on, which they doe not continuallye susteyne. In so muche, as they may moste truelie say, with the Apostle: in tribulatiūs, in necessities, in distresses, in strypes, in prysons, in tumultes, in labors. And 2. Cor. 6. with, the same soldioure of Christe in an 2. Cor. 11. other place: in perills vvith in the Citie, in perills in vvildernes, in perills in the sea, in perills amonge false brethren, in trauaile and miserie. Yea they may allso say further, as the Apostle saythe: euen in deathe oftētimes. Yet further, that same may be applyed vnto thē, and not vnaptlye, Skornefull mockes 
               Heb. 11. 
               and beatings haue they felt, ouer and besyde bothe fetters and prysōs, they haue bene racked, they haue bene cutt and mangled, they haue abydden temptations and trialls, they haue bene slayne vvith the svvoorde. And to conclude, that same allso verye fytlie agreeth vnto them, vve are made a spectacle to the vvorlde, to angels and to men: vve are euell spoken of, and 
               1. Cor. 4. 
               vve say vvell of others: vve suffer and endure persecution: vve are blasphemed and vve pray, for them: vve are accompted the parings of the vvorlde, and the refuse of all to this daye.
            
            But to make all theyse more euident, it shall not be (perhaps) farr from the

purpose, yf I touche euerye thing yet more particularlie.
            And fyrst (to speake of the last executiō, The last punishemēt of Catholiques. whiche oure Catholiques do endure in the ende of all) yt can not be doubtful (I think) to anie, how manye men, and what maner of men, haue bene put to moste paynfull deathe, as strangled, bowelled, cut in sunder, boyled, and dispersed by peece meale in the ayre, and all for religion: and though our aduersaries (for more reproche) make a surmise of treason: yet the matter is manifest, and they them selues do not denye, that only religion is the cause of this deathe.
            I make no mention here, of the greate nōber of those moste reuerend bishopps, doctors, priests, and other confessors of Christ, whiche in pryson haue bene either choked with filthie stinkyng sauour, or cōsumed with sorowe and hungar, whose causes we referr to the Iudgement seate of Christe alone. I speake here of them onelye, whiche openly in the sight of all men, haue geuē testimonie to the truethe, with their owne bloode. VVho (besydes the verye torment of the executiō, & that common contumelie, where in they die

(in the opinion of the people) as traitors to the state, and not as Catholiques, haue allso (for the moste part) this rewarde, and good turne geuen them whan they are deade, that they are slaundered Slaunderinge of deade mē. in dispersed libells with some notable false surmise throwne oute against their maners and doctrine.
            In this wise verie latelie whan they had hanged on their common gallowes, Paradoxes falsely imputed to M. HANSH. that godlie and zelouse priest Euerard Hanse, and were affrayed leste some perchaunce, wolde be moued with the martyrdome of that Innocent: they gaue owt in two contrarie bookes, thone impugnyng thother, certaine monstruouse errors and paradoxes, (I knowe not what,) and made this deade man theauthor thereof: Suche as this: that the bishopp of Rome can not sinne: where as in trueth maister Hanse dyd speake expresselye of the doctrine of faithe that is to be published to the vniuersall churche, and therin only he sayd, that the pope could not erre.
            And this is an other: that no prince hath anye supremacie vvithin his ovvne dominions, sauing the byshopp of Rome onlie: where in dede he spake onlie of the supremacie of

the Catholique churche in causes Ecclesiasticall. And this allso: that no treasō against the quene of Englād is a synn. VVheras being nowe at the point redie to be executed to deathe and repeting his owne woords diuers tymes before the people there present, he affirmed that he spake not of euery kinde of treason, but of that onlie, for the which withowt desert he was then in dyeing, and which his aduersaries vndiscretely call treasō, being in truethe no other thing, than a nedefull confession of the Catholique faithe. For now by the recitall of the lawes before mencioned, yt is manifeste, how many cheefe points and Principles of faithe made treason. principles of oure faithe, they haue drawne to the case of hyghe treason.
            In this point therfore, oure aduersaries excede the malice of auncient persecutors, that they do not make knowen the true cause why they martyre men, though them selues doe confesse the same. And yet the deuell in those formoste tymes hade sowne muche seede of this iniquitie, whē S. Paule as pernicious & seditious: yea & oure sauioure Christ: as one seducing 
               Act. 24. 
               the people, & forbyddinge to paye tribute 
               Luc. 24. 
               to Caesar: were moste īiuriously slaundered.
            
               
But nowe it is (I suppose) skant woorthe the laboure, to put downe here in Sauuage rudenes. writing, with how greate reproches, with what outcries, with how many mocks and skorns, with howsower and spite full skoffes, with how bitter and vnsauourye taunts, with what rustling noyse and dynne of mutteringe male cōtents, and fowle mowthed detractors, theyse our martyrs were strangled, and in the sight of all the people rent and torne in peeces: for the thinge of it selfe is lothesome to the eyes, and terrible to the eares. O howe pitifull is owre case, whiche are fallen in to these tymes, whan we see so greate rigoure practised by christians againste christians, for the christian faithe?
            And thus muche for the paynes and punishements ordeined for Catholiques: Contumelies against Catholiques. Nowe lett vs saye somethinge of the cō
               tumelies that they abyde before their deathes: but it is an infinit & endlesse matter, it can not be expressed in fewe woords. For I thinke verelie, that Catholiques no where in the world, no not amonge Moores, Gothes, Tartars, Saracens, Turcks, or whatsoeuer other confederats, or sworne enemies of Christe, could be more

skornfullie, than they are by these contumeliouse and disdeinfull new gospellers.
            Yf they take a priest at masse: a man Hovve a priest is entreated that is taken at masse. wold marueyle to see, how impiouslye & how despitefilly they behaue them selues. First, for the sacred yea and consecrated hoste, they take it away with violence, treade it vnder foote, thrust it through with knyues and daggers, fasten it to a poste, and with great wounder showe it to Catholiques, insult and triumphe against yt in all skoffing and skornfull maner, and call it (suche is their blasphemie (the wheaten or breadie god of papists. Now as to the priest, whan they haue (after their maner) first intreated hym yll withein doores, then they bring hym forthe abroade, and in the selfe same attyre wherein they fownde hym standinge at the aultar, they haile and chase hym abowte, throwghe stretes and villages, where all folke gase and stare vppon hym the whole multitude skorne hym, yea & some spytt in his face, but the moste part scolde, and raile against hym, and euerie one (well nighe) dothe practise some particuler spite and iniurie against this

seruant of Christ. Then they lock hym fast in the counter, or laye hym vpp in some other prison: they bynde hym in yrō cheyns, loade him with bolts and shakles, and (yf it like them) they put hym to the rack, and torture: or else, whan they haue vexed hym in euerie part with the rodd of all maner of reprochefull punishements: they hale hym fourthe to the place of Iudgement, and theyr, bothe hym, and all them which were present at his masse, they do condemne to prison, and to paye that summe of money for their fine or raunsome, whiche I tolde yow before is to be payde for this so hainous a fault (God wote) of hearing masse.
            And whan all this is done and past, (yf they thinke it may anie way further their affaires to dispatche the man quyte out of the waye, and kill hym) they exhibit vnto hym interrogatories touchinge some articles of the aforesayde capitall lawes: they appose hym with captiouse and subtile questions: they vrge hym vpon his allegeaunce to answere directlie & plainlie. VVhat nede manie woords? Doe they not easelie (think yow) beate oute of the poore man some thinge that may suffice

to serue their turne? yes in dede: for a staffe is euer at hande to beate a dogg.
            
            And here because I haue made mencion Of prisons. of imprysonmēts, and yow in yowre letters request aduertisemēt of some particulars thereof by name: I will saye some thing allso of prisons: whereof this shall be the first: that they are all very full replenished and stuffed vpp with Catholiques, in so muche as there is skante anie romthe for theues. Manie prisōs are Mistress Tomson. newe builded of late, but all doe not suffice. The Tower of London, (in time past vsed for traitors,) is nowe fraught full of priests. Yea, oure Bridewell, an infamouse place of light houswyues & lewed folke, is not withoute some parte. For it is not longe synce a yong maide, a gētle woman borne, confessinge the Catholique faithe some what zelouslie, was thrust in to this dishonorable place by the Superintēdent of London.
            Nowe to the wantes, distresses and inner troubles of prisoners I dare saye nothing, leste with my complaint I might afflict the afflicted more. This neuer thelesse is common, that no frinde of theirs may visit them, all intercourse of speche

and letters is forbidden, strayte watche is layde, & narroulie it is obserued who resorteth vnto them, in so muche as none withoute present perill, can eyther geue them any almes or other wayes releiue them with any woorke of charitie. And I heare of muche harder dealings, concerninge the order of their diet, speciallie in the prisons at york and hull. Yett because those extremities may procede perhaps of some peculiar frowardnesse of Iailers: I will not touche them here as afflictions common to all prisoners.
            But yet the report of a rigoure vse
                  •
                in a prison at Lanson in the countie of The prison at Lanson. Cornwale, is certeinlie true, and the fact more than barbarous. For whan syx (as I wene) or eight Catholiques were shooueled together and piled vpp in to one hole: thoughe they were of good calling, and for more part gentlemen borne: yet had they neyther meate geuen them, nor allowed to them, other than vnsauorie and Lothesome, yea and begged of almes from doore to doore, nor vse of any water but of corrupt & filthie. And as for place of easement to theyre bodilie necessities, they had none at all, other than

the verie floore where on they dyd lye. A sauage parte of a layler. But of all other this exceded: that when theyse poore wreches beganne at last to complaine of this inhumaine and sauage crueltie: the layler threatned them further, that he wolde from thenseforthe tye thē to maungers, and feede them like brute beastes. Yet in the ende by lōgesute and continuall soliciting of fryndes, yt came to passe, that they were remoued from this prison abowte two hundred miles thense, and posted ouer to a prison in london, with a common garde. Of which pilgrimage this was the ceremonie & circumstance. Hovv Catholiques are led to prison in England.
            
            Euery one of them was fett on a selie leane & bare horse, withoute bridle spurr, or other furniture for a horseman: the horses were fastned eche one to othera taile, marchinge in a long rewe one after an other. Eche mans feete were tyed vnder his horse bellie, and his armes were bound hard & fast behinde hym. VVhen they came neare to anie citie or towne: one was appointed to ryde before, and to geue warning to the inhabitants, that there were cominge at hand, certein papifts, foes to the Gospell, and enemies in the

common weale. Vppon whiche notice, the people beinge sturred vpp, dyd runne in flocks foorth of their houses in to the stretes, and welcome the commers with as spitefull contumelies as they could.
            VVith a verie like pomp and solemnitye Maister Edmund Cā
                  pian of the Societie of Iesus, led ī triumphe. (fashioned and framed all together for reproche, & to euery tricke & toye of mockerye) dyd they latelie leade throughe the citie of london, twelue catholicks, whereof fyue were priests, & the rest were of good estate and callinge. Theire fault forsoothe was this: they were fownde prayeing & at masse all in one house with maister Edmund Campian, of the Societie of Iesus, a greate lerned clerk, a harmelesse and verie Innocent man. This good man, for offeringe to the ministers a most iust defense of hys faithe by waye of disputation, was by oure aduersarie slaundered as a sediciouse persone, and to that end and effect, a large paper was most spitefullie written with great letters, which they forced hym to beare vppon his heade in this triumphe. All this the good mā did beare (not vnlike as Christ dyd beare the title and superscription of his crosse

Calmelye, myldlie, modestlie, with a gladde mynde and a cherefull countenance.
            At last after this tragedie was ended, Hovv Catholiqnes be tormented in the tovver. when they were come to the tower of London: as they had before that tyme entreated other of gods seruants, and speciallie priests: so dyd they novv put Maister Campian to the racke and to extreme torments, and therby vvold haue vvrested ovvte of hym, in vvhat places he Light causes of tortute. had seiourned, in vvhose houses he had bene enterteined, by vvhose frinde shipp and liberalitie he had bene mainteined, vvhere he had bated or inned: vvhome he had visited by the vvaie, vvhome he had made of his counsaile, vvhose help, and industrie he had vsed, and (to be shorte) vvho they vvere throughe oute all England, vvhiche fauoure the Catholique religion, and vvho abhorre Caluianism in theyre harts. O haynouse crimes, sufficiēt (no doubt) to bringe free borne men to be turmoiled in so exquisite maner of examination, & that by torture too, euen, for a mere furmise, and but a suspicion there of.
            Now (I praye yow) tell vs yf yow cā whē was this practise vsed anie where before

these dayes? In what barbarous Scythia was this asmuche as hearde of by anye report at any tyme, that freeborne men, of honest state & condition, lerned, of good education, well instructed and trayned vpp in gentlemanlye maner, dedicated and vowed to the sacred functiō of priesthoode, should be for the testimonie onlie of an auncient religion, of lōge cōtinuance left vnto them by theire auncestours, stauled vpp in cages to be racked on a payne banke (as bondslaues were wonte to be) and with dire and horrible paines, greeues, & afflictiōs wrested and writhen owte of their ioynts, vnlesse thei will appeache, & traiterously deliuer vp to the torture theyre owne cōpaniōs in faithe and profession: whiche to doe they are forbidden by the lawe of natiōs, by the rule of nature, by ciuile duetie, by common honestie, & by euerye religion? Ys this (think yowe) a verye iust cause of torture? ys this a reasō effectuall enoughe to bringe men to theire inquisition? speciallye so extreme, so rigorouse, so seruile a maner of inquisitiō for free born mē to endure? dyd Catholiques in any aige practise this, euen against the desperatest

and peruersest heretiques?
            Assuredlie, yf there were nothing elles The diffimulation of heresie. to admonishe a circūspect and attentiue persone of the fraude of heresie, and of that desperate wickednesse, vvhich lyeth lurkinge vnder her hypocrisie: thowghe the noueltie of theire opimons, the contrarietie amonge thē selues, the variable vncertaintie of their assertiōs, theyr licē
               tiouse dissolution in conuersation of lyfe coulde saye nothinge to the matter: yet this one thing wolde (to hym I saye that hathe good eyes & eares) sufficiētli discouer the whole frame of all theyre dissimulatiō: to wytt: that these self same felowes which of late so freshelye professed all kinde of humanitie and courtesie, & haue so fiercelye inueihed against the Catholique churche of Christe for her most eauen and most indifferent discipline, by moste iust and moste auncient lawes ordeined, doe nowe vse suche sauage crueltie vpon light and tristinge causes, as the very churlish, rude. and barbarouse dyd skante practise for moste haynouse offences.
            VVell, he must beare with my greefe and sorowe, who so euer thinketh my

woordes to be ouer sharpp. For I am displeased in dede and not well content: but not so muche with these men, which haue committed these owtrages (for I beseche God forgeue them): as I am with heresie, by whose meanes these men (not cruell of their owne nature, but muche disposed rather to lenitie and mekenesse) are dryuen in to so greate (I will not saye woodenesse, leste I shoulde offend them, but) sharpp angrinesse in dede, and fore displeasure against their owne: as, neither for neighbourhoode of one natiue soile, nor for integritie oflyfe, ornamēt of learnyng, or flower of aige they can be induced, nor in respect of the prerogatiue of freedome, nor in regarde of the priuilege of priesthoode, nor by intreatie of woordes, nor by abundance of teares they can be moued to take pitie and compassion vppon innocents and guiltlesse men, nor can be stayed backe frome doing extreme and outragious violence. I humblie beseche oure most mercifull and moste mightie God, that this huge offence be not imputed vnto them, but raither that they may finde mercie in the day of oure Lorde, who in their owne day, that is, in

the daye of man, haue showed no mercie to theire bretheren. Esa. 13. 
               1. Cor. 4.
            
            But now I omit to speake of the other outrages, whiche in this Tower of London are perpetrated, and patientlie endured. The straite vvarde & euell entreaty Catholiques in the tovver. For thoughe they be manie and verie greuous: yet can they not easilie come to oure knowleige, by reason of that close and straite warde, wherein the sound of all speche, and mourninge of the afflicted is shutt vpp frome the eares of them that are abroade. Nay, oure aduersaries bestowe no small diligence in this point: that the aflictions and torments whiche are there practised withein doores, be not browght to the knowleige of them that are witheoute: but buried rather in darknesse, and cleane hyd in blynde and obscure dungeons. But yf these break foorthe at any time, & the doolefull voice of the aflicted be plainelie hearde: then are those felowes greuouselye offended, and either flatlie denie all that was done, or with pleasant woords extenuate the matter.
            For twyse nowe of late Maister Campian hathe bene pulled on the rack. And what aduersarie dyd not vtterlie denye

yt? Yet at lengthe the truthe of the matter came to light, when maister Campian him selfe dyd vtter it in an open audience, & in the hearinge of oure aduersaries: twit, (say de they) yt was a mery pastime: he was cramped or pulled a lytle, not in ernest, but in ieaste. After the same maner they Ieasted of others, whiche had bene racked before. So greate delite these merie conceited felowes doe take, in makinge skosses and sports of the afflictions of forie poore men. Oure aduer saries accustomed to lie.
            
            But they haue yet an other stratageme or politike shyst, familiarlie acquainted in this tower: that is, to surmise and forge what they lust of the prisonner, & to publishe it to his shame, and for a trapp to beguile other Catholiques. The thing is euident, and hathe plenty of examples: but because I purpose to be breefe, I will touche but a few.
            VVhen maister Campian had bene afflicted wyth torments: it was reported that he had confessed what soeuer they had demaunded of him: specialie at whose howses, & in what places he had bene. And (to geue to the lie his right shape and perfection) it was further bruted abrode,

that he had promised a recantation of I know not what. But that tale no man thowght to be probable: yet there were that doubted thereof, because the aduersaries had so earnestlye affirmed it. For many gentlemen, and some of the nobilitie were called vp to London, frome their owne howses, and charged with a supposed confession of maister Campiā: And yet in verie truthe (as afterward it well appeared) he neuer yeelded one worde to his torments.
            A like shyft the lieutenant of the In the guildhall at London tower vsed, & (of purpose to laye a bate to seduce others, by some example) affirmed openlye at a common session, that there were no catholiks vnder his warde, whiche refused to goe to the churche of oure aduersaries: yet it was well knowen to all there, that euen they whome he ment of, went not willinglie to the churche, but vppon compulsion and drawne by violence had bene present at a few sermons, yet they allways openly spake against the same, called the preacher from his rayling speche, and chalenged hym to disputation, euen in the presence of the same lieutenant albeit angerlie he thretned

them often with heuy bolts & shakles. But it is harde by writing to discourse through all the particulers in euery kynde of affliction, whiche the prisoners in that tower doe endure: yet such as haue some tyme bene present vewers of the matter doe tell vs parte: vppon whose faithefull relation I will putt downe this one to geue a coniecture of the rest.
            Ther was a yonge man, of honest Conper. parentage, well entred in learninge for he had bene Scholar & seruant to Doctor harpesfeild a verie lerned man, that dyed in pryson for christs cause. This yonge man, for religion and learning sake, had appointed a Iourney in to these parts: And being redie for it, made his repare to the hauen (with the wealthe that he had got together in money or other things) of purpose to passe ouer the sea. But by some chaunce the matter was discouered, the yonge man was apprehended by an officer, and sent backe to London: where first he was spoiled of all his goods and caste in to the Tower of London: Beauchāp, tovver. there he was verie straitelie kept in that part of the prison whiche, ys called Becheams Tower, destitute of all comforte

and consolation nedefull for man, sauing one sorie bedd, that his frindes sent, and yet hardlie coulde he be allowed to haue yt. VVithin a while after, this yonge man (beinge but of a weake complection, and accustomed to open and cleare ayre) partlie throughe Hungar and colde, partlie through the filthie sauoure, and lothesomenesse of the place, and corruption of the aire, dyd fall in to a sicknesse, and semed to be vexed with an ache, or giddinesse of his heade. The lieutenant Nevv founde phisick. hearinge hereof, deuised a meruelouse straunge medicine for this disease. For he commaunded the bedd to be takē awaye, that for the better recouerie of his healthe, he might lie vpon the bare floore. To be short: within fewe dayes the poore mā dyeth, sterued, wasted, & pined awaie by extremitie of colde and Hungar: and thereof remained this euident testimonie and proofe, that when his clothes were to be taken of, that he might be buried: his flesh being putrified and rotten by cold, dyd sticke fast to his hose, and was with the hose pulled of from the bare bones, & fell in gobbetts vppō the grownd: a pitifull sight of a churlishe barbarousnesse

and of an odd kynde of crueltie. Neuer thelesse there be men yet lyuinge whiche dyd see this with their eyes. And (were it not for their perill) I coulde name thē.
            And because I am entred in to this kinde of talke: I will be some what more liberall than my promisse. And one other example I will laie downe, to let you see what good store I haue, yf I lyst to set it forthe to the showe.
            An other yong man not vnlike the Shear vvoode. The ladietregonell. Martin her sonne. former, the sonne of a Catholique cōfessor dyd frequent the house of a right woorshipfull ladie, who had a sonne cleare opposite and contrarie to the mother, and one full gorged with Caluine. This man dyd fume and freate in his mynde verie much for that he demed his mother had masse oftē times in her house by this yong mans helpe and procurement. On a time therfore, as he by chaunce dyd mete the yong man in a strete in London: he crieth verie outragiouslie, O rebell and traiter: take holde on the traiter, for by this terme they name vs, to make vs more odious: and with this kynde of moste vniust ignominie they vexe vs. The they of the citie hearing these woordes, traiter

and rebell, leape forthe of their shoppes, laye hands on the man, and hale hym to the Iustices or commissioners. And at their next session when he came before them: the exclamer had nothing whereof to accuse the yong man, nothing where with to charge hym, saue onlie à bare suspition of the Catholique religion: for he was not hable to conuince hym of the facte. The commissioners not withstandinge wolde not geue hym leaue to departe. For a presentment of religion is of all other moste adiouse. And yf the presenter want sufficient matter: the presentment is helped and set forwarde by interrogatories and questions, to be ministered by the commissioners them selues.
            The Iustices therfore examine the yong man, what he dothe beleeue, or thinke touching the chefe points of faithe. And at last by way of argument they wreste oute, that he supposeth the byshopp of Rome ought to haue chefe authoritie in causes Ecclesiasticall, yea, and in England allso. Vpon the hearing hereof: there folowed a like sentence as was geuen in an other session of Iustices. VVhy require vve 
               Marc. 14. 
               any further proofe? yovv haue bearde blasphemie,
               
               vvhat thinke you? all they cōdemned hym to be giltie of deathe.
            
            Then was he remoued ouer to the tower of London, & there Layde vp in a priuye chamber neare to the place where the Ingines for torments do lie. In the meane season his chamber which he had in the citie, was ryfled and ransacked, and all his goods snatched vp, & therewithall aboute thirtie pounds english more, (whiche he had taken vp of other men for debtes oweing to his moste miserablie afflicted father) were allso stolen & caried away. VVell, the poore man in prisō was sore afflicted with torments, to enforce hym to discouer the places where he had heard masse: for being but a laye man he coulde not hym selfe say masse. Then, after verie greuouse torments, which he endured with greate courage (for, so much an aduersarie that had bene there presēt dyd cōfesse:) he was throwen in to a verie obscure doungeon, that was bothe darke & dredefull, withoute light, withoute bedding, withoute nedefull apparell. And of his dyet you may easilie coniecture, when he coulde not be allowed to haue anie peece or paringe of

his owne goods, no not for the necessarie sustentation of his owne lyfe: Nay, there is an other thing that doeth looth me to M. vvilliā Roper. tell. For when a certein deuoute and charitable man being (vppon the common brute of this yong mans extreme calamitie) moued to compassion, had sent a Sum of money to be conueyed vnto this poore man for his releefe, and by the mean of an other prisoner had deliuered the same to his vnder keper (for here eche prisoner hathe his vnder keper): the vnder keper receiued the money, and brought it againe the next day to hym of whome he had yt, and tolde hym that the lieutenant of the tower wolde not suffer the poore man to enioy the benefit of that almes. And when the keper was verie earnestlie requested to take parte thereof & bestowe it in some thinge for the poore mans releefe he denyed to take yt, and sayd that he might not in anie wise take apenny, except it vvere six pence to bye hym stravve to lye vppon. So malitiouselie bent vvas that lieutenant against the selie poore man.
            In the ende after six moneths (as I thinke) vvere ouer passed in this moste

greuouse kinde of Martirdome they draw hym forth along throughe the stretes on a hurdle, and hang hym vp a litle, let hym dovvne againe, and then as he is in reuiuing, they afflict hym vvith the other kinde of tortures, vvhiche they vse to practise vppon suche as are traiters to the state, but in farre more terrible maner than they handle those traiters. For oure aduersaries are more rigourouse and more Protestāts are mercilesse to Catholiques mercylesse against vs, than they are againste anie sort of malefactors, howe vngratiouse naughtie so euer they be. For when these by order o flawe are to suffer the same kynde of deathe, they fynde suche fauoure, as either they are, by compassion and pitie of oure aduersaries, full deade before they be cut downe from the galowes: or in dede the execution is so handled according to the prescript rule of the lawe, as they are suffered to hang till they be halfe deade at the least, to dull the sense and felyng of payns in the torments foloweinge. But farre otherwise it is in the case of Catholiques. For they are no soner hāged, than the hangman enforceth hym selfe in a furiouse maner of haste to cut the haulter

in sunder, & whiles thei are yet aliue, and alyue lyke, yea and of perfect sense and felyng: he bringeth them to the other torments: and this oftentime he doeth so readilie, and with such dexteritie and nimblenesse: as not onlie their senses for moste parte are perfect, but they speake allso distinctlie and plainlie after their bowells be digged vp, yea and whiles the bouchars fyngars are scratchinge at their verie harts and intrailes.
            And yet this bloodie sight woorketh no compassion in the harts of oure aduersaries: but they deride and skorne the sorie poore wights, yea and spitefullie raile against them, euen whiles they are yet in dyeing, and specially yf anie being ouercome with payne doe grone, or happen (whiche is verie rare) to make anie lamentable noyse. For thus a certein preacher of theirs (and not a mean one) in a printed booke doeth collect & conclude, that oure verie Martyres, are not Martyres, because forsuthe (saith he) one Fulk. of them cried oute in his torments, and (that I may vse his owne woords) dyd yell and hovvle like a hell hovvnde. O goodlie sentence well besemyng suche a preacher.

O new fownde charitie of a new fownd gospell: what euer hacker or ruffian wolde haue vttered such a woorde withoute blushing? what euer cutthrote hathe shewed so sauuage and barbarouse a mynde?
            But trulie these felowes seme to degenerate cleane from all sense & felyng of humane nature, and to be quite transformed in to (I can not tell what) vnnaturall wildenesse, vtterlie forgetfull of that sentence: Iudgement vvithoute mercie to hym vvhich hathe not shevved mercie: And Iac. 3. speciallye of this sayeing. A hard hart shall fele sorovve in the last day: This appeareth Eccle. 2. not onlye by these examples whiche I haue allredy put downe, but by infinite other allso, whiche now I may not prosecute, leste I should be longer than an epistle may suffer. Yet I will note vnto yow some suche things by way of example, as may make the matter moste cleare and euident.
            A certein yong gentleman, of an auncient M. Tirvvit sonne to Sir Robert Tirvvit. and right woorshipfull familie, was accused for hearing of a masse celebrated (as it was reported) at the mariage of his sister. VVhere vppon he fled from his fathers

house, and kept hym selfe secret in London the yere last past. And there, by reason of his trauaile in flyeing awaye, and (as I think) through the intemperature of the sōmer, he fell in to a greuouse feuer. The aduersaries hearing hereof, doe runne vnto him by and by, and in all haste will nedes pull hym oute of the house, and throwe hym in to prison, euen as he then was, feble, faynt, and greuouslye sicke. This semed to the beholders thereof to be a maner of dealing bothe churlishe & detestable. They pray, they intreate, they make intercession, they vse all the means they can, to moue the aduersarie to haue consideration of the sick, not to heape sorow vpon sorow, nor affliction vppon an extremely afflicted man, not to take away the lyfe of so comelie a yong gentleman: they proffer as sufficient assurance for his forth coming, as his aduersaries wolde demaund, and to vnder take for his appearance before the iustices immediatlie vpon the recouerie of his healthe: but it will not be accepted. The phisitions come, they affirm for certein, that he is vtterlie vndone and castē away, yf he shoulde be remoued forthe of that

place in to the inconueniēces of a prison. All this is nothinge regarded: they layd hands on the sickeman, haled hym away, shut hym vp in prisō, & with in two days next after he dyed: they burie hym, and make no bones of the matter, nor scruple, or anie regarde at all.
            Euen so yt feel oute against a right M. Dimmok. woorshipfull and valyant gentleman, one (for a peculiar honor in the Armurie whiche he dyd beare) verie famouse, and sonne in law to the right honorable Erle of lincolne. This gentleman had bene troubled many yeres with a vehement palsey, & suche a resolutiō of his sinewes, as he was not hable to goe forth of his owne house, or moue a foote oute of his place, but as he was lyfted or holden vp by the hands or armes of his seruants. At the last vpon an informatiō touching the Catholique Religion, preferred against hym to the superintendent of that prouince (for by that terme wolde they be named whiche now detein the possessiōs of auncient byshopriks:) he was noted & appeached as suspected to holde the faithe of his aunceters: and thereupon he was summoned to appeare before the cō
               missioners

as euidentlie giltie of Catholicisme or Catholicque Religion, which they in contempt call papistrie. But this palsey sickeman appeared not. Neuerthelesse he made his owne excuse verie aduisedlie by letters. Yet is it not accepted: for the superintendent hym selfe cometh with all spede to the diseased mans house, & throwghlie veweth with his owne eyes the impotencie of the gentleman: but no motion of cōpassion entereth in to this snperintendents breeste: he cōmaundeth hym to be caried to the Iaile. VVhat nede manie woords? Nether the age of that man, nor his degree in callinge, nor the woorshipp of his kynred, nor the noblenesse of his affinitie, nor the resolution of his limbs coulde delyuer hym from the present trouble and mischefe of imprisonment.
            VVhat folowed? by these inconueniences in verie short space after, he dieth. And yet they leaue hym not when he is dyeing: yea then they vexe and afflict hym more. For they come when he is extreme sick, they come whiles he is wrestling with the pangs of deathe, they come as he is passing oute of this lyse, they come

whiles he is yeelding vp the Ghoost: then they trouble hym: thē they doe not suffer hym to rest, nor permit hym to die in suche sorte as he desired to die: (for his desire was to die according to the custome of the vniuersall christian churche:) but then the ministers flocke aboute hym: thē they intrude them selues vpon hym: then they vrge him to praye such sorie prayers of their owne making, as in healthe he cōtemned, in sicknesse with open voice he reiected, and (nowe dum & halfe deade,) by his countenaunce, by signes & tokens, & by gesture of his bodie he dyd vtterlie detest and abhorre. VVhat greater vncourtesie, or crueltie rather, can be imagined than this?
            But here I may not passe ouer in silence Mistresse Thimilbie an other matter which happened at the same time, and in the same citie. For a yonge gentle woman, vpon licence first obteyned, dyd goe for deutie sake to vysit her husbād, & entered in to the prison where he lay for religion. VVhen this was knowne: the superintendent (as one redie to catche holde of a pray fallen in to his owne snare) geueth cōmaundemēt to shut her vp allso in prison. The gentle

woman shortlye after (either vpon some greefe conceiued for this inhumane dealyng, or through terror of some further treacherie, or elles vpon some annoyance taken by the distemperature and lothesomenesse of the place) is possessed with a verie greuouse sicknesse, and falleth into a manifest perill of her lyfe. And when yt Greate in-humanitie was looked for euerie houre that she wolde die: her sorowfull husbande made humble sute that she might be en larged alitle, & remoued (yf it were but for one daye) forth of the prison, to some other place, where she might vse the helpe of skillfull women. But his sute wolde not be hearde. O harts of yron.
            I haue nowe bene long enoughe in prisons (my deare frinde Gerard,) & my speche (perhaps) may seme to haue taried ouerlong in this kinde of discourse. But where (I pray you) shoulde I be with better will, than with oure owne fryndes? why do I saye oure owne fryndes? Nay rather with the moste deare fryndes of Christe oure God and Sauioure? for the lyfe of these fryndes is oure lyght: their constancie is oure example: theire fortitude is oure woorshipp and honoure: and

theire deathe is oure glorie. VVherfore, I cōfesse, that thoughe in bodye I am absent: yet in spirit I doe cōuerse continuallie with them, & they shall neuer slyppe oute of my mynde. For I preferre their bolts and shackles, I extoll their prisons, I exalte their reproches and contumelies farre aboue the riches, welthe, & diademe of any Cresus, who so euer he be. Yet notwithstanding I wolde leaue these captiues for a time, and goe forthe to visit thē which are toiled & turmoiled abroode, were it not that the fit occasiō of this place admonisheth me (before I departe) to make mention of a certein bare shyft, or poore starting hole, whiche owre aduersarie (vpon the oportunite of imprisonment) taketh hold of, and fortifieth: I meane that deceitfull pretence of a disputatiō, A pretense to dispute. whiche he wolde be thought to profer to captiues in prifon: but to suche as are at libertie he will not yelde therein, no not when he is requested, or becalled and chalenged there vnto: Nay, nor yelde therein to the selfe same captiues vpon any indifferent or reasonable condition or lawe. And thus the case standeth.
            Aboute twentie yeres past, whan oure

aduersaries had expelled vs, before we were called to oure answere: and when thei were in full possession of oure romthes and habitations: then loe, (vpon a practise to geue a showe to the people, that they holde by Iustice that which they haue vsurped by violēce) they profered a cōbate, by way of writing, in the whole matter of controuersie. And here Protestāts prouoke Catholiks to vvrite. And yet forbydd their bookes. vpon they becalled vs forthe to write, & they challēged so many of oure partie, as were either learned in dede, or so accompted, with this condition annexed to the challenge, that who so euer shall wynne the victorie in writing, shall be accōpted, sounder in truthe of teaching.
            Oure Catholiques moste willinglie take holde of the condition. Manie verie greate learned mē (though troubled with the discommodities of exile) dyd neuer thelesse write muche in the Englishe tō
               gue, for the defense of the Catholique faithe: as those famouse doctors & Learned clerckes, Saunders, Harding, Fekenā, Alan, Stapletō, Heskin, Marshall Dormā, Rastall, and others. They set forth the state of the whole controuersie verie plainlie: they shew what reason, authoritie and

truthe we haue on oure syde: And they laye wydeopen the greate fraude, falsehoode, lapse, fall and error, on oure aduersaries syde.
            But when they on the other syde perceiued them selues to be ouer reached by their owne cunnyng, & in a maner beaten downe in this open cōbate: then they deuised an other shyft, such a one in dede, as indesperate cases were necessarie, albeit no discrete nor skillfull meane for the safetie of their estimatiō and credite. For they procured the Quenes verie sharppe and threatnyng iniunction to be proclamed against all those persones whiche shoulde haue, reade, receiue, bring or cō
               uey in to England anie such booke as those, whiche they thē selues before had vrged the Catholiques to write. Here vpō what greate vexations from hense forth oure Catholiques haue endured for these bookes. It is no easie matter to Iudge. For manie haue bene haled to the racke Persecution for Catholike bookes. & painbank: manie haue bene streictlie examined vpon their othes: some haue bene depelie fined: verie manye haue bene chased away, and for feare forced to flye into exile: An infinite numbre of

houses haue bene by night searched, narowlie perused, ryfled and ransacked in euerie corner: And all, but vpon a light suspition onlie of these bookes. And yf anie of these books happened to be found in a searche: it was (be ye assured) a matter sufficient for a greuouse presentment. If a man should byd an aduersarie answere one of those books: it were a vehemēt presumption (forsothe) of no good subiect. If one shoulde speake but a woorde in defense of such a booke: oh, that were a plain euidence, yea and a flat verdite of a traiterouse hart.
            Nowe, when oure men see them selues driuen in to these streicts and difficulties, that they coulde not (withoute verie greate inconueniences and molestations) eyther write or speake in the defense of the cause of God, and of his churche vniuersall: what dyd they then think you? trulie (euen as it besemed good & Catholique Christians to doe) as occasions of matters required, they submitted their bodies to prisons, their hands to giues & manacles, their feete to bolts & shackles, their goods to rauine and spoile, yea and their liues to perills of deathe. In the

meane season (leste they might seme to distrust their owne cause, and by silēce to betray gods businesse) thei made a petitiō quietlie and calmelie, for to haue indifferent conferences with their aduersaries: and (with as muche submission & earnest fute as might be) they humblie sued to euerie magistrate, that eyther publick disputation, or at the least priuate conferē
               ce touching the nowe litigiouse points of religion might be admitted, vnder reasonable and indifferēt lawes & cōditions.
            Manie at home, and mani abrode dyd The earnest sute of Catholiques for libertie to dispute. solicit this sute by way of petitiō: some applied it earnestlie by fauour of fryndes: other pursued it by authoritie and credit as they might: and verie many preferred yt by other wayes & meanes. Oure men for theire parts (thoughe by the way of greate disaduauntages, yet leanyng to the woorde of the prince, and for truthe sake) offred them selues willinglie and gladlie to enter in to this combate, with this onlie hope and confidence, that they trusted, many sowles, which were redemed with the pretiouse bloode of oure sauiour Christe, & now are defiledd with heresie, might with disceptation by gods

grace be recalled and recouered. VVherupon they gaue to the aduersaries the whole libertie and choyse, eyther to vse their owne homemates, or to call for others forthe of forraigne countries, for the defense of their cause: yea and to appoint the day, to chose the place, to moue the question, to prescribe the order and forme, to beginne, to ende, and to doe all things after their owne will & phantasie, so allwayes, and vpon such condition, as some lawe, rule, forme and order of a disputation might be obserued and kept. Protestāts distrnst their ovvne cause.
            
            But (to make a short tale) the aduersarie will none of these. For he did foresee (and not vnwiselye) that his partie wolde go to wracke, yf the matter were once to be tried by combate, hāde to hande in open fielde. And therfore he refused this open cooping at barriers in Scholes, as to lightsome a place for their dark dealings, and to famouse a triall of their deceit and guile, according to the sayeing of oure Saluioure: euerie one that doeth euill, hateth 
               Ioan. 3. 
               the light, and cometh not to the light, to the end that his vvorkes be not reproued: but he that vvorketh truthe, cometh to the light: that his vvorks may be manifest, for they are vvrooght
               
               in god.
            
            Yet in fine, two practises oure aduersaries (lest they might seme to doe nothing) dyd put in executiō for their more securitie and estimation sake. First, they sturre vp sharper persecution against all Catholiques, but speciallie against the more learned, and against suche as were thought able in this conflict to annoye them with reasonyng. Therfore they remoued from london the Lorde bishopp of lincolne, & the Lorde Abbot of westminster, with others of sownd learning, profownd knowledge, verie muche grauitie, & greate vertue, not a fewe. All these The castell of vvisbiche. they cast into an vplandisne dongeon, spoile them cleane of all their bookes, debarre them from all intercourse of talke and cōference one with an other, (except at meale time) and shutt them vp close & seuerallie in darke corners. And yf anie besydes of name and accompt were left oute, them allso they call vnto these Iron grates of prisons, that this waye, at the least, they may put all to silence.
            Secondlie, when they had contriued The shift & craft of ministers in their all these things according to their owne desires: thē they conuey them selues with

greate secrecie in to prisons. There they sett vpō the captiue Catholiques sodainlie pretense to dispute. ere they be aware, and call them in all haste to dispute of faithe, withoute anie time before hād to thinke on the matter, or libertie to talke thereof among them selues, And leste they might help or cō
               fort one an other, or testifie one for an other: they assaile them (for the moste parte) seuerallie, euery man alone by him selfe. And yfanie of oure partie dyd obiect their vneauen dealing, or desire time to consider, bookes for studie, or speche with his companions for instruction, and other things requisite for his defense: and yf anie alleiged further (as some dyd) that there wanted an indifferente Iudge to geue the sentence, cōuenient auditorie to beare witnesse, and faithfull notaries to sett downe the arguments in writinge: then loe, oure aduersaries exclamed that we refuse the combate, that we stand vpō bare shyfts of woords, that we seke for excuses, and flye in to holes and corners: In so muche as manie on oure syde moued with the importunate clamoure of these felowes dyd yelde them selues to all maner of conditions that were offred, puttinge

their on lie confidence in the goodnesse of their cause.
            But what so euer oure men alleiged, yt serued to small purpose there. For either dyd oure aduersaries cōtumeliouslie reiect it, or odiouslie drawe and wrest it to treason, or else moste vniustlie depraue, peruert, and misreporte yt to the people. And thereof I haue many examples: but here a fewe maye suffise.
            First yt fell oute of late, that after the sētēce of deathe was pronounced against Diuerse examples of cauills & vntrue surmise of ministers. Maister hanse (the good priest) for the Catholique faith, and he nowe in prison preparing hym selfe to die: there came vnto hym a certein minister vnder coloure of frindeshipp, with a countenaunce setled and framed to an hipocrisie of holynesse, but the yssewe of the matter proued hym to be full of bitter malice, and of euerye subtile shyft to deceiue the poore man. For in speche betwene them two, this minister, besides many other reprochefull woords, dyd charge that martyr of Christe with treason against the Quenes persone: where vpō when the same martyr had made this answere, that he had neuer offended against the Quenes

Maiestie, that he had but onelie made a profession of the Catholike faith and religion, whiche cannot betraie nor hurt the Maiestie of anie humane creature, for so muche as aboue all other things it moste pleaseth the Maiestie of God. VVhen good maister hanse (I say) had spoken these and other like woords: and said further that he moste willinglie wolde embrase this deathe, sithe he was then cleare in his conscience, that he had neuer committed anie haynouse crime against her maiestie: but rather (according to his dutie) hade commended her to God in his prayers: and that this crime of treason against her maiestie, imputed vnto hym, by his aduersaries, is in truthe neyther anie crime of treason at all, nor any synn in the sight of God: Loe this goodlie gospeller (as one that had catched plenty of matter, wherevpon to forge a malitious surmise) passeth forth of the prison, bruteth abrood to the people & publisheth in a libell writen and printed, that hanse affirmed no treason to be a sinne before God: Maister hanse hauinge intelligence hereof, complained of this iniurie openlie to the people when he was brought

to the place of execution: and there he opened his meaning towchinge his former woords, and besought god to perdō the accuser, for so vniust, and so odious an vntruthe.
            Likewise two ministers for conferē
               ce sake came into a prison, to a gentleman Tripp & Crovvley against M. Thomas pounde. whiche had bene some tyme a courtier, and then was become a prisoner, & so had bene many yeres, for his faith. And when they had onerworne and waisted all their matter with contumeliouse and lewed woords, and had wearied the gentle man with blasphemies (as he him selfe by letters complayned), and yet for their parts had not eyther concluded vpon any matter, or refuted any thinge by argumēt: then this gentleman (lest their talke should haue bene alltogether ydle and vnprofitable) moued them at length to conclude vpon some certein principall points whervpon they might afterward procede to discusse the rest. And the poīt was this: whether the priuate spirit of eche The controuersie. particular persone, or the common spirit of the vniuersall churche ought to iudge of the sense of holie scripture? For when he had heard them alleige scripture oute

of all places, and wrongfullie: he affirmed that in these matters of controuersie, a man shoulde not runne to the bare letter of scripture, in suche sense as euerie particuler man lyst to take yt: (for by this A necessarie principle for deciding of controuersies. mean all heresies are defended:) but that we ought to resorte to the moste certein Iudgement of the churche vniuersall, at the least way moste auncient: which being directed by the spirit of God, doeth laye downe before vs the true & naturall sense of scriptures. And because the ministers dyd not admitt this grownd, nor yet refell yt: but (as theyr fashion is) runne into corners, creakes and starting holes: he put downe in writing (being but a lay mā, & not muche trauailed in scriptures) six strong reasons to fortifie his opinion: whereunto he desired that the ministers wolde answere, & there with all requested that it might be lawfull for him, by speche or penne to confute their answers, yf they shoulde seme to hym eyther impertinent and doubtfull, or otherwyse weake and insufficient.
            VVell, when these ministers had got the writinge: thense they packe in haste, & to the superintēdēt of londō they go: & to

hym they cōplain of the mans pertinacie, how, notwithstanding their aduises and motions, he refused to be a Caluinian, yea and that he durst take vpō hym to defend his opinion by writing. This superintendent (as in verie dede he is a fumish hasty man, and by nature cholerick) being outragiouslie incensed with ire, desineth the gentleman by and by in his mynd to some speciall payne, purposing to punish hym throughlye: And thereupon he thrusteth him so delulie oute of lōdō īto a streicter kynde of imprisonment: he locketh hym Strateford castell. vp in an olde decayed castell, a raw, vnhaunted and obscure place, vhere he could neyther haue the sight of the Sunne or other light, nor yet of men: he loadeth hym wyth yrons: and (not to recite all particulars) he afflicteth hym with calamities meruailouse & withoute all measure. Now these ministers (being thus put owte of all doubt & feare of their aduersarie) do sett forth a booke, and make a kinde of answer to the reasons by hym before layde downe vnto them: and as in other things, so especiallie in this, they delt moste iniuriouslie with him: for they conceale and dissemble the verie state and

principall point of the question and controuersie, charging hym to haue sayde that the scriptures are (in his opiniō) of lesse authoritie than the churche: where in truthe he talked not of the authoritie of suche scriptures as are euidentlie knowne to be diuine scriptures: but his talke was eyther touching the knoweing and discerning of such vncertein scriptures as haue bene called in question and doubted of: or touching the vnderstanding of the sēse & true meaning of darke & obscure places of diuine scripture. VValker. In the marshalsey.
            
            Moreouer, a certaine diuine doctor, and one of some authoritie among oure aduersaries, came one day (with no small ostentation, nor light traine of folowers) to a certain prison for disputation sake, as he pretended: (for these felowes wold gladlie beare the people on hand & make them belieue that they do offer to oure men disputations thick and threfolde,) there, this gloriouse doctor calleth to gether in to the halle euery prisoner which whas shut vp in that prison for religion, bothe yong and olde, priests and lay folke: he telleth them that he is come to dispute: he and his associates take their

seats on the benche, & sitt downe solemnelre. And first of all, though the prisoners were in nūber manye: yet he demaundeth of eche man his name, & dwelling place. Yf any answer not readilie: the diuine So he railed against M. Cotton a priest, for telling his surname & not his proper name. by and by wolde fall in a terrible chafe, and shake vp the prisoner outragiouslie. Then before the disputatiō dyd begynne, one of the prisoners vpon occasion dyd alleige forth of holie scripture some thinge whiche the doctor had denied: whervpon, the sely old man waxeth verie augrie, & in no case will admitt that any suche thing is to be found in scripture: the booke is brought forth, and the thing is recited verie clearlie worde for worde as it had bene alleged. The olde man taketh his spectables and readeth: but for that the booke was an other mans booke, he wold not credit ye, but called for his owne: his cōpanions fall to laughing. And (to be short) withoute further proceding they all arose & departed: and thus the disputation was ended before it beganne. Then the sorye olde felow (when he seeth that he could not preuaile) falleth a cursing, & wisheth mischef and destruction to the howse and to

all the prisoners there. And all this fell oute thus, the keper of that prison being present, and ashamed of the matter. Now, what can be sayd more fonde or more ridiculous than this? And yet neuerthelesse yt was reported for certein and sure, that this mightie Hercules had ouerthrowen and beaten downe the Catholiques: albeit in verie dede he neuer vsed argumēt: but onelie a bare brabling and contention in woords.
            There is allso among oure aduersaries Fulk. one other odde minister, a bygge man in his owne opinion, yet in other mens iudgements he is but meane: how be yt in tongue not vnreadie, yet rashe and headlong, by reason that he knoweth not hym selfe. This felow not long agoe (hoping to pick owt some peece of estimation by contending with greate personages) crept, vnlooked for, into a prisō, where the aforesayde learned and reuerend vvisbiche castell. fathers, the byshop of Lincoln and▪ Abbot of west minister with others of good accompt are imprisoned for religion: And at his first entree he gyueth in commaundement that they all appears personallie before hym: he telleth them

that he his come to conferre aboute the chefe litigiouse points of religion: and signifieth his will and pleasure, that they should beginne the dispision. But when those good fathers (as they are wise) dyd perceiue the man to doe all this withoute warrant, and vvithoute anie certein order or forme of conference, but onlie vppon a rashe and vndiscrete heade of his owne, and meerlie for vainglorie: they make smale accompt of him, but contemne such ridiculouse vanitie of the arrogāt yong felowe. And therfore when they had spoken something abowte the vnreasonable condition then offred, and of their want of bookes, tyme and other things: they leaue the man to his owne folies, & (as best besemed their grauitie) they lett hym passe away, as one by them contēned, rather than vexed. But yet the yong peacocke (as his maner is) aduaunced vp his tayle triumphed abroode with all brauerye, and publisheth a pamphlet of his great conquests and victories ouer captiues: In which pamphlet there are many vntruthes, very many friuolouse toyes, and nothing to serue his turne, nothing to make for his side, but mere

vanitie, and that euen by his owne declaration, as he hym selfe telleth his owne tale.
            But when suche huddling & shyfting of matters was knowne, so as manye euen of oure aduersaries, dyd mislike yt (for it had allmoste bredde a cōmon quarell, & had wellnigh putt into the peoples heades some suspition that theire cause was ouer throwen:) Some there were which (to salue this sore and to take away the infamie) made a certaine promise that within shorte space there should be a disputatiō with cōditiōs very indifferent and verie reasonable. And thereupon, the In Nouember. 1580. knight Marshal writeth vnto the keper of the Marshallsey, and cōmaundeth hym to inquire and signifie, yf anie papists vnder his charge wolde mainteine their cause by A nevv disputation. appointed disputatiō: that they shoulde send to him in writing such cōclusions as they wolde defend, and shoulde subscribe their names, make them selues redie to dispute: that he hym selfe wolde aduertise them verie shortly of the maner, place and time of the disputation. M. Bosgraue. M Shyrvvin. M. Hart.
            
            This thyng pleased all men. Three of oure preists, thoughe yonger in yeres, &

of lesse reading (for such as were of more abilitie & experience were all sent away from London as I told yow before): yet with a certein good assurance, trust and confidence in their cause, doe vnder take the charge: And therfore they close vp certain conclusions in writing, subscribe theire names, and send them awaye to the knight Marshall with greate thanks. But the conclusions please not oure aduersaries: they appoint others accordinge to their owne phantasie & send them back. Theese oure men doe allowe: the day for the disputation is appointed: greate is the expectation thereof. But what folowed? Forsothe, in the day (as I think) next before they should dispute, the aforesayde defendants on oure syde were remoued from the prison of the Marshallsei, and conueyed to the tower of London to be racked: that sithe they wolde not be taught nor persuaded with reasons fett from authoritie, they might there be trayned vp and exercised with argumēts deriued from the rack and torture.
            But yet all this coulde not terrefye oure Catholiks frō their sute touching a disputation to be had with an indifferent

cōditiō. VVher vpō a noblemō, & one of the cheefe of her Maiesties moste honorable Thee Erle of Lecestre Councell, moued (as I think) with the vrgent petitiōs of some Catholiques, agreed thus farre at lengthe, that in this common sute, he wolde in a priuate maner satisfye some principall persones that were then in prison for religion. For he called them vnto his chamber, and sayd, that vpon the loue he bare vnto them, he was moued to agree vnto their requests, and desired them to shew them selues indifferēt and diligent hearers, and not peruerslie obstinate in a desperate case: And sayd further, that he putteth no doubt, but by this one conference of verie well learned men, the truth of the matter might moste easilie be discouered. The gentlemen shew them selues willing to be conformable to that request, and humblie thanke his Lordeshypp for so greate a benefite. But they looke aboute yf they coulde see anie Catholique diuine to defend their cause by disputation D. Laurence hūfrey vvith his felovves. (for there were foure ministers present to impugne it) yet they fynde none: they merueile muche: neuerthelesse they speake not a woorde of yt: Because they

wolde see the yssewe and ende of the matter.
            And at the last vp riseth a minister Adam Squier. from the benche, and (with verie great commendatiōs of his associates before) downe he goeth as smothelie as may be among the prisoners, & offreth hym selfe to be oure spokesman, and to pleade oure cause. VVho cowlde forbeare laughing, yf the reuerence of the place wold haue admitted a skorne? who wold not haue pityed oure case, to see vs thus frustrate and disapointed of oure owne frendelye counsailers, and cōmitted to the defense of none but of oure foes? Yet forsoothe he geueth vs fayre woords, & will nedes beare vs on hand that he will support vs with his faithfull assistāce. And thereupō he steppeth furth, and vp he Ierketh his hands, & white of his eyes to heauē ward, (as his maner is) and (full deuoutlye lyke a good man) he there vndertaketh the defense of the cause: but of what cause I pray yow? forsoothe euen of that same cause, which before (like an apostata) he had betrayed and forsaken, and made his bragge thereof when he had so done. But who wolde beleeue a skornfull and light

tryfeler? Ys there anie so madde (think yowe) as to cōmit so weightie a cause to hym that pleadeth in skorne? or to trust a Ieasting disputer with a matter of saluation vpon his bare worde: who (as it is reported) can not be trusted of his creditors in a money matter, no not vpon his othe when he sweareth moste depelie?
            And these are all in a maner, that can be sayde of the disputations or cōferences with ministers in matters of learning. For I doe not remember, that oure aduersaries euer yeelded to graunt any disputation to Catholiques, besides these whiche here I haue mentioned: sauyng onlie The disputatiō vvithe father Campian. the late disputation whiche they graunted to maister Campian, being thē a prisoner, & twise before that tyme racked, destitute of bookes, and vnprouided of And once again racked syns the tyme here mentioned. all things, sauing onlie of a good cause, & of a well willing mynde. But as for that disputation, we heare (euen by the testimoni of thē which were present) of muche parcialitie, & iniurie therein vsed, yea & of mani such odd shyfts, as perhapps to learned men might seme skant credible: but we are so admonished by examples in experience of former tymes, as we are

forced to mistrust any thing, beyt neuer so vnliklie, towching the indirect dealing of timourous and falseharted men in a naughtie cause. For who is ignorant, that nede maketh the naked man to runne, or that the swoorde of necessitie is of all other most daungerous? or who doeth nor verie well vnderstand that old prouerb, pouertie maketh many theues, and that error and want in a desperate case, leade many men into vnhonest wayes? but now let vs disgresse a litle while to other matters, for me thinks I haue spokē enough of prisoners. And though their condition seme harde and painfull: yet is the condition of those men eyther more painfull or more intricate, and more incumbred whiche liue abroade vnder some colour of libertie and are neuerthlesse vexed and shaken with stormes and tempests. For they whiche are shutt vp close withein the limittes of prisons: though in other respects they seme to be full of calamitie, yet in this one point seme verie happie, that in mynde they haue some quyetnesse and tranquillitie. The afflictiō of Catholiques ovvte of prisons. But the Catholiques which are abrood I mean those that are dwelling dispersed

through England, are neither suffred to rest nor abyde any where: but are tossed and tormoyled to and fro, as it were with waues & wyndes in continuall vexatiōs and troubles. For where so euer yow wolde sett youre feete, what way so euer you vvold goe by streete or pathe, yovv may see lamentable sights: this man to flye awaye: that man to lye hydden in a corner: an other to conuey hym selfe priuilie in disguised apparell: some apprehēded and led to the lustice: others to be sought for & not taken: many to abyde amōg busshes and vvoods: agreate nombre to haunt the feilds in the daye tyme, and neuer to repaire home but at mydnight.
            And yet when they are at home in Searching of houses by night. their owne houses: they can not so be in securitie one houre. For at midnight oure aduersaries oftentimes rushe in forcibly vpō them, and sett a watche aboute the house, that none may escape: then they searche euery chamber, euen the bedchā
               bers of wiues and maidens: aboute they goe throwgh all the house from place to place, veweing, tossing, & rifeling in euery corner, chests, coffers, boxes, caskets

and closetts. And yf anie thing happen to be fownd that maye woorke some detection of religiō, or may brede anie blame, or minister matter of surmise: as siluer chalices, patens, candlesticks, crosses, books, vestments, & other ornamēts whiche are called churche stuffe: these they snatche away, by a priuiledge of robberie, and by the prerogatiue of their gospell: for other lawe thei haue none to mainteine these their doeings. And that these things may not goe alone, they catche holde oftentimes, for companie, of what so euer other thing lyeth bye. And lest anye thing els should be lost by negligence, they stick not to ryfle the bosomes, purses, and coffers of honest matrones, yea and to vncouer their verie innermost garments, & oftentimes to teare & rēt the a sunder with violence, to see yf anye Agnus del, crucifix, medalls, beads or anie halowed things doe lye hydd there. These pageants their sergeants doe play, their catchepoles I mean, whome they call pursyuants, those hungrye storuen beasts rūning moste fierslie on euery pray or bootye: And in the power of these felowes yt lyeth, whō so euer they

do finde in the house eyther to commit to prison, or at theyr will and lyking to trouble with other vexatiōs, except they be annoynted with the oyle of the sinner, Psal. 140. and pacified with some gratefull sacrifice of money.
            This is the peace and rest which oure Catholiques do finde at home in their owne houses. Lett vs see alitle what interteinment they doe fynde abroade. I haue tolde you howe these pursyuants lyke theuysh night fyendes do runne withe deadelie hatred to doe displeasures in howses: we maye add herevnto hovv Psalm. 99. they besett the common wayes and crosse stretes with ambushements lyke noone daye deuills. For yf any of oure men, whose name is presented, doe happen to passe through eyther citie, towne or villaige: hym they apprehend in the commō strete. Yf anie enter in to anie citie yea by night, and be betrayed or bevvraied by the detectiò of some espiall, taleteller or pickthanke (vvereof vve haue greate store:) hym they hale and dravv forth of the common tauerne, or ynne: but thoughe one be neyther presented, nor bevvrayed, yet ys he not for all that in

safetie, except he vtterlie eschevve all companie and conuersation vvith men: For by many vvayes and means, euen vpon a light suspition onlie may a man be brought in perill: As for example, yf a man doe refuse to eateflesche on dayes prohibited by the churche: yf he be sene to pray some vvhat earnestlie, and spetiallie in latin prayers: yf he blesse hym selfe vvith the signe of the crosse: yf he counsail anie to fast, or moue one to virginitie or single lyfe: yf he some vvhat earnestlie commend the auncient fathers: yf he say or affirm any thinge on the behalfe of the Catholique religion, or confute a verie manifest vntruthe of oure aduersaries: Nay, when others by course one after an other doe raile and speake reprochefully against the Catholique religion, yf he (for his part onlie) holde his peace and speake neuer a woorde: anye of these is matter sufficient to bring a man in question for religion. And to be short, there is extant an edict and lawe, not In Nouember 1580. long a goe published, wherby euery man hathe power and authoritie to present, appeache, or accuse anie mā, who so euerhe be, vpon euerie leaste circumstance,

whiche may induce anie suspitiō or surmise of the Catholique religiō. By meane whereof, manye synce that tyme haue bene apprehended, and verie manie haue bene afflicted with diuerse vexations & aduersities.
            But there is one maner of roughe dealing (for I vvill not vse a more greuouse terme) vvhich afflictetth more thā all the rest: I meane that, vvhiche oure men doe finde and feele in sutes of lavve, in triall and Iudgements before iustices, in priuate businesses; and in the common conuersation and entercourses of lyuing to gether one vvith an other. For this is a matter vvhiche in dede toucheth the verie veines and sinevves of the naturall societie of mankinde, that are nourished and preserued by Iustice & humanitie or gentle behauioure: &, doe detest all cruell barbarousnes. But for my parte, I doe neyther complaine, nor thinke it mete to complain, yf neyther fauour be shevved vnto oure persones, nor pitie nor compassion to oure estate and condition, be yt neuer so afflicted or miserable, (for I can be content, sithe they will nedes haue yt soe, that such humanitie and ciuile courtesie

as nature graunteth euen among enemies be denied vnto vs their bethren, for the hatred whiche they beare to oure religion:) yet in verie truthe, for so muche as there be some, whiche are not satiate with the rigour of lawes, and greuousnesse The greate rigoure of some Iudges against Catholiques. of paines and punishments layed vpon vs all readie, but they will nedes add a bitter vexation of malice and euell will of their owne deuise and makinge: inso muche as eyther by pretense of lawe they vse rigoure against vs, where there is no lawe to warrant them: or elles they extēd the rigoure of the law, further than the mynde of the lawmaker dyd reache: and that in greatest, and moste weightie causes, euen suche as concerne oure liues and oure bloode: no mā shoulde wounder, yt we mourne, yf we lament, yf we sighe and grone alitle vnder so great a bourden of calamitie.
            Lett vs therfore see, what Catholiques doe endure allso in this maner of persecution, which ariseth vpō hatred and despite of the christiane religion. Fyrst, there is a certein law (which before I haue recited) that, who so euer shall obteine frō the by shopp of Rome bulls or publick Page. Nō
                  ber 2.
               
instruments, or bring the same in to England: he must be reputed guiltie of hyghe treason. Nowe admit this to be a moste Iuste lawe: (for I doe not here entreate of the equitie and indifferencie of the lawe, but of the mynde and intent of the lawe:) VVhoe seeth not that the intent of this lawe was onlie to except, prouide & take order, that the pope shoulde not determine or appoint anie suche thyng to be done, touching causes or affayres of England, as he was wont to doe by way of bulls (as they terme them) or writts Apostolique? And yet not withstanding, not longe agoe, when a certein bare copie of 1575. the bull, conteinynge a denuntiation of a yere of Iubiley, then past, was fownde: albeyt the same perteined not to English men: allthough it was printed withe in an other princes dominions: allthowgh the force therof was determined more than a yere before: although it lay (as matter of no accompt) among onlie torne & cast A notable point of iniustice. papers: all this not with standing: the greuousenes of the matter was so vehementlie enlarged, & aggrauated by the seueritie Iudge Māvvoode. M. Mayn priest. of a Iudge: as a priest in whose chāber the copie was fownd, was, for that same

cause, put to a moste cruell deathe: and a M. Trugiō
                gentleman of greate woorshipp, though ignorant of the matter, yet beause he enterteined the same priest in his howse, was by the sentence of the same Iudge turned owte of all his goods & possessiōs (which were very worshipfull) and cast in to perpetuall prison.
            Again, before the same Iudge and promoter, (for he executeth bothe those At dorcester the fifth of September. 1581. offices against Catholiques) a certein honest man was arraigned of highe treason, vpon the one and twentieth capitall lawe before mentioned, because he had geuen page. 67. Nūber. 21. a reason to one of his neyghboures, whie he hym selfe might not goe to the churches of protestants with a safe cōscience. Nowe, this Iudge dyd interprete the mās wordes in suche a sense, as yf by the reasō which he gaue, he ment to haue drawne his neighboure to his owne opinion, and cōsequentlie to haue dissuaded him from the Religion of England, and by an other A hard cō
                  struction of a savve. cōsequence to bring him to the obediēce of the byshopp of Rome. So long are the snares which are sett to intrapp oure bloode. But ther is yet an other seuere practise of this Iudge, to geue more

showe of his cruell mynde in this mattēr. For when yt was referred to a Iurie (as the custome of the countrie requireth:) and that the inquest could not fynde the offēce to be so greuouse as deserued deathe: they were compelled by the authoritie of the same Iudge to fynd it to be a matter of treason: suche a practise as was neuer wont to be vsed, nor ought to be vsed against any man, were he neuer so farr past hope of grace, neuer so detestable naughtie. The lavv against vagabunds.
            
            And where there is a law in England that suche slouthefull beggars as will not abyde ī one certain place, but idelie roaue abroad frō place to place like vagabunds should be whipped and burned in the ears with an hote yron: yt so fel owte that a Marck. syppet. vong man, born of honest and riche parēts, sikillfull in humame learning, hauing left his studie for a tyme, and going from Londō to visit his fryndes was apprehē
               ded, and brought before a Iudge for religion. VVhat affinitie is here with the persones noted to be punishable by this lawe? yet because the yonge man was thē latelie come forth of ffraunce, & had bene trayned vp in the popes Seminarie: therfore

and hastie froward Iudge, in despite and malice that he beareth to the Christian 
                  
                     •
                  letevvood. religion & Catholique cause, wolde not dimisse the poore man before he was whipped throughe Londō, and odiouslie burned in the eare. The like punishement touching burning in the eare was executed verie latelye at the Citie of yorcke (as I haue hearde) & vpō a priest. And I could recken vp a great nomber of like strict Fulk. dealinges of Iudges against Catholiques: but this may suffice for a complaint. God which Iudgeth the poore in iustice, and requiteth 
               Esa. 11. 
               the provvde abundantlye. Oure Lorde Psal. 30. 
               vvhich is bothe Iudge and vvitnesse (as Ieremie Ier. 29. saithe), & vvill Iudge in measure against 
               Esa. 27. 
               measure, vvhen measure shall be caste avvaye, pardone these Iudges for so wicked and so vniust iudgements.
            But what might a man say to the wickednesse of this tyme? whether now (good God) whether now haue these exulcerate and rancorouse controuersies towching matters of faith and religion thruste vs? how haue they plucked vs downe? no nation in the worlde adourned with ciuil maners: no countrie indued with the holie lighte of Christs Gospell:

no people īstructed with Christiā lawes & customes, was euer eyther better framed to courtesie and humanitie, more disposed to beneficence and fryndelie behauioure, more inclined to the loue of equitie, more bent to pitie and mercie, than this English people and nation was, before suche time as this vnluckye, detestable and pestiferous heresie had hardened the hart, and intrailes of loue, infecting them with deadelie poysons of malice. For this is she that hathe shaken in sunder the bolts and bares of right and equitie: this is she that hathe dissolued the bonds of loue and amitie: this is she that hath blowen vpp the fowndations of mercie and beneficence: this is she that hath cutt in sūder the veines & sinewes of the cōmon societie of men, and with a fyendelie force and tempestuous violence hath knocked together the membres thereof and beaten them one against an other into miserable disorder & confusion.
            But now perhaps (frinde Gerard) the time wolde require me to make some ende of this epistle: for me thinks I am verie long: and I owght to haue care that I wearie yow not with a reporte so greuouse

and lamentable, as in truth it can not but vehemently trouble yow (I think) whils youe are reding it, seing yt woorketh suche passions in my selfe in writing it, as some times I can not refraine frō weping, whiles I considre, eyther what I haue writen, or what I haue omitted. For there be farr moe things that ought to be suppressed and passed ouer in silence, rather than here to be cōmitted to writing: partly for that I should charge my selfe with an infinite laboure in reciting all the particulars: partly, because the certain knowlege of very many things in these difficulties and troubles of tymes and causes, can not be had: but moste especiallye, for that the explication & notice of the principall matters, and the discouerie of the persones whome they concern, do runne to gether in such sort, as they can not be so seperated that the matters may be well vnderstoode, nor so annexed as the persones may not be damnified. For the things can not be committed to publick speche or writing, but that the persones may be drawne therby in to priuate perill. Lett vs ther fore leaue these things to them which are to come after vs, that they

may eyther cōmit them to writing whan oportunitye shall serue: or elles in the meane time, with inward amasednesse, & secret sorow meruaile and be waile the case.
            Now these things whiche I haue tolde may suffice to minister matter, eyther for sorow and heuines, or for a lesson and example. For oure calamitie ought to be a perpetuall lesson, not onlie to oure selues and oure posteritie but to all Catholiques allso through the woorlde: howe terrible a thing it is (as the Apostle sayeth (, to fall in to the hāds of the liueing god: And to refuse to doe the vvoorthie vvoorkes 
               Heb. 10. 
               of pennance: yea, after mē haue bene therū
               to admonished. For oure owne synns and the synns of oure parents and auncetours haue layde vpon vs this moste heuye and painfull scourge of God, whiche will wax heuyer withowte doubt, and reache further, yf the Iustice of God, (by due repē
               tance of Catholiques, and amendement of their sinfull lyues) be not preuented.
            And as for sorow, particular or common, (frind Gerard,) who wolde not iudge that the things now by me recited may procure sorowe, and heuynesse

enough, eyther to yow or me, or to anie Catholique who so euer: for as they be verie manye, moste greuous, and haunt vs daylie: so in respect of the cause, they are moste vniust: for their maner of dealing, they are moste adiouse, and for the Innocencie of the persones wich suffer, they are moste vnsemelie & full of indignities. The straite examination of Catholiques. Neuerthelesse (as I haue sayde before) I coulde not touche euery speciall matter, nor yet the chefe and principall points: then muche lesse is any man able to putt downe in writing the particularities of matters moued in that strict maner of examination, practised by oure aduersaries against vs, with interrogatories so drawn in length by peece meale, with suche searching and siftyng euen in to the smallest motes that may be discerned, so curiouslie, so circumspectly, with so many eyes caste vpon a man, and with so many notes, and obseruations as nothing can escape them. And yf a woorde, yea a peece of a woorde slipp forth of a mans mouthe at vnwares, or that he happen to geue but a wink with his eie, or a nod with his heade, whereby anie suspition may arise, that he fauoureth oure cause: there

is then matter enough, wherupon eyther to accuse hym, or to cast hym in prison. As of late (by report) some were put in prison for speaching afew words in commendation of Catholiques touching the late disputations.
            But beholde a more straūge practise putt In August. 1581. in executiō by oure aduersaries, not many dayes a goe. For all the students abyding withe in the vniuersities, were by thē enforced vpon their othes, to discouer and appeache euery persone, whome so euer they knewe or suspected to fauour the Catholique religion in hart: to this intent and purpose (with oute doubt,) that they might driue away all suspected Catholiques forthe of the vniuersities. Nowe I praye yowe looke well in to this deuise. This matter of suspecting, how farr dothe yt reache think yow? howe easilie is it couered vnder the cloke of dissimulation? how redily dothe yt attend vpon hatred and enuie? what licentiouse scope doeth it geue to ambition? how much force dothe it bring to yll will & malice? & how sharpe spurre is it to pricke forwarde euerie kind of reuenge? See then an experiment fallen oute euen of the present occasiō of In Oxford.
               
this depe deuise. A minister forsoothe did accuse one vpon suspitiō of the Romaine religion. The persone accused dyd aske the minister what he had for hym to induce that suspition: because (sayd the minister) I doe not see yow resorte so much to sermons, as yow wolde doe, yf yovv A folish surmise of a minister. vvere feruent in the zeale of oure religion. How weightie and strong is this cō
               iecture, to enforce an accusation? Alas full greuous and troublesome is the state & cōditiō of them vvhich euen by lawes and publick authoritie are subiect to these stormes of malice, and to these tempests of the surmising forgerie of sycophants.
            And because I am talking here of that prōptnesse, facilitie and rashe disposition to accuse, whereby oure aduersaries vsuallie do charge vs with offenses, and do surmise slaunderous tales, & meere cauills against vs, and that vpon moste friuolous and impertinent occasiōs: And albeit for hast I thought to haue omitted this point: yet one example I will leaue for this place: whereby youe maye perceiue, that we are not onele accused for small and tryfeling matters, but blamed

and punished oftentimes for the benefits whiche we bestowe vpon them. The historie is notably well knowne, pleasant allso, and yt will geue to youre Italians there (beside matter to maruaille at) some patern allso of the estate and condition of oure affairs and troubles. And thus it is.
            A courtlike gentlemā of good vvelth, An historie touching restitution. that had liued in much brauerie, hapened to fall sick. And vvhiles he vvas lyeing in great pain: he dyd fall (as at that tyme ytt happeneth often to the most rechelesse) in to a vehement cogitatiō & depe studie of the lyfe to come. VVherevpō he called for a priest (for in mynde and opinion he vvas Catholique) that by his aduise and counsaile he might learne to dye vvell. The priest (according to his deutie, and the custome of the Catholique churche) admonished the sickman amonge other things that yf he had anie vvaye hurt or iniured any man, or vniustlie possessed other mens goods: he shoulde go aboute by and by to make restitution accordinge to his abilitie. The sick man dyd agree to doe so, and called to remembrance that he had taken awaie somewhat from a certain Caluinian vnder colour and pretense

of law in dede, but not vnder anie goode assurance for a Catholique conscience to trust vnto: therfore he tooke order for restitution to be made, & died. The widow, his wyfe being verie desirous to accomplish her husbands will, and affraied to committ the matter to an heretique, was in verie greate perplexitie of mynde, and coulde not ridd her selfe out of it. Now whiles she was thus intangled in the breres of dowbtfullnesse: by good happ a priest cometh to her she declared her M. Alvvai. greefe vnto hym, and besecheth hym for gods sake to helpe her, eyther with his trauaille or with his counsaile.
            Now the good man, whā he perfectlie vnderstoode the deuoute and holie desire of the gentlevvoman, being hymself a verie zelouse and charitable man, vvillinglie profered to put hym selfe in all perill that might befall in doeing the thing which she desired, persuading hym selfe that no man wold be so cruell and barbarous as of a benefit to desire reuēgemēt. Therfore first he commended the matter The thyrd day in Easter vveke. to God, then he mounted on horseback & awaye he goethe on his Iourney. And when he came to the towne vvhere the

mā dyd dwell to vvhome the monie vvas to be deliuered: he setteth vp his horse in the next Inne, that he might be readier at hand, for scaping immediatlie after his Fisher of vvarvvick businesse vvere dispatched: he goeth hym selfe to the creditors house, he calleth the man forth alone, taketh hym by the hand, and leadeth hym a side from the companie Tvventie poūds english. of others. Then he declareth that he hath money for hym, vvhiche he vvolde delyuer to hym vvith this condition, that he inquire no further, eyther vvho sent yt, vvho bringeth yt, or vvhat the cause or matter is, but onlie receiue the money, and vse yt as his ovvne. The olde felovv promiseth faire, and with a good will geueth his woorde faithfulli to doe so and with many thanks he dimisseth the man, and sendeth hym away.
            The good priest with all the speede he was able to make hastneth to his hostes house, for to catche holde of his horse & flie away: but all in vaine. For forthwith Tvvo of the sayd fy shers brethren. the deceitfull old felowe betrayed the priest, and sent men after to apprehēd hym. And first to begynn with all, they made this surmise against hym, that forsothe he is not a man but a deuill, whiche

had brought money of his owne making He is takē for a deuill vvhich maketh restitution of ill gotten goods. to bewitch the olde man. And for a proofe there of, they vsed this argument among others, that he had a blacke horse. And this horse they dyd obserue & watche diligentlye whether he dyd eate haye as other horses eate or no. And as for the priest, they put a horse lock aboute his legg, shutt hym vp close in a strong chā
               ber, and appointed a felow to be with hym continually bothe day and night, which shoulde watche yfhe dyd put offe his bootes at any time, & if his feete were like horsefete, or that he were clouē footed: or had fete flytand forked as beasts haue. For this they affirmed to be a speciall marke whereby to know the deuill, vvhen he lyeth lurking vnder the shape and likenesse of a man. Then the people assembled aboute the house in greate nū
               bres, and profered money largelie that they might see this monstre vvith their ovvn eyes. For by this time, the people are persuaded that he is in dede an yll spirite or a verie deuill. For vvhat man vvas euer heard of (say they) vvhiche (yfhe had the mynde, vnderstanding and sense of a man) vvoolde of his ovvn voluntarie

vvill and vvithoute anie respect or consideration at all geue or proffer suche a summe of money to a man vtterlie vnknovven, of no acquaintance vvith hym, and a mere straunger of an other countrie.
            Novv vvhen they had thus contumeliouslie vexed Christs seruant a vvhile: they pretended to sett the man at libertie, and licenced hym to depart and goe avvay vvhether he vvolde: yet all vvas but a deceiptfull practise to vvork him more spite and iniurie. For loe, the vngratefull & The brother of the said fisher churlishe Caluiniā, vvhiche had receiued the monei, sent oute priuilie a suborned felow to stay the good priest as he vvas goeing forth: to with holde him from escaping away: and to accuse hym of high treason. This was no sooner done than the man was all ryfled, and spoyled: his horse ridden and vsed as pleased them, his money all taken from hym, sauing a litle portion to serue for his expenses to the citie of London, whether shortly after they sent hym as a prisoner with a strong and curiouse garde, And when he came thither, and had opened the matter to her maiesties Councell (or rather to one of

thē, that the matter might not be vttered abroade to the reproche of the deade:) he was by them casten of, and put ouer to the Superintendent of London, and by hym throwne, first into one prison, then in to an other, and thyrdlie in to the Tower That is, first in to his ovvne porters lodge: thē in to the gate house at vvestminster. of Londō, vvhere the space wellnigh of a quarter of a yere (hardlie escaping the racke and tortures) he was sore punished for that heinouse offence (forsuthe) of restitution.
            And here the recitall of this historie putteth me in remembrance of that ridiculous and wanton maner of chatting of oure aduersaries (as oure moste auncient enemies were wont to doe) in slaundering Catholiques to be of familiar acquaintance vvith deuills. And I might sooner lacke time thā matter, yf I should recken vpp all the surmises, and fables whiche they haue forged, touching this point. But among many this is one. Poules Poules steple burned. steple in London was meruailouslie (a fewe yeres synce) blasted with lightning, and sett on a light burning fyre ragiouse hoate and skant extinguishible: Oure aduersaries layde the fault and blame thereof vpon vs, & were not a shamed to say

that it was done by Iuglings and coniurings practised by Catholiques. Again, it hapned that certein charmes or inchauntments, and deuises of witchecraft wound vp together in peeces of parchement with figures, characters & suche like fond toyes, and hydde in the grownde, were at lengthe fownd by certain persones: The matter was supposed to haue bene contriued for some mischefe or destruction to the Quenes Maiestie. But who was he among all oure aduersaries which did not charge Catholiques with that fact? yet loe, not long after, yt was fownd owt and proued, that a certein minister was the The minister of Nevvington. Author and principall of this sorcerie, & had diuerse complices & accessaries whiche were verie zealouse gospellers: whereupon all was huysht sodainlie: vea (as busye as they were before) now they say not one woord of the matter, sauynge that some (to turne the fault frome one to an other, that the blame might fall som way on Catholiks) sayde that this minister had perhaps dissembled his religion and was a verie papist in his hart. A like surmise was deuised vpō an accident that hapned in a citie and vniuersitie. VVhere Oxford.
               
a booke bynder for speaking some woords in the fauoure of the Catholique religiō was arraigned at the assises, before the Iudges, and roughlie handled by all the benche. For besyde muche griefe and vexation whiche he endured in prison: the matter fell owt thus at the last, partlie by the verdit of the Iurie, and partlie by the rigoure of the Iudges: that the poore man was fyrst made to stand openlie in the market place to his reproche and infamie, then were his eares nayled hard and fast to a poste and a knyfe was put into hys owne hand, there with all to cutt his owne ears in sunder & so to delyuer hym selfe. This was a feuere sentence aboue measure as many men then dyd think. But what folowed? A wonder full Iudgement of God vndowbtedlie. For withein few dayes after, the two Iudges, and well nigh all the iurie, many of the iustices & freeholders, with verie many other of them whiche had bene present there, dyed all of a straunge kinde of disease, some in the sayd citie, and some in other places. But all the blame for this was layd vpon Catholiques: all this was imputed to magike and sorcerie, as practised by Catholiques.
            
               
VVhat safety then or securitie (frind Gerard) is there for vs? In how hard termes stand we think yow, when not onlie other mens faults are layed vpon vs, but the manifest Iudgements of allmightie God are peruerslie interpreted to oure inconuenience and infamie?
            I could neuer make ende yf I shoulde prosecute all the other means whiche our aduersaries woork to the dishonoure and slaunder of oure cause. For yf they may find one (be he neuer so base & so badde) which can tell anie reprochefull tale against Rome: or bringe anie tydinges sownding to the rebuke thereof, or of any others which are thought to fauoure our faith and religion: albeyt that the stuffe which he bringeth, or the tale whiche he telleth be either nothīg but verie rakinges of the sinke & cānells of filthie detractiō, or else voyde of all probabilitie or appearāce of truthe: yet such a felow is for theyr toeth: hym they take holde of as affectuouslie as they can, and obtrude him to the people as a prophet: to hym they geue free leaue, and libertie to talke, to So vvas 10. Nicols a grammarion, and minister coming from Rome & lyeing of Rome. Set vp in the pulpet & honored vvith an honorable presence. dispute, to preache, and to write what so euer he lusteth according to his owne

phantasie & pleasure, so he doe it by way of despite and contumelie against the Catholique religiō. Now whence cometh so great rancour and hatred? wherof springeth so muche displeasure and malice? what may be the cause of ali this spite and enuy? can ye tell? Yea but they rest not thus: they stay not with in this degree of immodestie: nor are content to be kept with in these limits of folye: they run headlong much further: for yf there be none to be fownde, which can tell skornfull and scoffing tales, nor throw vp on heapes any filthynesse, nor obserue and note any milbehauiours against Rome: then doe these felowes forth of theyr own forge coyne and create new miracles and wondres of Rome, to doe them selues some pleasure or seruice in pulpets, tables, The 23. 24. 25. daies of Ianuarie. 1580. This fablingbook vvas printed by 10. charlevvood and Ed. vvhite vvith approbation vnder noted. & books. And to such an effect they haue latelie settforth in a printed pāphlet mani meruailous things to haue happened the last yere at Rome, & that by the space of many dayes. VVherby they woulde make vs beleiue that God by greate and straunge signes and tokens doeth shew his wrath and indignation against that citie, for they tell vs of two Sunnes and two

rainbowes that appeared at one time: that saint Peters great gate dyd fall downe, and kill fourtene persones with eight soldiours. That two towers allso of Saint Peters churche were fallen, had beaten downe the churche and crushed in pieces much people, amonge whom were eightene preests: further more, that the churches of the franciscanes, saint sames, & of saint Bartilmew, with oure ladyes churche, the whole Monasterie of Marie Magdalen, the whole Armorie of the citie of Rome, the hospitall of an hundred and fiftie persones with an infinitie number of other houses and buyldings fell downe all at once: And all this happened (say they) to the intent that the world might vnderstand the Roman Religion to displease God. I passe ouer and omitt verie manie such artificiall shiftes and deuises which oure aduersaries doe leane to, of purpose to make oure cause more odiouse in the open sight of the people.
            Now therfore (to come at the last to an end) yow know the state of oure case, in what termes vve stand, and to vvhat Issue oure matters in England are grovvē. All is on a hotefire vvith the light

burning flames of pesecutions: Catholiques and right belieuers are euerie where afflicted with all maner of discōmodities, with hatreds, with reproches, with bōds, with imprisonments, with iniuries, and with what else soeuer serueth to an afflicted lyfe or helpeth to make vp a calamitie, full, absolute and perfite: And yet for all this oure aduersaries are not moued at all with any affectiō of pitie or cōpassion: but their wrathe waxeth fierce, and their malice groweth fresh dailie more & more: In so muche as now they seme to be come to that point whereof oure Sauioure foretolde: that euerie one that killeth yovv, thinke he doeth a seruice to God. 
               Ioh. 16. But the Catholiques doe comfort them selues with the woords of oure Sauioure foloweing in the same place: These things they vvill doe to yovv, because they haue not 
               Io. 16. 
               knovvne my father nor me: but these things I haue spoken vnto yovv, that vvhen the houre shall come, ye may remembre them, for I haue spoken to yovv. That sayeing allso of Saint paule they doe often recite for their cō
               sort. God is faithfull, vvhiche vvill not suffer 
               2. Cor. 10 
               you to be tempted aboue that you maye, but euen vvith temptation he vvill make an encrease,
               
               that ye may ondure.
            
            This encreasse of the faithfull, thus promised before hand as a recompense for patient sufferance of persecution, the Catholiques in England doe sēsiblie feele The increase of Catholiques in Englād. to be passinge good: And thereupon yt falleth owte, that beside the inward swetenesse of the holie ghoste, they are allso not alitle animated and confirmed with this externall comfort and consolation, whiles they vnderstand and see with their eyes the number of right belieuyng Catholiques to be so maruailouslye encreased, syns the rigour of the persecutors haith bene doubled and redoubled vpon them. For this is a manifest signification of gods loue, whereby he doeth assure and certifie vs that he will neuer forsake this oure cause, or rather I might say his own cause, yf we for oure parts doe fullfill and kepe the rules and precepts of humilitie, meknesse, longanimitie and patience. And withoute doubt yf in mynd and memorie we wolde runne ouer & vewe the troubles whiche Catholiques haue suffered allredye: or measure & esteme by coniecture the vexatiōs which may hang ouer their heads to be yet suffred: we shall

finde, how yt can neyther be imputed to the power or habilitie of man, that hither to they haue susteined the same: nor may be looked for that hereafter by mans power they may perseuere stedfastlie to the ende. This must be begged and craued of God alone, and must by cōtinuall prayers be obteined of the father of lights, from vvhome euerie best guyst and euerie perfect 
               Iac. 1. 
               guyft procedeth.
            Now, what puissance and valew of mynd think yow might suffice? what noblenesse of courage wer nedefull? what strong and steadfast constancie do yow iudge requisite to make mē hable to beare and endure those vexations whiche before I haue reported? those contumelies (I mean) and those despites? those rebukes and dishonors? those prisons, bolts and shakles? those deformities and disorders? those loothsome and ill fauored sights? those stinking sauours? those putrifactions for want of good lodging? those consumptions, waistings and pinyngs away for lacke of naturall sustinance? those torments? those deathes? And neuerthelesse that same whiche before I haue sayde, I must here eftsones repeate

and yow must kepe yt in memorie, for it is true, that I haue skant touched the hundreth part of those afflictions whiche oure Catholiques dailie sustein in prison. But yet yf Catholiques might fynde such fauour as they might be entreated and vsed in suche maner as theeues, man murderers, parricides, and hainouse offenders are vsed, or might be releued with their owne goods, or refreshed with the benignitie and almes that other men wold bestow of them: we showld haue no cause to grudge, and we might well think that we were not hardlie delte withall. For I know there will be fownd in England many, aswell of honest calling, as of the degrees of wooshipp and honor, whiche willinglie woolde be content to sell away all their goods, lands and possessiōs, and to yelde them selues to become seruants to the afflicted Catholiques, rather than the same Catholiques should suffer so vnsemelie and dishonorable misehiefes and inconueniences of hungre, famine, pouertie and want of necessaries as they doe dailie suffer and endure: but it will not be allowed nor permitted.
            Yet I wold not yow should take me

other wise than I meā. I speake not of those principall persones of honor or woorshipp, whiche are in prison for religion: who (I deny not) haue libertie to vse their ovvn goods. But I speake of the great multitude of most miserable poore captiues, and speciallie of priests, vvho at this daye are kept so straitlie, as no man hathe accesse vnto them: and vvho so euer desireth accesse, he is called in suspition: and except he can purge hym selfe, he is apprehended by and by. So Maister hanse of late, vvhen he desired to speak vvith some prisoners (bicause he had almes to delyuer to them) vvas attached as suspected for religion, and in short space after hanged on the galovves. In like sort many other, for the same cause, haue bene arreasted vpon suspitiō, and clapt in prison. And by these means oure aduersaries do terrefie Catholiques, that none should dare to bring any almes for prisoners.
            And it is no lesse perill to the geuers than to the bringars, yf the matter be once knowne: But it hapneth to be knowne manie wayes: and oure aduersaries, to get the knowleige thereof, doe oftentimes putt priests to the racke, or other tortures,

and examin thē who they are whiche M. Iohnsō M. Briant an others racked for the same cause, all moste to deathe. haue geuen them almes? and who hathe bestowed vpon thē other woorks of pietie? And yf anie by force of torment should confesse anie such thing (whiche to this day, by gods help, none hathe done:) then wolde oure aduersarie thereupō two maner of wayes anoye vs. First, he wold vtterlie discredit the mā, as a traitor to his own frinds: then wold he so afflict the geuer of almes, as for drede of punishement he wold driue away others from exercise of like works of pietie.
            Now, sithe oure aduersaries by this cunnyng deuise haue brought this to passe, that none dare geue almes, nor anye dare carie to a prison the almes whiche is geuen: yt must medes hereupō folow (as plainlie with oure eyes we see haith folowed) that oure Catholiques in prison through penurie, nedynesse, and want of necessaries must languish & weare away, and at the last for verie pinyng hungar & nakednesse pitifullie perishe in prison I suppose yow haue heard of a certein nū
               ber of persones latelie extinct and dead in prison at york: I will not take vpon me to auouche or suspect more hardlie thereof,

than as I haue sayd: albeit there be some whiche do suspect somewhat because 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   of hū
                  tingdon. that president there beareth suche mortall and inconsiderate hatred against vs, as he semeth to couet nothing in the world so much as oure vtter ruine & destruction. God be gratiouse to hym, geue hym a better mynde, and send hym a mileder spirit toward miserable captiues, that he hym selfe allso, once at the length when the tyme will come, may for hym selfe obtain mercie at the hands of the generall and common Lorde and Iudge of vs all.
            Yf I wolde recite the bitter affliction and inhumanitie which Catholiques in that prison at york the yeres by past haue felt and suffred, or at this tyme do fele and suffer more than euer before: I should neuer make ende. But by this one we may coniecture of the rest. A certein minister M. Bell. competenlie learned, whiche had stode a great while on our aduersaries side, and had verie earnestlie to the vttermoste of his power defended the same: came at the length to such intelligence by reading of the holie fathers, as he dyd see verie clearlie that his companions had no truthe to

leane vnto, but that all was on oure side, and that, with out all doubt. The zealouse yong man could not stopp the conceiued light of truthe, nor suppresse the flame thereof burning within his brest. VVhen this was knowne abroad to the worlde oure aduersaries apprehend the man, they seke by threathinges to putt him in feare: But he for all that is not terryfied: they sett vpon hym vvith arguments, but he was to hard for thē: they vvold vvynne hym vvith faier vvoords, but he is not allured. VVhat then? they thrust hym into prison, they handle hym sharplie: yet is he nothing relented. At the last they hang hym vpvvard are in suche maner, as his feet being put in a payre of high stocks, he lay vvith his shoulders onlie vpō the floore, and that vvithoute either bedding or any thing to leane vpō other than the bare floore, the space of very many daies together, sauyng that they shewed hym suche fauour onlie; as at certein times thei eased him some vvhat, for his bodilie nedes. VVhat can be more cruell than this?
            I omit here the rigours which are vsed against women there imprisoned for religion; to whom ouer and besydes the

yexations that are incident to prisons: this further greefe is added, that albeit their husbands do yelde, and are conformable (as they terme it) to oure aduersaries: yet are they all punished, except they will eyther compell their wiues to doe as they them selues doe, or elles will take away from them their necessarie foode & sustinance. VVhat then shall these miserable afflicted vvomen do, when they cannot be permitted to haue the necessarie releefe of lyfe, no not at their husbāds hāds? must they not perish through the inconueniēces of penurie and nedyenesse? and yet oure gospellers are not moued with any compassion or pitie for all these.
            And as to other prisons vvhiche are in London, I coulde reporte to yovv many lamentable cases asvvell of suche as late vvere extinct therein, as of them vvhiche yet liue there in miserie, but that I feare lest my complainte vvold be an occasion of more greuouse affliction yet this is moste certein, that many haue endured verie greate extremities through penury, and yet dailie looke for more greuous vexation, yf that moste seuere

lavv touching going to churches be put Before mētioned. in execution. For it vvill so vtterlie begger exhauste and oppresse Catholiques: as they shall not be able to releiue either thē selues or their families, and muche lesse to succeure others that are afflicted. And therevpon the state and conditions of Catholiques in England semeth likely to fall in to extreme calamities, and inconueniences, neuer heard of before with christian ears, in such wise, as Innocents shall be spoyled of their own goods, yea and pine away perish and be consumed with famine: and all for their conscience onlie, towching the faith and religion of their aunceters.
            But when I beholde & earneslie looke into that passing excellent, singular and in dede princelie no blenesse of hart, with the exceding great clemency and milde disposition whiche nature hathe planted in oure Quene: I am hardlie induced to beleeue that her maiestie will permit such a straite and extreme law to be putt in execution, to the vtter ruine of men afflicted with miserie, to the ouerthrow of her owne subiects, to the disturbance of her kingdome, and to driue all the whole

worlde besides, in to a mase with the wō
               der thereof. Yet neuerthelesse on the othersyde, when I depelie consider how her grace is incensed against vs with the continuall clamours of oure aduer saries, and by how subtile means and cunnyng shifts, dailie incited and stirred vp to oure persecution and destruction, whiles there is not one in the waye eyther to excuse or defend vs, or yet in oure behalfe, by waye of hūble sute, to procure some cō
               passion for oure afflictions: then I see yt to be possible, that not onely these extremities, but greater allso, and farre harder extremities may be permitted against vs.
            
               The conclusion.Nowe therfore (to conclude all in one  woord) two things onlie remain for vs to doe in these straite distresses wherein we stand. One, that with seruent vowos, and deu oute prayers we humblie call and crie vpon oure Lorde and Sauioure Christ, to mollifye the harts of oure persecutors. The other, that we remaine in a steadfast sure and resolute minde to suffer, & beare for his sake, what so euer happeneth to vs, referring all the rest to his moste holie prouidence, vvith this moste certein persuasiō, trust & beleefe, that yf we stād

fast in this mynde, and laye oure selues whollie vnder his custodie and protectiō, he will directe vs the safest waye into the hauen of oure soluation.
            And yf we persist firmly in this mynd and purpose, yf we putt on this armoure of hope, faithe, and seruent charitie, with the contempt of all mortall and wordlie things: yf we be (I saye) once fast planted and depely rooted in this moste firm and vnmouable roole, which is oure Christe crucifiede VVe shall be able with greate ease, and withoute trouble to endure, and abyde what rigoure or crueltie so euer oure aduersaries shall practise against vs. For we shall peaceably enioye the passing greate securitie 
                  •
                quietnesse of that man, whome oure Sauioure in the gospell cō
               mendeth as a right wyse man vvhich builded 
               Matth. 7. 
               his hovvse vpon the rocke, and the raine dyd fall and the floodes came, and the vvinds dyd blovv, and rushed against that hovvse, and yt fell not for yt vvas 
                     〈◊〉
                   vpon a rocke: yea we shall sensibly feele in oute harts, and professe by mouth, as Saint Paule did, that moste holy and moste valiāt capita
                  ••
                of oure religion and champion of Christ oure Sauioure: VVho shall separate vs from 
               Rom. 8.
               
               the loue of Christe? shall tribulation? shall aduersitie? shall nakednesse? shall perill? shall persecution? shall the svvorde? As who should say none of these: for by and by he expowndeth hym selfe: Neyther deathe, nor lyfe, nor angells, nor principalitie, nor povvers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor strengthe, nor highenesse, nor depenesse, nor other creature can separat vs from the loue of God, vvhiche is in Christ Iesus, oure lorde.
            
            O passing noble sayeing, and woorthye to procede frō so greate an Apostle as Saint Paule was. VVhat can be spoken or imagined more couragiouse? VVhat can be thought in mans mynde with more assured trust and confidēce? This therfore must be depelie cōfidered of vs who are persecuted for the same cause for whiche he was persecuted: this must we imitate, whiche wrestle in the same barriars where he wrestled, and contend for the same game for which he contended: which hope for the same garland whiche he hoped for, and expect the same recompenser whiche he expected. Hither must all oure cogitations and studies tende: hither must oure forces and powers be applied all together: that in all troubles,

and aduersities, we retein fast this sure hope and confidence, whereof, in dede, so exceding greate fortitude will spring: & in all distresses (be they neuer so greuouse, hard & doubtfull) suche passing good comfort will arise and grow: as may suffise to bring vs through by fyre and vvater 
               Psalm. 65. 
               in to the refrigerie (as the prophet saith 
                  〈◊〉
                that is, by the painfull troubles and calamities of this worlde, in to the euerlasting rest, glorie, and felicitie of God and all Saints. Amen.
         
      
      
         
            
            AN ADMONITION SENT BY GERARD TO THE READER touching the former epistle.
            
               VVhen I imparted vvith some of my familiars this epistle, vvhich vvas sent vnto me from a fryend ouer the Alpes: vpo their earnest request and certein kinde of deuoute 
                  〈◊〉
               . I vvas comēt to let it passe further in to the hands of some noble and principall persones, by vvhole persuasion, or rather commaundement it vvas put in printe. For I thought it to be muche auailable to the common estate of Christendome, that this so notable a persecution of Catholiques in England should be not onlie communicated to the knovvleige of this present age, but put ouer allso to the mynde and memorie of oure posteritie. For it hathe matter enough to sturre vp them novv liuing to compassion and pitie, and to instruct them that are to come, of vvhat thīgs they ought to take hede & bevvare. But of one thing I vvoolde aduertise the reader (as my freēde in other letters hath aduertised me) that among many matters not mētioned in the other parts of his Epistle this one in the rehearsall of lavves he hathe vvillinglie omitted: that is, hovv by many statuts, and proclamations such order is taken in England as no Catholique, either by exile, or by forsaking of his countrie,

can escape, or vvith dravv hym selfe from those paines or persecutions vvhiche folovv hym for religiō For it is prouided (to this effect) that no Catholique may goe forth of the 
                  〈◊〉
                without leaue and licence first obteined And that yf anie do go forth vvithoute licence he shall forfait all his possessions during his life was and further, that none before his departure forth of the realme may geue avvay his possessions no not to his vvyfe, childeren nor fryend  
                  〈…〉
                doe: it shall be taken as done of 
                  〈◊〉
                defraude the quene of her for
                  〈…〉
                for such forfaitures, they 
                  〈…〉
                by information of couen. But this statute of fugitiues (for so it is called) is so strictlye and seuerelie obserued against Catholiques, as none vvithin the realm, dare by anie vvay or mean help, succoure, or releeue eyther father, mother, husband, bretheren, or children, vvhich are Catholiques, and vvithoute licece abyding oute of England. And as for this licence to be absent oute of the realme, as it is hardlie obteined for others: so is it neuer or seldome, and vvith verie muche difficultie graunted to Catholiques. Yea further, (vvhiche is more seuere) all those parents (vvhose childeren are abyding in these parts, or else vvhere oute of England, for studie sake, are compelled to enter in bond, vvith good assurance, eyther to dravve their childeren home again by and by vvithoute tarieng, or to depriue them vtterlie of all exhibition and releefe. All vvhiche things do tende to this ende, that no part nor portion of anie reloose

or comfort, be it neuer so litle, might frelye come to the English Catholiques, either at home or abroad. And these be the matters vvhere of I thought good to admonish yovv, because they are not spoke of in the epistle. There remaineth novv no more but that all true Christians vvold thorovvlie vevve and cōsider the great distresses of their bretheren & of their ovvne 
                  〈◊〉
               , and vvith moste feruent prayere, for the common bond sake of Charitie, vvhiche passeth thorovvgh the vvhole corps of Christendome, to commend their case to the common 
                  〈◊〉
                ouer all.
         
         
            
            THE COPIE OF A LETTER SENT frome a priest, being prisoner in the Tovver of London, to the fathers of the Societie of Iesus in England.
            To the deuoute reader.
            
               ALthoughe it be true, that Catholiques imprisoned in the tower of london, are kept so straitlye, and vncourteouslie in warde: as neyther friends maye haue accesse vnto them, nor they permitted eyther to haue company or to speake with other men, and muche lesse to haue books, paper, or penne and ynke: Yet during the late disputatio there with father Campian the prisoner, some of them whiche were entred in to heare the disputations, finding oportunitie, stepped a syde vnto the holes of some seclused priests, to visit and salute those seruants of Christe: by whiche means, as by gods holie prouidence, some thinges were vnderstoode and knowne, touching their state and passing greate comfort, where whith God of his goodnesse doeth refreshe and recreate them, in the myddes

of their extreme troubles and distresses. And among other things, this epistle foloweing, written in haste, (euen foorth of the mouth dowtlesse, as it semeth, of the holy ghooste) by a good preist, which had bene miserablie tormented, and sundrie times racked, came to my hands frome the reuerend fathers of the Societie of Iesus, to whome it was sent. And here I thought good to place yt woord by woord taken oute of the Authors owne handwriting, that all mortall men may vnderstand gods hand not to be abbriged, but that aswell now, as in old time, he aydeth his confessors in their necessities, Esa. 56. and assisteth them with in those dark and close prisons.
            
               
                  
                  TO THE REVEREND FATTERS of the Societie of Iesus.
                  
                     AS often as euer I consider vvith my selfe (reuerend fathers) hovvferuentlie, and by hovv many vvayes and means allmighty God seekeeth our saluation, desireth oure loue, vvisheth to possesse oure hart, and to raigne vvith in vs: euē so many tymes, am I ashamed & abashed, that neyther benefits do moue vs, nor revvardes all ure ys, nor terror of Gods Iudgement do the prouoque vs miserable men, to serue and obey hym vvith all force and indeuour, yea and most freelie to present our bodies as a liuing sacrifice, and perfect offering to his diuine maiestie. For beside those his passing greate benefits of creation, redemption, preseruation, iustification, and expected glorification beside these (I say) and infinite other his benefits, bestovved vpon vs: he exhorteth vs vvith moste svvete vvoords to haste apace tovvards hym. I loue them (sayth he) vvhiche loue me: & he vvhiche earlie in the morning vvaketh to me, shall fynde me: blessed is the man vvhiche heareth me, vvatcheth at my gates dailie, and attē
                     deth at the postes of my doore: he vvhiche fyndeth me, shall fynde lyfe, and obtein saluation at the hands of his lorde.
                  Novv, vvhere he is to be sought, he hymselfe teacheth vs by these vvoords; vvhere so euer tvvo or three are gathered together in my name (saith he) there am I in the myddes of the.

VVe must then think Christe to be trulie in that place, vvhere many being fast ioyned in loue and charitie, do assemble together to this ende that they may honor God, serue god onlie, kepe his commaundements and enlarge his moste gloriouse kyngdome. VVho so euer heareth hym, shall learne truthe and shall not vvalk, in darknesse and in blyndnes of errors, but shall goe safe and sure to the fountains of vvaters.
                  In such sacred congregations, dedicated to god, lyeth the right vvay to heauen: avvay not planted aboute vvith breers and brembles, not haunted of levved liuers, but continuallie trodden vvith the feete of deuout people, A vvaye not abounding in vain delites; nor in faire flattering enticemēts: A vvaye not adourned vvith the fading flovvers of this vvicked vvorlde, but fenced and fortified vvith moste holie lavves and rules, that the simple and ignorant can not erre therein, nor anie other go a stray oute of that vvay: except suche as viterlie neglect their ovvne saluatio. Here things are aptlie disposed in number, vveight, and measure, in so much as it may vvell be sayd, that true vvisdome in dede dvvelleth here, by vvhose me is all things are sett in good order meruailouslie. Here is vsed and exercised a certein heauenlie reformation of brethren, a svvete correction and amedment of stovvard affectiōs vvith a vvonderfull procurement and inuitation to mutuall loue and charitie.
                  For these or such like respects, I had determined vvith my selfe novv tvvo yeres agoe to entre in to this kinde of lyfe, yf god so vvold: &

I had some speche vvith a learned and deuoute man, then my Ghostlie father to this effect: vvhether there vvere any hope, that the fathers of the societie vvold receiue me vnder their holie rule and obedience, yf I shovvlde vpon reasonable cause returne forth of my naturall countrie againe; for then I vvas in the parts beyond the seas: his opinion vvas cleare that I had no nede at all to doubt thereof, Hereupon my hope encreased, my courage vvas augmented, and in these tvvo yeres, vvhiles I haue bene in England, I haue oftentymes renevved this purpose. But vpon hope and trust that my trauaile and industrie here, in the haruest of oure, Lorde, is not altogether vnprofitable, I haue differred the execution of my sayd purpose. Yet novv, seeth I am by the appointemēt of god depriued of libertie, so as I can not any longer employe my selfe in this profitable exercise: my desire is estsones reuiued, my spirit vvaxeth feruent hote, and at the last I haue made a vovv and promise to god, not rashlie (as I hope) but in the feare of god, not to anie other ende, than that I might therby more deuoutlie, and, more acceptablie serue god, to my more certain saluation, & to a more gloriouse triumphe ouer my ghoostlie enemye. I haue made a vovve (I say) that vhen so euer it shall please god to deliuer me (so that once at the length yt like hym) I vvill vvith in one yere then next folovving, assigne my selfe vvholie to the fathers of the societie, and that (Yf god inspire their harts to admit me:) I vvill gladlie, and vvith exceding great ioye thorovvlie, and

most vvlie, from the bottom of my hast geue vp and surrender all my vvill to the seruice of god, and in all obedience vnder them.
                  This vovve vvas to me a passing great ioye, and consolation, in the myddes of all my distresses, and tribulations. And therfore, vv
                        ••
                     h greater hope to obtein fortitude and patiēce pdrevv neare to the throne of his diuine maiestie, vvith the assistance of the blessed and perpetuall virgin Marie, and of all Saincts. And I hope verifie this came of God, for I dyd it euen in the tyme of prayer, vvhen me thought, my mynde vvas setled vpon heauenlie things. For thus it vvas.
                  The same day that I vvas first tourmented on the rack, before I came to the place, geuing my mynd to prayer, and commending my selfe and all myne to oure Lorde. I vvas replenished, and filled vp vvith a kinde of super naturall svvetenelle of Spirit. And euen vvhile I vvas callyng vpon the moste holie name of Iesus, and vpon the blessed virgin Marie (for I vvas in sayeing the Rosarie): my mynd vvas cheerefully disposed, vvell comforted, and readilie prepared, and bent to suffer, and endure those torments, vvhich euen then I moste certeinlie looked for. At the length my former purpose came in to my mynde, and there vvith all a thought to incidentlie fell vpon me to ratifie that novv by novve vvhich before I had determined. VVhan I had ended my prayers. I reuolued these things in my mynde depelie? and vvith reason as vvell as I could) I dyd debate and discusse them thorovvlie: I Iudged it god,

and expedient for me: I accomplished my desire: I put forth my vovv and promise freelie, and boldlie, vvith the condition a fore sayde.
                  VVhich acte, (me thinketh) god hym self did approue and allovv by and by. For in all my afflictions and tourments, he of his infinite goodnesse, mercifully and tenderlie, did stand by and assiste me, cōforting me in my trouble and necessitie. Deliuering my soule from vvicked lipps, from the deceitfull tongue, and from the roring lyons, then readie gaping for their pray.
                  VVhether this that Ivvill say, be miraculous or no: God he knovveth: but true it is, & thereof my cōscience is a vvitnesse before God. And this I say: that in the end of the torture though my hands & feete vvere violently stretched & racked, and my aduersaries fullfilled their vvicked lust, in practisynge their cruell tyranny vpō my body yet notvvitstanding I vvas vvith ovvt sense and feling vvell nigh of all greefe, & payne: and not so onlie, but as it vvere comforted, eased and refreshed by the greeues of the torture by past, I cōtinued still vvith perfect & presēt senses, in quietnesses of hart, & trāquilitie of mynd. VVhich thing vvhen the commissioners dyd see, they departed, and in goeing foorth of the doore, they gaue order to rack me againe the next day folovveing, after the same, sorie. Novv vvhen I hearde them say so: It gaue me in my mynd by and by, and I dyd verelie beleue & trust, that vvith the help of god, I should be able to beare & suffer it patientlie. In the mean tyme (as vvell as I could) I dyd muse and meditate vpon the moste bitter passion

of oure Sauioure, and hovv full of innumerable paines it vvas. And vvhiles I vvas thus occupied: me thought, that my left hād vvas vvounded in the palme, and that I felt the blood runne out: but in very dede, there vvas no such thing, nor any other payne than that, dyd then greeue my hand.
                  Novv then, that my sute and request may be vvell knovvne vnto yovv: for so muche as I am oute of hope, in short time to recouer & enioye my former libertie, so as I might personalie speake vnto yovv, And vvhether happilie I shall once at lengthe speake vnto yovv in this vvorld, no mortall man doeth knovv: In the meane season I humblie submitt my selfe vnto yovv, & (suppliā the kneeling) I beseche yovv, to doe, and dispose for me, and of me, as shall seme good to youre vvisdoms And vvith an hū
                     ble mynd moste hartilie I craue, that (yf it may be in my absens) it vvold please yovv to admit me into your Societie, & to regester and inrole me among yovv: that so, vvith humble men I may haue a sense and feling of humilitie, vvith deuoute men I may sounde out a lovvde, the lauds and prayses of God, and continually render thanks to hym, for his benefits: and then after, being ayded by the prayers of many, I may rūne more safelie to the marke vvhich I shoote at, and vvith oute perill attaine to the price that is promised.
                  And I am not ignorant that the snares & vviles of oure aunciēt enemie are infinite: for he is the slye serpēt, vvhich lyeth in the shadovv, of vvoods, vvyndyng, vvhirling, & turning aboute

many vvayes: and vvith his vviles & subtil shifts, he attempteth meruailouslie to delude & abuse the soules of the simple, vvhich vvant a faithfull guyde: in so much, as it is not vvithoute cause, that vve are admonished, to trie the spirits, yf they be of God. To yovv therfore, bicause you are spirituall, and accustomed to this kinde of conflict, I commend all this businesse: beseching yovv euen by the bovvelles of gods mercy that you vvold vouchesafe to direct me vvith your counsaile and vvisdome. And yf in youre sight yt seme profitable, for more honor to God, more cōmoditie to his churche, and eternall saluation to my soule, that I be preferred to that Societie of the most holie name of Iesus: then presently before god, and in the court of my conscience, I do promise obedience, to all and singular rectors, & gouernours established all redie, or to be hereafter established, and likevvyse to all rules, or lavves receiued in this societie, to the vttermoste of my povver, and so farre as God doeth geue me grace: God is my vvitnesse, and this my ovvn hand vvriting shalbe a testimonie hereof in the day of Iudgement. As for the healthe of my bodye, yovv haue no cause to doubt, for novv vvell nere I haue recouered my former strengthe and hardnesse by gods help, & I vvax euery day stronger than other. Thus in all other things cōmending my selfe to youre prayers, I byd yovv farevvell in oure Lorde, carefullye expecting vvhat yovv thinke good to determin of me.
                  Vale.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE TRANSLATOR TO THE gentle reader.
            
               SInce the printing of this epistle last rehearsed, I haue heard that the Author thereof vvas one Maister Briāt, vvho latelie suffered (as is sayd) vvith Maister Campian, and Maister Shervvyn, three moste blessed and fortunate men: vvhose happ hathe bene after so many torments and tortures suffred for gods cause, to seale vvith their innocent blood, the truthe, vvhiche they taught vvith so much payn and daungers before. Novv Maister briāt hathe more than his desire, being ioyned ī societie vvith Iesus hym selfe, to vvhose holie name he so muche coueted to dedicate his lyfe in this vvorlde, as appeareth by this his epistle. And I dovvbt not, but that it vvas a singular comfort vnto hym to suffer in the companie of good father Campian, so rare a man of that Societie, vvhereof he desired so greatlie to be a member vvhiles he liued.
            Hovv farr all treason, and other disorder of lyfe, vvas from the harts, hands, and vvoords of these Innocent men, and the rest vvhich vvere condemned vvith them, all they can testifye vvhiche euer knevv them, or liued vvith them: for that their vvoords and exhortations, vvere allvvays to the cōtrarye, in detestation of all vice, and in commendation of vertuouse lyfe, vvith contempt of the vvorld, and humbly suffring all troubles and persecutions for Christe his sake, adding alvvayes, that Catholiques must rather loue, & hartilie praye for their persecutors,

than seeke any vvay to hurt them, or to reuenge theire selues vpon them, if it lay in their povver. This haue I hearde, and so haue thovvsands moo in Englād besydes me, and no mā liuinge (I knovv) dyd euer heare from their movvthes the contrarie. Their lyues allso vvere suche in all secret austeritie of discipline to them selues: as he that had knovvne thē, vvolde litle beleeue, that they vvere men to attempt suche matters, as they vvere charged vvithall.
            Yf these men had bene guiltie of suche horrible treasons: they should neuer haue bene so dallied vvithe all, first in disputatiōs, and muche lesse should they haue had lyfe, libertie, and fauour offred them, for onelie yeelding to goe to churche, as maister Campian opēlie affirmed that they often had, and amongest many, named one of some accompt there present (as it vvas crediblie told me) vvhich had offered the same to hym vvith terrible threates, not onelie of deathe, but allso of renting of his nayles from his fyngars vvith pynnes, yf he yeelded not thervnto.
            Again, their ioyfull acceptation of Iudgement, and thankes geuing to God for the same, vvith their seuerall and moste vehement protestation, there made at the barre, after their condemnation, doeth declare sufficientlie the clearenesse of their cōsciēces. For then, and there, Maister Campian protested before God and his angells, heauen and earthe, the vvorld and that Iudgement Seate there present, vvhiche (as he trulie sayde) vvas but a litle figure of the moste dredefull Iudgemēt seat of God, before vvhich

he to his greate ioye expected shortlie to be presented: he protested (I say vpon eternall perdition of his Soule, that he vvas moste innocēt, guiltlesse, and vnvvitting of all and singular the matters in that inditement alleiged, and of euerie part and parcell thereof. Maister Shervvyn protested vvith like vehemencie, that yf euer his heade did imagin, or his hart cōceiued, or his tongue vttered, or his hand attēpted, any thing against his soueraigne ladie Quene Elizabeth, or against any of her honorable Councell, or against the common vvealthe, or realme of England: he renounced there his portion in heauen, and desired God, as a iust Iudge to dāne hym bothe in bodie and sovvle to the eternall darknesse and torments of hell fire And vvhen he had done, he cried oute: O happie and blessed day that euer he vvas borne. The like dyd the rest, vvhich vvere condemned vvith hym, forgeuing openlie their false accusars there present, and prayeing to God for them.
            Novv lett anie man shevv to me, that euer traitour dyed so, or that a guiltie conscience, dothe yelde suche cōfidence, vvhen they knevv novv that there vvas no vvaye vvith them but deathe.
            VVell, God be blessed for them: and surelie his holye name hathe bene greatlie glorifyed by them.
            VVhat straunge torments and other extremyties they haue suffred before they came to die, he alone knovveth, and vve heare onlie of some part thereof, for vve see they vvere not men to complain of euery thing done to them,

but vvere content to put it vp in secret, vvith hope to receiue theire revvarde at his hand.
            Yet yf vve had not heard of their seuerall & often rackings: maister Campian his cōming to the barre vvith his handes folden in lynnen clothe, and vvith that feblenesse, as he vvas neyther able to pluck of his ovvne mytton of freése nor lyft a cupp of drink to his mouthe vvithoute helpe, may vvell shevv hovv he had bene handled. Oure sorde shevv his tourmentours more mercie at the day of his Iudgement, than they haue shevved hym. Hovv mans nature had bene able to beare ovvte so great rigour & extremities, as they haue passed, (except Gods holie grace had bene plētifull vnto them) I doe not see. And that oure lorde dyd concurr vvith extraordinarie comfort, in their torments, it may appeare in this epistle goinge before of Maister Briant: vvhom Maister Norton the Rackem aister (yf he be not misreported) vaunted in the court to haue pulled one good foote longer than euer God made hym and yet in the myddes of all he semed to care nothing, and therfore ovvte of dovvbt (sayth he) he had a deuill vvithein hym. But vvhether it be a more propertie to the deuill to suffer patiently, or to torment other men mercyleslie, maister Briant and maister Norton shall dispute the matter one day, vvhen deuills shall be at hand to beare vvitnesse, and the Iudge bothe of deuills and deuelish men, shall be at hand to geue sentence. In the meane space I beseche God to accept the Innocent bloode of his vertuouse preests, for some part of pacification

of his vvrathe tovvards vs, and tovvards oure persecutors, that they hauing the miste of errour taken from their eyes, may see the truthe of Christs Catholique religion, for professing vvhere of, they afflict vs so greuouslie as he seeth, to vvhose eyes al iniuries do lye open, and to vvhose onelye Iudgement, vve leaue oure cause and doeings to be tryed and discerned, vvhen it shall seme moste conuenient to his diuine maiestie. Amen.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   