
      
         
            
            Diuine Sea-ſeruice:
CONTAINING
SVNDRY NECESSARY
AND VSEFVLL FORMES OF
PRAYER AND THANKS-GIVING
FOR THE HELPE OF SVCH AS
TRAVAILE BY SEA, FITTED
TO THEIR SEVERALL
NECESSITIES.
            By SAMVEL PAGE Dr in Diuinitie.
            
               1. THES. 5. 17. 18.
               Pray continually.
In all things giue thankes, for this is the will of God, in
Chriſt Ieſus toward you.
            
            
            
               LONDON,
Printed by Nicholas Okes for Simon Waterſon, and are to bee
ſold at his ſhop in Pauls Church-yard at the ſigne
of the Crowne. 1616.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
WORSHIPFVLL THE
Maſter, Wardens, and Aſsiſtants,
and the whole Societie of the Brethren
of the Trinitie-houſe, of Saint
CLEMENTS in Deptford-Strand.
            
               Right Worſhipfull and Worthy,
            
            
               BEcauſe I finde not,
that any man hath of
purpoſe endeuoured
to helpe the deuotion
of the Sea-men, with
fitting formes of Prayer and thanks-giuing,
applied to their ſeuerall occaſions,
I haue addreſſed theſe meditations
to your vſe, and the vſe of your

Companies at Sea. I doe not herein
preiudice the holy libertie of ſuch as
are able without theſe directions, to
powre forth their hearts before God,
to vſe their owne formes, but to giue
helpe to ſuch as cannot, beſeeching
you to recommend theſe to ſuch, and
beſeeching Gods Amen to yours, and
their deuotions: And to this you ſhall
euer haue the Amen of your euerlouing
and thankefull friend,
            
               Samuel Page.
               Deptford May 1.
1616.
               
            
         
         
            
            Diuine Sea-ſeruice,
Containing ſundry neceſſary and vſefull
formes of prayer and thankes-giuing, for
the helpe of all ſuch as trauaile by ſea, fitted
to their ſeuerall neceſsities.
            
               A forme of Prayer to be vſed in our owne land
for all our brethren at Sea.
               
                  ALmightie God, whoſe eye
beholdeth all things in heauen
and in earth, and whoſe
gracious prouidence keepeth
an eternall watch ouer
thy ſeruants, ſo that the Sun
ſhall not hurt them by day,
nor the Moone by night: wee thy humble and
vnworthy ſeruants confeſſe and acknowledge,
to thy glory, that wee enioy many fruits of thy

mercifull fauour, which many of thy deere children
doe want: Wee humbly recommend to
thy fauour and protection, all thoſe that are for
a time depriued of that fulneſſe of temporall
bleſſings which wee poſſeſſe; eſpecially we pray
thee for all our brethren, that trauaile vpon the
ſeas in their lawfull vocation: giue them the
feare of thy name, the loue of thy mercie, peace
in their conſciences, ſafety in their ſhips, health
in their perſons, mutuall loue amongſt themſelues,
obedience to their Gouernours, contentment
with their prouiſions, defence againſt all
dangers, ſucceſſe in their buſineſſe, and ſafe
returne to their owne land, that wee
may all ioyne together in the praiſe
of thy name, through Ieſus
Chriſt our Lord.
Amen.
               
            
            
               
               A forme of Prayer to be vſed at the
ſetting forth of any ſhippes in
any voyage to Sea.
               
                  ALmightie God and moſt mercifull
Father, who haſt diſpoſed vs thy
ſeruants in ſundry callings in this
world, wherein thou haſt appointed
vs to labour honeſtly for our
liuings, wee humbly beſeech thee for thy bleſſing
vpon this our voyage: wee commend the care
of our bodies and ſoules into thy hands, receiue
vs, wee pray thee, into thy protection, keepe vs
in thy faith and feare, defend vs from the danger
of ſinne and Sathan, preſerue our perſons in
health and ſafety, and keepe the goods committed
to vs from the hand of the enemie, from the
fraud of the deceitfull man, from the violence
of fire and water, and from all other euils: goe
thou forth with vs, and accompany vs all the
way, crowne our honeſt labours with good
ſucceſſe, and ſafe returne, that wee may tell
the people, what things thou haſt done
for vs, and praiſe thy name in the
great Congregation, through
Ieſus Chriſt our Lord.
AMEN.
               
            
            
               
               A Prayer to be vſed at Sea
for our owne Land.
               
                  GRacious God, by whoſe prouidence
we are now ſhipt for a ſtrange land,
we thy poore children doe beſeech
thee to bleſſe our owne Lands, and
therein we pray thee for our gracious
ſoueraigne Lord king Iames, Queene Anne,
Prince Charles, the Prince Elector Palatine, and
the Lady Elizabeth his wife, and their iſſue:
bleſſe the whole Councell of ſtate, the Clergie,
Nobilitie, Magiſtracie, and Commons
thereof: maintaine amongſt them the free paſſage
of thy Ghoſpell, giue, and continue to
them ſincere religion, peace, plenty, health,
proſperitie, and honour, defend them from
ſecret conſpiracies, domeſticall contentions,
ſchiſmaticall and hereticall corruptions,
and keepe them all in the vnitie of thy
ſpirit, and in the bond of peace,
and loue, through Ieſus
Chriſt our Lord.
Amen.
               
            
            
               
               A Morning Prayer.
               
                  MErcifull father, by whoſe watchfull
care wee haue beene preſerued
this night from all dangers,
in quiet and comfortable reſt:
we beſeech thee to keepe vs alſo
this day in thy feare and fauour,
ſanctifie vs by thy good ſpirit, that neither in
thought, word, nor deed we may diſpleaſe thee:
enable vs to do the buſineſſes of our calling, and
bleſſe we pray thee, all our labors therin, make vs
more ſenſible of thy good fauours, more ſorrowfull
for our ſinnes, more thankfull for all thy
mercies, more patient in all our afflictions, and
more conſtant in our obedience to thy holy will,
through our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. Amen.
               
            
            
               A Prayer before Meate.
               
                  O Lord bleſſe theſe thy Creatures which
thou haſt giuen vs for our bodily ſuſtenance,
to the maintenance of our
ſtrength and health, make vs by them the better
able for thy ſeruice, and the workes of our calling,
through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord. Amen.
               
            
            
               
               A thankes-giuing after meat.
               
                  WE giue thee thankes moſt mercifull
Father, for theſe thy creatures, wherewith
thou haſt now refreſhed our
weake bodies, beſeeching thee to furniſh
vs with food conuenient for vs, and to make
vs alwaies thankful to thee for the ſame, through
Ieſus Chriſt our Lord. Amen.
               
            
            
               An Euening Prayer.
               
                  A Almightie and moſt mercifull father,
we thanke thee vnfainedly for
all thy fauours vouchſafed to vs
this day paſt, in our health and nouriſhment,
and in thy powerfull defence
from all danger of body and ſoule: we beſeech
thee to watch ouer vs this night, and to
giue vs ſuch comfortable reſt, that wee may bee
thereby refreſhed, and enabled to the duties, and
labours of our calling: forgiue we pray thee to
vs, all the ſinnes of the day paſt: ſuffer vs not to
bee ouer-come with drowſineſſe, nor dulneſſe
in thy ſeruice, but that ſleeping or waking wee
may bee ready for thee; and ſo direct vs by thy
good ſpirit, that we may be more carefull in the
day following, to ſerue and pleaſe thee, through
Ieſus Chriſt our Lord. Amen.
               
            
            
               
               A Prayer to bee vſed in a time of
danger, by Stormes, and Tempeſts
at Sea.
               
                  GRatious God to whom all creatures
ſtoope, and obey thy will,
who ruleſt the raging of the ſea,
and calmeſt the furges thereof
when they ariſe, wee thy diſtreſſed
children, beſeech thee
to haue mercy vpon vs, to forgiue
vs all our ſinnes, and to remoue this preſent
danger from vs: Wee haue none in heauen but
thee, and wee haue none on earth, whom wee
eſteeme in compariſon of thee: Thou art our
refuge againſt the ſtormy wind, and the tempeſt,
ſpeake thou the word, and our ſoules ſhall liue,
viſit vs with thy louing kindneſſe, defend vs with
thy power, ſay vnto the windes, be ſtill, and to
the ſeas, ſtay heere your proud waues; let our
liues, and goods be pretious in thy ſight. Thou
haſt commanded vs to ſeeke thee in the day of
our trouble, and thou haſt promiſed to heare
the prayers of the diſtreſſed, ariſe O Lord, and
helpe now, that we may know that it is thy hand;
if thou helpeſt not, our ſoules ſhall dwell in ſilence:

Haſt thee O Lord to helpe vs, O Lord
make no long tarrying, O Lord heare vs, and
deliuer vs for thy mercies ſake: And whatſoeuer
become of our bodies, wee beſeech thee to prepare
our ſoules for death and iudgement, that
whenſoeuer they ſhall depart from our bodies,
they may reſt in the glory of thy choſen, through
Ieſus Chriſt our Lord, Amen.
               
            
            
               A Thankeſ-giuing for deliuerance
from the former danger of tempeſt
and foule weather.
               
                  O Lord our deliuerer, who haſt
brought vs againe from the
graue of death, and hauing onely
ſhewed vs our deſtruction,
haſt redeemed vs from it: by the
power of thy great mercy, thou
Lord haſt changed our feare into reioycing, and
turned our groanings into praiſes of thy name;
thou haſt ſaued our liues, and refreſhed vs with
thy mercies; O Lord receiue from vs the remaine
of our liues which thou haſt preſerued, and ſanctifie
them to thy ſeruice, and to the obedience
of thy will heere, and crowne them with eternall
life with the, in the Kingdome of thy glory,
through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord: Amen.
               
            
            
               
               A Prayer in danger of the
enemie.
               
                  O Lord the preſeruer of all, that put
their truſt in thee, wee beſeech thee
to ſaue vs from the hands of our
enemies, protect vs from the
power of the cruell man, giue vs
not a prey to them that ſeeke our liues to deſtroy
them, and our goods to poſſeſſe them: Wee
confeſſe that our ſinnes haue deſerued to bee
chaſtiſed with roddes, but O Lord we pray thee
to take the matter into thine owne hand, for
with thee there is mercy, and in thy rod there is
correction, but not deſtruction to thy ſeruants;
O Lord ſet not vp the right hand of our enemies,
and make not our aduerſaries to reioyce:
Wee humbly commit our bodies and ſoules into
thy hands, for we know whom we haue
truſted, and thou doſt not faile them that depend
on thee: Heare vs O Lord our deliuerer, and
haue mercy vpon vs for Ieſus Chriſt his ſake, our
onely Lord and Sauiour, Amen.
               
            
            
               
               A Thankeſ-giuing for deliuerance
from the former danger of the
enemie.
               
                  O Lord our Fortreſſe, and defence
againſt our enemies, which
ſought our deſtruction, we confeſſe
that our ſinnes haue iuſtly
deſerued, that thou ſhouldſt
haue forſaken vs in our greateſt
feare, & danger, but thou haſt exalted thy mercy
aboue all our iniquities, and haſt giuen vs thy
ſheild to couer vs in the day of our battell, thy
ſtrength hath magnified it ſelfe in our weakenes,
and thy right hand hath done valiantly; we humbly
acknowledge our duty to thee, and offer vnto
thee a ſacrifice of Thankeſ-giuing for our deliuerance
and victory, beſeeching thee to fill vs
with thy praiſe all the daies of our life, to the
glory of thy name, through Ieſus Chriſt our
Lord, Amen.
               
            
            
               A Prayer to bee vſed aboard in any
viſitation, by infectious ſickneſſe.
               
                  FAther of mercies, and Lord of life, to
whom alſo belong the iſſues of death,
wee thy children acknowledge againſt

our ſelues, that it is thy hand which puniſheth
vs in our health with ſickneſſe, and it is our ſin
that deſerueth this, and a greater iudgement to
bee inflicted vpon vs, O Lord heale our ſoules,
for we haue ſinned againſt thee, heale our bodies
which haue beene the inſtruments of ſin, and the
weapons of vnrighteouſneſſe; command thy deſtroying
Angell to hold his hand, and reſtore vs
againe to the cheerefull light of thy countenance.
Clenſe the corruptions of our defiled
ſoules, and repaire the decaies of our enfeebled
bodies, turne our ſorrow into ioy, our ſickneſſe
into health; and that mercy may neuer forſake
vs, turne all our ſinne into obedience of thy
will, and if thou haue now appointed vs for
death, prepare our ſoules we pray thee for that
remoue, and ſeaſon vs for a better life, that wee
may cheerefully embrace death, and willingly
forſake this world to dwell with thee in life euerlaſting,
through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord, Amen.
               
            
            
               A Thankeſ-giuing for deliuerance
from infectious ſickeneſſe.
               
                  WEe thy humble, and vnworthy ſeruants,
moſt mercifull Father, whom
thou haſt preſerued and ſpared in
this great and dangerous viſitation,
do thankfully praiſe thy name for this mercy,

confeſſing, and beleeuing, that thou onely haſt
ſaned vs, & defended vs; thou haſt viſited vs gratiouſly,
and corrected vs iuſtly, but thou haſt not
deliuered vs ouer vnto death: O Lord make vs
more and more thankefull to thee for our liues,
and obedient in the whole courſe of them to thy
holy will: Preſerue our bodies in health againſt
all ſickneſſe, and diſeaſe, and our ſoules in holineſſe
againſt the infection and dominion of ſin,
that we may ſerue thee in all humble obedience
to the end of our life through Ieſus Chriſt, our
Lord: Amen.
               
            
            
               A Prayer for their friends at home,
to be vſed by them who aduenture
their owne perſons to Sea.
               
                  ALmighty God, who ruleſt all things
by thy power, and wiſedome, and
in whoſe ſight all the inhabitants
of the round world do walke: We
thy ſeruants, diuided for a time
from our deereſt friends, to follow the buſineſſe
of our lawfull Calling, do yet moſt humbly call
vpon thee for them: Bleſſe, O Lord, our naturall
parents, our wiues and children, our kinred,
and allyance, all our friends, and acquaintance;
preſerue them in the true faith of thy Goſpell,

in the health of their perſons, in the loue of their
neighbours, in the buſineſſes of their Callings,
in all their waies direct and proſper them. Heare
their prayers for vs, and our prayers for them,
and grant vs a comfortable and happy meeting
againe in our owne Land, that wee may ioyne
together in the praiſing and glorifying of thy
name through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord, Amen.
               
            
            
               A Prayer to bee vſed aboard, for
the Aduenturers and Owners at
home.
               
                  MErcifull Father, wee thy ſeruants,
employed in the goods of other
men, to get the neceſſaries of our
owne liues, do beſeech thy bleſſing
vpon the owners and aduenturers
thereof vnder our labour and charge: O Lord
God of our maiſters, we beſeech thee to ſend vs
good ſpeed in this voyage, proſper their affaires
in our hands, that we may know that thou haſt
ſhewed them mercy, & let their holy prayers be
acceptable with thee, and effectuall vpon vs: direct
and bleſſe them in all their vndertakings,
and returne their aduentures to them with plentifull
encreaſe, to the praiſe of thy goodneſſe,
& mercy, through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord. Amen.
               
            
            
               
               A thankes-giuing for a faire Wind.
               
                  GRacious God, we thy vnworthy ſeruants
do confeſſe to thy glory, that by thy fauour
to vs, thy creatures doe vs ſeruice,
the winde and weather aboue vs, and the ſeas
vnder vs, obey thy word and holy will to proſper
our voyage: we humbly thank thee for this
fauour; and we bleſſe thy name with the honor
due vnto it: we beſeech thee to teach vs alſo by
the example of our fellow-creatures, to learne
obedience to thy will, that our vnderſtanding,
reaſon and religion, wherein we excell theſe vnliuely
creatures, be not loſt in vs; but as wee in
many things are more excellent then they, ſo eſpecially
we may exceed them in the maine end
of our creation, which is to doe thee ſeruice and
honour in the obedience of thy will, through
Ieſus Chriſt our Lord. Amen.
               
               
                  O Lord heare our prayers,
                  And let our cry come to thee.
               
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   