
      
         
            
            
            
            
            A
BRIEF CENSVRE
vppon two bookes
WRITTEN IN ANswere
to M. Edmonde
Campions offer of
disputation.
            
               Deuter. capit. 5. ver. 5. Yow feared the fyre, and therfore you
ascended not vp the mountayne.
            
               IHS
            
            Imprinted at Doway by Iohn Lyon.
1581.
WITH PRIVILEGE.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A Breefe Censure vppon two
bookes writen in answere
to M. Ed. Campions offer
of disputation.
            
               
                  THERE Came to my
handes two bookes
of late, in answere
of Mast. Edmonde
Campion his offer
of disputation: The
one wryten by M.
Hanmer, the other by M. Charke. Of
both which, vnder correction, I meane
to geue my shorte Censure, vntill such
time, as ether he, to whom the matter
appartayneth, or some other, doe make
more large and learned reply. Aduertising
notwithstanding the Reader, that
in myne opinion, this offer of M. Campion,
and so many other as haue bene
made, required not so much answering
in wryting, but shorter tryall in disputation.
But yet séeing there can be had
nothing from them but wordes: I wil

examine a litle, what they say at least
to the matter.
            
               The effecte of M. Hanmers booke.
               Meredith Hanmer answereth more
quietly, playnly, and more good felow
like excepting a foule lye or two, wherof
I must tel him whē place serueth. He
offereth also liberally for his part disputation,
who notwithstanding is not
lyke to be one of the disputers, if the
matter should come to that passe. He
had gathered some notes out of Sleidan,
Kemnitius, and frier Bale against
the Pope, and in dirision of the Catholique
religion, which he struggleth to
vtter in dyuers places, without occasion
geuen. He oppugneth féerslye and
confirmeth diuers things, nether sayed,
nor denyed, nor thought of, by M. Campion.
He frameth to him selfe an aduersarye
in the aire, and manfully fighteth
and assaulteth the same. Finallye, his
booke séemeth to very litle purpose, but
onely to spread abrode the copies of the
others resonable offer, which was some
labour before, to wryte out to so many
handes as desired it.
            
               
               The effecte of M. Charke his booke.
               William Charke dealeth more suttelly:
for he reporteth the Chalenge onlye
for his purpose, and that also some
times falsified, except it came corruptly
to his handes. He vttereth also much
more malice, by drawing euery thing
to disloyaltye and rebellion, which is
donne by the Catholiques, for conscience
and religion. He flattereth the
higher states, which can pleasure him,
palpably. He wearieth his hearer with
the infinite repetition of the worne out
tearmes, of Pope and Poperye. He
excéedethe in inuention of rayletyue
speach. He vndertaketh al manner of
lyes without blushing, and ventureth
vppon anye assertion what so euer, for
the bringinge of the Iesuites in discredite
with the Reader.
            
               Vpon this answere therefore of
Master Charke, I meane to enlarge
my selfe a litle, in brotherlye charitie,
not omittinge to remember also the other,
where occasion shalbe geuen. And
for the restrayning of Master Charkes
rouinge to some certayne poyntes,

I meane to consider first of that which
he vttereth touching the Societie of
Iesuites. Secondly, touching the man
whom he aunswereth. Thirdly, touching
the matter or demaunde propounded.
Lastlye, touchinge the Apostata
brought in, for the defacing of Iesuits
and the Catholique religion.
            
               Towching the Societie.
               
                  The first part.
                  MAISTER Charke imploye the all
his power, and laboureth paynfully,
to bring in defiance the order of Iesuites,
contayning most notable, learned,
and vertuous men. For the which
purpose he vseth dyuers meanes, and
first his ordinarie waye of rayling, by
calling them. A blasphemous secte, new
and detestable Iesuites, a weake & sham
full order, Scorpions, Heretiques, Iebusites,
poisoned spyders, wicked monkish
fryers, and fryerly monkes, scoutes
to rebellion, frogges and caterpillers of
Egipt, absurde and blasphemous Doctors,
bellowes to kindle persecution, of

beggerly estate, traytours, swarmes of
grashoppers, noysome beastes. To
whom M. Hanmer addeth. That they
are the broode of a cryppled souldiour,
and of the lowsiest order of al. Al which
I let passe without aunswering, for
that it proueth nothing but one, which
is, that they lack Christian and honest
modestie, which abuse so much soe manye
good men, whose wisdome learning
and honestie of lyfe, is better knowen
to the world, then anye such raylers
can be credited to the contrarye.
Marye I cannot let passe to tell M.
Charke, that to call them A blasphemous
sect,
                  Iesuites noe Secte. séemeth not onlye lewd, but
also vnlearned. And as for their blasphemies
they come to be examined after:
but how they maye be termed A
Secte, I cannot sée, For if liuing more
straitlye then the common sorte, in
apparel, dyet, or order of lyfe, doe make
a Secte:1. Reg. 17. 4. Reg. 1. 4. Dan. 1. Marc. 1. then not onlye Iesuites, but
Elias, Elizeus, Daniel and Iohn Baptist,
are also to be called sectaries, for
that they are reported in the Scripture

haue lead a different and more strayte
lyfe in those poyntes, then the cōmon
sorte, and yet are commended for the
same. But if Sectaries are only made
(as in déed they are) by cutting them
selues of, in opinion of religion from
the generall bodye of the Catholique
Church, as branches from the trée, and
by houlding a seueral fayth in religion
to them selues: then can not Iesuites
(by your owen confession) be any secte,
who differ not one iote in opinion of religion,
from the vniuersal Catholique
Church, but as you saye, defend euery
litle poynt of the same, be it neuer soe
vntrue or absurd in your sight. The name of Iesuites.Wherfore,
vnlearnedly you cal them a secte,
as also vnséemly you scofe at their nāe
of Iesuites, which they chaleng not to
them selues, nor euer vse it, in their
writinges or spéeche, but only naming
them selues a Societie, dedicated peculierly
to the honouring of the name of
Iesus, by preaching the same in all places
of the world, without any reward,
and with what danger bodely soeuer.
               
                  
                  Secondly you séeke to deface the Societie
by contemptuous deprauing of al
religious men: calling them, Base and
beggerlye monkes and fryers, popishe
orders, and the like: wherin you folow
the oulde heretique of the primatiue
Church, whose propertie hath bene frō
time to time, to hate and depraue those
kind of men aboue al others, as S. Austen
testifieth of the Manachies, and
Rufinus of the Arians.In psal. 132. lib. 11. hist. ca. 3. And Petilian
the Donatist
                     •
                   folowing the same spirit
scoffed at S. Austen for being a fryer,
as S. Austen him selfe writeth in these
wordes.Li. 3. con. lit. Petil. ca. 40▪
                   
                  After this, Petilian proceeded
on with his slanderous mouth, to speak
euill of monasteries, and of monkes,
blaming me also for that I had set forth
this kinde of lyfe, the which lyfe ether
he knoweth not, what it meaneth, or
else fayneth him selfe not to knowe it,
though it be notorious to all the world.
S. Austen sayth this kinde of lyfe (of
Monkes and Fryers and other religious
men) was notorious and knowen
to the world in his tyme, both in

in respect of the famous men, that had
liued in the same, as Anthonie, Paule,
Hilarion, Basill, Nazianzen, Martin
him selfe & others: Bookes written in the cō
                     mendation of monkes and fryers.as also of the infinit
bookes and treatises which holye Fathers
of the Primatiue Churche had
written in defence and comendation of
that kind of lyfe, as Athanasius in the
lyfe of S. Anthonie the Abbote, besides
a peculiar treatise intituled An exhortation
to monkes or to monastical lyfe.
S. Basil also wrot a great volume intuled,
Constitutions or lawes for monkes,
besides diuers other treatises of
that argument written both by him
selfe and by Gregorie Nazianzen. S.
Christostom hath fouer homilies extant
in cōmendation of the life of monkes,
& two whole bookes of the comparison
betwixt the monke and the King, wher
in he preferreth the lyfe of the monke,
before that of the Kinge. Also he wrote
a booke against you M. Charke, intituled
Against the blamers of Monkes
and monastical lyfe. Iohānes Cassianus
a lytle after wrote 12. bookes

intituled, Of the lawes and ordinances
of monkes. Seuerus Sulpitius wrote
a dialogue contayning the notable conuersation
of the Esterly monkes with
Saynt Martin Abbot of eyghtie monkes.
And finally Saynt Austen, (for
I will come no lower) hath written
manye treatises of monkes, commending
highly that excellent kinde of life,
and defending it against the detractions
of heretiques. Let anye man read
his hundred thirty seuen Epistle, wherof
the tytle is, That for a few euill
monkes we should not infame al monkes.
In which Epistle hee shall sée all
the slaunderous arguments of all heretiques,
against this kinde of men, answered.
Wherfore M. Charke and his
felowes in condemning and deprauing
the lyues of monkes and fryers, folowe
their auncestours, and make
warre with all the Sayntes of Christe
his holye Church, who haue soe much
reuerenced and commended the sayde
lyfe. In lyke manner bye callynge

them soe often Base and Beggerly, he
sheweth what spirite he is of, that is,
farr differing from the spirit of Christ,
whose voluntarie pouertie is noted in
the scripture, and the same most highly
cōmended by him, to al his folowers.Luc. 9. Ioh. 12. Math. 19.
               
               
                  Thirdlye, you endeuor to bring the
Iesuites in contempt, by their obscure
conception (as you terme it) from one
Loyolas a Spaniard and had not their
full creation and commission vntill about
thirtye yeares paste, from Pope
Paulus quartus, wherein you erre: for
it was from Paulus tertius, the third
Pope before Paulus quartus, and the
thyrd Pope after Leo decimus, in
whose time Luther began. Soe that
there is not much difference, betwixte
Iesuites and Protestants, in there antiquitie
of name, marye in matter very
great: for the Protestants faith and
beléefe began at that time: but the Iesuites,
followinge with humilitie the
fayth which they found in the Catholicke
Church, onelye began a strayter
kinde of lyfe in manners and behauiour,

then the common sorte of people
vsed: The true lyfe of Iesuites.for reforminge of whose vices,
they dedicated them selues to God, and
to al kinde of labor, paynes, trauaile,
and peril, with abandoninge al worldly
pleasures, and al possibilitie of preferment
in the same, so farre fourth,
as none of that Societie hath or may
take, any spiritual or temporal liuings
or commodities what so euer, though
dyuers greate Princes haue pressed
them often times with the same, but of
frée cost they preach and teach in al places
where they are sent, with al humilitie
of spirite, and without intermeddling
with matters of estate, as shalbe
shewed more hereafter. Wherefore M.
Charke offereth them the greater wrōg
in charginge them with the contrarye.
M. Hanmers notorious lye.And M. Hanmers impudencie is the
more to be woondered at, who blusheth
not to put in print so notorious an vntrueth,
in the sight of al the world, and
to repeate, vrge, and amplifie the same
so often in his booke, sayinge, that one
Theatinus a Iesuite hypocritically got

to be Cardinall and Pope,Vide Iaco. Payuam li. 1. de ortho. explicat. meaninge
thereby Paulus quartus, called before
Iohannes Petrus Caraffa of the order
of Theatines, and not of Iesuites,
which al the world knoweth to be two
seueral and distincte orders of religion.
And therefore M. Hanmer with fryer
Bale whom he cyteth in the margent,
may be ashamed of soe false a slander,
both towardes the man, and also the
religion.
               
                  But because M. Charke obiecteth against
the Iesuites, their first father
Loyolas, whom contemptuouslye he
calleth a souldier: And M. Hanmer, a
crippled souldier, which lyued in the
same time with fryer Luther, Progenitor
of the Protestantes: Let vs consider
in two or thrée wordes, the difference
betwixt these two men, whereby
it may appeare, which of them had the
better spirit, and whether of them may
more iustely geue credit and commendation
to their followers. The lyues of
them both, are extant, wryten by men
of their owne times, which knew them

and liued with them, and therefore I
shal easely discharge my credit, for that
which I shal out of these wryters, report
of them.
               
                  Ignatius the beginner of the Iesuites.
                  Ignatius de Loyola, was a gentleman
of a Noble house in Spayne, which yet
remayneth, who being chéefe captayne
of Pompeiopolis, and defending it, against
the frenchmen in the yeare 1536
was hurte and taken prisoner by the
same.Vide Iaco. Payuam li. 1. orthodo. explicat. & Pet. Maffeum in vita Ignatij de Loyola. But afterward beinge perfectly
healed, and curteously restored to libertie
agayne, and now in great possibilitie
of honour and prefermente in his
countrye, resolued him selfe, to serue
God onelye for the time to come, and
to take paynes for the gayning of Heauen.
Wherupon leauing al his frends,
and distributinge al that he had to the
poore: stale away from the Courte, and
betooke himselfe to a maruelous straite
lyfe, and after he had with contynuall
labour of manye yeares, gotten learninge,
and gayened manye soules
from sinne, vnto vertue, and from
the Deuill vnto Allmyghtye God,

by his example of auster lyfe and godly
persuasions: there adioyned them selues
vnto him, nyne other of diuers nations
in the Vniuersitie of Paris, to
the like trauelsome lyfe for gayning of
soules. Which kinde of lyfe was afterward
(after diuers examinations and
probations of their spirit and purpose)
alowed and confirmed by Pope Paulus
tertius, and soe consequently (dyuers
worthye men leauing the worlde
and taking vppon them that order of
lyfe) was made a distincte order of religious
men, in the which this Ignatius
bothe liued and dyed with singuler
example of al humilytie, vertue and holynes,
but espetially in zeale of gayninge
of soules and recalling men from
sinne, and his posteritie after him hath
by imitatiō of the same vertues, broght
forth infinit frute vnto the world.
               
                  Luther beginner of the new Ghospel.
                  Martin Luther, walking in his
youth in a certayne medowe, was stroken
with a thunderboult, and thervppon
sodaynlye for very feare made him
selfe an Austen fryer, where after in

the Abbaye of Erford, seruinge in the
Church vpon the third sunday in Lent,Vide Ioan. Cocle. in vi. Lutheri. & Lindā. li. de fug. ido. ca. 8. & 9.
when the ghospel was read of the deafe
and dumme deuil throwē out by Christ,
he sodenly fel doune on the pauemente,
and the deuil cried horriblye out of his
mouthe sayinge: I am not, I am not
dūme, I wil speake yet vnto the world.
After this, vpon a certayne emulation
and contention, betwixt him and the
fryers of S. Dominiks order, he lefte
his religion, cast away his habite, broke
his vowes, married a nonne, and by litle
and litle began to preache straunge
new doctrines, especiallye tending to al
libertie and carnalitie, as for example
saying.
                     Luthers doctrine.
                     There is no Sinne but incredulitie:
nether can a man damne him selfe, doe
what mischefe he can, except the wil refuse
to beleeue. In his booke de capti.
Babil. cap. de baptis.
                     The ten commaundementes appertayne
nothing vnto vs. Serm. de Moys.
                     It is a false opinion, and to be abolished,
that there are foure ghospels. For

the ghospel of Iohn is the onelye fayre
true and principal ghospel. In prefa.
ad nouum Testam. And this he sayed,
because the other thrée Ghospels spake
too much of good works.
                     
                     If anye woman can not, or wil not
proue by order of law, the insufficiencie
of her husband: let her request at his
handes a dyuorse, or els by his consent,
let her lye priuilye with his brother, or
with some other man. Lib. de matri.
in epithal. super 1. Cor. 7.
                     If the wife wil not come, let the maid
come. Serm. de matrim.
                     Matrimonie is much more excellent,
then virginitie. Li. de vot. euang.
                     Christ and S. Paule did not counsaile,
but dissuade virginitie vnto Christians.
                     Lib. de vot. monast.
                     It is as necessarie for euerye man to
haue a wife, as it is, to eate, drinke, or
sleepe. Li. de vo. coniu. & in asser. art. 16.
                     Al Christians, are as holy and is iust
as the mother of God, and as the Apostles
were. Serm. de Trin. de B. Maria
& com. ep. 1. Pet.
                  
               
               
                  
                  I leaue other infinit beastly doctrines
which he taught, for the inuentiō wherof,
he had much conference with the deuil
him selfe, whom Bishoppe Lindan,
and dyuers others wryte, to haue bene
séene talke bodyly with him, by men of
very great credit.Lib. de fug. idolis. ca. 8. Li. de miss. angul. pag. 228. to. 7. & li. de missa. priua. And Luther himselfe
confesseth in his workes, that he had
often and familier speache with him,
and that he was first moued by him to
wryte agaynst the Masse, in the yeare
1534. He also diserybeth his voyce sayinge,
that it was so terrible, huge, and
dreadfull, that he was lyke to dye dyuers
times, after the nightes conference
with him: And that dyuers men
were slayne by such conference. Notwithstanding
it was his chaunce to escape,
albeit (as he sayeth) he did eate
more then a bushell of salte together
with this deuil.Hoss. li. 1. de heres. Claudi. de Sainct. li. de reb. eucha. Lindā. li. de fug. id. ca. 8. But yet neuerthelesse
he was deceaued in the ende, as al men
are that deale with such Marchantes.
For Luther going one night drunke to
bed, (as Hosius wryteth) was founde
there the next day deade, slayne (as is

thought) by this his familier deuil. For
he was a pitifull creature to looke on,
(as Sainctes describeth) al blacke, with
his tonge lying out, as a man stranguled.
And this was the end of Luther after
almost thirtye yeres lyuinge, in all
kynde of sensualitie, pryde, and dissention,
not onelye with the Catholique
Church, but also with his owne broode
and ofspring Carolostadius, Oecolampadius, Bucer, and Zuinglius parents
of the Protestantes religion, whom he
perseruted, cursed, and condemned, to
the very pitt of hel, for damned Heretickes,
as yet appeareth in his bookes
writen agaynst them.Luth. ep. ad Argenti. & epist. ad. Io. Har. Bucer. ep. ad Luth. Wherefore whether
the Protestantes, or the Iesuites,
may be more ashamed of their first father,
let the indifferent Reader iudge.
There is the lyke lyfe or worse, wryten
of Calum by a french man that lyued
with him, of the same religion at
that time, and was translated into Englishe
by a countrye man of ours, and
had bene put in print ere this, had not
my L. of London by an euil chance gotten

the copye into his handes.
               
                  Fourthly you wil néedes bringe the
Iesuites in discredit by certayne blasphemous
doctrines, which you say they
hold, in a booke writen by common consent,
called Censura Coloniensis: out of
the which you haue, for examples sake,
put downe thirtine blasphemies, in
their owne very wordes (as you saye)
noting the leafe, and adding the cleane
contrarye doctrine out of the worde of
God: And that men should knowe that
you deale playnely, and bring their very
words, and no sillable of your owne
you haue put their sayinges doune, in a
differēt romane letter. But M. Charke
in brotherly charitie, let me reason the
matter a litle with you: Are you not ashamed
of this falshode? did you not
thincke that this your booke might be
examined by some man or other? in déed
you haue al the Printes to your selfe,
and your searchers are so watchful, as
nothing can passe their handes, to the
discouering of your doinges, and therefore
you may both saye and print what

you wil: And our eares may wel burne
on this side the sea, and our harts rew,
at the shameles vntruethes which we
heare and sée vttered there amongste
you dayly: but we can not remedie it,
and this that I wryte now, I make account,
it may as wel perishe as dyuers
things of greater importāce haue done
heretofore. But suerly me thincketh a
wise man that had care of his soule,
might sée the lighte at a litle hole, and
descrye the conclusion by a few premisses.
If you in so short a pamphlet, vtter
so many, so manifest, so inexcusable vntruethes,
as I wil now shewe, which
notwithstanding you might reasonably
doubt leste perhapps they might be disclosed:
what wil you, and your felowes
dare auouch in your sermons, spéeches,
and discourses, which you are sure shal
neuer come to the examination? But
now let vs consider these wicked blasphemies
of the Iesuites: with whom, if
you haue dealt truelye and honestlye,
thē let al be beléeued which you speake
dayly of vs: if you haue done otherwise

then the same malice which droue you
to abuse your selfe towards them, may
also iustelye be suspected in the reste of
your doinges and sayings towards vs.
1. First therefore you reporte the Iesuites
to say: It is not sinne, what so
euer is agaynst the word of God. Censura
Colon. leaf. 44. These wordes are
guilefully reported, péeced and culled
out for your purpose of a large discourse,
and yet most true in their sense.
The occasion whereof was this. One
Monhemius a Lutherā against whose
Catechisme this Censure of Colē was
made, would néeds proue Concupiscēce
remayninge after Baptisme, to be a
damnable mortal sinne, albeit no consent
of harte were geuē vnto the same,
and for proofe of the same, he brought
in this definitiō of sinne: A definition of Sinne.
                  Sinne is what
so euer repugneth to the law of God.
The which definition, the Censure of
Colen affirmeth not to be in al respects
perfecte, but that dyuers wordes should
be added to the same: as for example, in
stéede of that he sayeth (Sinne is what

soeuer &c.) he should haue sayed (Sinne
is an action) for that there be dyuers
things which repugne against the law
of God, as euil men, euil lawes, the deuils,
and the lyke, which notwithstandinge
are not properlye sinnes, for that
they are not actions. Secondlye he
should haue sayed not onely (Sinne is
an action) but (Sinne is a humane or
reasonable action) for if a mad man, a
foole, or a beast, should commit an acte
prohibited by Gods lawe (as for example
kill a man) it were properly no
sinne. Thirdly he should haue added
(voluntarie) for if a man should doe a
noughtie acte against his will, as the
virgins which were rauished by vyolence
in the Primatiue Church did, it
were no sinne. Lastly, he should haue
added (done wittingly) for although
Iacob laye with Lya which was not
his wife,Gen. 29. yet because he knew it not,
but thought her to be Rachel his wyfe,
he sinned not. Soe that the perfect definition
of sinne, is not that which
Monhemius did put down and the Protestantes

folow: but rather that which
Iesuites together with S. Austen and
other learned Fathers haue set doune,Aug. li. 3. de lib. arb. cap. 19.
to wit. Sinne is a humane acte voluntarilye
and wittingly commited against
the law of God. And this is to be vnderstood
of actual sinne properly.
               
                  But now how doth M. Charke ouerthrow
this doctrine, forsooth thus.
Contrarye to this (saythe he) is the
woord of God 1. Iohn 3. the transgression
of the lawe is sinne. You séeme to
haue made a vowe M. Charke not to
deale playnlye in anye one thing. Can
you not aledge one litle sentence without
falsifyinge? The woords of S. Iohn
are these. Euerie one that sinneth committeth
iniquitie, and sinne is iniquitie.
(Or as you will perhapps séeme to enforce
it out of the gréeke woorde (Anomia):
Sinne is transgression of the law.
                  Transposition in alledginge of Scripture.But why haue you fraudulently turned
it backward? you knew well the
force of transposition out of Sophistrie
that it changeth all the meaning of the
sentence. For if I saye, Euerie man is a

liuing creature, it is true: but if I turne
it backward and saye: Euerie lyuinge
crature is a man, it is false. Soe these
woordes, as S. Iohn vttereth them are
most true, Euerie sinne is iniquitie or
transgression of the law: but as you vtter
them, they are false, to wit, That
euerie iniquitie or transgression of the
lawe, be it neuer soe little, or donne
without ether consent or knowledge,
or by a madd mā, or brute beast, should
be properlye a mortal sinne. Soe that
this firste blasphemye of the Iesuites
commeth not to be soe haynous as you
would make it, but rather to confound
your ignorance which vnderstand not
soe cléere doctrine, but huddle vp matters
as M. Campion telleth you: alsoe
to note your vntruthe in misreporting
their woordes, and the Scriptures against
them. And of this first depend
the other two that folow.
               
                  Concupisence noe synne.2. You report the Iesuites to saye:
Concupiscence remayning in the regenerate,
although it be against the law of
God, yet is it not sinne properlye in it

selfe or of his owne nature. Cens. fol. 38.
You wil néedes helpe the Iesuites out,
with that which maketh for your purpose.
Wher finde you in them, the wordes
(Although it be against the lawe of
God?) They saye, that albeit this
Concupiscence doe sturre or moue a
man some times to doe things whiche
are repugnant to the lawe of God: yet
if no consent of harte be yelded vnto it,
it reacheth not to the nature of a mortal
sinne woorthye of eternal damnation.
And albeit S. Paul doe some times
cal it sinne:Rom. 7. yet meaneth he not properlye
but by a figure, wherby the name of
the cause is often tymes atributed to
the effect: as the latine spéeche, is called
the latine Tongue, because spéeche is
the effect of the tongue. Soe Concupiscence
being the effect of original sinne,
is called some times sinne, but not properly,
but only figuratiuely, as also S.
Paul calleth Christ him selfe,Rom. 8. 
                  Sinne,
because he was the sacrifice for sinne.
And all this is S. Austen his note,
whose playne woords in the same place

are:Li. de Nup. & conc. ca. 23. & 25. & li. 1. con. ep. 2. Pelag. ca. 13. et. li. 1. Re tract. ca. 15. 
                  Concupiscence is not sinne in the
regenerate, if consēt be not yelded vnto
her for the accomplishing of vnlawfull
woorkes. The same teacheth not only
S. Augustine in dyuers other places,
but also all other Fathers of the Primatiue
Church, as Nazianzenus orat.
de S. Lana. Pacianus orat. de bap. Clemens
Alexandrinus Li. 1. Pedago. cap. 6.
Cyprian ser. de. lot. pedū et Li. 2. ep. 2.
Ambro. Li. 1. de vocat. gentiū. capit. 5.
Soe that al these good Fathers are partakers
with the Iesuites of this blasphemie
which you enforce vppon them.
But how doe you proue it to be blasphemie?
marie because Christ saythe:Math. 5.
                  Whosoeuer shall see a woman to luste
after her, he hath alredye committed adulterie
with her in his harte. But are
you soe ignorant M. Charke, doe you
not sée that Christ by adding the woords
(in his harte) meaneth onlye of him,
which geueth consent of harte to his
luste and concupiscence, and would put
it in execution if he had tyme and place
and abilitie? but this is your common
alleaging of Scripture.
               
                  
                  First motions noe synne.3. You reporte the Iesuites to saye.
That the first motions of lust, are without
hurt of sinne. Cens. 54. 89. It is
most true and playne, as they deliuer it
but you, by clipping their woords, make
euerie thing to séeme a paradoxe. They
saye, the first motions of luste, if they
come of natural instinct only, without
anye cause geuen by vs, are no sinnes,
so longe as we geue no consent of hart
vnto them. And the reason is, because
it lyeth not in vs, (they being natural)
to prohibit them to come, no more then
it dothe, to prohibit our pulse from beating.
And therfore séeing no sinne can
be cōmitted without our will and consent
of hart, (as I haue shewed before)
these first motions, can be no more sinnes
in vs, then they are in beastes, for
the like reason. Nether is the ten the
commaundement,Exo. 20. alleaged by you for
the contrarie doctrine, to wit, Thou
shalt not couet, anye waye repugnant
to this. For this commaundement forbiddeth
consent to these motions, and
not the verie motions which are not in

oure power, as the Scripture it selfe
signifieth when it saythe.Deu. 30. 
                  This commaundement
which I doe geue the this
daye, is not aboue thee.
                  Li. de nupt et concupis. capit. 23. And as S. Austen
learnedlye prouethe out of an other
place of scripture, wher this commaundement
is expounded, to wit. Goe not
after thy concupiscence.
                  Eccl. 18. That is, consente
not to them, or followe them
not.
               
                  All things not expressed in Scriptures.4. You reporte the Iesuites to say.
The holye Scripture is a doctrine vnperfecte,
maymed, lame, not contayning
all thinges necessarie to fayth and
saluation. Cen. fo. 220. You are tooe
shameles, M. Charke, in setting for the
these, for the Iesuites woordes. Lett
anye man read the place, and he shall
finde noe such thing, but rather in contrarie
manner the holy Scripture with
reuerente woordes, most highlye commended.
Notwithstanding, they reprehend
in that place, Monhemius, for sayinge,
that nothing is to be receaued or
beleued, but that whiche is expreslye
founde in the Scripture. For reproofe

of which heresie, Thinges beleeued whiche ar not in Scripture.they geue examples
of manie thinges, which bothe we and
our aduersaries also doe beleue, which
neuerthelese, are not set downe expres
                  
                     •
                  ye
in the Scripturs, although perhaps

                     •
                  educed therof. As the perpetuall virginitye
of our Ladye after her childebirth:
two natures and two willes in
Christe: the procéedinge of the holye
Ghost equally from the Father and the
Sonne, with out generation: the vnion
of the worde vnto the nature of mā,
and not vnto the personne: That God
the Father begat his Sonne, onlye by
vnderstanding him selfe: That infantes
without reason should be baptised:
That the common Créede was made
by the Apostles: The celebration of the
Sondaye, in stead of the satterdaye:
The celebration of Easter onlye vppon
a Sonday: The foure Gospels which
we vse to be the true Gospels and not
fayned or corrupted: That our epistle
to the Romains, was wryten by S.
Paule, and the other whiche is to
be séene to the Laodycenses, is fayned

and not wrytten by him, séeinge
notwithstanding Saynt Paule neuer
mentioneth any epistle wryten by him
selfe to the Romanes,Colos. 4. but yet sayethe
that he wrote one to the Laodicenses.
Al these things (I say) and many more,
are beléeued by vs generallye, and yet
none of them expressye to be founde in
scripture.
               
                  Obiection.
                  But how doe you now ouerthrowe
this doctrine, and prooue it blasphemie,
M. Charke? By a place of S. Paule:2. Timo. 3. 
                  Al
(the) scripture (is) geuen, by inspiration
of God, (and) is profitable, to teach, to
confute, to correcte, and to instructe in
iustice, that the man of God maye be
perfect, (and throughly) instructed to euery
good worke. Wherof you inferre,
that the Scripture is sufficient to perfection,
but how wrongefullye it shal
now appeare. And first I let passe your
ordinarie misusinge of scripture, by adding
fiue wordes of your owne, in this
litle sentence, to wit, (the, is, and, and,
throughlie) which audacitie, if it were
in translating of Aesops fables, it were

follerable, but in the holie Scriptures,
where euerie worde must be taken as
from the holie Ghoste, it is impious.
Secondlie this place maketh nothinge
for your purpose: which I proue by
two reasons. Profitable.The first is, because S.
Paule saieth not here, that the Scripture
is sufficient to perfection, but onelie,
that it is profitable. Necessarye.Nowe you
know, that a thinge maie be verie profitable,
yea necessarie to an effecte, and
yet not sufficient to doe the same without
all helpe: As meate is profitable
and necessarie to maintaine life, and
yet not sufficiēt, without natural heat,
clothes, and the like. The second reason
is, for that S. Paule signifieth in this
place, that euerie parte, or canonicall
booke of Scripture, is profitable to
make a man perfecte: but yet we can
not say, that euerie part or booke is sufficient:
for then, al other bookes of scripture
besids that, were superfluous. And
that S. Paule meaneth in this place, euerie
seuerall canonicall booke or parte
of Scripture, by the wordes (Omnis

scriptura:) it is euident by that he vseth
the worde, Omnis, and not Tota, which
two words how much they differ both
in Gréeke and Latine, all Logisioners
know, For omns homo, signifieth, euerye
man. And M. Charke him selfe, in
this verye same sentence, hath translated,
Omne opus bonum, Euerye good
worke: And yet deceatcfullye, hath he
trāslated Omnis scriptura, Al the scripture.
As though S. Paule had mente
onelye, that al the Scripture put together,
is sufficient to perfection: which
sense can not stand. Firste, for that al
the Scripture, at such time as S. Paul
wrote this, wanted dyuers important
partes, as the Ghosepl of S. Iohn, the
Apocalips and some other, which were
writen after, and consequentlye should
haue bene superfluous, if the other before,
had bene sufficient. Parts of scripture loste.Secondly, because
we lacke at this day, many parts
of Scripture, which of likelihoode were
in S. Paules time. As the booke of Nathan
the Prophet, with the volume of
the Prophet Gad 1. Paralip. vlt. The

booke of Ahias Salonites, and the vision
of Addo the Prophet 2. Paral. 9.
Many of the Parables and verses of
Salomon, for he wrote thrée thousande
of the one, and fiue thousand of the other,
3. Reg. 4. Also the epistle of S.
Paul to the Laodicēses Colos. 4. wherof
it foloweth in M. Charks owne sēse,
that if al the Scripture put together, is
onely sufficient to perfection: then our
Scripture, now lacking dyuers partes
of the same, is not sufficient. And so me
thinkethe, M. Charke wrestethe this
place against him selfe.
               
                  Addinge to Scripture.5. You reporte the Iesuites to saye:
That the want of holy Scriptures must
be supplyed, by peecing it out by traditions. 
Cens. fol. 220. This is coyne of
the former forge, all false and noe one
such word to be found in al their booke.
But yet as though they had sayed soe,
you fight manfullye agaynst this your
owne sentence, sayinge in manner followinge:Deut. 4. Non addetis ad verbū &c,
                  Contrarye to this is the lawe
in Moyses. Thow shalte not adde to

the wordes which I speake to thee, nether
shalte thou take from them. But
why do you breake the law M. Charke
in reportinge the law? you haue héere
added the singuler nūber in the Verbe,
and the plural in the Noune, and haue
taken awaye the numbers which the
law geuer vsed, and changed the same
at your owne pleasure, and that for a
purpose which I could gesse at. But let
al thinges be lawful vnto you: what
maketh this law for your purpose? By
your meaning the Apostles and Euangelistes
did offend, in adding any thing
besids the law of Moyses, which is absurd.
Nether did Moyses in this place
(forbiddinge to adde or take awaye)
speake of his wryten law (for he had
not yet writen it) but of those thinges
which he deliuered them by worde of
mouth at that time, the which he willed
them to kéepe and obserue whollye
and perfectly, without chaunging it by
additiō or diminutiō, or by their owne
corrupte gloses, as noughtie men are
wonte to doe: And this is the true meaninge

of that place, and not as you
would haue it, that nothinge should be
beléeued besides that which Moyses set
doune: for a litle after Moyses him selfe
commaundeth the Iewes to heare the
Prophet which God should rayse after
him,Deut. 18. as himselfe, mening therby Christ.
               
                  The Scripture may be wrested to an euill sence.6 You reporte the Iesuites to saye:
The holy Scripture is a nose of waxe.
Cens. 117. God forgeue you, for abusing
so much these learned men. Marie you
take the waye to ouermatch both learninge
and trueth too, if you may haue
your desire. He that wil reade the place
by you quoted, shal finde the Iesuites,
vpon occasion geuen them, to say in effect
thus: that before the rude and ignorante
people, it is easie for a noughtye
man, to wreste the scripture to what
interpretation pleaseth him beste, for
the flatteringe ether of Prince or people:
euen as a man may frame a nose
of waxe what way, or to what forme,
he liste. And wil you of this make them
to saye, that the holye Scripture is a
nose of waxe? Christ is lykened to a

serpent, and yet is no serpent:Nu. 21. Also to a
couetous Vserer, and yet is none:Ioh. 3. Nether
doth the Scripture cōmit blasphemie
in vsinge such similitudes. But
how prooue you (M. Charke) that the
Scripture maye not be wrested into
manye senses, before the rude people,
as a nose of waxe maye be into manye
formes?Math. 25. Because it is contrarye (saye
you) vnto the wordes of Dauid:Psal. 18. 
                  The
law of the Lorde is perfecte conuerting
soules. Suerly I would you might be
féede cuē for the sauing of your credit
M. Charke, to alege one place, without
corruption. Doe you translate Lex domini
immaculata The Lawe of the
Lorde is perfecte in sense, soe that it
maye not be wrested to a wronge interpretation?
This is maruelous. Immaculata,
signisieth in these countryes,
vnspotted, voyde of filthe, or dishonestye,
wherewith prophane wrytings
are often times defiled: But the Law
of God is deuoyde of all such thinges,
and therefore conuerteth soules, wheras
other wrytinges, doe often times

corrupt them: But that Immaculata
can not be translated, perfecte in sense,
it is euidente by this, that euerye sillable
and worde in God his Lawe, is
vnspotted, but yet not perfecte in sense,
and much lesse so cleare, as it may not
be peruerted to an euil meaning: wherby
your fraudulente translation is discouered.
               7. You reporte the Iesuites to saye:
The readinge of Scripture.
                  The readinge of the Scripture, is not
onely not profitable, but manye wayes
verye hurtefull to the Churche. Fol. 21.
Did you thinke M. Charke, when you
wrote this, that anye of these bookes
whose leaues you cite, were to be had
or séene in Englande? I thinke noe, or
els you are at a poynte, to make none
accounte what you speake hereafter.
The Iesuites haue not this, which
you reporte here in their names. But
onely they laye doune certayne wayghtye
reasons, whye the readynge of
Scripture is not rashelye, and without
verye greate consideration to

to be permitted to the rude and ignorant
people, which vnderstande it
not, and therfore maye easely misconceaue
the meaning therof, shewing also
that al heresies from the beginning,
haue bene founded vpon the misunderstanding
of the Scripture, and yet this
without al faulte of the woorde of God,
but by the ignorance or malyce of the
misconsterer. As in like manner al sinnes
arise by the misuse of the creatures
of God, which creatures notwithstandinge
are good in their owne natures,
as the Apostle teacheth:1. Tim. 4. and Christ him
selfe is sayde to be an occasion of ruine
vnto some,Luc. 2. and yet without any faulte
of his.
               
                  This is the Iesuites doctrine, the
contrarie wherof I would sée nowe,
how M. Charke (according to his promise)
will proue out of the cléere woord
of God, Mary (saythe he) Christe delyuerethe
a contrarie note. Math. 22.
Yee erre not knowing the Scriptures,
nor the power of God: whereof he
would inferre, that all men must read

the Scriptures. A stronge argumente
the circumstances considered: for first,
the men to whome Christe spake these
woordes, were noe ignorante people,
but learned Saduces, which came prepared
to pose Christe, about the resurrection.
This appeareth by the subtile
question which they put for the,Math. 22. of seuen
brethren which had alone wife,Deut. 2. groū
                  ded
vppon the lawe of Moyses, wherby
they thought to ouerthrow the doctrine
of resurrection. But Christe hauing
heard their question, toulde them,
that they erred, not vnderstanding the
Scriptures touching that poynte of resurrection,
which Scriptures he interpreted
to them presentlye out of the iij.
chapter of Exodus. Also he sayde, they
erred, not vnderstanding the power of
God, wherby he is able to rayse againe
the selfe same bodye in nomber, whiche
is dead, though it be vnpossible (as it is)
in all natural reason. Soe that Christ
spake not here to vnlearned men, nor
of all Scriptures, nor of readinge, but
of vnderstanding. What maketh therfore

this to your purpose M. Charke?
forsoothe as much as if you should reason
thus: my Lorde Chaunceller sayd
to certayne Doctors of the Arches, pleading
a case vnskilfully before him: you
erre, not vnderstandinge the common
lawe in this case, nor the Princesse anthoritie.
Ergo, by these woordes he
meanethe, that al the clownes of Englande,
shall fall to readinge of the common
lawe, albeit they vnderstand neuer
a woorde therof.
               
                  Faythe and woorkes.8. You reporte the Iesuites to saye:
That the rightuous mā lyueth by faith,
ne hath it not in Christ, but by his own
woorkes. fol. 118. You wearye me out
with your impudent lyes: there is noe
suche thinge: what should I aunswere
you? and yet as though they had sayde
it, you bringe in a place of S. Paule
against the same, sayinge:Rom. 11. 
                  If rightuousnes
come by our woorkes, it is not now
grace. As thoughe noe mans woorkes
coulde be rightuous in this lyfe:
whiche is bothe from the purpose, and

false. For we denye not but the firste
and chéefe rightuousnes, wherof Saint
Paule speakethe in this place, that is,
wherby a man is called first from sinne
or infidelitye to the seruice of Christe,
his sinnes forgeuen him, and he iustified
by the infusion of grace, this rightuousnes
(I saye) is onlye of Gods merrye
and noe waye of our woorkes, or
by anye merite of the same. But yet
notwithstandinge, after we are nowe
made iuste, and by the mercye of God,
placed once in state of grace, the good
woorkes which ensue of this grace, may
be rightuous and meritorious, not of
themselues, or of their owne natures
(as you wickedly affirme vs to hould)
but thorough the dignitye of that grace
of Christe, whiche remaynethe in the
doers. The whiche grace beinge once
loste, their good déedes are noe more
rightuous or merytorious. The which
true doctrine of ours, you will not vnderstand,
but alwayes of malyce report
it contrarye, as also you doe shamfully

this place of S. Paule, to make it serue
your purpose. For S. Paule saythe
that Gods election, wherby he chooseth
men to be Christians, is of grace onlye
and not by merite of woorkes: and you
drawe it generallye against the rightuousnes
of al good woorkes. And because
it would not streche soe farre, you haue
added vnto it of your owne, these woordes:
If rightuousnes come by our. &c.
which woordes are not in S. Paule.
               
                  Faythe and hope.9. You reporte the Iesuites to saye:
Men doe surely hope, that euerlastinge
lyfe shall be geuen them, but they doe
not beleue it: now hope often fayleth,
otherwise it were no hope. Cens. 118.
For confutation of which doctrine you
aleage out of S. Paule, Hope is the
sure anchor of the soule.
                  Heb. 6. And againe:
Hope maketh not ashamed.
                  Rom. 5. In the
which you shew your selfe vnlearned,
huddlinge vp and confoundinge, faythe
and hope as one thinge, the whiche S.
Paule 1 Cor. 13 dothe affirme to be distincte
thinges. The Iesuites doctrine
(if you vnderstoode it) is true, learned,

and cléere, to wit:Luc. 10. that noe man, with
out a speciall reuelation from God (as
the Apostles had from Christ, when he
sayde that their names were written
in the booke of lyfe,) maye beléeue, that
he in particuler shalbe saued, albeit he
maye well hope it. Faythe grounded onlye vppon the word of God.And the reason of
this is, for that the only obiect of faythe
is the woorde of God reueled vnto vs,
ether by writing, or by tradition: that
is as much to saye, as noe man maye
beléeue or haue faythe in anye thinge,
excepte it be reuealed vnto him by the
woorde of God. Wherof it foloweth,
that whatsoeuer a man beléeueth, must
be soe certayne, necessarie, and infallablye
true, as it cannot possiblye be
false. Which two reasons proue, that
albeit a man maye hope his owne saluation,
in particuler, yet he maye not
make it of his beléefe. First, for that he
hathe noe expresse woorde of God that
he in particuler shalbe saued: for what
Scripture saythe, (for examples sake)
that Willyam Charke shalbe saued?
none I thinke, but onlye in generall,

and vppon conditions: as if he beléeue
as he should doe, ioyning charitye with
it. 1 Cor. 13. If he kepe the commaundementes.
Math. 19. If he perseuer in
honestie vnto the ende. Math. 10. If he
leaue his lyeinge. Apocal. 21. & 22. and
the lyke. The which thinges all, noe
man can tel whether he obserue or whether
he shall obserue them vnto the end
or noe. Secondlye it is not soe certayne
that anye man in particuler shall
be saued, but he maye be damned, at
the leaste wise it is not vnpossible: for
he maye denye his faythe, if he will he
maye committ adulterie, murther, and
the lyke enormityes, and soe damne
him selfe. As we sée Iudas and diuers
other haue done which séemed good for
a time, and soe maye I toe, if I liste?
and therfore my saluation in particuler,
beinge not infalliblye certayne,
can not be the obiecte of faythe and beléefe,
but onlye of hope.
               
                  Hope hathe doubte in it.
                  Now this hope hath ioyned with it,
bothe confidence and doubte, and that
in respecte of two thinges. For in respecte

of the goodnes and mercy of God,
it is full of confidence and assurance,
and in this respecte S. Paule callethe
hope, the anchore of the soule whiche
maketh not ashamed,Heb. 6. Rom. 5. as you aleadge.
But in respect of Gods iustice, and our
sinfull frailtie, hope hath also doubt and
feare annexed with it. For when I consider
that God, as he is mercifull, soe
is he iust, Psal. 10. nay, that he damneth
more by his iustice then he saueth by
his mercie, Math. 7. & 2. Luc. 13. also
that he wil take a straite accounte of euerie
little sinne at the daye of iudgement,
Math. 12. and that there be manie
secrete sinnes which maye be in me
without my remembraunce, Psal. 18. 1.
                  Cor. 4. moreouer, that diuers shall
come confidentlie at the laste daye hopinge
to be saued and yet shalbe damned,
Math. 7. when I doe cōsider this (I
say) adding to it, mine owne noghty inclination
vnto sinne, & my weaknes in
perseuerāce of vertue I cānot chose but
ioyne feare with my confidence, and soe
the scripture teacheth me to do, saying.

                  Doe you conuerse in feare duringe this
time of your habitation:1. Pet. 1. And agayne:
Worke your salutiō in feare and trembling.
                  Phil. 2. The reason wherof, is put doune
also in the scripture, to wit: Because a
man knoweth not, whether he be worthye
of hate or loue.
                  Eccle. 9. So that we, M.
Charke (as you sée) reconcile al scriptures
together, and mayntayne both
confidence and feare, in Christian hope,
and you take one part onely, and leaue
out the other, and yet you are offended
with M. Campion, for saying that you
confound and huddle vp matters.
               
                  Inuocation of Saintes.10 You reporte the Iesuites to saye:
The scripture in deede neuer teachethe
inuocation of Sayntes: yet we must beleeue,

                        •
                     eceaue, and hold it. fol. 230. This
is falslye reported too, for they doe not
saye: The Scripture neuer teachethe
inuocation of Saintes. But Monhemius
against whom they wrote, sayed so,
and thereof inferred, that therefore it
was not to be beléeued. Which consequence
of argument, the Iesuites deny
to be good, and geue examples in many

thinges which are not expreslye sett
doune in the scriptures, and yet are to
be beléeued as I haue shewed before in
your fowrthe reporte. And touchinge
this doctrine of Inuocation of Saintes
to pray for vs and with vs to our Sauiour:
the Catholique Churche foundeth
it in the woorde of God, and deduceth
it by necessarie consequence, out
of manye and euident places of Scripture,
adioyning therunto the explication
and determination of the auncient
general Councels, and the testimonies
of the holye Fathers, with the vniuersall
practise of all Christendome from
the beginning, as it maye appéere to
them that will reade the Catholique
bookes writen of this matter. And now
you Sir, to ouerthrow all this, bringe
in onlye, besides your lye, a metaphoricall
place of the prophet Esaye: Thou
art our Father, and Abraham hath not
knowen vs, and Israel hath bene ignorant
of vs.
                  Esa. 63. Are these your playne, cléere,
and euidente Scriptures, whiche you
bragge of soe muche? I will answers

your place to shew your weknes. First
if the prophet had spoken of inuocation
of Saintes in this place, and of their intercessiō
for vs, yet were not thes wordes
against vs: for we graunt that the
Fathers of the ould Testament, vntill
Christes ascension, were not in heauē,
as our Saintes are now, but in Limbo
patrum, expecting Christ his coming, &
therfore could not here vs, or vnderstād
our necessities as they can now in heauen,
& therfore in this sence the wordes
may be true: Abraham hath not knowē
vs &c. Secondly the prophet talketh of
no such matter in this place, but onlye
bringing in Christ, all bloodye after his
passion, resoneth with him in the name
of the whole people of Israel, cōfessing
their great sinnes, frō the which, Abraham
& Israel were not able to deliuer
them, but rather had reiected & cast thē
of for the same sinnes, & so knew them
no longer. Wherfore they were cōstrained
to come vnto Christ, as to their father
and only redéemer, & therfore they
say to him: Thou art our father and Abraham
hath not knowen vs &c. The

which kind of spéeche S. Ierome proueth
out of the Gospel,Ieron. in ca. 63. Esa. Math. 25. wher Christ saied
vnto the foolish virgins that came to
late: I know you not: that is, I know
you not for my seruantes, I refuse & reiect
you, I care not for you: and not, as
M. Charke doth interpret, I know not
your case or your necessities, for he
knew it wel inough: but yet would not
reléeue them.
               11. You report ye Iesuites to say: Christ
neuer sayd to lay men, do this in remē
                     brāce
of me: fol. 302. The which (as you
say) S. Paul doth plainly cōfute 1. Co. 11
You wil neuer vnderstand ye Iesuites a
right. Hoc facite.They proue in yt place, yt Christ in
his last supper, hauing cōsecrated his owne
body & blood, & cōmāding his Apostles
(which were preists) to do the very
same by ye words: Hoc facite: do this, or
the fāe that I haue dōe: they proue (I sai)
yt this authoritie of consecrating Christ
his body, was cōmitted only to priestes
& not to lay men, nether doth S. Paul any
way impugne this. For we deny not
to lay men the cōmunion of Christe his
body but the consecration of the same,

the which consecration to be geuen by
those woords of Christ. Hoc facite, Doe
this, all holye Fathers of the Churche
from time to time haue vnderstoode:
namely, Clemens Romanus Li. 5. cōst
cap. 20. Ambros. Li. 4. de sacram. ca. 6.
Cyprian. Li. 2. Ep. 3. Chrisostome. Ho.
14. in ep. 1. ad cor. Isodorus. Li. diu. offic.
cap. 18. Damascenus. Li. de ortho. fid.
cap. 14. with others. Nether importeth
it anie thinge, though the woorde facere
dothe not signifie to consecrate of his
owne nature: for the facte of Christe,
going before, draweth it to that signification:
as if a man should singe, and
afterwarde say to the standers by, Hoc
facite, Doe the same: héere facere should
signifie to singe, though not of his owne
nature.
               
                  Traditions.12. You reporte the Iesuites to say:
Traditions are of equal authority with
the woorde of God, we must beleue thē
though they be manifestlye against the
Scripture. Cens. fol. 230. You drawe towards
an end M. Chark, & therfore you
wil make a soūd lie, for a parting blow.
You haue here added of your owne.

                  We must beleue them, thoughe they be
manifestlye against the Scripture. The
Iesuites say no such woord, but they affirme
the former parte of your wordes,
although not soe generally, & confusedly,
as you report. For they say not that
all traditions are of equal authoritye
with the woord of God, but only such as
are certaynlye descended from Christ &
his Apostles, and were deliuered by thē
to be obserued as parte of the woorde of
God. Two kinde of traditions.For there are two kinds of traditions,
or doctrines receaued onlye by
woord of mouthe: the one called Ecclesiastical,
because they were begone and
left vs only by the Church: and thes ar
of no greater authoritie then the writinges
and other decrées of the Churche
are. The other are called, Apostolicall
or deuine, left vnto vs by Christ & the
Apostles: and thes are of no lesse authority,
then if they had ben writen by thē,
or then are the other things which they
wrot. For if a maister should leaue vnto
his seruantes, one thing in writing,
and an other thing by woord of mouthe,
they are of equal authoritie as all

men wil graūt. Thes traditions therfor
if they be certainly knowen to come frō
Christ & his Apostles, the Iesuites say,
they are of equal authority with ye written
word, & not al traditiōs as you malitiously
reporte. And now that Christ
& his Apostles left vnto the Church diuers
doctrines by word of mouth only,
& not writen, it is proued by inuincible
argumētes: as by the testimonies of the
Councels, Fathers, & stories of the Primatiue
church, by many places of scripture,
as namly by that S. Paule saithe
to the Thessalonians:2. Thes. 2. 
                  Brethern stande
fast and hould the traditions which you
haue lerned ether by word of mouth or
by our epistle. Also it is proued, by doctrines
which we haue and hould, & the
Church hath so done frō the beginning:
which doctrines notwithstanding are
not writen, but receaued by worde of
mouth from Christ and the Apostles:
as baptisme of infantes, celebration of
the sondaye, the nomber of the bookes of
Scripture, the fast of lent, and the like,
wherof I haue geuen more examples
before in your fourth reporte.
               
                  
                  Now this being soe, how vainly doe
you bring in (M. Charke) against this,
the sayng of Christ touching the superstitious
scribes and Pharases:Marc. 7. 
                  In vaine
doe they worshipe me teaching doctrines
that are but the traditions of men.
In your owne conscience, I aske you,
is this anything pertaining to our purpose,
or contrarie to the Catholiques
doctrine which I haue set doūe? & if it be
not, why doe you soe shamlesly deceaue
the people with such impertinēt stuffe?
But this is your onlye refuge, and
herein lyethe the whole mayntenance
of your cause, to reporte vs still amisse,
and to refute vs with that whiche nothing
pertayneth to the matter. As
in this place whiche you haue héere
brought in, let the reader marke how
manye differences there be, betwixt
it and our purpose. First Christ in this
place reprehendeth the teaching of doctrins
that are but of men: and we talke
of doctrines, deliuered vs by Christ and
his Apostles. Secondly Christe reprehendeth
not al obseruation of traditiōs

of men, but the noughtie obseruation
of them, by estéeming them more then
the worde of God, and by breaking the
worde of God for the obseruinge of
them, which we also doe condemne.
Thirdlye those traditions of the Pharases
which Christ reprehendeth, were
certayne idle and foolishe external ceremonies:
as the washing of cuppes, and
the lyke, and dyuers of them were directe
contrarye to the worde of God, as
certaine corrupt expositiōs of the law,
as Christ noteth there: Three kyndes of Rabbinical expositions of the Law.And these were
of thrée kindes: The one left by Rabbi
Akiuam, the other by Rabbi Iuda, the
thyrde by the sonnes of Asomoneus,
which interpretations all, were called
Deuteroseis, that is, secondarye expositions
after Moyses, of which peruerse
expositions, came al their errours of the
Talmud. But now what is this, to the
holye Traditions of Christ and his Apostles,
or of the Primatiue Church?
               
                  Worshippe of Creatures.13. Lastly you report the Iesuites to
say: We must worshippe the image of
Christ with lyke honour that we doe
the holy bookes of the Ghospel. fol. 66.
                  
Agaynst which, you bring in S. Paul,
askinge, What agreemente is there betweene
the temple of God and Idoles.
                  2. Cor. 6.
I answere, much more agréement, then
there is betwéene the matter we talke
of, and this place of S. Paule. For he
talketh of drawinge the yoke with infidels,
and our question is, whether the
worshippe done to the image of Christ,
and to the Byble, be al one or no?Act. 5. & 7. But
you by callinge the image of our Sauiour,
an Idole, shew your selfe impious,
and you are accursed for it by the seuēth
general Councel. And by putting such
great difference betwéene the worship
of Christes Image and his books of the
Ghospel, you proue your vnderstanding
to be very litle: For if you graunt any
kinde of worshippe to the one, how can
you deny the same to the other? séeinge
that both are creatures, and as the Image
was made by the Karuer, so the
letter of the Byble, by the Printer, and
the hononr done to the one and the other,
is not to them selues, but onely to
God whose Image and word, they are.
But if you denye al kinde of honour to

them both, in that they are creatures,
(for we assigne no diuyne honour vnto
them:) Exod. 25. Num. 21. Ioh. 3. Psal. 45. Phil. 2.Thē first your place of S. Paul
of difference, is nothing to the purpose:
Secondlye, what wil you saye to the
worshipppe done vnto the Arke, vnto
the Cherubins, vnto the serpent of
brasse? Why doth Dauid say, Doe you
adore the stoole of his feete? Why are
we commaunded to bowe our knée at
the sounde of the name of Iesus, which
is but a creature representing Christ to
the eare, as his image doth to the eye?
S. Austen geueth this reason for it.Aug. li. 3. de Trin. cap. 9 & 10. 
                  Because
the honour done to these thinges,
doth redounde vnto him, who is signified
by them. But you are so wilful M.
Chark, as you wil not vnderstād ye difference
betwéene an image and an idole,
nor betwéene the honours done vnto a
creature and to the creator: but malitiously
you wil stil confound the same in
our names, whether we wil or noe, and
that only to blind the poore people withal,
and to maintayne matter of rayling
agaynst your mother the Catholique
Church, God forgeue you for it.
               
                  
                  And thus M. Charke, I haue answered
bréefely your slaunderous false reportes,
of the Iesuites doctrine. Now
let modest men iudge, what cause you
had to breake into those vnséemelye
words, sayinge:M. Charke his lacke of modestye. 
                  These and many other
blasphemies, do the Iesuites maintayne.
There is not a spider, nor a spiders web
in anye corner of the Popes breste, but
these doctors wil hould it no lesse holy,
thē that which commeth out of Christs
brest. But doe not euen the Papists, that
know these thinges, easely see, how thes
Iesuites in these doctrines, bewraye the
spirit of Antichrist. What néedeth all
this, M. Charke? If a lying spirit be the
spirite of Antichrist: then he is bewrayed,
ether in them, or in you. If an ignorant
rayling spirite, be it: we can geue
a good gesse, where he dwelleth. M. Charke his zeale.Surely
me thinke your zeale ouerran your wit
in this place, as it did also not longe agone
when you hauinge the bewe of a
Masse booke, and finding the blessed virgin
named, Mother of God in the
same, you cryed out Blasphemye,
                  
vntil your felow, blushinge at your ignorance,
brought you in minde of the
antiquitie of that name. You are too
ouergréedie of our discredit, and it hurteth
your owne cause. You séeme to
haue made a compacte betwéene you, euerye
man to lye his parte, and so by
force to ouerbeare vs. Lyinge for the game.You haue plaied
yours: and M. Hanmer followeth pretilie
after you, whoe is not ashamed toauouch
(without citing the place) that
S. Thomas of Aquyne holdethe The
wearinge of Frauncis and Dominickes
cowle, to haue power to remoue sinne,
as wel as the Sacrament of Baptisme.
Which is as true as that which you
affirme, to wit: That Cardinal Poole
blushed at dyuers enormities in Popery:
And, That the Catholickes in England
at this daye, doe confesse Images, Pardones,
Prayinge to Sayntes, and Seruice
in the Latine tong to be wicked things. 
                  Newes from Rome printed by 10. Charlewoode & Ed. Whyte.All which is as true as your newes
from Rome, caused amongst you to be
printed of late, with your ordinarie approbatiō,
of Seene and allowed. Wherin

for the defacinge of that citye, you
shew the heauie hand of God towards
it in signes and tokens the 23. 24. and
25. dayes of Ianuarie last past, 1580: at
what time, you report 2. sonnes, and 3.
rainbows to haue appeared, with most
terrible earthquakes, wherewith fell
doune the gate of S. Peters, killinge
14. persons, besids 8. soldiers. Also two
stéeples of S. Peters Church, crushing
the Church, and killing 38. preistes, besides
Quiristers and other people: Also
the Churches of the Franciscans, of S.
Iames, of S. Bartholomew, of our
Lady, the whole Abbaie of Marie Magdalene,
the braue artillerie house of
Rome, with a hospital wherein were
150. persons, besides other infinite buildinges
which the reuenew of a Kingedome
wil not repayre: and al this (as
you interpret) in token of Gods wrath
towardes the Pope. Of which, no one
sillable being true, (as many both here
and in England can testifie:) your resolutiō
appeareth, which you haue made,
to auouch any thing be it neuer so false

so blush at nothing be it neuer so shamful,
and to inuente what so euer maye
séeme for the purpose, to entertayne or
de lude the simple people.
            
            
               Towching the Man.
               
                  The 2. parte.
                  Concerning the man whom you answere:
To let passe all your euill
speach towardes him, as pardonable in
you, which knowe litle ciuilitie: you
séeme to deale otherwise verye hardlye
with him: for what so euer he sayeth or
doeth, you wil haue it to be taken in
euil parte. If he speake humblye, he dissembleth:
If he yéelde commendation,
he flattereth: If he she we confidence in
his cause, he vaunteth: If he offer trial,
he meanethe not performance: If he
proteste his meaninge, he must not be
credited: If he desire audience, he must
not be admitted: Finally, what so euer
he can imagine to vtter for iustifiinge
of him selfe or his cause, it must auayle
nothinge: William Charke will haue
him condemned for vnlearned, proude,

wicked and trayterous to the state: and
he makethe this generall conclusion:
M. Charke his conclusion.
                  That no man can teache or maintayne
the Catholicke fayth in England, but he
must be thereby, an enimie to God, and
a traytor to the state. The firste parte
whereof touchinge God, I let passe, as
an ordinarie reproche, of his vncleane
mouth: whereby he condemneth al the
noble Princes of Englande, and other
our vertuous auncestors, from the first
conuersion of that land, vnto our age.
But towchinge the second parte of his
conclusion, concerninge the state, I
must say a worde or two.
               
                  Religion standeth with temporall obedience.
                  Doe you hould, M. Charke, that noe
man in Englande, can be of an other
religion, then yours, but that of necessitie
he must also be a traytor? This is
hote doctrine. Héere agayne your zeale
ouerrunneth your wit, or rather your
malice ouerlashethe all reason. Must
euerye man be an enymie to the state,
which lykethe not that religion whiche
is fauoured bye the State?
               
                  
what saye you to the Apostles whiche
were of an other religion, then the states
& Princes wher they came: and they
taught, maintayned and furthered their
owne religion within the same states:
and will you for this fact of theirs condemne
them of treason against the said
states; & of teaching rebellion against
those Princes? If you dare affirme it,
their owne woordes shall reproue you,Rom. 13. Tit. 3. 1. Pet. 2.
which declare vnto vs, how they (notwithstanding
their contrarie religion)
taught all dutiful obedience in temporal
matters towardes those Princes,
being but infidels and otherwise wicked
men: the which notwithstandinge
the Apostels did commaund al Christians
to obey in conscience, as substitutes
of God, and soe they did, as appeareth
by their Apologies,Vide Apolo. duas Ius
                     
                        •
                     ni. mart. written in defence
of their innocencie in these poyntes,
at such times, as they were charged
with the contrarie as we are now.
I might make the like demaunde of Athanasius,
                  Hillarius, Eusebius versellensis
and others, which ceased not to mayntaine,

teach, and defend, their religion,
in the hottest persecution of the Arians,
and yet were noe traytours to the
states which fauoured the contrarie religion.
Morouer in Quéene Maryes
time wil you saye that al For his martirs,
were traytours to the state? or
that all of your opinion in these and other
countries, where the states fauour
not your religion, are traytours and
rebels? nether maketh it anye thing to
the purpose for you to saye, that our religion
is false, and yours true: for the
question is generall, whether euerye
man of a contrary relygion must nedes
be an enemie to the state, which you affirme,
and we deny.
               
                  A bad argument.
                  Nether is that argument to be
respected wherwith some of your chéefe
prelates vse to presse Catholikes some
times, saying: that they in Quene Maryes
time wished al euil to the Prince
and estate, and therfore we must nedes
doe the same now. This argument, I
saye, houldeth not, for that there is difference
of spirites in men. We know

your doctrine bothe in Iohn Wicklife,Wiclif. li. 4. Trial. ca. 3. Concil Cō. sessi. 8.
Luther,Luther in Bulla Leō. 10. and Caluine,Caluin. li. 3. inst. cap. 19. &. li. 4. cap. 10. to be daungerous
to al Princes whom you mislyke: teaching,
that subiectes are not bound to obey
their Princes for cōscience sake, but
that if the Prince rule amisse they are
frée, to restraine him and punish him at
their pleasure: which doctrines we condemne.
The commotions also of those
of your religion in al countries where
they can make their parties good, are
knowne to the worlde. And I doubte
whether you would liue soe quietlye in
England as Catholiques do, if the state
pressed you as it dothe them: but we
teache it to be of conscience and dutie.
And it is but the cruel and bloody spirite
of your ministers, which by your books
and sermons, séeke to sturre vp bothe
Prince and Maiestrate to aflict Catholiques
more and more in England, and
to accounte them as disloyal subiectes:
wherby you will one daye proue, that
you hinder your cause more thē by anye
one thing. For it commeth not of that

spirit, which you would séeme to haue,
nether is it the waye to gayne men to
your religion. As the late racking and
tormenting of those vertuous priestes
for their consciences in the Tower,
wherof, al Christendome at this daye
talketh, what hathe it gotten to your
religion? nothing, but the casting of
mens hartes into a horrour of suche
straunge and vnwonted dealinges, and
if you should driue men by such means
to desperation, what gayneth your religion
or the state therby?
               
                  But to retourne to M. Campion againe,
whose comming into Englande
you wil néedes enforce (as a politique
man that sée the far into common wealthes)
that it is for practise against the
state, & in hope of a golden day. For the
first, he hathe aunswered you, that he
commethe with a quite contrarie purpose,
and with contrarie commaundement
from his Superiors, whoe deale
in no country with matters of estate as
the world can witnes, & as the Indies

Iapon, can geue example, where they
haue dealt so many yeares for the bringing
of men to the Christian religion,
disalowed by the states of those countries,
and yet are noe medlers against
those estates, nor euer caused subiectes
to leaue their obedience to those infidel
Princes. And to the second, touching
the golden daye, which you talke of, I
know not in what sence you may speak
it to that man, whom al the goulde in
England (as I thinke) wil not gilte:
for that he contemnethe gould as much
as you desire it, and flatter for the meanes
wherby to gayne it. And to tel you
more plainly M. Charke in few words,
if M. Campion and you should mete in
equal balances, I thinke you would appeare
to be to lyghte in those poyntes,
wherin you would séeme to your paryshoners
to haue your ful waight.
            
            
               Touching the matter.
               
                  The third part.
                  TOuching the petition, or matter demanded,
to wit, disputation for trial

of the truthe: M. Charke in no wise
likethe it, saying more ouer: That he
would wonder if anye which pr ofesse
the gospel, should now looke for disputation:
wherof he geueth diuers reasōs.
First, for that They haue had truthe
now established soe many yeares. But
this séemeth a verie weake reason, for
the controuersy is, whether it be truthe
or noe, and we vndertake to proue the
negatiue parte. And for his nomber of
yeares (they being but two and twentie)
they suffice not for a prescription,
by the common lawes of England, and
muche lesse to exclude vs, whiche can
proue our continuance for a thowsand
peares without interruption. An other
reason is, for that (as he saythe) They
shal gayne noe great victorie in ouercō
                     ming
two or three, of the last and the
least in the quarel. But this is not soe:
for they shal gayne al the Catholiques
in England to their side, and vs that
are abrode also, if they can shew the
truthe to be with them. And albeit two
or thrée doe speake for the reste in this

demaund: yet shal there be more so dispute,
euen as manie as they wil admit
with safetie for their comming.
               
                  A third reason he geueth: for that
These Iesuites will make the trial with
false weyghtes and measures which are
abomination to the Lorde: while after
their custome, they dispute with vnlearned
and peeuish distinctiōs, false argumentes,
and absurde interpretations.
But this shal appeare (M. Charke) in
the trial, and your victorie shalbe the
more easie. You haue vsed bothe lying
argumentes, and absurde interpretations,
in this little booke of yours, as
hathe bene shewed: but what the Iesuites
wil doe, you cannot yet tell: perhappes
they are not of your spirite. And
in calling them vnlearned and peuishe,
you runne further then your felowes
wil allowe, for they haue proued & confessed
the contrary. And these termes,
maye easily be retourned vppon your
selfe, not in wordes but in déedes, by the
wekest of thowsands of their schollers.

                  Distinctions.But in déed their distinctiōs offend you
much, which according to the saying of
the Apostle,Epi. Iudae. you condemne and reuile
because you vnderstand them not. For
you must knowe, that distinguishinge
in al sciences (according to the Philosopher)Arist. in Elench.
appertaineth to the learned and
not to the peuishe: but especially in deuinitie,
wher al heresies spring by confounding
and huddling vp matters: and
al truthe is displayed, by distinguishing
of thinges into their proper natures.
As also in the cōtrouersies of our time,
when we haue distinguished and put
the cléere difference betwixt the things
that you confound, as betwene Idols &
Images: bloody and vnbloody sacrifices:
Iustice by faythe and merite of good
works: mediation of Christ, and intercession
of Saintes: faith and hope: tradition
of men and of the Apostles: and
manye other the lyke: when I say, we
haue distinguished these thinges into
their proper natures, and shewed eche
parte consonant to the worde of God:
then you haue no more to saye, for that

your ignorance is bewrayed, and the
truth made to euerye mans eyes, manifest.
               
                  Libertye of pen.
                  Fourthly you saye M. Charke, that
disputation is not necessarie, for that
we haue had and may haue the libertie
of our pen. The which is as true, as the
rest of your assertions before. No, no:
the worlde knoweth what search you
make after euerye pamphlet, that commeth
from vs, and how you persecute
them that bring in, or receaue the same
within the realme. And is this geuinge
vs libertie of our penne? Doe you M.
Charke, and your felow ministers, for
the credit of your cause, and for the auoiding
the danger of this disputation,
procure vs but the libertye of one of
your printes, and we wil aske no further
tryal.
               
                  Proofes in disputation.
                  Lastlye you forstraule your opinion
of the proofes to be admitted in disputation,
if the matter, agaynst your wil,
should come so farre fourth. That is,
that onely scripture were to be admitted
in such disputation, and with one

breath you reiecte by name, all Councels,
Fathers, Stories, naturall and
morall Philosophie. And of Councels
and stories you saye: They are witnesses
of contrarietie one to an other. Of
Fathers: Some of them are condemned
of bastardie, and other not guiltie of
that crime: yet were they but men, how
great so euer they were. Of natural and
moral Philosophie you say: That they
are enemies of true religion, and two
great nourses of Atheisme and heresie.
To which I answere, that albeit we
grounde our beléefe onelye vppon the
worde of God, and make that onely the
obiecte of fayth more then you doe, as
I haue shewed before in your ninth reporte:
yet doe we mislike this audacitie
of yours, in reiectinge these verye
notable helpes, lefte vs by God for the
better vnderstanding of his word. Councels, Fathers, and stories.For
by Councelles, Fathers, and stories,
we come to knowe not onlie which is
the worde of God, and whiche is not:
but also, which is the righte meaning
of the same, among soe infinite wrong

interpretations, which so manye hereticks
from time to time haue inuented
vpon the same: with whom I might easely
erre, if I had not this certaine way
to knowe what the true Catholique
Church (which can not erre) hath alwayes
holden. And this can not I tel,
but onelye by the testimonie of Councels,
Fathers, and stories: by the which
onely, Theodoret wryteth,Theod. li. 1. hist. ca. 8. that the famous
hereticke Arrius was conuicted,
and not by the bare letter of Scripture,
which he and al other hereticks, would
interpret as they list.Syno. Constan. Damas. here. 99. The seuenth general
Councel also conuicted the Monothelites,
and proued two distincte
wills, to be in Christ, by the helpe of
natural Philosophie: Philosophie.by which they shewed
it, to be a most sure and necessarie
consequence, that If Christ had two
natures, he must needes haue also two
distinct willes. For that there could not
be a nature indewed with reason, without
a wil. And as for moral Philosophie,
who séeeth not the necessitie of it,

for the vnderstandinge the natures of
vertue and vice, and al other actions
belonginge to man? And albeit these
thinges may be abused, as also Scripture
may: yet is it grosse ignorance, for
an abuse that may be, to condemne the
thinges which are excellent giftes of
God, and sparkes of his most high and
infinite wisdome. To depriue vs therfore
of al these helpes, and to turne vs
ouer onely to a bare letter of scripture,
the which eche man may ether deny to
be scripture, or wrangle at his pleasure
vppon the sense, it is as much to saye,
as that controuersies in religion, shall
neuer be ended: as both reason teacheth
vs, and experiēce, not only of al ages
past, but also of our times, sheweth. Note this reason.
For séeinge there are at this daye, the
Hussites in Boemeland, the Trinitaries
in Transiluania, the Anabaptistes
in Pooleland, the Adamites in dyuers
partes of Germanie, the Lutherans
in Saxonie, the Caluinistes in
France, the Puritanes and family of

Loue in England, and other the lyke
sectes in the worlde abrode: which all
with one voyce agrée agaynst the Catholicke
Church in this poynte, that
Scripture only is to be receaued, and al
other testimonies to be reiected: How
comethe it to passe, that these sectes
groundinge their seueral religions vpon
the méere word of God, as they say,
can not yet end their controuersies? If
the scripture be so playne, cleare, easie,
euident, and sufficient to ende al controuersies,
as they say: why doe they so
long disagrée? Howe can they vppon so
manifest and cléere a thing as they say
the scripture is, build so manye contrary
opinions and defend them out of the
same Scripture? But it is but a shifte
of the 
                     •
                  ommon enemie, to depryue men
first of their euidences and witnesses,
and afterward to set them by the eares
for the tytle. Flying onely to Scripture condemned as heretical.And I find this poynte of
flying onely to scripture, to haue bene
an old tricke of al hereticks of the Primatiue
Church for the maintenance of
their owne deuices, and therefore condemned

in them as hereticall, by the
same Church. Namely in the Valentiniās,
as testifieth Ireneus li. 3. con. He.
And Tertulian li. 8. de prescript. Also
in the Marcionistes, as the same authors
witnes. Also in the Arrians, as
Epiphanius wryteth Her. 69. And S.
Austen li. 5. con. Maximum ca. 1. And
Socrates li. 1. hist. ca. 14. Also in the Aetians,
as S. Basil wryteth lib. de spirit.
sanct. ca. 27. And finallie in the Aerians,
as Epiphanius writeth Her. 75. And
S. Augustine Her. 53. Wherefore M.
Charke affirminge the same, draweth
in on line with thes progenitors of his.
            
            
               Touching the Apostata.
               
                  The 4. Parte.
                  M. Charke in the ende of his booke
bringeth in for the defacinge of Iesuites
and al Catholique religion, a dialogue
writen by one Christian Franken
a Germā, brought vp (as he saithe)
amongest the Iesuites, as one of that
Societie: but afterward being made a
Protestāt, reuileth in that booke, bothe

Iesuites and al Catholicke religion, as
frier Luther, frier Bale, and manye other
Apostatas before him haue done.
Touchinge whom, first, (if it be true
and not coyned by them selues as the
newes of Rome before was) I must
answere as S. Austen did to the lyke
thing, whose wordes are these.Aug. ep. 137 ad ple. Hip. 
                  Simplye
I doe confesse before our Lord, whoe is
witnes vppon my soule, that since I began
first to serue God, as I haue hardely
found better men then thos which haue
profited in monasteries: soe I neuer
founde worse then such as fel in monasteries.
And agayne in the very same epistle,
handling the place of the psalme,
where Christ sayeth: They insulted agaynst
me which sate in the gate, and
songe in my reproche which droonke
wine:Psal. 68. He applyeth the whole, to such as
you are M. Charke, which insulte against
Christ and his religion, for the
faule of some on religious man. Wherfore
doe these men sitt (sayeth S. Austē
of hereticks scoffing at religious men)
and for what doe they watch, but onely
if any bishoppe, or clarke, or monke, or

nonne should chance a faule, that they
may make it to be thought, that al are
such, though in al it be not manifest?
And yet notwithstandinge, these felowes
do not cast out their owne wiues,
or accuse their owne mothers, for that
some one maried woman, is founde to
haue committed adulterie. But when
any fault or falsehode, doth ether sound
or appeare, in any of them that professe
the holy name of religious lyfe: these felowes
labour, enforce, and striue by all
meanes possible, that this faulte may be
thought to be in all. These men therefore
which seeke the pleasure of their
tonges, by our greefes and sorowes, may
be compared to the doggs which licked
and tooke pleasure in the sores and
woondes of good Lazarus.
                  Luc. 16.
               
               
                  Secondly, I answere that this rayling
treatise of this Apostata, translated
and intituled by you, A discouery of Iesuites:
hath noe foundation at al in it,
but only a lewd foolish applying of euery
good thing in that religion, to some
euil absurd and wicked meaning, framed
by his owne imagination without

geuing any reason or profe of the same.
By which kinde of argument, it is easye
to depraue not only al religion but
also al other ordinances, al common
welthes, all actions bothe of God and
man, and al creatures in the world, by
likning them to some dishonest or ridiculous
thing or other, whiche a lewde
mans inuētion may find out, as this apostata
hath done. But dothe he charge
anye one of the Iesuites (in soe manye
yeares, as he saythe, he liued in diuers
places with them) with any one acte of
dishonestie or disorder of lyfe, which he
might haue done manye, if he had liued
amongest your ministers soe long? The Iesuites lyfe by the enemies confession.Or
dothe he improue by learning, anie one
poynte of their doctrine? noe not one:
but rather vttereth that, of their good
discipline and orderly life, in continual
meditation of heauenly thinges, with
subduing the appetites of their fleshe,
as maye shame you and your loose ministerie.
I will put downe his owne
wordes translated by you, which God
enforced him to let faule, to his owne

confusion, and to the iustrifiinge of their
honestie. The Iesuites (sayeth he) doe
adde vnto their earnest meditations, Great labour.the
great toyle of studie also: &c. Deuine meditations.And from
the time that a man geueth him selfe to
such meditations, he departeth farre away
from al seruice and cherishinge of
the body: Chastising the fleshe.He abandonethe the societye
of the fleshe to whippinges, and other
voluntarye punishmentes of the body:
He pressethe and beatethe doune pleasure
as a blot of shame: Perfect charitye.and (as our 18.
rule doth command) he acknowledgeth
the image of Christ, in euery one of his
spiritual brethren. Contempte of riches and honour.As for riches, honor,
and al thinges which he worlde esteemeth
most excellent, they contemne
them and make none accompt of them.
These are his wordes M. Charke, translated
by your selfe, the which, me
thinke, contayne prayse ynough especially
cominge out of the mouth of a professed
enemie, which would not report
their lyfe to the best: yet I doubte lest
your enemies shall neuer be able to
charge you iustiy with the lyke things.

                  Thirdly and lastely I answere to this
matter, that in this kinde of argument
we could easely represse you, with many
for one of these examples, in learned
and profounde men of your religion,
which by the grace of God returne dayly
to the Catholicke fayth agayne: and
that not vpon a fancie, as this Apostata
left it, but vppon great reasons and
inuincible proofes which after long studye
and toyle they haue founde to stand
with the same. But for examples sake,
I wil here recounte onely two, both of
them later then the running out of this
Apostata, and both which are exstant in
print: of men, that were many yeares
ministers and preachers of your religion. Causae motiuae N. Xilandri īpres sae Ingolsta dij 1579.The first was called Nicolaus Xylander
Borussus who yéeldeth these causes
folowinge of his conuersion, which
I haue onelye touched in general, but
the Reader may sée them more at large
set doune and proued by him selfe in
his booke for this purpose.
                     1. His first reason is, because he
hathe found that the Catholiques haue
endured these 15. hundreth years in concorde

of one doctrine, & he recounteth vp
16. distincte Sectes spronge of Luther
within these 60. yeares.
                     2. For that the Catholiques can
bring their succession of Bishopes one
after another from Christ his time vnto
ours, which the Fathers say to be an
inuincible demnostration of the true
Churche.Irē. li. 3. ca. 3. Optat. li. 2. cōtr. Donat Aug. ep. 165. But the contrarye side bring
none at al.
                     3. The infinite miracles which haue
bene in the Catholyque Churche the
which we must ether beleue or discredit
al antiquitie which reporte them.
                     4. The authoritie of the vniuersal
visible Catholique Churche, the which
hath deliuered vnto vs the Scriptures
them selues, and haue triumphed ouer
soe manye enemies and heresies which
from tyme to tyme haue assalted her.
Whose authoritie was soe great with
S. Austen that he would not haue beleued
the Gospel but only vppon her authorytie.
                     5. The great holynes of infinite mē
of that Church as S. Anthonie, Hilarion,
Basil, Austen, Benedict, Gregorie,

Bernard, Dominic, Frauncis and the
like, which al were monkes and fryers
and professed men of that religion, and
yet noe doubte are sainctes in heauen,
which cannot be if they liued in error.
                     6. The reuerent spéeche of Catholique
writers, and the rayling, balsphemous,
and dishonest spéeche to be found
in the writinges of the other side.
                     7. The ordinarye lyinge and fraudulent
dealing of Protestantes: neuer
almost reportinge the opinions of Catholiques
trulye, but faininge them to
say ye which they neuer say nor thinke.
                     8. For that Protestantes estéeme al
their Ancestors to be damned, and doe
breake their wils and ordinaunces, by
conuerting to propha
                           ••
                         vses thos reue
news and liuings which they assigned
to the seruice of God.
                  
               
               
                  Professio. Catholica M. Seb. Flas chij. impres Colo. 1580.
                  THE Seconde, is called Sebastianus
Flaschius, whoe besides the reasons
which the other hath geuen (for I omit
them which haue bene touched before)
he yealdethe these reasons of his conuersion.
                     
                     1. For that he hathe founde the Catholiques
to teache quite contrarye, to
that which cōmonlye their aduersaryes
doe reporte of them.
                     2. For that he hath found by Luthers
bookes that he was moued onlye of enuye
to write first against the Catholyque
Churche.Li. de cap
                              •
                            Bab. eth. 
                              〈◊〉
                            Pap.
                     
                     3. For that he hath found in Luthers
writings so great dishonestie and scurrilitye
of spéeche, as might shame anye
harlote to reade, which could not come
frō a man inspired with the holy Ghost.Li. cōt. Pap. et in sermo. conuiualib.
                     
                     4. For that the Protestantes doe
reiect easily any booke or péece of Scripture
which maketh against them, and
that which they cannot denye, he hathe
proued that they corrupte it, and that
they estéeme noe more of Councels and
Fathers then of the Turkes Alcoran.
                     5. For that he hath found by reading
of ancient histories and Fathers of the
primatiue Church, that the most of all
their newe opinions, are ould heresies
condemned expressely and by name, in
the heretikes of the primatiue Church.Vide Sand. de visib. mō cap. 57.
                     
                     
                        
6. For that he hathe founde Luther
to hould manye manifest contrarieties
in his woorkes.Fabius de ā
                           tilogijs. Lut
                     
                     7. For that Luther séemeth to haue
beleued in nothing, not being ashamed
to saye that he had more confidence in
his Katherin Bore, and in his Philipe,
then in Christ.Serm. conuiu. et tit. de prophet. et. tit. de oper. Dei.
                     
                     8. For that he hath found them by
experience, to be parshall and to exaggerate
euerye litle thing that they can
find amisse in the liues of Catholiques,
althoughe amongest them selues they
liue most viciouslye, especiallye in
the sinne of the fleshe. For albeit they
haue wiues of their owne, yet doe they
in Germanie (according to Luthers
doctrine)Ser. de matrimo. vse their maydes at their pleasure,
and more then this, the ministers
vse commutation of wiues amongest
them selues, and a preacher of no smal
account would nedes enforce this man
to change wiues with him. And many
other such thinges whiche he proued amongest
them, he saythe, that verye
shame letted him to reporte them.
                  
               
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   