
      
         
            
            
            ¶A warning agaynſt the
dangerous practiſes of Papiſtes,
and ſpecially the parteners of the
late Rebellion.
            ¶Gathered out of the common feare
and ſpeche of good ſubiectes.
            Vox populi Dei, vox Dei est.
            Sene and allowed.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               THe ſtate of this Realme
conſidered, and ſpecially
ſuch accidentes touching
the ſame, as late troubles
haue miniſtred, do make
it dayly more and more euident
how precious and how deare a
iewell is the ſafetie of the Quéenes moſt
excellent Maieſtie our moſt louing and
beloued ſoueraigne Lady.The Q. precious. Compare the
time of her moſt noble and gracious gouernement,
with ages long agoe paſſed,
and ſpecially with the miſerable and dangerous
dayes immediatly preceding her
moſt happie & comfortable reigne: call to
memorie the weakneſſe & perils wherin
the common weale ſtoode, before her highneſſes
comming to the crowne: wey the
infinite benefites, both bodily and ghoſtly,
that the whole realme and all her ſubiectes
haue and do daily receaue by her
meanes: thinke vpon the greuous and
vnſpeakable miſeries that we all ſhalbe
like to ſuſteine by loſſe of her vnualuable
preſence: it ſhall be plaine that he is wilfully
blinde that can not ſée, he is wickedly
malicious that will not acknowledge,
he is obſtinately ſtone harted that ſhall
not with ſorrow and trembling déepely

imprint in carefull hart, thoſe motions
and thoughtes that ſuch conſideration
ſhall lay before him.The Queenes good gouernement. Remember the quiet
of conſcience, the comfort of true ſeruing
of God, the fréedome of the Realme, the
deliuerance from foreine thraldome of
ſoules, the eſcape of the heauie yoke of
ſtrange dominion, the recouerie of welth,
the benefite of peace, the common and
egall diſtribution of iuſtice, the familiar
cheriſhing of Nobilitie, the good preſeruing
and loue of the Commonaltie, the
mutual and tender kindneſſe at home, the
amitie and awe abroad, the ſwéete enioying
of all theſe commodities: match herewith
the danger and feare of loſing them:
how can it then be, but that the minde
ſhall be marueilouſly diſtracted? Great
and full of diuerſities are the ſittes of a
paſſioned louer, but yet greateſt where
reaſon ruleth leaſt. Farre greater to a
good minde muſt be the panges of conſideration
in thys caſe, but yet greateſt
where reaſon ruleth moſt. The ſilly louer
is tranſported (as they complaine
poore ſoules in their dities) ſomtyme with
ioyes of hys enioying, ſometyme with
feare of his forgoing, there is no meane
or order of his exceſſiue affection, and all

is becauſe the abuſed creature hath ſet his
felicitie in a wrong conceite: But if ſuch
vaine, ſhort, repentable, and feble delite of
fanſie haue ſuch force vpon the minde of
man, how much more ought the déepe,
wiſe, naturall, and true impreſſion of the
eternall comfort of ſoule, the good and ſafe
eſtate both of the common weale and of
the priuate hauiour of him ſelfe, and of
thoſe thinges and perſons that he holdeth
deareſt, yea and of hys poſteritie for euer,
worke more mighty, violent, and continuing
effectes in the minde of an honeſt good
man, that ſetteth hys thought vpon iuſte
and aſſured groundes? All theſe contemplacions
can not but fill a good Chriſtians
and a good ſubiectes eye with ſight and
knowledge, how vneſtimable a treaſure
our Quéene, our I ſay Quéene Elizabeth,
is to the Realme of England,Reseſt ſolliciti plena timoris amor. and the ſame
can not but pearce hys hart with ſtrong
feare and care for her preſeruation, ſo
farre as ſurely it were able (as in the
dumme borne ſonne of Creſus) to breake
the ſtringes of a tyed toung, to drawe
ſpeach out of the moſt barbarous and rudeſt
ſubiect, to crie out at her highneſſes
perill, and with ſuch noyſe as he is able
to make, though it were but as a gooſe of

the Capitole, to geue warnyng to the
watchmen of the toure of all our ſafeties.
This hath moued me to forget how vnſkilfull
and how vnapt I am to treate of
matters ſo farre aboue me, and onely to
remember how méete it is for all men to
thinke of thoſe thinges that touch them ſo
nerely. Neyther do I altogether allow of
the manerlineſſe of that good fellowes curteſie,
that would not vnlocke a gate to the
kyng, but made the kyng to ſtaye there,
while he ranne two miles to fetch a more
worſhipfull man to open it. And farre
more diſcommendable had ſuch good maner
ben, if the kyng had then ben nerely
and egrely purſued by an enemye. When
traiterous affection ſo boileth in ſubiectes
hartes, as it can not be conteined in ſtomake,
but muſt breake out into open rebellion,
when the very humor that féedeth
ſuch treaſon is ſo ſtrong and ſo angry,
that neyther lenitiues of clemencie and
bountie can allay it, nor purgatiues of honeſtie
and loyaltie can expell it, it is hye
tyme to looke to the health of the body.
When the furie of treaſon outrageth ſo
farre,A figure of the Northren rebellion. that it ouerfloweth all the banke
                  •
               
of diſcretion, and all the boundes of remembring
theyr owne perill: when they

drawe euery ambitious popular witte into
their fellowſhip, lyke an eatyng canker
or infecting ſore: when they can not tary
the auantage of theyr owne tymes, the
ripeneſſe of their deuiſes, the redineſſe of
their aydes, the fitneſſe of ſeaſons, nor other
circumſpections of policie: when the
ſtay or ſeuering of their heades can not
holde them, but that, like an Adder when
her head is cut of, they will ſtill be wrigling
with theyr tailes and threaten a ſtinging,
when being vanquiſhed, they yet
finde ſome newe reſorters vpon olde hopes:
ſurely it muſt néedes appeare to be a
wonderfully malicious poyſon of treaſon
that poſſeſſeth them, and ſo a great neceſſitie
to know who be enuenimed with it,
the cauſes of the diſeaſe,Sero medicina paratur, cum mala per longas inualüere moras. and the ſignes of
the infection, that conuenient cure may be
applied, or for the vncurable ſome good order
may be prouided, that the head and
hart may be preſerued. It is now hie time
therefore, when traitors them ſelues haue
geuen warning of their owne treaſons,
to ſearch the confederacie, yea and as miners
follow the ſignes euery way as they
ſpred in the ground till they be guided to
the trunke or body of the metall, ſo to followe
the apparances of ſuſpicions and
likelihodes, till it appeare plainely what

light made the ſhadowe, or what fire raiſed
the ſmoke. It is not good tarying till the
flame mountyng in the ayre aboue the
houſe teppe, the principalls and pillers
conſumed, and eche part ſo embraced with
fire that no ayde dare approch, do plainly
declare the whole building paſt hope of recouery.
Fyres oftentimes negligently raked
vp, ſtickes endes not throughly quenched,
embers not regarded, a candeles end
not looked vnto, haue brought many an honeſt
man to pitifull calamitie. I like therefore
better the honeſt wiſedome of thoſe
that ſtudy how the Queene may ſtand
and not fall, then the reaching policie of
thoſe that deuiſe how them ſelues may
ſtand when the Quéene is fallen. God preſerue
her highneſſe long, for her fallyng
would make a Samſons poſte with vs all,
yea and rightly a Samſons poſte, for no
dout it woulde brooſe them too, that be buſieſt
to pull it downe. I haue thought good
therfore, as a faythfull ſubiect, ſtaying my
whole truſt of well doing vpon the well
continuing of thys bleſſed eſtate, without
other reſpect, or rather proſpect beyond
it, to diſcloſe in briefe collection of the common
brute of good and honeſt men, that
loue thys eſtate and be carefull for it, ſo
much as I haue noted, or rather common

experience & euident truth hath opened,
concerning the diſpoſitions of ſundry dangerous
thinges, doinges, and perſons, agaynſt
God, the Quéenes, highneſſe, the
Realme and her moſt noble gouernment,
to the entent that vpon laying abrode of
their faultes, them ſelues may be reformed,
or her highneſſe by warning ſo armed,
as they may be leſſe dangerous, that
is to ſay, more reſtrayned and diſhabled,
and her maieſties true ſubiectes more
ſtrengthened and emboldened.
            Surely all true Chriſtians and all true
Engliſhe ſubiectes ought to beleue,True coucluſions. and
may wel know, that theſe are true concluſions.
            Firſt that euery papiſt, that is to ſay, euery
one that beleueth all the Popes doctrine
to be true, is an enimie & traytor, agaynſt
the maieſtie and honor of God, agaynſt
the crownes and dignities of all
kinges and temporall princes, and againſt
the wealth and ſafetie of all ciuile kingdomes,
policies, and common weales.
            Item that euery ſuch Engliſh Papiſt
is a traytor to the Quéene of England,
and hateth her life, wiſheth the alteration
of her gouernement, and liueth in hope of
an other world, which euen by an ordinary

byword, it is ſayd that them ſelues doo call
theyr Golden day.
            Item that euery ſuch Engliſhe Papiſt
is a ſpeciall traytor to the realme of England,
and hath no regarde into what ſlauerie,
conqueſt, ſubiection to foren tyrannie,
diſhonor or other miſerie it be throwen, ſo
that theyr falſe idolatrous and ſuperſticious
religion be reſtored, with libertie
to ſpoyle and murder, without reſpect of
dignitie, age, ſexe, learning, reuerence, honeſtie,
or nature.
            Item that no clemencie, gentleneſſe, benefites,
or louing dealing, can winne a
Papiſt while he continueth a Papiſt, to
loue her maieſtie, how much ſo euer he diſſemble,
nor bring them to aſcribe theyr
ſafetie to any her benefites, nor to any
prayſe of her owne goodneſſe, but either to
theyr own diſſimulation, practiſe, and falſhed,
which ſome call cunning, or to the holineſſe
of theyr cauſe, for whom God forſoothe
ſo prouideth as his anoynted ones
may not poſſibly by any law, or at leaſt execution
of law, be touched: where in
deede, if they continue ſtill vnpuniſhed, it
muſt be thought that God ſo purueyeth▪
becauſe the puniſhmentes of this world
are not ſufficient for them. But yet in the

meane time it ſerueth to make them vnexcuſable,
by whoſe default ſo dangerous
wolues remayne in the flocke.
            Item that Papiſtrie hath this propertie
of hereſies, contrarie to the nature of
Gods truth: that is, to be throwen down
with aduerſitie, and to floriſhe with indulgence
and lenitie.
            Item that as it is reaſon that the owner
of a ſhepebiter maſtife, knowing his dogs
qualitie, ſhould either hang vp his dog,
or paye for the ſhéepe that his dog worieth,
ſo thoſe that haue notorious Shepebiters,
murderers of Gods flocke, in theyr
cuſtodie and power, muſt make theyr accompt,
either to hang vp or otherwiſe diſpatch
their curres, or ells to anſwere to
God for the bloud of his ſhéepe, both ſuch
as they haue deſtroyed, and ſuch as they
may deſtroy by any poſſibilitie hereafter.
            Item that all aduiſes to great perſonages,
to perſuade neutralitie or an enterteyning
of contrary ſides in religion with
vncertaintie of countenance and fauor,
is the way to ſupplant aſſured ſafetie, to
make ſure enimies and vnſure frendes, to
yle open to paraſites & traytors, to be vnknowen
to other, and to be vnhable to diſcerne
what other be to them.
            
               
Item that timorous policie is the worſt
policie that may be, what ſoeuer the cauſe
be, good or bad, and worſt of all it is in beſt
cauſes: wherein as her maieſtie hath neither
want of conſtant magnanimitie, nor
cauſe of feare, ſo is it méete that her enimies
haue no ſtomake to contemne her,
nor by exceſſe of clemencie to miſconſtrue
her goodneſſe as lacke of daring.
            Item that by the great nouelties and
alterations of times that haue happened
within our memorie, there is riſen a common
policie among people, to ioyne to
ſtrong and ſafe ſides, whereby they are aliened
from the fearefull, and therefore it
is to be prouided, that there be a boldneſſe
of ſafetie to ſerue the Quéene truely and
zelouſly, and an aſſuredneſſe of danger to
her enemies.
            Item by boldneſſe and ſharpe execution
vpon enemies, the frendes are encoraged,
and contrariwiſe if the dangerous
traytor be not remoued, the true ſubiect
may be left in perill, and thereby the reſt
of good ſubiectes diſabled, or at leſt diſcouraged
to venture ſo farr agayne, and the
fréedome of conſultation in the meane
time for preſeruing the prince empeched.
            Item that it is truely ſayd Improbum

hominem praeſtat non accuſaſſe quam
abſoluere. It is better not to meddle
with a dangerous noughty man, than to
let him goe: for what were it els than to ſet
a houſe a fier and runne away by the
light?
            Item that occaſions and fitte opportunities
ouerſlipped are not recouerable.
            Item that many times it is as ſmall an
offenſe to geue a warrant to kill a true
man, as to pardon a murderer or traytor,
as a wiſe ſhepeherd will rather geue leaue
to a hunter to kill the beſt lambe in hys
flocke, than to let goe a foxe or a wolfe.
            Item that the liues of kinges and princes
are the liues and ſoules of theyr kingdomes
and common weales, whereby
they are to conſider that in being prodigall
of theyr owne ſafeties in exceſſe of clemencie
to traitors, or in ſecuritie of expoſing
theyr perſons to perils, Largiuntur ex alieno,
they be liberall of that which is not
theyr owne to geue.
            Item that no traytor is more perilous,
than he that wreſteth the law to rayſe an
vnderminer of the princes crowne to her
danger.
            Item that he is iuſtly to be ſuſpected
that ſhall practiſe with any vayne deuiſe of

pacification, or colored clemencie, to rebator
blunt the edge of the princes ſworde, or
ſo to tye it in the ſcaberde that it may not
be drawen for her defenſe, as if ſuch qualifiers,
hiders, and clokers, ſhould ſéeke to
abuſe that moſt reuerend and holy ſigne
of maieſtie to no good ende or other end
than God ordeined it.
            Item that God can not well take it, if
he be leſſe zelouſly ſerued than the diuell,
that there be leſſe feruencie ſhewed by truly
learned princes for auauncing of Gods
honor againſt his enemies, than hath ben
by abuſed and deceiued princes for ſetting
vp of the kingdome of the diuell and Antichriſt.
            Item that Gods commandementes of
placabilitie and forgeueneſſe extend to our
owne enemies, but not to his enemies, againſt
reuenge of priuate diſpleaſures, and
not againſt ſeueritie & ſharpe execution in
caſes of Gods honor and common weales:
wherein is alway to be noted, that the
Prince is ſo not a priuate but a publike
perſon, as no attempt againſt her ſafetie
can or ought to be accompted a priuate
cauſe.
            The full proofe and larger explication
of theſe concluſions, though it be eaſy, as a

thing which not onely all conuenientie of
reaſon affirmeth, but alſo dayly experience
laieth before all mens eyes that haue a frée
conſideration not accombred with corrupt
zeale and affection, ſo yet ſurely were it a
méete thing to be handled by ſome ſuch
man, as could adde thereto ſuch ornaments
of ſpeche, ſuch ſtrength of eloquence, and
pith of perſuaſion, as myght not onely be
vnderſtoode & beleued, but be felt & mouel
Here any moſt excellent orators ſpecial-vertues
might be well employed. A fit argument
ſure it were to ſhewe witte and
knowledge, but ſpecially truth and good
meaning. But till ſome fitte perſon ſhall
take in hand to beſtow his more profitable
trauayle that way, let vs yet for vnlading
of ſome of the abundance of our entier deuotion
for Gods truth, for her maieſtie,
and our countrey, haue ſome remembrance
of the particularities thereof.
            For the firſt article that defineth papiſtes,
that accuſeth thē of treaſon to God,
to kings, and to realmes, if it be well weyed
it can not but quickly be ſéene for vndouted
truth. Though it be true, that euery
one that holdeth any one error or article
of doctrine that the Pope teacheth, varying

from the worde of God, is in that article
a papiſt, as for example the hereſie of
tranſubſtantiation,Not all Papiſtes traitors. the blaſphemie of popiſh
maſſe, or any ſuch other, yet compt I
not euery ſuch a one wholy a papiſt within
compaſſe of this article, that is, vnder title
of a traitorous Papiſt, but ſuch a one as
holdeth all the Popes doctrine to be true,
that the Romane church erreth not, that
it hath rightfully ſuch ſuperioritie and primacie
in others kingdomes and dioceſces
as it hath proudly claimed & vſurped, and
that Chriſtians are bound to referre their
fayth vnto it, and to hang vpon the Popes
determinations. Many men otherwiſe
good & honeſt ſubiectes are not yet purged
of all errors wherwith Rome hath infected
them, & muſt haue their tyme to be better
inſtructed. But thoſe that are perfect
Papiſtes,Which Papiſtes, be traitors that publiſh the Pope to be head
of the church (which yet in dede is no
member of the true church) and would
haue vs with an implicite & bond faith, to
depend vpon that ſea, & for that reaſon will
refuſe by all lawful meanes to confeſſe the
right of Princes in their kingdomes ouer
all their ſubiectes, they be perfect traitors
in deede, yea and the learned ſort of them

be wilfull heretikes & traitors.Learned Papiſtes wilfull traytors. For though
in the darke tymes, when controuerſies of
religion were not brought into ſearching,
the ſtreame of error caried men awaye
without douting, yet ſince that by debating
the light hath bene euidently opened,
and men haue ſought and throughly examined
the matter, there is no learned papiſt
but he knoweth he mainteineth error,
and in defending and ſpreading the ſame
he defendeth and ſpreadeth, and ſo directly,
aduiſedly, wilfully, and maliciouſly, putteth
in execution to his vttermoſt power,
hye treaſons againſt God, againſt kinges,
and kingdomes.
            Againſt God I cal them treaſons,Treaſon offence againſt maieſtie. though
our law, the iudge of ciuil treaſons in England,
haue no ſuch name, becauſe the nature
of the offence ſo properly receaueth
that title, and alſo the vſuall name of hye
treaſon in iure gentium, in the common
law of nations, and in other languages,
doth ſo playnely expreſſe it. Hye treaſons
are in their true nature, offences againſt
hye maieſtie, that is, either to the deſtruction
of the perſons, or denyall and defacement
of the iuſt dignities and authorities
of thoſe that beare the name of maieſtie,

and to whom the hyeſt dutie of obedience
faith and alleageance extendeth. And therefore
is treaſon called Crimen leſae maieſtatis,
the crime of violating or abating of
maieſtie. Greater maieſtie than the maieſtie
of God can not be, therefore hyer and
verier treaſons then againſt God can not
be.Treaſon againſt God. His perſon can not be deſtroyed, or touched:
his dignitie, honor, glorie, and authoritie,
may be ſclaundered and blaſphemed,
and his ſubiectes, that is, mortall men,
may be withdrawen from their due obedience,
and drawen into rebellion againſt
him. And this I ſay is hye treaſon to God,
to violate or abate the maieſtie of God:
and this do papiſtes. For though God be
king of the whole world, and ſo is rightly
called the Lord by vniuerſall name, yea euen
of deuilles: yet is hys chirch hys more
proper and certaine kingdome, whereby
he is more reſtrainedly and aptly called
our king and our father, and ſo more fitly
called our head in reſpect of the body, which
is his chirch and not the reſt of the worlde.
In this kingdome hys hyeſt dignitie is to
be the onely head thereof, which the Papiſtes
take from him, and deriue it to their
Pope. And though with gloſes they excuſe

it, that theyr Popes take it not from God,

                  〈…〉
                vnder God, as his vicars, yet
muſt they be admoniſhed, that wythout
ſufficient deputation and warrant from
the kyng himſelfe, (which the Pope hath
not) the ſubiect to thruſt himſelfe into gouernance
of the kingdome is hye treaſon,
where he that being a ſtranger would ſeke
to conquere it, were but an enemy. And ſo
is it rightly to be ſayd that the Turke is
to God an enemy, and the Pope is to God
a traytor, and all his adherentes principall
traytors, for treaſon admitteth no acceſſaries.
            Alſo one great part of Gods maieſtie
ſtandeth in making of lawes, to gouerne
his kingdome, that hys ſhéepe ſhall heare
hys voyce and no ſtrangers. Againſt which
poynt of maieſtie, as it is hye treaſon to
publiſh lawes and proclamations in ciuile
kynges names againſt their wyll, ſo are
papiſtes hye traytors in publiſhing and receauing
lawes, proclamations, and decrées
from a climing and vſurping tyrant to
bynde Gods ſubiectes the chirch, wythout
the wyll and warrant of God.
            Alſo rebelliouſly to burne, deſtroy,
tread downe, or deface in great contempt,

the commiſſions and lawes of temporall
kynges, is an hye offence againſt maieſtie,
and therefore papiſtes, that diſhonor and
diſcredit the word of God, and deſtroy the
bookes thereof, are hye offenders agaynſt
hys maieſtie.
            Alſo hie treaſon it is for the ſubiect to
leuie warre agayſt hys ſoueraigne, and to
deſtroy hys lande, hys faythfull ſubiectes,
and true liege people. And therefore Papiſtes
in their perſecuting and murderyng
of Chriſtians with open hoſtilitie, haue
ſhewed themſelues hye traytors to the vniuerſall
King of Chriſtians.
            Alſo where the counterfaityng of princes
handes and coynes, and the clipping
and abating the value of their true coynes,
and the vttering of ſuch forged and abated
coine, is hie treaſon: what leſſe name than
hye treaſon agaynſt God, can we geue to
papiſtes, that haue counterfait the writing
and coynes of God, and geuen out falſe
commiſſions, falſe patentes and falſe charters
in ſtede of his worde, that clippe from
the dignitie and ſufficiencie of hys word,
that haue coyned falſe hereſies, abated true
doctrines, & ſo do publiſh and vtter them.
            Alſo if corrupting and counterfaityng

of Princes ſeales, and geuing out or annexing
his ſeales to falſe charters of theyr
owne in the Princes name, be hye treaſon:
are they not hye traitors to God, that
corrupt his ſeales his Sacramentes, and
ſet forth new priuate inſtitutions of
their owne, as Maſſes, and ſuch bagages,
in ſtede of them, I meane not onely the inuenters
and forgers, but alſo the receiuers,
publiſhers, vtterers, and cariers abrode
of ſuch abhominable vntruthes?
            Alſo what greater offenſe agaynſt Maieſtie
can be, than to commaunde the
Princes ſubiectes not to beleue the Princes
word or writyng, nor any thyng that
ſhall paſſe by his authoritie, without ſuch
offenders confirmation and allowance:
And that the Princes word and writyng
ſuffiſeth not to direct the ſubiectes dutie,
without ſuch offenders explication and
addicions: And that ſuch offenders
may adde at their pleaſure: And that
ſuch addicions are to be holden equal with
the Princes word: And that the Princes
word muſt euer be ſo taken as ſuch offenders
expound it, & none otherwiſe? Then
muſt the Papiſtes, in theyr diſcredityng
the word of God, in their diſhablyng it as
not ſufficyng to the inſtruction of our

fayth, for the ſaluation of our ſoules▪ in
theyr clayming falſe and vndue authoritie
to theyr traditions, and in their reſtrayning
the word of God to their expoſitions
though directly againſt the word & againſt
the ſpirite of God, nedes be accompted
hye traitors agaynſt Gods maieſtie.
            Alſo the greateſt honor and dignitie
that God hath and chalengeth ielouſly to
hym ſelfe among men, is the redemption
and iuſtification of man. The Papiſtes,
which draw that from God to man, from
grace to workes, as they are moſt haynous
and blaſphemous traitors to God
in denying his frée graciouſneſſe therin, ſo
are they moſt arrant theues to Chriſtian
men in robbyng them of the benefite
therof.
            Alſo if to deny that the Prince ought to
enioye the ſtile, kyngly name, and dignitie
of the realme, with al preeminences to they
ſame belongyng, be hye treaſon: are the
not hye traitors to God, that take from
God the name of our onely Iuſtifier, and
from Chriſt the title of our onely redemer
and Aduocate, and from the holy ghoſt the
office and ſtile of our onely true and ſufficient
Inſtructer?
            Alſo ſeing that to defile the kynges wife

is hye treaſon, wherby the ſucceſſion of
hys crowne may growe to diſhonor and
oncertaintie: are not Papiſtes then hye
traitors that haue made the church the
ſpouſe of God, to commit ſo many fowle
ſpirituall whoredomes, with idolatries,
hereſies and yeldyng her ſelfe to be abuſed
of ſtrangers?
            So appeareth it euidently that, if violatyng
of maieſtie: if denyng the kyng to
be the onely kyng and hed of hys owne
realme: if vſurpyng ſupreme gouernance
without the kynges aſſignement: if makyng
and receiuyng lawes and proclamations,
in the kynges name, without hys
warrant: if deſtroyeng and defacyng
in contempt, the kynges charters: if leuyeng
warre agaynſt the kyng, within
the realme, and murderyng hys ſubiectes:
if counterfaityng the kynges coyne or
ſeales: if annexyng hys ſeales to falſe writynges:
if abatyng hys coyne, by clippyng
or otherwiſe: if vtterance of ſuch forged,
or abated ware: if diſcredityng the Princes
word and authoritie, and auauncyng
their owne aboue it: if denyeng the kinges
right to hys kyngly office: if takyng from
him hys royal ſtile name & dignitie: if corruptyng
hys wife with adulterie: if any of

theſe, if all theſe together, be hye treaſon:
Papiſtes are hye traitors to the maieſtie
of almightie God.
            But theſe parhappes may be thought
to be but allegoricall or figuratiue treaſons,
(ſo litle the matters of God do moue
vs) and in the eye and conſideration of the
law of the realme they are none other, yet
are they in very dede truely treaſons & offenſes
agaynſt the hyeſt maieſtie,Kinges ſhould haue care of Gods honour. euen the
ſame maieſtie by whom kynges do reigne
and are vpholden, and the ſame maieſtie
for which kynges ought to be carefull, if
they will haue hym to prouide for theyr
maieſties. Yea they are the very ſedes of
ciuil & temporall treaſons. For vndoutedly,
as no man breaketh out into actuall
ſinne agaynſt men, that hath not firſt yelded
to an aſſent to offend God: ſo no man
procedeth ſo farre as to commit treaſon agaynſt
the Prince,Papiſtrie ſede of ciuile treaſon. that hath not firſt conceiued
a traiterous minde to rebel againſt
God. And as of ordinarie courſe and naturall
neceſſitie it foloweth, that full and
ſtrong ſedes, throwen in ground fit for
them, cheriſhed with conuenient moiſture,
and comfortable heate of noriſhyng
ſonne, muſt rankly growe and bring forth
herbes or wedes of theyr propre kynd: ſo

theſe traitorous ſedes layed vp in fat ſoile
of Papiſtes boſomes, if they be watered
with welth and indulgence, and ſhyned
vpon with the cherefull glimſes of opportunities,
will ſurely bryng forth the frutes
of theyr owne qualitie, treaſons agaynſt
princes.Hereſies puniſhed by temporall law. And for this reſpect, other offenſes
that haue in tymes paſt ben wrongfully
ſuppoſed to be of this nature, haue ben alſo
puniſhed by the lawes of the realme. In
ancient order of Letes, and other courtes,
they haue ben enquired vpon before treaſons
done to the prince. They haue had
theyr ſeuerall formes of puniſhmentes,
yea in ſome caſes they haue ben, and in
ſome places and cauſes they yet be, exempted
from the Princes power to pardon.
They haue bene termed by ſpeciall
names of hereſies and blaſphemies: and
theyr puniſhementes, byſide temporall
peynes, haue ben extended in opinion to
the further reuenge of the eternall Maieſtie,
whoes crowne and dignitie they
haue ben thought to violate. And ſurely,
if in diſcernyng which were hereſies and
blaſphemies, they had not erred: if they
had not miſtaken, and executed the true
man for the traitor: the generall care
which was pretended to mainteyne truth

and the church, ſtode well with the dutie
of Chriſtian Princes, as viceroyes and deputies
iuſtly zelous for theyr ſuperior or
rather ſupreme Lord king of kynges and
Lord of lordes, the true monarch of whole
vniuerſalitie. And though the ſame late
& new deceiued antiquitie ſwarued from
true iudgement of the perſons and cauſes,
I can not well ſée howe that ſhould be a
warrant to diſburden Princes of imitation
of that zele, when it is ones ioyned
with right vnderſtandyng, no more than
the wrongfull hangyng of a true man by
miſtakyng hym for a thefe or a murderer,
ought to be a diſcharge for the very thefe
or murderer, when he is afterward taken
in dede. And without doubt more holeſome
and profitable it were for theſe hereticall
traitors agaynſt God,Mercie to puniſh Papiſtes. I meane the
Papiſtes them ſelues, to be in this lyfe, by
ſome ſharper law and execution driuen to
repentance, than to be repried or reſerued
to arrainement before the laſt iudge,
whoes knowledge can not be deciued,
whoes iuſties can not then be entreated,
whoes execution hath neither end nor
meaſure: and ſo a litle more hardneſſe
with them a while, would be a very beneficiall
and mercyfull ſharpneſſe.
            
               
But now let vs come to that part that
toucheth men more nerely than any loue of
God.Papiſtes traitors to kinges and kingdomes. Let vs ſée how they be traitors to
kinges and kingdomes. If we haue minde
to ſée that Papiſtes, which holde all the
Popes doctrine, to be true, are traitors in
déede to kinges and kingdomes, it behoueth
to call to minde what be the Popes
doctrines, doinges & practiſes concerning
the crownes of kinges and ſtates of kingdomes.
Popes haue chalenged, and Papiſtes
that affirme the Popes to be frée
from errour,Traitorous doctrines of Popes for kinges and kingdoms. their doctrine to be true, and
their authoritie to be lawfull, do alſo holde
that it is their due which they chalenge,
that is, to haue the authoritie of both
ſwordes, ſpirituall and temporall, the one
in exerciſe, the other in power: to haue
the diſpoſition of all the crownes of Chriſtian
Princes: to haue the iudgement of
deciding to whom the right of any kingdome
belongeth: to haue power for diſobedience
to him, or by hys diſcretion, to
tranſferre the crownes of kings to whom
he will: to haue lawfull power, to geue
kingdomes to prey, ſpoyle, and conqueſt,
to ſuch as can inuade and poſſeſſe them: to
haue power to aſſoile and diſcharge Chriſtian
ſubiectes, from fayth and allegeance

to their lawfull and naturall ſoueraigne
Lordes, Kinges, and Princes: to haue
power to geue leaue, yea commaundement,
bleſſing, reward, forgeueneſſe of
ſinnes, and heauen it ſelfe, to ſubiectes to
rebell againſt the Prince, to depoſe the
Prince, diſherite and deſtroy him: that
there is of common right, and by the mere
lawe of God, reſerued to the Pope a ſpeciall
ſubiection, reſort, appellation, and obedience
of one great part of all Princes
ſubiectes, yea and of all ſubiectes of all
Princes in one great part of their cauſes.
Be not theſe hainous treaſons? And theſe
can not be denied to be the naturall and
very treaſons of all Papiſtes, that is to
ſay, of all that depend vpon credit of the
Pope, that holde hym for Gods vicar, for
Peters ſucceſſor, for whom Chriſt prayed
that hys fayth ſhould not faile, that applie
to him this title ad quem perſidia non poteſt
accedere, to whom falſhode can not
reach, that holde hym for a conſtant rocke,
an aſſured preacher of truth, an apoſtolicall
man, if he be not ſome other thing
than a man, to whom our belefe is bounden,
with ſuch other falſe titles, wherewith
Popes them ſelues haue garniſhed
them ſelues and their paraſites haue ouerloden
them.
            
               
Conſider the ordinarie practiſe of
Popes and Papiſtes accordyng to theſe
doctrines,Traiterous doinges of Papiſtes againſt kinges and kingdomes. and than ſhall you ſée, that
from the moſt hye treaſon which the Pope
committed againſt hys ſoueraigne Lorde
the Emperour, the renting and deſtruction
of the Empire, all the victories and ſucceſſes
of the Saracens & Turkes againſt
Chriſtendome, all the tearyng away of
moſt noble and large kingdomes and prouinces
from the body of Chriſtianitie, all
the ſubduing and thrallyng of infinite
Chriſtian ſoules to Mahomete and the deuill,
all the depoſinges, murderinges, turmoyllinges,
ciuile warres, debates betwene
Chriſtian Princes, ſhedinges of
Chriſtian bloud, indignities and oppreſſions
of Chriſtian kinges and Emperours,
conqueſtes, rebellions, and miſchiefes, for
theſe v. C. yeares and aboue, are wholly
or chiefly to be imputed to the treaſons of
Popes and Papiſtes. All ſometime moſt
learned and noble Grecia yet lamentably
rueth it. All Africa the mother of moſt conſtant
Martyrs féeleth it. The Germane
Emperours, with moſt hainous reproches
and foule treading in their neckes,
may not forget it. The kinges of Fraunce
and Spaine, bothe at home in their natiue

kingdomes, and abrode, as well in Naples,
Sicile, Lombardie, as in other territories
of Italie and of the Empire, haue
ſharply felt it. The Lordes and ſtates of
Italie haue bene daily and long ſhaken
with it. The kinges of England haue bene
poiſoned, whipped, beaten with roddes,
murdered, depoſed, the land geuen in conqueſt,
enterdited, made tributarie, robbed,
pilled & ſcraped of their treaſure, brought
into ſlauiſhe ſubiection, depriued of honour
and eſtimation, euery way moſt villanouſly
abuſed. To let paſſe the elder times
and further realmes, let vs ſpeake nothing
of depoſing of olde Emperours, erecting of
new, ſetting the ſonne againſt the father,
the ſubiect againſt his Lord, making them
come barefooted them ſelues with theyr
wiues and children long wayting with
ſubmiſſion in colde froſtes, treading in
their neckes, ſpurning of their crownes,
and a thouſand ſuch abhominable prides of
Popes and ſlaueries of Princes. Let vs
deale, but with our ſelues, and with our
owne féeling, knowledge, and memorie.
The accurſing of king Iohn, the receauing
him vaſſall, the making his Realme ſubiecte
and feudatarie to the Pope, the arming

his ſubiectes againſt him, the poyſoning
of him at length, the geuing the land
to the French Kinges ſonne, the inuading
thereof by the Dolphine of Fraunce, his
ſo long poſſeſſing a great part of it, the rebellion
of the Barons to take the Frenchmens
part, all the miſchiefes that fell in
all this while, were they not the good
workes of Popes and Papiſtes? The great
diuiſion of the two noble houſes of Yorke
and Lancaſter, which coſt ſo much Engliſh
bloud, that there remaineth no houſe of hie
or meane nobilitie, that hath not ſmarted
for it, ſo many foughten fieldes within the
Realme, ſo long and ſo great vncertaintie
which ſide were true men and which
were traitors, and for how many daies
or houres they ſhould be ſo eſtéemed, ſuch
deſolation and miſeries, to whom are they
to be imputed, but to the Popiſh Clergie
and Papiſtes, and among other to Thomas
Arundell Archebiſhop of Canterburie
that traitorouſly practiſed the depoſing
of his lawfull ſoueraigne Lord king
Richard the ſecond? But come yet to later
times. How was the Quéenes maieſties
moſt noble father aſſalted by the
Pope and Papiſtes? His Realme was

interdited and geuen away to him that
could catch it. Legates, and one notable
Engliſhe traitor, were ſent about to perſuade
Chriſtian Princes, to inuade England,
to deſtroy and depoſe King Henrie,
and to take the Realme in reward for
their labour. When Charles the late
Emperour was ſetting forward againſt
the Turke, Cardinall Pole being ſent
by the Pope, made a ſolemne Oration
to him, which is yet extant in Print, to
perſuade the Emperour to turne his prepared
power from inuading the Turke,
and to bend it againſt King Henrie the
viij. as one worſe then any Turke. What
turmoile was raiſed then by the Northren
rebells againſt him, whereof ſome by his
elemencie (a good example) haue liued to
this day to raiſe a new rebellion? How
troubled they her maieſties moſt excellent
brother with vnhappie ſeditions?
How vexed they and how endangered they
the Realme and the Quéenes owne perſon
in her ſiſters time? What might
Charles the Emperour haue done for recouerie
and enlarging of Chriſtendome,
if his force that way entended had not by
Popiſh practiſe bene peruerted ſundry

waies and times, to the ſheding of Chriſtian
bloud and waſting of Chriſtendome,
and to the ouerthrow of his victorious
courſe? What tempeſtes hath the
late conſpiracie of Trent blowen vp in
Chriſtendome, that can not yet be quieted,
and all becauſe the Pope hath inſtilled
an opinion into his Papiſtes,Pope teacheth to keepe no fayth. that
Princes, if he diſpenſe with them, are
not bound to kéepe fayth and promiſe, no
not the word of a king, wherby no peace
can yet be aſſured? Whereof yet riſeth
one good admonition, to truſt them no
more, and to be well ware of them, and
ſpecially to thinke of this one particular,
that wicked perſons which haue geuen
occaſion of dangerous rebellions againſt
the Quéenes maieſtie their chiefe and
onely ſuccour and refuge, will neuer be
witholden by any reſpecte from attempting
or procuring to be attempted any
moſt hie and hainous treaſon and miſchiefes,
againſt our ſoueraigne Ladies
ſafetie, if auantageable opportunitie may
ſerue them, ſo long as ſuch perſons are
infected with Papiſtrie, and can thinke
the Pope hable to pardon or rather willing
to reward them, yea ſo farre as they
ſhall ſuppoſe them ſelues not onely to

winne the kingdome of England therby,
but alſo the kingdome of heauen. It is
perilous to thinke what traitorous rage
may do, being armed with dronken ſuperſtition.
It is a ſore thing to conſider
the impotentie of ambition, ſpecially
when it is ioyned with the furie of reaſonleſſe
loue. The common experience
is, how dangerous thoſe knottes of
théeues be where there is a woman in
the companie. Thus is it plaine, that
for as much as the Pope claimeth ſuch
wrongfull vſurpation and tyrannie ouer
kinges and realmes,Ladie of North. and ſith Papiſtes
holde that he ſaith true, and claimeth but
his right, and can not erre in diſcerning
it, all ſuch Papiſtes are traitors to all
kinges and kingdomes.
            As for the ſecond concluſion,Engliſh Papiſtes traitors to the Q. which
accuſeth Engliſh Papiſtes of treaſon to
the Quéenes maieſtie, it is ſufficiently
proued, for that it is as a particular within
a generall, included in the former. Yet
for the ſpeciall confirmation of it, it hath
certaine priuate and ſeuerall reaſons.
It is well knowen how they ſought her
graces death in her ſiſters time: what
practiſes, what fetches were vſed for it:
what examinations, what ſearchinges,

were to finde color of her deſtruction,
yea (if it be true, which is credibly ſayd)
how farre without color they proceded,
if God had not miraculouſly kept her,
to the preſeruation of this Realme and
the comfort of whole Chriſtendome. But
to make ſome demonſtration of their hatred
to her maieſtie by reaſon, and after
to deſcend to the examples and practiſes,
let vs examine the cauſes.
            Whereas the Papiſtes holde, that
the Pope is head of Gods vniuerſall
Church, and that ſuch authoritie as the
Quéene claimeth in England ouer eccleſiaſticall
perſons and in eccleſiaſticall
cauſes, as due to her highneſſe in right
of her crowne, is not due to her, but belonging
to the Pope, in ſo ſaying they
muſt ſay that her maieſtie claimeth an vniuſt
tyrannicall power. And whoſoeuer
ſhall ſo ſay, though not in the ſame ſillables,
is an vniuſt and an errant traitor,
and can not loue her that hath pulled
downe him whom they call head of their
Church.
            Alſo where Papiſtes affirme the
Chirch of Rome to be the true Catholicke
Chirch of God, and that, as out of
Noes Arke there was no ſafetie from

drowning, ſo out of the Romane Church
there is no eſcape of damnation: is there
any hope, that they ſo thinking can or
do loue her highneſſe, that hath diſmembred
them from the body of that Chirch,
and plucked them out of that Cocklorelles
boate?
            Where Papiſtes holde the hereſie of
tranſubſtantiation, and the bread to be
Chriſtes naturall bodie, the blaſphemie
of Popiſhe Maſſe to be an auailing ſacrifice
for quicke and dead, the Popes pardons
to be hable to deliuer them from
hell and damnation:Traian. is it likely that they
loue her whom they thinke to depriue
them of ſo great treaſures?
            Where the Papiſtes holde our whole
forme of ſeruing of God,Papiſtes take not the Q. for Queene. which forme
the Quéenes maieſtie hath preſcribed and
deliuered to her ſubiectes, to be ſchiſmaticall,
our lawes in ſpirituall thynges no
lawes, our ſacramentes no ſacramentes,
our Biſhops no Biſhops, our Clergie
no Clergie, ſurely they thinke our Coronations
no Coronations, our Quéene no
Quéene, or at leaſt they are ſory ſhe is ſo.
            Where Papiſtes beleue a Purgatorie,
and that Maſſes, Diriges, and ſuch other
gainfull marchandiſe of the Popiſh Clergie,

be beneficiall for their frendes ſoules
and their owne, and do in the meane time
imagine that theyr fathers, grandſires,
grandames, wiues, and other frendes
ſoules lie frying in vnexplicable tormentes,
and the Quéenes maieſtie holdeth
from them the onely meane to releaſe
them: thinke you ſuch perſons grudge
not at her excéedingly?
            Where the Pope hath accurſed the
Quenes maieſtie as an heretike and ſchiſmatike,
all thoſe Papiſtes which ſuppoſe
that the Pope hauing the diſpoſition of
Gods ſentence and the thunderbolt of excommunication
in his hand, can not erre,
do alſo ſuppoſe that the Quenes highneſſe
(our Quene Elizabeth I meane) is not
lawfull Quene of England, for ſo muſt all
Papiſtes hold, that hold the Pope to ſay
true, for the Pope doth not ſo accept her.
            And true it is that the refuſall of the
othe for the acknowledging her Maieſties
ſupremacie ouer eccleſiaſticall perſones
and in eccleſiaſticall cauſes,Papiſtes refuſe the othe, becauſe they beleue not the Q. title to the crowne. is for very
good reaſons to be ſuſpected, that for the
moſt part it is but coloured with pretenſe
of conſcience for eccleſiaſticall cauſes, and
to be thought that in very deede it dependeth
chefely vpon this poynt, that ſith her

Maieſtie hath bene ſuſpended, excommunicated
and declared out of the church by
the Pope, they thinke her Maieſtie not
lawfull Quene of England. For the like
example or preiudice haue the like Papiſtes
geuen heretofore at many times,
and namely when Elizabeth Barton, that
hipocriticall harlot, ſometime called the
holy mayde of Kent, with whoſe falſe
traitorous practiſes were fowly ſpotted
and entangled More and Fiſher the new
Romiſhe Saintes, publiſhed as a reuelation
from God, a traytorous article ſuggeſted
vnto her by popiſhe Prieſtes and
Monkes,In the ſtatute of her atte
                     ••
                  nder. with whom ſhe carnally and filthily
liued, that the Queenes Maieſties
moſt noble father after a time by them limited,
was not King of England one
houre in the ſight of God. The like interpretation
did Papiſtes make of king
Iohn. And Papiſtes haue publiſhed that
Goſpellers, whom they call heretikes,
ought not to haue any office among Gods
people, much leſſe a kingdome.
            And this poynt is well to be conſidered
that they which take from the Quéenes
maieſtie the ſupremacie ouer eccleſiaſtical
perſones and cauſes, do tranſferre the
ſame iuriſdiction to the Pope, for they neuer

yet bouch ſaued to geue it to any other▪
and I am ſure that after ſo many parables
and examples of bées and beaſtes and other
thynges, they will not now haue any
particular church hedleſſe and deſtitute of
a ſupreme gouernor, either vniuerſall like
a monarch as they wold haue it, or ſpeciall
vnder God of eche kingdome or dominion
as Gods good diſpoſition hath ſorted it. If
then the Pope haue in theyr opinion any
eccleſiaſticall iuriſdiction in England, he
muſt haue Ius excommunicandi lawfull
power and authoritie to excommunicate
in England, without which the eccleſiaſticall
power can not ſtand. Which power
if he iuſtly haue, and hath excommunicate
and accurſed the Quéene, either by ſpeciall
name or generally vnder title of heretikes
of which ſort he eſtemeth her, then hath
he therin done pro ſuo iure as he lawfully
myght do. And this beyng ſo ſuppoſed
true,Papiſtes draw obedience from the Q. then is it good to conſider what is taken
for Gods law and the law eccleſiaſticall
De vitandis excommunicatis, for
ſhonnyng of excommunicate and accurſed
perſones which yeld not to any repentance
ſubmiſſion or reconciliation to
that church, forſothe that euery Chriſtian
in peyne of excommunication de iure
               
(wherein to dye is thought to dye in ſtate
of damnation) is bound to withdrawe
from ſuch accurſed perſons not repentyng,
all frendly or louyng company and
countenance, all ayde and relefe, all ſeruice
and obedience. Which doyng, for
theſe good ſubiectes of England to put in
execution toward the Quéene,Papiſtes meritorious treaſon. were a very
meritorious act: But what doth it merite?
the iuſt peynes of treaſon for breakyng
theyr due allegeance, and eternall
damnation (if they repent not) for reſiſtyng
Gods lawfull ordinance. This
géere goeth ſore, it is very euident and
playne, that by neceſſary conſequence, to
this confeſſion of traitorouſneſſe they
muſt be driuen, if they will continue Papiſtes,
that is will affirme the Popes ſentences
not to erre, or will geue the Pope
any ſpirituall iuriſdiction in England.
            Wherfore theſe refuſalles to acknowledge
her maieſties lawfull power by
othe,Refuſers of the othe, mete to be well examined. would be well looked vnto, and the
pretenſes, colors, and cauſes of ſuch refuſalles
would be well examined, namely in
ſuch as ſhall haue to do with iuſtice and
gouernyng the contrye, but ſpecially with
thoſe that ſhall haue acceſſe into her hyghneſſe
houſhold and preſence. And well it

would be ſought what defenſe of diſpenſation,
Popiſh diſpenſations to diſſemble. or toleration they haue for theyr diſſemblyng
theyr purpoſes in not yet executyng
the Popes ſentence agaynſt her, and
what deuiſes they haue for warrantyng
of theyr conſciences in ſuſpendyng ſuch
treaſons till ſtronger opportunities, what
abſolutions or inſtructions Popiſhe Apoſtles
haue brought at theyr ſecret ſteppyng
into England agayne. For ſuch
ſalues are not vnlikely to come out of hys
ſhoppe that diſpenſeth with breach of
fayth, yea that openly proclaymeth that
there is no fayth to be kept with Chriſtes
frendes & hys aduerſaries, hys ſhop I ſay
that can geue grace to haue conſecrated
altarſtones or ſuperaltares for hys traitorous
frendes in enterdited landes to haue
maſſe without peril, his ſhop that can ſend
out badges with leaue to ſweare and vnſweare
with ſo liberal permiſſiō, as to ſay,
Geue me thy hart and it ſuffiſeth. And
well may it ſuffice, for the hart will cary
the hand too, when opportunitie ſerueth,
& when theyr Golden day approcheth, of
which they make ſo great accompt. Such
good fellowes would be well looked vpon?
            And for as much as Papiſtes accompt
theyr Popes decrées the voyce of Gods

ſpirite frée from error, it is to be weyed,
how farre we muſt nedes thinke they
ſuppoſe the Popes curſe to haue extended
agaynſt our moſt noble Quéene & realme,
with whoes publike ſeruice and prayer,
yea where nothyng is vſed but the vndouted
word of God and agreable with it,
they can not finde in theyr hartes to communicate,
but abhorre it as ſchiſmaticall.
They would be oppoſed with a few interrogatories.
Interrogatories for Papiſtes. It would be enquired, whether
they thynke our Quéene lawfully
Quéene of thys realme before God, notwithſtandyng
the Popes ſentence? And
whether they thinke the Popes ſentence
to reache any nerer vnto her hyghneſſe,
then if it had béen the ſentence of the Byſhop
of Toledo, or the Byſhop of Paris,
and not geuen by the Byſhop of Rome or
vnder hys authoritie? And if it reach nearer,
then how farre it reacheth? And if it
extend to caſes touchyng her hyghneſſes
crowne and dignitie, or the ſeruice and obedience
of her ſubiectes, or ſo farre as it
were treaſon for any Engliſh ſubiect to
put it in execution in England: then whether
the Pope in ſo preſumyng, and publiſhyng
that he doth but as he lawfully
may do, haue iudicially erred, & in matter

both of fact & doctrine paſſed hys boundes
or no?
            But to come ſomewhat nerer to Papiſtes,
alway ſuppoſing ſuch Papiſtes as
I haue before ſpecially deſcribed, I ſhall
in one thyng moue myne owne conceite
for a queſtion in law, referring it yet to the
correction & iudgement of ſuch as be learned
in law, of which ſort I truſt there be
none that haue not already by theyr othes
acknowledged the Quéenes maieſties full
authoritie and ſo haue declared that them
ſelues be not giltie.Papiſtes traitors by ſtatute. The ſtatute made in
the firſt yeare of the Quéenes maieſties
reigne, the vj. Chap. ſayth thus: And be it
&c. that if any perſon or perſones at
anie tyme after the ſayd firſt day of May
next to come, by any writing, printyng,
ouert dede or act, maliciouſly, aduiſedly
and directly do affirme that the
Quenes maieſtie that now is ought not
to haue and enioy the stile, honor, and
kingly name of this realme &c. ſhalbe demed
and adiudged hye traitors. I take
it by the ſame Statute that ſuch an affirmation
that the Quéenes maieſtie ought
not to haue and enioy the crowne of Ireland,
is hye treaſon, for that the kingdome
of Ireland is of ryght perteinyng to the

crowne of England, and the title therof
is belongyng to and parcell of the ſtile, honor
and kingly name of this realme, and is in
the Quenes maieſties vſuall ſtile ſo plainly
expreſſed. And ſo thynke I ſo much as
is conteyned in the Quéenes maieſties
royall ſtile, or as the law doth in anie wiſe
ſay to be parcell of the stile, honor or kingly
name of this realme. But the Quéenes iuriſdiction
ouer eccleſiaſticall perſones & in
eccleſiaſticall cauſes within this realme, is
parcell of the ancient right of the crowne,
and ſo part of the stile, kingly name or honor
of this realme, and ſo it is acknowledged in
the firſt ſtatute of the ſame Parliament,
where it is ſayd, May it &c. for the reſtoryng
of the rightes, iuriſdictions and
preeminences apperteinyng to the imperiall
crowne of this your realme &c.
Item, for the reſtoryng and vnityng to
the imperial crowne of this realme the
auncient iuriſdictions, authoritie, ſuperiorities
and preeminences to the ſame
of right belongyng and apperteinyng,
Alſo the authoritie of Rome is in ſundry
places of the ſame firſt ſtatute recogniſed
to be vſurped, which can not be if the
Quenes ſupremacie do not of right perteine
to her croune. Which act is alſo intitled

               An act for reſtoryng to the croune the
auncient iuriſdiction ouer the ſtate ecc
                     •
                  eſiaſticall
&c. Moreouer the ſame her maieſties
right is playnty expreſſed to be parcell
of the stile, honor and kingly name of
this realme in the vſuall ſtile as it is ſet out
at large in her maieſties Iniunctions, and
alſo conteyned in the commonly written
ſtile vnder thys clauſe et cetera, which
wordes et cetera can not be referred to nothyng.
And therfore I playnly gather that
to play the good plaine Papiſt, to affirme
the Popes hedſhyp of the Church of England,
or to denie the Quéenes ſupremacie
in her owne realme, ſo farre as her maieſtie
by the law hath it, and as it is incident
to her croune, is to play or rather in good
earneſt to be a hye traitor.
            As for the maner of affirmation (maliciouſly,
aduiſedly and directly) mencioned
in the ſtatut: if it be affirmed by a
man ſober, it wil eaſelie enough be iudged
to be aduiſedly and maliciouſly. And I
nothing doubt that the terme directly
doth not reſtrayne to the ſame forme of
ſyllables, but at leaſt to any plaine, certaine,
or indicatiue propoſition concluding
or expreſſing the ſame effect.
            But now how haue theſe good fellowes

ſhewed their good affection in practiſe?Practiſes of Papiſts againſt the Q.
For ſothe ſome, the great ghoſtlie fathers,
whereof ſome yet liue et inſidiantur ſaluti
bonorum & reipub. and lie in waite
for deſtruction of the ſtate and of good ſubiectes,
refuſe to acknowledge her Maieſties
authoritie, and that ſo doubtfully, as
it is not expreſſedly certaine, how ſoeuer
it be conſequently euident, whether they
ſticke at the matter of the ſupremacie, or
the very title of the crowne.
            Other ſome are ſuch,Storie. as one of them,
euen openly in her Maieſties hieſt court
of Parliament made ſuch mone that his
counſell was not followed in Quene Maries
time to hew vp the roote, as all men
plainly ſaw and vnderſtood his greefe that
the Quenes Maieſtie was not in her ſiſters
time diſpatched. And it is ſayd that
ſome other made graue motions for her
diſheritance.
            Other,Lonaniſts. becauſe they can not get her
highneſſe to ceſſe to be their lawful quene,
them ſelues haue deuiſed to ceſſe to be her
actuall ſubiectes. Becauſe they can not
ſhift her Maieſtie from her crowne, they
haue ſhifted them ſelues out of her highneſſes
dominions, and are fled beyond the oſeas.

Some being there ſend hether their
heretical,Seditious writers. ſeditious and traitorous bookes,
yet licenced there againſt good preſident of
Princes, and againſt the example of her
Maieſties honorable demeanour toward
the ſame Princes, which by them ſelues or
their Officers, rather ought to haue reſtrained
ſuch doinges, then to leaue ſo
ſhrewd occaſion of taking harme them ſelues
by the like. In theſe bookes her right
is impugned: her faith is defamed: her gouernement
is diſcredited: her honour is
touched: her Maieſtie is many wayes violated
and abated: the Religion that her
highneſſe holdeth and publiſheth, is called
ſchiſmaticall, heretical, deuelliſh, and with
as many ill fauored names as they can reherſe,
being yet in ſuch eloquence perfecte
oratours: the Preachers and profeſſers
of the religion that her highneſſe ſetteth
forth and profeſſeth, are termed worſſe
then Infidels: her title of ſupremacie ouer
all her ſubiectes is defaced for an vſurped
and vndue name. And yet forſothe they
thinke this geare gayly colored, and thereby
conducted to haue ſafe paſſage among
her ſubiectes, if they can ſay, not that the
Queene is an heretike, a ſchiſmatike,

worſe then an Infidel, not to be heard, not
to be obeyed, not to be eſteemed to haue in
dede the holy places and offices whoſe title
ſhe beareth, but pardie that al they be ſuch
that holde the ſame religion which the
Quene doth not only hold, but alſo aduiſe,
commaund & procure to be holden. They
thinke it trimly handled, if they do not
ſay that the Quene chalengeth and vſurpeth
a proude, wrongfull and falſe title,
but onely that her Clergie haue faſtened
vpon her ſuch a title, which it is well knowen
that with free conſcience ſhe vſeth.
They thinke them ſelues cunning fellowes,
and their bookes well warranted
in England, if they do not call the Quene
in plaine ſpeache Tirant, Infidel, Arrian,
and ſuch like, when vndirectly they implie
it, and do applie to her cauſe the examples
of pagane, Arrian, tirānous and wicked
Kinges and Emperours. Who ſeeth
not this ſo groſſe a mockerie offered to ſo
wyſe a Prince? as if for good maners ſake
they would forbeare to ſay that Iohn is a
foole, and onely ſay that he that is in Ihons
ſkinne is a foole. God rid their ſkinnes of
vntrue ſubiectes. This is done like fine
men, all together as ſuttle and as falſe, as

our late Rebelles, that riſing in armour
with actuall rebellion againſt her Maieſtie
and her gouernance, would yet nedes
proclaime that they were true and faithfull
ſubiectes, well diſpoſed perſons, and
had very good meanings. Yet were thoſe
falſe traytours ſomewhat more curious of
their honeſtie and truth than theſe good
writers, for thoſe Rebelles yet reſerued
one ſure ſtarting hole, to defend their faſtneſſe
to the Quene, becauſe they haue not
told vs what Quene they meant.
            An other companie of good ſure men
at home,Spreders of ſeditious bookes. receiue theſe goodly bookes, ſprede
them abroade, rede them in audiences and
corners, commend them, defend them,
geue them great praiſes for learning and
ſubſtantialneſſe, as matters vnanſwerable,
they amplifie them, they ſet them out,
much like to falſe ſeditious talebearers
that during this late rebellion ſpred rumors
in the quiet partes of the Realme,
what numbers of thouſandes theſe rebelles
were, how armed, how horſed,
what rank riders, what mighty ſtrong, actiue
and couragious fellowes, what Giantes,
as if all the reſt of England were
but ſhepe: what wonderous confederates,
what aydes, by land, by ſea, from Hieruſalem,

and no man knoweth whence, I
thinke euen out of Purgatorie, as the popiſh
Feſtiual telleth, of the dead felowes in
the churchyard that roſe with their ſpades,
ſhouelles, & other tooles that they vſed in
their life, to defend him that was impeached
by theeues to ſay De profundis for
their ſoules. And all this was no more
but to diſcourage the Queenes true ſubiectes
and ſoldiers, and to rayſe vp in doutfull
men inclined to papiſtrie, a daring to
ioyne themſelues to ſuch a ſuppoſed ſtrong
ſide and faction. And yet theſe be not taken
for ſeditious, as they are: the reaſon
is becauſe they are not yet hanged as they
ought.
            An other knot of ſuch good companie
be common rumorſpreders,Spreders of rumors. of whom the
publike fame is that there be or haue bene
certaine notable and noted walkers in
Paules and ſuch places of reſort,Good chirch will it neuer be. ſo common
that the very vſuall places of their
being there, are ordinarily knowen by the
names of Papiſts corner, and liers bench,
ſauing that I heare ſay now of late many
of them flocke more into the middle iſle,
which is ſuppoſed to be done partly for better
harkening, and partly for more commodious
publiſhing. The ſuſpition,

grudge & talke goeth among the Quenes
good ſubiectes, how ſuch fellowes be the
coyners of newes: In the beginning of the
rebellion, how luſtie they were, how their
countenances, their fléering, their flinging
paces, their whiſperinges ſhewed their
hartes: how they had newes of euerie encreaſe,
of euery going forward, and of euerie
auantageable doing of the Rebelles:
how they haue newes out of Fraunce and
Flaunders with the ſooneſt, God knoweth
what they ſend thether, and with what reciprocation
they requite ſuche newes againe:
how they had newes of the late horrible
murder ere it were done, as if they
had ben acceſſaries before the fact:Clubbe. Baſto. how
they write letters at home directed to them
ſelues: how with theſe prety letters, while
they be freſh bléeding, that is, ſo ſcarcely
drie that the ink blotteth, with their great
countenaunces, with their taking vpon
them wonderous intelligence and great
inſightes in ſecretes of Princes, as if they
were Kinges couſines, and with their offringes
of wagers, and ſuch other braggeries,
they deface (as men ſay) all that can
be brought or reported neuer ſo truly of

any good ſucceſſe to the Queene or her
frendes.
            And other ſort there is,Ouerthwart Papiſtes. like keſtrelles or
troutes, they euer flye agaynſt the wynde,
or ſwimme agaynſt the ſtreame, in quéene
Maryes time great Goſpellers, now great
Papiſtes,
                  
                     •
                  op. &c. men that would euer ſéeme wyſer
than the preſent world, and wold faine
be noted to ſée ſome ſingular thing, when
for the moſt part themſelues are the moſt
vayne and ſingular fooles that liue. No
gouernement pleaſeth them, & as they be
content with no world, ſo are they mete
to liue in none. But let them beware the
ſinne againſt the holy ghoſt, it is a perilous
thing. God graunt them to ſee the horror
of it, ſo farre as it may auayle to their
tymely repentance, before that mere apoſtaſie
bring them into it.
            There is feared to be an other ſuttle
ſort,Papiſtes counterfaiting Goſpellers. that are in déede of no religion, and
yet at ſundry tymes and places, to ſome ſecretly,
to ſome openly, to ſome one where
to ſome an other, much like the deuided
counſelles in Edwarde the fifthes tyme,
would ſéeme of all religions. Theſe be
moſt enclined to papiſtry, eyther becauſe
God will not vouchſafe that ſuch diſſemblers

féele true religion, or that they be
rancke papiſtes in déede, howſoeuer they abuſe
men wyth other ſhew for purpoſes, or
(which I ratheſt thinke) for that they are
perſuaded that the Popiſh faction eyther
for multitude, for welth, for foreine alliances,
or for hatred to the Quéene and her
gouernement (which they perhaps would
wiſhe to be ouerthrowen as all perfect papiſtes
would) or for other reſpectes, is
more commodious for their deſire and ambition
or for the toyes in their heades, to
riſe to vātage in an other world. Such belike
haue a good mynde to the aduiſe that
Lentulus wrote to Catiline, Auxilium
petas ab omnibus, etiam ab infimis,
ſéeke helpe of all ſortes, yea euen of the
meaneſt, they make much of al ſides. Such
can I compare to notable pyrates, that
wil euer haue within boorde men of all nations
and flagges of all Princes and countryes.
If he méete with Engliſhmen ſtronger
than himſelfe, out goeth a flagge of
England and Engliſhmen aboue hatches,
that he may paſſe in peace, likewiſe he doth
with the Frenchman, Scot, Flemming,
Spanyarde, or other, and many tymes he
doth this not to much to paſſe peaceably

himſelfe, as that he may the more vnprouidedly
ſet vpon hym whom he deſireth to
ſpoyle. So happeneth it ſometymes that
ſuch a counterfait papiſt, as my Lorde of
Weſtmerland and other, finding the plain
ſhew of papiſtry not ſo commodious profitable
or ſafe for hym by reaſon of many
occurrentes that may happe to haue ouertaken
hym, till he were ready for his purpoſe,
hangeth out a flagge of Chriſtianitie,
dealeth with the Bible & other good bookes
as the decayed knight did to whom Biſhop
Cranmer vpō a good hope gaue fifty pound
yearely penſion to cheriſhe his towardneſſe,
he ſetteth hys men of that nation aboue
hatches, he deceaueth good men that
be not filij huius ſeculi, no children of
this world, thoſe he abuſeth with proteſtations:
and God wote with the ſame fayth
that teacheth to kéepe no faith, while in the
meane tyme for all this, of their certayne
purpoſe of pyracie, of their prouiſion preparation
and furniture, of their former deuiſes,
nothing is chaunged, their other
company though vnder hatches yet ſtill be
ready till the opportunitie of miſchiefe
biddes them ſtart vp ſodenly like the children
of the earth that roſe by miracle of the

ſerpentes téeth that Cadmus had ſowen.
Theſe be watchers and reach euer to an other
world, they prouide for ſucceding of
tymes to come, imagining what day ſhall
follow the dreadfull night. They woulde
be looked vnto by the preſent day light, before
the night come. Theſe to ſpeake plainly
be they (if any ſuch be, as of ſuch mind al
perfect papiſtes be) that are weary of her
maieſties gouernment, & fal to deuiſing by
planting a hope of ſtrange titels to vndermyne
her maieſties eſtate, ſuch as hang
vpon the hope of Rome after her deceſſe,
which hope they know can not haue effect,
while her highneſſe lyueth and reigneth,
to whome almighty God graunt to
lyue & reigne while the world laſteth, in
perſon or in ſucceſſion of her owne moſt
royall body. Of this ſort was Gardiner
that abuſed K. Henry with a falſe flagge of
religion, when he made hys booke of true
obedience. Of this ſort was Boner when
he fauned vpon the L. Cromwell, & made
a notable preface to Gardiners booke. Of
this ſort was Tonſtall, and the reſt that
wrote againſt the Pope, Pole, and all papiſtry.
Of this ſort are all thoſe Catilines
companions Papiſtes that beare a gloſing

ſhew of obedience and waite for a tyme to
vtter their malice, till they droppe away
into Manlius campe, or tary with Lentulus,
Cethegus, Ceparius, and the reſt to
murder the Conſul Cicero, or ſet the Citie,
I meane the Realme on fire.
            An other leud ſort eyther depraue whatſoeuer
the Quéenes Maieſtie and her moſt
honorable Counſell doth for the ſafegarde
and commoditie of the realme,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   of the Q. good doinges. or of things
which they can not deface, they tranſferre
the praiſe to other, being deſirous as it
were by falſe flattery to créepe into ambitions
boſome, to raiſe vp a faction againſt
her highneſſe: as if her Maieſtie do any
popular or beneficiall act to the commonaltie,
by and by they imagine ſome
one or other whom they would make an
Abſolon whether he will or no, to embeſell
the peoples loue, ſeyng full well but
not caring at all how they burden with
great ſuſpicious thoſe whom they lode
with falſe praiſes & perhaps draw into vniuſt
harmes thoſe whom they claw with
vntrue flatterie. Howbeit I truſt all men
of credit and greatneſſe, haue taken héede
and will beware that wrongfull praiſes
and imputations raiſe not their mynde,

to a wrong way of climing, for ſurely
ſuch popularities and hanginges by the
vayne ayre, are not auancementes but
precipitations. But ſuch is the corne pouder
of treaſon wherewith theſe popiſh rumor
ſpreaders hartes be double charged,
that it muſt nedes breake forth, and commonly
to his deſtruction or great danger
of ſingeing that miniſtreth the fire.
            An other ſort exerciſe their rayling
tonges,Railers vp on the clergie. which by great vſe at tables and other
places, they haue made very ſlippery,
voluble, & flowing, in vntrue defacing the
clergie of the realme, their liues, examples
mariages, & doctrines: ſome tell of the liberalities
of times paſt, ſome of the old mery
world. And all this is but to this end, to
driue into ſubiects a lothing of preſent gouernment,
& a miſliking of the ſtate wherin
our good prelates & preachers are mainteined.
Papiſts in places of credit. An other ſpitefull dangerous ſort
being placed or rather left in places of good
countenance and credit, either in Colleges,
houſes of ſtudie, offices in the greateſt
houſhold, in Courtes, in Cathedrall
churches, worſhipfull roomes in the countrey,
and ſuch like, with the very ſhew of
their countenance, with their liking or

diſliking, pulling forwarde or preſſing
down, open preferring or ſecret pinching,
ſo handle the matter that many times it
is more ſafe, or at leaſt more commodious
and auantageable to be taken for a Papiſt,
than for a Chriſtian. For well you
wot how men will ſmell men of their
owne faction. And ſometyme by theſe
meanes, vnconſtant Goſpellers for neceſſitie
or profites ſake, become yelders,
and diſſemblers, till at length by Gods
grace forſaking them, and by his iuſt
plage ordinarilye lighting vpon yelders
and halters, they ſlide by degrées from
hypocrites to playne apoſtataes, which
are in déede the moſt deſperate kinde of
Papiſtes. And if this be not redreſſed,
in vaine the Preacher preacheth, in vaine
the Prince and Counſell ſetteth forth true
doctrine.A gentle prouerbe. Let 
                     〈◊〉
                   haue their wordes. For this they can ſay: when the
Preacher hath ſayd, he hath done, but continuall
execution carieth away the power,
credite, and people. Trow ye theſe be good
meaning men to her Maieſtie, that ſo perſecute
& vndermine the religion, whereof
her Maieſtie is vnder God, and by Gods
prouiſion, the great baſe and meane of
ſtay in this Realme?
            
               
But aboue all other dothe it not plainly
appeare what hartes papiſtes beare to
her maieſtie, when papiſtes them ſelues
and notorious open traitors and rebelles
made their plaine accompt, that to rebel againſt
the Quene, to practiſe the alteration
of her gouernement, the ouerthrow of
her eſtate, the diſplacing of her counſell,
the foyſting in of a farre worſe in her ſtead
whoſoeuer it be, and the deſtruction of her
perſone, is the very naturall humor, affection
and deſire of papiſtes? Conſider the
rebellious Earles, loke vpon their companie
and aſſiſtantes, viewe them wel, note
their enſignes of woundes and croſſes, the
inſcriptions about them, In hoc ſigno
vinces, in this ſigne thou ſhalt ouer come,
abuſing the wordes of Conſtantine to encoragement
of their falſe hipocriſie. Note
their procedinges, their tearing and burning
the booke of God, their breaking the
Communion table, their prophaning of
Churches with vile Idolatrie, their erecting
of abhominable Maſſe, their chaplens
leud and ſeditious ſermons, and chefely
rede their firſt proclamation. Find you not
there, in their proclamation, where their
truſt was repoſed? forſothe in men of that

ſort which they call the old and Catholike
religion, to whome their proclamation
was directed. Finde you not there in their
proclamation, the ſumme of their complaint▪
the cauſe and color of their rebellion?
forſothe that euell diſpoſed perſones about
the Quéene haue ouercome the old
and catholike religion within the realme.
Finde you not there, in their proclamation,
the declaration of their intent & purpoſe?
forſothe to reſtore old cuſtomes and
liberties to the Churche of England. If
theſe be true pretenſes, then is papiſtrye
being the ground thereof, plainely, flatly,
and truely treaſon. If they be not true, but
falſe and vaine colors, abuſed by theſe rebels
to deceiue and drawe moe ſubiectes
to take their partes, then ſée what foloweth,
then muſt it nedes conſequently be euident
that they them ſelues yet ſuppoſed
& knew papiſtrie to be the very likely and
apt color and meane to allure men to rebellion
and treaſon againſt the Quéene,
as the very kindely baite,Treaſon the natural humor of Papiſtrie. and as their naturall
affection daily gaping for ſuch opportunitie,
howſoeuer at this time inconuenience
of ſeaſon, vnripeneſſe of matter,
vntowardneſſe of aide, vnredineſſe of prouiſion,
unfitneſſe of guides, preuenting of

counſels, ſtay of their heds & colors, with
other good meanes of gods merciful prouidence,
repreſſed their vnhappy courages,
which yet daily l
                  •
               ke for new time & circumſtances
of leſſe encombrance. But in
the meane time as God gathereth his glory
out of al things, yea euen out of ſinnes,
ſo let vs out of this great euell yet gather
ſome good, a good example and a good leſſon
to learne to know that papiſtrie is treaſon
and he that is infected with treaſon is a
traitor, and ſo to prouide agaynſt them
thereafter.
            Whenſe come I pray you the propheſies
commonly talked of in the beginning
of her moſt gratious and bleſſed reigne,Traitorous prophecies.
how many yeares and how many months
her maieſty ſhould continue? Whenſe
came the leude coniurers conference with
the deuill, how long the Quéenes highneſſes
gouernement and this religion
ſhould endure? Commeth not this geare
from traytorous affections of thoſe well
diſpoſed perſons? Commeth it not from
the ſame fountayne of treaſon, from
whenſe did flow the ſupplications which
the late monſter Gardiner penned and
preferred in Quéene Maries time, for
reſtitution to the heyres of the northen rebelles

that roſe in her moſt noble fathers
daies, yea and adding the conſideration of
theyr reſtitution to be, becauſe they were
in armour agaynſt the king her father for
defenſe of religion (meaning Papiſtrie)
and for reuenge of iniuries and diſhoners
(as they ſayd) done to her mother? Commeth
it not from the ſame affections that
haue rayſed the great and lamentable tumultes
in the realme? And trow you the
ſame affection ſtill lodgeth not with the
ſame opinion? I am halfe afrayd, that out
of this fountaine ſhould alſo ſpring a few
blinde demie prophecies enterlaced in
prognoſtications,Prognoſtications. as Neſtradamus and others
pretie bywordes and this that lately
hath written: Alas the Moone ſhall be
called in the houſe of enemies and priſon,
wherby is like to happen to vs ſpecially
to the common people much aduerſitie.
&c. and ſome other ſuch toyes
to fill the peoples heads with buzzes. But
let the beſt of ſuch be conſtrued. Yet I
would for frendſhippe and learninges
ſake tell thoſe authors, if I were acquainted
with them, that ſuch vanities
might be ſpared, and onely ſo much out of
that art would be ſet out to the people as
is commodious and fitte for them to ſée,

and lawful & ſtanding with good diſcretion
for the writers to publiſh. Such a writer
might happe to be a man ſo holden ſuſpected
of Papiſtrie as he mought ſo encreaſe
the miſdemyng agaynſt his owne perſon
ſhrewdly. I ſpeake nothing of the prognoſticating
toy of a mariage ſent vp to be
printed. But let vs ſée moe examples.
            Remember I pray you Gardiners ſermon
at Paules croſſe in Quéene Maries
time vpon this text Hora eſt iam nos è
ſomno ſurgere,
               Gardiners traitorous ſermon. It is now time for vs
to riſe out of ſléepe. There he ſhewed
how God diſpenſeth eche thing and eche
ſucceſſe in conuenience of times, he declared
what wayes had bene attempted for
reſtitution of the Popes primacie in England,
wherein he diuers wayes falſely
defamed King Henrie with intentes of
ſubmiſſion, ſuch was the byſhops impudence.
He named the rebellions in the
North in King Henries tyme, and in the
Weſt in King Edwardes time, which he
clothed with cleanly names, as enterpriſes
and aſſemblies, as our late rebells doo
in both their firſt and ſecond proclamations.
But ſayth he, the houre was not yet
come. He by way of obiection wondered
how the people could without rebelling

beare ſuch iniuries oppreſſions and robberies
which they ſuſteined as he ſayd in
the fall of money and otherwiſe in King
Edwardes reigne.He did not foreſee the fall of Roſe pens to nothing. He anſwered him
ſelfe, that the houre was not yet come.
But now (ſayth he) the houre is come,
now is the time for vs to wake from ſlepe,
as who ſhould ſay.Accipe nunc 
                     〈…〉
                  , et crimine ab vno 
                     ••
                  ce omnes. Long haue we ſlept,
or long haue we winked, long haue we
bene holden in awe, glad to diſſemble our
treaſons and to ſemble good ſubiects, long
haue we borne our ſoueraigne Lord a
faire face, as if we acknowledged his due
authoritie and deteſted the enimie to him
and to all Kinges the Pope, long haue we
cloked and hidden our zeale, wayting for
a good houre. Now the dreadfull King
Henrie is dead, the hopefull King Edward
is taken away, the Chriſtian nobilitie
entangled in ſnares of law ſpecially
if it may be partially and violently vſed,
the prince and tyme fauoreth our ſide, a
mightie foren match is made for the vantage
of our part, now the ſonne of our victorie,
and the day of our triumph ſhineth
vpon vs, now is it tyme for vs to wake
from ſléepe. Though the time once were,
ſpecially in the L. Cromwelles dayes,
when we in ſhew abhord the name of

Papiſtes, and would commonly ſay we
had as leue be called traitor as Papiſt, and
bring actions of the caſe for our purgation,
yet now is the time that we glorie
in theſe titles, either of Papiſt in reſpect
of theſe tymes,Filii huius mundi. or of traytor in reſpect of
thoſe tymes. Let vs not now leſe our occaſion,
for we ſhall neuer haue the like agayne,
ſpecially for that ſo much of the nobilitie
ſnared with treaſon are yelded to
our 
                  〈◊〉
               . Note this geare well, for
Papiſtes did neuer beare her maieſtie
greater countenaunce of loyaltie, neuer
ſerued her with greater ſhew of faythfulneſſe,
neuer proteſted more truth and good
meaning, than thoſe did to King Henrie
the eight and to King Edward, which afterward
yet openly ſhewed what ſecret
diſloyaltie vnfaythfulneſſe and vntruth
had ſo long lurked in their boſomes.
Geue once the like opportunities, and be
bold that you ſhall haue the like ſpeches,
for they haue ſtill the like hartes and like
expectations. They comfort them ſelues
with this, that the remembrance of theſe
thinges will one day be pleaſant vnto
them, and in the meane tyme (as Cicero
ſayth) oculis deſignant ad caedem vnumquem
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
noſtrum, they note euery one of

vs with theyr eyes and regiſter vs to be
deſtroyed. Let vs therefore take the contrarie
courſe to them. Where they looke
for an other tyme, let vs doo our endeuour
to mainteine this tyme, where they reach
with expectation to altering of gouernement,
let vs bend all our force, policie and
meanes of ſeruice to the defenſe of thys eſtate.
Where they pray for change, ſpecially
of Quéenes, let vs pray for continuance
of her highneſſes reigne. Where they
hyde rebellious ſtomakes, let vs ſhew true
and faythfull hartes. Where they deſire
that her maieſtie and her Counſel may be
deceiued with flattering and erronious
pretenſe of policie, pacification, and colour
of clemencie, that vnder that ſhadow they
may lurke and be noriſhed as ſerpent in
boſome, let vs praie to God to geue iudgement
to diſcerne them, to ſearch the bottome
of the late treaſons, that they may
be ſhaken out and vſed as dangerous vipers.
Where their truſt is in their Pope
and Popiſhe treaſons and conſpiracies,
let our confidence be in God and his prouidence,
not ſhrinking from the ſame
with our beſt courage and prudence.
Where they will not ſticke to vſe all ſuttle
vndermyninges, and will not loſe the

vantage of times, that they may one day
triumph in cruel violence, let vs pray that
on this part be vſed all good policies, that
Gods offred meanes & good opportunites
be not refuſed or ouerſlipped, that God
rent not the kingdome from his anoynted
for ſparing his enemies, but that it may
long flouriſhe in the handes of his moſt
noble and vertuous handmayde our moſt
excellent & gratious Soueraigne Ladie.
Thus is it euident by reaſons and examples,
what hartes Papiſtes beare to her
maieſtie.
            The third concluſion,Engliſh Papiſtes traitors to England. that ſuch Engliſh
Papiſtes are traytors to the realme
of England &c. hath receaued two proues
already, the one in the generall treaſons
of all Papiſtes to all realmes, wherein
England and Engliſh Papiſtes are included,
the other in their traitorous
mindes to the Quéenes maieſties perſon
and dignitie, which is the hyeſt treaſon
that can be to the realme of England. Yet
are there ſome other particular doinges
more ſpecially to enforce it, namely the
experience that hath bene of theyr caſting
away the care of their countrie, no all other
naturall affections, to the end with all
immanitie & outragious vnnaturall crueltie

to torment Engliſhe Chriſtians and to
ſubiect the realme to foren power for their
falſe religions ſake. I am ſure there are
enow and to many that can remember
both that they haue red in credible hiſtories,
and ſéene in lamentable experience,
how the Papiſtes haue ſhewed them
ſelues ſo addicted to their ſuperſticion, and
ſo captiued to an vndue reuerence of their
tyrānous Pope, that they haue for it reiected
the care of country and of thoſe to
whome naturall dutie bound them.
            It is certayne that that Engliſhe man
which can be contented for Papiſtrie to
rayſe or fauor rebellion in our countrey:
to ioyne in conſpiracie with ſtrangers, to
helpe to inuade and ſpoyle our countrey:
to conuey the crowne of our countrey to
a forener: to agrée with them in faction
that offer our countrey to prey ſpoyle and
conqueſt: to colour foren ſubiections of
our countrey with falſe titles of wreſted
law, to ſubmit his fayth to that potentate
that hath accurſed and geuen our countrey,
theyr ſoules to the diuell their bodyes
landes and poſſeſſions to them that can
catch them: to beleue or fauor them that
ſpred all vile diſhoners agaynſt our countrey:
to take his part as the moſt holy one,

that claymeth to him ſelfe from our naturall
prince the obeyſance of one great part
of her ſubiectes, yea & of all her ſubiectes
in a great part of theyr affaires: to aſſent
that a foren vſurper ſhall by deceaueable
ſhewes of falſe religion haue ordinarie
meanes by colors of ſutes, reſortes, annates,
frutes, penſions, inueſtitures, and
other infinite craftes to robbe our countrey
of treaſure: to like wel of his doinges
and to hold that he doth no more than he
lawfully may doo, which beyng an alien
a foren byſhop ſhall take vpon him to extend
hys curſe to the prince of our countrey
and all the people thereof, and that he
hath power to diſcharge the ſubiectes of
the realme from their fayth and allegeance,
and hath authoritie to binde theyr
obedience to whome he will, and is able
to geue heauen to rebelles that ſhall
venture theyr liues in waſting and deſtroying
our countrey: he I ſay that can
yelde hys conſent to theſe doinges & thinkinges,
muſt néedes be a traitor to hys
countrey. And ſuch a one is euery ſuch
Engliſh Papiſt as I haue deſcribed, and
can be none other if he hold the Pope for
a true teacher and haue good opinion of
of the Popes doctrine and examples. And

to defend that we ought to yelde our
ſaythes or ſubmiſſion to the Pope, is in
generalitie to affirme all theſe miſchiefes
and treaſons. And ſuch as be of that
minde, as all ſuch Papiſtes bée, can not
in true iudgement be ſeuered from traitorous
watchers to put the ſame in execution
when ſo euer they may haue times
and meanes to beare them harmeleſſe.
            Let be called to minde the treaſons of
the clergie agaynſt Henrie the ſecond,
and ſpecially the vile practiſes of the two
traitorous byſhops of Lincolne and Hereſord
agaynſt Edward the ſecond. But
principally how as I haue aforeſayd the
Dolphin of Fraunce by color of title geuen
him from the Pope for King Iohns
diſobedience to that apoſtaticall ſeate, inuaded
and long poſſeſſed a great part of
England: how the deceaued barons of
England, both at that time ſpecially, & at
ſome other times ſeuerally, at the Popes
will and vpon pronouncing of his curſe
againſt the king, forſooke their allegeance,
looke part with the frenchmen, ſpoyled
their owne countrey, and like moſt vnnaturall
children, at an adulterous ſtop fathers
bidding did thruſt theyr ſwordes into
their mothers bellie. Remember Cardinall

Poles meſſage to the Emperor: the
rebellions rayſed in that time, and ſince:
the late practiſes in Queene Maries
dayes, to bring the realme in thraldome
to the moſt inſolent and intolerable nation,
and to tranſfer the inheritance of
the crowne, with not onely diſheriting
but alſo deſtroying the true and naturall
heire: their great ſorrow, that it was not
performed: the great truſt that our Papiſtes
in all their countenances and ſpeches
ſhewed them ſelues to haue of the
good ſucceſſe of Henrie the french king,
whome God tooke away before his accompliſhment
of thretened enterpriſes againſt
this realme. Let not be forgotten their
glorienges in their champion of Guiſe.
It is yet freſh and raw in remembrance,
how openly they vttered their as it were
applaudinges, gratulations, and cherefull
ſignifications of fauor to that ſide, euen
then when, as it is well knowen, the
ſame familie of Guiſe ſought, vnder color
of his kinſwomans title, and by that
foren title which was made the title and
fundation of this laſt rebellion,Romiſh religion. to inuade
this land, to ouerthrow the Quéenes maieſties
eſtate, and to tranſport the crowne
of our countrey to ſtrangers.
            
               
Let it be conſidered what good practiſes
theſe late Rebels haue had with ſtrangers
to the hazard of their countrie,Rebelles confedered with ſtrangers. euen
ſo far forth as they feared not in their proclamations,
with a litle colorable forme of
pennyng, to brag and put their confederates
in hope of ſtrangers coming to inuade
and deſtroy the realme, which by a
prety, gentle, falſe terme they call reforming
the realme. Let it be well weyed
what they meane to the realme, that vnder
colour of ſucceding do ſo far vndermine
the head of our country, that by rayſing
ſome to a hope of the next ſucceding,
they conuey the countenance, fauour and
ſupportation of a great corrupt nomber
of ſuche as may frame them ſelues any
hope of gaine that way, to other perſones
that by ſuch kindled ambition may be the
more haſtely enboldned. Such mad hopes
made lewd bokes to be publiſhed in print
to entitle ſtrangers to our crowne, and to
geue aduiſe to cheriſhe the amitie of
Fraunce to this ende that the rebellious
nation of England (as they terme vs)
may by that meanes be tamed,Prouing of 
                     〈◊〉
                  . if we wyll
not contentedly yeld to ſuch ſubiection. It
is not nothing that the ſame bookes were
ambiciouſly publiſhed in Paris, and ſet vp

vpon euery poſt and piller, and by men of
great place and charge moſt earneſtly defended,
when on our Quéenes Maieſties
behalfe they were required to be ſuppreſſed.
I ſpeake not yet of the worſt bookes,
well knowen to the beſt perſons.Plures adorant ſolem orientem quam occidentem. This
to doo is to ſhew vs a Sunne ryſing to
whoſe worſhip they would faine draw vs
from our Sunne declinyng, as they ſuppoſe.
No, no, our Quéene is our true
Sunne: and what ſoeuer ſhinyng thyng
they wold ſet vp in her tyme, it is no right
Sunne,Mutantem regna Cometen. but an vnlucky Comete. And it is
not yet noone, I truſt, with our Sunne:
or if it be, I hope yet God will lengthen
the day to our Sunne for his honors ſake,
as he dyd to Ioſua, and the rather ſhall all
good ſubiectes haue cauſe ſo to hope it, if
the reſidue of the day may be ſo ſpent as
Ioſua ſpent it, and for which purpoſe God
dyd prolong it, to rid the world of Gods
enemies. Let it be ſuſpected what hopes
of preuention, anticipation & moſt dreadfull
miſchief, which I feare and abhorre
to name, the encouragement of ſuch ſuccedyng,
which is the worke of Papiſtes,
may miniſter where the onely perſon of
our moſt deare and precious ſoueraigne
Ladie ſtandeth without any moe meane

ſtayes of her moſt honorable and ioyfull
iſſue betwene them and their deſired effect
the vtter vndoing of vs all, and ſpecially
where the power of reuenge may by
poſſibilitie fall into their handes for whoſe
ſake it ſhould be attempted. It is no ſmall
miſchiefe, danger, and apallyng of fayth
and courage, when our prince muſt be defended
agaynſt thoſe that by poſſibilitie
may aſpire to hope to haue colour to be
our Princes them ſelues and to wreke it
vpon good ſubiectes that ſerue our Quéene
truely. What kindneſſe or naturalneſſe
will doo, hath béen abundantly ſhewed already
diuerſe wayes. And in the late
murderous miſchief, a moſt foule preſident,
but a moſt perfect leſſon, this one
thyng is much to be noted, that it was
here by rumor reported as done, before it
were done there, which argueth that the
conſpiracie extended hither, and how farre
further (or rather nerer) is good to be quickly
and earneſtly ſearched, and by the ſame
example to be remembred, what harme
the loſſe of vſyng occaſion hath bredde,
when it might haue ſo béen preuented,Nouiſſimus error peior priore.
that neither he had bene murdered, nor the
Quéene encombred. I diſpute no titles. I

haue no reache beyond our Quéene. I can
ſée nothyng beyond our Quéene but a
Chaos of miſerie, therfore I am lothe to
looke ſo farr. My onely care is, as my prayer
is, & all good ſubiectes ought to be, for our
Q. Maieſties preſeruation. What other
title ſo euer be pretended, be it good or bad,
if it ſhall once threaten danger to the Q.
Maieſtie whoſe title and gouernance we
know to be true and haue felt to be good, I
wiſh it deſtroyed and put out of hope, leaſt
it hope to ſone, to faſt, to much, to hye, and
ioyne with to many.
            Record I pray you the anathemaes of
the conſpiracie of Trent, theyr cruell and
dangerous practiſes agaynſt this realme,
and agaynſt all other of Chriſtian profeſſion,
the Popes ſentences agaynſt our
Quéene and Countrey, and all this well
liked of, and holden for holy by our owne
vnhappy Papiſtes. Remember the deuiſes
to put the ſame ſentences and conſpiracies
in execution, in Fraunce and Flanders
all at one tyme.Haud recte temporibus diuiſa ſunt tibi iſta, Daue. Conſider the concurrence
and euenneſſe of tyme of this rebellious
enterpriſe in England, and that
late murderous and haynous attempt in
Scotlande. But to pyke a litle more

good out of the late ill déede of horrible
murder. What ſay the Quéenes good
ſubiectes to be the cauſe, why after our
rebelles vanquiſhed, the Regent was
ſlayne, that ſhould haue bene done before
to ſerue our rebelles and their conſpiraters
turne. For ſooth their traitors there
and ſome conſpiraters here Engliſhe or
Scottiſh ſaw full well the ſincere frendſhip
of the Regent to the Quéene, that notwithſtandyng
all the practiſes from henſe
to the contrarie, he mynded to deliuer our
rebelles, whereby the counſelles and complices
both here and there muſt haue bene
diſcloſed, they politikely prouided, by aſſent
to murder that noble gentleman betimes,
whoſe bloud added to other bloudes ſo crye
to God, as it is perilous to draw to much
into ſocietie and partnerſhyp of thoſe agaynſt
whom ſuch bloud ſo crieth. This
is the common feare of good ſubiectes: and
to feare to much rather then to little, may
be more folly, but it is leſſe fault. It may
haue leſſe cauſe, but it hath more truth honeſtie
and fayth. Wey well if theſe be
the meanes that my lordes of Northumberland
and Weſtmerland, and their company
haue ſought to bryng the vnityng of

realmes and crownes, and to worke the
effect of theyr proclamations both for ſtate
and religion, which doyng ſuch men brag
to be ſo beneficiall, & ſith the ſame and the
titles thereof reach not ſo farre as by any
theſe meanes to make ſuch vnityng in the
perſon of our moſt noble Quene, nor ſuch
attemptes for religion and other effectes
can be atcheued with her likyng: then
what ſucceſſe is to be looked for of theyr deuiſes
and what marke is it to be feared
they ſhoote at? They and ſuch other Papiſtes
and ambitious practiſers may perhaps
iuſtly and truly ſay, proteſt & ſweare
that they entended not the effect of ſuch
purpoſes while her Maieſtie liueth, for it
may be that they meane peraduenture
that her hyghneſſe ſhould not lyue ſo long.
God preſerue her to outlyue all them that
haue lyued to long. This example is terrible,
and would be profitably vſed.
            You can not forget how the Pope
claimeth,Popiſh clergie no good ſubiectes. and our Papiſtes do graunt him
the ſuperioritie ouer Eccleſiaſticall perſons.
Theyr obedience is thereby withdrawen
from theyr Prince, and from the
ſeruice of theyr Countrey, & they exempted
from theyr duties to the Prince and

realme. Like is the referryng of all eccleſiaſticall
cauſes to the Pope as to the ſupreme
iudge and ruler. Great wrong therby
is done to the Realme, great withdrawyng
of the bodyes of ſubiectes from
preſence to ſerue and defende the Realme,
and great tranſportation of the treaſure:
the foule examples whereof in pilfring and
ſcrapyng within the Realme, to ſerue the
vnſatiable couetiſe of Rome, appeareth by
the many lamentable complaints in theyr
owne hiſtories, with which enormities
and oppreſſions as moſt burdenous and
perilous to the Realme, our Parlamentes
and ſpecially Conuocations, haue before
tyme found them ſelues meruelouſly agreued.
And yet this heuie & ouerchargeable
yoke muſt be reduced agayne by our Papiſtes,
Harding. yea and our new angeles of Louaine,
with whom the euil ſprites at home
do accord, can terme theſe intollerable exactions,
but a ſmall pitance or trifle to
acknowledge our good will to our mother
church, and can call the reaſonable miſlyking
or iuſt gronyng thereat as a niggardly
grudgyng. Liberall men, I aſſure you,
and no maruell, for they be of hys faction,Wolſey.
that ſometyme bragged that the aduauncyng

of hym ſelfe to the throne of Rome,
ſhould coſt hym all England. So ſmall
a thyng theſe Papiſtes accompt it to venture
all England at a caſt. And good reaſon
haue they, for they venture it at the
perill of other mens loſſes, for whoſoeuer
reigne here by their treaſon, they are lyke
to kéepe or increaſe theyr wealthes and
dignities.
            Let it be thought vpon how much theſe
fellowes eſteme the common knot of fidelitie
to the Prince, whereby the peace of
the land is holden together, and eche mans
due propertie is preſerued, which beleue
that the ſame faith is diſſoluble at the will
of a foreine prieſt.
            Let alſo this deſcendyng gradation be
conſidered concernyng Papiſtes and their
hope,Traitours not true to theyr owne fellowes. how true they will be to their Countrey,
that are not true to God: how true
they will be to their good Prince, that are
not true to their Countrey: how true they
will be to any ſubiect, that are not true to
their Prince: and thereby let theyr confedrates
beware that they be not made bottels,
firſt filled & then emptied, & afterward
hanged vp by the walles. Let the Duke
of Buckingham in king Richardes tyme,

and infinite other beate this wiſdome into
theyr head, to know how ill a tyrant or
one that atteyneth a crowne by miſchiefe
and wrong, can beare to liue detbounden
to thoſe that aduaunced hym, or ſubiect to
their reproche, & being once fleſhed in miſchiefes
by theyr helpe how litle conſcience
he maketh to procede further and ſpecially
vpon them whom he knoweth in hys conſcience
in ioynyng with hym to haue well
deſerued it. Let them well digeſt the
vicont of Melunes admonition on hys
death bed to the Engliſh barons in the beginning
of the reigne of king Iohns heire.
And let them neuer ſay that they the late
rebels and theyr complices had no ſuch intētion
to ouerthrow her Maieſties eſtate,
ſith the thinges expreſſed in their firſt proclamation
can not be done while her Maieſties
eſtate continueth, who hath ſo honorably
oft proteſted to preferre Gods
truth aboue her crowne and lyfe, which
God long preſerue.
            Let all Engliſhmen, thinke of this and
beleue it as experience hath taught it, that
where Monkes and religious perſons
changed their ſurnames and had many other
ſolemne ceremonies at their profeſſions,Monckes forſwore theyr countrey and naturall dutie.
which they ſayd dyd ſignifie their vertuous

renouncing of worldly and carnall
fanſies,Therefore many Biſhops wold not be conſecrate till they were made Monkes. the ſame pretenſe of ſignifiyng
was vtterly falſe, like the pretenſe of refuſing
the othe to the Quéene: and the very
true meaning ſuch as is proued by the conſequence
of their déedes, was no other but
that euery perfect Papiſt doth take vpon
him a zeale, for defenſe of their God the
Pope and his hereſie to throwe away all
due and naturall beneuolence and fayth to
Prince, Countrey, parentes, frendes, and
all thoſe iuſt and due reſpectes, whereunto
God by the law of nature hath bounde
them in this world: and this muſt ſo be,
for the other true vowe of renouncing, was
made before in Baptiſme, and remayned
ſtill in force.
            To all theſe inconueniences and traitorous
abſurdities they muſt nedes be ſubiect
which hold that the Church of Rome
is the true Catholike Church of Chriſt,
and that the Catholike Church of Chriſt
can not erre.
            The horror of their cruelties to the people
of their country,Cruelties of Papiſtes. of whom their country
conſiſteth, whoſe liues they haue regarded
no more then ſhéepe, yea no more then
fleaes, and that with ſuch delite of torment

as if they ſtill cryed out as the heathen tyrant
did fac vt ſentiat ſe mori, let him
fele that he is dying, & as the Pope himſelf
did that cauſed ſome of his Cardinales to
be tormented in ſuch maner by ſpeciall cō
               mandement,
that he being in a garden vnderneth
ſaying hys deuotions, might heare
them cry: all this I referre to the large,
faithfull and learned explication of that
good diligent and vertuous man Maſter
Foxe in his Booke of Actes and Monumentes
of the Church, where as in a glaſſe
doth euidently appeare what nature or
any kinde, reſpect to kinne, reuerence, pitie,
loue, or countrey, reigned or rather remayned
in the furious hartes of Papiſtes,
how ſmothly ſoeuer the hypocrites wyth
Crocodiles teares or wild Iriſh laughter,
do faine, flatter and abuſe thoſe in whoſe
power they be, till they haue their time of
auantage. Though the remembrance of
theſe thinges be bitter, yet is it holſome.
And therefore let it not out of their hartes
that haue harty care, and ſpecially charge
of their countrey.
            That clemencie and gentleneſſe can
not reclaime them from traitorous minds
while they continue in Papiſtrie,Clemencie can not winne a Papiſt▪
                is as

plaine and as true a forme of ſpeach, as if
a man ſholde ſay they muſt nedes be traytors,
ſo long as they be full of treaſon, for
treaſon and Papiſtrie are vnſeparable
while they be kept vnder, euen as crueltie
and Papiſtrie are vnſeperable when they
are gotten aboue. Yet for ſome more ample
opening of the truth of this concluſion, let
vs ſomewhat more wey their qualities
with reaſonable conſideration and conference
of their doinges.
            If clemencie and benefites ſhould be
hable to reclaime them, it muſt be for ſome
regard that they muſt haue of the dutie of
thankefulneſſe, for benefites receaued of
thoſe perſons from whoſe ſincerely louing
minde toward them, and not from any
foreine enforcing cauſe, they accompt the
benefites to procede. Wherein is to be
ſearched, how much they are likely to eſteme
ſuch dutie, by their weying other &
nere duties, and agayne how well they acknowledge
from whence this clemencie
and benefites haue proceded. For if the
hieſt and greateſt duties of kindneſſe moue
them not, then is ſmall accompt to be
made of their thankfulneſſe for temporall
commodities, or at the leaſt for bare ſuffering

them to liue vnpuniſhed. And againe
if the ſame impunitie and other beneficiall
doinges, be thought to come enforced from
other, or craftily wonne by their owne policie,
or ſo to come from your ſelfe as you
could not choſe, then is your thanke fo far
loſt as there is no hope that euer any ſuch
meane can reclaime a Papiſt.
            Surely he that regardeth not the hyeſt
dutie, will neuer regarde the meaneſt.
The dutie of the loue or feare of God can
not hold a Papiſt from blaſphemie againſt
God. The dutie of faith & allegeance to his
Prince can not kéepe a Papiſt from treaſon
to his Prince. The dutie of deare loue
to his natural countrey can not withdraw
a Papiſt from aſſenting to, yea and procuring
the ſpoyle, deſtruction, bondage, and
alienation of his countrey, as I haue alredy
proued. The dutie of kinde and naturall
pitie can not ſtay a Papiſt from
murdering the feble ſexe, nor the ſilly tender
infancie, nor reuerend eldeſt age. The
dutie of familiaritie in youth, of frendſhip
in grauer yeares, of continuall ſocietie during
all the life paſſed, with heapes of
mutuall commodities, can not pull backe
a Papiſt from immanitie of ſacrificing his
dereſt frendes. The dutie of honor of Children

to parentes, or loue of parentes to
children, remoueth not a Papiſt from vnnaturall
crueltie. The dutie of entier loue
and felowſhip betwene man and wife, holdeth
no place in the hart of a Papiſt. No
dutie of kinred, no eſtimation of learning
& vertue, no good reſpect that moueth good
men to loue & compaſſion, once toucheth a
ſtubburne Papiſt. Al theſe duties we haue
ſene broken, yea neglected and throwen
away by Papiſtes. And is there hope that
clemencie can ſo farre winne them, as to
hold them in truth to the Prince, from
whom they receiue it, if opportunitie
ſerue to bring them out of her danger, or
her highneſſe into their danger, which
God forbid?
            Whenſoeuer (which God graunt
neuer be) her Maieſtie perſon ſhould
ſtand in theyr curteſie, it is euident that
then the gate were open to their deſires,
to theyr floriſhing, to theyr conqueſt,
to theyr abilities of reuengyng,
and to their perfect triumphyng. And
will they, trow you, omit all theſe that
they ſo earneſtly gape for? will they let
paſſe any occaſion that may bryng theſe?
and all in reſpect of her gracious clemencie,
and benefites? no no, that will not be.

It greueth me to thinke and I abhorre to
write what opportunities they are lykely
to ſéeke and vſe, hauyng now preſſed ſo
farre as they haue alreadie done with
theyr enterpriſes, ſhadowed with ſuch
hopes as theyr proclamation hath vttered.
            But admit kyndeneſſe were in them for
benefites where they impute them. It is
as well knowen as a common prouerb
that, where her Maieſtie of her ſingular
goodneſſe of nature (which yet were farre
greater goodneſſe, if it be directed to the
onely preſeruation of good men, and not
further ſtretched and abuſed to the cheriſhyng
of euill and dangerous men) hath
forborne and reſtrayned execution of law
agaynſt them, which yet are the lawes
made expreſſely for her Maieſties ſafetie,
theyr ordinarie ſaying is, you can haue no
law agaynſt vs, God ſo prouideth for vs
hys choſen anointed, that you can haue no
law, or if you haue, you can not execute it,
god ſo preſerueth theyr ſide forſoth & ſo bridleth
her Maieſties power, by hyw own inſtinct
or by theyr owne meanes of policie.
            Sée the examples of theyr thankefulneſſe.
Did euer thoſe Papiſts, whoſe liues
were ſaued by good Byſhop Cranmers
meanes, who were brought vp, who were
defended, who were aduanced, who were

ſhelded from harme & perill by hym, ones
requite hym with one drop of kyndneſſe?
And yet they ſpake hym faire in hys proſperitie.
Auayled the great liberalitie of
kyng Henry the viij. to rayſe vp any kinde
remembrance in Papiſtes, that were
great in Quéene Maryes dayes, to ſtay
them from aſſentyng to the captiuitie and
danger and ſekyng the bloud of hys moſt
noble daughter our moſt gracious ſoueraygne
Ladie? And yet duryng kyng Henryes
reigne, they ſhewed a ſeruiceable
face, as if they would haue ſpent theyr
bloudes, to kepe wrong from hym and
hys, and dyd ſerue agaynſt Papiſtrie it
ſelfe, till theyr treaſon and Papiſtrie was
rype to be aduaunced. Are not the great
doers of thys laſt rebellion and conſpiracie,
thoſe of whom her Maieſtie hath moſt
well and bountifully deſerued? And yet
while they were in her preſence, they were
as deſirous as any that be now about her
to haue her Maieſtie thinke of them as of
good and faithful ſubiectes. Yea when they
were nere the execution of theyr treaſons,
beyng ſuſpected and examined therof,Periuri 
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   arte Sinonis. denyed
it, and made vehement hye proteſtations
with great othes of theyr purpoſe
to the contrarie, and theyr readyneſſe to

ſubdue them that ſhould breake the peace,
as in her Maieſties proclamation appeareth.
The ſucceſſe of whoes doynges, ſo
ſhortly folowyng, amounteth to as much
as if they had playnly ſayd,Vnum nôris, omnes nôris. what ſoeuer
viſer of faith, whatſoeuer promyſſe of true
allegeance, what ſoeuer aſſurance of
wordes, what ſoeuer employeng them ſelues
agaynſt theyr owne partes till perfect
readineſſe, what ſoeuer iudgyng and condemnyng
of theyr owne faction beyng not
yet ſtrong enough, Papiſtes do pretend, it
is to no other end but to inſinuate them
ſelues into fredome from miſtruſt, and to
draw her Maieſties eyes to looke an other
way, to bryng her into a ſecuritie till the
danger be vnauoidable, as I truſt it neuer
ſhalbe, if good ſubiectes ſticke well together
to her hyghneſſe, which ſhalbe ſo long
as her Maieſtie ſhall as ſhe doeth ſticke
well to God & her good ſubiectes, & not to
ſuffer them to be diſhabled to defend her.
            Surely when Papiſtes are come ſo far,
that the wyfe can procure the murder of
her huſband, the father of hys ſonne, the
mother of her child, the frend of hys deareſt
frend, and ſo in all degrées of coniunction,
ſhall her Maieſtie looke to haue clemencie
and liberalitie requited with loyaltie

at theyr hands, that already boſt that
they receyue no clemencie or goodneſſe of
her, but by theyr owne cunnyng meanes,
or by a ſuperior enforcement?
            And truly of this theyr great vnkyndneſſe,
there is one great reaſon while Papiſtrie
remayneth in them, Earthly
thynges muſt geue place to heauenlie, and
tranſitorie to eternall. They eſteme the
voyce of the Pope as the voyce of the eternall
God. Whyle her Maieſtie actually
reigneth ouer them, they ſuppoſe not them
ſelues to lyue vnder her hyghneſſe as ſubiectes,
but to be holden as captiues, and ſo
with all theyr fained ſhewe they beare to
her a ſeruile reuerence,Papiſtes obedience vntrue. euen altogether
ſuch as the bond Mores haue done to the
Spanyardes, and as Gardiner and hys fellowes
dyd beare to kyng Henry the viij.
and to kyng Edward, and my Lordes of
Northumberland and Weſtmerland and
theyr companie with theſe that haue dropped
to them ſince or ſhall hereafter ſhrinke
lykewiſe from her, do beare to her ſelfe.
They are ready further at theyr God the
Popes voyce, whenſoeuer they may be hable
to ſhake of her yoke and gouernement,
with opinion of meritoriouſneſſe, as the

vyle Monke that tempered a tode for hys
naturall kyng, and as doctor Mackerell in
tymes paſt, and ſome other both then and
ſince haue openly vttered. Agayne where
they ſuppoſe theyr aunceſters and frendes
ſoules, for lacke of the helpe which the
Quéene kepeth from them, to lye in vnſpeakeable
peynes: where alſo they ſuppoſe
their owne ſoules to lacke their ghoſtly
comfortes, them ſelues to be cut from
Gods church beyng ſeuered from the pope
the hed thereof: chiefly where they thinke
not onely them ſelues, but alſo theyr children
and poſteritie for euer, to be by the
ſettyng forth of this Religion which the
Quenes hyghneſſe auaunceth, drawen into
a continuall dangerous ſtreame and
vnrecouerable ſtate of damnation. And
where all this whyle they are further perſuaded
(as they muſt nedes be, if they think
the Romane church catholike & the Pope
the hed therof, and the catholike church
and the hed thereof to be preſerued from
poſſibilitie of error) that by force of the
Popes ſentence and for ſchiſmaticall and
vnrepentant ſwaruyng from hys church,
her Maieſtie is not in Gods ſight iuſt
Quene of this realme, with remembring

how farre they thinke they may or ought,
when they dare, to ſhonne her as a perſon
excommunicate, and to withdraw from
her all ayde, relief, ſeruice and obedience:
is it, trow you, to be thought that
ſuch benefites as they receiue in clemencie
and otherwiſe, which yet they impute
to Gods preſeruing them for the holyneſſe
of theyr cauſe, or to theyr owne policies in
deceiuyng her, are hable to weye downe
thoſe depe and eternall conſiderations of
miſeries which they beleue them ſelues to
ſuſtayne by her meanes? It is not poſſible,
beyng ſo perſuaded of her right to the
croune, and of the Popes power ouer her
croune and perſon, as they be. Whyle they
thinke them ſelues true Iſraelites, the
choſen people of God, and the Pope theyr
Moſes or rather Chriſt, what accompt
make they of the prince, whom they ſerue,
other than as of Pharao? or make they any
more conſcience of withdrawyng all duties
from the Prince and theyr whole contrey,
than the Iſraelites dyd of robbyng
the Egyptians, how fayre ſoeuer they
ſpake, promyſed, or bound them ſelues
when they borrowed theyr iewelles? Many
ſuch examples haue ben ſeen in her

Maieſties moſt noble progenitors dayes,
but moſt chiefely and moſt euidently in
her owne.
            Of lyke truth it is that Papiſtrie being
an hereſie,Papiſtrie encreaſeth by lenitie. or rather a bondle made vp of
an infinite nomber of hereſies, muſt nedes
haue the propertie of hereſie, to floriſh
with indulgence and lenitie. We ſée the
lyke example in the ſect of Arrians, which
vnder hereticall Emperours excedingly
encreaſced, and beyng ones condemned
& reſtrayned by puniſhment, hath worne
away to a few. So farre as kyng Henry
the viij. went in reforming religion, which
was to aboliſh the primacie of Rome out
of this realme (a noble conqueſt) with certaine
groſſe idolatries: dyd not the ſeueritie
of hys lawes, the awe of hys perſon,
& the dred of due execution, ſo hold downe
thoſe partes of Papiſtrie which he ſuppreſſed,
that they durſt not ones ſhew
them ſelues in hys dayes? and yet in the
ſame tyme the greuous law of ſixe Articles
made agaynſt Gods truth, and ſiniſterly
procured by Popiſh clergie, nor yet
the earneſt inquirie, nor cruell executyng
of it by Byſhops & other, could hold downe
the truth of the Goſpell, but that it brake

out more and more vpon them. The reaſon
is, that Papiſtrie and Chriſtian truth
haue two ſeuerall endes: truth reſpecteth
heauen, and Papiſtrie the world. Wherby
theyr aduentures & enterpriſes are commonly
diuerſe: the Papiſt dare boldly ſet
vpon any miſchief, where he hath hope to
auaunce hys falſehode: The Chriſtian
dare conſtantly abyde any torment to
geue witneſſe of Gods truth. And ſuch
qualitie of Gods truth haue the auncient
fathers deſcribed, when one of them calleth
the bloud of Martyrs the water to
water Gods garden, an other ſayth that
they encreace with cuttyng downe, and other
in other maner haue expreſſed the
ſame meanyng.
            But now being vnder a Chriſtian Prince
in dayes of reſt (bleſſed be almighty God,
and long preſerued be her maieſtie the inſtrument
of it) as it is not mete that Gods
Church, after Iulian the Apoſtataes
maner, be perſecuted to make it encreace,
but holden downe with good diſcipline for
maners that it grow not wilde and runne
out into wantonneſſe, ſo is not the Church
of the Deuill to be mainteined and multiplied
with indulgence, winking and ſlackneſſe

of correction, but with good ſeueritie
to be reſtreyned, that it grow not to ſuch
rankneſſe to choke the true church in dede.
The licentiouſneſſe of Papiſtes ſpeach is
great,Papiſtes dangerouſ
                  
                     ••
                   cheriſhed. they dare do and ſay they care not
what, they haue their aſſemblies and ordinary
conferences together, their leude
and ſeditious bookes, and ſuch courage as
the truer ſort of her Maieſties part are ouercrowed,
as the good preachers dayly
complayne, and ſo long I pray God they
complaine not that God heare them, and
be angry that other heard them not. Popiſh
prieſtes, who ſometime triumphed
that they were ſo eſtemed Popiſh, and by
that meane got thoſe thinges together,
enioy the great eccleſiaſticall liuinges
without recantation or penance, yea and
in ſimoniacall heapes: Cathedrall Churches
are ſtuffed with them, as dennes of
theues: they are in offices: the meaner
ſort depend vpon them, and partly by example,
partly by common deſire to crepe
into fauour of their ſuperiors, and partly
alſo for that the great ones are loth to
haue other about them, are perilouſly infected:
the very ſpyes and promoters of
Quéene Maries time, without change of

their opinion are cheriſhed & marke men
againſt an other day. Mercie may haue
her exceſſe, and clemencie may be great
crueltie, when it ouerfloweth to the good
mans danger.
            Yet is not my minde that for mens
bare opinions or miſtakinges in controuerſies
of religion,No crueltie for ſimple opinions. being otherwiſe honeſt
and ciuile men, & where the ſame extend
not to participation of treaſon, or to thoſe
Articles that implie a dangerous meaning
to the ſtate, they ſhould be byandby
deſtroyed, but reſtrayned from inſolence
and licentious ſpreding of their errors,
and with doctrine & examples be reduced,
but ſpecially that confidence be repoſed
in men that be better aſſured. Such maner
of crueltie were to imitate Papiſtes,
rather than to correct Papiſtes. Meaner
puniſhmentes than the paines of treaſon
ar meter. Conuenient diſcipline, comming
after good teaching, were profitable. But
thoſe of them that in tyme paſt haue bene
ſhepebiters,Old ſhepebiters perilous to be kept. and hetherto ſhew no true
repentance, it is likely that they haue the
common qualitie of olde ſhepebiters, they
will neuer leaue it, and they cannot be
kept without danger of the flocke and

ſtate. Of this may Gardiner and Boner
(whom God hath ſent from hence, I dare
not ſay taken from hence) be notable examples.
Many moe there haue bene and
be: and ſome of thoſe that be, remaine not
onely in her Maieſties power, but alſo in
her charge.
            The other Concluſions following haue
great difference from theſe wherof I haue
made ſome explication. Of theſe yet nothing
ſo large an explication haue I made
as truth is well and eaſily able to furniſh,
nether can I ſo well make it as the expedience
of the cauſe aſketh to geue the vantage
of eloquence to the goodneſſe of the
matter, to helpe to draw it into credit and
effect of well mouing. But being as it is,
rude and true, great conning and fineneſſe
is the leaſt nedefull, where thoſe for whom
it is moſt intended are ſo wiſe as it is farre
more eaſie for naked troth to enforme
them, than for any gay ſpeach to leade
them. This is the diuerſitie of the articles
declared,Matters of facte not knowen but 
                     〈…〉
                  . and of the articles remayning:
thoſe that be paſt conteyne matters of fact,
doinges, maners, and diſpoſitions of men
abrode, the certainties and circumſtances
whereof cannot be vnderſtoode of any

the wiſeſt men in the worlde by way of
contemplation, but muſt be brought vnto
them by relation of true and faithfull ſubiectes,
by common rumor and ſpeach of
the honeſt ſort, or ſome ſuch other meane of
intelligence and experience: by reaſon
wherof I haue ben bolder of things conſiſting
in doing, and toſſed in talke abrode,
to gather luch a certaintie of report of
things, for the better conſidering of danger
to her Maieſtie and the eſtate, as is in dede
the very common and ordinary burden of
euery honeſt mans hart to ſée them, and
neceſſarie thynges to be layed before thoſe
that may amend them.
            The other concluſions that follow,
wherin I neither haue nor will wade ſo
farre, are matters of conſultation and meditation.
The effect therof, which is the
ſafe preſeruation of the Quéenes royall
Maieſtie and the realme, the auoydyng of
dangers that threaten the ſame, the eſtabliſhyng
of aſſuredneſſe, boldneſſe, courage
and fréedome of her hyghneſſes moſt good
counſellers and ſubiectes, the taking auantages
of opportunities and occaſions, the
wedyng out of deceiuers and vndermyners,
the defenſe of her Maieſties honor

& dignitie, the meanes to anſwere charge
toward God, & namely in dealyng with
men as they be affectioned to or agaynſt
God, this effect I ſay of thoſe other concluſions
I know doth continually occupie her
Maieſtie and her moſt honorable counſellers
in thinkyng on them and prouidyng
for them: therfore it ſhall no further occupie
me and other meane ſubiectes than in
prayer and readyneſſe to ſerue as her Maieſtie
and her counſell ſhall ſée fit to employ
vs. I will not therfore in diſcourſing
of them encomber my ſelfe and other. It
ſhall ſuffice me, and ſo ought it to content
all other, to know as we do know, what a
wiſe Prince we haue, what good Counſell
ſhe hath choſen, how well they haue gouerned,
what frute we haue had of it, ſo as
nothyng is left to vs, but to geue thankes,
to beware that our owne ſinnes geue not
the occaſion of loſſe and change, to ſerue
dutifully and to pray deuoutely.
            Howſoeuer the nature of Papiſtes
hath ſhewed it ſelfe, that they are moſt gloſing
traitors till they haue theyr aduantage,
and moſt cruell tormenters when
they haue obteyned it: howſoeuer it be
true that though her Maieſtie heape them

with infinitie benefites and cheriſh them
with vnmeaſurable and dangerous clemencie,
though they crepe and crouch, and
with theyr promiſe of fayth which they
thinke bound to kepe no fayth, ſpeake neuer
ſo faire, and for the tyme diſſemble
theyr zele, holdyng them contented with
glorious and falſe ſhewes of policie to perſuade
a certaine traitorous temper and perilous
neutralitie (if they repent not their
error and change not their Religion) they
hate her, they watch theyr tymes, they
tranſferre the prayſes of her good gouernement
to thoſe that neuer deſerued it, they
be redy to vndermine her eſtate while ſhe
lyueth, as they did with her brother, and to
defame and deface her beyng dead as they
dyd with her father: howſoeuer they now
hide, or hereafter vtter theyr ſtomackes: it
is on the other ſide true that though her
Maieſtie ſhould ſhew to Chriſtians in bodylie
and temporall thynges great hardneſſe,
yet is it ſo recompenſed and ouerweyed
to vs in the fréedome and ioy of our
conſciences, that we muſt and will ſtill
loue her how much more then beyng our
ſo good, louyng and benefici
                  •
               ll ſeueraine?
            It is we that depend vpon her, it is

we that thinke it ſhalbe more eaſy and
better for vs (euen in reſpect of our worldly
life, and benefites, though there were
not a greater proſpect beyond) to die at her
fote in her defence than to ouerliue her
Maieſtie, the ſame being expreſſed by her
enimies. Goſpellers be they, whom though
her maieſtie can by no meanes make to
ceaſe to loue her, yet by ouermuch cheriſhing
of Papiſtes, ſhe may make leſſe
ſtrong to defend her. Our caſe is ſuch as
her Maieſtie may be aſſured of vs,Onely Chriſtians true to the Queene. that we
ſtand for her, not only as for our Prince,
our louing ſoueraigne, our mother, our
countrey, our hauiours & poſſeſſions, but
alſo for the liues, and (that moſt is) for the
ſeules of our ſelues, our wiues, our children
& poſterity for euer. If any of this part
haue bene ſeduced by Papiſtes, as perhaps
there be, error I hope it is and not malice,
And as it is error, ſo is it mete to be forſaken
as error, I meane not onely forſaken
in purſuing, but alſo in defending, ſuccoring,
pacifiyng and helping. For let ſuch
make their accompt to finde no truth, defence,
mercy, nor kindneſſe in Papiſtes,
when they get aboue, howſoeuer their

preſent turne be ſerued. To late ſhall they
wiſh for the good Prince, whom their own
follies ſhall haue loſt. Let them remember
the policies of Charles vſed with
Maurice and other for aſſurance of religion
againſt the confederates of Smalcald.
Let them remember the Fremingham
promiſes for not altering religion. Let
them remember that the very promiſers
eyther in dede ſhall not be hable,
or will be glad to ſay they are not
able to kepe promiſe with them, or if
they would faine kepe promiſe they may
hap to be ſent after their predeceſſors.
Let them remember the keping of edictes
and word of a king in other places,
by meane of perſons ſomewhat allied.
Let them remember that them ſelues
ſhall not dare to chalenge ſuch promiſes,
no more then the Crane his reward for
pulling the bone out of the wolues throte.
Let them remember they ſhall haue to do
with ſuch as thinke not themſelues bound
to kepe faith with them nor any of our ſide,
& can haue a diſpenſation at their pleaſure.
It is we therefore that pray God to geue
her Maieſtie iudgement and all timely

meanes of intelligence, to diſcerne her 
                  ••
               nemies,
and courage to vſe ſuch opportunities
of times as God throweth vpon her.
            It is we that with thankes to God do
acknowledge that God hath ſo guided the
ſucceſſe of this late rebellion, as if he ſhould
haue ſayd to her maieſtie, 
                  •
               oe daughter, al
though neceſſitie of mine ordinance, and
the diſpoſition of thinges for my glorie
(which ſhalbe in the end alſo your benefit)
be ſuch as there muſt be a traitorous rebellion
in your realme, yet this will I do
for you: you ſhall vnderſtand it in tyme:
you ſhall haue the meanes, whereby they
ſhould accompliſh their entent, in your
owne power: you ſhall make your owne
match: you ſhall haue the choyſe to name
the parties your ſelfe, that ſhalbe the leders
and doers of it, euen the weakeſt of credit,
wit, and power that you can choſe to withſtand
you: you ſhall chuſe the tyme, when
they ſhall attempt it, the moſt vnſeaſonable
for them, either to procede in
their owne doinges together, or for hauing
aide to reſort to them, either of foraine enemies
or domeſticall traytors: you ſhal choſe
the place where you would haue it begon,

ſuch as lyeth beſt for danger of contagion
of other, eaſieſt for your ſelfe to encloſe,
hardeſt for your enemyes to come to, and
neareſt borderyng vpon your beſt foreine
frendes: they ſhall want furniture, your
ſelfe ſhall haue abundance: your good and
true counſellers ſhall nobly and truely
ſtand by you: your nobilitie ſhalbe prouoked
to reuenge diſhonor & ſlanderous ſuſpitions
throwen vpon them by the rebelles
and therby ſhall haue cauſe to ſtriue who
may beſt ſerue you: your good ſubiectes
ſhall euery way ſhew theyr zeale in your
ſeruice: your poore clergie ſhall poure out
theyr deuout prayer for you and I will
heare them: I will guide the ſucceſſe to
your victorie: your enemies ſhalbe ſo ſnared,
as the victorie well folowed, the treaſon
well examined, the faultie well remoued,
the roote well & cleane hewed vp, you
may ſit frée from traitors whyle you lyue,
and your good & true counſellers and ſubiectes
may be ſet in ſafe abilitie and encouraged
to ſerue you truly and ſtand
faythfully and boldly by you. Sée now
that you fayle not me nor your ſelfe, and
neither by miſſuſer, nor nonvſer, forſake

me, nor loſe the benefites that I haue ſo
prouided for you.
            We therefore acknowledge all theſe
things to haue ſo come to paſſe, and dout
not that her Maieſtie will euer with inuincible
conſtantie ſo prouide that thoſe
moſt noble Counſellers be mainteyned to
ſerue God and her without feare, and be
ſo cheriſhed as they may with delite and
frée careleſneſſe and aſſuredneſſe of their
owne eſtates from perill of reuenge or any
other aſſault, bend them ſelues wholly to
ſtudie for her highneſſes preſeruation.
We pray God to geue her Maieſtie euer
the hart to ſuſpect his truth whatſoeuer he
be, (if any euer be as I truſt there ſhall
not) that ſhall practiſe to abate any credite
of theſe moſt true counſellers, or ſhall inſinuate
or geue any aduiſe to ſtay the true
and perfect ſerching of the bottome of theſe
treaſens to forbeare the full deſtruction of
the roote thereof, or to extenuate her Maie
               
                  ••
               ies
perill, and to ſay to euery ſuch a one
if any ſmoke or glimſe of ſignification may
thereunto leade, et tu ex illis es. Thou
art alſo one of them. We confeſſe it is
time, and we pray, that all her Maieſties
ſubiects by othe and al other good meanes

may be aſſured vnto her, and that al titles,
all bondes, knottes▪ alliances, colours and
pretences to her Maieſties danger may be
cut of, what ſhew ſoeuer they make, knowing
and hartely deſiring it may be remembred,
that no common law of nations,
no title of anoynted, or what ſoeuer
face they ſet vpon it, may be warrant for
for any perilous creature, Papiſt, Biſhop,
Prieſt, runaway, gentleman, marchant,
or other, man or woman, to be dangerous
to her Maieſtie in her own realme. We
know well that a gallon of Rats bane in
an Apothecaries ſhop will not hurt a man
halfe ſo much as an ounce in his bellye.
We are not ſo madde to haue ſuch a fonde
longyng for the fleſh pottes of Egypt, for
marie & marie bones that we wold with
the rebellious Iewes deſire to returne againe
to the land of Egipt the houſe of bondage
& forein ſlauerie both of body & ſoule,
to ſuck them, and that not for lacke but for
lothing of fine natural and holeſome foode.
We pray that we may once ſee euery title
deſtroyed, whatſoeuer it be, either in
ciuill reſpect or eccleſiaſticall, that hath or
ſhall any way threaten her Maieſties
danger, that hath or ſhall any way clayme

the crounerom frm her hed, or her power
out of her hand, that hath or ſhall ſeke any
diſpoſſeſſion of her eſtate and the inuaſion
of her land,Romane tyrannies and cruelties. & ſpecially the titles and lewd
hopes of Romiſh Popes that haue by notorius
wickedneſſe excedyng the olde
Romane Emperours ſhewed them ſelues
vnmete to lyue among Chriſtian people,
much leſſe to gouerne them, that haue by
murrible and vnnaturall murders and
hoactiſe of poyſoning and other miſchieues
ſhewed that them ſelues and their
Papiſtes are not to be wonne with kindeneſſe
to be true to the Queene, that could
not be holden by nature from ſlaughter of
t
                  •
               eir own, as by many euident hiſtories
appeareth, yea where their treaſon may
be rewarded with a kingdome, yea with
the kingdome of heauen: thoſe fained and
wicked titles (we ſay) of Romiſh vſurpation,
that haue interrupted the bleſſed
yea
                  •
               e which we haue ſo long enioyed, that
haue drawen into conſpiracie,Treaſons of Papiſts. alliance &
knottes of fauour thoſe of whom her Maieſtie
hath well deſerued, that hath armed
the rebell againſt lour moſt good ſwete ſoueraigne
Ladies life, croune, and dignitie,
and put weapon in traytors handes to cut

true ſubiectes throtes, and vtterly to deſtroy
the wealth, ſafetie and honor of England.
            We pray that we may ſee when thoſe
that ſhall wreſt or procure to change law,
to erect the courage of any dangerous Viper
to ſuch endes, or to any aſpiring hope
of preuenting and vndermining, vnder
whatſoeuer colour, name, pretēce or ſhew
in proclamation or otherwiſe, or to the
ſafegard of their perſones that haue ſo attempted,
may be declared and executed as
enemies to this eſtate, and to the Quenes
ſafety. We pray that we may ſe ſuch laws
prouided for her highneſſes preſeruation,
& the ſame ſo executed without reſtraint
or ſlackneſſe for any reſpect as the hope of
Papiſtes, ſuch as be enemies to God, the
Quéene, and the realme, may if they repent
not, be cut of for euer. We pray to
liue to ſée that none may haue place, office
nor acceſſe into her Maieſties court nor
houſhold, no nor once to her preſence, that
ſhall not be well knowen to fauour both
God and her, ſo far as any circumſpection
and policie may prouide it. We pray God
that we may once ſée the adminiſtration,
yea and ſtudie of law and iuſtice wholly

taken from thoſe that ſhall not be knowen
to fauour the law of God, and to acknowledge
her Maieſties right, that is head of
law and iuſtice in the realme. We pray
God that her Maieſtie and her Counſell
may haue ſuch particular knowledge of
men that her enemies may be weakened,
and her frendes ſtrengthned, al auantages
vſed for her ſafetie, all neutrall aduiſes ſuſpected
for ſurtle vnderminings. We truſt
it wil be ſo, for God hath not drawen theſe
late miſchiefes into light for nothing. But
afore all thinges we pray God to ſend vs
true repentance, more ioyfull receiuing of
his Goſpel, and more vertuous enſuing it,
leaſt as we loſt our beſt king with liuing
ill, ſo we may loſe our beſt Quene with liuing
worſe. And that therewith it may
pleaſe him to direct all the doinges of her
Maieſtie and Counſell to procéede in their
good aduauncing his glorie and preſeruation
of the ſtate, which without ielous circumſpection
for preſeruing the Queenes
moſt royall perſon can not be done, and
that ſuch good meanes and prouiſions as
God offereth to that end, be not refuſed or
neglected, which were to tempt God, to
forſake his cauſe, to betray our noble

Prince, and to geue away or rather caſt
away the realme.
            Theſe be the dayly and nightly prayers
of good ſubiectes. And while we buſie our
ſelues with theſe praiers, we do after
our principall confidence in Godes goodneſſe,
reſt our ſelues vpon the truſt of her
Maieſtie and her moſt honorable Counſell,
for whom we prayſe God, and to them
we referre the guiding of vs and ours,
ready to follow them, when we are commaunded
with the vttermoſt of our power
and perill, knowing how they ſpare not
their vttermoſt endeuour and perill, with
ſuſteyning the moſt vnpleaſant life, God
wot, that may be, for our ſakes, for our
quiet, profite and defenſe.
            Conſider theſe thinges ye that haue
bene and haue not yet ceaſed to be ſuch
Papiſtes,Good coū
                  ſell to Papiſtes. remember how in that ſtate ye
be neither true Chriſtian men nor true
Engliſh men, wherby if ye repent not you
are not worthy to liue in the kingdome
of England, and you are ſure not to come
in the kingdome of Heauen. Let euery good
thing moue you to truth and to your prefitte.
Let euery euill thing fray you from
treaſon & from eternall vndoing. Learne

religion of God alone, render your allegeance
to your prince alone, liue in bond
of countrey with Engliſh men alone. Acknowledge
how God hath ſent his truth
to ſhine vpon you, her maieſtie hath poured
all benefites of her good gouernaunce
among you, her true ſubiectes deſire euery
way both in ſoule and body to be comfortable
to you. Put of onely the cankerd
affection or rather paſſion of inhumanitie.
Doo but once come home from thoſe articles
that can not ſtand with out treaſon
to the prince and ſtate, bynde not your
ſelues, your ſoules and fayth to the authoritie
of any mortall and ſinfull man, geue
euer infinitly to God, reſort faythfully to
him, pray deuoutely to him, to ſhew you
his truth by his owne worde. And ſo I
dout not but hauing once forſaken foreine
ſubiections, and being once ſo farre vnpapiſted
that ye may come into the number
of true ſubiectes, for the reſt God ſhall accord
vs, and ſhall reueale vnto you ſinceritie
of all truth in time, and in ſuch time as
ſhall be the greateſt comfort that euer you
felt in your liues. And ſo yet till other errors
be purged by Gods grace working by
the hearing of his word, we ſhall al goe vnder

the gentle yoke of our naturall ſoueraigne,
there let vs draw louingly together,
and then ſaye and ſing merily God
ſpede the ploughe of England. Amen.
            
            ¶God ſaue our Queene
Elizabeth, and confound
her enemies.
         
      
      
         
            ¶Imprinted at London by Iohn
Daye, dwelling ouer
Alderſgate.
            Theſe Bookes are to be ſolde in
Paules churchyarde at the
ſigne of the Crane.
         
      
   