
      
         
            
            
            
               A
Countercuffe giuen to Martin Iunior:
by the venturous, hardie, and
renowned Paſquill of England,
Caualiero.
            Not of olde Martins making, which newlie knighted
the Saints in Heauen, with riſe vp Sir Peter and Sir Paule; But
lately dubd for his ſeruice at home in the defence of his
Countrey, and for the cleane breaking of his
ſtaffe vppon Martins
face.
            
               NOSCE TE IPSVM NE QVID NIMIS
               LOVE AND LIVE
               printer's or publisher's device
            
            
               PRINTED,
Betweene the skye and the grounde,
VVithin a myle of an Oake, and not many fieldes
of, from the vnpriuiledged Preſſe of the
Aſſ-ignes of Martin
Junior.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ PASQVILL OF ENGLAND
TO MARTIN
IVNIOR.
            
               VAliant Martin, if euer the earth carried anie
Gyants, as fabulous antiquitie hath auouched,
which entred into wars and conſpiracies againſt
GOD, thy father Mar-prelat was a whelpe of
that race; who to reuiue the memory of his aunceſters
almoſt forgotten, hath broken into heauen with his
blaſphemies. If the Monſter be deade, I meruaile not, for hee
was but an error of Nature, not long liued: hatched in the heat
of the ſinnes of England, and ſent into theſe peaceable Seas of
ours, to play like a Dolphin before a tempeſt. The heads this
Hydra loſt in a famous place of late, where euery newe Bugge
no ſooner puts out his hornes, but is beaten downe; The Anotamie
latelie taken of him, the blood and the humors that were
taken from him, by launcing and worming him at London vpon
the common Stage; The maine buffets that are giuen him in
euery corner of this Realme, are euident tokens, that beeing
thorow ſouſt in ſo many ſhowres, hee had no other refuge but
to runne into a hole, and die as he liued, belching.
            
               Turkie hath very good cauſe to bewaile his death, for theyr
Religion like an ancient building, worne with extremity of age,
riues, & threatens ruine on euery ſide, if it be not ſupported by
newe proppes. One of the beſt meanes the deuill inuented to
holde that vppe, was the helpe of thy Father, to pull downe all
other Religions vnder heauen. His Concluſions and thy Epilogue,
are two as fitte ſwordes, as Mahomet himſelfe could deſire
to kill a Chriſtian. But becauſe thy Father wained with the

Moone for want of ſtrength, when he left thee his Theſes without
life or limme, I woulde wiſhe thee to put them in Moode
and Figure for his ſake. Paſquill hath vndertaken to write a
very famous worke, Entituled, THE OWLES ALMANACKE:
wherein, the night labours and byrth of
your Religion is ſette downe: the aſcent and deſcent of the
Starres that fauour it, is truelie calculated: the aſpects of the
Planets raigning ouer it, are expreſſed, with a iollie coniecture
drawne from the iudgement of the Theame, what end your Religion
is like to haue. Now becauſe hee hath reſerued a blanke
Paper at the end of the worke, for the foure ſeaſons of the yere,
(as commonly Calculators doe) he is determined to keepe that
in his hand, till your Syllogiſmes be made, that he may fill vppe
his Booke, with the diſeaſes and remedies of your Arguments,
in what quarter of the yeere ſo euer they fall.
            
               Paſquill hath taken vp your Gloue, and deſires you to charge
your weapon at him like a Man. If you play with him, as your
father and your ſelfe haue doone with the Biſhops heretofore,
if you barke like a Curre and bite behind, he will haue a trick▪
with his heele to ſtrike out your teeth. Whilſt you conſult
with your Topicks to ground your reaſons ſure, Paſquill wyll
come vppon you with another venewe. For he came latelie ouer-ſea
into Kent, frō thence he cut ouer into Eſſex at Graueſende,
and hearing ſome tidings of Hartford-ſhire, because hee
cannot ride far without a bayte, he made as much haſte as hee
could to S. Albanes, where he ſtaid one whole Sabaoth at the
Chriſtopher, and hauing there peſtered a newe paire of Writing-tables
with profitable Notes for that quarter, he ſette forwarde
the Munday following to North-hampton-ſhire, ſmyling
and glauncing as he turnd his Horſe about to bidde the Congregation
of Saint Michaels adiewe.
            To be brefe with your worſhipfultie, Paſquill hath poſted
very dilligently ouer all the Realme, to gather ſome fruitfull
Volume of THE LIVES OF THE SAINTS,
which Mauger your fiue hundred fauorites ſhall be printed.
There ſhall you read of that reuerend Elder of your Church,

who beeing credited with the ſtocke of the poore, pertaining
to the Bride-well houſe of Canterburie to ſette men a work, was
compelled to keepe it to himſelfe, becauſe no poore folkes of
the houſhold of Faith could be found in all that Cittie. There
ſhall you ſee the life and learning of a Paſtor of your Church,
which expounding the Articles of our Beliefe in Deuon-ſhire,
when he came to handle the deſcending into Hell, wrote a Latine
Letter to a neighbour Miniſter of his to craue his aduiſe,
and rapt it out luſtilie, Si tu non vis venire mihi, ego volo venire
tibi. and ſo by the leakes that remaine in his Latine, made more
worke for the Tinker, than euer your Father made for the
Cooper. I will leape ouer one of your Brother Preachers in
North-hampton-ſhire, which is as good a Hound for his ſent to
ſmell a feaſt as euer man ſawe. Paſquill met him betweene Bifield
and Fawſeley, with a little Hatte like a Sawcer vppon hys
crowne, a Filch-man in his hande, a ſwapping Ale-dagger at
his back, containing by eſtimation, ſome two or three poundes
of yron in the hyltes and chape, and a Bandogge by his ſide, to
commaund fortie foote of grounde whereſoeuer he goes, that
neuer a Begger come neere him to craue an Almes. O how my
Palfrey fetcht me vppe the Curuetto, and daunced the Goates

                  •
               umpe, when I ranne the ring round about him to retriue him:
it ſhould ſeeme by the manages my beaſt made, that hee knewe
his Maiſter had a ſpeciall peece of ſeruice in hande. You ſhall
haue a goodly bande of theſe men in the volume of the Saints.
Paſquill is nowe gone ouer-ſea to commit it to the Preſſe, and
it is his pleaſure (becauſe it is the firſt opening of his ſhop) to
giue you a taſte of his Wares before you buy them, like a franck
Merchant.
            In the mean ſeaſon, ſweet Martin Iunior, play thou the knaue
kindly as thou haſt begun, and waxe as olde in iniquitie as thy
father. Downe with learning and Vniuerſities, I can bring you
a Free-maſon out of Kent, that gaue ouer his occupation twentie
yeeres agoe. He wil m
                  •
               ke a good Deacon for your purpoſe,
I haue taken ſome tryall of his gifts, hee preacheth very pretilie
ouer a Ioynd-ſtoole. Theſe Biſhops are ſomewhat too well

grounded for greene-heades, ſo long as they keepe their place
and power, it is impoſſible for thee to caſt the Religion of this
Land into a newe Molde euery newe Moone. The whole ſtate
of the Lande perceiues it well enough, that to deliuer vppe the
Prelacie to Martin, is a Canker more daungerous to the
Church and Realme, than it was for the Athenians to deliuer
theyr Orators to Phillip of Macedon their vtter enemie: or thā
it is for the Sheepe to betray their Sheepheards to the Woolfe.
Theſe ſtaid Fathers, through their long ſtudie, practiſe, and experience
in the Church of God, are skilful Phiſitions, acquainted
with the beating of euery pulſe that beates out of order:
they are able to diſcerne at the firſt touch, from what kinde of
Haereſie, euery one of theſe new Feuers that trouble vs, had his
beginning. Therefore, as the high way to haſten the ende of
the ſicke, when you thinke to profit by their death, is eyther to
counſell them to deſpiſe the Phiſition, and caſt both the Goblet
and Potion againſt the walles: or els to deliuer them into
the handes of an ignorant Leache, which by miniſtring euerie
Sowters receipt to reforme the ſtate of the bodie, plyeth them
with purgatiue vppon purgatiue, till hee weakeneth the ſtomacke,
and rots both the Liuer and the Longes; So the readie
courſe to poiſon her Maieſties louing people, is to diſcredite
the Phiſitions of their ſoules vnto them, and to ſuffer euerie
Martin and Mounte-bancke to practiſe on them.
            By theſe meanes ſhall you ſee Religion haled with violence
into her graue, the goodly frame of this Common-weale ſhall
fall, and Banck-rouptes and Atheiſts pocket vppe the peeces.
But our comfort is, that the wiſedom of her moſt excellent Maieſtie
is knowne to be greater, then to be traind from ſo high a
ſeate to ſo baſe a lure, as euery Martiniſt caſteth out vnto her.
Her ſacred Maieſtie knowes, that it behooueth all Princes to
haue a watchfull regarde vnto their eſtate, which is to be preſerued
as well by dooing of nothing that may endomage them,
as by ſeeking of any thing conuenient for them.
            Neuer bragge in this quarrell of your fiue hundred Brethren
of credit and abilitie, Paſquill hath excellent Ferrets to followe

them in their owne Boroughs: and he can tell you that there is
a common kinde of affection, which men of this age carrie to
ſuch as you, whilſt they haue any ſeruice to put you to, like vnto
them that hauing ſomwhat to doe with a confection of poyſon,
reioyce when they finde it, yet they hate the malice of it,
and throw it out of the doores when their turne is ſerued. Neither
doubt I, but that the ſame reckoning in the ende wyll be
made of you, which your fauourers commonly make of theyr
olde ſhooes, when they are paſt wearing, they barter thē awaie
for newe Broomes, or carrie them foorth to the dunghill and
leaue them there.
            I coulde tell you manie ſtrange ſtratagems of your beſt
Friendes, but Paſquill is a Trauailer, and he knowes that Writers
and Printers in theſe daies, are like to Men placed at the
Perſian Banquets, if they rowle they eye neuer ſo little at one
ſide, there ſtands an Eunuch before them with his hart full of
iealouſie, and his Bowe readie bent to ſhoote them through,
becauſe they looke farther then the Lawes of the Countrey
ſuffer them Neuertheleſſe, becauſe your faction is ſuddainlie
growne ſtale like an Oyſter, and gapes ſo wide, that euery Fiſhwife
at Billingſ-gate ſees into you, either wee muſt wilfullie
winke, and put out our eyes, or els wee cannot chooſe but diſcouer
a number of your deformities. Paſquils experience in thys
generation teacheth him, that many of your Bowlſterers, may
be compared to Bookes that are gilded & trimlie couered, they
ſette a faire face of Religion vppon your cauſe, but when they
are opened, they are full of Tragedies, eyther Thyeſtes eating
vppe the fleſh of his owne Children, or curſed Oedipus, in bed
with his owne Mother.
            Can you nowe Maſt Martin, perſwade your ſelfe you ſhal
haue a pride in your Piſtle making, when you vaunte of thys
brotherhood, and deceiue the world with ſuch drugs as pleaſe
your owne taſte. If your fore-heade be ſo harde that you can
indeede, forwards and ſpare not, Paſquill is readie to pull your
Feathers. You ſhall ſhortlie haue a Gloſſe and a Commentarie
vppon your Epilogue, with certaine Hayes, Iigges, Rimes,

Roundelayes, and Madrigals, ſeruing for Epitaphes to your
Fathers Hearſe, to make the world laughe out the long Winters
nights, which verie ſhortlie will ſteale vpon vs.
            In the meane ſeaſon, becauſe the Winde and the Tide will
ſtaie for no Man, and I was iuſt at the making heereof as merrie
as your ſelfe, and taking Shippe to bring that braue Catalogue
of the Saints to light; I bid your Maſterdome fare-well
till Michaelmas Tearme, commending your worſhippe to
the line and the leading of your owne ſpirite. From Graueſende
Barge the eight of Auguſt, the firſt and laſt yeere of Martiniſme,
which like the vntimelie fruite of his Maſterſhips
Mother, dieth before it ſees the Sunne, and withereth as the
Graſſe vppon the houſe toppe before the Mower
be able to fill his hande
with it.
            
               To come to the cloſe,
               In Rime or in Proſe,
               In ſpight of thy noſe,
            
            
               Thine for theſe ſeauen yeeres:
Paſquill of Englande.
               
            
            
         
      
   