
      
         
            
            THE COVRTE of Ciuill Courteſie: Fitly furniſhed with a pleaſant porte of stately phraſes and pithie precepts: aſſembled in the behalfe of all younge Gentlemen, and others, that are deſirous to frame their behauiour according to their eſtates, at all times, and in all companies▪
               
            
            
               Therby to purchaſe worthy prayſe, of their inferiours: and eſtimation and credite amonge theyr betters.
            
            Out 
                  〈…〉
                Italian, by 
                  •
               . R. Gent.
            
            ¶ Imprinted at London, by Richard Jhones. Primo Ianuary, 1577.
         
         
            
            
            
               To the nouriſhinge Youthes, and Courteous younge Gentlemen of England, and to all others that are deſirous, and louers of Ciuile Courteſte: R. I. the Printer hereof, wiſheth an happie New yeere preſent, and many: to the pleaſure of God, and their owne hartes deſier.
               
            
            
               
                  MOſt Courteous younge Gentlemen, preſuming vpon your great Curteſie: I haue beene ſo bolde as to preſent your eſtate, in token and wiſh of an happie new yeere, with theſe the firſt fruites of my poore Preſſe, finiſhed ſince the cūming in of the ſame.
            
            
               Surely, the traueill of a Gentleman whom I know not, no not ſo mutch as by name, much leſſe by perſon: And concerning the copie, as hee that brought it vnto me made reporte, that it was tranſlated out of the Italian, by a Gentleman, a freeinde of his, deſyringe mee that it might bee printed. And I beeinge
               
               alwayes deſirous to farther the ſtudie, and procure the delite of all men, by publiſhinge bookes of ſemblable argument: thought good to dedicate the ſame vnto you, iudging it in this reſpect a preſent more meet for your moſt flouriſhing degree: for that I perceiue it to haue bin firſt written by a Noble and graue per ſonage of Italy, and directed vnto his nephew, a younge Gentleman alſo of noble parentage, for the better conforming of his behauiour at his entrance into the Courte, as it may appeare by his Epiſtle hereafter folowing. Now for that this caſe is cōmon vnto moſt of you, and aboue all other, the ſtudie of ciuell Curteſie, moſt incident vnto your calling, I am the bolder to craue your Courteous countenance, and freindly fauour in accepting the ſame now in English at my handes,
               
               as a teſtimonie of my ſeruiceable heart, and good meaning towardes you. And that receiuing it now from mee as your owne, you would vouche ſafe of your great curteſie to take both me and it into your aſſured protection: and to defend both the preſent, and him that offereth it, from the ſpightfull toungues of malicious carpers. And in ſo dooinge, you ſhall euermore binde mee to employe what traueill and ſeruice I can, to the aduauncing and pleaſuring of your moſt excellent degree.
            
            
               Farewell in the Lorde.
            
         
         
            
            The Cenſure of a freinde, concerning this woorke.
            
               OVr Parentes well deſerue the pricke of price,
               Who giue vs life which wee had not before.
               The teachers care deſerues great thanke likewiſe,
               Who traines the childe, and giues the learned lore:
               Immortall prayſe wee ought giue him therfore.
               Some ſtrife hath bin in reſpect of theſe thinges,
               Who beſt deſerues of theſe two Noble ſpringes.
            
            
               ¶ Though one giue life, the other learning lendes.
               Let reaſon rule, let wit this matter ſcan.
               And thinges are iudgde according to their endes,
               And Prouerb olde ſayes manners makes the man.
               The vitall ſprite muſt yeeld to learning than.
               Wherfore you youthes, ſprunge vp from gentle line,
               Vnto this Court your courteous eares incline.
            
            
               ¶ This Court, the which of Curteſie takes name,
               Declares what port eche Gentill shall enſue.
               At all aſſayes how he himſelfe shall frame,
               To follow what, and what for to eſchue.
               Thrice happie hee whom God shall ſo indue.
               A thing of weight, and wun for ſimple price,
               Reiect by fooles, but purchaſt by the wiſe.
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            Benga
                  •
               a
                  •
               a de
                  •
                Mont. Priſacchi Retta, vnto Seig. Princiſca Ganzar Moretta. For his behauiour. vz.
            
               To my Nephew Seig. Princiſca Ganzar Moretta.
            
            
               AT my laſt being at Priſacchi, vnderſtāding by your fathers talke, that he minded to haue you a while in the Courte, where hee hath ſpente the better part of his life: and becauſe it is frequented with all ſorts of cōpanies, as any place in Italy is. I haue directed this litle booke, whiche if you read and marke diligently, ſhal bee as it were a guide, to leade you from a nūber of ſnares which you may bee trapt withall, alſo for your behauiour in all companyes: with many other thinges fit to bee knowen of yonge Gentlemen, and eſpecially for ſutch as haue not beene conuerſant in all companyes.
            Fare yee well.
         
         
            
            ¶ The Contentes of this Booke.
            
            
               HOw a yonge Gentleman may behaue himſelf in all companyes: and bée prepared for ordinary entertaynmentes, and to get a good oppinion and credit among his betters. Chap. 1.
               ¶ How a man ſhall bée haue himſelfe in bad company, and among ſutch royſters as will offer familiaritie with him, will hée or no: and firſt a gueſſe of ſutch meanes as they will vſe therto. Chap. 2.
               ¶ How a man ſhal anſwer to the prayſe and thankes, & curteſies ſeriouſly offred by his betters or equals. 3.
               ¶ How a man ſhall acquite himſelfe towardes noble perſons, that ſhall either for his fréeindes ſake, or his owne, offer him curteſies: or aſſure him of freindſhip, willinge him in all chaunces to bée bolde with him. Chap. 4.
               ¶ Howe when the foreſayde ſpéeches bee offered by a Noble perſon pleaſantly, that is of acquaintaunce: which muſt bée alſo pleaſantly anſwered. Chap. 5.
               ¶ How to an equall, or but litle better▪ béeinge a friend and familliar. Chap. 6.
               ¶ How a man ſhal take thankes of a noble perſon. ca. 7.
               ¶ How a man may giue thankes to his betters and equals. Chap. 8.
               ¶ What manners bee requiſite at the Table, and what to be ſhunned: what is to be conſidered in the waſhinge before Dinner, and in the ſittyng downe, is ſet foorth in ye beginning of this Direction. Cha. 9.
               ¶ How a man ſhall pacifie his friend, his better, or his equall: if hee haue giuen him vnwillingly any cauſe of offence. Chap. 10.
               ¶ How a man ſhall ſhift off reproches or tauntes offered beetweene ſporte and earneſt: by enuious and ſcornefull perſons that will ſeeme to doo it ſo cunningly as the other ſhall haue the taunt, and yet at his owne pleaſure will denie if. Chap. 11.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ THE COVRTE OF CIVIL CVRTESIE.
            
               
                  How a yonge Gentilman may behaue himſelfe in all companies, and be prepared for ordinary entertainments, and to get a good oppinion and credit amonge his betters. Chap. firſt.
               
                  
                     FIrſt hee hath to conſider, that the lacke of good behauiour, which is a comely audacitie, with out a ſauſie preſumption (whiche argueth diſcreete iudgement and wiſdome) maketh his inferiour to be his equal, and maketh his equall his better, till himſelfe hath attayned not only the habit of beeyng the like, but the time to make himſelfe know to bee the like. Therfore if he ſhal light in the companie of any, whoſe liuing and birth is worſe then his owne, and yet perceyueth the other for his wiſedom and grauitie to be well eſteemed of by others, it becommeth the yonge Gentleman to giue him the place (or at leaſt with inſtance to offer it him) but yet with ſutch a modeſt audacitie, mingled with a ſmylyng grace, and curteous ſpeeche, neither too lowde nor whiſperyng, as the reſt of the company may well perceiue: it is the vertues, and not the man that is preferred, and that it is offered rather of a curteous diſpoſition, then of a ſheepiſhe ſimplicitie, which wilbee the better vnderſtanded if hee ſhall vtter

ſome famillier ſpeech in yelding the place at the doore, as thus:
               
               I pray you goe, for I loue to follow the ſteps of mine elders. Or thus:
               
               You muſt needes goe, for I cannot a waye to goe formoſt. Or thus:
               
               On, on I pray you, you bee the next the dore. Or thus:
               
               If you goe not wee ſhall ſtriue all day, for I will not. Or thus:
               
               You make too mutch adoe for ſo ſmal a matter: And at the placing at the table, as thus:
               
               Will you ſyt ſir, and I wilbee next you? Or thus:
               
               Not I by your leaue. Or thus:
               
               Sutch a one will needes haue you by him. Or thus:
               
               You ſhall not rule mee till you come to your owne houſe. Or thus:
               
               The place is fytter for you then for mee. Or thus:
               
               Goe too, ſhall wee ſtriue all day like women?
               And if it be one that be of great eſtimation, either for office, or ancientie, and will yet of too mutch curioſitie refuſe the place, then it ſhalbee beſt to ſyt downe firſt, but to take a lower place either on the other ſide, or on the ſame ſide. But here (by the way) it is to be conſidered that this curteſy is not ſo preciſely to bee vſed, either at cōmon tables, where eche man payeth equally for his meale, nor yet at ordenary tables in the court: for in either of theſe two places, except diuerſitie

of degree make difference, men vſe not this curioſity: then this aforeſayd at the table, is when men meete in their equals or inferiours houſes, in which it is to bee conſidered that the owners of the tables muſt beare the ſwaye of placing, if hee bee the better or equall. Howbeit, if the owner ſhall call or place one (eyther not knowinge who ought or not caringe who doe) that is inferiour euery way, ſauing for wealth, in ſutch a caſe, the younge Gentleman ſhall doe well not to tarry till other bee ſet, not abydinge the placinge of the owner: but takinge his nexte cōpanion to ſet himſelf downe firſt, rather two or three lower, then hee ſhould bee the next to his inferiour: wherby the owner ſhalbee (in ſylence) taught to conſyder better an other time. And hee muſt not ſuffer himſelfe to bee remooued any higher, that hee may keepe the owner ſtill in doubt whether hee ſo placid himſelfe of miſlike or of good fellowſhip. But if there bee mutch adoe made, and that hee finde the owner to finde his owne errour: then it wilbee curteſy to couller the fact with good wordes pleaſauntly, As thus:
               
               Why? thinke you that I can eate no meat but at the vpper ende of the bourd. Or thus:
               
               I pray you hinder not my good happe, I am where I like. Or thus:
               
               I pray you giue mee leaue to ſit wher I like. Or thus:
               
               I pray you trouble not your ſelfe, you ſhall ſee vs as merrye here as you bee there. Or thus:
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  As long as I finde good meat I neuer vſe to ſtudy for my place. Or thus:
               
               I warrant you if I had not lyked this place, I would haue bin ſo bould as choſen an other. But if it happen the owner of the houſe, bee ſo groſſe and careles, that hee either do not or will not finde any miſlike of the matter: then would I wiſhe▪ in ſutch a caſe, the younge Gentleman ſhould bee furniſhed with ſome guirdinge ſpeeches, or els ſome pleaſaunte ſcoffes, to countenaunce out the matter, with thoſe that ſyt by him, that the reſt may ſee hee choaſe the place in ſcorne of the other, as thus:
               
               I am happely placed here, for if I had mounred any higher, I had been cleane out of countenaunce. Or thus:
               
               Wee wilbee as merrie here, as though wee ſat at the vpper ende of the bourd: or to ſome companion, that ſits next aboue by the younge Gentlemans placing, thus:
               
               If you behaue not your ſelues gently, and be good to vs of the ſecond meſſe, wee will keepe you from mountyng the next time. Or thus:
               
               Beware freinds, pride will haue a fale: ſpeake not ſo lowde your betters bee in place. And to conclude, to make as mutch mirth and paſtime as may be all the meale. But if a man bee in a noblemans houſe, or a knight of great reputacion, then hee muſt bee contented for that time, as pleaſeth them. But hee may the nexte time, take as good a place as hee can with modeſtie get, and when hee is from the bourd, not looſe

any place that reaſon or courage can aduaunce him to. For as no man is diſgraced by giuing (of his curteſy) place to whom hee liſt, ſo to haue it taken from him by others being his right, is an abaſement not to bee ſuffred, it a man can take it either by ſlight or courage.
               Now that this young Gentleman, may know in what ſorte hee may accompany himſelf with all ſortes, and to all eſtates: hee ſhal know, that the eldeſt ſonne of a knight while his father liueth, may count himſelfe equall with a Gentleman of. cc. li. land rent of aſſiſe (for ſo the ſtatute limiteth) and may offer himſelfe a companion with ye beſt ſquire, if his wit we a modeſt audacitie wil ſerue him ther to, but not without ſome reuerent reſpectes in his ſpeeche: ſpecially if the ſayd ſquier bee of grauity, and ſo of reputacyon, either for his wiſdome or office, as if he wil aſke a queſtion, thus:
               
               I pray you ſyr, what? where? or why is ſutch a thing? Or thus:
               
               Will it pleaſe you to doo, or haue ſutch a thing: and in his affirmation and negation to anſwer as thus:
               
               Yee ſir, no ſir. And if the other aſke him any queſtion, as whether hee will doe this, or that. Then thus:
               
               Mary ſir I will tell you. Or thus:
               
               With a good will, if it pleaſe you, &c. As the matter ſhall fall out. Howbeit theſe ſpeeches, if it bee to no better then to the beſt ſquier, or an

ordinary knight be to bee vſed, with ſutch a famillier kinde of pronuntiation, as it may appere to bee vttred by him of his curteſy: meaning rather to giue them more then he greatly needed, then of any great difference hee thinkes to bee betweene them: ſpecially if they bee ſutch, as he is not like any way, either to bee in daunger of their hurt, or in need of their help. And though theſe kynde of reuerent ſpeeches neede not to bee ſo curiouſly vſed, by the inferiour, to one mutche his better, when they bee once very familier: yet they become the ſpeaker ſo well, as if they bee vſed with a good audacitie and familier countenance, a man may vſe them to his inferiour, without any abacement or diſgrace at all to himſelf, and ſpecially to Ladies and gentle women of credit.
               Then hee hath to conſider that among yonge Gentlemen, or younge Noblemen, there needes no great curioſity, but before a Barron, and ſo vpward, he may not bee couered while he ſtandeth in his viewe, except the nobleman bid him: vnles that Nobleman vſe ſutch an ordinarye kinde of good fellowſhip with all men (as hee ſeeth) as meane as himſelfe vſe him with ſmal curteſy: and yet hee muſt way withall whither that goodfellowſhip bee withall men indifferently, or only to ſutch as bee his familliers: for ſutch as be noble may make their companions whom they liſt, and the reſt though they ſhalbe better to ſutch companions, not to vſe euer the leſſe honour to him. And let this ſtand for a general

rule, that whatſoeuer familiarity a noble man ſhal ſhow to any his inferiour, yea though he profeſſe to make him his equall freind: let y• inferiour ſtill beware of vſinge himſelfe rudely, ſawcely or careleſly, eſpecially in the preſence of others. For though many to aſſure their inferiour of their goodwil, ſeeme to baniſh all curioſity: yet ſutch an one ſhalbe beſt eſteemed, and longeſt hold freindſhip with his better, y• in all their greateſt familiarity can make it appeare to others that hee doth not forget, that he playeth or ieſteth with his ſuperiour. Which a man may very well doe and yet holde company in all manner of ſportes, ieſtes, and paſtimes: then mutch more hee that is a ſtraunger muſt haue the more regarde. And as it is good manner for a man in his owne houſe, or his freindes, if hee bee the beſt in the company, to offer intertaynment to any nobleman: ſo in a ſtraunge place in the houſe of his better, though there bee no better then himſelfe in the place, hee may not preſume to beginne intertainment: but it is his part to bee ready, and nexte the Nobleman in ſight, agaynſt it pleaſeth him to vſe him, till hee ſeeth him accompanied with ſome others, or call ſome other to him: and if it bee but open talke deuiſed to paſſe awaye the time, then to helpe lengthen the ſame at his diſcretion: otherwyſe to finde ſome talke with others, and rather to ſtande or ſit, with a ſteddy and aſſured countenaunce, as though hee were ſtudiynge ſome matter of waight, or harkening to others

talke if it bee not ſecret: then to accompany him ſelfe with ſutch as bee vnwoorthy of his company: and ſutch count I ſeruing men, and fooliſh doltiſh perſons though they be his betters, But when a man ſhall ſit ſtill and ſay nothing, hee muſt bee ſure to haue an aſſured countenaunce, not gnawing any thinge in his mouth, or playing with his legges, toes or fingers, and to haue alwaies an eare and an eye about him, to here what is ſayde, and to bee reddy if anye part of an others talke, eyther by word or looke bee addreſſed to him, that hee may receyue the occaſion, and winne in the talke: and though no ſuch cauſe bee offred, yet it is a better grace to harken other folkes communication, then to be talkyng with a perſon of vayne credit: and if a man ſhall get him out of the way for lacke of countenance, when noble perſons or others of reputacion be in place: then will his inferiour lye in a wayte for occaſion, and ſtep in, to bee of familiaritie before him.
               Furthermore, if talke be offred to this yonge Gentilman by his better, hee hath to conſyder whether the ſame proceede of a deſire to paſſe away the time, and for want of other companie: or els (as ſome do) bicauſe they wilbe thought curteous, they will ſay ſome thyng to euery bodie, but for feare of too mutch familiaritie, will not ſtay longe with their inferiour. To this laſt it ſhalbee good only to anſwer to the queſtion, addyng ſome reaſon to verefie the ſame, but not to enter any new matter, nor to dilate any further

in the olde, then hee ſhall perceiue him by his countenāce and attentiuenes to heare without prouocation. But if the inferiour perceiue, that the talke is miniſtred vpon the firſt reſpect, that is to make entertaynment: hee muſt not only anſwere all his demaunds, but enlarge the ſame to the vttermoſt: And when hee ſeeth his better pawſe, ſo that hee turne not awaywarde (as though hee would begon from him) to inuent ſome matter of himſelf, to lengthen talke: And that hee may the better do ſo, hee muſt before hande haue enquired (of ſutche as come inIn any wiſe let a man ſhun as much a
                        •
                      he can in his entertaynmēts to ſpeake of himſelfe as to tell, what he hath ſaid or what hee hath donne: for that wil be taken to come of a deſire to tell his owne prayſe, except it be either to his very freind or els that it bee ſumthing that thother is deſtrous to here. his companie) if otherwiſe hee cannot learne, what manner of country the ſtranger dwelleth in: from what place he commeth: and whither hee is goyng: what paſtime or exerciſe he loueth. By which meanes hee may redemaunde of the wearines, or pleſantnes of the iourney: of the fowlenes or fayrenes of the weather: whether the countrie hee dwelleth in ſerue commodiouſly to the vſe of ſutch thinges as hee delighteth in: whether the Gentlemen of that ſhyre bee companiable in y• like or not: and by this meanes, alſo hee ſhalbee able ſo to vnderſtand of mo count
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  s, and men, then he knowes, although hee met with them as ſtraungers, yet hee ſhalbe prouided of ſumwhat to diſcourſe with them therof. But if a man talke with his better, hee muſt alwayes obſerue with what attentiuenes or willing minde the other giueth eare to him, y• hee may leaue of, beefore the other bee weary: and to bee very heedefull that hee ſpeake nothyng

affirmatiuely, but that himſelf hath ſeen: but hee may well ſay I haue harde, or I haue read, that this, or that is thus. And in tellynge any thynge by hereſay, ſpecially to a ſtranger, he muſt reſpect three thynges, thone, that it ſound not to the diſprayſe of any by name, except it be a thyng openly knowne, and yet the diſprayſed may hap to be ſo neare a friend to him that ſhall heare it, as the teller ſhall get miſlike. The other is, that when they tell a tale of an other mans mouth, hee forbeare to tell the name of his aucthor eſpecially, if hee bee his freind, for if it ſhall ſeeme vnlikely though it bee true, he ſhal bryng his freindes credit in ſuſpect. The thyrd kinde is, that hee neuer take vpon him in open preſence, to make any report of the ſayinges or dooynges of his betters, except they bee ſutch as the company knoweth him to bee familliarly acquainted with, for otherwiſe, hee ſhall make himſelfe compared to them that talke of Robyn Hoode and neuer ſhot in his bowe. Laſtly let him neuer make vp his entertaynments with the diſprayſe, or mockyng of any, either preſent, or abſent, though hee heare other doo the like, (except only in the companie of his very aſſured freinds) and that for this reſpect. A yonge man muſt euer thinke that it is vnpoſſible for him to bee ſo compleat in all perfections of beehauour, but that ſome thynge remaynes in him worthy the laughyng at, if men ſhould not forbeare him in reſpect of time, which brynges experience to the wiſeſt, and peraduenture too, euen ſome of

the ſame defects which hee ſeeth ſcoft at in another, may bee in himſelf, vnknowen to himſelf, or atleaſt others as ill: And therfore the wiſeſt way is, if his better ſeeme to deride any for his beehauour, to appeare by a ſmiling countenance to bee of the ſame opinion: but in woordes to eſcuſe it, if hee may, as if the doynges of him that is mocked ſhew ſimplicitie, thus:
               
               It may bee that baſhfulnes is the cauſe: if they ſhew rudenes, then thus:
               
               Want of experience makes men erre. But if they bee his equals, or interiours that ſo ſcof, then merely, thus:
               
               Go too ſyrs, many a one goynge aboute to mocke one hee cares not for, doeth often touche himſelf or his neere freende, or by a ſimilitude thus:
               
               On, on, ſaw yee neuer any or this, that lift vp a weapon to ſtrike another and hit himſelfe. Or thus:
               
               Take your pleaſure my maſters, I warrant you therebee that doo aſmutche for vs, as wee doo for them. And in deede there cannot any greater prayſe bee giuen to any man, then this, that one ſhall neuer here him ſpeake ill of any, and hearynge ill, will make the beſt of it. How bee it, it is both within ye limits of honeſtie, wiſdome, & freindſhip, any man to diſcourſe plainly with his freind, either of the miſbehauour, or vnhoneſt dealynges of any: that on the one ſide hee may ſhew himſelf a miſliker of ill perſons, and alſo make his freinde ware of them. And by the way it is to bee noted, that there be three

ſorts of people, which whoſoeuer ſhal ſcoffe and ſkorne at, or els ieſt with them, further then the compas of curteſy ſhal permit, ſhal receiue more diſgrace by dooyng it, then the other ſhall by ſufferyng it.
               The fyrſt is women, or ſimple milde ſprited men: for women muſt neuer be ieſters, nor ſcoffers, further then the boundes of modeſtie and curteſie, to make the time paſſe away the more pleaſantly: ſo that a man to ieſt ſo farre with them as they may not for ſhame anſwere, nor for inſufficiencie quarell for, wilbee accompted a diſhonorable battell, wherein the vanquiſhed hath more honour then the vanquiſher: for it is better to yeelde with ſilence, then to contendeThis is ment by ſharp and taunting ieſtes when a man will ſeeke to disgrace or put one out of con̄tenance by ieſtes. for the maſterie in vnfittyng termes, and to offer the milde ſpreeted man the like: that fynding himſelf agreeued, hath neither the wit to ſhift of it in woordes, neither the courrage to reuenge it in deedes: is in the ſame predicament that the woman is: And all noble mindes doo of their curteſies forbeare to offende, and offer to defende all thoſe that either cannot (as feeble perſons) or ought not (as the feminine ſexe) reuenge or defende them ſelues.
               The ſeconde ſorte that may not be mocked or ſcoffed at, bee aged perſons, and ſutch as ve deformed, for want either of bewtie, fauour, or other blemiſhes in their ſhape, ſtature or limmes: becauſe none of theſe thinges bee faults of their owne makyng, neither lieth it in their power to amende them. So as wee ought rather to bee

mooued thereby to thanke the maker of vs all, for dealyng ſo mutch better with vs, then with them, then to ſcorne or depraue them for that they cannot helpe. And if withall wee will conſyder, that the deformities of the mynde, bee ſo mutche fowler then thoſe of the body, as the ſoule is of more value, and ought to bee more vniforme: it wilbee a good meane to make the outward defects of others, very ſmall in reſpect of our owne, which cannot, but bee greater and many moe, and conſequently, rather to eſcuſe them, then deſpiſe them.
               The thyrd ſorte that cannot beare, neither ought to bee offred ſcoffing, mockyng, or ieſting: bee thoſe that bee in miſerie: either by ſorrow, impriſonment, or any aduerſitie, by loſſe of freeindes, ſubſtance or credit: For theſe be thynges ſent from God, to put vs in remembrance, that wee hauyng deſerued as ill, may fal into the like when it pleaſeth him: and in the meane times bee obiects for vs, to practiſe our compaſſion & charitie vpon. But there may ryſe this queſtion, ſeeyng that publique enterteinments, ſpecially amonge yonge folkes, are continued more often with ſpeeche of litle importance then with matters of waight: How a man findyng himſelf in ſuch companie, as are neither fit to diſcourſe of matters of wiſdome, nor yet to bee imparted with of his owne priuate affayres, ſhall finde matter ſufficient to paſſe the time in companie? For anſwer hereunto, let this bee remembred, that where as I haue ſayd, that men muſt take

heede in their open talke, how they bee to buſy in bryngyng in the ſayinges and doinges of noble perſons, leaſt the hearers ſhould thinke that hee arrogateth to himſelf greater acquaintance with ſutche, then in deede hee hath: or els, leaſt cōmyng to theyr eares, they ſhould miſlike that their inferiours ſhould make them their talking ſtockes. Yet if hee that ſhall ſo introduce (by way of confirmatiō, enſample, or ſimilitude) the ſayyng of his betters, bee ſure that it ſhew his wiſdome and prayſe, or at the leaſt, ſome pleaſantneſſe without any harme or diſgrace to any other, hee may well vſe it in his talke: Prouided that hee ſpeake it as by hereſay, except he haue it in deede by his owne knowledge. Alſo women and deformed perſons, may bee pleaſanted and ieſted with, if their wit bee ſutche as they delight in the like, and can in good ſporte enterchaunge in the ſame manner. Prouided that the boundes of curteſie be obſerued (that is) that there bee no cauſe of bluſſhyng giuen.
               Alſo, all men in ſickenes, priſonment, or pouertie, bee not miſerable, for they bee only ſutch that haue an afflicted minde: for ſome can ieſt and ſcoffe at their owne diſgraces, thinkynge thereby to make them ſeeme the leſſe in other mens eyes, while they appeare no heuier, then ſutche as themſelues can pleaſantly beare: And ſutche had rather bee ieſted with, then pittied.
               The fault therfore that can bee committed in theſe perſons, is the mockynge them beehinde their backes, or deſpiſyng them, which no man

ought to ſhew to any, except it bee to them that be knowen to bee impudent and ſhameleſſe perſons, or els ſutche as bee knowen to bee ouerwenyng fooles in theyr owne conceyte, and bee ſutche as doo the like by others. Of theſe a man may talke his pleaſure, as well of them, as with them, without any diſgrace to himſelf: Prouided that if any quarell riſe thereby, hee be as readie of courage to mayntayne it with his hand, as of ſpeeche to vtter it with his tongue.
               Alſo a man may ieſt with his very famillier freinde, if hee finde him of diſpoſicion willynge to beare it, and of wit ſufficient to anſwer it. And it ſkilles not what hee lay to his charge, though it bee diſhoneſtie: prouided that it bee not true that is imputed to him, or if it bee true that the other bee ſo braſon faced as hee wil not bee aſhamed of it.
               I would not aduiſe any man to ieſt mutche with his inferiours, vnleſſe they bee ſutch as he knoweth, both can and will vſe a reſtraint of ouer malepartnes. For if a gentilman ſhould bee ſaucely vſed by ieſt, by his inferiour, hee cannot eſcape diſgrace, whether hee beare with it, or quarell for it: but bearyng it is beſt, and to ſhut it vp rather with a pleaſant nip, then any way to ſeeme angry, if the myrth bee of his owne beginnyng.
               And thus mutch for a taſte how a man may paſſe his talke amonge his betters and equals, in a ſtraunge place, and in ſtraunge company.
               Yet this admonition more I muſt adde, that

who ſo in his entertainments ſhall endeuour to tell any tale to mooue laughter (ſpecially in ſtraunge companie) had neede to bee ſure that it carry that life or quickeneſſe with it, as hee be not ſo mutche deceaued of his expectation, that hee bee fayne himſelf to laugh alone: for that wil bee ſo great a diſgrace, as in ſteede of laughyng at the table, they will ſmile in theyr ſleeues at him: and therfore to ſhun that hee muſt beeware that hee take not in hand to tell any thing for fooliſhe, that is not folly: nor for wiſe that hath couller of folly: nor for a woonder that is not woonderfull: nor for rare, that is common: for want of experience may deceiue all theſe.
            
            
               
                  How a man ſhall beehaue himſelf in bad company, and among ſutche roysters as will offer familiaritie with him will he or no: and firſt a gueſſe of ſutche meanes as they wyll vſe thereto. ¶ The ſeconde Chapter.
               
               
                  THeir manner is lightly, if they finde a yonge Gentleman that is to bee of a fayre liuyng, if they ſee him ſoverly giuen, after they haue made theyr deuiſe amonge themſelues,

how euery man ſhall play his parte, that one of them ſhall pretende greate grauitie with him, and hee ſhall prayſe him to the cloudes, and beecome his councellour. Another ſhall tell wonders to his fellow, to ſee if beetween them they can catche a woodcocke of him.
               Another (if the fyrſt deuice ſerue not) will go about in ſcoffyng and iollyinge ſorte, to ſee if by puttyng them out of countenāce, they can make him glad to bee of their faction, and to further the ſame, an other ſhal ſeem to reproue al them. And as though he were the plaineſt honeſt man in the company, hee will offer to quarrell with them in his behalfe: and all will bee donne with ſutch oathes and ſad lookes as for all a man is warned (hee ſhall doubt) whither there bee any that meane good fayth or not. And it may bee in deed that ſome of theſe may meane honeſtly, and that may be the firſt & the laſt, (for thether two bewray themſelues) and therefore a man muſt vſe thoſe hee doubtes of in ſutch ſorte, as hee neither vtterly reiect them, meaning well, nor ſhew him ſo fooliſhe, as at the firſt or vppon ſmall acquaintance to credite euery man that will profer him fayre woordes. And therfore, for the firſt man that vpon ſome litle acquaintance ſhall take vpon him to prayſe or aduiſe him, let him conſider what reputacin and countenaunce hee is of, or if they bee ſutch, as bee of lyuinge, and withal can bee contented to liue within the compaſſe of his owne, then there is the leſſe ſuſpition to bee had of him, further then this: that

euery wiſe man will ſuſpecte any man that too mutch praiſeth him (except it be his famillier and aſſured freinde) but for the more ſuerty it ſhalbe wel to anſwer in this manner: not ſeriouſly, but ſomewhat ſmyling and famillierly. Mee thinks it very good that you and I were neuer better acquainted: for by that meanes you may bee kept in that good opinion which now yee ſeeme to conceiue of mee, either by hereſay, or by your owne gueſſe, leaſt by too much conuerſation you be made to chainge your minde: but in the mean time I thanke you, both of your good lykinge, and of the good aduice you profer mee: for I ſhall euer haue neede of good counſell: and if there be any other thinge (becauſe I am vnfurniſhed to requite you in the ſame) wherin I may pleaſure you as mutch, you ſhall finde mee as ready. And ſo to ſhift him of and fall into ſome other talke, enquiring of this or that, him or her, as the obiecte of the eye or minde ſhall lead.
               Now for the wonder tellers, I finde three or foure ſortes of them: the one ſort only vpon pleaſure to paſſe away the time, not lookinge to bee beleeued of any, but to be iolled within the lyke: With theſe the beſt way is meerely to take vpon you to know it to bee true, and to ad to it ſomethinge that may make it ſeeme more vnlikely. And though it ſhould ſo fall out that the tale ſhould bee true, that to another ſeemeth either vnlike or vnpoſſible: yet is there no harme done, in not ſeeming to beleeue it, while I knowe no reaſon to lead mee therto: mary, if after the ſame

with ſad aſſeueracion and others bee iuſtified to bee true: a man muſt of curteſie ſeeme to credit their others, but neuer the more to confeſſe it likely, except they can ſhew ſo by reaſon.
               Thother ſorte for that they would bee taken for dooers or knowers of great thinges, will for their owne glorye tell maruels, either of ſutche thinges as they haue done, or ſutch thinges as they haue ſeene in ſtraunge Countries. And will thinke in deede, what by his ſolemne countenance, what by ſwearing and lyinge, eyther to bee credited, or at leaſt that no man ſhall ſeeme to diſcredit them: and if any go aboute it to quarrell with them. In this caſe I would either ſay nothynge, or if hee ſhould direct his tale to mee, whereby I muſt bee drouen to ſay ſomethynge: I ſhould bee in ſurche ſorte as I would ſeeme to ſoothe him in woordes, but others ſutch as I thought my freindes, ſhould perceiue by my countenance I rather thought it pittie to put him out of his vayne, then was of the minde to beleeue all hee ſayd. Yet that muſt bee done ſo conningly too, that if the teller or the hearers ſhould, to picke a thanke, chalenge mee for the ſame: I would be able (if I lyſt) without denyinge any thinge I ſayde or did, or make the blame light on them that would goe about to diſtayne my meaning, as thus:
               
               Can I not looke on ſutch a one, or ſpeake ſo, but that I muſt meane as ye would: it is you (me thinkes) that go aboute to brynge in queſtion that which no man els thought on, if I

were as hee, I would thanke you for that &c.
               The thirde, and the worſt of theſe wonder tellers, is hee that in very deede maketh it his art, of purpoſe to catche Woodcockes (as they terme it) and they will vſe it either ſo connyngly or ſo impudently, as they will make him, whom they hunt after to be a wole in that poynte, or ſeeme a foole: for they wil ſo mingle thinges like to bee true, or at the leaſt not impoſſible with thinges merely, faulſe and vnpoſſible: as if the hearer ſhall either receiue all indifferently, or reiect all indifferently, he ſhall ſeeme either too ignorant, or too light of beeleif. And if hee ſhall by iudgement ſcan and ſeuer the other from the oother, and ſo condemne any parte, though not the whole: then ſwearyng, flowtyng and quarelynge, wilbee offred to iuſtifie the matter: and this it is (will they ſay) to tell a tale to him that hath neuer gon further then his mother and nurſery, to call for his pappe in a mornyng. &c. And then muſt the laſt man that I firſt ſpake of and is the fourth in this tragedie, ſteppe foorthe and tell his felow hee offreth the yonge Gentleman too mutche wronge, and hee ſhall not take it at his handes, and himſelf will take his part, and go into the field, either with him or for him.
               To ſhift bothe theſe of, the beſt way (if any will rid it) is firſt to let the other to tell all his lies, & to let him paſſe with a ſmile in the ſleelie, (as they will call it) rather then to vſe either admiration, affirmation, or negation: but if hee bee vrged to ſay his opinion, as hee ſhall (if it be

a verſe of courſe) then ſhortly to anſwer, thus: or the like:
               
               I ſay no more, but it may bee true for me: for there bee many thinges that ſeeme vnpoſſible, and yet proue true. Matters of faith may not be reaſoned on, Or thus:
               
               Mee thinkes it is a very good tale, I meane not to ſcan any further on the matter. And theſe or the like woords may bee vttered with ſutche a grace, as the countenāce may ſhew the minde, and yet the ſpeeche keepe them from quarell. But if they will needes proſecute it to the vttermoſt: then hee that ſhall ſeeme to ſet the yonge Gentleman a gog, and offer to bee his companion, hee muſt of curteſie ſeeme to thanke him, but not bee ſo vnwiſe as accept him. For no wiſe man will accept into his companie, at ſutche a bargen, a ſtraunger if he haue any of his freinds to make accompt of, though hee ſuſpect no practiſe at all, but yet hee muſt bee put of with good woordes, as thus:
               
               I thanke you, you ſhal not neede to take the payne, for I haue promiſed a freend of myne, in theſe caſes (if I take any body with mee) it* There is a difference betweene ruffāly phraſes and ſuch reprocheful woords as expreſſe the fowleneſſe of the fact or the ilneſſe of the perſon. muſt bee hee: I will quarell with no body, but if any body haue any quarell to mee, I haue buſineſſe into ſutche a place, ſutche a day, at ſutche an hower: I wil haue but my ſelfe and my man, or but my ſelfe and my freinde, there hee may finde mee if hee dare: and ſo aſmutch as may bee to forbeare ruffainly words. But if any man bee called by any reprochefull names they muſt

needes bee requited both in termes and deedes but after ſundrie manners accordynge to the perſon, the cauſe and the place.
               For if a mans better, beyng a noble perſonIf the noble man bee not of authoritie. (not beeyng of the counſell) ſhall in ſcornefull woords chalenge his inferiour for any thing of offence towarde him, the inferiour ought by all meanes (not abaceing himſelf too mutch) to eſcuſe the matter. Or if it bee a fault (ſutche as he can yeelde no reaſon for the committynge of it) to yeelde with requeſt of pardon. But if either the eſcuſe will not bee taken, or that the inferiour had iuſt cauſe to commit the offence, & that therevpon the noble man breake out in termes of reproche, as knaue, or lie: it may very well be anſwered thus:
               
               My Lorde, theſe termes bee odious, and ſutche as (aſſure your ſelf) I would not beare if you were my equall, neither peraduēture would you offer them, but I pray you leaue them, for I cannot promiſe you ſtill to temper my ſelfe ſo, but that I may forget you be a noble man. And at the next puſhe thus:
               
               I neither am knaue, nor lie any more then you, take it as you liſt, Or thus:
               
               My Lorde, I know you are a noble man, you may peraduenture ouermatche mee with your trayne, and yet I muſt ſcamble as well as I can too: Theſe termes bee very vnſittynge, you muſt either forbeare them, or giue me leaue to thinke too, Or thus:
               
               Your 
                     ••
                   may beſtow theſe liueries on thoſe

that liue by you, and cannot liue without you: it you will not haue mee forget you, forget not your ſelf, for I am mutche afeard I ſhall reſpect the villanie you offer mee aboue the dignitie of your eſtate: But if a greate perſonage ſhall reprooue one for anie faulte, then mediation of freindes, and humble woordes, as thus:
               
               I am ſorie your Lo. ſhould growe to theſe termes: I neither am ſutche, nor deſerue to be ſo called of you: howbeit you be to great a ſtate for mee to contende with, but if the proudeſt hee in this lande being mine equall, or not ſo mutch my better ſhould vſe mee ſo, if I did not my beſt to teache him better manner, you might well publiſh mee for ſutche as you call mee: but I will beare all theſe and be glad of your Lo. fauour if I may get it, if not I muſt liue like a poore man and do as I may, Or thus:
               
               My Lorde, theſe bee verie ill termes to offer to a Gentleman: and I muſt tel, you offer them to him y• would not beare them at manie mens handes, but I muſt beare them at yours. For I confeſſe you bee able to ouermatche mee: your traine is longer then mine: if I had thought you would haue vſed mee thus, your Lordſhip ſhould haue pardoned mee for comming to you at that time.
               Now it is to bee conſidered that woordes al this while as they breake no boanes (ſo from one mutche a mans better) they bee no greate diſgraces: and a man may bee compted the wiſer to forbeare, where hee knoweth hee ſhall by

power and rowtes of men or kindred, bee ouer matched. But if the beſt vnder a Councellour ſhould giue a blowe, a man ſhalbe aſhamed, if he do not his beſt to reache him another, whatſoeuer come of it.
               Now if between equals, reprochefull words doo riſe, it muſt bee diſtinguiſhed thus:
               
               If I giue one occaſion of offence that toucheth but his profit, and hee giue mee reprochefull names for it, as the Lie, or knaue: I muſt for my credit ſake, not only requite thoſe words with like woordes, but counte the wrong mine:The beſt way to this is to lende him a blow. and either offer the firſt blowe (if the place ſerue for it) or els chalenge him into the feild: vnleſſe I can (for pollicie ſake) driue him to chalenge me to ſaue my ſelfe from the daunger of the lawe. For fighting quarels neuer are made for profit, but for honour: and therfore whatſoeuer hurt bee doone, not touching credit, the quarel muſt bee his that receiueth y• firſt reprocheful words: ſo touching the cauſe, the right conſyderation is this: If I offer the firſt reproche, diſdaine, or diſpite, the quarell is the others: his parte it is to chalenge, and I neede not to my equall to make the chalenge. But if the other giue mee the firſt lie, or like diſgrace, it is not inough to ſay hee lieth againe: but I muſt needs offer a blow, or chalenge the feeild.
               If an inferiour offer his better ill ſpeeche, though the better began with him: yet he muſt not doo with him as with his equall: that is, to tarie till hee make the chalenge: but hee muſte

accompt himſelf aſmutch diſgraced, that his inferiour hath replied vpon him, as though his equall had begonne with him: And therefore, if the place ſerue, he muſt reward that reply with a rap on the face with a dagger.
               But if his inferiour be no Gentleman, he may chuſe without any imputation of cowardiſe, whether hee wil either chalenge him, or receaue any chalenge at his handes: but turne one of his men to him, except that inferiour bee ſo well eſteemed for his valiancie, as the Gentleman may be thought, if hee haue not otherwiſe tried himſelfe to make refuſall for feare. In this caſe, ſo that hee make ſhow by woordes, that hee is contented to abaſe himſelfe, to reforme the pride of a malaperte knaue, a man were better to take the quarell himſelfe, then to reſt condempned of the companie, ſpecially if the reſt of the companie bee of reputacion. Thus mutche for the perſon and the cauſe, touching the place and the manner thus:
               
               Within the Queenes houſe (beyng ſhe court) no man for any cauſe muſt giue or require any blowe, if they doo they loſe their hande.
               In the houſe of mutch a mans better, he may not offer a blow: but if anie be offred him, hee muſt needes (if hee can) requite it: at the leaſt ſhew his endeuour theretoo.
               In the houſe of his freeinde, I meane in theBut yet the villany may bee ſutch as hee maye ſtrain good mann
                        ••
                     . dinyng place at the bourde, or where any aſſembly is a man may not offer a blowe; but if hee haue cauſe giuen him, hee ſhal doo well to make

ſhew in woords that hee forbeareth the preſent occaſion, reſpecting y• diſturbance of the cōpanie.
               In a mans owne houſe, or his Fathers, hee muſt not offer a ſtraunger a blow to breede the quarel on: but y• in thoſe places, it wilbe thought his courage is grounded vpon hope of his freeindes and ſeruants helpe, more then vpon any value: And it wilbee no diſgrace to the other to forbeare him, but rather taken for wiſedome, where hee may bee ouermatched. Therfore the manner that is to bee obſerued in thoſe places, when prouocation of quarell is giuen by others is to bee vttred in woords thus:
               
               This is no place to growe in termes in, if it were you would not bee ſo braue, Or thus:
               
               Theſe bee too greate villanies to be borne, if it were not in mine owne houſe, where thou knoweſt I am able to eate thee vp, Or thus:
               
               Yf it were not for troublyng this companie I would bee your caruer of a peece of my dagger: but doubt not but I ſhall finde a time for you. Or thus:
               
               No moo woords, this matter ſhal bee eaſed anon you ſhall ſee, Or thus:
               
               I thanke you ſyr, nay take your pleaſure, IBut al chalenges of poyntinge places muſt bee made in the care for danger of law. He that vanteth what he hath done or 
                        •
                     h
                        ••••
                     neth what he wil doo ſhalbee iudged a m
                        •
                      of many woords and few deedes. could rayle too, but then I ſhould bee like ſutch a raſcall as thy ſelfe, tell mee this ſoone if thou ſee I forget it: but if I doo take mee for ſutche a cowardly boy as I will take thee for, till thou meete mee in ſutche a place, Or thus:
               
               Away raſcall with thy villanous woordes, I heare by thy great boaſte I ſhall paſſe my

iourney quietly at ſutche an hower, in ſutche a place. I know I ſhall haue cauſe to report thee for a good quiet fellow: I, no more a doo, you know my minde.
               If any man bee chalenged, if hee dare to meet an other in any place, hee may (prouided that the chalenged haue receiued no villanie) very well anſwere thus:
               
               What I dare doo ſhalbe ſeen, when the quarell is mine, I haue no matter to you: if you bee angrie ſeeke you the redreſſe as you may: I meane not to balke the hie way, nor ſtep a ſtrideBut theſe words muſt bee vttered with ſutch a gallant, pleſant, & ſomwhat ſcornfull grace, y• it may appere hee deſireth nothyng more then that y• other ſhould meete him. out of my way for you: you may eaſely finde me at your pleaſure: howbeit I proteſt I woulde bee lothe to haue to doo with any man: marie, if I bee interrupted of my walke, I muſt doo as well as I can to keepe my footyng. Or thus:
               
               If I dare not, you muſt holde mee excuſed, I promiſe you in deede I dare make no ſutche ſet matches, but my buizeneſſe lieth ſutch away; if any go about to hinder mee of my iourney, hee may hap finde that hee angreth mee: for in deed I loue not to bee letted of my purpoſe, but I wil not quarell with a gooſe, Or thus:
               
               Alas, alas, dare; it were a ſorie goaſte that durſt not encounter ſutche a gueſt: but it would greeue one to bee driuen to forſake his countrie for 
                     ••
                  n
                     •
                  kyng a ditche with 
                     •••
                  che a carren.
               But to conclude in this, I ſhall aduiſe y• yongeIf hearyng of frayes a man ſeeme deſtrous to enquire of y• cauſe and the manner, he ſhall get experience without bewraying his ignorance, for it wil be thought to proceede of delight to here, rather then of neceſſitie to learne. Gentleman to enforme himſelfe afore hee haue neede by 
                     〈…〉
                   at their handes, that the experienced in y• trade, that when hee hath neede

hee may not only bee prouided of courrage, but alſo of woords, phraſe and manner to it curragiouſly: and in the ſtouteſt and ſeemlieſt manner for all that I haue written hithertoo of this matter, hath byn rather to ſhew that in euery thyng there is a meane to bee vſed, in one ſorte to inferiours: and in another ſorte to ſuperiours and equals: to thende to prouoke him to learne the right manner, then of a meanyng to ſhew anie ſkill of mine in the ſame, beelonging nothing to my profeſſion: and therefore▪ I will now ſay ſomethyng how hee ſhall take the ieſtyngs, the prayſynges, and the thankes of his ſuperiours and equals, as thinges that are bothe fitter for mee to write, and ſhall of him bee oftener and ſooner put in practiſe.
               Firſt I will diſcriue ſome ſundrie manner of ieſtyng. One is, when a man will charge his famillier freinde (a mans famillier may bee either his equall or his better, that liſt of curteſie to become his equall, or one ſomewhat his inferiour to whom hee liſt by like curteſie to make his equall) with ſome ill matter that all the companie knoweth to bee vntrue. In that kinde there is no difficultie to anſwere: but it is good to haue varitie of phraſe, and not to anſweare ſtill after one manner: to his mere equall thus:
               
               You doo well to exerciſe your tongue in matters of no trouth▪ you may hap els to bee taken for a lie teller. Or thus:
               
               Go too, you will haue euery bodie ſee what a lauiſh tongued fellow you bee; that cannot ſo

mutche as keepe counſell of that hee knoweth not, what would hee doo thinke you of that hee knoweth? Or thus:
               
               Nay I dare ſay you would fayne haue it beleeued, for it greeueth him that any man ſhould bee taken for honeſter man than himſelf, Or thus:
               
               Go too, you were beſt leaue your tatlyng, leaſt I fall a tellyng of true tales, Or thus:
               
               Nay tell on, for I am ſure all is goſpell that cometh out of thoſe lippes of yours, Or thus:
               
               This is nothyng finely handled of you, you ſhould haue ſayd ſumthynge that had caried ſome likelyhoode with it, Or thus:
               
               Go too, I will make you no more of my councell ſeeynge you bee ſutche a blad, Or thus:
               
               Is this the truſt you performe with your freeindes, to tell all and more too? Or thus:
               
               Houlde thy peace foole, for my honeſtie is ſo well knowen, as no body here will beleeue thee.
               ¶ Now in the like caſe to a mans better muſt bee other phraſes, as thus:
               
               You ſay truthe ſyr I haue been taken for a ſore fellow at that, when I was a yongeman, Or thus:
               
               If my credit were not very good, this were inough to diſgrace mee quite, Or thus:
               
               It may bee true that you ſay, but I warrant you I handle y• matter ſo cunnyngly, that there is no proofe to bee had of it, Or thus:
               
               It were great pittie any bodie ſhould doubt of that matter, Or thus:
               
               Thus a mans credit is put in daunger by you

if the hearers be not ye more fauourable, Or thus:
               
               This is becauſe my face is towards you: if I would turne my backe I know yee would tel a better tale for mee, Or thus:
               
               Some meaſure other mens trades by theyr owne, but I would bee lothe any body ſhould thinke I meane ſo by you.
               ¶ An other kynde of ieſtynge with a mans friende is, when they charge him to haue ſayde or donne ſomething of a thirde perſon, that only himſelfe and his freinde knoweth to bee fayned: but yet it may bee tould with ſutche a reſemblance of truthe, as ye hearers may doubt whether it bee true or no. In this caſe alſo it is not good to make deniall: but to vſe ſome ſutche phraſe or countenance as ſhe hearers may perceiue hee maketh ſo litle accounte of it, as it needeth no eſcuſe or denial, as thus:
               
               You haue loſt mutch good labour now, if you be not beleeued, Or thus:
               
               You may ſell this good cheape, ſeeing it is of your owne making, Or thus:
               
               I like you well, for I ſee you loue to make the beſt of any thinge, euer, when you wote not how to make the woorſt, Or thus:
               
               I pray you beleeue him in this, and you ſhal ſee hee will take ſutch a pride in it, that hee will quoyne you newe ſtaffe euerie day. Or to a mans better: Uery well, you may ſay that and more too, if it pleaſe you, Or thus:
               
               You muſt looke with a ſadder countenance when you wilbee beleeued.
               
                  An other kynde is when they will touche one with ſomethyng which is true: and though it be no great infamie, yet it may bee ſomewhat that a man would bee loathe to confeſſe, and yet as loathe to bee taken for a denier of that which is knowen to bee true. In this caſe a man may anſwere thus:
               
               You doo but dreame peraduenture, when you wake you ſhall finde it otherwiſe, Or thus:
               
               Loe, now you haue heard ſay ſo: and beeyng of a good faith, you beeleeued it ſtraight, Or thus:
               
               Nay no doubt but it muſt needes bee true, if you ſay it, Or thus:
               
               Did I? you ſpeake your pleaſure, a good tale in deede if it were longe inongh. Or to your better thus:
               
               This is but ſome malicious tongue, that hathTheſe and like ſpeches wt altrynge only ye ſoūde and countenance may ſerue in ſport, or between ſport and erneſt, if a man like not to bee ieſted with. ſounded this in your eares, I am ſure you doo not beeleeue it, Or thus:
               
               Nay you may ſay what pleaſeth you, for I will doo ſo mutch as confeſſe it, rather then you ſhould not bee beeleeued, Or thus:
               
               I perceyue you minde to make mee beeholding to you for giuing me ſo good report, Or thus:
               
               I know ſyr your good woord is euer at hand for your freindes, and I perceiue by this that I am one of them, Or thus:
               
               I am bounde to you alwayes, I truſt to be able one way or other to make you amendes, Or thus:
               
               No I warrant you, there ſhall no man bee able to catche mee in ſutche a fault. Or thus:
               
               
                  Well this you would doo if a mans marriage lay on it, Or thus:
               
               Well, when I lacke one to ſpeake well for mee, I know where to finde him at a neede. Or thus:
               
               If you looke ſo ſadly, you will make them beeleue you in deede.
               ¶ An other kinde of ieſtinge is, when one praiſeth another for well handlynge of any matter, either in ſaying or dooynge, that in deede hath not been well, or not ſo wel or wiſely as it might haue been: wherby the other knoweth he ſpeaketh by contraries, this is to bee anſwered diuerſly, as thus:
               
               Now if another time you lacke one to do ſuch a thinge finely, it is but ſending for mee, & you ſhalbe ſped, Or thus:
               
               It is a ſygne you haue a good inſight with you, for I may tell to you, and yet I would bee lothe to vaunt too: it was very excellently done in deede, Or thus:
               
               Well, yee ſee I loue not to bragge, but when I doo a thinge very wiſely, I loue ſutche freeindes as will tell mee of it, Or thus:
               
               O nay, but if you had had the handlyng of it it would haue been exquiſitiuely doone. Or to a mans better thus:
               
               Wel, if a man chaunce to ſhew all the wit he hath in dooing of a thinge, were it reaſon there ſhould bee any more required? Or thus:
               
               I may tell to you, I did it withall the prouiſion of wit I had at that tune in ſtore, Or thus:
               
               
                  Nay, I truſt I ſhall neuer ſurfet with dooyng too wiſely, Or thus:
               
               I loue not to diſſemble with my freeindes, I meane to ſhew them all my wit at once.
               To conclude, in any thing yt may ſeeme to carrie ſome defect in the doinge, if the doer can himſelf either with wit turne it to ſome merie cōceit, or els helpe merely to mocke him, himſelf for companie: it will appeare either no defect, or els to dee committed rather by careleſneſſe, then for want of wit.
               Another kinde of ieſtyng is to prayſe a man to his face of thinges that bee true in deede: as for his perſonage, his wit, his qualities, his good nature, or his learninge: and whether this hee ſpoken in ſporte, or in earneſt, it is all one: for a man muſt euer take vpon him as though all praiſes were ſpoken in ieſt: by which meanes he may in ſport arrogate them all to himſelfe, with leſſe glorie, then it with taking it in earneſt hee ſhould endeuour to put them from him. So as all ſutche praiſes may bee anſwered thus with a ſmiling grace.
               Go too, you thinke now that I will doo as mutche for you: and ſo I would if I thought you as woorthie of it as I: but you muſt bate mee an ace of that, Or thus:
               
               In deede I muſt confeſſe it is ſo: and you that want ſome of theſe rare gifts, which I am endowed with muſt bee contented too, Or thus:
               
               You ſay true, there be many proper fellows of the name of vs, if yee knew them, Or thus:
                  
Theſe thinges bee but trifles with mee, in compariſon of that I could doo if I liſt, Or thus:
               
               You neede ſay no more, for I warrant you, I beeleeue all this to be true, and mutche more. Or to a mans better thus:
               
               I thanke you for ſayinge ſo, for I hope ſome bodie here will beleeue it, Or thus:
               
               Take heede ſyr, yt you make not mee to beeleeue you herein, better then you beeleeue your ſelfe: for I tel you, it wil bee hard to make mee thinke the contrarie, Or thus:
               
               Beware what you ſay, for it lieth in you to bringe mee in as greate an errour as this coms too, Or thus:
               
               I know you will ſay nothinge, but that you bee ſure is true: and therfore, I meane bothe to beeleeue it my ſelfe, and alſo to perſwade the audience to bee of a right faith.
            
            
               ¶ How a man ſhall anſwere to the prayſe and thankes, and curteſies ſeriouſly offered by his betters or equals. The third Chapter.
               
               
                  THe prayſe that anie man ſhall giue his freeindes to his face, proceedynge of his owne iudgement, in earneſt and freeindly wiſe, as one freeinde may in ſome order (in vtteryng either his owne affection, or to encourage the other without touche of flatrerie) doo to an

other: it may be anſwered to his equall freeind,Any prayſes or thāks require rather ſomewhat a ſmylyng grace then too ſolem, though it bee to a mans better dooyng it of good faith, in parte as I haue preſcribed beefore towardes his better, in dooynge the like in mirthe. Or thus:
               
               I may not take your prayſe for any thing, for the goodwill you beare mee blindes you. Or thus:
               
               I pray you looke better into mee, and when you finde how mutche you bee deceiued, tell me of it, that I may amende it, Or thus:
               
               If another ſhould tel mee ſo mutche, I ſhould thinke he mockes mee: but you may mocke me indeede, and paſſe vneſpied, for the goodwill I thinke you beare mee.
               To a ſtaunger, that ſhall prayſe him, or ſeem to conceaue a good opinion of him thus:
               
               It were beſt (I thinke) neuer to be better acquainted with you, leaſt I make you of another opinion, Or thus:
               
               I thanke you for your good opinion, I would I coulde beguile euery bodie ſo conningly as to make them of the ſame minde. And to a mans better thus:
               
               How mutche ſo euer I ſhall want in this, my redineſſe to bee at your commaundement ſhall ſupplie it, Or thus:
               
               The good opinion, whiche rather my good hap, then my deſerts hath wrought in you, cauſeth you (I thinke) to beeleeue that to be in mee, which you wiſh to bee in mee. Or thus:
               
               I account my hap good, that it pleaſeth you, but to ſay thus mutche: for at the leaſt, I ſhalbe aſhamed of as mutche as I finde wantynge

hereof in my ſelfe, Or thus:
               
               I cannot but take this as a freindly curteſy, by pollicie to encourage mee to ſeeke the attainment of that which I am borne in hand to haue alreadie. Theſe and like anſweres may be applied alſo to ſutche as ſhal bring to his eares the good reportes of his freeindes giuen out of him behinde his backe (as they terme it.) Prouided that hee pike them out accordinge to the diſtinction of perſons beefore deſcribed: and withal, as it is to bee conſydered that all thinges ſpoken in a ſhowe of mirth, though it ſeeme to the hearer ſomwhat ſharpe (and peraduenture anger him) is yet to bee diſſembled and anſwered merely. So whenſoeuer a man in any thing yt hee may attribute truly to himſelfe is praiſed to his face, though it bee ſpoken earneſtly and of good meanyng:In al other entertainements ſpoken ſeriouſly, a gladſome looke is a better grace then a flatterynge ſ
                        ••
                     le. hee ought alſo, in his foreſaide manner of anſweres: to ſhew ſutche a ſmilynge grace, as it may appere hee taketh it as ſpoken rather of their curteſie, then for any cauſe hee findes in himſelfe why they ſhould ſo ſay: in ſpeeche (for the moſt parte) the countenance, the grace, and ſounde in the pronunciation is able with one ſelf ſentence, without altringe woorde or ſillable, to pleaſe or diſpleaſe others, to ſhew himſelf wiſe, or make him for ſo mutche to ſeeme fooliſhe.
               
                  SALOMON affirmeth, that there is nothyng that more trieth the wit of man, then the hearyng of his owne prayſe: for ſaith hee, the wiſe man is put too his triall, when hee is prayſed to his face. And therfore for this matter I cōclude,

that for aſ mutche as many times it is harde to finde who ſpeaketh of flatterie contrarie to his thought: who by way of mockerie, though hee know hee ſay true, to trie him, and who of good zeale to ſhew affection, and to encourage him: The ſureſt way in this doubt is (except to thoſe whoſe freeindſhip by other meanes hee hath experience of) to vſe his anſweres ſo, as hee may make them earneſt or ſporte at his pleaſure, as he perceiueth their aſſeueracion to prouoke him.
            
            
               How a man ſhall acquite himſelf towards noble perſons, that ſhall either for his freeindes ſake, or his owne, offer him curteſies: or aſſure him offreeindſhip, willinge him in all chaunces to bee bolde with him. The. iiii. Chapter.
               
               
                  IN this caſe as in all other of intertaimnents; the inferiour muſt 
                     •••
                  e in what manner, whether ſeriouſly or familliarly, ſutche curteſie or intertaynment bee offred him▪ and thereafter▪ to ch
                     ••
                  e out and ſhape out anſwers▪ agreeable to eche kinde▪ for the firſt, if hee bee a ſtraunger to him: but not to his freendes thus:
               
               I know ſutche, or ſutche of my freeindes ſo

mutche bee holdynge to you too, as hath bin ſufficient to binde mee to honour and loue you: and ſeeyng it pleaſeth you to extende your curteſie alſo towardes mee, I can but wiſh my ſeruice, as ſufficient as my good will is: to aſſure you too, of my thankefull minde, Or thus:
               
               My Lorde, I can but acknowledge y• debte for my ſelfe, which before I thought to owe for others of my freeindes, that haue taſted of your curteſie: but I am glad that I may by this meanes ſhew it, which your Lordſhip ſhall finde mee ready to doo, wherin ſoeuer I ſhall thinke my ſeruice may bee acceptable, Or thus:
               
               As this your Lordſhips goodnes riſeth of your curteſie without any deſertes, ſo muſt I confeſſe my ſelfe euer vnable to counterpeyſe it: I can but acknowledge my ſelf too mutch boūd to you for it: and double bounde, if it ſhall pleaſe you to commaunde mee to the vttermoſt of my power, Or thus:
               
               I humbly thanke your L. I can but requite it with my ſeruice, and that I beeſeeche you cō
                  maunde, Or thus:
               
               My humble thankes are but an vnequall recompence, and therfore I ſhal deſier your L. to put my gratefull minde in trial, by commaundynge my ſeruice, Or ſhortly, thus:
               
               If my ſeruice may any way bee ought worth, if I may but vnderſtande it, it ſhall not neede to bee commaunded, Or thus:
               
               I humbly thank
                     •
                   your L. and I beeſeeche you commaunde mee, as your ſeruant, Or thus:
               
               
                  I humbly thanke your L. and I beſeche you thinke that you vontchſafe this curteſie on him that will be as readie to requite it with the vttermoſt of his ſeruice, as he that is better ſtored of woordes. The vſe of longe or ſhort ſentences muſt bee imployed accordinge as hee ſeeth the hearer at leaſure.
            
            
               How when the foreſayde ſpeeches bee offred by a noble perſon pleſantly, that is of acquaintance which muſt bee alſo pleaſantly anſwered. The. v. Chapter.
               
               
                  MY Lorde, you know I haue no ſtore of eloquence: but what mayme ſo euer you finde in my vtterance, I can aſſure, you ſhall finde none in my good will, whenſoeuer I may doo you any ſeruice, Or thus:
               
               I humbly thanke your L. I warrant you I make ſo ſure recknynge thereof, as I am more like to be boulde of your curteſie, then to requeſt it: but I muſt pray your Lordeſhip to thinke that ſhal bee rather for want of power then of good will, Or thus:
               
               Your Lordeſhip muſt bee content with my humble thankes for this time
                     •
                   but I would bee very ſory to thinke your L. made not accompt of mee, as of him whom you may moſt commaund Or thus:
               
               
                  My Lorde I haue had to good experience of your former curteſies, bothe towards mee and other my freeindes, as I had need with my ſeruice to goe aboute to recompence ſome parte of that, beefore I come in debt for any more: But the leſſe wee can requite, the more wee muſte ſtande bounde.
            
            
               How to an equall, or but litle better beeyng a freeind and familliar. ¶ The. vi. Chapter.
               
               
                  TO our freeinde thus:
               
               I am in your debt for ſo mutche alreadie as if you lende mee any more, you wil make me bankroute: and agree with you for the tenthe parte, Or thus:
               
               You offer mee ſo mutche, and I can requite ſo litle: as I ſee, you meane to make mee an ill debter ſtill, Or thus:
               
               You know I haue no curious woordes in ſtoare, but in playne termes, I thanke you, and will requite it if I can. Or ſeriouſly thus:
               
               I pray you thinke, that though I vſe not many woordes with you, I thinke my ſelfe ſo mutche beeholdynge to your 
                     ••
                   wherein I may pleaſure you, if you commaunde me not, I ſhall thinke, you loue mee not. Or to a ſtraunger thus:
               
               Syr I thanke you of this curteſie, if it ſhall

lie in mee to requite it, I pray you bee as boulde with mee, Or thus:
               
               Sir I muſt bee your debter for this curteſie, till time and place ſerue to requite it: but in the meane time I thanke you, I pray you make the like accompt of mee.
            
            
               How a man ſhall take thankes of a noble perſon. The. vii. Chapter.
               
               
                  IF thankes bee offered in ſerious manner & for any waightie matter thus:
               
               My Lorde, it was my goodwill, as well as my duetie, to haue done it to your beſt contentacion: but if there be any defect in it, I pray your Lordſhip, impute it to mine vnſkilfulneſſe. Or thus:
               
               My Lorde it is no reaſon that you thanke him, whom you ought to commaunde: and ſpecially mee, that am vnable to ſatiſfie for the tenthe parte of that dewtie or goodwill I owe you: but if therebee ought done to your contentacion, or that haue pleaſed you, I am very well a payde and ſufficiently thanked, Or if merely thus:
               
               I pray you keepe your thankes for a thynge more woorthy them: for if your Lordſhip beeſtow ſo manie thankes for ſo ſmal matters, you will make mee looke for too manie when I ſhal

doo you any better ſeruice.
               ¶ To a mans equall freeinde, or but litle his better thus:
               
               Nay ſir, you will marre mee, if you giue mee too many thankes: for then you will bring mee more in debt for my thankes, that I am yours for this matter by a great deale, Or thus:
               
               Doo freeindes vſe this curioſitie in giuynge thankes, I am ſure it is but to teache mee good manners agaynſt an other time, Or thus:
               
               I pray you keepe thankes for ſtraungers, and let mee know whether it were to your likyng or not, Or thus:
               
               You be at too mutche coſt for ſo ſmall a matter: I know now where to haue thankes another time when I deſerue them.
            
            
               How a man may giue thankes to his betters and equals. The. viii. Chapter.
               
               IF my humble thankes were a ſufficient recompence to your Lordeſhip, I ſhould not reſt ſo mutche in your debt as now I am bounde to doo, for ſutche a curteſie. &c. Or thus:
               
               My Lorde, I haue humble thankes to render, for ſutche a matter whiche did mee greate pleaſure: but they bee ſo vnequal a requitall, as I were beſt to ad this to the reſt of your curteſies

or goodneſſe, & ſtande bounde for the whole Or thus:
               
               I am ſo mutche bounde to your Lordſhip, for ſutche a thinge, &c. As I muſt thinke all the ſeruice I can doo too litle woorthe in reſpecte of your goodneſſe ſhewed therein.
               To a mans freeinde thus:
               
               I am too mutche in your debte, to giue you thankes for ſutche a thynge. &c. For till I can make ſome ſhew in deedes, I will come vpon the ſcore with you in woordes, Or thus:
               
               Though thankes bee not inough for this pleaſure that you haue doone mee: yet I pray you allow of them till I be able to make better payment.
            
            
               What manners bee requiſite at the Table, and what to bee ſhunned: for, what is to bee conſidered in the waſhyng before Dinner, and in the ſitting downe, is ſet foorth in the beeginnyng of this Direction. The. ix. Chapter.
               
               
                  FIrſt, to pawſe when a man is ſet, and with leaſure to vnfolde his Napkin, wipe his knife, cut his breade, and there to ſtay till either his better beegin, or make countenance

to him to eate where hee liſt: and then toThis ceremonie is not to be vſed, but whē a man ſitteth at the vpper meſſe with his b
                        •
                     tters, or at ye ſecond, whē either the maſter of y• houſe ſitteth there, or ſome 
                        ••
                     ble perſon. beegin, not at the diſh that ſhall ſtande right before his better, except it bee offered him: neither of the daintieſt meates whiche (lightly) ſtande loweſt: but to chuſe ſome ſutche diſh to bee dooyng on the while, till hee ſee whether his better will chuſe or refuſe ſome other diſh, that hee had rather eate on.
               Item to haue an eye to ſutche as ſit next beeneath him and cannot reache, and peraduēture for good manner (if they bee any thynge his inferiours) will not ſpeake: and if they eate not, to aſke whether hee ſhalbee their Caruer. But I woulde not haue him to bee any mans Caruer without aſkyng him firſt, except it bee to one ſo mutche his inferiour, as hee knoweth wil bee glad of the curteſy hee ſheweth him, though hee like not the meate. For as to Carue to a mans better is a preſumption, ſo to ones equal, except by aſkynge firſt the queſtion, you know it wilbee welcome to him, wilbee taken for too mutche fawnyng, except alſo that for the daintineſſe of the meate, or fine chuſynge of the beſt morſell, he offreth it to his very famillier freind, by way of a curteous affection: for a man muſt for a generall rule, take heede that in a ſtrange place hee bee not too buſie in offryng ſeruice, or curteſies, though it bee to his betters: but in a mans owne howſe or his Fathers, it cannot lightly bee too mutche.
               Item if a man bee in his owne howſe, or his Fathers, where it beecometh him to giue countenance

or entertainment, he may to his equall, and ſutche as bee ſomwhat his inferiours, hee may the oftner profer them this or that meate, and drinke to them, but not too mutche. For if a man euery time hee drinketh, ſhall drinke toI
                        •
                     's counted a fooliſh grace euer to drinke to ſomebody, & ſpecially at the fyrſt draught one or other, it wilbee ſeene, as though hee did it for lacke of countenance: ſo that to vſe the ſalutacion of the Cup aboue twiſe in one meale, wilbee too mutche, except the whole companie fall to quaffynge. For wyſe men doo rather ſeeke to ſatiſfy their gueſts with ſome good ſpeches, then with ſutche dum ſygnes.
               This kinde of Cup greetyng ought not to bee vſed but in one of theſe two reſpects: either to make our inferiour (to whom wee meane not to vſe ſpeeche of familliaritie) to thinke we will doo them a curteſie: or els to our very freeinde by way of congratulation. And therefore a man muſt neuer drinke to his better, except hee bee ſure that by way of freeindſhip and familliaritie hee bee content to beecome his equall, and that not with a ſolem or ſad countenance, but with ſome ſmilyng grace, that the reſt may know it proceedeth of familliaritie, and not of preſumption: yet with reuerent wordes and chaunge of phraſe, as thus:
               
               My Lorde, if ſome yonge Nobleman:
               Sir, or Madam, will it pleaſe you to giue me leaue. Or thus:
               
               Shall I be ſo boulde as ſalute you with this Cup of Wine. Or thus:
               
               By your leaue ſyr, againſt it next pleaſe you. Or thus:
               
               
                  Will you giue mee leaue to remember ſutche a one? as ſome freeinde of his. Or thus:
               
               To plucke you out of your ſtudies. Or thus:
               
               Sauyng your tale ſyr.
               Item, that aboue all thynges in a ſtraunge place, or in the preſence of ſtraungers, he attend not ſo greedely, nor ſo continually to his feeding: but that in modeſt wiſe, without either gazynge too longe in another mans face: or yet hangyng his head continually on his trencher: hee hath both his eye and his eare ſo redy, that nothynge is ſayde or doone at the bourde, but he may perceyue it, for his learning, that good is to follow, that ill is to eſchew. And when hee ſéeth any thynge vncomely, to examine himſelf, whether hee haue not the ſame grace himſelfe: and alſo to doo the like, whenſoeuer he heareth any man diſprayſed. For moſt men know what is comely or vncomely in another: But many for lacke of due obſeruation in themſelues, mocke or diſprayſe in another, the ſame which others mock in them: and the rather for their ſo dooynge.
               Item, that he pawfe between meate & meate and neuer to carue himſelfe, either of meate or breade, while his mouth is full: nor till hee haue ſwallowed the laſt morſell.
               Item, that hee fill not his mouth ſo full of meate as hee cannot holde his lippes together while hee is chawyng: for otherwiſe, men ſhall looke into his mouthe, and ſee the meate rowle vp and downe while hee is eatynge: whiche is a fowle ſight, and loatheſome: and for that

cauſe a man muſt forbeare to ſpeake with meat in his mouthe, except hee haue ſo litle as hee be ſure to hide it in his mouthe while hee is ſpeakynge.
               Item, while his better telleth him any tale, to ceaſe eatynge: 
                     •
                  o the while hee heareth, and while hee anſwereth him.
               Item, if hee hee prouoked to laughe in the preſence of his betters, to doo the ſame with as little noyſe as may bee; and likewiſe in the company of ſtrau
                     •
                  gers,, for too lowd a laughter, ſpecially, for ſlender occaſions, doo make wiſemen counted fooliſh of ſutch as know them not.
               Item, when a man will tell a mery tale, let him tell it ſo as himſelfe bee not the firſt that ſhall laughe at it. A ſmilyng ſound to make men know hee ſpeaketh but in ſporte, is good: but a fayned laughter is ill beecommynge. A hartie laughter (ſo the matter bee worth it) is allowable.
               Item hee muſt beeware that while another tell a tale, or make ieſtures: that his wits be not caried away, ſo as hee gaze continually in his face, and make the ſame countenances which he ſeeth the other doo: for that will make a man counted doultiſhe.
               Item if he be conſtrayned to yawne, reache, belche, cough, ſneeſe, clenſe the noſe, or ſpit either at the bourde, or in the preſence of his betters or ſtraungers: he muſt ſuppreſſe the ſound, and ſhadow y• ſight, as mutche as hee may conueniently without makyng it to nice.
               
                  Item in caruyng himſelf or others, hee muſt not embrew too many of his fingers, nor his thombe: nor wallow his meate vp and downe too mutche in the ſauce, bycauſe in ſo dooynge a man ſhall waſhe his fingers in the ſauce, which others will loathe, ſpecially ſtraungers.
               Now to conclude, though a man either at home or amonge his freeindes, may vſe what manner hee liſt, without obſeruynge all theſe ceremonies: yet it ſhalbee very good ſo 
                     •
                   what to enure himſelf by dayly cuſtome▪ otherwiſe hee ſhall in preſence forgette bothe them and himſelf.
            
            
               How a man ſhall pacifie his freeind, his better, or his equall: if hee haue giuen him vnwillingly any cauſe of offence. The. x. Chapter.
               
               IF 
                     •
                  or a light cauſe, then merely thus:
               
               I am ſure you take it not in earneſt, or thinke I meant otherwiſe then in the beſt part: for if you doo, you ſhall doo mee great wronge, Or thus:
               
               By my trouthe I did, or ſayde it to no ſutch ende, as you take it: and therefore I pray you thincke of it, as I meant it. Or thus:
               
               If I had thought it coulde haue bin ſo mutch

miſtaken, I would haue bin more warie: but let it ſuffice you that I ment but well and freeindly, for otherwiſe I did it not I aſſure you: Or earneſtly for ſome greater matter, then thus:
               
               My hap is ill, that of ſo good a meanynge, ſhould fall out ſo ill conceiuyng, or ſo ill ſucceſſe: for that I did or ſayde, was as I woulde haue dooue to my very freeinde, or would haue had doone to my ſelfe, it reſts in your choyce to beeleue mee: but if you doo not, you ſhall wronge your, ſelfe as well as mee, in miſtruſtynge mee without a cauſe, Or thus:
               
               I can but tell you and aſſure you on my faith, I meant thus, Or thus:
               
               If I haue giuen you any cauſe to thinke otherwiſe, or if it haue fallen out contrarie to mine expectation: I am not only ſoarie for it, but I will bee readie to make any recompence I can, Or to ones better thus:
               
               Truly ſir, it was not my intent to doo herein any thing that might offende: but I will yeelde, that it is fault inough that I vſed no more circumſpection, but that you may conceyue ill of it: you neede not to giue mee any penance, for that my repentance is ſo mutche, Or thus:
               
               If you knew my minde, you would put mee in truſt for reuengynge this fault: for I ſhalbee angrie with my ſelf this good while for it.
            
            
               
               How a man ſhall ſhift of reproches or tauntes offred beetweene ſporte and earneſt, by enuious and ſcornefull perſons that will ſeeme to doo it ſo cunningly as the other ſhall haue the taunt, and yet at his owne pleaſure will denie it. The. xi. Chapter.
               
               
                  THe beſt way is, if hee can touche the ſame partie as neere, without ſeemyng to bee angrie: but if he know nothyng perticulerly to charge him or to mocke him withall, then to ſcorne 
                     ••
                  n beetweene ſporte and anger agayne, as thus:
               
               Oh finely handled, were you borne ſo. Or thus:
               
               Jeſus who would haue thought you coulde haue throwen ſo hard to hit your ſelfe, Or thus:
               
               I dare ſay, you weene you haue ſpoken very trimly now. Or thus:
               
               You haue made a great ſpeake ſir, Or thus:
               That is quoth you, Or thus:
               
               I thanke you of your coſt, Or thus:
               
               It is but your good nature to take or expounde

it ſo. Or thus:
               
               As I remember I deſired you not to ſay that for mee: but yet you ſhall finde mee too kynde harted to die in your debt. Or thus:
               
               Did any bodie teache you to ſay ſo, or coms it of your mother wit.
               ¶ Now if they ſhal replie, & go aboute to make it ſeeme they meane ſimply, then thus:
               
               I dare ſay you doo, and therefore I thanke you as hartely. Or thus:
               
               Why I truſt you thincke not that I doubte of that, Or thus:
               
               Why I take it ſo, and therefore I commend you for it: and ſo turne it to mirthe agayne, if the other will needes haue it ſo. But if the other will proſecute it with ſharpe tauntes, vnder▪ a 
                     •
                  leeryng or laughyng countenance, then thus:
               
               Nay I am not ſkilled in ieſters arte, tell mee your minde in earneſt, and you ſhall finde mee ready to make you ſutche ſporte as I d
                     •••
                  . Or thus:
               
               I will tell you, if you will needes beecome a Jeſter to make Gentlemen ſporte: It were beſt to call ſome other to help countenance you, that is of your facultie, for in faith I am nothing apt for you at this time.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   