
      
         
            
            
            ALLARME To England, foreſhewing what perilles are procured, where the people liue without regarde of Martiall lawe.
            With a ſhort diſcourſe conteyning the decay of warlike diſcipline, conuenient to be peruſed by Gentlemen, ſuch as are deſirous by ſeruice, to ſeeke their owne deſerued prayſe, and the preſeruation of their countrey. Newly deuiſed and written by Barnabe Riche Gentleman.
            Malui me diuitem eſſe quam vocari.
            Peruſed and allowed.
            1578.
         
         
            
            
            To the right honorable Syr Chriſtopher Hatton, Knight, Captaine of her Maieſties Garde, Vicechamberlayne to her Highnes, and one of her Maieſties moſt honourable priuie Counſayll, Barnabe Ryche wiſheth long and happie lyfe, with increaſe of Honour, as your Noble heart both deſireth and deſerueth.
            
               THE common and vulgare ſorte of people (Right Honorable) are accuſtomed to eſtimate and valewe of ſuch thinges as ſhall happen to their ſight, more rather according to the credit and opinion that they haue conceyued in the authour, then for the ſubſtance or matter of that is eyther ſayde, or written.
            For better proofe I could alleadge ſundrie examples, but leauing many others, this fable may ſuffice (fayned by the Poetes) of the man, which by the conſent of all the goddes, was deemed for his feauture in euery proportiō to be ſo pure and perfect, that with one generall verdite they all commended him to bee without any maner imperfection.
            In the ende Momus taking the vewe of this goodly perſonage, and throughly peruſing the excellencie of this creature, perceyued yet one faute which all the reſt had miſſed: which was, that there wanted a windowe in his breſt, through which his thoughtes might bee looked into, whereby might be ſeene what there remayned within him.
            Meaning that there were no man that almoſt might be founde, howe comely ſo euer he was in his perſonage, how gallantly ſo euer he went in his apparell, howe ſmoothly ſo euer he could ſpeake with his tongue, howe demurely ſo euer he ſeemed in countenance, nor howe plauſible ſo euer he appeared in his other demeanours, yet if his ſecrete thoughtes might be ſeene into, and that the priuities of his heart might be throughly conſidered of, there is no doubt, but there would be founde ſome great corruption yet remayning.
            If this faute had bene founde by Pallas or Apollo, queſtionleſſe it would haue bene regiſtred amongeſt the ſayinges and ſentences of the wiſe: but proceeding from him whome they rather had in contempt, then eſteemed in any credit, it was reputed to be but a mocke and a ſcorne.
            I haue here (right Honourable) raſhly and aduenterouſly taken vpon me to become a writer, wherein a great number (I knowe) will

likewiſe condemne me, and the rather conſidering my ſimplicitie & trayning vp, which hath not bene ſo much with my penne, but more with my pyke, nor in the ſcholes amongſt learned clarkes, but rather in the fields amongſt vnletered companions, or as ſome will terme them, amongſt a company of ruſtike ſouldiers.
            Wherefore moſt humbly I deſire your Honour to accept of theſe my ſlender trauayles in good parte, the which I do here preſent vnto you with my ſimple ſeruice during my lyfe, to be at your Honorable diſpoſition: And although I do know both the one and the other to be to farre inſufficient to be preſented vnto you, yet though not according to mine owne deſeruing, eyther for the valew of that I haue written, yet according to your accuſtomed clemencie and goodnes, that you would vouchſafe to protect and ſhroud them with your fauourable countenance, whereby they may be made more acceptable to the readers, and be the better welcome to ſuch as ſhall peruſe them.
            I do here omitte to follow the order of ſome writers, which is with great circumſtance to blaſe the vertues of ſuch as they chooſe to be patrons of their workes: for what may bee ſayde ſounding more to your aduancement, then what your ſelfe haue already gayned, whoſe noblenes hath not onely aduaunced you to ſo great honour, but alſo in euery mans iudgement hath made you to be deemed worthie to enioye it?
            But I may not here omit, that amongſt other honorable roomes whereto you haue bene called, what a preſident you haue begunne, whereby our captaines of Englande may learne and gather light.
            I meane where her Maieſtie hath worthily appointed you to bee Captayne of a worthy bande, what care and conſideration you haue euer had, aſwell of the maners and conditions, as otherwyſe of the perſonage and abilitie of any one that you would permit, whereby her Maieſtie is guarded with a bande of men, not onely indued with actiuitie, but alſo with honeſtie.
            Howe much they be bound to your Honour, that was the onely meane to her Maieſtie, for the amending of their pay, whereby they are made the better able to do her ſeruice, I leaue for them ſelues to reporte, and do but onely wiſhe that our Captaynes of Englande would by your Honourable example, take ſuch light, whereby they might be made the more renowmed.
            Thus deſiring your Honour to pardon my boldnes & ſimplicitie, I humbly take my leaue.
            
               
                  Your humble and obedient ſeruant, Barnabe Ryche.
            
         
         
            
            To the gentle and friendly Reader.
            
               ALlarmes (gentle Reader) as they are giuen vpon diuerſe and ſundrie occaſions, ſo they are many times offred aſwel by friends as foes.
            By foes to further their pretences when they practiſe to deceyue: by friendes, but to ſee howe they be prepared, and in what readines they ſtande. Who if they ſhall be negligent or vnprouided, to giue them as it were a friendly caueat, hereafter to vſe greater circumſpection and care.
            I haue in like maner aduentured to giue a friendly warning, the which I haue termed by the name of an Allarme, wherein, I knowe, there be a great number wil confeſſe I haue bewrayed mine owne ſimplicitie, in that I ſhould thinke to giue any Allarme to thoſe that ſtande in doubt neither of King nor Keyſer.
            But becauſe I would not be thought to arrogate ſo great preſumption to my ſelfe, I haue rather but vſed the parte of ſome poore bel ringer, or of ſome other inferiour perſon, that ſometymes being more afrayde then hurt, hath rong the larume bell, or hath runne through the campe in great haſte, crying, Arme, arme, arme, wherewith euery one hath runne to his furniture, and being prepared to make defence, ſeeking on euery ſide where the foe ſhould make aſſault, it hath in the ende fallen out, that the poore man was but ſtared in his owne conceyte, or elſe afrayde of ſome ſhadowe in the Mooneſhine. Now it may be likewyſe, that I am but afrayde of myne owne ſhadowe, the which if it be ſo, my ſimplicitie yet ought the rather to be borne withal, conſidering it proceedeth of good wil that I beare to my countrey.
            But what excuſe might ſeeme here ſufficient, wherewith to auoyde me from ſo many quipping tauntes, which I knowe wil be pronounced againſt me, by our carping cauillers, ſuch as wil be correcting of euery mans doing? Some wil find faulte with my homely maner of inditing, and wil ſay, This is no good ſenſe, or this is no true Engliſhe, here he hath bene ſomething to tedious, and this matter asked longer circumstance, this maner of phraſe is but bad, and by this he ſhewed his eloquence was but ſmall, and here it is not well poynted, and ſo forth with many other faultes, I know not what.
            Wherefore I would theſe ſuperficial heades would take this for myne anſwere, that what I haue written, it hath not bene to prooue my ſelfe artificiall or eloquent, but to ſhewe things more needfull, which I haue noted by experience.
            Some others there be, which are of ſuch excellent memorie, that there is nothing may be written which they do not already knowe, and wil ſay, This is but borowed in ſuch a place, and this I haue read in this or in that booke.
            
               Surely I must confeſſe I haue vſed the helpe of ſundrie writers, but not of ſo many as I would haue done, if I had bene in place where I might haue come by them: for what I haue written, was onely done in Ireland, where there is no great choyce of bookes to be had▪
            
            But what then? Is this ſufficient cauſe to condemne what I haue written? is not the bee accustomed to gather out of euery flower what liketh her best, wherewith ſhe maketh hony? Or I pray you, what is the medicine the worſe, although the Phyſition be ſometimes driuen to borowe a handful of herbes out of his neighbours garden, ſhal his compoſition be any thing the vnwholeſomer, becauſe the ſimples were not al his owne?
            There is yet an other ſorte, that becauſe they thinke it a ſhame to reade ouer any thing, & not to be able to miniſter ſome correctiō, becauſe they wil not be thought to be ſo dul witted, wil finde ſome fault, if it be but with the Orthographie, and wil ſay, It was pitie this man would take in hande to write before he could ſpell.
            To theſe I anſwer, As great folly might be aſcribed to thoſe that were their bringers vp, that would learne them to goe, before they had taught them to ſpeake well.
            But ſuch is the delicacie of our readers at th
                  •
                time, that there are none may be alowed of to write, but ſuch as haue bene trained at ſchoole with Pallas, or at the lest haue bene fostered vp with the Muſes, and for my parte (without vaunt be it ſpoken) I haue bene a trauayler, I haue ſayled in Graueſende Barge as farre as Billings gate, I haue trauayled from Buckelers bery to Baſingſtocke, I haue gone from S. Pankeridge church to Kentiſh towne by lande, where I was combred with many hedges, ditches, and other ſlippery bankes, but yet I could neuer come to thoſe learned bankes of Helicon, neither was I euer able to ſcale Parnaſſus hyl, although I haue trauailed ouer Gaddes hyll in Kente, and that ſundrie tymes and often.
            No marueill then good reader, although I want ſuch ſugered ſape, wherwith to ſauce my ſenſe, whereby it might ſeeme delightfull vnto thee: ſuch curious Coxcombes therefore, which can not daunce but after Apollos pype, I wiſh them to ceaſe any further to reade what I haue written: but thou which canst endure to reade in homely ſtyle of matters, more behooueful and neceſſarie, then eyther curiouſe or fyled, goe thou forward on Gods name, and I doubt not, but by that time thou hast peruſed to the end, thou ſhalt find ſome thing to ſatisfie thy deſire, whereby thou wilt confeſſe that al thy labour hath not bene bestowed in vayne. And thus I bid thee hartily Farewell.
         
         
            
            To the valiant Captaynes and renowmed Souldiours of Englande, Barnabe Riche wiſheth for their better encouragement, encreaſe of credit, estimation and neceſsarie maintenance, according to their due deſertes.
            
               ALthough (right noble Captaynes and worthie Souldiours) I may ſeeme too raſhe and bolde to enter into thoſe diſcourſes ſo farre ſurpaſſing my capacitie, the which I knowe I haue finiſhed not according as the argument hath required, but according as the ſlendernes of my ſkyll would permit me: yet I proteſt, I haue not taken in hand to write, for any vayne glory or preſumption in my ſelfe, but rather to incite ſome one amongſt you, that is more able & ſufficient, to performe a greater enterpriſe, to a much better perfection: and for my parte, I haue but vſed the office of the meaneſt labouring man, & (as it were) haue but brought lyme and ſtone together, wherewith the maſter workeman maye erecte his building in braue and ſumptuous ſorte.
            Thus crauing pardon for this my bolde attempt, I ſubmit altogether what I haue done to your noble iudgementes, to correcte and amende what you ſhall ſee needfull and requiſite. And thus I reſt, yours to diſpoſe
            
               Barnabe Riche.
            
         
         
            
            To my very louing friend Captaine Barnabe Ryche.
            
               I Haue peruſed your booke, as farre as the ſhortnes of the tyme would ſuffer me: which was not ſo farre by a great deale as I gladlyeſt would, if it might haue longer continued with me. Your trauaile and good mynde moſt iuſtly deſerueth in my opinion, both thankes and commendations of all your countrey men. I wiſh with all my heart it may ſo be accepted of thoſe, in whoſe handes the only remedie lyeth, that ſome good order may be deuiſed for the reliefe and encouragement of ſuch vertuouſe myndes as are contented with the expens of their bloud to benefite their countrie. Which kinde of men aboue all others, ought moſt to be eſteemed as the very ſinowes and ſtrength of euery common weale, howe mighty or wealthie ſo euer ſhee be. For according to the opinion of a late learned writer, Pertinet autem maxime ad Reipub. fortitudinem, vti milites peritos & exercitatos habeat. Sic enim & tranquilla vita fruetur, & a terroribus tumultibuſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   vacua erit. The onely ſtrength of euery common wealth is, To haue skilfull and well trayned ſouldiers: ſo ſhall they liue in happines, being free from all kinde of terrour and tumult. And agayne, Dum belli furor inſurgit, hostiſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Reipub. bonis occupandis inhiat, eorū in manibus Reipub. Salus, Religio, Fides, Libertas est repoſita. When the rage of warres doth ſuddainly burſt out, and the enemie at hand, gaping for the ſpoyle of the countrey, then both Safety, Religion, Faith and Libertie reſteth wholy in the hande of the ſouldiours: who are the onely terrour to the enemie, defende their countrey from preſent danger, and bring the common wealth to ſafetie and quietnes. But our countrey hath alwayes had that faute (and I am afrayde will neuer be without it) of being vnnaturall and vnthankfull to ſuch as with their great hazard, paynes and charges haue ſought to attayne to the knowledge of armes, by which ſhee is chiefly mainteyned, ſuccoured and defended. To bring one example amongſt thouſands▪ What a number was there of noble Gentlemen, and worthy ſouldiours, that in the dayes of that victorious prince King Henry the fifth (after the honourable behauing of them ſelues, as well at Agincort, as other places, to the diſcomfiture and vtter ouerthrowe of the whole Chiualry of Fraunce) returning to their countrey, were pitifully conſtrained (& which was in deede moſt miſerable) in their olde and honourable age for very want and neceſſitie to begge, whyle a great number of vnworthie wretches that lyued at home, enioyed all kindes of felicities. That Noble Gentleman Syr William Drurie a Paragon of armes at this day, was wont (I remēber) to ſay, that the ſouldiers of England had alwaies one of theſe three endes to looke for: To be ſlayne, To begge, or To be hāged. No doubt a gentle recompence for ſuch a merit. Yet want there not ſome, yt dare affirme it a vayne burdē to a cōmon wealth, to mainteine ſouldiers, as the cōmon diſturbers & hinderers of publike peace. Such a one was ſometime Syr Thomas More, who hauing more skyll in ſealing of a writte, then ſurueying of a Campe, was not aſhamed moſt vnwiſely to write (if I may ſo ſpeake of ſo wyſe a man) that the commō labourer of Englande, taken from the plowe, was hee, that when it came to the matter, dyd the deede: whoſe goodly ſeruice in tyme of neede, is better knowen then I neede to ſpeake of. But what hath this Realme gayned by her ſmall accompt of ſouldiers? Shee hath of barbarous people bene foure or fyue tymes inuaded and ouertunne. I pray God the ſixt be not neerer then men looke for. It is not money nor multitude of men that in extremetie preuayleth, but skyll and experience that ſafely mainteyneth and preſerueth. Rome, whyle ſhee maynteyned her ſouldiours, was myſtreſſe and commandreſſe of the whole world: but when ſhee fell to her owne delicacies, and neglecting of them, ſhe became not only a triumphe, and contempt to the

rude Vandale and barbarous Gothe, but as yet ſhee remaynes a ſpectacle of miſerable ruine to the vniuerſall world. Wee haue a number of Captaynes, ſuch as neuer came yet vnder enſeigne in their life: happy ſhall that realme be, that ſhall haue neede of ſuch expert ſouldiours, but moſt vnhappy and vniuſt men that dare chalenge to them ſelues the place of ſo great a charge Souldiers ynough we haue that in time of peace can range their battailles, caſt out their ſkirmiſhes, aſſault townes, and cōquer kingdomes, that a man would iudge them at the firſt ſight, for very Hectors and Hanniballes. But theſe be they, (I knowe not how it happeneth) that are the firſt that wil be gone, when they come to it. We haue on the other ſide, a number of good captaynes, who by their ſkilfull experience, are well able to trayne and leade a gallant companie of ſouldiours, who perceyuing their colde entertaynement, do dayly (as no man can blame them) abandon, and vtterly renounce their profeſsion, or ſerue in other places where they ſhould not. Theſe diſorders and great numbers more, your booke (if it continew according to that part that I haue ſeene) will ſufficiently lay out at large, and with his larum awake (I truſt) the mindes of thoſe, in whoſe handes it lyes to redreſſe them: whether it do or do not, your well doing deſerueth of all men to be embraced, that haue with learned authorities, and ſufficient eloquence, done what in you lyeth to mooue it: the reſt is to be ſupplied by him, that being of that Maieſtie, vouchſafeth, in ſigne of his well liking of ſo noble a profeſsion, to be called by the name of Dominus exercituum, the Lord of Armies. And thus with my harty thankes, I ſende you your booke agayne. From Kingſtone in haſte.
            
               
                  Your aſſured friende, Barnabe Googe.
            
         
         
            Lodowick Flood in the behalfe of the Authour.
            MArch forth with Mars, clap coſtlets on, ring larum loud apace,
            ſtrike on the drum, ſound out the trumpe, defie your foes in face.
            Shake Morpheus of, ſet Vatia by, flee Bacchus bankets fro,
            ſhunne Ceres ſeat, let Venus be, to Mars your ſeruice ſhewe.
            In India loiterers were looked to, in Egypt youth were taught,
            and in Lacena idle men, as men ſuſpect were caught.
            With ſword & ſhield, in warlike w
                  •
               eds the Romains Mars obeyed,
            eche Martial feate the Grekes to Mars, in moūt Olympus plaied.
            Had Pyrrhus prayſe bin pend in bookes, had Alexander fame,
            had Phrygia fieldes ſuch fame by blood, had Mars not ſpred the ſame?
            Scipio got by Hannibal prayſe, by Pompey Ceſar fame:
            by Hector ſtout, Achilles ſtrong, dyd win his noble name.
            What worthie Cyrus gaynd by warres, what noble Ninus wanne,
            that Sardanapalus loſt by ſloth, euen from thaſſyrians than.
            What noble courage doth attempt, what haughtie heartes do winne,
            that ſluggiſh mindes do loſe againe, as had no conqueſt binne.
            A cowarde vile, a daſtard he, that dares not marche in fielde,
            whom dread of greeſly gūne may daunt, to leaue both ſpeare & ſhield
            What greater glory can be got, what greater prayſe be wonne,
            then Curtius feates or Decius deedes, to do as they haue done?
            
               Darius wiſht Zopyrus like, to haue but twentie men,
            and Agamemnon wiſht againe, to haue but Neſtors tenne,
            Whereby that Troy and Ilion proud, by Neſtors wiſdome wonne,
            and by Zopyrus brought to ground, the pryde of Perſia done.
            One ſubtle Sinon with ſome ſleight, like Laſthenes one to be
            is better then a thouſand ſuch, that bragges and boſt and flee.
            Then pace this path the tracte is playne, that Riche hath troden out,
            and leades thee lightly to the place, where honour ſhould be ſought.
            Sith Riche of right dyd runne this race, and painted forth with pen,
            his trauaill tryed commend you muſt to Mars and to his men:
            And geue of right to Riche his prayſe, that rings the larum bell,
            enroll his name, record his fame, and ſay to Riche far well.
         
         
            Thomas Churchyard Gentleman, in commendation of this worke.
            
               IF chyld thatt goes to skoell, dyd any warning tack
            att fellows fawtts who feells the rod (whē they offence do maek)
            
               His ortographie and maner of writing obſerued.him ſelff ſhuld skaep the skorge, and conſtrue many a lyen
            and lawghe to skorn the whisking whyp, thatt maeks the skollars whyen
            But neyther chyld nor man, wyll warnyng taek youe ſe
            tyll tempeſt coms wyth thonder crak, & ſtryeks down ſtaetly tre
            owre nebors howſe a fyer, byds wyes to loek a bowtt
            and rack vpp coells in imbers cloes, and putt the candell owtt
            leaſt ſparkulls creep in ſtrawe, and ſmothryng ſmoek a ryes
            and ſtyeffull ſylly ſleepyng Soells, in bed that caerles lyes
            The warrs att hand we heer, maeks hollowe peace to bloeſhe
            byds call for warrs and coetts off ſteell, to ſtand and byed the poeſhe
            A man who long gyvs aem, may ſhoett hym ſelff att leynth
            A heddy hors muſt corbbed be, by connyng or by ſtreynth
            A wyelly wykked world, byds wantton heds bewaer
            Whatt needs moer words when peace is craktt, for lufty warrs prepaer
            loes not your old renown, O baebs off bryttayn bloed
            Dance afftter drom, lett tabber goe, the muſyck is nott good
            that maeks men loek lyek gyrlls, and mynce on carpaytts gaye
            as thoghe mayd marry on mentt to martch, and Iuen ſhuld bryng in May
            The ſownd off trompett ſuer, wyll change your maydens face
            to loek lyek men or lyons whelpps, or tygers in the chace
            A gallantt ſtoering hors, thatt maeks a manneg ryghtt
            wear fytter than a lady fyen, for myghtty marſſys Knightt
            The warrs for marſhall mynds, and peace for Venus men
            The ſword and ſoldior beſt agrees, the lawyer for the pen
            The warrs calls corraeg vpp, and peace breeds cowards ſtyll
            maeks peple prowd, dyſtroyes greatt hartts, and pampers wantton wyll
            peace prowlls a bowtt for pence, and warrs the mock wyll ſpend
            
               that gredy gayn hords vp in hoells, god knoes to lyttell end
            the wealth that peace doth bring, maeks many a myſcheeff ryeff
            and peace rons hedlong in to vyce, and warrs refforms leawd lyeff
            for fear off ſword or ſho
                  •
               t, mans mynd loeks throwe the ſtarrs
            the hartt fawlls flatt beffoer hys face, that maeks boeth peace and warrs
            the noghtty natuerd wyghtt, by warrs is broghtt in fraem
            the baddeſt putts on better mynd, the wyeldeſt waxeth taem
            peace fills the land wyth pomp, thatt gyvs a pryuey wownd
            feeds folly fatt, maeks vertue lean, and floeds off vyce a bownd,
            Daem luſt her pleaſuer taeks, in peace and banketts ſweett
            and warrs doth quenche owr hott deſyers, and dawntts the dallyng ſpreete
            in warrs we honor wyn, on peace reproetch doth groe
            and warrs contentts owr nobleſt frynds, and peace doth pleas owr foe
            peace putts vp ſondry wrongs, and warrs doth ryght mentayn
            and ſuer a battayll is well loſt, thatt doth a kyngdom gayn
            To feyght in forrayn ſoyll, apawlls the enmyes pryed
            and better fare abroed to martch, than heer the brontt to byed
            nott many hold with peace, thoghe warrs is cald a ſhreawe
            nor many aer by peace maed rytch, for wealth butt fawlls to feawe
            and thoes thatt thryvs by peace, aer fy
                  •
               n and full off ſleyghtt
            who taketh owtt off meaſuer ſtyll, and gyvs agayn by weyghtt
            yff any wyn by warrs (as dyuers do in deed)
            they loes the ſaem agayn by peace, thus peace myſlyek doth breed
            for peace reſtoers the goods, thatt warre haeth concquerd well
            yelds vpp the fortts, gyvs back perfforce, the towns whearin we dwell
            and warr trayns ſoldyors vpp, (whych keeps the world in awe)
            putts rebells down, mentayns good men, thatt ſtyll vpholds the lawe
            When Roem ſoghtt warrs from hoem, in peace the ſtaett remaynd
            when common wealth wyth peace was cloyd, prowd peple peace dyſdaynd
            This peace I do compaer, to calmye wether fayre
            thatt ſmoethly loeks tyll doskye clowds, haue clean oercaſt the ayre
            butt when the ſtordy ſtorms, rons rattling throwe the ſkyes
            The rack goes ſwyfftt the clowds wax dark, and ragyng wynds aryes
            and tears vpp trees by roetts: ſutch ſtore a tempeſt maeks
            thatt att the clapp, lowe caues of earth, and higheſt heauen ſhaeks
            warre is nott liek to thys, whear baddeſt warre youe fynd
            butt peace moer liek a ſwellinge ſoer, thatt feſters ſowndeſt mynd
            and ſo burſts owtt in byells, in botch or vlcerrs greatt
            whych vtters by thear ſmokyng fuem, a cuerles inward heatt
            lett peace gyue place to warre, off force hytt muſt be ſoe
            off force the gallantts off this land, muſt needs a warrffaer goe
            Thoghe ſtowttnes ſtriue youe ſe, the quarrell is the ſtaetts
            thatt ſteps in to thoes bloddy broylls, by feyghtt to end debaetts
            admitt thatt myllions dye, and periſhe on the playn
            in pryncys cawſe and conttreys ryghtt, thear muſt be thowſandes ſlayn
            To hold the enmyes ſhort, and maek our manhoed known
            whoes value in our elders dayes, a boutt the world was blowen.
            and we wear vyctors cald, and feard of forrayn foe
            whear now tranſformd to wemens wylls, liek carpett knightes we goe
            O Eangland loek thoue back, whatt noble elders did
            ſhall ſtrangers braggs & boeſts gyue fear, to boldnes god forbyd
            Thyen honour ſo wear ſtaynd. Than pluck vpp corraeg nowe
            and waeſh away thatt ſpyetffull ſpott, that blotts thy noble browe
            
               To gyue thy ſoldyors lyeff, this boek is nuely maed
            by oen who c
                  •
               n for conttreys cauſe, wel vſe boeth pen and blaed
            Accept hys wylling work, gyue other corraeg to
            (by fauryng thatt is worthy prayes) the lyek off this to doe
            Thys ſetts forth many greeffs, and ſercheth ſondry ſoers
            not fraemd 
                  •
               o fawn and flatter world, a ſoldyor that a boers
            Loek for the lyek in haeſt, from me yf layſer wyll
            and thatt youe pleas to taek in worth, the payns of barrayn quyll.
         
         
            S. Stronge, in the behalf of the Authour.
            IF painfull pilgryme for his toyle, deſerues a guerdon due
            In ſeeking of the ſacred ſorte, which vertue doth purſue:
            Or if the wakeful watche in warre, do merit like reward,
            Or cunning pylot that with skill, doth take his due regard,
            To cut in twayne the billowes huge, that ſwell in Occean ſea,
            And keepes the keele aright his courſe, tyll wished port he wray:
            Then (Ritche) that rings this larum bell, to warne his countreyes thrall,
            And ſortes (much like the buſie bee) the hunny from the gall,
            Deſerues no leſſe, in lieu thereof: ſuch fruite I reape thereby,
            As for my parte, a double prayſe, I may him not deny.
            The toyle to him no profit yeelds, he bites on bitter paine:
            He hales home haruest for the chaffe, the reader reapes the graine.
            He giues the ſworde and shield in hande, to shroud thee from annoy,
            He wiſely warnes thee of the worſe, lest foes might thee destroy:
            He treades thee out a perfect path, oh England loude I crye,
            Refuſe therefore thy follies past, he ſees thee goe awrye:
            And leaue of al thy lustfull lyfe, and eke thy great exceſſe,
            Thy dainty fare, thy fine array, and eke thy wantonneſſe.
            Leaue of likewiſe thy vſance great, and leaue thy lawing vaine,
            Lest for the preſent guyle thereof, there happe ſome future paine.
            Yet God forbid but iustice should in eche thing beare the ſway,
            And lawe is good where lawe is vſde, I cannot this denay.
            But ſo your Common lawes are courst, at will of euery pelth,
            That common is the woe (God knowes) but priuate is the wealth.
            Do ſorte thy ſelfe from Comedies, and foolish playes of loue,
            Leſt tragicall and worſe perhaps in fine thee chaunce to proue.
            Take ſword in hand, and leaue of eaſe, for nowe the tyme is comme,
            The bell is rong, the trumpettes ſound, all arme doth ſtrike the dromme.
            And thanke good (Ritch) that rings the ſame, to wake thee out of ſleepe,
            That thou thy ſelfe, that liuest at peace, in ſafetie ſtill mightſt keepe.
            A iewel ritche and gemme of price, the ſame no doubt doth ſeeme,
            A ritcher gifte for thy behoofe, he could not geue, I deeme.
         
         
            
            Thomas Lupton, in commendation of this worke.
            
               WHat beter thing, then perilles to preuent?
               What danger more, then careles ſtill to ſleepe?
               Then iſt not good, in peace for to frequent
               The thing that vs from force of foes may keepe?
               What harme in heate, to make for colde a hoode?
               The Ante prouides, in ſommer wynters foode.
            
            
               Therefore who lothes his loſſe and countreyes ſpoyle,
               Let him peruſe this booke with griedie mynde,
               Which vtters howe his foe may haue the foyle,
               And eke what hurt through want of skill we finde.
               And thanke thou Riche, that giues this larum bell,
               A richer gifte, he coulde not giue thee well.
            
         
         
            The Authour to the reader, why he tooke in hand to write this booke.
            IN dolful dumpes of deepe deſpayre, and vnacquainted fyt,
            with troubled head but here of late, I chaunced for to ſyt,
            reuoluing what reuenge the goddes doe yeld to thoſe of right,
            that haue their godheds in diſdaine, or yet contemnes their might:
            What iuſtice Ioue did rightly vſe, and Iuno alſo ſhowe
            on Priams race for Paris fact, the Troyans all did knowe.
            Acteon felt Dianas force, ſhee yelded him for hyre:
            and what it is for mortall men, to moue the gods to yre
            Narciſſus may a mirrour be, of Venus ſcourge to ſuch
            as haue her darlings in diſdaine, or at her lawes will grutch.
            The Spider ſhewes how vaine it is, to ſuch as will contemne,
            and Piers daughters for like fact, the Muſes did condemne.
            And Bacchus byrdes had dewe reward, for that they would deſpiſe,
            and what reuengement hath bene vſde by Ceres may ſuffiſe.
            Though I omit a numbre mo, that here I could recite,
            who for contemning of the gods, haue felt their force and might:
            But here my muſe is in a maze, my ſenſes all do ſhake,
            my fainting wits do faile for feare, my quiuering quil doth quake,
            To blaze the bloody broyles of Mars, the mightie god of warre,
            wherewith he plagues ſuch rebels ſtout, as at his lawes will ſnarre.
            How he doth ſcourge the careleſſe crewe, that liues deuoide of awe,
            in ſecure ſort without regard of Mars or martiall lawe.
            
               No ſtories ſtrange I need recite a hundred yeres forepaſt,
            but ſuch as chaunſt in theſe our dayes, and at this houre doth laſt.
            Let Holland make diſcourſe at large, if I haue ſaid amiſſe,
            whoſe ſtate ſometime in all reſpectes, ſurmounted moſt in bliſſe.
            Whoſe townes were ſeated in ſuch ſort, by nature framed ſo ſtrong,
            as no aſſault of forraine foe, might do them ſodaine wrong.
            No want of welth might work their wo, no coine with thē was ſcāt,
            of ſhippes great ſtore in euery port, no pleaſure they did want.
            
               Lecker coſt is good chere.They livd at caſe in vyle exceſſe, they ſought for (Lecker coſt)
            their paunches ſtuft with double beere, was that they carde for moſt.
            They honourd Bacchus as their god, and Venus had her dewe,
            but as for Mars they knew not him, they were not of his crewe.
            they ſcornd to learne the lawes of armes, their countrey to defend,
            they livd in peace, which as they thought, ſhould neuer haue an end.
            But mighty Mars, who long had winkte, & borne with their contēpt
            perceiuing that from him and his, them ſelues would ſtil exempt,
            To teach ſuch rebels to reſiſt, his godhed did deuiſe
            a ſtraūge reuenge, yf wiſely waid: for whom they did deſpiſe,
            And whom they held in moſt contempt, euen they did rule the roſt,
            and ſuch had them at their command, as they deſpiſed moſt.
            Loe here of Mars the iudgement iuſt, prepared but of right,
            that thoſe which had both him and his, but late in ſuch deſpight,
            Thoſe that diſdaind all martiall wightes, & ſcornd to learne their law
            by martiall might were ſoone ſuppreſt, and brought to liue in awe.
            Of men of warre by vowe profeſt, a troupe of Mars his traine,
            though numbre ſmall more haughtie heartes, came neuer out of ſpaine
            And theſe were planted in their townes, throughout in euery place,
            and ſouldiers now preſcrybd them lawes, a wofull altered caſe.
            They ſwaid the ſword where they became, for who durſt them reſiſt?
            they tooke their liues as they thought good, & pardond whom they liſt
            Their liues & goodes were at command, their coyne at ſpaniards call,
            their virgins faire, their married wiues, the ſpaniardes held as thrall.
            their ſcutes muſt ſcoure with friſters fraught whō ſpaniards muſt cō
               uoy
            their waggans trould with luſty frowes, that neuer made it coy.
            Their huſbands they muſt be content, they durſt not ſeeke redreſſe:
            the ſpaniardes held them in good awe, their deedes did ſhew no leſſe.
            A hundreth Spanyardes in a towne would gouerne thouſands fiue,
            the Hollanders were men of peace, they lovd not they to ſtriue.
            Good men they tooke all in good part, but if they hapt to quarrell,
            their ſtrife at firſt was ſtird about, that (Shellam) in the barrell.
            But though of Holland all this while, my tale hath bene pretended,
            yet other places in like caſe, with Holland haue offended,
            And haue with Holland felt the ſcourge, of Mars his force and might
            wherewith he dauntes the rebel route, that hath him in deſpight.
            Hath Seland thinke you ſcaped free, let Flanders make report.
            let Brabant bragge what gaines they get, that liues in ſecure ſort.
            But Antwerpe thou thy woful wracke, thy ſpoyle hath proued plain
            
               where martiall mindes do want, no ſtate in ſafety may remaine.
            For thou that ſometime didſt excel, whoſe wealth did ſo abound,
            whoſe daily traffyque did ſurmount, whoſe like might not be found,
            Whoſe ſtreets with marchāts ſo did ſwarm, who by their painful toil
            did bring their goodes by ſea and land, from euery forraine ſoyle.
            Of Europe thou the ſtorehouſe rich, wert ſometime cald by name,
            in wealth I ſay a pereleſſe piece, ſo paſſing was thy fame.
            Thy houſes built in braueſt ſort, with walles enuirond round,
            a platforme of a greater force, might not in haſte be found.
            Artillery both great and ſmall, abundant was thy ſtore,
            for armour, weapon, powlder, ſhot, what ſhould I ſpeake of more?
            For all prouiſions for the warre, great ſtore thou didſt poſſeſſe,
            thou nought didſt want but martial mindes, the ſequel ſhewd no leſſe
            For thou ne durſt at all contend, what Spaniardes would gaineſay
            thou paydſt for building of a ſlot, that wrought thy owne decay.A ſlot is a caſtel.
            
            In bondage thus at Spaniardes call, thy ſelfe thou didſt bequeſt,
            by meanes whereof thy ſtore became, a ſcourge to all the reſt.
            What did inſue is to well knowen, I need not here expreſſe,
            I rewe thy wracke, but yet I ſay, thou didſt deſerue no leſſe.
            For hadſt thou traind but halfe the troupe, to bin of Mars his traine,
            that practiſd dayly to be drunke, in Bacchus beaſtly vaine:
            Or hadſt thou ſpent but halfe the pelfe, to maintaine martiall wightes
            that was conſumde in vile exceſſe, by Bacchus drunken knightes,
            What keyſer could haue wroght thy woe, what prince haue done thee wrōg
            what forraine foe haue thee anoid, thy force had bene ſo ſtrong?
            But Mars might be of no accompt, thou kneweſt no ſuch a god,
            his lawes were neuer cald to mind, before thou felt his rod.
            Who will not here confeſſe a trueth, that all thy ſpoyle and wracke,
            was but for want of martiall mindes? thou hadſt no other lacke.
            For better proofe this may ſuffice, to ſuch as will confeſſe
            a trothe apparant to be true, what ſhould I more expreſſe
            Then this, the ſpoyle the Spaniardes gaue to Antwerpe in ſuch ſort,
            that all the world doth wonder yet to heare the true report?
            Fiue thouſand Spaniardes at the moſt, by force in bloody broyle,
            ſhould ſo ſubdue a famous towne, and beare away the ſpoyle.
            Where ſuch prouiſion of defence, in ſtore did ſo abound,
            where hundred thouſands able men were dayly to be found.
            Ynough to eate the Spanyardes vp, had they bene bakte in pyes,
            or had bene brued in double beere, becauſe the Flemings gyes
            Do better ſerue to drinke then eate, the Spaniardes had bene dead,
            they would haue drunke them all vp quite, without a byt of bread.
            But here ynough to make my proofe, and ſtil of this be ſure:
            where Mars is had in no accompt, no ſtate may long endure.
            May rebels (thinke you) ſcape his ſcourge, may ſuch cōtempt go quite
            will Mars the mightie god of warre be had in ſuch deſpight?
            No no, he may deferre a time, ere he reuengement take:
            but in the end he payes them home, the ſtouteſt then doth quake.
            
               O England would thou didſt regard, what plagues in time do hap
            to ſuch as ſo without reſpect are luld in pleaſures lap,
            And feares no force of future fits, that after may enſue,
            till dangers doe beſet them round, and then to late to rue.
            And would to God by others harmes, thou mightſt ſo warned be,
            that thou into thine owne eſtate, wouldeſt vouchſafe to ſee.
            And tel me then yf Mars be had in honour like a god,
            yf not, how thinkeſt thou to eſcape the rigour of his rod?
            May peace procure ſo great contempt, and alter kind ſo farre,
            that yr ſhould make thee quite forget there is a god of warre?
            Shal martiall feates be ſtil neclect, as though we were ſo ſure,
            that this our time of pleaſant peace, ſhould euermore endure?
            Would God it might, but ſo to wiſh, I know is but in vaine,
            our foes are ready preſt no doubt, they ſeeke but time to gaine.
            What though in ſecret yet they lie, who knowes not why they ſtay?
            their quarrell is not now to ſeeke, they hope but for a day.
            Loe here the cauſe that vrged me firſt, to take in hand to wright
            this blunt diſcourſe, good reader, here preſented to thy ſight.
            Which yf thou wilt vouchſafe to read, do iudge as thou ſhalt finde:
            giue ſentence then, and I wil mend, yf ought miſlike thy minde.
            FINIS.
            
               Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The first parte entreating of warre.
            
               I Doubt not, but a great number wil thinke I haue taken paynes more then ynough,The firſt obiection. to write of warres, or of warlike diſciplines. Firſt, becauſe warres haue euer bin accompted a moſt grieuouſe plague, and of it ſelf is reputed ſo euill, ſo ſtraunge, and ſo pernitious, that it comprehendeth and ſurmounteth, al other kind of euils: for it afflicteth as well the poore and innocents,The fruites of warre. as thoſe that be wicked and euil diſpoſed: for by it good lawes are decayed, humanitie is defaced, equitie is ſuppreſſed, holy places are prophaned, murthers are committed, virgins are defloured, chaſte matrons are defiled, kingdoms be ſubdued, cities be ruinated: as warlike Numace, ſumptuouſe Corinth, ſtately Thebes, delicate Tyre, learned Athens, holy Ieruſalē, contentious Carthage, mightie Rome, and now laſtly wealthy Antwerpe. Theſe with many other moe, by warres haue bene ſacked, ſpoyled, robbed, defaced, and ſometime layde waſte and deſolate: for warre, peſtilence, and famine, are the three dartes, which the almightie God is wont to ſhoote againſt the earth, when he is diſpleaſed: and is holden ſo yrckſome amongſt vs, that in our letanie we daily vſe this praier, From plague, peſtilence, famine, battell, and murther, good Lord deliuer vs.
            
            A ſecond reaſon, why I ſhould be condemned, is this:A ſeconde obiection. Becauſe as the warre of it ſelfe is an euill, and that ſo lothſomly deteſted: euen ſo, to be profeſſours, followers, and miniſters in the ſame, is eſteemed a thing more fitte for ruffians, royſters, blaſphemers, and people of the vyleſt condicion, rather then an exerciſe for honeſt men, in whom there is any feare of God, or any loue towardes their neighbour: in ſo much that Cornelius Agrippa ſayeth, That if you would cal a tyrant, a blaſphemer, a murtherer, a robber, a ſpoyler, a deflowrer,

an oppreſſour, with many other ſuch like: if you would (ſaieth he) include all theſe into one ſhort name, you may call him by the name of a ſouldiour.
            
               A third obiection.But now thirdly and eſpecially, I knowe a number will ſcorne me, and thinke me to be to ſimple to write any thing of warres, in this ſo peaceable a time, but would rather haue allowed of my diſcretion, if I could haue framed ſome conceite according to the time, ſome pleaſant diſcourſe, ſome ſtrange nouell, ſome amorous hiſtorie, ſome farre fette or vnknowen deuice: this might haue purchaced me credit: the Printer might haue gayned by ſelling of my booke: but to giue men ſodayne Allarmes of warre, that be quietly minded,Such is the effect of ſecuritie. pleaſantly diſpoſed, and peaceably pretended, I knowe it is but a mockerie: and euen nowe I begin to muſe with my ſelfe, what madneſſe at the firſt ſhould driue ſuch a conceyte into my brayne: but ſeeing I haue begun to enter into this fondneſſe, pardon me, I pray you, the hearing of my excuſe, which I truſt you ſhall fynde to be reaſonable.
            
               Of warre.Then firſt to ſpeake of warre, becauſe I knowe there be many whoſe conſciences be ſo ſcrupulous, that they thinke no warres may be lawfully attempted, allowed of by Gods worde, or agreeing with true chriſtianitie, for the number of outrages which by it are committed.
            I thinke it therefore conuenient to ſee, what proofes may be alleadged in the defence of warre, although not in generall, yet in the holy Scriptures where they haue bene allowed of, and many times commanded by the almightie God him ſelfe.
            
               Geneſis 14.In the 14. Chapter of Geneſis it is written: When Abram hearde his brother was taken, hee harneſſed his freſh yong men, borne in his owne houſe, three hundred and eighteene, and followed on them vntyll Dan: and he was ſet in array vpon them by night, hee and his ſeruants: and he ſmote them, and purſued them vnto Hoba, which lyeth

on the left hand of Damaſcus, and recouered all the goods, and brought agayne his brother Lot, and his goods, &c.
            
            By this it ſeemeth, that Abram executed as well the part of a King,Abram executed the parte of a King. as the duetie of a Captaine: in that he tooke vpon him to leauy a bande, and to enter into battell with theſe that before had oppreſſed his friendes: which hee dyd of his owne head: and yet this parte did nothing offend God,Warres nothing offended God. as the ſequele doth euidently prooue.
            But in the 31. Chapter of Numeri,
               Numeri. 31. by the expreſſe commandement from God, Moſes is willed to make warre vpon the Madianites, the wordes bee theſe:Warres commanded by God. 
               And the Lorde ſpake vnto Moſes, ſaying: Auenge the children of Iſrael of the Madianites: and afterward ſhalt thou be gathered vnto thy people. And Moſes ſpake vnto the folke, ſaying: Harneſſe ſome of you vnto warre, and auenge the Lorde of the Madianites, &c. And in the 8. chapter of the booke of Ioſua: And the Lord ſpake vnto Ioſua, Feare not, neyther be thou faint harted, take all the men of warre with thee, & vp, & get thee to Hai: Beholde, I haue giuen into thy hand the King of Hai, and his people, and his citie, and his lande: and thou ſhalt doe to Hai and her King, as thou dideſt vnto Iericho and her king: neuertheleſſe, the ſpoyle and cattell thereof ſhall ye take vnto your ſelues, &c.
            
            
               Saul in the firſt booke of Kinges the 15. chapter,1. King. 15. hath the like commandement: and theſe be the wordes: Samuel ſaid vnto Saul, The Lord ſent me to anoynt thee King ouer his people Iſrael: nowe therefore hearken thou vnto the voice of the Lord: Thus ſayth the Lord of hoſtes: I remēber that which Amalek did to Iſrael, how they layde wayte for thē in the way, as they came out of Egypt: Nowe therefore go and ſmite Amalek, and deſtroy ye all that pertayneth vnto him, & ſee that thou haue no cōpaſſion on them, and couet nothing that they haue: ſlay both man and woman, infant and ſuckling, oxe and ſheepe, camel and aſſe, &c.
            
            
               By this commandement we may perceiue, GOD gaue charge to Saul, that he ſhould ſacke the coūtries of the Amalechites, and to paſſe by the edge of the ſword, men, women, children, and beaſts, without diſpenſe or grace, giuing a reaſon of that extreeme iuſtice: becauſe thoſe people had done many oppreſſions to Iſrael, in the voyage out of Egypt into Chanaan, and willeth him in no wiſe to ſhewe mercy, or to haue compaſſion, not ſo much as vpon women and children. This place might ſeeme ouer cruell to ſuch as would haue men go to warre, and to kil no body, nor to cōmit any ſpoyle: neither do I alleadge this, to maintayne tyrannie, for there is time and occaſion to vſe, both rigour and pitie, iuſtice and mercy, as hereafter I wil further ſhewe. I meane now but to make profe, yt God hath not bene diſpleaſed with warres, but is called in many places, the God of hoſtes. And Moyſes citeth a place of the warres of the Lord: and in the 20. chap. of the ſecond booke of Chronicles it is writtē,2. Chron. 20 cap. that when Ioſaphat had vnderſtāding of the multitude of his enemies the Moabites, the Ammonites, and the Syrians that were gathered againſt him, Ioſaphat aſſembling his people into the Temple, made this prayer vnto God.
            
               The prayer of Ioſaphat.
               O Lord God of our Fathers, art thou not God in heauē, & raigneſt not thou ouer all the kingdomes of the heathen? and in thy hand is power and might: and there is no man that is able to withſtand thee: art not thou our God, which dideſt caſt out the inhabiters of this land, before thy people Iſrael, and gaueſt it to the ſeede of Abraham thy louer for euer? and they dwelt therein for thy name, ſaying: If euill come vpon vs, as the ſword of iudgement, peſtilence, or hū
                  ger: then if we ſtand before this houſe, and crye vnto thee in our tribulation, heare thou and helpe. And now behold, the children of Ammon, and Moab, and mount Seir, by whom thou wouldeſt not let them of Iſrael goe, when they came out of the land of Egypt, but they departed by them,

and deſtroyed them not, ſee howe they would rewarde vs, that would caſt vs out of thy poſſeſsion, which thou haſt giuen vs to inherite: O our God, wilt thou not iudge them, for we haue no might againſt this great companie that cō
                  meth agaynſt vs, neyther wote we what to do, but our eies attende vpon thee. And as he continued thus in prayer, beholde, the Prophete ſpake vnto him: Feare not this multitude, it ſhall not be thy warre, but the warres of God, &c.
            
            I could here cite a number of like places, but theſe may ſeeme ſufficient,Warres ſometime pleaſing God better then peace. to prooue that warres haue bene acceptable before the maieſtie of God, and ſometimes more auaylable then peace, as in the ſecond chapter of the booke of Iudges it appeareth, where the children of Iſrael were blamed for making of peace with the Cananites.
            
            And like as out of the ſcriptures, many other probable reaſons might be gathered: ſo there be diuers excellent authours, and ſundrie learned writers, which ſeeme not onely to alowe of warres, but thinke them to be many times very meet & cōuenient to be attempted & to be taken in hand: and that it is many times neceſſary for Princes to become enemies, to the ende they may be perfect friendes.A happy warre which bringeth aſſured peace. And a moſt happie begun warre may that be called, whereby is wrought the ſafetie of the ſtate: ſo contrary, moſt miſerable is ye peace,A miſerable peace. which bringeth with it, the hazard of a countrey.
            
               Cicero ſaieth in his booke of Offices,
               Tull. officiis lib. 
                     •
                  . 
               To this end and purpoſe we muſt enter into warre, that without iniurie we may liue in peace. And in an other place of the ſame booke hee ſayeth: We muſt beware that we take not vp the matter by aduice, more to auoyd warre, then for cauſe of profite:
               Warres muſt be taken in hand to the end to haue peace. 
               for we muſt neuer by ſeeking to eſcape perill, deſerue to ſeeme cowardes and daſtards, but ſo let warres be taken in hand, as no other thing but peace, may ſeeme to haue bin ſought. This was the cauſe that made Demoſthenes ſo mightily to inuey againſt king Philip: for hee perceyuing the inſatiable

deſire of king Philip, and that he ment to make a conqueſt of all Grecia, and had already begun with the Olynthians, whō if he had once ouerthrowen, there was nothing then to let his paſſage to Athens, the which Demoſthenes very wel foreſeeing, by ſundrie orations perſwaded the Athenians not onely to ſende helpe to the Olynthians, but alſo to ſende an armie into the partes of Macedonie, a meane whereby to make king Philip to haue withdrawē his force frō the Olynthians,
               Better offende then defende.
to defende his owne countrey: alleadging by many perſuaſions, that ayde to their neighbours was very needful and neceſſarie, when their owne ſafetie did chiefly conſiſt in the others good ſucceſſe: for who withdraweth him ſelfe whē his neighbours houſe is on fyre, may wāt helpe to quēch his owne.Warres ſometime attempted, occaſion of better peace. Thus we may ſee, although that peace be chiefly to be deſired, yet many times by entring into warres it is the more ſafely & quietly maintayned: Like to a ſhip which many times by ſome extraordinary winde, forſaketh ye quiet harbour, and ſeeketh her ſafetie in the wilde and raging ſeas.
            
               Time beſt taken when it ſerueth.So as Salomon ſaith, There is a time of peace, a time of warre, a time of mirth, a time of mourning: and therefore to vſe time in time, as occaſion doth ſerue, is a point of the greateſt wiſdome.Tull. de officiis lib. 1. And Cicero to ye ſame effect vſeth theſe words: To runne to the field raſhly all vpon the head, and to enter conflict & skirmiſh with the enemie, is no point of humanitie, but the propertie of a ſauage beaſt: but when time & neceſſitie requireth, then on with armour, and fight for lyfe, preferring death before ſeruitude and miſerie.
            
            
               As great iniuſtice not to defend an iniurie as to offer an iniurie.And in an other place of the ſame booke, he ſpeaketh of two kindes of iniuſtice: the firſt in him that wil offer it: the ſecōd in him that will take it, and being able will not defende it. But here peraduenture ſome will alleadge againſt mee the ſaying of Chriſt, where he willeth, that he who had receyued a blowe on the one eare, ſhould likewiſe turne the other: & he

that would take thy cloke, thou muſt likewiſe giue him thy coate. But I truſt they will not maintayne by this, that a Prince, when he is oppreſſed by any tyrant, ſhould ſurrender vp his crowne & ſeigneurie, for that he ſhould be counted a quiet man and the childe of God, or that Gods worde doth any where forbid a Prince to maintayne his right, or that it ſhould not be lawful for him to enter into warres, either for the maintenance of Gods true religiō,For how many cauſes a Prince may enter into armes. either for his owne ſecuritie, as did the Athenians againſt king Philip: eyther for the ſubuerſion of any tyrant or oppreſſour, or ſuch as ſhall wrongfully vſurpe vpon any other, that are not able to defend their owne cauſe. And in the ancient time, it hath bene thought very cōuenient, that where a tyrant doth raigne ouer his own people with crueltie, rauine, rape, murther, or other like oppreſſions, wherein a Prince may do his ſubiects manifeſt wrong, and is not by them to be redreſſed, for that it is not lawful for the ſubiect to ſtande in armes againſt his Prince: it hath bene alwayes therefore thought requiſite, that ſuch Princes as haue bene borderers next vpon him, ſhould chaſtiſe and correct ſo great enormities, to the ende that the name of a King might not ſeeme odious & hatefull to the common ſort of people: as was Nero, Heliogabulus, Dionyſius, and others.
            This gote Hercules ſuch immortal glory,What gayned Hercules ſuch immortall glory. yt he was rekoned amongſt the number of the gods, only for his valiance and proweſſe, vſed vpon monſters, tyrants, oppreſſours, and ſuch other.
            But ſomething the better to ſatiſfie ſuch as in their opinions are ſo preciſe, to thinke that no warres, howe ſoeuer it bee attempted, may bee eyther good or godly: I will therefore here recyte the wordes of that learned and excellent man Hieronymus Oſorius, in order as they bee written in his booke intituled, Of Chriſtian nobilitie, which followe in this maner:
            
               
               Hieronymus Oſorius in his book intituled, Chriſtian nobilitie.
               Firſt therfore, I can conceiue no reaſon why they ſhould deſpiſe warfare when it is rightfully begunne and taken in hand in the defence of religion, whereas we ſee it wonderfully extold in innumerable places of holy ſcripture, which thei do not denie: but what ſay they? many things (ſay they) were conteyned in the olde law, which rather for the tymes ſake were tolerated, then worthy dewe commendation: as to make a diuorce, to take vſurie of foraine countreys, of which ſorte they ſay is to make warres vpon our enemies: but what ſemblance or ſimilitude hath either vſurie or diuorces with martial affaires? for they were not cōmended, but tolerated becauſe of mens weakenes and imbecillitie: but he that durſt preſume not to obey, when commandement was giuen to wage battell, committed an offence ſo heynous, that he could redeeme the ſame by no ſatiſfactiō. For in what place read we that it was decreed, that he ſhuld eyther abyde a payne, or bee ſubiect to a curſe if any man (whereas after the firſt offence his wife counted it was lawfull ſo to doe) did not departe from his wife, or exacted no vſurie of forriners and ſtrangers? but in many places wee haue wel noted, that men rauiſhed and repleniſhed with the holy ſpirit, haue decreed that they ſhould dye ye 
               death which through cowardiſe refuſed to come foorth into the fielde. But what ſhould I in this place make mention of Debora, who being inſpired with the holy ghoſt, curſeth thē, which for as much as in them lyeth, take not in hand the warres of the Lord, and inueyeth againſt their cowardiſe in ſharpe & vehement wordes? And agayne, they lay to our charges circumciſion, the offering vp of a lambe, old ſacrifices, which were in olde tyme with great deuotion kept, and after the comming of Chriſt did want their wonted reuerence: as though warfare dyd any whit appertayne to the ceremonies and myſteries of holy things, and were not rather ordayned for the preſeruation of the common wealth: for

thoſe holy rightes, in which were foreſhadowed the expreſſe ſignes and tokens of Iuſtice and ſaluation, to be procured by our high and mightie Sauiour Chriſt, after the cōming of the thing it ſelf, which was by thoſe ſignes declared, were by good right and iuſt deſert abrogated and diſanulled: but this can not be thought of the noble knowledge of feates of armes, for as much as it is not compriſed vnder the nature of ceremonies, but embraced for the maintenance and preſeruation of the common ſafetie, and wholy appertayneth to ciuill policie: and to confound thoſe thinges which are to be diſtinguiſhed, it is eyther the propertie of extreme madnes, or an argument of wonderfull temeritie and raſhenes. And whereas the ſtate of the common wealth can not be eſtabliſhed, but it muſt needes be ſtayde, and as it were propped vp with ſtrength and force of armes, for as much as all things in the time of peace to be practiſed and exerciſed, are vnder the tuition and defence of martiall proweſſe: he that taketh away the knowledge of feates of armes, worketh the ouerthrowe of the common wealth: which thing if it had happened through chriſtian diſcipline, then madde men mooued with ſome reaſon, might laye to our charge, that ſome common wealth by meanes of Chriſtian diſcipline was ouerthrowen: which ſlaunderous accuſatiō how wicked and vayne it is, we haue afore declared. For Chriſte would not that the ſtate of ciuill policie ſhould bee ouerthrowen, but rather eſtabliſhed and confirmed: and therefore as he hath not wreſted the ſword out of the hande of a Magiſtrate, ſo neyther would he haue a ſouldiour to wante his weapon, to the intent that a Magiſtrate beeing armed with authoritie of lawes, might with ſeueritie of the ſame lawes, ſuppreſſe wickednes amongſt the members and inward partes of the common wealth, and the ſouldiour clad in armour, might with dint of ſworde repelle and put aſide from the common wealth all imminent daunger. For this

cauſe Iohn neuer exhorted men from applying themſelues to the knowledge of feates of armes, but preſcribeth lawes vnto ſouldiours of harmeleſſe vſage, and temperat behauiour: And Paul calleth thoſe Magiſtrates the ſeruantes of God, which with the ſword puniſhe wicked and deſperate perſons. Truely nothing were more hartily to be deſired of a Chriſtian man, then that all men would refrayne them ſelues from wickednes and ſinfull luſt: but for as much as that can not alwayes fall out, and in ſtead of continencie, vnbrideled luſt: in ſteade of iuſtice, either forayne force or ciuill broyles vſe to ariſe: then of neceſſitie eyther force of the enemie is with weapons and maine ſtrength to be beaten backe, or the outrage of our citizens with ſworde to be repreſſed. That ſay they is contrary to chriſtian charitie: as thogh any kind of crueltie were greater thē to be diſſolute and negligent in a general diſtreſſe and miſerie. Chriſt hath cōmanded that we ſhuld not be reuenged of our enemies: no doubt it is the propertie of perfect and abſolute vertue, when priuately wee ſuſtayne wrongs and iniuries, to ſhewe a ſingular and wonderful patience of the minde: but when either the common wealth or ſafetie of our countrey, or the honour or eſtate of religion is impugned, then againſt outrage and vilanie, to take an inuincible ſtomacke. Chriſte hath eſpecially commended vs vnto peace: no doubt, that peace hee hath commended, which hee him ſelfe gaue vs, which doth not conſiſt in pleaſant reſte and quietnes, that mans nature is prone to require (for who can ſuppoſe that he hath graunted vnto vs that kinde of ſecuritie, whē he ſuffered his own diſciples to be toſſed, as it were, with troubleſome waues of mans outragious furie?) but that peace, by the which we were reconciled into the grace and fauour of God, which had conceiued great wrath & indignation againſt vs, and to whoſe religion our wilful appetites were moſt repugnant: theſe enimities therefore & diſlikings

betwene vs and God, Chriſt (as Paul teſtifieth in many places) with his owne preciouſe bloud hath done away, and hath purchaſed for vs a peace continual & euerlaſting. The which we may then eſpecially enioy, when we moſt vehemently and egerly fight, either for the ſafetie of our countrey, or maintenance of the faith of Chriſt and his religion: vnleſſe peraduenture we ſuppoſe, that Abraham wanted the benefite of this peace, at what time he gathering a bande of men of his owne domeſticall ſeruants, encountered with a huge and puiſſant hoſte of his enemies, & valiantly (farre exceeding the eſtimation of man) vanquiſhed foure mighty Kings, and his enemies being part of them ſlayne, the other put to the worſe, he caryed away the ſpoyle. Or if we thinke likewiſe of Gedeon, who being guarded onely with three hundred men of warre, ſlewe innumerable multitudes of his enemies. Again, what think you of Ioſua, Moyſes his ſucceſſour? what of Iephthah? What ſhould I rehearſe many other noble men, honoured aſwell for their feruent zeale of religion, as magnified for their worthy exploytes in martial affaires? may we thinke that they did offend God, whē they moſt valiantly ſet vpon their enemies? or ſhall we not rather ſay, that then eſpecially the peace of GOD tooke effecte amongſt them, when in the cauſe of righteouſnes, againſt godleſſe people they waged battell? Thus farre Oſorius.
            
            But becauſe it ſhall not be thought that this is but one doctours opinion, we finde many other that do giue the like commendation. Diuine Plato prayſeth this arte of warre,Commendation of the art of war. and commandeth that children ſhould learne it, and as ſoone as they be of abilitie, to become ſouldiours. Cyrus ſayd, It was as neceſſarie as huſbandrie. Auguſtine and Barnard, both catholike doctours, do approoue it.
            But the people of Rome, who amongſt all other dyd moſt exceede in noblenes of courage & in deſire of martial glory,

(as may appeare by their images of honour, which for the moſt part are ſet vp in warlike aray) they appointed for their chief officers two Conſulles, the one to deale in citie matters, the other ſtill occupied in warlike cauſes. For they very wel foreſawe, that it was not poſſible to liue at quietnes within the walles of the citie, if the enemie were not kept backe from inuading their boundes and territories.
            
               Hippodamus Myleſius, a man excellent well learned in the ſtudie of good artes, thought it very conuenient for that countrey or citie that would liue in quiet ſafetie, that they ſhould deuide and ſeparate their people into three ſortes: the one to artificers, the other to huſband-men, and the third to warriours.
            
               No renowme ſo honourable as yt which is gayned by martial proweſſe.And in the ancient time, there hath bene no glory thought ſo great, no renoume eſteemed ſo honourable, as that which hath bene gayned by force of martiall proweſſe: and of purpoſe to prouoke and pricke forward eche manly wight, great rewards haue bene appointed to ſuch as haue deſerued wel.
            
               What rewarde hath bene vſed to ſuch as haue ſhewed thē ſelues couragious in ye warrs Nombers 14. Ioſua. 15.The noble Caleb, who by his great courage and conſtancie of minde, had againe perſwaded the children of Iſrael, that were in a muttering to haue returned into Egypt, to continew in their former manhode and vertue: and had therefore his reward promiſed him by Gods owne mouth. This Caleb hauing a very beautiful daughter whoſe name was Achſah, would beſtow her on no man but vpon him that could take the citie named Cariathe, which in the ende was taken by Othniel, his brothers ſonne.
            
               1. Kings. 17. 2. King. 7.
               Dauid likewiſe receyued great riches with the daughter of king Saul for killing Goliath: and Dauid him ſelfe promiſed great rewarde to ſuch as ſhould ouerthrowe the Iebuſites.
            
            Amongſt the Carthagians, they had ſo many rings giuen them, as they had bene preſent at battels.
            Amongſt the Scythians, they only might drinke in a broad

bowle of golde (that was caried about) who had ſlayne an enemie.
            The Romaines aboue the reſt to ſtirre vp mens myndes to worthines, and with the better will to prouoke them to martial exploites, inuented glorious triumphes, whereby he that deſerued fame, might bee for euer renoumed: ſo contrariwiſe, to ſuch as were cowardes, daſtardes,What reproche▪ was vſed to carpet knightes. or of the affinitie of our carpet knightes, to ſuch moſt bitter cauntes & ſhameful reproches were moſt iuſtly appointed.
            The Macedonians ordained a lawe, that he who had not in fight of battel ouercome one, ſhould in the ſight of al men be truſſed vp in a haulter.
            The women of Cimbria would kill thoſe that firſt fled the fielde, yea, although they were their next friends & kinſmen.
            The women of Spraca would goe into the fielde to ſee in what place their huſbandes and friendes were wounded, if it were before, they would with ioy and gladnes ſhewe them to euery man, and ſo burie them with great ſolemnitie: if behinde, they al aſhamed would depart leauing them vnburied.
            
               Tirrias a woman of Lacedemonia, hauing vnderſtanding that her ſonne was ſlaine in a battell, anſwered, Was it not requiſite, that my ſonne going to the warres ſhould ſlea others? Wherfore ſhould I then lament, if he him ſelfe bee ſlaine? no ſurely, I more ioyfully take knowledge of my ſonnes death worthy of me and his predeceſſours, thē if with ſhame in ſlouth and idleneſſe he ſhould yet haue liued. Let cowardes complayne, for I without teares will burie my ſonne.
            An other woman of Lacedemonia killed her own ſonne, for that he had returned from the warres, in whoſe reproche this Epitaphe was written:

                  Thou dastard knight Damatrion, thy mother hath thee ſlayne:
                  That didst both her and Spratayne bloud with cowardiſe diſtayne.
               
            
            
               
               Solon, who for his wiſdome is moſt renowmed, being demanded of Creſus king of Lidia, whom he iudged of al other to be moſt happie, anſwered: one Tellus an Athenian, which had begotten (in a countrey abounding with all commodities) children excelling in goodlines of perſonage, & ſtrēgth of body, and afterwardes, defending his countrey manfully, ended his lyfe with great glory.
            Thus we may perceiue, how in ye anciēt time, they thought the knowledge & practiſe of warre to be in great reputatiō, that by ſo many means would ſeeke to encourage men to ye exerciſe of it: & what incōmoditie hath happened vnto thoſe, that haue ſo wholy ſought their felicitie in peace, yt they haue not only deſpiſed war, but vtterly refuſed to learne any martial diſcipline, or warlike exerciſe, hereafter ſhal be ſhewed.
            
               The occaſions that make men to hate warre.But the occaſions that make men ſo extreemely to hate warre, are ſundrie: but that which doth moſt of all vexe the greateſt nūber, is this: not ſo much for any ſpecial loue they haue to peace, as for feare of taxes, paymēts, & other charges hanging vpon warre: for otherwiſe warre or peace were all one with them, ſo they might liue in quietnes, without any charge. And yet I dare vndertake, not one of theſe peacemongers, that wil thinke he hath bene ſo ouercharged, if he haue beſtowed but x. ſhillings toward the ſetting forth of a ſouldiour, that goeth to ſpende his life in his prince or countries cauſe, but will with more willing mind beſtowe x.li. amongſt the lawiers to do his neighbour a ſhrewed turne.
            Other ſome would loue ye warres wel ynough, ſo thēſelues might be free frō preaſſing, for that thei had rather liue like ydle loytering lubbers, then offer their ſeruice any way to defend or maintaine the liberties of their countrey: in cōdition to be cōpared to cur dogges, yt wil fawne vpon any mā as long as hee feede thē, but whē they ſhould be farther vſed for pleaſure in the field, then adue, they go to their kenels: ſo theſe people, they are borne, foſtered vp, & enioy the lawes & liberties of their countrey: & when their countrey ſtandeth in

need, do ſhew thēſelues euery way to aide & aſſiſtance, with as willing mindes, as a beare commeth to a ſtake: theſe be right baſtards to their countrey, & are in deed worthie to enioy no benefit of their countrey. Plutarch maketh mentiō of an Ile yt is in Grece, called the Ile of Cobde: in this yle there is a linage deſcended of ye noble Greeke captaine called Agis the good: amongſt theſe Agites, this law is eſpecially obſerued, that none dare call him ſelfe to be natural of the yle, vnleſſe he hath done ſome valiant act, or by ſome meanes ſhewed him ſelf forward in his coūtreis defence. If this law were in Englād obſerued, we ſhuld haue to few natural Engliſhmē
               
            
            There are an other ſorte, that onely cowardlines & feare make them hate the warres: theſe deſerue litle to bee ſpoken of, and leſſe to be accompted of.
            There is yet a laſt ſort, whoſe cōſciences be ſo pure (as they ſay thēſelues) yt they can alowe of no wars, either to be good or godly, cōſidering what murthers, ſpoyles & other outrages by thē are cōmitted. This in deede ſeemeth to carie reaſon wt it: but notwithſtanding it is not ſufficient to cōdēne a iuſt quarel: for Saul loſt the eſpecial grace & fauour of god,1. King. 15. for preſeruing the beſt of the praye hee had taken from the Amalechites, which he ſhould haue vtterly deſtroyed.
            And Ioſua,
               Ioſua 10. fearing the day would haue bin to ſhort for him to kil his enemies which fled before him, cōmanded ye ſūne to ſtand ſtil, which was obedient to his cōmandemēt: & ſhal we therfore condemne his quarell, becauſe hee ſeemed to cary a murtherous mind? Not ſo: for his quarel was moſt iuſt, & his facte beſt pleaſed God. Neither haue I brought forth theſe exāples as neceſſary for all to folow, but as probable for my purpoſe:Mercy a ſpeciall vertue in a captayne, ſo it be vſed in time. for mercy I acknowledge to be one of the greateſt vertues, wherewt a noble captaine may be endued: but to be vſed out of time, as occaſiō may fal out, hath greater reſemblance to fooliſh pitie thē to be called mercy, and is rather to be holden a vice then a vertue, as hereafter I meane further to ſhew.
            
               
               A fond maner of reaſoning.But I do not a litle wonder, what madnes ſhould moone mens mindes to frame ſuch argumentes, that becauſe murthers, ſpoyles, and other like hauockes be committed in the warres, the warres therefore can not pleaſe God, and what ſoeuer pleaſeth not God, can not be good.
            
               The fruites that ſpring in the time of peace.By the like argument, peace is the moſt greateſt and the moſt deteſtable enormitie that of al others may happen, and amongſt Chriſtians moſt to be abhorred: for peace is the nouriſher of vices, the roote of euils, the proppe of pride, and to be ſhort,What meanes to come by riches. it is the mother of al miſchiefes. For in the tyme of peace we ſet our mindes onely to waxe riche, for the attayning whereof, what extortion, what deceit, what fraud, what flatterie, what lying, what forſwearing is vſed to come by them? and when they be had, they are the onely inſtruments to vanitie, the readie miniſters to vices, the very occaſiō why ſo great warres be many times arreared betweene Princes, a ſpecial cauſe of commotions amongſt ſubiects, they breede quarelles amongſt friendes, ſuites betweene brethren, they make him that ſhall poſſeſſe them proude, preſumptuous, vaine glorious, and of a good man to become euil & wicked.
            Furthermore, in peace men growe to be ſlouthful, ydle, proude, couetouſe, diſſolute, incontinent, vicious, folowing al maner of vanities, giuē al to delights, to inordinat luſt, gluttonie, ſwearing, & to be ſhort, to al maner of filthineſſe: which was very wel perceyued by S. Auguſtin,
               Auguſtine de ciuitate Dei. who in a booke that he wrote intituled, De ciuitate Dei, hath theſe wordes:
            
               More hurtful was the citie of Carthage to Rome after her deſtruction, then during the whole courſe and ſeaſon of the warres which the Romaines had with her: for that whyleſt they had enemies in Affrike, they knewe not what vyces ment in Rome.
            
            And what greater argument may there be of the diſpleaſure of God, then where he ſendeth amongſt them ſuch peace and quietnes? for as the ſcriptures witneſſe, Whom he loueth,

them he chaſtiſeth: but a ſmall ſigne of care ſhould ſeeme, where he giueth the people ouer to their owne vanities, and ſuffereth them to wallowe in all vyce and wickedneſſe.
            Thus you may ſee, by ſuch maner of reaſoning, vice may be made to ſeeme vertue,Vice may be made to ſeeme vertue. and contrarie vertue appeare to be vice. But here if any man would coniecture, that by this which I haue alleadged, I ment in deede to perſwade, that warres were more conuenient then peace, they ſhould doo me great wrong: for, although I do know I haue ſayde nothing but what is true, and that in the time of peace al kinde of vices do moſt wickedly abounde, yet I do very wel know, that the time of peace is not therefore to be condemned: ſo likewiſe, in the time of warre, although there be many diſorders and ſundrie outrages committed, yet the warres therfore are not abſolutely to be reprooued. For as peace is the great benefite and bleſſing of God, ſo warres being attempted vpon due conſideration, doe nothing at all offende him: but like as the ſunne when it ſhineth in ſome pleaſant garden, the herbes and flowers do yeelde a moſt delectable verdure, ſo where it ſhineth vpō ſome filthie dunghill, the ſtench and lothſomeneſſe to the paſſers by, is moſt noyſome.
            As the ſunne which was prepared of the almightie God to be a comfort to euery humane thing, is not the cauſe of the one nor the other, but the qualitie of the places: ſo thoſe abuſes which are vſed either in peace or warre,Leude diſpoſed people good at no ſeaſon. are not to be imputed to the time, but to the diſpoſition and lewdnes of the people, which like to filthie dunghilles, at euery time and ſeaſon, are more noyſome then profitable.
            Let this ſuffice then: that what I haue written, is but only to prooue that warres are not alwayes to bee comdemned, and that it is not agaynſt the lawes of God, that Princes ſhould erect warres vpon ſufficient cauſe, but ſometyme for ciuil policies ſake, moſt requiſite to be done: Concluding,

that aſſured peace is euer to bee preferred before doubtfull warre, ſo it may be had without preiudice or iniurie.
            Thus endeth the firſt parte of warre.
         
         
            The ſeconde parte entreating of Souldiours.
            
               The ſecond obiection.
               THe ſecond obiection is, Whether he that is honeſt, may take vpon him the profeſſion of a Souldier? As who ſhould ſay, that to be a ſouldiour may not bee an honeſt mans profeſſion, becauſe in the warres they bee the miniſters of ſo many miſchiefes: this is their reaſon. But in this place I will but reaſon of ſouldiours, as I haue already done of warres: that is, but to ſhewe what maner of people ſouldiours haue bene: As for ſuch as do but vſurpe the name of ſouldiers, I leaue them, tyll another occaſion.
            We finde in the 14. chapter of the booke of Geneſis, that Abraham was a captaine and a leader of men,Geneſis. 14. vnto whom Melchizedech the king of Salem brought foorth bread and wine: albeit he were a prieſt of the moſt high God. And S. Paul in his epiſtle to the Hebrewes the 6. chapter,Hebr. 6. ſpeaking of our Sauiour Chriſt, ſaieth, That hee was made a highe Prieſt for euer after the order of Melchizedech: and all the diuines and ancient doctours by generall conſent doe agree, that the firſt true figure of Chriſt, was here offered to ſouldiers,The firſt figure of Chriſt offered to ſouldiours. that were returned from the ſlaughter and ſpoyle of their enemies.
            A ſpecial cauſe wherein ſouldiers may worthily triumph, and a choke peare ſufficient, to ſtoppe their mouthes, that

would ſo abſolutely condemne them.
            
               Moyſes, though he were otherwiſe a Prophet,What maner of men haue bene ſouldiers. Exod. 18.21. Deut. 1.13.15. yet he was likewiſe a captaine, to whom Iethro his father in law by the motion of Gods ſpirit, gaue counſell to prouide ſuch to be iudges ouer the reſt, which ſhould be found to be men of courage, to feare God, to be louers of trueth, & hating couetouſnes, &c. and that of them he ſhould make ſome millenaries to rule ouer thouſands: and that he ſhould create others centeniers, to rule ouer hundreds: others Cinquantiniers, to beare authoritie ouer fifties: and Diſiniers to cōmand ouer tennes.
            
               Ioſua at whoſe commandement the ſunne was obedient, was a ſouldier and a leader of an armie.
            Whē the whole hoſte of ye childrē of Iſrael was vtterly diſmayde for the multitude of their enemies,Iudges. 7. whoſe nūbre was like the ſandes of the ſea, the Lord commanded Gedeon to make his choyſe of ſuch to ſerue for ſouldiers to encounter them, as were moſt faithful, that doubted not of his promiſes made vnto them, which were in numbre but 300. and were choſen by lapping of water.
            Who euer ſtood more in the good grace & fauour of God, then that noble king and captaine Dauid, whom the Lorde termed to be a man after his owne hartes deſire?
            What ſhould I here ſpeake of Iephthah, of Iehu, of Iudas Machabeus, and of many other, which were notable ſouldiers? ſhall they be condemned to be wicked and euill, becauſe they were warriours? or ſhal we thinke of them that in that vocation they offended God?
            When the ſouldiers demaunded of Iohn Baptiſt,
               Luke. 3. what they ought to do, he willed them to hurt no man wrongfully, but to liue by their wages: hee ſayd not vnto them, Forſake your vyle profeſſion, you can not be the children of god, to followe any ſuch maner of exerciſe: the which queſtionleſſe hee would haue done, if he had ſo thought.
            And when the captaine who had ſent vnto Ieſus, for the

healing of his ſeruant that laye ſicke, as Ieſus was going towardes his houſe:Luke 7. 
               Nay Lord (quoth the captayne) I am not worthie that thou ſhouldeſt enter vnder my roofe, doe but ſpeake the worde onely, and my ſeruant ſhall be ſafe: for I alſo am a man ſet vnder power, and haue vnder mee ſouldiours: and I ſaye vnto one goe, and he goeth: to another come, and he commeth: and to my ſeruant do this, and hee doth it. Ieſus marueyling at his words, turning him about to thoſe that folowed, ſaid: I haue not found ſo great faith, no not in Iſrael.
            
            And what godlier commendation may bee giuen to any man,Actes 10. then we finde in the .10. chapter of the Actes of the Apoſtles, where it is written as foloweth:
            
               There was a certaine mā in Ceſarea whoſe name was Cornelius, a captaine of the ſouldiers of Italie: a deuout man, & one that feared God with al his houſhold, &c. To this Cornelius the Angel of the Lord appeared & willed him to ſende into Ioppa, and to enquire for one Simon Peter, who ſhould inſtructe him and baptize him in the name of Ieſus: & when the Angel was departed, thus ſaith the text: He called vnto him two of his houſhold ſeruants, and a deuoute ſouldiour, that wayted on him, and tolde them all the matter, and ſent them to Ioppa, &c.
            
            This may ſeeme ſufficient to prooue, that not onely captaynes, but alſo priuate ſouldiers, haue bin founde to be both zealous, and feruent in the loue and feare of God, and that he hath likewiſe accepted them into his ſpeciall grace and fauour.
            
               With how many vertues noble captaynes haue bene endewed.But what ſhould I ſtande here to manifeſt the vertues wherewith a numbre of noble captaines hath bin moſt plenteouſly indewed: as the bountie and liberalitie of Alexāder, the continencie of Scipio, the iuſtice and equitie of Iulius Ceſar, the patience and humilitie of Agathocles, the mercy and pitie of Ageſilaus, the faith and fidelitie of Regulus to his

very enemies? Here might (I ſay) euen of this onely matter a huge volume be written, only of the vertuouſe diſpoſitions of noble ſouldiers: in ſo much that this othe,By the faith of a Souldiour. 
               By the faith of a Souldiour, hath bene ſo inuiolably kept, that a ſouldiour hath bene better to haue bene credited by that othe, thē ſome marchants now by their obligations.
            But here if any will coniecture, that in tyme paſt ſouldiours haue ſo exceeded in vertues, that at the time preſent they haue none at all left for them to boaſt on: although in England our multitude be not many, yet amongſt thoſe few there be both honourable and worſhipful, whoſe magnanimitie in the time of warres hath made them famous in forrain countreis, and whoſe noblenes and vertues now in the time of peace, doe ſhine coequal with the beſt.
            But here peraduenture ſome curiouſe cauiller wil replie that theſe may better be called ſage and wiſe counſailers, thē bloudy or cruel captaines, and rather may be termed ſober & diſcrete Iuſtices, then raſh and harebrayned ſouldiours: and thus by denying of them to be ſouldiers, will thinke I am neuer the neerer my proofe: But here if there were no other ſhift, or that the matter were ſo needful to be reaſoned on: it were very eaſie to prooue, that the beſt and nobleſt ſouldiers be euer found to be the wiſeſt and meeteſt counſaylers:Souldiours moſt meete to haue rule. and for this cauſe the Poetes haue fayned▪ 
               Minerua to be armed, ſignifying that Captaines and ſouldiers ſhould be as wiſe in counſailing, as couragious in conquering: as politique in keeping, as valiaunt in getting.
            And Tullie in his firſt booke of Offices ſpeaketh of a double commoditie that theſe men do yeelde to their countrey,Tull. de offi. li. 1. who armed, do make warres: and roabed, do gouerne the cō
               mon wealth.
            But leauing theſe,Smal choyce of ſouldiers in Englande. we haue in England but one only place to make any choice on, which is the garriſon lying in Barwicke: where I doubt not but he that doth know ye gouernement

of the captaines, and the orderly liuing of the Souldiours,The noble captaines and ſouldiers of Barwicke. will confeſſe them to be as vertuous in their liuing, as valiant in their actes: as modeſt in their maners, as hardie in their courage: as mylde in the towne, as manly in the fyelde: as faithful to their friendes, as furious to their foes: to be ſhort, amongſt them lyars are cōtemned, ſwearers are reprooued, deflowrers are puniſhed, brawlers are baniſhed, drunkardes are not regarded, all maner of vices are corrected: that of my conſcience, the olde ſouldiours of Barwicke may be a ſpectacle for orderly liuing to any other, what kind of trade ſo euer he would ſeeme to profeſſe.
            
               Some become ſouldiers rather to ſpoyle then to do any ſeruice.What though there be ſome that in the tyme of ſeruice will intrude them ſelues, and become ſouldiers, of purpoſe rather to ſpoyle, robbe and filtch, then to doo any good ſeruice, ſhall the honeſt Souldiour therefore bee condemned? ſo euery profeſſion, howe neceſſarie ſo euer it ſeeme, would bee miſliked, and men of euery facultie would bee deſpiſed.
            
               Of marchants.As firſt for example, the marchantes, whoſe trade, as Plinie ſayeth, was inuented for the neceſſitie of mans life, tranſporting from one region to another, that which lacketh in the one and aboundeth in the other: yet there be many that vnder this cloke and good pretence, continually doe practiſe, to tranſporte out of their owne natiue countreis, ſuch cōmodities as may not wel be ſpared: whereby many times great ſcarcitie and dearth doth happen, wherein the people are piteouſly oppreſſed.
            
               No worſe theeues then marchants.In Englande once a yeere wee fynde the extremitie, eyther for wante of corne, lether, hydes, tallowe, butter, cheeſe, bacon, beefe, biere, & many other ſuch lyke, which by her Maieſtie are prohibited: but no reſtrainte may ſerue againſt thoſe theeues, vnnaturall robbers and ſpoylers of their owne countrey.
            
               And yet theſe are commonly the greateſt fynde faultes that will inuaye agaynſt Souldiours, whoſe ſpoyles are much more tolerable, becauſe they ſpoyle but their enemies: theſe robbe and ſpoyle theyr friendes,What trafique is vſed by many marchants. and make wracke of theyr owne countreys, by conueying awaye theyr commodities, and by returning of incommodities, vayne tryfles which are not neceſſarie for our humane life, but onely to maynteyne women and children in pryde, pompe, and vayne glorie: ſuch thinges as doo procure delightes, wantonneſſe and delicacie: the very vanities and vyces of euery Nation by theſe men are brought home. And then what periurie, what fraude, what deceyte, by them ſelues, their brokers, and retaylers is vſed to vtter them, my wittes be to weake, nor I thinke there is no other that is able to expreſſe, vnleſſe it bee a marchant him ſelfe that hath vſed the trade.
            Furthermore, vnder this trade and traffique they haue conference with ſtraunge Princes, and vtter vnto them the ſecretes of countryes, lende them money, and in the ende will not ſticke to betray their owne countrey, and common wealth.
            There is an other kynde of marchauntes,Very harde to knowe one from another. that decke their ſhoppes with other mennes goodes, borowing here of one, and there of another: and when they haue gotten into theyr hande ſome great maſſe or valewe, then they become bankeroutes, and liue in a corner with other mennes goodes.
            Thus you may ſee, that although this trade or traffique of marchandiſe is very beneficiall to euerie eſtate and common wealth, and that there haue bene many wiſe and notable men that haue vſed it, as Thaluſt, Solon, Hippocrates, and others, yet it is by other ſome abuſed: but ſhall wee therefore condemne the trade, or other good & honeſt

marchantes that vſe it? not ſo: for the exerciſe of it may not be forborne, and the honeſt trading marchaunt is to be had in reuerence and eſtimation.
            
               Of lawyers.In like maner amongſt the lawyers, are there not found many that creepe into the Innes of court, that ſeeke by lawe to ouerthrowe lawe, ſuch as be termed by the name of peti foggers,
               Pety foggers. brethelles, that practiſe nothing but to breede diſſenſions, ſtrifes, ſuites, quarels & debates betwene neighbour and neighbour, brother and brother, yea, ſometimes betweene the father and the ſonne?
            
               Marke the order of theſe fellowes.Firſt they animate them to cōmence actions, perſwading them that their quarelles be iuſt, & wil very well ſtande with lawe: but when they haue once gotten them in, then they feede them with delayes, procraſtinating their ſuites frō day to day, from terme to terme, yea from yeere to yeere: in the end, when the matter is like to fall out againſt them, thē they blame their clients, yt in the beginning they did not throughly inſtructe them.
            
               Lawyers the authours of ciuill diſſenſions.Theſe be the people that of all other are moſt to be deteſted: for in the time of peace, theſe procure continual warres and ciuil diſſenſions, not amongeſt enemies, but amongeſt friendes, not amongſt forraine foes, but amongſt their naturall countrey men, reioycing when any brawle or brabble do fall out amongſt their neighbours.
            
               Lawyers would be the authours of peace.And yet they would be accompted the authours of peace, and will not let to exclaime againſt the ſouldiour, and condemne him, becauſe they do thinke him to be like vnto themſelues, that is, to be deſirous of warres and troubles.
            There is no Parliament or cōuocation that is called, but if there be any good motion had in queſtion, for the quietnes or quicke diſpatche of matters in controuerſie, but ye lawyers be the onely lettes,Lawiers the lettes of many good ordinances. that it ſhall not come forth: becauſe that if it were not for delayes and ſhiftes, the one halfe, nay not a quarter of them might be able to thriue by their occupatiō,

there are ſuche a ſhamefull companie.
            Yea many times there are found great corruptions euen amongſt ye Iudges them ſelues: yt for feare to offend a prince or ſome noble man, will not ſticke wt Pilat, to condemne Chriſte. Sometime with Golde and Siluer or other giftes, they be ſo corrupted,The vertue of Gold. that they regarde more the preſents that are giuen them, then either iuſtice or equitie: they are diligent in riche mens cauſes, but the poore they deferre: the complaint of the widowe or fatherleſſe, can not be heard amongſt them.
            But ſhal we therfore reproue the lawe, which is the onely prop & ſtay to euery common wealth, without the whiche we coulde not liue in any good order, otherwiſe then as brute beaſtes, neither coulde thoſe that be good & harmeleſſe, inioy either goods or poſſeſſions from cruell Tyrants & oppreſſours? neither were any one man aſſured of his life or liuing, were there not lawe to puniſhe murtherers, and to mainteine right: or ſhall the abuſes of ſome, condemne all honeſt and true dealing Lawyers, who in their profeſſiō of al men are worthy to be honoured? as there is no reaſon in the one, ſo they be to much to blame,No reaſon that ſome ſhould condemne all. that for the lewdnes of ſome loſſels, that doe but vſurpe the names of ſouldiers, will therfore ſo abſolutely condemne all ſouldiers: thinking there can none be good, becauſe ſome are yll.
            But what profeſſion may there be,The manners of our clergie. wherein wicked men will not ſéeke to cloake and couer them ſelues: be there not that enter euen into the miniſterie of the holy ſacramentes, proude prelates, blinde guides, and lazie lubbers: ſome that during the ſpace of twentie yeares, haue receiued the fruites of benefices, that haue not thrée times viſited their flocke: but commits them to Sir Iohn lack latine and his fellowe, poore ignorant chaplines: ſuch, as they may hire beſt cheape: while

they them ſelues liue in pleaſure, pompe, and pride: not like Saint Peter nor Saint Iohn, that had not one penie to giue to the poore lame man, that ſat begging at the Temple gate: and yet they would be called their ſucceſſors.Ezec 34. Mi
                     •
                  h
                     •
                  . 3. Eſai. 
                     •
                  6. Theſe be they of whom the Prophet Ezechiel ſo exclameth, ſaying they ſerue for nothing, but to ſerue them ſelues, and in ſtéed of féeding their flocke, they take the fléece, drawe the milke, kill the fatteſt, eat the fleſh, breake the bones, they are dumbe dogges, that knowe nothing, they dare not barke, but are very curious to haue horſkéepers for their palfries, faulconers for their hawkes, cookes for their paunches, but the poore ſhéep periſh through their default. I know likewiſe that there be a number of learned Paſtors, godly Miniſters, diligent Preachers, and faithfull followers: they which God defend ſhould beare the abuſes of the others. Then if the holie temple of God, can not be cleanſed from ſuch Miniſters of miſchiefes: they be ſomething too nice, that would haue ſouldiers to be all Saintes, and much more to blame that woulde make them all diuelles, bicauſe ſome doe amiſſe. And héere with all I muſt thinke them to be very parciall, that with ſuche blunt tearmes will intitle ſouldiers in the time of warre: and in the time of peace, can ſo cleanly cloake the very ſame actors, with names and titles of credite and eſtimation. For in the time of warres, he that is founde to be bloudily minded, killing without compaſſion all that lighteth in his wrath, they tearme him by the name of a Tyrant and a murtherer, where in the time of peace, they ſometime ſhadow him vnder the title of my Lord Iudge, but many times by the name of Maiſter Iuſtice of peace and Quorū. In the time of war whō they tearme a ſeditious mutiner, a peruerter of good lawes, a mainteiner of vngodly quarells: in the time of peace they call him Maiſter

Sargeant of the quoyfe, a wiſe coūſeller in the law, or an honeſt diligent Atturnie. In the time of warre, whom they tearme a théefe, a robber, & ſpoyler: in the time of peace they cal him an honeſt trading merchaunt. In the time of warre whom they call a violatour of women, a rauiſher, & deflowrer: in the time of peace they cal him a friendly and louing gentleman: yea and ſome fooliſh ſoother that wil ſpeake they knowe not what, wil ſay he is a right Courtier, & a courtlike gentleman. In the time of warre, he yt can tell a fyled tale, & that can créepe into mens boſomes to ſerue his owne turne, they cal him a Paraſite, a flatterer, and a diſſembler: in the time of peace they call him an excellent learned man, and a very good Preacher.
            Suche parcialitie (I ſay) is amongſt them, that no faultes are eſpied, but ſuch as be committed amongeſt ſouldiers: neither do I here goe about to excuſe al ſouldiers, as though there were none yll: but thoſe that be, are commonly founde in theſe newe leuied bandes, and not amongeſt olde ſouldiers as hereafter I will ſhewe.
            But here peraduenture, ſome will thinke that although many of them may be excuſed from a number of vices, wherwith they haue béene charged: yet that they of force muſt be all murtherers, may not be denied: for they goe into the féelde as well weaponed to kill, as armed 
                  〈◊〉
                defend▪ This obiection I haue many timeshard, but thoſe people are in too ſcrupulous an opinion, conſidering howe many examples we may finde in the holy Bible: where God hath not béene offended, with thoſe that haue killed their enimies: but that it is ſometimes lawfull in the preſence of God to ſhake off the yoke of bondage by the death of Tyrantes, as Iudith by Holofernes, and many other like. But as iuſtice without temperance is reputed iniurie: ſo magnanimitie

without mercie is accounted Tyrannie: and as it cannot be counted a noble victorie which bringeth not with it ſome clemencie,Mercie not alwaies to be vſed. ſo to vſe pitie out of time and ſeaſon is as great folly: as to vſe mercie in any conflict till victorie be atteined.
            
               Policie ſomtime excludeth pittie.And ſometime policie excludeth pitie, as the Gréekes who after the deſtruction of Troy, flewe Aſtianax the ſonne of Hector, to the end that there might remaine no occaſion of quarell, fearing if he had liued he would haue ſought ſome reuenge.
            But leauing all other forreigne hiſtories, I will come but to this one example whiche is moſte familiar among vs for the proofe of the premiſſes, which is this: That the greateſt cauſe of thoſe endleſſe warres, that are holden in Ireland,
               To much pittie the cauſe of ſo much diſquietneſſe in Ireland. The verie meane to bring Ireland to be quiet. do onely procéede of the mercie & lenitie that is vſed amongeſt them: and that the onely means to bring the people ſooneſt to conformitie, and the countrie to quietneſſe, is without compaſſion to puniſhe the offenders, and without either grace or mercie to execute the rebelles, and ſuch as be malefactours.
            And ſéeing my occaſion falleth out ſo fitly to ſpeake of Ireland, I craue pardon here a little to digreſſe from my matter, and to ſpeake ſomething of the manner of the countrie: conſidering it was my fortune to be there, when I firſt tooke in hande to write this ſimple deuiſe, & ſo continued til I had fully finiſhed it: ye which time I confeſſe was verie ſhort for me to vnderſtande the verie true and perfect eſtate of the countrie: which in euerie condition,Ireland is in moſt miſerable condition. is ſo confuſed, ſo ouerthwart, and diſordered: that I thinke there is none ſo vncharitable, whiche will not lament to heare it.
            The cauſes are too many, and doe farre ſurpaſſe my capacitie to bewray them, yet as néere as I can I will glaunce at ſome part of them: and although I knowe

my cunning will not ſerue to hit the verie pricke, yet he may wel be paſſed for an archer, that can ſhoot faire and ſomething about his marke: the which I may ſo much the better doe, conſidering there be ſuche a many that doe ſtande and giue aime: ſome with open exclamations, crie out howe they be ſpoyled, robbed, reued, and burned, by the rebels.
            But this is that whiche moſt of all doth make me to muſe, that almoſte euery man will ſéeme as though he knewe a remedie, and yet there is no reformation can be had, amongſt them: Well (ſay ſome) theſe rebels could not continue, were it not that they had other helps then them ſelues: They haue mainteiners, and ayders, neither can they be without receiuers, but if thoſe that be borderers would doe their beſt vppon them: they could not holde out.
            But there is amongeſt them, Forbeare me, & I will not ſée thée: Hurt not me, and I will not hinder thée.The orders of Ireland.
            
            And many be driuen in déede perforce, to ayde them, and currie fauour with them, for feare of being ſpoyled.
            And although there be diuers lawes, & ſundry good ordinaunces, to puniſhe ſuche as ſhall be founde guiltie in the premiſſes: yet they are ſo cleanly conueied and ſo cuningly handled, that the Lorde Deputie ſhall neuer vnderſtande it. But if there happen any to be accuſed, and brought foorth to anſwere the lawe: then there is ſuch cloaking, ſuch couering, ſuch ſhifting, ſuch bowlſtering, and ſuche bribing: that it was not he that did it: ſome chéefe horſe, ſome fine ambling hackney, or ſome halfe ſcore or a hundred cowes will ſalue all the ſore.
            But here perchance you would know amongſt whō this is vſed: nay I muſt not tell you that, ſo I might get my ſelfe ſuch enimies, as I might not tarrie in Ireland.
            
            
               In like manner it hath béen often ſéene, that when a raſcall (a rebell I would tearme him) hath done many ſpoyles, & committed many outrages, yet in the end hath béene receiued vpon compoſition, and many times haue their pardons begged, by ſome that be about the Lorde Deputie: and many times they haue friends in England to purchaſe them pardons, and to ſend them ouer: and this is the very cauſe that giueth them boldneſſe to doe yll, ſo that there is no aſſured truſte to be founde in the greateſt number of them: but when they may ſée time and occaſion,The very occaſion that maketh Ireland ſo troubleſome. to doe a ſhrewd turne, then they get them a cōpanie of bréechles beggers (folowers they call them) and when they haue plaid their parts to the vttermoſt, they aſſure them ſelues that a hundred of ſtolen cowes will buy a pardone: where otherwiſe if all hope were cut from them, & that no pardons might be granted vnto them, & that ſuch as ſhoulde be found fauourers vnto them, might without fauoure féele the force of the lawe, without any exceptions from the beſt to the worſt, and that euery one like duetiful ſubiects would put to their helping hande, to the ſuppreſſing of them, there is no queſtion, but Irelande woulde ſoone waxe ciuil, and the countrie woulde quickly growe to be quiet.
            
               Idlenes the greateſt enimie to a common wealthIn like manner, foraſmuche as it is euidently knowen, that idleneſſe amongeſt all people hath euer béene accompted moſt hatefull, and that in euery well gouerned Commonwealth it is founde to be a vice moſt hurtfull: the which to preuent ye 
               Romans vſed very ſtreight meanes: inſomuch that none durſt goe in the ſtreates, but he muſt beare a ſhewe whereby or how he liued, in conſideration whereof, the Conſul did beare a battell axe, the Tribunes a mace, the Prieſtes a hatt, the Cutlers a ſword, the Tailors a payre of ſheres, the Smithes a hammar, and thus euery one according to his exerciſe,

to the end it might appeare he liued by his owne labor, and not by the ſweat of others, as commonly theſe followers doe in Ireland. For remedie whereof, it were very fitt and moſt conuenient, that ſuch ſtreight lawes and ſharpe ordinaunces were prouided, that not one that ſhoulde be founde, might be ſuffered to eſcape or in any wiſe to paſſe, til ye maner of his life were throughly examined, & the order of his liuing very wel knowen.
            Some would thinke me here to be too ſeueare to be made a Iuſtice of peace, and would ſay vnto me that the countrie that were conquered by force, ought rather to be gouerned with more clemencie & mildneſſe: for that the inhabitantes, with the better will woulde prepare their hearts to obedience: but that experience hath ben tried long enough, and this is moſt certeine, that who ſo euer will thinke to preuaile in Ireland,
               The beſt way to gouerne Ireland it muſt be by vſing of iuſtice with extremitie, and not wt lenitie. And what pitie is to be vſed to thoſe, that ſo without pitie will not ſpare to oppreſſe the poore and ſimple farmer, ſuche as laboureth duly for his liuing? Howe lamentable is the caſe of thoſe that be honeſt, and ſuche as would gladly indeuour them ſelues to liue orderly, whiche can not ſo much as enioy a poore flocke bed to lie vpon, but muſt content them ſelues with homelier beds then a bundle of ſwéete ſtrawe: and in ſtéede of other cates, doe onely liue by graſſe, hearbes, and rootes: and then to ſée what labour, what toyle, & what paine they endure, but to get ſome ſmall portion of money, wherewith to buy a loafe of bread, of the whiche neither he, his wife, nor his children, ſhall neuer eate ſo much as one crumbe: but muſte ſerue to content thoſe ydle roges, where the poore man him ſelfe, if he be able to kéepe a cowe for his better reléefe, letteth her bloude

in a veine in her necke, the which bloud being boyled in a clod, ſerueth his turne in ſtead of the fineſt manchet.
            
               A miſerable caſe.Thus (I ſaye) thoſe that would be honeſt, be ſtill kept vnder in moſte miſerable manner, contented to yeld them ſelues to any manner of thraldome, ſo they might be defended from theſe helhoundes, as may better appeare by a Prouerb that they vſe, which is: Defend mee, and ſpend mee. But the multitude of theſe Idelers are ſuch, that it cannot be. Theſe be the people, through whome the greateſt parte of the diſorder doth ſpring, there cannot be therefore too great puniſhments to correct them, nor too much crueltie vſed to ridde them: and euen like as bitter & ſharpe puniſhments ſhould be rewardes for thoſe that be euill: ſo for thoſe that be good, there ought likewiſe to be ſome incouragements, whereby they might ſtill continue in their goodnes: and a meane wherby to incite other to do the like. But this amongeſt other matters, is eſpecially to be lamented: that in all the countrie there is not erected ſome Vniuerſitie, wherin they might be trained vp in good letters, whereby they might learne to ſerue God aright: who I thinke amongeſt the greateſt number of them, is neyther knowen nor feared: and yet they will ſéeme to haue a zeale to religion, for there be amongeſt them,A ſound religion. that during the time of Lent, will refraine from eating of egges, butter, & chéeſe: and yet will make no conſcience, if it were vpon good friday, to goe ſteale an hundred cowes to their breakefaſt.
            As I haue heard, it hath béene in queſtion, and profers haue béene made to the erecting of a Vniuerſitie: but howſoeuer it happeneth, it is deferred: but this is moſt certeine, they be neyther friendes, nor well willers to the countrie, that will ſtand againſt it.
            For if it were well conſidered, what a benefite it

would be to the countrie, if there were a place, where gentlemen might bring vp their children in learning, where nowe they bring them vp in lewdneſſe, in filching and ſtealing: where they might be brought vp in knowledge of good artes and ſciences, in manners and ciuilitie, where nowe they remaine in ignoraunce, and be onely trayned but in brutiſh beaſtlineſſe.
            Neither is it much to be meruelled at, for beſides that there is no place in the countrie, where they might attaine to knowledge and learning: no more there is anie one meane whereby they might almoſt knowe vice from vertue: for they are likewiſe béereued of one of the greateſt benefits, that giueth light and vnderſtanding, which is by reading of hiſtories: conſidering that there is nothing which may be either pleaſaunt, profitable, or neceſſarie for man: but is writen in books,The light that reading of hiſtories do bring wherin are reported, the manners, conditions, gouernementes, counſels, and affaires of euerie countrie: the geſtes actes, behauiour, and manner of liuing of euerie people: the formes of ſundrie Common wealthes, with their augmentations, & decayes, & the occaſions therof: the precepts, exhortations, counſels, & good perſuaſions comprehended in quicke ſentences: to conclude, in bookes and hiſtories are actually expreſſed, the beautie of vertue, and the lothſomnes of vice. Wherfore Lactantius ſaith thou muſt néedes periſh, if thou knoweſt not what is to thy ſelfe profitable, that thou maiſt ſéeke for it: and what is dangerous, that thou maiſt flie & eſchew it. Which knowlege & light commeth chiefely vnto vs by reading of hiſtories: but how ſhould they come by this profit or cōmoditie in Ireland: where they haue no maner of bookes, neither yet the vſe of printing: ſo that for them there is no meane either to learn ciuilitie

or good order: but by the example of vs that be Engliſh, whome naturally they doe hate:A prouerbe vſed in England. & we haue a Prouerbe in England which is this: Loue me and loue my dogg, ſo contrarie, it may be ſaid, Hate me and hate all that comes from me: the which queſtionleſſe is proued true amongeſt the greateſt number of them: but eſpecially in the wild parts,The nature of the wilde partes where in the ſtead of liking, they fall to lothing any thing that commeth from the Engliſh: where they had rather continue in their owne beaſtly and brutiſhe manners, then reforme themſelues to any conformitie either in their maners either in their conditions. And in their faſhions of their apparell they be as confuſed as in the reſt: the men goe more beaſtly and ſauage like then the people of America, where the people in moſt places hath euer ſéene any ciuilitie: the women attired after ſuch a manner as in Europe there are none that doth come néere their faſhion: but hath greateſt ſimilitude to the maner of the Aegyptian women. Although this ſéeme but a ſmall fault to be picked out of a number of others: yet it were verie good that this faulte were reformed. And ſéeing we goe aboute to amende them in their manners and to bring them to ciuilitie, it coulde not be amiſſe likewiſe that they were brought into ſuch apparell, as to the view of the worlde they might ſéeme to haue ſome meane of modeſtie: for as a man may be partely coniectured by his apparrell, & may wel be déemed what exerciſe he doth profeſſe (as the clergie by their apparrell are knowne from the laytie, ye lawyer from the merchaunt, and ſo of others: and amongeſt all men and in all places & countries it is holdē conuenient, that ſo it ſhoulde be:) Euen ſo queſtionleſſe the manner of apparell is of no ſmall effecte to féede mens mindes either with grace or diſgrace: as for example.

A proude man clothed in ſumptuous or coſtly aray, it maketh him the more proud and hautie in his mind: or a whore that is bedect in light and gariſh apparell, it maketh her in her mind to be the more whoriſhe. And like as a foole is not in his right kind without a yellowe coate, ſo fonde or vndecent apparell, may ſomtimes confuſe the wiſeſt heads. As to ſée a learned preacher go into a pulpit pretending to make ſome ſolemne ſermon, appareled like ſome luſtie courtier, it woulde not onely bréede laughter to his audience, but it woulde likewiſe ſo amaſe him in his owne conceipte, that it woulde be a greate let to the tale that he ment to tell. And like as Semiramis, when ſhée gouerned the Aſſyrians, tooke on her ye habit of a man, the better to ſhewe her manly courage: and as Sardanapalus diſguiſed himſelfe into womanes attyre, the more liuely to expreſſe his effeminate minde: ſo I am of this opinion that theſe Iriſh do the rather deſire this rogiſh maner of apparel, becauſe it is moſt ſutable and beſt agreing to their conditions: neither were it amiſſe if by cō
               pulſion they were reſtrained from it as much as conueniently it might be.
            I doe heere ouer paſſe many other abuſes, neither will I ſpeake of an infinite number of priuie practiſes, that are ſometimes vſed in the Superlatiue degrée, you may chooſe howe you will conſtrue it, either to ſome of thoſe that are of noble parentage in the countrie, and gentlemen that bee of the greateſt credite, and woulde be accompted the beſt Subiectes: either elſe to the number of their ſlye deuiſes whiche in déede dothe excéede in the higheſt degree, but ſome times rather then faile, you may

conſtrue it both for the one and the other, ſo expert they be in deuiſing of trecherie, and in the mainteining and relieuing of rebelles, and that by ſo many meanes and ſuch ſundrie ſhiftes, as it paſſeth my conceipt, neither will I take vppon mée to diſcipher. But theſe matters cannot be proued, and therefore may the eaſilier paſſe: but I cannot ſée almoſte howe it is poſſible, that any thing ſhould be proued that ſhould make againſt them, for there are verie fewe amongeſt them that will make any conſcience to forſweare them ſelues vppon a booke: but if Ananias, with Saphira his wife, receiued bothe death,Actes. 5. but for denying of that portion which was their owne, what puniſhment could be ſufficient for theſe people, that will ſo ordinarily denie GOD, and that almoſt for euery trifle?
            And here, (I knowe,) I ſhall offende the patience of a great number, for that they finde mée ſtill in one maner of ſonge, and woulde exact nothing but puniſhementes, and ſharpe corrections vppon them: but I truſt I ſhall not offende thoſe that be good and honeſt, conſidering that my penne doeth not in any reſpecte touche them. And I knowe there are in the countrie many honourable houſes, as the houſes of Ormunde and Kyldare, the Lorde of Doluin, the Lorde of Vproſore, the Lorde of Louthe, with many other (though not expreſſed by name) both honourable and worſhipfull, and others of inferiour calling, that may not any wayes be detected with any thing that I haue written. So I knowe likewiſe, that there be a great number, of ſuch as I haue ſpoken of, that are not to be reformed, but by moſte bitter and ſharpe puniſhmentes in déede: for the better triall, howe long time haue they béene gouerned by ſundrie noble Princes, but nowe laſtly,

and eſpecially, by a moſte gratious Quéene, who of her greate mercie and clemencie, ſpendeth not onely ſuch reuenues as riſe by the countrie it ſelfe: but alſo addeth no ſmall portion out of her owne purſſe, onely to kéepe the countrie in quietneſſe if it might be: which otherwiſe would be at ſtrife and warres in it ſelfe, the one killing and murthering the other, as it daily falleth out notwithſtanding: and with no leſſe care, ſhée prouideth for them good & wholſome lawes and ordināces, where of them ſelues they would rather liue like beaſtes, voide of lawe and all good order: where otherwiſe, if her maieſtie pretended to rule by rigour ouer them, who knoweth not that ſhée coulde ſende ſuche a power ouer into Irelande, as in verie ſhorte ſpace, would make quicke riddaunce of all that ragged rowt, which nowe ſo vexeth and moleſteth the countrie: but ſhée rather ſéeketh wt mercie to reclaime them, and with lenitie to reforme thē, ſending them ouer from time to time, ſuch gouernors to direct them, as are neither founde to be rigorous, cruell, nor mercileſſe. But how muche is the countrie bounde to her Maieſtie at this preſent, in ſending that noble gentleman, Sir Henrie Sidney, to be their gouernour, the onely man that they themſelues haue ſo muche deſired, and ſo long time wiſhed for: whoſe onely carke and care, hath béene to ſéeke the countries Common wealth, and the quietneſſe of the people. And with what humanitie and gentleneſſe, hath he ſtill continued his gouernement: what pittie and mercie hath he from time to time extended to thoſe that little deſerue it: conſidering with what treaſon, with what trecherie, with what fraude, and with what deceipt, they requite him? There is no hope of their promiſe, no holde of their worde, no credite

in their othe, nor no trueth in their dealings towardes him.
            Therefore, to conclude as I began at the firſt, there néedes no longer circumſtaunce, nor better triall to proue, that courteſie in the Iriſhe gouernement, is not the readieſt way to winne: but onely by ſeuere iuſtice without mercie, to him that ſhall offende: for this hope of forgiueneſſe is the onely marring of all together.
            Thus farre I haue ſpoken partly by report, and as it were by vox populi: but if vox populi be vox Dei, as ſome will affirme, it is not onely the Iriſhe alone, that altogether confuſeth the gouernement, but ſometimes there is falſhood in fellowſhip played amongeſt the Engliſh: but let him that is guiltie accuſe him ſelfe: I ſpeake but by report. And ſéeing I am entred into reportes, I will not let to make report howe a great many do reporte, that ſome of thoſe that be ſent ouer, to be ayders and aſſiſtaunts to the gouernement, and ſuche as ſhould helpe to boult out ſuch matters, haue greater care to ſéeke their owne gaine, and to make them ſelues riche: yea, and ſo they may be rewarded with a bribe, will rather ſéeke to helpe couer and cloake ſuche cauſes, then to giue their conſentes to puniſhe them: ſuch is the effect of this filthie vice couetouſneſſe,The effect of couetouſneſſe. that when it once inrageth the mindes of men, it draweth from them all feare, religion, loue, reuerence, and knowledge of GOD: it peruerteth iuſtice and true dealing towardes men: and he that thirſteth onely for gaine, of force muſt runne into actions of iniuries and oppreſſions.
            And nowe to ſhewe what reportes runnes amongſt the miniſters of the lawes, whereof ſome be Engliſhe,

and ſome be Iriſhe.
            The Iriſhe (they ſaye) fauour no Engliſhe mennes cauſes, but foades them off with further delayes then may well ſtand with lawe or reaſon. The Engliſhe yet be founde to be moſt indifferent, for they reſpect no countries, but fauour his cauſe that hath moſte money to bribe them: ſuch parcialitie there is vſed amongeſt them, and ſo farre they be eſtraunged from pietie and iuſtice, that the miſerable poore oppreſſed people, doe holde it leſſe euill to ſuffer their iniuries, then to pleade their ſuites, before ſuch as haue greater regarde to the brybes that are giuen them, then eyther to the equitie or innocencie of their cauſes.
            Thus, I haue not thought it good, with ſecret ſilence to diſſemble and ſmother inwardly in my minde, what I haue heard: conſidering, that men ought rather to eſtéeme the wordes of him that telleth the trueth with ſimplicitie, then ye ſmooth ſpéeches of him that ſpeaketh all to currie fauour, and yet in déede ſaye nothing that is worthie of commendation.
            And thus, wiſhing to Irelande as good ſucceſſe, as he that was borne in the countrie, I returne to my firſt purpoſe to ſpeake againe of Souldiers: neyther ſhall I néede ſpende any longer time, in that I pretended to proue: that to become Souldiers, or warfaring men, is no profeſſion for thoſe that be honeſt: conſidering that there is alreadie ſufficiently ſaid,The Souldiers of England in moſt miſerable eſtate. to thoſe that be reaſonable. Wherefore nowe I will direct my tale to the poore Souldiers of Englande, whoſe number as it is verie ſmall, ſo their caſe is likewiſe moſt miſerable, if it be well conſidered.
            Firſt in the time of warres, they ſpare not in their countries behalfe, to forſake their wife, childrē, father,

mother, brother, ſiſter, to leaue their friendes, and onely betake them againſt their enimies:To what extremities ſouldiers doe comit them ſelues in the time of warre. contented to yeld them ſelues to continual watch, ward, faſting, hunger, thirſt, cold, heate, trauaile, toyl, ouer hils, woods, deſerts, wading through riuers, where many ſometimes loſe their liues by the way, lying in the féeld, in raine, wind, froſt & ſnowe, aduenturing againſt ye enimie, the lack of lims, the loſſe of life, making their bodies a fence & bulwark, againſt the ſhott of the cannon.
            But the warres being once finiſhed, & that there is no néede of them, howe be they rewarded, howe be they cheriſhed, what accounte is there made of them, what other thing gaine they then ſlaunder, miſreporte, falſe impoſitions, hatred and deſpight?
            
               A colde warde.Howe ſmall is the number, that be in England of ſufficient men, ſuch I meane as be able in déede, in the time of ſeruice, to ſtand their countrie in ſtead, to any purpoſe, and yet how many of this ſmall number, hath euer béene brought to credit, or bene any thing preferred, for the ſeruice they haue done? There be ſome that haue ſerued twentie or thirtie yeares as occaſions haue hapened, & in the warres haue ſpent part of their bloud, and receiued many gréeuous woundes, but their eſtate of liuing, I woulde to God were knowne to thoſe that might amend it.
            There is that ſmall garriſon of Barwicke, whiche for the value of their minds, and the nobleneſſe of their courage, I knowe may well compare with the beſt: but for their other riches, I haue ſéene a hundred Spaniardes or a hundred Frenche men as they haue béene marching towards ſeruice, that only but in their apparell & furniture, haue béen more welthy then all ye ſouldiers of Barwicke were able to make, if all their riches

were brought together: and yet if there were any occaſion to vſe any number of men from thence muſt the conducters and leaders be brought,The number of able ſouldiers to ſmal in England. that ſhoulde be founde able and ſufficient when it came to the pinche. Some others there be, wherof many be diſperſed here & there, for want of other ſtay of liuing, but ſure the number is ſo ſmall, as I feare me it woulde be found, if any ſoudaine aſſaulte ſhould be offered vnto vs.
            God preſerue her maieſtie therfore, long to gouerne & reigne ouer vs, through whoſe prouidence & foreſight, we haue béene ſo long time preſerued in peace and quietneſſe.
            And O Englande, woulde to God ſo many preſidents of others miſhapes, might make thée take héed, and call thy ſelfe to remembraunce, conſider thy enimies be not ſo ſecrete, but they be as malicious: and haue ſtaide all this while neither for want of quarell, neither for want of will, if they them ſelues were once at quiet: nor flatter not thy ſelfe bicauſe thou haſt inioyed a peaceable time, that it ſhall ſtill indure: but remember the longer it hath béene calme, the ſooner the ſtorme is looked for, and the greater the rage when it falleth.
            If thou doſt well looke into thy ſelfe, and ponder thy owne caſe, thou ſhalt finde that if any ſoudaine alarum ſhoulde happen, thou ſhalt finde that thy greateſt want ſhalbe onely of thoſe men that nowe thou holdeſt in ſo ſmall eſtimation, and doeſt eſtéeme of ſo litle accompt.
            If thou thinkeſt thy great numbers of vntrained men, are ſufficient to defende thée, doe but remember what happened to Antwerpe, where they wanted neither men, nor any other prouiſiō for the wars. But they wanted ſouldiers to direct them, and men of vnderſtanding to incourage them: For the want of knowledge, bréedeth the want of courage: as Solomon ſaith: A

wiſe man is euer ſtronge:
               Prou. 24. 
               yea, a man of vnderſtanding increaſeth with ſtrength: for with wiſedome muſt warre be taken in hand, and where there are many that can giue counſell, there is the victorie, &c.
            
            And Xerxes who with a great armie, was put to the worſt, but with 300. Lacedaemonians, confeſſed that he forced not ſo much for the multitude, as for their knowledge & experience. I could here rehearſe many other examples of like effect, but I leaue thē til other occaſion, & wil conclude with what care and prouiſion ſundrie noble Princes haue prouided for their ſouldiers, not onely in the time of war when they haue had néed of them: but aſwel in ye time of peace for their ſeruice alreadie done, that they ſhould not wante: according to the minde of Alexander Seuerus, who ſaith that, The ſouldier is worthy his keeping in the time of peace, that hath honeſtly ſerued his countrie in the time of warr, although for age he cannot trauell, his counſel yet may not be ſpared. And Ieſus the ſonne of Sirach ſaith,Eccle. 27. 
               There be two thinges that greeue my hearte, and in the thirde is a diſpleaſure come vpon me, when an experte man of warre ſuffereth ſcarceneſſe & pouertie, when men of vnderſtanding and wiſedome are not ſet by, and when one departes from righteouſneſſe to ſinne, &c.
            
            
               Octauian Auguſtus honored ſouldiers with this law: What ſo euer thou be that ſhalt ſerue with vs in wars x. yéeres ſpace, ſo that thou ſhalt be xl. yéeres olde, whether thou haſt ſerued on foote or on horſeback, héereafter be thou frée from warres, be thou Heros, an olde ſouldier: let no man forbid thée the citie, the ſtréete, the temple, nor his houſe: let no man lay any blame to thy charge, put any burden vpon thée, or aſke thée any monie: if thou ſhalt offend in any thing, looke to be chaſtiſed by Caeſar & by no man elſe. In all diſhoneſtie that men

ſhall commit, I will that thou be the Iudge, and diſcloſer, whether they be priuate or officers: that which thou ſhalt ſay and affirme for trueth, no man ſhall reproue for falſe. I will that all wayes and places be open for thée, thou ſhalt haue authoritie to eate and drinke at Princes tables: thou ſhalt yéerely haue wages of the common treaſurie to finde thée and thy houſhold: let her be preferred before other women, whome thou ſhalte take to be thy lawefull wife: and he that thou ſhalt call infamous, let him be wicked & infamous: thou béeing Heros, ſhalt haue authoritie to beare armes, badges, names, & ornamentes, which be decent for a King: doe what thou liſte in euery place and countrie where thou commeſt, if any doe thée wrong let his head be cutt off, &c.
            
               Charles the great, when he had tranſlated the name of the Empire to the Germanes, after the Saxons and Lombards were vāquiſhed, gaue this honor to his ſouldiers ſaying: You ſhall be called Heroes, the companions of Kinges, & Iudges of offences: liue ye héereafter voide of labour, counſell Kinges in the publique authoritie, reproue diſhoneſt thinges, fauour women, helpe Orphanes, let not Princes lack, your counſell, and aſke of them meate, drink, and monie, if any ſhall denie it, let him be vnrenowmed and infamous: if any doe you iniurie, let him knowe he hath offended the Emperors maieſtie: but ye ſhal forſée, that ye diſtaine not ſo great an honour, and ſo greate a priuiledge, gotten by the great labour of warre, with dronkenneſſe, rayling, or any other vice: to the end, that that whiche we haue giuen you for glorie, redounde not to puniſhment, whiche we will for euer reſerue to be giuen you by vs and our ſucceſſors, Emperours of Rome, as often as you ſhall tranſgreſſe.
            
               And Polycrates of Samos, appointed liuing for the wiues and children of the dead ſouldiers, ſtreightly commaunding, that no man ſhoulde offende them, or do them any wrong.
            
               Solon made this lawe, that thoſe children whoſe fathers had ſpent their liues in fighting in the defence of the common wealth, ſhould be brought vp at the charges of the common treaſure.
            But what doe I ſtand reciting of ſtraunge hiſtories, forepaſſed ſo many yeres ſithens? Why do I not remē
               ber, the French men and Spaniards, amongeſt whom at this inſtant, men of ſeruice be not a litle honoured, and had in eſtimation? And goe to the dronken contries of Denmarke and Swethen, and thoſe other partes of the Eaſt, and how be ſouldiers cherriſhed, and men of ſeruice prouided for?
            
               The manner of England in the 
                     ••
                  me of needeBut in Englande, when there is occaſion to vſe them, then, Helpe noble captaines, Now ſhewe your ſelues couragious, & worthie ſouldiers: but ſeruice once being ended, they be quite forgotten, that euer there was any néede of them, for any thing they are like to get. And yet I muſt impute it but to their own miſfortuns, & not for any want of liberalitie:Euery one hath his time. for who knoweth not, how manie fées, penſions, ſtipends, & many other offices, are daily to be giuen in Englande, but very fewe fall to the ſhares of theſe vnthriftie ſouldiers: but ſuche doe many times gett them, as can thriue by them, and play the good huſbandes:Souldiers the greteſt vnthrifts that liue in theſe ſeaſons, there are verie fewe of them that are able to giue his felowe a dinner. ſuch as can build ſumptuous houſes, purchaſe faire liuinges, runne in the Quéenes debte, till they come in the thouſandes, and then the price of a veluet gowne, or ſome odde hundred poundes, beſtowed vpon ſome ye Quéens women, wil ſtall the debt. The Quéene will be content to take it by a hundred or two hundred pounds a yeare, this is the way to thriue, theſe

be the fellowes that do gaine. But how ingratefull may that countrie be called,Souldiers of all others had in leaſt eſtimation. where thoſe that muſt fight in the defence, and offer them ſelues to the ſlaughter in their countries quarell, doe onely receiue for recompenſe, but hatefull wordes, ſlaunderous reportes, and are no better accompted of, then as the abiects, and holden inferiours to euery other people?
            Here might be many other things ſaid in the behalfe of ſouldiers, the whiche I omit, and leauing them to the benefite of better fortune, will come to ſpeake of the abuſe of the time.
         
         
            ¶The third part ſpeaking of the time.
            
               I Knowe there be ſome will condemne me (as I haue ſaide) to write any thing of warre, in this ſo peaceable a time, the cauſes I haue ſhewed be partly before: for there be many vnto whome the name of warre is ſo odious, that with a good will they would neuer heare them ſpoken of: and will coniecture that I rather allow of warre then peace, that will ſo buſie my ſelfe to write any thing of them, now while there is no néede.
            But thoſe that be wiſe can very well conſider, that there is no man ought more rather to deſire peace,Which are ſouldiers. then ſuche as by warre may ſooneſt catch harme.
            I ſpeake this in mine owne excuſe, conſidering that I haue ſerued her Maieſtie, as occaſion hath happened, and am ſtill in a readineſſe to ſerue, when néede ſhall require.
            
               And as I know it is but the part of a foole at the ſea, to wiſhe for a ſtorme, when the wether is calme: ſo I knowe likewiſe in the time of calme, to prouide for a ſtorme, is the poynt of a wiſe mariner: for who ſo well conſidereth, to what diſpoſition Kinges and Princes be commonly inclined vnto▪ in theſe latter dayes, whiche is to haue greater felicitie, with Tyrannie to offende others, then with iuſtice and equitie to kéepe their owne: it ought therefore with great diligence to be prouided for, that like as in the time of warre, circumſpect care of peace may not be omitted: ſo in the time of peace, ſuch thinges may be foreſéene, apperteining to the war, that the want of warlike prouiſions, be not preiudiciall to the maintenaunce of this ſwéete and quiet peace.
            And the very occaſion that vrgeth me to write, is to wiſh that in England we were expert warriors, though not warre louers: and that we had many that were wiſe, rather then willing ſouldiers. But where peace is ſo inordinatly deſired, that in ye preferring therof they forgett all Martiall exerciſes, whiche is the very preſeruer,
                  The cuſtodie of peace conſiſteth in the knowlege of warre.
                  Careles people nereſt their own harme.
                and mainteiner of peace, (according to the mind of Valerius Maximus, who ſaith That the cuſtodie of bleſſed peace conſiſteth in the knowledge of warre.) It can not be choſen therefore, but thoſe people be euer néereſt their owne harme, that will ſo careleſly ſpende the time of peace, as though they ſhoulde neuer more haue occaſion to enter into warre.
            
               Pleaſure bringeth paine.And generally it is ſéene, where pleaſure is preferred ſo exceſſiuely, and the people followe it ſo inordinately, that they lye and wallowe in it ſo careleſly, they commonly end with it moſt miſerably.
            For howe many Cities, how many Countries, whiche ſometime moſt of all floriſhed, onely by reaſon

of their farre ſtretched Empire, glorie and renowme, purchaſed by famous and noble actes: are nowe beaten flatt to the grounde, couered with moulde, and almoſt out of remembraunce?
            Where are now become the dominions of the Aſſyrians and Perſians? What is become of the glorie of the riche Citie of Athens: whiche had béene ſo often forewarned by ye excellent Orator Demoſthenes? Or where is nowe the pompe and power of the Macedonians? Or what hath waſted the fame and renowme of the citie of Rome, that it had not béene perpetuall?
            What other thing then this inordinate delicacie,Idleneſſe and delicacie the decay of many common wealthes. riot, & ydlenes. For when they ouer neglected the feats of war, laide aſide their weapons, ſought more for their owne priuate aduauncement, then for the liberties of their countrie: then came their kingdomes to calamitie, and beganne headlong to fall to the ground: and then in the ſtead of frugalitie ſproung vp outragious riot: in ſteade of hardineſſe and courage in the warres, excéeding tenderneſſe, and niceneſſe, both of body and minde: and thus when the knowledge of ſouldier-fare was extinguiſhed, then vnſatiable deſire of riches made entrie amongeſt them, & nothing ſo much practiſed, as to haue experience in buying and ſelling: that in the ende, the Emperiall crowne was bought and ſoulde for money amongeſt them: and the Romane Empire whiche ſo mightily had floriſhed, was nowe made ſubiecte to common thraldome.
            But for that there are ſome, that are nothing moued with reading of hiſtories, monuments, or the examples of auncient writers, vnleſſe they haue knowen the like in their age, or ſéene wt their eyes, or as it were touched with their finger, I will therfore put ſuch in remembrance, of ye ſtate & conditiō, of Holland, Zeland, Flanders

Brabant, and other partes of the lowe countries: How many yeares continued they in peace and quietneſſe, in dronkenneſſe, in lecherie, in riot, in exceſſe, in gluttonie, in wantonneſſe, (I will not ſay in the like predicament that we nowe remaine in Englande) the whiche to continue, they were contented to ſubmit them ſelues, to any maner of thraldome, and to euery kind of ſlauerie, to receiue the Spaniards into their cities and towns, which were naturaly ſeated ſo ſtrong, yt no forreine prince could forcably haue made entrie into them.
            Howe the Spaniards gouerned them, with what rigour they ruled them, & howe tyrannouſly they reigned ouer them, is ſo well knowen as I will not ſpende the time to relate: in the end, to diſburden them ſelues from that which before they had yealded vnto,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   the ſteed 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſtolen they ſhut the ſtable dore. by neceſſitie they were inforced to goe to Mars his ſchole, & to practiſe the art of warre, whiche had euer béene moſte lothſome vnto them, not without great ruine & wrack, of many noble cities and townes, and with no leſſe ſpoyle and hauocke, of infinite goodes and riches.
            For like as the deſire to haue dominion ouer many kingdomes, and to haue ſouereigntie ouer far ſtretched Empires, is a common infirmitie amongeſt kings and princes:Where the ſtile is lowe euery dogge will ouer. ſo there is nothing may ſooner prouoke them to giue attempt, then where they ſée ſuch forgetfulneſſe amongeſt the people: that ſlouthe and idleneſſe beareth the whole ſway among them: As Plutarch, in his Apophthegmaes, maketh report of a famous capteine, to whom a certeine reader of the Atheniens made his complaint, that the men of armes in his campe, reproched them of Athens, to whom the capteine made anſwere, that as the thing that is well kept, is hardly loſt, and that nothing prouokes the théefe ſooner then negligence: So, if the Atheniens, had tied care and circumſpection

to their wordes and déedes, they had neuer falne into the handes of the Lacedemonians.
            
            And Cambyſes the father of Cyrus king of Perſia, being aſked by what meanes Cities might beſt be kept in ſafetie, aunſwered, if they that kept the ſame cities,Miſtruſtfulneſſe a verie good remedie. do thinke they can neuer be warie ynough of their enimies: the which in the Maſsilians was charily perfourmed, who kept both warde and watch in their cities in the time of peace, as if they had béene continually vexed and troubled with warre, and to that purpoſe, inſtituted ſundrie good ordinaunces, vpon the holie dayes to ſée their ſouldiers ſtanding vpon the walls, and exerciſing them ſelues in the feates of armes. And that notable Capteine Epaminondas, while the citizens of Thebes gaue them ſelues to feaſting, banquetting & bellie chéere, ranne haſtily to arme him ſelfe, and marched towards the citie walles, to the end the reſt might b
                  •
                the ſafelyer dronke, and aſwell to ſignifie, that the ſafetie of their Citie ſhould at no time be forgotten.
            And although king Solomon, who in the holie Scriptures is called Rex pacificus, and was promiſed by the mouth of God a peaceable reigne, and was ſtill buſied, and turmoyled with the buylding of the holie temple: yet notwithſtanding, he was not forgetfull to furniſhe his garriſons, with innumerable men of warre, horſes and charriots. To be ſhort, there is, neither hath béen any well gouerned Common wealth, but the lawes of Armes be as carefully prouided for, as any other citie cauſes: but where delicacie once preuaileth, and getteth the vpper hande, there adewe Martiall mindes: & farewell magnanimitie, where ſlouthfulneſſe hath once made entrie: for the nobleneſſe that is to be looked for in a Princely and hautie courage, though it bée chéefely wrought by the force of the minde: ſo the bodie

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
muſt be exerciſed, and brought in ſuch plight, as it may be made able to follow payne and trauell.
            Were not the olde ſouldiers of Hanibal, in lying but one winter in Capua, ſpēding the time in wantonneſſe amongſt the delicate dames, ſo effeminated & infeebled, both in bodie and mind, that they neuer did any thing afterwarde, that was worthy of report?
            And Xerxes being offended with the Babylonians, becauſe they trayterouſly had ſhronke from him, when he had againe brought them vnder: he forbad them to beare any more weapons, and further commaunded them, that they ſhoulde ſinge to the Lute, and other inſtrumentes, learne to kéepe harlotes, & haunte tauernes: which policie hee of purpoſe prepared, to weaken their courages, whereby he might the better kéepe them vnder awe.
            The knowledge of warre therefore and the exerciſe of armes are eſpecially to be ſought, neither can I tell whether any thing be more noble, by the whiche ſo greate dominions and noble Empires, haue béene purchaſed, kingdomes inlarged, princes preſerued, iuſtice mainteined, good lawes protected, and the Common wealth defended.
            Great is the glorie in the knowledg of warre therfore: neither hath the citie of Athens, atchieued ſo great renoume and glorie, although it merited to be called the mother of all artes & ſciences, as Rome hath done, onely by magnanimitie, and force of Martiall might: which brought ſuch reputation to their Cōmonwealth, that farre and ſtraunge regions, ſought their aliaunce and friendſhip, and thought them ſelues aſſured againſt their enimies, if they had confederation with them, yt in the end, they grewe to ſuch admiration, that for their lenitie and ſurmounting courteſie, they were of all men

beloued, & for their valiante magnanimitie, they were of all men feared. Neither was this magnificence, vpholdē by doing wrong & iniurie, for they neuer attēpted warres but for things in claime, or in defence of league friends. Then as Cicero ſaith? The Senat might rather haue beene tearmed, the protection, hauen,
               Tull. officiis. Lib. i. 
               & refuge of kings, people, & nations, more truly then the Empire of the world. Neither were they found raſhe to enter into warrs hedily, although they had occaſiō, as did appeare at ye citie of Sagunto, where ye people of Carthage brake ye league, & defied peace: yet the Senate ſent thither Ambaſſadour Fabius Maximus, wt two tables, the one conteining peace, the other warres, putting the election to their owne choice, as it liked them ſelues to chooſe, although the Romans them ſelues, could beſt defend their cauſe. But did the Romanes gaine this glorie by enuring themſelues, to liue in delicat idlenes, in dicing, in carding, in danſing, in whoring, in banqueting, in reueling, & in royſting: no, but ordayned moſt ſharpe & bitter puniſhments to expell them, & with diſgrace to dant thoſe, that were the practiſers, and followers of them.
            Where contrarily, to prouoke & prick forward Martiall mindes, and manly wightes, to the ſtudie of chiualrie & Martiall affaires, they ordeined glorious triumphes, liberall rewards, and honorable titles: which was the verie cauſe, that the citie grew to be ſo great, & large in Empire: for where valiaunce, & proweſſe, was ſo honorably rewarded, not onely noble men, but alſo inferiour perſons, were ſo inflamed with deſire of renowme, that no daunger was lefte vndelte withall, nor no perill left vnproued, where there was glorie to bée gayned, or ye ſafetie of their contrie might be preſerued.
            The two Decii, by race and birth were no gentlemen borne, yet by their valiaunce and fortitude, they aſpired

to the higheſt type of dignitie in their Commonwealth, and in their countries defence, conſecrated themſelues, as valiant and vowed veſſels, to glorie & immortalitie.
            Neither was Lucius Martius, borne but of a meane parentage, yet for his puiſſaunce ſhewed in Spaine, he receiued of his countrie, great honor and principalitie.
            By theſe means, the liberties of their countries were moſt ſtrongly defended, and the indifferencie of their lawes were chiefely mainteined, where wel doing is ſo liberally rewarded.
            For what greater diſhonour may there be in a Cō
               mon wealth, then where worthie acts & high attempts receiue but colde rewarde? Or what rewarde may that countrie thinke too much to beſtowe on him that hath not ſpared his owne life to fight in the defence?
            There be ſundrie examples in the holy ſcripture, tending to the ſame effect: for when the children of Iſrael, were purſued by Pharaoh, & that they began to ſtagger in the promiſes of God: the Tribe of Iuda, did manifeſtly ſhewe foorth, farre greater courage and valiance, then the reſt, who lingered not nor drewe backe, but with a marueilous conſtancie, by the example of Moſes aduentured firſt the ſea, by whoſe ſtout ſtomaches, the reſt were incouraged to followe: For which facte, the people of Iuda, were euer afterwardes, more honoured then the reſt, and ſuch had the principalitie amongſt the twelue tribes, as were deſcended of this tribe of Iuda.
            
            
               Cronicles. 2. Cap 8.In like manner Solomon, made the Hethites, the Amorites, the Phereſites, the Heuites, and the Iebuſites, to become tributaries, and to labour in the buildinges: but of the children of Iſrael, he made men of warre, capteines, great Lordes, and rulers,
            And Socrates in a certeine fable vſeth theſe wordes:

               All you that liue in one citie, are brethrē, being ſtreightly linked and vnited together: but when God created you, he gaue not euerie one a like propertie, for they that were moſt mete to rule, he tempered with gold: & thoſe that in defence of their countrie would valiantly aſsiſt kings & princes, he mingled them with ſiluer: & to ſuch as ſhoulde applie themſelues to tillage, and other meane occupations, he beſtowed braſſe and yron: nowe it falleth out generally, that they ingender children like to them ſelues: but ſometimes it happeneth, a golden father to haue a childe of ſiluer: ſome other time, a ſiluer father, to haue a golden ſonne. He willeth therefore, that they ſhoulde take in no one thing, more ſpeciall regarde, then diligently to ſearch, with what mettall their childrens mindes be tempered with, ſo that if there be found any braſſe or yron in their childrens ſenſes, they ſhoulde aſſigne them, ſuch a trade conuenient, & agreeing with their groſſe & rude nature: but if they finde in them any golde, or ſiluer, they ſhould beſtowe on them honourable roomes, & that they ſhould be trained vpp, in the knowledge of Martiall affaires.
            
            The Romanes, ordeined for that purpoſe, a long & ſpacious fielde, which they called, Campus Martius, wherin the youth of the citie, were exerciſed in Martiall feates, and to enure their bodies, both for their owne health, & alſo that they might be made, the more profitable members for their Cōmon wealth in the time of warres.
            The Lacedemonians vſed their children to goe barefooted, exerciſing them in running, in leaping, & in caſting ye darte, in which exerciſes, they were continually practiſed: from whēce Diogenes, on a time returning, & going to Athens, was aſked from whence he came, and whither he woulde: I come (ſaide he) from amongeſt

men, and am going among women.
            I wonder if Diogenes were nowe liuing, and going into England, whither he would ſay he were going, if he were demaunded: where we be wholie nouſeled in wantonneſſe, and onely nouriſhed in deintineſſe, both in minde, manners, and dyet: where we be altogether made ſtraungers to Martiall actions, and vtterly alienated from lawes, and déedes of armes, where no conſideration is had of Martiall mindes: where prouiſion for defence is neuer called in queſtion.
            Here peraduenture, ſome will ſay vnto mée, Good ſir, if you would but put on your ſpectacles, and looke into the Tower of London, you might ſée that neyther ordinaunce, ſhott, poulder, pike, caliuer, armour, nor any other furnitures conuenient for the warres were any whit lacking: from thence, if it pleaſed you but to ſayle downe in Graueſend Barge, you haue but fiue myles to Rocheſter, where you might likewiſe take ye view of ſo worthie a fleete of royall ſhips, as no Prince in Europe may make compariſon with the like. Call you not theſe prouiſions of defence, where no munitions fit for the warres, are any whitt wanting?
            Verie true in déede, which doth argue the ſpeciall care her Maieſtie hath euer had, not onely in making of ſuch prouiſion, but alſo at ſundrie times, ſhée hath likewiſe inſtituted diuerſe good ordinaunces for the trayning of men, the which hath béene ſtill diſcontinued, by her ſubiectes, ſuch as will pyne at the ſpending of one pound of poulder towardes the practiſing of thoſe that ſhould fight for their ſafetie.
            Wherefore I néed vſe no other aunſwere, then king Philip vſed to that noble Capteine Antipater, which was this.
            
               What feareſt thou man, any Capteine of Athens?

Their Gallies and their Peere are but trifles and toyes vnto mee: For what account is to be made of thoſe fellowes that giue themſelues to daunſing, hoyting, banquetting, and to bellie cheere, that if Demoſthenes onely were not amongeſt them, I would ſooner gett Athens then Thebes, or Theſſalia, &c. So, to what effect ſerue all theſe warrelike furnitures, where there are not men experienced to vſe them: & where men be trayned onely in pleaſure, howe vnapt be they to indure the perplexities of warre: and howe hardly are they faſhioned to the vſe of weapons, that neuer haue had any exerciſe in them: and with what difficultie are they prepared to the field, when they haue neuer béene accuſtomed to marche?
            But I haue hearde many ſay, that ſouldiers may well be trayned in one moneth, and made fit for the warres: and in déede I am of this opinion, that he that in one moneth wil not learne the vſe of his weapon, whereto he ſhall be ſorted, and to learne to marche in order of array, being throughly inſtructed by a diligent and painefull Capteine, I am fully reſolued, that that man will neuer make good ſouldier. But as our Souldiers in Englande are acuſtomably leuied, a Capteine ſhall haue muche to doe, to make a greate parte of them for euer being Souldiers at all.
            But admitte, that Souldiers may be trained and made readie in one moneth, yet during that ſpace, our enimies would committ greater ſpoiles vppon vs, then wee ſhould be able to recouer againe in ſixe wéekes after.
            Moreouer in the day of ſeruice, I had rather haue one thouſande ſuch as haue alreadie ſéene and entred ſkirmiſhe with the enimie, then foure thouſande of ſuch haſtie mad Souldiers, that are but trained vp, as it were

at a Midſummer ſight, or at the fetching home of a Maypole. For proofe hereof, I could ſhewe many examples, but it were but in vaine, conſidering there is no man of reaſon, but will conceiue it to be true: and ſuch as haue experience will confeſſe I am nothing deceiued in my opinion.
            And to ſaye the trueth, if in Englande we ſhoulde haue néede to vſe any reaſonable number, there woulde hardly be founde conductors, ſuch as be ſufficient in déede for the training of them.
            For Gentlemen that are deſcended of honourable families, in theſe dayes, giue themſelues rather to become Battalus knightes,Battalus an effeminate man. then Martiall wights, & haue greater deſire to be practiſed in Carpet trade, then in that kinde of vertue, which extendeth it ſelfe to the common profite, and preſeruation of the countrie.
            And I cannot but marueile, what moueth ſo many men, to make ſuch great account of their gentilitie, that they thinke themſelues worthie of ſuch honour and eſtimation: and yet haue no regarde to the renowme or preeminence, that is annexed vnto it: for as Cicero ſaith:Tull. officiis. Lib. i. 
               Truely, the beſt inheritaunce that fathers leaue to their children, and more worthie then all liuelod, is the glorie of vertue, and worthie deedes, whereunto to be a ſtaine, it is to be accompted both vice and ſhame.
            
            But what reputation bring they to their houſes, that licentiouſly, in ryot, rometh to and fro, not knowing in what faſhion to diſguiſe them ſelues, what countenance they ſhould beare in the ſtreates, nor with what curioſitie they ſhould giue intertainment, furniſhed with thrée or foure Frenche, Italian, or Spaniſhe wordes, thinking that the whole glorie conſiſted in being newfangled in their apparell, ſtraunge in their conceiptes, and as daintie in their dietes, as dame Follie

her ſelfe, when ſhée is going of her firſte childe. To be ſhorte, in Englande,
               A good exchang Gentlemen haue robbed our women of their mindes, and our women haue béereued vs of halfe our apparell.
            Where Gentlemen ought rather to indeuour themſelues to ſuch exerciſes of vertuous actes, whereby they might giue ſuch cleare light, and purchaſe true fame to their poſteritie, according as their predeceſſours haue left vnto them, of which they them ſelues do ſo mightily boaſt of: and eſpecially, to giue them ſelues to ſuche exerciſes, wherein labour prepareth the bodie to hardineſſe, and the minde to couragiouſneſſe, neither ſuffering the one to be marred with tendernes, nor the other to be hurt with idleneſſe.
            As we reade of Sardanapalus, who was ſcorned as an effeminate King, who choſe rather to ſitt & ſpinne amongſt women, then to learn to weld weapons: againſt whom, when Belochas and Arbaſes made inſurrection, he fled and durſt not ſhewe him ſelfe in the fielde.
            
               Xenophon maketh mention howe Hercules being but a young man, muſing wherevnto he might applie his noble minde, there appeared vnto him two goodly young women, the one verie gorgious and braue, with ringes on her fingers, a chayne about her necke, her haire ſet and frizeled, with pearles and diamonds in her eares: the other ſober in her chéere, comely in her apparell, modeſt in her behauiour, ſhamefaſt in her countenaunce. The firſt ſaide: Hercules, if thou wilt ſerue me, thou ſhalt haue gold and ſiluer ynough, thou ſhalt féede deintily, thou ſhalt liue Princely, thou ſhalt inioy pleaſures, imbrace delightes, poſſeſſe mirth. In fine, thou ſhalt haue all things to thine owne contentation, that apperteine to eaſe, reſt, and quietneſſe. Then ſpake the other with demure countenaunce: If thou wilt ſerue

mée Hercules, thou ſhalt be a Victor of Conquerours, thou ſhalt ſubdue kingdomes, and ouerthrowe kinges: thou ſhalt be aduaunced vnto fame, renowmed in the world, and ſhalt deſerue praiſe both of man and womā. Hercules perceiuing the idle ſeruice of the firſt, and the fame and renowme that was to be gained by the ſecond, choſe her for his maiſtris: and I think ſent the other into England, where at this preſent ſhée is dutifully ſerued.The cauſe why gentlemen do not deſire to be ſouldiers. But I thinke the verie occaſion why many doe not indeuour themſelues to practiſe to be ſouldiers now in England, is becauſe they ſée thoſe fewe that be there alreadie to thriue ſo ilfauouredly by their occupation, yt they rather ſéeke to indeuour themſelues, where there is either pleaſure or profite to be gained, which is not in ſouldierfare, & therefore makes them to become either Courtiers, Lawyers, or Louers. The Court, I confeſſe is a place requiſite for gentlemen to knowe, ſo their mindes might not be ſeduced with the vanities thereof, whereby they ſhould be enticed, not to followe other exerciſes, tending more to their honour and eſtimation: & forſake thoſe places, where greater glorie is to be gayned then any doth ordinarily atteine vnto, that conſumes their dayes wholy in the court: for he yt fully frames him ſelf to becom a courtier, muſt likewiſe fraught his head ſo full of courting toyes, that there will be no roome left, to cōſider of matters aperteining more to his credite.The maner of our young courtiers. For the moſt in number of our young courtly gentlemen thinke that ye greteſt grace of courting conſiſteth in proude and hautie countenaunces to ſuche as knowe them not, to be verie faire ſpoken, bountifull & liberall in wor
                  •
                to all men,But nothing in deedes. to be curious in cauilling, propoūding captious queſtions, therby to ſhew a ſingularitie of their wiſedomes: for the helping whereof, they diligently ſtudie bookes for the purpoſe, as Cornelius

Agrippa, de vanitate ſcientiarum, and other like: to ſéeme to talke of farre and ſtraunge countries, of the maners of the people, of the fertilitie of ſoyles, and by ye way of communication, able to diſpute of all things, but in déede to knowe nothing, to apply their pleaſant wits to ſcoffing, quipping, gybing, and taunting, whereby they may be accompted merrie conceipted gentlemen, & with all, they muſt learne to play the paraſites, or elſe I can tell them, they will neuer learne to thriue. And in their apparell, they muſt be verie nyce and neat, with their ruffes finely ſet, a greate bundle of feathers thruſt into a cappe, which muſt likewiſe be of ſuch a bigneſſe, that it ſhalbe able to holde more witt then thrée of them haue in their heades. They muſt be raſhe in their iudgements, curious in their conceiptes, they muſt be bold, ſaucie, and mallapert, which they them ſelues terme to be good audacitie. They muſt be readie to eſpie euery mans faultes, but not to ſée their owne follie. But what ſhould I ſtand to decypher the vanities of our courtiers, which are alreadie ſo painted forth in their colours, and that by ſo many men, as I doe but waſte the time in vaine about them. I do likewiſe acknowledge, that the lawe is eſpecially to be practiſed by gentlemen.Of Lawyers. For as the lawe it ſelfe is moſt honourable amongeſt men: ſo thoſe that ſhould be practiſers, profeſſours, and miniſters of the lawes, ought likewiſe to be of credite and eſtimation.
            But our Innes of court in theſe days are ſo furniſhed with ſhomakers ſonnes, taylers ſonnes, Inholders ſonnes, farmers ſonnes, & almoſt there is not ſo meane a man, but his ſonne muſt go to the Innes of court, and they when they haue gotten a little lawe, becauſe they will not mend ſhooes, and do as their fathers haue done before them, there is no ho in their getting, no meaſure

in their taking, no meane in their bribing, nor no reaſon in their extorting.
            Theſe be they, that by lawe will peruert lawe, and what one lawe doeth make, they will bring another lawe ſhall marre. Theſe be they that laughe, when other men mourne, and that make them ſelues riche, by other mennes follies: and theſe be the only men that bring Lawe and Lawyers into ſuch exclamations.
            
               Of Louers.But of all other people that doe moſte ſurmount in vanities, are thoſe that in ſuch contagious paſſions, cō
               ſume their time in loue, that as Marcus Aurelius doth affirme, he that doth once fall in loue with another, doth euen then begin to hate him ſelfe.
            It hath many times béen had in queſtion, frō whence the furie of this maladie ſhould ſpring, but the greateſt parte do conclude, that the original thereof doth procéed of idleneſſe.
            Loue, where it once taketh holde, it tormenteth the patients with ſuch ſtraunge and bitter paſſions, that it reduceth reaſon into rage,The effect of Loue. pleaſure into paine, quietnes into carefulnes, mirth into madneſſe, neither maketh it any exceptions of perſons, eyther old or young, riche or poore, weake or ſtrong, fooliſh or diſcréete, that as Peter Bouayſtuan, a notable Frenche author doth write, that if all the louers that are in the world, were made in one whole armie,Cupides band. there is neyther Emperour, nor Monarche, but would be amazed to ſée ſuch a companie of Bedlem fooles in a cluſter.
            But he that ſhould take the viewe of their countenaunces, geſts, maners, furies & al their frantiké toys, might confeſſe that he neuer ſawe a more ſtrange Metamorphoſis, or a ſpectacle more ridiculous to laugh at. If at any time they haue receiued a merrie coūtenance of their beloued, good God how gay ſhall you ſée them in

their apparell, howe chéerefull in their countenaunce, howe pleaſant in their conceiptes, how merrie in their moodes: then they bathe in brookes of bliſſe, they ſwim in ſeas of ioy, they flowe in floudes of felicitie, they houer all in happineſſe, they flie in ſwéete delightes, they baniſh all annoy.
            Contrarily, if they receiue a lowring looke, then you ſhall ſee them drowned in dumpes, they pleade with pitious plaintes, they crie with continuall clamours, they forge, they fain, they flatter, they lie, they forſwere, otherwhiles falling into deſperate moodes, that they ſpare not to blaſpheme the gods, to curſe the heauens, to blame the planetes, to raile on the deſtinies, to crie out vppon the furies, to forge hell, to counterfeite Siſiphus, to playe Tantalus, to faine Titius, to grone with Prometheus, to burne the winter, to fréeſe the ſummer, to lothe the night, to hate the day, with a thouſand other ſuch ſuperſtitious follies, too long for me to reherſe.
            Now, if he be learned, and that he be able to write a verſe, then his penne muſt plie to paint his maiſtreſſe praiſe, ſhe muſt then be a Pallas for her witte, a Diana for her chaſtitie, a Venus for her face, then ſhee ſhall be praiſed by proportion, firſt her haires are wires of golde, her chéekes are made of Lillies and redde Roſes, her brows be arches, her eyes Saphires at the leaſt, her lookes lighteninges, her mouth Corall, her téeth Pearles, her pappes Alabaſter balles, her bodie ſtreight, her belly ſofte, from thence downwarde to her knées I think is made of Sugar Candie, her armes, her hands, her fingers, her legges, her féete, and all the reſt of her bodie, ſhalbe ſo perfecte, and ſo pure, that of my conſcience the worſt parte they wil leaue in her, ſhalbe her ſoule.
            But what néede I heape vp ſo many wordes in this

matter? My penne hath not ye power to paint their doating deuiſes: neither do I mind otherwiſe then to wiſh, ye gentlemen ſhould ſet aſide all ſuch trifling affaires, and vaine follies, & to ſhake off thoſe delightfull deſires, and rather to indeuour them ſelues, to ſuch exerciſes, which haue gained Hercules, Achilles, Theſeus, Caius Marius, Epaminondas,
               The beſt exerciſes for gentlemen to follow. 
               Themiſtocles, Alexander, Pyrrhus, Hanibal, Scipio, Pompeie, Caeſar, with diuerſe others, ſuch immortall glorie, as neither the enuious rage of cruel death may blemiſhe, neither the furious force of fortunes fickle whéele may diminiſh, neither the tracts of deuouring time ſhal euer be able to remoue frō memorie. And I woulde to God, that while time doth yet ſerue vs in England, that ſuch care might be had for the training and practiſing of men, that we ſhoulde not be founde altogether ſo careleſſe, that to ſatiſfie all our voluptuous pleaſures,A ſpeciall cauſe to be conſidered on, if it be not too late. we neuer conſider the preſeruation of our countrie and Common wealth. So likewiſe, if it be not altogether too late, as I feare me it is, I would wiſhe that an other thing were looked vnto, and that verie narrowly, wherein we haue made ſuch a rod for our owne tayles, as there is no queſtion, but in the end it muſt of force endure to be our owne ſcourge: & this it is. We had in Englande, ſo greate a benefite, as it might haue béene vſed, as no other countrie inuironing about vs, is poſſeſſed with ye like, which is the caſting of yron ordinaunce: but as the prouerbe is, that euerie commoditie bringeth his diſcommoditie, ſo this commoditie, bringeth vs double diſcōmoditie. Firſt in the caſting, it conſumeth vs our woods and timber, in ſuch ſort, that one of the firſt thinges that England ſhall want, wilbe of timber for ſhips, which is all made hauocke on, only about thoſe yron mills, in the end comes M. merchant, who cares not for his own priuat gaine, what miſchief he worketh to his countrie: or ſomtimes

ſome olde bruſed ſouldier, that hath ſerued the Quéene in her warrs, about London, Lambeth Marſhes, or the out Iles of Iſlington, all the dayes of his life, and in reſpect of his good ſeruice, muſt get a commiſſion, to ſel two or thrée hundred péeces of this yron ordinance out of the realme, that betwéene M. merchant and him, I dare vndertake, there is thrice as muche ordinaunce ſolde out of the Realme, as is within the Realme, and that ſome of our merchaunts haue fealt. For Iohn the Frenche man, hath béene at hoſt with ſome of their ſhips, and Dauie dronkarde of Fluſhing, & his fellowes haue not béen behinde, & theſe with other mo, were not able to go ſo ſtrōgly to ye ſea, were it not that they were furniſhed with our Engliſh ordinance. The Spaniards & Portingales, haue ſome pretie ſtore of it. In Fraunce there is Rochel, Roſco, S. Mallous, & Deepe, their ſhips be generally as well furniſhed with our ordināce as any merchaunts ſhips in the Thames. The mightie hound of Dunkerke, & the reſt of the begels that were of her conſort, God knowes, had béen able to haue made but a ſlender crie, when they had come to chaſe, had it not bin for our Engliſh barks. The other parts of Flanders, Zeland, & Holland, both vppon the walles of their townes, & alſo in their ſhipping, are furniſht with the like. I haue ſéene euerie ſtreate in Fluſhing, lie as full of Engliſhe ordinance, as if it had béene the Tower Wharfe of London. To be ſhorte, there are diuerſe townes in Eaſt Freeſland, with Emden, Hambrougbe, Denmarke, Danſke, Lubeck, Rye, Reuell, Swethen, with diuerſe other cities, and towns, of thoſe Eaſt parts, that ſhe is but a verie meane and ſimple Hulke, aperteining to any of theſe places, which hath leſſe then a dozen or ſixtéene péeces, of our Engliſh ordinaunce in her.
            Such hath béene the careleſnes of this our peaceable time, that it hath not onely made vs weake, by our

owne neglecting the feates of armes, but alſo with our owne artillerie, and our warlike munitions, we haue made ſuch ſtronge, as be our doubtfull friendes, nay rather, I may ſaye our aſſured enimies, as I feare me wee ſhall finde, if they were at quietneſſe amongeſt themſelues.
            And thus once againe I can but wiſh, that ſuch conſideration might be had of the time that is preſent, as in the time that is to come, we ſhoulde not haue cauſe to rue it.
            And here although I knowe my ſkill will not ſerue me, nor my occaſion at this time may well permit me, to ſpeake of Martiall diſcipline, howe farre it is decayed from the firſt ordinaunce, and inſtitution, yet gentle reader, not doubting but thou wilt beare with me, aſwell for the want of the one, as for the neceſſitie of the other, I wil aduenture to ſpeake ſome thing thereof.
         
         
            The fourth parte conteining the decay of Martiall diſcipline.
            
               I Haue alreadie ſhewed in the firſt parte of this booke, howe vppon ſundrie quarells, warrs may be attempted without any offence to the maieſtie of God.
            In thoſe warres therefore thus taken in hand, and vppon ſuch ſufficient cauſe, it ſhould ſéeme likewiſe as requiſite and neceſſarie that as great regard ſhoulde be vſed in the appointing of lawes, diſciplines, & orders, the which not only among them ſelues, but alſo to their vtter enimies ought inuiolably to be kepte according to the iuſtice and equitie of the cauſe: for the

which they be entred into armes.
            We do finde in the holy ſcriptures, and that in ſeuerall places, both in the bookes of Moſes, in the booke of Ioſua, and others, where they haue vſed no litle regard aſwell in the chooſing of their capteines, leaders, and conductors, as alſo in their preſcribing lawes, & diſciplines of warre, which were many times appointed by the almightie God himſelfe.
            But let vs peruſe the examples of ye 
               Romanes, which of all other people did moſt excéed, aſwell for the greatnes of their glorie, as in all their other Martial actions, and we ſhall finde, that they had not onely conſideration to the equitie of their cauſe, for the which they would enter into warres (as by theſe wordes of Tullie, in his firſt book of Offices may better appeare: And the iuſtice of warre, is moſt ſincerely deſcribed in the Pheſiall lawe of the people of Rome, wherby it may be perceiued, that no warre is iuſt, but which either for thinges in claime is moued, or elſe proclaimed before, and bidden by defiance &c.) But alſo they had as great regard, to maintaine their quarelles, with like equitie and iuſtice,The Romanes alowed of no warre which was vnfaithful, either that was mainteined by vnlawfull meanes. not ſuffering their capteines to enter into actions of treaſon or trecherie, where their warres were altogether arreared vpon cauſes of honeſtie, as by many examples they did plainly ſhewe.
            When king Pyrrhus, vnprouoked had moued wars againſt the Romans, one Timochares whoſe ſonne was yeoman for the mouth to the king, promiſed to Fabricius, then being Conſul, to ſlea king Pyrrhus, which thing being reported to the Senat, they preſently warned king Pyrrhus, to beware of ſuche manner of treaſons, ſaying, the Romanes mainteined their wars with armes, and not by treaſon or trecherie.
            Likewiſe, when Lucius Pius, in a banquet that hee

made, had filled the people of Sarmatia full of wine, and made them ſo dronke, that they yelded themſelues ſubiecte to Rome, for which exploit, Lucius Pius at his returne required triumph, but when the Senators vnderſtanding the manner of his facte, cauſed him openly to be beheaded, and a ſlaunderous epitaph ſet vpon his graue. Neither would they ſuffer that ſouldier, which amongſt other being taken by Hanibal, and licenced vppon his oth to departe, conditionally that he ſhoulde either make returne, or elſe ſende his raunſome, the ſouldier with others of his companions, being departed the campe of Hanibal, feigned an arrand backe againe, for ſomething that he had forgotten, and thus comming to Rome, did thinke him ſelf diſcharged of his oth: but the Senate alowing of no ſuch deceipt to be vſed, made a decrée, that the ſame ſouldier, ſhould be caried pinioned to Hanibal. And ten other, that in like manner, were diſmiſſed by Hanibal, vppon their othe: were ſeſſed at a yerely fine, as long as any of them did liue, for being for ſworne. So nobly were the Romanes diſpoſed, and ſo honourably minded, that no act was alowed of amongſt them, ſéemed it neuer ſo profitable, wherein was founde either fraud or deceipt. And this magnificence, gate thē condigne cōmendations of their verie enimies, & betwéene whom there had béen mortall hoſtilitie, and many times was of greater effect to ſubdue thē, then huge or mightie armies. And as they did excel in the excellencie of theſe vertues, iuſtice and equitie, to ſuch as were able to ſtande in armes againſt them: ſo likewiſe they did ſurmount in humanitie & courteſie, & in miniſtring of comfort, to ſuch as they had alreadie vanquiſhed and ſubdued, as by no example may be better expreſſed, then by a letter written, by Marcus Aurelius Emperour of Rome, to Popilio, captein of the Parthies, a notable diſcourſe for capteines to peruſe, and foloweth in this maner.

               I can not denie the glorie I haue gained by this battel, neither may I hide the perplexitie I feele for thy preſent miſfortune: for noble mindes are bound to ſhew no leſſe compaſſion, to ſuch as are ſubdued, then to expreſſe ioy & gladneſſe with thoſe that are victors. Thou being the chiefe of the Parthies, dideſt ſhewe great courage to reſiſt, & in me the leader of the Romanes, was found no want of force to fight: notwithſtanding, though thou loſt the battell, and I remaine poſſeſſed of the victorie, yet as I know, that thou wilt not acknowlege this chāce to happen for any want of ſtomache in thee, ſo it belongs to my grauitie not to attribute it altogether to the greatnes of my vertue, ſithens God doth always miniſter victories, not to ſuch as doe their duties beſt, but to thoſe that he loueth moſt: for the effect of al things depending vpon God, man can haue no power to cōmaund the deſtinie of a battell, ſeing he is not able to ſtay the courſe of the leaſt planet in heauen. Darius againſt Alexander, Pompeius againſt Caeſar, Hanibal againſt Scipio, had aboue all equalitie, far greater armies then their enimies, by whiche thou haſt reaſon to conclude with mee, that againſt the anger of the ſouereigne God, can not preuaile moſt huge and mightie hoaſtes. I meruell Popilio, that being great in birth, valiant of ſtomach, welthy in goods and mightie in eſtate & dignitie, why thou beareſt with ſuch ſorow, the loſſe of this batel, ſeing that in no worldly things fortune is more vncerteine and variable, then in the action of warre. It is tolde me, thou draweſt to ſolitarie corners, & ſeekeſt out ſhaded places, thou eſcheweſt the conuerſation of men, and complaineſt of the gods, which extreme perplexities, ſince thou wert not wont to ſuffer in others much leſſe oughteſt thou to giue place in thy ſelfe: for that the valiant man, loſeth no reputation, for that fortune fayleth him, but is the leſſe

eſteemed of, if he want diſcretion to beare her mutabilitie.
            
            
               To aſſemble great armies, is the office of Princes, to leuie huge treaſures, belongs to ſouereigne Magiſtrates, to ſtrike the enimie is the parte of a couragious capteine: but to ſuffer infirmities and to diſſemble miſhaps, is a propertie duely annexed to noble and reſolute mindes: ſo that one of the greateſt vertues that worldly men can expreſſe, in the common behauiour of this life, is neither to riſe proude by proſperitie, nor to fall into deſpaire by aduerſitie. For Fortune hauing a free will, to come and goe when ſhee liſt: the wiſe man ought not to bee ſorie to loſe her, nor reioyce to hold her. Such as in their miſerie ſhewe heauie countenaunce, doe well proue, that they made accompt to be alwayes in proſperitie, which is a great folly to thinke, and no leſſe ſimplicitie to hope for: Seing the giftes and graces of Fortune haue no better thing more certeine in them, then to be for the moſte part, in all things moſt vncerteine, according to the ſucceſſe of the day, wherein thou gaueſt mee battell: for there thou orderedſt thy campe according to a wiſe capteine, madeſt choiſe of the place, in great policie, tookeſt aduauntage of the ſunne, as a leader of long experience, in conſideration of which things, thou haſt cauſe to complaine againſt thy fortune, which fauoured not thy vertue, and not blame thy diſcretion, wherein could bee found no errour.
            
            
               Conſider that in wiſe and graue men, it is an office, that if they cannot doe what they will, at the leaſt they yeld to time, and are content with what they may. And as the vertuous and valiant minde, ought not to grieue for not obteining that which he woulde, but becauſe he deſired that which he ought not: ſo Popilio, I wiſh thee take heede, that the honour which ſo many times thou

haſt wonn, with the hazard of thy valiant perſon, in enterpriſes of warre, be not loſt at this preſent, for want of bearing well thy fortune: aſſuring thee, that he beares his miſerie beſt, that hides it moſt. And as of all voluble things, there is nothing more light then renowme: ſo in caſes of warre and hazarde, it is not ynough for the valiant man to do what he may, but alſo he is bound to attempt nothing but what he ought: for aſwell the conſideration as the execution of a fact, belonges duely to a diſcreete minde.
            
            
               I heare thou wandereſt here and there in great vncerteintie of minde, fearing that if thou be taken of my ſouldiers thou ſhalt be euill intreated of mee, which if no man haue tolde thee, it is againſt reaſon thou beleeue it of thy ſelfe, becauſe to vs Princes of Rome, it is familiar to ſhewe our liberalitie to ſuch as yeld to vs, & with others that are our priſoners to cōmunicate in great clemencie. We raiſe armies againſt campes proudly furniſhed, and Cities ſtrongly walled, but to captiues in thy condition, we hold it more honourable to miniſter comfort then to add increaſe of affliction. For as it ſufficeth the valiant Capteine to fight againſt the enimie that reſiſteth him, and diſſemble with him that flyeth: ſo the wiſe man ought to require no more of his enimie, then that he acknowledge that hee ſtandes in feare of him, becauſe to a daunted and timorous heart, is ſildome lefte courage to renue an enterpriſe. And therefore a man takes greater reuenge, when he putteth his enimie to flight, then if he take his life from him. For the ſworde diſpatcheth a man in a day, but feare and remorſe tormentes the minde continually. And better it were to ſuffer without feare that which we expect in griefe and ſorowe, then by feare to be alwayes in martyrdome. It is right terrible to fleſhe and bloud to dye of a ſworde, but

to be in perpetuall ſorrowe and diſquiet of mind, is the verie furie and torment of hell.
            
            
               If thou eſcheweſt my preſence, in feare that I wil not vſe pittie to thee, thou art abuſed in the opinion of my diſpoſition, and doſt wrong to the reputation and experience of my actions paſt. For I neuer refuſed to ſhewe mercie to him that aſked it, & much leſſe deceiued him that put his truſt in mee. The doubt and feare that thus do trauell thy mind, ought not to be ſo much of my perſon, as of the cuſtome of fortune, who vſeth not to vnloſe her ſharp arrowes with better wil againſt any then ſuch, as think they be in beſt ſecuritie of her: her nature being ſuch, as not to meddle with thoſe that ſhee findes prepared, the better to aſſure them, but followeth the fearfull & negligent, to the end to deceiue them: yea, ſhe preuailes euen ouer the counſels and actions of men, and being exempt to make reckoning to any, her prerogatiue is to require accompt of all men. I aſſure thee Popilio, that more do I feare the reuolution of Fortune at this houre, then I doubted her before the battell. For ſhee delightes not ſo much to keepe vnder the vanquiſhed, as to bridle and checke the victors. And worſſe doeth ſhee meane, when ſhee ſmiles the faireſt, then when ſhee frownes moſte. But to ſpeake on thy behalfe, I tell thee that without daunger thou maiſt reſort to my preſence, ſince in thy eſtate is no cauſe of ſuſpicion, and in my hearte no malice to thy perſon: for in deede, that cannot be called true victorie, which bringeth not with it ſome clemencie. And therefore he cannot be called victorious, in whome reſteth intent of rigour and crueltie. For, Alexander, Iulius Auguſtus, Titus, and Traianus, wonne more renowme by the clemencie they vſed to their enimies, then by all the victories they obteined in ſtraunge regions. To obteine a victorie is a thing naturall & humane,

but to giue pardon and life, is the gifte and bleſſing of God. By which it comes to paſſe, that men feare not ſo much the greatneſſe of the immortall God, for the puniſhments he doth, as for the mercie he vſeth. Notwithſtanding as I cannot denie, but that great is the value & eſtimation, which we Romane Princes make of a victorie wonne by battell: ſo alſo I aſſure thee, wee holde it more honourable, to pardon ſuch as do offend vs, then to chaſtice thoſe that do reſiſt our power.
            
            
               Therefore, if thou flye from my preſence as fearing the iuſtice which I haue executed vpon the Romanes, thou oughteſt to take ſecuritie and courage euen in that whiche makes thee gelous and doubtfull: for ſo muche greater ought to be clemencie, by howe much the offender is in fault. And therefore as there is no offence which cannot be either forgiuen or fauoured, ſo right worthily may that pardon be called honourable and famous, whiche is giuen to an iniurie malicious and manifeſt, ſince all other common and light wrongs with greater reaſon we may ſay we diſſēble them, then that we pardon thē.
            
            
               The thing that moſte drawes mee to enter friendſhip with thee, is for that in our firſt capitulations and truce, thou perfourmedſt all thinges that were concluded for the peace, and yet in the battell thou dideſt expreſſe the partes of a valiant Capteine, the ſame giuing me cauſe to beleeue, that as in warre I founde thee a iuſt enimie, ſo in the time of peace, thou wouldeſt proue an aſſured friend. Alexander neuer repented the pardon he gaue to Diomedes the tyraunt, nor Marcus Antonius the fauour he ſhewed to the great Orator Cicero. Neither ſhall I haue cauſe (I hope) to forethink the reſpite I giue to thy life. For the noble mind, albeit he may haue occaſion to be ſorie for the vnthankefulnes of his friend: yet hath he no licēce to repent him of his good turns done

for him: & therfore, in the caſe of liberalitie or clemencie, by howe much the perſon is vnworthy that receiueth the benefite, by ſo much more he is to be commended that beſtoweth it: for that onely may bee ſaide is giuen, when he that giueth, giueth without reſpect.
            
            
               So that he that giueth in hope of recompenſe, deſerueth not to be called liberall, but to pretend vſurie.
            
            
               Thou knoweſt well that in the time of the battel, and whē the incounter was moſt hot, I offered thee nothing worthy of reproch: euen ſo, thou haſt now to iudge, that if in the furie of the warre, thou foundeſt me faithfull, and mercifull, I haue nowe no reaſon, to exerciſe rigour, holding thee within the precinct of my houſe: ſo that if thou ſawe mercie in mee at that inſtant, when thy handes were buſie to ſpill my bloude, thinke not that my clemencie ſhal faile, calling thee to the fellowſhip of my table.
            
            
               The priſoners of thy camp, can aſſure thee of my dealing, amongeſt whom the hurt are cured at my charges, & the deade are buried according to the place of ſouldiers: wherein if I extend this care vppon ſuch as ſought to ſpoile me, thinke there is farre greater plentie of grace, to thee that comeſt to ſerue me. And ſo leauing thee in the handes of thine owne counſell, I wiſhe thee thoſe felicities, which thy honourable hearte deſireth.
            
            Loe her a mirrour, méete to be peruſed by kinges and princes, wherein they may learne, with what conſideration they ſhould firſt enter into warres, with what valiaunce and courage they ſhoulde proſequute them, and with what iuſtice, temperaunce, and mercie, they ſhould vſe their enimies.
            Capteines may likewiſe learne how to vſe fortune, either when ſhe fauours, either when ſhée frownes.
            
               But leauing a great number of neceſſarie leſſons, worthie to be noted, howe is it poſible in ſo fewe lines, more amply to deſcribe ye glorie of the Romanes: neither are their vertues here ſo liuely painted forth in words, as they them ſelues, did nobly ſhewe it in their déedes.
            But all other examples of humanitie, amongeſt a great number vſed to their enimies, this in my opinion deſerueth not the leaſt commendation, that hauing taken Siphax king of Numantia, who being kept priſoner in the houſe of Tiberias, died of ſickneſſe before he was ranſomed, notwithſtanding now when there was no maner of hope of requitall, his funeralles were yet perfourmed, with ſuch ſolemnitie, ſuche pompe, and ſuch honor, ſuch large giftes were giuen, & ſuch liberalitie vſed, being but a Romane priſoner, as might haue wanted at Numantia, where he was Lord and King ouer all. I haue thus farre briefely, and in this ſhort manner, ſhewed ſome ſmall part of the magnificence of the Romans, in their Martiall actions, whereby may be perceiued, howe farre we be digreſſed, and how cleane we be degenerate at this preſent,Princes more deſireous with tyranie to offend others, then with iuſtice to keepe their owne. from their honorable inſtitutions. For if we conſider in theſe dayes, the impietie that is founde amongeſt Princes, whiche for the moſt part are ſo led by the furie of ambition, where they thinke they may oppreſſe, that without any other reſpect of cauſe they are redy to accompanie themſelues, with a ſort of bloudie capteines, that ſhoulde haue the leading of a companie of as lewd and vngratious ſouldiers, and euen according to their quarelles and to the qualitie of their owne diſpoſitions, they proſecute their warres, and performe all their enterpriſes, the whiche for the moſt part are executed with ſuch treaſon, and trecherie, as no Prince almoſt may be ſo ſurely garded, but his life ſhalbe finiſhed wt ſome deadly blowe with a

weapon, with ſome ſoudeine ſhot of a piſtoll, or at the leaſt practiſed with ſome ſecret poyſon: neither is there any towne, that may be ſo ſurely walled, ſo ſtrongly rampered, or ſo throughly fortified, which ſhall not be betrayed.
            
               The manner howe to proſequute warres in theſe dayes.For in our warres we be nowe come to this paſſe, that fraud and deceipte is reputed for policie, and treaſon and trecherie are called grauitie and wiſedome, and he is holden the nobleſt champion, that by any of theſe meanes can beſt deceiue: where, in the opinion of all men,Deceite hath euer been holden moſt hatefull. whiche exactly doe honour iuſtice, it hath euer ben condemned, & accompted moſt horrible. And no doubts it cannot be acceptable in ye ſight & iudgement of God, who in ye Scripture is called ye God of trueth & veritie: but rather procéedeth from the diuell, who is (in déede) the father of fraude, and the forger of all deceipte.
            
               By whom trecherie is chiefely practiſed in warres.And theſe enormities haue euer béene eſpecially practiſed amongeſt thoſe yt haue arreared warres, rather to oppreſſe and rauiſhe the goodes of others, then amongeſt ſuche as haue but defended their owne right, or entred into warres onely vppon cauſes of iuſtice and equitie, for that it hath béene euer holden a matter moſt inconuenient,The beſt meane to incite men to valiaunce and courage. of an honeſt quarell, to make an vnhoneſt victorie. Neither is there any meane more rather, to incite men to valiaunce and courage, then when they ſhal remember, they goe to fight in a righteous cauſe, according to the opinion of Cicero. Therefore (ſaith he) manlineſſe is well defended of the Stoikes, where they ſay it is a vertue, that fighteth in defence of equitie: Wherefore no man that hath atteined the glorie of manlineſſe, hath euer got prayſe, by wylie traines and craftines, for nothing may be honeſt, that is voyde of iuſtice.
            
            And procéeding further in the ſame place, he expreſſeth a ſaying of Plato, tending to the ſame effect, whiche

is this.
            
               That not onely the knowledge which is ſeuered from iuſtice is rather to be called ſubtiltie, then wiſedome, but alſo the courage which is forwarde to daunger, if it be ſet on for our owne greedineſſe, and not for a common profit, may rather beare the name of lewd hardineſſe, then of manlineſſe.
            
            And for as muche as my ſelfe about a thrée yeares ſithens, did ſet foorth a booke intituled (A dialogue betweene Mercurie and an Engliſhe Souldier) wherein I haue deſcribed, what mildneſſe ſhoulde be mixt with this manhood, with many mo examples of humanitie, and ſundrie other vertues, wherwith noble capteins ſhould be indued, I will therefore omit to vſe any further circumſtance in thoſe cauſes, neither will I further ſpeake of the decay of Martiall diſcipline in generall, but of certeine priuate abuſes, that are vſed amongeſt our ſelues in Englande, in our inſtitutions in the time of warre,Great abuſe in England both in chooſing of capteines and in appointing of ſouldiers. but eſpecially in the election of our capteines, for the moſt part, and our ordinarie manner of appointing of ſouldiers, the whiche although I haue likewiſe in the ſame booke before mentioned, ſomething touched, yet in my opinion, there cannot be too muche ſaid, conſidering the peril that might inſue by ſo great a negligence, and ſo ordinarily committed.
            To ſpeake generally of our capteines, they are many times appointed more for fauour then for knowlege more for friendſhip then for experience, and more for affection borne them by ſome noble man, then either for valiance or vertue: for they are not to be accompted valiant,Not valiaunce but foliſhe hardineſſe. that will offer them ſelues into daunger without iudgement: but rather to be eſtéemed men puft vp with a vaine deſire, and prickt forwardes with a kind of deſperate boldneſſe.
            
               
               Ariſtotle woulde in no wiſe that Diomedes, ſhoulde be reputed either valiaunt or wiſe: for that when the Gréekes were put to flight, he remained alone, and aduentured him ſelfe againſt the force of Hector, whiche he rather did to ſéeke the vaine praiſe, and brute of the people, béecauſe he would not be accounted a runneaway, then in reſpecte of the true and ſouereigne good, wherein conſiſteth the end of vertue, and the glory immortall.
            In like maner he iudged of Hector, who many times beholding his wife, and other women ſtanding vppon the walles of Troy, woulde more boldly and couragiouſly aduenture his life, hauing greater care, leaſt any rumours might haue béene raiſed by women to his diſhonour, then otherwiſe he would haue done, to haue deſerued the title of true honour and vertue.
            But what would Ariſtotle iudge, of a many of our gentlemen in Englande, that will take vpon them to be capteines & conductours, that God knoweth are vtterly ignorant, in the leaſt duetie that apperteineth to a ſimple ſouldier? And howe many times doth it fall out, that where battelles be ordered, by ſuch raſhe and harebrained gouernours, that they ordinarily doe bringe foorth but vnhappie iſſues?
            What auailed the boldnes of Varro, and Flaminius, two Romane capteines, which deſpiſing the proweſſe & crafte of Hanibal, and contemning the ſober counſell of Fabius, hauing onely truſt in their owne hardines, loſt two noble armies whereby the power of the Romanes, was néere vtterly periſhed?
            
               What auaileth boldenes without experience.They are therefore farre from the true praiſe of valliaunce in déede, that will ſo raſhly runne, to hazarde thē ſelues without any maner of knowledge. We be of this opinion in England, (& elſe where,) that a man may

not come to be exactly perfected, in ye meaneſt occupation without ſeauen yeares practiſe, and therfore ordinarily, ſuche as binde their children apprentices, binde them for that ſpace: Is it poſſible then that the art of warre ſhould be ſo ſoudeinly learned,Neuer ſo perfect a ſouldier but hath beene to learne. wherein yet there hath not béene any one founde, though he haue followed the warres all the dayes of his life, which hath not béen in ſome things to ſéeke? Philip king of Macedonia, maruelled why ye 
               Atheniens did euery yeare chooſe new Generalles and Capteines of their warrs, ſithens he in all his life had found but one good, whiche was Parmenio. Plato would not wiſhe, that any man ſhould haue authoritie in warres, till he were 30. yeares olde.
            But Alexander admitted none to the roome of a capteine, that was vnder the age of 60. finally by the generall aſſent of all, there ought no ſmall regarde to be vſed in the chooſing of Capteines.What is requiſie in a capteine, 
               Cicero preſcribeth foure things that ought to be in a Capteine, but eſpecially in a gouernour or general, which is experience, valiaunce, authoritie, and felicitie, to the whiche if you adde theſe foure more, which is iuſtice, fortitude, policie, and temperance, firſt iuſtice to reuenge, fortitude to execute reuengment, policie to prepare the meane whereby to reuenge, and temperaunce to limit and meaſure out how far they ought to reuenge: capteines thus indued with theſe vertues, there is no doubt but they ſhall greatly preuaile.
            Our maner of appointing of ſouldiers,How ſouldiers be appoynted in England. is yet more confuſed then the reſt, they be appointed in the countrie as it pleaſeth Maiſter Conſtable: for if there be any within his circuit, that he is in diſpleaſure withall, he thinkes it ſome part of reuenge, if he ſets him forth to be a ſouldier, but if Maiſter Conſtable be in loue & charitie with his neighbours, then ſome odde fellowe muſte be

picked out that doth leaſt good in the pariſh, it is no matter for his conditions, they thinke he can not be too yll to make a ſouldier of. In London when they ſet foorth ſouldiers, either they ſcoure their priſons of théeues, or their ſtreates of roges and vagabondes, for he that is bound to find a man, will ſéeke ſuche a one as were better loſt then found: but they care not, ſo they may haue them good cheape, what he is, nor from whence he comes, they put him in a ſute of blew, and bring him before maiſter warden of their companie, and then if he can ſhoote in a gonne, he is bild a gonner, but he dares not lette his ſouldier goe out of his ſight with his furniture and his newe apparell, before he hath deliuered him ouer to his Capteine, for if he ſhould, he might fortune to miſſe him when he would haue him.
            
               He that would further ſee the manner of our appointing of capteines and ſouldiers, both how they be and how they ought to be appoynted let him peruſe a booke intituled, A dialogue betweene Mercurie and an Engliſh ſouldier, whiche booke was of my owne ſetting forth.Theſe be they through whoſe abuſes, the name of a ſouldier is béecome ſo odious to the common people: God graunt vs, that we be neuer driuen to trie the ſeruice of ſuche ſouldiers. But bicauſe in my other booke before mentioned, I haue more effectually ſpoken of ſouldiers, and haue giuen ſpeciall note howe ſouldiers ſhoulde be choſen, whiche maketh me thus bréefely to paſſe them ouer: and in like manner I haue done of capteines, there reſteth nowe, to ſhewe what ſeueritie ſhould be vſed, in puniſhing of ſuch as be mutiners, or yt by any maner of meane, wil breake or infringe ye lawes & order of armes, or any other inſtitution or ordinance, directed by the general capteine or any other officer, for what ſhal it auaile to make good orders, vnles they ſhuld be ſurely kept?
            
               Nume. 1. Cap. 16. Mutinie in ſouldiers puniſhed by God.In the booke of Numerie, we doe finde how Corath, Dathan, and Abiram, were ſwallowed vp in the earth, for mutining againſt the capteine Moſes, an euident proofe wherby may be perceiued, how odious it is in the

ſight of God, that ſouldiers ſhould rebell againſt their capteines: They ought therefore to be reſtrained with ſharp & bitter puniſhmentes, and that as often as they ſhall tranſgreſſe, or make any offences.
            But I woulde not in any wiſe wiſhe, that a ſouldier ſhould be puniſhed by the purſe, or that his pay ſhoulde be diminiſhed, whereby he ſhould not be able to mainteine him ſelfe in ſeruice: other puniſhments therfore ought to be prouided, according to the qualitie of their offences.
            
               Manlius Torquatus cauſed his ſonnes head to be ſtriken off, bicauſe he had forſaken the place whereto he was appoynted: although he went to fight with an enimie that had challenged him, and ſlew him.
            
               Saluſt doth report, yt there were more ſouldiers put to death amongeſt the Romanes, for ſetting on their enimies before they had licence, then for running out of the fielde before they had fought.
            And in very déed, in that reſpect there ought no litle regarde to be vſed: for it is not requiſite, that euery priuate capteine, or any other, ſhould raſhly enter into attemptes, of their owne heades, further then they be directed: for otherwiſe, they commonly conclude with vnhappie ends, & many times it doth fall out, that when there is ſome exploite to be vſed, through the wilfulnes of ſome harebrained capteine, or any other that is more forwarde then wiſe, that will aduenture for his owne glorie, further then his direction, it bringeth ouerthrow of altogether. For example. When ye Spaniards lay in ſiege at Zurickzeas, ye Prince of Orenge, by good eſpiall, had vnderſtāding where to annoy them, he ſent certeine bāds into S. Anna land, where they ſhuld haue fortified thē ſelues, in ij. ſeueral places vpon ye diches, which they might wel haue don, conſidering ye nature & ſituation of ye
               
place, by whiche meanes the paſſage by lande ſhoulde haue béen quite cut off, that no victuals could haue come to the campe by lande: and by ſea it was as well garded, with the Princes ſhippes. Theſe companies comming thither by ſea, landed, and did take the places to the whiche they were directed, nowe when they ſhould
                  •
                haue fallen to fortifying, and to haue made them ſelues ſtrong: the one of the companies, perſuaded by two or thrée Duche capteines, which were amongeſt them (as there was in the companie both Engliſhe, French, Wallan, Scotiſhe, and Duche) woulde néedes goe charge certeine Spaniards, whiche did lie hard by them, in a ſtreight they had made: although there were ſome that foreſawe what daunger might inſue, of this pretence, yet they woulde vſe no diſſuaſions, bicauſe it woulde haue béene coniectured, that it had rather procéeded of want of courage, then for any other thing. There was no delay in the matter, but the charge was giuen with courage ynough, but ſo muche to their coſtes, as the Spaniards at that charge, ouerthrew the greateſt part of their beſt and principal men. I wil not ſay they were Engliſhe men, becauſe I haue tearmed them the beſt and principall men. I might be thought to ſpeake parcially. But yet the matter being ſo lately done, and ſo well knowen, I néede not doubte to tell the trueth, they were Engliſhe men in déed, that receiued the greateſt ouerthrowe: for howe coulde it otherwiſe fall out, they were the formeſt that were in the fray: nowe the Spaniards perceiuing what ſpoyle they had giuen, followed the chace of the reſt, killing and ſpoyling of them as they retired, til they were come to a ſlender ſtrength, that was caſt vp, whiche the Spaniardes had entred, had it not béene valiauntly defended, by the reſt of the Engliſhe men that were left, who in the ende, as the

Spaniardes did retire, couragiouſly purſued them againe to their owne ſtrength. By this fooliſhe attempt, this companie was made ſo weake and ſo féeble, that they were driuen to forſake the ground, and to get them againe aborde of their ſhippes, and the Spaniards ſent preſently thither a freſh ſupply of men, by which meanes the Prince could neuer get the like opportunitie againe. The other companie kepte the ſtrength fiue or ſixe dayes, in the end gaue it ouer, and came away: for that it was to ſmall purpoſe, conſidering the loſſe of the firſt. There were manie like parts played in thoſe Holland ſeruices, where I thinke as litle Martial diſcipline was vſed, as in any warres that euer were attempted: Neither had it béene poſſible that the countrie coulde ſo long haue holden out, but that it was by nature ſeated ſo ſtrong: for they might ſo drowne the countrie about them, that it was not poſſible that any enimie ſhoulde conquer them. The Prince him ſelfe was verie wiſe & politike in all his directions, but many times they had but vnhappie ſucceſſe, by the raſhneſſe of ſome of his Capteines, which onely did procéede for want of experience. For many of them were choſen after the Engliſh manner, I meane they had little knowledge, what them ſelues ought to do, & leſſe experience howe to rule their ſouldiers. But leauing Holland cauſes, & to returne againe to the examples of the Romanes, who I ſay were verie ſeuere in the puniſhing of thoſe offences,The Romanes vſed to adioyne the authoritie of God to their owne preſcriptions, the better to keepe their ſouldiers in awe. & the rather to kéepe their ſouldiers vnder awe & diſcipline, they adioyned to their owne lawes & ordinances, the authoritie of God, and vſed with greate ceremonies to make them ſweare to kéepe the diſciplines of warre. Cicero maketh mention howe Pompilius, when he was generall of the Romanes in the Perſian warres, had diſcharged one legion, in the which Catoes ſonne had ſerued

for a ſouldier, and notwithſtanding that he was diſcharged, he remained yet amongſt the other ſouldiers, deſirous to ſée the warres: which Cato vnderſtanding, did write to Pompilius, that if he woulde ſuffer his ſon to remaine in the armie, he ſhoulde ſweare him ſouldier againe, becauſe it was not otherwiſe lawful for his ſonne to fight with the enimie, being diſcharged from his former othe, it did likewiſe diſcharge him for being a ſouldier. The Grecians vſed to ſweare their ſouldiers in this manner, being armed they were brought to the church,The oth that the Grecians gaue to their ſouldiers. where they receiued this othe following. I will not do any thing vnworthie the ſacred and holie warres, neither will I abandon or forſake my bande and Capteine, to whome I am appointed. I will fight for the right of the Church, and ſafetie of the ſtate. I will not make my countrie to be in worſe caſe then it is: but I wil make it better then I found it. And I will euer frame my ſelfe reuerently to obey ſuch orders as are decreed and adiudged: and to lawes eſtabliſhed I will ſtill yeld my ſelfe: and obey thoſe lawes alſo, that the ſtate hereafter, ſhall by common aſſent, enacte or ſet foorth: that if any one man ſhall chaunge the lawes or not obey them, I wil not ſuffer him to my power, much leſſe will I alow in ſo doing: But I wilbe a ſure defender of right, as well by my ſelfe alone, as when I am with others: And I will euer more honour the religion of my countrie:
               No profeſſion more honorable then a ſouldier. 
               to theſe my ſayinges, I call the gods to witneſſe. If this othe were throughly cōſidered on among vs in England, it might peraduenture bring many to haue a better opinion of ſouldiers. For what profeſſion may be more honorable, then where a man ſhall be ſo ſolemnely ſworne, to offer himſelfe as it were to martyrdom for the maintenance of religion: and with the like vowe doth profeſſe to defende the lawes and liberties of his countrie, with the

price of his bloud, and the hazard of his life.
            But eſpecially by this example, both of the Romans and Grecians, may verie well be coniectured, that as they had ſuch conſideration to ſwear their ſouldiers, & men of warre, they would vſe the like reſpect and care, in the chooſing of ſuch as had regarde of their oth, for otherwiſe as good vnſworne, as to miniſter an othe vnto ſuch as care not to be foreſworne. But what othe might be miniſtred vnto our ſouldiers, as they be ordinarily choſen in England, or by what gods might they be made to ſweare by, that ſtande in awe of none at all, neither yet are inclined to any manner of religion?
            But if this example in chooſing of ſouldiers were vſed, and that in the time of ſeruice ſuch might be apointed, as ſhoulde be founde to be honeſt, zealous in religion, and that had the feare of God before their eyes, there is no queſtion, but the diſciplines of warre woulde be more better obſerued, and capteines ſhoulde haue the greater obedience and gouernement of their ſouldiers, whereby we might the better proſper in our warrs, according to the opinion of Xenophon, who ſaith, That ſouldier which firſt ſerueth God, and then obeyeth his capteine, may boldly with all courage, hope to ouerthrowe his enimie.
            
            And Alexander Seuerus ſaith,Obedience the greateſt vertue that may be in ſouldiers. 
               The ſtrength of war lieth in the ſouldier, whoſe greteſt vertue conſiſteth in obedience towards his capteine. When Scipio went into Affrica, to deſtroy Carthage, reſting his armie by the way in Sicilia, a noble mā of ye countrie, ſéeing his ſouldiers exerciſing the feates of arms, demanded of Scipio wherein lay his chiefe hope to ouercome Carthage, who anſwered, in yonder felowes that you ſe, whom if I cō
               mand to runne to ye top of this high caſtel, & to caſt thē
               ſelues backward vppon ye rocks, they will not refuſe, they are in ſuch odedience.
            
               
               Xenophon maketh mention of a ſouldier, who in a ſkirmiſhe hauing ouerthrowne an enimie, as hee was aduauncing his weapon to haue ſlaine him, the trumpet ſounded a retreate, wherewith the ſouldier ſtayed his blowe, and retired himſelfe, this being eſpied by ſome of the companie that was nexte vnto him, demanded what he ment to let his enimie ſo to paſſe, hauing him at ſuch aduantage:A good leſſon for ſouldiers to learne. the ſouldier aunſwered, becauſe (quoth he) I doe holde it farre more honorable, to obey my capteine then to kill my enimie. A noble ſaying of a ſouldier, and worthy to be had in perpetuall memorie.
            
               How obedience is nouriſhed in ſouldiers.This obedience in ſouldiers is nouriſhed by feare & loue: feare is kepte by true iuſtice and equitie: loue is gotten by wiſedome ioyned with liberalitie: for that capteine, that with ſuch righteouſneſſe can ſo rule his ſouldiers, that he wil ſuffer them, neither to doe wrong, neither to receiue iniurie, but with wiſedome & liberalitie will mainteine him in that whiche is right, that Capteine muſt néedes be loued and feared of his ſouldiers, of the which procéedeth true and vnfeigned obedience.
            Thus to conclude, the armie that ſhould be continued in order and diſcipline, muſt be kepte well paide, and ſurely puniſhed:Diſciplin of war beſt mainteined where ſouldiers be kept paide & puniſhed. for many times where ſlacknes of payment is vſed, it turneth into greate inconueniences: & I cannot thinke, but it was the onely cauſe, that loſte king Philip the lowe countries: for when the Spaniardes had taken Zurickzeas, it did ſo amaſe and daunt the ſtates of Holland, as it was thought and looked for, that they rather would haue ſubmitted them ſelues to the kings mercie, and haue ſought by compoſition, to haue receiued the Spaniardes againe, then otherwiſe to haue made hed againſt them: and there were diuerſe townes, as Tregoe for one, where the chiefe Burgers

had ſought ſundrie meanes to haue ſurrendered them ſelues vnto the Spaniardes.
            The Prince was then in Zeland, in the Iſle which is called by the name of Waulkerland, which is the Iſle wherein Middleborough, Fluſhing, Camphyre, & Armue are ſeated, and there it was thought he would haue remained, they neuer looked for him more in Holland. And while the Hollanders were thus in the middeſt of their dumps, liſtening euer when ye Spaniardes ſhould haue taken ye Plaate Iſland, which was hard adioyning vppon Zurickzeas, wherein laye a fewe faint bandes (God knowes) to ſmall purpoſe: From thence the Bryel Iſland was nexte adioyning, the which coulde not haue béene defended, if the Spaniardes had once béene commaunders of the Plaate. The firſte thing the Spaniardes would there haue ſought for, ſhould haue béen the Bryel head, which is nowe verie ſtrongly fortified, but at ye inſtant nothing begun: which if they had once takē, Holland had béene no longer able to haue holden out, for their trade by ſea would haue béene ſoudeinly cutte off, without the which they may not endure, conſidering it is the onely wealth of all their townes, that are to bée accompted of, as Skeydame, Delftes hauen, Roterdame, Delfte, Dorte, Gorcom, all theſe with many other, ſtanding vppon the riuer called the Maaſe, would haue béen ſhut vp, that they ſhould haue had no traffike or paſſage to the ſea.
            Thus (as I ſaide) as the Hollanders were in theſe muſes, coniecturing with themſelues, that this (in déede) was the marke which the Spaniardes ſhotte at, neither wiſt they howe to preuent it: for the taking of Zurickzeas had ſo quailed their courages, & nowe their malice and their money was wel nigh ſpent, that they were hardly able to pay thoſe ſouldiers they had reteined.

In ſo much that a great number of them were prouiding what they were able to make, to packe them into England. But in the middeſt of this perplexitie, and when they were moſte amazed with this terrour, the Spaniardes which were entred Zurickzeas fel in a mutinie amongeſt them ſelues for a paye which had béene of long time behinde, proteſting that they would neuer proſecute further ſeruice, before they were paide: thus they diſcontinued ſeruice, forſaking ſo good occaſion, which euen then had happened vnto them. In the ende, hauing layd a platte amongeſt them ſelues, for the pacifying of theſe matters, all their practiſes were laide open and manifeſt, by letters which were intercepted, by thoſe of Bridges, whereby Flaunders and Brabant, preſently put them ſelues in armes againſt them, and were nowe of friends become mortal enimies: by which meanes the Spaniardes were driuen to drawe them ſelues from all partes into one maine ſtrength. The Prince of Orenge in the meane while, forſlowed no time, but he recouered Zurickzeas againe, with Harlam, Vtricke, Sconehouen, Hardame, with diuerſe other townes in Holand, which before were in the poſſeſſions of the Spaniards, the ſequele of the matter is ſo well kn
                  •
               wen, as I néede not ſpend the time to reherſe. Thus gentle reader, truſting thou wilt accepte in good parte theſe lines, the which I knowe to be more conuenient, and neceſſarie, then learned, or eloquent, and when my time and occaſion ſhall better ſerue mée, I wil not foreſlowe ſome other thing, the which I truſt ſhall be more to thy liking.
         
      
      
         
            ¶Imprinted at London, by Henrie Middleton, for C. B.
            
         
      
   