
      
         
            
            
            THE English Creede, CONSENTING WITH THE TRVE AVNCIENT CATHOlique, and apostolique Church in al the points, and articles of Religion which euerie Christian is to knowe and beleeue that would be saued.
            THE FIRST PARTE, IN MOST LOYAL MANER TO THE GLORIE OF GOD, CREDIT OF OVR Church, and displaieng of al haerisies, and errors, both olde and newe, contrarie to the faith, subscribed vnto by THOMAS ROGERS.
            
            
               Allowed by auctoritie.
            
            
               Cyprianus Epist. li. 1. epist. 4.
Humanos errores, & mendacia relinquamus, & in veritate Dei maneamus.
            
               verbum Dei manet in aeternum:
               NON SOLO PANE VIVET HOMO
               I W
            
            
               AT LONDON▪
                IMPRINTED BY JOHN VVINdet for Andrew Maunsel at the brasen Serpent in Pauls church yard. 1585.
         
         
            
            
            
               REVERENDISSIMO IN CHRISTO PATRI, AC DOMINO EDMVNDO PROVIDENTIA DIVINA NORWICENSI EPISCOPO▪ RELIGIONIS VERAE, CATHOLICAE, AC ORTHODOXAE ET PROFESSORI CONSTANTI, ET FAVTORI QVIDEM SINGVLARI▪ ATHEISMI, IVDAISMI, TVRCISMI, PAPISMI, ANABAPTISMI, ET OMNIVM DENIQVE FANATICARVM OPINIONVM HOSTI ACERRIMO ET CAPITALI: THOMAS ROGERIVS PRIOREM HANC SYMBOLO ANGLICANO SVBSCRIPTIONIS SVAE PARTEM, HONORIS, DEBITAEQVE OBSERVANTIAE ERGO DICAT, CONSECRATQVE.
         
         
            
            To the Christian readers, and hearers, S.
            
            
               OF the great subscription vrged from the Pastors and ministers of the worde and Sacramentes in a great part of this land the last yeare, yee can not lightlie be ignorant. The causes of the same being either secrete, I cannot: or not conuenient to be published, I may not set downe. What the euent thereof wil be, God he knoweth: what it hath beene, according to the diuersitie of mans minde, diuerslie do men thinke thereof. For some are of opinion that much hurt thereby hath redounded to the Church of God, and they think not amisse in diuers considerations: others, (again) wiselie do suppose that it hath made not a little vnto the glorie of God, and comfort of his seruants, as whereby a ful and perfect trial of men is had, & diuers of the godlie notablie be deliuered from the manifold slanders, & wicked surmises falslie raised of them through the secret, and subtil suggestions of Satan, and his members.
            For, to speake first of her Maiesties authoritie in causes Ecclesiastical, (and that to offend none of Gods children, but to the consolation of manie) of al that haue bine examined, what one hath denied the same? who but most willingly, and cheerefully doeth ascribe so much as the lawes of this land in euerie respect do giue vnto her highnes? Who but hath offered, as to subscribe, so to sweare vnto that article? Who but would suffer the losse, not of goods onely, but of life also, for the maintenance of the same?
            And although the Papistes do write, that to grant this vnto her maiestie, is lothsome and base flatterie 
               Answer to the Execut. of Iustice c. 8, p. 207., abominable and blasphemous adulation 
               Ibi. c. 8, p. 198., shameful haeresie, and vntruth 
               Ibi. c. 8, p. 195, against nature 
               Ibi. c. 7, p. 159., and is not to make her next to God in her Realme, but to make her the God of her people 
               Ibi. c. 8, p. 298.: For the next step, saie theie, (vnto diuine adoration) is to saie & beleeue, that a temporal King is aboue the Priest in causes Ecclesiastical, or that in a Christian common weale the next dignitie to Christ, or God is not the priest▪ but the Prince: yet can we not to auoid the aeternal displeasure of God, but thinke it, and to showe our selues dutiful, & loial subiects, subscribe vnto the same, hauing learned so to do out of Gods holie word.
            As for the supremacie chalenged by the Pope, whom (as heretofore, so dailie, but most sacrilegiouslie) theie cal The general pastor 
               Answer to the Execut. of Iustice c. 6. p. 131., yea, The common Father of al Christians, specialie of princes 
               Ibi. c. 6, p. 121., yea, The chiefe priest and pastor of our soules 
               Ibi. c. 5, p. 96., yea, The supreme pastor of Gods faithful people 
               Ibi. c, 8, p, 193., yea, The high pastor of Christs vniuersal Church 
               Ibi. c, 3, p, 52.: and, to omit a number of such blasphemous titles, The prince of Gods people 
               Ibi. in the preface.: as we know no such praerogatiue giuen him by the word of God, so we do vtterly renounce, and altogether mislike the same.
            And, to come vnto another Article concerning the booke of common praier, not one, that I know, hath refused simplie to subscribe vnto that neither. Though some denie not onlie that that forme, but that anie forme of publique, & ordinarie praier is to be vsed in the Church, and think it papistical, and giue out that it doth but mocke the Lorde, and the Lorde loatheth, and spueth it out of his mouth 
               
                  
                     •
                  . H. vpon the 122. Psal. pub. anno 1
                     •
                  83.: though some againe write that it hath no part of the catholique seruice 
               Howlet in his 4. reason., and cal it a Caluinistical 
               Answer to the Execut. of Iustice, c. 3, p. 50., a schismatical 
               Ibi. c, 1, p, 1
                     •
                  ., a damnable schismatical 
               Ibi, c, 3, p, 38., an heretical 
               Ibi, c, 2, p, 28▪ c, 8, p, 174., an abominable seruice 
               Ibi. c. 1. p. 14., (These be the 
                  ••••
               dest and charitable words of them whom, theie saie, no protestant in England is able to reproue of a
                  
                     •••
                   vntruth, or slander, railing, immodestie, &c. 
               Ibi, c. 9, p, 212.:) yet what is that vnto vs? which of al Gods ministers that haue bine tried can iustlie be charged so much as to fauor, much lesse to maintaine those vngodlie

assertion? And the auctors too, who are theie? Not nightbirds? Not light hedded, and fugitiue persons? Not our professed and knowen enimies?
            It maie not be denied, but some do with-hold their pens from approuing that holie booke in euerie point by subscription: yet are there none, I trust, that proudlie contemne it, none that disdainfulie despise it, none but in the feare of God, and in pub. Churches alwaies, and onely doe vse it, and manie haue set their hands there-unto, and al, I doubt not but so would, were that which is offensiue, reformed; and that which is crooked, made streight; and that which is doubtful, made euident and plaine. Which things also are for number but verie fewe, and, therefore maie the more easilie be remoued: and remaine, for the most part, in the directions and rubricks, and therefore with lesse offence may be taken awaie.
            Neither doth anie minister of the word, that I heare, denie by subscription to allow the booke concerning the Articles, & summe of our faith, but what lawes do exact, or enioine most willinglie haue theie offered to performe. And no cause is there whie we should not so doe: the auctors of the same do moue; the soueraigne authoritie, whereby it was established, and is vpholden, doth moue; but the necessarie, and al Christian doctrine there-in comprised, doth most of al moue vs, not onlie in heart to like thereof, but with mouth also, and euerie waie to praise it, and to glorifie the goodnes of God for the same. Our fore-fathers manie of them desired to see that, though it were but secretlie, and to the hazarding of their lands, goods, and liues, which in that booke we openlie and publiquelie to our vnspeakable comfort, and profit do see maintained.
            Besides, it is the badge of Eng. Christians whereby we are knowen to the vniuersal worlde not onlie to agree with al the godlie that haue bine or do liue at this present in the material points of religion: but also to disagree from the Iewes, Turks, Papists, Anabaptists, and al other prophane men. So that theie, or he which shal with-drawe his hand from allowing the same, maie vehementlie be suspected to be a contemner of the sacred auctoritie of this noble realme, and of the doctrine of Christ; a dissenter not onlie from al the godlie in this land, and therfore not worthie to liue among vs: but also from the true Christians who both haue liued heretofore, and remaine in anie reformed Church at this present time; and a fauorer either of the Iewish, or Turkish, or Popish, or Anabaptistical, or some vngodlie, and cursed opinion, or other.
            Theis things (one of the weakest of my brethren knowne I confesse, yet through confidence in our chiefe captaine Iesus Christ, whose al power is Matth. 28, 18.) I haue vndertaken to proue in two books or treatises: the former wherof is now before you, the other in good time, if so it please God, shal come abroad, In which aduisedlie looke, and yee shal perceiue, that the Religion established by the auctoritie, and professed of al degrees in this land, is neither a false religion, as the Papists do thinke, stil tearming it (how like Christians iudge yee) vngrateful haeresie 
               Answer to the Execut. of Iustice c. 6, p. 128., barbarous haeresie 
               Ibi. c. 1. p. 4. c. 4. p. 71., brutish haeresie 
               Ibi. c. 6. p, 126., cruel haeresie 
               Ibi. c. 1, p. 
                     〈◊〉
                  ., wicked haeresie 
               Ibi. c. 6. p, 132., wild condemned haeresie 
               Ibi. c. 5. p, 103., diuelish doctrine 
               Ibi c. 8. p. 166., but founded and built vpon the immouable fundations which the true Apostles of Iesus Christ, and the Prophets haue laid, and therefore cannot deceiue; nor a new religion 
               Answere to the Execut. of Iustice in the praef. &c. 3, p. 13. c. 4. p. 8
                     •
                  . c. 8. p, 182., a newe faith 
               Ibi. c. 8. p, 172., a newe and barbarous Gospel 
               Answer to the Execut. of Iustice c. 4, p. 83., a newe haeresie 
               Ibi. c. 8. p. 166., (as the Antichristians, and priestes of the breaden God woulde perswade, and make their credulous companie to beleeue) found-out by Zwinglius, whom they cal, The vnfortunate father of our Eng. faith 
               Ibi. c. 4, p. 80., and not extant in England aboue 5. or 6. yeres before the short reigne of K. Edward the sixt 
               Ibi c. 3., but the most ancient, receiued euen from Christ himselfe, and his written word; nor, A wicked religion tending vnto Paganisme, & Epicurisme 
               Ibi c. 8, p. 169., but that the man of God maie be absolute, being made perfect vnto al good workes 2. Tim, 3. 17., nor at this present taught in a corner of the world by vs onlie, but with a sweete harmonie and consent of al the Churches protestant in Europe publiquelie embraced.
            Againe, besides that al the enimies of name, which the truth hath had from time to time euen til this verie houre be here discouered, yee shal so cleerlie and plainlie beholde, as anie thing yee maie when the Sunne gloriouslie doth show himself, that Poperie is not the onlie true worship of God 
               Answer to the Execut. of Iustice, c, 
                     •
                  , p. 103.; that Poperie is not consonant to (God) his sacred word and wil 
               Ibi c, 8, p, 180.; but planted by weake & wicked men; that Poperie is not the old Religion 
               Ibi c. 2, p, 19. c. 3, p, 36, c, 9, p, 211, but a new, or more trulie a loathsome Chaos of all condemned haeresies, and antichristian opinions; and that Poperie agreeth not with the church of God in this land, or in anie other countrie or citie, almost in no one substantial & material point of Christianitie,

and so is not the Catholique or c
                     •••
                  on Religion 
               Answere to the Execut. of Iustice, in the preface., as theie commonlie giue out. And therefore is to be detested: and the teachers 
                  ••
               ereof, whether Seminaries, or others, to be held accursed Gal. 1. 8, 9.: and the maintainers of the same as 
                  ••
               ch to be taken heede of, as the Arrian, Nestorian, Pelagian, and such like haeretikes that haue liued heretofore: or as the Iewes, Turkes, Anabaptistes, which trouble the world in theis daies. And therefore right▪ godly wisedome and Christian magnanimitie hath our soueraigne Queene, & her noble Counsel declared, in suffering the papistes, being more dangerous to the Realme, and as hurtful to the true and Catholique religion, to haue no more fauor either publiquelie in temples, or priuatelie in houses to assemble themselues together, than the Iewes, or Turkes: the contrarie wherof as they excedingly do wish Answer to the Execut. of Iustice, c. 
                     •
                  
                  ▪ p, 
                     〈◊〉
                  .: so wee trust shal neuer come to passe, notwithstanding the maruelous opinion they haue in their Gregorie the 13. that now is Pope, who theie hope shal once be the bane of our vngrateful heresie 
               Ibi. c. 6, p. 328..
            And hauing noted these things iudge in the name of God, both what he was that incited the Emp. Charles the 5. to make warre rather against that most puissant and noble King of famous memorie (whom the enimies of their countrie saie, is Radi
                     •••
                  eccati 
               Answer to the Execut. of Iustice, c. 
                     •
                  , p. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . c. 8, 
                     •
                  . 188.,) Henrie the eight for enclining but in part vnto that truth, which wholie is here defended, than against the Turke Card. Polus.: & what theie are who cal our countrie The sanctuarie of the worst men 
               
                  
                     ••
                  lla Pu. 5.: our Church, The slaughter house of haeresie 
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   in his 9. reason.: our Martyrs, No martyrs, but murtherers of themselues 
               Answer to the Execut. of Iustice, c. 3, p. 56.: our Ministers. Intruders 
               Ibi. c. 8, p. 171.: vncircumcised Philistims 
               Ibi. c. 3, p. 44., wolues 
               Ibi. c. 3, p. 41., Apostataes 
               Ibi. c. 3, p. 41. c. 
                     •
                  , p. 171.: the honorable Counsel, A sort of heretiques 
               
                  
                     ••
                  lla Pn. 
                     •
                  .: her roial Maiestie, A Schismatique 
               
                  
                     •
                  ristow motiue. 6., an Haeretique, un Ethnique, a Publicane 
               
                  
                     ••
                  lla Pn. 5. N. Sand. de visib. ecclesi. 3, p. 78.: and therefore of Bishops to be excommunicate i: of the nobles to be resisted, and of al the commons to be disobeyed 
                  
                     •
                  ristow motiue. 
                     •
                  .: iudge in the feare of God, whether Poperie be Christianitie, and al other sects, as theie saie, false religions, and whether the professors of this Creede be out of the Church, as one Howlet par. 1., naie manie Antichristians Answer to the Execut. of Iustice, c. 6. p. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . would persuade, and so can haue neither saluation in the next, nor anie true peace, and securitie in this world 
               Ibi. c. 8, p. 19
                     •
                  .: and whether Papists are to be cherished as good catholique Christians Ibi. c. 9., and the hot Protestants which most carefulie embrace al theis religious Articles, to be punished, as the Screecher would insinuate Howlet in his preface..
            Besides, forsomuch as the Papists do not onlie thinke, but also giue-out, that we are at ferce contention among our selues, let them aduisedlie consider, either howe al the Protestant Churches in Europe do subscribe vnto our Articles, or we vnto their confessions, and then tel what our dissension is. It maie be they wil saie, al reformed Churches subscribe not to euerie of our Articles. But manie do, and none denie, I saie not anie of our Articles, but not anie one Thesis, or proposition of anie Article common to al Christians. I grant some confessions be larger than other some are, and conteine more matter of Christianitie than others do: yet are theie not contrarie, no more than Athanasius Creed is contrarie to the Apostles, because it is larger; nor the Decaloge is contrarie to the moral Lawe, because it is the summe of it; nor the Commandements, Loue God aboue al, and thie neighbor as thie selfe, are contrarie to the Decaloge, because theie are the Epitome of that also. Occasions maie fal out that we maie be briefe, & vpon occasion we maie vse mo words as errors be suppressed, or do spring vp. And it is to be wished, that as new errors peep out, so frō time to time new Articles by auctoritie were published, thereby to make it euident vnto the whole world both howe hurtfull theie be to the Church of Christ, and how we condemne them.
            Nowe, as the Papists cannot in truth saie, that we dissent from the godlie Christians liuing in other parts of the world: so maie theie not tel vs so odiouslie of diuision among our selues at home. For we, al of vs, allowe her Maiesties auctoritie in causes Eccles. and ciuil; we, al of vs, either simplie subscribe vnto the forme of pub. praier prescribed, or humblie (which libertie the lawe giueth) desire resolution in some fewe things; we, al of vs, iointlie both embrace the Articles of the English Creed, and renounce al haeretical opinions contrarie there-unto; we, al of vs acknowledge the good things that we do enioie, and that the Church would florish much better, if that good lawes alreadie made were faithfulie put in execution, and the true discipline of Christ so greatlie, and so long wished Booke of Common praier Tit. C
                     •••••
                  ation., were firmelie established, who doth not acknowledge? A thing euident enough these manie yeeres, but neuer so apparent as by this great, and late trial of the Ministers. So that this is another benefit redounding to vs thereby.
            Another is, that whereas the Papists would make their fauourers to beleeue (who theie thinke

wil credit al things whatsoeuer they do write) that the farre greater parte of al degrees in this land are Catholiques 
               Answer to the Execut. of Iustice c. 8.▪ p. 171.: and an infinite number of al states neuer consented vnto those things which we do 
               Ibi. c. 
                     •
                  , 
                     •
                  . 200.: yea, and that al the Clergie in a manner be on their sides 
               Ibi in the preface., who is either so blinde, that he seeth not; or so ignorant, that he knoweth not, howe a greater vntruth could neuer haue bine published? And in this respect we maie tearme it an happie trial, that euen al the Papists maie learne how to credite them in things not so apparent, when they wil not blush to giue-out which in their conscience they knowe is vntrue. For, God be thanked, not the lesser parte, but euen al the Ecclesiastical persons of the Church, especialie which haue▪ bine tried, are on our side, and not on the Papistes, or else they dissemble so cursedly as no true Christian would to gaine the whole worlde. And as al the realme maie see, and must confesse thus much: so her Maiestie, and the right honorable of her priuie Counsel, do best knowe, and we may easilie coniecture, that the noble and worshipful of this Realme, chiefelie the greater and better parte, haue deuoutlie sworne, and be readie, and that by sworde stoutlie to defend not Poperie, as some seditious fellowes blowe abroad Answer to the Execut. of Iustice c. 3, p. 48., but the Religion publiquely into this lande by auctoritie receaued; and our most noble princesse & Queene Elizabeth, not that odious and most infamous Pontifex. And such as the Pastors are, such be the flocks; as the Nobles be▪ such are the Commons; and as the ruler of the citie is himselfe, such are al theie that dwel therein.
            Againe, although our common enimie Satan (which accuseth vs not onlie before man but also euen before the throne of the Almightie, and that daie and night 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪ 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  .,) so much as in him was, laboured to sowe the poisoned seedes of mortal strife and dissention among vs: I trust he shalbe deceiued of his expectation, and that which he made an occasion of discorde, wilbe turned into a cause of an holie and indissoluble concord. For holding her Maiestie immediatly after Christ in her dominions ouer al persons the chiefe gouernour; the ordinarie seruice for a religious worship of God; the Articles of our religion for the verie groundes of Christianitie, where-upon we must build or perish, what shal deterre vs from louing one another with a moste firme and Christian loue? Shal pettie and trifling thinges of no waight, or of smal importance? yea, or anie thing else that can be conceiued in heart, or expressed by mouth or penne? God forbid. And in this holie vnitie we shal the more firmelie be rooted, doe wee turne our eies from beholding one another, and consider the vnquenchable malice of our capital enimies against vs, and the cause of the same. From the abundance of their malice, they cal the holie Ministers of Christ raskals 
               Answere to the Execut. of Iustice c. 3, p. 44. 
               Intruders, Philistims, Wolues, Apostataes, as before was noted. And theis infamous, yea blasphemous titles, theie attribute not vnto a fewe, but vnto al, euen from the poorest, and moste obscure Curate in the countrie, to the highest Praelate in the Palace. Nowe if thus they thinke, and write of vs in the time of their trial, what wil theie not tearme vs, if theie shoulde haue their wils? And theie which haue so litle respect of persons, and of gifts nowe, wil haue much lesse then. And the cause is neither for the Seruice which we haue in our Temples, which diuers Popes haue offered to tollerate euen as it nowe is without alteration (theie would neuer so do, we must think, were it either Schismatical, haeretical, or abominable, as our English of al the vainest Papistes do saie) nor for the diuersitie of our ceremonies, it is for our Faith, which is contrarie to theirs, and for their Supremacie, which we denie: yea, theie can beare al, themselues do saie Answer to the Execut. of Iustice c. 7, p. 155., and turne all to good, so long as the true Faith, and substance of Ecclesiasticall iurisdiction be not destroyed: but seeing wee haue and do both oppugne the faith, and ouerthrowe the gouernement of the Church of Rome, therfore the vilest wordes that Satan, their spiritual father, can put into their hearts, be in most poisonful manner vomited forth to hurt vs.
            This being so, howe ought we to loue and make of one another, who are thus hated, and by reuilings persecuted, and that for one and the same cause at this present. If that daie which theie so long-for should, as either that or some other affliction in this world for our vnthankfulnesse, or a more intollerable at the general iudgement, which is neere at hand, shal come, it will not be to our griefe that we haue beleeued, preached, and professed the trueth which the Church of England at this daie doth hold, but that we haue not liued there-after, we shal repent; and publishing the Gospel of peace, haue yet bine contentious, we shal repent; and being seruants to one and the same Lord and master, haue not onlie railed vpon, but also beaten and pursued one another,

we shal repent; and, being watchmen, haue not bine more vigilant and resident in our places, we shal repent; our negligence, our coldnesse, we shal repent; & if we haue either kept-out of the Lord his vine-yard, such as both for abilitie could, and for their zeale would, either implant this faith in the ignorant, or confirme it in the learned; or to the certaine destruction of themselues, and many others depending vpon them, either brought or kept in the idle, and idol shepherd, that shal we repent also, and that with teares.
            Theis things that we maie carefulie thinke vpon, and performe euerie of vs in our place, the God of peace grant vs for his Christ sake, to whome together with the holie Ghost be ascribed al honor, and praise, and glorie for al the good things both praesentlie imparted vpon vs, and in the life to come praepared for vs, for euermore, Amen. At London the 6. of Februarie, Anno 1585.
            
               In Christ yours Tho. Rogers.
            
            
               D. August. Epist. 9.
               Incomparabiliter pulchrior est veritas Christianorum, quàm Haelina Graecorum.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
               
                  1. ARTICLE. Of faith in the holy Trinitie.
               
                  THere is but 1 one, liuing, and true God, euerlasting, without bodie, partes, or passions, of infinite power, wisedome, and goodnes; 2 the maker and preseruer of al thinges both visible, and inuisible. 3 And in vnitie of this God-hed, there be three persons, of one substance, power, and aeternitie, the Father, the Sonne, and the holie Ghost.
               
                  The Propositions.
                  1. There is but one God, who is liuing, true, euerlasting.
                  
                  2. God is the maker, and praeseruer of al thinges.
                  
                  3. In the vnitie of the God-hed, there is à Trinitie of persons▪
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  1. That there is but one God, who is &c. It is à truth which
                  1. Maie be gathered from the al holie and sacred Scripture, which giueth vs to knowe, that God is
                  
                     
                        1. But one
                        
                           
                              Exod. 30. 3.
                              Deut. 6, 4.
                              Psal. 18, 31.
                              Mal. 2, 10.
                              1. Cor. 8, 4, &c.
                              1. Tim. 2, 5.
                           
                        
                        2. The verie God
                        
                           
                              1. Chro. 15, 3
                              Ier. 10, 10.
                              Iohn. 17, 3.
                              1. Thes. 1, 9.
                           
                        
                        3. Euerlasting,
                        
                           
                              Psal. 102, 24, &c.
                              Dan. 6, 26.
                              1. Tim. 1, 17.
                           
                        
                        4. Without bodie, &c.
                        
                           
                              Psal. 104, 1, &c.
                              Iohn. 4, 24.
                              2. Cor. 3, 17.
                           
                        
                        5. Of infinite
                        
                           
                              Power,
                              
                                 
                                    Ezech. 10, 5
                                    2. Cor. 6, 18.
                                    Reuel. 11, 17.
                                 
                              
                              Wisedom
                              
                                 
                                    Psal. 1. 7, 5.
                                    Rom. 16, 27
                                    1. Tim. 1, 17.
                                 
                              
                              Goodnes,
                              
                                 
                                    Psal. 106, 1.
                                    Psal. 107, 1.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  2. Is agreeable to the publique confessions of the Church of God in
                  
                     
                        Ausburgh, art. 2.
                        Heluet. 2, art. 2.
                        Bohem. cap. 3.
                        France, art. 1.
                        Fland. art. 2.
                        Wittemb. cap. 1.
                        
                           
                              Whereby we maie beholde th'impietie
                              Of such as flatlie denie there is à God, as did
                              
                                 
                                    Diagoras.
                                    Theodorus.
                                 
                              
                              Of such as be doubtful whether there be anie God,
                              
                                 
                                    As was Protagoras.
                                    As are the Macchiauils.
                                 
                              
                              Of such as fained two Gods, as did the
                              
                                 
                                    Valentinians.
                                    Manechies.
                                 
                              
                              Of such, who saie there be manie Gods, as did the Gentils, wherof some worshipped for God.
                              
                                 
                                    Beastes, as the Aegyptians.
                                    Th'elements, as the Persians.
                                    Iupiter &c. as the
                                    
                                       
                                          Indians.
                                          Graecians.
                                          Romans.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              Of such as ascribe the forme and lineaments of man vnto God, as did the Anthropomorphites.
                              Of such as put anie confidence in
                              
                                 
                                    Sanctes, As the Papistes.
                                    Man, As the Papistes.
                                    Riches, As the Atheistes.
                                    Horses, &c. As the Atheistes.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  2. That by God the world
                  1. VVas made, it agreeth with
                  
                     
                        1. The Scripture,
                        
                           
                              Gen. 1, 1, &c.
                              Psal. 124, 8.
                              Psal. 134, 3.
                              Psal. 135, 6.
                              Heb. 1, 2.
                              Col. 1, 16.
                           
                        
                        2. The Confess. of the Church of God in
                        
                           
                              Heluet. 2, cap. 6, 7.
                              Basil. art. 1.
                              France, art. 7.
                              Fland. art. 12,
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  2. Is preserued, it accordeth vnto
                  
                     
                        1. The word of God,
                        
                           
                              Psal. 104, 1, &c.
                              Matth. 10, 29, &c.
                              Act. 17, 25, &c.
                              Heb. 1, 3.
                           
                        
                        2. The confess. of the Church of God in
                        
                           
                              Heluet. 2, cap. 7.
                              Basil. 1, 2.
                              France, art. 18.
                              Fland. art. 12, 13.
                              
                                 
                                    Herebie are condemned al Heretiques & errors which impugne
                                    1 The creation of the worlde by God; as did
                                    
                                       
                                          Aristotle, that saide the world was aeternal, and without beginning.
                                          The Marcionites, who saide God made not the world. For it was too base à thing for him to create.
                                          The Manechies, which ascribed the creation of al things vnto two Gods, or Beginnings, or Natures,
                                          
                                             
                                                Th'one Good; where-of ca
                                                      ••
                                                    good thinges.
                                                Th'other Euil; where-of came euil thinges.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    2. The prouidence of God; as
                                    
                                       
                                          The Stoikes, who ascribe al thinges to Fate, or Destinie.
                                          The Epicures, which thinke howe God is idle, and gouerneth not the world.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  3. Though there is but one God: yet that there be three persons in the God-head, it is agreeable
                  1. To the sacred Scripture,
                  
                     
                        Gen. 1, 1, &c.
                        Psal. 33, 6.
                        Matth. 3, 16, 17.
                        Gal. 4, 6.
                        2. Cor, 13, 13.
                        1. Iohn, 5, 7.
                     
                  
                  2. To the Creede
                  
                     
                        Apostolical,
                        Nicen,
                        Athanasian.
                     
                  
                  3. To the confess. of the godlie in
                  
                     
                        Heluet.
                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 . art. 6.
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 . cap. 3.
                           
                        
                        Ausburgh, art. 1.
                        France, art. 6.
                        Fland. art. 8, 9.
                        Bohem. cap. 3.
                        Witemb. cap 1,
                        Sueuia, art. 2.
                        
                           
                              Curssed then are al opinions of men contrarie here-vnto, which do
                              Saie, there is one God, and not three persons in the God head, as do the
                              
                                 
                                    Iewes.
                                    Turkes.
                                 
                              
                              Saie, there be moe God than one, and yet not three persons, nor of one nature, but of contrarie disposition, as the
                              
                                 
                                    Gnostikes,
                                    Marcionites.
                                    Valentinians.
                                 
                              
                              Thinke, there be three Gods, or spirits, not distinguished onlie, but diuided also, as the Tritheites.
                              Holde, that not à Trinitie, but à Quaternitie is to be worshipped, as the Emperour Anastasius commaunded.
                              Graunte
                              
                                 
                                    The name of three sondrie persons, and denie their persons, as did the
                                    
                                       
                                          These did saie howe the same God was called in the holie Scripture by diuers names. And therfore that the Father became flesh, and suffered, because one & the same God is called the Father, Sonne, and holie Ghost. For this cause they were called Patripassians. In this number was Seruetus.
                                          Noëtians,
                                          Praxeneans,
                                          Termogenians.
                                       
                                    
                                    The names, and persons of three: and yet doe depriue not onelie the Sonne, and holie Ghost of their Diuinitie, but the whole Trinitie of their properties. For they sayde there be three in heauen, the Father, the VVorde, and the holie Ghost: but the Father onelie is verie God; the VVorde is the breath of the Father, and the holie Ghost is the Spirit created by God of nothing through the VVorde. And so they spoile the Sonne and the holie Ghost of their Deitie; and the whole Trinitie of their properties. These were the Arian and Macedonian heretiques, who were called Pneumatomachoie, because they warred against the holie Ghost:
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  2. ARTICLE. Of the word, or sonne of God, which was made verie man.
               
                  THe Sonne, which is the1 VVord of the Father, begotten from euerlasting of the Father, the verie and eternal God, of one substance with the Father, 2 tooke mans nature in the wombe of the blessed Virgine, of her substance: so that 3 two whole & perfect natures, that is to say, the Godhead and man-hood were ioyned in one person, neuer to be diuided, whereof is one Christ, verie God and verie man; 4 who suffered, was crucified, dead and buried to reconcile his Father to vs, and to be a sacrifice, not only for original gilte, but also for al actual sinnes of men.
               
                  The Propositions.
                  1. Christ is verie God.
                  
                  2. Christ is verie man.
                  
                  3. Christ is God and man and that in one person.
                  
                  4. Christ is the Sauiour of the world.
                  
               
               
                  
                  1 That Christ is verie God with vs also
                  1. The Scriptures do witnesse. As it is apparent that he is
                  
                     
                        The Word, Ioh. 1. 1.
                        Begotten of the Father frō euerlasting▪
                        
                        
                           
                              Psal. 2, 7.
                              Act. 13. 33
                              Heb. 1, 5.
                              Heb. 5, 5.
                           
                        
                        Very God
                        
                           
                              Ioh. 17. 3.
                              Iohn. 8, 42.
                              Mat. 1. 23.
                           
                        
                        God eternal, Heb. 5, 5.
                        Of one substance with the Father, Heb. 1, 3.
                     
                  
                  2. The Creede
                  
                     
                        Do testifie.
                        Apostolical
                        Nicene
                        Athanasian
                     
                  
                  3. The confessiōs of the churches in
                  
                     
                        Do acknowledge.
                        Helue. conf.
                        
                           
                              1. art. 11.
                              2. cap. 11.
                           
                        
                        Bohem. cap. 4. 6.
                        Ausburgh. art. 6.
                        France art. 13. 14.
                        Fland. art. 10.
                        Wittemb. cap. 2.
                        Sueuia, art. 2.
                        
                           
                              Miserably therefore haue they erred, which deny the diuinitie of our Sauiour Christ.
                              As did
                              
                                 
                                    Arius.
                                    Corinthus.
                                    Ebion.
                                    Eunomius.
                                    P. Samosatenus.
                                 
                              
                              As doe
                              
                                 
                                    The Iewes.
                                    The Turkes. which say that Christ was
                                    
                                       
                                          A good man.
                                          Not God.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  2. Holding the humanitie of Christ, we do agree
                  1. with the scripture, which entreateth of Christ his
                  
                     
                        Conception
                        
                           
                              Gen. 49, 10.
                              Isa. 7, 14.
                              Mat. 1, 18, &c.
                              Luke 1, 26, &c.
                           
                        
                        Growing, Luke 2, 40.
                        Hungering, Mat. 4, 2.
                        Thirsting, Iohn. 4, 7, 19, 28.
                        Weeping, Luke 19, 41.
                        Sleeping, Mark. 4, 38.
                        Suffering deth,
                        
                           
                              Math. 27, 50.
                              Marke, 15, 37.
                              Luke 23, 46.
                              Ioh. 19. 30. 33
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  2. With the Creede.
                  
                     
                        Apostolical,
                        Nicen,
                        Athanasian.
                     
                  
                  3. With the Confession of the godly in
                  
                     
                        Helue. Confes.
                        
                           
                              1. art. 11.
                              1. cap. 11.
                           
                        
                        Basil. art. 4.
                        Bohem. cap. 6.
                        Fland. art. 18.
                        France. art. 14.
                        Ausburgh. art. 3.
                        Wittemb. cap. 2.
                        Sueuia. art. 2.
                        
                           
                              Therfore most wicked was the opinion of those men, which said
                              That Christ had a body without a soule, as Eunomius the heretique did.
                              That Christ had a soule without sense and reason, as Apollinaris did.
                              That Christ tooke not flesh of the Virgine Marie, as
                              
                                 
                                    did the
                                    
                                       
                                          Valentinians.
                                          Arians.
                                       
                                    
                                    doe the
                                    
                                       
                                          Anabaptists.
                                          Fam. of Loue.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              That Christ tooke flesh not of the Virgine only, but by the seede of man too, as Ebion gaue out.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  3. That the diuine and humane nature of Christ is vnited in one person, accordeth
                  1. With the Scripture.
                  
                     
                        Iohn 1, 14. &c.
                        Math. 3, 17.
                        Ephes. 4, 10.
                        Phil. 2, 5. &c.
                        1 Tim. 2, 5.
                     
                  
                  2. With the Creede
                  
                     
                        Apostolical.
                        Nicen,
                        Athanasian.
                     
                  
                  3. With the Confes. of the Churches in
                  
                     
                        Confes. Helue.
                        
                           
                              1. cap. 11.
                              2. art. 11.
                           
                        
                        Basil. art. 4.
                        Bohem. art. 6.
                        France. art. 15.
                        Fland. art. 19.
                        Ausburgh art. 3.
                        Wittemb. cap. 2.
                        Sueuia. art. 2.
                        
                           
                              Therefore detestable is the error
                              Of Eutiches and Dioscorus, who thought the two natures of Christ were so confounded, that the nature of the Word, and of the Flesh was one, and the same.
                              Of Nestorius, who denied the two natures of Christ to be vnited, that the properties of the one, might in some sense be ascribed vnto the other: and sayde that as Christ had two natures, so he had not one but two persons.
                              Of Seruetus, who said of Christ, that he was the Patren of al things, & but a figure of the sonne of God and that the bodie of Christ, was compact of three vncreated elements: and so confounded and ouerthrew both natures.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  4. That Christ is the Sauior of the world, agreeth.
                  1. With the Scripture, which testifieth that Christ trulie
                  
                     
                        Suffered,
                        was crucified,
                        Died,
                        was buried,
                        
                           
                              Matth 27, 26, &c. And that
                              1. To reconcile his Father vnto vs,
                              
                                 
                                    Rom. 5. 10.
                                    2 Cor. 5. 18, &c.
                                    Ephes. 2, 16.
                                    Col. 1, 19, 20.
                                 
                              
                              2. To be a sacrifice, &c. for al sinnes of men.
                              
                                 
                                    Isa 53, 4.
                                    Iohn. 1, 19.
                                    Gal. 3, 13.
                                    2. Cor. 5, 21.
                                    1. Iohn. 2, 2.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  2. With the Creede
                  
                     
                        Apostolical,
                        Nicen,
                        Athanasian.
                     
                  
                  3. With the Confess. of the Churches, in
                  
                     
                        Heluet.
                        
                           
                              1. cap. 11.
                              2, art. 11.
                           
                        
                        Basil. art. 4.
                        Bohem. art. 6.
                        France, art. 13, 16, 17.
                        Fland. art. 20. 21.
                        Ausburg. art. 3.
                        Saxon. art. 3.
                        Wittemb. cap. 2.
                        Sueuia, art. 2.
                        
                           
                              Then wicked are al opinions contrarie herevnto, which tende
                              To shewe that
                              
                                 
                                    Did suffer, a
                                          •
                                        that of the Patripassians
                                    The Father in his Deitie
                                    Not the Sonne in his humanitie
                                 
                              
                              To shewe that Christ did not truelie suffer, but in imagination, as the Heretiques Cerdon, and Basilicus cast-forth.
                              To bring the passion of our Lorde into detestation, as do the fantasies of the wicked Iacobites and Turkes.
                              To make the passion of Christ
                              
                                 
                                    Of none effect,
                                    To put awaie but Original sinne onlie.
                                    
                                       
                                          As that of
                                          Popish Masses.
                                          Popish praiers.
                                          Popish pardons.
                                          Popish Purgatorie.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              To showe that Christ died not for the sinnes of al men.
                              To showe that some sinnes be so filthie, as Christ his bloud vppon true repentance cannot washe them awaie.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  3. ARTICLE. Of the going downe of Christ into hel.
               
                  AS Christ died for vs, and was buried: so also it is to be beleeued that he went downe into hel,
               
                  That our Sauiour Christ descended into Hel, together without Church
                  1. The ancient creeds
                  
                     
                        1. Apostolical
                        2. Athanasian
                     
                  
                  2. The confessions of the Churches of
                  
                     
                        Heluet. 2, cap. 11.
                        Basil. art. 4.
                        Ausburgh art. 3.
                        Sueuia, art. 2.
                        
                           
                              Doe testifie. Which worde Hel, in this article, as we take it, signifieth
                              Not the place of euerlasting tormēts where
                              
                                 
                                    Diues was, and is; Luke 16, 23.
                                    Al the reprobate together shalbe: Matth. 25, 41.
                                    
                                       
                                          In which place Christ, as man, was not, forasmuch as
                                          1. His bodie laie in the graue,
                                          
                                             
                                                Matth. 12. 40.
                                                Matth. 16, 4.
                                                Luke 11, 29.
                                             
                                          
                                          2. His soule was
                                          
                                             
                                                Commē
                                                   ded into the hands of God the Father,
                                                
                                                   
                                                      Psal 31, 5.
                                                      Luke 23. 46
                                                   
                                                
                                                In Paradise: (so is it set downe as a thing wel to be obserued) & not in Hel, Luke 23, 43.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              The terrors, and torments of the bodie, and soule, which Christ suffered, as appeareth,
                              
                                 
                                    Isa, 53, 6.
                                    Isa. 53. 10.
                                    Psal. 116. 3,
                                    Matth. 26, 38.
                                    Matth. 27, 46,
                                    Luke 22, 42.
                                    
                                       
                                          And so we are against them.
                                          1. Which saie, that Christ descended not into Hel at al.
                                          2. Which thinke that Christ descended into the place of torments, where in soule he endured for a time the paines which the damned spirits doe there sustaine.
                                          3. Which holde, that Christ went downe into Lake 
                                                •
                                             ymbo, to fetch from thence, as Canisius: to loose from thence, as Vaux he saith, the soules of our forefathers, which afore his death were shut vp in the close prison of Hel.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  4. ARTICLE. Of the Resurrection of Christ.
               
                  CHrist did trulie 1 arise againe from death, and tooke againe his bodie, with flesh, bones, and al thinges appertaining to the perfection of mans nature; 2 wherewith he ascended into heauen, and there sitteth, 3 vntil he returne to iudge al men at the last daie.
               
                  The Propositions▪
                  
                  1. Christ is risen from death.
                  
                  2. Christ is ascended into heauen.
                  
                  3. Christ wil come againe to iudge the quicke, and the dead.
                  
               
               
                  
                  1. The resurrection of Christ is
                  1. Proued by the Scriptures. For it is euident that Christ
                  
                     
                        Should arise,
                        
                           
                              In th'old Testament,
                              
                                 
                                    Psal. 16, 12.
                                    Isa. 53, 10.
                                 
                              
                              In the Newe Testament, by the testimonie of our Sauiour Christ,
                              
                                 
                                    Matth. 12, 40▪
                                    
                                    Marke 9, 31.
                                    Marke 10, 34.
                                    Luke 9, 22.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        Did rise again▪
                        
                        
                           
                              By his appearing to
                              
                                 
                                    Marie Magdalene, Iohn 20, 14, &c.
                                    Diuers women, Matth. 2
                                          •
                                       , 9. Two Disciples in the field, Luke, 24, 13.
                                    Tenne Disciples, Iohn 20, 19. &c.
                                    Al the Disciples, Iohn 20, 26.
                                    Moe than 500. brethren at once, 1. Cor. 15, 6.
                                    To sundrie, 40. daies together, Act. 1, 3.
                                 
                              
                              By the testimonie of
                              
                                 
                                    Peter,
                                    
                                       
                                          Act. 1, 22.
                                          Act. 2, 31.
                                          1. Pet. 1, 3.
                                       
                                    
                                    Paul.
                                    
                                       
                                          Act. 17, 3.
                                          Rom. 10, 9.
                                          1. Cor. 15, 4, &c.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  2. Affirmed by
                  
                     
                        1. The Creede
                        
                           
                              Apostolical,
                              Nicen,
                              Athanasian.
                           
                        
                        2. The Confession of the churches in
                        
                           
                              Heluet.
                              
                                 
                                    1. art. 11.
                                    2, cap. 11,
                                 
                              
                              Basil. art. 4.
                              Bohem. cap. 6.
                              France, art. 15, 16.
                              Ausburgh. art. 3.
                              Sueuia, art. 2.
                              
                                 
                                    So that vtterlie false, and vnchristian is the opinion of
                                    The Sadduc
                                          •
                                       is, which flatlie denie the resurrection of anie.
                                    The Iewes, that wil not acknowledge this resurrect. of Christ.
                                    The Schuenkfeldians, that sa
                                          •
                                       e, howe our Sauiour after his resurrection was so deified, that he reteined no more the properties of his bodie and soule, nor the vnion of both natures, but was meerelie God.
                                    The Fam. of Loue, which take the resurrection of Christ to be but an allegorie, and no certaine historie.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  2. In saying how christ with his very body ascended into heauen, we declare our selues to dissent not
                  1. From the scriptures
                  
                     
                        Psalm. 47, 5.
                        Psal. 68, 18.
                        Psal. 110, 1.
                        Math. 22, 44.
                        Math. 26, 64.
                        Act. 1, 9.
                        Luke. 24, 51.
                        Rom. 8, 34.
                        Ephes. 4, 8, 9, 10.
                     
                  
                  2. From the Creede
                  
                     
                        Apostolical,
                        Nicen,
                        Athanasian.
                     
                  
                  3. From the Confes. of the Churches of
                  
                     
                        Helue.
                        
                           
                              1. art. 11.
                              2. cap. 11.
                           
                        
                        Basil. art. 4.
                        Bohem. cap. 6.
                        France, art. 15.
                        Fland. art. 20.
                        Ausburgh. art, 3.
                        Saxon. art 3.
                        Sueuia. art. 2.
                        
                           
                              But we altogether dissent
                              1. From the Vbiquitaries, as
                              
                                 
                                    Papistes
                                    Certaine Germans
                                    
                                       
                                          Which doe holde that the body of Christ is
                                          Not only in heauen,
                                          But also in earth, and that euery where
                                          
                                             
                                                Where the Sacrament is 
                                                      〈…〉
                                                   .
                                                In euery kingdome,
                                                In euery Countrey,
                                                In euery citie,
                                                In euery parish,
                                                In euery loase,
                                                In euery peece of bread, and cup of wine.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              2. From the Papistes that say how Christ ascended carrying with him the soules which he losed from captiuitie, & bondage of the Diuel, wheras there is not one word, either
                              
                                 
                                    1. In the S. Scripture.
                                    2. In any sound Confession.
                                    
                                       
                                          Olde
                                          Newe
                                          
                                             
                                                That the soules of the righteous
                                                Were not afore 
                                                      〈…〉
                                                   
                                                
                                                Were then placed 
                                                      〈…〉
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     . Where we say that Christ shal come again to iudge al men we agree
                  1. With the scripture.
                  
                     
                        Acts. 10, 42.
                        Rom. 2, 16.
                        2. Tim. 4, 1, 8.
                        Iam. 5, 9.
                     
                  
                  2. With the Creede
                  
                     
                        Apostolical▪
                        
                        Nicen▪
                        
                        Athanasian.
                     
                  
                  3. With the Confes. of the Churches in
                  
                     
                        Helue.
                        
                           
                              2. cap. 11.
                              1. art. 11.
                           
                        
                        Basil. art. 9.
                        Bohem. cap. 6.
                        Fland. art 37.
                        Ausburgh. art. 3.
                        Sueuia, art. 2.
                        
                           
                              But we renounce their opiniōs which thinke
                              That there shal be no iudgement at al, as the Atheists, & Epicures of this world, do.
                              That The Diuels The wicked shalbe saued, as do the Origenists.
                              That before the iudgement there shalbe a golden worlde, the godly and none besides enioying the same peaceablie and gloriouslie, as the Iewes do.
                              That the righteous are in godly glory, & shal from henceforth liue euerlastingly with Christ, & raigne vpon earth, as the Fam. of Loue teacheth.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  5. ARTICLE. Of the holie Ghost.
               
                  THe holie Ghost, proceeding from the Father, and the Sonne, is of one substance, maiestie, and glorie, with the Father, and the Sonne, verie and eternal God.
               
                  This article concerning the holy ghost
                  1. The Scripture,
                  
                     
                        Math. 28, 19.
                        Act. 2, 4.
                        2. Cor. 13, 
                              •
                           3.
                        2. Pet. 1, 21.
                        1. Iohn. 5, 7.
                     
                  
                  2. The Creede.
                  
                     
                        Apostolical,
                        Nicen,
                        Athanasian,
                     
                  
                  3. The Confes. of the Churches in
                  
                     
                        Heluet.
                        
                           
                              1. Art. 6.
                              2. Cap. 3.
                           
                        
                        Basil. art. 1.
                        Ausburgh. art. 1.
                        France, art. 6.
                        Bohem. cap. 3.
                        Fland. art. 8, 9, 11.
                        Wittemb. cap. 1. 3.
                        Sueuia, art. 1.
                        
                           
                              Do verifie. In saying
                              That the holie Ghost proceedeth from the Father, and the Sonne, we shew our selues not to be of the error of the Graecians, which said howe the holy Ghost proceeded from the Father, but not from the Sonne.
                              That the holy Ghost is of one substance with the Father and the Sonne, we declare our selues aduersaries to the Macedonian heretiques, who sayde the holy Ghost was a Creature, which is of another substaunce than GOD is.
                              That the holie Ghost is of one substance, maiestie, and glorie with the Father, and the Sonne, we altogether dissent from the heresie of the Sabellians, & Tritheites, which thought the holie Ghost to be that, which God the Father, and God the Sonne were, and no distinct person from them.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  6. ARTICLE. Of the sufficiencie of the holy Scriptures for saluation.
               HOlie Scripture 1 conteineth al thinges necessarie to saluation: so that whatsoeuer is not read therein, nor maie be proued thereby, is not to be required of anie man, that it should be beleeued as an article of the faith, or be thought requisit necessarie to saluation. 2 In the name of the holie Scripture, we doe vnderstande those Canonical bookes of the old and newe Testament, of whose auctoritie was neuer any doubt in the Church.
               
                  Of the names and number of the Canonical bookes.
                  Genesis.
                  Exodus.
                  Leuiticus.
                  Devteronomium.
                  Iosue.
                  Iudges.
                  Ruth.
                  The 1. booke of Samuel.
                  The 2. booke of Samuel.
                  The 1. booke of Kinges.
                  The 2. booke of Kinges.
                  The 1. booke of Chron.
                  The 2. booke of Chron.
                  The 1. booke of Esdras.
                  The 2. booke of Esdras.
                  The booke of Esther.
                  The booke of Iob.
                  The Psalmes.
                  The Prouerbes.
                  Eccles. or the Preacher.
                  Cant. or song of Salomon.
                  4. Prophets the greater.
                  12. Prophets the lesse.
               
               
                  3 And the other bookes (as Hierome saith) the Church doth reade for example of life, and instruction of manners: but yet doeth it not applie them to stablish anie doctrine. Such are theis following.
               
                  The third booke of Esdras.
                  The fourth booke of Esdras.
                  The booke of Tobias.
                  The booke of Iudith.
                  The rest of the booke of Hester.
                  The booke of wisedome.
                  Iesus the sonne of Sirach.
                  Baruch the Prophet.
                  Song of the three children.
                  The storie of Susanna.
                  Of Bel, and the Dragon.
                  The praier of Manasses.
                  The 1. booke of Machab.
                  The 2. booke of Machab.
               
               4 Al the bookes of the Newe Testament, as they are commonlie receiued, we doe receaue, and accompt for Canonical.
               
                  The Propositions.
                  1. The S. Scripture containeth al thinges necessarie vnto the saluation of man.
                  2. Al the bookes in the volume of the Bible, are not Canonical.
                  3. The 3. and 4. bookes of Esdras: the booke of Tobias, &c. are Apocripha.
                  4. In the newe testament, al the bookes are Canonical.
               
               
                  
                  1 That the Scriptures of God are al sufficient and necessarie to instruct vs vnto 
                        ••
                     luation, with vs,
                  1 The S. Scripture,
                  
                     
                        Deut.
                        
                           
                              4, 2.
                              12, 8.
                           
                        
                        Iosh. 1, 7.
                        Prou. 30, 5.
                        Iohn. 20, 31.
                        Gal. 1, 8.
                        2. Tim. 3, 16.
                        Reuel. 22, 18. 19.
                     
                  
                  2. The confess. of the Churches of God in
                  
                     
                        Heluet
                        
                           
                              1. art. 1, 4.
                              2. cap. 
                                    •
                                 .
                           
                        
                        Basil. art. 10.
                        Bohem. cap. 1.
                        France, art. 2, 4, 5.
                        Fland. art. 5, 7.
                        Saxon. art▪ 1.
                        Wittemb. cap. 30.
                        Sueuia, art. 1.
                        
                           
                              Do witnesse. And therefore we are aduersaries to al such as before the worde of God, do prefer their, owne
                              Inuentions, as the Philosophers: whereof one saide of Moses. That good man maketh a trim discourse, but hee proueth nothing.
                              Phantastical imaginations, a
                                    •
                                 
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Did the Manechies.
                                    Doe the
                                    
                                       
                                          Libertines,
                                          Anabaptistes,
                                          Fam of Loue.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              Traditions, as the Papistes, which euidently appeareth in that they do moste cruelie punish, and torment such as refuse
                              
                                 
                                    The wicked precepts of men; or not at al, or ouerslightly correct the breakers of God his commaundements.
                                    To keepe popish holie daies.
                                    To heare their blasphemous Masse,
                                    To obserue their superstitious fastings and ceremonies,
                                 
                              
                              Statutes, or edicts, or decrees, or iudgements, or proclamations, or els whatsoeuer proceeding from the braine of man, as Macchiauel doth, and his fauorers.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  2. That some bookes in the Bible are Canonical, and some Apocrypha, it hath bene graū
                     ted by the best learned, and most godly of long time. And as all the reformed Churches in the worlde are of the same iudgement with vs: so in their publique confessions some haue so compted, and iudged of them as we doe. As namelie the Church in
                  France, art. 3.
                  Fland▪ art, 4.
                  
                     
                        Therefore (to speake first of the Canonicall bookes of the olde Testament) they haue hainously offended, & defaced the glory of God, which
                        1. Reiected al the bookes of the old
                              •
                            Testament, as did the Heretiques
                        
                           
                              Basilides,
                              Ca
                                    •
                                 po
                                    •
                                 rates,
                              the Manichies.
                           
                        
                        2. Allowed some, but not al the Canonical bookes of the old Testament. And of this sorte
                        
                           
                              Some receaued no more but the. 5. bookes of Moses, as the Saduceis.
                              Some receaued the Lawe onlie, and the Prophetes▪ as the Samarites.
                              Some receaued neither the law nor the Prophetes: as the Appelleans.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  3. That diuers, yea and those bookes here mentioned are Apocrypha, we are neither the first that said it, nor they only which affirme the same. For
                  The auncient Councel at Laodicea, can. 59. did
                  The confessions of the Churches reformed in
                  
                     
                        Doe
                        France, art. 3.
                        Fland, art. 4.
                        
                           
                              Iudge them, not to be Canonical. So that they are to be taken heede of as seducers, which would thrust vpon the Church,
                              1. The bookes for canonical Apocrypha, within the volume of the Bible, as the Papistes would: and therefore accursse so manie as take them not for canonical, Conc. Trid, sess, 4. decr. de can. Scrip.
                              2. Anie bookes not comprehended in the Bible, whether they be
                              
                                 
                                    The newe Prophetes, Barcobas, and Barcolf, of Basilides the heretique.
                                    The Phaneroses, or manifestations of Marcion the heretique.
                                    The mysteries of Manechie the Heretique.
                                    Isais Ascensorium, of Hierax the Heretique.
                                    The Gospel after
                                    
                                       
                                          The Aegyptians.
                                          The Hebrues.
                                          The 12. Apostles.
                                          Barnabas.
                                          Thomas.
                                          Nicodemus.
                                       
                                    
                                    The Actes of S. Paul.
                                    The Reuel. of S. Peter.
                                    The bookes of the
                                    
                                       
                                          Montanistes▪
                                          
                                          Anabaptistes▪
                                          
                                          HN.
                                          Papistes, &
                                                •
                                             .
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  4 Although some of the auncient Doctors accepted not all the bookes comprehended within the volume of the new testament for Canonical: yet in the ende they were wholy takē and receiued by the common consent of the Church of Christ in this world, for the verie word of God, as they are at this day in al places, where the Gospel is preached & professed▪ Howbeit we iudge them canonical
                  Not so much because man in the world doth so receiue and allow of them.
                  As for that
                  
                     
                        1 The holy spirit in our hartes, doth testifie that they are from God.
                        2 They carrie a sacred auctoritie with thē.
                        3 They do agree with the other books of God in the old Testament.
                        
                           
                              Therefore in receiuing thē wholy, not in part, we shewe our selues vtterly to condemne
                              Such as receiued not the whole new
                                    •
                                  Testament but▪ a part thereof. And these were of diuers kindes, whereof
                              
                                 
                                    Some reiected all the Epistles of Paule▪ &c. and allowed only the Gospel after Mathewe, as Corinthus the Heretique.
                                    Some receaued of the
                                    
                                       
                                          As Marcionth
                                                •
                                              Heretique.
                                          Euangelistes onely Luke,
                                          Epistles of Paul only the Epistle vnto Timothie and Titus.
                                       
                                    
                                    Some alowed of al the testament, only the Act
                                          •
                                        of the Apostles, as Tatian the Heretique.
                                 
                              
                              Such as allowed neither the whole new Testament, nor those books wholie which they receiued, as the Marcionites, who defaced al those places in the Gospel after Luke, and in the Epistles which concerned either the Diuinitie, or humanitie of our S. Christ.
                              Such as receaue & read the new Testament, but scrape out such text
                                    •
                                  therein, as mislike them, as the Turkes, who scrape out whatsoeuer they finde touching the passion of Christ, saying how it was added purposely by the Iewes, in derision of the Christians.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               7. ARTICLE▪ 
                  Of the old Testament.
               
               
                  THe 1 old Testament is not contrarie to the new, for both in the old and newe Testament euerlasting life is offered to mankind by Christ, who is the onely mediator betweene God and man, being both God and man. 2VVherefore they are not to be heard, which faine that the old Fathers did looke only for transitorie promises. 3 Although the Lawe giuen from God by Moses, as tuching ceremonies and rites, do not bind Christian men, nor the ciuil precepts thereof ought of necessitie to be receiued in any Common wealth, yet notwithstanding, no Christian man whatsoeuer is free from the obedience of the Commaundements, which are called moral.
               
                  The Propositions.
                  1 The old Testament is not contrarie vnto the new.
                  
                  2 The old Fathers looked for eternal happinesse, so wel as for temporal blessings.
                  
                  3 The Law moral remaineth, though the ceremonial and ciuil be abrogate.
                  
               
               
                  
                  1 That the old Testament is not contrarie to the newe, it may easily be proued by many inuincible arguments yet is it most apparant in that our Christ (verie God, and verie man, as aboue, p. 6▪ 7. hath beene declared) is offred vnto mankind by them both. That
                  1 There is one Christ, and no moc,
                  2. Christ is the Son of God,
                  3. Christ is verie man,
                  4. Christ was born at Bethlehem,
                  5. Christ was▪ born of a virgine,
                  6. Christ was honoured of wi
                        •
                     e men,
                  7. Christ rid vpon an Asse vnto lerusalem,
                  8. Christ was betrayed,
                  9. Christ did suffer not for his owne but for our sins,
                  10. Christ did rise againe,
                  11. Christ did ascend,
                  
                     
                        As 'it is apparent in the newe Testament.
                        1. Acts. 3, 25. Gal. 3, 8. 16.
                        2. Acts. 13, 33.
                        3. Heb. 2, 12.
                        4. Math. 2, 1.
                        5. Math. 1, 23.
                        6. Math. 2, 11.
                        7. Math. 21, 1.
                        8. Luke 22, 7.
                        9. Mat. 8▪ 17. Acts. 8, 32. 1. Cor. 15, 3. 1. Pet. 2, 24.
                        10. Act. 2, 25. 1. Cor. 15, 
                              •
                           
                        
                        11 Ephes. 4. 8.
                        
                           
                              So is it confirmed by the old Testament
                              1. Gen. 12, 3.
                              2. Psalm. 2, 7.
                              3. Psalm. 22, 22.
                              4. Micah. 5, 2.
                              5. Isa. 7, 14.
                              6. Esai. 60, 6.
                              7. Zech. 9, 9.
                              8. Zech. 11, 12.
                              9. Isa. 53, 5.
                              10. Psal. 16, 10. Ion. 2, 1.
                              11. Psal. 68, 8.
                              
                                 
                                    So that we are aduersaries to their doctrine, and they, as it should seeme, enemies to this which
                                    Vtterly reiect the old Testament, as did the Heretiques.
                                    
                                       
                                          Basilides.
                                          Carpocra
                                                •
                                             es.
                                          Manichies.
                                       
                                    
                                    Say that the Law as contrarie to the Gospel, is not to be preached, as do the Antiomies, and Anabaptists.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  2 That the old Fathers looked not only for transitorie promises, but for eternal happinesse beside
                  1 The Scripture.
                  
                     
                        Rom. 1, 1. 2, &c.
                        1. Peter. 1, 10.
                     
                  
                  2. The confession of the people of God in
                  
                     
                        Heluet. Confes. 2. cap. 13.
                        Saxonie, art, 3.
                        
                           
                              Do testifie. Wherefore they are not to be heard which thinke the fathers hoped for temporal, and not for spiritual and eternal happinesse, as
                              Many of the Iewes did.
                              The Fa of Loue, as it should seeme, doth.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  3. That the Law
                  1. Ceremonial is not necessarilie to be obserued of al men, and in al times.
                  
                     
                        1. The Scripture by
                        
                           
                              The example of
                              
                                 
                                    Stephan, Acts 6, 14.
                                    The vision, Acts 10. 13, &c.
                                    Th'Apostles, Acts 15, 1, &c.
                                 
                              
                              The testimonie of
                              
                                 
                                    Paul,
                                    
                                       
                                          Gal. 2, 3, &c.
                                          Ephes. 2, 14.
                                          Col. 2, 16.
                                       
                                    
                                    Peter, 1. Pet. 1, 18, 19.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        2. The Confessions of the Churches of God in
                        
                           
                              France, art. 23.
                              Fland. art. 25.
                              
                                 
                                    Doe witnesse. Theie therefore are in à wrong opinion, which thinke that in force.
                                    It stil is, as do the
                                    
                                       
                                          Iewes.
                                          Turkes.
                                          Cerdonits
                                          Armenians.
                                       
                                    
                                    It shalbe à thousand yeeres together, after the general resurrection, as do the Apollinareans, and Millenaries.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  2. Moral is to be taught, kept, and obeied of euerie man, is easilie proued
                  
                     
                        Wherebie the vane opinions of the Antinomies, is vtterlie confuted, and condemned.
                        1. In the S. Scripture by infinite places, and namelie
                        
                           
                              Rom. 2, 13.
                              Rom. 3, 31.
                              1. Cor. 7. 19.
                           
                        
                        2. By the consent of al good Christians, and by the publique confessions of the Church of God in France, expreslie art. 23.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  8. ARTICLE. Of the three Creedes.
               
                  THe three Creedes, Nicene creede, Athanasius creede, and that which is commonly called the Apostles creede, ought throughlie to be receiued and beleeued: for they maie be proued by most certaine warrants of holie Scripture.
               
                  The Propositions.
                  The Nicen
                  The Athanasian
                  The Apostolical
                  
                     
                        Creede
                        1. Is to be receiued, and beleeued.
                        
                        2. Maie be proued by the holie Scripture.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  That the 1. Nicen
                  That the 2. Athanasian
                  That the 3. Apostolical
                  
                     
                        Creedes
                        1. Are to be receiued, and beleeued, with vs the Churches of God
                        
                           
                              1. In the old time, haue thought.
                              2. At this daie in
                              
                                 
                                    By publique confessions do acknowledge.
                                    France, art. 5.
                                    Saxon. art. 1.
                                    Flan. art. 9.
                                    Heluet. Confess. 2, cap. 11.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        2. May be proued by most certaine warrants of the S. Scripture, is verie apparent, in that they al speake
                        
                           
                              1. Of one, and the same God, whom we are to beleeue, is
                              
                                 
                                    1. For essence, but one
                                    
                                       
                                          Deut. 6, 4.
                                          Mal. 2, 10.
                                          1. Cor. 8, 4. &c.
                                          Ephe. 4, &c.
                                       
                                    
                                    2. In persons, three,
                                    
                                       
                                          Matth. 3, 17.
                                          Gal. 4, 6.
                                          1. Iohn 5, 7.
                                          
                                             
                                                The 1. Father, the Creator,
                                                
                                                   
                                                      Psal. 134. 3.
                                                      Heb. 1, 2.
                                                      Col. 1, 16.
                                                      Rom. 11, 36.
                                                   
                                                
                                                The 2. Sonne the redeemer
                                                
                                                   
                                                      Isa. 53. 4.
                                                      Rom. 5. 18.
                                                      Gal. 3, 13.
                                                      Ephes. 2, 16.
                                                      1. Iohn 2, 2.
                                                   
                                                
                                                The 3. Spirit, the sanctifier.
                                                
                                                   
                                                      2. Cor. 1, 21, 22.
                                                      1. Pet. 1, 2.
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              2. Of the people of God, whom we must also thinke to be
                              
                                 
                                    1. The Church
                                    
                                       
                                          1. Holie,
                                          
                                             
                                                Ephes. 1. 3.
                                                Ephes. 2, 21.
                                                Coloss. 1, 22.
                                             
                                          
                                          Catholique
                                          
                                             
                                                Isa. 54, 2.
                                                Psal. 87. 4.
                                                Acts. 1, 8, &c.
                                                Ephes. 2. 14.
                                                Reu. 5. 9.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    2. The communion of sanctes,
                                    
                                       
                                          Ephes. 4, 15.
                                          1. Cor. 10. 16.
                                          Heb. 10, 25.
                                          1. Iohn 1. 7.
                                       
                                    
                                    3. Pardoned of al their sinnes,
                                    
                                       
                                          Isa. 44, 22.
                                          Matth. 18, 23, &c.
                                          Col. 2, 13.
                                       
                                    
                                    Appointed to
                                    
                                       
                                          4. Arise frō death
                                          
                                             
                                                Iohn 5. 28.
                                                1. Cor. 15, 12 &c
                                                Phil. 3. 21.
                                             
                                          
                                          5. Enioy eternal life, both of bodie & soule,
                                          
                                             
                                                Iohn 6, 39.
                                                1. Pet. 1. 4.
                                                Reuel. 21, 4.
                                                
                                                   
                                                      Therefore we are enimies to al aduersaries of the doctrine in them comprised, whether they be
                                                      Arrian
                                                            •
                                                         .
                                                      Iewes.
                                                      Turkes.
                                                      Sadducies.
                                                      Papists.
                                                      Epicures.
                                                      Atheists
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  9. ARTICLE. Of original, or birth sinne.
               
                  ORiginal 1 
                  2 sinne standeth not in the following of Adam (as the Pelagians do vanelie talke) but it is the fault and corruption of the nature of euerie man, that naturallie is engendred of the ofspring of Adam, wherebie man is verie farre gone from original righteousnes, and is of his owne nature enclined to euil, so that the flesh lusteth alwaies against the spirit, and therefore in euerie person borne into this world, it deserueth Gods wrath, and damnation. 3 And this infection of nature doth remaine, yea in them that are regenerated, whereby the lust of the fleshe, called in Greeke 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which some do expound the wisedome, some sensualitie, some the affection, some the desire of the flesh, is not subiect to the law of God. 4 And although there is no condemnation for them that beleeue, and are baptised: yet Th'Apostle doth confesse, that concupiscence and luste hath of itselfe the nature of sinne.
               
                  The Propositions.
                  1. There is original sinne.
                  
                  2 What original sinne is.
                  
                  3 Original sinne remaneth in God his children.
                  
                  4 Concupiscence euen in the regenerate is sinne.
                  
               
               
                  
                  1. Though this worde original sin is not to be founde in the Can. Scripture, yet that there is Orig. sin, it is cleare
                  1. By the S. Scripture, wherein is set downe most euidentlie, thereof
                  
                     
                        1. The cause which is
                        
                           
                              1. Principalie the fal of Adam▪ as
                              
                                 
                                    Rom. 5. 15 &c.
                                    1. Cor. 15. 22.
                                    
                                       
                                          Who fel partly
                                          By the suggestion of the Diuel
                                          
                                             
                                                Cor. 11. 3.
                                                Gen. 3. 4.
                                             
                                          
                                          Through his owne free will.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              2. Secondarily the propagation of the corrupted nature fro man vnto man. So sayth
                              
                                 
                                    Christ▪ Iohn 3, 3, & 6, 
                                          •
                                       3.
                                    Paul. Rom. 5. 12, 1. Cor. 15, 48.
                                    Peter. 2. Pet. 2.
                                    Iames, cap. 1. 
                                          •
                                       8.
                                    Iohn, 1. Epist. 3, 4, 5.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        2. The subiect euen the old man, with al his powers, minde, wil, & heart. For in the
                        
                           
                              1. Minde there is
                              
                                 
                                    Darkenesse.
                                    Ignorance
                                    
                                       
                                          Of God & his wil
                                          Matth. 12. 34.
                                          Rom 8, 7.
                                          Rom 3, 4.
                                          1. Cor. 2, 14.
                                          2. Tim. 3, 8.
                                          1. Iohn 3 1.
                                          1. Iohn 5, 20.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              2. Will and hart there is
                              
                                 
                                    Concupiscence
                                    Rebellious motions
                                    
                                       
                                          For so it is
                                          Matth. 5, 19.
                                          Act. 7. 39.
                                          Act. 15, 9.
                                          Rom. 1, 21.
                                          Iam. 1, 13.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        3. The effects, which are
                        
                           
                              1. Not only actual sins, and they both
                              
                                 
                                    Math. 15. 19.
                                    1. Inwarde, as vngodly
                                    
                                       
                                          Affections
                                          Cogitations
                                       
                                    
                                    2. Outward, as
                                    
                                       
                                          Wicked lookes,
                                          Prophane speech,
                                          Diuelish actions.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              2. But also
                              
                                 
                                    1. An euil conscience, 1. Iohn, 3. 21.
                                    2. The wrath of God Rom. 1, 18. Col. 3, ver. 5. 6.
                                    3. Death, Iohn 8, 24. Rom. 5, 12. Iam. 1, 15.
                                    4. Eternal damnation. Rom. 5, 18.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  2. By the Confession of the Churches of God in
                  
                     
                        Heluet. confes.
                        
                           
                              1. Art. 8.
                              2. Cap. 8.
                           
                        
                        Basil. art. 2.
                        Bohem. cap. 4.
                        France, art. 9. 11.
                        Fland. art. 15.
                        Ausburgh, art. 2.
                        Saxon. art. 2.
                        
                           
                              And thus armed both with the word of God, and the confessiōs of the purest Churches we do offer battell
                              Both to the Carpocratians and such like, who vtterlie denie that there is any original sinne.
                              And also
                              
                                 
                                    Not only to Florinus & Blastus, &c. who make God the Auctor of sinne; But also to al such as curiously enquire whether God woulde haue Adā to fal; or why he stayd him not from offending
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  2. Original sinne 
                        ••
                     
                  
                  Not the imitation of Adam his wickednesse. For neither doth
                  
                     
                        The Scripture speake thereof
                        Any Church reformed or otherwise, so thinke: and some flatly by publique cō
                           fession with vs denie it, as the Church in France, art. 10. in Fland. art. 15.
                     
                  
                  Partly
                  
                     
                        1. The Imputation of Adam his disobedience vnto vs. So sayth
                        
                           
                              1. The Scripture. Rom. 5. verse
                              
                                 
                                    12.
                                    15.
                                    16.
                                    17.
                                    18.
                                    19.
                                 
                              
                              2. The Churches of god at
                              
                                 
                                    Ausburgh, art. 2.
                                    Saxon. art. 2.
                                    Wittemb. cap. 4.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        2. The fault and corruption of the nature of euery man. As we find in the
                        
                           
                              1. Scripture
                              
                                 
                                    Rom. 5. 12.
                                    Rom. 3, 23.
                                    Rom. 7, 18.
                                    1. Cor. 15. 48.
                                    Ephe. 2, 3.
                                 
                              
                              2. Confessions of the Churches in
                              
                                 
                                    Helue. lat. ca. 8.
                                    France, art. 10.
                                    Bohem. cap. 4.
                                    Ausburg. art. 2.
                                    Saxon. art. 2.
                                    Wittemb. ca. 4.
                                    
                                       
                                          Our Sauiour Christonly exempted from the taint of this corruption. For
                                          He is the immaculate Lambe, 1. Pet. 1. 19.
                                          He did no sinne, 1. Pet. 2. 22.
                                          He knew no sinne, 2. Cor. 5▪ 21.
                                          He was tempted, & yet without sinne, Hebr. 4, 15.
                                          
                                             
                                                Now aduersaries herevnto, are the
                                                
                                                   
                                                      Who say that Orig. sinne commeth by imitation and not otherwise.
                                                      1. Pelagians
                                                      2. Fam. of Loue.
                                                   
                                                
                                                3. Valentinians who ascribed Orig▪ sin
                                                
                                                   
                                                      Not in anie sort vnto man.
                                                      To the Diuel.
                                                   
                                                
                                                4. Manichies, who hold that this sinne
                                                
                                                   
                                                      Proceedeth not from our corrupted nature.
                                                      Is another substance within vs.
                                                   
                                                
                                                5. Papistes, who though they graunt that the virgine Marie was naturally engendred of the ofspring of Adam: yet they denie that she was guiltie of original sinne, Conc. Trid. decr. de pec. Orig.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  3. That Original sin remaneth, yea in them that be regenerate, it is
                  1. Easie to be proued by the scripture, as in diuers places beside: so apparently
                  
                     
                        Rom. 7, 14▪ &c.
                        Gal. 5, 16.
                        Iam. 1, 14.
                        Iam. 4, 1.
                        
                           
                              •
                           . Pet. 2, 11.
                     
                  
                  2. Agreeable to the Confessions of other reformed Churches, Confes.
                  
                     
                        Heluet.
                        
                           
                              1. art. 8.
                              2. cap. 8
                           
                        
                        Basil. art, 2.
                        France, art. 11.
                        Saxon. art. 10.
                        
                           
                              Therefore we do stande in this point against
                              1. The Papists, who say that Orig. sinne was not at al, much lesse remaned in the Virgine Ma
                                    ••
                                 e, whence it followeth, if Orig. sinne were not in her, then 
                                    〈◊〉
                                  was not regenerate; if not regenerate, à very dangerous, and most vnchristian doctrine doth ensue concerning her.
                              2. The Fam. of Loue, who affi
                                    •
                                 me that the elect and regenerate sinne not. For seeing Orig. sinne is in the regenerate, as the Scripture doth testifie, then do, and shall the regenerate sinne, so long as they haue within them Orig. sinne.
                              3. Adamites, that contend howe they are in so good à state, as Adam was afore his fal: therefore without Orig. sinne.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  4. That Concupiscence in al men (and therefore in the faithful & regenerate) is sin, is very apparent.
                  1. In the Scripture, because
                  
                     
                        1. The holy Spirit straightly forbiddeth it
                        
                           
                              Coloss. 3, 5.
                              1. Pet. 2. 11.
                           
                        
                        It
                        
                           
                              2. Not onlie lusteth against the Spirite. Gal. 5, 17.
                              3. But also fighteth against
                              
                                 
                                    The soule, 1. Pet. 2, 11.
                                    The law of the mind, Rom. 7, 24.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        4. It bringeth certainely (but that there is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Iesus, Rom. 8, 1.) death, & damnation. Gal. 5, verse 17. & 21. Iam. 1. 14, 15.
                     
                  
                  2. In the right Christian Confession
                  
                     
                        Heluet. 2, cap. 9.
                        Saxon. art. 2. 10.
                        
                           
                              Therefore we mislike their opinions, as vnsound which say that concupiscence is no sinne, but
                              1. A thing indifferent, and the punishment of sinne, as do the
                              
                                 
                                    Pelagians.
                                    Sententiaries.
                                 
                              
                              2. Proceeding from sinne, and inclining vnto sinne; so doe the Papistes. Conc. Trid. Sess. 5. decr. depec. Orig.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  10. ARTICLE. Of free wil.
               
                  THe 1 condition of man after the fall of Adam is such, that he cannot turne and prepare himselfe by his owne natural strength & good workes 
                     •
                  re faith and calling vpon God. Wherefore we haue no power to do good workes pleasant and acceptable to God, 3 without the grace of God by Christ preuenting vs, that we may haue â good wil, and woorking with vs, when we haue that good wil.
               
                  The Propositions.
                  1. Man maie do outward and euil things, being not yet regenerate.
                  
                  2. Man cannot do what good is, being not yet regenerate.
                  
                  3. Man maie performe good thinges, when he is preuented by the grace of Christ, and renued by the holie Ghost.
                  
               
               
                  
                  1. We denie not that men, not yet regenerate, haue free wil to doe the workes
                  1. Of nature, for the preseruation, or destruction of the
                  
                     
                        1▪ Bodie,
                        2. Bodilie state,
                        
                           
                              Which thing the verie
                              1. Brute beastes
                              2. Prophane Gentils
                              
                                 
                                    Had, and haue, As it is wel obserued in the Confession of
                                    Heluet. 2, cap. 9.
                                    Ausburgh, art. 18.
                                    Saron. art. 3, 4. 7.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  2. Of Satan, both in
                  
                     
                        1. Thinking,
                        2. Willing,
                        3. Doing.
                        
                           
                              That which il is. So witnesseth
                              1. The S. Scripture
                              
                                 
                                    Gen. 6, 5.
                                    Gen. 8, 11.
                                 
                              
                              2. The godlie by the confession
                              
                                 
                                    Heluet. 2, cap. 9.
                                    Heluet. 1, art. 9.
                                    Bohem. cap.
                                    
                                       
                                          A false opinion is it therefore, that man hath no power to moue
                                          1. His bodie vnto outward thinges.
                                          2. His minde vnto wickednes, as the Manichies do holde
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  2. We denie, that man before he be regenerate can turne, and prepare himselfe by his owne natural strength and good workes to faith, and calling vpon God, that is, we denie that man hath power of him selfe
                  
                     
                        What good is.
                        1. To vnderstand
                        2. To wil,
                     
                  
                  3. To doe anie thing that pleaseth God,
                  
                     
                        So it is
                        1. In the Scripture,
                        
                           
                              Rome. 8, 7.
                              2. Cor. 3, 5.
                              1. Cor. 2, 14.
                              1. Cor. 12, 3.
                              Iohn 15, 5.
                           
                        
                        2. In the Confess. of the godlie at
                        
                           
                              Heluet.
                              
                                 
                                    1. art. 9.
                                    2. cap. 9.
                                 
                              
                              Basil. art. 2.
                              Bohem. cap. 4.
                              Ausburgh. art. 18.
                              Flan. art. 14.
                              
                                 
                                    Aduersaries vnto the truth are the
                                    
                                       
                                          Which hold, that naturallie there is free wil in men, and that vnto goodnes.
                                          Pharisies
                                          Sadduces▪
                                          
                                          Pelagians
                                          Papistes,
                                       
                                    
                                    Donatistes, that say, how man is borne with free wil, and if he wil, he beleeueth in Christ; if he wil not, he beleeueth not: if he wil, he continueth in that which he beleeueth, if he wil not, he continueth not.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  3. In à mā preuented by the grace of Christ, and regenerate by the S. Spirite,
                  1. The vnderstanding is inlightened, so that he knoweth
                  
                     
                        The secrets
                        The wil
                        
                           
                              Of god. So testifie
                              1. The scriptures
                              
                                 
                                    Iere. 31, 33.
                                    Matth. 11, 27.
                                    Matth. 16, 17.
                                    Luke. 10. v. 21, 22.
                                    1. Cor. 2, 12.
                                    1 Cor. 12, 3, &c.
                                 
                              
                              2. The godlie in al places,
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  2. The verie wil is
                  
                     
                        1. Not onlie changed.
                        
                           
                              Acts. 15, 9.
                              Phil. 2, 13.
                              1. Cor. 6, 10, 11.
                           
                        
                        2. But also endued with power to do good thinges. As witnesse
                        
                           
                              1. The scriptures▪
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Acts. 15, 9.
                                    Rom. 8, 26.
                                    Phil. 1, 29.
                                    Phil. 2, 13.
                                 
                              
                              The godly in their confess.
                              
                                 
                                    Heluet. 2, cap. 9.
                                    Ausburgh art. 18.
                                    Bohem. cap. 4,
                                    Saxon. art. 4.
                                    
                                       
                                          And this do the godlie
                                          Not onlie passiuelie, but also actiuelie,
                                          Yet not perfectly, but imperfectly.
                                          
                                             
                                                1. Cor. 13. 9, & 12.
                                                Rom. 7. 22, &c.
                                                Gal. 5, 17.
                                                
                                                   
                                                      So we declare our selues enimies to the doctrine of the
                                                      Anomaeans, for that cause by-named Atheons, who saie theie knowe the inuisible God▪ not in part, but thoroughlie; not by faith, but perfectlie; as anie man knoweth any visible thing.
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            Which either saie, they are pure from al spots of sinne: or that the regenerate do not sin at al.
                                                            Capocratians.
                                                            Marcians,
                                                            Adamites
                                                            Fam. of Loue.
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  1. ARTICLE. Of the iustification of man.
               
                  WE are accounted righteous before God, only for the 1 merite of our Lord & Sauiour Iesus Christ 2 by faith, and not for 3 our own workes or deseruings. Wherefore, that we are iustified by Faith only is a most wholesome doctrine, and verieful of comfort, &c.
               
                  The Propositions.
                  
                     
                        VVe are accounted righteous before God
                        Onlie
                        
                           
                              1. For the merite of our L. and Sauiour Christ.
                              2. By Faith.
                           
                        
                        3. Not for our owne
                        
                           
                              VVorkes.
                              Deseruings.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  1. That through the merits of our L. Iesus Christ we are accounted righteous before God, it is euident
                  1. In the Scripture; where we finde, that by Christ
                  
                     
                        His blood we are clensed
                        
                           
                              1. Iohn, 1. 17.
                              1. Pet. 1, 18.
                              1. Cor. 6, 20.
                              Iohn 1, 29.
                              Rom. 3. 25.
                           
                        
                        His righteousnes, we are iustified
                        
                           
                              Phil. 5, 8. &c.
                              Rom. 5, 19.
                              1. Cor. 1. 30.
                              2. Cor. 5, 21.
                              Rom. 10, 4. &c.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  2. In the Confessions of the godly militant in this worlde, as may be seene in the Confes. of the Church in
                  
                     
                        Heluet. 2, cap. 15.
                        Bohem. cap. 6.
                        France, art. 12.
                        Fland. art. 22.
                        Ausburgh. art. 4.
                        Wittemb. art. 5.
                        Sueuia, cap. 3.
                        
                           
                              But so beleeue not
                              The Atheists of this world, for they are not perswaded of the life to come, not of the mysteries of mans saluation.
                              The Pharisaical teachers, who thinke there is no righteousnes before God, but ciuil and external righteousnes in the sight of men.
                              The Papistes. For they teach that
                              
                                 
                                    Some sinnes are washed away, not by the blood of Christ, but by holy water, so called, as lesser offences.
                                    Some sinnes are purged
                                    
                                       
                                          By the fire of Purgatorie.
                                          By almes giuing.
                                          By Perigrinations.
                                          By Pardons.
                                          By Masses.
                                          By fasting, &c.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  2. The doctrin of our iustification by Faith only, as it is whol some, and ful of comfort▪ so is it
                  1. Grounded vpon the worde of God, as
                  
                     
                        Mark. 5, 36
                        Act. 10. 41, &c.
                        Act. 13. 
                              •
                           8.
                        Act. 15, 8.
                        Act. 22, 16
                        Rom. 1, 16.
                        Rom. 3, 20, &c.
                        Rom. 4, 4, &c.
                        Rom. 10. 3, &c.
                        Gal. 2, 16, &c.
                        Gal. 3, 7▪ &c.
                        Ephes. 2, 8.
                        Phil. 3, 6▪ &c.
                     
                  
                  2. Subscribed vnto by the godly in al the reformed Churches of this world, and by publique writing in the Confession of
                  
                     
                        Hel. 2. c. 16.
                        
                           
                              •
                           asil. art. 8.
                        Bohe. c. 6. 7.
                        Fran. art. 20
                        Flan. art. 22.
                        Ausburgh, art. 4.
                        Sax. art. 3, 8.
                        Wittemb. art. 4.
                        Sueuia, cap. 3.
                        
                           
                              Partakers of the profit & comfort of this doctrine 
                                    •
                                 re not
                              The Infidels, who
                              
                                 
                                    Either be altogether ignorant of this mysterie.
                                    Either know it, but applie it not to their owne soules and consciences, but altogether despise the same
                                    
                                       
                                          As did
                                          
                                             
                                                Herod, in killing Iams, act. 12▪
                                                
                                                Agrippa, in not desending Paul Act. 26, 26 &c.
                                                The Iewes in persecuting the Apostles. Act. 13, 41. &c.
                                             
                                          
                                          As doe
                                          
                                             
                                                The Diuels. Iam. 2. 19.
                                                Many vngodly mē
                                                
                                                
                                                   
                                                      False Christians.
                                                      Tyrans.
                                                      Apostates, &c.
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    Either teach not a sure confidence in Christ: but an historical knowledge of Christ, and of other Eccles. matters, as in his Catechisme doth
                                    
                                       
                                          Canisius. cap. 1.
                                          Vaux. Cap. 1.
                                       
                                    
                                    Either holde that man is to be stil in doubt whether he shalbe saued, or no, as the Papists, Conc. Trid. sess. 6 c. 9.
                                 
                              
                              Such as do faine, that they please God, not through faith by hearing, but by reuelation, as the
                              
                                 
                                    Manichies.
                                    Enthusiasts.
                                    Anabaptists.
                                 
                              
                              They whiche hold that man is iustified
                              
                                 
                                    By Workes without Faith.
                                    
                                       
                                          As did
                                          
                                             
                                                The false Apostles in Asia, 1. Tim. 1.
                                                The Interim of Ausburgh.
                                             
                                          
                                          As do the Turkes: Anabaptists.
                                       
                                    
                                    By Faith & works
                                    
                                       
                                          As did the Pseudoapostles at Hierusalem. Act. 15.
                                          As do the Papists commonly.
                                       
                                    
                                    Neither by faith nor workes, as they which contemne both a sure confidence in Iesus Christ, & good virtues, & yet hope to be saued, as they say.
                                 
                              
                              They who defende how we apprehend not the righteousnesse of Christ by faith▪ but haue it, or Christ himselfe rather dwelling essentially within vs, as the O sianders.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  3. Besides what hath bene saide that workes haue no place, nor portion in the matter of our iustification, it is euident
                  1. In the holy Scripture, where we do find, that
                  
                     
                        Al men be sinners, and are destitute of the glorie of God: and therefore that no man can be iustified by works
                        
                           
                              Psal. 14, 2, 3.
                              Psal. 53, 2, 3.
                              Psal. 51. 4.
                              Rom. 5, 12. &c.
                           
                        
                        The Apostles, and the whole Synod gathered together in the holy Ghost did conclude that both Iewes and Gentiles which beleeued were saued, not by workes, but by the meere grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, Act. 15.
                        Eternal life commeth not by desert, but
                        
                           
                              Of Promise
                              
                                 
                                    Acts
                                    
                                       
                                          2. 39.
                                          3. 25.
                                          13, 32, &c.
                                       
                                    
                                    Rom 3, 21, &c.
                                    2. Tim. 1, 1.
                                 
                              
                              Of Gifte,
                              
                                 
                                    Iohn. 17, 2.
                                    Rom. 6, 23.
                                    1. Iohn. 5, 11.
                                    Reuel. 2, 10▪
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        The iust shal liue by faith. And the Law is not of 
                              ••
                           ith, Gal. 3. 11.
                        As the godly in olde time were: so Christians in these dayes are▪ and shal be iustified. But the godly were iustified not for any good works, or worthinesse of their owne. So iustified was
                        
                           
                              Abraham
                              
                                 
                                    Rom. 4, 1. &c.
                                    Gal 3, 6. &c.
                                    Heb. 11. 17.
                                 
                              
                              The Iewes, Act. 2 44.
                              The Sama
                                    •
                                 itans, Act. 8, 12.
                              Paul,
                              
                                 
                                    Act. 9.
                                    Act. 22, 16.
                                    1. ti. 1. 13 &c.
                                    Ph. 3. 6. &c.
                                 
                              
                              The Eunuch, act. 8, 37
                              The 
                                    •
                                 ailer. Act. 16. 31. &c.
                              The Ephesians, Eph. 2, 4. &c.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  2. In the Confess of the godly in this world, as appeareth plainly
                  
                     
                        Heluet. 2, cap. 16.
                        Basil. art. 8.
                        Bohem. cap. 7.
                        France, Art. 22.
                        Fland. art. 24.
                        Ausburgh, art. 6. 26.
                        
                           
                              Aduersaries vnto this truth are
                              The Pharisies who thought that by external righteousnesse
                              
                                 
                                    They were saued.
                                    Moral
                                    Ceremonial▪
                                    
                                 
                              
                              The false Apostles both
                              
                                 
                                    In Asia, 1 Tim. 1.
                                    At Ierusalem, Act. 15.
                                 
                              
                              The Pharisaical Papists, which against the iustification of Faith only, do holde a iustification by Merites, & that of
                              
                                 
                                    1. Congruitie.
                                    2. Dignitie.
                                    3. Condignitie.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  12. ARTICLE. Of good workes.
               
                  ALbeit that good workes, which are the frutes of Faith, and follow after iustification, cannot put away our sinnes, and endure the seueritie of Gods iudgement: yet 1 are they pleasing and acceptable to God in Christ, 2 and do spring out necessarilie of a true and liuely faith, insomuch, that by them a liuely faith 3 may be as euidentlie knowen, as a tree discerned by the frute.
               
                  The Propositions.
                  1 Good workes do please God.
                  
                  2. No worke is good except it spring from faith.
                  
                  3. Good workes are the outward signes of the inwarde beliefe.
                  
               
               
                  
                  1. Though God acce
                        ••
                      not man for his works 
                        •
                     ake, as hath bin
                        •
                      proued▪ yet that good works after man his iustification please God, it is a cleere truth euerie where to be seene.
                  1. In the Scripture, because God hath
                  
                     
                        Commaunded them to be done,
                        
                           
                              Matth. 5. 16.
                              Iohn. 15. 12.
                              Phil. 2. 14 &c.
                              1 Thes 4, 3
                              2. Tim. 2, 19.
                              
                                 
                                    And requireth righteousnes
                                    Not onely outward, of the bodie,
                                    But also inward, of the minde,
                                    
                                       
                                          Matth. 5, v. 22. &c.
                                          Act 24. 16
                                          1. Pet. 2. 11
                                          1. Pet 3. 4, &c.
                                          Rom 
                                                •
                                             2. 2
                                          1. Ioh. 3. 15, 17.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        Appointed
                        
                           
                              For the virtuous, rewardes
                              
                                 
                                    In this life,
                                    
                                       
                                          Mat 5, 5
                                          Mar. 10 30.
                                          1. Tim. 4. 8.
                                       
                                    
                                    In the world to come
                                    
                                       
                                          Matth. 7. 21.
                                          Matth. 10, 32.
                                          Luke. 14, 14.
                                          Rom. 2, 10.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              To the wicked, punishments, both
                              
                                 
                                    Temporal▪ and theie
                                    
                                       
                                          Spiritual
                                          
                                             
                                                Isa 59. 1, 2.
                                                Iohn. 9. 31.
                                                1. Tim. 1. 6. &c.
                                                1. Iohn 3. 21. 22.
                                             
                                          
                                          Corporal
                                          
                                             
                                                Deut. 28. 15. &c.
                                                Ier. 5, 24, 25.
                                                Rom. 13. 1. 2.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    Heauenly & eternal.
                                    
                                       
                                          Matth. 10. 33.
                                          Matth. 21. 41. &c.
                                          1. Cor. 6, 9, &c.
                                          Heb. 12. 14, &c.
                                          Reuel. 21, 8.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  2. In the confess▪ of the godly in
                  
                     
                        Heluet. 2, cap. 16.
                        Basil. art. 8.
                        Bohem. cap 7.
                        France, art. 22.
                        Fland. art. 24.
                        Ausburgh. art. 6 & 26.
                        Saxon▪ art. 3, 5, & 6.
                        Wittemb cap. 7.
                        Sueuia, cap. 4.
                        
                           
                              Which truth is oppugned by aduersaries of diuers kindes, whereof
                              Some hold, that seing man is iustified by faith, he may liue as him listeth licentiously, as the Libertines.
                              Some think that to attend vpon vertue & to follow goodnes▪ is a yoake too intolerable, as the Simo
                                    •
                                 ia
                                    •
                                 s.
                              Some vtterly reiect al grace, virtue and feate of God, as
                              
                                 
                                    Did the
                                    
                                       
                                          Donatistes.
                                          Aë
                                                •
                                             ians. Circumcellians.
                                       
                                    
                                    Do the
                                    
                                       
                                          Macchiauils.
                                          Atheists.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              Some permit, though not al manner: yet some sinnes▪ So of the
                              
                                 
                                    Whoredome, is allowed.
                                    Carpocratians
                                    Valentinians,
                                 
                                 
                                    Periurie in the time of troubles, is allowed.
                                    Basilidians,
                                    Helchisaits,
                                    Priscilhanites,
                                    Fam. of Loue,
                                 
                              
                              Papists.
                              
                                 
                                    Simple fornication, yea, in Priests. is allowed.
                                    Breaking of faith to an heretique, &c. is allowed.
                                 
                              
                              Some dreame that God is pleased with lipseruice, and outward righteousnes, as the hypocritical Pharisies or Pharisaical Hypocrites.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  2. Al which man doth, is not pleasing vnto God, but that onelie which proceedeth from a true faith in Iesus Christ. So witnesseth
                  1. The Scripture
                  
                     
                        Heb. 11, 6.
                        Rom. 14, 23.
                        Tit. 1, 15.
                        Rom. 8, 8.
                        Gal. 5, 6.
                        1. Iohn 5. 4. 5
                        
                           
                              And although the workes of the beleeuing do please God: yet are theie not so perfect, that they can satisfie the law of God Therefore euen to the iustified saith
                              Christ,
                              
                                 
                                    Praie, &c. forgiue vs our debts. Matth. 6, 12.
                                    Saie we are vnprofitable seruants. Luke 17, 10.
                                 
                              
                              Paul,
                              
                                 
                                    We know that the Lawe is spiritual, but I am carnal, &c Rom 7. 14, &c.
                                    We which haue the first frutes of the Spirit, euen we do sight in ourselues, &c. and haue infirmities. Rom. 8, 23.
                                    Ye cannot do the same thinges that ye would. Gal. 5, 17.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  2. The godlie in their publique confessions extant in print,
                  
                     
                        Heluet. 2, cap. 16.
                        Basil. art. 8.
                        Bohem. cap. 7.
                        France, art. 22.
                        Fland. art. 24.
                        Ausburgh art. 26.
                        Saxon. art. 3, 5, & 6.
                        Wittemb. cap. 7.
                        Sueuia, cap. 4.
                        
                           
                              Therefore as we mislike: so we condemne the vngod lie opinion of the
                              Valentinians, who saie, that please God do
                              
                                 
                                    Spiritual men, which are themselues, not by faith, but onelie by knowledge.
                                    Natural men, not by faith, but by
                                    
                                       
                                          Labor.
                                          True dealing.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    Who teach, that the Lawes of God maie perfectile be fulfilled of men, once iustified, as the Papistes; illuminated, as saie the Elders in the Familie.
                                    Papistes,
                                    Fam. of Loue.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  3. Manie are the reasons whie good workes are to be done, cited in part afore pag. 42. yet not the least cause is that men maie be knowen what they are; so saith
                  1. The Scripture, that therby are knowen
                  
                     
                        The good trees, from the bad. Matth. 7, 16. &c.
                        The wheate from the chaffe. Matth. 3, 12.
                        The true Disciples, from the false. Iohn. 13, 35.
                        The sonnes of God, from the children of Satan,
                        
                           
                              Luke 6, 36.
                              Ephes. 5. 1.
                              1. Iohn 3, 10.
                           
                        
                        The regenerate, from th'vnbeleeuing
                        
                           
                              Iam. 2, 18.
                              1. Pet. 1, 17. &c.
                              1. Pet. 4, 22, &c.
                              Ephes. 4, 17.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  2. The Confession
                  
                     
                        Heluet. 2. cap. 16.
                        Basil. art. 8.
                        Bohem. cap. 7.
                        Franc: art. 22.
                        Flan. art. 24.
                        Saxon. art. 3.
                        Wittemb. cap. 7.
                        Sueuia, cap. 4.
                        
                           
                              And this doe the children of God.
                              Not to be seene of men, as Hypocrites.
                              Not to merit, as the Pharisaical Papistes. Con. Trid. Sess. 6. can. 24.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  13. ARTICLE. Of workes before iustification.
               
                  WOrkes done before the grace of Christ, and the inspiration of his spirit, are 1 not pleasant to God, forasmuch as theie spring not of faith in Iesu Christ, 2 neither do they make men meete to receiue grace, or (as the schoole aucthors saie) deserue grace of congruitie: yea rather, 3 for that they are not done as God hath willed and commaunded them to be done, we doubt not but they haue the nature of sinne.
               
                  The Propositions.
                  
                     
                        Workes before Iustification
                        1 Please not God.
                        
                        2. Deserue not grace of congruitie.
                        
                        3. Haue the nature of sinne.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  1. Before men do please God, nothing that man doth can please him. But men please not God being not renued by the Spirite, which as it hath bene alreadie proued: so is it
                  1. In the Scripture, where it is euident, that before man be regenerate, they are
                  
                     
                        Which bring out no good frute of them selues.
                        
                           
                              Matth. 7, 16.
                              Not grapes but thornes.
                              Not figs, but thistles.
                           
                        
                        Not good, but il trees,
                        
                           
                              Matth. 12, 33.
                              Luke 6, 43.
                           
                        
                        Not liuely, but dead bowes. Iohn 15. 4.
                        Not ingraffed, but wilde oliues. Rom. 11.
                        
                           
                              17.
                              23.
                           
                        
                        Not frends, but enemies Rom. 5. 10
                        Not the sonnes of God, but the children of wrath. Ephes. 2, 3.
                     
                  
                  2. In the publique confessions of the Churches reformed, expresselie,
                  
                     
                        Heluet. 2, cap. 15.
                        Ausburgh, art. 20.
                        
                           
                              Wherebie the vanitie of al them is perceaued, which thinke that without regeneration God is pleased with man his deedes whether they be
                              Papists, Look pag. 39
                              Commenders of ciuil, and Philosophical righteousnes, and placers of the doers of such workes, though without faith in christ in the heauens.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  2. The vnregenerate, not yet iustified, haue nothing in them to mooue God to be gratious vnto them. As may be seene
                  1. In the Scripture, where wee finde that the vnregenerate, being
                  
                     
                        Olde, not new creatures
                        
                           
                              Ephes. 4, 22.
                              Col. 3. 5.
                           
                        
                        Enimies, (Rom. 8. 7.) not the
                        
                           
                              Children of God,
                              Seruants of God,
                           
                        
                        Sinners, not godly bent, Rom. 5, 8.
                        Infidels (Tit. 1, 15.) and not faithfull Christians
                        Of congruitie deserue no grace at God his hande
                        Hereby is ouerthrowne the Pap. doctrine concerning merites of congruitie.
                     
                  
                  2. In the Confessions of the Churches in
                  
                     
                        Heluet. 2, cap. 16.
                        Bohem. cap. 7.
                        Flan. Art. 23.
                        Ausburgh. art. 4, 20.
                        Sax. art. 3, & 8.
                        Wittemb. art. 5.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  3. VVhatsoeuer men, not yet iustified before god, do, it is sin: & this shall we finde confirmed
                  1. In the scripture, where it is cleare, that of the vnregenerate
                  
                     
                        The best workes which they doe, euen their
                        
                           
                              Fasting
                              
                                 
                                    Isa. 58, 3. &c.
                                    Math. 6, 16.
                                    Zach. 7, 5, &c.
                                 
                              
                              Praying
                              
                                 
                                    Prou. 28, 9.
                                    Math. 6, 5.
                                 
                              
                              Almes deedes, Math. 6.
                              Sacrificing vnto God
                              
                                 
                                    Psal. 50, 8.
                                    Isa. 1, 13.
                                    Hos. 6, 6.
                                    Mar. 12. 33.
                                 
                                 
                                    though in the name of Christ, Mat. 7, 22, 23.
                                    Prophesieng
                                    Doing of miracles
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        Al th'actions whatsoeuer
                        
                           
                              Rom. 14. 23.
                              Tit. 1, 15.
                              Heb. 11, 6. Are abhominable in God his eies.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  2. In the Confessions of the holy militant in this world, and namelie
                  
                     
                        Heluet. 2, cap. 15, & 16.
                        Bohem. cap. 7. Belg. Art. 23.
                        Ausburgh, article 4. 20.
                        Saxon. 3, & 8.
                        Witemb. art. 5. Erred therefore hath the Trid. Councel in pronouncing them accursed, which hold that al workes of men whatsoeuer done before his iustification, are sin, Sess. 6. can. 7.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  4. ARTICLE. Of workes of Supererogation.
               
                  VOluntarie workes 1 besides, ouer, and aboue Gods commaundements, which they call workes of Supererogation, cannot be taught without arrogancie, and impietie. 2 For by them men doe declare that they doe not onely render vnto God as much as they are bound to do, but that they do more for his sake than of bounden dutie is required: wheras Christ saith plainely, When ye haue done al that are commaunded to you, say, We be vnprofitable seruants.
               
                  The Propositions.
                  
                     
                        Workes of Supererogation
                        1. Cannot be taught without
                        
                           
                              Arrogancie.
                              Impietie.
                           
                        
                        2. Are the subuersion of the true Religion.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  1. Workes of Supererogation, which are al voluntarie workes besides ouer, and aboue the commaundements of God are often cōdemned
                  1. In the Scriptures where
                  
                     
                        We are cō
                           maunded
                        
                           
                              To walke, not after the lawes of men, but according to the statutes of God,
                              
                                 
                                    Iohn 1. 7.
                                    Ezek. 20. 19.
                                 
                              
                              To heare, not what man he speaketh, but what Christ doth say. Mat. 9, 7. And
                              
                                 
                                    He teaching the duties of Christians, setteth before them the Lawe, and word of God (Math. 5. 15. & 22. And more than that, he doth neither ad, nor require.
                                    He sayth
                                    
                                       
                                          They worship me in vaine, who for doctrine teache the commaundements of men. Mar. 7, 7.
                                          Teach them to obserue all thinges whatsoeuer I haue comaunded you. Mat. 28. 20
                                          My sheep
                                          
                                             
                                                Heare my voice.
                                                Know not the voice of Straungers. 10. 10, 27. 5.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        Such doctine is called somtimes
                        
                           
                              Beggerly rudiments. Gal. 4, 9.
                              Ordinances of the world, &c. Co. 2. 20. &c
                              The doctrine of Diuels, 1. Tim. 4, 1.
                              Cursed. Gal. 1, 8.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  2. In al the reformed Churches in Christendom, and namely by the Confession
                  
                     
                        Heluet. 2. cap. 16.
                        Aus burgh. art. 20
                        Basil. art. 10.
                        France art. 24.
                        Fland. art. 12.
                        Saron. art. 3. 17.
                        
                           
                              Therfore they which teach such works be
                              Arrogant.
                              Vngodly.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  2. VVhere the workes of Supererogation are taught
                  The Law of God is broken, that the traditions of men may bee obserued.
                  The S. Scripture must be contemned, as not sufficient enough to bring men vnto the knowledge of saluation.
                  God is made vnwise, in not commaunding so necessarie workes.
                  Faith, and other spiritual virtues, are brought into vtter obliuion.
                  Perfection is imputed not vnto Faith, but vnto workes, and which is most detestable, vnto the workes not commaunded but forbidden of God, ordeined by men.
                  The Lawe of God is thought to be throughly satisfied; and more duties performed than man needed to haue done.
                  
                     
                        They which broached, and defende these errors
                        VVere the Pharisies.
                        Are the Papists who besides what hath bine said, do holde that such workes
                        
                           
                              Do merite remission of sinnes, and that
                              
                                 
                                    For themselues
                                    For others
                                 
                              
                              Oftentimes do driue away
                              
                                 
                                    Diuels.
                                    Euil spirits.
                                 
                              
                              Are tokens of the forgiuenesse of sins, so wel as Baptisme; yea deliuer from the wrath of God, so wel as Christ.
                              
                                 
                                    And so they prefer their owne workes before
                                    The word of God.
                                    The Sacraments.
                                    Faith.
                                    The death of Christ.
                                    
                                       
                                          And therfore may
                                          Their doctrine 
                                                〈◊〉
                                              called 
                                                〈◊〉
                                              doctrine of Diuels.
                                          The teachers be held accursed.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  15. ARTICLE. Of Christ alone without sinne.
               
                  CHrist 1 in the truth of our nature was made like vnto vs in al things, sinne only except, from which he was clearely voide, both in his life and spirit. He came to be the Lambe without spot, who by sacrifice of himselfe once made, should take away the sins of the worlde; and sin, as S. Iohn sayth, was not in him. 2 But al we the rest, although baptized, and borne againe in Christ, yet offende in many things, and if we say, we haue no sin we deceaue our selues, and the truth is not in vs.
               
                  The Propositions.
                  1. Christ is truly and perfectly righteous.
                  
                  2. Al men besides Christ, though regenerate, be sinners.
                  
               
               
                  
                  1. That Christ was pure from sin, it is abundantlie to be seene.
                  1. In the Scripture. For
                  
                     
                        He was without sin
                        
                           
                              Conceaued. Matth. 1, 20.
                              Borne. Luke 1. 35.
                           
                        
                        He appeared to loose, but not to fulfil the workes of Satan. 1. Iohn 3, 8.
                        He liued
                        
                           
                              And was tempted, yet without sinne. Heb. 4, 15.
                              And did no sinne. 1. Pet. 2, 22.
                              And knewe no sinne. 2. Cor. 5, 21.
                              And had no sinne in him. 1. Iohn. 3. 5.
                           
                        
                        He died à guiltlesse man, euen by the testimonie
                        
                           
                              Of Paul. Rom. 5, 6. &c.
                              Of Peter
                              
                                 
                                    Act, 3, 14.
                                    1. Pet. 3. 18
                                 
                              
                              Of Stephan. Of his aduersarie, and persecutor Pilate,
                              
                                 
                                    Act. 7, 52. Math. 27. 24.
                                    Iohn 19, 4, 6.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  2. In the godlie confessions of the reformed Churches, namelie
                  
                     
                        Heluet. 2, cap. 11.
                        Heluet. 1. art. 11.
                        Bohem. cap. 4, 7.
                        France. art. 14.
                        Fland. art. 18.
                        
                           
                              Therefore à cursed companie were they, which laide vnto the charge of our Sauiour
                              That he was à violator of the Sabbaoth,
                              
                                 
                                    Matth. 12. 10, &c.
                                    Luke 13, 14.
                                    Iohn 5▪ 16, &c.
                                 
                              
                              That he taught, being not lawfulie autorized therevnto. Math. 21, 23.
                              That he forbad tribute to be giuen vnto Caesar. Luke 23, 2.
                              That he was the destroyer of the Lawe. Matth. 5, 17.
                              That he ouerthrewe all religion, and moued the people vnto rebellion. Luke 23. 5.
                              
                                 
                                    Such were the
                                    Scribes.
                                    Pharisees.
                                    High Priestes.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  2 Al men besides Christ, are sinners. A truth most apparent
                  1. In the Scripture, which testifieth how al men be either
                  
                     
                        Vnregenerate; & they be vnrighteous (alredie proued aboue, pag. 46, 47) and sinne in al things (confirmed, pag. 48.)
                        Regenerate; and there are not without sinne
                        
                           
                              Original; reade pag. 31, 32.
                              Actual, see pag. 43. Besides confirmed is it
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          〈…〉
                                        2.
                                    Eccles. 
                                          •
                                       , 20.
                                    1. Tim. 1, 15.
                                    Gal. 5, 17
                                    1. Iohn. 1, 8.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  2. In the confessions of the godly, especialie
                  
                     
                        In Ausburgh. art. 20
                        In Saxonie. art. 3, 8.
                        
                           
                              Oppugned is this truth by sondrie aduersaries which hold, that besides Christ, others either haue bine, or be perfectlie righteous, such be
                              The Papistes.
                              The Manichies.
                              The Catharans.
                              The Donatists.
                              The Pelagians
                              The Familie of Loue.
                              The Marcionites.
                              The Adamits.
                              The Carpocratians.
                              
                                 
                                    Whereof some haue thought
                                    As the Papists, that
                                    
                                       
                                          The virgine Marie was pure from al sinne, both
                                          
                                             
                                                Original.
                                                Actual.
                                             
                                          
                                          S. Francis hath fulfilled euerie 
                                                •
                                             ote of the booke of God.
                                       
                                    
                                    That they could not sinne so much as in cogitation, as the
                                    
                                       
                                          Manechics.
                                          Catharans.
                                       
                                    
                                    That theey haue bin so perfect that they could iustifie other men at their pleasures, as the Donatists.
                                    That they needed not to say, as Christ commaundeth, Forgiue vs our trespasses, &c. except it were on the behalfe of others. For they cannot sin. Of this opinion are the
                                    
                                       
                                          Pelagians.
                                          Fam. of Loue.
                                       
                                    
                                    That they are so pure, euen as
                                    
                                       
                                          Yea more holie than Paul, Peter, &c. such are the Marcionites Adam, and Eua before their fal, as the Adami
                                                ••••
                                             .
                                          I. Christ himselfe, as the Carpocratians.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  16. ARTICLE. Of sinne after Baptisme.
               
                  NOt euerie deadlie 1 sinne willinglie committed after baptisme, is sinne against the holie Ghost, and vnpardonable. Wherefore, the graunt of repentance is not to be denied to such as fal into sinne after Baptisme. 2 After we haue receiued the holie Ghost, we may depart from grace giuen, and fal into sinne, and by the grace of God, (we maie) rise againe, and amende our liues. And therefore they are to be condemned, which saie, they can no more sinne, as long as they liue here, 3 or denie the place of forgiuenes to such as trulie repent.
               
                  The Propositions.
                  1. Euerie sinne is not the sinne against the holie Ghost.
                  
                  2. The verie regenerate maie fal, and yet rise againe.
                  
                  3. None are vtterlie to be cast of, which vnfainedlie repent.
                  
               
               
                  
                  1. Euerie sin willinglie committed after regeneration, is not the sin against the holy Ghost, and therefore vnpardonable; as maie be seene
                  1. In the Scripture, where we finde though euerie sinne of it owne nature deserue damnation: yet that there is
                  
                     
                        A sinne
                        
                           
                              Stripes. Luke 12, 46.
                              Which shalbe punished with fewe,
                              Which shalbe punished with manie
                           
                        
                        A sinne
                        
                           
                              1. Iohn 5, 6.
                              Vnto death,
                              Not vnto death,
                           
                        
                        A sinne against
                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    which shalbe forgiuen,
                                    The Father
                                    The Son
                                 
                              
                              The holie Ghost; that neuer shalbe forgiuen
                              
                                 
                                    Matth. 12, 31.
                                    Mar. 3, 39.
                                    Luke 12, 10.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  2. In the publique confessions of the Church of God at
                  
                     
                        Heluet. 2, cap. 8.
                        Bohem. cap. 4.
                        Saxon. art. 10.
                        
                           
                              Diuerslie hath this doctrine bine inuaded. For
                              Some haue thought al sinnes to be like, as the
                              
                                 
                                    Stoikes.
                                    Pelagians.
                                    
                                       
                                          •
                                       ouinians.
                                 
                              
                              Some taught howe none of the godlie fathers, and nations from the beginning of the worlde, vntill the 15. yeare of Tiberius the Emperour, though earnestly theie did repent, were saued, but were punished alike with vtter confusion, as Manes the Heretique.
                              Some giue out that al euerlastingly be condemned, which depart out of this world
                              
                                 
                                    Afore theie are baptized, as the Papistes.
                                    Afore theie come vnto yeares of discretion; as the Heracites.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  2. That the verie regenerate maie fal, and yet rise againe, is à true doctrine
                  1. Graunted vpon the Scriptures. For in them we do euidentlie see
                  
                     
                        That fal
                        
                           
                              They maie
                              
                                 
                                    Partlie by the admonitions
                                    
                                       
                                          Of Christ vnto
                                          
                                             
                                                The man healed of the palsie. Iohn 5, 14.
                                                The adultresse. Iohn 8, 11.
                                             
                                          
                                          Of Paul▪ vnto
                                          
                                             
                                                Th Ephesians. cap. 4, 21.
                                                Colossians. cap. 3, 8.
                                                The Hebrues. cap. 5, 12.
                                                Timothie
                                                
                                                   
                                                      1. T. 1, 9.
                                                      2. T. 4, 3
                                                      2. T. 2, 22.
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                          Of Peter, vnto al the godly
                                          
                                             
                                                1. Pet. 2, 10.
                                                1. Pet. 5, 8.
                                                2. Pet. 3, 17.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    Partlie by the example of
                                    
                                       
                                          Dauid.
                                          Salomon.
                                          Peter, &c.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              Thei
                                    •
                                  do, euen by the 5. petition of the Lord his prayer, were there nothing beside to proue the same: but looke pag. 31, 32, 43, 54.
                           
                        
                        That being fallē, they maie rise againe, by the
                        
                           
                              Exhortations of the Angel vnto the churches of
                              
                                 
                                    Reuel. 2.
                                    Ephesus,
                                    Pergamus.
                                    Thyatira,
                                 
                              
                              Examples
                              
                                 
                                    Of Peter, who denied, and yet afterwarde confessed Christ. Of al the Disciples, which fled (Matth. 26, 56.) and yet came againe.
                                    
                                       
                                          But subscribe herevnto wil not
                                          The Catharans.
                                          The Nouatians.
                                          The Iouinians,
                                          The Anabaptistes.
                                          The Fam. of Loue.
                                          
                                             
                                                Who thinke that the people of God be regenerate into a pure and Angelical state, so that they be defiled with no contagion of sinne.
                                             
                                          
                                          The Papistes simplie. For though they graunt that the godlie maie rise againe from sinne: yet they denie that they can so do without their Sacrament of Penance; which is an error. Conc. Trid. sess. 6. can. 29.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  2. Grounded by al the godly, & published in the confession of
                  
                     
                        Heluet. 2, cap. 7.
                        Bohem. cap. 5, 8.
                        Saxon. art. 10, 11.
                        Wittemb. art▪ 32.
                        Sueu. art. 15.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  3. Such as do fal, & yet returne againe by vnfained repentance vnto the Lorde, are to be receaued as mēbers of the true Church. And this is verified
                  1. In the Scripture. For there is it
                  
                     
                        That God
                        
                           
                              Would haue al men to be saued
                              
                                 
                                    Matth. 11, 28.
                                    1. Tim. 2, 4.
                                 
                              
                              Is readie to receaue the penitent,
                              
                                 
                                    Luke 15. 7.
                                    Luke 19, 41.
                                    Iam. 5, 20.
                                    2. Pet. 3, 10.
                                    1. Iohn 1, 9.
                                    Reuel. 2, 5, &c.
                                 
                              
                              Doth refuse none that returne vnto him by repentance, as appeareth in th'example
                              
                                 
                                    Of the prodigal childe. Luke 15, 20.
                                    Of the debitor Matth. 18, 26, &c.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        That vpon repentance man must receaue, & comfort them which haue gone astraie. So did Paul wil
                        
                           
                              The Galathians to restore the weake. Gal. 6, 1.
                              The Corinthians to comfort the man which had committed incest. 2. Cor. 2, 7, &c.
                              Philemon to receaue One simus. Phil. vers. 12.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  2. In the Christian confessions of the godlie in
                  
                     
                        Heluet. 2, cap. 14.
                        Bohem. 5.
                        Ausburgh art. 11.
                        Saxon. art. 3.
                        Wittemb. art. 12.
                        
                           
                              Aduersaries. vnto this truth, are
                              
                                 
                                    Who leaue nothing but th
                                          ••
                                       
                                       apeaseable wrath of God to such as offend after Baptisme.
                                    The Montanists.
                                    The Nouatians.
                                    The Anabaptistes.
                                 
                                 
                                    That saie, how being once regenerate, sinne is cut awaie, as with à rasor, so that they cannot sinne, neither neede to repent.
                                    The Messalians.
                                    The Fam. of Loue.
                                 
                              
                              The desperate, whose sinnes be either so manie, or so grieuous, that they think how God he neither can, nor wil forgiue them.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  17. Article Of Predestination and Election.
               
                  PRedestination 1 to life, is the euerlasting 5 purpose of God vvhereby, 2 before the foundations of the vvorld vvere laid, he hath 3 constantlye decreed by his councel secrete to vs, to deliuer from curse & damnation 4 those vvhome he hath chosen 5 in Christ out of mankinde, and to bring them by Christ to euerlasting 5 saluation, as vessels made 5 to honor, 6 vvherefore they vvhich be endued vvith so excellent a benesite of God, be called according to Gods purpose by his spirit vvorking in due season, they through grace obey the calling, they be iustified freely, they be made sonnes of God by adoption, they be made like the image of his only begotten s
                     •
                  nne Iesus Christ: they vvalke religiously in good vvorkes, and at length by Gods mercy, they attaine to euerlasting felicitie. As 8 the godly consideration of predestination and our election in Christ is ful of svveete, pleasant & vnspeakable comfort to godly persons, & such as feele in themselues the vvorking of the spirite of Christ, mortefying the vvorks of the flesh, & their earthly members, & dravving vp their mind to high and heauenly things, as vvel because it doth greatly establish and confirme their faith of eternal saluation to be enioyed through Christ, as because it doth feruently kindle their loue tovvards God: so, for curious and carnal persons lacking the spirit of Christ to haue continually before their eies the sentence of Gods predestination, is a moste dangerous dovvnfal, vvhereby the diuel doth thrust them either into desperation, or into rechlesnesse of most vncleane liuing, no lesse perilous than desperation.
               
                  9 Furthermore, vve must receiue Gods promises in such vvise, as they be generaly set forth vnto vs in holy scripture, 10 and in our doings that vvil of God is to be follovved, vvhiche vve haue expressely declared vnto vs in the vvord of God.
               
                  The Propositions.
                  1. There is a Praedestination vnto euerlasting life.
                  
                  2. Praedestination hath bine from euerlasting.
                  
                  3. They which are praedestinate vnto saluation cannot perish.
                  
                  4. Not al men, but certaine are praedestinate to be saued.
                  
                  5. VVhy some are elected, and not others.
                  
                  6. Who they are which shalbe saued.
                  
                  7. VVhat are the effects of Praedestination.
                  
                  8. The vse of the doctrine of praedestinatiō, both to the godly & wicked.
                  
                  9. VVhat may keepe men both from desperation, & also frō securitie.
                  
                  10. In our actions the word of God, which is his reuealed wil, must be our direction.
                  
               
               
                  
                  1. That amōg men some be predestinate vnto life, it is a truth most apparent
                  1. In the Scripture
                  
                     
                        1. By the testimonie
                        
                           
                              Of Christ himselfe
                              
                                 
                                    Math. 10, 20. 20, 23. 22, 14. 24, 22. 25, 35.
                                    Luke 12, 32. 17, 34.
                                    Iohn. 6, 37. 10, 26, &c.
                                 
                              
                              Of the
                              
                                 
                                    Euangeliste, Luke, Act. 13. 48.
                                    Apostle Paul
                                    
                                       
                                          Rom. 8, 29 &c. 9. 10. 11.
                                          1. Cor. 1. 27. 2. Cor. 2. 13.
                                          Ephes. 1.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        2. By the example of
                        
                           
                              The Creatures
                              
                                 
                                    Man
                                    Angels, Math. 25, 41.
                                    
                                       
                                          •
                                       ude, vers. 6.
                                 
                              
                              The two Bretheren
                              
                                 
                                    Habel Kain
                                    
                                       
                                          Gen. 4. 4.
                                          Heb. 11, 4.
                                       
                                    
                                    Isaac & Ismael Rom. 9, &c.
                                    Iaakob & Esau
                                    
                                       
                                          Mal. 1, 2, 3.
                                          Rom. 9. 13.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              The two Eunuches of K. Pharao, Ge. 40, 20, &c.
                              The two kingdomes Iuda & Israel.
                              The two peoples Iewes & Gentiles Rom. 11.
                              The two Apostles, Peter & Iudas.
                              The two theeues vpon the Crosse.
                              The two men in the Fieldes, Math. 24. 40.
                              The two women at the Mill. Math. 24. 40. Al wicked: and yet of them some be receaued into the fauour of God, and some reiected.
                              
                                 
                                    Erre therefore doe they which stand in opinion
                                    That some are apointed to be saued, but none to be damned.
                                    That some in soul, but in soule and bodie together none shal be saued, as the
                                    
                                       
                                          Pseudapostles.
                                          Carpocratiās.
                                          Valent.
                                          Cerdonites.
                                          Manichies.
                                          Hieracites.
                                          Montanists.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  2. In the publique writings, and confession of the Churches militant.
               
               
                  
                  2. Predestination beganne not in time, but before al times. So is it
                  1. In the Scripture
                  
                     
                        Matth. 25, 34.
                        Rom. 16, 25. 26.
                        Ephes. 1. 4. &c.
                        2. Tim. 1, 9.
                     
                  
                  2. In the publique confession of the godlie in
                  
                     
                        Heluet. 2. cap. 10. 11.
                        Basil. Art. 1.
                        France, art. 12. Whereby it appeareth how those Sophisters be deceiued, who, because God is not included within the compasse of anie time, but hath al things to come as present continually before his eyes, doe 
                              •
                           a
                              •
                           e, that God he did not in the time long passed onely, but stil doth in the time present likewise predestinate.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  3. They which are predestinate vnto life euerlasting can-not fal awaye from God for altogither, sayth
                  1. The Scripture
                  
                     
                        Math. 16. 18.
                        Math. 24, 24.
                        Iohn. 6, 37.
                        Iohn. 10, 28, 129.
                        Rom. 8, 30. &c.
                        Rom. 11. 29.
                        2. Tim. 2, 19.
                        1. Iohn, 2, 19.
                     
                  
                  2. The Church of God in
                  
                     
                        Heluet. confes. 2. cap. 10.
                        Basil. confes. art. 1.
                        France, art. 12. confes.
                        
                           
                              Then wander doe they from the truth, which thinke
                              That the very elect may fal vtterly from grace & be damned.
                              That the number of those which be predestinate, may both increase and be diminished. So did the Pelagians.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  4. As wee graunt there is a Predestination and that before al worlds, of men who must enioy euerlasting life: so we do saie not that al men, but certaine be predestinate vnto saluation. And so doth
                  1. The word of God
                  
                     
                        Luke, 10, 20.
                        Luke, 12, 7.
                        Iohn, 10, 14.
                        2. Tim. 
                              •
                           , 10.
                     
                  
                  2. The Churches reformed in
                  
                     
                        Heluet. 2. cap. 10.
                        Basil. Art. 1.
                        France, art. 12.
                        Fland. Art. 16.
                        
                           
                              What they are therefore appeareth, which saie that
                              Not certaine, but al shal be saued, yea the verie
                              
                                 
                                    As the Origenistes. Libertines Catabaptis
                                          •••
                                       
                                    
                                    Diuels
                                    Damned
                                 
                              
                              Al men be elected vnto euerlasting life,
                              Furthermore they are not to bee liked that curiously wil enquire what the number of them is that shalbe saued, or damned.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  5. The causes why some are predestinate vnto life, are set downe most plainelie
                  
                     
                        •
                     . In the Scripture, wher may be seene
                  
                     
                        1. The cause efficient to be th'euerlasting purpose of God
                        
                        
                           
                              Rom. 8, 28.
                              Rom. 9. 11.
                              Ephes. 1, 5. &c.
                              2. Tim. 1, 9.
                           
                        
                        2. The cause formal, God his infinite mercie
                        
                        
                           
                              Exod. 33, 19.
                              Rom. 9, 15.
                           
                        
                        3. The cause material, the bloud of 1. Christ
                        
                        
                           
                              Act. 2, 38.
                              Act. 3, 20, &c.
                              Act. 10, 43, &c.
                              1. Cor. 15, 22, &c.
                              Ephes. 1. 3. &c.
                              1. Tim. 2. 5.
                              1. Pet. 1, 18, 19.
                           
                        
                        4. The cause final, or end, why both God the Father hath loued, and Christ thus suffered, namelie
                        
                           
                              The glorie of God
                              
                                 
                                    Ephes. 1. 6▪ 12.
                                    Prou. 16. 4.
                                    Isa. 5. 16.
                                 
                              
                              The saluation of man
                              
                                 
                                    Rom. 8, 29.
                                    Rom. 9. 21.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  2. In the publique writinges of the Churches militant with a sweete consent according to this article,
                  
                     
                        And this condemneth the impietie of al those which thinke
                        That God doth not predestinate man of his mercie, but that man doth predestinate himselfe by his merites.
                        That God behelde in euerie man whether he would vse his grace well, and beleeue the Gospel, or no; and as he sawe a man wel affected, so he did predestinate him.
                        That beside his will there was some other cause in God why he choase one, and cast off another: but this cause and reason was hid from vs.
                        That men are predestinate vnto life, if they doe beleeue; But Predestination is not conditionall, but certaine. For they which are elected in Christ shall, and if they liue, must and wil beleeue.
                        That God is partiall, and vniust, for chusing some, and refusing others; calling manie, and electing but fewe.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  6 Though true it be the Lorde knoweth all, & euery of his elect: yet hath he reuealed vnto vs certaine notes and tokens, whereby we may see, & certainly know whether we be of that numer, or not. For such as be ordained vnto euerlasting life, if they liue
                  1. They be called vnto the knowledge of saluation, by the preaching of the worde.
                  2. They obeie that calling through th▪operation of God his spirit, working within them.
                  3. They feele in their soules, the Spirit of God bearing witnesse vnto their spirits, how they are the children of God.
                  4. They walke religiously in all good works.
                  
                     
                        And this is euident, and cleare
                        1. In the Scripture, where is set downe, of the predestinate vnto saluation▪
                        
                        
                           
                              1. The calling
                              
                                 
                                    Rom. 8, 30.
                                    Gal. 1, 15.
                                    1. Thes. 2, 12.
                                    2. Tim. 1. 9.
                                    Reuel. 17, 14.
                                 
                              
                              2. Th'obedience vnto the word.
                              
                                 
                                    Matth. 13, 11.
                                    Rom. 1, 5.
                                    Rom. 16. 19. 26.
                                    2. Cor. 13, 5.
                                    Ephes. 1, 13.
                                 
                              
                              3. Th'adoption into the childrē of God.
                              
                                 
                                    Rom. 8, 15. 16.
                                    Matth. 6, 9.
                                    Ephes. 1, 5.
                                    Gal. 4, 5. 6.
                                 
                              
                              4. The holines of life, and conuersatiō.
                              
                                 
                                    Ephes. 1, 4.
                                    Ephes. 2, 10.
                                    2. Thes. 2, 13. 14.
                                    Tit. 2, 11. 12.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        2. In the 2. publique Heluet. confession, cap. 10.
                        
                           
                              Sundrie aduersaries hath this truth, but principalie.
                              The Papists, who reach that none are to think that they ar of the nūber of the predestinate Con
                                    •
                                 . Trid. 
                                    〈…〉
                                 .
                              
                                 
                                    Cap. 
                                          •
                                       
                                       ▪
                                    
                                    C
                                          •••
                                        
                                       
                                          ••
                                       .
                                 
                              
                              Such as thinke it is a sufficient argument of election, if they be outwardlie called by the worde, though they haue none inward calling of the Spirit.
                              The Schuenkfeldians, and al such as depending vpon reuelations, condemne the ordinarie calling of God by the ministerie of hi
                                    •
                                  worde.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  7 Diuers be th'effects of predestination: but chiefly it bringeth to th'elect
                  1. In this life, Iustification.
                  2. In the life to come, Glorification.
                  
                     
                        Alwaies à conformitie to the image of th'onlie begotten sonne of God
                        1 In suffering trobles.
                        2. In enioieng glorie.
                        
                           
                              So witnesse
                              1. The scripture
                              
                                 
                                    Rom. 8, 30.
                                    Rom. 8, 29, 17.
                                    Matth. 25, 34.
                                 
                              
                              2. The god lie, who
                              
                                 
                                    In any age haue bine
                                    Doe liue at this present.
                                    
                                       
                                          And this is flatlie against thē which oppugne either
                                          1. The iustification by faith through the hearing of the worde preached, as do the
                                          
                                             
                                                Infidels.
                                                Epicures.
                                                Atheistes, of which reade more aboue, pag. 39.
                                             
                                          
                                          2. The glorious condition of man in blessed immortalitie. such are
                                          
                                             
                                                The Appollinari
                                                      •
                                                   ns.
                                                The Millinaries.
                                                Those heretiques whiche denie the resurrection of the flesh. as the
                                                
                                                   
                                                      Carpocratians.
                                                      Valentinians.
                                                      Cerdonites.
                                                      Manichies.
                                                      Montanists, &c.
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  8. The consideration and doctrine of predestination, is
                  1. To the godly ful
                  
                     
                        Sweete,
                        Pleasant,
                        Comfortable.
                        
                           
                              Because
                              It greatlie confirmeth their faith in Christ.
                              It doth feruentlie kindle their loue toward God.
                              
                                 
                                    So saith
                                    1. The scripture.
                                    
                                       
                                          Rom. 8 18, 31. &c.
                                          Ephe. 1. 15, &c.
                                          1. Cor. 15, 14, 15, &c.
                                       
                                    
                                    2. The Church of God in al places.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  2. To the wicked and reprobate
                  
                     
                        Soure
                        Vnsauorie,
                        Vncomfortable.
                        
                           
                              As that which they thinke, though moste vntruely and wickedly, bringeth them either
                              To despaire of Gods mercie, being without faith.
                              Not to feare his iustice being so extremely wicked.
                              
                                 
                                    VVhere as▪ neither
                                    .1 By the word of God.
                                    2. By any sound confession
                                    
                                       
                                          Can anie man collect that he is a vessel of wrath, prepared vnto damnation: but contrariwise, by manie great arguments may perswade himselfe that he is in the fauour of God, as in the next table following, plainly doth appeere.
                                          
                                             
                                                Therfore they are to be held as heretiques against the faith, which giue out that this doctrine leadeth
                                                Vnto desperation, which is with out al comfort,
                                                Loosenes of life, and so vnto Atheis. me.
                                                
                                                   
                                                      And therefore to be published neither by mouth nor by writing: such
                                                      were the heretiques called from hence, Predestinati.
                                                      Are the newe Pelagians, the Fam. of Loue.
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  9. That men the better may auoide
                  Desperation,
                  Carnal securitie,
                  
                     
                        Theie are in their mindes firmely to remember
                        1. That the promise of grace and fauour to men is vniuersal,
                        
                           
                              Matth. 11, 28.
                              Matth. 18, 14.
                              Iohn. 3, 15.
                              Rom. 3, 22.
                              1. Tim. 2, 4.
                              2. Pet. 3▪ 6.
                              Reade Rom.
                              
                                 
                                    9.
                                    10.
                                    11.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        2. That the doctrine of predestination is to be preached not vnto a fewe, but vniuersalie to al men
                        
                           
                              Matth. 28, 19, 20.
                              Mark. 16, 15, 16.
                              Luk. 24, 45, 46, 47
                           
                        
                        3. That the seales of the couenant be appointed to al in general. For
                        
                           
                              Concerning Baptisme, Al are to be baptised,
                              
                                 
                                    Matth. 28, 19.
                                    Mark. 16, 
                                          •
                                       5.
                                 
                              
                              Touching the Lorde his supper, Christ faith
                              
                                 
                                    Of the bread, Take, eate, this is my bodie.
                                    Of the cup, Drinke ye al of it.
                                    
                                       
                                          Matth. 26, 26, &c. 1. Cor. 11, 23. &c.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        4. That as the disobedience of Adam brought condemnation vpon al men: so the bloud and obedience of Christ is able, and al sufficient to washe away al sinnes, and that of al men.
                        5. That none euer yet did flie vnto the mercie of God by vnfained repentance, but he was receaued into fauor: so among others was
                        
                           
                              Dauid after his adulterie. Manasses after his idolatrie. Peter after his apostacie. The theefe hanged with Christ, euen at the last gaspe. The Nin
                                    •
                                 ui
                                    •
                                 s after many▪ and greeuous offences committed
                              
                                 
                                    So that as theie are not to be heard, which do saie
                                    The numer of the elect is but smal, and seing we are vncertaine whether we be of that companie or not, we wil proceede on as we haue begonne:
                                    That God is an acceptor of persons, and so vniust in choosing some, and refusing others:
                                    
                                       
                                          So is it the parte of al, and euerie man,
                                          Not to refuse the mercies of God, as generalie: so most gratiouslie offered vnto al men.
                                          Not to despere in 
                                                •
                                             espect either
                                          
                                             
                                                Of the greatnes
                                                Of the multitude
                                                
                                                   
                                                      Of his sins.
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                          Not to prouoke the Lorde to execute his vengeance through prophanenesse of life, and securitie.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  10. In our doings, but cheefely in the matter of Predestinatiō, we are to follow
                  1. Not our oune iudgementes, and what seemeth good in our oune opinions.
                  2. The will of God. And that wil to
                  
                     
                        Not which is concealed from vs, of God his omnipotencie, whereby he is minded to gouerne at his pleasure the things by him selfe created. Of this wil is mention made
                        
                           
                              Psal. 115, 3.
                              Isa. 46, 10.
                              Rom. 9, 15.
                           
                        
                        Of his fauour and good will towarde mankinde, reuealed vnto vs in the S. Scriptures by Iesus christ, whome we are to heare, Math. 3, 17. And he saith
                        
                           
                              Come vnto me, &c. Math. 11, 28.
                              So God loued the world, &c. Iohn, 3, 16.
                              
                                 
                                    Subscribed hereunto haue the Godly in al ages, and by name the Church in Heluetia by their publique confession. Heluet 2▪ cap. 10: but so haue no
                                          •
                                       
                                    
                                    The Enthusiasts.
                                    Anabaptists.
                                    Fam. of Loue.
                                    So many as leaue the writtē word of God, and depend vpon reuelations, either contrarie, or besides the truth
                                    
                                       
                                          Of which vngodly cogitations springeth among men
                                          Contempt of the words of the Preache
                                                ••
                                              and of al godly exerc
                                                ••••
                                             .
                                          Impeni
                                                •
                                             enci
                                                •
                                             
                                             ▪
                                          
                                          Carnal securitie.
                                          Desperation▪
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  18. ARTICLE. Of obtaining eternal saluation only by the name of Christ.
               
               
                  THey also are to be had accursed, that presume to say that euery man shalbe saued by the lawe, or sect which he professeth, so that he be diligent to frame his life according to that law, and the light of nature. For holie Scripture doth set out vnto vs onlie the name of Iesus Christ, whereby men must be saued.
               
                  For so much as there is bu
                        •
                     
                  
                  One faith
                  Onlie the Name of Iesus
                  
                     
                        Whereby men must be saued, as witnesse
                        The Scriptures
                        
                           
                              Ephe, 4. 5.
                              Act. 4, 2.
                           
                        
                        The Godly militant in this world.
                        
                           
                              They are to be had accursed which saie that
                              Euerie man is saued by the
                              
                                 
                                    which he professeth.
                                    Lawe
                                    Sect
                                 
                              
                              
                                 Men maie frame them selues according to al
                                 Times, Places, Persons, Religion.
                                 As
                                 
                                    The Libertine Anabaptistes.
                                    The Familie of Loue.
                                    Temporizers.
                                    Macchiauels.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  19. ARTICLE. Of the Church.
               
                  THe 1 visible 2 Church of Christ, is a congregation of 3, 4 faithfull men, in the which the 5 pure worde of God is preached, and the Sacraments be dulie ministred, according to Christes ordinance, in al those thinges that of necessitie are requisite to the same.
               As 6 the Church of Jerusalem, Alexandria, and Antioch haue erred: so also the 7 Church of Rome hath erred, not only in their liuing and maner of ceremonies, but also in matters of faith.
               
                  The Propositions.
                  1 There is a Church of Christ, not onely inuisible, but also visible.
                  
                  2 There is but one Church.
                  
                  3 The visible Church is a catholike church.
                  
                  4 The word of God was, and is before the Church.
                  
                  5 The markes and tokens of the visible church, are the due and true administration of the Word and Sacraments.
                  
                  6 The visible Church may erre both in doctrine and conuersation.
                  
                  7 The church of Rome most shamefully hath erred both in life, ceremonies, and matters of Faith.
                  
                  8 There is no saluation without this church, and therefore euerie man is firmely to ioyne therevnto, and neuer to depart there from by schisme, and contention.
                  
               
               
                  
                  1 A true saying is it. The Lorde, and hee onely, knoweth who are his. For to man the Church of christ is partly
                  1 Inuisible; which are all th elect, who are or shall be either
                  
                     
                        1 In Heauen, triumphing.
                        2 In earth fighting against the
                        
                           
                              Flesh
                              World
                              Diuell
                              
                                 
                                    These as mē
                                       bers of the Church, are sayde to bee inuisible, not because the men are not seene, but for that their faith and conscience is not perfectly known vnto vs.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  2 Visible, whereof some are
                  
                     
                        1 For God.
                        2 Against God.
                        
                           
                              Al notwithstanding well thought of: and accompted faithfull, so long as they make no manifest and open rebellion against the trueth.
                              
                                 
                                    And this
                                    1 Is gathered out of the S. Scripture, where is touched the Church
                                    
                                       
                                          1 Inuisible, and holy
                                          
                                             
                                                1 Triumphing
                                                
                                                   
                                                      Reu. 2▪ 26.
                                                      Reu. 7. 14▪ 15
                                                      Reu. 3, 5 12.
                                                   
                                                
                                                2 Militāt, or wa
                                                      •
                                                   
                                                   ring
                                                
                                                   
                                                      Gal. 4, 29.
                                                      Ephe. 6. 10.
                                                      2. Tim. 3. 12.
                                                      1. Pet. 5. 10.
                                                      Reu. 12. 11.
                                                      Reuel. 17. 14.
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                          2 Visible & mixed
                                          
                                             
                                                By the parable
                                                
                                                   
                                                      Of the Sower▪ Mat. 13.
                                                      Of the Marriage, Mat. 22.
                                                      Of the Virgins, Mat. 25.
                                                   
                                                
                                                By the saying
                                                
                                                   
                                                      Of christ
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            Ioh. 6. 70
                                                            Ioh. 13. 10.
                                                         
                                                      
                                                      Of Paule, 2. Tim. 2. 20
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            This truth hath many aduersaries, wherof
                                                            Some renounce our Christ, the Sauiour of mankind, & so think hys people are not the Church as the
                                                            
                                                               
                                                                  Iewes.
                                                                  Turks.
                                                                  Anabapt. Heretiks.
                                                               
                                                            
                                                            Some denie the triumphing state of the godlie in heauen, and dreame of a glorious condition in this world, as the familiars.
                                                            
                                                               
                                                                  H. N.
                                                                  Vitell▪
                                                                  
                                                               
                                                            
                                                            Some think the Church Catholike to be visible, as the Papists. Some suppose the Churche militant is not visible at all, as the Libertines.
                                                            Some giue out that the Church is voyde of sin and sinners, as the
                                                            
                                                               
                                                                  Donatists
                                                                  Anabaptists.
                                                                  Fami. of Loue.
                                                               
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    2 Is testified in the Churches reformed Confes.
                                    
                                       
                                          Heluet. 
                                                •
                                             . cap. 17.
                                          Heluet. 1. art. 14.
                                          Bohem. cap. 8.
                                          France Art. 27.
                                          Flan. Art. 27.
                                          Ausburgh. art. 7.
                                          Sax Art. 11.
                                          Wittemb. Art. 32.
                                          Sueu
                                                •
                                             . art.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  2. When we doe saie
                  That the Church is
                  
                     
                        Visible,
                        Inuisible,
                     
                  
                  That there is à church
                  
                     
                        VVeast,
                        Easte,
                        Greeke,
                        Latine,
                        Italian,
                        English
                        
                           
                              We think not that Christ hath diuers churches, but that the Church
                              Is diuerslie taken,
                              Hath manie particular Churches (as the sea manie armes) contained in it.
                              
                                 
                                    For the visible Church is
                                    Not manie congregations
                                    A Congregation.
                                    
                                       
                                          As may be read.
                                          1. In the Scripture,
                                          
                                             
                                                Rom. 12, 5.
                                                1. Cor. 10, 17.
                                                1. Cor. 12, 13.
                                                Gal. 3. 28.
                                             
                                          
                                          2. In the Confes. of the godlie in
                                          
                                             
                                                Heluet. 2, cap. 17.
                                                Bohem. cap. 8.
                                                Franc. art. 26.
                                                Fland. art. 27.
                                                Ausburgh art. 7.
                                                Wittemb. art. 32.
                                                Sueu. art. 
                                                      •
                                                   5.
                                                
                                                   
                                                      Then blasphe mous be th'opinions of
                                                      The Iewes,
                                                      The Turks,
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            〈…〉
                                                         
                                                      
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            VVho seclude al from the Church, whosoeuer embrace no
                                                                  •
                                                                their 
                                                                  〈◊〉
                                                                nations.
                                                         
                                                      
                                                      Munce
                                                            •
                                                         , that Anabaptist, which tearmed his 
                                                            〈◊〉
                                                         
                                                         ▪ cleane contrarie to the people of Christe 
                                                            〈…〉
                                                          of God; and sa
                                                            •
                                                         de that al others were wicked, and worthie to be slaine.
                                                      The familie of Loue, who publish how
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            They onlie are the Church.
                                                            None are in à rect faith or beliefe, but only the Communaltie of Loue.
                                                            The Communaltie of Loue are the Saintes of God, and his acceptable people.
                                                            Theie which are not of the Familie, haue no liuing god; and be without Gods seruice.
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     . The visible church propertie vnderstood, is but à part of the Catholique: yet forasmuch as it is a Congregation of the faithful, who be
                  For calling
                  
                     
                        Gouernors and subiectes,
                        Noble and base,
                        Rich and poore,
                        Teachers & learners,
                     
                  
                  For sexe
                  
                     
                        Men
                        Women,
                     
                  
                  For age
                  
                     
                        Old
                        Yong▪
                        
                     
                  
                  For their countrie.
                  
                     
                        Iewes and Gentils,
                        Graecians and Barbarians,
                        
                           
                              It may be wel called a Catholike Church. This
                              1. Is grounded vpon the word of God. Where we find that excluded is
                              
                                 
                                    No calling
                                    
                                       
                                          Marc. 16, 15.
                                          Matth. 28, 19.
                                          1. Cor. 4, 10.
                                          1. Cor. 1, 26, 27.
                                       
                                    
                                    No sexe
                                    
                                       
                                          Act. 2, 21.
                                          Rom. 1, 16.
                                          Gal. 3, 28.
                                       
                                    
                                    None age
                                    
                                       
                                          Marc. 16, 16.
                                          Act. 13, 39.
                                          Rom. 10, 4.
                                       
                                    
                                    No nation
                                    
                                       
                                          Matth. 28, 19.
                                          Luke 13, 29.
                                          Act. 2, 39.
                                          Act. 10, 34▪ 35.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              2. Is graunted by the Church, namelie in
                              
                                 
                                    Heluet. confes. 2. cap 
                                          •
                                       7.
                                    Bohem. confes. cap. 8.
                                    Flan. confes. art. 27.
                                    Wittemb. art. 32.
                                    
                                       
                                          Vnsounde be they in religion therefore, which wil t
                                                •
                                             e the Church to a certaine
                                          Calling, as the rude Romanistes, to the Clergie.
                                          Contrie, as the Donatists, to Africa.
                                          Place▪ as the Papists, to Rome.
                                          People, as the Iewes to themselues, excluding al others.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  4. Seeing the visible Church of Christ is à Congregation of men (either in th'eies of God, or at the least in the iudgement of the godlie) faithful: it followeth that the word of God must be before the Church, fo
                        •
                     
                  
                  1. Time▪ Because the word is
                  
                     
                        The seede: the faithful
                        
                           
                              The corne Luke 8, 
                                    •
                                 1
                              The children. 1. Pet. 1, 23
                           
                        
                        The rocke, or foundation; the faithful the house
                        
                           
                              Matt. 16, 1
                                    •
                                 .
                              Ephes. 2, 
                                    •
                                 0.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  2. Auctority: forsomuch as the voce
                  
                     
                        Of the Church, is the voce of man, who
                        
                           
                              Hath erred,
                              Maie erre.
                           
                        
                        Of the scripture is the voce of God,
                        
                           
                              2. Tim. 3, 16.
                              2. Pet. 1, 21.
                              
                                 
                                    Who cannot
                                    Deceaue
                                    Be deceaued.
                                    
                                       
                                          Of this iudgement are the Churches reformed, as appeareth in their confes.
                                          Heluet. 1, art. 14.
                                          Heluet. 2, cap. 13, 17.
                                          Bohem. cap. 1, 8.
                                          France, art. 5.
                                          Flan. art. 3, 7.
                                          Saxon. art. 1, 11.
                                          Sueuia. art. 1.
                                          
                                             
                                                This maketh to the strengthning of vs, against those Popish opinions; that the Church
                                                1. VVas before 
                                                      〈◊〉
                                                    VVord, for time
                                                2. Is aboue the VVord▪ for auctoritie.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  5. There is the visible Church, where
                  1. The pure worde of God is syncerely preached.
                  2. The Sacraments instituted by Christ are dulie administred.
                  
                     
                        And so saie not we onelie, but besides
                        1. The scripture; wher in we find that à note of the visible Church is the
                        
                           
                              1. VVord preached,
                              
                                 
                                    Luke 8, 21.
                                    Iohn 8, 47.
                                    Iohn. 10▪ 27.
                                    Gal. 1, 8
                                    1. Thes. 5, 20.
                                    1. Iohn 4, 2, &c.
                                    2. Iohn verse 9.
                                 
                              
                              2. Administration of the Sacraments.
                              
                                 
                                    Matth.▪ 28, 19.
                                    Rom. 6 3.
                                    1. Cor. 6, 11.
                                    1. Cor. 12, 13.
                                    Luke 23, 19.
                                    1. Cor. 1. 20. &c.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        2. The god lie in reformed Churches Confes.
                        
                           
                              Heluet. 1, art. 14.
                              Heluet. 2, cap. 17.
                              Bohem. cap. 8.
                              France, art. 27, 28.
                              Saxon. art. 11.
                              Wittemb. art. 32.
                              Sueuia. art. 15. Some, and they also godlie men, ad besides for à note of the visible Church, Discipline. But because discipline in part, is included in th'other markes mentioned, both we, and in effect, al other Churches reformed, ouerpasse it in this place, as no token simplie of the visible Church. Neither do we tie the Church so strictlie to th'other signs, that we thinke al those to be without the Church, and Antichristians, which neither doe heare the worde orderlie preached, nor receiue the sacraments; if so be they would, and can neither heare th'one, nor receaue th'other: at which time the Church is not visible, but inuisible, as in the time of tyranny, and cap tiuitie.
                              
                                 
                                    On the other side we renūce, as altogether Antichristian, the opinions
                                    1. Of the Papists, who alleage for tokens of the true Church
                                    
                                       
                                          Antiquitie,
                                          Vnitie,
                                          Vniuersalitie,
                                          Succession,
                                          Miracles.
                                          Reuelations.
                                          
                                             
                                                But these are not so,
                                                Because theie are not deriued from the verie nature of the Church, but are meerelie external.
                                                Because they are tokens aswel of the false, as of the true Church.
                                                Because theie are not good, except there be warranted by the worde of God.
                                                Because it was fore tolde by the Spirit of God, that the comming of Antichrist should be with all power, signes, and lieng wonders, &c. 2. Thes. 2, 9, &c.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    2. Of some, which make discipline, and that their owne too, such an essentiall argument of the visible Church, as theie thinke where that is not, though both the Word, and the Sacraments be rectlie ministred and receaued, there
                                    
                                       
                                          1. The Magistrates are Tyrants.
                                          2. The Ministers are false prophets
                                          3. No Church of God is.
                                          4. Antichristianitie doth reigne.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  6. Nothing is more certaine, than that the church militant and visible, may erre, and that
                  1. In doctrine,
                  2. In conuersation,
                  
                     
                        Els woulde it not haue bine saide to the Church
                        By our Sauior Christ, concerning
                        
                           
                              1. Doctrine,
                              
                                 
                                    Take heede, &c. Matt. 24. 4.
                                    Beleeue it not. Matt. 24, 23, & 26.
                                    Beware of the leauen, &c. Mar. 8, 15.
                                    Many shalbe deceaued: yea▪ the verie elect if it were possible. Matt. 24. ver. 11, 24.
                                    Shal he finde faith on the earth? Luke 18, 8.
                                 
                              
                              2. Conuersation.
                              
                                 
                                    Iniquitie shal be encreased.
                                    The loue of manie shal waxe colde. Matth. 24, 12.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        By Paul touching
                        
                           
                              Doctrine.
                              
                                 
                                    We knowe in part. 1. Cor. 13. 12.
                                    Antichrist sitteth in the temple of God 2. Thes 2, 4.
                                    Beware of dogs of idle workemen, of concision. Phi. 
                                          •
                                       . 1.
                                 
                              
                              Conuersation.
                              
                                 
                                    There is a fight. Rom. 7. 22.
                                    Restore, &c. least thou also be tempted. Beare one anothers burthen Gal. 6, 1.
                                    
                                       
                                          Now that the Church hath erred, either the
                                          Superstition,
                                          Here sies,
                                          Atheisme
                                          
                                             
                                                Now reigning at
                                                Hierusalem,
                                                Alexandria,
                                                Anti och.
                                                
                                                   
                                                      The most famous places in th'vniuersal world, do witnesse. And this is subscribed vnto by the churches in
                                                      Heluet. confes. 2. cap. 17
                                                      Saxon. confes. art. 11.
                                                      Wittemb. art. 32.
                                                      Sueuia. confes. art. 15.
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            But this truth is oppugned by
                                                            1. The Papistes which holde that the Church cannot erre in doctrine.
                                                            2. The Donatistes Anabap. who saie the churche cannot erre for manners.
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  7. Iustly is the Church of Rome condē
                     ned of vs, and of al reformed Churches. Because not onlie it hath erred, but stil cursedly doth offend
                  1. In life. for there
                  
                     
                        The harlot hath a better life, Than she that is a Romans wife.
                        Al things are vendible.
                        A man may be what he wil, sauing a godly man.
                     
                  
                  2. In ceremonies, which are
                  
                     
                        For numer, infinite: such as neither we, nor our fathers could beare.
                        For vse
                        
                           
                              Vaine. For manie of them are
                              
                                 
                                    To no purpose.
                                    To none order.
                                    To no comlines.
                                 
                              
                              Damnable: inasmuch as they are held
                              
                                 
                                    Necessarily to be obserued, which is against Christian libertie.
                                    To merit, which bringeth vnto nothing, the sacrifice of Christ.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  3. In doctrine. For
                  
                     
                        1. Against the law of God it maintaineth
                        
                           
                              Idolatrie.
                              Inuocation of creatures.
                              Disobedience vnto Magistrates. Whoredome. Periurie so it be not to a Catholique.
                           
                        
                        2. To the ouerthrowe of the Gospel, of man his saluation, it ascribeth
                        
                           
                              The original, partlie
                              
                                 
                                    To the grace of God.
                                    To the force of nature.
                                 
                              
                              The substance, partly
                              
                                 
                                    To the iustice of God.
                                    To the merits of man.
                                 
                              
                              The end partly
                              
                                 
                                    To the glorie of God.
                                    To the honor of creatures.
                                    
                                       
                                          Againe, looke we into the heades of The antichristian Synagogue and we shal see that of them some haue bine
                                          1. Coniurers, & forcerers, as Pope
                                          
                                             
                                                Martine, 2.
                                                Syluester. 2. 3.
                                                Iohn 19. 20. 21,
                                                Gregorie 6. and Gregorie the 7.
                                                Benedict. 9▪
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                          2. Heretikes. For▪ Pope
                                          
                                             
                                                Syricius, Calixtus, Leo 9. Paschalis, if not simply, yet in some men, & women condē
                                                   ned marriage.
                                                Liberius was an Arrian.
                                                Anastasius 2. an Acatian.
                                                Honorius a Monothelite.
                                                Iohn 22. a D
                                                      •
                                                   rmitane.
                                                Caelestinus a Nestorian.
                                             
                                          
                                          3. World Athely prophane men. Pope
                                          
                                             
                                                Sixtus builded a stewes for Sodomites. Paul. 3. receaued 40000▪ duckats monthly of curti
                                                   
                                                      •
                                                   ans. Leo 10 denied the immortalitie of the soule. Iohn 23 was pronounced a diuel incarnate, at the counsel at Constance.
                                                
                                                   
                                                      Hence it came that
                                                      1. Rome
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            Hath bine called Babylon, and that by
                                                            
                                                               
                                                                  August de ci
                                                                        •
                                                                     itat. Dei, lib. 18.
                                                                  Hieron in praefat. lib. de Spiritu S.
                                                               
                                                            
                                                            Was saide to shewe the parts of the Gentils, rather than of Christians, euen by the late Pope Paus 5.
                                                         
                                                      
                                                      2. Bernard saide the Romanes are wise to doe wickednes, but be altogether fooles vnto goodnes. They are hateful to heauen and earth, yea, and hurtful to both: wicked against God, rash against holy thinges, seditious among themselues. De consider. ad Eugen. lib. 4.
                                                      3. The Pope was proclamed Antichrist at Rhemes, by the coū
                                                         sel vnder Capet.
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            What they are then, it appeareth, which sa
                                                                  •
                                                               e, the Churche of Rome doth not, yea, cannot erre at al.
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  8. Although it be not expreslie set downe: yet is it necessarilie deriued from this Article, that
                  1. None can be saued, which are not members of this true church
                  2. Euerie one is firmelie to ioyne and neuer to forsake this communion of sancts
                  
                     
                        And this is euident
                        1. In the word of God, where we are commanded
                        
                           
                              To heare Christ. Matth. 17, 5.
                              To come vnto Christ. Matt. 21, 28.
                              To beware
                              
                                 
                                    Of false prophets. Matt. 7, 15.
                                    Of the leauen of the P
                                          ••
                                       t. & Sad. Mat. 16, 6.
                                    Of dogs, Phil. 32.
                                    Of idle workmē Phil. 32.
                                    Of concision Phil. 32.
                                    Lest there be anie that spoile vs through philosophie. Col. 2, 8.
                                    Lest we be plucked awaie with th'error of the wicked. 2. Pet. 3, 7.
                                 
                              
                              To trie the spirits, &c. 1. Iohn 4, 1.
                              To goe out of Babylon. Reuel. 18, 4.
                              To come out from among th'vngodlie, &c. 2. Cor. 6, 17.
                              
                                 
                                    For
                                    1. The benefites which the Church doth, and shal enioye, are most singular
                                    
                                       
                                          1. Corporal
                                          
                                             
                                                Matth. 6, 33.
                                                Luke 21, 28.
                                             
                                          
                                          2. Spiritual
                                          
                                             
                                                Iohn 17, 3.
                                                Gal. 4, 6.
                                                Col. 3, 13.
                                                1. Iohn 1, 9.
                                             
                                          
                                          3. Eternal
                                          
                                             
                                                Matth. 25, 21.
                                                Iohn 16, 22.
                                                Matth. 13, 43.
                                                Rom. 8, 17.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    2. The punishmēts which the enimies of the Church shal haue, are manie and greeuous.
                                    
                                       
                                          1. In this life
                                          
                                             
                                                Wars, and destructiō Matth. 22, 7.
                                                Induration of harte. Iohn 12, 40.
                                             
                                          
                                          2. In the world to come
                                          
                                             
                                                Expulsion frō the Supper. Luke 14 24. Exclusion frō the mariage. Matth. 25, 12. A portion in the cup of the wrath of God. Reu. 1
                                                      •
                                                   , 10, in the lake &c. Reue. 21, 8. Damnation. Phil. 3, 19.
                                                
                                                   
                                                      Therfore let thē take heed
                                                      Who, whatsoeuer considerations they may seeme to haue, 
                                                            〈◊〉
                                                          to ioine with this church, I meane
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            Papistes.
                                                            Liber. Anabaptists.
                                                            Schismatikes.
                                                         
                                                      
                                                      Who wil 
                                                            •
                                                         ome not onlie with this churche but with al other besides, if occasion doe serue,
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            I
                                                                  •
                                                                
                                                               
                                                                  •
                                                               urkie, with turks
                                                            At Rome with Antichrist
                                                            At home with Christ
                                                            
                                                               
                                                                  Suc
                                                                        •
                                                                      are
                                                                  The Familiars.
                                                                  
                                                                     
                                                                        〈…〉
                                                                     
                                                                  
                                                               
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        2. In the publike confessions of the reformed Churches in
                        
                           
                              Heluet. 1. art. 14.
                              Heluet. 2, cap. 17.
                              France, art. 26.
                              Fland. art. 28.
                              Saxo. art. 11.
                              Wittemb art. 32.
                              Sueuia. art. 15.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         
      
   