
      
         
            
            CERTAINE SERMONS, VPON SEVERALL Texts of Scripture: PREACHED BY THAT REuerend and faithfull ſeruant of Ieſus Chriſt M. ROBERT ROLLOK, Minister of the Church (and Rector of the Colledge) of EDINBVRGH. Whereof the firſt eleuen were be
               fore publiſhed, and the remnant ſeuen, are newly adjoy
               ned thereunto.
            
            Imprinted at Edinburgh ANDRO HART, 1616.
         
         
            
            
               
                  The number of Sermons, with the Texts of Scripture, and in what leafe to find euery Sermon.
                   I 2. Cor. Chap. 5. verſ. 1. 2. 3 4. Fol. 1
                   II 2. Cor. Chap. 5. verſ. 5. 6. 7. 8. Fol. 24
                   III 2. Cor. Chap. 5. verſ. 9. 10. 11. Fol. 45
                   IV 2. Cor. Chap. 5. verſ. 12. 13. 14. 15. Fol. 63
                   V 2. Cor. Chap. 5. verſ. 16. 17. 18. Fol. 79
                   VI 1. Cor. Chap. 2. verſ. 6. 7. 8. 9. Fol. 97
                   VII 1. Cor. Chap. 2. verſ. 10. 11. 12. Fol. 118
                   VIII 2. Cor. Chap. 4. verſ. 3. 4. 5. Fol. 137
                   IX 2. Cor. Chap. 10. verſ. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. Fol. 155
                   X Philip. Chap. 1. verſ. 18. 19. 20. 21. &c. Fol. 175
                   XI Titus, Chap. 3. verſ. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. Fol. 198
               
            
            
               
                  Theſe are newlie adjoyned.
                   XII Pſalme cxxx. verſ. 1. 2. 3. 4. Fol. 229
                   XIII Pſalme cxxx. verſ. 5. 6. 7. 8. Fol. 246
                   XIV Mat. Chap. 15. ver. 21. 22. 23. 24 &c. Fol. 262
                   XV Luk. chap. 7. ver. 37. 38. 39. 40. 41. &c. Fol. 281
                   XVI Iohn, Chap. 3. verſe 6. Fol. 306
                   XVII 
                        •
                      Timoth. Chap. 1. verſ. 12. 13. 14. Fol. 332
                   XVIII 1. Tim. Chap. 1. verſ. 14. 15. 16. Fol. 357
               
            
         
         
            
            TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, THEIR MOST LOVING FRIEND IN THE LORD, MASTER WILLIAM SCOT of ELY, Grace in this life, and euerlaſting glorie in the Life to come.
            
               
                  OVR Gracious GOD, who in His rich Mercie (RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL) hath in this latter time raiſed vp manie rare and worthie inſtruments and faithfull Preachers in other Countreyes about vs, hath not left this our Countrey deſtitute of the like benefites: for, as amongst them, ſo amongst vs, ſtriuing with our ingratitude, Hee hath raiſed vp from time to time ſundrie notable men, indewed with ſingular graces, whoſe Ministerie Hee made powerfull to ouer
                  •…
                the kingdome of Sathan, ſinne, and the Anti
                  •…
               
               
to acquire a CHVRCH vnto Himſelfe, in the which Hee might bee glorified in the riches of His mercies: of whome the moste part nowe ſleepe in the LORD, and rest from their labours: Amongst whome MASTER ROBERT ROLLOK, of bleſſed memorie, deſerueth (for his graces) to bee counted with the first: for who euer preaſſed more to approoue himſelfe to GOD in a good conſcience than hee? Who euer was more faithfull and pairfull in his calling than hee? Hee ſtro
                  •
               e alwayes to glorifie GOD, and to honour his profeſſion and calling by a godlie life and conuerſation, ſo that the verie enemies of the trueth coulde not accuſe him, nor Enuie it ſelfe justlie reprooue him: Hee ſet himſelfe alwayes to doe good to others: for hee thought hee was not his owne man, but deputed for the ſeruice of others: Hee was neuer idle, but hee did either reade, meditate, praye, conferre, counſell, comfort, preach or write: He was peaceable in the Church, patient of wronges, neuer vindictiue, but euer readie to forgiue: Hee ſought not the worlde, knowing that hee had heere no continuing, but had his conuerſation in the Heauen, from whence hee looked for his Sauiour to come.
            But it is needleſſe to praiſe him, either to you, Syr, who knoweth ſo well what ſtore of grace the LORD vouchſafed vpon him, or yet to anie others, ſeeing his workes ſpeake plainlie enough for him: for as hee edified manie in his life by his Preaching, ſo alſo hath hee edified many not onlie in his Countrey, but in manie other partes, by his learned and judicious writinges, lef
                  •
                behinde him.
            
               And becauſe his Lectures, that haue beene before publiſhed by vs, vpon the COLOSSIANS and THESSALONIANS, as alſo the first eleuen SERMONS heere contained, haue beene receiued with good liking and applauſe of manie: and newe, finding that there are not copies extant, eſpeciallie of theſe eleuen Sermons, to ſatisfie the deſire of ſuch as ſeeke them, wee haue thought good to cauſe imprint them ouer againe: as alſo to adjoyne ſeuen other Sermons, preached by him vpon diuerſe Textes, and receiued by his Schollers from his mouth: which indeede wee must confeſſe, required the refining hand of the Author, that they might haue ſhined in their owne beautie: Alwayes, our care haue beene in theſe, as in all the rest before publiſhed, out of ſome copies offered vnto vs, as neare as wee coulde, to giue out to the publike viewe of the Church, both the matter, ſtile, and phraſe of the godlie Author.
            Nowe, for manie reaſons wee are mooued to recommende theſe his Sermons, (and our labours therein) to your patronage, that with them your memorie, with the posteritie, might long endure.
            First, in reſpect of the entire loue and affection yee carried to Master ROLLOK from the first houre that yee were acquainted with him, euen vnto his death: for no man euer loued him, conuerſed with him, reſpected him, &c, more than your ſelfe: and manie a time haue you reſorted vnto him in his health, and offered him ſuch curteſie and kindneſſe, that hee acknowledged himſelfe to bee obliged to none ſo much as to you.
            
               And finallie, yee not onelie viſited him in his ſickneſſe, but allured him to come to your houſe, where without regarde of paines and expenſes, yee entertained him, and ſuch as viſited him, moſte liberallie and chearefullie, till the time that the LORD called him to Himſelfe: Yea, yee counted it a ſingular bleſſing of the LORD, that Hee honoured you with ſuh a gueſt.
            Next, Maſter ROLLOK in his Teſtament ordained, that all his Bookes, which after ſhoulde bee imprinted, ſhoulde bee dedicated vnto you: that whoſoeuer got commoditie thereof, next after GOD, might giue the honour and thankes vnto you.
            Thirdlie, through your care, endeuour, and expenſes onelie theſe whole Sermons were gathered in from them that wrote them, through your procurement onelie they were reuiſed, corrected, and made fit for the Printing: by your meanes onelie nowe they ſee the light, which without you had beene buried in darkneſſe.
            Laſtlie, if it were free for vs to make choyſe of a patrone, wee woulde make choyſe of none but you, to testifie our thankefulneſſe for your great vndeſerued kindneſſe ſhewed vnto vs particularlie, yea, and to all theſe whome the LORD hath ſet in His ſeruice.
            So that in all reſpectes reaſon requireth, that all theſe Sermons ſhoulde bee publiſhed vnder your patronage and protection: For whereas your name was not prefixed vnto the firſt eleuen, when they were firſt imprinted: (ſeeing by your endeuour, charges, and expenſes onelie they were firſt ſet foorth) nowe this occaſion beeing preſented, wee

might juſtlie haue beene blamed, if that ouer-ſight by vs had not beene amended.
            Finallie, Syr, honour the LORD, and Hee will honour you, delight in His wayes, and Hee will giue you your hearts deſire, weary not to doe good vnto the Saincts, and He will recompenſe you, & at laſt, will crowne all your good deedes with glorie.
            The LORD make you to goe on from grace to grace, and in all thinges direct you by His Spirite, that yee may bee long happie in this life, and for euer happie in the life to come, Amen. Edinburgh, the 22. of Ianuarie, Anno Dom. 1616.
            
               Yours in the Lord, H. C. W. A.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE FIRST SERMON.
            
               II. COR. CHAP. V.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 1
                     For we know, that if our earthly houſe of this tabernacle bee deſtroyed, wee haue a building giuen of GOD, that is, an houſe not made with handes, but eternall in the Heauens:
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 2
                     For therefore wee ſigh, deſiring to bee clothed with our houſe, which is from Heauen.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 3
                     Becauſe that if we bee clothed, wee ſhall not be found naked:
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 4
                     For indeede, we that are in this tabernacle, ſigh, and are burthened becauſe we would not be vnclothed, but woulde bee clothed vpon, that mortalitie might be ſwallowed vp of life.
                  
               
            
            
               IN the Chapter immediatlie going before, the Apoſtle Paul hath bene ſpeaking of the afflictions that hee ſuffered in his owne perſon▪ and hath declared, that there was two things that helde him vp in thoſe afflictions, the one thing preſent, the other thing to come. The thing preſent, the power of God, the life of Ieſus, this held him vp in ſuch ſort (ſaith hee) that when he was dying vnder affliction in the bodie, yet the

life of Ieſus was manifeſt in him, & he was liuing in ſoule: and the more his bodie was decaying & wearing away, the more the inner-man, that ſpirituall life that floweth from Chriſt, grew and was renewed. Woe to that man that dieth altogether! thou muſt die, and this bodie and life muſt bee ſeparated, the▪ bodie muſt goe to duſt, but looke that ſoule and bodie goe not together: looke that as thou findeſt the bodie and life naturall to decay, ſo thou finde that ſpirituall life that floweth from the Lord of life, to grow, or elſe of neceſſitie thou muſt haue a woefull departure. This is the thing preſent that helde him vp. Another thing, and greater, which was not preſent, but to come, helde him vp vnder a
                  •
               l the afflictions that were laide vpon him, which hee vttereth in th
                  •
               ſe words, The momentanean lightneſſe of affliction worketh vnto vs an euerlaſting weight of glorie that paſſeth in excellencie. Theſe are the wordes of the Apoſtle, wherein hee woulde learne vs, that after all theſe afflictions are done and ended, there abydeth a glorie after this life, that paſſeth in infinite degrees aboue all the afflictions that euer came to man in this life.
            Will yee looke to the nature of the afflictions, Firſt, they are light, that is one propertie: then they laſt but for a moment, that is another property: the weight of them is light▪ the time of their during is but a moment: but the glorie (marke euerie word of the Apoſtle) the glorie (ſaith he) paſſeth
               
               in excellencie. It is not onlie excellent, but i
                  •
                excelleth in excellencie, excellent aboue excellencie, an heape aboue an help, mounting vp to an infinite heape. Then looke to the weight thereof, it is not light▪ but it is heauie: the afflictions were as light as a fether, or as the winde, in compariſon of this glorie, but the glorie is heauie and weightie, a weight of glorie that paſſeth in excellencie, this is the firſt propertie. Then looke to the time, the afflictions were but for a moment. And if thou ſhouldeſt liue a thouſand yeeres, and bee afflicted as manie yeeres (for all thy dayes, and thy beſt dayes, if thou ſhouldeſt liue neuer ſo well, 
                  •
               re but dayes of affliction) all the thouſand yeeres are but a moment in reſpect of that eternitie that followeth. Then let your eye be euer vpon eternitie of joy, or eternity of pain, eternity either of torment or of reſt. Affliction is but for a moment, this glorie that paſſeth in excellencie is eternall in time. Loe, how great things are ſpoken in few words! A glorie paſsing in weight & eternitie. And when he hath tould you all that he can, he hath not attained to the thouſand part of the greatneſſe of that glorie: neuer man thought of it as it is, nor it could neuer enter into the heart of man that excellent glorie that is prepared for them that loue God, 1. Cor. 2. 9. When he hath ſet down theſe two points in ye end of the chap. preceeding, he goeth forward, a
                  •
               d hee ſheweth what he is doing in the meane time whilſt he getteth this excellent glory.

Learne to doe as he is doing, hee ſaith, Mine eyes are not vpon the worlde, my looke is not ſet vpon theſe viſible things, which mē haue ſo great pleaſure into; but mine eyes are lifted vp, & I am looking to thinges inuiſible, that the mortall eye of man cannot ſee, becauſe al theſe things viſible are but temporall, & wil decay. If it were a kingdom, and thou begin to reſt or repoſe vpō it▪ it will decay, and thou ſhalt fall downe together with it, and periſh euerlaſtinglie: But the things inuiſible are eternal, and he who leaneth & repoſeth thereon, ſhall get eternitie. Looke to the condition of thoſe thinges whereupon thou repoſeſt in this world: for if they bee thinges heauenlie, ſpirituall and eternall, thou ſhalt be heauenlie, ſpirituall and eternall: And as euer thou wouldeſt wiſh to ſee that glorie, looke that thine eye be ſet thereon in this earth, looke that thine eye bee mounted vp aboue all theſe earthlie things, & that thou keepe the heauenly things in thy ſight: forget them not, for if thou die and they bee out of thy ſight, thou ſhalt neuer ſee them: Take ple
                  •
               ſure to looke to that excellent glorie, and thou ſhalt obtaine it, otherwiſe not.
            Now I come to the text: I ſhall let you ſee the diſpoſition of the Apoſtle, and what he eſteemeth of this life preſent, whereof we account ſo much, and whereupon our hearts & mindes are ſo ſet to keepe it: All our terrour is for the parting of the ſoule from the body: looke to Paul what he doth,

and behold his diſpoſition, either in life or death: Brethren, wee haue the more neede to take heede to theſe things, becauſe wee ſhall all be put to the proofe, happie is hee that can bee prepared! The Apoſtle hauing ſpoken this, that his eye was ſet on that heauenlie glorie; it might haue beene ſaide, thou ſetteſt thine eye vpon a life aboue: but take heed Paul, thou ſhalt die in the meane time, is not life and death two contraries? thou muſt die, and that bodie of thine muſt bee diſſolued: lookeſt thou euer to riſe agine? thinkeſt thou anie other thing but to be diſappointed of life? lookeſt thou that that bodie of thine, beeing diſſolued in duſt, ſhall riſe againe to glorie? This is a ſore temptation, and ſundrie thinketh after this maner. The Apoſtle anſwereth, We know that if our earthlie houſe of this tabernacle be diſſolued, we haue a building giuen of God, an houſe not made with handes, but eternall in the heauens. Learne a leſſon here: Ye ſee while a man is looking to heauen, he will not be without temptation, no not Paul himſelfe, nor none other man nor woman, that haue their conuerſation in heauen: And the ſpecial temptation of him who wold faine haue life, is death, and the dreadfull ſight of death, and death is euer in his eye: Hee was neuer borne but death will tempt him, death wil be terrible to fleſh and blood, and when hee is looking vp to that light and glorie in heauen, it will come in betwixt his eye and the ſight of heauen, as it were a terrible blacke cloude, and ſometime will

ſunder him and that ſight of Heauen. As when a man is looking vp to the Sunne, a cloude will come, euen ſuddenlie, and take the ſight of the Sunne from him: Euen ſo, when a man is looking vp to the Sunne of righteouſnes, CHRIST IESVS, that cloude of death will come in▪ and catch the ſight of CHRIST from him. This is our eſtate here, & there is none acquainted with Heauenlie things, but hee will find this in experience, as PAVL did. But what is the remedie? In the firſt word of the Text that we haue read he ſ
                  •
               ieth, Wee knowe, and wee are aſſured, for the worde importeth a full aſſurance, and faith, and a full perſwaſion. Then the remedie againſt this temptation of death is onelie Faith, a full perſwaſion, and light in the minde of the knowledge of the glorie of GOD in the face of CHRIST, with a gryping and apprehenſion thereof: this is the onelie remedie. The man that lyeth in ignorance, and hath not this knowledge, hee is oppreſſed by death. So euer ſeeke, and ſeeke earneſtlie for light, CHRIST is light: and let your pleaſure bee in light, for death is darkeneſſe, and ſmoothe
                  ••
               th the ſoule, except it bee lightned with this light that comme
                  •
               h from the face of IESVS. But to bee more ſpeciall, what light and knowledge muſt this bee? what aſſurance muſt this be? Thou muſt knowe and bee aſſured, not that thou wilt bee free from death: naye, beguile not thy ſelfe, die thou muſt, and therefore reſolue thy ſelfe

to die: ſo it muſt not be ſuch an aſſurance as to be perſwaded that thou ſhalt not die, opponing thy ſelf to death, ſaying, I wil not die, & I ſhal not die. Then what aſſurance & knowledge muſt this be? Euer this, that after I am dead I ſhall riſe againe to life. It is true, O death, thou ſhalt ceaſe vpon my bodie, and thou ſhalt not leaue it till it bee diſſolued into duſt, but when thou haſt gotten this body diſſolued, I ſhall recouer a new glorious bodie. There is the meeting of this temptation, aſſure thy ſelfe of life after death. Seeke this aſſurance, and labour to pierce, with the eye of Faith thorow the clouds of temptation, to ſee that life in Chriſt, which is hid vp aboue thoſe cloudes. Seeke that eye of Faith, to pierce in through thoſe cloudes, to ſhew thee that life and the Sunne of righteouſnes, Chriſt Ieſus. Nowe, the wordes would be weighed particularly: and firſt, marke a deſcription of this death, and of the temptations that woulde ſeparate thee from that life eternall. The words are theſe, If our earthly houſe of this tabernacle be diſſolued. Then what is death? a diſſolution and looſing of a thing that was joyned together, a diſſoluing and ſcattering of the partes of it: it is not an vtter deſtruction of it, the thing that it diſſolueth, it deſtroyeth not vtterlie: It lyeth not in the handes of death to deſtroye the thing it diſſolueth, it may well looſe it and caſt it aſunder, but it cannot deſtroye it. Then death is a diſſolution, and not a deſtruction: a diſſoluing,

whereof? not of the ſoule, it lieth not in the power of death to looſe thy ſoule or ſunder the parts thereof, thou haſt that aduantage: Death will diſſolue and looſe thine houſe the lodging that thou dwelleſt in, that is, this bodie which clotheth thy ſoule: Thou art termed by thy ſoule, and the ſoule properlie maketh a man to be a man, it is ye chiefe part of man, and the bodie is called the lodging of the ſoule, and the ſoule dwelleth in it as in an houſe: So death is the diſſolution of the bodie, of the houſe▪ which it looſeth into powder: yea, it wil looſe all the members and parts of the houſe. O! but marke, when it commeth to powder and aſſhes, it lieth not in the handes of death to deſtroy the powder and aſhes of the bodie, but that powder and aſhes in deſpite of death will be gathered and ſet together in a more glorious forme of bodie than euer it was before. Yet looke howe the Apoſtle deſcribeth this houſe: Firſt from the matter, ſecondlie from the forme thereof: As for the matter, he calleth it our earthlie houſe. This bodie is but claye, euen a lumpe of that claye and earth whereupon thou goeſt, eſteeme of it as thou wilt: yee ſee the matter of this bodie is vile and contemptible: as for the forme thereof, it is an houſe, not an houſe that hath a foundation, or builded on a ground-ſtone, but a tabernacle and flitting tent: it is ſet down here to day, tomorrow taken vp, and ſet downe in another place: thy body is a pauilion, that men tranſport hither and thither as

they pleaſe. Then thou ſeeſt that thy bodie is a thing litle worth, whether thou looke to the matter whereof it is made (of the earth) or to the form thereof, an vnſtable tent or pauilion. Now marke this well, brethren, who ſpeaketh this? it is Paul: how ſpeaketh he it? by faith: ſpeaketh the bodie this? no: what then? the ſoule that dwelleth in the bodie, as in a lodging ſpeaketh it. The ſoule is ſpeaking of the bodie, the faithfull ſoule of Paul is ſpeaking of his fraile bodie. Then learne how little faith counteth of death: Learne alſo how little the faithfull ſoule counteth of the body, yea▪ euen then when it is dwelling in the bodie, it will lightlie the lodging thereof: it will call it a lumpe of claye, a tabernacle, a tent, a fraile houſe: it will count no more thereof, than a glorious king will count of a cottage, he hauing manie faire palaces. We'l, brethren, it is faith that doth this, it is not the ſoule alone that can count ſo lightlie of death, or of the fraile body: if thou haſt onely the ſoule in the bodie, and want this faith, the ſoule will thinke the bodie ſweet to dwell in: It is faith, and the faithfull ſoule that doeth the turne: and there is not a better argument than this, to ſee if thy ſoule bee faithfull or not. Looke what eſtimation thou haſt of thy bodie and carcaſſe, what account thou makeſt thereof, I ſaye to thee, if thou haſt thy chiefe pleaſure in eſteeming of thy body, decking and feeding it, following thine appetite, wallowing in the luſt thereof, if thou liueſt in ſuch

eſtimation of thy body, I ſay, thou haſt a faithleſſe ſoule remaining within thy bodie. Woe to that faithleſſe man, that hath none other pleaſure, not can gripe nor ſeek to none other thing but to the pleaſing of that fleſhly body, without regarde of the precious ſoule: alas! in pleaſuring thy bodie, thou loſeſt thy ſoule, thou makeſt thy bodie thy Heauen, and thou teſtifieſt plainly that thou wanteſt that light and ſenſe of that Heauenly bodie, which ſhall be after this life. Thus farre for the deſcription of the death of the body, which is the houſe of the ſoule, learning vs to eſteeme of the ſoule and body, as they are indeed, and that not with a fleſhly ſenſe, but with the Spirituall eyes of Faith.
            Nowe wee come to the life that is contrarie to death. There is two partes of man, his ſoule and bodie: this glorie, of the which wee ſpeake, is not the glorie of the ſoule onely, but the glorie of the bodie likewiſe, a glorie belonging both to ſoule and bodie. Wee (ſaieth hee) ſhall get a building, not a ſillie houſe, as this earthly body was, but a faire building. Hee calleth the body, which wee haue preſently, an houſe: but the body which we ſhall get, hee termeth it a building: Thou gotteſt this bodie from nature, that other is aboue nature: nature cannot giue thee that other bodie, GOD ſhall giue thee it aboue nature, and againſt nature. What building is this? It is an houſe, not builded with the hands of men, it is builded with

GODS owne hand: the LORD immediatelie with his owne hand builded vp this building. The former houſe of this body was vnſtable, and had no abiding, for this body paſſeth away: but this ſecond building is an houſe that ſhall neuer fall nor ſlit, but ſhall be eternall: When thou ſhalt get this building, thou ſhalt not need to be afraid for the diſſolution thereof, it ſhall neuer be diſſolued. Where ſhall this building be builded? men regard much ſituation in building: this houſe in the which we dwel here, it is builded in the earth, and it is a tabernacle pitched ſomtimes in this place, & ſomtimes in that place, but the ſituatiō of this building ſhall bee in the Heauen: for I aſſure thee, when a man is once glorified, & entereth into that glorie, hee ſhall no more returne to the earth. The earth cannot beare a glorified perſon. Chriſt beeing glorified, coulde not abide in the earth, but He went to that glorious manſion in the Heauens. Thou ſhalt no ſooner bee glorified, but thou ſhalt mount vp to Heauen as CHRIST did. Well then, there is the glorie, and there is no worde heere, but it aggregeth that paſſing glorie. Euerie worde l
                  •
               tteth vs ſee the greatneſſe of that glorie, and yet it is not all tolde. Nay, Paul cannot tell thee all the glorie that ſhall bee in the glorified bodie, he hath giuen but a little inckling of it. It is but a building whereof hee telleth thee: Yet marke, Who is this that ſpeaketh this? It is Paul. How ſpeaketh he it? by faith. Is it his mouth

that ſpeaketh it? no: it is the ſoule that lodgeth in the bodie, that falleth out in the extolling of that building that it ſhall dwell in. As a ſillie man, in a cottage, appointed to glorye ſhoulde ſaye, I am nowe ſitting in a ſillie houſe, but I ſhall once ſit in a glorious Palace. So marke, Faith will cauſe the ſoule mount vp aboue the bodie, and whilſt the ſoule is in the bodie, Faith and Hope will lift it vp, and put it (in a maner) into Heauen. Therefore this ſame Paul ſaith in the third Chapt. to the Phillip. & the 30 verſ. By Faith and Hope hee had his conuerſation in Heauen, while hee was yet dwelling on the earth. Get therefore Faith and Hope, that entereth thee into the poſſeſſiō of that glorie, and before the ſoule bee ſeuered from the bodie, they will (in a maner) put thee in poſſeſſion thereof. It is the too-looke to heauen that maketh the ſoule of Paul to rejoyce in this glorie. The cottager that hath not a too-looke to a better houſe, is a foole to deſpiſe his cottage, but hee that hath a too-looke to a better, who can blame him to deſpiſe this cottage? I will tell thee my counſell, before thou diſlodge out of this bodie, for as fraile as it is, be aſſured of a better, goe not out of the houſe doore, except thou knowe that thou ſhalt enter into a glorious houſe. I aſſure thee if thou bee not prouided for a better houſe, and haue not Faith and Hope of a better than that which thou lodgeſt in, thou ſhalt enter in a worſe, thou ſhalt get that bodie againe which was euill

before, but then it ſhall bee a thouſande times worſe: for the ſoule ſhall bee ſhot into that bodie againe, and then thou ſhalt be ſhot both ſoule and bodie into that foule dungeon of Hell. So, brethren, looke for a glorious building, & thou that eſteemeſt not of this bodie, bee carefull for a better. A vaine prodigall man will caſt his ſoule out of this bodie, and in the meane time will not bee prouided for a better lodging thereto. Hee is not eſteemed a man in theſe dayes, that wil not hazard and caſt out his life for an euill cauſe and quarell. Truſteſt thou that that ſoule of thine ſhall get any better lodging hereafter, and thou not prouided thereof by Faith and Hope here? nay, nay. O bleſſed is that man that dieth in a good cauſe! And what better cauſe can be than Chriſtes cauſe, who is the God of life? Aſſure thee, thou that wilt die for Chriſts cauſe, thou ſhalt get a building in Heauen: thou that takeſt no care of this life for Chriſts cauſe, death ſhall be aduantage to thee. The Lord graunt vs a too-looking to that Heauenlie building, & an aſſurance of that Heauenlie life. Thus much for the aſſurance that Paule hath, that hee ſhall dwell in Heauen.
            Nowe in the verſe following, learne howe hee groundeth this aſſurance, and what warrande hee hath for him: Faith is not a word, as to ſay, (I belieue) and Hope is not a word, as to ſay, (I hope) Nay, but thou muſt haue a warrand of thy ſaluation in this life or elſe I aſſure thee, in the Name of

GOD, thou ſhalt neuer get Heauen: It is a ſtraite way to come to Heauen, and it is wondrous hard to get the aſſurance of it: It is no ſmall matter to get an aſſurance of life euerlaſting after death. Then looke what warrandes this man PAVLE had, that thou mayeſt preaſſe to haue the like. The firſt grounde of his aſſurance is in this ſeconde verſe, For this cauſe (ſaieth hee) wee ſigh, deſiring to bee clothed, to put on, as it were, a garment: Wherewith? With our houſe which is from Heaven. Theſe are his wordes. Then his firſt warrande and ground of his aſſurance is a deſire of that ſame glory. What ſort of deſire? An earreſt deſire, with ſighing and ſobbing: not a colde deſire, but day and night crying and ſobbing for life. Thinkeſt thou ſo eaſily to get Heauen, that canſt neuer ſay earneſtly in thine heart, GOD giue mee that Heauenly life: no, thou wilt bee diſappointed: It is the violent that entreth into Heauen, Matth. 11. 12. as yee will ſee a man violentlie thruſt in at a doore. Thou that wouldeſt goe to Heauen, make thee for thronging thorowe till all thy gut
                  •
               es bee almoſte thruſt out. Paule, in the eight chapter to the Romanes. and the 22. and 23. verſes, vſeth theſe argumentes againſt thoſe wicked men that cannot ſigh for Heauen: Firſt, hee taketh his argument from the elementes, the ſenſeleſſe and dumbe reatures, which ſobbe and grone for the reuelation of the ſonnes of GOD, and trauell for that time, as a woman in her birt
                  •
               
               ▪
               
O miſerable man! The earth ſhall condemne thee, the 
                  •
               loore thou ſitteſt on is ſighing, and woulde faine haue that carcaſſe of thine to Heauen: The waters, the aire, the heauens, all ſighing for that laſt deliuerance: the glorie appertaineth to thee, and yet thou art laughing: Alas! what ſhall betide thee? The other argument hee taketh from the ſighing of men, who haue gotten the Spirit of GOD: We alſo (ſaith he) who haue the firſt fruites of the Spirit, euen wee doe ſigh in our ſelues, waiting for the adoption, euen the redemption of our bodie. Thou that haſt not gotten the Spirit ſhalt neuer ſigh for Heauen: fleſh and blood will neuer ſhed one teare for Heauen. It muſt onely bee the Spirite of IESVS, that muſt fetch vp the ſigh out of the heart, and the teare in the eye, Roman. 8. 26. So hee taketh his argument from them who haue gotten a ſenſe of the Spirit of GOD, and redemption of the body to prooue the certainty of that Heauenly Kingdome and glory. Nowe, there cannot bee a ſurer argument to vs that euer wee ſhall obtaine glory, than this ſighing in heart for it, and this earneſt deſire thereof. If thou find thine heart deſirous of glory, a ſure argument thou ſhalt bee partaker of glory. It is ſaide, Bleſſed are they that hunger and thirſt for righteouſnes, for they ſhall be filled, Matth. 5. 6. Seekeſt thou for CHRISTES righteouſneſſe and thy glorie, aſſure thee thou ſhalt get a ſweete filling. Marke it, I ſaye to thee,

thou haſt not onlie through this earneſt deſire of glorie, an aſſurance that thou ſhalt reigne in glorie, but (looke to your experience) that deſire is not ſo ſoone begun of that life and glorie, but ſo ſoone alſo the ſoule of the faithfull beginneth to riſe with joye. Who euer yet was hee that gaue a ſigh from his heart, raiſed vp by the Spirite of Chriſt, that felt not with that ſigh a joye in his heart? Learne it by your experience. This letteth vs ſee, that the deſire and thirſt of glory putteth vs in preſent poſſeſſion of a part of glorie. Ere thou come to it deſire it earneſtly, and I promiſe thee, in the Name of the Father, thou ſhalt be preſently put in poſſeſſion of a part of that Heauenly inheritance. It is true thou ſhalt not get it al here, yet there is none other Heauen after this life, but that Heauen which thou getteſt begunne in thee in this life. Alwayes, looke euer for that joye that is by ſight: There are two ioyes, the one by ſight, the other by faith, 2. Cor. 5. 6. The ioye by faith is in our pilgrimage in this life: The ioy by ſight is after this life, when with our eyes wee ſhall ſee Chriſt: The ioy by faith is to looke to Chriſt a far of, and yet wee reioyce, and loue Him that is farre abſent, 1. Pet. 1. 8. Faith hath a ioye that it enioyeth, by ſpeaking and thinking: Sight hath the ioye that it enioyeth by preſence: The ioye of the eye great in quantitie, and the fulneſſe of ioye: The ioye of faith not ſo great, for it is the ioye of a pilgrime, not as yet come to his home. The ioye of

the ſight is when wee ſhall ſee our glorious Lord, face to face, whom we ſee only now by faith. 1 Cor 13 12. This is the fulnes of ioy. The ioy of Faith, which induring our pilgrimage, is not ſo full. O how great ſhal be the ioy at the perfect ſeeing of Chriſt! Thinke never to have the ioy by ſight after this life, except in this life thou have the ioy by faith, as the earneſt-penny of the other, & except by Faith thou once get a ioy before thou depart from this life, thou ſhalt never ſee the face of Chriſt, nor have ioy in him. So brethren, it is a good thing to have that deſire of Heaven: Sigh and ſob, and deſire with Paul for Heaven: for it is a Charter & Evidence of thine everlaſting inheritance: & never earthly lord had a ſurer charter of his land, than thou that haſt a deſire of heaven, haſt of thine inheritāce in heaven: for theſe earthly evidences of land are without thē in their kiſts but this evidence of thine is written & ingraffed in thine hart. Now, when extremity is threatned, it is time to ſeek thy warrands of this heavēly in heritance: this preſent country is good forthee, & the beſt country that ever thou ſhalt ſee, except thou find this warrand of ſighing, and deſire for that heavēly inheritāce. And therfore let ſcorners & mockers ſcorn as they wil, the children of God muſt powre forth tears: And this is it that y• Lord hath bene deſiring theſe many days paſt, he hath benegently drawing out of us this ſenſe, but now He beginneth to preſſe it out of us, that our eyes

might burſt out in teares: and thou that canſt not ſob, and deſire in theſe miſerable dayes to bee diſſolved, thou haſt no true matter of ioy. Woe bee to them that have none heart to ſigh for the troubles of Chriſts Church, but are ever ready to execute iudgement againſt Gods ſervants when the Lord is viſiting them. Well, the Lord ſhall wring out teares out of them in His wrath, that will not ſob in the time of the danger and trouble of His Church. Then what is it that Pavle ſigheth for? And what deſireth he? Hee deſireth a new cloathing to bee put one above as a cloathing that is, he would keep this ſame body in ſubſtance, and caſt off this filthy garment of ſinand death, & put on that glorious ſhape of the body of Chriſt. The reaſon is ſet down, For when the Lord ſhal cloath us, we ſhall not be found naked. So this body ſhall remaine in ſubſtance but O the glory and immortality of it! Mark the natur of the lodging which we ſhall receive, it ſhal not be another body in ſubſtance, than this body which we have heer in earth. The ſame body in ſubſtance wee ſhall have in heaven, which we have heer. Heerein onely is the difference, this body is vile, it is mortall, full of ſinne and wickedneſſe, unglorious, ignominious, full of corruption, weak infirm, But when this body ſhall be changed in heaven, it ſhall not be changed in ſubſtance, but in qualitie Paul. 1 Cor. 15. 42. 43. 44. Saith, The bodie is ſawn in corruption, and is raiſed againe in incorruption,
               
               and is raiſed againe in incorruption: it is ſowne in diſhonour, and is raiſed in glorie: it is ſowne in weakeneſſe, and is raiſed in power: (The weakeſt bodie in Heauen, ſhall be ſtronger than the ſtrongeſt man in earth) Then (ſaieth hee) it is ſowne a naturall bodie, and is raiſed a ſpirituall bodie. So the change is in qualitie, and therefore he ſaith to the Philippians, chap. 3. verſ. 21. When CHRIST commeth, Hee ſhall transforme (not aboliſh, but tranſforme) in qualitie, our vile bodies like to His owne glorious body. Chriſt keepeth in ye Heauen that ſame very body which he had in the earth, & thou ſhalt keep the ſame bodie in Heauē, which thou haſt in earth, but it ſhall be altered in qualitie, as far as ye Heauē & earth is different. Brethrē, this miniſtreth comfort: there is none of vs, but naturally we loue this body: then let this comfort thee, that ſuppoſe thy ſoule ſhall bee for a time without this bodie, yet thou ſhalt get it again. Another comfort: death cannot deſtroy it, the graue ſhall not bee able to ſwallow vp that body, but the graue ſhal keep it, & the duſt & ſubſtance thereof till the comming of Chriſt, & then it ſhall be compelled to render it againe. Life ſhall ſwallow vp death, but death (nor the graue) ſhall not be able to ſwallow vp the bodie of God
                  •
                Elect: But the reprobate ſhall be ſwallowed vp of death, both in ſoule & bodie. In the 8. chap. to the ROMANES, the 10. and 11. verſes, Paul miniſtreth theſe two conſolations againſt death, Hee ſaieth, The bodie must die, becauſe of ſinne:
               
but hee ſubjoyneth, The ſoule in the meane time ſhall liue: and the Spirit of Ieſus ſhall take it & couer it with that blood: And albeit it was a ſinfull ſoule, yet aſſoone as the Father blinketh vpon it, wimpled and wrapped, as it were, in the blood of Ieſus, immediately hee biddeth it paſſe to glorie. He goeth forward: And where it might haue bene ſaid, shall we haue no conſolation in the body? He anſwereth, If the Spirite of Him that raiſed Ieſus from the dead, dwell in your mortall body: what then? He, that is, GOD the Father, that raiſed vp Chriſt from the dead, He, by His Spirit, ſhall raiſe your bodies: that ſame body that is dead and laid in graue, that ſame body, by Gods Spirit (for the Spirit of Ieſus, and the Spirite of the Father is all one) ſhall be raiſed vp Learne then, if this holy Spirit of God once take lodging in you, He ſhall neuer leaue you in ſoule nor body, He ſhal accompanie the body in the graue, and conuoy the ſoule to Heauen: The Spirit of Ieſus ſhall goe with ye ſoule, & lift it vp: The earth getteth the body, when the ſoule is ſeparated from it, yet the Holy Spirit ſhall goe to the graue with the body, and ſhall remain with it in the graue, and with the leaſt part of the duſt thereof: And when Chriſt ſhall come, He ſhall gather it together, and make it a whole body. So, happy are they that haue once lodged this gueſt in their ſoules: for, neither fire nor water, nor none other power, euer ſhall bee able to deſtroy them, becauſe that Holy Spirit euer remaineth with thē.

Now in the next verſe, becauſe it might haue bene ſaid and objected, Thou wouldſt not want the bodie▪ why ſigheſt thou then? and what meaneth this deſire, if thou wouldſt keepe the body? Wee (the faithfull) that are in this tabernacle, we ſigh, & are burthened, (but marke our deſire) becauſe wee would not be vnclothed, (as ſome will ſay, Soule to God, and bones to the dung-hill, in contempt of the body: but thinkeſt thou to be glorified in Heauē, without a body? No) but would be clothed vpon, that mortalitie might bee ſwallowed vp of Life. As if hee would ſay, I wold haue this faire cloke of glory put vpon this body, that it might conſume and ſwallow vp all this ſtinke of ſinne that is in the body. Learne then firſt, the body as it is now is a burthen. Hee ſaieth, Wee that are in this tabernacle ſigh, and are burthened: It is a loade laide vpon the backe of the ſoule, it is a tabernacle, but a burthenable tabernacle, as an houſe ſmoothering him down, and he holding the ſame vpon his ſhoulders, that appearantly it would be better for him to bee out of it. Learne ſecondly the eſtate of them that dwell in this tabernacle: If the body be a burthen, then the ſoule muſt ſigh & grone as a man vnder a heauie burthen: And the body is nothing but an houſe of mourning to the faithfull ſoule, as long as it dwelleth therein: The wanton light man thinketh this body which he beareth about, to bee no burthen, and will run and leape with it, as though this carcaſſe were as light as a fether: Alas! hee feeleth

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
not the burthen, hee is ſenſeleſſe, and like one in a feuer, and in a rage, that knoweth not what hee doeth, nor what hee ſuffereth: A mountaine is lying vpon him, and hee feeleth it not. Woe to thoſe men that are ſo wanton vnder this miſerie! Amend in time or the LORD ſh
                  •
               ll thruſt thee downe to Hell. Fye on thee, that dwelleſt in Bethania, the houſe of mourning & canſt not mourn: Mourne in time, or elſe I aſſure thee, thou ſhalt mourne for euer. This beeing the condition of men who dwell in this tabernacle, ſighing and deſiring, as a wom
                  •
               n with childe, to bee relieued, what is the ende of this deſire? The ende of the mourning of the Godlie, is not that they woulde bee quite of the houſe, as manie deſire, that were wrong: for manie will mourne vnder this houſe deſperatelie, and the bodie will bee a burthen to the ſoule in them, and their life will be vnpleaſant to them: they will thinke to get a reliefe of the burthen by the want of this preſent life, and will put hand in themſelues: but then beginneth their euerlaſting mourning, for they neuer knew what mourning was till that end come. So then, this is not the way to bee deliuered of the burthen, but the way is, To ſeeke to put on a cloathing on this bodie, and heere is the ende of our deſire. It is clothed with mortalitie, and that is all the matter of thy mourning: It is not the ſubſtance of the bodie that cauſeth thee to mourne, but ſinne, that poſſeſſeth thy bodie, and corrupteth the marowe

of thy bones, death accompanying ſinne. Then this mortalitie beeing an accident of ſinne, which is the chiefe cauſe thereof: the remedie is, Seeke to bee cloathed with the life that commeth from Chriſt: Sucke in, by Faith, a droppe of that life of Chriſt. This will not deſtroy thy bodie, but it will deſtroy the death & ſinne that poſſeſſeth thy bodie. And the life of Ieſus Chriſt in a moment wil ſwallowe vp all that death and ſinne, and all that miſerie that laye on thee: There is the way to dwell with eaſe in the bodie: Seeke not to deſtroy the bodie, But ſeeke the ſlaughter of that ſinne and death that lieth vpon thy bodie, otherwiſe ſoule and bodie both ſhall periſh, the houſe ſhall fall downe, and the man that lodged in the houſe ſhall bee deſtroyed.
            Remember then, Life and Death are not matters to bee ſcorned withall, they are not wordes, nay, nay: Thinke grauelie of them, and before thy ſoule bee diſlodged, looke that thou bee prepared for a better life: Looke that thou finde the LORD of Life CHRIST IESVS by His Spirit working the death of mortalitie in thee, and the beginning of the Life that ſhall laſt for euer. The LORD by His Spirit worke theſe thinges in your heartes. To whom bee all Praiſe, Honour, and Glorie, for euer and euer,
            AMEN.
         
         
            
            THE SECOND SERMON.
            
               II. COR. CHAP. V.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 5
                     And He that hath created vs for this thing, is GOD, who alſo hath giuen vnto vs the earnest of the Spirit.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 6
                     Therefore, wee are alwayes bolde, though wee knowe that Whilst wee are at home in the bodie, wee are abſent from the LORD.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 7
                     (For we walke by faith, and not by ſight.)
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 8
                     Neuertheleſſe, we are bolde, & loue rather to remooue out of the bodie, and to dwell with the LORD.
                  
               
            
            
               BRethren, yee that were preſent the laſt day, hearde what was the purpoſe of Paul in this place. Firſt hee beginneth to comfort himſelfe and all others that are to die, and to be diſſolued, againſt death, & the terrours of death. He (as he ſaith in the chap. preceeding & 18. verſ.) is looking vp to Heauen, and whilſt he is looking vp to Heauen, to ſee that end that he was once to attaine to, there cometh in betwixt his ſight and the light of that glorie and life, a cloude of death, to haue caught away out of his eies (if it had bene

poſſible) all too-looke to life euerlaſting. The remedic againſt it, wee ſhewed you was Faith, and a conſtant Hope, with a ſharpe, earneſt, and ſtedfaſt looking, euē to pierce in throrow death, and that cloude of death, and thorow death to get a ſight of that life, and light of glorie, which lieth hid vp in Heauen beyond death. We know (ſaith the Apoſtle) and are aſſured, that our bodies and the earthlie houſe of this tabernacle, ſhall bee diſſolued, yet wee ſhall get a building for an houſe, a building that is from God, not made with mens hands, but an eternall building, that is ſituated in the Heauens aboue the carth. When hee hath ſet down this remedy, he beginneth to comfort himſelfe and others, by a ſure Faith, that after death he ſhall liue againe, after the diſſolution of his mortall bodie, hee ſhall receiue a glorious bodie. The firſt argument of his aſſurance is from the deſire hee had of life, ſighing with an earneſt deſire of that Kingdome which is from Heauen. This deſire neuer diſappointed man: Neuer was there anie man that had an earneſt deſire of life & glorie, and had the true knowledge and meane to attaine to this glorie, that was diſappointed of his deſire: but who euer deſired moſt earneſtlie to be glorified, moſt certainly they liue now in Heauen, and at this houre they are glorified there: and none there ſhall be that ſhall haue this deſire, and ſtriue to throng into Heauen violently, Mat. 11. 12. but they ſhall enjoy Heauen after their departing. Now in the Text which we haue read, we

followe out the aſſurances and warrandes which the Apoſtle hath of the glorie of the life to come. The ſecond aſſurance and warrand of the life to come is in the firſt words, Hee (ſaith the Apoſtle) that hath created vs for this thing, is God, &c. The argument of the life to come in theſe words, is from the ende of our creation, GOD hath created vs to this ende, to wit, That in the ende this mortalitie wherewith wee are clothed, might bee ſwallowed vp of Life: therefore, liue muſt wee in Heauen. This is the ende of our creation, therefore it cannot faile, but wee muſt bee glorified. Learne then, The maner of our glorifying is this: It is GOD, not man, that hath made vs, and created vs to this ende: It is impoſſible that GOD can be diſappointed of the ende which He ſetteth before Him of His worke: man may bee diſappointed, for hee will begin a worke for ſome purpoſe, but oft times hee will bee diſappointed of that purpoſe: Hee will build an houſe to dwell in, but it may be hee neuer dwell in it, another will dwell therein. GOD, when He worketh a worke to anie ende, it is impoſſible that Hee can bee diſappointed. All the world, if they would ſtand vp, and oppone to GODS worke, they cannot hinder it. That worke that GOD worketh in vs, is ſuch a worke that tendeth to Life, as to the ende thereof. Who ſhall condemne vs? (ſaith the Apoſtle) it is God that justifieth vs, Roman. 8. 33. Will Hee juſtifie thee? all the world ſhall not bee able to condemne thee:

Will Hee ſaue thee? all the worlde ſhall not bee able to make thee periſh: So is it of His whole Church in generall: Suppoſe all the worlde were conſpired againſt His Church, He wil haue it ſafe: and wonderfully worketh He the ſaluation of His Church, & euery member thereof: through death He bringeth them to life: ſo that it is folly to men to ſtriue againſt the works of GOD. Yet looke to the wordes, Hee that hath created vs to this end, is God. What creation is this that he meaneth of? Is this that firſt creation of Adam and Eua? of euery one of vs in them that was at the beginning? Not ſo, that creation failed. Indeede wee were firſt created to liue, and thorowe that firſt creation euerie one of vs got a certaine right to liue for euer, but that right wee loſt in our owne default, wee are fallen from that right of our creation in the fall of Adam. So we muſt ſeeke another creation, or elſe wee ſhall neuer ſee Life: for wee haue no right to that firſt creation, which was in all Holineſſe, according to the image of GOD, Epheſ. 4. 24. If thou ſticke to that firſt creation and olde birth-right, thou ſhalt neuer ſee Life. Then the Apoſtle meaneth of another. What other making or creating of vs is this? It is our regeneration or renewing againe, which is nothing elſe, but as it were, a newe birth and begetting, from the which we are called new creatures, 2. Corin. 5. 17. Then, Brethren, wouldſt thou haue a ſure argument that thou ſhalt liue after this life? (& wo to

thee, if thou liueſt not after this life! woe to them that euer ſawe this worlde, and they get not a life after this life! for this life will away) Looke if thou art regenerated and renewed, looke if thou art ſanctified, and findeſt a ſlaying of thy luſts within thee: Looke if thou findeſt the life of God by his Spirit working within thee, not this naturall life, but this Heauenly and ſpirituall life begunne in thee not by nature, but by grace: If thou haſt this, thou haſt a warrand that thou ſhalt liue: and albeit this naturall life ſhall bee taken from thee, thou ſhalt get another life euerlaſting in glory: but if thou findeſt thy ſelf not renewed by the Spirit of grace, take this life from thee, thou ſhalt not get life euerlaſting in glorie. So looke if thou be a newe creature, thou haſt gotten a greater grace, than to be borne to an earthly kingdome, if ſo be thou mayſt aſſure thy ſelfe of lif euerlaſting. What is this newneſſe in the new creature? This newnes that is in the new creature, is nothing els but that ſame life which we ſhall liue in Heauen, and is begun here. This newneſſe is only this new life of regeneration, which life ſo long as thou liueſt heere (from the time that thou haſt gotten a ſponke thereof) piece and piece eateth vp the olde and cankered nature. The life of God within thee, will conſume (euen as thou conſumeſt the meat thou eateſt) the olde corruption which lieth in thy nature: and in the ende, in the glorious reſurrection of the dead, it ſhall bee altogether aboliſhed. This

life then, which is begunne heere, it ſhall open the mouth, and ſwallow vp death, and death thereafter ſhall haue no more place. This life is onely eating vp by little and little death heere: but at that time it ſhall ſwallowe it vp wholly, and thou ſhalt ſay with Paule, Death is ſwallowed vp, 1. Cor. 15. 54. So well is the ſoule that hath a warrande of his new creation, whether he die in his bed, or out of it, he ſhall die with joy. Then my counſell is ſeeing death is daylie threatned, let euery one ſtriue to get this aſſurance of this new life begun in him heere, that it may ſwallowe vp death: Woe bee to them that haue not this aſſurance! This is the ſecond aſſurāce of life euerlaſting. I pray you marke theſe aſſurances, for Paule had ſuch an earneſt deſire, that hee ſought all aſſurances and warrandes of this life, and hee is reigning now in Heauen. So thou, who thirſteſt after life, learne at him. Nowe reſteth the thirde warrande in the next wordes, Who alſo hath giuen vs the earnest of the Spirite. Learne the words, for al the doctrine riſeth of the words. Then the third warrand is the Spirit of Chriſt Ieſus in thee. If euer thou mindeſt to haue life hereafter, thou muſt haue Gods Spirit in thee: not onlie thine owne Spirite, but Gods Spirite, flowing from God through Ieſus Chriſt, & entering into thy bodie & ſoule. Beholde the liberality of God, when Hee by His Spirite hath renewed thee, Hee will not take that Spirite from thee, as a man will doe, when he hath builded a worke, hee will take

his hand from it, ſtand if it will or not: But the Lord doeth not ſo, Hee hath renewed thee by His Holie Spirite, which Hee putteth within thee. O how the Lord putteth the third perſon of the Trinitie in thee, and maketh Him an earneſt-pennie to thee of Life euerlaſting: Becauſe thy regeneration is vnperfect, and thou haſt not yet attained to that Life, therefore Hee letteth His Spirit abide in thee, aſſuring thee as an earneſt-pennie, that whatſoeuer God hath promiſed, He ſhal perform it to thee, and thou ſhalt not bee diſappointed of a jot thereof. Such is the infidelitie of our nature, that all the promiſes, all the othes which He maketh to confirme His promiſes, all His Sacramēts which Hee hath joyned to His promiſes, cannot perſwade vs. But looke to this thirde warrande, Haſt thou the Spirit of God, if Hee bee in thee, He will bee quicke, working joye with ſighs: He cannot be idle, Hee will be working the worke of regeneration both day and night: Then anger Him not, Epheſ. 4. ▪30. Away with filthie cogitations, away with euerie rotten worde, away with euerie euill deede, labour to pleaſure Him day & night, and ſtriue to keepe Him, and thou ſhalt hauea warrande of life in thy boſome, and when thou art dying thou ſhalt find ſuch ſweetneſſe in death as is wonderfull to tell. None euer had the Spirite of God, but in death they had vnſpeakable joye. Then ſeeke to bee in Chriſt, and get His Spirite within thee, and hauing gotten this Spirite, keepe

Him diligently, and powre out thine owne ſpirite but never Gods Spirit, for then in all diſtreſſes thou ſhalt have comfort. Now to reſume all: Yee who take great pleaſure in your Charters, the Evidences of your inheritance and land, take heed to this, Your inheritance is in Heaven, and thou art a foole, who thinkeſt that thou haſt an inheritance in earth: For either ſhalt thou be pulled from it, or it ſhall bee pulled from thee: Nay, looke as ever thou wouldeſt be an inheriter, that thine inheritance be in Heaven: Thou art the fooliſheſt begger, and the pooreſt that ever was, if thou bee a King, if thou thinkeſt thine inheritance to be in earth: Having laid this count with thy ſelfe, Mine inheritance is in Heaven, then next looke that thou have thine evidence. For thou ſhalt never poſſeſſe Heaven, except thou have the evidence thereof laid up in thy charter kiſt. Now thine evidences are the ſame euidences that Paul had, and the ſame kind of evidences ſerve for all, it is an inheritance that all men muſt get, one ſort of charter muſt ſerve for one inheritance. What then can be the charter and evidence? Canſt thou ſigh for that Heavenly inheritance? Canſt thou have a deſire of it: There is thy firſt evidence: Then findeſt thou thy ſelfe to bee renewed? Findeſt thou CHRISTS life in thee? The life of Ieſus is manifeſt in me, ſaith Paul, 2. Cor. 4. 10. Findeſt thou the wicked life of this world reformed? There is the ſecond evidence. Yet more, findeſt thou the worker of the deſire, and

the worker of thy regeneration, the Spirit of Chriſt within thee, then keepe him well: There is the beſt evidence of all the evidences of thine inheritance: having theſe, aſſure thy ſelfe of Heaven: but wanteſt thou theſe, or any of them, thou ſhalt never get that inheritance in Heaven. As theſe three are three evidences of thine heavenly inheritance, ſo they are three props of Faith that gripe this Heavenly life: They are the three pillars that hold up Faith, which is builded upon them: cut one of theſe pillars away, and thou ſhalt loſe Faith and Hope. But here it may be asked, Are all theſe three of the nature of the life to come? I anſwere, As for the deſire, ſighing, and ſobbing for that heavenly inheritance, it endeth with this life, and in that life to come all weeping ſhall bee taken away, REVEL. 21. 4. Mourne and groane in time, then heereafter ſhall come ioy, aud pure ioy. A troubled ioy is 
                  •
               eere in this life, but heereafter there ſhall bee a pure and ſolid ioy, and nothing but ioy. So this mourning ceaſeth then, and is not of the nature of the life to come but as to the new creature and regeneration, it is of the nature of the life to come, and it is the beginnning and firſt part of that heavenly glorie: ſo that our heavenly glorie ſhall bee none other thing but the per
                  •
               yting of our regeneration: For when all this pelffrie ſhall be taken away, then wee ſhall fully bee renewed. As to the Spirit, if ever hee was powerfull in earth, he ſhall be more powerfull in Heaven: ſo that the ſame

Spirit that heere dwelt in thy body, ſhall then glorifie thy body, and make it to ſhine brighter than the Sunne: Therefore let vs ſeeke this regeneration, and the Spirit of CHRIST: For in theſe two ſtandeth the perfection and the glorie of the life to come.
            Now, when he hath reckoned out all the warrands of life, whereby he aſſureth himſelfe thereof, hee concludeth in the next ve
                  •
               ſe, Then (ſaieth he) wee haue confidence alwayes: as if hee would ſay, Hauing theſe warrandes, I haue confidence alwayes, that is, I am aſſured of my glory: and yet the wordes import not only an aſſurance▪ but the effect thereof, which is a ſweete ſecuritie in the ſoule: for whenſoeuer any man is aſſured of life, then the ſoule with ſweetneſſe wil reſt: then commeth that peace of Conſcience, aſſuring vs, whether wee liue, or wee die, wee are CHRISTES: ſo this draweth on that boldneſſe & confidence. Then looke the nature, the beginning▪ and 
                  •
               iſing of Faith: it is builded and ſtandeth vpon theſe three pillars, An earneſt deſire of life, Regeneration, and the Spirit of GOD: Theſe are the three proppes thereof, which are ſenſible to them who haue faith, and wee ſhoulde bee acquainted with them. Then of this riſeth the ſweete confidence of glory▪ and ſecurity, the repoſe and reſt of the ſoule and conſcience, and from the ſoule it commeth vp to the mouth and breaketh out in a glorying. As this ſame Apoſtle vpō this confidence

in his ſoule, breaketh out & ſaith? What ſhal ſeuer vs from the loue of Chriſt? Shall tribulation, or anguiſh, or perſecution, or famine, or nakednes, or pe
                  •
               il, or ſword? No▪ in all theſe things we are more than victorious, through Him that loued vs. Rom. 8. 35. &c. So that faith being builded vpon theſe three pillers, ſecuritie and confidence beeing builded vpon Faith, then boldn
                  •
               ſſe in mouth will ſay, I defie all contrarie powers▪ lay the ſword, lay fire, lay death before mee, it will ſay, I defie them all: yea, let all the Deuils of H
                  •
               ll come before a man▪ & his faith be well builded, and confidence on faith, hee will defie them all: yea, albeit they threatē damnation to him: for it thou ſtand in Chriſt thou ſhalt liue: albeit thou muſt bee ſeparated from this mortall life, yet all the worlde cannot ſeparate thee from the life of Chriſt. Seeke this life now in time, that in trouble wee may ſay▪ that wee will reſt in Chriſt, and all the world ſhall not ſeuer thee from Him.
            Yet to goe forward in the words. The Apoſtle as yet hath not the full contentation in heart for all this aſſurance: For (ſaith he) wee knowe, that while wee are at home in the bodie, wee are abſent from the LORD. If wee bee at home with a thing we are farre from a better thing which is abroade. Alas! thou beeing 
                  •
               t home a
                  •
                thine houſe and fire, thou art farre abroade from thine home in Heauen: whilſt wee are at home in this mortall bodie wee are ſtrangers and Pilgrimes from the LORD.
            Brethren, yee ſhall learne heere a great difference

betweene confidence & contentation: It is one thing to haue contentation, & another thing to haue confidence. This Apoſtle had confidence but not contentation. Thou art farre dec
                  •
               aued that thinkeſt thou haſt ſufficient contentation in this worlde. Woe is thee! yea, although thou haue Heauenly graces, and if thou thinkeſt thou haſt contentation, either of glory, or of ſight, all is nothing: Why? Becauſe there cannot, nor ſhoulde not bee contentation heere: no, the beſt and moſte confident man that liueth, ſhoulde not thinke hee hath contentation in this pr
                  •
               ſ
                  •
               nt life. All thine holineſſe, faith, confidence and hope, ſhoulde not giue thee full contentation. All the kingdomes, honours, and riches of this worlde, which is nothing but dirt and pelffrie, in reſpect of thoſe Heauenly thinges, ſhoulde not giue thee full contentation. And yet the worldly foole will ſaye in his heart, I haue contentation and ſufficiencie. O! but what ſaide CHRIST to him that decreed with his hart to make wide barnes? Foole, this night thy ſoule ſhall be taken from thee, Lu
                     •
                  e▪
                12. 20. Away with an opinion of contentation in this earth, and thou bee a king of all the earth: Wilt thou haue contentation without CHRIST? Wilt thou hau
                  •
                ſufficiencie▪ and not haue Him who is thy life & glorie? When thou art a pilgrime from CHRIST, and wandring from thy countrey and inheritance, wilt thou ſaye thou haſt thine hearts deſire? Had euer pilgrime full contentation

during the time of his pilgrimage? Then no contentation to the faithfull ſoule, but in CHRIST. I ſhall neuer thinke cōtentation to be in my ſoule, till I ſee CHRIST face to face: I giue thee the ſame counſell, yea, and if I had all ſpirituall graces, in neuer ſo great a meaſure yet no cōtentation for my ſoule, till I ſee CHRIST: for all our bleſſedneſſe ſtandeth in the ſight of CHRIST, and thou canſt not ſee CHRIST heere, becauſe thou art abſent from Him: For▪ as long as I am at home (ſpeaking of the ſoule ſo long as it is cloſed heere within this earthly tabernacle) I am abſent from CHRIST: And this priſon of my bodie ſo cloſeth mee about, that I cannot ſee CHRIST.
            Brethren, it is this mortall bodie that is clothed with ſinne and mortality, wherewith we muſt be clothed as long as wee are heere, that holdeth vs from the ſight of CHRIST. It is impoſſible ſo long as thou art clothed with the ſinfull bodie, to get that full ſight of IESVS, albeit Hee were ſtanding on the earth, cloathed with His glorie. So thou muſt be vnclothed of this mortalitie, ere thou canſt ſee Him: And there is the grounde wherefore wee ſhoulde thinke no contentation whilſt wee are in this body: Becauſe ſo long as wee dwell in this mortall body, we ſhall neuer ſee CHRIST, nor get a full fruition of His countenance. Therefore, Brethren, take not ſo much pleaſure and delight in this mortall bodie▪ for I

aſſure thee, it is but a priſon, holding the faithfull ſoule, and the eye of the faithfull ſoule from the ſight of CHRIST, but aſſoone as it ſhall bee looſed from it, it ſhall mount immediatelie with joye to CHRIST, and there get full contentation in His face. yee thinke, ſo long as yee want theſe earthly thinges, yee cannot get contentation: (I ſpeake not of the wicked, but euen of the regenerated man) but when the ſoule getteth this glorious preſence of CHRIST in Heauen, it ſhall haue joye in infinite degrees greater than euer it had in earth. And albeit the body ſhall lie heere in graue, and ignominie for a time, yet all that ſhall bee recompenſed by the glorious ſight of CHRIST, which the ſoule ſhall enjoye in the Heauens, beeing ſeparated from the body. Wee thinke we can haue none Heauenly glory and joy, except wee haue this earthly body there: It is true indeede, the ſoule cannot haue ſo great joye, as if the ſoule and body were together: but it is alſo true, that the ſoule beeing ſeparated, hath greater joye in Heauen, than the ſoule and body can haue together in this earth. Otherwiſe, howe woulde Paul haue deſired to haue beene diſſolued, he hauing that confidence and earneſt-penny of glory, except he had deſired that joye in the ſoule? Alas! wee are ſo ſenſeleſſe, that wee thinke joye cannot come, except wee get it in our earthly body: And this is one part of our miſerie.
            Now in the next verſe (in a parentheſis) he caſteth

in the cauſe why hee is abſent from GOD, and a pilgrime heere, and ſaieth, For wee walke by faith, and not by ſight: As if hee woulde ſaye, All the ſight which I haue of Him is afarre of, looke how farre the Heauens are diſtant from the earth, alſo as far is IESVS diſtāt from the eye of the faithful ſoule: there is onely a farre ſight of Him heere: all the ſight of Heauenly glory which wee haue here, is like a more, in reſpect of that ſight we ſhall ge
                  •
               : it is ſo farre from thee that it ſeemeth not to bee the thouſand part of that fulnes that it is indeed: Thou ſeeſt it now as it were a more, but thou ſhalt once ſee it as a mountaine in great fulneſſe. So Paul ſaith, I ſee my LORD, but afarre of: there is a great diſtance betwixt the eye of my ſoule and Him: & beſides this farnes, ſuch a miſt ariſeth out of the ſtinking body of corruption betwixt my LORD and me like a cloude, that it hideth my LORDS face from me. So there are two impedimentes, which hinder vs from the full ſight of CHRIST the firſt is the farre diſtance of place betwixt Him & me: the ſecond is the ſmoke & miſt of my corruptiō that goeth in betwixt me & Him, and taketh the ſight of my LORD from me. Find yee not this in your ſelues by experience? In the beginning of an houre thou ſhalt haue a ſight of Him, and againe ere the halfe houre bee paſt, the ſight of Him is away let bee a day or halfe a day. Then maruell not, ſuppoſe Paule complaineth of this, that he cannot ſee CHRIST in reſpect of the

farneſſe and ſmoke that commeth betwixt them: Would to GOD wee had a ſenſe of this! Who is he that once groneth for this, and ſaieth, Alas. I am a pilgrime, it is a farre ſight which I haue of my LORD: O! if my ſoule were looſed from my bodie, that I might bee with Him! Who can ſaye this? No, wee are all ſleeping, and there is none eye lifted vp to CHRIST in this great miſ
                  •
               rie. Wilt thou alwayes crie peace in ſuch a miſerie? at laſt thou ſhalt be preſſed downe to Hell.
            Yet to inſiſt vpon this verſe▪ 
               We walke (ſaith he) by faith and not by ſight. Yee ſee heere then the condition of a Chriſtian is walking, not ſitting, nor ſleeping, hee muſt be afoote This worde is euer in the Apoſtles mouth, 1. Theſſal. 
                     •
                  . 6. Colloſſ. 4. 2. &c. Euer walking, a pilgrime muſt not ſit downe▪ Thou art a pilgrime, vpon thy journey towardes another countrey, thou muſt not ſit downe: for otherwiſe thou ſhalt neuer come to thy journeys ende. The ſeconde thing which I marke heere▪ This walking muſt not be in darkneſſe, but it muſt bee in light. Woe to him that walketh in darkeneſſe, for if hee were neuer ſo well occupied, hee ſhall die in darkneſſe: hee that walketh in darkeneſſe, he ſhall get Hell, for H
                  •
               ll is darkneſſe: ſo that walking muſt be in light. The light is of two ſorts, they are both ſet downe in 
                  •…
               hrſe: The firſt is the light and knowledge of 
                  •••••
               : The ſecond the light of preſence and ſight. The knowledge of Faith is but a glimmering, in reſpect of the other

light that is by ſight, whē thou ſhalt ſee CHRIST: in His preſence is a wonderfull light: when Hee ſhall looke to thee, and thou to Him, the beames of His glory ſhall ſo ſtrike on thee, and cauſe thee ſhine, that thou ſhalt bee aſtoniſhed. There is no ſoule▪ but aſſoone as it commeth in His preſence, it will bee aſtoniſhed and maruell that euer there was ſuch a light in CHRIST. Faith hath but a ſmall light, but the light by preſence is marueilous: H
                  •
               e ſhall tranſlate vs to a marueilou, light, 1. Pet. 2. 9. All the Angels wonder at the light which is about the Lambe: and thy ſoule, when it ſhall come into glory, ſhall ſtand wondering at ſuch a glory: and thy body, when it ſhall followe, ſhall wonder, and all ſhall bee wondering at ſuch a paſſing glory! Theſe are the two ſights. Would GOD wee coulde take heede to get a glaunce of that Heauenly glory! then all the pleaſures of this earth would bee but vanitie, dirt, and pelffrie to vs. The Lord yet open our eyes, to get a ſight of this glory.
            Theſe are two lights: and as there is two lights, ſo there is two kindes of walking: The one is in this life▪ the other in Heauen in the life to come: In this life, wee haue a ſmall glimmering, without any Sunne, a blincke of light, enuironed about with darkneſſe Therefore, becauſe of the want of light, there is ſuch ſtumbling in our walking in this life: but when we ſhall walke in the Heauens with that H
                  •
               au
                  •
               ly light of GOD, with the countenance

of CHRIST before our eyes, then no ſtaggering, neither to this ſide, nor to that, becauſe of that light that is in the face of CHRIST euer ſhining in our eyes. The darkneſſe yee ſee is vnpleaſant, but the light is pleaſant: It is a wonderfull thing, that wee ſhall get leaue to walke in that inacceſſible light of GOD, wherein the Father and the Sonne doe walke. Brethren, thinke on theſe things, for theſe are the chiefe points of all. All earthly thinges euaniſh when the Sunne goeth downe, and darkneſſe commeth: Therefore ſet your eyes vpon that glory, which neuer ſhall euaniſh nor decay, as euer ye wold deſire to reign there: Theſe dayes require this preparation. Certainely, preaching and hearing will euaniſh, and preaching beeing taken away, faith will faile, and without faith how can mē attaine to glory. Therefore, to keepe in the glory of this light, we ſhould earneſtly crie, LORD, GIVE VS THIS WORD: For if it bee taken away, wee ſhall bee worſe than they of Sodome and Gomorrha.
            
            Now, the Apoſtle hauing ſhewed this, he commeth backe againe, and ſaith, Neuertheleſſe we haue confidence, &c. He that hath confidence he will rejoyce to ſpeake of it, & it ſwelleth ſo in his heart, that of neceſſity it muſt bee vttered, and hee will ſay once, twiſe, thriſe▪ I haue confidence: 
                  •
               u
                  •
                nowe with confidence hee joyneth another thing, to wit, his loue to die, and to ſlit out of the bodie, to reigne with CHRIST. Loue to die is the companion

of confidence. Hee ſaieth, I haue confidence, but I loue rather to remooue out of the bodie, and to dwell with the LORD. There are two good thinges, The one confidence, the other light. The Apoſtle maketh a choiſe heere, he will leaue confidence here in the bodie, and hee chooſeth to die, that he may attaine to the light: and in this reſpect he would change all the confidence hee hath with death. Thou wil
                  •
                not change a foot of earth with death, but th' Apoſtle will change confidence with death, and confidence is more preciou, than all ye earth. Few will doe this, and yet thou wi't die and thou hadſt ſworne it. Well is that bodie that is ſo reſolued to die as Paule was! But maketh Paule a choiſe of death for death it ſelfe? Certainely no man wil chooſe death for death it ſelfe for except the LORD lighten death, and transforme it, it is an entrie to Hell: And if thou haue none other reſpect in death but to be quite of this miſerable life, (as ſome will ſ
                  •
               y, Would GOD I were dead, that I might bee quite of this miſerie) thou ſhalt bee in greater miſerie after death, than euer thou was whilſt thou was liuing. What then ſhould bee the ſpeciall cauſe that ſhould mooue a man to ſay, (Would GOD I were diſſolued) euen this, I am burthened with ſinne, I am burthened with mortalitie. This burthen ſhould bee a great motiue: Well is the ſoule that is freede of ſinne: What pleaſure is it to a ſoule that woulde faine ſerue GOD, to liue euer in ſinne? Nay, no pleaſure.
            
               This is the ſpeciall motiue that ſhould mooue vs to make choiſe of death, To bee with IESVS CHRIST, to dwell with Him, and to bee in His companie in the participation of that glorie that is in the countenance of CHRIST. For that ca
                  •
               ſe I would flit, that I might bee with my LORD, and embrace that joye. So as the miſerie of this worlde will put thee forwarde to GOD. ſo the ſweeteneſſe of CHRISTS companie will draw thee forward. Then to ende, The Apoſtle hath preconceaued in himſelfe a wonderfull joye of that glorie, when hee ſawe it not yet, ſo muſt wee doe. All his walking was by faith, and not by ſight: but hee ſeeth before the hand an Heauenlie joy and pleaſure, in reſpect of that 
                  •
               ruition that he ſhall once get of the countenance of CHRIST. This ſhoulde learne thee to looke euer for more than thou 
                  •
               eeſt: thinke not that thou haſt ſeene all the glorie that ſhall come to thee and haſt felt all the pleaſures that are laid vp for thee in Heauen: But thinke that there is greater joye and glorie there thā euer thou couldi heare of: for CHRIST him ſelfe neuer vttered al the glory that is laid vp for the Sainctes: All that wee ſee heere is but in a mirrour: All the glorie of CHRIST in the Scripture, is but in a mirrour: li
                  •
               e as when the Sunne ſhineth in the mirrour, thou lookeſt not to the Sunne that ſhineth, but to the glauncing thereof in the mirrour. And as there is greater ſhining in the Sunne, than in the glauncing thereof

which thou ſeeſt▪ ſo thinke euer there is greater glorie in Heauen, than euer thou hearde of in the Scripture. Suppoſe not that thou canſt thinke of the joyes of Heauen, as men on earth thinke on earthly thinges: Who can thinke a thing greater than it is? No, the glory of Heauen, and the joye with CHRIST, mounteth vp aboue the reach of thy faith and hope, and all thing that is able to conceiue the ſame. It mounteth vp higher that the Heauen of Heauens is aboue the earth. Therefore, thinke not with thy ſelfe, it is too much that I looke for: Thou faileſt only in narrowneſſe, thy Faith and Hope is ſo narrowe, that they cannot comprehende the thouſande part of that glorie: And ſo wee ſhould ſay (I hope, and I belieue, more than I am able to comprehend.) And here is the cauſe that thou canſt not get that full ſight of glorie that is laide vp for thee. The weake begunne grace of Faith, and the Spirite of GOD in thee is not able to attaine to the thouſand part of that glorie.
            The LORD giue vs grace to preconceaue this glorie in ſome meaſure, that wee may ſeeke the ſame, and ſay with PAVL, I haue Faith and Hope, but that glorie paſſeth all. The LORD grant vs this, euen for CHRISTES ſake, So bee it.
         
         
            
            THE THIRD SERMON.
            
               II. COR. CHAP. V.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 9
                     Where
                           •
                        ore alſo we couet, that both, dwelling at home, and remoouing from home, wee may bee acceptable to Him.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 10
                     For we must all appeare before the judgement ſeate of CHRIST, that euery man may receiue the things which are done in his bodie, according to that that he hath done, whether it be good or euill.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 11
                     Knowing, therefore, that terrour of the LORD, wee perſwade men, and wee are made manifest vnto GOD and I trust alſo that wee are made manifest in your conſciences.
                  
               
            
            
               WEe haue hearde, Brethren, theſe dayes paſt, the remedie that the Apoſtle ſetteth downe againſt this temporall death, & the diſſolution of the body. In a worde, it is a full aſſurance and perſwaſion of the heart, that when we are dead, concerning the body, yet we ſhall liue againe, and ſhall receiue at the handes of God a more glorious body than euer this bodie was. It is an harde matter to get this aſſurance, for the

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
naturall reaſon of man cannot, nor will not perſwade him, that hee once beeing dead, the bodie beeing diſſolued in aſhes, that euer that bodie ſhall bee recouered againe. Therefore, the Apoſtle bringeth in three argumentes of this aſſurance: The firſt is the earneſt deſire that the Godly haue in this life to be glorified: It is a thing impoſſible that this deſire can bee in vaine: Hee that giueth thee a deſire of glorie and ſighing for it. He muſt giue▪ thee the life and glorie that is deſired and ſighed for: For otherwiſe Hee would neuer giue thee grace to ſigh once for this life and glorie except Hee were purpoſed to put thee in poſſeſſion of that glorie one day. The ſecond argument is taken from our regen
                  •
               ration, or the end of our regeneration. GOD is Hee that maketh vs of new againe, after we were diſmaide by the fall of Adam, Hee createth vs of newe againe, to this ende, that wee ſhould liue the firſt creation. It ended indeede, and wee haue loſt the right thereof, euen in the firſt creation. Wee were created to liue euerlaſtingly, yet wee died. But the ſecond creation in IESUS will neuer breake: but as in him wee are renewed to life, liue ſhall wee in the Heauens euerlaſtingly, it can neuer faile. Peter ſaith in his firſt epiſt. chap. 1. verſ. 3. Wee are regenerate againe into that liuely hope.
            
            The third argument is the Spirit of CHRIST, whereby GOD worketh in vs both the deſire and regeneration: hauing once giuen vs that Spirit,

He taketh Him not from vs againe, but letteth Him dwell in ſoule and bodie, to bee an earneſtpennie in vs, aſſuring vs He ſhal neuer leaue vs, till the whole promiſes in CHRIST be fulfilled to vs. And therfore He is called the Spirit of trueth. (Iohan. 15. 26. Notwithſtanding, of all this confidēce and aſſurance, vnder-propped with theſe three pillers, Deſire, Regeneration, and the Spirit, the Apoſtle hath not full contentation of heart, and the reaſon is, becauſe he ſeeth not the LORD. Hee is yet wandring as a pilgrime in this world, & hath not gotten that joyfull countenance of CHRIST, in the which countenance is onelie ſacietie of pleaſures: For aſſure you, the faithfull heart ſhall neuer haue contentation till it ſee CHRIST. Therefore, to attaine to this thing, and to get the full ſatisfactiō of the heart, he maketh choiſe of death and remouing out of the bodie: hee preferreth it to all grace that can be had in this life. Hee preferreth it to that confidence and aſſurance▪ and to all other graces that hee can haue in this bodie, that he might go vp to that preſence of CHRIST. Thus farre wee haue ſpoken hitherto.
            Now to come to the text that we haue preſently read. The Apoſtle conſidering that ſight that once we ſhall ſee, and that preſence that once wee ſhall haue of ye LORD IESVS, which he hath not gottē nor will not get, till the time it pleaſe the LORD to call on him: (and none of vs will get it, albeit wee woulde neuer ſo faine, till that the LORD

call on vs) he ſheweth, therefore, what he will do till that time come that he get that preſence, an
                  •
                how hee will bee occupied liuing here in this pilgrimage, what will bee his ſtudie and care in lif
                  •
                and death: Therefore (ſaith hee) alſo we couet, that ba
                     •
                   dwelling at home, and remoouing from home, we may b
                     •
                   acceptable to Him. There is his care in the mean
                  •
                time. All my care, would he ſay, ſo long as I liue i
                  •
                this earth, ſhall be, to bee acceptable to my Lord, to whom I goe, that I may be the welcomer when I come.
            Yet, Brethren, becauſe the words are weightie, euery word would be weighed: We couet, ſaith hee, there is the firſt worde, and in the firſt language this word importeth not onely a common deſire, but an ambition: So by this word he vttereth that he is griedy of honour, and ambitious: for there i
                  •
                an holy ambition that is lawfull, that is requiſite, that is needefull in euery Chriſtian man, euen in the pureſt man that is. But to come to the honour which he coueteth: We couet (ſaith he) that we may be acceptable: There is the honour, to be acceptable, to bee counted and liked of. The worldlie man that hunteth after the honour of the worlde, he deſireth to be eſteemed of, to bee had in admiration, and to be in grace. So is it with the man of God the honour which he deſireth is eſteematiō, he would be accounted of, hee would bee in grace and good liking, and if it were poſsible, he would be eſteemed aboue all the men in the world: but

whome would hee haue to eſteeme of him? The worldly ambitious man would bee accounted of by men, hee hath no regarde of GODS eſtimation of him, hee would haue the Prince accounting of him aboue all Courtiers: hee would haue the people accounting much of him. But the man of GOD, that hath this holie ambition and griedineſſe of honour, hee careth not for the account and eſtimation of men, neither ſeeketh his praiſe of men, but of GOD, and CHRIST, with whom hee muſt dwell after this life: hee deſireth in this pilgrimage, to bee aſſured, that CHRIST hath a liking of him, that after this life hee may reigne with CHRIST as a king for euer: That is his honour.
            To goe forward in the wordes: When ſeeketh hee to bee acceptable to CHRIST? at what time? There is two times: One time of liuing, and another time of dying: A time when the ſoule dwelleth in the bodie, and another time when ſhee flitteth. The ambitious holie man ſeeketh to bee acceptable to the LORD at both theſe times, both dwelling at home, and flitting from home. All the honour of the worldlie man is in this life, and whilſt the ſoule is dwelling in this bodie: But once laide downe in his bedde, and let death aſſaile him, there hee layeth downe his honour: and if yee tell him of the honour which hee was ſeeking, hee will ſpitte at it. But the godly man, if euer he was griedy of honour in

this life, in the houre of his death he is griedier thereof, and the nearer death, the griedier of the honour of CHRIST: hee can haue no contentation in heart, till hee know his ſoule is acceptable to that LORD whom to hee is going. As for the meanes whereby hee ſeeketh to come to this honour, ye will heare of them in the next verſe hereafter.
            This ſame Apoſtle (2. Timoth. 2. 15.) ſetteth them downe alſo: when hee hath deſired Timothi
                     •
                  
                to ſtudie to approoue himſelfe to GOD, immediately hee ſubjoyneth, If thou wouldeſt bee approoued, bee a worke-man: thou wilt not get this acceptation by driuing ouer thy life in idleneſſe, or ſluggiſhneſſe: let euery man, in whatſoeuer eſtate, bee a worke-man. The worldly man is clyming to his honour by vnlawfull meanes, by flatterie, by falſhood, &c. but it endeth in miſerie. But the godly mā, let him ſeek to be approued by the King of kings, being a faithfull worke-man in his calling, & diligent therein. There is the meane of thine acceptation in this life. In thy dying, & when all thy ſenſes, thy tongue, thine hand, and all faileth th
                  •
               e and art not able to worke, yet ſuffer with patience, and ſet thine heart patiently to ſuffer death, that in thy dying GOD may be glorified, and ſo thou mayeſt conſecrate both death & life to Him.
            Marke heere a leſſon. Paul of before he maketh a choiſe to go & dwell with Chriſt: he would faine

haue bene dead: but here is another deſire, which muſt goe before that, and thou muſt haue the like deſire, before thou deſire to flit out of this bodie and to bee with CHRIST. Firſt deſire, whilſt thou art in this bodie, to bee acceptable to Him, and then deſire to flit, otherwiſe not: for certainely, if thou die, before thou bee acceptable to GOD in thy life, thou ſhalt not bee welcome to Him, and he ſhal be the moſt terrible ſight to thee that euer thou ſaw: I ſhall neuer deſire to ſee Him when I die, if I deſire not to bee acceptable to Him firſt in life and death. Therefore, ſtudie by a faithfull diſcharge of thy duetie heere on earth, to bee acceptable to thy LORD, beguile not thy ſelfe.
            Learne againe heere. When hee hath made a choiſe to goe and dwell with the LORD, hee deſireth that hee may liue a godly life heere firſt: then the leſſon is, A godly life heere is a too-looke to that life which wee ſhall haue in CHRIST, which maketh a faithfull Pilgrime deſire to bee with CHRIST. It is an eaſie thing to haue an eye to the life to come, if thou ſtudie to liue well in this life. And on the other part, it is the hope of that life and glory to come, and an eye to Heauen that maketh a Pilgrime to liue well in this life: where this eye to Heauen is not, there is no good life. Wherefore ſhould we ſpeake further? Alas! theſe euill liues of men, theſe murthers, adulteries, thefts, tell vs plainely, there is no ſight of Heauen, nor regarde of the life to come. Thou that paſſeſt

thy time, taking thy pleaſure in the diſpleaſing of GOD, teſtifieſt, that thine eye was neuer on Heauen, that the eye of thy ſoule was neuer lifted vp aboue thy bodie, and aſſure thy ſelfe, if thou liue on ſo, thou ſhalt neuer ſee Heauen.
            Now in the next verſe, hee ſubjoyneth another argument, moouing him to bee ambitious to bee with that LORD of life. The firſt argument was, becauſe hee was to dwell with that LORD in Heauen. The ſecond is, that terrible Iudgement that all fleſh ſhall ſee, except they endeuour themſelues to ſerue GOD in this life: For (ſaieth hee) wee must all appeare before the Iudgement-ſeate of CHRIST. Learne a leſſon of the pith of this argument. As there is a force in the hope of the life to come, ſo there is a force in the feare of a terrible Iudgement, to mooue a man to liue well here. Looke howe needefull the one is to cauſe thee to liue well in this life▪ as needefull alſo is the other. Hope of life is needful, feare of judgemēt is needful: what ſhould be the cauſe of this? knoweſt thou not thy nature, how backward & froward it is? ſo that except thou be pricked forward with terrors of judgement, thou wilt neuer addreſſe thy ſelfe to Heauen, but wilt linguer & ſit downe by the way.
            Brethren, There are two things in Heauen, and two thinges in earth, both ſeruing to mooue vs to liue well heere in this life: In Heauen there is two ſeates, one of Grace, which is called, the Throne of grace: The other a ſeate of Iudgement,

a Tribunall: Fie on all tribunals in the earth, in reſpect of that Heauenly Tribunall! The Throne of grace is ſpoken of to the Hebrewes, Chapt. 4. verſ. 16. Let vs goe boldly to the Throne of grace that wee may get mercie. But this will not ſuffice, except the Tribunall of judgement be alſo before thee, to draw thee forward: both muſt bee before thee: and as thou lookeſt to the Throne of grace with the one eye, ſo look to the Throne of judgement with the other eye. There are alſo in like maner two thinges in earth, to draw thee forward: The one, the Goſpell of grace, The other, the Law threatning judgement. The Goſpel drawing thee louinglie to GOD, the Lawe threatning thee to goe forwarde, or elſe thou ſhalt die. The Goſpell gently alluring thee forwarde, promiſing that thou ſhalt get life: The Lawe ſtanding about the Goſpell as a fire, to terrifie thee, and if thou goe out of the right way, it will burne thee. It will not bee the Goſpell alone that will ſerue the turne. Indeede, if there were no canker in thee, the Goſpell would ſerue the turne: but in reſpect of this wicked canker in thy nature, thou muſt be threatned with the Lawe. Seeſt thou not thy nature? fairnes will not ſerue the turne, thou muſt be pulled forward by the haire, or elſe thou wilt fall into damnation. Take me away the rebukes of the Law, if thou bee a king or a Monarch, it is but a dead Goſpel to thee, ſuch is the corrupt nature of man: Take away the canker of the nature of man,

I ſhall ſpeake nothing of the Lawe: but as long as this canker remaineth▪ the Law muſt threaten all, from the king to the begger. I were a falſe Doctor, if I vſed not the threatning of the Lawe to rebuke this canker of nature. Who is more holie than Paule was? He▪ looking vp to Heauen, ſeeing the Mercie-ſeate, likewiſe ſeeth the Iudgement-ſeate, and if hee had not ſeene the Iudgement-ſeate, and beene terrified therewith, hee ſhoulde neuer haue gotten a ſight of that Mercie-ſeate: ſo muſt it bee with vs, wee muſt ſee that Iudgement-ſeate, as well as that Mercie-ſeate. This is wonderfull: Hee was euen nowe ſpeaking of CHRIST as a ſweete LORD, and faine would bee at Him, and nowe againe hee ſetteth Him vp as a Iudge to terrifie men. Is this the LORD, at whom he would bee? Who deſireth to appeare before a terrible Iudge? Who hath life and death in his handes? Take heede: this is Paules meaning: The LORD IESVS Hee is both terrible to men, and joyous to men, and Hee muſt bee both joyous and mercifull indeede, to thee who endeuoureth thy ſelfe to pleaſe Him in this life: Terrible to them who endeuoureth them not to pleaſe Him in this life. Wouldeſt thou haue Him mercifull to thee, ſtudie then to liue well ſerue Him ſincerely in thy calling. Wilt thou haue Him terrible to thee, thou ſhalt indeede finde Him terrible to thee, and thou ſhalt ſhake & tremble at His countenance, in caſe thou ſeeke not to pleaſe Him in this life.

And this ſhall bee the firſt ſight that euer the wicked, who deſired not to pleaſe Him in this life, ſhall get of Him. Heauen and Hell are thought jeſts & mocks now adayes: & this Tribunall is not looked too, but certainely thou muſt appeare, either before the Throne of Mercie, or the Tribunal of Iudgement.
            Yet to goe forward in the wordes: I ſhall only touch them, without diſcourſing on that generall judgement. Then firſt heere to let you ſee the terribleneſſe of that judgement, there is an Appearance whereof Eſaias, in his 45. Chapter, and the 23. verſe thereof, and Paule, Roman. 14. 11. ſpeaketh: As I liue (ſaieth the LORD) all knees ſhall how to Mee, and all thinges ſhall confeſſe Mee to bee GOD. There is the reuerence that ſhall bee at that appearance, all kinges in the earth ſhall bow their knees: & the tongue that would not ſpeake in this earth to GODS glory ſhall then bee compelled to ſpeake to His glorie. Then there is firſt an appearance: Secondly an neceſſitie, Thou muſt appeare: Thirdly, an vniuerſalitie, all ſhall appear, without exception, all ſhall be called and all muſt anſwere, Hic ſum, I AM HEERE: None ſhall bee away, man nor womā, rich nor poore, from Adam the firſt man, to the laſt man borne on the earth. Then fourthly. The ſeate before the which this appearance muſt bee, is a Tribunall: the Iudge is CHRIST, IEHOVAH, GOD not man onely: all knees ſhall bow to Him as GOD, and not only to

CHRIST as GOD, but to CHRIST in our nature, as man, he ſhall ſit as a glorious Iudge, as it is ſaide, Iohn, 5. 22. The Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgement to the Sonne. And as there ſhall bee one appearance of all, ſo there muſt be one receiuing: none ſhall appeare but ſomething they ſhall receiue. What ſhall bee receiued? A reward of thy actions and doinges in thy bodie, which rewarde ſhall appertaine to the bodie as well as to the ſoule, becauſe thou didſt them in the bodie. As to the qualitie of the rewarde, it is proportionall to that which thou haſt done in the bodie, bee it good or euill: if it bee good, thou ſhalt bee rewarded with glorie: if euill, thou ſhalt bee rewarded with ignominie and ſhame.
            To inſiſt ſomething vpon the laſt wordes, becauſe the Papiſtes ſticke to them, and thinke they haue an aduantage of this place: when they heare that euerie one ſhall receiue according to the thinges which they haue done in the fleſh, incontinent they conclude, ERGO, workes merites. I anſwere, Euill workes indeede merite damnation, and damnation ſhall bee thy portion for them, if thou bee out of IESVS: but good workes haue no merite: in all thy good workes there is no deſeruing, althogh they were ten thouſand more than they are. There is force enough in an euill work to condemne thee, but in a thouſand good workes no force to ſaue. The Apoſtle ſaieth

not heere, They ſhall receiue a rewarde for that which they haue done, but according as they haue done: hee ſaieth not Propter, making workes a cauſe, but Secundum, that is, according to the teſtification of the works. But to leaue the larger inſiſting in this, as more pertinent to another place, and to come to our purpoſe.
            Weigh the wordes, for euerie worde is a worde of weight, importing a terrible Iudgement, an Appearing, a neceſſitie of appearing, an vniuerſall appearing without exception, no reſpect of perſons, of the king, more than of the begger, no mitigation of the ſeueritie of the Iudge, &c. CHRIST will haue no mitigation, but if thou bee a reprobate, thou wilt bee handled ſeuerelie, albeit thou bee a king. The judgement then, being ſo terrible, the Iudge, CHRIST, muſt alſo bee terrible: And ſo the Apoſtle ſaieth, Knowing, therefore, that terrour of the LORD, &c.
            And all this is to learne euerie ſoule, not ſo to preſume of the mercie of CHRIST, that thou ſhalt thinke to finde Him mercifull in that daye, except that thou haſt ſtudied to bee acceptable vnto Him in this life, and canſt ſay, LORD, I EMPLOY MY SELFE IN SERVING THEE. Away with that preſumption of mercie, which maketh the lowne, when hee is mu
                  •
               thering and committing adulterie, to ſay, GOD is mercifull. Hauing ſet downe the terrible Iudgement, hee concludeth what he will doe in his owne perſon.

Is the judgement and Iudge ſo terrible? I will bee wiſe: the LORD giue vs this wiſedome. Knowing (ſaith Paul) that terrour of the LORD I will do my duetie in this life. My duetie is to preach, to bring men to the faith in CHRIST: I will walke in the diſcharge of that duetie night and day. Hee ſaith, Knowing perfectlie that terrour of the LORD: It is not a blinde terrour that will make a man to doe his duetie in this life, but it is the knowledge of a Tribunall: to belieue that there is a Iudge and a Tribunall in Heauen, and that there is a moſt terrible day abyding. And if a mā belieued that there is a Tribunall in Heauen, a terrible Iudge ſitting there to take account of his doinges in earth, for all the worlde hee would not offende that GOD: but this cannot ſinke in the heart of man: Hee will ſay, there is a generall judgement, but this is from the mouth onely, and not from the heart: and ſurely, as long as a man continueth in ſinne, albeit hee ſhould ſweare that there is a Tribunall. it is a token hee knoweth it not. The wordes of judgement auaile nothing: it is the belieuing, and ſure knowledge that there is a judgement, and a terrible Iudge to ſinners in Heauen, that doth the turne. Therefore, ſeeke perſwaſion, and looke to that Article of thy Creede, that the Iudge ſhall come, and take account both of the quicke & the dead: Belieue it, and then it ſhall draw thee to liue a godly life. Knowing, therefore, that terrour of the LORD, wee perſwade men, or cauſe them belieue.

Hee ſaieth not, I goe to play the part of a king, or of a politicke man, I am buſie in this or that turne that appertaineth not to my calling: No, but according to my calling, I preach the Goſpell, to perſwade men to belieue in CHRIST, that they may bee ſaued. To ſpeake the trueth, it is not thy labouring and doing in any other mans calling, that will profite thee, but thou art ordained by GOD to doe thy duetie in thine owne calling: and when the account of thy deedes ſhall bee taken in that Great day, hee ſhall not ſay, what haſt thou done in another mans calling? but, what haſt thou done in thine owne? I made thee a Miniſter, howe haſt thou traueled in that vocation? Therefore I ſaye, as euerie man would bee readie to giue an account of his doinges, let euerie man bee diligent in his owne vocation, ſeeking the glorie of GOD therein.
            Nowe it might haue beene ſaide to Paul, Thou boaſteſt much of thy doing and preaching: but looke with what ſinceritie thou haſt beene occupied, and with what vprightneſſe of heart thou haſt beene preaching in thy life time? He anſwereth, and firſt hee taketh GOD to bee witneſſe of the ſinceritie of his heart in diſcharging his Miniſterie: and then hee taketh the Corinthians, among whome hee had traueled, to bee witneſſe alſo of his ſinceritie. As for GOD, hee ſaieth, We are made manifest vnto GOD: And as for men, I trust alſo I am made manifest in your conſciences. Hee

taketh firſt GOD to bee witneſſe, who knoweth the heart, and then the Corinthians, who ſawe his actions.
            Then, Brethren, it is not enough for a Miniſter, that preacheth CHRIST as Paule doeth, for to perſwade men to belieue in CHRIST, to ſpeake outwardlie to men, as I am now ſpeaking to you, but hee muſt looke in the meane time, that inwardlie his heart be ſet vpon GOD, that is, looke that he approoue his heart in ſinceritie to GOD, who ſeeth the heart. Men marke the wordes that come out of the mouth, but GOD marketh the ſinceritie of the heart, to ſee with what ſinceritie the man ſpeaketh. This that I ſpeake of Paul in his calling, I meane of all other men in their callings. Doeſt thou anie thing outwardlie to men, looke that thou doe it inwardlie in thine heart, with ſinceritie to GOD, otherwiſe thou loſeſt all thy trauell, albeit it were neuer ſo good in the preſence of men. Of this it followeth, al theſe are but vaine voyces, to ſtand vp and ſay, I haue done this thing or that thing. To ſpeake to men, who knowe not the heart, except in the meane time, as thou art ſpeaking vnto men, thou mayeſt draw the LORD to bee witneſſe (as Paule doeth) to the ſinceritie of thine heart, and may ſay, I haue beene traueiling, with what ſinceritie the LORD knoweth: that which I haue done, I haue done it in ſinceritie: not being content to call GOD onelie to bee witneſſe, he turneth him to the Corinthians, and he

appealeth their conſciences to beare recorde of his ſinceritie in his doing, and hee ſaieth, As for you, Corinthians (ſpeaking ſparingly) I trust. &c. Hee was aſſured of GODS teſtimonie, but hee truſted, that the Corinthians alſo would beare him recorde, that hee had traneiled truelie: Hee ſaieth, in your conſciences. It is to bee marked, that he appealeth to their conſciences, not their mouthes, but their conſciences: for the mouth of man will giue one teſtimonie, but the conſcience will giue another: And when the conſcience will bee ſaying, the man hath ſpoken truelie and in ſinceritie, the mouth in the meane time will bee backebiting him, and the conſcience will ſay, thou lyeſt mouth. Speake, therefore, euer according to conſcience for if thy conſcience ſpeak one thing, and thy mouth another, thou ſhalt bee challenged of a lye. It is true indeede, men knowe not the heart of man, as when a Miniſter is ſpeaking, yee cannot judge of his heart, the LORD judgeth it, yet a faithfull and ſincere man, hee will vtter ſometime the inwarde ſinceritie of his heart in his wordes and deedes, that all that ſeeth and heareth him, will looke in therethorowe, and ſee the inwarde ſinceritie of the heart, and giue an outward confeſſion of it.
            Now, Brethren, then in this example of Paule, yee haue ſuch a proteſtation, as the faithfull Paſtor ſhoulde make in the houre of his death, and which ſhould be his teſtament. There is two things

in his Miniſterie, the outwarde ſpeaking, and the inwarde ſinceritie of the heart. If hee would proteſt of his faithfulneſſe, looke that hee proteſt as PAVLE did: Firſt outwardly, I haue vſed all diligence in diſcharging all the outward partes of my calling, I haue kept nothing abacke: and then inwardly, As for my ſinceritie, Firſt I take GOD to bee witneſſe, who knoweth and onely ſeeth mine heart, with what ſinceritie I haue ſpoken, and then I take you to witneſſe, that haue beene conuerſant with mee, ſo farre as yee can knowe the inwarde ſinceritie of mine heart, by my liuing and outwarde actions. Woulde to GOD wee coulde haue this ſinceritie. And I praye the LORD graunt mee this ſinceritie: and I beſeech Him, that as Hee hath beene with mee ſince the beginning of my Miniſterie, ſo Hee would neuer leaue mee, vntill the time I finiſh my courſe with joye. to His glorie, and comfort of His CHVRCH, through IESVS CHRIST our LORD,
            To whome, with the FATHER, and the Holie GHOST, bee all Honour, Praiſe, and Glorie, both now and euermore, So bee it.
         
         
            
            THE FOVRTH SERMON.
            
               II. COR. CHAP. V.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 12
                     For wee praiſe not our ſelues againe vnto you, but giue you an occaſion to rejoyce of vs, that yee may haue to anſwere against them, who rejoyce in the face, and not in the heart.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 13
                     For whether wee bee out of our wit, wee are it to GOD, or whether wee bee in our right minde, we are it vnto you.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 14
                     For that loue of CHRIST conſtraineth vs.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 15
                     Becauſe wee thus judge, that if one bee dead for all, then were all dead, and Hee died for all, that they that liue, ſhoulde not hence foorth liue vnto themſelues, but vnto Him who died for them, and roſe againe.
                  
               
            
            
               TO repeat ſhortlie that which we haue heard in this Chapter, We hearde firſt of that aſſurance of glorie and life euerlaſting, which is the only remedy againſt death and the diſſolution of this body. Wee hearde ſecondly of the three warrandes of this aſſurance of life & glorie: The firſt, the earneſt

deſire which the heart had of that glorie and life▪ The ſecond, Regeneration and renewing: The thirde, the Holie Spirite, who is the worker of all grace in our heartes, and who neuer leaueth vs, but abideth in vs, as an aſſured earneſt-pennie of the full accompliſhment of all that glorie promiſed to vs in the word of GOD. And yet for all this wee heard that the Apoſtle had not that contentation nor full ſatisfaction of his heart▪ becauſe he is yet a pilgrime, liuing heere by confidence, and hath not gotten the full preſence of his LORD, hee chooſeth to leaue all the thinges in this life, and therefore, hee taketh reſolution what hee will doe in life and death, to the ende, that when hee commeth to his LORD in the Heauens, hee may bee welcome. The thing hee reſolueth to doe is this, hee endeuoureth himſelfe in his calling to be acceptable to Him in life and death: and hee will conſecrate all the actions and ſufferinges of both to Him. Beſide that glory to come, which moueth him to ſtudie to bee acceptable to his LORD, he ſetteth downe another motiue, a terrible Tribunall which abideth him and all men and women, who ſtudie not to bee acceptable to the LORD. The ſoule ſhall not ſo ſoone depart out of the bodie, but it ſhall alſo as ſoone bee preſented before that Tribunall, and ſhall receiue that dolorous ſentence, if they haue not ſtudied to bee acceptable to Him. Therefore, the Apoſtle concludeth, Knowing, therefore, that terrour of the

LORDm we trauell in our calling to preach Chriſt, and to bring men to faith, and that not for the faſhion, but in ſinceritie of heart: ſo that wee take God (who ſeeth the heart) to be witneſſe to vs of our ſinceritie. And as to you, Corinthians, vpon whom we haue beſtowed our labour, wee appeale to your conſciences, and wee take you to be witneſſe of that ſame ſinceritie of our calling. This is the ſumme of all which ye haue heard hitherto in this Chapter.
            Now to come to this Text which we haue read: In the firſt verſe, the Apoſtle hauing ſpoken of his ſinceritie in preaching, the Corinthians, who had not that liking of him which they ſhoulde haue had, might haue objected, Well Paule, yet vaunteſt thou of thy ſelfe? thou haſt once vaunted of thy ſelfe (as appeareth in the ſecond and third Chapters preceeding) and yet art thou commending thy ſelfe? He anſwereth, no, I commend not my ſelfe againe, I vaunted not of my ſelfe before, nor now neither: but when I ſaid, We are made manifest to GOD, and I trust alſo that wee are made manifest in your conſciences: in theſe words I giue you occaſion to glorie of me, and not ſo much for my cauſe as for the cauſe of falſe flattering Apoſtles, who glorie in their outward doings, without ſinceritie of the heart: the repreſſing of theſe mens vaine glorying, is the cauſe of this my ſpeaking. This is the meaning of this verſe.
            Then, this Text beeing plaine, learne theſe leſſons:

I marke firſt in the perſon of the Corinthians, who objecteth this vaunting to the Apoſtle, miſtaking his words. Scarſe may a godly man ſpeake a worde or two of the grace which the Lord hath giuen him, and that not to his owne praiſe, but to the praiſe of his God, when he is miſtaken by euill men, who ſet thēſelues to wryth euery word that is ſpoken: And if euer there was an age in ye which this vice reigned, I am aſſured (& experience proueth it) none age may bee compared, in that caſe, to this age: Yea, a godly man can do nothing, but incontinent he is miſtaken: he can ſpeake nothing but he is miſconſtrued, and eſpecially the Miniſters in their callings, among all men their words are moſt miſcōſtrued▪ the day riſeth not, but there is an euident experience of this point, and euerie one ſeeth it. Therfore, what remedy? but patience: all this judging is but for a time, tary a litle while, and keepe a good conſcience in the meane time, and we ſhall ſee another judgemēt, when He ſhall come who judgeth rightly.
            Then ſecondly, learne in the perſon of Paul: he will not haue it ſo much as once ſeeming, that he pra
                  •
               ſeth himſelfe: euery good man, and eſpecially a Miniſter ſhould flee all occaſion of vaine glorie: Yea, Chriſtian modeſtie, and ſoberneſſe require, that euery man though they were indued with the greateſt graces in the world, yet they ſhould ſpeak and thinke of themſelues ſoberly: the more they haue, the greater graces that God hath giuen thē,

the leſſe they ſhould account of themſelues: yea, ſuppoſe they be ſomthing in the ſight of God▪ yet looking to the naughtineſſe that abideth in this cankred nature▪ they ſhold ſay of themſelues (I am nothing) for th'Apoſtle ſaith, 1. Cor. 8. 2 & Gal. 6. 3. He that thinketh himſelfe ſomething, he is nothing & Phil. 2. 3. Let euery man account another man better than himſelfe. If a man will meditate on his owne eſtate, either by night or by day, let him thinke of his infirmities, his ſins and naughtines: will hee rejoyce of himſelfe in his owne mind? looke to Paul what he ſaith. 2. Corin. 12. 9. I will rejoyce in mine infirmities, that the power of Ieſus may dwell in mee. The power of God neuer dwelt in a proud nor ambitious heart, but in an humble heart: God reſiſteth the proud, & giueth grace to the humble▪ 1. Pet. 5. 5. So Paul, when hee was muſing of himſelfe, albeit hee had ſeene great viſions, 2. Cor. 12. he complaineth of his infirmitie to the Lord: the Lord anſwereth, My grace is ſufficient for thee, my power is made perfect through weaknes. Then thou that wouldſt be ſtrong in God▪ be weake in thy ſelfe: thinke night and day of thine infirmity & miſery by ſin. I mark againe in the words of the Apoſtle: A godly man may rejoyce and glory in the grace of God: Why ſhould not the grace of God bee gloried in? The Apoſtle, 2. Cor. chap. 18. verſ. 5. whē he hath ſpoken of that Heauenly reuelation, Of ſuch a man I will rejoyce, ſaith he, of my ſelfe will I not rejoyce, except it bee of mine infirmity. Then may not a godly man ſpeake

of him ſelfe? Yes, he may ſpeake of himſelfe, as the inſtrumēt of God, as the diſpenſer of the grace of God, as Paul did here. To what ende? That they, vnto whome the Lord hath made him a good inſtrument, vpon whom hee hath beſtowed his trauels, may glorifie God, and render vnto him the honour of a Miniſter. Paule ſaieth, 1. Cor. 4. 1. Let a man count of vs, as of the Ministers of Christ, and diſpoſers of the ſecretes of God. And ſo a Miniſter ſhould haue honour, and they vpon whome hee hath beſtowed his trauels, and the grace which God hath giuē him, ſhould honour him, & they are as greatlie indebted to giue it him, as anie debt that euer they ought to pay. Therefore, the Apoſtle ſaieth, 2. Cor. 12. 11. I haue beene fooliſh in glorying, but ye haue compelled me, becauſe I ſhould haue beene commended by you. It is a point of ſacriledge to take anie honour from them that God hath giuē them. Now wherefore is this, that th'Apoſtle would haue them glorying of him? Not ſo much for his owne cauſe as for the cauſe of falſe Teachers, who rejoyced in the face, & not in the heart, that is, not in inwarde ſincerity, but in outward things, hauing a faire ſhow of eloquence and faire words. Then learne, ambition muſt not be borne with: it is pernicious both to the man in whome it is, and to other men who haue adoe with him. This vaine glorying is a kind of blaſphemie, for that which thou takeſt to thy ſelfe in thy vaine glorying, thou reaueſt God of it▪ in what calling ſoeuer thou bee. Therefore, th
                  ••
               
               
vaine vaunting of our ſelues is a vice, which among all vices ſhould bee moſt repreſſed. Alace that ſtinking fleſh ſhould ſtand vp and reaue God of his glorie! Now, wouldeſt thou haue a meane to repreſſe this v
                  •
               unting in the mouth of an ambitious man? When hee is vaunting of theſe outward graces and benefites, as an emptie veſſell, ſounding without ſinceritie in his heart, caſt thou vp in his teeth the ſincerity of the heart: ſay, vaine man▪ all thy ſpeach is in thy face, and not in thine heart. Set vp the heart againſt the face, and it ſhall ſhame it. It auaileth not to ſpeake of anie thing that thou canſt doe, except thou haue inward ſinceritie in the heart: For theſe outward things ſhall euaniſh, and dare not appeare before God in that great day: but ſinceritie remaineth for euer.
            To come to the next verſe: Yet they will not let him bee: yet they will object vnto him his fooliſhneſſe. Who will vaunt of himſelfe but a foole? Paule, thou art a foole, thou braggeſt of thy ſelfe. The Apoſtle anſwereth with modeſtie, Whether we bee out of our wit, wee are it to GOD, or whether wee bee in our right minde, wee are it vnto you. There is the Apoſtles anſwere.
            Then, Brethren that which God counteth wiſdome, the world counteth it fooliſhneſſe, and that which the worlde counteth wiſdome, God counteth it fooliſhneſſe. Was there anie fooliſh talking here, when the Apoſtle ſaith, We are manifest to God, and I doubt not but we are manifeſt alſo to your cōſciences?
               
Was there any bragging here? So the wiſdome of God is fooliſhnes to the world, & ſhal be, as long as corrupt nature is within vs: And the Apoſtle ſaith, 1. Cor. 3. 19. The wiſdome of the world is fooliſhnes with God. But the queſtion cannot now be decided what the true wiſdome is, and what falſe wiſdome i
                  •
               : the end will proue. True wiſdome is juſtified of her owne children, Matt. 11. 19. Well, the end will ſhew, and eſpec
                  •
               ally that day when all things ſhall be reuealed. Fooliſhneſſe ſhall ſtand vp, and all the world ſhall ſee it to be fooliſhnes: Wiſedome ſhall ſtand vp, and all the world ſhall ſee it to bee Wiſdome, & then it ſhal haue the owne approbation. So that theſe mē, that will be counted wiſe in this world, will bee compelled to vtter theſe wordes of them, whom they eſteemed fooles in this worlde, Are theſe the men, whoſe liues wee counted fooliſhnes? And I beſeech God to opē our eyes to ſee this true wiſedome & eſpecially in things concerning religiō, which wiſdom only wil abide approbation. Secondly learne, Paule here yeeldeth to them, & ſaith, Let me bee mad, I am mad to God: my God is before mine e
                  •
               es, and I care not to bee mad to this worlde: And as for you, if I bee in my right mind, it is to you: Ye Corinthiās▪
                haue nothing to laye to my charge, for I haue done my duetie faithfully to you. Brethren, ſee ye not heere the care which we ſhould ha
                  •
               e of the glory of God & of the Church of God and her ſaluation? It ſhould cauſe a man of this calling that Paul was of, to be

rauiſhed in ſpirit, and to be content to be counted a foole in this world, that God may bee glorified, and men helped forwarde to Heauen. If God bee glorified in my madnes, what regard I to be mad? what reſpect is to be made of a mā in this world? and what if men goe to ruine and decay, ſo that God bee glorified? But alas! there is ſuch a ſelfeloue ingraffed in the heart of euery man, that wee wil not ſuffer God to be honoured, except it may ſtand with our honour. & we will ſay, I will not be eſteemed a foole, I will not be diſgraced: if it may ſtand with mine honour and profite I will glorifie Him: but if His honour and mine ſtand not together, I will chiefely haue reſpect to mine own honour. So it will neuer be well▪ till wee get this cankred ſelfe-loue ſubmitting it ſelfe to the glorie of God. And it ſhould be the greateſt endeuour that euer we ſhould haue in this world, to caſt out this ſelfe-loue, that we may be content, that God may bee glorified, although it were to our diſhonour▪ yea▪ though it were with our deſtruction. It is not ſelfe-loue that bringeth honour and glory, onelie honour is of God▪ & thou ſhalt neuer get honour except thou caſt away ſelfe-loue, that God may bee glorified.
            Then to go forward: Paul muſt haue ſomthing for him, why he will bee mad for Gods cauſe: hee will not bee mad without ſome reaſon: therefore, in the next verſe he ſaith, For the loue of God conſtraineth vs: as if he would ſay, I am conſtrained to this

fooliſhneſſe, and a charge is laide on me to doe ſo. I am bound and obliged ſo to doe: that is, to be a mad man for the glorie of my GOD. And from whence commeth this neceſſitie? It is the loue of God, ſaieth hee, that conſtraineth mee: this bande that bindeth me is the loue of Chriſt not the loue which I beare to Him (that is too weake) but the loue which H
                  •
               e beareth to mee, it bindoth all my ſenſes, and vrgeth me to honour my God with my whole bodie. Theſe are the words. Then the verie neceſſitie which lieth on thee to bee a mad man for GODS cauſe, it is not a thing whereof thou canſt free thy ſelfe: there is a neceſſity aid on thee to bee counted mad for Chriſtes cauſe. Then, if there be a neceſſitie laid on vs to doe this (albeit it bee to our owne diſhonour) what if wee doe it not, but will ſhake off this yoke? Then I tell thee, in place of it, another neceſſitie muſt come in, a neceſsitie of woe. Paule ſaieth, 1. Cor. 9. 16. Woe to me if I preach not the Gospell. God hath laid this neceſsity on me to preach, and if I caſt it off, another neceſsitie of woe ſhall be laide on mee Alas! this world thinketh all this worſhipping of God to be voluntarie, that men may ſerue GOD as they pleaſe, and that men may preach as they pleaſe, this way, or that way, and ſpeake heere, and holde their tongue there, as they will. But I ſay to thee, Wilt thou free me of that neceſsitie that lieth on mee? Art thou able to take it off my backe? If thou bee not able, then for GODS ſake let mee

preach the Goſpell with freedome and ſinceritie of heart. I tell thee, There is ſuch a neceſsitie laide vpon the ſhoulders of the Miniſters to vtter euery thing which the Lord putteth into their mouthes, that if thou ſhake off this neceſsity another neceſſitie of woe ſhall be laid vpon them. And this ſhall be their crie on their dead-bed, Woe to mee, that I preached not the Goſpell truelie.
            Yet to goe forward. From whence commeth this neceſsitie? Hee ſaieth▪ 
               It is the loue of GOD that conſtraineth mee It is the loue of Chriſt which Hee ſhewed in His ſuffering for me, that bindeth mee. So, it was the loue of Chriſt towardes Paule that moued him patiently to be called mad for Chriſts cauſe. Chriſt, for the loue which He did beare to vs, ſuffered Himſelf not only to be called mad, but to be called a Deuill, Matt. 12. 24. He ſuffered the extremitie of paine and ignominie for our ſakes: and all the reuilinges and reproches that ſhoulde haue lighted vpon vs, Hee tooke them vpon Him. Such was His loue towardes vs. Then, wilt not thou ſuffer to be called a mad man for His cauſe? If thou wouldeſt haue a part of ye inheritāce which Chriſt conquered, thou muſt bee bound, a neceſſitie muſt be laide vpon thee, and if thou bee looſed, thou art looſed from the loue of IESVS, and then woe and euerlaſting deſtruction ſhall come vpon thee. I ſee then, all our ſeruice of Chriſt▪ is of neceſsitie. Then what pleaſure can bee in the ſeruice of CHRIST, if it bee conſtrained ſeruice? The

thing I am compelled to doe, I will haue little pleaſure in the doing of it: In deed it is true, thou art not looſe, but bound: From the time that thou entereſt into the Church of Chriſt, thou entereſt into bonds: but there is a great difference betwixt band and band: one band will binde thee & force thee to do a thing, whether thou wilt, or wilt not: Another band will only leade thee the right way, which thou art to goe.
            Brethren, this band that Paule ſpeaketh of in this place, it is a ſweete band the band of the loue of Chriſt, and it bindeth thee ſweetly and louingly to diſcharge thy duety towards God: and all thy duety by this band is voluntary: and hee who is bound with this bād, will rejoyce more to be called a foole for Chriſts ſake, than to be eſteemed a king vpō the earth. But thou muſt take heed where this band is that bindeth thee, that it may leade thee to doe thy duetie willinglie: If the loue of Chriſt, which is the band, be outwith thee onelie ſounding in thine eare (as when it is tolde thee, Chriſt loueth thee) I tell thee it wil not bind thee. All the preaching in the world will not bind thee, if it be without thee: Paul ſaith, therefore, Rom▪
                5. 5. The loue of God is ſpread abroad in our hearts, thorow the holy Spirit that is giuen vs. Then, that that loue may binde thine heart it muſt bee powred in thee, and when it entereth into the heart, it looſeth ye heart with ſuch a ſweetneſſe to doe Gods will as is vnſpeakeable: it bindeth the heart with an exceeding

joye. Would to God wee had a taſte of this loue! All is but words. There cā be no ſuch ſweetneſſe as that is, from once the Spirit hath powred the loue of Chriſt in thine heart, then let all our trauels be▪ when we heare of theſe things, to get a ſenſe of the loue of Chriſt in our hearts. Al the powers in the world will not mooue thee to doe thy duety ſo much as the feeling of this loue of Chriſt towardes thee. And nothing will bee able to ſtay thee from Chriſt, and honouring Him (and it were with thine owne ignominie) if once thou haue a ſenſe of it.
            In the next verſe hee giueth two reaſons why the loue of Chriſt conſtrained him: The firſt reaſon is taken from that miſery that Chriſt founde him in, when he ſuffered for him: The ſecond is taken from the ende of the death of Ieſus. As to the firſt, this was our miſerable eſtate before Chriſt loued vs, we were all dead: how proueth he that? If one be dead for all, then were all dead: if thou hadſt not bene dead, in vaine Chriſt died for thee: if thou hadſt bene but halfe dead (as the Papiſts ſay, who vaunt of their free will) the Sonne of God had neuer died for thee: if Paul had had this free will, and ſo bene halfe dead, Chriſt had neuer died for him: and if there were none other argument but this, To import that there is not a free wil, nor ſponke of godlines in mē by nature, it is ſufficient to ſay, Chriſt hath died for all: we were without all ſponk of free will to good, when Chriſt came.
            
               Marke the force of the argument. It is from that miſerable eſtate and ſpirituall death wherein CHRIST found vs, when Hee beganne to beſtow His loue vpon vs. Wee were dead ſpirituallie in ſinne, dead in treſpaſſes. What is this corporall death to bee reſpected, if thou bee dead in ſinne, thou art worſe than a carion.
            This ſpirituall death ſhould moue vs to thinke that the loue of Chriſt was wonderfull towardes vs: it ſhould euer make vs aggrege that loue wherwith He hath loued vs: Hee died for thee, who was dead in ſinne and treſpaſſes, and ſo an enemie to Him. Who is hee, ſaieth the Apoſtle, that will die for his enemies? Roman. 5. 7. Thou being dead in ſinne, thou liuedſt in ſinne▪ and ſo liuedſt an enemie to the life of CHRIST. And therefore, thine heart can neuer ſufficientlie aggrege the benefites of His death. Men are miſerable, but alas! they feele it not: thou haſt no want nor ſcant of miſerie, but thou wanteſt ſenſe: and the leſſe feeling thou haſt of thy deadnes, the greater is thy deadneſſe: for the ſenſe of death is the beginning of life: the more thou wanteſt the ſenſe of death, thou art euer the deader: the liuelier the ſinner is, leaping and playing in his wantonneſſe, the deader is hee in ſoule: For hee hath a burthen vpon his backe, that will preſſe him thorowe the earth, and make him ſinke to Hell one day: and in the meane time, he is running to his miſchiefe and villanie, and knoweth not that hee hath death euerlaſting

vpon his backe. O wo be to that miſerable catiue, although he be a king! Alas! men are dead in ſinne, and halfe in Hell, and will not conſider it. It is a pitifull thing to conſider howe there is no ſenſe of this infernall miſerie, that followeth vpon this death: When it is tolde them, The LORD hath died for them, they will make none account of it. The word of the Croſſe of Chriſt hath beene to the multitude of this Land but▪ a vaine ſounde, and they haue neuer eſteemed of ſuch a mercie. And therefore what wonder is it to ſee theſe vexations! O SCOTLAND! thou ſhalt get another wakening, thou haſt ſo long contemned grace, which is ye moſt precious thing that euer was. The Lord cānot be Lord, if He ſuffer ſo long contempt and lightlying of Chriſt and His loue vnpuniſhed.
            The ſeconde argument is taken from the ende and purpoſe that Chriſt had in dying: looked Hee to this end, that thou ſhouldeſt play thee, and follow thine own luſt? that thou ſhouldeſt abuſe that life, which He had bought ſo deare with His precious blood? No, his purpoſe was, that not only in his death & ſatisfaction thou ſhouldeſt be juſtified & coūted juſt but alſo that thou ſhouldeſt be ſanctified, that thou ſholdeſt caſt off the works of vncleannes, & dedicate thy life in holines to him: it is ſaid, Rom. 14. 9. that he roſe again, that he might be Lord ouer thy life: For there was neuer man, that had ſuch a right to an earthlie thing, as Chriſt hath to thy life▪ then doe what euer may pleaſnte him,

if it were to die a thouſand times, if it were to bee a foole for His cauſe, what euer may pleaſure Him ſet thee to doe it, or of neceſſitie thou ſhalt loſe that life of thine: But here is the miſery: Mē know not wherefore Chriſt died: Will yee aske men and women, when they are bathing themſelues in wickedneſſe, if they will goe to Heauen? they will anſwere, yes, they will goe to Heauen before their feet be colde. But, vaine lowne, thou neuer knewſt Chriſtes purpoſe in dying for thee, His purpoſe was, that thou ſhouldeſt be a new man, and thou ſhouldeſt not liue to thine owne ſelfe, but to Him. And the end ſhall proue (if thou proceed ſo▪ liuing to thy ſelfe, & not to Him who died for thee) that the death of Chriſt had neuer force in thee. Therefore, looke if thou liue to Chriſt: and if thou doeſt ſo, then aſſure thy ſelfe Chriſt died for thee. Looke if in the morning thou canſt ſay, Lord, thou died for me, I will giue thee my life, and conſecrate to Thee this day, all mine actions, and all that I haue. Well is the ſoule that can ſaye this way. Then all turneth to this, Seeing Chriſt died for me, I will take this reſolutiō, I will liue to Him al my dayes. The Lord grant vs this reſolutiō, that we may liue to Him in this life, that herafter we may liue with Him in Heauen for euer: To whome, with the FATHER, and the Holie GHOST, be all Honour, Praiſe, and Glorie, both now and euermore, So bee it.
         
         
            
            THE FIFT SERMON.
            
               II. COR. CHAP. V.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 16
                     Wherefore hencfoorth knowe wee no man after the fleſh: yea, though wee haue knowne CHRIST after the fleſh, yet now hencefoorth know wee Him no more.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 17
                     Therefore, if anie man bee in CHRIST, hee is a new creature: olde thinges are paſſed away: Beholde, all thinges are become new.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 18
                     And all things are of GOD, who hath reconciled vs vnto Himſelfe by IESUS CHRIST, and hath giuen vnto vs the ministerie of reconciliation.
                  
               
            
            
               YEe hearde the laſt daye, in the laſt part of this Chapter, the reaſons ſet down wherfore a man is bound and obliſhed in conſcience to liue to God, to conſecrate his life, his death, and all his actions to Ieſus Chriſt: to wit, Firſt the loue of Chriſt conſtraineth and obliſheth vs ſo to loue Him againe, that we be content euen to bee fooliſh to this world for His ſake. Another argument was taken from our own eſtate wherein we were when He ſhewed this loue of His vpon

vs, wee were dead in ſinne and treſpaſſes. So this miſerable condition that we did lie in, which was the beginning of Hell & euerlaſting damnation, ſhoulde mooue vs neuer to thinke on pleaſing of our ſelues, but onely to pleaſure Him who hath deliuered vs from ſuch damnation. The third argument was taken from the purpoſe which the Lord had in dying for vs: to wit, that the life that was bought by His death ſhould bee conſecrated to Him, and employed in His ſeruice: for, beeing once redeemed by Him, we are no more our own men▪ but His who hath bought vs. And therefore, as the ſeruant ſetteth his eye vpō his lord, waiting to pleaſure him: euen ſo in all our actions with our whole minde wee ſhoulde bee ſet to pleaſure our Lord, who bought vs, when we were bond-ſlaues to ſinne and Sath in. Otherwiſe we ſhal fall abacke to that damnation from which wee were redeemed.
            Now to come to this Text that we haue read: in the firſt verſe thereof we haue the reſolution of the Apoſtle Paule, and the purpoſe which hee taketh concerning this matter. Seeing CHRIST his LORD hath ſet Himſelfe to pleaſe him, and to redeeme him from death, and to purchaſe life to him: his reſolution is to giue Him againe that life which Hee hath purchaſed to him to employ the whole life of him in the ſeruice of that Lord who hath redeemed him. Therefore, Brethren, before I goe forward, learne a leſſon of this generall. If

this was the purpoſ
                  〈…〉
                CHRIST in dying for vs, & in dying ſo ſhamefull a death, that we for whom He died ſhould liue to Him, and not to our ſelues, our purpoſe ſhoulde bee on the other part to giue Him this life that He hath bought ſo dearely: giue Him it, or elſe thou ſhalt giue it to a worſe man. Imploy it in His ſeruice, or elſe thou ſhalt imploy it in the ſeruice of a worſe man. And euerie one ſhould ſay for their owne parts as Paul did for his part, Hath Chriſt died for me to this purpoſe, that I ſhould liue to Him, then will I take purpoſe, and will reſolue in mine heart to giue Him the life that He hath purchaſed to mee by His death: this was His purpoſe in His death concerning mee, I will not diſappoint Him of His purpoſe: that life that He hath wonne to me, I will conſecrate it to His ſeruice. It is true, thou canſt neuer diſappoint the Lord of His purpoſe, His purpoſe ſtandeth immooueable: the man to whom He looked in His death, hee muſt liue: and euerie man, for whome Chriſt died, was in His eyes when Hee died. No godlie man was out of His minde in His ſuffering, but He ſaide in His heart. I will die for this man, and for this woman, that they may liue to mee. So He will not be diſappointed: But looke thou diſappoint not thy ſelfe: If thou ſayeſt, Chriſt died for me, and in the meane time thou wilt not giue thy life to Him, but wilt liue to thy luſts, and not to Him, thou of neceſsitie in the ende ſhalt bring thy ſelfe to a miſerable point. There is nothing

in the world that a man ſhould take more heede to, than to the life to come, to their maner of liuing heere, and to the actions that they haue in hand, and the thinges about the which they are occupied in their conuerſation: for if thou haue a conſcience, thy conſcience will tell thee by thine actions what part thou haſt in CHRIST: if in thine actions thou be ſeruing Him, thy cōſcience wil tell thee thou haſt a part in the LORD, whom thou art ſeruing: and thou in the meane time (if thou bee but eating thy dinner) if thou doeſt it to His glorie, thou ſhalt finde a ſweete apprehenſion of the death of CHRIST, and it ſhall raiſe a great joye in thine heart. But by the contrarie, if thou be euill occupied, and about to do an euill deede, thy conſcience within thee will giue thee a ſecrete warning, and will ſaye, O man! thy worke teſtifieth thou haſt nothing adoe with CHRIST, and thou ſhalt find in thine hart no comfort of Chriſts death, nor of His reſurrection. So it is good to be well occupied, euery man in his owne calling, and in all his doings euer to haue CHRIST before his eyes, who hath giuen him this life. Wouldeſt thou then trie whether the deedes that thou doeſt, bee ſeruice done to ye Lord or not, I ſhall tell thee how thou ſhalt know (I will not ſpeake of outward tokens) but looke day and night within thy ſelfe to thine owne heart▪ what thou feeleſt there: feeleſt thou a conſcience by night and by day, teſtifying to thee that thou art vpon a good courſe, and ſeruing

CHRIST, who died for thee, it is well with thee: if thy cōſcience be rightly informed, & thou finde in the meane time a ſweete apprehenſion of CHRISTS death, paſſion, and riſing, it is well: But if thou feeleſt not this teſtimonie of a good conſcience, but rather a diſpleaſure and grudging in thy ſoule, all is wrong. Well art thou, if thou finde in all thy doinges a ſweete apprehenſion of CHRISTES death and reſurrection: if thou finde it not, woe is thee, leaue that deede, away with it: Away with all buſineſſe that will not furniſh a joye of conſcience in CHRIST, and will not make thee to ſaye, CHRIST is mine, I am doing Him ſeruice.
            Nowe, to come to the purpoſe: The ſpeciall point of ſeruice that ſhould be giuen to CHRIST is ſet downe in theſe wordes: From hencefoorth know wee no man after the fleſh: Theſe are the wordes, weigh them. The ſpecial point of ſeruice ſet down here, is the right eſtimatiō of men, among whom we liue in y• world. It is no ſmall matter to eſteeme of men & women as we ſhuld do. The rule whereby the Apoſtle will eſteeme of them, is not in the fleſh, nor by fleſhly doing, that is, by nonē outward thing: All theſe outward things as kindred, nobilitie, beautie, wiſdome, worldly eloquence, riches, honour, &c. with all the reſt of theſe things which men hold in admiration, are nothing. This is not the rule of the Apoſtle, nor we ſhould not by that rule eſteem of them. How then? What is contrarie

to the fleſh? the ſpirite. What is contrarie to nature? grace. What is contrarie to the olde man? regeneration. Then what ought to be the rule according to the which wee ſhould judge of men? the ſpirit, grace, and regeneration. But ye will ſay, Are not all theſe worldlie thinges benefites of God? ſhoulde not men bee eſteemed of for them? I anſwere, The Apoſtle ſpeaketh not ſimplie of them, but in compariſon, in reſpect of the ſpiritual graces. The nobilitie of the king is but dung in reſpect of the leaſt droppe of the blood of Chriſt: the leaſt ſponke of grace is worth whole nature: the leaſt portion of Heauenlie glorie is worth all the glorie in the world: the leaſt ſponke of regeneration is worth all the genealogies that can bee in this worlde. When Chriſt commeth with His ſpirit, grace, and regeneration, all theſe earthlie prerogatiues vaniſh as the miſt.
            Then marke: There is the ſpeciall point of ſeruice done to Ieſus, diſcerne betwixt dead men and liuing men in this world: Dead men are they who are natural men and no more. Haſt thou no more but nature, with all the prerogatiues that can followe nature, thou art dead, although thou bee a king. Liuing men are they who are borne againe by Chriſt. Haſt thou the Spirit of Chriſt, thou liueſt: wanteſt thou the Spirit of Chriſt, thou art but dead. So there is a ſpeciall point of Chriſtes ſeruice, diſcerne betwixt liuing men and dead men thou art in the middeſt of them, and liuing men

on the one hand, & dead men on the other hand: Diſcerne betwixt them: Count not of the dead man, although hee had all the prerogatiues vnder Heauen: If he haue no more but nature, call him not bleſſed. The liuing man is hee that hath the Spirit of Chriſt in him, albeit he be a begger: and the men who make an account of their worldlie prerogatiues, and follow nature and the olde generation, are but naturall men: thou that accounteſt of dead men, thou art dead thy ſelf, & as thou art dead, ſo all thine eſtimation is of dead men.
            To goe forward to the wordes: Hee amplifieth this by the example of Chriſt, and ſaieth, How beit I accounted once of Christ after the fleſh, before▪ 
                  
                     •
                   knewe Him, well, yet from hencefoorth I will knowe, Him no more after the fleſh: and therefore, why ſhould wee knowe men after the fleſh, who are inferiours to Chriſt, the head of all fleſh.
            Nowe 
                  •
               o ſpeake of this Lord: When He was in this worlde, Hee was clothed with theſe earthlie prerogatiues as other men: yea; I thinke Hee had theſe outwarde prerogatiues in His owne perſon in greateſt meaſure aboue all men▪ For neuer man deſcended of a more excellent raſe and genealogie than He did. Then looke to his beautie, albeit it bee not ſet downe in the Scripture, yet I thinke there was neuer man ſo faire in beautie as He: He was moſt wiſe, & moſt eloquent of all mē, & therefore ye Apoſtles held Him in admiration for theſe prerogatiues. But from once by His glorious reſurrection

(as the Apoſtle 
                  •
               aieth, Roman. 1. 4.) Hee was declared mightily to be the Sonne of GOD: then all theſe thing, euaniſhed, and the onelie admiration remained of that glorie which Hee declared by His reſurrection. All theſe earthlie prerogatiues (ſaieth Paule) then paſſed out of their eyes, and the graces of CHRIST onlie remained to be marueiled at. The leſſon is plain. The LORD IESVS is the rule of the eſtimation of all fleſh. In thine eſtimation hold thine eye alwayes vpon CHRIST, or els thou ſhalt fall. Firſt caſt thine eyes vp to Heauen, and then ca
                  ••
                downe thine eyes on man, who is but a worme on the ear
                  ••
               . Looke vp to a glorious GOD, IESVS the Mediator, and then to a worme on this earth, though hee bee a king, and ſay, Thoſe thinges that I will not count of in IESVS, which He had beeing in G
                     ••
                  l
                     •
                  e and in the earth, I will not count of them in thee that art but a worme, I will not doe it. But by the contrarie, that thing which I eſteeme of in Him, that paſſing glorie which is in Him, when I looke to thee, and ſee a glaunce thereof in thee, indeede for that little reſemblance which I ſee in thee, like to my LORD, reſembling Him in grace, I will eſteeme of thee: otherwiſe, I may well giue thee this worldlie reuerence, b
                  ••
                if thou wanteſt this reſemblance, I will neuer count thee happie, albeit thou hadſt all the earthly prerogatiues in the world. And certainelie, they who hold men in 
                  •…
               miration for their earthly prerogatiues, neuer 
                  ••••
               
               
CHRIST, nor His glorie. Thou that wilt ſee a Tribunall, a Monarch heere, and maruell thereat, thou neuer ſaw the Tribunall of CHRIST. So the thing that cauſeth people to eſteeme of men for their earthly prerogatiues, is, becauſe they ſee not the glorie & graces of CHRIST. Would the people haue eſteemed ſo much of Herod, if they had knowne the Majeſtie of the Great GOD, when they called him a god? Acts, 12. 22. No, not for all the world: and therefore, ſeeke a ſight of the glorie of GOD, if ye would rightlie eſteeme of men, and giue them only their owne place.
            Nowe to goe forward: Yee haue heard of the purpoſe that the Apoſtle taketh in ſeruing of his LORD, by the right eſteeming of men in this world, among whome hee liueth. In the next verſe he commeth to the eſtate of this world & ſheweth what alteration was made in the world, by the alteration made in the perſon of IESVS: for when IESVS altered, all creatures altered with Him: when He went from the earth to the Heauen, and left behinde Him all theſe earthly pleaſures, there followed a wonderfull change and alteration in all the creatures.
            But to come to the wordes: Hee firſt ſpeaketh of the eſtate of man, and ſecondly of the eſtate of the reſt of the creatures in the earth. As for man, h
                  ••
                ſaieth, Therefore, if anie man be in Christ, let him 
                     •••
                   a newe creature. Marke this, If anie man bee in CHRIST, hee is a new creature: hee is changed,

he is altered, and wonderfully altered: he is changed from an olde creature to a new creature: from an olde dead creature, to a newe liuing creature: from nature to grace, from death to life, from Hel to Heauē. What ſhold become of an old rottē ſtok, but be caſten into the fire. So if thou hadſt continued an olde rotten creature, thou hadſt beene brunt in that fire which is vnquenchable. He ſetteth downe the meanes how this change is made▪ Firſt thou muſt be in Chriſt: as euer thou ſawe an impe ingraffed in a tree, ſo thou muſt be planted and ingraffed in Him: Being planted in Him, then commeth that freſh ſap out of Him into thee, and transformeth thee, and maketh thee a newe creature. Then learne of this firſt, looke the force of the alteration of IESVS, when Hee altered from earthlie things to Heauenlie glorie, man eſpeciallie altered with Him. Then looke ſecondly the dignitie of man, among all creatures hee hath the firſt place of changing▪ & Chriſt was firſt effectuall in man to make him a newe creature. And this preferment hath man aboue all the Heauens and aboue al the creatures. The maner how this commeth to paſſe is this: Ere thou bee altered, thou muſt bee raiſed vp to Him, and joyned with Him, and ingraffed in Him as an impe in a tree: then He and thou, and thou and Hee, being made one▪ the glorie that is in Ieſus ſpreadeth her ſelfe oued thee, & couereth thee. But if thou bee not in Him, thou ſhalt neuer get any part of His glory. Looke

that thou be in Him by faith (for faith ingraffeth thee in Him) and beeing in Him, thou ſhalt get a part of His glory: and yet thou art but a creature, and not a creator. The difference is in newneſſe, thou was made before olde, but now made newe, greene & liuelie, being once ingraffed & planted in Chriſt thou art flouriſhing. It is true, all theſe things are not ſeene yet, and this flouriſhing of vs in Chriſt is not found yet perfectlie: and this conjunction of Him with vs is not ſo ſenſible as it ſhall be: but this ſhall once be found true, we ſhall find that wee were the ſonnes of God, and newe creatures, when wee were on this earth: and wee ſhall get the accompliſhment of our felicitie in Heauen, when we are reigning in glory with Him. Now, as to the reſt of the creatures, hee ſaith, Olde thinges are past by, behold, all thinges are become newe. He ſaith, Beholde: Marke the word: hereby ſtirring vp their hearts to ſee the alteration and renewing of theſe creatures, ſeing it is a thing difficill to be belieued by men. There is no creature, neither Angell nor man, no, the dumbe & ſenſeleſſe creatures, as the Heauen, earth, fire, water, a
                  ••
               e, but they were all benefited by that change made in Chriſt; and by His glorious reſurrection and aſcenſion they receiued ſome alteration, from the worſe to the better. The Angels who were before in glorie, were bettered, and their glorie was augmented by the riſing of Chriſt. The Apoſtle (Eph. 1. 10. and 3. 10. and Col. 1. 20.) ſheweth t
                  •••
               . But to

ſpeake of the inferiour creatures, and their eſtate, of this Heauen, Sunne, Moone, Starres, Earth, Water, &c. that were created for the vſe of man, theſe creatures from the beginning euer altered with man. When man was created in the beginning in perfection, theſe creatures were in their perfectiō, the Heauen in his perfection, the Sunne in his perfection, &c. When man fell, they fell alſo, the Heauen fell from his perfection, &c. the earth was accurſed for man (Rom. 8. 20.) As man grew olde that is, as hee grewe in ſinne, vnto the time that ſinne came to the height (which fell in that ſame period of time when CHRIST came into the world: then the Apoſtle ſaieth ſinne ſuperabounded, and all was vnder ſinne. And ſurelie I thinke if the LORD had not come at that period of time whē the world ſuperabounded in ſinne, and ſinne was come to the height, the world had preſentlie periſhed) So, I ſaye, as men grewe olde by ſinne, the Heauens, the Sunne, the Moone, and all the reſt of the creatures grew olde. Alas
                  •
               man by ſinne defileth the aire, the Heauens, &c. When thou, O man, for whome all the reſt of the creatures were made, runneſt forward in offending thy Creator, thou draweſt on all the reſt of the creatures after thee. And againe, at the comming of CHRIST the old creatures beganne to be made new creatures, and the creatures that were made to the vſe of man, were benefited with that benefite of man, & got a renewing, as man their lord was renewed.

Againe, after CHRISTS comming, when man beganne of new to degenerate and grow olde, then the creatures alſo beganne to grow olde. So man growing in ſinne, draweth after him the creatures, and as he decayeth, the earth and all creatures decay alſo: and therefore Paul (Rom. 8. 19. 22.) ſaieth, that the ſenſeleſſe & dumbe creatures grone and make a mone for ſin, mourning as a woman traueiling of birth, & faine would be deliuered: ſo the earth would faine be quite of thee, O ſinfull man, that art made of the earth, and treadeſt on y• belly of the earth: ſhe groneth vnder the weight of thee for ſin: Fy on thee, that cāſt not grone for ſin: thou ſhalt either grone here in this life, and get relief, or thou ſhalt grone after this life for euer without reliefe. This is the groning that the poore creature maketh for the bearing of thee, & the earth would 
                  •
               aine ſerue God in her own kind, but ſhee is made ſubject to thy vanitie (Rom. 8. 20) and therfore ſhe groneth: ſo the ſenſleſſe creatures are wearie, and cry, Lord, put an end to this vanity, and are crying this day this ſame houre: But man; for whome the earth and all is made ſubject to this miſerie and vanitie, is going playing him on the earth without groning. Well, at laſt, when the ſonnes of GOD ſhall bee reuealed, and ſhall bee glorified (Coloſſ. Chap. 3. verſ. 4.) then the earth which groned with them when they groned, ſhall bee glorified with them, and then the Sunne and the Moone ſhall receiue newneſſe, and (as Peter ſaieth, 2. epiſt. 3. 
                  〈◊〉
               
               ▪)

The ſonnes of God ſhal receiue this ſame Heauen in ſubſtance, but it ſhal be new, and the earth ſhal be new, & then the earth ſhal be no lōger capable of a ſinfull man. Thou ſinner ſhalt not get leaue to looke to this Heauē, only the ſonnes of God that ſhall be glorified ſhal get this priuiledge, they ſhal be kings of this newe earth. Yee ſee then the eſtate of the creatures euaniſheth according to mans eſtate, and altereth as man doeth▪ and in the ende the creatures ſhall haue the participatiō with man of that glorie which they longed for. This for the opening vp of the Text. Learne here: ye ſee ye creatures get renewing as well as man, but (marke the difference) in the ſecond roome: Man is firſt renewed, then the creatures are renewed: Mā hath his preferment firſt, next the creatures are renewed, but not after that maner that mā is renewed and preferred: for man is firſt graffed in Chriſt▪ and he is made one with Him. Ieſus the Head, ye Church, the body, and euery faithfull man and womans member of that body, Eph. 1. 22. 23. But the creatures, when they are renewed, they are not ingraffed in Chriſt: The Heauen, when it is renewed is not called to that honor to be ingraffed in Chriſt, it is no part of the body of Chriſt: The earth when it is renewed, is no part of the body of Chriſt. No, no ſuch conjunction is betwixt Chriſt and thoſe creatures, as is betwixt Him & His Church. Then, ſeeing theſe creatures that are renewed with mā, are not honoured with that conjunction which is

with Chriſt the Lord, it muſt follow, that the glory of the creatures is not equall with y• glory of man. When the Heauens ſhal be made new & very glorious, yet all ſhall be nothing to that glory of mā. Thou, O man, ſhalt ſhine in body aboue the glorie of the Sun by a thouſand ſtages, Matth. 13. 43. The conjunction of Chriſt not being ſo made with the creatures, as it is with man, the glory of them cannot be compared with ye glory of man, but al the glory of the creatures ſhall be as a participatiō of the glory of man. Thou mā, ſhalt be glorified with the glory of Ieſus Chriſt himſelf: the creatures ſhal bee glorified but with thy glory. All this telleth vs what glory wee ſhould looke for, ſeeing this Lord that maketh this renovation, is ſo glorious. It is certain that at the cōming of Chriſt in the world, and His paſsing vp to the Heauens, a renewing of all the creatures in the world was made, al things were renewed. This is a ground that we muſt hold if we belieue that Chriſt came in the world, & hath aſcended to glory Alas! this is not perceiued, and in my ſelfe I cannot ſee it as I would, & the moſte godly complain, that they cānot ſee this effectualneſſe of Chriſtes glory. The cauſe is, the deadneſſe that abideth in vs ſin cānot be gotten out of this world, till the Lord come again: it dwelleth in vs. and reigneth in the world, & the Deuil, the prince of this world, reigneth by it (for where ſinne reigneth, he reigneth) yea, it oppreſſeth ye godly heart, that they can ſcarcely feele in themſelues this renouation:

ſo weighty is ſinne: who ſeeth it? There is a glimmering of this newe creation, but who hath this glimmering? None, but that new ſoule: an vnregenerate man neuer ſawe this regeneration, neither in himſelfe nor in others, and hee cannot ſuffer to heare of a regenerate & ſanctified man, hee will laugh, as though there could not bee ſuch a thing as regeneration: becauſe the ſcorner himſelfe is vnrenewed, therefore hee cannot weigh GODS graces in others: So long as thou art vnregenerate, thou canſt not but ſcorn regeneration, yea, and perſecute the regenerate man, and ſo raſh thine head againſt a wall: For the LORD hath made him inviolable, and the Temple of His Spirite, and therefore He ſhall deſtroy thee, that art the vnregenerate man: yea, and deſtroyed ſhall euerie man bee that daſheth himſelfe againſt the Church of IESVS, that is, the renewed body, that body, as an yrō wall, ſhall bruiſe them. Experience telleth this. Who euer was hee that raſhed againſt the Church, but the Church hath beaten him into powder? Meddle not with ye Saincts of God: although it were but one Sainct renewed by the grace of God, hee is ſufficient to deſtroy and bruiſe a whole kingdome that raſheth on him. The Lord open mens eye, to ſee this. For all the world would not I bee one to make oppoſition to one of the Saincts of GOD. The LORD therefore ſaue men, and learne them to account of this renouation, as they would haue a portion

thereof, & be glorified at the comming of Chriſt.
            Now to end ſhortly. The Apoſtle when he hath ſpoken of the renewing of all creatures made by IESVS the Mediator (for all floweth out of him) in the next verſe hee riſeth, and mounteth vp (O howe hee that is carried with the Spirite of Chriſt will riſe, when hee is ſpeaking of IESVS) hee riſeth vp to a light inacceſſible, he ſeeth God the Father ſitting in his Throne and Majeſtie, and the worke of this renewing flowing frō him, through Chriſt the Mediator, & riſing vp to the Father of Chriſt, hee ſaieth, And all thinges are of GOD, &c. Our leſſon is, All graces come from Chriſt the Mediator, our regeneration floweth out of his life, but the fountain of all is the Father of Heauen, the Father of Ieſus: and therfore, when thou findeſt the grace flowing from Ieſus, raiſe vp thy ſoule, & look thorowe to the glorious Fountaine, ſitting in his Majeſty & ſay. All glory be to ye Father, I acknowledge all goodneſſe to come from thee, O Father, thou haſt giuen all graces to me through thy Son Chriſt. Now when he hath riſen vp to the Father, he cōmeth down again to two degrees, which are the 
                  ••
               wayes wherby the regeneration is wrought: The firſt is the reconciliatiō to the Father throgh Chriſt the Mediator by his death. The ſecond is this Miniſterie, baſe and contemptible in the eyes of men, this diſpenſation of the myſteries of GOD that hee hath put into the handes of his Miniſters, to bee diſtributed to the people.
            
               Well, Brethren, a man muſt come to this regeneration by degrees, as a mā ſtepping vp a ladder▪ If thou wouldeſt be renewed in Chriſt, thou muſt climbe and goe vp by degrees: The firſt is the Miniſtery of reconciliation: The ſecond is the reconciliation it ſelfe in Chriſt: The thirde and laſt is the fountaine of regeneration, God the Father. Will thou runne vp, and miſſe one of theſe ſ
                  •
               eps? No, it is not poſsible, for thou ſhalt neuer get regeneration before God be friended with thee: thou art His enemy, thou muſt be friēded with Him, before thou bee renewed. Well then, thou wilt ſay, I muſt bee friended with Him, but I neede not thy miniſtery, can I not come to Heauen, but by hearing thee pre
                  •
               ch? I ſay, thou canſt not, I lay this neceſſity before thee, and I charge thee, & I binde thee to this miniſtery. Imagine thou another meanes to attaine to this glory, contemne thou this miniſtery in the ſillieſt perſon to whome God hath giuen it, I ſhal make a ſtrawe bar the gates of Heauē in thy teeth: yea, albeit thou bee a Monarch, thou ſhalt neuer get reconciliation without this Miniſtery. The Lord wakē our cōſciences, that we may embrace the ordinance of God: we ſhall neuer be wiſe in God, except firſt wee become fooles, that wee may bee wiſe. Then ſeeing this neceſsity is of the Miniſtery, to make a reconciliation with our God, and this reconciliation muſt paſſe, by a proclamation of peace, to the miſerable worlde. and paſſe by the mouth of this contemned Miniſtery.

The Lord waken theſe our ſenſeleſſe heartes, that we may reuerence and eſteeme of this Miniſterie more than we haue done. The Lord grant vs this for Chriſts ſake: To whome, with the Father and the Holy Spirite, bee all Glory and Honour for euermore,
            AMEN.
         
         
            THE SIXT SERMON.
            
               I. COR. CHAP. II.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 6
                     And we ſpeake wiſedome among them that are perfect: not the wiſedome of this world, nor of the princes of this world, who come to naught.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 7
                     But we ſpeake the wiſedome of GOD in a mysterie, euen the 
                           •
                        id wiſedome which God ordained before the world, vnto our glorie.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 8
                     Which none of the princes of this world knew, for had they knowne it, they would not haue crucified the Lord of glorie.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 9
                     But as it is writtē, The eye hath not ſeene, the care hath not heard, neither hath entred in
                           ••
                         the hart of mā, the things that God hath prepared for thē that l
                           •
                        ue him.
                  
               
            
            
               IN the Text immediatelie preceeding (well-beloued in the LORD IESVS) the Apoſtle hath beene renouncing the wiſedome of man, in vttering of the Goſpel of IESVS

CHRIST, thinking it not worthy that any mans faith ſhould be builded on it: For that faith that is builded on it, cannot ſtand, becauſe ye wiſdome of man is a falſe foundation, and the thing that is builded on a falſe foundation cannot ſtand.
            Now to come to this Text which we haue read preſentlie. It might haue beene ſaid to the Apoſtle, Who counteth of thy wiſedome? thou eſteemeſt not of mans wiſedome nor eloquence, but who counteth of thee, or of thy wiſedome either? Hee anſwereth in the 6. verſe, Wee ſpeake wiſedome among them that are perfect, &c. That is, Who ſoeuer are perfect in ye Church of God, or whoſoeuer are come to a degree of perfection, or preaſſe to perfection, aſpiring aboue nature, aboue humane things, to ſee things Heauenly and ſpiritual, theſe men account of my wiſdome, in the ſight of theſe I am wiſe, and in their audience I ſpeake wiſdom, howbeit earthly men thinke all that I ſpeake but follie. This is the meaning & th'effect of the Apoſtles anſwere ſhortly. As to this word of perfectiō, I will not iuſiſt in it. A full perfection is not heere meaned, but a ſtriuing to perfection. No man nor woman in this life is perfect, but the perfecteſt of vs all that liueth in this worlde, one lie are ſtriuing to perfection, thorowe infinite infirmities. Therefore, this worde of perfection is not to be vnderſtood of that conſummate perfection which wee ſhall haue in that other life, but as it is opponed vnto them that haue no perfection, no ſpirituall

nor Heauenly ſight or knowledge of things Heauenly & ſpirituall. Then, there is the leſſon in one word: Yee know the ſentence ſpoken commonly, Wiſdome is juſtified of her owne children (Mat. 11. 19) Let the world account of it as they will, wiſdome ſhall euer be wiſdome to them that haue any wiſdome fooles will neuer count that Heauenlie wiſdome to be wiſedome, nor the wiſe of this world will neuer eſteeme of it. Much conſiſteth in the diſpoſition of the hearts of the hearers: that which is wiſdome to one, is meere follie to another, and all becauſe the diſpoſition is diuers and contrary. Set together a man that is Heauēly minded▪ & a man that is only earthly minded▪ ſpeak the wiſdome of God to them both, and wiſdome to the Heauenly minded man ſhall be wiſdom, to the earthly minded man it ſhall bee fooliſhneſſe: The ſpeech of the Croſſe, ſaieth the Apoſtle in the 1. chap. of this epi. verſ. 18. to them that periſh▪ is fooliſhneſſe, but to them that are ſaued, it is the wiſedome and power of GOD Art thou one that art ordained to bee ſaued? The Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt ſhall be wiſdome and onlie wiſedome vnto thee. And therfore, ſeeing there ſtandeth ſo much in the diſpoſition of the hearer, before thou commeſt to heare, look to thy diſpoſition, leaue thine earthly minde behind thee leſt thou receiue thine own damnatiō: & bring an heauenly mind with thee, that ye wiſdom of God may be ye power of ſaluatiō to thee: there hath bene lōg hearing & teaching among vs in this Towne, bu
                  •
               
               
the iſſue of things teſtifie, that there hath bene an euill diſpoſition in the heartes of the multitude, the preſent trouble of this Towne telleth what hath bene the diſpoſition of manie: for what euer bee the worke of men herein, yet no queſtion the Lord hath His worke in it, to ſpoyle thee for thine ingratitude, and euill diſpoſition of thine heart, of the libertie of His glorious Goſpell: and if this Goſpell goe away, then ſhame and confuſion ſhall light, not onelie vpon this Towne but alſo on the whole Land, and euerie eſtate thereof.
            Then to goe forward. The Apoſtle falleth out in an high deſcription & commendation of this wiſedome which 
                  •
               ee preached, which is the wiſedome of God. Marke it: he ſaith, Not the wiſedome of this worlde, nor of the Princes of this worlde, who come to naught. In this deſcription there is nothing that may commende anie ſcience or wiſedome of this world, which is not brought in heere to the commendation of this Heauenlie wiſedome. Sciences and wiſdome vſe to be commended from the Authors, from them that inuented them: they vſe to be commended from their ſecrecie and hidneſſe, in that they are hidden vp in a myſterie from the eyes of men: they vſe to be commended from the ende and vſe for the which they were ordained: they vſe to be commended from their ſublimitie & ſubtilitie: when they paſſe the capacitie of men, men holde them in admiration, and wonder at them: they vſe to be commended from their ſubject

which they entreat of, if it be a worthie ſubject, it is a worthie ſcience. Theſe things recommend▪ vnto vs Sciences inuented by the braine of man. All theſe thinges are in an higher degree in the wiſedome of God, than euer they were in anie worldlie ſcience.
            Now marke euerie word: The Apoſtle beginneth his commendation at the Author: and firſt he letteth you ſee who is not the Author: then he letteth you ſee in verie deede who is the Author of this wiſedome. (All this is ſpoken of the Goſpell, which we preach to you, and therefore note euerie circumſtance, marke the excellencie of this Goſpel, which the Apoſtle to the Philippians, chap. 3. verſ. 8. calleth the eminencie of the knowledge of Ieſus Chriſt, which mounteth aboue all knowledge in this world) Then whom ſaith hee not to bee the Author of it? This world neuer found it out; neuer inuented it, it came neuer from ye heads of worldlie men. Indeede it is true this worlde is wiſe in her owne kind; Luke 16. 8. and this world, and all the men thereof, from the beginning of it vnto this houre, hath beene occupied in counſels, in laying of plottes, in ſetting downe purpoſes, and taking conſultation, they haue bene verie buſie: But amongſt all the things that euer man aduiſed vpon▪ there was neuer found ſo much as one thought in the head of a man, of the remedie againſt ſinne and death: but ſitting from the beginning in their counſels, they ſate like as manie

damned creatures, without anie thought howe they ſhould be relieued of that damnation: & this is that Heauenly wiſdome ſpokē of here, that telleth vs of the remedie againſt ſinne, death, & damnation, wherein we lye. Yea, Brethren, let be they had not anie thought of this matter, they did nothing in al their wiſe conſultatiōs, for the moſt part, but inuolued themſelues more and more in their guiltineſſe, & augmented their damnation, wherein all men were fallen by Adam. Then it was not the world that found it out. O! but there are ſome Princes in the world that paſſe others in wiſdome: there are wiſe & high ſpirited men that will put order to others, and with their wit will compaſſe Heauen and earth, that will ſearch out the deepneſſe of nature, and bee occupied in high things: it may bee that theſe men haue found out this wiſdome. The Apoſtle meeteth this: No, ſaith hee, none of the princes of this world, whether Iewes or Gentiles, found out this wiſedome. All the great Monarches, all the Philoſophers, with their wiſdome, and philoſophie, neuer thought once on ſuch a thing: it is true indeed, there is ſome in this world that haue euer bene occupied in hie things aboue the reach of the common ſort of people, ſitting on high places, ſearching into the deepnes of nature: but among all their occupations▪ high conceits and deuiſes, there was neuer ſo much as a thought or ſuſpi
                  •
               ion or a dreame of that onlie remedie againſt ſin and death, of that onlie way and

meanes of ſaluation, and deliuerie of a loſt ſinner. A wonderfull thing! condemned men ſitting in ſuch occupations, without any thought of their damnation. Emperours condemned men! and yet neuer ſuch a thing as a thought howe they ſhould be relieued of their condemnation! It is true, the Philoſophers among the nations aſpired to a wiſdome and knowledge of God to know Him, and ſome of them laboured to ſet downe a ſcience of Him. Plato traueiled much on this purpoſe, and therfore he was called Diuine: but all their knowledge was of GOD the Creator, as Hee created this world, and by His prouidence gouerneth it. But will ye ſpeake of GOD the Redeemer in His Sonne Ieſus Chriſt, they had neuer ſuch a thing as a thought of Him: and yet for all the buſineſſe that they had about the Creation; and GOD the Creator, what were they? fooles, and euaniſhed in their owne cogitations, & as ye may reade, Rom. 1. 22. 23. in ſtead of the true God they ſet vp an idole to bee worſhipped. Then ſeeing they found it not out, and ſeeing it is ſo neceſſary for al men, euē for Princes (for they ſhal neuer ſee life except they get a part of this wiſedome) they are bounde to keepe that wiſedome, in ſinceritie, and not to prejudge her libertie one whit: but to maintaine her and keep her from all her enemies, that would peruert her. Thou foundeſt her not out, keep her therfore in her liberty. The Lord grāt that men may be occupied this way in their coūſels, not in impairing,

but in preſeruing the libertie of this wiſedome, that onelie muſt ſaue them: Thy kingdome, thy life, thine honour and all theſe earthlie riches will away, onelie this wiſedome will abide.
            Then this wiſedome is not founde out by this world▪ or by the Princes thereof. Yet before wee come to the Author whereof it is come, ye haue a reaſon wherefore ſhe cannot bee of the Princes of the worlde, who come to naught, they are aboliſhed, they euaniſh, ſhee is eternall, and will neuer haue ende. A periſhing head, will neuer inuent a ſcience that will laſt for euer, albeit his head were neuer ſo quicke & ſo curious but as the head periſheth and goeth to graue, ſo ſhall the wiſedome thereof die in her owne time: And therefore there was neuer anie Arte nor Science inuented by the braine of man, which ſhall not die & periſh, becauſe they are all come of periſhing heads: howbeit the head die and the wiſdome remaine for a ſpace, yet that ſcience and wiſedome ſhall alſo die in her owne time. Aristotle is dead, his wiſedome abideth yet, but it ſhall die. Plato is dead, his wiſdome abideth yet, but it ſhall alſo die. But the immortall GOD, when He findeth out a wiſedome, it ſhall bee immortall alſo. In the firſt Epiſtle of Peter (Chap. 1. verſ. 23.) there are two thinges joyned together. The immortall ſeede of the word, and a liuing and immortall God, who abideth for euer. The ſeede of the worde is immortall: and wherefore is it immortall? Becauſe it commeth from a God that

abideth for euer. If it be once ſown in thine heart it ſhall neuer die out of thine heart: No, this word ſhall goe to Heauen with thee, and there it ſhall ſpring out in a wonderfull glorie, and ſhall abide in him who found it out, and in thee in whome it is ſowne for euer. Then if the world be not the author of it, who hath found it out? We ſpeake (ſaith the Apoſtle) not our owne wiſedome, but the wiſedome of God. Paul inuented it not, neuer a man that preached this Goſpell was the author of it, the Lord who is onelie wiſe, found it out.
            Then marke, Brethren: If God of His infinite mercie (after thou madeſt that foule fall in Adam, and fell from grace & innocencie) had not found out to thee the onelie meanes of thy deliuerance from death and ſin, thou hadſt neuer riſen againe: for thou hadſt neuer ſo much as once a thought of the way of thy redemption. Adam, when hee had fallen, and hid himſelfe in an hole, had not ſo much as one cogitation of his deliuerance: That God that created thee without thee, redeemed thee alſo without thee: when He made thee of nothing in the beginning, Hee called not thee to the counſell, becauſe thou was not: no more was thou on the counſell of thy redemption, when He took purpoſe to redeeme thee: No, there was neuer an Angell on the counſell of thy redemption. And this is that that is ſpoken, Rom. 11. 34, Who hath knowne the minde of the Lord? or who hath giuen▪ Him counſell? No, all is of Him, & all is from Him only:

He is the onlie finder out, as well of thy redemption, as of thy creation, that the onlie glorie may bee giuen vnto Him. I might ſpeake ſomething here againſt the enemies of the trueth, but I will not inſiſt. If thou takeſt any part of that worke to thy ſelfe, thou bereaueſt God of a part of His glorie. Therfore ſeeing thou haſt neither arte nor part in it, let Him haue the onelie glorie for euer and euer.
            Nowe followeth the ſeconde part of the commendation of the Goſpell, In a mysterie. It is in a myſterie, it was hid vp. Sciences vſe to bee commended becauſe of their ſecrecie: for men wil ſay, O! it is a myſticall and ſecrete thing, therefore it is a commendable and precious thing. But if euer anie ſcience or wiſedome in the worlde, merited commendation, thorowe the ſecrecie of it, eſpeciallie this wiſedome of GOD, for there was neuer ſo ſecrete a wiſedome, ſo manie ages, from Adam till CHRIST came, all cloſed vp in a myſterie, & hidden from the world, and if there was anie blinke of it, it was verie obſcure.
            Brethren, there are ſundrie wiſedomes of God: There is a wiſdome of the creation and gouernament of the worlde, and there is a wiſedome of God of the redemption of the worlde once created, and making defection from that bleſſed eſtate of creation. As for the wiſedome of creation, as ſoone as euer the worlde was created, this wiſedome brake foorth, and was reuealed, and made

knowne to men, and it ſhineth yet in the creatures: looke to them, thou ſhalt ſee the image of that wiſedome ſhining in them: and more than this, man receiued this wiſdome of creation written in his heart. So this wiſedome was not kept cloſe, but made patent to the eyes of men & Angels to looke vpon it.
            But as for the wiſdome of God of the redemption of the worlde, in the creation Hee neither vtred it in word nor writing, He wrote not one letter of it in the heart of man in the creation. But after the fall of Adam He gaue an inkling of it, but very obſcure. Nowe, wherefore was this that the Lord hid vp this wiſdome? Thereby no doubt He would teſtify to the world, that this wiſdome contained a precious thing, a jewell: there was incloſed in it the whole treaſure of Heauen. The treaſure of Heauen is Chriſt Ieſus, who is incloſed in this myſterie and therefore, the Lord woulde not reueale it, till Ieſus Chriſt came into the world. Is it reuealed now? It hath beene reuealed euer ſince CHRIST came into the worlde, and this daye in SCOTLAND that treaſure is laid open, if we had eyes to ſee it. Abraham, nor Dauid, nor all the godlie Kings and Fathers were neuer in ſo bleſſed an eſtate as thou art. But if thou repent not, and receaue not this wiſdome, the greater is thy damnation: For euer the greater the benefite bee, the greater is the condemnation, if it bee not receaned: And many at that daye ſhall ſaye, Would to

GOD we had neuer heard of this Goſpell Well▪ keepe it as yee will, there is no glorie but it, and take it awaye, farewell the glorie and well-fare of the Land: yea, I ſay more, There is no glorie in this world but it.
            Nowe, the Apoſtle ſtandeth not heere, but paſſeth forward in the praiſe of this wiſedome: Hee hath praiſed it from the Author, who is God onlie: from the ſecrecie, that it is a myſterie hidden vp ſo long: he commeth now to the time when it was found out, which God had determined before the world. Sciences vſe to bee commended from their antiquitie: men ſay, O▪ it is an olde Science, it was ſound out by the Aegyptians, therefore, a commendable Science. But there was neuer wiſedome that might bee compared in antiquitie to this wiſedome. Wilt thou aske howe olde is this wiſedome? I aske another queſtion, How olde is God Himſelfe? This Goſpell is euen as olde as GOD Himſelfe: the Goſpell is from all Eternitie, as the glorious GOD is without beginning from all Eternitie. Then this Goſpell that is preached this day, is no nou
                  •
               ltie.
            This is that wiſedome and doctrine that GOD predeſtinated from all Eternitie, howbeit the enemies in contempt call it a new doctrine. Thou art a lyar, although thou bee the Pope, I ſpeake it to the glorie of God, this Goſpell that is preached in SCOTLAND, was from all Eternitie.
            The wordes import more. It is not onelie from

all Eternitie, but it is grounded vpon an Eternall counſell. The glorious Trinitie ſet downe in a glorious counſell this doctrine of ſaluation. And therefore, ſeeing this doctrine is ſet on ſo ſolide a foundation, who will ſhake it? Shake it let ſee off her foundation, and thruſt at it, It will ſhake thee, and driue thee into Hell. I tell thee, it hath ſaued manie men from the beginning, but it is alſo true, it hath ſlaine manie one: beware that it ſlaye thee not: for it is the ſtrōgeſt thing that euer was. Thou mayeſt well baniſh this Goſpell, and put it out of SCOTLAND, but thou ſhalt neuer put it out of the world, ſo long as there is a ſoule to be builded by it: But when ſhe is out of SCOTLAND and ENGLAND both, ſhee can goe, and it were, to all theſe newe found Landes, and abide there.
            Yet marke how he riſeth in his tearmes (I neuer heard anie Philoſopher in all his Declamatiōs riſe ſo highlie in his praiſes of anie Science, as the Apoſtle doeth in praiſing of this wiſedome, and it is not the eloquence of man, but the eloquence of the Spirite of God, that raiſeth him. And yet hee hath not tolde all her glory. No, we ſhall neuer ſee it all, till wee ſee the Lord Ieſus, who is the ſubject of this Goſpell.) Sciences haue their commendation from their ende: it is a good science that hath a good ende, and inuented for the weale of man, for his profite, and pleaſure, and glorie: But this ſcience in this mounteth aboue all the ſciences in

the worlde: for all the Sciences in the worlde will not make thee mount vp▪ nor raiſe thee one footbredth from the earth, although thou bee a Monarch: they may well get thee a piece of honour here, but it ſhall all be earthly honour. O! but the Science whereof our God is the Author, this wiſedome of our redemption maketh thee to mount, draweth thee vp, in a word, glorifieth thee All that euer learne in her ſchoole ſhall bee glorified, wilt thou learne this wiſdome, ſhe ſhall glorifie thee in the Heauens. For why? ſhe is the power of God to ſaluation, Roman. 1. 16. and as hee ſpeaketh, 2. Cor. 3. 18. wilt thou looke in her but as in a mirrour, to the glorie of GOD in her, ſhee ſhall transforme thee from glory to glory in that ſame Image. What more? All the wiſedome in the world without this wiſdome, is like as much poyſon, to ſwell vp thine heart in pride againſt GOD and man.
            Shall I come to the particulars? Art thou a Lawier? and haſt the knowledge of the Common Lawes? If thy ſcience of the Lawe bee not ſeaſoned with this wiſedome, it is meere poyſon to thee. Art thou a Mediciner, perfect in that Science, and haſt read all Hippocrates and Galene, and all the reſt of them, and haſt not this wiſedome, thou art poyſoned for all thy Medicine. Is thine head full of policie, and haſt thou manie plottes and conceites in it, and haſt thou not this wiſedome? thou haſt an emptie and poyſoned head. Art thou a Philoſopher, and canſt count all the

Starres, and canſt ſearch out all the mineralles, and canſt goe downe to the Center of the Earth. yea, and it were downe to Hell, and haſt not this wiſedome, thou art poyſoned. What neede I to ſpeake further? If thou haue no apprehenſion of this wiſedome, that onely ſanctifieth thee, and all thy Sciences, and maketh them profitable vnto thee, thou art a miſerable bodie, and woe to thee for euer. Would to God the worlde ſaw this, but alas, this humane wiſedome and the glory of this worlde pulleth CHRIST out of their eyes, and obſcureth this Heauenly glory. But woe is thee! that euer thou ſaw this light, if thou getteſt not a part of that Heauenly glory.
            Yet hee ſtayeth not heere, but looke howe hee climbeth vp, & exalteth this Heauenly wiſdome. Sciences vſe to bee commended for their ſubtility and ſublimity. O, ſaieth the Philoſopher, it is an high and ſubtile Science, therefore it is praiſe worthy. Mathematikes are ſubtile, and are full of ſubtile demonſtrations, therefore they are worthy Sciences. But, Brethren, there was neuer Science comparable in ſublimity to this Wiſedome of GOD, who is onely wiſe. As farre as the head of GOD paſſeth thy braine, as far doth this wiſdom that is come of GODS head, paſſe all the wiſdom that thou canſt inuent, and it were a thouſande yeeres: and therefore th'Apoſtle ſaith, This wiſdom none of the Princes of this world haue knowne: No, not after ſhee was reuealed and came into the world,

when they ſaw her, they knew not what ſhee m
                  •
               
               ned. The Philoſophers, who ſcāned in curiouſnes when this wiſedome came to them, they knew no more in it than children and infants. Looke ho
                  ••
                little a childe can conceiue of anie humane ſciences, as little alſo could they conceiue of this wiſedome. Reade in the Acts, chap. 17. verſ. 18. when Paul came to Athens, and preached it vnto them, they ſaid, What a ſower of words is this? they thought hee had nothing but words. This is a marueilous ſecrecie: they could not find her out when ſhe was found out to their hands, they knew not what ſhe meaneth. There is not a ſcience found out by man▪ bu
                  •
                I ſhall get a naturall man that will comprehend it, and oft times he will goe beyond the author himſelfe: But to this day there was neuer 
                  •
                naturall man that could comprehēd the wiſdome of this Goſpell. For why? ſhe is ſpirituall, ſupernaturall, and aboue nature, and therefore the naturall wit could neuer bee able to comprehend her. I ſaye more to you, the more a man hath of naturall wit and judgement, the prouder hee is in his wit, and ſtroke his owne head, and thinke he hath a wiſe braine, the more hee counteth of his owne wiſdome the more ſhall this wiſdome of the Goſpell bee fooliſhneſſe vnto him: and euer the wiſe
                  ••
                of the world accounteth the Goſpell the greateſt fooliſhnèſſe. I had rather take in hand to teach an idiot the Goſpell, and cauſe him to conceiue it, 
                  ••
                God woulde giue mee grace, than to take an high

headed worldling that is puffed vp with the pride of nature, to driue into-him one word of it. Sillie ones, who haue no conceite of their naturall wiſdome, will ſwallow it vp but a proude headed bodie cannot be capable of it. Therefore, the Apoſtle in this ſame firſt Epi. to the Cor. 3. 18. ſaieth veri
                  •
                well, Wilt thou be wiſe? be a ſoole, that thou mayest bee wiſe. Renounce that reaſon of thine, and take it captiue, and make it a ſlaue, otherwiſe thou ſhalt neuer ſee GOD to thy conſolation: for thy naturall reaſon is an enemie to God, and His wiſdom, Roman 8.7. Hee giueth a reaſon in the end of the verſe, that teſtifieth, that the Prince; of this world knew not this wiſdome, yea, not when it was laid open to them. Hee ſaith. For had they knowne it, (namely that great Prince Herode, and Pilate that Romane Preſident) they would not haue crucified the Lord of glorie. They had not done ſuch indignitie to Him as to naile Him to an ignominious croſſe. How aggree theſe two together. The Lord of glorie, and an ignominious croſſe? Howe ſtand theſe two, The King of glorie, and ſuch a ſhamefull death? Becauſe they knew not His glorie, they exponed Him to ſuch an ignominious death. Thou that canſt not ſee the glorie of God in the Goſpell, thou wilt commit the moſt ignominious, the moſte villanous thing in the world. No, if Chriſt were heere, thou wouldeſt crucifie Him againe. And therefore, finde not fault with Herode nor Pilate, Or anie of them that crucified Him, and think

not that thou hadſt beene free of it if thou hadſt bene there. No, I tell thee, Thou that ſeeſt not the glorie of the Goſpell of IESVS CHRIST, if ſuch a deede were to be done, thou wouldeſt haue a ſhare in it. It will not be ſpeaking that will ſeru: the turne. Let men ſpeake of this Goſpell, and all this wiſedome, what they will, their deedes will euer bewraye them. I will not giue one pennie for thy mouth, for thy tongue, for thy ſpeaking, yea, for thy preaching, if thou haue not deedes alſo in thy calling.
            Art thou a King? Art thou a Counſeller? Art thou a Miniſter? If I ſee not good deedes in thine owne calling, all thy wordes are but winde. When thou haſt ſtood vp, and tolde that thou knoweſt CHRIST, and vnderſtandeſt His worde and Goſpe
                  •
               l, and then in thy life wilt bee an enemie to CHRIST, and wilt diſhonour Him, and His Goſpell in thy calling, thy doinges bewraye and vtter what ſtuffe is within thee. The god of this worlde, and thy malicious heart, haue put out thine 
                  •
               yes, thou haſt a blinde minde, wherefrom thy deedes proceede. Wilt thou crucifie IESVS CHRIST, and expone Him to ignominie anie way, and perſecute and trouble Him in His members, and then wilt ſtand vp and ſay, thou knoweſt CHRIST, thy doings teſtifie to ye world, that thou art a lyar. The LORD open mens eyes to knowe what it is to deale with CHRIST, or His mēbers. As euer thou wouldeſt teſtifie to the worlde, that

thou knoweſt CHRIST, honour Him and His Miniſters both, and honour His members: for whatſoeuer is done to one of them in the earth, good or euill, Hee counteth it all done vnto Himſelfe. Saul, Saul, Why perſecuteſt thou Me? ſaith He to Paul, Act. 9. 4.
            He ſtandeth not here, but goeth forward in her commendation: mark the words, & I beſeech you to weigh them, that ſeeing the eminency of this Goſpel, ye may learn to ſtoup & giue obedience to it. Sciences are commended from their ſubjectes whereof they entreat: if they haue a glorious ſubject, they are accounted high, & accurate ſciences: but their was neuer ſcience that had ſuch a fair & glorious ſubject, as this Goſpel which we preach. What is the ſubject of it? I cannot tell it in better words than are here ſet downe: The things which the eye hath not ſeene, neither the eare hath heard, neither entered into mans heart. All ſciences of this world, and wiſdom found out by man, are of things either viſible, that are ſeen with ye eye, or of things audible, heard with the eare, or of things intelligible, vnderſtood with the mind. If I cannot ſee thine inuention, if I cannot heare it, at the leaſt I will get ſome apprehenſion of it in my minde, I haue that aduantage. But as for the ſubject of this wiſdome, thy naturall eye neuer ſaw it, thy naturall care neuer heard it, and it neuer entered into thy naturall heart: and therfore whoſoeuer wil ſee theſe things, he muſt ſeek an cye that is more than natural, that

is ſupernaturall, that is ſpirituall: ſeeke an eare that is ſupernaturall and ſpirituall. Goe to the heart, content not thy ſelfe with a naturall heart: ſeeke an heart that is ſpirituall and ſupernaturall: For gaze with thine eye as thou wilt, laye to thine eare as thou wilt, if thou ſhouldeſt heare an hundreth Preachings, if thou haue but a naturall care, and a naturall eye, thou ſhalt neither ſee not heare: but in hearing thou ſhalt not heare, and in vnderſtanding thou ſhalt not vnderſtand, as the Prophet Eſaias in the ſixt Chapter and ninth verſe ſaieth. Therefore, ſeeke at GOD an Heauenlie eare, and an Heauenlie eye, and ſaye, LORD, giue mee an Heauenlie eare, and an Heauenlie eye, that I may conceaue theſe thinges and apprehende them.
            Nowe, in the ende of the verſe hee bringeth them downe for as high as they were, and telleth what they are, Which GOD (ſaieth hee) hath prepared for them that loue Him. They are predeſtinated from all Eternitie, and they are prepared in time, for ſo manie onelie as loue the LORD. Therefore, loue IESVS, and thou ſhalt get a part of them. The leſſon is this. Wonderfull are the thinges that GOD hath prepared for them that loue the LORD IESVS. But how ſhal I knowe that ſuch high and ſublime thinges are prepared for mee? Art thou marked with this token? and carrieſt thou it about with thee? Loueſt thou the LORD? how beit not ſo well as

thou wouldeſt. (Accurſed bee hee that loueth not the LORD: let him bee an Anathema Maranatha, as the Apoſtle ſaieth in the ſixteenth Chapter and the two and twentie verſe of the firſt Epiſtle to the Corinthians.) Loueſt thou Him, aſſure thy ſelfe, howbeit thou canſt not get ſuch a loue to Him, or ſuch a ſight of theſe thinges, as thou wouldeſt haue, they are prepared for thee. Onelie, thou art to take heede to ſee if that loue of GOD bee in thine heart. Goe not to ſearch what is in Heauen, and thinke not to get a full ſight of that glorie in this life, that is laide vp for thee: But reſt on Him, yea, though it were halfe blindlinges. Well is the ſoule that can loue the LORD IESVS.
            I will ende heere, and will recommende to euerie ſoule that Loue of IESVS, as euer they woulde ſee the thinges that the eye neuer ſawe, nor the eare neuer hearde, nor hath euer entered into the heart of man, to their euerlaſting comfort and conſolation, at the comming of the LORD IESVS: To whome, with the FATHER and the Holy GHOST, bee all Honour, Prayſe, and Glorie, for euer and euer, world without ende, So bee it.
         
         
            
            THE SEVENTH SERMON.
            
               I. COR. CHAP. II.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 10
                     But GOD hath reuealed them vnto vs by His Spirit: for the Spirit ſearcheth all thinges, yea, the deepe thinges of GOD.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 11
                     For what man knoweth the thinges of man, except the ſpirite of a man, which is in him? Euen ſo the thinges of GOD knoweth no man, but the Spirite of GOD.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 12
                     Nowe wee haue receaued not the ſpirit of the world, but the Spirite which is of GOD, that wee may know the things that are giuen to vs of GOD.
                  
               
            
            
               THE laſt day, Brethren, we heard a cleare deſcription & commendation of that wiſedome which `Paul ſpake and preached, which is none other, in effect, but this ſame bleſſed EVANGELL that is preached to you. We ſhewed you that there was nothing that might commende a ſcience or wiſedome in this world, but it concurred with him to the commendation, praiſe, and glorie of this wiſdome that is here deſcribed. The author of it is not the world, nor the Princes of the

world, but God the maker of the worlde: The ſecrecie of it, was hidden vp in a myſterie ſo manie ages, from the creation to the comming of Chriſt, and manifeſtation of Him in the nature of man: The antiquitie of it, it was predeſtinated from all Eternitie: The end of it, our glorie: The ſublimitie and highneſſe of it, when it was reuealed at the cumming of CHRIST, none of the Princes of this world could vnderſtand it, for if they had known it, they had not crucified the LORD of glorie. The ſubject of it, the thinges which the eye neuer ſawe, the eare neuer hearde, which neuer entered into the heart of man, and yet for all this, prepared for them that loue the LORD.
            Nowe to come to the Text which wee haue in hand. It might haue bene asked of the Apoſtle, If ſuch thinges as were neuer ſeene, neuer heard of, nor neuer entred into the heart of man, were contained in that wiſdom which he taught, what profite haue we by that wiſedome? what profite haue wee of the thinges whereof wee are not capable? The Apoſtle meeteth this in the firſt verſe which we haue read, But (ſaith hee) God hath reuealed them vnto vs by His Spirit: It is true indeed, they paſſe the ſight of our eyes, they ſurmount aboue our hearing, they paſſe the capacitie of our mind, yet that LORD hath dimitted Himſelfe vnto vs, & by His Spirit He hath reuealed thoſe things to vs the ſillie ones of ye world, not to the princes of ye world, but to the ſillie ſimple ones. Hee hath reuealed them

not by our ſpirit, but by His owne Spirit. There is the ſumme of the anſwere ſhortlie: He giueth the reaſon in the next part of the verſe, and letteth vs ſee, that the Spirite of Ieſus is able to reueale all theſe high and hidden things to vs▪ ſetting out the nature of the Holie Spirit: For (ſaieth hee) the Spirite ſearcheth all thinges, yea, the deepe thinges of God. The Spirite is a ſearcher, and hee is a ſearcher of all things created in Heauen and earth. Nothing can eſcape him, but hee will ſe
                  •
               rch into the ſecreteſt things in the world, and into the ſecreteſt parts of thine heart. What more? Hee is a ſearcher of the God of glorie Himſelfe, and will pierce into the infinite deepneſſe that is in God. Hee being ſuch a Spirit as this, is he not able to reueal the things whereof wee are not capable? There is the meaning of the whole verſe ſhortlie.
            Then we ſee theſe things contained in the Heauenlie wiſedome, as the riches of God in IESVS CHRIST, our remiſſion of ſinne, our juſtification, our regeneration, our ſaluation, and life euerlaſting, euen common thinges which yee heare of daylie, together with Ieſus Chriſt the Mediator, in whome and thorowe whome all thinges are wrought, are the thinges which the eare hath not hearde, nor the eye hath not ſeene, neither haue they e
                  ••
               ered into the heart of man. Yet wee ſee that theſe thinges paſſe not ſo the capacitie of man, nor they are not ſo altogether hidden from man, but they are reuealed. And they are reuealed▪
               
to whom? To them for whom they are prepared. They are reuealed▪ when? euen in this life: there is none for whom they are prepared from all Eternitie, but in this life, before the ſoule goe out of the bodie, they ſhall receiue ſome reuelation and vnderſtanding of theſe ſame things: and thou that getteſt no reuelation of them in this life, and getteſt not a ſight of them ere the ſoule goe out of the bodie, I will ſay to thee, They were neuer prepared for thee: Remiſſion of ſinnes was neuer prepared for thee, Iuſtification before the Tribunall of GOD, Regeneration, Life euerlaſting was neuer prepared for thee. There is not a better token of life after this life, than a blink of life in this life, if it were but a glimmering (for the beſt of vs hath but a glimmering) a blinke of IESVS Chriſt, and of the graces that are in Him in this life, is the ſureſt token that thou canſt haue of the life to come. And by the contrarie, There is not a worſe token of darkeneſſe after this life, than to haue thine eyes ſo cloſed, that thou haſt no blinke heere of that life to come. And when thou dieſt, hauing no ſight of the life to come, thou ſhalt die a miſerable catiue, & a faggot for the fire of H
                  •
               ll.
            Let vs goe forward to the reſt. God hath reuealed them by His Spirit. Now yee ſee heere a reuelation by the Spirit
                  •
                Marke it: I ſhall tarie ſomwhat vpon theſe wordes. Yee heard before of a reuelation by the word which is this wiſedome. Now yee heare of a reuelation by the Spirite: It is not enough to

receaue a reuelation by the word, though it were neuer ſo faire and ſo ſoundly preached, it will neuer doe thee good, it is nothing but as if thou wouldeſt holde a light before a blinde man, & ſay to him, Man, ſeeſt thou not this light? Wilt thou bid a blinde man judge of colours? thou ſcorneſt him. Euen ſo, all the ſpeaking of the Scriptures vnto men is but ſcorning of them, except they get this reuelation of the Holie Spirite. What is this reuelation of the Spirit? I ſhall tell you what it is. With that preaching of the worde, which is the firſt reuelation, the Spirite of IESVS commeth downe, and ſeateth Himſelfe in thine eye, & openeth thine eye to ſee the thinges which are ſpoken commeth to thine eare, & openeth thine eare to heare the things which are ſpoken, entreth into thine heart, and maketh thee to conceaue the thinges which thou ſeeſt and heareſt, and maketh thee capable of them, of the which thou art no more capable by nature, than the verie ſtone in the pillar: ſpeak to thee, & to the ſtone, all is alike, till this alteration be made in thy ſoule.
            Then, Brethren, There are two reu
                  •
               lations, The firſt by ye word, when it is preached: The ſecond by the Spirit, when that Holy Spirit concurreth with the word. I will tell you the differēce of them, The firſt will bee common to all: the word is preached alike to all. O! but the other reuelation is not ſo cōmon, but is only made to ſome ſecret ones of ye Lord. That bleſſed Spirit will not light vpon euery

man and woman, but onlie vpon ſome ſecret perſons, vpon whom the Lord hath pitie. Wee reade in the 16. Chapter of the Actes of the Apoſtles▪ that there is a meeting of manie: many are gathered together, Paule the Apoſtle the Preacher, hee reuealeth the graces of the worde to all alike: amōg all the reſt we reade of one ſpeciall perſon called Lydia (there was neuer a word ſpokē of the reſt) it is ſaid of her namely, that the Lord opened the heart of Lydia, to receiue that which Paul preached: the Spirit of IESVS opened her heart, not Paul: the Spirit of IESVS only is the reuealer: be neuer content with hearing onelie: fie on thee, if thou thinke thou haſt done enough, when thou haſt ſitten an houre or two, hearing, if thou finde not the ſweet operation of the Spirit to opē thine heart with ſuch a ſweetneſſe as is vnſpeakeable. And therfore fixe not your eyes ſo much on men, as vpon the Lord, who ſendeth the Spirit, and crie euer▪ Lord, giue me ye Spirit, or els all is but wind: bleſſed is that body that getteth the Spirit, for the word will neuer doe good without the Spirit.
            Yet I goe forward, and I marke the reaſon: The Spirit ſearcheth all thinges, yea, the deepneſſe of GOD. Theſe are the wordes. There is a great deepneſſe in theſe wordes, if wee could attaine to it. The firſt thing that I take vp heere, is this, Great is that deepneſſe and that profundity that is in our God. Paul, in the 3. chap. to the Epheſ. and the 18. verſe, conſidering that deepeneſſe falleth out in theſe

words, That yee, beeing rooted and grounded in loue, may be able to comprehend with all Saincts, what is the breadth, and length (meaning of God, for He is both broade and long) and the depth (Hee is deepe) and the height (He is high alſo) Infinite in length, infinite in breadth, infinite in height, infinite in deepneſſe, what would yee haue? He Himſelfe is (as it were) a bottomleſſe Deepe. There is neuer a propertie in Him, as we call them, but all is an infinite deepneſſe, the wiſedome of GOD, an infinite and endleſſe deepneſſe: His power, an endleſſe deepeneſſe. And therefore the Apoſtle (Rom. 11. 34.) falleth out in an admiration of the deepeneſſe both of the wiſedome, and of the knowledge of GOD.
            Well then, Brethren, it is no wonder, albeit it was ſaide in the verſe going before, that the thinges that are prepared for them that loue Him, the eye hath neuer ſeene, the eare hath neuer hearde, neither haue they entered into the heart of man: Why? Becauſe all theſe things are hidden vp in a bottomleſſe deepneſſe, that is, in GOD. What wonder then, that thou canſt not ſee them? that the eye of a worme, creeping vpon the earth, cannot ſee them? that the eare of a worme cannot heare them? and that the heart of a worme cannot be capable of them? It is true indeed, y• Goſpel ſpeaketh of them al vnto vs, yet the worde is not ſufficient to ſhew them▪ they are not ſo in the word, but they abide ſtill in that deepnes: the mercie is not ſo reuealed in ye word, & broght down frō Heauen, but yet it remaineth

ſtill in that deepnes: remiſſion of ſins is not ſo reuealed in the word, but yet it abideth ſtill in that deepeneſſe. And therefore, the worde, when it ſpeaketh of theſe thinges, whither ſendeth it thee vnto? When it ſpeaketh of the mercie of GOD in Ieſus Chriſt, of the juſtice of God, of Life euerlaſting, whither doeth it direct thee? Euermore to this deepneſſe. Goe thy wayes (ſaieth the word) to the deepneſſe of GOD, and ſee all theſe thinges plainlie. Therefore, the ſame Apoſtle ſaieth, (Coloſſ. 3. 1. 3.) Seeke the thinges which are aboue, where thy life is hidden with Christ in God. Where is thy life then? I am ſpeaking of it now: but where is it? It is hidden vp in that deepneſſe of God. The word ſhould not holde downe thine eye, but lift it vp to ſeeke all thoſe mercies that are aboue with God. Ye may ſee then, theſe thinges that concerne our ſaluation in Ieſus Chriſt, our remiſſion of ſinnes, our juſtification, our ſaluation (theſe are euen the things, to ſpeake them plainlie, whereof the Apoſtle meaneth) they are incomprehenſible to the wit of man▪ to the eye of man, to the judgement of man, to the nature of man. Hee will ſtand vp, and talke of his nature▪ of his engine, an high ſpirited man his wit will compaſſe all the worlde. O! but thy wit reached neuer vp heere to ſearch this deepneſſe. Therefore, by nature there is none aſſurance of remiſſion of ſinnes, of ſaluation, of life, if thou haue no more but nature, (ſcorne as thou wilt) although thou be a Monarch, thou ſhalt neuer

get aſſurāce of life, but die like a deſperate dogge▪ Art thou able to pierce in to the deepneſſe of the ſea, that hath a bottome? or to the deepnes of the earth that is finite? No, thou wilt neuer ſee one foot into it, albeit thou be neuer ſo clear of ſight: & then, O foole, wilt thou ſtriue to reach vp to a bottomles deepneſſe that is in God, with thy wit and thy conception, when thou canſt not attaine to a finite thing?
            Now, Brethren, I haue ſpoken of God, & of His deepnes: next we haue to ſpeak of the Spirit▪ of the ſearching of the Spirit: I ſhall only touch it ſhortly as farre as the Text will furniſh, and not digreſſe in amplifying of theſe common heads. I marke then of this Text: As there is an infinite deepneſſe in God, ſo there is a ſearcher of it, it wanteth not a ſearcher. The onlie ſearcher of this deepnes, is the Spirite of God: euerie ſpirite is a ſearcher: it is the nature of a ſpirite euer to pierce in, and to ſearch: for it is a ſubtile thing, and will pierce in very ſubtilely to the ſecrets of things. The ſpirit of an Angell is a ſearcher, and a ſubtile thing: the ſpirit of the Deuill is ſubtile, and will pierce in ſubtilely, he will pierce in to thine heart, and inſinuate himſelfe therein: likewiſe, the ſpirit of a man is a ſubtile ſpirit, and a ſearcher alſo: he will ſearch out the things that are in heauen▪ and in the ſea, and in the earth: for, he is wonderfully inclined to ſearching. But all the ſpirites, except the Spirit of that Holy One, ſearch onely the creatures. The ſpirite of an

Angell, of the deuill, of a man, ſearch but the creatures: As for the Creator, no ſpirit is able to ſearch in Him but His owne Spirit, yea, they knowe nothing in Him, but ſo much as He will reueale vnto them. As for man, hee is very buſie▪ but for all his buſineſſe, hee could neuer yet ſearch out his owne heart 
                  ••
               there is a myſterie of ſinne lying in the foldes of his heart, which hee ſhall neuer ſee, except this Spirite enter in, and giue him light. But the bleſſed Spirit of God and of Ieſus Chriſt (hee is the Spirit both of the Father and of the Sonne, for one Spirit proceedeth frō both) He ſearcheth the Father, He ſearcheth the Sonne, Hee diſcouereth all And no man can bee a good ſearcher, or a ſanctified ſearcher, except hee haue this Spirite. If thy ſpirit be not ſanctified by this Spirite, which is the onlie ſearcher and ſanctifier of all thinges, all thy ſearching is but vanitie.
            Nowe to goe forward. Before Hee was called a ſearcher, and now He is called a reuealer: Firſt He ſearcheth out, then He reuealeth vnto vs, There is the order: He reuealeth the hiddē things in God, becauſe He Himſelfe of His owne nature is a ſearcher of them: and before that euer Hee reueale them, He ſearcheth them out firſt. Thē, he that will be a reuealer, and will ſet himſelf to reueale thoſe things to men (I ſpeak it in plain talk) he that will bee a Preacher of theſe hidden thinges to others, looke that firſt hee bee a ſearcher, and let him bee occupied in ſearching, and heartilie beſeech

GOD, that the Holie Spirite would lead him in to thoſe things that haue none acceſſe: For hee is not fit to bee a Preacher of the Goſpell, that ſearcheth not with all his might, firſt to ſee theſe things in God, which he ſpeaketh to others. Woe to him that commeth in of purpoſe to ſpeake the things to others which he neuer ſaw nor felt firſt in his owne heart. Dauid ſaith, (Pſalme 116. 10.) I beleeued, and therefore I ſpake. Paule afterwardes ſaieth, We beleeue and therefore wee ſpeake, 2. Cor. 4. 13. What is this beliefe? None other thing, but, before hee ſpeake to others, to get an aſſurance of them in his owne heart. Now looke the maner of the reuealing of theſe things. The Spirit, he reuealeth, becauſe hee openeth our heartes, and taketh away the vaile off our heartes, to let vs ſee them: otherwiſe in vaine were it to laye them before vs. I ſee another maner of this reuelation, and therefore looke what more the Spirit doeth: Hee is not content only to take the vaile frō thine heart, but hee taketh thy ſoule by the hand, (as it were) and leadeth it in thorow the deepneſſe of God, he will rauiſh it out of the bodie, (as it were) and leade it in to that light which hath none acceſſe, and will ſay, Loe there is the mercie, loe, there is the righteouſneſſe, loe, there is the euerlaſting Life, which is ſpoken of, ſeeſt thou not them all in Him? So he will point out euerie thing in God. Therefore, no doctrine auaileth without this Holie Spirit, ſeeing Hee alone taketh the vaile from our heartes, and

leadeth vs in to ſee the thinges which are ſpoken of. There is no perfect Doctor but the Spirite of Ieſus onlie: There is no creature, although hee be an Angell, that can take the vaile off thine heart, to let thee ſee, that can bore thine care, to let thee heare perfectlie: And therefore, in preaching depend not vpon the mouth of men, but onlie vpon the Spirit of Ieſus Chriſt.
            Yet I ſhall make the matter more plaine, and ſhew how the Spirit will take thee, and let thee ſee the thinges which are in God. I will vſe a ſuppoſition which cannot bee, yet it will make the matter more cleare. I ſuppoſe that my ſpirit or ſoule entered into thee, if my ſpirite or my ſoule bee in thee, there woulde bee nothing within mee, but thou wouldeſt ſee it, all my thoughtes would bee patent to thee.
            Now to applie this. This is no ſuppoſition. God will put His Spirite into a man or woman: for if His Spirit be not in vs, wo be vnto vs for euer and euer. If God put His Spirit into anie of vs muſt it not follow of neceſſitie, that wee muſt ſee in God at leaſt the things which concerne our weale and saluation. That ſpirite in mee, in thee, muſt reueale to mee, to thee, the thinges which lie in the verie deepneſſe of God, which concerne our weale and ſaluation: and that man that hath the Spirite of God, will ſee the verie heart of God, & His mind, he will ſee the remiſſion of his ſinnes in the mind of GOD, and all by the benefite of the Spirite of

IESVS that dwelleth in him. Marke this yee that account ſo lightlie of the Spirite of Ieſus, in whom conſiſteth the onlie felicitie of man: For if thou want His Spirite, woe to thee, thou ſhalt goe to Hell. So wee haue a great vantage heere, that by the benefite of the Spirite, wee ſee the thinges that are in GOD.
            But, Brethren, God hath as great an aduantage of vs: for if Gods Spirit be in vs, by His Spirit Hee ſeeth all that is in our heartes: for if my ſpirit were in thee (as I ſpake before) as thou wouldeſt ſee all that is in mine heart, ſo I would ſee all that is in thy ſoule, & the leaſt thought of thine heart would bee patent vnto mee: ſo, much more that Spirit ſeeth the leaſt motion & thoght of the heart of man, in whom He is, & will preſent them all to the Father, and lay them open before Him. So al ſerueth to this end, that we ſhould take heed to the leaſt thought of our hearts, and beware to thinke one thought to diſpleaſe Him: for the Spirit, as He is called the ſearcher of the deepneſſe of God, ſo He is called the ſearcher of the heartes of men. There is not one thought, nor one grone in thine heart, or one motion of joy in thy ſoule, but He reporteth all to the Father. We haue neede to take heede to all the motions of our heartes, and neuer to thinke one thought, but that which wee thinke is acceptable to the Father, & neuer to anger the Spirit (as ye Apoſtle ſaith Eph. 4. 30.) neither in word or thought. And therefore, as thou wouldeſt

keep Him & not anger Him, ſtudy to ſanctificatiō, & ſanctification ſhall bring on ſaluation, for it is ye very means that ſhall make thee to ſee God: look what th'Apoſtle ſaith, Heb. 12. 14. Without ſanctification no man ſhall ſee GOD. Now vpon all this diſcourſe I marke ſhortly: There were neuer two things ſo ſtraitly joyned together as God & man is: there was neuer ſuch kinred betwixt two things in ye world, as is betwixt the God of glory, and an earthly man: thou wilt count thy kinred with this man, and that man, if thou be joyned with him in blood or alliance. But I aske this queſtion, Is his ſpirite within thee? is his ſoule within thee? or is thy ſoule in him? Indeede it is true, the affection may goe out of thee to him, but giueſt thou him thy ſpirit with thy affection? or giueth he thee his ſpirit with his affection? knoweſt thou ye thought of his heart? or knoweth he the thought of thine heart? who will ſay it? O! but God with His affection giueth thee His Spirit within thee, that thou mayeſt know the thought of His heart, and He of thine. This is the conjunction that is betwixt God & thee: there is a narrow conjunction indeed betwixt ye members of that myſticall body, for they are conjoyned together by ye Spirit of Chriſt, & by loue, but no member putteth his ſpirit into another member: there is ye other cōjunction betwixt the head and the members of the naturall bodie: for the ſoule will, as it were, come downe, and the ſpirit of the head to the members, and they will

vnderſtand the thought of the head, and the head will vnderſtand the thought of the members, but there was neuer ſuch a conjunction betwixt the members & the head, as is betwixt God & man, and all conjunctions among men, are but a pendicle of that which is betwixt GOD and man. In this conjunction with thy GOD, and with thine Head, IESVS, (for thou art joyned with GOD in Him) ſtandeth thy felicitie and bleſſedneſſe.
            To come to the next verſe. It might haue bene ſaid to the Apoſtle, Thou dedicateſt all to the Spirit of God, may not the ſpirite of man doe ſomething in this purpoſe? may not my ſpirit ſearch in to God, and diſcouer the deepnes that is in Him? He anſwereth, Noman can ſee the thinges that are in God, but His owne Spirit. Then hee declareth his anſwere by a compariſon, Euen as no man can ſee the thinges which are in man but by the ſpirit of a man, ſo nothing can ſearch the things which are in God, but the Spirit of God. Thou canſt not ſee the things that are in me. onlie I my ſelfe will ſee the thinges that are in me: euen ſo no man can ſee the things that are in God but onlie His owne Spirit.
            Nowe the Apoſtle heere hee meeteth the verie, pride of the heart of man, that hee will conciet of himſelf, that he by his ſpirit will ſearch the things that are in God. Paule had this experience in the Corinthians, who were but carnall, they tooke vpon them to judge vpon his doctrine that was ſpirituall. Haſt thou but that ſpirite which is carnall?

albeit thou bee a Monarch, thou art too bolde to take vpon thee to judge of thinges which are ſpirituall, and ſpoken ſpirituallie.
            This ſame is the pride of the Papiſts this daye. There will come out a Thomist, a Scotist, who hath the ſpirit of a man onlie, and a verie ſubtile, or rather a Sophisticall ſpirit, an humane. Philoſopher, and hee will judge of the Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt, and turne it ouer into humane Philoſophie. They haue turned the Goſpell of Ieſus to Aristotle, all their writings are but ſpiritleſſe. There is not ſo much as a ſmell of the Spirit of Ieſus in them all: But, O that terrible judgement that abideth ſuch Doctors as are prophane polluters of the Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt! There is none of vs all, but if a man would ſtand vp and ſay to mee, or to thee, I knowe thine heart, and what is in thine heart, wee would be angrie at him. Then, will not that glorious God bee angrie at a prophane villane, that will ſay, hee will ſearch in to that profunditie, hauing only his owne ſpirit?
            Brethren, when I was younger than I am, if I had ſeene one of great engine, & great capacitie, & great graces, I thought immediately he would comprehend the whole Bible, but I proteſt before God, that the longer I liue, I thinke euer the leſſe of the wit of man, I had rather haue ye leaſt ſponk of the Spirit of Chriſt, nor all the engine & knowledge of ye world: No, a ſilly body that hath ye Spirit of Ieſus will conceiue more of ſpiritual things,

than all the high headed bodies in the worlde. Therefore, alwayes renounce thine owne wit, and be a foole, that thou mayeſt be wiſe.
            Another thing I marke heere. When hee hath magnified the Spirit, and made Him the ſearcher of all the deepneſſe of God, ſee howe hee holdeth off him the proude conceites of men: hee will not let thee touch him, or his priuiledges, that is, to ſearch the deepneſſe of God. Therefore, if yee will ſpeake of God, to His honour, (He is inuiolable) ſaue him from the proude conceites of men. Hold proude men off God, & let them not touch Him, or violate that inuiolable Majeſtie, or elſe thou ſhalt be guiltie, if Hee be violated by thy default. Alas! wherefore art thou ſet in this world, but to preach His glorie? and to keepe it inuiolate from the injuries of all fleſh in the worlde. Looke what he doeth next in the laſt verſe, when he hath, as it were, holden off GOD the proude conceites of men, who woulde take vpon them to ſearch in to the deepneſſe of God, what doeth he? He draweth that Spirit to himſelfe, and ſaieth, Nowe wee haue receiued, not the ſpirit of the World, but the Spirit which is of God. whereby hee learneth thee this leſſon: It auaileth thee not to magnifie, to glorifie God and His Spirit, except in the end thou take that Spirit to thy ſelfe, and mayeſt challenge Chriſt and His Spirit, as thine owne propertie. Men haue ſpoken verie highlie of Chriſt, and haue had little adoe with Him. Speake thou not of Him ſo, but as thou

ſpeakeſt of Him to His praiſe, take Him to thy ſelfe: otherwiſe, in all thy ſpeaking of Him, thou art but a verie babler, if thou haue not that Spirite within thee: For the Apoſtle ſaith, No man can call Ieſus Lord, except he haue the Spirit of Ieſus, 1. Cor. 12. 3. Therefore, as thou wouldeſt ſaue thy ſelfe from prophaning of God, and of His Spirit, and of His graces, when thou art praiſing and magnifying Him, looke that thou haue the Spirite, that thou mayeſt ſay to thy ſelfe, This Spirit whom I praiſe, is mine: this God, whom I haue bene magnifying, and all His graces, is mine. In the end of the verſe hee ſetteth downe the ende wherefore GOD hath giuen vs this Spirit. The end is this, To make vs to know the things which are giuē vnto vs by God. I ſee here the Spirit of Ieſus, when He maketh our eye to looke in to that deepneſſe of God, to that ſtore of mercie, He will let vs ſee nothing in GOD, but meere grace & mercy. As this Euangell preacheth nothing but meere grace and mercie, ſo the Spirit of Ieſus, when He letteth thee ſee al the hidden things in GOD, Hee letteth thee ſee nothing but meere mercie and grace. And therefore, hee that will tell the people of the merits of men, or of the Saints, that they are not juſtified by meere grace, but muſt ad to their own deſeruings, I wil tell you my judgmēt of ſuch a man, ſuppoſe he be neuer ſo glorious a Doctor, neuer ſo ſacond or ſo learned, hee neuer ſpake by the Spirite of IESVS. Papiſt Doctors, who leade men to leane to their owne

merites, and to the merites of Saincts, neuer ſpake nor wrote by the Spirit of Ieſus: For the Spirite of Ieſus letteth thee ſee nothing in God but mee
                  •
               e mercie: for one merite of man will deſtroye all grace: ſo contratie is the Spirit of God, & the ſpirit of man, the grace of Chriſt, & the merit of man, And this is ye ſpirit that men ſtriue to put amōgſt vs againe: for if they bring in Papiſtrie amōgſt vs again, farewell ye Spirit of Ieſus. No, I ſpeak it from mine heart, if that Idolatrie come in againe, I ſhall ſtand vp in my laſt Preaching, and ſaye, Farewell the Spirit of Ieſus: For, no more than Hell can accompanie Heauen, no more can that bleſſed Spirit of Ieſus accompanie that dirt & dung of mans doctrine. Therefore, as thou wouldeſt keepe the Spirit of Ieſus, holde abacke theſe men, for thou ſhalt not enjoye them both in deſpite of thine heart. The Lord Ieſus cannot remaine amongſt Idolaters: and if thou haue not His Spirite, thou art not His, (Roman. 8. 9.) if thou be not His, thou art the Deuils, and ſhalt goe to euerlaſting damnation. Therefore I ſay ouer againe▪ Holde them away, as thou wouldeſt keepe that bleſſed Spirit of IESVS CHRIST: To whom with the FATHER and the Holie Ghoſt, be all Honour, Praiſe, Power, Glorie, and Dominion, both now and euer worlde without ende,
            AMEN.
         
         
            
            THE EIGHT SERMON.
            
               II. COR. CHAP. IIII.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 3
                     If our Goſpell bee then hidden, it is hidden to them that are lost:
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 4
                     In whome the god of this worlde hath blinded the mindes, that is, of the Infideles, that the light of the glorious Goſpell of Christ, which is the Image of God, ſhould not ſhine vnto them.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5
                     For wee preach not our ſelues, but CHRIST IESUS the LORD, and our ſelues your ſeruants for IESUS ſake.
                  
               
            
            
               IN the verſe immediatelie going before this Text which wee haue read in your audience, the Apoſtle hath beene ſpeaking of that ſinceritie, of that plainneſſe which hee vſed in the preaching of the Goſpell of CHRIST, which he vttered with ſuch an euidence, that whoſoeuer hearde him, might vnderſtand him, might haue ſeene the light of the Goſpell, and haue apprehended it. Nowe becauſe this people of Corinth were ſtiffe-necked, hard to conceiue, full of conceits, and liked nothing but humane wiſdome and eloquence, ſcorning & mocking the euidence

of the Spirit: Therefore, ſome of them might haue objected immediatelie, Paule, thou ſpeakeſt of thy plainneſſe in vttering the Goſpel, yet for thy plainneſſe there is manie amongſt vs who knowe not what thou ſpeakeſt, thy Goſpell is hidden to manie, manie vnderſtand thee not. The Apoſtle meeteth this in the firſt wordes which wee haue read, If our Gospell be hidden, it is hidden to them that periſh. A ſore ſentence: as if hee woulde ſaye, Corinthians, blame me not, nor my Goſpell, the fault is in that miſerable corruption which is in you: yee cannot ſee the light of my goſpel, becauſe ye are adjudged to perdition and damnation: ſo the blame is in your blindneſſe, who are appointed to damnation before all eternity. So this verſe being plaine, let vs obſerue ſome leſſons. The firſt is this: There hath beene, and is, many in the world, in all ages, that neuer ſaw, ſeeth, nor ſhall ſee the light of the Goſpell. Ye haue an example of theſe Corinthians, howbeit the Goſpel ſhould ſhine clearer than ye Sunne at noone time of the day, it ſhall neuer be ſeene of them, it will be hidden to them, howbeit it ſhould bee as a booke laide open before them, yet it will bee a claſped booke to them. Let euerie man beware of himſelfe, for this is a neceſſitie laide vpon the multitude of this worlde. A multitude hath bene in all ages, a multitude is in this age, a multitude ſhal be in euerie age to come, who ſhal neuer ſee the light of the Goſpell. The next leſſon is: Theſe folke haue this propertie, and diſpoſition,

(beeing pleaſurers of themſelues) they are euer quarreling with the Goſpell, amongſt all the hearers of the worlde they are the moſt quarrellous, they, I ſay, who get the leaſt good of it, are alwayes the moſte quarrellous, and euermore laying the fault either vpon the Goſpel, or vpon the teachers thereof, becauſe they neither get light nor conſolation thereby. Beware of this quarrellous complexion. I marke thirdlie, where is the fault, or in whome? They blame the Goſpell, and the teachers therof, but where is the fault indeed? Paule telleth thee heere, If my Goſpell bee hidden, it is hidden to them that periſh. That perdition and deſtruction wherunto thou art appointed from all eternitie, is the cauſe wherefore thou receiueſt no conſolation, no light in thy ſoule thorow the Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt. Thou layeſt the fault where it is not, thou art like a blinde man, that will ſtand vp againſt the Sunne, ſhining at the noone time of the daye, and accuſe it becauſe it ſhineth not, when in the meane time it is ſhining vpon the face of him. Thou art a veſſel of perdition, if there bee not a remedie, and becauſe the ſentence is paſt, therefore, as when a thiefe or a murtherer is once condemned to death, the gracious preſence of the Prince is with-drawne from him, that hee may looke on him no more: Euen ſo, if once a creature bee adjudged to death, the gracious countenance of Ieſus Chriſt is with-drawne from him, leſt hee ſhould beholde it in the Goſpell.
            
               Another thing followeth: There are manie tokens of damnation, that men and women are adjudged to death: Amongſt the reſt this is a ſure token, If the Goſpell be hidden to thee, euen as it is preached in SCOTLAND, (wee haue neither Peter nor Paul to teach vnto vs) yet if it be hidden to thee, if thou receiue neither light nor conſolation by it, as it is now preached, if thou continue ſo till thy life be in thy lips, as wee ſpeake, till the laſt gaſpe, thou haſt a ſeale in thine owne boſome of euerlaſting damnation: thine heart is marked with the marke of perdition: yea, if thou bee a king, thou art a veſſell ordained for ſhame and ignominie.
            Then, Brethren, learne here: seeing there muſt be a number that muſt periſh, and a number of all eſtates in the worlde muſt die, that muſt goe to Hell, ordained from all eternitie to perdition, beguile not your ſelues, and ſeeing to this number the Goſpel muſt bee hidden, and muſt be a cloſed booke, they can neuer haue cōſolation of it. Then thou that deliteſt to walke in the light of the Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt, thinke thou not euill of this Goſpell, thinke thou not euill of this Miniſterie. Ioyne theſe two together, that cannot bee ſeuered, the Goſpel and the Miniſtery. Thou that thinkeſt euill of ye Miniſterie, thou thinkeſt euill of the Goſpell: bee thou not aſhamed of the Miniſters, nor of their bondes, nor of their captiuitie, nor of their death, nor of no croſſe that can be laid vpon

them: (the 2. Epiſt. to Timot. and the 8. Chapter) For the multitude of the worlde thinketh ſhame of the Goſpell, and of the Miniſters thereof, when affliction once commeth vpon them. Thou that loueſt the Goſpel, keepe thy comfort in thine own boſome, and aſſure thy ſelfe, there is none other way to Heauen: and knowing well, that this muſt bee the hazarde of the Goſpell, and of the Miniſters, take all theſe troubles for ſure tokens of the trueth of God. I loue not the Goſpell that hath the countenance of the Princes of this world, and hath the confluence of the multitude. The Princes and multitude of this worlde hath euer borne the pure Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt at hatred. Thus ſarre for the firſt cauſe, wherefore the Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt is hiddē from manie, to wit, that perdition whereunto they are adjudged from all eternitie.
            Nowe take vp in the next verſe another cauſe wherefore the Goſpel is hidden to many, In whom (ſaith he) the god of this world hath blinded their minds. The ſecond cauſe is excecation, blind-folding▪ putting out of the eyes, and all to this ende, that they ſhoulde not get a ſight of the glorious light of the Goſpel, and ſo be ſaued. But how commeth this to paſſe? howe are they blinded? I ſhall tell you: Once beeing adjudged to die, and ordained in the counſell of God to perdition, in commeth the god of this worlde, that is, the Deuill, whome this worlde maketh a god of, the God of Heauen

ſendeth him. Whome to ſendeth Hee him? Vnto that catiue, that miſerable creature that is ordained for perdition, as a torturer, & perſecuter, an hang-man, to put that eternall decree in execution. And what doeth hee when he commeth in? The firſt turne that euer hee doeth, hee bindeth him. What bindeth hee, his handes or his feete▪ No, he letteth them louſe, and letteth him worke on with them his owne ruine, and runne on vnto his owne perdition: But hee bindeth his eyes, or rather, pulleth them out, that the miſerable bodie may not ſee the gracious face of Chriſt. Wherefore is he ſent vnto him? The cauſe is not onelie in the ordinance of God, but in the catiue himſelfe, that maliciouſly repineth to the light, and will not receiue the Goſpell, therefore the GOD of Heauen ſendeth the Deuil to put out his eyes, that he ſhould not ſee. Mark then the leſſon: They that are adjudged to die & to perditiō in the world to come, in this worlde, ere euer they goe out of this life, they are bounde like thieues and murtherers, to bee preſented bound to that damnation that is to enſue: they are reſerued in chaines till that great Daye. What chaines are theſe? Chaines of darkneſſe, their eyes are plucked out, that blindlinges, in that great Day, they may bee caſt into Hell, into that Lake that burneth with fire and brimſtone for euer. There is neuer a ſoule y• goeth to damnation in the worlde to come, but in this life it is blinded: Yee know the Ethnickes ſaying,

               Quos perdere vult IVPITER, iis mentem ſolet adimere. It is a true ſaying: and therefore, take vp a ſure note of perdition to come, excecation, blindneſſe: ſo that if thou canſt not ſee that gracious face of CHRIST in the Goſpel at no time, for all thine hearing, for all this Miniſtery that is in the world, take heede to thy ſelfe, and feare that euerlaſting damnation. Bee neuer at quiet night nor daye, till thou ſeeſt a light in thy minde by the Goſpell: otherwiſe thy conſcience ſhall condemne, thee as a veſſell of perdition. The Goſpell is not ſent for nothing: either ſhall it bee vnto thee a ſauour of life vnto Life, or a ſauour of death vnto Death, and this ſhall bee juſtified one day: And except thou get light, thou ſhalt curſe the time that euer thou hearde the Goſpell, when it commeth to that damnation. Another thing marke heere: When commeth the god of this worlde to blinde men? (Looke to the order of the Text) The firſt cauſe is counted perdition & GODS ordinance, then commeth in the Deuill. When commeth in the Deuill? When GOD hath firſt ſaide the worde, I will haue this bodie periſhing, and will bee glorified in his perdition; then commeth in the torturer, and plucketh out his eyes. So the Deuill is nothing to GOD, but a perſecuter, a miniſter of His wrath, when Hee is angrie, than is the lowne at hande, as a ſlaue, to put in execution that wrath. But it is a ſore pitie to conſider the miſerable bodie on whome this wrath is

executed! When the hang-man commeth to bind the hands of a bodie, that bodie is ſorrowfull and ſad: but when the Deuill is binding thee, thou art merrie in the meane time: & when he is a Deuil to thee, thou thinkeſt hee is a God to thee. Thou neuer rejoyceſt, but in blindnes: look to experience, The multitude of this Land is neuer merrier, than when he is binding them, and drawing them to filthineſſe, to murther and villanie, to gluttonie and dronkenneſſe: Count not of ſuch a man: but ſaye, or thinke, if thou dare not ſay it, O miſerable cat
                  •
               ue! the Deuill is blinding thee, and leading thee to perdition.
            Nowe marke in the thirde roome, the cauſes which haſten this damnation, and which muſt paſſe before the god of this worlde come as a torturer to put in execution the ſentence of GOD. There muſt goe before this excecation, and that damnation that followeth this excecation, a cauſe in thy ſelfe, thou muſt euer bee the cauſer of thine owne death: notwithſtanding the ordinance of God, yet thou neuer periſheſt till thou be worthie of thine own death, and merite thine own damnation. What bringeth on this blindneſſe? A malicious, falſe, infidell heart, repugning to the Goſpel, for thou firſt deſpiſeſt it, and rejecteſt it ſo maliciouſlie and deſpite
                  •
               ull
                  •
               e, that in a maner, thou wouldeſt ſpit on the face of Chriſt Ieſus, which ſhineth in the Goſpell. This haſteneth the wrath: For whē the Lord ſeeth the deſpitefulnes of thine

heart, that thou wilt not ſee not look in the light when it is offered to thee, and holden vp before thine eyes: then He ſendeth His torturer & ſaith, Go thy wayes, Sathan, and plucke out the eyes of this bodie: then hee plucketh out the eyes of thy mind immediately, and God giueth thee ouer to a reprobate ſenſe: and this is it which the Apoſtle ſaith of the Gentiles, Rom. 1. 28. It pleaſed them not to retaine God in knowledge, therefore God gaue them ouer to a reprobate ſenſe. And Epheſ. 4. 18. Hauing (ſaith he) their cogitations darkned, and beeing ſtrangers from the life of God, thorow the ignorance that is in them, becauſe of the hardneſſe of their heartes. There plainlie hee letteth vs ſee that the hardneſſe & malice of their heartes bringeth on this ignorance and blindneſſe. Therefore, beware of this malice, and put it out of thine heart, or elſe thou ſhalt bee carried blindlinges to euerlaſting damnation, ſuppoſe thou bee an Earle or a King: what regarde hath GOD of perſons?
            Now, Brethrē, there are ſome words that I muſt weigh to you, as the Lord ſhall giue me the grace, & I ſhall repeat them, & marke ye with me, if they be not weighty, That the light of the glorious Goſpell of Chriſt, which is the image of God ſhuld not ſhine vnto thē, or ſpread His beames vpō them: ye know, & anie man yt hath knowledge knoweth, that this might haue bene ſpokē in fewer & baſer words, but the Apo. cōtents not himſelf with baſe words in ſuch a matter, but ſaith, that ye 
               light of the glorious goſpel, &c.

Well, is there one word here in vaine? and is there any chāge of words made for nothing? are ſimple baſe words changed into glorious words for nothing? no (alas! we cannot ſee this) and it is one of the things in the world that I would faineſt haue you to vnderſtand, what moueth the Apoſtles and Prophets to vſe ſuch an high language, and ſet vp a thing in ſuch glorious tearmes, the which they might vtter in baſer tearmes. Thinke not that the men of God, Prophets and Apoſtles, haue ſpoken (as we ſay) hyperbolicè, great and loftie words, greater than the matter. Theſe wordes are borrowed words, and they are borrowed from the moſt glorious thing in the earth, and yet they attaine not to the thouſand part of the things which by them he would expreſſe. All the high wordes that a man can vſe to expreſſe ye glorie of Chriſt, are not able to expreſſe the thouſand part of that glorie.
            But to come to the purpoſe. Ye haue ſet down firſt in glorious tearmes the effect of the Goſpell: it is ſet down in ſhining and beames, thereafter ye haue ſet downe the Goſpell it ſelfe. To come to the firſt: The moſt glorious thing that a man can ſee in this earth, is the ſhining of the Sunn, which the Lord hath fixed in the Heauens. The pleaſandeſt thing that a man can looke to, when he hath looked to all theſe earthlie thinges, is the glauncing of the Sunne in a faire day. And therefore, ye ſee the glorie of the Sunne is deſcribed very highlie by Dauid in the 19. Pſalme. To applie this:

Euen ſo the effect of the Goſpell beeing the moſt glorious effect that euer was wrought: the Spirite of God ſetteth it out by the moſt glorious thing in the world, the ſpreading of the Sunne beames. And ſurelie, ſuppoſe there were no more but this word [Shyning] it letteth vs ſee a wonderfull effect of the Goſpell in the hearts of men and women. Ye ſee by experience, the beames of the Sunne, ſuppoſe they were neuer ſo bright, will neuer alter the bodie which they ſhine vpon, nor make it bright like themſelues: the ſunne hath ſhined this long time in the world, but yet by ſhining it could neuer ſo tranſ-change any creature, that it coulde become as bright as the Sunne it ſelfe. It may well let thee ſee the bodie that is opacum (as wee ſaye) darke & obſcure, ſo long as it ſhineth, but as ſoone as it is remooued, the bodie is darke as it was before. But as to the Goſpell: The Goſpell, with the beames of it, not onelie maketh the object wherevpon it ſhineth, to be ſeene, and to appeare: but it doeth more, it transformeth the ſoule of the man or woman into that ſame light and brightneſſe that is in it: That is to ſay, The face of IESVS, the Sunne of righteouſneſſe that ſhineth in the Goſpell, when the beames of it ſtriketh vpon thy ſoule, they make it lightſome and bright like the face of Ieſus, they turne the ſoule in the ſhape of the face of IESVS, that ſhineth in the Goſpell. Would yee haue Scripture for this? looke the laſt verſe of the chapter going before, We behold (ſaieth

hee) as in a mirrour, the glorie of God with an open face. and are changed into the ſame image from glorie to glorie, as by the Spirit of the Lord. And this is done in ſuch a ſort (O would to God wee knew the power of the Goſpell) that thou, who hadſt nothing but darkneſſe within thee, art made a ſhining light, caſting out thy beames, and ouer-ſhadowing ſillie darke bodies. Hee that brought light out of darkneſſe (ſaith Paul) by His word, Hee hath ſhined in mine heart, that I may miniſter the knowledge of Ieſus Chriſt to others. So is it moſte certaine, thou in whome the Goſpell is ſo powerfull, art made a light in the world, to illuminate darke ſoules.
            Nowe to come to the next, the Goſpell it ſelfe: How expreſſeth he the Goſpell? Hee calleth it not ſimplie and barelie with a meane word, The Goſpell, (all theſe meane words, and ſillie ſimple ſpeaches of ſuch a glorie, telleth what feeling men haue in their heartes of the effectualneſſe of the Goſpell) but hee calleth it, The light of the Goſpell, The Goſpell is a light, and it is the light of lightes. The Sunne, albeit it be bright, was neuer comparable to it in ſhining, and therefore it caſteth out ſuch glorious beames in the ſoules of men and women. What is the cauſe that it is a light? The cauſe is in the ſubject of it. The ſubject of it is glorie. What will make a light, if glory will not make it? The Goſpell, is the Goſpell of glory, and all that is within it is glorie. What glorie 
                  ••
                this? The glory of CHRIST the King of king
                  •
               
               
his glory muſt be a great glory: what kind of perſon is this Chriſt? He is ye Image of God. He neuer reſteth mounting vp till he come to that diuinity. Lo how he riſeth: he climbeth from the Goſpel to the Mediator, & from ye Mediator to that glorious Majeſty. So all the glorie that ſhineth in ye Goſpel, is ye glory of God, and all the light of the Goſpel, is that light of God which th'Apo. 1. Tim. 6. 16. calleth yt light which hath none acceſſe, & neuer man had acceſſe to it, till this Ieſus brought it down, & without this light thou art but darkneſſe, and ſhalt end in exteriour & vtter darkneſſe. All the beames of the Sunne are but darkneſſe in reſpect of it. The Sunne is but a creature, this is the light vncreated of the glorious GOD, the verie eſſence of GOD, count of it as thou wilt. Now marke one thing of this: This man by his ſpeach leadeth vs to his hart, what are words, if they want the heart? and if they haue no life, what are wordes to bee reſpected, ſuppoſe thou ſpeakeſt a thouſande yeeres of light and glorie, if thou haue neither light nor glorie in thy ſoule. Certainely, there are none that will looke to theſe wordes, but they may ſee the mans heart was repleniſhed with this light and glorie whereof hee ſpake. The face of IESVS ſhyned on his ſoule, and ſo wonderfullie hee vttereth that conception, and fulneſſe of the heart, in ſuch wordes as are marueilous. The heart of PAVLE was full of light and glorie. But I ſee little light in the heartes of men and women, in

reſpect of that light which was in his heart. And therefore, Brethren, to ſpeake the trueth, becauſe this Goſpell, howbeit it hath beene ſounding in the eare theſe manie yeeres in this Lande, yet it hath not entered into the hearts of men & womē, it hath bene a ſound in the eare, but not a light in the ſoule, becauſe thou haſt not ſuffered it to enter into thine heart, & kept it there: therefore, the Lord is threatning to take it from thine eare alſo: and ſo will be ſeene on EDINBVRGH one day. The eye is alwayes vpon men, but thou lookeſt not to that poyſonable heart of thine, that is procuring ye away-taking of this Goſpel out of thine eare, and except ye deſcend into your owne hearts, & ſearch the emptineſſe of yt light in them, it is not poſſible that it can remaine. Can it bee poſſible that this contempt of the Goſpell, that of her owne nature is ſo effectuall in the hearts of men, can bee borne with for euer? No, ye Lord will not ſuffer this contempt to bee vnpuniſhed. And therefore, the Lord appearantly hath ſaid▪ 
               I will put away my Goſpel from this vngrateful people, whom it hath not illuminated after ſo long time. So ye yt haue bene long looking to inſtrumēts, looke as long on your owne falſe hearts that are the cauſe of all. Yet, Brethren, notwithſtanding of al this contempt of ye Goſpel, the Lord ſaue me, & all them that I wiſh well to, from this, to be an inſtrument of the with-drawing of it for yet it was neuer ſeene that ye Lord vſed good men to be inſtruments in ſuch a deed. Who is it that is

heere ſent to blind this worlde? who but the god of this world, the Deuil!? and therfore I giue this watch-word, Let no man preaſſe to bee the occaſion of the away-taking of the Goſpell.
            Nowe I ſhall take vp the next verſe ſhortly, and ſo I ſhall end. In the next verſe the Apoſtle giueth the reaſon wherefore they to whome the Goſpell was hidden, behoued to be they who were ordained for perdition, and whome the god of this world hath blinded. His reaſon is takē euen from his ſinceritie in preaching the Goſpell, For (ſaieth hee) wee preach not our ſelues: Whom preach I then? but IESUS CHRIST the LORD, and I preached Him to be the Lord in my Goſpel: and what preached I of my ſelfe? Our ſelues your ſeruantes for Christ Ieſus ſake. For the Bridegromes cauſe I was a ſeruant to the Bride, for His cauſe who is the onelie Head and LORD of the Church, I was a ſeruant to the Church. Then of this reaſon marke this leſſon: A man, whome the LORD raileth to preach the Goſpell, not to ſeeke himſelfe, nor his owne aduancement, nor worldlie riches, nor honour, but onelie to preach the Goſpell in ſinceritie, what effect will hee haue in his preaching? Strange effectes will followe him: if hee ſaue thee not, if hee winne thee not to God, if he miniſter not comfort to thee by his Goſpell, what will hee doe? I ſhall tell thee, Hee will put a ſtampe vpon thee, and thruſt it into thine heart & conſcience, teſtifying to thee in the owne time (for the conſcience

wakeneth not in all men at all times) that thou waſt not faithfull, but a reprobate ordained to perdition from all eternitie, if thou getteſt not repentance in time, and if the Goſpell preached by a ſincere man hath not fructified in thee, all his preaching is but a ſeale to thee of thy damnation, and in the Great Day ſhall ſtand vp and aggrege thy judgement.
            Marke another thing heere: What is this that maketh this man ſo bold? He will denounce perdition, excecation, and blind-folding by the god of this world, (I aſſure you, this is a bolde ſpeach to denounce damnation) but what maketh him ſo bolde? Yee ſee it in a worde, the conſcience of his owne ſinceritie, that in his preaching hee ſought not himſelfe, but the LORD his Maiſter. There is the leſſon. A man whom the LORD will ſende (and the LORD as certainlie will ſende men to ſpeake in ſinceritie his meſſage, as euer he ſent any Prophet in the worlde, howbeit there be not an extraordinarie calling nowe) A man, I ſay, whom the LORD will ſend, he will denounce damnation to an obſtinate and rebellious people: and hee will bee bolde to take thee, as it were, by the eare ſuppoſe thou bee a king, and leade thee to that Tribunall to heare the ſentence of damnation pronounced againſt thee. The LORD giue mee this ſinceritie, and then I will not care for all the kinges and all the men in the worlde: for the LORD will giue boldneſſe to the man whome he

raiſeth in ſinceritie to cyte kinges before that Tribunall of IESVS CHRIST.
            Another thing I ſee in this Text: There is no lord, but the Lord IESVS, who will tread down all the lordes in the earth, and treade vpon their neckes at his pleaſure. And more I ſee, There is no Ladie, nor Queene, but the Church, the Spouſe of IESVS CHRIST: As for Kinges, Queenes, Politickes in the earth, all are but ſeruantes onelie, Kinges ſeruantes, Queenes ſeruantes, Paſtors and Miniſters ſeruants and nouriſhers of the Church of IESVS: The Apoſtles, ſeruants, miniſtring food to this glorious bodie of IESVS, and feeding it with the ſincere milke of the worde. And that is it which the Apoſtle ſaith in the 1. epiſ▪ to the Corin. chap. 3. verſ. 22. ſpeaking of himſelfe, and others. All is yours (ſaith he) whether it be Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, &c. Euen ſo, all is yours, all are but ſeruants to you, ye are Chriſtes, Hee is your Lord, ye haue none other lord, but Chriſt. Thē the Church muſt haue a great prerogatiue, juriſdiction, and liberty. She is a Queene, and if euer there was in any countrey a juriſdiction and libertie, ſhee hath it giuen her of her Spouſe, the Lord IESVS. Then ye know what ſhould follow: If ſhee haue a libertie and juriſdiction, I will ſpeake that which the Apoſtle ſpeaketh in the ſecond epiſt. to the Corin. chap. 13. verſ. 10. God hath not giuen me (ſaith Paule) power to your deſtruction, but all the power which GOD hath giuen mee is to your edification. The GOD of

Heauen gaue neuer to anie creature in Heauē no
                  •
                earth, power to doe againſt her, but all to maintaine her in her liberty. Then meddle not with her juriſdiction. Let none earthly power meddle with it, and beware that no irruption bee made within it. There was neuer Emperour nor Monarch of this worlde, that made irruption within it, that euer wanne by it. Therefore, let euerie ſoule beware to meddle with this libertie: for certainelie, that ſworde that ſhall be ſtrocken at her, ſhee ſhallding it back again like the hammer off the ſtithie. Reade the Eccleſiaſticall Hiſtories, yee ſhall ſee, that neuer man got the vpper-hand, that euer medled with it. And therefore, the LORD open mens eyes, and let them ſee this, that they may reuerence this glorious Spouſe of IESVS CHRIST, as euer they would ſee that glorious Face of CHRIST IESVS Her Head: To whome with the Father, and the Holie Spirite, bee all Praiſe, Honour, & Glorie, worlde vvithout end: ſo bee it.
         
         
            
            THE NINTH SERMON.
            
               II. COR. CHAP. X.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 1
                     Now, I Paule, my ſelfe, beſeech you by the meekneſſe and gentleneſſe of Christ, who when I am preſent amongst you, am baſe, but am bolde towardes you, beeing abſent.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 2
                     And this I require you, that I neede not to be bolde when I am preſent with that ſame confidence wherewith I thinke to bee bolde against ſome, who ecteeme vs as though wee walked according to the fleſh.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 3
                     Neuertheleſſe, though wee walke in the fleſh, yet we doe not warre after the fleſh.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 4
                     (For the weapons of our warre-fare are not carnall, but mightie through God to cast downe Holdes.)
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5
                     Casting downe the imaginations, and euerie high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captiuitie euerie thought to the obedience of CHRIST.
                  
               
            
            
               THESE Corinthians, vnto whome the Apoſtle writeth, beeing before founded and grounded in the faith of IESVS CHRIST by this Miniſterie, yet afterward ſeduced and led aſide with falſe apoſtles,

Oratours 
                  •
               ather than Teachers, who preached the Goſpel of IESVS CHRIST with humane affected eloquence, beginne to diſdaine the Apoſtle, who 
                  •
               ounded and grounded them in that Faith of IESVS CHRIST, and to account of him euen as if he had not beene ſent, or had not bene an Apoſtle in verie deede, but had onelie giuen himſelfe out for an Apoſtle. Therefore, in this preſent Text, the Apoſtle beſeecheth them to account of him (as he was indeed) as the Apoſtle of Ieſus Chriſt, and deſireth them ſo to eſteeme of him: and ſo, taking occaſion, he falleth out in a verie high deſcription of his Apoſtleſhip. And firſt hee maketh a requeſt vnto them, Nowe, I Paule, my ſelfe, beſeech you, by the meekneſſe and gentleneſſe of Christ: Surelie, if yee will conſider their deſeruinges at the handes of the Apoſtle, they ſhould haue bene met more hardly, and ſharper language ſhould haue beene directed vnto them: Yet ye Apoſtle meeteth them gently, & directeth to them a meeke and gentle requeſt, I Paule, in mine own perſon, beſeech you, and that for the meekneſſe and gentleneſſe of Ieſus Chriſt, if euer ye had any taſte of that mercy & meekneſſe in Ieſus Chriſt towards you, euen for that meekeneſſe ſake, and for that mercies ſake, obey me, doe the thing which I bid you. So the Paſtor hath his leſſon firſt heere: It is the part and duetie of a Paſtor, who hath to doe with people, Firſt at the entrie to beginne with meekneſſe and lenitie: yea, amongſt all the properties that is required in a

faithfull Paſtor, this is not the leaſt to bee endued with lenitie and pitie: Lenitie, (I ſaye) ariſing not onelie of the conſideration of the miſerie of men, with whome hee hath to doe, (for all people are miſerable by nature, and all our preachinges are to a companie of miſerable creatures, who, beeing miſerable, hath neede of mercie, and craueth pitie) but ariſing alſo of a ſenſe and feeling of his owne wretchedneſſe and miſerie. What? Is hee not himſelfe a miſerable man by nature, as well as anie other perſon of the flocke, man or woman? Then againe, the mercie and lenitie of IESVS CHRIST which hee hath found towordes himſelfe, ſhoulde mooue and raiſe vp his lenitie and pitie towards his flocke.
            Therefore, Paule; beeing of minde to ſpeake to theſe Corinthians, how be it he had matter of ſharpeneſſe & threatning offered vnto him by them, yet the mercy of Chriſt towards him, who was ſo miſerable himſelfe, vntill hee got that mercie, changeth all ſharpneſſe to lenity▪ & turneth his threatnings which hee might haue vſed, in a pitifull requeſt. Next the people likewiſe hath their leſſon here For, as the lenitie pitie, and meekneſſe of Ieſus Chriſt ſhould mooue the Paſtor to lenitie towards y• people, euen ſo this ſame lenitie & meekneſſe of our Lord Ieſus ſhould moue the people to obey the gentle and humble requeſt of the Paſtor. And he or ſhe that euer hath felt in heart, and taſted the ſweetneſſe of the mercie of GOD in

IESVS CHRIST, will not ſo ſoone heare of this lenitie and mercie, for CHRISTS mercies ſake, or for His lenities ſake, but as ſoone they wil bee moued to obey the requeſt. And they againe, who continue ſtubborne & diſobedient, notwithſtanding of a duetifull and lawfull requeſt, I ſaye (for my part) that ſtubborne hearted bodie neuer knew what Chriſt meaned, neuer felt remiſſion of ſinnes through the blood of Ieſus Chriſt. They that will not doe the thing which they ſhould doe for the mercies ſake of Chriſt, ſhall neuer taſte of that mercie, nor of Ieſus Chriſt. Affuredlie, they ſerue for nothing but to be faggots for the fire of Hell: for where mercy is not, there muſt be judgement.
            Now in the latter part of the verſe, hee ſetteth downe a deſcription of himſelfe, I Paul, who when I am preſent among you am baſe, but am bolde towardes you being abſent. This is one thing in effect with that which followeth afterwards in the 10. verſe of this chap. (for this diſ-eſtimation of himſelfe, is from that light account and regarde that they made of him, and of the Goſpel which he teached) For the Letters (ſaith he) are ſore and ſtrong, but his bodilie preſence is weake, and his ſpeach is of no value. He here deſcribeth himſelf conforme to their diſ-eſtimation of him, for the miſ-liking is recent in his memorie, yet his ſpeach is meeke to them. This matter would haue angered a good man, but Paul is ſo farre from anger, that hee breaketh out

in a gentle and humble requeſt. Whereupon I note, That the vnthankfullnes of the world ſhould not breake our patience, or cauſe vs forget that lenitie wherewith the Embaſſadour of Ieſus Chriſt ſhoulde bee endued: for lenitie is bounde to vs, and wee are bound to it, yea, although this worlde be neuer ſo vngrate, yet we are bound to ſtriue by long ſuffering to ouercome in the ende. Secondly, think ye not but Paul ſhould haue thoght ſhame to regiſtrate (as it were) his own ſhame to ye poſteritie to come, ſo that I may ſay, Paul, thou waſt of none eſtimatiō, & euery one may ſee in how ſmal acoūt he was amongſt theſe people. There is none of vs all, if there be anie infirmitie in vs, but wee would haue it hidden: but a man hauing a good conſcience, and diſcharging a faithful part of duetie, is nothing blotted by the ſpeaking of the world, nor the regiſtrating of their ſpeaches, is nothing to his ſhame: But the ſhame pertaineth to the people: their words and deeds towards the Paſtor remaineth in his memorie, and in the memorie of God, and ſhall continue vntill the day of Iudgement; except they repent: yea, euen theſe ſame wordes ſpoken againſt Paule, ſhall meete them in the teeth at the day of Iudgement.
            Yet I ſee in theſe wordes a ſharpneſſe and rebuking mixed with lenitie, to let vs ſee, that when we haue to doe with wicked men, lenitie and meekeneſſe ſhould not be corrupted, but tempered with ſharpeneſſe, that vngratefull men may be brought

to a ſenſe and feeling of ſinne and miſerie. Lenitie alone will not ſerue the turne, but with ſweetneſſe ſowreneſſe muſt be mingled, that the word ſpoken may be the more effectuall and forcible, who when I am preſent among you am baſe, &c. The worlde, and the men of this world account of nothing but of that which hath a faire ſhew, and that they eſteem highly of, although it were neuer ſo litle worthie: The ground whereof is this: All men and women by nature are hypocrites, painted bodies, no ſoliditie in them, all are viſorned folke: hee commeth out, ſhee commeth out, all masked and diſguiſed: For what is an hypocrite, but a falſe ſhowe? Nothing ſurely: And therefore, becauſe there is no ſoliditie in themſelues, they can account nothing of ſoliditie: as hee is himſelfe, ſuch is his eſtimation of others: as ſhee is her ſelfe, ſuch is her eſtimation of others. O! would to God euery man and woman could diſ
                  •
               en
                  ••
                into themſelues, and know their owne nature.
            Amongſt all things in the world, this Miniſtery is the vileſt, it is the baſeſt thing vnder the Sunne to the eye of man. Other callinges will haue ſome outward glory, a king will haue an outward glory, but this Miniſtery hath none outwarde glory: and yet there is no calling vnder the Sunne that hath ſo precious a ſubject, as the calling of the Miniſterie: Yea the moſte ſolide thing in the worlde is vnder it, euē that which maketh men and women ſolide, and without it no ſoliditie, but all is a
                  •
               
               
chaf
                  •
               e before the winde. The Apoſtle (2. COR. 4. 7) compareth IESVS CHRIST, and His graces, which are reuealed in the Goſpell, to a treaſure, and the Apoſtles themſelues to lame veſſels: But wee haue (ſaieth hee) this treaſure in earthlie veſſels, that the excellencie of that power might bee of GOD, and not of vs. There the moſt glorious thing in the worlde is in the baſeſt veſſels, and weakeſt inſtrumentes. What maketh the worlde to contemne and diſdaine this treaſure of the Goſpell, but the weakneſſe of theſe veſſels, & the baſeneſſe of theſe ſillie men whome GOD hath put into this ſeruice? Indeede I maruell not, howbeit I ſee the contempt of this Miniſterie, (and ſurelie there is nothing more vilder in the eares of men of SCOTLAND, than to heare the name of a Miniſter) but I wonder rather, that euer man or woman ſhould be altered by this Miniſterie: the one is of nature, the other is of grace. Wonder neuer at nature, but wonder to ſee a man or woman altered by grace. Alas! this is to bee pitied, men loſe their part of theſe vnſearcheable riches in IESVS CHRIST, becauſe they ſtumble at the ba
                  •
               eneſſe of this Miniſterie: For hee that eſteemeth not of this Miniſterie, neuer taſted of the ſweetneſſe of IESVS CHRIST: he that eſteemeth not of the lame veſſell, hath no part of the riches which are in the lame veſſell. In the words following, But I am bolde towardes you, whilest I am abſent. I ſee they were compelled to ſee and feele

ſome boldneſſe in Paule, though not in his preſence, yet in his abſence, though not by his words in ſpeaking, yet by his writing. There is none ſo ſenſeleſſe in the world, none ſo dead, none ſo hard hearted againſt the power of this Miniſterie, but either by word or writing, either by abſence, or els by preſence, they ſhall bee compelled to feele the force of i
                  •
               : Yea, this Miniſterie ſhall either bee the ſauour of life to life, or els the ſauour of death to death vnto them.
            
               And this I require you, that I need not to be bold, &c. In this next verſe we haue his requeſt expreſſed in few words, which is as much in effect as if he wold ſay, Seeing I am the Apoſtle of Ieſus Chriſt, I beſeech you to acknowledge of me as of an Apoſtle. The argument is, If ye count not of mee, whileſt I am abſent, when I come, if there be anie power in me, I ſhall make you knowe it, and vtter it againſt you: ye ſhall finde me bolde, and not baſe: ye ſhall finde ſowrneſſe, and not meekneſſe: ſharpneſſe, and not lenitie. Here he telleth by a compariſon, what kinde of boldneſſe hee will vſe: When I come to you, I ſhall vſe the ſame boldneſſe towardes you, that I vſe towardes the falſe apoſtles: and as concerning ye falſe apoſtles, I ſhal thunder out againſt them ſhame, and confuſion, & ignominie, ſo that they that coūteth not of me, that I am the Apoſtle of Ieſus Chriſt, ſhall finde my power▪
            
            Wee may ſee here. Paul would bee counted by theſe Corinthians, to be the Apoſtle of Ieſus Chriſt:

is he therefore ſeeking his owne honour and glorie? No, hee is ſeeking the weale of the people. It is the weale of the people to count of the ſeruant of GOD, for when they count not of him, they cannot account nor accept of his doctrine: and when the doctrine is not well accepted of, then goeth the building ſlowlie forward Alas! this euill eſteeming of men in the Miniſterie, is the cauſe that ſo fewe are edified, and ſo manie to remaine faithleſſe: for where the man is lightlied, the doctrine is contemned: and where the doctrine is contemned, there can be no faith, no edifying: ſo that it is a greater matter to contemne the Miniſterie, than men thinke it to be.
            Marke theſe wordes, That I neede not to be bolde▪
                Heere wee ſee plainlie, that lenitie and meekneſſe is required in a Paſtor: The Paſtor is euer bounde firſt to beginne with lenitie and meekneſſe, ſeueritie ſhoulde onelie come vpon neceſſitie, when lenitie and meekneſſe is contemned, and cannot ſerue. Reade in ye 1. epiſt. to the Cor. chap. 4. verſ. 21. Take your cho
                     •
                  ſe, whether I ſhall come to you with a rodde, or in loue, and in the ſpirite of meekneſſe: meaning, that hee woulde come in ſeueritie, if lenitie would not ſerue. And 2. Cor. 13. 2. when hee ſeeth that they cānot be won with lenitie, he changeth his voice, & ſaith, If I come againe, I ſhall not ſpare you: when I come againe, I ſhall terrifie you with the power of God, becauſe ye throw it out of mee. I ſee againe, hee is verie ſharpe againſt theſe falſe

Oratours, hee vſeth no lenitie towardes them. Yet there is a diſcretion to bee had betwixt the dealing with falſe teachers, and with the people. There ſhould be lenitie vſed towards the people: but what ſhould bee with a deceiuing lowne, that beginneth to bring the trueth in ſlander? Hee muſt bee handled with ſeueritie and rigour: no lenitie ſhould bee vſed towardes theſe that crcepe in daylie to bring the trueth in ſlander: Yee know their voyces, Who made LVTHER a Miniſter? Who made CALVIN a Miniſter? But they ſhall finde it one day that LVTHER and CALVIN were Miniſters, and that there was a power in the word which LVTHER and CALVIN teached: For this is true that PAVLE ſpake, The LORD conſumeth them daylie with the word that commeth out of the mouthes of His Ministers, and ſhall conſume them daylie, vntill the Daye of the LORDS appearance.
            
            In the third verſe hee falleth out in a deſcription of the maner of his walking, Neuertheleſſe, though wee walke in the fleſh, &c. Though wee liue in the fleſh, that is, in the infirmitie of this common nature: for, to liue in the fleſh heere, is to liue in the weakneſſe of nature, yet we walke not, or warre not, according to the fleſh: that is, our actions and doinges in our Apoſtleſhip are not fleſhlie and weake: Yee ſee the outward bodie is weake, but meaſure not the inward man after the bodie and ſtrength thereof: for, ſuppoſe my bodie be weake,

yet mine actions are ſtrong. So hee taketh to him one thing, and refuſeth another.
            Nowe, Brethren, let euerie man that liueth take gladlie to him frailtie and weakneſſe: and if men call thee weake, take it to thee: for hee that will bee ſtrong in himſelfe, cannot bee ſtrong in GOD. In this ſame Epiſtle (Chap. 12. verſe 9.) The power of GOD (ſaieth hee) is made perfect in mine infirmitie. Of all men in the worlde, a man whoſe calling is to bee a Miniſter, ſhoulde take chiefelie vpon him this frailtie and weakneſſe: yea, let him accept it more redilie than it can bee caſten to him: and as hee is fraile and weake, ſo hee muſt feele his frailtie and weakneſſe, and the chiefeſt part of his preaching ſhould bee of frailtie: and that Miniſter that neuer felt his owne miſerie, cannot perſwade the people that they are miſerable, and bring them to an acknowledging of it.
            And heerein appeareth the wiſdome of GOD, who chooſeth not to this Miniſterie thoſe who haue the greateſt graces of nature, and naturall giftes, but Hee chooſeth out the weake ones, and contemptible bodies, that are amongſt men, and Hee ſetteth them vp to bee Preachers to mankinde, as Hee ſpeaketh in the firſt Epiſtle to the CORINTHIANS, in the firſt Chapter, and the ſixe and twentie verſe, Yee ſee, Brethren, your calling, howe that not manie wiſe men amongst you according to the fleſh, not manie mightie, not manie noble are called,
               
               but GOD hath choſen the fooliſh thinges of the worlde, to confound the wiſe, and GOD hath choſen the weake thinges of the worlde, to confound the mightie. So the Lord chooſeth the ignoble and ſillie creatures, and ſetteth them vp aboue kinges, yea, and the greateſt Monarches of the worlde, to beate them downe.
            Marke againe, as euerie man ſhoulde willinglie take to him this frailtie and weakneſſe of nature, ſo let him refuſe the other, that is to ſaye, let him refuſe to walk according to the fleſh: To walke according to the fleſh, and to warre according to the fleſh, is all one, (for the walking of a Chriſtian is a warrefare.) Holde backe theſe fleſhlie actions, and namelie, theſe actions of ſinne: take to thee the weakneſſe of nature, but caſt off ſinne: For if thine actions bee altogether fleſhlie, bee thou ſure thou haſt no part of the power of God, nor of the life of IESVS CHRIST: thou haſt but the life of a man, or of a woman, and ſhalt die like a man or a woman without the life of GOD. But aboue all men in the worlde, let a Miniſter eſchewe theſe actions of the fleſh, looke that his actions bee powerfull, and that the power of GOD appeare in his walking: ſo that when in outwarde appearance hee is but a weake bodie, yet it may bee ſaid of him, yt he is ſtrong in Chriſt: For as weake as hee is to looke to, yet hee is a ſtrong warrier, the Spirite is ſenſible in him, hee ſpeaketh not like a man onelie, there is another

grace conuoying his wordes, than can accompanie the worde of man. If thou bee a Miniſter, although thou were neuer ſo ſtrong in bodie, if thou findeſt not GODS power in thy life and doctrine, I will not giue one penny for thee: looke that thou feele the power that Paule felt, as yee reade in the 2. Epiſt. to the Corin. chap. 4. verſ. 16. when hee was dying in the bodie, then was the inner man quickeſt in him: and the more the bodilie life was away, the more the life of, GOD was manifeſt in him. A Miniſter that hath not the power of GOD within him, howe can hee preach of CHRISTES power, or of His life? howe can hee bee a Miniſter of life, that hath no taſto of life himſelfe? how can he preach of life, that neuer felt life? of neceſsity, he muſt be a ſhameleſſe man, that will ſpeake of Chriſt, of His mercie, life, and power, when in the meane time hee knoweth not what the mercie, life, & power of Chriſt meaneth: that man was neuer called of God to bee a Miniſter, all that hee ſpeaketh is like the babling of a Parockquet, the power of God doeth the deede: & therfore, God chooſeth the weake inſtruments, that the world may ſee, that it is onelie His grace, and not the gifts of the men that doeth the turne. He calleth it not his walking, but warring & fighting. The life of a Miniſter is but a warre-fare: and hee who would bee a Miniſter, ſhoulde make him for warre-fare, make him for paine and labour, otherwiſe, let him neuer ſtriue for that calling:

Yea, there is nothing ſo laborious or painefull, but the life of a Miniſter is compared vnto it. We neuer read in the Scriptures where it is compared to any thing that importeth eaſineſſe or idleneſſe. 1. CORIN. 9. 26. The Miniſter is compared to a Warrier, then to a runner, running with all his maine ſpeede, ſtriuing to come to the marke, neuer looking ouer his ſhoulder to this or that thing, as manie will doe▪ ſaying, I haue done this turne, or that turne. No, when thou haſt done all thou canſt doe, ſay, thou haſt done nothing. Then hee is compared to a wrastler, and to an husbandman, that holdeth the plough from morning till euening. In all theſe compariſons of the Scriptures, the figure is not ſo great as the thing figurate: when an heauenlie thing is compared with a worldlie thing, the worldlie thing is nothing in reſpect of the heauenlie thing. And therefore, there is no man comparable to the Miniſter in labour, the warrier, the runner, the plow-man, is nothing to him.
            The Apoſtle writing to Timothie, ſaieth in his ſecond Epiſtle, Chap. 2. verſ. 5. If thou fight not, thou ſhal
                     •
                   neuer attaine to the crowne: and why ſhouldest thou loſe ſo faire a crowne for a momentes fighting? No man (ſaieth hee) is crowned▪ except hee fight faithfullie. And 2. Timoth. 4. 8. There is a crowne of righteouſneſſe laide vp▪ not onelie for mee, but for all thoſe that loue the bright comming of the LORD IESUS. When Paul was an olde man, and leauing this worlde, I
               
               haue ended (ſaieth hee) my warrefare, and I haue foghten a good fight, and therefore I looke for that crowne. If hee had neuer beene a runner, hee would neuer haue taken this promiſe to himſelfe, A crowne is laide vp for mee: And therefore, the LORD giue vs grace to labour for a while, that wee may reſt from our labour in the life to come.
            In the next verſe hee prooueth that his warring and fighting in this worlde was not according to the fleſh, taking the argument from the weapons and armour wherewith hee fought, ſuch as the armour is ſuch ſhall the warring bee, if the armour bee weake▪ the fight ſhall be weake: if the armour bee ſtrong, the fight ſhall bee ſtrong. Our armour (ſaieth the Apoſtle) is not fleſhlie, our weapons are not of fleſh nor fraile matter, but our weapons are ſtrong through GOD, the power of GOD is in them, GOD is in the worde which wee ſpeake, Hee ſetteth downe the ende, To beate downe ſtrong holdes: This power will beate them downe, nothing will gaine-ſtand it.
            Brethren, yee ſee by experience, put a raſour into a childes hand, it will cut: this cutting commeth not of the ſtrgēth of the childs hand, but of the ſharpnes of y• raſour. Take a gun, & put it into a childs hand, hee will ſlay a man, or ſhoote thorow a woodden doore: this is not by the ſtrength of the childe, but by the ſtrength of the armour. Euen ſo, GOD by His worde in the mouth of the ſillieſt and weakeſt bodie in the worlde▪ will

ſlaye▪ and kill the ſtrongeſt man that goeth vpon earth, if He put His word & it were but in a blabbering mouth as He did in Moſes, that word ſhall come and pierce in thorowe fleſh and bone, till it come to the mergh, and ſhall diuide aſunder the ſoule and the Spirit, Hebr. 4. 12. It is not the man that doeth this, but the weapon, the word that is in his mouth. The multitude of this world; is beguiled, if they ſee a poore man ſet vp, they will meaſure ye grace of God by the man, & they think the inward man bee as weake as the outward: and ſo Kinges and Princes are beaten downe this way, and ſlaine, Earles fall downe ſlaine, men and women of all rankes fall downe ſlaine, as ſure as euer ye ſaw a man ſlaine in the bodie.
            Ye remember the Hiſtorie of Samuel, 1. Sam. 15. 32. he calleth for king Agag, and as ſoone as Agag commeth forward, and had eſchewed the furie of the young king, thought that he ſhould eſchewe the ſword of the aged man alſo: but Samuel calleth for the ſword, taketh it in his hand, & cutteth him in pieces: So this worde, in the mouth of weake bodies, ſlayeth Kings and Queenes in the worlde, when they are laughing & playing they are ſlaine without their expectation.
            Yet in this ſame verſe marke the force of this armour, Yee heare not of the building, but of the throwing downe. It is true, he buildeth vp alſo, but thou muſt firſt be brought down & humbled, and then be builded vp vpō a new ground. What is he

that will build a new worke vpon an olde rotten wall? thou wouldeſt keepe nature and ſinne, & yet be a new creature: no, thou muſt firſt renounce nature: for the ſlaughter of the old man muſt go before the quickning of the new man.
            In the verſe following, hauing ſpoken of the weapens, he commeth to the warrefare, and heere is a ſtranger battell than euer was foghten, Wee throwe downe (ſaieth hee) the imaginations, and euerie high thing, &c. There is a battell, and a ſtrange battell: Paul is the fighter of this battell▪ the warriour of the Lord Ieſus, a warrier to Him, to win priſoners to Him, to take Kinges and Princes by the cares, and lead them to Chriſt. That thing that is aſſaulted in this battell, and againſt which Paul hath taken armour, is firſt the cogitations. By theſe cogitations is meaned the whole faculties of the ſoule, for the principall function is the reaſon of man. Nowe what is ſhee doing, but ſitting in her Caſtle, building her rampiers, and caſting her fowſies about her, and ſnaring her ſelfe in her owne nette? And let thee bee thou needeſt none other to trappe thee, thou wilt trappe thy ſelfe, take thou as much pride in thine own engine as thou wil
                  •
               , if thou haue no more▪ woe is thee: It ſhall fetter thee, and take thee in the grinne, as ſurelie as euer thou ſaweſt a birde caught in the nette of a fowler. The next thing that Paule aſſaulteth in this battell, is euerie high thing that is exalted againſt GOD: this I take to bee the pride

of the heart, which as an high mountaine, riſing vp as it were to the heauen, exalteth it ſelfe againſt GOD, and holdeth out GOD, and the light of GOD. Theſe then are the thinges which Paul aſſaulteth Nowe to come to the battell, the firſt thing that Paule doeth, hee wealdes his weapons ſo skilfullie, that firſt of all he beateth down all the imaginations and reaſonings of the mind, which are as rampieres and fowſies wherewith ſhee circuiteth her ſelfe to holde out GOD and His light. Next, hee aſſaulteth the pride of the heart, which as a mountaine exalted it ſelf againſt GOD, hee beateth it downe, and maketh it equall with the ground. Thirdlie, hauing beaten downe all, hee commeth and taketh the thiefe by the necke, and leadeth him by the haire captiue to IESVS CHRIST, not to himſelfe, that he ſhould bee king ouer her: No. IESVS CHRIST is the King ouer the ſoule, as the Apoſtle in the ſecond epiſt▪ to the Corinth. chap. 11. verſ. 2. voweth the Church of GOD not to himſelfe, but to her Spouſe, to the ende that ſhee may bee ſafe, and GOD glorified. The man that ſeeketh his owne gaine, is but an hyreling. There are three actions heere, whereof the firſt two are none other thing▪ but the deſtroying of the ſinne that is in the mind and in the heart. The third is the ſauing of man, by leading him captiue to Ieſus Chriſt, for the leading of a man captiue to Ieſus Chriſt, is his ſafetie, and the libertie of the ſoule is this captiuitie,

and the ſlauerie of the ſoule is libertie to ſinne. When ye were ſlaues to ſinne (ſaith the Apoſtle Paul in the ſixt Chapter of the Epiſtle to the Romanes, the twentie verſe) then yee were free from righteouſneſſe. Marke heere a wonderfull power of God in this baſe and ſillie Miniſterie, (O! would to GOD men coulde knowe this power) deſtroying the deceite of reaſon, and beating down the pride of the heart of man, mounting vp againſt GOD. Alas, ſo great is the power of ſinne, that it hath no match vnder heauen but this Miniſterie. I will tell it ouer againe, There is nothing to throw this power downe but this Miniſterie. When this Miniſterie was not in the world amongſt the Gentiles (of the which SCOTLAND was one part, for our Progenitors were Gentiles without GOD in the world) ſinne raigned to death: (Roman. 5. 21) Multitudes of Gentiles periſhed: but from the time that Ieſus Chriſt, the author of grace, came into the world, and brought with Him this Miniſtery, firſt He himſelfe, thereafter His Apoſtles, amongſt whome Paul was as painfull as anie man) made it manifeſt howe powerfull this Miniſterie was by demoliſhing the kingdom of ſinne, for then grace beganne to reigne, and the power of GOD was manifeſted.
            Brethren, I dare affirme the onelie thing that holdeth down the power of ſinne is this ſillie baſe Miniſterie, take it away, (for men wold faine haue it away) and ſhoote it to the doore, (and for ought

that I can ſ
                  ••
               , I thinke it ſhall goe away) ſinne ſhall come to an hight. Take away the thing that holdeth downe the head of ſinne, and it ſhall reigne. Then, O miſerable Scotland! heere I denounce ſhame & ignominie ſhall come to thee, ſhame and confuſion to King and Court, Land and Burgh, if this candleſticke be remoued. This ſhall be found by experience, if euer thing was true. And thou that wouldeſt 
                  •
               un to damnation, haſt the remoouing of it, that thou mayeſt haſtē thine own damnation. Nowe the laſt thing I ſee is the proper effect of this Miniſtery of the bleſſed God (& would to God the worlde could ſee the glorie of it▪) the proper effect is not to ſlay men, but to ſaue them. This worlde thinketh that wee are come to ſlaye them: No, wee are come to ſlay ſinne in you, that will ſlay you, if it be not ſlaine. Paul (in the 1. epiſt▪ to the Cor. chap. 3. verſ. 12. & 13.) compareth the Miniſtery to a burning fire, that burneth vp haye, ſtubble, and trees: euen ſo it burneth vp thy ſinne, and the droſſe of thy nature▪ and
                  ••
               l the vanities of thine heart, but ſaueth thy ſelſe. Howe is this that the world cannot abide the meane of their ſaluation? they cannot get reſt neither night nor day, till they get away the thing that ſaueth them. Nowe it ſaueth the man, by taking him, and leading him captiue vnder the King of glorie. Ye ſee they that are ſuperiours in the battell, when they ſay to anie man. Bee taken, if hee will not bee taken, they will ſlay him there: Euen ſo as truelie, i
                  •
               
               
thou wilt bee ſtubburne, and wilt not bee taken in this fielde, this word ſhall ſlay thee. Therefore, bleſſed are they that can ſuffer the ordinance of GOD, and ſtand ſtill vntill ſinne bee ſlaine, and they themſelues bee ledde captiues vnder Chriſt, for that captiuitie vnder Him is true freedome. To that immortall and euerlaſting King, bee all honour and glorie, for euermore,
            Amen.
         
         
            THE TENTH SERMON.
            
               PHILIPPIANS, CHAP. I.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 18
                     What then? yet CHRIST is preached all maner of wayes, whether it bee vnder a pretence, or ſincerelie: and I therein joye, and will joye:
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 19
                     For I knowe, that this ſhall turne to my ſaluation, through your prayers, and by the helpe of the Spirit of IESUS CHRIST.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 20
                     As I heartilie looke for, and hope, that in nothing I ſhall bee aſhamed, but that with all confidence, as alwayes, ſo nowe CHRIST ſhall bee magnified in my bodie, whether it bee by life or by death:
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 21
                     For CHRIST is to mee both in life and in death aduantage.
                  
                  
                     22. And whether to liue in the fleſh were profitable for mee, and what to chooſe I know not:
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 23
                     For I am greatlie in doubt on both ſides, deſiring to bee looſed, and to bee with CHRIST, which is best of all.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 24
                     Neuertheleſſe, to abide in the fleſh is more needefull for you.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 25
                     And this I am ſure of, that I ſhall abide, and with you all continue, for your furtherance, and joye of your faith:
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 26
                     That yee may more aboundantlie rejoyce in JESUS CHRIST for me, by my comming to you againe.
                  
               
            
            
               PAVL lying in bandes at ROME, there riſeth vp two ſortes of Preachers: The firſt ſort of them that preached ſincerelie, that GOD and His glorie might be aduanced. The ſecond ſort of them that preached not ſincerelie, not for the aduancement of Chriſt nor His Goſpell, but to adde afflictions to Paule bands, moued with ambition and enuie towards him.
            In the firſt verſe which wee haue read in your audience, Paule vttereth his minde concerning theſe two ſortes of Preachers, and this is his mind in effect, Let them (ſaieth hee) preach as they will preach, let them preach of ſinceritie for the glorie of Chriſt, let them preach for the faſhion: howeuer they preach, (preaching the trueth of God)

CHRIST is preached, euen by them who preacheth not ſincerelie. And therfore, becauſe Chriſt is preached, I rejoyce notwithſtanding of all that injurie which I receiue by their preaching: I rejoyce and will rejoyce, and no man will bee able to take my joye from me. Shortlie then, there is Paules minde concerning theſe two ſortes.
            My doctrine ſhall bee generall: And the firſt thing that I marke heere is this, (and anie of you may ſee it) The Lord is glorified, Chriſt is magnified, euen by a counterfeite doing of men, when they doe the thing that is good: yet not in ſinceritie, nor of purpoſe to glorifie GOD in their doing. But their purpoſe not beeing to glorifie God in their doing, (they not doing ſincerelie) howbeit Hee getteth His owne glorie by their doing, yet they ſhall get little thankes. It is not ſo much the turne it ſelfe, the action it ſelfe, preaching, or whatſoeuer it bee, that procureth to a man thanks and grace at the handes of God, as it is the purpoſe & intention in doing. I had rather doe the ſobereſt thing in the world, and if it were 
                  〈…〉
                eate my meate, and drinke my drinke, of purpoſe to glorifie God in my doing, than to do the greateſt and faireſt worke that can be ſeene to the eye of man, without purpoſe to glorifie God in that doing. Marke it: Whether yee eat, whether ye drinke, or whatſoeuer ye doe, little or much, do all to the glorie of God, ſaieth Paul, 1. Cor. 10. 31. And therefore, Brethren, there is nothing that a

man ſhould ſo much looke to in his doinges and actions, as to his purpoſe, and to the intention of his heart. Looke thou as thou wilt, the Lord looketh chiefelie to euerie mans intention and purpoſe. He that preacheth, what is to bee reſpected with what meaſure of grace he preach, if in preaching his intention be to glorifie God & Chriſt: whatſoeuer anie man or woman doeth, let them looke aboue all things, that in doing their intention be to glorifie God, as euer they would looke for thanks at His hands. This is a leſſon. I ſee here another thing. The Goſpell is aduanced, IESVS CHRIST is glorified in Paules hurt, and who is a dearer man to Chriſt, than `Paul? The leſſon then is this. Wee ſee the Lord is glorified, when thoſe whom He loueth beſt, is damnified in this world, in their hurt and domage Hee getteth His glorie: that thing which is done againſt them in malice, the Lord therein is glorified.
            Well then, I learne by the example of Paule, If ſo bee that my GOD is glorified in mine hurt, if He getteth aduantage by my damnage & skathe: then vnderſtanding that glorie redoundeth vnto Him by my ſuffering, and it were by my death, I am bound to rejoyce I rejoyce, (ſaieth the Apoſtle) and ſhall rejoyce: I am bound to rejoyce, and thou art bound to rejoyce ſtill in glorifying God to the ende. So aboue all thinges, the glory of Chriſt ſhold be ſought. What am I to be reſpected, & my ſhame, hurt & death? what art thou to be reſpected

thy ſhame, hurt and death? if it redound to ye glory of Him who made me and thee for His glorie?
            Now, when he hath ſhewed his joye and mind concerning theſe two ſortes of men, in the next verſe he commeth to the cauſe of his joye in that the LORD was glorified in his hurt and domage. For (ſaieth hee) I knowe that this ſhall turne to my ſaluation, &c. That thing that is done to mine hurt, it ſhall bee ſo chaunged and turned about, that, againſt the expectation of men who woulde hurt mee, the LORD ſhall worke out my ſaluation. There is the leſſon. If I can rejoyce, & thou canſt rejoyce, that the LORD getteth glory by thine or mine hurt or skathe, wee may bee aſſured, that our trouble ſhall be wonderfullie altered & changed: that which was done to our hurt, ſhall turne to our ſaluation. The Apoſtle Paul ſaieth, (in the 8. chapter of the epiſtle to the Romanes, verſe 28.) To them who loueth God, all things commeth for the best: For if the glorie of GOD bee deare to thee, if thou preferre His glory aboue thy ſaluation, be aſſured thy life and ſaluation ſhall bee deare vnto Him: yea, thy ſaluation ſhall bee dearer vnto Him, than His glorie can bee vnto thee: for thou canſt not loue Him ſo well as He loueth thee. Moſes (Exod. 32. 32.) vttereth a wonderfull zeale to GODS glorie, and ſaieth, Ere Thou deſtroye this people, raze mee out of the booke of Life: that is, altogether deſtroye mee. But what anſwere gets hee? No Moſes, I had rather raze them

out of my booke who haue ſinned againſt mee. Paul deſireth that he may be an Anathema, Rom. 9. 3. and that for the zeale hee had to the glorie of God. But Moſe, ſhall neuer bee ſcraped out of the booke of God, becauſe hee loueth Gods glorie: Paul ſhall neuer bee accurſed, becauſe hee loueth Gods glorie. And if thou wilt looke to His glorie, all that euill which thou canſt wiſh to thee for His glory, ſhall be turned to thine health and ſaluation. Then yee ſee there is nothing that we can loſe by ſeeking of Gods glorie. Our damnage ſhal be euer turned to our aduantage.
            In the next part of the verſe, and the verſe following, is ſet downe the maner, and the ordinarie manes whereby the hurt and domage that the godlie ſuffer for the glorie of God, is turned ouer to their good: The Lord onelie is able to turne it to their good. Who is able to turne darkneſſe into light? death into life? ignominie into honour, but Hee? It paſſeth the cunning of all the creatures to make this wonderfull change: The Lord onlie is able to make this change. And certainlie, the ſhame, trouble, and affliction, that the godlie ſuffer in this life, woulde all bee the beginning of Hell, except that moſte skilfull crafts-man, the Lord, come in, and made this wonderfull alteration, and turned all theſe thinges to their aduantage, except Hee turned death to life, ignominie to honour, and trouble to joye, the eſtate of the godlie in their ſufferinges were moſte miſerable.

Thinke not that theſe thinges are good in themſelues: No, death is not good of it ſelfe, it is a puniſhment for ſinne, Rom. 6. 23. The Lord onlie maketh the change, and maketh death to bee the entrie to life: but the Lord doeth all this by ordinarie meanes and middle: and yet all the meanes which Hee vſeth, derogateth nothing to His glorie, becauſe they all come of Him, and Hee hath the glorie of all. Seeing then, in making of this wonderfull chāge of darkneſſe into light, of death into life, of woe into joye &c. there muſt bee ordinarie meanes: woe be to thee that contemneſt the meanes, for if thou doe it, the trouble ſhall lie ſtill on thee till thou bee troubled in Hell: Sickneſſe ſhall bee ſickneſſe indeede to thee, death ſhall bee death indeede, and the beginning of Hell to thee.
            Then let vs take vp the meanes, as they lie here in order. Yee haue heard of one alreadie, to wit, Rejoycing that God is glorified in trouble. If (as I haue ſaide) thou canſt haue that heart and care of His glorie, that thou canſt rejoyce in thy trouble, that thy trouble glorifieth Him, bee aſſured a wonderfull alteration ſhall bee made of thy trouble: Trouble ſhall be no trouble, affliction ſhall be no affliction, death ſhall bee no death: Onelie get thou this deſire of His glorie.
            Nowe followeth the next meane: The Apoſtle ſaith, I am aſſured, that this thing ſhall turne to my ſaluation, through your prayers. As the care to the glorie of God is a meane to make this alteration; and

to turne our troubles to our ſaluation: ſo the care and ſolicity of the body of the Church, the interceſſion and prayer that the godlie maketh for vs, who lye in trouble, is another meane: for the prayers of the godlie for anie member of the bodie of the Church hath a wonderfull effect. They will turne miſerie into joye, darkneſſe into light, yea death into life. Yet howbeit others haue care of thee, lying in diſtreſſe, if thou thy ſelfe contemneſt and deſpiſeſt their care, if thou regardeſt not whether they pray for thee or not, & no body make interceſſion at GODS handes for thee, there ſhall bee nothing but trouble to thee: trouble ſhall alwayes continue trouble: affliction ſhall alwayes remaine affliction. And as thou contemneſt and deſpiſeſt the prayers of the Sainctes and the godlie for thee, ſo thou ſhalt lye ſtill in miſerie and drowne in miſerie at laſt. It is a follie to a man to thinke, that his owne care onelie for himſelfe will ſerue the turne, contemning and deſpiſing the care of all others for him: I cannot thinke that ſuch a one hath one ſpunke of godlineſſe in him, who will cōtemne the care of others: For it is certaine, the ſufficiencie of grace is not giuen to one man, or to one woman onelie, but to the whole members of the bodie. And therefore, there muſt bee a concurrance of the whole, all muſt concurre for thy good and ſaluation: for if the hand will ſtand vp and ſaye to the eye, to the mouth, to the foote, or to the reſt of the members,

Care for your ſelues: foote, care for thy ſelfe: wombe, care for thy ſelfe, &c. I will care for my ſelfe: were not this a fooliſh hand? woulde not this hand periſh and wither? yea, it woulde periſh if the mouth fedde it not, if the foote caried it not, if the wombe receiued not ſuſtenance to nouriſh it: Euen ſo if thou ſayeſt to the reſt of the members of the Church, Care for your ſelues, I will care for my ſelfe, thou ſhalt die like a drie member, and be cut off: no ſaluation but in the vnion of that bleſſed bodie of CHRIST, which is the Church. And none yet euer came to Heauen, but by a certaine concurrance of the reſt of the members of the Bodie, by praying by preaching, by admoniſhing exhorting, and rebuking If thou refuſe this concurrance in teaching, admoniſhing, and comforting thee, thou ſhalt neuer get Heauen. Paul (in the 8. chap. to the Romanes, verſ. 28.) ſaith, Wee knowe that all thinges worke together for the best, to them that loue GOD. Marke the force of the wordes. If there bee not a working-together for thy ſaluation, thou ſhalt not come to Heauen. There are two of the meanes whereby trouble and damnage is turned to ſaluation. Yet there are more of them, for hee ſaieth, And by the helpe of the Spirite of IESUS CHRIST. There is another meane. As it is a fault to one member to refuſe the helpe of the reſt of the members of the body of the Church, their prayers & interceſſion: ſo it is as great a fault, to leane ſo vpon the care of

anie of the members of the body, of the Church, or of the Miniſterie, in preaching, praying exhorting, and comforting, that in the meane time thou haue no care of thy ſelfe, to get the ſpirite and life within thee, for Chriſts Spirit is thy life: thou wilt not praye for thy ſelfe, but wilt bid the Church & Miniſtery pray for thee, as if that were enough. No, except that Spirite bee within thee, (which is the Spirit of Adoption) to make interceſſion with ſighes vnſpeakeable at the hands of God: downe ſhalt thou goe, albeit that the Church and whole members thereof would pleaſe to holde thee vp. What if the hand had no motion, life, nor ſtrēgth in it ſelfe, would the foote and the eye bee able to holde it vp? No, if the foote and the eye ſtriue to holde it vp, they ſhould rotte with the hand, and behoued to bee cut of: For whereto ſerueth a rotten member? It will infect the whole bodie, if it be not cut off. So if thou bee without ſpirite and life within thy ſelfe, how beit all the reſt of the members of the body of the Church would holde their hands about thee to holde thee vp, thou ſhalt fall downe and die. So as ye would haue others caring for you, care for your ſelfe, and ſee that yee haue the Spirit of God caring for you. If Moſes, Abraham, and all other faithfull men woulde praye for you, it is nothing. What good did Samuels prayers for Saul? The Lord ſtopped his mouth, and forbad him to praye for him. Thus yee haue heard of three meanes whereby this wonderfull change is

made: The firſt is the care of God and His glorie: The ſecond is the interceſſion of the reſt of the members of the body: the third is the Spirite of Chriſt interceading for vs, and the care which we haue of our ſelues. We haue need of theſe meanes. And certainlie the day is approaching, that experience will tell the trueth of theſe thinges. Paul, a man euer afflicted, in trouble and vnder danger, telleth of his owne experience what hee founde. But are there yet anie more meanes? Looke the verſe that followeth, As I (ſaith hee) heartilie looke for, and hope, &c. The worde importeth ſuch an hope, as when a man hath his head raiſed vp, his eyes open and bent, awayting for anie thing attentiuely. Wee ſee when a man looketh earneſtlie for any other, his head will bee lifted vp, his eyes will be bent, looking to that place where from he ſhould come: and if he loue him well, he wil looke attentiuely, hauing both heart and eyes bended vp, with hope of his comming. The like worde in the 8. chap. to the Rom. verſ. 19. is aſcribed to the creatures: They awaite with feruent deſire, when the ſonne of God ſhall be reuealed.
            I ſhall make the words more plaine: I hope, according to mine attentiue exſpectation, that in nothing I ſhall bee aſhamed: that is, that I ſhall neuer thinke ſhame of my Maiſter Ieſus Chriſt: becauſe, that if I thinke ſhame for any thing which I ſuffer for His cauſe, I thinke ſhame of Himſelfe. Hee ſaith, that in nothing I ſhall bee aſhamed: There is the

negatiue: I will be aſhamed of nothing. But what more? With all boldneſſe of ſpirite I ſhall magnifie Him in my bodie, not in my ſoule onelie, but in my bodie alſo: and that, Whether it bee in my life, or in my death. Hee caſteth in the argument of this aſſurance, as in all times by-gone, euer to this houre, I haue magnified Him in my bodie. So this by-gone experience (would he ſay) maketh me to be aſſured by hope, neuer to be aſhamed of Him, but to glorifie Him in life and death. Then take vp the leſſon. Amongeſt the reſt of the mean s whereby this change is made, of miſerie to felicitie, of death to life, and all thinges are made to ſerue to our ſaluation. Hope is one, and it is the fourth in number. Wherein ſtandeth this Hope? That in no affliction which I ſuffer for Chriſtes ſake I will bee aſhamed, and ſo ſhame the Lord. (For in ſuffering if thou bl
                  •
               ſheſt, and thinkeſt ſhame, thou ſhameſt Him) But by the contrarie, in all thinges that I ſhall doe or ſuffer in this bodie, I ſhall doe with courage, confidence, and libertie: I ſhall ſuffer with courage, confidence, and libertie. And ſo, in doing, in ſuffering in the bodie▪ I ſhall magnifie my LORD. So this is the point: If I glorifie Him before men with courage and boldneſſe in mine afflictions, I may bee aſſured, Hee ſhall glorifie me before His Father in Heauen, Mat. 10. 32. They that ſuffer with Him, ſhall reigne with Him, 2. Timoth. 2. 12. But by the contrary, if thou with bluſhing think ſhame of Him and of His Goſpel,

and of the afflictions of the Goſpel, if thou ſhame Him before the world, He ſhall ſhame thee before His Father, Mark. 8. 38. So this Hope is no ſmall matter, for if thou haue an aſſured Hope during thy whole life▪ thou ſhalt magnifie Chriſt, whatſoeuer falleth out in life or death, aſſure thy ſelfe all ſhall bee turned to the glory of God, and thy ſaluation. All the troubles that ſhall bee laide vpon thee in this worlde, ſhall bee ſo turned ouer, that they ſhall ſerue to thy good and conſolation. But if this hope be away, if thou lie ſluggiſhly, not hauing thine head raiſed vp, with cloſed eyes, not looking and hoping that thou ſhalt glorifie thy Lord, not caring for His glorie, either in thy life, or in thy death, all thy miſerie that lighteth vpon thee, ſhall remaine miſerie, and ſhall preſſe thee down to euerlaſting damnation. Looke then how precious this hope is? Learne another thing here. There ſtandeth much in theſe two, in shame and blushing, in confidence, libertie, and courage: I ſay to thee, there ſtandeth more in the conſequēts of ſuffering and doing, than ſtandeth in the ſuffering and doing it ſelfe. I ſuppoſe thou ſuffer the death for Chriſtes ſake, if thou bee ashamed in ſuffering, and haſt not libertie and courage, thou ſuffereſt not ſo much for CHRIST, as for thy ſelfe: and thy death is nothing elſe, but a death to thee, and thy ſuffering is nothing, but a ſuffering to thy ſelfe. Euen ſo, do what thou wilt doe to glorifie Him, if it be not done with libertie,

freedome, and courage, thou loſeſt thy trauell. Seeing then, that ſo much ſtandeth in the diſpoſition of the heart, let euery man looke that hee prepare himſelfe with courage and confidence againſt the daye of triall, that with confidence in ſuffering he may magnifie God: Paul ſaith to Timothie, in his 2. epiſt. chap. 1. verſ. 8. Bee not aſhamed of Chriſt, nor of me, that am His captiue. Thinke ſhame of none that ſuffer for Chriſt, but rather bee thou partaker of that affliction, to ſuffer with courage and confidence thoſe things with them.
            Yet marke another thing here: he ſaith, that he might magnifie Chriſt in his bodie: Hee ſpeaketh not of the ſoule. And ſo I obſeru; that of the very bodie. (let bee of the ſoule) euen of the very bodily maſſe which thou beareſt about with thee, a great duety is required for the glorifying of God and His Chriſt. When thou art liuing in thine actions, when thou art dying in thy death, it muſt be an inſtrument glorifying God, when thou art going vpon thy feete, it muſt bee an inſtrument of His glorie: when thou art lying in thy bedde, yea, the Lord muſt bee glorified in it, when it is diſſolued into aſhes in the graue. I marke this againſt that vaine conceite of men, who will ſaye, What care I, ſo I keepe a good minde to God, let mee proſtitute my body to harlotrie, gluttony, and all vices, yet I will keepe my ſoule to God. No, either God will haue all, or the Deuill will haue all. Awaye thou idolater, who wilt keepe thy ſoule to GOD,

and wilt bowe thy knee to Baal, the Deuill will get both ſoule and bodie. Paul ſaieth not, that the Lord hath only bought thy ſoule with a price, but that Hee hath bought both ſoule and body, that they ſhould glorifie God, 1. Corin. 6. 20, 
                  
                     •
                  ee are bought with a price, yee are not your owne. Fye, filthie bodie, that wilt ſay, May I not doe with my bodie as I pleaſe? Haſt thou power to reaue it out of the handes of the Lord? The Lord hath the power of thy body, and in that laſt day thou ſhalt bee challenged with theft and ſacriledge. And when hee hath ſaid, ye are bought with a price, hee ſubjoyneth, Glorifie God not in your ſpirite onely, but alſo in your bodies: Either Hee will haue both, or elſe none: Thinkeſt thou to ſend thy ſoule to God, and thy body to the Deuill? No, either the Lord ſhall get both, or both ſhall goe to Hell. Take heed how ye keepe theſe bodies, ye ſhall render accompt of them: Thy body ſhould be the Temple of the holie Spirit, if thou defile the ſeate of that holy One, ſhame ſhall light vpon thee. I marke heere: To aſſure himſelfe of continuance, that hee ſhall continue in glorifying God in life and death, he taketh an argument from his former experience, Euer hitherto I haue glorified God in my body, & I haue a ſtedfaſt hope, that I ſhall continue & that all the actions of my body ſhall glorifie Him: and when I am dead, He ſhall be glorified in my body.
            It is good then, to begin well, and to haue experience, that thou haſt ſerued GOD well in thy

calling: for experience bringeth hope, and hope maketh thee no wayes ashamed, Rom. 5. 4. 5. And if thou haue experience that thou haſt ſerued GOD, and Hee hath beene with thee, and kept thy bodie in puritie, thou mayeſt bee aſſured to continue to the ende: Not that our continuance ſtandeth in our ſelf, (no our continuance ſtandeth not in our ſelues, for the beſt man that liueth is not able of himſelfe to ſtand one moment) but out ſtanding is in God, for if Hee would take His grace from vs, in one moment, we would fall. It is the loue that He beareth to vs that holds vs vp: be once aſſured of that loue of GOD towardes thee, and then thou mayeſt bee aſſured, that thou shalt glorifie God both in life and death.
            Now in the next verſe he ſaith. For Christ is to me both in life and death aduantage: Hee giueth a reaſon wherefore hee ſaide hee would magnifie God in his bodie, both in life and death: The reaſon is, becauſe of the aduantage hee hath of Him, CHRIST IESVS is aduantage to him. And when? Not when I liue onelie, (ſaieth hee) but in my death alſo. Is it not good reaſon that I should glorifie Him both in life and death, in whome I haue aduantage both in life and death? All men doe for aduantage. When a man hath done and ſuffered, hee woulde haue aduantage. When wee honour the Prince, or anie man, all is for aduantage. If gaine mooueth to honour men, to ſerue them, where was there euer ſuch a gaine and aduantage

as may bee looked for at the handes of CHRIST? If gaine will mooue thee, where wilt thou get it, if not in CHRIST? Would thou haue gaine & aduantage for thy doing in thy lifetime? He will giue thee it. Thou shalt not do one deed, but thou shalt haue thine hire in thine hande. Wouldeſt thou haue gain in thy death? if thou die for Him, thou shal get as fair an aduātage as euer man got. Indeede, a man will giue thee gaine for honouring him in thy life-time, but when thou art lying in thy deathbedde, canſt thou get aduantage out of the hand of a man? Suppoſe a Monarch would giue thee a kingdome, what aduantage is it to thee, if thou liueſt not to brooke it? But I tell you plainelie, The LORD is greater aduantage to vs in death, than in life: and all this aduantage which wee haue of Him in this life, is nothing in reſpect of that aduantage which we shall get in the life to come. Paul (in the third chapter of the Epiſtle to the Philippians) when hee hath counted al his aduantages, and numbered out all the prerogatiues which hee had in this worlde, That hee was a Iew, a Phariſee, his father a Phariſee, of the Tribe of Ben-jamin, none ſo zealous of the Lawe as hee, &c. manie aduantages and great prerogatiues: but after that hee once commeth to CHRIST, and getteth Him, hee ſayeth, All is but dung, in reſpect of that excellent knowledge, of that aduantage of IESVS CHRIST. As I counted much (would he ſay) of theſe earthlie aduantages

before I knew Chriſt, euen ſo, after that 
                  •
                once had gotten a ſight of Him, I counted them nothing but dirt and dung. And therefore, hee telleth out the aduantages and gaines that hee founde in Chriſt. That (ſaith he) I may be found in Him: that is, not hauing mine owne righteouſneſſe, which is of the Lawe, but that which is through the faith of Chriſt, euen the righteouſneſſe which is of God through faith. There is the firſt aduantage, Thou art juſtified before the Tribunall of GOD. What king can giue thee that aduantage, to ſet thee vp as a free-man before the Tribunall of God? And albeit thou hadſt gotten all the aduantages that kings can giue thee, if thou getteſt not this aduantage to ſtand before that Tribunall, cloathed with Chriſt, thou ſhalt goe to damnation. Then hee addeth to another aduantage, That I may knowe Him, and the vertue of His reſurrection, and the fellowſhip of His afflictions, and bee made conformable vnto His death, if by any meanes I might attaine to the reſurrection of the dead. There is the ſecond aduantage: thou art made like vnto Him in holineſſe, and both in ſuffering and in glory, thou art comformed vnto Him. Well is ye man that can get this aduantage, to be glorified. What are all aduātages to be coūted of that can come to thee in this life, in reſpect of this aduantage? that when thou art lying (a vilde bodie) in the graue, Chriſt ſhall take thee vp, and ſet thee in that glory which is prepared for the

ſonnes of GOD. Alas! if men coulde ſee the aduantages which are in CHRIST: For all faileth for fault of ſight: If men got but one blink of CHRIST, they woulde not giue that ſight for all the kingdomes in the earth: Wee want ſpirituall eyes and ſenſes. Theſe ſpirituall aduantages in CHRIST, are ſeene onelie with a ſpirituall eye: and for fault of that ſpirituall ſight, wee ſee not the aduantages which are in Him. There is nothing which wee ſhoulde more deſire, than theſe ſpirituall ſenſes, wherewith wee maye get a ſight and fore-taſte of theſe thinges which are in IESVS CHRIST.
            Nowe, in the next verſe, taking occaſion of the wordes, that CHRIST was aduantage to him both in life and death, hee beginneth to doubt, whether it were better for him to liue or die And whether (ſaieth hee) to liue in the fleſh were profitable for mee, or what to chooſe, I knowe not: I thinke I woulde bee dead, to ſee mine aduantage which I will get in death: for my gaine, which I get liuing, is nothing to that aduantage which I will get in death: But I am ſtraited, whether to liue in the fleſh, or to goe out of the bodie. Then he bringeth in the reaſon, It is better for mee to bee looſed, and to bee with CHRIST: I will bee at Him, (yet hee ſaieth, I am in doubt, and not reſolued.) Neuertheleſſe, to remaine in the fleſh, is more needefull for you: For albeit it bee better for me to be dead, yet when I looke to you, it is worſe for you. After

this doubting and reaſoning, hee concludeth, I will liue then, and the LORD will keepe mee for your weale.
            
            Then, Brethren, I will marke heere one or two thinges, and ſo I ſhall ende. Yee ſee a doubting in PAVL, whether hee ſhoulde liue or die, which diſtracteth his minde. This doubting is common to manie: For ſometimes wee woulde liue, and other whiles wee woulde bee dead. But looke to the cauſe that diſtracted PAVLES minde, and made him to doubt, whether hee ſhoulde deſire to liue or die. Some men woulde die, becauſe there is nothing in this worlde but miſerie: Some men woulde die for other cauſes, becauſe of ſickneſſe, ſome becauſe of ſhame following ſome offenſe, for the life is tedious to a miſerable bodie, the life which ſhoulde bee comfortable, is tedious in diſtreſſe.
            But howe manie commeth to this point, To deſire to bee diſſolued for the glorie that is with IESVS, and ſaieth. If I were away, I woulde get this aduantage of glorie? Who woulde be awaye for the glorie of Heauen, and aduantage that is laide vp there? It is a rare grace to get this deſire. No queſtion (thinke as yee will) infinite joy, glorie, and paſſing aduantage is in Heauen.
            Againe, ſome men woulde liue, wherefore? becauſe they are freſh, greene, and able men: they would paſſe their time yet: Some men would liue▪ becauſe they haue wife and children, and woulde

care for them, (I condemne not lawfull care) but all this deſire is vaine. Where wilt thou get that man, that would liue to help the poore Church of CHRIST with his labour? How manie will come on with this, to liue onelie for the weale of the Church of CHRIST? I deſire ſuch a Paſtor who is minded to liue for the care yt he hath to leade manie by the hand to Heauen, ere he goe away, that he may winne manie ſoules to CHRIST, that hee may bee the welcomer when hee commeth there himſelfe: He is happie. It is the ſight of that Heauenlie glorie, that maketh men to haue this foreſaide deſire. Howe manie ſeeth that Heauenlie glorie? Fie on vs, ſeeing ſuch a glorie laide vp in Heauen for vs, that yet will not make a meane to get it: wee periſh for fault of ſenſe: There is 
                  •
               o lacke of aduantage in CHRIST, but the lacke is in me, & in thee, I haue no deſire of that glorie, thou haſt no deſire of that glorie, and ſo wee periſhe. Therefore, get this ſenſe of glorie in time, or elſe thy ſoule ſhall bee drawne out of thy bodie. Doe accordinglie. Wouldeſt thou haue it ſweetlie looſed? Then get in time a ſenſe of this glorie. Wouldeſt thou haue it pulled out by force? Thē neglect the ſenſe and ſight of this glorie.
            Obſerue another thing of the care of Paul. He counted nothing of all theſe afflictions, in reſpect of the care which he had of the Church of God. I wonder at this care of his, conſidering now our careleſneſſe: For if euer care was dead out of the

hearts of men, it is now dead. Farewell the care of the Church of God in Scotland, for fault of ye zeale of Gods glory, & the care of the Church of God. I ſee this Land, and the Church of GOD therein, decaying. Learne another thing of PAVLES reſolution. Yet he reſolueth to liue & that for the weale of the Church of Chriſt. Marke it. There is none of vs, but wee ſhould deſire to haue the fruition of the glory and joye that is in the face of Ieſus: yet we, who may profite in the Church of God in this life, are bounde to deſire to liue for a while, that the Church may be holpen. The Lord accounteth more highly of this deſire, than of a deſire that a man hath to die, and to bee with Ieſus. The Lord accounted more of PAVLES liuing, to helpe the Church, than of his glorifying Him in his death. Thinke yee that PAVL woulde haue liued ſo long, except the Lord had ſeene him profitable to His Church? And no queſtion, ye Lord Ieſus (knowing the miſery of this earth) would haue taken vp His Apoſtles at His aſcention with Him, if He had not loued the weale of His Church. There is no good body, but the Lord woulde haue them with Him: yet Hee letteth them remaine heere in paine, that they may help the Church, otherwiſe there would not be a good body left liuing in SCOTLAND, Hee would take them all away, and glorifie them. But ſo long as Hee hath a Church in SCOTLAND, Hee will let good men continue, but when Hee taketh them away, wo be to them that tary behind! It is

wonderfull to ſee how the Lord will keepe a man by whoſe trauels Hee will helpe His Church. All the worlde will not get leaue to hurt an haire of his head. HEROD taketh PETER, and putteth him into priſon, laying him betwixt two ſouldiers, thinking to execute him ye next morning, Act. 12. But the Lord by His Angell wakeneth him, and bringeth him ſafe out, and yet hee wiſt not what hee was doing. PAVL and PETER were wonderfully deliuered, ſo long as the Lord had to doe with them: but when He had done His turne, and they fell into the hands of NERO, there is no more dinne of them, they were ſlaine. So long as the Lord hath adoe with any man He will ſhake Heauen and earth ere hee periſh. Well, the care of the Church of God is decaying in SCOTLAND. Le
                  •
               vs crie, LORD, put the care of this Church, and the care of the members of the body of Chriſt, into the hearts of men, that euery man may care for the ſaluation of another, and that God maye bee glorified in them through His Sonne Chriſt Ieſus our Sauiour: To whome, with the Father, and the Holy Ghoſt, bee all Prayſe, Honour, and Glory both now and for euermore,
            AMEN.
         
         
            
            THE ELEVENTH SERMON
            
               TITVS, CHAP. III.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 3
                     For we our ſelues were in times past vnwiſe, diſobedient, deceiued, ſeruing the lustes and diuerſe pleaſu
                           •
                        es, liuing in maliciouſneſſe and enuie, hatefull, and hating one another.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 4
                     But when the bountifulneſſe and loue of GOD our Sauiour toward man appeared,
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5
                     Not by the workes of righteouſneſſe, which wee had done, but according to His mercie Hee ſaued vs, by the waſhing of the newe birth, and the renewing of the Holie Ghost,
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 6
                     Which Hee ſhedde on vs aboundantlie, through IESUS CHRIST our Sauiour:
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 7
                     That wee, beeing justified by His grace, ſhould bee made heyres, according to the hope of eternall life.
                  
               
            
            
               IF we ſhall conſider this Text (welbeloued in IESVS CHRIST) we ſhall find in it three things. The firſt, the miſerable eſtate and condition of man, wherein hee ſtood before hee was called to grace by IESVS CHRIST. The next is his mercifull deliuerie, frō that miſerable eſtate and condition. The laſt is the ende of his mercifull

deliuerie: to wit, That he ſhould ſerue God all the dayes of his life, in all maner of thankfulneſſe for ſo mercifull a deliuerie. And ſeeing our communicating with the bodie and blood of the LORD approaches, our preparation cānot ſtand in three better thinges than theſe: Firſt, in a knowledge of our miſerie before that we knew God in CHRIST: Next in a knowledge of our mercifull deliuerie from that miſerable eſtate: And thirdlie, in a duetie toward God for our deliuerie. We ſhall ſpeake at this time of the firſt two.
            Now, to returne, and to goe thorow the words as the Lord will giue vs grace: The occaſion of the ſetting downe of this firſt part, to wit, of our miſerie before we knew Chriſt, is this: Immediatelie before he hath exhorted TITVS to vſe all kinds of lenitie towardes them that were not conuerted, not to deale with them in rigour, but to deale with them in meekneſſe. Hee giueth the reaſon: Looke what they are now, euen ſuch were we before wee were called, liuing in concupiſcence, our mindes were rebellious againſt God: therefore let vs deale with them as wee woulde haue beene dealt with our ſelues at that time. I marke here firſt, That our miſerable eſtate that we ſtood in, before we were called to this grace through Ieſus Chriſt ſhoulde neuer be forgotten. The miſerie of nature wherein wee are conceiued and borne, and wherein wee liue for a time, till wee knowe Chriſt, ſhould neuer goe out of our remembrance: When thou haſt

plaide the foole a while in ſinne, when thou haſt followed harlotry, committed murther, oppreſſed thy neighbour, & when God hath called thee out of that miſerable condition, & made thee to know Him in Chriſt, forget neuer thy former miſery, forget neuer that thou haſt followed filthineſſe, murthered, oppreſſed, &c. Saieth the Apoſtle to the Epheſians, who were Gentiles after their conuerſion in Chriſt, Forget your olde done deedes? ſaith he ſo? No: but he ſaith, Remember that ye were Gentiles.
            
            Brethren, it is true, the eſtate of grace in Chriſt hath a ſweetneſſe with it, if a man or woman haue a ſenſe of it, but looke that the ſweetneſſe of it▪ m iſ-
                  •
               eliſh not ſo the taſte, that in the meane time thou loſe all ſenſe of thy former miſery. Keepe therefore both the miſery and the deliuery in thy mind, that thereby the true ſenſe of GODS mercie may be ſtirred vp in thine heart: for none haue the true ſenſe of the mercie of God in Chriſt, except hee onelie that ſigheth for the miſerie which we did lie in before. This is the firſt. Another thing I marke here. This ſame remembrance of our miſery, it ſhould make euery one of vs that ſtand in grace, to haue a compaſſion vpon ſinners: where euer thou ſeeſt them, labour to winne them, but with pitie, and let bee thy bitterneſſe: A man that hath no pitie, but is full of bitterneſſe againſt a ſinner, that man hath forgotten that hee was a ſinner before. There is no man ſo cleane, but there is a remaining corruption in him, albeit hee

ſee it not. They that haue the true zeale of God, they will indeede bee ſeuere againſt ſinners: Why not? but they beginne alwayes at their ſelues, and then reprooue others. Hypocrites beginne not at themſelues, but they hide and cloake their owne ſinnes, and are alwayes ſeuere againſt others. But the man that beginneth at himſelfe, his ſeueritie is aye mixed with pitie.
            But to come to the words, Wee were ſuch as they are now: we were mad, and out of our right wit, we were beſide our ſelues. There is the firſt part of our miſerie in nature, for wee were all miſerable by nature: there is not one ſoule, but it is borne miſerable by nature. Yee ſee then, Brethren, our miſerie beginneth not at our body: (there are manie who if they haue their body well diſpoſed, are at eaſe then, but if it be not well diſpoſed, they are heauily diſpleaſed, then they grone and ſigh) no, our miſery beginneth not at our body, it beginneth within vs, at our ſoules, and not at ye inferior parts of the ſoule, but at the minde, which is the moſt excellent part & light of our ſoules, and that ſhould guide all the reſt of the powers of ye ſoule. Nowe the ſickneſſe of it is madneſſe, it is blinde, ignorant, without judgement, and wee are madde fooles by nature. There is no man born in ye earth, but he is borne a foole: thou art borne a mad bodie, and beſides thy ſelfe. Thou wilt thinke thy ſelf very wiſe, & thy wit will compaſſe Heauē & earth, yea, & others that look to thee wil think thee wiſe,

but if thou haue no more than nature, thou art a foole. As he is a fool in very deed, who thinketh he ſpeaketh alwayes an oracle, euen ſo art thou, that art not in Chriſt, and counteſt thy ſelfe wiſe: the wiſer thou thinkeſt thy ſelfe, thou art the more and the more a foole. All this is to let men ſee, that none is wiſe without God: For when the light of GOD is not in thee, all that thou doeſt is fooliſhneſſe and hee that is wiſe without GOD, ſhall curſe his wiſedome one day, and ſaye, that all was but madneſſe: yea, and all the Monarches in the worlde ſhall curſe that wiſedome, which they had without God. This natural ſickneſſe goeth further downe, it deſcendeth to the heart, it tarieth not in the minde: But next wee become maine rebelles againſt God, hee that is madde, he is ſet to rebell, and he is froward, euer inclining to diſobedience againſt GOD.
            Brethren, yee knowe there are two ſortes of fooles amongſt men: Some fooles are ſillie ſimple fooles: other fooles are malicious fooles: by nature we are all borne fooles, but malicious fooles, euermore rebelling and diſpleaſing GOD. If wee compare th
                  •
               ſe two ſortes of fooles together, the ſecond is worſt. LORD ſaue vs from a rebellious heart: For I tell thee, the minde is not ſo blinded, but it hath ſome ſight of GOD: but the heart of man, after the fall, is altogether inclined to rebellion: ſo that if there bee one ſpunke of light left in nature, it will trauell by all meanes to put in the

finger in the eye of the minde, and put it out. And therefore, trauell to reforme thine heart, for if it bee not reformed, it ſhall euermore carrie thee the wrong way. So there are two partes of the miſerie of man. Nowe commeth on the thirde. Thy miſerie endeth not heere. Marke, and trauell to finde this in experience. (Fie on vs, if wee knowe not our ſelues, for if wee know not our ſelues, wee ſhall neuer knowe God aright.) The thirde part ſtandeth in actions, for the madde and rebellious heart muſt breake out in ſome actions. Can a mad and rebellious bodie bee idle? Hee calleth ou
                  •
                works wauering, going out of the way. Can a mad man keepe the hie waye? No, but euermore hee goeth to one ſide or other. No more can wee by nature goe forwarde in the right waye: for by nature wee are madde, frowarde, and diſobedient. It is true, naturall men will doe things that are right in themſelues: but no man ſhall do that which is good in it ſelf rightlie, that hath yt rebellion in his heart: for wee doe nothing rightly, but when our eyes are vpon God. Albeit the action were neuer ſo good, if thou ſeekeſt not GOD in it, it is not done rightlie. Thou mayeſt well doe it to pleaſe the eyes of men, and thou mayeſt get thankes at the handes of men for it, but thou ſhalt get none at Gods handes: ſo if thou wouldeſt bee accepted of GOD, and wouldeſt haue the action of thine handes to pleaſe God, firſt looke that thine action bee good, and then looke to God in thine action.

Then there are three parts of miſery of the naturall man: firſt, madneſſe in the mind: ſecondly, maliciouſneſſe in the heart: thirdly, his actions are wauerings, all wandring out of the way.
            To goe forward. Hee deſcribeth this wauering, and he calleth it ſeruing: it ſtandeth in ſlauerie, his whole life-time is but a ſeruice and ſlauery. The naturall man, if hee haue no more but nature, hee is a ſlaue and a ſeruant, bought and ſolde, for Paul ſaieth, hee▪ is ſolde to bee ſubject to ſinne, Roman. 7. 15. Suppoſe hee were a Monarch of the whole earth, if hee bee without the newe man, hee is a ſlaue. It is true, hee will haue manie ſeruantes vnder him, but hee is the firſt and chiefe ſlaue himſelfe: yea, hee is a greater ſeruant than the verie kitchen boye, and the moſte abject ſeruant in his houſe. But to whome is this ſeruice done? To whome are wee ſlaues? In plaine talke, hee ſaieth, to concupiſcences. Hee calleth them pleaſures, but fi
                  •
                on them, how beit they are ſweete things, yet they haue a ſoure ende. Harlotrie is ſweete for a time, but, O that bitterneſſe in the ende! It is ſweete to murther, but, O that bitterneſſe that it ſhall bring with it in the end! it ſhal be bitterer than the very gall. Paul maketh mention here of a
                  •
               varietie and diuerſity of luſts. Thou that ſerueſt thine own luſts, art not ſubject to one maiſter only, but to an hundreth: thou art ſubject to many vncleane maiſters of diuers qualities.
            Brethren, are theſe our maiſters? Fy vpon them,

the ſeruice done to them, it is a vile ſeruice. Thou that art a lord, when thou lookeſt to thy kitchen boye, thou wilt thinke his ſeruice vile, but fye vpon thee, thou art a greater ſlaue, hee is an honeſt ſeruant, but thou art a ſlaue: for thy ſeruice is done to thy filthy pleaſures, there is a variety of them, and ſo thou haſt manie maiſters, whom thou ſerueſt. And therefore, yee will ſee theſe men who ſerue their owne luſtes, to bee the wearieſt bodies y• euer liued, euen as if they were drawne thorow a myre: for the onely true and cleane ſeruice, is the ſeruice of that onely one GOD: the onely repoſe of thy ſoule, is on that one GOD: there is no reſt, but on Him. Awaye with that creature that drinketh in the ſoule luſtes of this earth, that is no reſt to him heere, and woe to that reſt that ſhall come in the ende. So there are the maiſters which wee ſerue, foule concupiſcences, and fleſhlie luſtes. It may bee asked, Will a perſon bee ſubject to ſuch a great varietie of concupiſcences? I anſwere, The ſeede of euerie ſinne in the worlde is in euerie man: ſo all concupiſcences are in thee, becauſe the ſeede of them is within thee: No, the beſt men in the earth hath the ſeede of theſe luſts, which budde out into actions: it will lurke for a time in the winter, but in the ſpring it will breke out, and then thou wilt knowe thou haſt it, when thou feeleſt the ſtinke of it. So there is the firſt anſwere, the ſeede of euery ſinne is in the heart of euery man, in ſuch ſort that it wil make thee loath

at it, if thou ſaweſt it: but alas! it is hidden from our eyes, that wee cannot ſee it, and therefore we loathe it not. Againe, in ſome men and women, that ſeede of all luſts will breake out in actions: A man that followeth harlotrie, will bee a drunkard alſo: an auaritious man, will bee ambitious alſo, &c. It is a maruell to ſee howe manie ſinnes will be reigning in one miſerable ſlaue, and to ſee howe that ſlaue will bee hurried from one ſinne to another. Fie on thee, wilt thou neuer get thy fill of ſinne? thou ſhalt once bee filled with wrath, and then thou ſhalt loathe at thy ſinnes: For albeit there were no more but one ſinne in thee, it is enough to cauſe thee to goe to Hell.
            Nowe to goe forward: Hee numbers out ſome of theſe concupiſcences, and the firſt is malice, maliciouſneſſe in the heart againſt our neighbour. Then commeth in her two daughters, enuie and hatred. When thou art ſorie at thy neighbours weale, and wouldeſt not ſee him thriue, then thou wilt hate him. There are three particulars, and they are as manie pleaſures to them that ſerueth them: hee that hath malice, thinketh himſelfe neuer well, but when there is malice in his heart: from thence commeth enuie, and the enuious heart is neuer well, but when it ſpeaketh euill of his neighbour, for that is meate and drinke to it▪ hee that hath hatred, is neuer well, but when hee hateth his neighbour, and that is his meate and drinke.
            
               Nowe I ſhall drawe theſe concupiſcences into certaine rankes. There are ſome of them againſt God, ſome againſt our neighbour, & ſome againſt our ſelues, amongſt the which is intemperancie. Fie on thee, O Epicurian! thou 
                  •
               inneſt againſt thy ſelfe. Now the Apoſtle in ſetting downe theſe concupiſcences, maketh a choiſe of the concupiſcences againſt our neighbour, for if we bee malicious againſt him, wee are malicious againſt GOD. Whoſoeuer is enemie to man, hee is alſo enemie to God. Now there is no harmonie amongſt men that are onelie naturall: For without GOD in Chriſt, there is no true loue, no true concord. Put a man and a woman together without God, will there bee anie concord there? No, for the dueties of the firſt Table are requiſite for the diſcharging of the dueties of the ſecond Table, and muſt preceede them. Howe canſt thou loue thy wife or thy children, without God? No, there is no true loue, and the ende ſhall prooue it to haue beene but hatred onelie.
            In the ende of the verſe hee ſetteth downe two ſortes of hatreds, hee ſaieth hatefull, that is, hee that ſuffereth hatred: then hee ſubjoyneth, hating one another: wee are odious to others, and againe we hate others. Alwayes marke one meeting here. Thinkeſt thou to hate, and not to be hated again? It is but the juſt judgement of God, that as thou enuieſt and hateſt, thou alſo to bee hated and enuied. What harmonie can bee heere, when thou

hateſt mee, and I thee? No true concord, but all is loſe. There is no conjunction, but that which is in CHRIST IESVS. When this conjunction is not amongſt men, awaye with all other conjunctions. This is ſhortly the miſerable eſtate wherein wee ſtood by nature, before the participation of mercy in CHRIST.
            Now I come to the other eſtate. An alteration muſt bee made, or elſe wee are gone: For what can become of a body that dieth in madneſſe? Nowe looke howe wee are deliuered: But (ſaieth hee) after that the bountifulneſſe and loue of GOD our Sauiour appeared. There is the way how our mercifull deliuery commeth on. Yee reade not one word heere, that man lying in miſery, began to find out a deliuery himſelfe. Ye reade not that the mad man of himſelfe beginneth to take vp himſelfe: hee ſaieth not, Then we took vp our ſelues: No, no, we would haue lied long ere we had takē vp our ſelues. Then the naturall man waltering and wallowing in ſinne, and drinking in the foule pleaſures thereof, he will neuer take vp himſelfe and let him goe on, if hee ſhould liue ten thouſand yeeres, hee will neuer bee the better, but ſtill worſe and worſe. Can a man that is dead naturally, thinke of any life to himſelfe, to riſe vp, and ſtand againe? Not ſuch a thing, hee cannot ſo much as once thinke to riſe vp.
            Now, Brethren, we are all blacke dead ſpirituallie, by nature there is not one ſpunke of that Heauenlie

life in vs, no more than in a dead bodie, that is dead naturally, there is a ſpunk of naturall life: and we are not halfe dead only, but are whole dead. Can a naturall man once thinke of a ſpirituall life? No, and therefore Paul ſaith, Epheſ. 2. 31. When wee were dead in our ſinnes, wee were quickned by CHRIST, meaning that wee had no power in our ſelues to riſe againe. If it bee ſo then, when I ſee a wicked man (that hath beene ſeruing his foule luſts all his life-time) take vp himſelfe, I will not ſaye, that that man tooke vp himſelfe, I will ſay, there is a dead man riſen to life: I will aske of thee, In the beginning of the creation, thoughteſt thou of thy creation? deſiredſt thou to thinke of it? No, no more thoughteſt thou of thy regeneration: thou thoughteſt as little of thy ſecond creation, as thou thoughteſt of thy firſt creation. And therefore it is well ſaide, Hee created thee without thee: And as Hee created thee without thee, ſo He redeemed thee without thee. Dareſt thou ſaye, that thou gaueſt counſell to thy redemption, and thoughteſt of it when GOD redeemed thee? then how commeth this worke on? We are preuented, ſomething appeareth that was hid: there was one thing long hidden, & nowe it beginneth to ſhine. And what was this bountifulneſſe & loue to mankinde? it was hid, and breaketh out. And who is it that is bountifull? is this any mans bountifulnes? No, it is the bountifulneſſe of GOD: and this quickning loue is GODS, and that towards man.

And what God is this? Hee calleth Him GOD our Sauiour: For God is conſidered two wayes, as a Creator, and as a Sauiour. It is the loue of Him as a Sauiour, that is ſhewed to thee in thy Redemption. And when was this loue reueiled? when IESVS CHRIST came into the world, and tooke vpon Him our nature, then this loue brake out toward man: Hee loued him from all Eternitie, but it brake not out till then. Marke then. It is the loue of GOD that ſaueth, it is GODS bountifulneſſe that ſaueth: our deliuerie behooued to proceede of a wonderfull bountifulneſſe in God, whereof the ground is loue. If Hee had not loued thee, Hee would not haue deliuered thee. Then it is not a common loue which He beareth towards vs, but there is a ſpeciall loue in GOD to mankinde: He loueth not theſe Heauens, theſe Starres, ſo well as Hee doeth men. No, Hee communicateth not the thouſand part of thoſe thinges that Hee communicateth to man, either to the Heauens, or to the Starres. Then it is not the loue of GOD the Creator that doeth this, and is the ground of this bountifulneſſe, and of our life in Him: but it is a ſpeciall kinde of loue. It is that loue that proceedeth of GOD the Sauiour. It is not the loue of a Creator, but of a Father, not to the creature, but to the ſonne. GOD loueth His ſonne better than Hee doeth His creature, He loueth vs as His ſonnes. If there were no further loue of GOD, but as Hee is a Creator, thou durſt

neuer crie, Abba, Father: and except the Spirit ſpreade abroade into our heartes that loue which Hee beareth vnto vs, for all the world thou durſt not appeare before Him. The time is ſet downe when Hee hath ſaued vs, when His ſingular loue appeared in the world, Hee ſaued vs beeing manifeſted in the fleſhe. Then it followeth that wee were loſt, and gone, when GOD of His loue put to His hand, and ſaued vs, wee were out of our right wit, rebelles to GOD, wauering, and vagabunding out of the right waye, ſlaues to our owne luſtes. Whome count yee loſt, if theſe be not loſt? I will neuer count of a reprobate perſon, who is giuen ouer to filthineſſe, to harlotrie, to murther, to oppreſſion, to miſchiefe, &c. I will neuer count of him but as a madde, deſperate, and loſt bodie: when hee is walking abroade, and moouing in the world, hee is but a dead carcaſſe: and if hee come to GOD againe in mercie▪ it may bee ſaide. There is a dead bodie, turned to life. Haſt thou followed harlotrie? repenteſt thou? thou haſt bene dead in ſinne, but now thou art aliue. The loſt ſonne, when hee had ſpended his childes-part of goods yet he repented, and came home to his father againe: his father ſaieth, Hee that was dead, is liuing againe, Luke 15. 24. So in a worde, wee were loſt men. Thinkeſt thou that thou art not loſt, becauſe thou canſt breathe? And thinkeſt thou a man not dead, if hee can walke vpon the ſtreete? Thinkeſt thou thy ſelfe verie well, if thou haue theſe vitall motions

in thee? O, but ſuppoſe thou hadſt all the naturall liues in the world, if thou bee giuen ouer to thine owne affections and leaueſt not off thine olde ſinnes and iniquities, thou art a madde and a dead bodie. Began then that loue towardes man only to appeare when Chriſt came into the world? I anſwere: The loue of God the Father appeared & manifeſted it ſelfe in ſome meaſure to the godlie, euen before Chriſt came into the world: God forbid but this loue had bene apparēt vnto Abraham, and the reſt of the godly, before the incarnation of our Sauiour. But at the comming of Chriſt it manifeſted it ſelfe more brightly, than euer it did before: for al His loue of before was in Chriſt to come: but now, ſince He came into the world, the loue of God towards mankind hath appeared in greater aboundance. The Lord grant vs an apprehenſion and ſight of this loue, that at the leaſt wee maye ſtriue to loue Him againe, who hath loued vs ſo dearly in His Sonne IESVS CHRIST.
            Nowe, hee ſheweth by what meanes this our ſaluation is procured at the handes of GOD: hee telleth you by what meanes we are not ſaued, Net (ſaith he) by the workes of righteouſneſſe which wee had done. The meanes by the which we are not ſaued, is our owne juſt works: thou art not ſaued by thy juſt works, leane to them as thou wilt, I will promiſe thee▪ 
               in the name of that Great God, they ſhall neuer ſaue thee. Can a man that is mad and a rebell to GOD, and a ſlaue to his owne luſtes, doe ſuch

works as may procure ſaluation? But ſuch were we, ſaith the Apoſtle: therefore wee can deſerue nothing by our workes. Fie on thee, Papiſt, with thy merites! fie on the works of preparation! can a madde man prepare himſelfe for grace? No ſuch thing. I tell you when GOD put to His hand to our ſaluation, Hee founde no matter in vs of our ſaluation, but damnation. When GOD beginneth to loue, Hee findeth no matter of loue in vs, but of hatred. And this commendeth the greatnes of His loue towards vs, when He ſeeth nothing in vs but matter of damnation, yet Hee of His free grace & mercy loueth vs & ſaueth vs, Rō. 5. 8. This ſetteth out His loue highly towards vs, when that we were ſinners He ſent Chriſt to die for vs: therefore ſeek not thy ſaluation neither before thou be in Chriſt, nor after thou art in Him by y• merite of works, for thou ſhalt neuer get it yt way, but thou ſhalt ſtill be the further from it the more thou ſeekeſt it by that meane. Then if good works be not the meane, what is the meane? The Apoſtle 
                  •
               aith, He hath ſaued vs according to His mercy: Theſe are flat contrary, The mercy of God, & the merit of man. If thou be ſaued by y• mercy of God, thē no merit, becauſe thy merite is not able to ſaue thee. The firſt fountaine of our ſaluation is loue, after loue commeth on mercy: then pitie and compaſſion in His mercie preſupponeth miſerie. Mercie is ſhewed to the miſerable creature. GOD ſeeing vs miſerable, madde, rebelles; following our own

crooked affections, beginneth to bee pitifull, and to haue compaſsion of vs. Yee knowe mercie and pitie followeth vpon loue: For when wee loue any one, and ſee him in miſerie, then wee haue pitie vpon him: if thou hate him, ſuppoſe hee were in neuer ſo great miſerie, thou wilt not pitie him. Then GOD, ſeeing vs wrapped in ſinne and miſerie, He hath pitie upon vs, which pitie proceedeth of loue, and with loue and pitie concurreth His power. Wee will lone one, and ſee him lie in miſerie, when it will paſſe our power to relieue him: but GODS power is alwayes effectuall, to deliuer all them who are ſubject to miſery, if once He extende His loue and compaſsion towardes them. Then the cauſe of our ſaluation is in GOD onlie, and no part in man, who is ſaued. The firſt cauſe is the loue of GOD, which is the fountaine: The next cauſe is mercie, for ere euer this worlde was created GOD of His mercie tooke a purpoſe to ſaue vs. The Apoſtle ſaieth, Epheſ. 1. 4. Hee purpoſed of Himſelfe, Hee ſawe no thing in vs wherefore He ſhould take purpoſe to ſaue vs. And when Hee commeth on to the execution of that eternall purpoſe of our ſaluation, there is nothing in vs, but all is in Himſelfe, for He is all-ſufficient Himſelfe, and nothing is without Him. The ende wherefore He died, all of Himſelfe, without vs, was to the praiſe of the glorie of His grace, Epheſ. 1. 6. that thereby the whole glorie of our ſaluation might redounde to Him onelie, becauſe the cauſe is onelie in Him:

Thou that takeſt anie part in it, and attributeſt it vnto thy ſelfe, thou ſpoyleſt GOD of His glorie: Either giue Him all the glorie of this action, or take it all to thy ſelfe: this glorie is too heauie for thee, if thou take it vpon thee, it will preſſe thee to euerlaſting damnation. Then there is the meane of our ſaluation, The mercie of GOD.
            Next hee laieth out the partes of our ſaluation abroade one by one, that yee may ſee what ſaluation meaneth: hee ſaieth, By the waſhing of the newe birth, and the renewing of the Holie Ghost. There is the firſt part. It is a waſhing of vs, when GOD putteth to His hand to ſaue vs. Yee knowe, waſhing preſupponeth fouleneſſe: therefore it muſt follow, when GOD beganne to ſaue vs, we were vnclene, full of byles and botches, conceiued and borne in filthineſſe, and then warbling and wallowing in our owne ſinne and filthineſſe, and euer the longer wee liue, we are ſtill the filthier. It is a maruell, that that Holy GOD ſhould euer ſuſtaine to looke to thy filthy byles, or to put His holie and pure hand to thy vile botches, or to ſende downe His cleane Spirit to dwell in thine vncleane heart, or that any wayes His purity ſhould meddle with thine impurity. Amongſt all the argumentes of His loue, this is one, When Hee putteth to His fair bād to thee that art ſo foule. Findeſt thou thy ſinnes pardoned? and thy ſelfe purged & waſhed? aſſure thy ſelfe, thou art ſafe, and GOD hath loued thee: For except the loue of GOD had beene

all the greater towardes thee, Hee woulde neuer haue purged thee from thy ſinnes. It is a ſure token of His loue towards thee, that it is infinite & exceeding▪ that He hath not loathed thee, and thy filthie byles & botches. I ſee heere two waſhings, one outwarde, another inwarde: the firſt in theſe wordes▪ 
               The lauer of regeneration, the next. Therenewing of the Holie Spirite. The firſt, is our Baptiſme: the next, the inward waſhing and renewing by the Holie Spirite, repreſented by this outwarde Baptiſme. As the vvater vvaſheth away▪ the filth from the bodie▪ ſo the Holie Spirite purgeth & vvaſheth the heart from ſinne. I vvill ſpeake but thus farre ſhortly of Baptiſme. The outwarde vvaſhing in Baptiſme is not to bee looked to lightlie: the powring on of the vvater, is but a baſe ſigne to looke to: yet it is not a bare ſigne of the vvaſhing of the Holie Spirite: but it is the inſtrument that God taketh in His hand, & vvhereby He applieth 
                  •
               o vs the inwarde vvaſhing of the Holie Spirite, Col. 2. 12. Rom. 6. 4, hee aſcribeth our regeneration to Baptiſme. Wee by Baptiſme are buried vvith Chriſt, riſen vvith Chriſt, and if this meane bee con
                  •
               emned, there ſhall bee no regeneration: if a man lightlie this Baptiſme. I affirme, there ſhall be no renewing inwardlie by the Holie Spirit: and if he be not renewed. hee ſhall neuer bee ſaued: for vvithout regeneration. no ſaluation. Ye ſee (2. Kin. 5. 10) vvhat vvas injoyned to Naaman the Syrien, vvhen hee ſought cleanſing, the Prophet bad him

goe to the Iordane, and vvaſh him ſeuen times: But hee thought vvith himſelfe, What is this? Are not there faire Riuers at home at Damaſcus? Yea, hee would not goe till hee tooke better counſell: but ſo ſoone as hee vvent, and vvaſhed himſelfe ſeuen times, hee vvas cleanſed. Euen ſo it is in Baptiſme: if a man contemne the outward vvaſhing, hee ſhall neuer be cleanſed by the Spirit.
            This ſame is alſo true of the Sacrament of the Supper: Count not therefore little of the Sacraments, becauſe God hath promiſed to giue Himſelfe vvith the Sacrament, if it bee rightly receiued. Now looke howe long our regeneration is in working in this life, the force of Baptiſme continueth as long: thou muſt be continually renewed ti
                  •
               l thy laſt breath: therefore, the force of Baptiſme muſt continue vvith thee to thy laſt breath. It is a vanitie to thinke that the force of Baptiſme ſtandeth in the miniſtration of the action onelie: no, it leaueth vs neuer, after wee haue once receiued it, till vve be placed vvith Ieſus Chriſt. Haue thine eye ſtill vpon Baptiſme, for it is a meane vvhereby the Lord vvill ſaue thee.
            Further, Brethren, hee beginneth heere at regeneration: Yee may ſee then the neceſſitie of regeneration: Wouldeſt thou be ſafe? looke that there bee a newe birth. looke that thou bee borne ouer againe, as Chriſt ſaid to Nicodemus, Iohn 3. 3. Verilie, I ſay vnto you, except a man bee borne againe, hee cannot ſee the Kingdome of GOD. If thou bee

not a new creature, thou art not in CHRIST, but without CHRIST, and without IESVS CHRIST there is no ſaluation. Yee ſee men woulde beguile themſelues, if they ſhoulde ſaye, when yee aske of them, Whether they will goe to Heauen or not? They will anſwere, Wee will goe to Heauen: and yet in the meane time they will holde on the olde man, and will neuer change their maners: but that vaine opinion wil deceiue them: 2. Corin. 6. 9. Bee not beguiled, for no 
                     •
                  ornicaters, adulterers, murtherers, drunkardes, &c. ſhall inherite the Kingdome of Heauen. If thou holde on the olde man, thou ſhalt neuer bee ſafe, IESVS CHRIST muſt beget thee a newe againe, or els thou ſhalt neuer enter within the gates of Heauen.
            Now when hee hath ſpoken of this inward and outward waſhing, hee inſiſteth in this point concerning the Spirit, and declareth from whom this Spirit commeth, which Hee ſhedde on vs aboundantlie through IESUS CHRIST our Sauiour. We haue Him not our ſelues, He that waſheth vs is He that powreth on the precious lauer of the Spirit, vvherby vve are vvaſhen. Then the Spirit is from GOD. Is that Spirit from the Father immediately? No, He powreth Him in through IESVS CHRIST our Sauiour: ſo immediatly this Spirit commeth from IESVS CHRIST, but mediately from GOD as the Fountaine: Hee commeth from the Father to the Sonne, from the Sonne to vs. Iohn 15. 26. The cauſe of this order is this: Hee is our Sauiour, and

hath bought vs vvith a deare price: the Spirite is bought to vs by the blood of IESVS CHRIST, His blood hath bought all which vve receiue and get by Him: ſo He giueth His holy Spirit vvith all His graces, by the hand of IESVS CHRIST the man. Then if ye would haue the Spirit, dreſſe your ſelues to that treaſure in Heauē, and beſeech God that He would vouchſafe to ſend that Spirit vpon you through IESVS CHRIST, and giue you His grace by the hand of the man CHRIST.
            Yet to open vp the vvordes more narrowly, Which Hee powreth out, &c. He ſpeaketh of the Spirit, as it were of vvater: the Spirite heere is compared to vvater, becauſe of the vvaſhing: for as the one vvaſheth the filth of the body, ſo the other vvaſheth the filth of the ſoule. Hee is not content to ſay, Hee powreth out the Spirit, ſimply, but hee ſaith, aboundantly, in a great meaſure, as a flood in aboundance. This teacheth two things to vs: firſt, the liberality of GOD, Hee giueth not grace niggardly, as men, but vvhatſoeuer vvee gette, it is in aboundance: His loue is rich, His mercy is rich, the Spirit vvhich He giueth vnto vs is rich: ſo Hee is liberall vnto vs. Then it followeth of this alſo, that vve are very foule and vncleane. A cloth that is very foule, will require much vvater & waſhing: euen ſo vvee muſt haue aboundance of grace, becauſe vvee vvere ſo foule through ſin: but ſuppoſe vve vvere neuer ſo foule, except vve get a ſight of our filthineſſe, vve vvill neuer deſire to be vvaſhen:

when Dauid felt himſelfe verie filthie in murther and adulterie, he cryed, Waſh mee, O Lord, and make mee cleane, PSAL. 51. When a bodie commeth to a remorſe of conſcience, it is a vvonder to ſee howe hee vvill drinke in that Spirite, and deſire to bee ſatiate vvith that vvater. A foule bodie that hath not the ſenſe of his filthineſſe, will neuer crie for vvaſhing. The murtherer and the harlot vvill neuer crie, Lord vvaſhe mee, except they gette a ſight of their owne vncleanneſſe. Bleſſed are they that hunger and thirst for righteouſneſſe, for they ſhall be filled, MATTH. 5. 6. There may bee mooued a queſtion heere, Howe is it ſaide, that the Spirite is powred out ſo aboundantly, how many feeleth this riches? Will a man or vvoman diſcende into their ſelues, they will finde great lacke and ſcarcitie of this Spirit.
            Brethren, I anſwere: One droppe of the Spirite of Ieſus Chriſt is coūted great riches: one droppe of grace is great riches: one droppe of the vvater of life, is greater riches, than all the vvater in the vvorlde: it vvill vveigh downe all the precious things that are vpon the face of ye earth. Thou that haſt gotten one droppe of grace in Ieſus Chriſt, thou art richer than all the kinges in the worlde. Moreouer, if this droppe of grace could bee dried vp in the heartes of the regenerate, it were leſſe to be coūted of: but there is ſtil droppe after droppe, and none ende of dropping: Continually thou art refreſhed now and then vvith new drops of grace,

ſo long as thou liueſt. So this cōtinuance in dropping is a great riches: thou haſt no cauſe to complaine, that hath this continuance. Well is the ſoule that getteth droppe after droppe, for that ſoule may ſaye it hath gotten great riches. Thus much for the firſt part of our ſaluatiō, called regeneration: when God putteth to His hande to ſaue vs, He putteth to His hād & vvaſheth vs inwardly and outwardlie, and giueth vs His Spirit.
            Nowe followeth the next part, That being justified by grace, we may be made heyres according to the hope of life euerlasting. The next part ſtandeth in juſtification. I vvill not inſiſt, I ſhall touch it in a worde: It is none other thing but the imputing of the righteouſneſſe of IESVS CHRIST vnto vs. This righteouſneſſe is not inherent in vs, but the ſatiſfaction of IESVS CHRIST is imputed to vs. This Iuſtification in effect is none other thing, but forgiueneſſe of ſinnes. when God forgiueth thee thy ſinnes▪ & accounteth Chriſts righteouſneſſe to bee thine, and laieth not thy ſinne to thy charge. Al is one thing. Iuſtification is not this y• men dreame of, to wit, a righteouſnes inherēt in our ſelues, but it is another mans juſtice which by imputation is made ours. Compare theſe two together, Iuſtification and Regeneration, and conſider the naturall order of them, Iuſtification is firſt. A man is juſtified by the blood of IESVS CHRIST imputed to him, ere euer he be regenerate by the Spirit. The Spirite that vvaſheth him in

regeneration commeth through the blood: the blood, firſt, and then commeth in regeneration, and vvaſheth awaye the mother ſinne, and the foule ſtinking corruption that is in thee, and both thy juſtification and regeneration commeth of free grace, without merites: for theſe two are euer opponed, grace and mercie: preaſſe not to deale theſe two: to giue GOD one part, and to attribute another part to thy ſelfe: leaue thy merites behinde thee, and take thee to the mercy of God, otherwiſe there is no ſaluation for thee. Thereafter commeth on another part of ſaluation, vvee are made heires of euerlaſting Life: but there is ſomething going betwixt, that is not ſet downe here: For yee ſee, that when wee are juſtified and regenerated, vvee are made ſonnes by adoption: before we be heyres, vve muſt bee children. But I leaue this, becauſe the Apoſtle ſpeaketh not of it heere.
            Then the laſt part is: Wee are made heyres of the Kingdome of Heauen: vvhat more can be required in ſaluation? there is the higheſt degree, Thou art placed in thine inheritance, there is thy perfection, According to the hope of eternall Lift, leſt vvee ſhould thinke, that vvee are alreadie put in poſſeſſion of this inheritance: he meeteth this, and ſheweth, that albeit vve are in this life made heyres, yet vvee are not in this life put into a reall poſſeſſion of this heyrſhip: but hee ſaieth, according to hope: vvee are heyres by hope, but once

hope and all ſhall goe awaye, and vvee ſhall bee heyres in very deede. Yet hope is neceſſarie ſo long as vvee liue heere: ſo long as the Father is liuing, the heyres haue a to-looke and a hope of the heyrſhip: Hope thou, or elſe thou ſhalt neuer ſee Heauen. Nowe this hope is not ſo bare, that in the meane time vvee haue no fruition of the thing hoped for: yea, euen in this life the fruition of Heauen is begunne in effect: and if thou haue not the beginning of it heere, hope neuer for the accompliſhment of it heereafter. Wee haue a beginning in this life, but as for the full poſſeſſion and fruition of our inheritance, it is reſerued to the life to come: And therefore it is, that the Godly in this life hope ſtill for the comming of IESVS CHRIST, till they bee ſet and placed vvith Him, in that inheritance purchaſed to vs by His blood: To vvhome vvith the Father, and the Holy Spirite, bee all Honour, Prayſe, and Glory, for euer and euer,
            AMEN.
         
         
            
            
            THE TWELFTH SERMON.
            
               PSALME CXXX.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 1
                     Out of the deepe places haue I called vnto Thee, O LORD.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 2
                     LORD, heare my voyce: let Thine eares attende to the voyce of my prayers.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 3
                     If Thou, O LORD, ſtraightly markest iniquities, O LORD, who ſhall ſtand?
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 4
                     But mercie is with Thee, that Thou mayest bee feared.
                  
               
            
            
               THE inſcription of this PSALME (Brethren) declareth that it is a PSALME moſt excellent: The excellencie of it wee remit to the matter contained therein: it hath bene penned by ſome holy man, and Prophet of old, but by whom it is not certaine: It is ſufficient to vs to knowe that the Spirite of GOD was the dyter of it. To come to the matter and partes thereof, The Prophet (whoſoeuer he was) firſt ſetteth downe the eſtate and diſpoſition of his ſoule in trouble, to wit, that he ranne to the Lord, and prayed to Him for deliuerie: and this hee doeth to the fift verſe. Next, finding in verie deede the effectes of the

prayer hee made, and finding mercy and deliuerie as hee craued, hee profeſſeth before all the worlde, that as he had before awaited vpon GOD, ſo hee will await ſtill vpon Him, and He will put his confiden̄ce in Him: and this he doeth to the ſeuenth verſe: laſtly, from the ſeuenth verſe to the ende, he recommendeth this duetie to Iſrael, that is, to the Church of GOD, to waite vpon the LORD, and with the recommendation, hee giueth in forceable reaſons to mooue them. To come to the firſt part, firſt hee ſaith, that in his greateſt danger hee cryed to the Lord IEHOVAH. Next, hee ſetteth downe the prayer. To come to the propoſition, he ſaith, Out of the deepe: yet more, Out of the deepe places haue I called vnto thee, O IEHOVAH. By theſe deepe places hee vnderſtandeth great miſeries, great dangers, wherein his body was, great terror and feare in his conſcience, for his ſinne & offerding of God: for the Scripture (as ye may ſee Pſal. 69. 2. 3) compareth great afflictions to deepe waters, wherein a man is like to drowne: and manie a time, when the body is in danger, the ſoule will bee like to drowne in deſperation. No doubt, the greatneſſe of the danger made him to vtter to the Lord voyces cōming from the very deapth of the heart. If we felt our ſelues in great dāger, we wold call from the deapth of our hearts to God: he vttered not a voyce onely, but a lowde voyce, with a crie. This is the meaning of the words. We ſo here firſt, that the children of God, whom God loueth

moſt intirely, are many times ſubject to great and extreame dangers and troubles: and if euer thou thinkeſt to come to Heauen, make thee in thine owne courſe to ſuffer one trouble or other. Let no man therſore, judge euill of a man becauſe he ſuffereth. Next we ſee the greater the danger bee, the heauier ye diſtreſſe & the afflictiō wherwith ye godlie is exerciſed bee, the more vehement, feruent, & earneſt will their prayer be they haue to God: and howe commeth this to paſſe? Euen in this maner, & by theſe degrees, Oppreſſiō & afflictiō worketh in the hearts of the faithfull a ſenſe of ye common miſery of nature: Whē the hand of ye Lord is vpon afaithful man, then he begins to feele his ſinne & corruption: And except the LORD exerciſe vs in this life, either one way or other, the beſt of vs all will fall into ſuch a ſound ſleepe, that we will neither remember what we haue bene, what wee are, nor what wee ſhall bee, neither acknowledge our ſelues to be ſinners: So there is a neceſsity of afflictions, for affliction bringeth vs to a feeling of our miſery. Next, when through affliction, the heart is prepared and brought to ſome ſenſe of ſin, then it is capable of grace, thē it prayeth to God. (Look neuer to come to Heauen if thou feeleſt not thy finne, yea, and that thou art a miſerable ſinner) Then, if once thine heart bee prepared with ſome ſenſe of ſinne and miſerie, then commeth in that holy Spirit of Ieſus Chriſt, which in ye Scripture is called the Spirit of adoption, who finding ye heart

dejected and made lowlie (the Spirite will nerer looke in to a proude heart) beginneth to worke, & to touch the heart of the miſerable ſinner with a ſweet ſenſe of mercie through Ieſus, hee beginneth to ſhedde abroade the loue of Chriſt into the ſoule: and when once the heart hath taſted of the ſweetneſſe of mercie, and as Peter ſaieth, hath taſted how ſweet and gracious the Lord is, and findeth this paſſing loue of God in Ieſus Chriſt, then i
                  •…
               eth a boldneſſe, and beginneth with confidence & peartneſſe to preſent itſelfe before God, and to put vp prayers and requeſtes, Roman. 8. 26. When once that Spirite hath giuen libertie, then we crie with an open mouth (for the heart is wide opened) Abba, Father, Roman. 8. 15. Becauſe wee haue gotten a ſenſe of that fatherlie loue in Ieſus Chriſt. The prayer of the faithfull is moſt effectuall when they are in greateſt danger, and then the voyce is lowdeſt: for it is the Spirit of GOD, who maketh interceſsion for vs with ſighes which cannot be expreſſed, but God knoweth the meaning of his Spirit.
            Now, Brethren, ſurely few of vs haue yet beene in this deepneſſe and extreamitie of miſerie: the Lord hath not yet ſo preſſed vs with His hand, as Hee hath done many others: and therefore, 
                  •
               e
                  ••
                there is amongſt vs, who hath this feeling of ſinne and miſerie: and conſequently few of vs can pray ſo earneſtly. Howe many are there amongſt you that dare ſay, that yee feele ſenſibly the common

miſerie of nature? Goe to your hearts, and looke if yee feele it not ſleeping in ſinne: and ſo long as thou ſleepeſt thus, and knoweſt not thy miſerie, howe wilt thou bee carefull to feele the loue of Chriſt? and how wilt thou earneſtly pray to God? And certainly I take this coldneſſe in prayer to be a fore-runner of a judgement to ouer-take this Land. No, it were better to bee ſwimming in the waters of affliction, praying earneſtly to GOD, than to bee this way lying in proſperitie without prayer.
            Nowe I goe forward. After hee hath proponed, that out of the deepneſſe hee cryed to IEHOVAH, then to let vs ſee his cryes, hee ſetteth downe the forme of prayer that hee vſed in his great miſeries: firſt he ſaieth, O Lord, heare my voyce: Next, in the other wordes, hee doubleth ouer the ſame petition, Attende to the voyce of my prayers: for hee prayeth not coldly, but hee cryeth earneſtly: certainly, the doubling of the crie would be opened vp from the ground. Wee ſhould gripe downe to the heart, from whence the prayers of the godlie do flow, that when we heare them, or reade them, we may get ſuch an heart & diſpoſition in prayer as they had. The doubling of the prayer, and the mouth wide opening, commeth of the doubling of the graces of the Spirite of GOD in the heart, and of a double opening of the heart: for except the heart be opened in prayer, the mouth cannot be opened with pleaſure, otherwiſe if thou ſpeake

anie thing, I will not giue one pennie for it: So the opening of the mouth commeth from the opening of the heart When the Holy Spirit ſo ſweetly maketh manifeſt the loue of God to the creature, then ye tongue is looſed, & the ſecond cry cōmeth of the ſecond grace, & of ye ſecond opening of the heart: & ſo oft as thou cryeſt, ſo oft is there a new grace & motion within the heart wrought by the Holy Spirite, for it is Hee onely that openeth the mouth piece and piece, to ſpeake to God: for take this for a certainty that Paul ſaith, There is none that can call Ieſus Lord, without that Spirit come in, 1. Corin. 12. 3. And againe hee ſaith, We knowe not what wee ſhould pray, or how wee ought to pray, without that Spirit teach vs, Romanes chap. 8. verſe 26. And if Hee teach not, no man or woman is able once to open the mouth with confidence and liberty to pray.
            And ſo, Brethren, if yee would ſpeake well, pray well, or doe well, looke euer to the diſpoſition of the heart, and night and daye pray for that Spirit, who may tranſchange thee, transforme thee, and take thee out of nature, and plant thee in grace: for ſo long as thou remaineſt in nature, thou canſt not thinke well, thou canſt not ſpeake well, thou canſt doe nothing well, yea, thou art worſe than a very beaſt.
            But becauſe the wordes are very weightie, wee will yet conſider them better: What meaneth h
                  ••
                when he ſaieth, Lord, let thine eare bee attentiue to my prayer? Thought he that the Lord heard him no
                  ••
               
               
and that the Lord played the part of a deafe man? No▪ He meaneth not this: look to the eſtate of the godly, when ye hand of the Lord is vpō them, when ye Lord afflicteth vs any way, we think that He neither heareth nor ſeeth vs, nor remembreth vpō vs: Indeed I grant, it is not ſo in effect, for God neuer altereth His affection towardes His owne: but the faithfull oftentimes judge and apprehend ſo, and all the fault of this is in vs. Yee ſee how Dauid oftentimes complaineth to the Lord, that Hee had forſaken him, Hee had left him, and deſireth that He ſhold look vpō him: I aske▪ Is it ſo indeed, that when the faithfull ſoule crieth, Lord heare ſee, and remēber, that He heareth not, He ſ
                  •
               eth not He remembreth not? No queſtion but He doth▪ 
               for Hee that made the eye, ſeeth Hee not? Hee that made the eare, heareth He not? Hee that formed the heart of man, vnderſtandeth He not? remembreth He not? Pſal. 94. Yea, all things are patent to His Majeſty, albeit when Hee maketh it not manifeſt by ſome ſenſible effectes and operation, we think He heareth not, He ſeeth not, He remembreth not, His fauour & affection is neuer indeed altered no
                  •
                chāged frō his own children: Then whē they cry for His preſence, are they altogether deſtitute & depriued of his preſēce? no, they want it not: for who gaue the heart to ſaye, Lord heare me, Lord ſee and remember me, if that thou hadſt not ſome preſence of the Lord in thine heart? thou couldeſt neuer vtter theſe voyces to God. Thē I ſay, If I haue the preſence of God when

I crie vnto Him, why crie I, and pray I, as though I had not His preſence? Are not ſuch prayers in vaine? No, for although we haue the preſence of God when wee praye, yet for all that our prayers to God are not in vaine: for if we had Him of before in any meaſure by our prayers, He will manifeſt Himſelfe more ſenſibly, piece and piece, more and more: And looke howe much more ſtrongly thou cryeſt, ſo much the more will the Lord bee drawne to thy ſoule, and ſo much the more ſhalt thou finde the increaſe and grouth of grace in thy ſoule. It is vnpoſſible, that the prayer of a faithfull man, if it were but one worde that proceedeth from the Spirit of adoption, can paſſe away without comfort: for the Lord giueth His Spirit to no man in vaine, but becauſe He knoweth the meaning of His owne Spirit, therefore He will graunt that thing for which hee maketh requeſt, there is nothing more certaine: And therefore the Lord (Matth. 5. 6.) pronounceth them bleſſed, who hunger and thirſt for righteouſneſſe, for, ſaith hee, they ſhall bee filled and ſatisfied: And ſo Chriſt ſpeaketh to that woman of Samaria, Ioh. 4. 13. 14. If thou ſoughteſt a drinke, I ſhoulde giue thee a drinke of the water of life: for the water that I ſhall giue, ſhall bee in a man (or woman) a Well of water ſpringing vp into eternall life: meaning generally, that whoſoeuer hath gotten the firſt fruites of the Spirite, and the beginnings of grace, deſireth and ſeeketh for further progreſſe

and increaſe, that the LORD ſhoulde euer furniſh them with ſomething to quench their thirſt, and that becauſe they ſhoulde euer haue a fountaine within their bellie, to furniſhe ſomething to them when they thirſted: ſo that when as they ſhoulde ſeeke refreſhment, they might gette it in aboundance. And if we felt this thirſt and drineſſe of the ſoule, we would ſeeke earneſtly: for there was neuer ſuch a dryneſſe and ſuch an heate in any man naturally▪ as there is in vs through ſinne. Conſider thine owne experience, when thou haſt felt ſomtimes the great burthen of ſinne, and the terrours of the wrath of God for ſinne, whenſoeuer in this eſtate thou cameſt to God, and prayedſt for mercie, and ſaid, I am a miſerable ſinner, LORD, giue mee mercie; haſt thou not felt, that the Lord hath anſwered thee comfortably? and hath filled thine heart with joye, euen when in thy prayer thou ſigheſt and ſobbeſt vnſpeakeablie? What meaneth that joye? Euen that as ſoone as thou openeſt thy mouth with libertie▪ to ſeeke that water of life, the Lord conuayeth ſome portion of it into thine heart to quench thy thirſt.
            Now after hee hath cryed twiſe, hee ſubjoyneth in the next wordes, If thou, O Lord, ſtraightly markest iniquities, O Lord, who ſhall ſtand. This no queſtion, followeth by way of preoccupation: It might haue bene objected to him in his prayer (for manie are the temptations of the godly) by his conſcience, pleading for GOD againſt him: or GOD

Himſelfe might haue ſaide, Thou prayeſt to mee and yet thou art a ſinner, how ſhould I heare thee? How dareſt thou ſtand before mee? It is a wonder that in my fierce wrath I deſtroye thee not. To this hee anſwereth, firſt by waye of confeſſion. It is true, O LORD, that if thou wilt ſtraitelie marke iniquitie, that no fleſh can ſtand in thy preſence, but they muſt bee conſumed, through the rage of thy diſpleaſure. Then hee anſwereth by waye of correction, But mercie is with thee: the meaning is, Thou takeſt none heede to our iniquities, but of thy free mercie and grace, thou pardoneſt them all in thy Sonne IESVS CHRIST: for none of the Saincts, none of the Fathers, none of the Prophets, euer got mercy, but thorow that blood of IESVS CHRIST, who was ſlaine from the beginning of the worlde: through His blood only was the wrath of God pacified: except Gods juſtice bee firſt ſatisfied, there is no place left to mercy: therefore ſaith he, my refuge is to thy mercie. Indeed our eſtate who liue now, is farre better than the eſtate of them who liued before Chriſt came into the world: for they ſaw▪ the death & ſatisfaction of Chriſt, & remiſſion of ſin in his blood but a far of: but we ſee now all, already paſt, & wee may ſay, that now God in Chriſt is merciful to vs, is become our Father, and hath forgiuen all our ſins. Now out of theſe words, & by this example of the Prophet, yee maye ſee what is the eſtate of Gods children in prayer: to wit, when in affliction

they ſeeke to repaire to GOD by prayer, they will not ſo ſoone begin to pray, but as ſoone their guiltie conſciences will beginne to knocke and challenge them, as vnworthie to bee heard: the conſcience will ſtand vp, and if it be not cleanſed, it will preſent thy ſinnes before thee, and ſet them in order in all their circumſtances. Albeit thou forget thy ſinnes, after thou haſt gotten thy pleaſure, yet thou ſhalt ſee, that thy conſcience hath marked them all: and as a man cannot reade when the booke is cloſed, yet beeing opened, they maye reade therein: Euen ſo, albeit vvhen our conſciences are benummed, wee ſee not the vglineſſe and guiltineſſe of ſinne, yet when GOD wakeneth them, wee will ſee ſinne in the owne colour, and finde the vglineſſe and guiltineſſe thereof: Our ſinnes will come in, and ſtand vp as mountaines, and will hide the bleſſed face and preſence of GOD from thee: Sinne goeth betwixt vs and GOD, and ſeparateth vs from GOD. The Sainctes finde in experience, that it is not an eaſie thing to finde a familiar acceſſe to God in prayer: except our conſciences firſt bee purged, wee can haue none acceſſe to GOD. Therefore, whoſoeuer woulde drawe neare to GOD, let him ſeeke to followe the counſell of the Apoſtle, in the 10. Chapter of the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes, and the two and twentie verſe, where he ſaith, Let vs draw neare with a true heart, in an aſſurance of faith ſprinkled in our heartes from an euill conſcience. No fleſh can

haue a fauourable acceſſe to God, except his conſcience bee firſt purged from guiltineſſe▪ yea, that which wee ſpeake of the guiltineſſe of ſinne, wee ſpeake alſo of ſinne it ſelfe, that except it bee quite taken away out of His ſight, that He will not look fauourably vpon vs. And this is that which the Prophet ſaieth here, If thou, O Lord, ſtraightlie markest iniquities, O Lord, who ſhall ſtand? For, as guiltineſſe of ſinne ſtayeth vs to beholde God, ſo ſinne it ſelfe ſtayeth God from beholding vs (miſerable wretches) with the eyes of His compaſſion. So long, therefore, as thy conſcience is not purged, when thou goeſt to preſent thy ſelfe before His Majeſtie, if thy conſcience bee wakened, thou wilt finde God marking thy ſinnes, laying them to thy charge, and wilt finde Him as a terrible Iudge, compaſſed about with burning wrath, readie to deſtroye thee: and if He marke thee, thou haſt no ſtanding: and if thou appeare not cloathed, with the righteouſneſſe and perfect ſatisfaction that IESVS through His blood hath purchaſed for thee, thou dareſt not preſume to approach, for then His fierce wrath ſhall bee poured out vpon thee.
            Further wee learne heereof, that when euer wee would haue our prayers accepted, wee ſhould beginne with an humble confeſſion of our ſinnes, and vnworthineſſe, and with an earneſt prayer to forgiue the ſame: yea, wee muſt aggreadge our ſinnes by all circumſtances, as the Prophet doeth

here. No, none, not the holieſt Sainctés, Fathers, nor Prophets, could be able to ſtand, if he marked their iniquitie, let bee himſelfe, who was ſuch an vnworthie wretch, who was laden with ſo manie and great ſinnes. Thou muſt not extenuate thy ſinnes before GOD, if thou wouldeſt find fauour with GOD, as manie men commonlie doe, ſaying wee are all ſinners, yea, manie men haue ſinned more, and haue done worſe deedes than I haue done. That is not the way to finde Gods fauour. Thou muſt bee very abject, vile, and contemptible in thine owne accompt, if thou wouldeſt haue the Lord to account of thee. Then where ſhall wee get a remidie, to helpe an euill conſcience? for ſinne taketh away all joy and confidence in prayer.
            The next wordes furniſh a faire remidie, But mercie is with Thee: Lord, it is not Thy juſtice I looke to, but Thy mercie, Thy juſtice holdeth mee abacke, but Thy mercie allureth mee▪ I flee from Thy juſtice and I claime to Thy mercie. So when a man deſireth his prayers to bee heard, hee muſt firſt haue a ſight of his owne miſerie, guiltineſſe, and vnworthineſſe, and of the fierceneſſe of the Lords wrath for the ſame, and in all humilitie hee muſt confeſſe the ſame. Next hee muſt haue a ſight of the Lordes mercie, and hope, that it is poſſible that GOD bee reconciled with him: except that theſe two bee joyned together, hee commeth not duelie prepared, the one without the other will not ſerue, both are neceſſarie: for without the

knowledge, ſight, and feeling of our miſerie, of ſinne, and of the wrath of God for the ſame, vvee will neuer be earneſt in prayer: Who will aske, except hee finde his want? and without an humble confeſſion, there is no cōming before God. Thou muſt not do as the Phariſie did: reade that parable of the Phariſie and of the Publicane, Luke 18. The Phariſie was ſo blinded with ſelfe-loue, that hee could not ſee the filthineſſe and corruption of his own heart: and therefore, not only in the preſence of man, whom he might deceiue, would he juſtifie himſelf, but alſo in the very preſence of God, who cannot be deceiued, & who ſearcheth the hearts, he would boaſt of his own righteouſnes, and condemne the poore Publicane But what found he? It is ſaide, hee went home not juſtified, that all men might feare thereafter to come before God with a cōceit of their worthines. Thou muſt follow ye example of the poore Publicane, who being aſhamed of himſelf, would not looke vp to Heauē, but looked down, & ſmote his breſt, & ſaid, O God, be mercifull vnto mee a ſinner. Next, if thou haue no more but a ſight, ſenſe, & confeſsion of thy miſery, will that bee ſufficient? No, for albeit thou ſaweſt all thy ſinnes, and foundeſt the burthen thereof, and foundeſt the Lord as a judge in a judgement purſuing thee, and heaping daylie judgement vpon judgement, and wrath vpon wrath, that will neuer make thee to drawe neare to the Lord, but by the contrary wil make thee to turne thy back vpon the

LORD: for as a male-factor hath no pleaſure to beholde the face of a judge, becauſe his countenance is terrible, No more can the ſinner abide the countenance of God, His judgementes & His wrath may make vs aſtoniſhed, and ſtupified: but if there bee no more, they will neuer make vs to come to God. Then if this be not ſufficient, what more is requiſite? Euen a ſight of the Lordes mercie, for that is moſt forceable to allure, as the Prophet ſaieth here, and as the Church of God ſaith (Cant. 1. 2) becauſe of the ſauour of thy good ointments, therefore the Virgines loue thee: this onelie is forceable to allure ye ſinner▪ for all the judgementes of GOD, and curſes of the lawe, will neuer allure him. What was the chief thing that moued the Prodigall ſonne to returne home to his father? Was it chiefely the diſtreſſe, the diſgrace, and pouerty wherewith he was burthened, or the famine that almoſt cauſed him to ſterue? No, but the chiefe thing was this, hee remembred that hee had a louing father: that maketh him to reſolue with an humble confeſsion, to goe home, Luk. 15. Euen ſo is it vvith a ſinner, it is not terrours and threatninges yt chiefely vvil moue him to come to God, but ye conſideration of His manifold & great mercies: therfore, if the Lord waken thy cōſcience, preſent thy ſins before thee, threaten thee, & heap judgemēts on thee, then ſay, Lord, I deſerue to be threatned, & alwais to be plagued, but, Lord, thou knowſt my nature, thes things wil not make me to

come to Thee, but will put mee away from Thee: therefore, let mee ſee Thy manifolde mercies towards ſinners, to allure me, and then I ſhall come vnto Thee.
            So wee ſee the remidie againſt an euill conſcience, to wit, an humble confeſsion of ſinne and vnworthineſſe, and a fleeing from the juſtice of God, to His mercie. The faireſt & ſweeteſt thing in the worlde is to feele the mercie of GOD. But herein there is great hardneſſe and difficultie. It is not ſo eaſilie attained vnto, as men commonlie thinke: for His mercie is compaſſed about with His juſtice, and with His wrath againſt ſinners, as with a wall of fire: and he who will come to grace, he muſt come through a conſuming fire: and when hee preaſſeth to come neare, the fire of Gods wrath will holde him off, and will ſtrike out and burne vp the impenitent ſinner, as fire doeth the ſtubble: So it is an harder thing than manie think it to be, to win to Gods mercy. And how ſhal this be remidied? By what meanes ſhall wee gette thorowe this wall of fire? Truely hee who woulde meane to paſſe thorow fire, had neede to bee well armed: the man who preaſſeth to approach neare to that inuialable Majeſtie, who can abide no ſort of vncleanneſſe, and woulde drawe neare to the Throne of His grace muſt bee well armed againſt the juſtice and wrath of GOD, which debarreth ſinners. Surelie there is none armour in the world that can preſerue vs from that raging and conſuming

fire of the juſtice and wrath of GOD, but only the righteouſneſſe and ſatisfaction of Ieſus Chriſt. Let a man vſe all the meanes in the world, and he be not found in Chriſt, he ſhall haue none acceſſe to come thorowe the juſtice and wrath of God to the Throne of grace: yea, his ſoule and his conſcience muſt bee ſprinkled and purged from dead workes, with that blood which was offered vp to GOD to that ende by His eternall Spirite, Heb. 9. without he bee dipped in that blood, hee will finde GOD a terrible Iudge. And after that through faith in the death and blood of IESVS, thou commeſt to that Throne of grace▪ thou ſhalt heare the ſweeteſt and moſte comfortable voyce that euer was, that is, All thy ſinnes are forgiuen thee in that blood. And if a man were cōdemned to die for ſome haynous cryme▪ if the king would ſaye, I abſolue thee, I forgiue thee, thou ſhalt liue: What joye and comfort woulde that voyce bring to the heart of him who was condemned? The Apoſtle ſaieth, Hebr. 10. 22. Let vs goe to the Throne of grace with a true heart, and purged from an euill conſcience through the blood of IESUS▪ CHRIST, that is, Thinke not to come to that Throne of grace, except firſt thou bee purged with that blood. Therefore, as euer thou wouldeſt bee in Heauen, or ſee the face of GOD to thy comfort, ſeeke to haue faith in CHRIST IESVS: Looke vvhat neceſſitie is laide vpon a ſinner: either muſt hee bee baniſhed from the preſence

and face of GOD for euer, and be caſten into the ſocietie of the damned, or elſe if he would bee ſaued, hee muſt bee imped and ingraffed by a true and liuely faith in Ieſus Chriſt: make thee for it with all thy maine, to get a gripe of Chriſt, as euer thou wouldeſt be ſaued.
            Nowe after hee hath met this objection, which God or his owne conſcience in Gods cauſe might haue caſten in, that hee was ſo vnworthie to bee heard by an humble confeſſion of vnworthineſſe, and by fleeing from His juſtice, and claiming to His great mercies, bee ſetteth downe the ende of this mercie and free forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, when he ſaieth, But mercie is with Thee, that Thou mayest bee feared: The ende whereof the Lord granteth mercie and forgiueneſſe of ſinnes to ſinners, is that they may obey, ſerue, and worſhip God with pleaſure and alacritie. No man can euer be able to glorifie God, and to ſerue Him chearfully, but the man who hath aſſurance that his ſinnes are freely forgiuē him in that eternall loue of God, through the blood of Ieſus: for none can glorifie God, except firſt he be glorified of God. Albeit the naturall man got neuer ſo manie and great benefites, yet becauſe hee hath none aſſurance of the forgiueneſſe of his ſinnes he can neuer glorifie God, nor be thankfull to Him. On the other part, It is vnpoſſible and if thou haue a ſure perſwaſion that thy ſinnes are forgiuen thee, but thou wilt bee careful in ſome meaſure to meet the Lord God in

loue, to pleaſure Him, and to thanke Him: for the firſt effect that floweth from the remiſsion of ſinnes, is ſanctification or glorification: And it is not poſsible▪ but if thou bee glorified, thou muſt glorifie the Lord againe. But the queſtion may be here proponed, Wherein ſtandeth our glorifying of God? hath He neede of our glorification? Can our ſeruice bee profitable to Him? Can our welldoing extend to Him? Hath He need of any thing that wee can doe? I anſwere: Indeede it is true, our well-doing cannot extende to Him, as Dauid confeſſeth of himſelfe in the 16. Pſalme, and the 2. verſ. All the Kinges and Monarches in the world cannot doe any thing that is profitable and ſteadable to God: We are not able to adde any thing to the glory of God, for His glory is infinite, and to an infinite thing nothing can bee added: for if anie thing coulde bee added, it were not infinite. The Father, the Sonne and the Holy Spirite perfectlie glorified one another from all eternitie. Glorifie Mee, ſaieth Chriſt, with that glorie which I had with Thee before the foundation of the world was laide. That bleſſed Trinitie was as perfect in glorie before the creation of the world, as it hath beene euer ſince. Our glorifying of God ſtādeth only in this, when the Lord illuminateth our minds, that we may ſee His glorie, in all his properties, that wee in our heartes with pleaſure and chearfulneſſe conſent thereunto, allow of it, and with our mouthes proclaime that glory which we ſee to be in Him. And

it lieth not in man nor angel to compare His glory. The good & the euil, the well & ye wo, the commodity & incommodity of al cōmeth to our own ſelues: and happy is that man that glorifieth God, & miſerable is he y• glorifieth Him not: for our felicity ſtandeth not in that y• we our ſelues be glorified, but in this, that we glorify our Lord eternally, for that end were we created, & to y• ende were we redeemed with that precious ranſom, euē that we ſhuld glorify ye Lord & happy is that creature that hath ſome purpoſe, thirſt, & deſire to glorify God in this life, for he may be aſſured that one day the Lord ſhall glorify him eternally in Heauen. That ſoule, I ſay, ſhall be perfected in the life to come & without all impediment ſhall cry with the bleſſed Angels, Holy, holy, holy, is ye God of heauē, the Whole World is full of his glory. There ſhall it find in his countenance ſaciety of ioy, and at his right hand pleaſures for euer.
            
            Marke here laſt, & I ſhal end with it, that the ſeeling of the mercy of God in Ieſus Chriſt bringeth out obedience & chearful ſeruice of God: yea, of al argumēts to moue a man to abſtein from ſin, & to ſerue the Lord with pleaſure, that is ye moſt pithie & forcible, The ſhame of ye world, the feare of temporal judgement, the horror of conſcience, & the feare of the paines of hel, wil not be ſo ſteadable: it may be 
                  •
                they repreſſe raging luſts, & furious affections 
                  ••
               r a time, but they wil not mortify ſin, & ſlay corruptiō, & wil neuer cauſe a man with pleaſure to ſerue & obey God: but if a man hath foūd 
                  •
               
               
God hath loued him ſo well, that he hath giuē his only ſon to dy, that he might liue, it is not poſſible but that mā, in ſome meaſure, wil ſet himſelf with alacrity & chearfulnes to ſerue God. Therfore, the Apoſtle, whē he wold perſwade chriſtiās to abſtein from ſin, & to ſerue God, what argument vſeth he chiefly? read Rom. 12. 1. he proponeth the mercy of God, offering Ieſus to die for them, for there hee ſaith, I beſeech you, brethrē, through the mercies of God, 
                     •
                   ye offer vp your ſelues a liuing ſacrifice: therfore, if thou wouldeſt couet to do ye Lords wil chearfully, pray the Lord, that he would not ſo much threatē thee, & propone terrors to thee, as that he would make thee ſenſible of His mercies in Ieſus Chriſt. The vaine Papiſt ſpeakes litle or nothing almoſt to the people of this mercy of God in Ieſus Chriſt, but propones to the people the pains of hell, & fire of purgatory, to ſtay them from ſin, & to make them ſerue God▪ and do good works: but if there be no more, it wil neuer make them to bring forth ſuch obedience, as either is acceptable to God, or yet profitable to themſelues. The Lord therfore, make vs to bee ſenſible of his vnſpeakeable loue in Ieſus, that wee may ſet our ſelues with pleaſure to ſerue and glorify him here, that ſo we may be aſſured that hee ſhall glorify vs in the kingdome of Heauen, which Ieſus hath purchaſed to vs by his precious blood. To this Ieſus, with the Father, & the H. Spirit, be all praiſe, honor, and glory, for euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            THE XIII. SERMON.
            
               PSALME CXXX.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 5 I haue waited on the LORD: my ſoule hath waited, and I haue trusted in His word.
                  
                     
                        verse 6 My ſoule waiteth on the LORD more than the morning watch watcheth for the morning.
                  
                     
                        verse 7 Let Iſrael wait on the LORD: for with the LORD is mercie, and with Him is great redemption.
                  
                     
                        verse 8 And He ſhall redeeme Iſrael from all his iniquities.
               
            
            
               WELBELOVED in the LORD IESVS, The laſt day we diuided this Pſalme into theſe three partes. Firſt, the propoſition, whoſoeuer hee was that writ this Pſalme, hee maketh mention and rehearſall of that prayer that hee made to his God in the time of his great danger, and this hee doeth to the fift verſe: Then finding in experience a comfortable anſwere, and howe good a thing it was to pray to God, and to waite on Him, he profeſſeth▪ that as before, he had awaited on Him, ſo ſtill in time comming hee woulde awaite on Him, and this hee doeth to the ſeuenth verſe. In the third and laſt part, he turneth him to

               Iſrael, to the Church, and exhorteth them to await on God, as hee had done, promiſing them mercie and redemption from all their iniquities, if they would awaite on Him. The laſt day we ended the firſt part: ſo wee haue now to follow out the other two parts which remaine.
            Then as for the ſecond, The prophet finding in experience the fruite of his prayer, hee profeſſeth that hee will yet ſtill waite on the Lord: I haue waited on the Lord: my ſoule hath waited, and I haue trusted in His word: As though he would ſaye, I depend yet ſtill on His word, for the preſence of the Lord that wee haue in this life, is in His worde, and in His Holy Spirite, that accompanieth it: So all the dependance we haue on GOD, is in His worde and promiſe. Take that away, and then wee haue no ſight, no preſence, no faith here, till wee ſee Him face to face.
            Yet the wordes are better to bee marked, hee ſaith, I haue waited on the Lord: Then hee ſaith▪ 
               My ſoule hath waited on the Lord: as if he woulde ſaye, I haue not awaited on the Lord onely with my bodily eyes, but with mine heart and ſecrete inward affections: I haue depended on Him from my verie heart. For, Brethren, marke it well, It is the heart of a man or woman, that draweth GOD downe from Heauen, & ſucketh in His preſence▪ Marueilous is the power that a faithful heart hath when it ſendeth vp ſighes and ſobbes to Heauen for grace, to pull down Gods preſence and grace:

if there be no more but the eye, it will not doe the turne, but where the Spirit of the Lord dwelleth in the heart, it maketh it to 
                  •
               igh with ſobbes that cannot be expreſſed. It is not poſsible, but GOD, who giueth His Spirite to no man in vaine, and who knoweth the meaning of His owne Spirite, will grant that for which the Spirit maketh interceſsion. Paul (in the 8. chap. to the Rom.) ſetting downe the waiting on of the godly, how they wait on the Lord, he ſetteth downe both the forceable operation of Gods Spirit in our hearts, as alſo the fruit of his operation, Wee ſigh in our ſelues, waiting for the adoption, euen the redemption of our bodies: there the vvaiting on of the godly, is conjoyned vvith ſighes and ſobbes. Then after, hee letteth vs ſee what followeth vpon that▪ 
               What to ſeeke wee knowe not: but when the Spirite of the Lord interceadeth for vs with ſighes and ſobbes vnſpeakeable then the Lord, who ſearcheth the heart, & knoweth the meaning of His owne Spirit, granteth that thing, for the which the Spirite maketh interceſsion: for what els meaneth that vnſpeakeable joye, vvhich many a time the Saincts of God finde before they haue ended their prayers, but that their prayers are fauourably accepted? What meaneth that vnſpeakeable joy, when he ſaith, Belieuing we rejoyce with joy vnſpeakeable and glorious? That joye witneſſeth, that the Lord giueth his preſence: for there is a ſure ground, There is no true joy, but in the preſence of God: and ſo the joy teſtifieth to thee, that

thou ſigheſt not ſo ſoone, but the Lord giueth his preſence to thee. Now, when hee hath ſaide, My ſoule hath waited, then he ſubjoyneth, I will waite ſtill vpon His word: I will hold vp mine eare to Heauen, as it were, and heare what He wil ſpeake vnto me. There is no conſolation nor joy in this world, but in the hearing of His voyce: The friends of the bridegrome, ſaith S. Iohn, when they ſtand and heare the bridegrome ſpeake, they rejoyce exceedingly: So it is the joye of a Chriſtian to heare the Lord Ieſus ſpeake. The meaning is this, I haue waited on ſo long, & haue founde in experience how good a thing it is, and therefore that experience ſhall moue me to waite on ſtill, I am forced through the experience of mercy▪ to waite on ſtill without wearying. This prophet, whoſoeuer he was was in a great danger, and therefore in the beginning hee ſaide, Out of the deepe places haue I cryed vnto thee, O IEHOVAH: ſo he was vnder great affliction, his affliction y• hee ſuffered wrought in him ſo y• he waiteth patientlie ye Lords deliuerāce: a waiting with patience, in end he finds experience & proof of the mercy of God, for hee was deliuered: finding experience of the Lords loue through that deliuery, hee conceits an hope that Gods fauor ſhal neuer leaue him, & profeſſeth that he wil wait yet ſtil, & wait on cōtinually, becauſe of that experience of mercy. In the 5. chap. to the Romanes, yee haue the notable effectes that affliction worketh, linked together: and if there vvere no more but the effects y• wee finde to

haue beene in this man, they teſtifie, that it is true that the Apoſtle ſpeaketh here: Oppreſſion (ſaith he) worketh patience, that is when affliction is ſanctified to him that is afflicted, through time it bringeth forth patience. Then after that a man hath waited patiently on the deliuerance of the Lord, then ſaith he, patience worketh experience, that is, a bodie that abideth patiently vnder the croſſe, in the end he findeth an experience and proofe of the Lords loue, one way or other, either by deliuery, or by furniſhing ſtrength to beare it out, or by ſome ſpirituall grace. Then he ſaieth, experience worketh hope, that is, when anie one hath founde in experience the mercy of the Lord, hee conceaueth an hope, that the Lord ſhall euer deliuer him, and neuer forſake him: & he hopeth yt he ſhall get greater fauour, than euer he got before: for if the Lord giue the faithfull a temporall deliuerie, they hope Hee ſhall giue them eternall deliuerie: And this is ſure, thou canſt neuer hope for great enough things of the Lord, thine hope is farre inferiour to the things that ſhall be granted: for certainly, they that hope in the Lord, ſhall finde greater thinges than euer they hoped for: thou art not able to apprehend in thine hope the greatneſſe of them: the kingdome, the joye, and the glorie, is greater than thou canſt looke for: when thou ſhalt come there, thou ſhalt finde that all thinges are greater than thine hope.
            Nowe when hee hath proponed that hee will

hope in the Lord, hee beginneth in the next verſe to amplifie that propoſition, and declareth the earneſtneſſe of it by a compariſon taken from the watch-men, who watch all the night ouer without any reliefe, and ſaieth, My ſoule waiteth on the Lord more than the morning-watch watcheth for the morning. It is a worthie thing, to conſider how that after the heart is once preuented with a taſting of the ſweetneſſe of Gods fauour, howe that heart will hing and depend vpon Him, and ſeeke and waite for grace at Him more and more. Alas! from whence commeth this, that men & women are ſo careleſſe to ſeeke the Lord, and to waite on Him? Alas! they haue not taſted of that gracious ſweetneſſe that is in God through Ieſus Chriſt, for if they had once taſted of it, there would bee a perpetuall thirſting & deſiring for that preſence: the heart would neuer haue reſt nor eaſe till it got that preſence. The Apoſtle Peter, when he deſireth them to ſeeke that ſincere milke of the worde, whereby they might grow, hee ſubjoyneth, If once yee haue tasted how ſweet and gracious the Lord is: meaning, that they that neuer haue taſted of the ſweetneſſe of the Lordes preſence and His graces, haue not a deſire of grace. Wee ſee heere what is the eſtate of the faithfull in this worlde, by this compariſon with the watch. The eſtate of euery one of vs. is this waking and watching from euening to morning. The watch, yee knowe, watcheth in the night, and there eſpecially where greateſt danger

may fall out, and the watch that hath no reliefe in his watching, but muſt watch from the euening to the morning, hee muſt bee very weary, and being very weary, hee will bee very deſirous of the morning and the ſunne riſing: when it commeth, he is relieued of his painfull watching & goeth to take his reſt. To apply this to vs: This world which wee liue in, till the comming again of the Lord Ieſus, is but a darkeſome night, in reſpect of that glorious day that ſhall appeare when He commeth againe. Indeed, the world ſince the firſt cōming of Chriſt, is called a day in the Scripture: but that is in reſpect of them that were before Chriſt, but in reſpect of that paſſing light that Ieſus Chriſt ſhall thē bring with Him: this is but paſſing darknes, and we ſhall thinke ſo, when that day ſhall come. Nowe next, the watch in this worlde was neuer more ſtraitelie bound to watch in the night, than euery Chriſtian man is bound to watch till he come again: & this was the direction that Chriſt gaue His diſciples. Wait, for yee knowe not what houre thee good-man of the houſe ſhall come: and in watching, wee finde a great heauines: What faithfull man is in this world, that is not wearied with watching? The worlde that ſleepeth in this life, is not wearied, but the faithfull that watcheth is weary of this life, and faine would they haue that morning comming, whē the ſunne of righteouſnes, the Lord Ieſus, ſhall riſe vp, that they may be relieued: And when yt morning ſhall come, thou that haſt watched in this worlde,

at the leaſt hath ſtriuen to watch, and looked for that glorious comming of the Lord Ieſus, thou ſhalt get reſt, ſo ſweet a reſt as neuer man found in this world: but thou that haſt ſlept here, & haſt not vvatched for Him, ſleepe on: when Hee commeth thou ſhalt get no reſt, thy ſleeping ſhall ende in a terrible wakening. There is no reſt to them that hath not a deſire to watch in this world: but they yt haue a deſire to watch, & to holde vp their heads, they ſhall get reſt, yea, endleſſe reſt, and quietnes.
            Now, hauing ſpokē of the firſt & ſecond parts, I ſhall goe ſhortly forward to the third part of the Pſalme, wherein the Prophet turneth himſelfe to Iſrael, that is, the Church of God, and hee exhorteth Iſrael, the Church of God, to watch, & waite on the Lord: Let Iſrael waite on the Lord: finding in experience what hee had gotten for his waiting on, to vvit, mercie and deliuerance, he cannot be holden from glorifying Him, and cannot get Him glorified enough: Therefore, hee turneth him to the whole Church, and exhorteth them to vvaite on, that they may finde ſuch experience as he found, and that they may glorifie the Lord alſo. So the end he looketh to, is to glorifie the Lord, that He may bee glorified in manie belieuers, and waiters on him. The ende of the mercy of God tendeth to His own glory. There are many properties in God, he is infinite in wiſdom, in power, in trueth, infinit in glorie & Majeſtie. Now the Lord is glorified in all his properties, in his wiſdome, power & juſtice.

But aboue all thinges, the LORD ſeeketh that the world ſhould glorifie Him in that deepe riches of mercie and gentleneſſe that is in Him, that wee ſhoulde praiſe Him euerlaſtingly in His mercie. And as this is His will, and as the mercy of GOD ſerueth to His glory, So the ſoule of a man that hath once taſted of the mercy of the Lord Ieſus, is caried away with ſuch a zeale to His glory, that it will cauſe am in forget himſelfe, and with Moſes and Paul wiſh to be a curſe and anathema, to haue God glorified. This man ye ſee, when he hath taſted or His mercy, hee turneth him to the whole Church, and willeth them to truſt in Him, that they might find His mercy, that ſo God may bee glorified. So it is hee onely, who hath taſted of the mercy of God, who when he looketh thorow the miſerable world, can haue pity on any mā. He that neuer taſted of that mercy of God had neuer true pitic vpon any mā Then y• thing which he craueth is this, that many ſhoulde taſte of His mercy, that God may be glorified by many. His heart is moued with pitie, and ſo all his endeuour is to ſee if once he can gette them win to God: for when hee looketh abroad vpon miſerable ſinners, he is full of rueth and compaſsion. But marke againe, the zeale which hee hath to the glory of GOD, is the firſt cauſe that mooued him to ſeeke that all the world ſhould taſte of mercy and glorifie God. So firſt he beareth a loue to Gods glory, and then he hath pitie towarde men: the one is the cauſe, the

other the effect: the one preceedeth, the other followeth: the one is the roote, and the other the branch. All the loue we cary to man, ſhould be for the loue vve haue to GOD. And vvhere theſe two goe together, a zeale to the glory of God, (alas! vvhere is zeale to Gods glory now adayes? vvhich is a true token, that His glory is departing away) and then a pitie of the miſery of man, a deſire of the ſaluation of man: then that man vvill forget himſelfe, that hee maye ſeeke the ſaluation of the vvorld, that ſo in it God may be glorified. And the man that hath this diſpoſition in his heart, is fit to be a Miniſter & Preacher of grace to the world, otherwiſe, if hee vvant this diſpoſition, it is but a colde preaching that he vvill make.
            Now in the next vvords, vvhen he hath proponed the exhortation, and deſired them to vvaite on the Lord, to moue them the more, he pointeth out to the Church the nature of God, vvhat God is: for vvee muſt know vvhat God is, ere euer vvee put our truſt and confidence in Him: for why? ſaith he, with the Lord is mercie and gentleneſſe: as if hee would ſaye, The Lord is full of mercy. His mercies are incomprehenſible, yea, infinite, and neither man nor Angel can ſound out the deepneſſe therof: He is all mercie: and as S. Iohn ſaieth in his firſt Epiſt. chap. 4. verſ. 8. The Lord is loue. Therefore, await on Him: for why? there is no want nor ſcant of mercy in Him. This is vvell to be marked, when hee exhorteth Iſrael to vvaite vpon the Lord, hee

ſaith not, becauſe He is omnipotent, and infinite in juſtice, onelie wiſe, &c. But hee giueth this reaſon, becauſe mercy is with Him, therefore waite vpon Him. This would be well conſidered, What is the cauſe of this? Nowe I will aske another queſtion, What thing in God neede wee moſte into this worlde? There are manie thinges which wee haue much neede of: What is it that wee haue moſte neede of? Another queſtion: What is the eſtate that euerie one of vs is borne in, in this worlde? Are wee not borne ſinners? conceiued and borne in ſinne and iniquitie? And ſo are wee not all miſerable? For there is nothing for ſinners, but miſerie, death, & damnation: and ſo all ſinners are miſerable. So, what thing is it that a ſinner wanteth moſt? vvhat is it that ſinne and miſerie craueth, but mercie? And if thou bee miſerable, the thing in this world that thou ſhouldeſt craue firſt, is mercy, that God woulde bee mercifull to thee: So mercie and forgiueneſſe of ſinne is the firſt thing whereto thou oughteſt to haue recourſe. And if thou wilt tell a miſerable bodie that feeleth himſelfe to bee miſerable and the childe of wrath, that God is omnipotent if thou point Him out in His wiſedome, in His juſtice, hee ſhall bee ſo farre from receiuing anie comfort, and conſolation, of anie of theſe things, that by the cōtrarie he ſhall be ſo terrified, that hee dare not preſume to ſeeke God, to looke to Him, to come to Him, &c: but hee will runne away from God: But tell him that God is mercifull,

& full of grace in Ieſus Chriſt, that is the ſweeteſt ſpeach that euer he heard. But, alas! few of vs feeleth that burthen of ſinne: Who is he that groneth vnder ſinne? Who feareth the terrors of that wrath? If thou find them, then tell thee of the mercies of Ieſus Chriſt, it would bee the ſweeteſt tale that euer thou heardeſt. And when a man is once ſenſible of the infinite mercies of GOD in Ieſus, then tell him of all the infinite properties of God, tell him of His power, wiſedome, and prouidence, they will all ſerue to his comfort: for why? he will thinke that all things that are in God appertaine to him, and ſerue to his weale, he will finde that all things will ſerue to his ſaluation. Otherwiſe, without this aſſurance of mercy, hee will neuer thinke them comfortable. So there is a ſure ground, The faith of a man or woman, firſt of all, is euer relatiue to the mercy of God: and that is the firſt object of faith. Indeed, hauing gottē a gripe of mercie, then it extendeth to all the reſt: but before that, there is nothing in God that it can reſt vpon. Yee ſee by experience, when the law is preached, there is little allurance of the heart: but when the Euangell and Chriſt Ieſus is preached, the heart is drawne on and allured. What is the cauſe of this? The doctrine of the law is a doctrine of extreame juſtice, and His juſtice doeth nothing but terrifie the ſoule: but the doctrine of the Euangell is a doctrine of the mercy of God in Ieſus Chriſt, which draweth to it the hearts of men. Albeit thou heare

the law preached an hundreth yeares, & heare no more, thou ſhalt be ſo far from being the better, that thou ſhalt ſtill be the worſe. So this teſtifieth, that the object of our faith is the ſurpaſſing mercy of God. Then, if thou wouldeſt ſearch ye nature of God (and ſearch Him a thouſand yeeres, thou ſhalt neuer come to the ground of His deepneſſe) ſearch out eſpecially His loue & mercy: a man may faile & vaniſh away in curioſity, ſearching ye deepeneſſe of God: but in ſearching out His mercy, thou ſhalt neuer erre, it ſhall be with a joy & cōſolation of the heart. Paul prayeth for the Epheſians (chap. 3 verſ. 18.) that they might attaine to that infinite deepneſſe & breadth, length & height in God, for God is infinitly deepe in all things: but wherefore is it that he prayeth? Euen that they, ſearching in God, ſhould ſearch that infinit profoundity of the loue of God. Surely, if wee would know that profoundity of God, & ſearch in to His nature▪ thē let vs ſearch alwayes in to that loue & mercy of God in IESVS Chriſt. And this ſearching hath euer a grouth and increaſe in faith, till wee get a ſight of Him euerlaſtingly.
            To go forward. He is not cōtent to ſay, with Him is gentlenes, but he ſubjoynes, with Him is great redemption: the words grow in highneſſe, & theſe words comprehēd & ſet out a greater mercy in God than the former: now ye mercy of God in Ieſus Chriſt is not all told in a word: alas, for want of feeling we ſpeake ſlenderly & lightly of it: no, in very deed, all

the words, and the greateſt words in the world, of the moſt holy, moſt wiſe, & moſt eloquent men, is not able to ſet out & point out that infinit greatneſſe & deepnes of it: and he & ſhe that once haue taſted of mercy, ſcarcely can they find words to expreſſe the thouſand part of it: whē they haue gotten a little taſte & apprehenſion of it, they are not able to get words to expreſſe that apprehenſion of the heart. Paul commonly calleth it the riches of mercy, God, who is rich in mercy, according to His infinit & great loue, &c. Epheſ. 2. 4. Paul, Dauid, & the reſt of them cānot get words to expreſſe that apprehenſion of mercy that they haue in their heartes. No, there is no creature that is capable of that infinite mercy: for the worke that ye Spirite of Ieſus Chriſt doeth worke in the heart, whether it be a ſenſe of dolour, or a ſenſe of joy, the tongue of no creature can tell or expreſſe, Paul calleth it ſighes inexpreſſible: & Peter calleth it joy vnſpeakeable: So ye heart cannot expreſſe the greatneſſe of the worke of the Spirit. Men will thinke them hyperbolicall words, but that is a token that they haue not taſted that joy and mercy in their owne hearts.
            Now in the laſt words he commeth neare hand, & makes a particular promiſe of His mercy to His Church, He will redeeme Iſrael, His Church, from all her iniquity, as hee would ſay, I haue told you, He is mercifull & full of redemption, but I come nearer hand: Thou ſhalt finde in experience, that Hee is mercifull, & full of redemptiō: So it is not enough

to the Preachers of ye word, to preach Gods mercy and redemption generally to the world: no, they muſt come nearer hand, & in promiſing▪ they muſt make to the hearts of the people a particular application, and ſay not only, God is mercifull, but▪ He will be mercifull vnto you, and He is full of redemption, and He ſhall redeeme you: and ſo ſay I, I haue not beene ſpeaking of mercy and redemption that appertaineth not to vs, but the Lord ſhal be mercifull, and redeeme you, if ye belieue in Ieſus Chriſt: for there is no grace but in Him. If this particular application be not made, the cōſcience of ſinne is ſo great, that the ſinner dare not put foorth his hand to receiue mercy. Now to whom pertaineth mercy and redemption? He ſaith, Hee ſhall redeeme Iſrael, that is, the Church militant. The Church is militāt in this world, but redemption pertaineth to it in the ende. But where from ſhall the Lord redeeme ye Church? Not from perſecution and tribulation in this worlde, but from all her ſinnes. So this preſupponeth firſt, That the Church is full of ſin ſo long as it is in this world. This is but a vaine dreame to imagine that there ſhall bee a Church, or any member of the ſame, in this worlde, without ſpot: away with that vanitie. So next, the redemption of the Church ſtandeth nor ſo much in freeing it from perſecution or tribulation, although ſhe ſhall be redeemed from all theſe things alſo, as from redeeming her from ſin: the chieſe redemption ſhall be from ſin: for why?

the greateſt enemy of the Church is her own ſins▪ & it is her own ſins that is the cauſe of all her perſecution and it is ſin that the Lord mortifieth and ſlayeth by perſecution and tribulation: for if there were no ſin, there would not bee ſuch a thing as a perſecuter or a tyrant againſt her: and the greateſt burthen that ye godly feele, is alwayes their owne ſins, & they were neuer vnder ſo great perfecution▪ no croſſe, no trouble comparable to the burthen of ſin. Paul ſaith, Rom. 7. 24, Miſerable man! who ſhall deliuer me? Where from? Not from perſecution, albeit he was ſubject to as great perſecution as anie man, but from this body of ſin, becauſe hee could not get that obedience to God, that hee would haue had. And wherfore died Chriſt? Was it to redeeme vs from perſecution, or croſſes in this world? No, the Lord died that Hee might redeeme vs from ſin with His precious blood. And Paul (to ye 
               Corin) maketh mention of that triumph that the Church ſhall haue when the Lord Ieſus ſhall come, O death where is thy ſting? Then ſhe ſhall glory that ſhe is redeemed from ſinne, and from offending of GOD. And that ſhall be our chiefe felicity in that life to come, that our hearts & thoughtes ſhall be free of all ſinne, we shall offend God no more, but al ſhall be full of obedience to Ieſus Chriſt, and then shall we be fully ſanctified and glorified when wee get that bleſſed preſence of the Lord Ieſus, which wee long for: To whome bee praiſe and glory, for euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            THE XIIII. SERMON.
            
                MATTH. CHAP. XV.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 21 And Ieſus went thence, and departed into the coaſts of Tyrus and Sidon.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 22 And beholde, a woman, a Canaanite, came out of the ſame coastes, and cryed▪ ſaying vnto him, Haue inercie on mee, O Lord, the ſonne of Dauid, my daughter is miſerably vexed with a deuill.
                  
                     
                        verse 23 But he anſwered her not a word. Then came to him his diſciples, and beſought him, ſaying, Sende her away, for ſhe cryeth after vs.
                  
                     
                        verse 24 But he anſwered, and ſaid, I am not ſent, but vnto the loſt ſheepe of the houſe of Iſrael.
                  
                     
                        verse 25 Yet ſhee came, and worſhipped him, ſaying, LORD helpe mee.
                  
                     
                        verse 26 And hee anſwered, and ſaide, It is not good to take the childrens bread, and to cast it to whelps.
                  
                     
                        verse 27 But ſhee ſaide, Trueth, Lord: yet in deede the whelps eat of the crummes, which fall from their maisters table.
                  
                     
                        verse 28 Then Ieſus anſwered, and ſaide vnto her▪ O woman, great is thy faith: bee it vnto thee as thou deſirest. And her daughter was made whole at that houre.
               
            
            
               
               IN this TEXT which wee haue read (wel beloued in the Lord Ieſus) wee haue a wonder, that the Lord wrought on a woman, a Canaanite a Gentile, of a curſed generation, the generation of Canaan. The wonder is, the healing of a womans daughter that was poſſeſſed, and ſore and miſerably vexed with a deuill. The woman hauing the occaſion to meet with the Lord through His comming to theſe parts where ſhe abode, ſhee ſlippeth not the occaſion, but ſeeketh mercy and grace: ſhe findeth at the firſt great hardneſſe and difficulty, to get mercy: but at the laſt, ſhe ouercommeth all by her faith, and getteth mercy.
            Now to go through this Hiſtory ſo ſhortly and plainly as the LORD ſhall giue the grace. This woman is called a Canaanite, that is deſcended of that olde and rotten ſtocke of Canaan▪
                that was deſtinate for wrath and deſtruction. (Geneſ. 9. 25. Looke to her eſtate, ſhee is come of a curſed raſe, ſhe is lying in ſinne and ſecurity: firſt in ſinne, next in a deadly ſleepe and ſecurity of ſinne. This is the eſtate of euery one of vs: we lie in ſinne, conceiued in ſinne, and borne in ſinne: we feele not the ſinne, & that deadly ſleepe of ſecurity is worſe than the ſinne we lie in: there is none of vs better by nature than this woman was. Then when ſhe is thus lying in ſinne & ſecurity, the Lord from the Heauen ſendeth

her awakening, and a ſharpe wakening: for the judgements of God are like many meſſengers from Heauen to waken vs. In the example of the woman wee ſee that the Lords children muſt bee wakened: and oftentimes our firſt wakening is verie sharpe, dolefull, and fearefull, as it is with one that is wakened in the rage of a feuer. Yet there is grace here: Well is ye man that is wakened, though the wakening were neuer ſo ſore and sharpe: for the multitude of the worlde dye in ſecuritie, and neuer waken, till the fire of Hell waken them. Well is thee, and thou be wakened, albeit it should be with neuer ſo heauy a judgement, yea, though thy daughter, or thy ſelfe, should bee poſſeſſed with a deuill.
            Now, when this poore womā is thus wakened, and is wraſtling vnder the heauy hand of God, the Lord caſteth an eye towardes her, (for no doubt, howbeit ſhe was one of the raſe of curſed Canaan, yet ſhe was choſen to eternall life) and of very purpoſe He caſteth Himſelf into theſe parts where ſhe was: what euer other erand Hee had, there is no queſtion, but He had a particular reſpect to her, 
                  •
                she might haue the occaſion to come to Him, and this was a great grace. When we are wakened out of ſecurity, then the Mediciner hath his time, and this is a greater grace. It is a great grace to bee wakened, but it is a greater grace to find a Mediciner to cure thy diſeaſe: for, as multitudes die in ſecuritie, ſo alſo multitudes die in paine, torment,

and deſperation, after they are wakened. Well, she hearing tell that He was come to theſe parts, and that He was ſuch a man, a wonderful man, as the prophet Eſay calleth Him, who cured all ſort of diſeaſes, who reſtored ſight to the blind, limmes to the lame, cleanſed the leprous, and raiſed vp the dead, she is moued to ſeeke grace and mercy at Him. Had not the Lord preuented her, and come downe thither & ſought her, to draw her to Him, there had neuer bene ſuch a thing, that she had ſought for Him. All thy miſery, albeit it vvere neuer ſo great, vvill neuer draw thee to Him, except Hee ſeeke thee firſt, and draw thine heart vnto Him.
            Well, nowe to come forwarde, vvhen shee ſeeketh Him, shee findeth Him, and getteth His bodilie preſence.
            CHRIST and His Diſciples vvere vvalking together after His accuſtomed manner: at the firſt meeting, ſaieth the TEXT, The woman cryeth, Hee is apparantlie going before, and the vvoman followeth after, and cryeth: Miſerie conſtraineth her to crie: And if the LORD laye His handes vpon thee, Hee vvill compell thee to howle and crie. O, that power and might that is in the LORD ouer His creature!
            But I doubt not, conſidering the vvordes and communication that the LORD hath with this poore, miſerable, and ſinfull vvoman, but it was that Spirit of adoptiō that opened her mouth ſo vvide to crie vpon Him ſo, O thou ſonne of Dauid
               
               haue mercie on mee: What crieth ſhee? Marke her words: She crieth, haue mercy vpon me. How many of Hieruſalem cried after this manner? An Heathen, 
                     •
                   Cananite, crieth this way: miſery compelleth her to cry. But what maketh her to cry Mercy? Wee will raile & blaſpheme God whē we are in miſery: but what cauſed her to cry Mercie? No queſtion, the conſcience of her demerites cauſed her to crie Mercie: ſhee felt her ſelfe to bee worthy of all that miſery wherewith ſhee was burthened. The voyce of a miſerable ſinner, that feeleth miſery, is, O Lord haue mercy vpon mee: but loe howe ſhee ſtileth Him, O Lord, The Sonne of Dauid: theſe were the common ſtiles indeed of the Lord, in this life, He was called of the multitud, LORD, and the ſonne of Dauid. But certainly, I am of this mind, that this woman took theſe ſtiles otherwiſe than ye common multitude: The very eye of her ſoule was opened, to ſee Ieſus Chriſt to be the Lord, & to bee the Sonne of God manifeſted in the fleſh of the ſeed of Dauid, howbeit I will not attribute vnto her a diſtinct & clear knowledge of both His natures in one perſon, and of His offices.
            Then, Brethren, ye ſee two grounds of her petition. The firſt is a Lordſhip, and Power, and Dominion in Him, of whom ſhe ſought mercy. The next is, a Pitie, a Mercy in Him of whome ſhee ſought mercy. She ſought mercy at a mèrcifull face, grace at a gracious face. Looke that thy prayer bee well grounded on the LORD. When thou openeſt thy

mouth to ſeeke mercy at that LORD, looke that thou acknewledge that there is a power in that Lord to giue thee euery thing that thou ſtandeſt in need of: and chiefely, looke that thou acknowledge, that there is an infinit paſſing mercy in that Lord, ſurmounting all thy ſinnes, and then ſhalt thou pray from the heart, with confidence and liberty: otherwiſe thou mayeſt well ſeeke mercie from the teeth outwarde, but neuer with thine heart. Then ſhee letteth Him ſee a good cauſe wherefore ſhe ſought mercy: Lord, I haue need of a Phiſition, for I am ſicke. What ſickneſſe is ſorer to a poore body, than this, to bee rent both in ſoule and body with a deuil? Lord, my poore daughter is tormented with a deuill: As in thy prayer thou muſt haue a ſight of the infinit power of thy God, of the mercy of thy God, ſo ſcorn Him not with a ſenſeleſſe heart: No, if thou getteſt not a ſenſe & feeling of thy miſery, of thy trouble, & vexation in thine heart, call not vpon the Name of the Lord. It is true indeed, the Lord ſeeth and knoweth thy miſery, as well as thy ſelfe, albeit thou ſpeake not a word vnto Him of thy miſery: yet for all that, the Lord taketh pleaſure to heare thy miſery out of thine owne mouth: He will not only haue thee to feele and grone in thine heart for it, but he will haue thee to vtter it vnto Him with thy tongue alſo, if oportunity ſerue: He wil haue thee to make it knowne vnto Him, as if Hee knew it not He will haue thee to bring vp thy miſery from the ground

of thine heart, & as thou feeleſt it in the ſadneſſe of thine heart, ſo to vtter it in thy voyce: for the Lord delighteth to heare miſerable bodies ſpeaking of their miſerie.
            Now to goe forward. When shee hath made her petition, ſee the meeting: the text ſaith, At the firſt Hee anſwered her not a vvord, but goeth forward vvith the Diſciples, and letteth her follow on crying, O Lord, haue mercie vpon me: not once nor twiſe, but the crie goeth neuer out of her head. This is wonderfull: Hee that preuented her vvith grace, and gaue her grace to ſeeke him, vvill not make her one vvorde anſwere, but goeth his vvaye, and vvill not ſpeake vnto her: Yea, thou vvilt find, that he, who preuēted thee vvith grace, & ſought thee, ere euer thou ſoughteſt him, & gaue thee grace to crie and pray, Haue mercie, O God, yet he vvill ſeeme to miſ-knowe thee, and make thee none anſwere. Thou vvilt crie in ſickneſſe, Mercie, but vvilt thou alwayes find mercy? No, no, thou vvilt cry in other troubles, Mercie, and his Spirite no queſtion vvill interceade for thee, and yet for a time hee vvill make thee none anſwere. What meaneth this? why doeth he ſo? Now vvhen he hath giuen thee grace to crie for mercy, a thirſt & an hunger for grace, (Bleſſed are they that hunger & thirſt) vvhen he hath giuen thee this firſt grace, hee vvill let thee crie a great vvhile to trie thy conſtancie. We neuer get a ſpirituall grace in this life, but vvith the grace vve get alwayes a tryall: and vvhen he giueth vs grace

to crie: hee vvill trie if vvee vvill crie on. And to ſpeake the trueth, Brethren, All our life heere, is but a tryall of the graces of GOD, vvhich hee hath giuen vs. Wee gette not our heauen heere, but a faith to looke a farre of vnto it, an hunger, a thirſt, a deſire of it, and vvith our thirſt a tryall of our Faith, a tryall of our Hope, of our deſire, to ſee if vvee vvill ſtand in it. And then ſaieth Peter, in the life to come, the tryall of thy faith, and hope, and patience, beeing ended, What ſhall followe, Praiſe, and honour, and glorie, vvhen IESVS ſhall appeare, 1. Pet. 1. 7. Thou ſhalt bee filled vvith ſaciety and fulneſſe of joye, thine hunger and thirſt ſhall bee ſatisfied as ſoone as euer thou ſeeſt thy Redeemer.
            Now to proceed. The Diſciples that followed ye Lord, they are troubled vvith the cry of ye woman, & ſay to the Lord. Either giue her one anſwere or other, and let her goe her way. Surely I thinke this ſute of the diſciples was not ſo much for anie deſire they had that he ſhould helpe her, as to be quite of her crying, becauſe they vvere deafned vvith her. So then the Papiſtes neede not vpon this, to ground their interceſſion of the Sainctes in heauen, for vs that remaine heere on earth: for this ground is as vveake as their doctrine of interceſſion is: and ſhe directeth not her ſpeach to the Apoſtles heere, to PETER, IAMES, or IOHN, that they ſhould intercead for her, but to the Lord himſelf, ſhe ſpeaketh to none of thē, but ſhe paſſeth & ſpeakes to ye Lord

immediately: So ſhould wee leaue all the Saincter, and with confidence goe to the Lord Himſelfe. The Diſciples are deafned and troubled with her crying: the Lord Himſelfe letteth her crie on: and this is a token that Hee is not wearied with her crying Well then, thou findeſt a comfort heere, when thou cryeſt night and day, Hee neuer wearieth with thee: He ſaith not, thou troubleſt me, al thy cryes ſighes, and ſobbes, are pleaſant to Him. Men will bee weary ſometimes with thy crying, as wee reade, that vnjuſt Iudge was importuned by the juſt ſute of the poore woman, and diſpatcheth her away, and ſaith, thou troubleſt and irkeſt mee night and day, Luke 18. 1. But the true righteous Iudge is neuer wearied with thee, when He letteth thee cry out, He wil not anſwere with a grudge, as the Iudge did, but chearfully. The Lord that loueth a chearfull giuer, He Himſelfe giueth chearefully. What meaneth that joye that the faithfull finde in their heartes, accompanying the benefite that commeth from Him, but that the Lord giueth His benefites chearefully? for if the LORD gaue thee them not chearfully, but in anger and wrath, and threwe them to thee as to a reprobate, thou wouldeſt neuer haue joye in the receiuing of them. There is not ſuch a thing, as a reprobate can haue joy in the giuer, or euer haue his mouth opē with true thankeſgiuing to the Lord to ſay once, I thanke thee: Why? Becauſe the Lord giueth him not His benefites in loue, but in anger. So this is a

ſure token when thou findeſt joye in thine heart, and a contentation in thy prayer, and a purpoſe to be thankfull, that the Lord giueth thee chearefully, and heareth thee joyfully. And if thou canſt get but a joyfull looke of thy God, thou mayſt be aſſured that it proceedeth of mercy. When Hee looketh ſo vnto thee, Hee doeth not as earthly kings, or any earthly creature vſe to doe, for they can keepe a faire countenance, and yet haue little good will in their heartes. Well, the womā crieth, & the diſciples cry: The Lord muſt anſwere once, but Hee maketh an anſwere little to her contentment, I am not ſent, ſaieth He, but vnto the loſt ſheepe of the houſe of Iſrael: What haue I to doe with that poore woman? ſhee is not one of My ſheepe, ſhe is of a curſed generation of the Canaanites, ordained to deſtruction and wrath: In a word, He debarreth her from grace, Hee cloaſeth the gates of Heauen vpon her teeth: for when He ſaith, Hee is not ſent to her He ſhutteth her out of Heauen. Wee ought to marke this well, for we are Canaanites, that is to ſay. Gentiles: It is true indeed, the Lord comming down from the Heauen, & manifeſting Himſelfe in the fleſh. He had His commiſsion firſt & principally to the Iewes, and not to the Gentiles, not to Scotland, nor ENGLAND, nor Germanie, nor France, chiefely and principally: as Chriſt ſaid to Hieruſalem. Oh! that thou couldeſt ſee the day of thy viſitation! Luke 19. 41. Hee was ſent with commiſsion to the Gentiles, but in caſe of the contumacie & rebellion

of the Iewes, as if the Lord had ſaid vnto him, Goe thy vvay vnto mine owne people, vvhome I haue choſen from among all the Nations of the earth, and ſee if thou canſt vvinne them, goe no further. And if the Iewes had not bene rebellious and diſobedient, vve had neuer gotten mercie and grace▪ Looke Roman. 11. 11. The fall of the Iewes, vvas the raiſing vp of the Gentiles, & the diminution of the Iewes, vvas the riches of the Gentiles. Howe got yee grace? ſaith he, By their contumacie and rebellion. So Chriſt, ſending out his Diſciples to preach, biddeth them go, not vnto the Gentiles, or vnto the Samaritanes their next neighbours, but vnto the l
                     •
                  st ſheepe of the houſe of Iſrael, Matth. 10. 5. And Paul in a preaching before both the Iewes and Gentiles, Act. 13. 46. The worde of GOD, ſaieth hee, behooued first to bee preached vnto you, the promiſe belonging vnto you. But becauſe yee will not receiue the worde, and haue made your ſelues vnworthie of life euerlaſting▪ Therefore, I will turne and preach to the Gentiles: And ſo hee bade the Iewes good-night, and turned him to the Gentiles. And the TEXT ſaieth, that then the Gentiles rejoyced exceedingly.
            So vvee vvere ſtrangers from heauen, and aliantes from the common vvealth of Iſrael.
            
            And vvee learne in the example of this vvoman that our entrie to grace, and to heauen, vvas verie hard and difficill: And as our entrie to grace vvas hard▪ ſo if vvee fall from grace, our re-entrie to grace ſhall bee farre harder: And if thou fall

once from grace, hardly ſhalt thou get grace againe. A Gentile that falleth once from grace, and treadeth vnder his feete the blood of Ieſus, ſhall neuer bee renewed with grace againe. And I ſay to thee, O Scotland, if thou falleſt from grace, looke neuer for grace againe. Looke to the cities amongſt the Gentiles that fell from grace, looke Corinth, looke Philippi▪
                looke ye 
               Galathians, &c. got they euer grace again? No: ſo if Scotland fall from grace, it will bee a wonder if euer it get grace againe. The wrath of God ſhall bee powred foorth vpon euery one, from the greateſt to the ſmalleſt: for if He receiued not the Iewes (His owne people) into grace, after that they were once fallen from it, ſhal He take thee vp againe, a Gentile, a vile dog, in reſpect of them? And yet our men in this countrey care not to caſt themſelues, and their whole land, into Hell, and into euerlaſting abjection from grace, without all hope of recouery. So this is an harde anſwere▪ ſhee findeth no grace at all. They that follow Ieſus Chriſt, and ſeeke for grace, will finde in their way a ſore tryall: men thinke that Heauen is but a common benefit, & that it is eaſie to a mā to come thither: but albeit thou be a king, an Emperour, or Monarch, thou wilt find an hard entry therein. Will thy kingdome or thy lordſhip bring thee to heauē? No, if thou ſleep on in careles ſecurity, thou ſhalt neuer ſo heauē. So if there were no more but this exāple of this Gentiliſh womā, it teaches vs, that it is hard to win to heauen, & that

the gates of Heauen at the firſt ſhall be ſhut vpon our teeth. What is the cauſe of this? Thou art further from Chriſt, and from grace, from Heauen, and from the joye of Heauen, a thouſand times more than the naturall earth is from the naturall Heauen. Thou art a Canaanite, come of a curſed generation. What adoe hath a Canaanite with Heauen? ſo vnworthie a thing, with ſo worthy a thing? The Lord, before He opened the gates of Heauen vnto her▪ Hee woulde let her vnderſtand, that ſhee had nothing to doe with Heauen. And I ſay vnto thee, that the Lord, ere euer Hee giue thee grace, Hee will haue thee knowing by tentations and tryalles, that thou art a Canaanite, deſcended of a curſed and reprobate generation, and vnworthie that euer thou ſhouldeſt ſee Heauen, or haue a do with Heauen: And if Hee bring thee not to this sight and this feare, I giue thee thy dome, thou ſhalt never ſee Heauen.
            Nowe marke, Hee hath cloaſed the doores of Heauen vpon her: And certainely, this anſwere might haue cauſed her to haue gone awaye with ſhame and confuſion. But for all this tentation, ſhe continueth ſtill, ſhe crieth ſtill, and hopeth for mercie: holde vpon mercy, hope ſtill, belieue on ſtill and that hope ſhal neuer make thee aſhamed. Shee hath cryed for mercie, the gates of Heauen are ſhut againſt her: What doeth ſhee? Goeth ſhe her way? No, no, ſhee tarieth ſtill, and knocketh. And if thou kneweſt what Heauen were, and what

Hell were, thou wouldeſt bee loath to leaue Heauen. Oh! the tormentes that remaine for them that fall into Hell! So ſhee knocketh, and falleth downe vpon her face, and adoreth, and ſaieth, O Sonne of Dauid, haue mercie on mee. This adoring was not onely for the caſting the deuill out of her daughter: No, no, ſhe ſought euerlaſting life at the handes of the Lord, & that healing of her daughter was an earneſt-pennie of that Life. This was the mind of the woman no queſtion. It is ſaide in the Scripture, Seeke, and yee ſhall find: aske, and yee ſhall receiue: knocke, and it ſhall be opened vnto you. Mat. 7. 7. If the ſeeking faile thee, yet tarie ſtill and knocke. And if it had not bene the Lords will that a ſinner (when he findeth heauen gates cloſed vpon him) ſhould tary ſtil & knock, would he haue biddē him knock? It were a preſumptuous thing for a begger to knocke at one of our doores: but ſeeing ye Lord hath expreſſely commanded thee to knocke, then knocke on boldly. And if thou goe away with the firſt anſwere, or the firſt nay-ſaying thou waſt neuer truely hungrie nor thirſtie: And it is a token that thou counteſt little of the grace of GOD. If thou kneweſt howe precious a thing the grace of God & Ieſus Chriſt were, and what Heauen were, and what Hell were, thou wouldeſt neuer ceaſe knocking day nor night all the dayes of thy life: for if thou goe away proudly, and tarieſt not vpon Gods anſwere, but ſpeake preſumptuouſly, & ſay, If He will not giue mee grace, let Him holde it to

Himſelfe, as blaſphemous men will ſay: then Hee will ſhoote thee into Hell: for if thou wert a king of all the worlde, thou ſhalt neuer get thine head in at Heauen gates, except thou knocke. Lord, if the world knew how hard a thing it is to get entry there! men think that they will come eaſily & ſleeping to Heauen, albeit they take their pleaſure & paſtime: but they deceiue themſelues, there muſt bee much ſtriuing and fighting ere they get Heauen: Before that Heauen could be opened, it behoued Ieſus Chriſt to ſhed His precious blood.
            Now, Brethren ye may ſay to me, Alas, who can knocke? who is able to come there? No, thou haſt no power once to lift vp thine hand to knocke at that gate, except that the Lord put out His hand, & hold thee vp, euen in the meane time when Hee is holding thee backe, ſo wonderfull is the Lordes working with His owne, He will be holding them abacke with the one hand, and He will be pulling them in to Him as faſt with the other hand, when He will be diſſwading▪ He will perſwade, when He forbiddeth to approach vnto Him, hee inwardly allureth m
                  •
               n to come vnto Him. Nowe, will yee heare the Lordes anſwere? If the firſt anſwere was hard, this is▪ as hard and rough: for with an angry countenance no doubt He anſwereth, It is not lawfull, ſaieth Hee▪ 
               to take the childrens bread, and to cast it vnto dogges. It is euen as much as if Hee had taken her by the ſhoulders, and thruſt her out: firſt Hee ſaieth, Thou art but a dogge, a Gentile, and this

that thou ſeekeſt is a precious thing, the bread of life, this appertaineth onely to the children of GOD: Shall I take that and giue it vnto a dog? As if Hee had ſaide, Goe thy waye, dogge, thou ſhalt not get ſuch a precious benefite as thou requireſt.
            Then we ſee here, becauſe ſhe was a Gentile, therfore Hee calleth her a dogge. Suppoſe thou bee a King (I pray thee be not too proude in thine own conceit) and yet a Gentile, Ergo, by nature, a dogge. He will caſt a Kingdome, an Empire, a Monarchie to a man, as one will caſt a bone into the mouth of a dogge, but all is nothing in reſpect of one droppe of grace, and the hope of the kingdome of Heauen.
            Albeit thou bee a begger, and yet getteſt but one droppe of grace through IESVS CHRIST, anie hope of the Kingdome of Heauen, anie beginning of regeneration, then thou haſt gotten a greater grace, a more precious thing, than Caeſar, that got all the worlde. There is no compariſon betwixt the meaneſt ſpirituall & heauenly gift, & betwixt the greateſt temporall and earthly thing.
            Nowe I note againe the hardneſſe to winne to the Kingdome of Heauen. Would yee not thinke it a marueilous thing to turne a dogge into the Sonne of God? It is as great a wonder to ſee a Gentile to be called to Heauen as to make dogges and ſtones the Sonnes of God Nowe know, that before thou getteſt acceſſe to Heauen, although

thou wert a king, thou muſt bee humbled in thine owne conceite, thou muſt know thine owne eſtate and condition, thou muſt thinke thy ſelfe as vile and contemptible as a verie dogge by nature, as this woman was brought to ſaye: otherwiſe, thou ſhalt neuer get heauen.
            Then, Brethren, if the entrie to the Kingdome of heauen be ſo harde, if thou like a dogge returne to thy vomite, or as a ſow to the puddle, (as Peter ſaieth, 2. Pet. 2. 22.) after thou art waſ
                  •
               en with the blood of that immaculate Lambe, then it is a wonder if euer thou get grace to re-enter againe. Now heare the poore womans anſwere: ſhe granteth all, It is verie true, thou ſayeſt, I am but a dog, a vile and an vnworthie wretch, and that bread of heauen is a precious thing, I am not worthie that it ſhould bee caſten vnto mee: Yet (ſaieth ſhee) the whelpes doe eate of the crummes which fall from their maiſters table: If thou wilt not ſhew mee this grace, to eate bread with the children, yet let me eate the paringes and crummes vnder the table. Ere euer the Lord beſtow grace and eternall life vpon thee, hee will haue thee to accompt thy ſelfe vnworthie of anie grace: yea, hee will haue thee to accompt as vilely of thy ſelfe as of a dog, albeit thou hadſt neuer ſo many great prerogatiues otherwayes in the worlde: ere thou get that life, thy conſcience will accuſe thee to bee vnworthie of ſuch a life, and ſuch a joye as the LORD ordained for his owne. Shee ſcipped before, nowe shee thrumbleth

and thruſteth in at the gates of heauen, and goeth like a violent woman: not indeede preaſſing like a ſturdie begger, to be in whether the Lord would or not: but by humilitie, and acknowledging of her owne vnworthineſſe, in all ſubmiſſion, comming as it were, creeping like a ſillie whelpe vnder the table: that is the violence that is done to the Kingdome of heauen, Matth. 11. 12. Shee taketh vp heauen by violence, in all ſubmiſſion and humilitie. And if thou bee once but a whelpe vnder the table of GOD, in the houſe of GOD, to gather vp the crummes of that plentifull table, thou art called to a greater honour, than if thou were made King of all the worlde. I had rather bee a doore-keeper in the houſe of GOD, than to bee king of all the worlde.
            
            Nowe, Brethren, when shee is thronging in, hee is loath to put her out againe: No, hee ſaieth, O woman, great is thy faith, bee it vnto thee as thou deſireſt, thy faith hath wonne the victorie. From whence had this poore woman all this perſeuerance, and this continuance, and this conſtancie, but from him? and yet hee ſtandeth wondering at his owne graces. The LORD, (beholde his doing) when hee hath giuen thee grace and perſeuerance, when thou commeſt to heauen, he will wonder at thee: and there is the ende of all thy perſeuerance, a faire crowne of glorie. And what more doeth hee? That ſame moment, that force that was in the worde, that proceeded out of the

mouth of IESVS, extended it ſelfe to the womans daughter, and healeth her, and caſteth the deuill out of her. Now ſhe ſought only to creepe in as a whelp vnder the table to eat the crummes, and now the LORD ſetteth her vp at the table to ſit with Him in glory, as CHRIST Himſelfe ſaieth, I ſay to thee, ſaieth Hee, manie ſhall come out of the East, and out of the West, into mine houſe, into the Kingdome of Heauen, and ſit downe at the Table with Abraham, Iſaac, and Iaakob, Matth. 8. 11. And from whence are wee come? Euen out of the furthermoſt point of the Weſt. And, O SCOTLAND! Belieue in IESVS, ſeeke earneſtlie grace at Him, and waite patientlie, when Hee tryeth thee, and thou ſhalt find that thou ſhalt be ſet downe with ABRAHAM, ISAAC, and IAAKOB, in glorie. Wee are the Sonnes of GOD indeed, but it appeareth not yet what wee ſhall bee: but one daye it ſhall appeare, when wee ſhall be crowned with the crowne of glorie. The Lord worke this faith and earneſt deſire of grace in vs for Ieſus Chriſts ſake: To whome bee all glorie, honour, and praiſe, for euer, and euer,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            THE XV. SERMON.
            
                LVKE, CHAP. VII.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 37
                     And beholde, a woman in the citie, who was a ſinner, when ſhee knewe that Ieſus ſate at table in the Phariſees houſe, ſhe brought a boxe of oyntment:
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 38
                     And ſhee ſtood at his feete behinde him weeping, and began to waſh his feete with teares, and did wipe them with the haires of her head, and kiſſed his feete, and anointed them with the ointment.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 39
                     Nowe when the Phariſie who bade him, ſawe it, hee ſpake within himſelfe, ſaying, If this man were a Prophet, hee would ſurely haue knowne who, and what manner of woman this is who toucheth him: for ſhee is a ſinner.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 40
                     And Ieſus anſwered, and ſaide vnto him, Simon, I haue ſomewhat to ſay vnto thee. And hee ſaide, Maister, ſay on.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 41
                     There was a certaine lender who had two detters: the one ought fiue hundreth pence, and the other fiftie:
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 42
                     When they had nothing to pay, he for gaue them both: Which of them, therefore, tell mee, will loue him most?
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 43
                     Simon anſwered, and ſaid, I ſuppoſe that he, to whom he forgaue most. And hee ſaide vnto him, Thou hast truely judged.
                  
                  
                     44. Then hee turned to the woman, and ſaid vnto Simon, Seest thou this woman? I entered into thine houſe, and thou gauest mee no water to my feete: but ſhee hath waſhed my feete with teares, and wiped them with the haires of her head.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 45
                     Thou gaueſt mee no kiſſe: but ſhee, ſince the time I came in, hath not ceaſed to kiſſe my feete.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 46
                     Mine head with oyle thou didſt not anoint: but ſhee hath anointed my feet with ointment.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 47
                     Wherefore, I ſay vnto thee, many ſinnes are forgiuen her: for ſhe loued much. To whome a little is forgiuen, he doeth loue a little.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 48
                     And hee ſaide vnto her, Thy ſinnes are forgiuen thee.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 49
                     And they that ſate at table with him, began to ſay within themſelues, Who is this that euen for giueth ſinnes?
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 50
                     And hee ſaide to the woman, Thy faith hath ſaued thee: goe in peace.
                  
               
            
            
               THIS Text (welbeloued in the Lord Ieſus) containeth a notable Hiſtorie, of the conuerſion of a penitent ſinner, a ſinfull woman, whom the LORD firſt called inwardly by His Spirit, & to whom after outwardly by His owne voyce He giueth aſſurance of the remiſſion of her ſinnes: And wee haue firſt ſet downe the occaſion that the Lord offereth to this ſinfull woman to

metee with Him, that ſhe may receiue mercie and forgiueneſſe of her ſinnes: Of very purpoſe He caſteth Himſelfe in her way, and into theſe partes where the woman was, and yeeldeth to dine in the houſe of a Phariſie, where ſhee might haue the occaſion and oportunitie to meete with Him: This occaſion being offered vnto her, being partly touched with a feeling of her owne miſerie, partly being preuented with the Spirite of Ieſus alluring her, ſhe letteth it not ſlippe, but ſhee commeth to the houſe, where the Lord was, and ſhee commeth not emptie handed, but ſhee bringeth with her a boxe of precious ſweete ſmelling ointment, and comming to the houſe where the LORD was ſitting at table, looke what ſhee doeth, ſhee entreth not in peartly and boldly, neither commeth ſhee before His face, being aſhamed of her own ſinnes: ſhe was aſhamed that theſe eyes, theſe all-ſeeing eyes of the LORD, which pierce into the ſoule of man, ſhould ſee her: So ſhe ſtandeth (ſaieth the Text) behinde His backe, and then ſhee falleth downe at His feete.
            The ſight of thy ſinne, as it will worke ſhame of face, when the relicts of nature beginneth to challenge it, when it ſtriueth to enter into the ſoule, ſo that ſcarcely thou dareſt looke a man in the face, let be the Lord, who is the reuenger of it: Euen ſo, when it once pleaſeth the Lord to waken the conſcience, it will worke in thee a wonderfull humilitie: ſo that thou wilt ſtoupe, and caſt thy

ſelfe downe vnder the feete of thy GOD. The ſtiffeneſſe that yee ſee in men, who bowe not their bodies & knees vnto the Lord, proceedeth of the want of that ſight of ſinne and corruption within them. If theſe men, who fling their heads in the aire, (& make their boaſts of their euill deeds) ſaw their ſins, they would bee aſhamed of themſelues, & humble themſelues in ye duſt. When ſhe is fallen downe, ſhe weepeth. The ſight of ſin will make thee to weepe & mourne. Thou laugheſt now, & plaieſt ye wanton, becauſe there is a vaile caſten ouer thine eye, that blindeth thee ſo that thou canſt not ſee ſin the own colour yea, it couereth thy ſelf from thee: but if once thou ſaw ſinne & thy ſelfe well, it would make thee to weep & lament bitterly. Wel, ſhe leaueth not of yet, but being drawne and allured with a ſenſe of His preuenting mercy, y• came from Him, ſhe draweth near
                  •
                vnto Him. If ſhe had not felt that loue that came from Him, ſhee durſt neuer haue come neare Him. As a male-factor hath no pleaſure to beholde the countenance of the Iudge, but his eye and countenance is terrible to Him: Euen ſo, the Lord is fearefull and terrible to them that feele not that loue that proceedeth from Him.
            It is the ſenſe of the loue that allureth ſinners to come to God, As Dauid ſaieth, Pſal. 130. 3. If thou ſtraitlie markest iniquitie, no fleſh can ſtand: but mercie is with thee, that thou mayest bee feared. The teares that the diſpleaſure for ſin expreſſeth out of her,

ſhee will not loſe them, but ſhee taketh them, and 
                     •
                  aſheth his feet with them, & thē 
               taketh the haire of her head, and dryeth them therewith. Haddeſt thou once a ſenſe of that ſweete mercy in Ieſus Chriſt, were that loue once ſpred abroade into thine heart by His H. Spirit, as th' Apoſtle ſpeaketh, O, how thou wouldeſt loue Him, & be carefull to ſerue & pleaſure Him! This want of loue towards ye Lord Ieſus argueth plainely, that thou haſt not felt that loue of His towardes thee: For if once thou hadſt felt how well Hee loueth thee, who ſhed His precious blood for thee: then it is a faire matter to thee to ſheede teares for Him, that ſhedde His blood for thee: And if thou once felt that loue, nowe all the teares, and all the moyſture in thy body, yea, thy very ſoule thou wouldeſt bee glad to poure it out for Him, and conſecrate thy life vnto His ſeruice: but liuing againſt Him, in doing all kinde of villanie in deſpite of Him, thou teſtifieſt plainely, that thou haſt neuer found the vertue of His blood.
            Looke what Paul ſaieth, 2. Cor. 5. 14. The loue of God conſtraineth mee: that is, bindeth vp my ſoule, and all the powers and faculties thereof, and occupyeth my whole ſenſes, that I am rauiſhed from all thinges in the worlde, to get mine heart and affections fixed vpon Him: Why? ſaieth hee, Becauſe He loued me ſo well, that Hee hath died for me: and therefore, I will conſecrate my life to him, who hath purchaſed euerlaſting life for me. And therefore, whoſoeuer hath not a purpoſe to

poure out his life for Ieſus Chriſt, and hath not a free heart towards Him in ſome meaſure, he cannot haue any ſure argument that Chriſt hath died for him. And if thou haue not that aſſurance, woe is thee, that euer thou tookeſt life! it had beene better thou hadſt beene made a ſtocke or a ſtone, if thou findeſt not that Chriſt died for thee.
            But what further did this ſillie woman? Shee ceaſeth not here, but is continually kiſsing the feete of the Lord. Ye who before delited in kiſſing▪ leaue your harlots, and from this woman learne to kiſſe the LORD, or elſe thou, and thy vile mouth, ſhalt burne in Hell. Kiſſe the feete of the LORD, who hath ſhedde His blood for thee: for ſo oft as thou kiſſeſt the feete of the Lord, thou ſhalt finde that thou ſuckeſt grace out of Him. And this woman, who was before a vile harlot, now only ſhe taketh pleaſure to kiſſe the Lord. And what did this woman more? It is ſaid, when ſhee had beſtowed her body vpon Him▪ ſhee taketh that boxe of coſtlie ointment, that ſhee had prepared for Him▪ 
               and anointed his feete therewith. Beſtowe thy ſelfe firſt vpon the Lord, and beſtowe thy body vpon Him and His ſeruice, and ſay to Him▪ Nowe Lord I giue thee, and I beſtow vpon thee, mine heart, my ſoule, my body & all the members therof, keepe thouthem in holineſſe, that they may bee conſecrate to thee. Then when thou haſt beſtowed firſt thine heart and thy ſelfe vpon Him, it will be none hard matter to beſtowe thy goods, when His glory requireth.

And certainly, when men are ſo nigard in the 
                  ••
               ds cauſe, that they will not beſtowe a pennie 
                  •
               pon Him when his glory requireth, or vpon His 
                  •
               oore members, it is a ſure argument, that they 
                  •
               euer beſtowed their heart vpon Him. Many vain men and women will ſaye, And if Chriſt were in the worlde, for the loue I carie vnto Him, I would followe Him, ſerue Him, imploye my body, and all that I haue in His ſeruice, and to His glorie: but if thou wilt not beſtowe thy goods vpon the needie, vpon His ſeruants, and vpon theſe who carie His image, if Chriſt Himſelfe were in the worlde, thou wouldeſt beſtowe nothing vpon Him: for if once thou were ſenſible of that liberality that Ieſus offereth vnto His owne, thou wouldeſt loue Him ſo well, that thou wouldeſt ſhewe thy ſelfe liberall to theſe who cary His image: thou wouldeſt giue all that thou haſt for His cauſe, who is onelie able to make thee rich.
            Now to goe forwarde in the Hiſtorie. Whileſt ſhee is thus exerciſed in weeping, in waſhing the Lordes feete with her teares, in drying them with her haire, in anointing them with precious ointment, what doeth the Lord? what is His behauiour? All this time the LORD ſpeaketh neuer a worde vnto her: all this time while ſhee findeth ſo great grace and mercie in Him, Hee turneth not once His face vnto her. If thou getteſt once the Lordes backe neare vnto thee, if thou getteſt leaue to kiſſe His feete, howbeit thou getteſt not His

face at the firſt, nor His countenance at the entrie, yet out of Him thou ſhalt ſucke grace and mercie vnſpeakeable. It is a marueilous thing to ſee how a ſinner will get grace. When the Lord will ſeeme to turne His backe vpon thee, yet follow thou on and leaue Him not, till He turne His face toward thee: and I aſſure thee thou ſhalt get His face at the laſt. Therefore, neuer depart from Him, but ſticke by His backe and His feete, and certainly in the ende thou ſhalt get that ſight of that joyfull countenance that ſhall compleate thy joy.
            Nowe to come to the Phariſies part, who called Him to dinner, for we haue heard the part of the woman. The Phariſie, named Simon, ſitteth ſtill, and ſeeth all that is done and ſpeaketh not one word, but thinketh, and hee thinketh the thing which is not good: his mouth is cloſed, but he blaſphemeth in his heart, If this ma
                     •
                   were a Prophet, ſaieth hee, 
                  
                     •
                  ee would know▪ who, and what manner of woman this were who toucheth him▪ for ſhe is a ſinner: he thought incontinent, that the filthineſſe of the woman woulde pollute the Lord: would hee ſuffer this vile harlot to touch him, if hee were a Prophet, or an holie man? Yee ſee now, Brethren, how diſdainfullie he thinketh of her, and howe hee contemneth her in his heart. A Phariſie that is an hypocrite, that wil counterfeite outwardly a kind of holineſſe: ſee how he will diſdain a poore ſinner, that is an open ſinner in the ſight of the world: An hypocrite is a foule ſinner, and he will doe ſuch things in ſecrete,

that it is a ſhame to ſpeake of, becauſe his ſinne is cloaked from the ſight of the world, and from his owne eyes: when hee beholdeth another ſinner, againe, that ſinneth openly in the ſight of the world, how diſdainfully will hee count and ſpeake of the open ſinner? and will ſpitte at him: the ſeuereſt cenſurer that euer was, is an hypocrite: and then he will ſtand vp, admiring of himſelf, and his coloured righteouſneſſe, and ſaye, I thanke God, I am not like other men: And what is the cauſe of this? The Lord ſaieth, The hypocrite is nothing but a whited tombe, a painted graue, that within is full of dead mens bones, ſtinke and filthineſſe, Matth. 23. 27. And yet that cloake of hypocriſie beeing ſpred ouer the heart, the hypocrite ſeeth not that filthineſſe that is in his owne heart: and that hypocrite that thinketh to beguile all the world, chiefely he beguileth himſelfe. And if thou ſaweſt that ſeede of all miſchei
                  •
               e that is within thy ſelfe, certainely thou wouldeſt diſdaine thy ſelfe, and thou wouldeſt be inclined to judge charitably of a poore ſinner: thou wouldeſt not bee ſo ſore and rigorous a cenſurer of others as thou art: And if thou ſaweſt what kinde of ſtuffe were within thy ſelfe▪ (howbeit it breake not out) thou wouldeſt ſay, Now I ſee as great corruption in my ſelfe as in any body: (& it is the Lord that letteth it not breake out) the Lord purge and renew mee, and the Lord purge & renew yonder ſinner from the ſinne that breaketh out ſo openly in outward

action. Now as the Phariſie knoweth not himſelfe, ſo he knoweth not what the Lord is, he knoweth Him not to bee the Mediator, come into the worlde to ſaue poore ſinners: and therefore hee concludeth ſo blaſphemouſly, The Lord is not a Prophet.
            Marke, Brethren: Who euer ſeeth not that miſerie that is within themſelues, of neceſsitie they neuer ſaw that mercy that is in Ieſus Chriſt: Theſe two goe together of neceſsitie, Whoſoeuer ſeeth not himſelfe, is ignorant of Chriſt, and would not buy the mercy of Chriſt for one penny, hee careth not for Chriſts kindneſſe, hee counteth grace and mercy all but vanity. Now of theſe two followeth another thing, Not ſeeing himſelfe firſt: next, not ſeeing that mercy in Chriſt, not knowing that He was that Sauiour of the world: of theſe two followeth this wicked conceit in him, ſeeing the ſinner deale with Him to get grace & mercy, & the Lord dealing ſo mercifully with her, he ſcorneth, & contemptuouſly diſdaineth in his heart this dealing yt the poore ſinner hath with y• Lord. The men who ſee not their own miſery, no
                  •
                ye Lords mercy, they will ſcorne & diſdaine a poore ſinner, either outwardly, calling them ſighing brethren, & ſobbing ſiſters: or at leaſt in their hart inwardly. And I am aſſured there are hypocrites enough this day, who haue no ſenſe of miſery, that ſcorne in their hearts a poore ſinner yt ſeeketh mercy of ye Lord, & hold in diriſion our faſting, our humiliation, and all our

preaching which they heare. And therfore, as thou wouldeſt not bee culpable of ſuch ſcorning, and wouldeſt not be inuolued in yt judgement that tarieth that ſcornfull number, ſeeke I beſeech thee, to get theſe two ſighs, & ſay, Lord, I am but a miſerable body, & am vnworthy to look vp to ye Heauen: & then get a ſenſe of the mercy of the Lord: and then thou ſhalt bee 
                  •
               o farre from ſcorning grace in thine heart, that thou ſhalt bee faine to creep in with all humility to get a part & portion of the grace that is ſpoken of.
            The Phariſie yet hath not bene one of the worſt of them, hee was not an open blaſphemer, but an hypocrite, I doubt not, but ye Lord hath had mercie on him: but what, how, and when his conuerſion hath bene, the Lord knoweth.
            Now I go forward to ye part of the Lord: firſt toward the Phariſie, and then toward the poore woman. The Phariſie conceiued not this ſo quietlie & ſecretly within his owne heart, but the Lord, the ſearcher of the heart, that made ye heart, draweth it to light, and ſaith, Simon, I haue ſomewhat to ſay vnto thee, I know what thou thinkeſt well enough, no man needeth to tell me thine heart▪ & therefore I will ſpeake ſomthing vnto thee: Simon anſwereth, Lord, ſaye on. Brethren, ſtriue to preſent holie thoughts before GOD: thinke it not enough to keepe thine hand holie, thy tongue from blaſphemie, but keepe an holy heart vnto the LORD: begin not to play the counterfeit, to ſpeak holily,

and to haue a faire ſhewe outwardly, and then to keepe a foule heart: and if an euill thought eſcape thee (as who will not haue a thouſand euill thoughts?) if a blaſphemie againſt GOD eſcape thee, (as who blaſphemeth not God in their heart as well as the Phariſie?) bee ſorrowfull for it, away with it, let it not tarie, but ſay as Paule ſaieth, Rom. 7. 17. It is not I, that doeth it, but the corruption of my nature which remaineth within mee. Renounce that foule birth, and take it neuer vnto thee: and this is that battell which we ſhould haue night & day, to get that vile canker and corruption which vttereth it ſelfe ſo violently againſt that inuiolable Majeſtie, repreſſed and put away.
            Now when He hath thus ſpoken, He beginneth to let Simon ſee, that that ſame very woman, of whom hee counted ſo diſ
                  ••
               ainfully, was not ſo vile a woman as he thought: as though He would ſay, Simon, thou thinkeſt there is not ſo vile a ſinner in the world, as ſhe is: but I ſ
                  •
               y vnto thee, ſhee is not ſo ſinfull, I haue cleanſed her I haue giuen her remiſſion of all her ſinnes: (Who dare call a ſinner foule, that the Lord hath called cleane?) dareſt thou call a penitent ſinner foule, who hath waſhen my feere with teares, and repenteth vnfainedly? Then ſubſuming He ſaith, This woman repenteth vnfainedly, and teſtifieth her repentance in louing me ſo exceedingly: Therefore He concludeth, All her ſinnes are forgiuen her: Therefore Simon, diſdaine her not, no more than I doe.
            
               But to conſider more narrowly, firſt the ground of the propoſition: then the aſſumption: laſt, that joyfull concluſion. The ground of his reaſon is this, To whome a great debt is forgiuen, that perſon will loue exceedingly. To make vs to vnderſtand this the better, Hee bringeth in a familiar example, a parable, There was a certaine lender, who had two debters: the one ought fiue hundreth pence, and the other fiftie: And when they had nothing to pay, hee forgaue them both: Which of them, therefore, tell mee, will loue him most? Hee, ſaith Simon, to whome hee forgaue most. Well, ſaieth the Lord, then I take this propoſition out of thy mouth, Hee to whome much is forgiuen, he loueth exceedinglie, he loueth much: And certainly, if thou haue no ſenſe of debt, if thou thinkeſt in thine owne conceite, that thou oweſt nothing, I ſaye to thee, Thou loueſt not God, thou haſt no loue towards Him. A wanton ſinner, that feales not the burthen of ſinne, hee hath no more loue to God, nor to Chriſt, than a dogge hath: fie on thee dogge! fie on thee, that haſt not a ſenſe of ſinne: for thou haſt no loue to God. Next againe, ſuppoſe thou haue a ſenſe of ſinne, & feeleſt ſome burthen therof, yet if thou but thinkeſt that thou haſt a pennie in thy purſe to paye GOD for thy debt, thou wilt neuer loue thy God. And I ſaye to thee. I could neuer thinke in mine heart, that a Papiſt, a vaine lowne, who will boaſt of his merites, who glorieth in his owne workes, and thinketh hee can pay God for his redemption: I ſaye,

I could neuer be perſwaded that ſuch a one could loue the Lord. Next, except with the ſenſe of thy debt, thou find alſo a free remiſſiō of all thy debt, alas, thou canſt haue no loue to GOD: feele thy ſinne, and thy pouerty, as much as thou wilt, if thou findeſt not a free remiſſion and pardon of all thy debt, thou wilt neuer loue Him, but He is a terror vnto thee ſo oft as thou thinkeſt of Him, and thou wouldeſt flee out of the world to eſcape His handes. Then thirdly, thou that feeleſt thy debt, and then feeleſt thine owne pouertie, that thou haſt not one pennie to giue Him: (ſuppoſe thou bee a King, all thy Kingdome will not ranſome thy ſoule: n
                  •
               , ſell Heauen and the earth and all, they will not ranſom the ſoule of one creature, they will not fill vp one penny of the ſumme to ranſome the ſoule of one ſinner) and thē with the ſenſe of the pouertie, ſeeleth a free remiſſion, and heareth the Lord ſay, I forgiue thee all, I will haue none of thy ſiluer: but I forgiue thee all in the precious blood of my deare Sonne the Lord Ieſus: (there is the ranſome and I adjudge thee to damnation that ſeekeſt any other ranſome) then thou wilt loue the Lord exceedingly. Theſe three things being felt, firſt with grones and ſobbes feeling the debt and burthen: Next, thy pouerty, and vnhabilitie to pay: and laſt, a free remiſſion and disburthening, that ſinner would beſtowe all his goods, and land, and life, and all that hee hath for the loue that hee beareth to the LORD IESVS:

thine heart will be ſweetly looſed with a loue to ye Lord. Who is able to expreſſe that loue and that vnſpeakeable joye, that will bee in the heart of a ſinner, that feeleth the remiſſion of his ſinnes.
            Brethren, There is yet more than this in the compariſon: Hee to whome little is forgiuen, hee will loue little: and hee to whome much is forgiuen, will loue much. Hee or ſhee that will come in, and confeſſe their ſinnes, but will in the meane time extenuate it, and ſaye, it is but a little ſinne, it is but a veniall ſinne, and manie one hath done twiſe as much: that bodie, I ſaye, that will extenuate ſinne, although it were but an euill thought againſt that inuiolable Majeſtie, I knowe not whether ſuch an one hath gotten remiſſion of their ſinnes or not: and ſuppoſing they haue gotten remiſsion of it, yet it will bee but a little loue that they will haue vnto the Lord.
            But hee or ſhee that will come in, and aggreadge their ſinne, though it were but a thought againſt that Majeſtie, for thou art neuer able to aggreadge it enough, and if thou find a remiſsion of thy ſinne, then no man can thinke how heartily that bodie will loue the LORD: for if once thou getteſt grace to repent, and to loue GOD, thou mayeſt bee aſſured, that thy ſinnes, though they were neuer ſo great, neuer ſo weighty, and many in number, ſhall neuer hinder thee of grace and mercie. And then againe I ſay to thee, the greateſt ſinner, yt counteth moſt of their ſins, once feeling ye
               
remiſſion of their ſinnes, euer the greater louer. Paul, an oppreſſor, a perſecuter, blaſphemer, a wrongfull man, once feeling the loue of the Lord, forgiuing him, O! how exceedingly loued he the Lord! A penitent ſinner ſhall farre ſurpaſſe them in loue that haue not ſinned halſe ſo much: the world ſhall admire at him for his loue, he ſhall be a miracle to all them that beholde him.
            Now I proceed forward. The Phariſie can judge well enough of this generall, that hee that hath moſt forgiuen him, loueth moſt, and that loue is the effect of remiſſion of ſinnes: (Well art thou that loueſt the Lord, for be aſſured that the Lord loueth thee, and hath forgiuen thee thy ſinnes:) But when it commeth to the aſſumption, that that poore woman, that ſinful woman, loued the Lord, there hee erreth. Beholde, Brethren, the light of nature, and the blindneſſe of nature: by nature wee will know the generall well enough: ſuppoſe thou haddeſt no more but that light of nature, thou wilt confeſſe that a murtherer ſhould die the death: But if thou come to the particular, O! but thou art a murtherer, thou haſt a bloodie heart, a bloodie hand, and thou art all bloodie: Will anie man ſuffer that? No, no, and therefore he will hold off this concluſion, Therefore thou ſhouldeſt die the death, and be takē to the place of execution, and there loſe thine head. And would to God that our bloodie men (whether they bee Noblemen, lordes, Earles, Barons, or others) had bene headed

long ſince: for it is a maruell that plague ſolloweth not after plague continually, till this land bee purged of this blood that cryeth continually in the ſtreetes. So the Phariſie could not belieue the particular, that euer the poore ſinner coulde get mercie, hee was ſo hard a cenſurer of the poore woman. But I count it nothing worth, to judge vprightly in generall, except alſo thou judge vprightly in particular. The Iudges of the Land they will judge vprightly in generall: but come to the particular, to kinsfolkes, friendes, and alliances, this man, or that man with his bud, O, there there the judgement is peruerted. Well is the Iudge that judgeth vprightly in particular: for a Turke may judge vprightly in generall: and woe is thee that judgeſt not vprightly in particular.
            Now to come to the other part of the reaſon, The Lord turneth Him to the poore woman, and the more the Phariſie findeth fault with the Lord, the more the Lord turneth Him toward her, and ſaieth, I ſay to thee, Simon, that this woman loueth mee more a thouſand times, than euer thou diddeſt. If thou withholdeſt grace from a ſinner, then in deſpite of thy teeth, the Lord will heape grace vpon him. The aſſumption is this, This woman loneth me exceedingly: then the concluſion will follow in the owne roome. Therefore this woman certainly hath all her ſinnes forgiuē her. Then He declareth the aſſumption by waye of compariſon with the Phariſie, Thou calledst me to dinner, ſaith hee,

but this woman loued me better than thou doeſt. I entered into thine houſe, and thou gaueſt mee no water to my feat, after the faſhiō of the countrey: but ſhe hath waſhed my feet with teares: looke if this be a token of loue: then againe, Thou gaueſt me no kiſſe, after ye faſhion of the countrey, but ſhe, ſince the time I came in, hath not ceaſed to kiſſe my feete. Then, Mine head with oyle thou didſt not anoint: but ſhee hath anointed my feete with ointment: therefore, ſhee loueth me better than thou.
            Nowe the Phariſie coulde not diſcerne of the penitent ſinner: but the Lord letteth him ſee, that Hee can diſcerne betwixt an hypocrite & a true penitent ſinner, there Hee hath payed him in his owne hand. And the Lord letteth vs ſee, that He taketh heede, and ſhall take heede to the ende of the worlde, to the leaſt thing that thou doeſt for His cauſe to anie of His. Who wuld haue thought that the Lord woulde haue taken heede to this? The Lord will take heede who giueth Him water to waſhe His feete, which is but a ſober office. The LORD will take heede who will ſtoupe downe and giue Him a kiſſe, and waſhe His feete▪ with teares. The LORD will take heede who will beſtowe common oyle to anoint Him with, or who will beſtowe precious ointment on Him: and in the Great daye, when all ſecretes ſhall bee reuealed, (looke if Hee tooke heede what wee were doing in the worlde) Matth. Chapter 25. verſe 34, Hee will ſaye, Thou gaueſt Mee nothing
               
               when I was heere in the worlde, thou viſitedst Mee not: and hee will point out, place, time, and all the circumſtances vnto thee.
            Then, Brethren, if the LORD taketh ſo good heede what wee doe, vvell is the ſoule that giueth but a piece of bread to an hungrie bodie for CHRISTES ſake, or a coate to a naked bodie for His ſake. And therefore, euer haue Him before thine eyes, and ſaye, LORD, I giue this to Thee, that Thou mayeſt not ſay to me when Thou commeſt to judge the worlde, Thou gauest Mee nothing.
            
            Nowe, I heare there is a great pouertie and famine in this Land, and woe vnto them that are the inſtrumentes of hunger: Let vs bee ſo farre from this, to bee the cauſes thereof, that on the contrarie, wee may pintch our ſelues, that wee may ſpare vpon the needie: for I ſee the LORD will trie our liberalitie: Therefore, let vs ſpare vpon the poore in this Land, that wee maye heare of the LORD in that Great daye, Come yee bleſſed of My Father, for yee gaue Mee meate, and yee gaue Mee drinke in this worlde. And further, wee ſee heere, the tryall of an hypocrite. Howe ſhalt thou knowe an hypocrite? The LORD layeth downe the rule: Yee ſhall knowe them by their fruites, Matth. 7. 16. Yee ſhal know by their doings: an hypocrit hath many fair words: & I doubt not but this Phariſie, whē he inuited the Lord to dinner, had many faire words, but there ſhall be little doing, at the leaſt hee ſhall

neuer doe anie thing heartily. Where is this Phariſies humilitie? Hee offereth not to waſh the Lordes feete, who was euer traueiling and journeying, nor to kiſſe the Lord when He entered into his houſe, after the faſhion of the countrey, nor ſhewed none heartſomeneſſe towards the Lord. An hypocrite can neuer doe any thing heartily, neither to God nor man. Then wouldeſt thou know a true Chriſtian man or woman? Yee heare neuer a word out of her mouth, all this time that ſhe is waſhing the Lordes feete with teares, kiſſing them, anointing them with ointment: So a true Chriſtian hath few wordes, but many deedes. One good deede, is worth ten words. And when thou ſpeakeſt, looke that thy wordes bee heartie, and ſauour of loue. Looke that thou bleſſe not with thy mouth, and curſe with thine heart: & whatſoeuer thou doeſt, doe it heartily, and though thou were but preſenting a cuppe full of colde water to a poore bodie, do it heartily, & then the Lord ſhall count wel of it, though it were neuer ſo litle. Looke what ſentence the Lord giueth out concerning ye poore woman that preſented two mites, Hee ſaieth, ſhee gaue more, than they all did, Luke 21. 3. Whatſoeuer thou doeſt, doe it for the loue of the LORD, ſtill waiting for that day wherein the LORD ſhall reward thee. It is true indeede, that hee who hath anie diſcretion, will diſcerne the heart by the verie deede of the hand: And hee or ſhee, that hath any heartſomneſſe inwardly, it will be manifeſt and vttered

in the verie deede of the hand outwardlie. But ſtand thou not vpon the ſight of any man in the world: But ſay, Lord, thou ſeeſt the heart, thou ſeeſt with what heartineſſe I doe this: And whatſoeuer thou doeſt, ſtriue euer to do it with heartſomneſſe, for Ieſus Chriſtes ſake: ſo in doing thou ſhalt haue joye. No man can doe any thing heartilie or joyfullie, but they who haue their eyes vpon the Lord.
            Ye haue heard the propoſition, & the aſſumption alſo: now He commeth to the concluſion: and He concludeth as it were in the teeth of the Phariſie, Therefore her ſinnes are forgiuen her. Not that this loue is the cauſe of the remiſſion of her ſinnes, but as a ſure argument and teſtimonie of her faith. Her loue toward Chriſt preceeded not, nor went before the aſſurance of the remiſſion of her ſinnes: but it followed as a true token. So it is an argument not from the cauſe, but from the effect, that teſtifieth aſſuredly, that the cauſe is, and hath proceeded: that is, that ſhee hath faith in Ieſus Chriſt.
            Howbeit the Papiſtes abuſe this place, gathering heere, that the loue which this woman caried to Ieſus, was the cauſe of the remiſſion of her ſins: But I leaue them to their owne vanitie.
            Now, Brethren, after the example of this Phariſie, I ſhall neuer judge euill, nor be a ſharpe cenſurer of a penitent ſinner: for the poore ſinner that beleeueth once in Ieſus Chriſt, and repenteth, and

taketh purpoſe of amendement, (for faith and repentance goe euer together) a ſinner that beleeueth in Ieſus Chriſt, will repent, and hate and deteſt ſinne to the death, wherewith hee hath offended God: for when hee hath once taſted of mercy, then will hee ſaye, Alas, that I haue offended ſo louing and ſo mercifull a Father: for after that hee hath once gotten a ſenſe of the infinite mercie of GOD, all his diſpleaſure will bee, that euer hee hath offended ſo louing and ſo mercifull a Father: I ſaye, ſuch a ſinner maye bee aſſured of forgiueneſſe.
            Nowe marke the Lordes anſwere to the Phariſie: He ſaith not, howbeit ſhee be a ſinner, yet ſhee is penitent, and loueth mee: but Hee ſaieth, ſhee is no ſinner, all her ſinnes are taken awaye: for except all her ſinnes had beene taken away and purged by Him, it is moſt true yt the Phariſie thought, to wit, the LORD would not haue ſuffered her to haue touched Him, Hee would not haue receiued the kiſſes of her mouth, nor the teares of her eyes: No, the LORD IESVS that Holie One, (if thou bee not made as vvhite as the ſnowe, and all thy ſinnes bee not purged) Hee vvill not ſuffer thee once to touch Him, nor to kiſſe His feete.
            It is a vvonderfull thing to ſee ſuch a ſuddaine change in an inſtant, that ſo vile and ſo vncleane a bodie, ſhoulde bee ſo pure and ſo cleane. Howbeit the bodie vvere as redde as the blood, and as the Scarlet, as the Prophet Eſay ſaieth, in the

firſt Chapter of his Propheſie, and the 18. verſe, yet ſuddainlie Hee vvill make it as vvhite as the ſnowe, and the vvooll. Indeede it is true, thou wilt neuer bee purged from the remainentes of ſinne, ſo long as thou art in this life: but yet notwithſtanding, if thou put on that righteouſneſſe of Ieſus Chriſt by faith, God ſhall count thee as clean as a glorious Angell in His ſight.
            Nowe vvhen Hee hath ended the ſpeech to the Phariſie, at the laſt Hee ſpeaketh to the vvoman, not thinking it enough to ſpeake in her hearing vnto the Phariſie: but to the greater joye and conſolation of the poore vvoman, Hee ſpeaketh to herſelfe. Thou vvill runne in and out, hither and thither, to gette a vvorde of the king: and vvhy not? if ſo thy neceſsitie require: but ſtriue to get a vvord out of the mouth of IESVS. Kings manie times vvill giue thee flattering vvordes, but the LORD when Hee ſpeaketh vnto thee, Hee vvill ſpeake in trueth, and vvith vvonderfull loue, vvhen Hee ſaieth to thee, Thy ſinnes are forgiuen thee, thy ſinnes are forgiuen thee indeede: for the vvord of the Lord hath an operation vvith it, for if He once call thee an Holie One, thou wilt be ſo indeede. The worde of the Lord worketh in thee the thing that Hee ſpeaketh moſt powerfullie: for Hee calleth theſe thinges that are not, and by calling Hee maketh them to bee. So the Lord filleth her heart with joy, her heart no queſtiō began to find joy whē ſhe was ſpeaking to ye 
               phariſie.
               
Nowe Hee filleth vp her joye, for the fulneſſe of joye is not gotten in an inſtant, all joye is in the face of Ieſus Chriſt. Thinke yee not, but this woman, when ſhe heard this word, conceiued an vnſpeakeable joye in her heart? And I ſay vnto euerie one of you, who as penitent ſinners will bewaile your ſinnes, and mourne for offending of GOD, and will purpoſe to waſh the feete of IESVS with teares, and wipe His feete with your haire, as the Lord hath giuen mee commiſsion to ſpeake, Repenteſt thou ſinner of thy ſinnes? Thinkeſt thou to amende thy life? Deteſteſt thou thy ſinnes? Beleeueſt thou aſſuredly? Loueſt thou the Lord? I ſay to thee▪ Thy ſinnes are forgiuen thee in the blood of that ſame Ieſus whom thou loueſt ſo well.
            Nowe a worde, and ſo I ſhall ende. When Hee hath ſpoken thus comfortably to the woman, the Phariſic beginneth againe to interrupt and to impede Him if it had beene poſsible, to hinder the woman of her ſaluation. The reſt about the table ſcorneth Him, What is hee this, (quod they) that taketh vpon him to forgiue ſins? He taketh too much vpon him, more than he is able to performe: So as the Phariſie concluded before, that Hee was no Prophet, now they conclude that Hee was no Mediator.
            Well, Brethren, the worke of our ſaluation hath many impedimentes. Wilt thou ſeeke ſaluation? ſeek grace & mercie: then think not to come ſleeping to grace, for I ſay to thee, ere thou wanteſt

a ſtoppe to hinder thee from grace, from remiſsion of ſinnes, thine owne heart, by the ſuggeſtion of the deuill, ſhall ſtand vp in thy teeth, and blaſpheme, (as the Phariſie did firſt, and as the reſt at the table did thereafter) and all to hinder the worke of thy ſaluation. But ſee the ende. Stayeth the Lord for all this? Re
                  •
               raiteth He His ſentence againe, and ſaieth, thy ſinnes are not forgiuē thee? No, no, the Lords concluſion is paſt: if Hee ſay it once to thine heart, and if He giue once that perſwaſion in thine heart, ſo that thou mayeſt ſaye, Lord, be bleſſed, my ſinnes are forgiuen me: happy art thou, they ſhalbe forgiuen thee: the Lord ſhall double it within thee: ſo Hee ſpeaketh to the woman as He would ſay, Let them ſpeake what they wil, thou art in Heauen, thy ſins are forgiuē thee, goe in peace. There is no peace but the peace of the Lord, comming from the remiſsion of ſinnes. Crie peace as thou wilt, but if thou goe not in the peace of the Lord, thou g
                  •
               eſt not in peace▪ but in warre: the Lord is at warre with thee: and albeit thou getteſt the Kinges peace, and all the worldes peace, yet if thou getteſt not the LORDS peace, thou haſt no peace at all: ſo wel is him that hath His peace for they only may goe in joy, that may ſay, Now Lord, I am at peace with Thee, thou haſt forgiuen me my ſinnes: And if thou canſt ſay this truely, thou ſhalt haue ſuch a joy in thy ſoule, as all the Kings in the world cannot giue thee, nor all outward comforts and pleaſures affoord thee.
            
               Nowe the LORD giue vs this peace, and a blincke of that joye in the heart, through the remiſsion of our ſinnes: for then one day wee ſhall ſee the accompliſhment of it to our euerlaſting joye and ſaluation in IESVS CHRIST: To whom, with the FATHER, and the Holie SPIRIT, bee all Honour, Praiſe, Glorie, Power, and Dominion, both now and euermore, worlde without ende, So bee it.
         
         
            THE XVI. SERMON.
            
               IOHN, CHAP. III.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 6 That which is borne of the fleſh, is fleſh: and that that is borne of the Spirit, is ſpirit.
               
            
            
               IN this conference that NICODEMVS hath with CHRIST, (welbeloued in the Lord IESVS) Firſt Nicodemus comming to Him by night, and confeſſeth Him plainly, that Hee was a Teacher that came from God, becauſe there was none that could worke thoſe wonders that He wrought, except the Lord were with him: Then the Lord Ieſus beginneth to playe the part of a Teacher to Nicodemus, who was a Doctor in Iſaael: And the firſt ground that Hee beginneth to inſtruct him into, is the ground of Regeneration:

For Chriſt came to make a new world again, and to renewe man, who was dead in ſinnes and treſpaſſes: Therfore He beginneth to inſtruct Nicodemus in this doctrine of Regeneration: and Hee bindeth him to learne it with ſuch a neceſsity, that except hee and whole mankinde bee regenerate, there is none of them that ſhall ſee the kingdome of God: and this Hee doeth with a great aſſeueration, ſaying, Verily, verily. Nicodemus hearing and fearing that heauie denunciation of baniſhment from the kingdome of GOD, but not vnderſtanding this regeneration, beginneth to reaſon, that it was a thing vnpoſſible that hee coulde bee borne againe, becauſe hee was an olde man: and it is not poſsible that an olde man can enter into his mothers wombe againe. Chriſt anſwereth, and anſwering▪ inſiſteth in that propoſition of regeneration, vrging him againe with a neceſsitie of the ſame regeneration: Onely He addeth to that that He ſpake before the manner and waye of this begetting: to wit, of water, and the Spirite. It is not a fleſhlie generation, but a Spirituall generation, whereby a man is begotten againe, by ye renewing of the Holy Spirite in him, of the which, water is the ſeale to ſeale vp our faith in that aſſurance of that regeneration or new birth.
            Nowe in this Text which I haue read, Chriſt inſiſteth in the ſame doctrine: and like as in the verſe preceeding Hee hath proponed the manner of this new birth not to be naturall, but ſpirituall: ſo

in this verſe He ſheweth Nicodemus what a kinde of birth it is, That (ſaith He) that is begotten of the Spirit, is Spirit, that is, the Spirit of the Lord IESVS working, begetteth not a fleſhly or corrupt creature, but a Spirituall and Heauenly creature. This Hee ſ
                  •
               tteth not downe ſimplie, but Hee ſetteth it downe by waye of compariſon, with the fleſhlie generation, to the ende that Nicodemus and all men, ſeeing the corruption of the fleſh, they ſhuld eſteeme the more highly of that Spirituall generation. And Hee ſaieth, that the thing begotten of the fleſh, is fleſh: that is, as the fleſh, a corrupt maſſe of fleſh and blood cannot beget but corrupt fleſh: Euen ſo, the Spirit of the Lord Ieſus cannot beg
                  •
               tte but that that is Spirituall and Heauenly: and thus yeeſ
                  •
               e the meaning of this place.
            But becauſe this place offereth occaſion to ſpeake ſomewhat of Regeneration, whereof the worlde had neuer greater neede than at this preſent: (for I thinke the world is going backe againe to that old corruption, from the which they were deliuered) Therefore, to the ende that all thinges may be the more cleare, I ſhall ſpeake to you firſt of the fleſh, and generation thereof: Next, of the Spirit & Regeneration: And the LORD make vs carefull to finde the Spiri
                  •
               e to bee effectuall in euerie one of vs to regeneration.
            Then beeing to ſpeake of the fleſh, it ſhall bee expedient to deduce it from the fountaine. There are two ſortes of ſinne in this worlde: The one

ſort is called Originall, that ſinne that man and woman is borne with in this worlde, which they drawe out of their mothers wombe vvith their birth: The other ſort is called Actuall ſinne, that ſtandeth in a doing and vvorking and vvhich floweth and proceedeth from that originall ſinne, as from the fountaine. I maye not inſiſt vpon theſe thinges particularlie, but I ſhall giue you a ſhort viewe of them.
            Originall ſinne ſtandeth in two partes: The firſt is that horrible defection and apoſtaſie which whole mankinde in the worlde, from Adam to the ende of the worlde, haue made in the loynes of Adam: for yee muſt vnderſtand, it was not Adam alone, that ſinned, and fell from GOD, but it vvas thou, and all others that euer vvere gotten of man, and borne of woman whole mankinde made that defection: for as it is ſaide, in the ſeuenth Chapter to the Hebrewes, & the ninth verſe, that when Abraham paide tithes to Melchiſedeck, that Leui, vvho long after vvas not begotten nor borne, vvas tithed in the loynes of Abraham his fore-father: (hee payed his tithe as vvell as Abraham did) Euen ſo, vvee beeing euerie one of vs in the loynes of Adam vvhen hee ſinned, vve made all defection from the LORD, and ſinned in him. Vpon this defection there followed a guiltineſſe, wherethorow there is none of vs, but vvee are obliged to die euerlaſtinglie: And if there vvere no more ſinne in all this vvorlde, but that

firſt Apoſtaſie only, there is matter enough of thine euerlaſting damnation: thou needeſt not to heape ſinne vpon ſinne: there is thine obligatiō to thine euerlaſting death, and to damnation. This is the firſt part of originall ſinne. The ſecond part of originall ſinne is the effect that followeth vpon the firſt, a foule and horrible corruption, that entered in the whole nature of man: ſo that from the top to the toe of man, there is not ſo much whole as one intch: Man is a vile leprous creature, there is not a whole intch neither in bodie nor ſoule, but all is infected: for, Brethren, that firſt defection paſt not away ſo: but it brought with it a fearefull ruine and wracke to mankinde: and it leaueth behinde it a foule ſtinke and terrible darkneſſe, and that came of the juſt judgement of GOD, puniſhing ſinne by ſinne. And this corruption of nature bringeth with it the owne guiltineſſe & obligation to eternall death: ſo that ſundrie wayes we are guiltie of death.
            The Apoſtle Paul (Epheſ. 2. 3.) ſetteth downe this guiltineſſe, when hee ſa
                  •
               eth, Wee were all children of w
                     •
                  ath. This ſecond part of it, Is it that Chriſt calleth heere fleſh, in another place it is called the olde man: for by fleſh we vnderſtand not this fleſhlie and bodily lumpe which wee cary about with vs: nor yet as the Papiſts call it, a concupiſcence in this lumpe, and nothing in the ſoule: No, no, but this fleſh is a corruption both in ſoule and bodie, and in all the powers and faculties thereof: So

that there is neuer an intch free from that peſt. The Lord who made man (Geneſ. 8. 21.) expreſſeth the worke and the force of the fleſh after the fall, where it is ſaide, that after Hee looked, and ſawe this corruption, He ſaide, that the whole in aginations of the cogitations of the heart of man, are wicked and euill continually: which wordes import, that man from his youth, yea, euen from his mothers wombe, could doe nothing but imagine, thinke, and forge, euill, wickedneſſe, and all ſortes of miſchiefe. And when Hee ſawe this, Hee vttered a ſadde and an heauie voyce▪ 
               It forthinketh mee, that euer I made man, Geneſ. 6. 6. And it was no ſmall thing, no queſtion, that made the Creator to repent that He made man. What is man nowe, but a filthie creature, and a peſt to infect Heauen and earth, if it were poſſible?
            But that yee may the better vnderſtand the incomparable greatneſſe of this euill, which is in man, I ſhall let you ſee howe it hath ſpred it ſelfe thorowe the whole power of the ſoule of man: for as for the bodie, I ſpeake nothing of it: it is true indeede, it neuer leaueth that bodie, till it reſolue it in earth againe, which otherwiſe was made to bee immortall, and in the meane time, till death come, it maketh the body to bee ſubject to many great and fearfull ſickneſſes and diſeaſes. Where from come theſe biles, the feuers, the palſie, the peſt, the leproſie, and other diſeaſes, but from this corruption? But I ſpeake nothing of it. I will let

you ſee, howe it hath ſpred it ſelfe in the ſoule of man: Brethren, there is neuer a power nor facultie in the ſoule, but all is infected. This peſt it hath not only infected the inferiour appetite, as the blinde Philoſophers thought, and as the Papiſts doe this day affirme. But where beginneth it? What is the moſt excellent power of the ſoule? It is the vnderſtanding, the minde, and this is it that we call reaſon: This corruption, it hath ſo entered into the ſoule of man, that when as that vnderſtanding ſhould be as a light going before, to direct all our actions, motions, and thoughts the right way according to Gods worde and ordinance: It doeth nothing but fight and repine againſt the wiſdome of the God of Heauen. It is an hard matter yt God hath created this vnderſtanding, and yet it fighteth againſt Him. Paul ſaieth (Rom. 8 7.) that the wiſdome of the fl
                     •
                  ſh, is enemie against God: that is, the very vnderſtanding of man, which is the moſt excellent thing in man, is enemy to God, let bee the inferiour appetites: And therefore, Epheſ. 4. 23. hee deſireth not onely that the inferiour appetites ſhould bee renewed, but that regeneration ſhould begin at that which is moſt excellent in the ſoule: euen that they may bee renewed in the Spirite of their minde. Then yee ſee this vnderſtanding of man is altogether corrupt, and that light of the minde is turned vnto terrible darkneſſe and that this wiſedome fighteth directly againſt God: for this reaſon of man fighteth not onely againſt the

wiſdome of GOD ſet downe and declared in the law, but chiefly againſt that which is more againſt His wiſdome manifeſted in the Euangell He eſteemeth it naturally to bee but meere fooliſhneſſe, that euer a man ſhoulde get ſaluation by a crucified man, 1. Cor. 1. 18.
            And to goe fordward. This peſt ceaſeth not here, nor reſteth not in the minde onely, but it entereth into the rootes of the heart, into the will and affections of man: it hath entered ſo into his vvill, that when as this will of ours, this power of our ſoule, that we call the will, ſhould haue choſen that which is good, and refuſed that which is euill, according to the reaſon going before, & informing what is to be choſen and purſewed, and what is to be refuſed and eſchewed: it fighteth not onely directly againſt that moſt holy wiſedome and will of God: but euen againſt that ſponke of knowledge, light, and reaſon that is left in man: for when man fell in Adam, the Lord tooke not all kinde of light from man, but Hee left in His great mercy in man ſome ſponke of light and knowledge of the Majeſtie of GOD the Creator, whereby hee might in ſome meaſure knowe his Creator: And Hee left in man alſo ſome knowledge & judgemēt of politike things, cōcerning our cōuerſation & dealing with our neighbors, what is juſt, & what is vnjuſt, what is reaſonable, & what is vnreaſonable: he left in him alſo ſome judgemēt & diſcretiō of naturall things, whereas He might haue ſet vp man as brutiſh as a

dogge or an aſſe. Notwithſtanding of this, the raging corruption of the malicious will, repineth againſt this ſponke, and ſtriueth to blotte it out, that it ſhould neuer vtter it ſelfe to reformation, and to glorifie God, and to diſcharge a duetie to man, in ſuch ſort, that it were a juſt judgement of God, that they ſhould be made as brute as beaſts, as it went with the Gentiles, Rom. 1. 24. whome Hee gaue ouer vnto reprobate mindes, ſo that they had not care of naturall honeſtie or ſhame: but they wrought all ſort of vncleanneſſe, becauſe they deteined the trueth of God in vnrightiouſneſſe, and ſuffered it not to reforme them. And naturall men hath found this repining of this corrupt will contrary the reaſon and light of the minde, and they haue ſaide, Video meliora proboque, deteriora ſequor: that is, I ſee and allowe better thinges, but I followe the worst. And to bee ſhort, this wit of man repineth as faſt againſt the Lordes will, as the will of the deuill doeth: for by nature we will that ſame thing that the deuill willeth: and there was neuer anie thing ſo abhominable that the deuill hath pleaſure in, but wee haue pleaſure of the ſame: Yee, ſaieth our Sauiour, are of the deuill your father, and the lustes of your father will yee fulfill, Ioh. 8. 44. Beholde how great matter and occaſion the Papiſtes haue to boaſt of free will to any good: they are but vaine blinde bodies. The will of man goeth wholly with the will of the deuill. There is no ſuch a thing. There is not ſo much as one jot of the

will of man free: yet the corruption reſteth not here, but it goeth forward, and polluteth and defileth all the affections that are in man, as anger, loue, hope, feare, &c. none of them are free, they fight all againſt God, they haue no conformitie, but a great repugnance with that will of God.
            I goe forward, and I will not omit the naturall powers and faculties of the ſoule. And I affirme, that there are no powers of the ſoule that are naturall, as the facultie and appetite of eating of digeſting, of expelling, but all are infected with this poſt. So that (Brethren) there is neuer a power of the ſoule that is free of this corruption. Would ye vnderſtand what becommeth of this corruption, and what it doeth? Beeing in the ſoule of man, it maketh that there is neuer a thought that a man thinketh, but it is a ſinne. And if thou haue no more than nature, the leaſt motion of thine heart is a ſin in ye ſight of God: neuer a worde that thou ſpeakeſt, but it is a ſin: neuer a deed yt thou doeſt, but it is a ſin: neuer a way thou wilt goe, but it is a ſin: & conſequently, it maketh thee alwayes ſubject to the heauie wrath of GOD: If thou ſtirreſt but thine hand or thy foote, thou ſinneſt, and the wrath of God will purſue and followe thee, till at laſt thou bee caſten into hell, if thou bee not renewed. Beſides this, ſo long as wee remaine in nature, this corruption and peſt is ſo forceable in euery one of vs, that there is not one ſinne in the worlde ſo great and abhominable, but with pleaſure

and delight euery one of vs woulde performe it, if the Lord of His mercy did not by His Spirite renew vs, at leaſt by His power reſtraine vs, when occaſion is preſented. The roote and ſeede of all miſchiefe vnder the ſunne is compacted in euerie man & woman. Maruell not when thou ſeeſt ſome running to adultery, ſome to murther, ſome to ſorcery and witch-craft: for that ſeede which is forceable in them, would bee as forceable in thee to all miſchiefe, if the Lord reſtrained thee not: Naturally thou art as bent and inclined to theſe thinges as they are, if the Lord by His powerfull prouidence did not reſtraine thee. When the Apoſtle Paule conſidereth the ſtrength and the force of that corruption that was in his heart, hee ſaieth, I knowe that in mee, that is, in my fleſh, there is no good. And in another place the Prophet ſaith, Except the LORD had left a ſeede in vs, wee had beene made like SODOME and GOMORRHA, Eſay Chap. 1. verſe 9.
            Brethren, this ſame ſeede and roote of bitterneſſe is in euery infant: yee thinke they bee Angels, and men commonly call them innocentes: No, no, they are but wolues birdes, and there is a vvorlde of miſchiefe vvithin them, vvhich vvill burſt out, when yeeres, ſtrength and occaſion concurreth, except the Lord reſtraine the ſame.
            Further, I aduertiſe you of the deceitfull lurking of this peſt, for it is not onely to bee feared when it burſteth foorth, and is fruitfull in euill

deedes, but alſo when it lurketh: yee ſee if there be a peſt in the fleſh of man, before it be broken out, many a time they will thinke they haue not a peſt: So it is with this peſt: it will lurke within the fleſh and ſinewes of the heart ſo quietly, that a man wil thinke hee is the wholeſt body in the worlde: but touch him, preſent any object or ſmall occaſion, yea, apply but the holy Law of God to that heart, incontinent his 
                  •
               oule affections and luſtes ſhall vtter themſelues, and burſt out: Euen as yee ſee ſometimes, that fire vvill bee ſo hidden and couered vnder the aſhes, that it vvill not appeare, and men vvill thinke that there is no fire there: but as ſoone as there is any meete and apt matter, as wood, powder, or brimſtone applyed, then it vvill manifeſt it ſelfe, and burſt foorth in a flame. Euen ſo, albeit vvhen men feele not their foule luſtes and affections, they ſeeme to themſelues to bee holy: yet ſpeake to them of the Lawe of GOD, forbidding and diſcharging ſuch and ſuch thinges to bee done, then they ſhall finde the paſsions of ſinne, vvhich appeared before to bee dead vvithin them, to beginne to liue, yea, to rage in the ſoule, and to bring foorth fruites vnto death, as Paul ſaieth, in his epiſtle to the Romanes, the ſeuenth Chapter, and fift verſe. And then vvhen theſe paſsions breake out, happie is hee that hath ſome part of the Spirite of Regeneration, to repreſſe them, and ſtriue againſt them in ſome meaſure: For, naturallie, there is nothing in vs to

gaine-ſtand them, but wholly with all our force, and with griedineſſe wee will accompliſh them, yea, the deuill ſitteth betwixt the ſhoulders, yea, in the very heart of man, and carrieth him heere and there to accompliſhe all ſort of miſchiefe in all kinde of filthineſſe, and ſhall neuer let him ſtay, till hee bring him to deſtruction. There is no power in man to reſiſt: And therefore, ſinne is ſaide to reigne, and to haue a kingdome within vs: And except the Spirite of Chriſt come, and in mercie either holde downe, or elſe mortifie and ſlaye that foule corruption, it ſhall ſlay vs at the laſt.
            Yee ſee then, howe deceitfull it is, and howe eaſily men are deceiued, whileſt this corruption lurketh within and vttereth not it ſelfe.
            But, Brethren, more dangerous is the deceite thereof when it burſteth out: We thinke that man to bee in a miſerable eſtate, who is raging in this bodily peſt, and yet is ſo blinded and ſenſeleſſe, that hee is not aware of the ſickneſſe, till hee die in the ſame: if hee were ſenſible of the diſeaſe, hee were in a better eſtate and condition. And ſo is the eſtate and condition of man naturally, when this corruption beginneth to vtter it ſelfe: for yee ſee ſome raging in murther with pleaſure, and waſhing their handes in innocent blood with griedineſſe, &c. And ſome committing adulterie vvithout any remorſe yea, boaſting and vaunting of it amongſt their companions: Others, abuſing the benefites of God, thorowe intemperance in

drunkenneſſe, vvithout any griefe of conſcience: And others, deliting to oppreſſe, and ſpoyle vvith violence ſuch as they may ouer-come: and in the meane time they haue no griefe, prick, nor trouble in their conſcience for ſuch doing: Are not ſuch men miſerably deceiued, who when they are going to judgement and wrath, rejoyce, yea, when they are poſting to deſtruction, take their paſtime, when they are running to condemnation, laugh, and who, when they are moſt miſerable, thinke themſelues moſte happy? And this is the eſtate of many, and chiefely of the great men in this countrey: they rejoyce and boaſt of their ſinnes, and they thinke themſelues in a good and happie eſtate, becauſe they finde no remorſe nor griefe in their conſciences.
            I ſhall vſe an homely ſimilitude, to declare this matter: A man will haue a worme in his finger, or tooth, it will keepe it ſelfe quiet, and ceaſe from gnawing for a ſeaſon & he will thinke he is whole enough: but take a little vineger, or ſome ſuch like pearcing and ſharpe water, then ſhee will beginne to gnawe, and then the ſillie man will complaine, that hee was beguiled, when hee thought hee was well enough: Euen ſo it is with the conſcience of man, for it lieth in the ſoule of man lurking, as a worme lieth in the fleſh, & ſometimes it gnaweth, and ſometimes it lieth ſtill, and letteth the murtherer, the adulterer, the oppreſſor, goe forward in murther, adulterie, oppreſsion, and other moſte

abhominable ſinnes, vvithout anie accuſation, griefe▪ remorſe, or feare of the law of GOD, and threatning of the curſes thereof. I ſhall tell you more than that: Sometimes the conſcience of a miſerable male-factor will bee ſo ſenſeleſſe, that it will no wayes bee moued by the Preaching: A murtherer will bee ſitting before the Miniſter: A vile filthy adulterer will bee ſitting there, deuiſing howe to accompliſh their abhominable luſtes, in the meane time that the Miniſter will bee threatning judgement againſt their wickedneſſe: they will not be moued with the threatninges, but will diſdaine and ſcorne them in their heartes, and will ſay, This fellow doeth nothing but prate and raiſe what hee pleaſeth: and after Preaching vvill goe out merrily to his dinner and there curſe and ſweare, and blaſpheme Gods Name and thereafter goe to his bedde, as a beaſt, or a ſenſeleſſe ſow. But I admoniſh thee, O miſerable wretch! in deſpite of thy teeth, thy conſcience ſhall not ſleepe alwayes: the conſcience of all fleſh ſhall bee wakened one day, either to their weale, or to their woe: And that Lawe which ſo ſecurely men contemne many a time, ſhall bee ſo powerfull to waken the cōſciences, & to torment: hem, that by no meanes nor policie ſhall they bee able to pacifie them againe: Their drinking, their halking, their hunting, their carding, their dycing, and other paſtimes, will not then bring comfort or true peace to the ſoule: Then that man who thought himſelfe

moſt happy, when he was enjoying the pleaſures of ſinne, ſhall thinke himſelfe the moſt miſerable wretch that euer the earth bore.
            Brethren, the lawe that was giuen, and threatning thereof, is wondrous terrible, and for as little as many men account of it, yet either one time or other it ſhall be effectuall to ſtirre vp and to waken the conſciēces of men▪ I except no man: And if the conſcience ſleepe ſtill on in this life, till death ouer-take men, as it doeth in many, yet it ſhall be ſo wakened after this life in Hell, that it ſhall neuer get leaue to ſleepe againe, it ſhall ſo g
                  ••
               w vpon the ſoule, that it ſhall neuer get reſt: And in that Great day, whē that righteous Iudge ſhall appeare, the lawe ſhall bee moſte forceable to raiſe in the ſoule, dolour, griefe, and anguiſh for euer, which is impoſſible for any fleſh to ouercome, expell, and put away: yea, it is as impoſſible as it is to ouercome the majeſty of God His owne ſelfe: for as the Goſpell is the power of GOD to ſaluation, to euery one that beleeueth: So the law is the power of God, to raiſe vp dolour, terrour, and anguiſh in the ſoules of impenitent ſinners, and at laſt to bring it into condemnation. Therefore, happy is that man, who in the time of grace, when the Goſpel is crying vpon euery wearie and laden ſoule, to come to Ieſus, and promiſing to eaſe and disburthen all that cometh vnto Him, findeth this conſcience wakened in mercie: for nowe Ieſus Chriſt, by His ſeruantes, is going

thorow the world, offering to cure all ſorts of diſeaſes, yea, euen theſe that are moſt incurable: And miſerable is that man, who ſleepeth on till death ouer-take him, for then the time of grace is paſt, repentance then will bee to late, it will not auaile, remiſſion of ſinnes then cannot bee obtained: the voyce of the Lawe ſhall euer 
                  •
               ounde, Curſed art thou miſerable wretch for euer: the comfortable voyce of the Goſpell crying, Come all yee wearie and laden, ſhall neuer bee heard anie more: Suffer, therefore, your ſelues to bee launced & wounded in time, that yee may bee compelled to come to Ieſus: and the Lord waken the conſciences of theſe bloodie murtherers, adulterers, and oppreſſors in time, that they maye ſee where awaye they are going, and at laſt may returne to God.
            Nowe hitherto wee haue handled this naturall corruption, and this noble fleſh, which men glorie ſo much into. Nowe let vs ſpeake ſomething of the naturall birth, That which is borne of the fleſh, is fleſh. And what can corruption breede, but corruption? What can a leprous man bring out, but a leprous childe? Who can bring a cleane thing out of filthineſſe? No, not one, Iob, Chapter 14. verſe 4 For why, Brethren? In this naturall generation, as the parent naturallie communicateth nature, and his owne ſubſtance: ſo looke what venome, vileneſſe, and deteſtableneſſe is in his nature, hee giueth and communicateth it all to his children.
            
               Men glorie commonlie much of theſe thinges which they gette thorowe their parentes, they will ſaye, I haue gotten great heritages, much honour, and great riches by my father: But I ſaye, that no man euer got ſo ſurelie theſe things thorowe their parentes, as they gette through them and their birth a poyſon and peſt with their fleſh, whereby they are made the children of wrath, and ſhall get Hell for their inheritance.
            Brethren, happie is the man that can conſider this naturall vncleanneſſe, and is touched in conſcience with the pollution which hee giueth to his children, and ſtriueth to haue it purged: for in ſo doing, hee both acquireth a good conſcience to himſelfe, and giueth his children a better heritage, than if hee left him all the heyreſhips of the worlde.
            When thou haſt begotten thy childe, and gathered goods and riches together, and acquired great poſſeſſions vnto him, then if thou takeſt no care of the purging of that corruption which hee hath contracted from thy loynes, that ſame peſt ſhall bee laide to thy charge in that great day.
            Therefore, nowe hauing ſpoken ſomething of the fleſhe, and the generation thereof, let vs nowe ſpeake ſhortlie of the Spirite, and His generation. What is meaned by the Spirite? This Spirite is the Spirite of the LORD IESVS: this Spirit is y• Spirit of Regeneration, who reneweth men & women▪ & of olde and ſinfull creatures, maketh

them new and holy againe: For, as ſoone as a ſinfull man beginneth to laye holde on the Lord Ieſus, by a true and liuely faith, ſo ſoone findeth hee power and grace conuoy
                  •
               d by His Spirit into his ſoule to renew it.
            Then, to ſpeake of Chriſt, becauſe this Spirit is His Spirit: As Ieſus Chriſt is our elder Brother, ſo is Hee alſo our Father, Hee is called the Father of Eternitie, Eſai. 9. 6. He is called the ſecond Adam, Rom. 5. 14. He is our ſpirituall Father, who begetteth vs by His Holy Spirit. Nowe compare the naturall parent with this ſpirituall parent: Our naturall parent is not onely culpable and guilty of that firſt defection▪ but alſo of innumerable ſinnes and tranſgreſſions following thereupon: Our ſpirituall parent, Chriſt, is culpable of no ſinne at all, but is full of all kinde of obedience: for Hee was obedient to the Father to the death, euen to the death of the Croſſe. Our naturall parent is altogether naturally corrupt, yea, a lumpe of ſinne: but Chriſt, our ſpirituall parent, is not only cleane in nature from all ſpot of ſinne, and perfectly holie, as H
                  •
               e is man, but alſo Hee is Holineſſe it ſelfe, becauſe He is the Sonne of God from all Eternitie: and what can bee cleaner than Cleanneſſe it ſelfe?
            Now to come to their generation: The naturall parent begetteth by the force of nature: there is a force in nature to beget: our ſpirituall parent, Ieſus, is farre more able to beget by the power of

His Spirit who is the author of nature: The naturall parent by the force of nature will beget fleſh, a corrupt maſſe, a ſinfull creature, yea, the image of the deuill: this will hee giue to his childe: but our Heauenly parent, the Lord Ieſus, by His Spirit, begetteth the Spirit, that is, a ſpirituall man, an holy & cleane man, who hath no delite nor pleaſure in ſinne: for Sainct Iohn ſaith, in his 1. Epiſtle, Chap. 3. verſe 9. Hee that is borne of God ſinneth not: that is, ſinneth not as the worldlinges doe, with pleaſure and delight: ſinne reigneth not in him: why ſinneth hee not? becauſe (ſaieth hee) the ſeede of God remaineth in him: that is, His Spirit, by whom as a liuely ſeede wee are begotten and made newe creatures. And what ſaith he more? He ſaith, ſuch a man cannot ſinne: that is, he cannot ſinne: that is, he cannot ſinne as the naturall and vnregenerate man ſinneth: hee cannot follow the courſe of this worlde, and wallow in the puddle of ſinne as they doe. And why can he not ſinne ſo? becauſe (ſaieth hee) he is borne of God. It is a marueilous force that the Spirit of GOD hath, Hee maketh a man that he cannot ſinne, all the worlde will not make him to ſinne. The naturall man can doe nothing but ſinne, all his actions are ſinnes: but hee that is borne of God cannot ſinne
            Nowe this generation of the Spirite is called Regeneration: which word, albeit it be commonlie in many mens mouthes, yet fewe vnderſtand what it meaneth: therefore, wee ſhall ſet downe

the nature and definition thereof, and touch ſome particular circumſtances, which may ſerue for the better vnderſtanding thereof. Then, what is Regeneration? It is an alteration and changing of the whole nature of man, accompliſhed and performed by the powerfull operation of the Holie Spirite. When I call Regeneration a changing of nature. I meane not that there ſhoulde be any change of the ſubſtance & eſſence it ſelfe, either of the ſoule or of y• bodie, as if that by Regeneration the olde ſubſtance were quite aboliſhed, and a newe ſubſtance brought foorth: but I meane that there is a change and alteration of the qualities which are in the ſubſtance.
            I will let you ſee this in the powers and faculties of the ſoule, as in the minde and reaſon, in the will, and in the affections. In the minde and reaſon, there muſt bee a change of the vviſedome of the fleſh into the vviſedome of GOD: nothing is a greater enemie to GOD and His glorie, to thy ſelfe and thy ſaluation, than the vviſedome of the fleſh: And therefore, if thou wouldeſt be ſaued, this wiſedome muſt be mortified, & thou muſt become a foole, that thou mayest bee wiſe, as yee maye reade in the firſt Epistle of S. Paule to the Corinthians, the 3. Chapter, and the 18. verſe. In ſtead of this vviſedome muſt bee powred into the minde the wiſedome of GOD. In the vvill and affections there muſt bee a change of the frowardneſſe and wicked inclination, into holineſſe

and a good inclination: Whereas before there was nothing in them but frowardneſſe, (LORD that man is a froward creature, when GOD commandeth him to goe one waye, hee will goe the plaine contrarie) that muſt be mortified and ſlain: and in ſtead of it there muſt bee wrought in the heart a propenſion and willingneſſe in ſome meaſure, to purſue and to doe that which the LORD commandeth, and hath pleaſure into.
            Nowe howbeit I call Regeneration a change onelie of the qualities, yet it is not ſo light a matter, and ſo eaſilie performed, as men would think: for it is a greater worke to renewe man, than to create him. In the beginning GOD created all thinges with His word, but before man could bee renewed, the Sonne of God behooued to become the ſonne of man▪ and ſuffer ſhame and ignominy, & die an accurſed death, euen the death of the Croſſe. It is an eaſie thing for thee to ſaye. I muſt bee changed ere euer I ſee Heauen: But, Brethren, it is not ſo ſoone done: it is the moſte difficill thing vnder the Sunne, to gette the heart of a creature changed: And they who haue found this vvorke ſenſiblie to haue beene begunne in them, haue found howe harde it is by their owne experience: for I tell thee, that before thou bee renewed, thou muſt denie thine owne ſelfe: CHRIST ſaieth, Thou must renounce thy ſelfe, and take vp thy croſſe daylie, and followe Him, LVKE, Chapter 9. verſe 23. If the LORD had onelie bidden vs renounce our

friendes, our father, our mother, our riches, our landes, and ſuch other thinges as are without vs, we would haue thought it a matter hard enough, and ſcarcely would we haue bene induced to giue obedience, as ye ſee in the young man in the Goſpell, Matth. 19. 16. But when the Lord commandeth vs to renounce our ſelues, euen that thing that is moſte excellent, that which is moſte wiſe, this reaſon it ſelfe, the wiſedome of the fleſh, that furniſheth ſo many reaſons to diſſwade mē either to profeſſe or followe Chriſt: what can bee more hard? But ſuppone reaſon were conuinced, and the mouth thereof cloſed, that it coulde gette no ſhift to anſwere, yet thinkeſt thou ſo to bee quite of thy ſelfe? No, the will and the affections will ſtand obſtinately againſt the judgement of the minde, and follow out, and purſue that which the minde diſcearneth to be euill.
            So thou mayeſt eaſily ſee, that there is nothing more harde than to gette this Regeneration: yea, thou mayeſt ſee that it is a thing altogether impoſsible, except that Almighty Spirit of God be preſent, and worke it effectually in the ſoule, all the kings of the earth, with all their weapons and engines of warre, cannot be able to doe it. No, all the Angels in Heauen are not able to accompliſh this worke: The weapons of our warre-fare, ſaith Paul, are not carnall, but mighty through God, to cast downe ſtrong holdes, casting downe imaginations, and euerie high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God,
               
               and bringing into captiuitie euery thought to the obedience of Christ, 2. Cor. 10. 4. 5. There is no power in Heauen or earth, but onely the Spirit of God, that is able to renewe one creature. And this power is granted to this our Miniſterie, the preaching of the Euangell. Let great men, let worldly men eſteeme of it as they pleaſe, God hath ordained this Miniſtery, to miniſter this wonderfull power whereby the ſoules of men ſhall be regenerate.
            Further, thou muſt vnderſtand, that this Regeneration is not perfected in an inſtant, but in proceſſe of time: it muſt continue all the dayes of thy life: ſo long as thou liueſt, albeit thou liue a thouſand yeeres, this olde man will not bee perfectly and altogether mortified and ſlaine, till the houre of death: Thou muſt all the dayes of thy life-time be groaning vnder the burthen of ſinne, ſubject to croſſes and troubles, (away with lightheaded ſinners, who ſaye, they woulde alwayes haue their heartes vp: ſadneſſe becommeth a ſinner well) and thou muſt ſtriue to finde the newe man to bee renewed degree by degree, piece and piece, euen till at laſt death bee ſwallowed vp of life, and mortalitie of immortalitie. And if thou wouldeſt haue this worke to goe forward in thee, then ſet euermore Ieſus thy Lord and thine head before the eyes of thy ſoule: looke vpon Him with the eyes of faith: for it is only His preſence & the ſight of His glory, that worketh this marueilous change: for there is a great oddes betweene the

ſight of His glorie, and the ſight of the glorie of worldlie Princes, for the ſight of their glorie will not change thee, nor make thee glorious, but vaniſheth awaye in a moment: But the ſight of the glorie of IESVS ſhall change thee, and make thee glorious, whenſoeuer thou beholdeſt Him, either by faith in this worlde, or elſe face to face in the Kingdome of Glorie: For when thou beholdeſt Him with the eyes of faith heere, thou ſhalt bee changed, according to the meaſure of thy faith: and becauſe thy faith is imperfect, thy change heere muſt bee imperfect: but when thou ſhalt ſee Him face to face, and beholde Him as Hee is, then ſhalt thou bee like vnto Him in glorie: thy change ſhall bee perfect: His preſence ſhall bee effectuall to change thy vile bodie, and to faſhion it like vnto His owne glorious bodie: when thou beholdeſt His glorie, thou ſhalt bee changed into the ſame glorie.
            Therefore, yee ſee what neede wee haue to finde this Regeneration begunne in vs heere, and to finde a continuall progreſſe therein all the dayes of our life, that ſo wee maye bee aſſured, that the LORD ſhall crowne His worke in vs with glorie in IESVS.
            And nowe to ende: then ſurelie yee ſee, that corruption, miſchiefe, and venome, euerie man, without exception, communicate vnto their children, by naturall generation: Therefore, Brethren,

this is mine exhortation to all, both to great and ſmall, (I except none, from the King, to the Begger) Striue, as yee are inſtrumentes of generation, ſo to bee inſtrumentes of regeneration, that your children maye bee taken out of nature, and planted in grace, and ſo bee made members of the myſticall bodie of IESVS CHRIST: Striue to bring them vp in the knowledge of CHRIST, that ſo yee maye bee free of that heauie judgement which remaineth for all ſuch as neglect this duetie towardes their children, and that yee maye ſee GODS bleſſing vpon your children heere, and maye haue hope of that eternall life and glorie heereafter, which the LORD hath promiſed to His owne in CHRIST IESVS: To whome, with the FATHER, and the Holie SPIRIT, three perſons and one GOD, be all Honour, Glorie, Praiſe, Power, & Dominion, both now and euermore, So bee it.
         
         
            
            THE XVII. SERMON.
            
                I. TIMOTH. CHAP. I.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 12 Therefore, I thanke him, who hath made mee ſtrong, that is, Christ Ieſus our Lord: for hee counted mee faithfull, and put me in his ſeruice:
                  
                     
                        verse 13 When before I was a blaſphemer, and a perſecuter, and an oppreſſour: but I was receiued to mercie: for I did it ignorantly through vnbeliefe.
                  
                     
                        verse 14 But the grace of our Lord was exceeding aboundant with faith and loue, which is in Christ Jeſus.
               
            
            
               IN this Text (beloued Brethren in Ieſus Chriſt) there is ſet downe to vs a notable example of thankfulneſſe to God, in the perſon of the Apoſtle Paul, for that great and incomparable mercy which the Lord beſtowed vpon him: not onely in forgiuing him his groſſe and manifold ſinnes, but alſo for ſetting of him in His ſeruice, and for the committing to him the meſſage of reconciliation, & making him an Apoſtle to preach repentance and remiſsion of ſinnes to others. As the mercies which he found were wondrous great, ſo is hee wondrous carefull alwayes to teſtifie his thankfulneſſe to GOD: And to the

ende the more chearefully he may praiſe & thanke God, hee conſidereth and ſetteth downe by degrees, and in order, his vnworthineſſe, and the euill deedes that he did, notwithſtanding, whereof the Lord extended His mercy moſt aboundantlie towardes him.
            To come to the wordes: Hee ſaieth, Therefore, I thanke him, who hath made me ſtrong, that is, Christ Jeſus our Lord: Theſe wordes depend vpon the verſe immediately going before: hee ſaide before, that the glorious Euangell of Ieſus Chriſt was concredite to him, for the which cauſe he burſteth forth in thankeſgiuing, and hee ſaieth, Therefore I will be thankfull to Him, who hath concredited it vnto mee.
            Then yee ſee, his thankfulneſſe ariſeth on two conſiderations: Firſt, vpon the conſideration of the excellency of the Euangel of Ieſus Chriſt. The Goſpell is glorious in it ſelfe, and it is come down from the bleſſed God: next, vpon the conſideration of his owne vnworthineſſe: looke howe worthie the Goſpell was, as vnworthie was hee: then conſidering that ſo worthy a thing was giuen vnto him, and that hee himſelfe was ſo vnworthy, hee knoweth not what thankes to giue, he cannot deuiſe what manner of waye to teſtifie his thankfulneſſe. If once wee could ſee what God were, howe bleſſed that inuiolable Majeſty were, and what the Euangell is, how glorious how liuely, & howe powerfull in operation, and then what our ſelues

are, how vnworthie we are, now, Lord, what would wee account of Ieſus Chriſt! this heart that now is bound vp, would then bee looſed to thankfulneſſe: But wee ſee not what GOD is, and if we haue not found glorie and the power of the Goſpell. Looke what great cōmendation this Apoſtle giueth to the Goſpell, 2. Cor. 3. 6. where hee compareth the Lawe with the Goſpell, and calleth the Goſpell the Miniſterie of the Spirit, the Miniſterie of righteouſneſſe, y• Miniſterie of life. Then againe, wee ſee not what our ſelues are, how vile, how filthie and vncleane we are: we ſee not that myſterie of ſinne that is in vs, and therefore we account ſo little of the Goſpell, and are ſo little moued when the Lord threatneth the away-taking of it: And to the ende men may knowe howe they ought to eſteeme of this Miniſterie & of this Goſpell committed vnto them, which now the world ſo much contemneth and diſdaineth, we ſhall ſpeake a litle of the dignitie & excellencie thereof. To haue the Goſpel of Ieſus Chriſt cōmitted to a mans charge is no ſmall thing: No, there is no fleſhe worthie of ſuch dignitie and honour: no, not the Angels in Heauen, let be ſillie mortall creatures. Is the creature worthy to diſpoſe the treaſures of ſaluation? Is a man worthy to reconſile God and the world? Is anie man worthy to bee an inſtrument to bring remiſſion of ſinnes, peace of conſcience, and joye in the Holie Ghoſte to the ſoule of man? Is anie worthy to beare witneſſe to the ſoule of man, that

life euerlaſting appertaineth vnto him, and is laid vp for him in the Heauens? And this mooued the Apoſtle to crie out, when hee conſidered this, Who can be found meet for theſe thinges? 2. Cor. 2. 16. And ſo, if wee knewe all that is contained in the Goſpell, wee woulde ſaye, that the Angels themſelues are not worthie to beare ſuch a meſſage, to diſpenſe the ſecrete and hidden thinges of GOD, to confirme forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, to put poore ſinners out of doubt, that the LORD loueth them▪ and taketh them for His children: and laſt, that Hee will crowne them with ſaluation, and euerlaſting life. And the conſideration of this ſhould moue them whom the Lord hath ſet in His ſeruice, to follow the example of th'Apoſtle Paul, and day and night to bee thankfull to God, vvho chooſeth ſuch fraile and poore creatures to ſuch an high, excellent, and glorious office, as to offer ſaluation to them who before were condemned and caſt-awayes. Next this, conſideration ſhould mooue men faithfullie and carefullie to execute that charge which is committed vnto them, as alſo to pray y• Lord earneſtlie, that Hee would bleſſe them with graces and ſtrength according to the weightineſſe of the calling, that they maye bee 
                  •
               ound faithfull in that Great daye: for man of himſelfe cannot doe ſo much as to thinke a good thought, (2. Cor. Chap. 3. verſ. 5.) let be to haue ſuch graces by nature as to furniſh ſuch an high and glorious a calling. And as the Paſtors haue their

duetie to learne heere, ſo the people alſo may and ſhould make their vſe of it, that is, when they come to heare the word of God, to the ende that the Goſpell and the promiſes of mercy may profit and edifie them, they ſhoulde bee reſolued in themſelues, that it is God that ſendeth men vnto them, and maketh them meete who were vnmeet. And in this place the Apoſtles minde is not onely to humble Preachers to acknowledge the grace beſtowed vpon them, but alſo to reſolue all men that hee that preacheth is ſent from God: otherwiſe the preaching of the Goſpell will ne
                  •
               er profit them.
            And laſt, this ſerueth to reprooue the vaine thoughtes and vngodly ſpeaches of the common multitude: for they thinke this Miniſtery to bee but a baſe and contemptible calling, and ſay, Who ſhould be placed into it? who but ſuch fooles and vnworthy bodies as cannot bee meete for another calling? who but kinleſſe bodies? But if a Gentleman, an Eſquires ſonne, a lordes brother, &c. take on this calling, hee is diſgraced and abaſed therewith. But. O vnworthy wretch! No Emperour, no Monarch, nor no fleſh whatſoeuer is worthy of ſo great a calling: no, the Angels in Heauen honour not ſo much the commiſſion, as the commiſſion honoureth them: If thou continueſt in counting baſely of it to the ende, thou ſhalt finde it at the laſt to bee the moſt glorious thing that euer was, but it ſhall be to thy confuſion and deſtruction.
            
               Nowe I goe forward: Hee commeth to a reaſon of his thankfulneſſe: Who hath ſtrengthened me, ſaith hee, that is, of a weake body, full of imperfection, blottes, and ſinnes, which might haue hindered mee from that calling. Hee made mee ſtrong and able. So the Apoſtle compareth his eſtate by nature, with that eſtate which he found of grace: and when hee was in nature, hee ſaieth hee was weake, and vnder the worde of weakneſſe hee comprehendeth his blaſphemy, perſecution, and oppreſſion, which hee ſetteth downe heereafter: And heereby wee maye ſee, that men will neuer knowe the grace of God well, nor accompt worthily of it, vntill they conſider what men are, when GOD leaueth them to their owne eſtate: And when men get a ſight, either of themſelues, or of others, they will ſee that there is no goodneſſe, nothing worthie of praiſe, but much miſchiefe & miſery both in themſelues, and in others. And when men once ſeeth and knoweth this, then it will bee an eaſie thing to them to judge of the grace of GOD, which ſupplieth and remedieth all wantes and vices. When Paule looked to himſelfe, hee ſawe no goodneſſe, & that that had appearance of goodneſſe, was nothing but euaniſhing ſmoake: and therefore confeſſeth, that whatſoeuer was in him by nature, was corrected: and ſo hee giueth the praiſe of all to God.
            Againe, I ſee that none will account of IESVS CHRIST, and His Goſpell, but they who finde a

power and ſtrength in the Goſpell. There is a power in the Goſpell, which all the faithfull finde: for by the Goſpell he that was weake to any good deede, is made ſtrong: by the Goſpell he that was dead, is quickened, and beginneth to liue. This conſtrained the Apoſtle Paule to giue ſuch glorious and powerfull ſtiles to the Goſpell: hee calleth it the power of God to life and ſaluation, Rom 2. 16. he calleth it liuely and mighty in operation, Heb. 14. 12. The children of God find it powerfull, to ouerthrow and caſt downe the imaginations of man and euery ſtrong holde which is raiſed vp againſt Ieſus. And whoſoeuer findeth this of neceſsity they muſt be thankfull. Alas! that there ſhould be ſuch a power and ſtrength in the Goſpell, and that we ſhould finde ſo little of it! for if wee found it, it could not bee poſsible but wee woulde teſtifie and practiſe by mouth and hand, by word and action, our thankefulneſſe otherwiſe than we doe.
            Nowe wee come to the next argument, which moued the Apoſtle to be thankfull: hee ſaith, that our Lord Jeſus Christ counted him faithfull, and ſet him in His ſeruice: hee meaneth not here that the Lord fore-ſawe that there would bee ſome worthineſſe, goodneſſe, and faithfulneſſe into him, and therefore Hee employed him, as vaine and ignorant men doe affirme: for are not all corrupt? are not all children of wrath. and ſubject to Sathan? what goodneſſe then can God ſee in anie of vs, except Hee put it into vs? and what can moue Him to

make a choyſe of one more than another, but onlie His good pleaſure and free-liking? But this he ſaith, to meete and ſtoppe the mouthes of wicked and malicious men, who went about to diſgrace his perſon and office, and to make his preaching fruitleſſe. The world is now full of ſuch perſons: as if hee had ſaid▪ Let men reproach mee, diſdaine me, ſet themſelues againſt me, yet this is ſufficient for me, that Ieſus Chriſt, who hath all authoritie, and who is ſupreame Iudge, who onelie can abſolue and condemne, and from whoſe ſentence none can appeale, is on my ſide, and hath declared, by putting me into His ſeruice. and by calling me immediatelie with His owne mouth, that Hee would vſe my Miniſterie, and declared, that where I was vnfaithfull before, Hee accounted me faithfull, He accounted more of me than I was worthy of. So by this th' Apoſtle importeth a double grace which hee got from Chriſt: firſt, that whereas hee was ynfaithfull, the Lord gaue him ſaith, and ſo accounted him faithfull: Next, that he had manifeſted, by calling him to bee an Apoſtle, that Hee had a liking that he ſhould be in His ſeruice.
            Then heere yee ſee, that as before, hee thanked GOD for the power and ſtrength that hee founde, ſo heere hee thanketh GOD, for that exceeding mercie, vttered in forgiuing him his ſinnes, and in calling him to bee an Apoſtle.
            Hence wee perceiue, Brethren, that no man will euer account of IESVS CHRIST, except he

firſt finde that CHRIST hath accounted of him: yea, except he finde that Chriſt hath accounted of him that which he is not: whereas he is vnfaithfull, hee muſt finde that Ieſus counteth him faithfull: whereas hee is vnjuſt, hee muſt find that Chriſt counted him juſt. Yee ſee by common experience, that when one man loueth another exceedingly, hee will account more of him than hee is to bee counted of indeede, for loue ouer-ſeeth and hideth many infirmities and offences. Was there euer ſuch a loue as Chriſt Ieſus carried vnto vs, vnworthy wretches? For when wee were vile & wretched ſinners, euer offending the Majeſtie of God, and procuring His wrath, the Lord Ieſus in the multitude of His mercies, and infinite deepeneſſe of His loue, couered our ſinnes, and hid our iniquities that they ſhould not beeſ
                  •
               ene by God. So when the Lord Ieſus hath once extended the mantle of His mercy and compaſsion vpon His choſen children, then albeit they were repleniſhed with neuer ſo many vile and groſſe ſinnes, yet the Lord will not laye them to their charge, but in Ieſus Hee will count them juſt, righteous, and innocent: ſo Hee will account more of them than they are worthy of: For, except that euery one of vs be perſwaded of this, that we are greater men in the account of Ieſus Chriſt, than wee are in our ſelues, we ſhall periſh in our ſinnes for euer.
            The Pope, and that crew of his ſhameleſſe-ones, ſcorne this doctrine of the imputation of the

righteouſneſſe of IESVS: they will haue men to bee juſtified by their inherent righteouſneſſe in Gods preſence: But I denounce, in the Name of the Great GOD, that if they goe on ſo, if they leane to their own righteouſneſſe, and if they find not the righteouſneſſe of Ieſus to be imputed vnto them, they ſhall neuer taſte of mercy.
            But howe knoweth the Apoſtle that the Lord accounteth ſo much of him? The laſt words of the verſe declareth, Hee put mee into His ſeruice, therefore I knowe that Hee hath accounted more of mee than I am. Wouldeſt thou knowe that the Lord hath accounted more of thee than thou art, hath the Lord Ieſus put thee into his ſeruice, then He accounted of thee. Indeede I grant, that there are many who are called to offices, both in Church and Policy, who cannot, nor may not ſay, that therefore the Lord hath counted them faithfull: for there are many who are not ſent of God, but who runneth vnſent, and are thruſt out by their owne corrupt affections, as by ambition, by vaine glory, by deſire of preferment, by couetouſneſſe. Often times yee ſee, that many who haue the place and name of Paſtors, ſet themſelues to trouble the eſtate of the Church, and to giue offence vnto the weake ones, to ſpeake nothing of their negligence in that calling. And ſuch like in the ſeate of Iuſtice, yee will ſee men without regard of God, conſcience, nature, and common honeſty, to giue out wicked judgement, and maintaine

manifeſt hainous crimes, and to ſtand directlie in contrarie tearmes with the Majeſtie of God, contra-manding where Hee hath commanded. Therefore, ſuch perſons cannot alleadge that the Lord hath counted them faithfull. And men cannot ſaye, that they are ſet into theſe offices by Gods hand: but as it were by Sathan: Therefore, to the ende that thou mayeſt know whether ye Lord counteth thee faithfull or not, Looke and ſee that thou haue theſe ſignes & teſtimonies, which may beare witneſſe that the Lord hath called thee. It is true, men now adayes cannot haue ſuch a perſwaſion as Paul had, for he was called immediatly by the mouth of Ieſus Chriſt from Heauen, & therefore he might ſpeake confidently: but it is as true, there are none whome the Lord calleth, but they haue ſome ſignes thereof. Looke therefore, if thou haue an earneſt deſire to glorifie the Lord in the riches of His mercy, to propagate the kingdome of Ieſus, to draw mē from darkneſſe to light from miſerie to felicitie, from death to life, from Hell to Heauen. Look if thou haſt grace in ſome meaſure for ſuch a calling: looke if the Lord accompanieth thy Miniſtery, with euidencie & demonſtration of the Spirite, and by thy preaching hath acquired ſubjectes to His kingdome. Looke if thou doe the worke of the Lord chearfullie. If thou haue theſe tokens, thou mayeſt be aſſured in thy conſcience, and other men alſo may bee perſwaded, that thou runneſt not vnſent. But if thou haſt not theſe tokens,

then boaſt not of this, that thou art in a calling. And to ſpeake more generally to all them who are called Chriſtians, Wouldeſt thou know in what eſtate and calling ſoeuer thou art into, whether priuate or publike, whether the Lord account more of thee than thou art worthie, whether Hee accounteth thee faithfull or not, Looke to the markes, ſignes and tokens of a true Chriſtian: if thou finde them in thee, as namely, whether thou haſt a pleaſure in body and ſoule, through infirmitie, to ſerue the Lord, to be exerciſed in the means of grace, in preaching, prayers, reading, conference, &c. Looke if thou haue a pleaſure to approue thy ſelfe in all thinges to thy LORD and Maiſter. Looke if thou haue a care, to further others in the courſe of Chriſtianitie, and waye of repentance: then, if thou haſt theſe tokens, thou mayeſt rejoyce.
            Then he goeth forward: & he cannot ſufficientlie ſet out that mercy which he found, he knoweth not how nor in what tearmes to vtter & proclaim it: If we could find that mercy of Ieſus, we would ſee that the heart would neuer ſatisfie it ſelfe with thinking of it, or the mouth with ſpeaking of it. And to the intent that hee maye magnifie the greatneſſe and the riches of the mercie of the LORD, hee confeſſeth and ſetteth downe, although to his owne ſhame, his former ſinfull life and behauiour, in ſundrie degrees, Whereas before, ſaieth hee, I was a blaſphemer, and a perſecuter,
               
               and an appreſſor. Looke if hee thought much of himſelfe, hee was one of the cruelleſt perſecuters that euer was in the Church, hee was in a rage againſt Chriſt.
            Beholde Brethren, Paul is not aſhamed to paint out himſelfe in his owne colours, and particularlie to confeſſe his former euill deedes, and to regiſtrate them to his owne ſhame to the worlds end. Yea, yee ſhall ſee in ſundry places, where hee ſpeaketh of himſelfe, that he can neuer ſatisfie himſelfe in aggregating his owne wickedneſſe. The ſinner who hath found mercy, will not regard to diſcouer his ſinnes to his owne ſhame, and to tell all the world of them, that hee may glorifie Him who hath giuen him mercy: hee will not ſtand vpon his reputation, but hee will preſerre Gods glorie vnto his owne account, hee will glorifie the LORD with his owne ſhame. When Dauid found mercie for his vile adulterie, and abhominable murther, hee not onelie confeſſeth his ſinnes to his owne ſhame, but alſo aſcendeth, to confeſſe the naturall corruption which hee had from the loynes of his parentes. The man that hath fallen into a notorious and vile ſinne and offence, and yet for ſhame will not confeſſe it, that God maye bee glorified, that ſoule hath neuer felt the mercie of God. And if thou hadſt felt that mercie of God thine heart would bee looſed, and thy mouth alſo, to glorifie God by an humble confeſsion.
            Moreouer, ye may perceiue out of theſe words,

how and what way th' Apoſtle found the ſtrength and power of the Goſpell: hee found a power in it, but not at the firſt inſtant: but ere euer hee felt the power of the Lord, hee findeth himſelfe to be weake: and ere hee feele the mercy of God, hee findeth himſelfe to bee a miſerable man: Thou ſhalt neuer feele the power of God, except firſt thou feele thine owne weakneſſe: and thou ſhalt neuer feele His mercie, except firſt thou feele thy miſerie. And therefore, the Lord Ieſus manie a time ſundrie wayes croſſeth His owne in this life, to the ende that they maye knowe and feele their weakneſſe and miſerie, and ſo goe out of themſelues, to find ſtrength and mercie in Ieſus Chriſt. Sometimes Hee will exerciſe His owne with ſhame and reproach in the worlde: ſometimes with heauie diſeaſes, and painfull ſickneſſes: ſometimes with want of the outward comfortes of this life: ſometimes with trouble and terrour in the conſcience, and all to this ende, that they may knowe what they are without the Lord, howe weake, how fraile, howe abject and naughtie they are: that ſo finding themſelues as nothing, they may be compelled to renounce themſelues, and to ſeeke to be found in Ieſus. Yea, after the Lord hath drawne them to Him by croſſes, the Lord vſeth all the dayes of their life-time, to expone them to croſſes that euerie day, finding more their wantes, infirmities, and lack of comfort in themſelues, they may the more daylie ſeeke and ſtriue to bee found

in Ieſus, who can ſupplie all their wantes, and furniſhe euerie thing that they ſtand in neede of. It is true indeede, manie a time the Lord will not exerciſe His owne with croſſes, but ſpare them & let them haue libertie, & giue them in abundance the outward comfortes of this life, befor they bee effectuallie called. Looke to Paul before he knew Chriſt hee boaſted much of his worldlie prerogatiues, of his kinred: hee was a gentleman, hee was in great account, by the lawe a Phariſie, Philip. 3. 4. 5. he knew not what the croſſe meaned. The like ye will find in many others of the Saincts of God: but aſſoone as He calleth them effectuallie, Hee layeth the croſſe vpon them: that ſeeing their weakneſſe, and diſtruſting themſelues, they may learne to renounce themſelues, and deſire to finde the power and life of IESVS in them, which they will finde effectuall in the croſſe in a wonderfull manner: Looke 2. Cor. 11. The LORD layeth manifolde croſſes vpon Paule, and when with teares hee prayeth, that the Lord would take them away, hee getteth this anſwere, My grace is ſufficient for thee, for my power is made perfect through thy weakneſſe: Meaning, that Hee will bee glorified, and make Paule to finde ſtrength in Him, when as hee is weake in himſelfe. And neuer one is ſtrong in CHRIST, but when hee feeleth himſelfe weake. Therefore hee ſubjoyneth, that hee woulde rejoyce and take pleaſure in his infirmities, that the power of CHRIST might dwell

in him: He ſaith (2. Cor. 12. 8. 9. 10. And 2. Cor. 4. 10.) Euerie where wee brare about in our bodie the dying of the LORD IESUS, that the life of IESUS might alſo bee made manifest in our bodies, &c. When the bodie by croſſes was dying, then hee founde the life of CHRIST: and no ſoule ſhall finde that life without it bee dying. Therefore, if euer thou wouldeſt finde the power and life of Chriſt in thee, bee carefull to feele thine owne weakneſſe and miſerie.
            Yet marke the wordes: Hee ſaieth, notwithſtanding of my ſinnes, the Lord had mercie vpon mee: And if ye looke to the ſpeach, it importeth a wondering, that euer hee ſhould haue found mercie, vvho vvas ſuch a great ſinner. It is the greateſt vvonder that euer was, that one ſinne is forgiuen to a ſinner, ſuppoſe it were but an euill thought: And if thou ſaweſt that great, inuiolable and infinite Majeſtie, and the greatneſſe of thy ſinnes, thou wouldeſt wonder that euer thou getteſt one ſinne forgiuen thee, let bee blaſphemie and perſecution forgiuen thee: And wonder thou as thou wilt: all the Angels of Heauen wonder that ſinners ſhould get mercy, & that God loued the vnworthy worlde ſo, that Hee would giue His onelie Son to die that they ſhould liue for euer: and they wondered when Adam, & the Fathers of olde got mercy: but when Chriſt came into the world to dy for the ſinnes of the worlde, they wondered farre more at that mercie, and vvith chearefull voyce

praiſed GOD for the ſame, ſaying, Glorie bee to GOD in the high heauens, and peace on earth, and towardes men good will, Luke 2. 14. Looke alſo what the Apoſtle ſaieth to this purpoſe, to the Ephes. Chap. 3. verſe 10. It is their pleaſure to pierce in to that miſterie, and to looke to that mercie, but miſerable man, to whom it belongeth, commonlie wondreth not at it. But albeit the prophane man, when hee is ſleeping in ſinne, and going on in an euill courſe thinking it but an eaſie thing to gette mercie: and albeit hee wonder not much when he ſeeth another miſerable ſinner to get mercie, but account it a matter of ſober importance, yet if it pleaſe the Lord once to waken his conſcience, and make his ſinnes to appeare in their owne colour, how great, how vile, and how deteſtable they are, and what it is to offende that infinite and inuiolable Majeſtie, that Omnipotent IEHOVAH, who created all thinges, and to finde the terrours and tormentes of that ineuitable wrath and euerlaſting paine. And if the Spirit of God leaue him there to his owne ſelfe, and helpe him not forwarde, hee woulde conclude, that there were no mercie for him: and hee would maruell that euer a ſinner ſhoulde get mercie: for hee woulde ſee the juſtice of God, as a wall of fire, ſtanding before God, holding off the ſinner, that hee preaſſe not to come neare to God. So ſuch perſons woulde dite their owne dittie, and giue out their owne doome againſt themſelues. And except it pleaſe

the Lord to ſende His Holie Spirit, who ſearcheth all thinges, yea, the deepneſſe of God, out of His owne boſome, to a miſerable ſinner, thus exerciſed, to conuoy him through His juſtice, thorowe that wall of fire, and to let him ſee and feele the mercie of God in the Lord Ieſus, he would neuer, nor durſt neuer claime to His mercie. Onelie they who getteth that Holy Spirit, who cometh out of that deepeneſſe, to conuoye the creature to that vnſearcheable deepneſſe, (for albeit the deepneſſe of that mercie bee infinite, yet the Spirit of GOD ſearcheth out that deepneſſe) will acclaime and apprehende mercie: and then ſuch perſons will maruel, that euer themſelues, or any other, ſhould haue found ſuch infinite mercie. And the Sainctes of God, in the kingdome of Heauen, ſhall euer be exerciſed in marueiling at the mercies of God vpon them.
            It is true, that manie vaine wanton men, when they are going on in ſinne, beeing drunken and bewitched with the pleaſures of ſinne, and mad in their damnable courſe, will promiſe mercie to themſelues, and will applie mercie to ſinne, to make ſinne more and more ſweete, as if it were not ſweete enough before: But away with thee, for mercie appertaineth not vnto thee, but wrath and judgement, ſo long as thou remaineſt in that eſtate. Thou art not in that eſtate, that thou mayſt claime to His mercie: for onely the man who hath a ſadde, a contrite, and a broken ſoule, may acclaime

to mercie, and ſuch a man in greateſt ſadneſſe for ſinne ſhall haue vnſpeakeable joye.
            Nowe after hee hath vvondered at the mercie of GOD, in the ende of the verſe, hee ſetteth downe a cauſe not ſo much vvherefore GOD gaue him mercie, as that GOD was ſo readie to giue him mercie: Hee ſaieth, that hee was an ignorant: and that hee prooueth, becauſe hee wanted faith: His ignorance deſerued no mercie, but rather made him culpable and guiltie: For the Lord will not allowe ſuch an excuſe in that Great day: but ignorance maketh the ſinne the leſſe. The ſinne that proceedeth from ignorance, is not ſo great as the ſinne that proceedeth from knowledge: for the ſeruant vvho knoweth not the maſters vvill, and doeth it not, ſhall bee ſtriped with fewe ſtripes: but the ſeruant vvho knoweth the maſters vvill, and doeth it not, ſhall bee ſtriped vvith manie ſtripes, Luke 12. 47. 48.
            But for the better clearing of this point, vvee muſt vnderſtand, that Paul meaneth not, that euerie ſinne vvhich is committed vvillinglie and vvittinglie, men knowing vvell enough that they are ſinning, ſhall not bee forgiuen: for in vvhat caſe ſhould vvee all bee into then? Doe vvee not all manie a time ſinne vvittinglie and vvillinglie? Doe not our conſciences challenge vs in the verie act? Will vve not doe vvrong to our neighbour, in his perſon or in his goods, or in his name and account? yes, no queſtion: and vve cannot juſtifie

our ſelues in our doinges: If therefore, they vvho offend God, euen with open eyes, were condemned, without hope of mercie, alas! in what caſe would wee bee into? Hee meaneth not then of all ſins in generall, hee meaneth not of the ſins committed againſt the ſecōd Table againſt our neighbours: but by joyning ignorance and miſ-beliefe together, he ſheweth that hee meaneth of the reſiſting of the trueth of God, which is a far greater ſinne than theft, hooredome, or backe-biting: for they who reſiſt the trueth, doe as much as in them lieth, to pluck God out of His ſeat, and to put out the remembrance of His glorious Majeſtie, that He reigne no more: and they ſay in effect, Let mee alone with God, & I ſhall handle him wel enough, I ſhall bring him to nought, hee ſhall not reigne, I ſhall fight againſt him. Therefore, Paul ſpeaking of ſuch an accurſed ſinne, ſaieth not without cauſe, I did it of ignorance: as if he had ſaid, It is true, to blaſpheme Gods name and to treade Gods word vnder feete, and to perſecute the Saincts of God, is a ſinne that ſurmounteth and ſurpaſſeth all ſinnes, and I am culpable of this ſinne: But what? I did it not wittinglie, for I thought I ſerued GOD when I was an enemie to the Goſpell, becauſe I 
                     •
                  anted faith. Indeede Paule was a learned man, and brought vp in all good literature, as we reade in the 3. Chap. to the Philipp. As for the knowledge of the lawe, and the tradition of the Phariſees, hee ſurpaſſed the reſt (Galat. 1. 14.) Yet for all this,

hee ſaieth, hee was ignorant, becauſe hee wanted the knowledge of Christ. Suppoſe thou knoweſt all the worlde, and yet if thou knoweſt not Ieſus Chriſt, thou knoweſt nothing. And though thou kneweſt all the lawes in the worlde, all humanitie, all philoſophie, yet if thou knoweſt not Chriſt, thou knoweſt nothing. Now bleſſed is that ſoule that knoweth Chriſt, albeit hee knewe no more for in the knowledge of Him ſtandeth life euerlaſting.
            Marke againe, hee ſaieth, becauſe hee was ignorant, therefore hee was a blaſphemer and perſecuter. Ignorance is a dangerous thing: they who are ignorant of Chriſt, they who haue not faith in Him, they who knowe not what a glorious perſonage Hee is, what incomparable benefite Hee brought with Him vnto the worlde, who hath not founde His mercies, who haue not beene ſenſible of the forgiueneſſe of their ſinnes, who haue not founde the image of God repaired in them, and they who haue not found that peace of conſcience and joye in the Holie Ghoſt, they will perſecute Chriſt, and His Goſpell, and His Sainctes. It is a dangerous thing for the Sainctes of GOD to dwell among ignorantes and vnbeleeuers, for ſuch men are vnreaſonable, yea, they are Atheiſtes. The Apoſtle Paul requeſteth the Theſſalonians to praye to God for him, that hee may bee deliuered from froward and vnreaſonable men: for (ſaieth hee) all men haue not faith, 2. Theſſal. 3. 2. This Land is full of Atheiſtes: and giue them but a vvatch-vvord, they

would ſoone make a Maſſacre. And it is a maruell that the Church of God ſtādeth ſo long amongſt them: for few is the number, & ſilly is the flocke of God that beleeueth, in compariſon of them who remain in ignorance and infidelity. Wee ſhoulde therefore pray to God daily, that Hee would deliuer His own Saincts from them, & that by His powerfull prouidence He would reſtraine their malice & fury, & guard His own on all ſides. Further, think not that Paul alleadgeth his ignorance that thereby he may juſtify himſelfe, as if it were without fault and offence: for no mans ignorance ſhall ſerue to be a cloke to abſolue him before God. It will not ſerue a man to ſaye, I thought not of it, I thought otherwiſe, I knew it not: but if he get not mercy, hee muſt die for his ignorance: but hee alleadgeth it to let mē ſee, that it was not of malice & deſpite that he ſet himſelf to fight againſt God: & therfore that ye Lord was more ready to forgiue him. Then conſider, that ye Lord taketh heed & regardeth ye grounds & fountaine of ſin where from it proceedeth, & accordingly he is either more eaſie or more hard to ſhew mercy. There is a ſine againſt Chriſt of ignorance, and ſuch was the ſin of Paul: there is a ſin againſt Chriſt of knowledge, this is an higher degree, & this ſin will hardlier get remiſsion: this ſin of knowledge is of two ſorts, for either it cōmeth of infirmity, or els of malice: if it come of infirmity, as feare of trouble, daunger of life, it may find mercy: ſuch was ye ſin of Peter, whē
               
at the voice of an handmaid he denied his maiſter Chriſt, for he knew in his cōſciēce y• he ſaid & did wrōg, yet it proceeded of infirmity, for fear of his life: for as Bernard ſaith, Petrus peccau
                     •
                   contra veritatem, nō cōtra charitatē, for he loued Him in his heart, whō he was denying with his mouth, & therefore he foūd mercy, albeit his ſin was higher thā the ſin of Paul was: but if it come of malice & deſpite againſt God, & y• light of His Goſpel, it getteth no mercy: yt is, if a mā come to this point, yt whē he knoweth Gods trueth, albeit he be not moued with infirmity, fear, or dāger, yt he wil ſay in his hart, I know y• this doctrine is true it is ye truth of God, yet I wil go of ſet purpoſe to fight againſt God, I wil go clean againſt it, I wil do ſo much as in me lieth to bring it to nought: whē a mā cōmeth thus far, this mā carieth a mark about wt him, wherby he may accoūt himſelf a cōdemned perſon: ſuch was y• ſin of Iudas, & of Juliā
                y• 
               Apoſtate for of very malice they ſinned againſt Ieſus Chriſt & his goſpel: therfore they got no mercy. And wel were it with many of this lād, & namely theſe whom ye Lord hath promoued & preferred aboue others, who haue ſolde thēſelues to y• 
               Antichriſt, y• man of perdition, either quietly & craftily to vndermine, or els opēly, if occaſiō offer, to perſecute ye Church & Saincts of God: wel I ſay were they, if either they did it of ignorance, or of infirmity & weaknes. Now to come to an end: In the laſt verſe he returnes again to y• grace & mercie, But the grace of our Lord ſuper abounded ſo much the
               
               more: my ſinne was great, but it reached aboue, & ſurpaſſed my ſinne. Hee wondered before of the mercie of God but now finding vnſpeakeable joy proceeding of this mercie, his heart is inlarged, and his tongue looſed with chearfulneſſe, to magnifie His mercie. Where ſinne aboundeth, ſaieth the Apoſtle, there grace ſuper aboundeth, Roman. Chap. 5. verſe 20. Goe to thine owne experience, and conſider what motions thou haſt founde in vſing the meanes of grace, ſometimes at the hearing of the worde, ſometimes at the Holy Sacraments, ſometimes in prayer, and ſometimes in meditation: and I will let thee ſee, that grace ſuperaboundeth. Wilt thou not feele when thine heart is verie ſad, when it is burthened with exceeding griefe & diſpleaſure, when thou art ſighing, ſobbing, & groaning vnder the burthen of ſinne, & when thou art powring out teares aboundantly before God becauſe of thy ſinful life, and fooliſh race which thou haſt run: wil ye not find exceeding yet, incomprehenſible joye, to ariſe out of that ſadneſſe at that ſame time, which will ſwallow vp all diſpleaſure & ſadneſſe? ſuch a joye, I ſaye, as the like whereof all worldlie pleaſures and comforts cannot bee able to afford: No queſtion, but if thou be the child of God, ſomtimes thou wilt find this joy. Now from whence proceedeth this joy, but from the feeling of a ſuperaboundant mercy, forgiuing thee al thy ſins? for as ſadneſſe riſeth of ſin, for offending ſuch a louing God, & merciful father: ſo the joy riſeth

of the aſſurance of forgiuenes of ſin in his ſuperabū
                  dant mercy: & if there were not a ſuper abundant mercy ye, joy would neuer ſwallow vp y• ſadnes: ſo if there were no more to teſtify, that ye mercies of the Lord ſuperaboūdeth, but ye vnſpekeable joy mixed with ſadnes, it is as ſure an argumēt as euer was in the world: yea, & when thou feeleſt this joy, wilt thou not be compelled ſomtimes to burſt out, & to ſay, Lord, thy mercies are ſuperabundant, where ſin aboundeth, there thy grace & mercy aboūdeth more: ſo if thou woldeſt feele this ſurpaſsing joy, ſtriue not ſo much by a general knowledge & bare cōtēplation to know y• the mercies of God are infinit, & to ſpeak of them ye they are aboue al His works, higher thā ye heauēs, deeper thā ye ſea, & broader thā ye earth, but chiefly to find & feel thē by experiēce in thine own ſoule (for a bare knowledge & naked ſpeaking without feeling auailes nothing) & thē thou ſhalt find ſuch a joy as wil make thee cōtēne & diſdain al joyes ye thou foūd before in ſin, or in theſe worldly courſes: & it ſhal make thee to ſay, y• thou neuer kneweſt before what true & ſolide joy meaned: & to ye intēt thou mayſt find this ſuperabūdant mercy, which is ye cauſe & foūtain of this joy, ſtriue to haue ſadnes & bitternes in thy ſoule for ye offēding of ſo louing a God & merciful father: for none is capable of this mercy but he who hath a cōtrit, a brokē & bruſed ſoule. The Lord, therfore, giue vs grace to feele the burthē of ſin, & to grone vnder it, y• we may taſte of y• 
               ſuperabūdāt mercy, & ſo may find y• true & ſolid joy y• paſſeth all vnderſtāding in Ieſus Chriſt,
            Amen.
         
         
            
            THE XVIII. SERMON.
            
               I. TIMOTH. CHAP. I.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 14
                     But the grace of our Lord was exceeding aboundant with faith and loue, which is in Christ Ieſus.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 15
                     This is a true ſaying, and by all meanes worthie to bee receiued, that Christ Ieſus came into the world to ſaue ſinners, of whom I am chiefe.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 16
                     Notwithſtanding, for this cauſe was I receiued to mercie, that Ieſus Christ ſhould first ſhew on mee all long ſuffering, vnto the enſample of them, who ſhall in time to come beleeue in him vnto eternall life.
                  
               
            
            
               THE Apoſtle Paul (well-beloued Brethren in Chriſt) conſidering that the Lord IESVS had ſhewed ſuch mercy vpon him, as to concredite to him the glorious Euā
               gell of the bleſſed GOD, immediately falleth out in a thankſgiuing to Chriſt. There are two cauſes in the propoſition of the thankeſgiuing: the one is taken from the power of Chriſt, wherewith he is made ſtrōg: for whē he was nothing, the Lord Ieſus made him ſtrong: The other is from the mercy of Chriſt, whē
               
hee was vnfaithfull, (how could a blaſphemer bee faithful?) the Lord was ſo mercifull, that He made him faithful, & this he declareth, becauſe he being before, a perſecuter, the Lord made him an ambaſſadour of that ſame Euangell which hee perſecuted. He leaueth not this mercy, but inſiſteth in magnifying of it in regard, that not only he was a Preacher, but likewiſe hee was a true Chriſtian man. Ere euer he ſet downe this mercy, he telleth what he was before, and he 
                  •
               ayeth, When I was a blaſphemer, & not onely that, but with torments, compelled the Chriſtians to blaſpheme, I was a perſecuter, and yet further, an oppreſſour, he leaueth nothing vntolde of himſelfe, and he thinketh no ſhame to honour that God, who had mercie vpon him, with his owne ſhame, and hee regiſirateth his owne miſ-behauiour to his ſhame, that euery one of the Saincts of God, to the end of the world may ſay Glory be to God, that hath ſhewed mercy on ſuch a ſinner: then he wondereth and ſayeth, but he had mercie vpon me, & therewith by the way hee joyneth a reaſon, why the Lord ſhewed mercy ſa readily on him, becauſe he did it not of malice or knowledge, but he was blinded, hee did it of ignorance, hee was deſtitute of Faith, but aſſoone as hee gote mercy, hee changed his courſe: yet hee leaueth not off but entereth into a deaper conſideration of this Grace, & he ſayeth, The Grace of the Lord abounded exceedingly, My ſinne abounded, but grace ſuperabounded, and theſe

wordes are from the ſenſe of the heart, the heart beeing opened with the ſenſe of Grace, openeth the mouth that it vttereth theſe words: the grace of Chriſt is ſuperabundant, for if the heart be filled with the ſenſe of grace & mercy, it will make the mouth to proclaime the mercy of God, & to extoll it highly. The cauſe why we cannot ſet out ye mercy of God in hie termes, is, becauſe in vs there is no feeling of mercy: therefore it is, that we vtter wordes ſo ſlender and of ſo litle valour, when we ſpeak of that loue & that mercy, as it were a thing of none importance. When he hath told that the grace of the Lord ſuperabounded, he addeth alſo. With faith and with loue in Ieſus Christ, he declareth that ſuperabundant grace by a wonderfull mutation and change that was made in him by the power of IESVS CHRIST, that of a blaſphemer of Chriſt, he is made a beleeuer, apprehending him by Faith, of a perſecuter and oppreſſour of the Sainctes of God, hee was made a louer of them. The ſenſe of the mercy of God, & faith in Ieſus Chriſt, bringeth foorth loue in the heart. And whoſoeuer hath aſſurance of mercie & true faith, his heart wil be joyned with Chriſt and he will haue a great loue towardes Him: then for Chriſtes ſake he will loue all His Saincts: there wil not be a ſoule in the Church of Chriſt, but he will loue him ſo intirely y• he wold giue his life for him, & as he will loue him ſo he will pity him: for he y• hath faith, wil both loue & pity mē: he y• wāts pity,

and careth not what becōmeth of ye whole world, ſo he bee well hee hath neuer found what was the mercy of God in his heart. Alas! howe few is the number of theſe faithfull ones! how rare a thing is faith in the hearts of men! What argueth this coldneſſe in the heartes of men, this want of loue and pity in the multitude? Nothing but this, that albeit mercy be preached, yet ye multitude feeleth it not. And if thou hadſt all this world, and yet taſted not of that ſweetneſſe of this mercy of God in Ieſus Chriſt, thou kneweſt neuer what joy, what comfort, what pleaſure was.
            Then in the next wordes hee openeth vp the ground as it were of that mercy that was ſhewed vpon him, which is the generall ende of the comming of Chriſt into this worlde: and from the generall he concludeth on this manner, Christ Ieſus is come into the world to ſaue ſinners, and I am a ſinner, therefore He will ſaue me amongſt the reſt. Before he come to the words of the propoſition, becauſe it is a great and notable ſentence, hee vſeth a preface: as ye Lord Ieſus in matters of importance vſed to ſay, Verily, verily, I ſay vnto you: ſo here th' Apoſtle ſaith, This is a true ſaying, and by all meanes worthy to be receiued. In this preface he prepareth not onely Timothie, but all that euer ſhal heare this ſentēce vnto the end of the world: and he prepareth them not only to the attenſion of the eare, but he prepareth them vnto faith in the heart: ſo that as ſoone as they ſhould heare this ſentence, they ſhould apply

it with their hearts. Alas! why ſhould ſo worthy & excellent ſentēces as theſe are paſſe away without any attention or preparation on our part? It is true, Brethren, we ſhould neuer come to ye hearing of any part of the word without preparation: wee ſhould not come to the holy congregation like as many ſwine, without hauing any regard what wee are doing, but we ſhould come with preparation: & not only with an eare prepared, but with an hart prepared: and when thou entereſt into the Church thou ſhouldeſt ſay, The Lord prepare mine heart, that I may receiue ſome ſponke of grace. So a preparation is requiſite in generall to the hearing of the worde. But yet the heart of man would be better prepared for the hearing of ſuch notable ſentences as this is, Christ is come into the world to ſaue ſinners: they require a more ſingular preparation. There is no doubt he ſpake through the full aſſurāce of faith, and that which he ſpake, he aſſuredly beleeued: & therefore he ſpake of it. When wee ſpeake of that grace, the heart ſhould riſe with an aſſurance. Look to the Prophet Dauid, with what aſſurāce he ſpeaketh of it, I beleeued (ſaith hee) therefore did I ſpeake, Pſal. 116. 10. Look to the Apoſtles, with what faith & aſſurance they ſpeake of it: becauſe, ſaith Paul, 2. Cor. 4. 13. We haue the ſame Spirit of faith, according as it is written, I beleeued, and therefore haue I ſpoken, wee alſo beleeue, and therefore we ſpeake. So when thou heareſt or ſpeakeſt of this grace of the Lord Ieſus, ſeek to haue this aſſurance in thine heart, and ſaye, Lord,
               
               giue me Thy grace in ſpeaking and hearing of the benefite of Chriſt, that I may ſpeake and heare with aſſurance. And if ye take heede to the words of the preface, he riſeth vp in commending of this ſentence, that Chriſt came into the world to ſaue ſinners: and hee ſaieth not onelie, This is a true ſaying, that wee may aſſuredlie beleeue: but likewiſe hee ſaieth, and by all meanes worthie to bee receiued. Hee welcommeth (in a manner) Chriſt Ieſus comming into the world, he embraceth that ſaluation that Hee brought vvith Him. And would to God, whether wee bee Preachers or hearers, that wee coulde attaine to that meaſure of grace, that ſo oft as wee name the comming of Ieſus Chriſt, that in ſpeaking of it our hearts may be mooued to embrace Him, and that life and ſaluation which He hath purchaſed for vs. So this preface ſerueth to confirme our hearts, & deepelie to imprint in them the doctrine of the grace of Chriſt of remiſſion of ſinnes, of ſaluation through Him, &c. for by nature there is in euerie one of vs ſuch a miſtruſting & doubting thereof: y• albeit God wold a thouſand times offer it vnto vs: albeit Chriſt himſelfe would teach neuer ſo much vnto vs, yet are we euer ſtill in doubt and queſtioning in our owne heartes, whether it be ſo or not. Againſt all this miſtruſting and reaſoning of our owne hearts, we muſt bee armed with this preface of the Apoſtle, as with a buckler, that it is a true ſaying, & by al means worthy to be receiued. But to come to the ſaying it ſelf, It reckoneth vp ye whole Euangell,

for what is the Euangell in fewe wordes? The Lord Ieſus, the Sonne of God, is come into the world, by his manifeſtation in the fleſh & taking vpon him our nature, and in it, hee hath ſuffered the moſte ſhamefull death of the Croſſe, for the ſinnes of man, and riſing againe from death, hath paſſed vp to glorie, and all to this ende, For the ſaluation of man: There is the whole Goſpell. Alas! if we took heed to theſe tithings, our hearts woulde not bee carried after ſo manie vanities. The Apoſtle (1 Timoth. 3. 16.) calleth this the myſterie of godlineſſe, and a great myſterie, That GOD is manifeſted in the fleſhe, juſtified in the Spirite, ſeene of the Angels, preached vnto the Gentiles, beleeued on in the worlde, receiued vp into glorie, &c. All this hee ſetteth downe here in a word, Chriſt Jeſus came into the worlde: and hee telleth vs it was to ſaue ſinners: that wee, who are ſinners, might haue joye, and rejoyce at His comming: for wee ſhould neuer heare nor reade ſuch ſentences, but with joye. But the wordes woulde bee weighed, hee ſaieth, CHRIST came into the worlde to ſaue ſinners. What is this that hee calleth ſinners? there are two ſorts of ſinners in the worlde: The firſt are they who thinke they haue no ſinne, they are ſo hardned in their ſinne, they neuer got their hearts opened to ſee their owne ſinne, and wretchedneſſe: (for an indured ſinner feeleth no ſinne) but by the contrarie, they thinke themſelues juſt: they are puft vp with a cōceit of their own righteouſnes, they thinke thēſelues whole & free frō the

diſeaſe of ſin, and theſe are the greateſt part of the world. An example we haue in that proude Phariſie, who would ſtand vp and juſtify himſelfe before God, & ſay, I thanke thee, O God, that I am not a ſinner as other men, extortioners, vnjust, adulterers, or euē as this Publicane, Luke 18. 11. But it is not for the ſaluation of thoſe men that Chriſt came into the world: no, mercy belōgeth not to them, they will neuer taſte of any mercy of God in Ieſus Chriſt and therfore Chriſt ſaith, (Mat. 9. 12. 13.) The whole need not a Phiſition, that is, they who are whole & free of the ſickneſſe of ſin in their own conceit: I am not come to call the juſt, that is, indured ſinners who think thēſelues juſt, becauſe they are touched with no ſenſe of ſin: and well had it bene for them, if Chriſt had neuer come into the world, for they want not only grace in Him, but by the contrary, by the contemning of the grace that is offered, they heap on cōdemnation on their own heads. There is another ſort of ſinners, who haue a true ſenſe of ſin, and grone vnder the burthen thereof, who are ſore grieued in their owne conſciences for it: and it is of theſe ſinners that th' Apoſtle ſpeaketh here: for Chriſt ſheweth mercy only on theſe ſinners, He came into the world to ſaue them only: therfore He ſaith, Mat. 9. 13. I come to call ſinners to repētāce, meaning theſe ſinners who haue their conſciences wakened with ye ſenſe of ſin: theſe ſinners only He inuiteth to come vnto Him to get grace & refreſhmēt: Come vnto me, ſaith He, all ye that weary & laden, & I will refreſh you, Mat.
               
11. 28. Theſe ſinners will get grace to heare the word, and wil get their minds illuminated with it, whereas indured ſinners, the more they heare the more are they blinded: and therefore Chriſt ſaith, Joh. 9. 39. I am come vnto judgement into this world, that they that ſee not, may ſee, to wit, the penitent ſinners: and that they ſee, that is, indured ſinners, may bee blinded: & if thou be an indured ſinner, thou canſt not heare the word with profite, thou canſt not be inlightened thereby. But albert thou be a blaſphemer, an adulterer, an harlot, & the greateſt ſinner that is, if thou harden not thine heart at the hearing of the word of God, O how wonderfully will it worke in thy ſoule! it wil bring thee to a ſenſe of thy ſin, it will make thee to bee grieued for thy ſin▪ and to lament & mourne vnfainedly for it: it will make thee to runne & ſeeke for grace & mercy in Chriſt that thy ſin may be done away: an example of this ye haue in Dauid, when he had committed adultery & murther: no ſooner is ye word preached to him by Nathan, but aſſoone his heart is pierced with the ſenſe of his ſin, he confeſſeth & acknowledgeth it, hee is ſore grieued for it, hee crieth for mercy in the Meſſias, to put away his iniquities, as ye may ſee, 1. Sam. 12. 13. & Pſal. 51. Such like ye ſee in Paul, who before was perſecuting the Church, aſſoone as he heareth the voyce of Chriſt, his conſciēce is wakened, he trembleth, he is aſtonied, he humble intreateth for mercy, hee offereth ſeruice to the Lord, & ſaieth▪ 
               Lord, what wilt thou that I doe?
               
               Acts 9. 6. And it is onely ſuch perſons as theſe, who are of a contrite Spirit, who tremble at the Lords wordes, that doe get mercie and ſaluation. Then in a word, a humble & penitent ſinner, how great ſo euer his ſinne be, he 
                  •
               all get ſaluation. So there is nothing that hindereth thee from mercie and ſaluation, but the malitiouſnes of thine owne heart. It is not Adulterie, it is not Murther, it is not Blaſphemie or oppreſlion, that depriueth thee of yt ſaluation, but the hardnes of thine heart that cannot repent: if thou haſt a contrite heart, and canſt ſay, Woe is me, that I haue offended ſo ſweet & gracious a God, thou ſhalt get mercie. It is an heauie & Iamentable caſe, that ſinners ſhould want mercy for fault of repentance. When he hath ſet downe this generall ſentence, whereon hee groundeth the mercy of God that was ſhewed on him, that Chriſt came in the world to ſaue ſinners, he cōmeth to the particular application, & he ſubjoyneth, But I am the firſt ſinner in the world, the concluſion is vnderſtood, therefore Chriſt Ieſus came in the world to ſaue me. Would to God euery ſinner in the world could learne to apply this general ſentence to themſelues in the ſame maner that Paul doth here, & frō his heart could ſay with him, Chriſt Ieſus is come in the world to ſaue ſinners, & then ſubjoyne, Bot I am the firſt ſinner in the world, that ſa he might apply mercy & ſaluation to himſelfe, for without this application, theſe generall ſentences can ſerue for no vſe. It is true indeede,

Brethren, ſciences of theſe generall ſentences that are contained in ye Scripture, is very good, yea, the knowledge of them is moſt neceſſary: for no man can haue conſcience without knowledge: But it is as true on the other part, that ſcience and knowledge auaile not without cōſcience, applying particularlie to a mans ſoule the thing that hee knoweth. As when men know theſe generall ſentences ſet downe in the word, if they applie them not to themſelues, the knowledge of them can ſerue to no purpoſe: As for example: when a man knoweth this generall ſentence of the law, Curſed is euery man that continueth not in euery thing which is written in the booke of the law, to doe them, if thou apply it not, it can doe thee no good: But if thy conſcience be wakened, to acknowledge thy trāſgreſſing of ye law, & conſequently to apply to thy ſelfe that curſe of the lawe, & eternall condemnation, what ſorrow & griefe will it worke in thine heart? what earneſt deſire will it worke to bee free from that curſe and eternall condemnation? Yea, thou wouldeſt bee content to giue all the world to bee free of that curſe, and the heauie burthen of the wrath of God. And Brethren, look neuer for mercy, nor ſaluation, except firſt thine own conſcience condemne thee: if thy conſcience condemne thee not, the Lord of Heauē ſhal condemne thee. There is neuer one that is freede from the curſe and condemnation of the law, but they who feele their ſin & groane vnder the burthen of it, & get a ſight of their condemnation for ſin.
            
               Another example we haue of this generall ſentence that the Apoſtle hath in this place, Chriſt Ieſus is come into the world to ſaue ſinners: If thou applie it not, & ſay not as the Apoſtle doeth, I am a ſinner, it can furniſh thee no joy nor comfort. Thē when we come to heare the doctrine of grace & mercy, let vs come with a conſcience wakened & wearie with the ſenſe of ſin: for if the ſoules of men and women were weary, & laden with the burthen of ſin, they would feele an vnſpeakeable joye in their hearts at the preaching of y• doctrine of ſaluation. But becauſe we are caſten vp in a ſenſeleſſe ſecuritie, our conſciences are aſleep, & the thing that we haue is but a generall motion: therefore it is, that at the preaching of the law there is no ſorrow, no griefe no heauineſſe of hart: & if the glad tithings of the Euangell bee preached, there is no joye nor comfort: And this is the thing that we haue moſte to lament at the preaching of the word, that wee haue no feeling neither of ſadneſſe nor of joy: and therefore the judgement is the nearer. And hee or ſhe that l
                  •
               eth hardeſt ſleeping in greateſt ſecurity, ſhall get the foreſt & moſt terrible wakening when the judgement commeth. Nowe the Lord waken our conſciences in time and giue vs grace to take heed to the preaching of the word, and to beware of our ſelues, & euer pray to the Lord for grace: & neuer let neither the memory of His mercy toward penitēt ſinners, nor of His judgemēt againſt indured and impenitent ſinners, paſſe out of our

mind. Marke againe: In application when he applieth the generall vnto himſelfe, he applieth not immediately ſaluation, but firſt he applieth ſinne to himſelfe, and then ſaluation: he ſaith not firſt, I am ſaued, but firſt hee ſaieth, I am the greateſt amongſt ſinners, & thereafter he ſaith, I haue obtained mercy. Then take heed to thy application. When thou heareſt, by the preaching of the Goſpell, ſaluation offered to ſinners, take not firſt to thy ſelfe ſaluation, but firſt take ſinne and death: then take life, and apply it to thy ſelfe: Rejoyce not firſt at the preaching of the glad tithinges of ſaluation, but firſt conceiue a diſpleaſure: then let joy ariſe out of diſpleaſure: for joy of ſaluatiō muſt ariſe out of the diſpleaſure, through the feare of damnation. It ſhall paſſe thy power to finde joye through the ſenſe of mercy and ſaluation▪ before thou find ſadneſſe & heauineſſe of heart through the ſenſe of ſinne and damnation. Euen as ye ſee a ſpring of water will not breake out of a rocke except the rocke bee broken: Euen ſo is it with this effect, No joye can bee to the heart of a Chriſtian man or woman, till the heart be contrite and broken with ſadneſſe through the ſenſe of ſinne: The heart is firſt exceeding heauy and ſorrowfull, and out of that heauineſſe ariſeth the joy: and the heauier the heart is, the greater the joye is. Would to God we had this ſorrow & ſadneſſe, and the ſenſe of the wrath of God in our hearts for ſinne: for the ſaddeſt heart for ſinne will get the greateſt joy, &

euermore the greater ſadneſſe, the greater joye. If our hearts bee grieued, and weary with the ſight of ſinne, wee ſhall haue ſuch a ſpirituall joy, as the world knoweth not: And this joy is as ſure an earneſt-penny of that joy of Heauē, as euer was. And he that hath that joy that ariſeth from that ſorow in the hart for ſinne, he hath a ſufficient warrand of that joy in Heauen: and hee that hath not that joy, hee hath no warrand of that Heauenly joye: Therefore Chriſt ſaieth, Bleſſed are they that mourne, for they ſhalbe comforted, Mat. 5. 4. Now in this world this joy is mixed with teares, but then it ſhall be a perfect joy, and all teares ſhalbe wiped away from our eyes. Now for Chriſtes ſake put away vanitie and wantonneſſe and let euery one of vs take vp a new courſe of life, that we may mourne and weep vnfainedly for our ſinnes, (for we haue all neede) that in ſtead of this worldly joy, wee may get that ſolide & vnſpeakeable joy that ariſeth out of ſadneſſe: otherwiſe we only enjoy the name of Chriſtians, but as the diſpoſition of the heart which is required in a Chriſtian, it is farre from vs.
            Yet marke further: His conſcience is not onelie wakened with the ſenſe of ſinne, hee is not onelie touched with a true ſorrow for it, but alſo he maketh a cleare & plaine confeſſion of it. Then mark it: Before thou getteſt mercy in Chriſt, thou muſt firſt of neceſſity acknowledge & confeſſe thy ſin: for confeſſion of ſinne muſt of neceſſity go before mercy. Dauid found this by experience, for ſo long

as he held his tongue, and would not confeſſe his ſinne, he could find nothing but the wrath & heauie hand of God againſt him: My bones (ſaieth hee) were conſumed, I roared all the day, &c: but aſſoone as hee taketh this reſolution with himſelfe, I will confeſſe againſt my ſelfe, my wickedneſſe vnto the Lord: then hee found the Lord to ſhew mercy on him, and to forgiue him ye puniſhment of his ſin, Pſal. 32. 3. 4. 5. And to what purpoſe ſhoulde any man cou
                  •
               r his ſinnes from God, whoſe all-ſeeing eyes pierce into the braines and moſte ſecrete corners of the heart, and to whom all things are open & patent, and who knoweth euery mans ſinnes better than he can doe himſelfe? Why ſhouldeſt thou then diſſemble with Him? why ſhouldeſt thou not make a plaine & open confeſſion of thy ſinnes vnto Him, that thou mayeſt get mercy? Another thing would be marked: Hee is not content to confeſſe his ſin, but he ſaith, I am the chiefe of ſinners: Hee ſaieth not ſimply, I am a ſinner, but the chiefeſt ſinner, the firſt ſinner in the world. Brethren, if we had a ſenſe of our ſin, euen the leaſt ſinner of vs would thinke he were the greateſt, hee would not goe about to excuſe his ſinne, hee woulde not cloake it as Cam did, hee would not extenuate it, much leſſe would hee haue a proude conceit of himſelfe, and of his own righteouſneſſe: he would not enter in as that proude Phariſee did, Luke 18. 10, who helde vp his head, and ſaide, I am not as other men▪ extortioners, vnjust, adulterers, or euen as this Publicane: The poore

               Publicane was in ye meane time hinging down his head: but hee was a greater ſinner. But if thou enter into compariſon with others, and haue a ſenſe of thy ſin, thou wilt thinke with thy ſelfe, There is not ſo great a ſinner in the world as I am, & thou wilt ſay with Paul, I am the firſt and chiefeſt of ſinners. Now when he hath applied the generall ſentence to himſelfe, and ſhewed that the Lord had giuen him mercy and ſaluation. He ſetteth downe next the end of this grace: But herefore (ſaieth hee) he had mercy on me, that he might first ſhew on me al long ſuffering: there is an end: another end is, that I ſhould be an example, to others in the world.
            Nowe, Brethren, when God ſheweth mercy on any man, it is not for nothing, it is not without great & manifeſt cauſes, for He will not caſt grace lightly away: Indeed He will giue theſe temporall benefits to the wicked, becauſe He eſteemeth not ſo much of them: Hee will throwe a lordſhip, an earledome, yea a kingdome, to a reprobate: but as for one ſpunke of y• ſpirituall grace of Ieſus Chriſt, He will know well to whom He giueth it: He will take good heed to whom Hee giueth one drop of that precious blood of Ieſus Chriſt, and Hee will loue them exceedingly. Thinke yee not that hee would loue a leprous man well, that would waſhe him with his owne blood? The preciouſeſt liquor that euer was in the world, is the blood of the Lord Ieſus, yea, ſuch is the worthineſſe & preciouſneſſe thereof, that all the worlde will not buy one drop

of it. Shall we not thinke then, that He loueth that man well, whome Hee waſheth with His blood? Shall we not thinke, that He beareth an vnſpeakeable loue to that man whom He waſheth with His Holy Spirit? Marke it, Brethren: Mercy commeth by chance to no man: it is vſually ſaid, Kingdomes come of hap: but it is not ſo with mercy and the grace of Ieſus Chriſt: none gets it but theſe whoſe names are writtē vp in the booke of life: none are called to the participation of one ſpunke of that ſauing grace, but they who were predeſtinated from all eternity. And therefore, if thou haſt gotten one ſpunke of grace, count with thy ſelfe, that thou waſt predeſtinated from all eternity to euerlaſting life, and count with thy ſelfe, that thou haſt gotten a more excellent and precious thing, than if thou hadſt gotten all the world. Now as He will not lightly giue grace, ſo He giueth it not for the perſon himſelf alone, who receiueth the grace: but Hee will haue a conſequence following vpon the giuing of that grace and mercy: firſt, He will haue the glory of that grace and mercy to Himſelfe: and what more? Hee will ſet him, on whome Hee hath vouchſaſed that grace and mercy, to be a ſpectacle and example of His mercy before the worlde. To ſpeake of the firſt ende, That he ſhould ſhow on mee al clemency: that is, that ſhewing ſuch mercy on me who was the greateſt ſinner, Hee might manifeſt and declare the exceeding greatneſſe of His mercie to the world.
            
               Brethren, the thing that God looketh to in His workes, is, that Hee might bee glorified in His eſſentiall properties: but aboue all the reſt of His properties, Hee will bee glorified in His mercy, He will bee glorified in His power, in His wiſedome, in his juſtice. Sodome and Gomorrha was a ſpectacle to ſinners of His juſtice, to terrifie ſinners to the ende of the worlde. But aboue all, Hee ſeeketh to bee glorified in His owne mercy. Aboue all things the Lord will haue His loue and mercy to ſhine in the worlde, Hee will haue the creature to glorifie Him in His mercy. What is the cauſe that Hee ſent Chriſt into the worlde? That in Chriſt His mercy might ſhine in the world. What is the cauſe of this preaching of the Euangell? Why is it ſent? That His mercy might ſhine in the worlde: And all the Paſtors ſhould teach and proclaime this mercie of God, and not ſpeake of judgement, but when men regardeth not His mercy. Looke what the LORD will doe, that His mercy ſhould ſhine in the world, Hee will take blaſphemous perſons, perſecuters, oppreſſors, ſuch as Paul was, and Hee will ſhewe mercy vpon them, Hee will make them to be ſpectacles of His mercy in the ſight of the world, that all the worlde ſhoulde ſtand wondering, that the Lord ſheweth mercy vpon them. And there is not one of them who are juſtified by Chriſt, but they are ſpectacles of the mercy of God, ſet before the world, to make the world to wonder at his mercy: that ſo wee may learne to knowe, and deepely to

conſider, the mercy of GOD, not onely by His worde, but alſo by His workes and examples of them that haue obtained mercy. Now to come to the ſecond ende, hee ſaieth, Unto the example of them that ſhall in time to come beleeue in him. Then Paul getteth mercy not for himſelfe onely, but alſo for other ſinners, who ſeeing this mercy ſhewed vpon him, might reaſon with themſelues and ſay, Yonder blaſphemer, yonder perſecuter, yonder oppreſſor, hath gotten mercy, and may not I likewiſe bee aſſured to get mercy? Therefore, when thou ſeeſt that the Lord is merciful to any man, ſay with thy ſelfe, It is not for nothing that the Lord hath giuen this man mercy: but it is for my cauſe, that I may by his example be ſtirred vp to ſeeke mercy: therefore I will goe and get mercy at his handes. But alas! ſuch is our ſecurity and ſenſeleſneſſe, that howbeit the Lord be continually calling vpon vs, and offering mercy vnto vs by His worde, and likewiſe by euer ſetting foorth before vs godlie men and women, that of vnholy creatures are made holy creatures, to be ſpectacles of His mercie, that by them wee ſhould take example: yet all theſe meanes that God vſeth to teſtifie His mercy vnto vs, mooueth vs not to conſider and take vp His mercy. But bleſſed is that ſoule that can learn by anie of theſe meanes, to take vp the mercie of GOD, and to ſeeke for it: for mercie is the preciouſeſt jewell that euer was. Therefore, when

thou findeſt not aſſurance of mercy, then be ſorie for it, and ſtriue earneſtly to obtaine it: for there is no ſurer token that the Lord is to ſhew mercie to anie ſoule, than vvhen vpon the ſight and feeling of the vvant thereof the ſoule is grieued, and ſtriueth and endeuoureth more and more to obtaine a more full aſſurance thereof. And therefore, vvhen I conſider howe men in this Land are ſleeping in ſinne, vvithout anie remorſe of conſcience, and are ſo careleſſe to ſeeke to haue aſſurance of mercie, I am afraide, that the LORD is about to vvith-draw mercie from this Nation. The LORD auert His vvrath, and be mercifull vnto this ſinfull Nation, for CHRISTES ſake: To vvhom vvith the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all honour, praiſe, and glory, vvorlde vvithout end, AMEN.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   