
      
         
            
            
            An expoſition of certaine difficult and obſcure words, and termes of the lawes of this Realme, newly ſet foorth and augmented, both in french and Engliſh, for the helpe of ſuch younge ſtudents as are deſirous to attaine the knowledge of ye ſame. whereunto are alſo added the olde Tenures.
            ¶ In aedibus Richardi Tottelli. 1579.
            ¶ Cum priuilegio.
            
         
         
            
            
            Le Table.
            
               ABatement de brief on plaint fol. 1
               Abatemēt en terres 1
               Abbe 2
               Abbettours 2
               Abeyance 2
               Abiſherſing 4
               Abiuration 4
               Abridgement de plaint on demaund 5
               Acceptance 5
               Acceſſories 6
               Accion 7
               Actions perſonals 7
               Actions populer 7
               Actions reals 8
               Accord 8
               Acquital 8
               Acquitance 9
               Additions 10
               Adiournement 11
               Adminiſtratour 11
               Actes 11
               Admirall 12
               Aduowſon 12
               Age prier 12
               Agreement 13
               Aide 16
               Alien 17
               Alienation 17
               Ambidexter 17
               Amendement 18
               Amercement 18
               Amercement royal 18
               An, iour, et waſt 18
               Annuitie 19
               Appell 19
               Appellant 20
               Appellor 20
               Appendant et appurtenant 20
               Apportionment 20
               Appropriations 22
               Approuement 23
               Arditerment 23
               Arreſt 23
               Arrerages 24
               Aſſets 24
               Aſſignee 25
               Attainder 26
               Auerment 26
               Auerpenie 26
               Auncien demeſne 26
               Auowry 27
            
            
               B
               ¶ Bayle 27
               Baylement 28
               Baylife 28
               Bakberind theefe 28
               Bargaine et ſale 29
               Barre 29
               Baſtarde 30
               Battaile 31
               Bigamy 31
               Blodewit 32
               Boote 32
               Brodehalpeny 33
               Brugbote 33
               Burghbote 33
               Burghbrech 33
               
                  Burgh Engliſh 33
               Burglary 34
            
            
               C
               ¶ Car
                     •
                  age 34
               Ceſſion 34
               Challenge 35
               Champertour
                     •
                   36
               Charge 36
               Charters de terres 36
               Chattels 37
               Childwite 37
               Chimni 37
               Choſe en action 37
               Circuit de action 38
               Claime 39
               Clergie 39
               Clerke attaynt, et Clerke conuict 41
               Colour 41
               Colour de office 43
               Coiluſion 43
               Common lcy 43
               Common 45
               Condition 46
               Con
                     •
                  iſcate biens 48
               Contract 48
               Conuſance 49
               Corody 50
               Coroner 51
               Corporation 52
               Corps politike 53
               Corruption de ſangue 53
               Couenant 54
               Couerture 54
               Couin 54
               Counterplea 54
               Cinque ports 55
            
            
               D
               ¶ Damage fefants 60
               Danegelde 61
               Dcane et chapter 61
               Declaration 61
               Defendaunt 62
               Demaines 62
               Demaundant 62
               Demy ſanke ou ſangue 62
               Demurrer 63
               Denizen 63
               Deodande 64
               Departure de ſon plea ou matter 64
               Departure in deſpite del court 64
               Deputie 64
               Deuaſtauerunt bona teſtatoris 65
               Deuiſe 66
               Diſcent 70
               Diſclaimer 70
               Diſmes 70
               Diſperagement 71
               Diſſeiſin 72
               Diſſeyſin ſur diſſciſin 72
               Diſſ
                     •
                  yſour et diſſeiſee 72
               Diſtrcſſe. 72
               
                  Diuorce 75
               Donour et donee 55
               Double plee 75
               Droit 76
               Droit dentrie 76
               Dures. 76
            
            
               E.
               ¶ Eire Juſtices 77
               Embraſour, ou Embraceour 77
               Encrochment 77
               Enheritance 78
               Equitie 78
               Eſcape 80
               Eſplces 81
               Eſſoine 81
               Eſtoppel 82
               Eſtraungers 84
               Eſtraye 84
               Excōmengement 84
               Exchange 85
               Execution 86
               Executour 87
               Extinguiſhment 87
               Extortion 88
            
            
               F.
               ¶ Failer de recorde 89
               Fait 89
               Farme on farme 95
               Fee farme 96
               Feoffement 96
               Feffour et feffee 96
               Fir
                     •
                  bote 96
               Fledwite. 97
               Flemeſwite 97
               Fletwite 97
               Forſtal 97
               Forſtaller 97
               Fraunches roial 98
               Frankemariage 98
               Franktenement 98
               Freſhſuit 99
            
            
               G.
               ¶ Gager de deliuerāce 100
               Garde 101
               Garden. 101
               Garniſhment. 102
               Gauelate 103
               Gauelkinde 104
               Gelde 135
               Grithbrech 135
            
            
               H.
               ¶ Hangwite 135
               Hariot 136
               Haybote o
                     •
                   hedgebote 136
               Hidage 137
               Hotchpot 137
               Homeſoken 138
               Homicide ou manſlaughter 138
               Hornegeld 139.
               Houſebote 139
               Hundred 139
               Hundredum 140
            
            
               I.
               ¶ Ideot 140
               Illoyal aſſembly 141
               Imparlance 141
               Impriſonment 142
               Inſangethe
                     •
                  e 142
               
                  Information 142
               Jointure 142
            
            
               L.
               ¶Larc
                     •
                  ny. 144
               Laſtage 144
               Leſſor et leſſee 144
               Leuant et couchant 145
               Ley gager 145
               Li
                     •
                  ery de ſeiſin 145
               Lother
                     •
                  it 148
            
            
               M.
               ¶Mahim 148
               Mainpriſe 149
               Manour 149
               Ma
                     ••
                  iſſion 150
               Ma
                     •
                  imes 250
               Mayno
                     •
                  r 151
               Miſpriſion 151
               Monſtrans de faits on records 152
               Mortgage on morgag 153
               Mo
                     •
                  t
                     •
                  aine 154
               Mulier 154
               Murder 155
            
            
               N.
               ¶Negatiua preignans 155
               Niefe 157
               Nihil dicit 158
               Nomination 158
               Nonability. 158
               N
                     •
                  de contra
                     •
                  t 158
            
            
               O.
               ¶Or
                     •
                  d
                     •
                  lfe 159
               O
                     ••
                  fa
                     •
                  gthiefe 159
               Oweltie 159
               Oyer de records et faits 160
            
            
               P.
               ¶Pape 160
               Particion 161
               Parties 163
               Patron 163
               Perquiſities 163
               Plei
                     •
                  tife 164
               Pledinge 164
               Pound 164
               Poſſeſſion 165
               Preamble 165
               Preſcription 166
               Preſentment 166
               Pretenſed dr̄t ou title 166
               Priuie ou priuitie et priuies 167
               Priuiledges 168
               Prochen amy 169
               Proteſtation 170
               Purchaſe 170
            
            
               Q.
               ¶Quarentine 170
               Quinzim 171
            
            
               R.
               ¶Regratour 171
               Reioynder 172
               Reliefe 172
               Remainder 174
               Replication 175
               Repriſes 175
               Reſceit 175
               Reſeruation 175
               Retraxit 176
               
                  Reue 176
               Reuerſion 177
               Riot 178
               Robberie 178
               Rout 178
            
            
               S.
               Sake 179
               Scot 179
               Shewinge 179
               Socke 179
               Sokemans 179
               Spol
                     •
                  ation 281
               Stallage 183
               Suit couenant 183
               Suit cuſtome 183
               Suit real 183
               Suit ſeruice 184
            
            
               T.
               ¶Taxe et Tallage 184
               Tenure in capitie 184
               Teſtament 185
               Them 186
               Theſehoote 186
               Title 186
               Title de entrie 187
               Tolle ou tolne 187
               Tourne del viſcont 189
               Treaſure troue 189
            
            
               U.
               ¶U
                     ••
                  we. 190
               Uiſcount 190
               Uoucher 19
                     •
                  
               
               Uſes 19
                     •
                  
               
               Uſurie 193
               Utlagaries 194
            
            
               W.
               Waiſe 194
               Waiue 196
               Wa
                     •
                  wite. 196
               Wrecke 197
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            La table del Tenures.
            
               SEruice de chi
                     •
                  aler 198
               2 Graūd ſerieanty 198
               3 Petit ſerieantie 198
               4 Eſt
                     ••
                  ge 199
               5 Homage aunceſtrel 199
               6 Curteſy Dengle
                     •
                   200
               7 Fee ſimple 200
               8 Franke tenure 201
               9 Dower 201
               10 Terme dans 201
               11 Mortgage 201
               12 Burgage 203
               13 Socage 203
               14 Fee ferme 205
               15 Franke fee 205
               16 Baſe fee 205
               17 Uillenage 205
               18 Tayle 208
               19 Taile apres poſſibility diſſ
                     •
                  e extinct 208
               20 Fanke mariage 211
               21 Franke almoigne 212
               22 Elegit 213
               23 Statut merchant 216
               24 Rent ſeruice 218
               25 Rent charge 219
               26 Rent ſecke 221
               27 Suit ſeruice 224
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            Termes of the lawe.
            
               ¶ Abatement of a writte or plaint.
               
               ABatement of a writ or plaint, is when an action is brought by writte or plaint, wherein is lacke of ſufficient & good matter, or els the matter alleaged, is not certeinely ſet downe, or if the plaintife, or defendant, or place, are miſnamed, or if there appeare variance betwéene the writ and the ſpecialtie, or record, or that the writ or the declaration be vncerteine, or for death of the playntife or defendant, and for diuers other like cauſes which I omit of purpoſe, for thereof alone, a man might make a large diſcourſe, & I determine to ſatiſfy you▪ (good brother Nicholas,) as wel as I may, with as muche 
                     •
                  reuitie & as litle trouble

to my ſelfe as I can, then vppon thoſe defaultes, the defendant may pray, that the writ or plaint may abate, that is to ſay, that y• plaintifes ſuit againſt him may ceaſe for that tyme, and that he ſhall beginne agayne his ſuite, and bring a newe writte or plaint if he be ſo diſpoſed to doe.
            
            
               Abatement in Lands.
               ABatement in landes or tenementes, is whē a man dieth ſeiſed of landʒ or tenementes, & a ſtranger, that is to ſaye, one that hath no right, entreth into the ſame landes or tenementes, before the heire maketh his entrie: this entrie of the ſtraunger, is called an abatement, and he, an abator: But if y• heire ēter firſt after

the death of his aunceſtour, and the ſtraunger enter vppon the poſſeſſion of the heire, this Entry of the ſtraunger, is a diſſeiſin to the heire.
            
            
               Abbot.
               ABbot, was the ſoueraigne head, or chiefe of thoſe houſes of popiſh religion, which when they ſtood, were called abbeies, and this abbot together wt ye monkes of ye ſame houſe, whoe were called the couent, made a corporation.
            
            
               Abbettours.
               ABbettorʒ are indiuers caſes diuerſely taken, one kinde of Abbettours are they that maliciouſly without iuſt cauſe or deſert do procure other to ſue falſe appeales of murder,

or felonie, againſt menne, to the entent to trouble, and gréeue them, and to bringe them into infamye and ſclaunder. Abbettours in murder, are thoſe that commaunde, procure, coū
                  ſel, or comfort others to murder. And in ſome caſe, ſuch Abbettors ſhalbe taken as principals, and in ſome caſe but as Acceſſories. Soe in other felonies, And their preſēce at the deede doinge, and their abſēce, maketh a differēce in the caſe. There are abbettors alſo in Treaſon, but they are in caſe as principalles, for in Treaſon there are noe acceſſories.
            
            
               Abeyance.
               ABeyaunce is when a leas is made for terms of lyfe, the remainder to

the right heires of I. S. which. I. S. is liuing at y• time of the graūt: Nowe this graunt of rem. paſſeth from the grauntour preſentlye, yet it veſteth not preſently, nor taketh holde in the grauntee, that is to ſay, the right heire of I. S. but is ſayde to be in abeyance, or as the Logiciens terme it in power, or in vnderſtanding, and as we ſay in the cloudes: That is to wit in the conſideration of the lawe. That if I. S. die leauing a rightheire lyuinge, and lyuynge the Leſſee for lyfe, then this is a good rem', and nowe veſteth and commeth into that right heire, in ſuch ſort as that hée may graunte, forfayte, or otherwyſe dyſpoſe the ſame, and ceſſeth to bée anye more in abeyaunce,

for that there is one nowe of Abilitye to take it, becauſe that I. S. is deade & hath left a right heire in life, which coulde not bée liuinge I. S. for that duringe his life, none coulde properlye bée ſayed hys heire. Alſo if a manne be patron of a church, & preſentethe one to the ſame. Nowe is the fee in the perſon, but if the perſon die, and the church is become voyde, then is the fee in abeyaunce, vntyll there bée a newe perſonne preſēted, for ye patron hath not the fee, but onely the right to preſent, & ye fee is in yt incūbent ye is preſented, & after his death, it is in noo body, but in abeiāce til therebe a new incūbent as aforeſaid.
            
            
               ¶ Abiſherſing.
               
               
                  ABiſherſinge (and in ſome copyes miſherſinge) that is to be quite of amercements before whō ſoeuer of tranſumptyon proued.
            
            
               Abiuration.
               ABiuration is an othe that a manne or womanne ſhall take, when they haue committed felonye, and flye to that church or church yarde, for ſafegarde of their lyues, choſinge rather perpetual baniſhement out of the Realme, then to ſtand to the lawe, and to bée tryed of the felonye. And this lawe was inſtituted by Saynt Edwarde the confeſſour a Kinge of this Realme before the conqueſte, and was grounded vppon the lawe of mercys, and for the loue and

reuerence, noe doubt, that hée and other hys ſucceſſours, dyd beare vnto the houſe of God, or place of prayer and adminiſtration of his woorde and ſacraments, which wée call the church. But howe vncomely a thinge it was or is, and howe farre from the nature of the houſe of god, to make her a ſuccorour and defender of horrible murderers & theues, you may conſider (brother Nicholas) and the rather when you remēber what our ſauiour Chiſte ſayed, reprehending the Jewes, and parauenture alſo propheſeinge of thys: My houſe ſhalbée called the houſe of prayer, but you haue made it a denne of théeues.
            
            
               
               Abridgement of a plaint or demaund.
               ABridgemēt of a plaint or demaunde, is where one bryngeth an aſſyſe, writ of dower, writte of ward, or ſuch like, where the writ is, de libero tenemento, as in a writ of dower the writ is, rationabilem dotem que eam contingit de libero tenemento. W. her huſband. And in a writ of ward the writ is, cuſtod' terr' et hered' &c. and the plaintife or demaundant demaundeth diuers acres or parcels of land, and the tenant pleadeth non tenure, or iointenancy, or ſome other ſuch like plea to parcell of the land demaūded, in abatement of the writ: then the plaintife or demaundant, may abridge his plaint or demaunde to that parcell

that is to ſay, he may leaue that part out and pray that the tenaunt ſhall anſwere to the reſt to which hee hath not yet pleaded any thinge: The cauſe is, for that in ſuch writs the certeintie is not ſet downe, but the demaunde runneth generally, de libero tenemento, and notwithſtandinge the demaundaunt hath abridged his playnt or demaunde in part, y
                     •
                  t the writ remayneth good ſtil, de libero tenemento for the reſt.
            
            
               Acceptance.
               ACceptance is a taking in good part and as it were an agreeinge vnto ſome act don before, which might haue byne vndon and auoyded (if ſuch acceptance had not bin) by him or them that ſo accepted

As for example if an Abbot leaſe land of his houſe for terme of yeares reſeruing rent and dieth, and after an other is made abbot, who accepteth, that is to ſay, taketh or receyueth the rent when it is due, and ought to bee paied: Nowe by this acceptance the leaſe is made perfect and good, which els the Abbot might very well haue auoyded and made fruſtrate. The like law is, i
                     •
                   a man & his wife ſeyſed of land in y• right of y• wife 
                     •
                  ome and make a leaſe, or feoffemēt reſeruing rent, and the huſband dieth, ſhee accepteth or receiueth the rent by which the feoffement or leaſe is made perfect and good, and ſhall barre her to bring her writ called Cui in vita.
               
            
            
               
               Acceſſories.
               ACceſſories are in ii. ſortes, the one before the offence, the other after the offence is done.
               Acceſſorie béefore the fact, or offence is hée that commaundeth or procureth an other to doe felony and is not there preſent him ſelfe when the other doth it, but if hée bée preſent, then hee is alſo principall.
               Acceſſorie after the offence or fact, is he that receyueth, fauoureth, or aydeth a felon, knowing wel of the deede that hee hath done.
               Alſo one may be acceſſorie to an acceſſorie, as if one feloniouſly receiue an other that is acceſſorie of a felonie, there the receyuer is an acceſſorie.
            
            
               
               Accion.
               ACcion is a ſuit geuen by the lawe to recouer a thing, as an accion of debt and ſuch like.
            
            
               Accions perſonals.
               ACcions perſonals bée ſuch accions whereby a man claymeth debt, or other goods or cattel, or damage for them, or damages for wrong done to his perſon.
            
            
               Accion populer.
               ACcion populer is an accion which is geuen vppon the breach of ſome penal ſtatute, which accion euery man that will, may ſue, for him ſelfe and the Queene, by information, or otherwiſe as the ſtatute alloweth and the caſe requireth, And of theſe accions

there bee an infintts number, but one for example is when anie of the Jurye that are impanelled and ſworne to paſſe betwéene party and partye indifferentlye, do take any thing of the one ſide, or other, or of both parties, to ſay their verdicts at that ſide: Then any man that will within the yeare nexte followynge the offence made, maye ſue a writte called Decies tantum agaynſt hym or them that ſo did take to geeue their verdicte, and becauſe that this accyon is not géeuen one man ſpeciallye but generally to the Queenes people that wyll ſue, it is called an accyon populer.
            
            
               
               Actions Reals.
               ACtions Reals, bée ſuch actyons whereby the demaundaunt claymethe tytle to any landes ortenementes, rentes or cō
                  mon in fée ſimple, fée taile or for terme of life.
            
            
               Accorde.
               ACcordeis an agréement betwéene ij. at the leaſt, eyther to ſatyſfie an offence, that the one hath made to the other: Or elſe, it is a contracte, wyth dyuers articles, to bée done, ſome on the one part, and ſome on the other, where there ſhalbée one thinge for an other &c. The firſt is when a man hath done a treſpas, or ſuch like vnto an other for which hee hath agréed with him, ſatyſfyed and contented him, with ſome recompence alredie executed and

done in déede. And béecauſe that this recōpence, is a full ſatiſfactyon for the offence, it ſhalbée a good barre in ye lawe, if the other ſhoulde ſue agayne any actyon for the ſame treſpas. The other is, when as I. S. letteth a chamber for yeares to H. G. and it is farder agréed béetwéene them, that the ſayde H. G. ſhalbée at Boorde with the ſayde I. S. and ſhal for the ſame chamber and Boorde, paie to the ſayde I. S. a certen ſome &c. this is a contract and accorde with articles on both ſides.
            
            
               ¶ Acquital.
               
               ACquital, is where there is lord, meſne, & tenant, & the tenant holdeth of the meſne certein lands or tenemēts, in frākalmoigne,

frankemariage or ſuch lyke, and the meſne holdeth ouer alſo of the Lord paramount, (or aboue him.) Nowe ought the meſne to acquite or diſcharge y• tenant of al and euery maner of ſeruice, y• any other would haue or demaund of hym concerninge the ſame lands or tenementes, for that the tenant muſt doe his ſeruice to the meſne onely, & not to diuers lords for ōe tenement, or parcell of lande. The ſāe lawe is, wherthere is lord, meſne, & tenant, as aforeſayd, and the meſne graunted to the tenāt (vpon the tenure made betwene thē) to acquite, and dyſcharge him of al rentes ſeruyces, and ſuch like. This dyſcharge is called acquitall.
            
            
               
               Acquitance.
               ACquitaunce is a diſcharge in writinge, of a ſumme of money, or other duetie which ought to be payde, or don. As if one be bound to pay money vpon an obligation, or rent reſerued vppon a leaſe, or ſuch like, and the party to whom the money, or duety ſhould bée payed, or don, vppon the reſceit thereof, or vpon other agreement betwene them had, maketh a writing, or bill of his hand, in diſcharge thereof, witneſſing, that he is payed, or otherwiſe contēted, and therefore doth acquite, & diſcharge him of ye ſame, which acquitance is ſuch a diſcharge and barre in the lawe, that hée cannot demaūd, & recouer that ſūme or duety againe, cō
                  trary

thereunto if he can ſhew the acquitance.
            
            
               Additions.
               ADdition is that, that is geuen vnto a man, but chiefely to the defendant, in accions where proces of outlawrie doe lie, as in det, and ſuch like, ouer and beſides his proper name and ſirname, that is to ſay to ſhow of what eſtate or degree, or miſtery hee is, and of what Towne or Hamlet or Countie.
               Additions of Eſtate ar theſe, yeoman, Gentleman, Eſquire, & ſuch like
               Additions of degree are thoſe that wee call names of dignitie, as Knight, Earle, Marques, and Duke.
               Additions of miſtery

are ſuch, Scriuener, Printer, Maſon, Carpenter, Tayler, Smith, & ſo al other of like nature, for miſtery is the craft or occupatiō, wherby a man getteth hys liuinge.
               Addicions of townes as Sale Dale and ſuch, and ſo of the reſt.
               And where a mā hath houſhold in ii. places, hee ſhalbe ſaid dwellīg ī both of them, ſo yt his addicion in one of thē doth ſuffiſe.
               And this was ordayned by a ſtatute made in the firſt yeare of H. 5. cap. 5. to the intent that one man ſhould not bée gréeued nor troubled by the vtlary of an other, but that by reaſon of the certein addicion, euery man might bée certeinly knowne, and beare his owne burden.
            
            
               
               Adiournement.
               ADiournement is whē any court is diſſolued, and determined, and aſſigned to be kept againe at an other place, or time.
            
            
               Adminiſtratour.
               ADminiſtratour is he to whō the ordinary cōmitteth thadminiſtration of y• goods of a dead man, for defaut of an executour, & an acciō ſhal lie againſt him and for him as for an executour, & he ſhalbe charged to the value of the goods of y• dead man & no further, if it bée not by his own falſe plée, or for that that hee hath waſted the goodes of the dead, but if thadminiſtratour die his executours be not Adminiſtrators: but it behoueth the Ordinary

to commit a newe adminiſtration, but if a ſtraū
                  ger that is not adminiſtratour nor executoure take the goodes of the dead and miniſter of his owne wrong, hée ſhalbe charged & 
                     •
                  ued as an executour & not as adminiſtratour in any acciō that is brought againſt hym by any creditour. But if yt ordinary make a letter ad colligēdū bona defūcti, he that hath ſuch a letter is not Adminiſtratour, but the accion lieth againſt the Ordinary, as wel as if he toke yt goods to his owne hande, or by the hande of any of hys ſeruauntes by any other commaundement.
            
            
               Actes.
               ACtes of parliament are poſitiue lawes which conſyſt of two

partes, that is to ſay, of y• words of y• act, and of the ſenſe thereof, & they both ioined together make the lawe.
            
            
               Admiral.
               ADmirall is an officer vnder the Quéene that hath aucthoritie, vpon the ſea onely to ſée the nauie repaired, & mainteined, to ſuppreſſe, and chaſé away robbers, and rouers and to deale in matters betwene party, and party, concerninge thinges done there, and for that purpoſe hath hys court called the Admirally: yet he may cauſe his Citation to be ſerued vpon the land; and take the parties body, or goodes, in execution vpon the land. Alſo he hath cogniſāce of the death or mayhem of a mā cōmitted i any great

ſhip fléetinge in great riuers in the land benethe the bridges of the ſame next the ſea, alſo to arreſt ſhips in y• great ſtreames for y• viages of y• Quéene & Realme, & hath iuriſdicciō in y• ſaid ſtreames during the ſame viages.
            
            
               Aduowſon.
               ADuowſon is where a man, and his heires haue right to preſēt their Clerke to the ordinarie, to a perſonage, or other ſpiritual benefice when it becōmeth boide. And hée that hath ſuch right to preſent, is called patron.
            
            
               Age prier.
               AGe prier is whē an accion is brought againſt an infant of lands that hee hath by diſcent, there he ſhal ſhewe the matter to the court, & ſhall pray

that the action ſhal abide til his ful age of one and twenty yeres, and ſo by awarde of the court, the ſuit ſhal ſurceſſe: But in a writte of Dower & in Aſſiſe, & alſo in ſuch actions where the infāt cō
                  meth in of his own wrōg he ſhal not haue his age.
               Alſo note well, y• there be many diuerſities of ages, for y• Lord ſhal haue ayde of his tenant in ſocage for to marye hys doughter when y• doughter of the lord is of thage of vii. yeres, and alſo aide for to make his ſonne & heire knight, when hée is of the age of ſeuen yeres.
               Alſo a womā which is maryed at the age of ix. yeres, yf her huſband die ſeyſed, ſhal haue dower & not before nine yeres,
               Alſo xiiij. yeres is y• age

of a womā y• ſhe ſhal not be in ward if ſhe were of ſuch age at y• time of the death of her aūceſter, but if ſhe were wtin y• age of xiiii. yeares and in ward of ye lord, thē ſhe ſhalbe in ward til y• age of 16. yers & alſo xxj. yeres is the age of y• heire male to 
                     •
                  ée in warde, and after y• out of warde, & alſo it is y• age of male and female to ſue & to be ſued of lands which they haue or clayme by diſcent & to make al maner of contractes & bargaines and not before: But if ſuch an infaunt wt the age of xxj. yeres geue his goods, & the donee take them, hee may haue an action of treſpas but otherwiſe it is if hee delyuer them him ſelfe.
            
            
               Agreement.
               A Gréemēt is after this ſorte defined or expoūded

in maſter Plowdēs Comētaries: Aggreamentū
                   is a worde compounded of two wordes namely of Aggregatio, and Mentium, that is to ſay agremēt of minds, ſo that agréement is a conſente of myndes in ſome thinge done, or to bee done, and by drawinge together of the ij. words Aggregatio, & mē
                     tiū, & by the haſty & ſhort pronouncing of thē, they be made one woorde, to wit, Aggreamēt', which is no other thing, then a ioining, putting, cuppling, & knitting together of ij. or moe mindes in any thinge done, or to bée don. Sée after in Teſtament.
               And this agréement is in iij. maners. The j. is an agrement executed

al ready, at y• beginning. The ſecond is an agreement after an act done, by an other, and is an agreement executed alſo. The third is an agremēt executorie or to be don in time yet to come. The firſt, which is an agreement executed already at y• beginning, is ſuch wher of mencion is made in y• ſtat of 25. E. 3. cap. 3. of clothes. in y• iiij. ſtatute which ſaith, that y• goods & things bought by foreſtallers beinge therof attainted ſhalbée forfait to the Queene, if the huyer haue therfore made gree with the ſeller, in which caſe, this woorde (Gree) which is otherwiſe called agrement, ſhalbe vnderſtood agremēt executed, y• is, paiment for y• things. The ſecōdmaner of agrement,

is where one doth a thing, or act, and an other agrees or aſſentes thereto afterward, as if one doe a diſſeiſin to my vſe, and after I agree to it, nowe I ſhalbe a diſſeiſour from the beginning, & ſuch agréement is an agréemēt after an act don.
               The iij. agremēt is whē both parties at one tyme are agreed, that ſuch a thing ſhalbe done in time to come, and this agréement is executory, in as much as the thing ſhalbe done after, and yet there, their 
                     ••
                  indes agreed at one tyms, but becauſe the perfourmance ſhalbe afterwarde, and ſo the thinge vppon which the agreemēt was made remaynes to be done, y• agréemēt ſhalbe ſaid executory. And y• the ſtatute

of 26. H. 8. cap. 3. doth prooue, where it ſaith, that euery vicar, perſon, & ſuch like &c. before their actual poſſeſſion or medling wt the profits of their benifice, ſhal ſatiſfie, content &c. or agree to pay to the vſe of the Quéene, the firſt fruits &c. and if any ſuch perſon vicar &c. enter in actual poſſeſſiō &c. this agrement is to be vnderſtoode executory as y• cō
                  mon vſe prooues, for it is vſed, y• he, wt one, or ij. wt him doe make two, or thrée obligations for it, to bée payed at certeine dayes after. And this agréement executorye, is denided in ij. pointes, One is an agréement executory, which is certein at the beginninge, as is ſayed laſte béefore of the firſt fruits.
               
                  The other is, where y• certentye doth not appeare at the firſt, and y• parties are agréed, y• the thinge ſhalbe performed, or payed, vppon the certenty knowen. As if one ſell to an other, al hys wheat in ſuch a taſſe in his barne 
                     •
                  nthreſhed, & it is agréed betwene thē, y• he ſhal pay for euery buſhel xij. d. when it is threſhed cleaned & meaſured.
            
            
               Aide.
               AIde is when tenaunt for terme of life, tenāt in dower, tenant by curteſie, or tenant in tayle, after poſſibilitie of iſſue extinct is impleded, then for that, y• they haue noe eſtate but for terme of lyfe, they ſhal pray in aid of him in the reuerſion, & proces ſhalbée made by writ againſt him, to cōe

and plede with the tenāt in the defence of the land if he wil, but it behoueth that they agree in plee, for if they vary, the plée of the tenāt ſhalbe taken and then the aide prayer is voide, but if hee come not at the ſecond writte, then the tenant ſhal aunſwere ſole. Alſo tenaunt for terme of yeares, tenaunt at wil, tenaunt by Elegit, and tenaunt by ſtatute merchaunt, ſhall haue aide of him in the reuerſion, & theſeruant and baylie of their mayſter when they haue done any thing lawfully in the right of their maiſter, ſhal haue aide.
               Ayde of the Kynge is in lyke caſe as it is ſayed béefore of a common perſonne, and alſo in manye other caſes

where the king may haue loſſe, although that the tenaunt be tenaunt in fee ſimple hée ſhal haue aide, as if a rent bée demaunded againſt the kynges tenant which holdeth in chiefe, he ſhall haue aide, and ſo hée ſhall not haue of a common perſon.
               Alſo where a Citie or borough hath a fee ferme of the kinge & any thinge bée demaunded agaynſt them which béelongeth to the fée ferme, they ſhal haue ayde for the loſſe of the king.
               Alſo a man ſhall haue ayde of the kynge in the ſtéede of voucher. Alſo the kynges Bailife, the collector and purueyour ſhall haue ayde of the kinge as well as the officers of other perſons.
            
            
               
               Alien.
               ALien is he whoſe father & him ſelfe were both borne out of the Quéenes legeance, and if ſuch an alien being none of y• Queenes enemies, but am alien frend, come & dwel here in England and haue iſſue, this iſſue is no alien but Engliſh ſo if an Engliſh man go ouer the Seas with the Quéenes licence, & there hath iſſue, this iſſue is noe Alien.
            
            
               Alienation.
               ALienatiō is as much to ſay, as to make a thing an other mans, to alter or put the poſſeſſion of land or other thing frō one man to an other.
            
            
               Ambidexter.
               AMbidexter, is he, that when a matter is in

ſuite betwéene men, taketh money of y• one ſide & of the other, either to la bour the ſuit, or ſuch like, or if he be of the iury, to ſay his verdict.
            
            
               Amendment.
               AMendment is when errour is in the proceſſe, the Juſtices may a mend it after iudgment. But if there be errour i
                     •
                   geuing of iudgment, they may not amend it, but y• partie is put to his writ of error: And in many caſes where the defaut appereth in the clarke y• writeth the Record, it ſhalbe amended: but ſuch things as come by Information of the partie, as the towne, miſtery▪ and ſuch like, ſhal not bée amended, for he muſt informe true vpō his peril.
            
            
               Amercement.
               
               AMercement moſt properly is that in a court Baron, Leete, or Lawday, which in a court of Record before Juſtices, is called a fine. And is a penalty aſſeſſed by the homage for an offence doneagaiſt y• ſame court, as for lake of ſuit of court or for not amendinge of ſome thinge that he was appointed to redreſſe by a certeyne tyme at the laſt court day béefore, or for ſuch like cauſe.
            
            
               Amercement Royal.
               AMercement Royal is when a ſherife, coroner, or other ſuch officer of y• Quéene is amerced by the Juſtices for his abuſe in the office.
            
            
               An, iour, et waſt.
               
                  AN, iour, et waſt is a forfaiture whē a mā hath cōmitted petit Treaſon,

or felony, & hath landes which he holdeth of ſome comon perſon which ſhal be ſeiſed for the Quéene, & remaine in her handes by the ſpace of one yere & a day next after y• attainder, & then the trées ſhalbe digged vp, the houſes ſhalbee raſed and pulled downe, & the paſtures & medows eared & plowed vp, a thinge the more to gréeue the offendors, and terrefy others to fal into the like, in ſhewing how the lawe doth deteſt their offence, ſo farre foorth as that it doth execute iudgment & puniſhment euen vpon their dome & dead thinges.
            
            
               Annuitie.
               ANnuitie is a certeine ſūme of money graunted to an other, in fee ſimple, f
                     •
                  e taile, for terme of

life, or for terme of yeres, to receiue of the graūtor or his heires, ſo that noe fréehold is charged therewith.
            
            
               Appell.
               APpell is where one hathdon murder robery or felonye, then the wife of him that is ſlaine ſhal haue an accion of appeale againſt the murderer: but if he haue noe wife, then his next heire male ſhall haue the appeale at any time within the yere and day after ye déede. And alſo he that is ſo robbed, ſhall haue hys appeale with in ye ſame time: And if the defēdant be acquited he ſhall recouer dammages agaynſt the appellour, & thabettours, and they ſhal haue thenpriſonmēt of a yere, & ſhal make fine to ye kīg.

An appeale of mayhem, is in maner but an acciō of treſpas, for he ſhal recouer but damages,
            
            
               Appellant.
               APpellant is ye plaintife in the appel.
            
            
               Appellor.
               APpellor, or approuer, is he who hath committed ſōe felony, which he confeſſeth, and nowe appelleth, or approueth, that is to ſay, accuſeth other that were coadintours, or helpers we him, in doing the ſame, or other felonies, which thīg he wil approue, & therefore is called ī latin, Probator.
               
            
            
               Appendant, et Appurtenāt.
               
                  APpendāt et appurten̄t are things ye by time of preſcripciō, haue belōged,

pertained, and are ioyned to an other principal thīg with which they paſſe, & goe as acceſſary to the ſame principal thing, by vertue of theſe wordes, Pertinencijs: As lād, aduowſōs, Comōs, Piſcaries, waies, courts, and diuers ſuch like, to a maner, houſe, office, or ſuch other.
            
            
               Apportionment.
               APporcionment is a deuiding into partes of a rent (which is deuidable and not entier) or whole, and for ſo much as the thinge for which, or of which it was to be paied, is ſeperated and deuided, the rent alſo ſhalbe deuided hauing reſpect to the partes: As if a man haue a rent ſeruice iſſuing out of lands, and h
                     •
                  e purchaſeth parcel of the land, the

rent ſhalbe apporcioned according to the value of the land.
               So if a man holde his lande of an other by Homage, Fealtie, Eſcuage, and certeine rent, if the Lorde of whome the lande is holden purchaſe parcel of the lande, the rente ſhalbée apporcioned.
               Alſo if a man let lands and goodes for yeares reſeruinge rent, and after a ſtrāger recouereth the lande, then the rent ſhalbée apportioned, becauſe the goodes are not recouered but remayne: And ſoe it is if but part of the lande bée recouered the rent ſhalbée apportioned, that is to ſay deuided, and the leſſée ſhal pay, hauinge reſpect to yt which is recouered,

and to that which yet remaynes in hys handes, accordinge to the value.
               But a rent charge c
                     •
                  
                  not bee apportioned, nor thinges that are entier, as if one holde landes by ſeruice to paye to his Lorde yearelie at ſuch a feaſte a Horſe, a Hauke, a Roſe, a Cherie, or ſuch lyke: There if the Lorde purchaſe parcell of the lande, that ſeruyce is gone altogether, béecauſe a Horſe, a Hauke, a Roſe, a Cherye, and ſuch other, cannot bée deuided ſeuered, nor apporcioned without hurt to the hole.
            
            
               Appropriations.
               
                  APpropriatyons were when thoſe houſes of the Roomiſhe religion, and thoſe religious perſons, as Abbots, Priours and ſuch like had y• aduowſon of any perſonage to thē and to their ſucceſſours, and obtayned lycence of their holy father the Pope, that they them ſelues and their ſucceſſoures from thence foorth ſhoulde bée perſonnes there, and ſerue the cure. And ſo at the beginninge appropriations were made onely to thoſe perſonnes ſpiritual that coulde miniſter the ſacramentes and ſaye deuine ſeruice, as Abbotes, P
                     ••
                  oures, Deanes & ſuch like, after

by lytle and litle, they were enlarged and made to other, as namelye, to a Deane and Chapter, which is a body corporate conſiſting of manye, which bodye together, coulde not ſay deuine ſeruice, and what more was to Nunnes that were Prioreſſes of ſome Nunry, which was a wicked thinge, in ſoe much as they coulde neyther miniſter ſacramēts, nor preach, nor ſaye deuine ſeruice to y• pariſhioners. And al this was vppon pretence of hoſpitalitye, and mayntenaunce thereof. And to ſupply theſe defects, a vicar was deuiſed, whoe ſhould be deputy to ye prioreſſe, or to the Deane and chapter, and alſo at the laſt to the ſayed Abbots

and others, to ſay deuine ſeruice and ſhould haue for his labor but a litle portion, and they to whome the appropryation was made, ſhould retayne the great reuenues, and they dyd nothinge for it, by meanes whereof hoſpitalyty decaied in the place where it ought to haue bē chefelye mayntained, namelye in the pariſhe where the benefice was, and where the profites dyd growe, & ſo it continueth to this day, to y• great hinderance of lerninge y• empoueriſhmēt of y• miniſtery, & y• infamy of y• goſpel & profeſſor therof.
            
            
               Approouement.
               APprouemēt is wher a man hath common in the lords waſt groūd, and the Lorde encloſeth

part of the waſt for himſelfe, leapinge neuer the leſſe ſufficient comon, wt egreſſe & regreſſe for the cōmoners: This encloſinge is called approouement.
            
            
               Arbiterment.
               ARbiterment is an awarde, determination, or iudgement, which one or moe, maketh at the requeſt of ij. parties at the leaſt, for, & vpō ſome det treſpas, or other controuerſie, had betwéene the ſayed parties: And this is called in latin Arbitratus, and arbitrium, and they that make ye award, or arbiterment, are called Arbitri, in engliſh Arbitrators.
            
            
               Areſt.
               AReſt is when one is taken and reſirayned

from his libertye none ſhalbe arreſted for debt, treſpas, detinue, or other cauſe of action, but by vertue of precepte, or cō
                  maundemēt out of ſome court. But for treaſon, felony, or breaking of the peace, euery mā hath aucthority to areſt without warrant or precept, and wher one ſhalbe arreſted for felony, it behooueth y• there hath bene ſome felony done, and that he be ſuſpected of ye ſame felonye, or otherwiſe hée may haue againſt hym that ſoe did areſt him, a writte of falſe impriſonment.
            
            
               Arrerages.
               ARrerages, are duities behinde vnpayed after the dayes, and tymes, in which they were due, and

ought to haue ben payed whether they be rēt of a maner orany other thing reſerued.
            
            
               Aſſets.
               ASſets is in ij ſortes, the one called Aſſets per diſcent, the other Aſſets enter maynes. Aſſets per diſcent, is where a man is bound in an obligation and dieth ſeiſed of lāds in fée ſimple which diſcend to his heire, but maketh no executors, or if he make executors leaueth not ſufficient goods to diſcharge this obligation, thē this land ſhalbe called aſſets that is to ſay enough or ſufficient to pay the ſame det, and by that meanes the heire ſhalbee charged, as farre as the lande ſoe to hym dyſcended wyll

ſtretch: But if he haue aliened before the obligation be put in ſuite, hée is diſcharged.
               Alſo when a man ſeyſed of lāds in taile, or in ye right of his wife, alieneth the ſame witt, warrantie, and hath in value as much land in fée ſimple which diſcendeth to hys heire, who is alſo heire in taile, or heire to ye woman: Nowe if the heire after the diſceaſe, of his aunceſtour bring a writ of formedon, or ſur Cui in vita for the lande ſo aliened, then hée ſhalbée barred by reaſon of the warranty & ye land ſo diſcēded, which is as much in value as that that was ſold, & ſo thereby hée hath receiued noe preiudice, & therefore this land is called Aſſets per diſcēt
                  
                  Aſſets ent' mains, is whē a man indebted as before is ſaid, maketh executors & leaueth to thē ſufficient to pay, or ſome cōmoditie or profit is coē to thē in right of their teſtator, this is ſaid aſ
                     ••
                  ts ī their hāds.
            
            
               Aſſignee.
               ASſignee is he to whō a thing is appointed, or aſſigned to be occupyed, paied, or don, and is alwaies ſuch a perſō which occupieth or hath y• thing ſo aſſigned in his owne right, & for him ſelfe. And of aſſignées there bée ii. ſorts. Nāely aſſignee in déed, and aſſignée in law. Aſſignée in déed, is when a leas is graūted to a mā & to his aſſignées or with out thoſe words, aſſignées & y• grantee giueth, graū
                  teth, or felleth the ſame leas to an other, he is his aſſignée in déede.
               
                  Aſſignée in law is euery executor named by y• teſtator ī his teſtamēt, as if a leas be made to a mā & to his aſſignées (as is aforeſaid) & he maketh his executours & dieth wtout aſſignemēt of the leas to any other, nowe ye executors ſhal haue ye ſāe leas becauſe they are his aſſignées in law, & ſo it is in diuers other like caſes.
            
            
               Attainder.
               ATtainder is a cōuiction of any perſon, of a cryme, or fault, whereof he was not cōuiet before, as if a man haue cōmitted felony, Treaſon, or ſuch like, & therof is endited, arraigned, & foūd giltie, & hath iudgment: then he is ſaid to be attainted. And this may be ii. ways the one vpon apparance, the other vpon default.
               
                  The attainder vppon apparance is by confeſſion, Battaile, or verdict.
               The attainder vppon default is by proceſſe.
            
            
               Auerment.
               AUerment is where a man pleadeth a plée in abatement of the writ or barre of the accion which hée ſayth hée is ready to proue as the court wil award: this offer to proue his plée is called an auerment.
            
            
               Auerpeny.
               AUerpeny that is to bée quite of diuers ſūmes of money for the kinges auerages.
            
            
               Auncien demeſne.
               AUncien demeſne, are certein tenures holden of thoſe mannours that

were in the hāds of ſaint Edward the confeſſour, and the which hée made to be written in a booke called Domes day. ſubtitulo regis, and all the lands holden of the ſayd manours be auncien demeſne, and the tenaunts ſhal not be impleded out of the ſaid manor, and if they bée, they may ſhew the matter, and abate the writte, but if they aunſwere to the writte, and iudgment be geuen, then the lands become franke ſee for euer. Alſo the tenauntes in auncien demeſne be free of tolle for al things cōcerning their ſuſtenāce & huſbandry in auncien demeſne, & for ſuch lands they ſhall not be put or impaneled vpō any enqueſt. But all the lands in aunciē demeſne

that are in the Kynges hands be franke fée, and pledable at the common lawe. See more after in the title Sokmanes.
            
            
               Auowry.
               AUowry is where one taketh a diſtreſſe for rent or other thing, & the other ſueth a repleuin, thē he yt hath takē it, ſhal iuſtify in his plee for what cauſe he tooke it, and ſo auowe the taking, and yt is called his auowry.
            
            
               Baile.
               BAile is when a man is taken, or arreſted, for felony, ſuſpicion of felony, endited of felony, or any ſuch caſe ſo that hée is reſtrained of his libertie: And beinge by lawe baileable offreth ſuerty, to thoſe that haue aucthoritie

to baile him which ſuerties are bounde for him to the Quéenes vſe in a certeine ſūme of money, or body for body, yt he ſhall appere before the Juſtices of gaole deliuery at y• next ſeſſiō &c. Thē vpon the bonds of theſe ſuerties, as is aforeſayd, he is bailed, that is to ſay ſet at libertie, vntyll the day appointed for his apparance.
            
            
               Bailement.
               BAilement is a deliuery of things (whether it be of writings goods or ſtuffe) to an other, ſome times to be redeliuered backe to y• bailor, yt is to ſay, to him yt ſo deliuered it, ſomtimes to the vſe of yt baily, yt is to ſay of him to whō it is deliuered, and ſōetimes alſo it is deliuered ouer to y• third perſō.

This deliuery is called a bailement.
            
            
               Bailife.
               BAilife is an officer that belongeth to a manour to order the huſbandry, & hath aucthoritie, to paye quitrents iſſuing out of ye manor, fell trées, repaire houſes, make pales, hedges, diſtreine beaſtes vpō the ground, & diuers ſuch like. This officer is hée whom the auncient ſaxōs called a Réeue: for the name (bailife) was not then knowne amonge thē but came in with the Normans, & is called in lattin villicus.
               
            
            
               Bakeberinde theefe.
               BAkberinde Théefe, is a théefe that is takē with the manner, that is to ſay, hauing y• found vpon him (being folowed with

the hue and crie, which he hath ſtollē whether: it be mony, linen, woollē, or other ſtufe, but it is moſte properly ſayed when he is taken, caryinge thoſe things, y• he hath ſtollen in a bundel, or fardel, vpō his backe.
            
            
               Bargaine and ſale.
               BArgaine and ſale, is when a recompence is giuen by both the parties to the bargain. As if one bargaine & ſel his land to an other for mony. Here the lande is a recōpēce to him for the money, & the money is a recōpence to the other for the lande, & this is a good contract and bargain, and fée ſimple paſſeth, notwithſtā
                  dinge he doth not ſaie, to haue and to hold the land to him and to his heires.

And by ſuch a bargaine and ſale, landes may paſſe without liuery of ſeyſin, if the bargayne and ſale be by déede indented ſealed and enrolled, eyther in the county where y• land lieth, or in one of the Quéenes courtes of Recordes at Weſtminſter, within vjmonethes next after the date of the ſame writing endented accordinge to y• ſtatute in that béehalfe made in the 27. yeare of H. 8. ca. 16.
            
            
               Barre.
               BArre is when the defendant in any action pledeth a ple which is a ſufficient aunſwere, and that diſtroyeth the action of the pleintife for euer.
            
            
               
               Baſtarde.
               BAſtarde is hée that is borne of any woman not maried ſo yt his father is not knowen by the order of the law, & therfore he is called the childe of y• people. But by the lawe ſpiritual if one get a child vppon a woman which child is borne out of wedloke, & after he mary the ſame woman, thē ſuch a childe ſhalbe ſaid mulier & not baſtarde. But by y• law of Englād it is a baſtard: and for yt cauſe whē ſuch ſpecial baſtardy is alleaged, it ſhalbe tryed by the countrey & not by the biſhop. But general baſtardy alleaged ſhalbe tried by y• certificat of ye Biſhop.
               And if a woman bée greate wyth childe by

her huſbande who dieth and ſhe taketh an other huſband, & after ye childe is borne, this child ſhalbée ſayed the childe of the firſt huſbande. But if ſhée were priuely wyth childe at the tyme of the death of her firſt huſbād, then it ſhalbe ſaid ye child of ye ſecōd huſband, but enquire farther, & ſée ye opiniō of Thorp. 21. E. 3. 39.
               Alſo if a manne take a wyfe which is greate we chylde by an other that was not her huſbande, & after the chylde is borne wein the eſpouſels, then he ſhalbe ſaied the childe of the huſbande, though it were borne but one day after ye eſpouſels ſolempniſed.
            
            
               Battaile.
               
                  BAttayle is an auncyent trial in our lawe, which the defendaunt in an appeale of felony may chooſe, that is to ſay, to fight with the appellant, for proofe whether he bée culpable of the felony or not: which combate if it fal out ſoe wel on ye part of the defendant, that he doe vanquiſh the appellant, hée ſhal goe quite, and barre him of his appel for euer. But if one bée indicted of felonye, and an appel is brought vppon the ſame indictment, there the defendant ſhal not wage battayle. Battaile alſo may be in a writ of right.
            
            
               Bigamy.
               BIgamy was a counterplea (deuiſed at the Councel of Lions vppon

miſlike of ſecond mariage) to be obiected whē the priſoner demaundeth the benefit of the Clergie, to wit his booke, as namely to ſay, that hee which demaundeth the priuiledge of the clergy, was maried to ſuch a woman, at ſuch a place within ſuch a dioceſſe, & that ſhee is dead, and that he hath ſince maried an other woman, within the ſame dioces, or with in ſome other dioceſſe, and ſo is Bigamus. Or if he haue bin but once maried, then to ſay that ſhe whom he hath maried, is or was a widow, that is to ſay the left woman of ſuch a one &c. which thing ſhalbe tried by the Biſhop of ye dioceſſe, where the mariages are alleged. And

béeinge ſoe certifyed by the Biſhoppe, the priſoner ſhall loſe the benefite of the clergie. But at this daye, by force of the Act made in Anno 1. E. 6. cap. 12. this is n
                     •
                  e plea, but that hee may haue his Clergye yet not wythſtandinge.
               Soe is Brooke titulo Clergie placito 20. to the ſame purpoſe. And hereuppon, if you bee deſirous, (Brother Nicholas) to ſée what reaſons they haue that perſwade againſt ſecond mariages, reade, amonge manye other, Fraunches Petrarch of Remedies for both fortunes the firſt booke and lxxvi. Dialogue intituled of ſeconde mariage,

which booke nowe of late our brother maſter Thomas Twyne hath very wel and wt good grace (as they y• can iudge doe ſay) tranſlated out of latine into engliſh, and moſte aptly called it Phiſicke againſt fortune.
            
            
               Blodewit.
               BLodewit, that is to be quite of amercements for blodſheding, & what pleas are holden in your court you ſhall haue the Amercementes thereof coming, becauſe (wit) in engliſh is Miſericordia in latine.
            
            
               Boote.
               BOote is an old woord, and ſignifyethe helpe ſuccour, ayde, or aduauntage, and is commonly

ioyned with an other word whoſe ſignificatiō, it doth augemēt as theſe brighoot, burghboote, fireboote, hedgboot, plowboote, & diuers ſuch like, for whoſe ſignifications, looke in their proper titles.
            
            
               Brode halpeny.
               BRode halpeny (in ſōe copies Bordehalpeny) that is to be quite of a certein cuſtome exacted for ſettinge vp of tables.
            
            
               Brugbote.
               BRugbote (and in ſome copies Brigebote) that is to be quite of giuinge aide to the repairinge of bridges.
            
            
               Burghbote.
               BUrghbote, that is to be quite of giuinge ayde to make a borough Caſtel,

city or walles throne downe.
            
            
               Burchbrech.
               Burghbrech, that is to bée quite of treſpaſſes don in Citie or borough againſt the peace.
            
            
               Burgh Engliſh.
               BUrgh Engliſh or borow engliſh is a cuſtome in ſōe auncient borough, that if a man haue iſſue diuers ſonnes, and dieth, yet the yongeſt ſonne onely ſhal enherit and haue al the landes & tenementes, that were his fathers whereof hée died ſeyſed wythin the ſame burgh by dyſcent, as heire to his father, by force of the cuſtome of the ſame.
            
            
               
               Burglary.
               BUrglary is when one breaketh and entreth into y• houſe of an other in the night with felonious intent to robbe, or kil, or to doe ſome other felony, in which caſes, although he cary away nothing yet it is felony, for which he ſhall ſuffer death. Otherwiſe it is if it be in the day tyme, or that hée breake the houſe in the night, and enter not therin at that tyme.
               But if a ſeruant will conſpire with other men to robbe his maſter, and to that intent hee openeth his maſters dores, or windowes in the night for them, and they come into the houſe by that way,

this is burglary in the ſtraungers, and the ſeruant is a théefe but noe burglar: And this was the opinion of the right worſhipfull Sir Roger Manwood knight, moſt woorthy Lorde Chiefe Baron of the Eſchequer at the quarter Seſſions holden in Caūterburie in Januarie laſt 1579. 21. Elizabeth.
            
            
               Caruage.
               CAruage, that is to bée quite if the kinge ſhall taxe al hislād by Carues Note that a Carue of land is a plowland.
            
            
               Ceſſion.
               CEſſion, is when an Eccleſiaſticall perſon is created biſhop, or whē a perſon of a perſonage taketh an other benefice without diſpenſation, or

otherwiſe not qualified &c. In both caſes, their firſt benefices are becōe void, and to thoſe that he had who was created Biſhop, the Quéene ſhal preſent for that tyme, whoſoeuer be patron of them: And in the other caſe, the patron may preſent.
            
            
               Challenge.
               CHallenge is where Jurours appeare to trie an iſſue, then if any of the parties ſuppoſe y• they are not indifferent, they may there Challenge and refuſe them.
               There be diuers challenges, one is challenge to the array, the other to the polles. Challenge to tharray is whē the panel is fauourably made by the ſherife

or other officer. Challenge by the poles, are ſome principal, and ſome by cauſe as they call it. Principal is whē one of the Juroures is the ſon, brother, or coſine to the plaintife, or defendaunt, or tenant to him, or y• he hath eſpouſed the daughter of the pleintife, & for thoſe cauſes hée ſhalbée withdrawen.
               Alſo in a plée of y• death of a mā, & in euery other accion reall, & in accions perſonall, if the debt or dāmages amount to xl. markes it is a good challenge that he cannot diſpende xl. s. by the yeare of free holde.
               Challenge by cauſe, is where the party doth alledge a matter which is no principal chellēge, as y• y• ſon of one of y• Jurrours

hath eſpouſed the daughter of the pleintif, & then he doth cōclude & therfore he is ſo fauorable, which ſhalbe tried by others of thēqueſt whether he be fauorable or indifferent, & if they ſay that he is fauorable and not indifferent, thē hée ſhalbée drawen out, otherwyſe hée ſhalbée ſworn. Alſo a felon that is arraigned may challenge xx. Jurrours paremptory wythout any cauſe, & that is in fauour of life, & as many as hee wil with cauſe, but then it ſhalbe tried if for ſuch cauſe he be indifferent or not.
            
            
               Champertours.
               CHampertours be they yt moue pleas & ſuites, or cauſe to be moued by

own, or others procurement, & ſue them at their owne coſts to haue part of the land, or gaines in variance.
            
            
               Charge.
               CHarge is where a man graūteth a rent out of his grounde, and that if the rent bée béehinde, that it ſhalbe lawfull for him his heires & aſſignes to diſtraine till the rent be paide, This is called a rent charge. But if one graunt a rēt charge out of the land of an other, and after purchaſe the land, the graūt is voide.
            
            
               Charters of lands.
               CHarters of lands, are writings, déeds, euidē
                  ces, & inſtrumēts, made frō one man to an other vpō ſome eſtate cōueied

or paſſed betwene thē, of lands or tenemēts, ſhewing the name, place, & quantitie of the land, the eſtate, time, & maner of the doinge thereof, the parties to the eſtate deliuered and takē, the witneſſes preſ ēt at the ſame with other circumſtaunces.
            
            
               Chattels.
               CHattels are in ij. ſortʒ that isto ſay, Chattels Reals, and Chattels perſonals. Chattels Reals, are leaſes for yeares, wardes, and to holde at wil &c.
               Chattels perſonals ar al mouable goods, as money, plate, houſeholde ſtuffe, horſes, kine, corne & ſuch like.
            
            
               Childewite.
               
                  CHildwite, that is y• you may take a fine of your bondwoman defiled and begotten wt childe wtout your licence.
            
            
               Chimin.
               CHimine is the hye way where euery mā goethe, which is called via Regia, and yet the Kynge hath noe other thinge there but the paſſage for hym and hys people, for the frée holde is in the Lorde of the ſoyle, and all the profyte growinge there, as trees and other thinges.
            
            
               Thing in action.
               THinge in action, is when a manne hath cauſe, or may brynge an action for ſome duity

due to him, as an action of det vpon an obligation, ānuity, Rent, Couenant, warde, goods, treſpas, or ſuch like. And becauſe they are thinges wherof a man is not poſſeſſed, but for recouery of them is driuen to his actiō, they are called things in action, & thoſe thinges in action that are certen, the Quéene may graūt, & the graūtee may vſe an actyon for them in hys owne name onely. But a common perſon cannot graunt his thing in actiō nor the Queene her fel
                     •
                  e cannot graūt her thing in actiō which is vncerten, as treſpas & ſuch like.
            
            
               Circuit of action.
               CIrcuite of action, is when an actyon is

rightly brought for a duetie: but yet about ye buſh as it were: for y• it might as well bene otherwiſe aunſwered, and determined, & that ſuit ſaued, and becauſe that thē ſame actiō was more then néedful, it is called circuite of action. As if a manne graunt a rent charge of x. li. out of his manner of dale, and after, the grauntee diſſeiſe y• graū
                  tour of the ſame maner of dale, and hée bringeth an aſſiſe, and recouereth the lande and xx. li. dammages, which xx. li. being paied, the grauntee of the rent ſueth his action for x. li. of his rent due duringe the time of the diſſeiſon, which if noe diſſeiſin had bene, hée muſt haue had. This is called circuit of action, béecauſe

it might haue bene more ſhortly aunſwered, for where as the grauntour ſhould receyue xx. li. dammages, and pay x. li. rent, he might haue receiued but the x. li. onely for the dammages, and the grauntee might haue cut of and kept backe the other x. li. in his handes by way of detayner for his rent, and ſoe thereby mought haue ſaued his action.
            
            
               Claime.
               CLaime is a challenge by any man of the propertie, or ownerſhippe of a thinge which he hath not in poſſeſſion, but which is with holden frō him wrongfully.
            
            
               Clergie.
               CLergie is an auncyent

libertye of the popiſhe Church, which hath alſo béene confyrmed with vs in dyuers Parlyamentes. And it is when a prieſt, or one within holy orders (as they terme it) or any other whoeſoeuer, in whome is noe impedyment or impoſſibilitye to bée a prieſt, is arraigned of felonye or ſuch lyke béefore a temporall Judge &c. and the priſoner praieth his clergye, that is to ſaye, to haue hys booke, which is as much as if hée deſired to bée diſmyſſed from the Temporall Judge, and to bee deliuered to the Ordinarie to purge hym ſelfe of the ſame offence. This priuyledge at the firſte was not ſoe generall,

in reſpect of the parties that ſhould take benefite thereby, as it afterwarde beecame to bée, for at the beginninge, beinge a popiſhe inuentyon the patrons thereof were very partial, and wolde not that any ſhould reape commodity thereby, but their popiſh prieſtes only and ſuch as were wythin orders, as aforeſayed: and this aroſe amonge them, partlye through their great pride, dyſdayninge to bee vnder the obedience of their natural kinges and temporall correctyon, and partelye of polycie, for ſhame leſt the leude maners of their ſpiritualty, ſhould come to the open view & examination of ye
                  
layetie (as they diſtinguiſh them) noe meruaile at al for wtin a fewe of the firſt yeres of king Henry ye ſecōds raigne: the clergie of the Realme had committed aboue one hundred ſeueral murders vppon hys ſubiectes, as the Kinge was certenly informed, beſides many robberies and other outrages, for remedy whereof, order was taken by ye king, his nobilitie, and wt much a doe the Clergie conſented therto, yt if any clerke from thence forth committed felony or treaſon, he ſhould firſt be degraded, and afterwarde deliuered to the lay power, there to receiue as to his offence belonged &c. at y• laſt in fauor of life (a thing to bee ſhewed indifferently

towards al mankinde) and for the loue of lerninge, it was graunted to al men that could reade, though they were neither prieſtes, nor wt
                  in orders. And ſince in parliament made vpon good conſiderations, it hath ben reſtreined and taken away in dyuers caſes, as in wilful murder, Burglary, and ſuch others.
            
            
               Clerke attaint. Clerke conuict.
               CLerkes are in ii. ſorts, that is to ſay Clerkes attaint, & Clerkes conuict. Clerke attaint, is he which prayeth his clergy after iudgement gyuen vpon him of the felony, and hath his clergy allowed, ſuch a Clerke may not make his purgatiō.
               
                  Clerke conuict is hée which prayeth his clergy before iudgment gyuen vppon him of the felony, and hath hys clergy to him graunted, ſuch a clerke may make his purgation.
            
            
               Colour.
               COlour, is a fayned matter which the defendant or tenant vſeth in his barre when an accion of treſpas, or an aſſiſe is brought againſt him, in which he gyueth the demandant or plaintife a ſhewe at the firſt ſight that he hath good cauſe of accion where in troth it is no iuſt cauſe, but onely a colour and face of a cauſe: And it is vſed to the intent that the determynatyon of the accion ſhould bée by

the Judges, and not by an ignorant Jury of xii. men. And therefore a colour ought to bée a matter in law or doubtfull to the common people, as for example. A. bringes an aſſiſe of land againſt B. and B. ſaith that hee hym ſelfe did let the ſame land to one C. for terme of life, and afterwarde did graunt the reuerſion to A. the demaundaunt, and after C. the tenaunt for terme of lyfe died, after whoſe deceaſe A. the demaundaunt claiming the reuerſion by force of that graunt (whereto C. the tenaunt for life did neuer atturne) entred, vpō whom B. entred, againſt whom A. for y• entre bringes this

aſſiſe &c. this is a good colour becauſe the comō people thinke that the land will paſſe by the graūt without atturnement, where in déede it wil not paſſe &c.
               Alſo in an accion of treſpas colour muſt bée geuen, and of them are an infinite number, one for example: In an accion of treſpas for takinge away of the playntifes beaſtes, the defendaunt ſaith, that before ye pleintife had any thing in thē hée himſelfe was poſſeſſed of thē as of his proper goodes, and deliuered them to A. B. to redeliuer them to him againe when &c. and A. B. gaue them vnto the plaintife, & the plaintife ſuppoſing the propertie to be in A. B. at y• time of the gift,

tooke them, and the defendant tooke them from the plaintife, whereupon the plaintife bringeth ye accion, this is a good colour, and a good plea.
            
            
               Colour of office.
               COlour of office, is alwaies takē in ye worſt part, & ſignifieth an act euel done, by the countenance of an office, and it beareth a diſſemblinge face of the right office, where as the office is but auaile to the falſehod & the thinge is grounded vpō vice, and the office is as a ſhadowe to it.
               But reaſon of the office, & vertue of the office are taken alwayes in the beſt part, and where the office is the iuſt cauſe of the thynge, and the thynge is pursuing

to the office.
            
            
               Colluſion.
               COlluſiō is where an accion is brought agaynſt another by hys owne agreement, if the plaintife recouer, then ſuch recouery is called by colluſion: and in ſome caſes the colluſion ſhall bée enquired of, as in a Quare impedit, an aſſiſe & ſuch like: But in auowry, nor in a writ of entrie, or any accyon perſonall, the colluſion ſhall not bée inquyred.
            
            
               Common law.
               COmmon lawe, is for the moſt part taken 3. waies, firſt for the lawes of this Realme ſimple without any other lawe, as cuſtomary lawe, Ciuil lawe,

Spirituall lawe, or whatſoeuurr els lawe ioyned vnto it, as when it is diſputed in our laws of England, what ought of right to bée determyned by the comon lawe, and what by the ſpirituall lawe, or Admirales Court, or ſuch like,
               Secondly it is taken for the kinges courtes, as the kynges bench, or common place onely, to ſhewe a difference béetwéene them and y• baſe courtes, as Cuſtomary courts, courtes barons, county courtes, pipouders, and ſuch like, as when a plea of land is remoued out of auncient demeſne, becauſe the lād is frank fée & pleadable at the cōmon lawe, yt is to ſay in y• kings court,

and not in auncien demeſne, or in any other baſe court.
               Thirdly, and moſt vſually by the comon law is vnderſtoode, ſuch laws as were generally taken and holden for lawe before any ſtatute was made to alter the ſame: as for example. Tenant for life, nor for yeares, were not to be puniſhed for doinge waſt at the common lawe, tyll the ſtatute of Gloceſter ca. 5. was made which doth giue an action of waſt againſt them: But tenant by the curte
                     •
                  y, and tenaunt in dower, were puniſhable of waſt at the common law, that is to ſay by the vſual and comon receiued laws of y• Realme, before the ſayd

ſtatute of Gloceſter was made.
            
            
               Comon.
               COmmon is the right yt a mā hath to put his beaſtes to paſture, or to vſe & to occupy the groūd that is not his owne.
               And note y• there be diuers comons, that is to ſay comō in groſſe, common appendaunt, comon appurtenant, & comō becauſe of neighbourhod.
               Common in groſſe is where I by my déede graūt to an other that he ſhal haue cōmon in my lande.
               Common appendaunt is where a man is ſeiſed of certaine lande, to the which hée hath common in anothers grounde, al they that ſhalbée ſeyſed of that lande, ſhall haue

the ſayed common onely for thoſe Beaſtes which compeſte that lande to which it is appendaunt exceptinge géeſe, gotes, & hogges.
               And alwaies this cō
                  mon is by preſcription & of common right, and it is appendaunt to erable lande onelye, and not to any other lande or houſe.
               Comon appurtenāt is in the ſame maner as common appendant, but it is wt al manner of beaſtes, as well hogges goates and ſuch lyke, as horſes, kyne, oxen, ſhéepe and ſuche as compeſte the grounde. And ſuch common may bee made at this day, and may be ſeuered frō y• land to which it is appurtenant, but ſoe cannot cōmon appendāt.
               
                  Common by cauſe of neighbourhode, is where the tenants of two lords which he ſeiſed of two townes where one lieth nigh another, and euery of them haue vſed from ye time whereof no minde runneth to haue comē in the other towne, with al maner of beaſtes comynable.
               But the one may not put his cattel in ye others ground, for ſo they of the other towne may dyſtreine thē damage feſāt, or may haue an action of treſpas, but they may put thē into their owne féeldes, & if ſo they ſtraie into the feeldes of the other towne, they there ought to ſuffer thē. And ye inhabitāts of ye on towne ought not to put in as many beaſtes as they wil.

but hauinge regarde to y• inhabitants of the other towne, for otherwiſe it were noe good neighborhoode, vppon which all thys matter dothe depende.
            
            
               Condition.
               COnditiō is a reſtraint or bridle, annexed, and ioyned to a thing, ſo that by ye not performance or not doinge thereof, the party to ye condition ſhal receiue preiudice & loſſe, & by the performance and doing of y• ſāe, cōmodity and aduantage.
               And al conditiōs are either conditions actual & expreſſed, which be called conditions in deede, orels they be cōditiōs implied or couert & not expreſſed, which are called conditions in lawe.
               
                  Alſo al condicions are either conditions precedent and goinge before the eſtate and are executed, or els ſubſequent & following after y• eſtate & executorie.
               The condicion precedent, doth gaine & gette the thing or eſtate made vppon condicion by the performance of y• ſame.
               The condicion ſubſequent, doth kéepe & continue the thing or eſtate made vpon condiciō, by y• performance thereof.
               Actual and expreſſed condition, which is called a condition in déede: is a condition knit & annexed by expreſſe words to the feoffement, leas, or graunt either in writing or wtout writinge, as if I enfeffe a man in lands reſeruing rēt to be

paied at ſuch a feaſt vpō conditiō that if the feoffée faile of payment at the day, yt then it ſhalbe lawful for me to reēter.
               Condition implied or couert & not expreſſed which is called a condition in lawe, is when a man graūteth to one the office to be keeper of a parke, Steward, Bedle Bailife, or ſuch like, for terme of life: & though there be no condition at al expreſſed in y• graunt, yet y• lawe ſpeaketh couertly of a condicion, which is that if the graū tée doe not execute all points apperteininge to his office by himſelfe or his ſufficiēt deputy, thē it ſhalbe lawful for y• grā
                  tor to enter & diſcharge him of his office. Cōditiō precedēt & goinge before

is when a leas is made to one for life vpon condition that if the leſſee for life, wil pay to the leſſor xx. li. at ſuch a day y• then he ſhall haue fée ſimple: here y• conditiō precéedes & goeth before the eſtate in fée ſimple, and vppon the performaunce of the conditiō, doth gaine and get the fee ſimple. Condition ſubſequent & following after, is when one graunts to I. S. his maner of dale in fée ſimple, vpon condition, that the graūtée ſhal pay to him at ſuch a day xx. li. or els yt his eſtate ſhal ceaſe, here y• cōdition is ſubſequēt & following ye eſtate in fée ſimple, and vpon the performaunce thereof, doth kéepe and contynue the eſtate.
            
            
               Confiſcate goodes.
               
                  COnfiſcate goodes are goods to which ye lawe intitleth the Queene, when they are not claymed by any other. As if a man be indited that he feloniouſly ſtole the goodʒ of I. S. where in truith they are his owne goods, and they are brought into the court againſt him as a maineur, and then it is demaunded, what hée ſaith to thoſe goodes, and he denieth thē, nowe by this denyinge of them, he ſhal loſe thoſe goodes, although that afterward he be acquited of the felony, and ſo in other like caſes.
            
            
               Contract.
               COntract is a bargaine or couenant betwéene two parties, where one thinge is géeuen for an other, which is called quid
                  
                  pro quo, as if I ſell my horſe for money, or if I cauenant to make you a leaſe of my manner of Dale in conſideration of xx. li. that you ſhal gyue mée, theſe are good contracts becauſe there is one thinge for an other. But if a manne make promiſe to mée that I ſhall haue twenty ſhillinges, and that he wil be debtour to mée thereof, and after I aſke the xx. s. and he will not deliner it, yet I ſhall neuer haue any accyon to recouer this xx. s. for that, that thys promiſe was no contract but a bare promiſe, and ex nudo pacto non oritur actio: but if any thing were geuē for ye xx. s. though it were not but is y• value

of a peny, then it had bin a good contract.
            
            
               Conuſance.
               COnuſaunce of plée, is a priuiledge that a city or Towne hath of the kinges graunt to holde plee of all contracts, and of lands within the precinct of the fraunchiſe: & whē any mā is impleaded for any ſuch thynge in the Court of Weſtminſter: the Maior and baylifes of ſuch fraunches or their atturney may aſke conuſaunce of the plee, that is to ſay, that the plée & the matter ſhalbée pleaded and determined before them:
               But if the Court at Weſtminſter be lawefully ſeiſed of the plea, béefore conuſance be demaunded, then they ſhal

not haue conuſance for y• ſuite, becauſe they haue negligētly ſurceſſed their time of demaund, but this ſhalbee no barre to them to haue conuſance in an other accion, for they may demaūd conuſance in one accyon, and omit it in an other accion at their pleaſure. And note that conuſance lieth not in preſcription, but it behoueth to ſhewe the kinges letters.
            
            
               Corody.
               COrodye, was a reaſonable allowaunce of Meate, breade, Drinke, money, clothinge, Lodging, and ſuch like ſuſtenance, which of comon right euery founder of Abbeies, Priories, Nū
                  ries, & other houſeʒ of religiō, had in ye ſame houſe

whē any were ſtāding, for his father, brother, coſin, or other man that he wolde appoint ſhould take it, if it were a houſe of Monkes, and if hée were founder of a houſe of Nuns, or women, thē the ſame for his mother Siſter, Coſin, or other woman that hée would direct thither. And alwaies this was prouided for that hée that had Corody in a houſe of Monkes, might not ſēd a woman to take it: Nor where Corody was due in a Nunry, there it was not lawful to appoint a man to receiue y• ſame, for in both caſes, ſuch preſentation was to bée reiected.
               And this Corody was due, as well to a cōmon perſon y• was foundor,

as where the kinge him ſelfe was foundor. But where the houſe was holden in frankalmoign there the tenure itſelfe was a diſcharge of Corody againſt al menne, Except it were afterward charged voluntaryly, as when the kinge woulde ſend his writ to the Abbey for a Corody for ſuch a one whō they admitt, there the houſe ſhould be charged for euer whether the kynge were foundor or not,
            
            
               Crowner.
               CRowner is an auncient officer of truſt and of great aucthoritie, ordayned to be a principal conſeruator, or kéeper of the peace, to beare recorde of the pleas of the Crowne, and of

his owne ſight, and of diuers other things many in number, &c. But at this day, either ye aucthoritie of the Coroner is not ſo great, as in fore tyme it was, whereby the office is not had in like eſtimation: Or els the Shirife and thoſe y• haue aucthoritie to chooſe the Coroner are not ſo careful as they ſhould be in their election: & therefore, it is nowe almoſt come agayne into that plight, that it was in king Edward the firſts daies, when this ſtatute followinge was made. Foraſmuch as meane menne and vndiſcréete nowe of late are commonly choſen to the office of Coroner where it is requiſite that wyſe

men, lawfull, and able ſhould occupie ſuch offices: It is prouided that through all Shires ſufficient m
                     •
                  n ſhoulde bee choſen to bée coroners out of the moſt wyſe and diſcréeteſt knightes &c. And although the letter of this ſtatute be not preciſely obſerued: yet at the leaſt the entend ſhould be followed as nigh as might bée, that for the default of knights Gētlemen furniſhed with ſuch qualities as the ſtatute ſetteth downe (of whych ſort there bee many) might be choſen: with this addiciō that they be vertuous & good knowne Chriſtians.
            
            
               Corporation.
               COrporation is a permanent thing y• may

haue ſucceſſion: And is an aſſembly and ioining together of many into one fellowſhipp, brother hoode and minde, whereof one is hedde & chéefe, the reſt are the body: & this hedde & body knitte together make the corporation.
               And of corporatyons ſome are called ſpiritual, and ſome temporal, and of thoſe that are ſpiritual, ſome are corporations of dead perſons in lawe, and ſome otherwiſe, and ſome are by aucthoritie of the kynge onely, and ſome haue byn of a mixt aucthoritie, and of thoſe that are temporal ſome are by aucthoritie of the kynge alſo, and ſome by the common lawe of the Realme.
               
                  Corporation ſpiritual, and of deade perſons in lawe, is where the corporation conſiſteth of an Abbot, and Couent, and theſe had beginninge of the kinge and the man of Roome when he had to doe here.
               Corporation ſpiritual and of able perſons in lawe, is where the corporation conſiſteth of a Deane and chapter, and his corporation had béeginninge of the Kynge onely.
               Corporation Temporal by the king, is where there is a maier and cō
                  minalty.
               Corporation Temporal, by aucthoritie of the cōmon law, is the aſſēble in parliament, which cō
                  ſiſteth of the Quéene, the hedde of the corporation,

and of the Lordes ſpiritual and temporal, and the comons of ye realme, y• body of y• corporation.
            
            
               Bodies politike.
               BOdies politike are Biſhops, Abbots, Priors, Deans, perſō of a church and ſuch like which haue ſucceſſion.
            
            
               Corruption of Blodde.
               COrruption of blodde is when the father is attaynted of felonye or treaſon, then his blode is ſayed to be corrupt, by meanes wherof his children cannot bée heires to him nor to any other aū
                  ceſtour. And if hee were a noble man or gentlemanne before, hee, and al his chyldren thereby are made vnnoble & vngentle, hauinge regarde

to the nobilitie or gentrye that they clayme by their father, which cannot bée made hole againe without aucthority of parliament.
            
            
               Couenant.
               COuenaunt is an agréement had béewéene two perſonnes, where euery of them is bounden to the other, to parfourme certeyne couenauntes for hys parte.
            
            
               Couerture.
               COuerture, is when a man & a woman ar maried together: Nowe the tyme of the contynuaunce of this mariage betwene them is called couerture, and the wife is called a woman couert.
            
            
               
               Couin.
               COuin is a ſecret aſſent, determined in the hartes of ij. or more, to the preiudice of any other: As if tenaunt for terme of life, wil ſecretly cōſpire with an other, that y• other ſhal recouer againſt the tenaunt for lyfe the lande whiche hée holdeth &c. in preiudice of him in the reuerſion.
            
            
               Counterplea.
               COunterplee, is where one bringeth an actyon, and the tenaunt in his aunſwere and plee, voucheth or calleth for any manne to warraunt his title, or praieth in aide of an other, which hath better eſtate then hée, as

of hym that is in the reuerſion, or if one that is a ſtraunger to the action, come and pray to bee reſceyued to ſaue his eſtate, if the demaundaunt reply thereto, and ſhew cauſe that he ought not to vouche ſuch one or that hée ought not of ſuch one to haue ayde, or that ſuch one ought not to bée reſceyued, this plée is called a counterplée.
            
            
               Cinque portes.
               CInque portes, be certein hauen townes, fiue in number, to which haue bene longe ſince, graunted manye libertyes (that other porte Townes haue not) and that firſt in the time of king Edward called y• cō
                  fessor

(who was before y• cōqueſt) & hath bē encreaſed ſince chiefly in ye dates of ye ij. Edwards the firſt, & ſecond (ſince y• conqueſt) as appereth in the booke of Domeſday, & other olde monuments, which in this worke beinge to longe to cite I meane bro. N. to omit, & ſet you here downe y• copy of an auncient record in frēch which ye worſhip full, our louing and very good father maſter Iohn Tvvine of Caunterbury gaue me out of his booke called W. Biholt, ſometime a monck of y• abbey of Saynt Auguſtines, wherein you ſhal learne which were aūciētly accōpted y• v. ports; & their memberz, what ſeruices they ow, where their court ought to be kept, before whom, and of what

matters they may hold plee, wt ſuch like worthy to be knowen, & thereby you ſhal perceiue alſo y• ye olde rude verſe doth falſely name ye v. ports, in reckninge them vp after this ſort: Douer, Sandwicus, Rye, Rūney, Frigmareuentus, Douer, Sandwich, Rie, Rumney, Wichelſey which is mēthy Frigmareuētus &c. which recorde I will engliſh as well, as my ſmale ſkil in y• old french wil geue me leaue. And thus it is.
               Theſe are the chiefe townes of the Cinque ports.
               
                  1 Maſtinge. 
                  2 Romney. 
                  3 Meth 
                  4 Douer. 
                  5 & Sandwich.
               
               The members of the ports of Maſtinge are theſe.
               
                  1. Peueneſe. 
                  2 Bolewareheth. 
                  3 Petite James. 
                  4 Bekeſborne. 
                  5. Breneth. 
                  6 Rie. 
                  7 et Winchelſe.
               
               Some adde to theſe the Seaſhore in Sefford,

Hydeney, and Northye.
               The chiefe port of Haſtinge, with the mē
                  bers aforeſaid ought to finde to the kinge from yere, to yere, if neede bée, vppon the ſea twenty & one ſhips: That is to ſay the towne of Haſtinge thrée ſhips, Peueneſe one ſhippe, wole worcherye and Petite Ihāme one ſhippe, Bekeſburne one ſhippe, Greneſhe ij. men with two armours, with them of Haſtinge, The Towne of Rye fyue Shippes, the Towne of Wynchelſce Tenne ſhippes.
               The mēbres of y• port of Romney are. 2.
               1. Olde Romney, and 2. Lyde
               Some adde to theſe, Prormhell, Oſwardeſtone

& Denge Marreis, Romney with the afore ſaid members, oweth to the kinge as is before ſaid fiue ſhippes, whereof Lyde oweth one ſhip, The port of Heth with the member weſt Heth, ought to finde fiue ſhips to the kinge as is aforeſayde.
               The members of the port of douer are theſe.
               
                  1. Folkeſtone, &
                  2. Fauerſham.
               
               Sōe adde Meregate &c.
               This part of Douer, with the aforeſaid members, ought to find to the kinge. 21. ſhippes, that is to ſay, Douer 19. ſhips Folkeſtone one ſhipe, & Fauerſham one ſhip.
               The members of the port of Sandwich are theſe.
               
                  
                  1. Stonor. 
                  2. Fordwich, 
                  3. Dale. 
                  4. Seire.
               
               Sōe adde Reaculure.
               This port of Sandwich, with the memberz aforeſayd, ought to find in the kinges ſeruice as is before ſayde, fiue ſhippes,
               Some lvii. ſhippes.
               When the king would haue his ſeruice of the aforeſaid ſhips, they ſhal haue xl. daies ſūmons, & they ſhal find to ye king in euery ſhip. 20. men, and the maſter wel armed, and well appoynted to doe the kynges ſeruice.
               And the ſhippes ſhal goe at the proper coſtes of the Cinque portes thither whether they ſhalbée ſummoned. And when the ſhyppes are

thither come, they ſhall continue xv. daies in the kinges ſeruice, at the proper coſtes of the Cinque portes. And after the 15. dayes are paſt they ſhalbée at the charges of the kinge: if hee haue any thing for thē to doe.
               The maſter of the ſhip ſhall take ſixe pence a day, the Conſtable ſixe pence, and euery of the other mariners thrée pence.
               And it is to be knowē that the court of Shipwaye, which is the chief court of y• Cinque ports where euery Maior of euerie port, or 12. 10. 6. or 4. and the Maior of euerie port as they by letters of the warden of the Cinque ports

haue byn ſūmoned, and as the port is greater or leſſer, without eſſoyne ought to come, ought to bee ſūmoned by the letters of the ſaid warden to al the ports that ought to doe ſute there.
               And the ſūmons ought to be vppon ſute made to ſūmon any comminalte to aunſwere to any of any plée, containing 40. dayes from the day of the receyte of the Letters of the ſayed warden.
               And the aforeſayde Court ought to bée ſū
                  moned chieefelye for Treaſon done agaynſt the kynge or kynges: for counterfaytynge of the kynges ſeale: or of hys money, for treaſure founde vnder the

ground: For the kynges ſeruice denied, or withholden, for fals Judgement giuen by any cō
                  munaltie.
               And no commoner to any plea againſt him brought ſhall aunſwere but at the court aforeſayd.
               And pleas there had againſt any Baron of the Cinque portes beinge challenged by the Bailife of the ſame port of which the ſaid Baron is: ought to bée adiourned vnto the port, wherof the ſame Baron is, (if it be not for treſpas don agaynſt the kynge) becauſe that the ſaid Barōs haue conuſance of all manner of pleas except pleas of the Crowne. And when thoſe Barons haue fayled to

doo right: The ſaid warden at the complaynt of hym to whom they haue fayled to doe right, ſhall goe to the ſame port to doe right, as is contayned in the Charter.
               Moreouer, the aforeſaied court ought not to bée holden from the feaſt of the natiuity of ſaynt Mary, vntill the feaſt of ſaint Andrewe, becauſe of the martes of Germany.
               Alſo when the Barōs of the Cinque ports are in the Kynges ſeruice vppon the Sea, or at the kings ſummons, or at the kinges commandement.
               Furthermore, it ought not to bée holden but one day.
               And one Eſſoine onely

yeth in the aforeſayed Court in euery plea.
               O f ſute no Eſſoigne lieth, as is before ſayde, and therefore if the maior, whoe béecauſe of ſickneſſe or other ſodeine infirmitie cannot come thither, an other may at that day keepe his place, ſo notwithſtandynge that returne bée made by hys Baylife.
               Nor others principally ought to bée charged of any iudgement gyuen in the ſame Court but thoſe names whoe by the Baylifes there haue byn returned.
               Beſides all this, prouiſion of ſhippes & men as is aforeſayde: I haue ſéene in an other

recorde (ſhortly written) that euery ſhippe ought to haue a boy, whych there is called a Gromet: ſo y• in ſome the Cinque portes are charged with 57. ſhips 1197. men, & 57. boyes or Gromets.
            
            
               Damage feſants.
               DAmage feſauntes, is when a ſtraungers beaſts are in an other mans ground, wythout aucthoritie of the lawe, or licence of the tenant of the grounde, and there doe feede, treade, or otherwyſe ſpoile the corne, graſſe, woods, or ſuch lyke: in which caſe the tenaunt whom they hurt, may therefore there take, diſtreigne, & impoūd them,

as wel if it be in ye night, as in the day time. But in other caſes as for rent and ſeruices & ſuch like, none may diſtreine in ye night ſeaſon.
            
            
               Danegelde.
               DAnegelde, that is to be quite of a certein cuſtome which hath runne ſome tymes, which the Danes did leuie in Englande.
               This beganne firſt in kinge Etheldreds daies, who beinge ſore diſtreſſed by the continual inuaſions of the Danes, to purchaſe peace was cō
                  pelled to charge his coū
                  trey and people wyth importable payements: for hée firſt gaue them at v. ſeueral paies 113000 li. and afterwarde graū
                  ted thē 48000. li. yerely.
            
            
               
               Deane and Chapter.
               DEane & chapter is a body ſpiritual corporate, conſiſting of many able perſons in lawe as namely the deane (whoe is the chiefe) and the prebendes, and they together make the corporation. And as this corporation may iointly purchaſe landes and tenements to the vſe of their Church and ſucceſſours: Soe likewiſe euery of them ſeuerally may purchaſe to the vſe of hym ſelfe & his heires, as wée dayly ſée them doe moſt abundantly.
            
            
               Declaration.
               DEclaratiō is a ſhewing forth in writing, of the griefe and complaynt of the demaundant

or plaintife againſt the tenant or defendant, wherein he ſuppoſeth to haue receyued wronge. And thys declaratyon ought to be plaine & certen, both becauſe it impeacheth the defendaunt or tenant, & alſo compelleth him to make aunſwere thereto.
            
            
               Defendant.
               DEfendant is he that is ſued in an actyon perſonal, & he is called tenant in an action real.
            
            
               Demaines.
               DEmaines, or demeſnes, is the lords chiefe maner place, which hée & his aunceſtours haue from time out of mind, kepte in their owne hands, and haue occupied

ſame, together wyth al buldinges and houſes whatſoeuer, alſo ye meadowes, paſtures, woods, errable lande, and ſuch like, béelonginge thereunto.
            
            
               Demaundant.
               DEmaundaunt is hée that ſuethe or complayneth in an actyon reall, for title of lande, and hée is called playntife in an aſſiſe, & in an action perſonall as in an action of dette, treſpas, diſceit, detinue, and ſuch other.
            
            
               Halfe blodde.
               HAlfe blodde, is when a man marieth a wife. and hath iſſue by her a ſonne, and ſhée dyeth, and then hée taketh an

other womanne, and hath by her alſo a ſonne, Nowe theſe two ſonnes are after a ſorte Brothers, or as they are termed, halfe Brothers, or Brothers of the halfe blodde, that is to ſay brothers by the Fathers ſyde béecauſe they had both one father, and are both of his bloud and not brothers at all by the mothers ſyde, nor of blodde ne kinne that waye, and therefore the one of them cannot bée heire to other, for he that wyll clayme as heire to one by dyſcent, muſt be of ye whole blode to him from whome hée claimeth.
            
            
               Demurrer.
               
               DEmurrer is when anie action is brought, and the defendaunt pleadeth a plée, to which the pleintife ſaith that he wil not aunſwere, for that, y• it is not a ſufficient ple in the lawe, and the defendaunt ſaith to the cō
                  trary, that it is a ſufficyent plee, this doubt of the lawe is called a demurrer.
            
            
               Denizen.
               DEnizen is where an alien becommeth the Quéenes ſubiect and obteyneth her letters patentes to enioye al priuiledges as an engliſhmā. But yet not with ſtandinge, he ſhall paye cuſtomes and diuers other things as aliens doe &c.
            
            
               Deodande.
               
                  DEodande is when any man by miſfortune is ſlaine by an hors or by a cart, or by anie other thinge that moueth, thē this thing that is cauſe of his death, and which at the tyme of the myſfortune mooued, ſhalbée forfayte to the Queene, and that is called deodande, and that perteineth to y• Quéenes Almener for to diſpoſe in almes & in dedes of charitie.
            
            
               Departure from a plee or matter.
               DEparture frō his plea or matter, is where a manne pledeth a plee in barre, & the plaintife replieth thereto, and he after in his reioinder pleadeth or ſheweth an other

matter contrary to his firſt plée, yt is called a de parter frō his barre &c.
            
            
               Departure in diſpite of the court.
               DEparture in diſpite of the court, is when the tenant or defendant appereth to the actyon brought againſt him, & hath a day ouer in yt ſāe terme, or is called after without day in the ſame terme, and doth not appere, but makes defant, this is a departure in diſpite of the court, & therefore he ſhalbe condempned.
            
            
               Deputie.
               DEputie, is he ye occupieth in an other mans right, whether it bee office or any other thig els and his forf▪ or miſdemener ſhal cauſe the officer, or him whoſe deputie

he is to loſe his office or thinge. But a man can not make his deputie in al caſes, except the grant ſo bée as if it bée wt theſe or ſuch like woordes, to exerciſe or vſe by himſelf or his ſufficient deputie: or if ye words go furder, by himſelfe or his deputy, or the deputy of hys deputy, then hée may make a deputy, and his deputy alſo may make a deputy, els not.
            
            
               Deuaſtauerunt.
               
                  DEuaſtauerunt bona teſtatoris, is when Executours wil deliuer the legacies that their teſtator hath gyuen, or make reſtytutyon for wronges don by him, or pay his debts due vppon contractes, or other dets vpon ſpecialtyes, whoſe

dayes of payments are not yet come &c. And kepe not ſufficiēt in their hands, to diſcharge thoſe debts vppon ſpecialties that they are compellable preſently by the law to ſatiſfie: Then they ſhalbee conſtrayned to pay of their owne goods thoſe duetyes, which at the firſt by the law they were compelled to pay: accordinge to the value of that that they deliuered or payed wythout compulſion: For ſuch paymentes of debts or deliuery of legacies, as is aforeſayde, béefore debtes payed vpon ſpecialtyes, whoſe dayes of payment are already come: are accompted in the lawe a waſtynge of the goodes

of the teſtator, as much as if they had gyuen them away wythout cauſe, or ſold them, and conuerted them to their owne vſe.
            
            
               Deuiſe.
               DEuyſe is where a man in his teſtamēt géeueth or béequeaueth his goodes or hys landes to an other after his deceaſe.
               And where ſuch deuiſe is made of goodes, if the executours will not deliuer the goodes to the deuiſée, the deuiſée hath no remedy by the common lawe, but it behoueth him to haue a cytation againſt y• executors of the teſtator, to appere before the Ordinary to ſhewe why hée perfourmeth not the wil of the

teſtatour, for the deuiſee may not take the legacy and ſerue himſelf, but it muſt be deliuered to him by the executours.
               And here to the end to ſhewe you (Brother Nicholas) howe much the lawes of thys Realme, and the wiſe dyſcréete Judges of ye ſame, who are the interpreters of the lawe, doe fauour willes, and teſtaments, and ſo deuiſes in yelding to them ſuch a reaſonable conſtruction, as they thinke myght beſt agrée with the mindes of the dead, conſideringe that willes & teſtaments are for the moſt part, and by cōmō intendment, made whē the teſtator is nowe very ſicke, weake, & paſt al hope of recouery, for it is a receiued opinion in ye
                  
countrey amonge moſt yt if a man ſhould chaūce to be ſo wiſe, as to make his wil in his good helth, when he is ſtronge, of good memory, hath tyme and leyſure, and might aſke counſel if any doubt were, of the lerned, that then hée ſhould not liue longe after, and therfore they deferre it, to ſuch tyme, when as it were more conueniēt to apply them ſelues to the diſpoſition of their ſoules, then of their landes or goodes, except it were, that by the freſh memory, and recitall of them at that tyme, it myght bée a cauſe to put them in mind of ſome of their goodes, or landes falſely gotten, andſo moue them to reſtitutyon &c.

And at that tyme, the penning of ſuch willes, are commonly committed to the miniſter of the pariſh, or to ſome other more ignoraunt then hée if y• may be, whoe knoweth not what woordes are neceſſarie to make an eſtate in fée ſimple, fée taile, for terme of life, or ſuch like, beſides many other miſchiefes. I will therefore ſet you here downe ſome of thoſe caſes that are moſt common in ignoraunt mens mouthes, and doe cary, by the wiſe interpretatiōs of ye Judges as is aforeſaid, a larger and more fauorable ſenſe in wills thē in déedes: firſt therfore if one deuiſe to I. S. by his wil, all hys lands and tenementes, here not onely all thoſe

landes y• he hath in poſſ. doe paſſe, but alſo thoſe that he hath the reuerſion of by vertue of theſe wordes tenements▪
               
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  e deui
                  
                     •
                  ed to a man to haue to him for euermore, or to haue to hī & his aſſignes, in theſe. ii. caſes ye deuiſée ſhal haue a fée ſ
                     •
                  ple. But if it be geuen by feoffement in ſuch maner, hée hath but an eſtate for terme of life.
               Alſo if a man deuyſe his land to an other, to giue, ſel, or doe therwith at his pleaſure or wyll, this is fée ſimple.
               A deuiſe made to one & to his heires males, doth make an eſtate taile, but if ſuch words be put in a déede of feoffement, it ſhalbée taken in fée ſimple, becauſe it doth

it doth not appere of what bodye the heires males ſhalbe begotten.
               If lands be gyuen by déede to I. S. and to the heires males of his body &c. whoe hath iſſue a daughter, whoe hath iſſue a ſonne, and dieth, there the land ſhall returne to the donour, and the ſonne of the daughter ſhall not haue it, becauſe hée cannot conuey himſelf by heires males, for his mother is a let thereto: But otherwiſe it is of ſuch a deuiſe, for there ye ſon of ye daughter ſhall haue it, rather thē y• wil ſhalbe voyd.
               If one deuiſe to an infant in his mothers belly, it is a good deuiſe, otherwyſe it is by feoffement, graunt, or gift, for in thoſe caſes there

ought to be one of hability to take preſently, or otherwiſe it is voide.
               A deuiſe made (in fee ſimple) without expreſſe wordes of heires, is good in fee ſimple.
               But if a deuiſe be to I. N. hée ſhall haue the land but for terme of life, for thoſe words wil cary noe gerater eſtate.
               If one wil y• his ſonne I. ſhal haue his land after the death of his wife, here the wife of the deuiſour ſhal haue the lande firſt for terme of her life. Soe likewiſe if a man deuiſe his goodes to his wife, and that after the deceaſe of his wife, his ſonne and heire ſhal haue the houſe where y• goods are, there the ſonne ſhal not haue the houſe during the life of the wife,

for it doth appere y• his intēt was, that his wife ſhould haue the houſe alſo for terme of her lyfe, notwithſtandīg it were not deuiſed to her by expreſſe words.
               If a deuiſe be to I. N. and to y• heires females of his body begotten: after the deuiſée hath iſſue a ſonne and a daughter and dieth, here ye daughter ſhal haue the land, & not the ſonne, & yet he is the moſt worthy perſō, and heire to his father, but becauſe the wyll of the dead is, that the daughter ſhould haue itlawe and conſcience wil ſo alſo, And herein the very hethens were precyſe, as appereth by theſe verſes of Octauius Auguſtus whych Donatus

reporteth, he made after that Uirgil at hys death, gaue commaundement that hys bookes ſhoulde bée burnt, béecauſe they were vnperfite, and yet ſome perſwaded that they ſhoulde bée ſaued as in deede they very happely were, to whom hée aūſwered thus. But faith of lawes muſt nedes be kept, and what laſt wil doth ſay, & what it doth cōmaūd be done, y• néedes we muſt obey.
            
            
               Diſcent.
               DIſcent is in ij. ſorts, eyther linial, or collateral.
               Linial diſcent, is whē the diſcent is conueied in y• ſame line of the whole bloode, as Grandfather, father, ſonne, ſonns ſōne & ſo downwarde.
               
                  Collateral diſcent, is out in an other braunch from aboue, of y• whole bloode, as the graund fathers bro. fathers brother, & ſoe downewarde.
            
            
               Diſclaimer.
               DIſclaimer, is where the Lorde dyſtraineth his tenaunt, and hée ſueth a repleuin, & the lord auoweth the takinge by reaſon that he holdeth of him, if the tenaunt ſay that hée dyſclaimeth to holde of him, this is called a dyſclaimer, and if y• lorde thereuppon bringe a writ of right ſur dyſclaimer, & it be founde againſt the tenant, he ſhal loſe the land.
            
            
               Tithes.
               TIthes are in thrée ſortes deuyded, to

wit, Preiudicial tithes, Parſonal tythes, and Mixt tithes.
               Predial tithes, are tithes that bée payed of thinges that come of the groūd onely, as Corne, Haye, fruits of Trées, & ſuch like.
               Parſonal tythes, are tithes that bee payed of ſuch profits as come by the labour, and induſtrie of a mans perſon, as by buyinge, ſellinge, gaines of marchandiſe: and of handicraftes men, laborers, and ſuch as woorke for hyer, as Carpenters, Maſons and ſuch like.
               Myxt tythes are the tithes of Calues, Lambs, Pigges, and ſuch lyke, that encreaſe partlye of the grounde that they be fedde vppon, and partlie 
                     〈1… paragraphs〉
                  
               
            
            
               
               Diſſeiſin vppon diſſeiſin.
               DIſſeiſin vppon diſſeyſin is, when the diſſeiſor is diſſeiſed by an other.
            
            
               Diſſeiſor and diſſeiſee.
               DIſſeyſoure▪, is hée which putteth anye manne out of his lande without order of y• lawe, & diſſeiſee is hée that is ſo put out.
            
            
               Diſtreſſe.
               DIſtreſſe is the thinge which is taken & dyſtrayned vpon any lande, for rent beehinde, or other duty or for hurt don, although that the propertie of the thinge béelongeth to a ſtraunger, but if they be beaſts that

belong to a ſtranger, it behoueth that they bée leuant and couchant vppon the ſame ground, y• is to ſay, that the beaſts haue ben vpon y• ground by certaine ſpace y• they haue themſelfe well reſted there or els they bée not diſtrainable. And if one diſtraine for rent or other thynge without cauſe lawfull, then the party gréeued ſhall haue a repleuin vppon ſuertie found to purſue his accion, and ſhal haue y• diſtreſſe to hym deliuered againe.
               But there bée diuers thinges which bée not diſtrainable, y• is to ſay an other mans gowne in the houſe of a tayler, or cloth in the houſe of a fuller, ſheremā, or weyuer, for that, that they be

commen artificers, and that the cōmon preſūption is, that ſuch thinges belong not to the artificer, but to other perſons which put them there to be wrought.
               Alſo vitaile is not diſtrainable, nor corne in ſheues, but if they be in a carte, for that that a diſtreſſe ought to bée alway of ſuch thynges wherof the ſherife may make Repleuin, and deliuer againe in as good caſe as it was at the time of the taking.
               A manne may dyſtrayne for homage, & fealtie, and eſcuage, & other ſeruyces: for fynes and amercements which bée aſſeſſed in a léete but not in a court baron: and alſo for dammage feſaunt, that is to ſay, when hée

findeth the beaſtes or goods of an other, doing hurt or cumbringe hys groūd. But a man may not diſtraine for any rēt or thing due for any lād, but vpon the ſame lande yt is charged therewith, but in caſe where I cōe to diſtraine, & the other ſéeing my purpoſe, chaſeth the beaſtes or bereth the thing out to the intent y• I ſhal not take it for a diſtreſſe vpon the ground, thē I may well purſue, and if I take it preſently in the hye way or in an others groūd, y• taking is lawful aſwell there as vppon the land charged to whomſoeuer y• propertie of the goodes bee. Alſo for fines and amercemēts which be aſſeſſed in a leete, one may alway take the goodes

of him that is ſo amerced, in whoſe ground ſo euer they bée within the iuriſdictyon of the court as it is ſayd. And when one hath takē a diſtreſſe, it beeh
                     ••
                  ueth hym to bringe it to the commen pound, or els hée may kéepe it in an others ground ſo that hée géeue notice to the party, that hée (if the diſtreſſe be a quicke beaſt) may géeue to it foode, and then if the beaſt dye for defaut of foode, hee that was dyſtrayned ſhall bee at the loſſe, and then the other may diſtrayne agayne for the ſame rent or duitie. But if hee brynge the dyſtreſſe to a holde or out of the coū
                  ty, that the ſherife may not make deliueraunce

vppon the repleuin, then the party vppon the retorne of the ſherife, ſhall haue a writ of Withernam, directed to the ſherife, that he take as many of hys beaſtes, or as much goodes of the other in his kéepinge, tyll that he hath made deliuerāce of the firſt diſtres. Alſo if they bee in a forfelet or Caſtell, the Sherife may take with him the power of the County, & beate downe the Caſtel, as it appeareth by y• ſtatute Weſtm. 1. cap. xvii. Therefore looke the ſtatute.
            
            
               Diuorce.
               DIuorce ſo called of diuortium, cōminge of the verbe diuorto, which ſignifieth to returne backe. As when a mā is diuorced frō his

wife, hée returneth her backe home to her father or other frends, or to the place from whē
                  
                     •
                  e he had her, & by ſuch diuorce the mariage is defeated and vndone.
            
            
               Donor, & donee.
               DOnor is hee whych gyueth lands or tenements to an other in tayle, and hée to whom the ſame is ſo gyuen, is called donée.
            
            
               Double plea.
               DOuble plee, is where the defendaunt or tenant in any accion, pleadeth a plée in the which ii. matters be comprehē
                  ded, and euery one by himſelfe is a ſufficyent barre or aunſwere to the action, then ſuch a doublee plee ſhall not bée

admitted for a plée except one depend vpon an other, and in ſuch caſe if he may not haue the laſt plée without the firſt plée then ſuch a double plee ſhalbe wel ſuffered.
            
            
               Ryght.
               RIght is where one hath a thing that was taken from an other wrongfully, as by diſſeiſin, or putting out, or ſuch like. And the challenge or claime that hée hath, who ſhould haue ye thing is called right.
            
            
               Right of entrie.
               RIght of entrie, is when one ſeyſed of land in fee, is therof diſſeiſed: Now the diſſeiſée hath right to enter into y• land, & may ſo do whē he wyll: or els hée may

haue a writ of ryght againſt the diſſeiſour.
            
            
               Dures.
               DUres is where one is kept in priſon or reſtrained frō his liberty contrary to the order of the lawe, and if ſuch a perſon ſo beinge in dures make any eſpecialtie or obligation by reaſon of ſuch impriſonment, ſuch a déede is voyde in the lawe: and in an actyon brought vppon ſuch an eſpecialtie, hee may ſay that it was made by dures of impryſonment, but if a man bee arreſted vppon any accion, at the ſuite of an other, though the cauſe of the accion be not good nor trewe, if hée make any obligation to a ſtraunger béeinge in priſon by ſuch arreſt, yet

it ſhall not bee ſayed by dures: but if hée make an obligation to hym at whoſe ſuit he was arreſted to bée dyſcharged of ſuch impriſonment, then it ſhalbe ſaid dures.
            
            
               Eire Iuſtices.
               EIre Juſtices, or Itinerant as we call them, were Juſtices that vſed to ryde from place to place through out the realme, to adminiſter Juſtice.
            
            
               Embraſour or Embraceour.
               EMbraſour or Embraceour, is he that when a matter is in trial béetwéene party and party commeth to the Barre with one of the partyes (hauinge receyued ſome rewarde ſoe to doe) and

ſpeaketh in the caſe, or priuely laboreth the Jurie, or ſtandeth there to furuey, or ouerlooke thē, thereby to put them in feare & doubt of y• matter. But men that are learned in the laws, may ſpeake in the caſe for their fée, but they may not labour the Jurye, and if they take money ſoe to doe, they alſoe are embraſors.
            
            
               Encrochment.
               ENcrochment is ſayed, when the Lorde hath gotten ſeiſine of more rent, or ſeruices, of hys tonaunt, then of right is due, or ought to bée payed or done vnto him: As if the tenaunt holde slande of hys Lorde

by fealtye and ij. s. rent yerelye, And nowe of late tyme, the Lord hath gotten ſeyſine of thrée ſhillings rent, or of homage, or Eſcuage, or ſuch lyke, Then thys is called an Encrochment of that rent or ſeruice.
            
            
               Enheritance.
               ENheritaunce, is ſuch eſtate in landes, or tenements; or other thinges as may be inherited by the heire, whether it be of eſtate in fée ſimple, or taile, by diſcent from any of hys▪ Aunceſters, or by hys owne purchaſe.
               And Enheritaunce is deuided into two ſortes, that is to ſay, enheritāce corporate, & enheritance incorporate.
               
                  Enheritance corporate are meſuages, landes, meadowes, paſtures, rentes, and ſuch lyke that haue ſubſtaunce in them ſelues, and may haue contynuaunce alwayes. And theſe ar called corporal things.
               Enheritaunce incorporate, are aduowſens, villaynes, wayes, comons, Courts, fiſhings, and ſuch like that are, or may be appendant, or appurtenant to inheritances corporate,
            
            
               Equitie.
               EQuitie is in two ſorts, differing much the one from the other, and are of contrarye effectes, for the one doth abridge, diminiſhe and take from ye letter of y• law. The other doth inlarge amplifie and adde therunto.
               
                  The firſt is thus defined, Equitie is the correction of a lawe generally made, in that part wherein it faileth, which correction of ye generall wordes, is much vſed in our lawe: As if for example, when an act of parliament is made, that whoeſoeuer doth ſuch a thinge, ſhalbe a ſclon, and ſhal ſuffer death: yet if a madde manne, or an infaunt of yonge yeres that hath noe diſcretion, doe the ſame, they ſhal be no felōs, nor ſuffer death therefore.
               Alſo if a ſtatute were made that al perſonnes that ſhal receiue, or gene meate and drinke, or other ſuccour, to any that ſhal do ſuch a thing, ſhal bée acceſſorie to hys offence, and ſhal ſuffer

death if they did knowe of the fact, yet not withſtandinge one doth ſuch an act, and commeth to his wife whoe knowing thereof doth receiue him and giues him meat and drinke, ſhée ſhall not bée acceſſory nor felon, for in the generaltie of the ſaid wordes of ye lawe, he that is mad, nor ye infant, nor the wife were included in meaning. And thus equity doth correct y• generality of y• law in thoſe caſes, & the general words are by equitye abrydged.
               The other equitie is defined after this ſorte, Equitye is when the wordes of the lawe are effectually directed, & one thing only prouided by y• words of the lawe, to the end y• althigs of like kind

may be prouided by the ſame. And ſoe when the words enact one thing, theye enact all other thinges that are of lyke degree. As the ſtatute which ordeines that in an actyon of dette againſt executours, hée that doth appere by diſtreſſe ſhall aunſwere, doth extende by Equitie to Adminiſtratours, for hée of them that doth fyrſt appere by diſtreſſe ſhal aunſwere by equitie of the ſayed act. Becauſe they are of lyke kinde.
               Soe lykewiſe the ſtatute of Gloceſter geues the actyon of waſt and the payne thereof, agaynſt hym that holdes for life, or yeres, and by ye
                  
equitie of the ſame a mā ſhall haue an action of waſte agaynſt hym that holdes but for one yere, or halfe yere, and yet yt is without the words of y• ſtatut, for h
                     •
                   that holds but for halfe a yeare, or on yere, doth not hold for yeares, but y• is ye meaning, & the words yt enact ye one by equitie, enact y• other.
            
            
               Eſcape.
               EScape is in two ſorts, that is to ſay voluntary, & necligent.
               Uoluntary eſcape, is when one doth arreſt an other for felony, or other crime, & after letteth him go where he wil, this letting of him to go is a volūtary eſcape. And if y• arreſt of hī y• eſcaped were for felony, thē y• ſhalbe felony in him ye did ſuffer y•
                  
eſcape, and if for treaſon, then it ſhalbe treaſon in him, and if for treſpas, then treſpas, and ſo of other.
               Negligent eſcape, is whē one is arreſted and after eſcapes againſt the will of him that did ſoe arreſt him, & is not freſhly purſued and taken before the purſuer loſeth ye ſight of him, this ſhalbée ſaid a negligent eſcape, notwithſtanding, yt hee out of whoſe poſſeſſion he eſcaped, do take hym after he loſt ſight of him.
               There is an eſcape alſo without arreſt, as if a murder be made in the day, and the murderer be not taken, then it is an eſcape for the which the towne where the murder was done ſhalbe amerced.
            
            
               
               Eſples.
               ESples is as it were, y• ſeyſin, or poſſ. of a thinge profit, or cōmodity y• is to be takē. As of a cōmō y• eſplées is the taking of the graſſe or comon by y• mouthes of the beaſtes y• cōmon there: Of an aduowſon the takynge of groſſe tythes: Of a wood, the ſelling of wood, of an orchard the ſelling of Aples or other fruit growing there: of a mill in taking of tol is the eſplees: and of ſuch like.
            
            
               Eſſoine.
               ESſoine is where an actyon is brought, and the plaintife or defendāt may not wel appere at the day in court, for one of y• v. cauſes vnder expreſſed, thē he ſhalbée

eſſoined to ſaue hys defaut, whereuppon note well that there be v. maner of eſſoines, that is to ſay, eſſoyne de ouſter le mere, and that is by xl. daies, the ſecond eſſoyne is de terra ſancta, & that ſhalbe by a yere & a day, & theſe two ſhalbee layd in y• beginning of ye plée. The iii. eſſoin is de male vener, and that ſhalbée at cōmon dayes, as the action requireth, & this is called y• cōmon eſſoin. The iiii. eſſoyne is de malo lecti, & that is onely in a writte of right and there vppon there ſhall a writte goe out of the Chauncerie, directed to the ſhirife, that he ſhal ſend iiii. knightes to the tenaunt to ſée the tenant, & if he bee ſicke, to géeue him a day after a

yere and a day. The v. eſſoyne is de ſeruice le roy, and it lyeth in al accions, except in Aſſyſe of nouel diſſeiſin, writ of dower, darein preſētment, & in appel of murder: but in this eſſoin, it behoueth at the day to ſhew his warrāt, or els it ſhall torne into a defaut, if it be in a plee real, or hée ſhall loſe xx. s. for the plaintifs iorney, or more by the diſcretion of the Juſtices, if it be in plee perſonal, as it appereth by the ſtatute of Gloceſter. ca. Octauo.
            
            
               Eſtoppel.
               EStoppell is when one is concluded, and forbidden in lawe to ſpeake againſt his owne act, or déede, yea, although it bée to ſay the

truith: And of eſtoppels there are a great many, one for example is, whē I. S. is bound in an obligation by the name of Thomas Stile, or any other name, and is after ward ſued accordinge to ye ſame name put in the obligation, that is to ſay Thomas Stile, Nowe he ſhal not be receiued to ſay y• hee is miſnamed, but ſhal be driuen to aū
                  ſwere accordinge to the name put in ye obligatiō yt is to ſay T. S. for peraduenture yt obligée did not know his name, but by y• report onely of the obligor himſelfe: and in as much, as he is y• ſame man y• was bound: hee ſhalbe eſtopped & forbidden in law to ſay y• contrary againſt his owne déede: for otherwiſe he

might take aduauntage of hys owne wronge, which the lawe wyl not ſuffer a man to doe.
               Alſo if the daughter yt is onely heire to her father, wil ſue liuery with her Siſter that is a baſtard: ſhe ſhal not afterward be receiued to ſay yt her Siſter is baſtard: inſomuche that if her baſtard ſiſter take halfe y• lād wt her, there is noe remedy by law.
               Alſo if a manne ſeyſed of landes in fée ſimple, wyll take a leaſe for yeares of the ſame land of a ſtraunger by déede indented, this is an eſtoppel during ye terme of yeares. And the leſſée is thereby barred to ſay the trouth, for the troth is, that hée that leſſed the land had nothynge

in it at time of the leaſe made, and that the fée ſimple was in hym that did take ye leaſe: but this hée ſhall not bée receyued to ſay, tyll after the yeares are determined, becauſe it appereth that hee hath an eſtate for yeares, and it was his folly, to take a leaſe of hys owne landes, & therefore ſhall thus bée puniſhed for his folly.
            
            
               Eſtraungers.
               EStraungers are they, that are not parties, nor priuies to the leuyinge of a fine, or making of a déede.
            
            
               Eſtray.
               EStray, is where any beaſt or cattell, is in

any lordſhippe, and none knoweth y• owner therof, then it ſhalbe ſeiſed to the vſe of the Quéene or of the Lord y• hath ſuch eſtray by the Quéenes graunt or by preſcription: & if the owner come & make claime thereto, within a yeare & a day, then hée ſhall haue it againe payinge for hys meate, or els after the yere, the propertie therof ſhalbe to the Lorde, ſo that the Lord make proclamatiō therof accordīg to the lawe in ii. market townes.
            
            
               Excōmunication.
               EXcōmunicatiō, is whē a man by iudgment in the ſpiritual court is accurſed, thē he is diſabled to ſue any accyon in the Quéens court, & if he remaine excommunicate

xl. daies, & wil not be iuſtified by his Ordinarie, then the Biſhoppe ſhall ſende hys letter patent to the Chauncellour, and thereupon it ſhalbe commaunded to the ſheriffe to take the body of hym y• is accurſed, by a writte called de Excommunicato capiendo til hée hath made agréement wyth the Church for the contempt and wronge, and when hée is iuſtified and hath made gréement, then the biſhop ſhal ſend his letters to y• Quéene, certifiyng the ſame, and then it ſhalbe commaunded to the ſhirife to deuer him by a writ called Excommunicato deliberando.
               
            
            
               Exchange.
               EXchaunge, is where

a man is ſeyſed of certaine land, and an other manne is ſeyſed of other lande, if they by a déede indented, or without déede) if the Landes be in one ſelfe countie) exchaunge the landes, ſo that euery of them ſhal haue others landes to hym ſo exchaunged, in fée, fée tayle, or for terme of lyfe, that is called an exchaunge, and it is good wythout lyuere and ſeyſin. And in exchaunge it behoueth that the eſtates to them limitted by thexchange be equal, for if one haue an eſtate in fée in hys land, and the other hath eſtate in the other land but for terme of lyfe, or in tayle, then ſuch eſchaunge is void, but if ye
                  
eſtates bée equal, and the landes bee not of equal value, yet the exchange is good. Alſo an exchange of rent for Landes is good, ſoe an exchaunge beetwene rent and common is good and that ought to bée by déede. And it béehoueth alway, that theſe woordes (exchaunge) bée in the deede, or els nothing paſſeth by the déede, except that hée haue liuery and ſeiſin.
            
            
               Execution.
               EXecutiō is where iugement is geuen in any actyon that the playntife ſhal recouer the land, the debt, or dammages, as the caſe is, and whē yt writ is awarded to pute him in poſſeſſion, that

is called a writte of Executyon, and when he hath the poſſeſſion of the lande, or is payed of the debt, or dammages, or hath the bodie of the defendant awarded to priſon, then hée hath executyon, and if the plée be in the countie, or court barron, or hundred, and they deferre the iudgement in fauoure of the partie, or for other cauſe, then the demaundaunt ſhal haue a writ of Executione iuditij. But in a writ of Debt, a man ſhal not haue recouerye of any lande, but of that whiche the defendaunt hath the day of the iugement yelded. And of chattelles a manne ſhall haue executyon onelye of the chattelles which hée hath the day of executyon

ſued.
            
            
               Executour.
               EXecutour is when a man maketh his teſtament and laſt will, and therein nameth the perſonne that ſhall execute his teſtament, then hée that is ſo named, is hys executour, and ſuch an executour ſhall haue an actyon agaynſt euerye debtour of hys teſtatour, and if the executors haue aſſets, euery one to whō the teſtator was in debt, ſhall haue an action againſt the executor, if hée haue an obligatiō or ſpecialtie, but in euery caſe where y• teſtator might wage his lawe, no actiō lieth againſt the executour.
            
            
               Extinguiſhment.
               
               EXtynguiſhement is, where a Lorde of a manor or any other, hath a rent goynge out of lande, and hee purchaſeth the ſame lande, ſoe that hée hath ſuch eſtate in the lande as hée hath in the rent, then the rent is extinct, for that, that a manne may not haue rent goinge out of hys owne lande. And when any rent ſhalbée extinct, it behoueth that the lande and the rent bée in one hande, and alſo that the eſtate that hee hath bée not defeſible: and that hée haue as good eſtate in the lande as in the rent, for yf hée haue eſtate in the lande but for terme of lyfe or yeares, and hath a fée ſimple in the rent,

then the rent is not extinct but is in ſuſpence for that tyme, and then after the terme, the rent is reuiued. Alſo if there bée Lorde, meſne, and tenaunt, and the Lorde purchaſeth the tenauncy, then the menaltie is extinct, but that meſne ſhall haue the ſurpluſage of the rent, if there bée any, as a rent ſecke. Alſo if a manne haue a hye waye appendant, and after purchaſe the lande wherein the hye way is, then the waye is extinct, and ſoe it is of a common appendaunt.
            
            
               Extortion.
               EXtortion is a wronge don by an officer, as a Maier, Bailife, Sherife,

Eſchetor or other offycer by colour of hys office, in takinge exceſſiue reward or fée, for executyon of hys ſayde office or otherwyſe, and is no other thynge in déede then playne robbery or rather more odius then robbery, for robbery is apparant, and alwaies hath wyth it the countenance of vice, but extortion being as great a vice as robbery is, carrieth wt it a countenance of vertue, by meanes whereof, it is the more hard to be tryed, or dyſcerned, and therefore the more odious, and yet ſome there bee, that will not ſticke to ſtretch their office, credit, and conſciēce, to purchaſe mony as well by extortion as

otherwiſe according to y• ſaying of ye poet Uirgil.
               What can be told? or what is that that hūger ſwéete of gold doth not conſtraine men mortal to attempt?
            
            
               Failing of record.
               FAilynge of recorde, is when an action of treſpas, or ſuch like, is brought againſt one, and the defendaunt ſayeth, that the plaintife before this brought an accyon for the ſame trespas in an other court, & recouered damage &c. And demaūdeth iudgmēt of the court, if he ſhall agayne haue this actiō &c. And y• plaintife ſayth there is 
                     •
                  o
                     •
                   ſuch record. Whereupō y• defendant hath a day giuē him, to bring in the record, at which day hee fayleth or bryngeth

in ſuch a one, as is nor barre to this action, thē he is ſaid to faile of hys record, and therupon the plaintife ſhal haue iudgment to recouer &c.
            
            
               Deede.
               DEode is a proofe and teſtimonie of the agréement of the partye whoſe déede it is, to the thing contayned in the déede: as a déed of feoffement is a proofe of the liuery of ſeyſin: for ye land paſſeth by the liuery of ſeyſin, but when y• déede and the liuery are ioyned together, that is a proofe of the liuery, and that the feoffour is content, that the feoffée ſhal haue the land.
               And note that al déedes are either indēted, wherof there bée two, thrée,

or more as the caſe requireth, of which ye feoffour, grauntor, or leſſour hath one, the feofrée, grā
                  tee, or leſſee an other, and peraduenture ſome other body alſo another &c. or els they are poll deedes or ſingle, and but one, which the feoffée grauntée or leſſée hath &c.
               And euery deede conſiſteth of thrée pryncipal points (and if thoſe thrée be not ioyned together, it is noe perfect déed to bynd the parties) namely, writinge, ſealing, and deliuery.
               The firſt point is writing, wherby is ſhelved y• parties names to the déed, their dwelling places, their degrées, ye thīg graūted, vpō what cōſideratiōs, the ſtate limitted,

the tyme when it was graunted, and whether ſimply, or vpon condition, with other ſuch lyke circumſtāces. But whether the parties vnto the déede, writ in the ende their owne names, or ſet thereto their markes (as it is cōmonly vſed) it maketh noe matter at al (as I thinke)▪ for that is not ment where it is ſayde, that euerie déede ought to haue wrytynge.
               The ſecond poynt is ſealinge, which is a farder teſtimony of their conſents to that contained in the déede as appereth by theſe wordes: In witneſſe whereof &c. alwayes put in the later end of déedes, wythout whych woordes, ye deede is inſuffycient.
               
                  And becauſe we are about ſealing and ſigning of deedes, it ſhal not bee a miſſe, (brother Nicholas) here to ſhewe you, for antiquities ſake, the maner of ſigning & ſubſcribing of déedes, in our aunceſtors the Saxons tymes, alfaſhion different from that wée vſe in theſe ourdaies in this, that they to their déedes ſubſcribed their names (commonly addinge the ſigne of the croſſe) and in the end did ſet downe a great number of witneſſes, not vſing at that time any kynde of ſeale. And wée at thys day for more ſuerty, both ſubſcribe our names (although that bée not very neceſſary as I haue aforeſayde) put to our

ſeales, & vſe the helpe of teſtimony beſids. That former faſhiō continued throughout, vntyll the tyme of the conqueſt by the Normans, whoſe maner by litle and litle at the lēgth preuayled amongſt vs, for the firſt ſealed Charter in Englande, is thought to bee that of king Edward the confeſſour to the Abbey of Weſtminſter: who (beinge brought vp in Normandy) brought into thys Realme that, and ſome other of their guiſes with him: And after the comminge of William the Conquerer, the Normans, lykynge their owne countrey cuſtome (as naturally all nations do) reiected the maner y• they ſound here, and reteined

their owne, as Ingulphus, ye Abbot of Croyland, who came in with the conqueſt witneſſeth ſayinge: The Normans doe chaunge the making of writings, which were want to bée firmed in England with Croſſes of Gold, and other holy ſignes, into the printing waxe, and they reiect alſo the maner of y• Engliſh writing. Howebeit this was not don all at once but it increaſed & came forward by certen ſteppes and degrées, ſo that firſt, and for a ſeaſon, the kinge onely, or a fewe other of ye nobilitie beſides him, vſed to ſeale: Then y• noble men for the moſt part, and none other, whych thinge a manne may ſée in the hyſtory of

Battell Abbey where Rycharde Lucy chyefe Juſtice of England in the time of king Henry the ſecond is reported to haue blamed a meane ſubiect, for that hée vſed a priuate ſeale when as that pertayned (as he ſayde) to the kyng and nobilitie onely. At which time alſo (as Iohn Roſſe noteth it) they vſed to ingraue in their ſeales, their owne pictures, & counterfaites, couered wyth a longe coate ouer their Armours. But after this the Gentlemen of the better ſort tooke vp the faſhion, and béecauſe they were not al warriours, they made ſeales ingrauen wyth their ſeuerall Coates, or ſhyeldes of armes,

for difference ſake, as the ſame aucthour reporteth. At the length, about the time of kinge Edwarde the thirde, ſeales became ver
                     •
                   cōmon, ſoe that not only ſuch as bore armes vſed to ſeale, but other menne alſo faſhioned to them ſelues ſignets of their owne deuiſe, ſome takynge the letters of their owne names, ſome flowers, ſome knottes, & floriſhes, ſome birdes, or beaſtes, and ſome other thinges, as wee nowe yet dayly beholde in vſe. Some other maner of ſealinge béeſides theſe haue ben herd of amonge vs, as namelye that of king Edward the third by which he gaue, To Norman y• hunter, the hop & the hoptowne, with al the boundes vp

ſide downe, And in witneſſe that it was ſooth, he bit the waxe with his fore tooth.
               The like to this (Brother Nicholas) our reuerend and good father, amonge other antiquities ſeruing my purpoſe, ſhewed mée in a loſe paper, but not very aūtiētly wrytten, and therefore hée willed mée to eſtéeme of it as I thought good, it was as followeth.
               I William king geue to thée Powlen Koiden, my hope and my hoplandes, with the boundes vp & downe, from heauen to earth, from earth to hel, for thée and thin
                     •
                   to dwel, from mée and mine, to thée and thine, for a bowe and a brode

ſagit quāt ieo veigne pur hūter ſur yarrowe, En teſtmoigne que ceo eſt veray, ieo mord ceſt cere oue madent, En la prence de Magg, Maud, & Margery. Et mon iij. fits Henry.
               Item ceo de Alberic de veer, conteinaunt le donation de Hatfield, al quel il fixe vn curt noyer haft cuttell ſemblable al vn viel demy denierwhit tle, en ſtede de vn ſigille, oue diūs tiels ſē
                  blables. Mes aſc' peraduenture voilent pē
                  ſe q' ceux fueront receiue en common vſe et cuſtome, et que ils ne fuerount les deuifes & pleaſures dun peu ſinguler perſons,

ſuch are no leſſe deceiued, then they that deme euery charter and wrytinge that hath no ſeale annexed, to bée as auncient as the Conqueſt, whereas (in déede) ſealinge was not commonlie vſed, til the tyme of kinge Edward the iij. as hath ben already ſaid.
               The third point is deliuery, which although it be ſet laſt, is not the leaſt for after that a déede bee written, and ſealed, if it be not deliuered al ye reſt is to noe purpoſe. And this deliuery ought to be done by the partye him ſelfe, or his ſufficyent warraunt, and ſo it ſhall binde him, whoſoeuer wrot, or ſealed the ſame, and by this laſt act the déede is made perfect according

to the intent and effect thereof, and therefore in déedes the deliuerie is to be proued &c. So thus you ſee, y• writinge & ſealing without deliuery, is nothīg to purpoſe, That ſealing & deliuery, where there is noe writinge, woorketh nothing, Nor writinge and delyuerie wythout ſealinge alſo maketh noe déede. Therefore they al ought 
                     •
                  oyntlye to concurre to make a perfect dede, as is before ſaid.
            
            
               Farme, or ferme.
               FArme, or ferme, is the chiefe meaſuage in a village, or towne, and thereto belonginge great demeaſnes of al ſortes, & hath bene vſed to be let for terme of life, yeres,

or at wil.
               Alſo the rent y•is reſerued vpon ſuch or like leaſes, is called farme, or ferme.
               And farmor, or fermor is he that occupieth the farme, or ferme, or is leſſée thereof.
               Alſo in ſome places, & counties euery leſſée, for life, yeres, or at wil, although it be of neuer ſoe ſmal a cottage or houſe, is called farmor, or fermour.
               And note, that they a
                     •
                   called farmes, or fermes, of y• Saxon woord Feormian, which ſignifieth to féede, or yelde victuall. For in the aunciēt time, their reſeruations were as well (or for the more part) in victualles, as money, vntyll at the laſt, and that chiefely

in the time of Kinge Henry the firſt (by agréement) the reſeruation of victuals, was turned into redy mony, & ſo hitherto hath cōtinued amonge moſt men.
            
            
               Fee farme.
               FEe farme is when a tenaunt holdeth of his lorde in fee ſimple, payinge to him the value of halfe, or of the third, or of the fowerth part or of other part of the lande, by the yere. And he that holdeth by fée ferme, ought to doe noe other thinge then is conteyned in the feoffement, but onely fealtie, for that belongeth to al kinde of tenures.
            
            
               Feoffement.
               FEoffement is where a mā geueth lands to an

other in fee ſimple, and deliuereth ſeiūn and poſſeſſion orthe land, that is a feffement.
            
            
               Feoffor, et feffee.
               FEoffor is hée that infeffeth, or maketh a feoffement to an other of landes, or tenements, in fée ſimple. And feoffee is he, who is infeffed, or to whō y• feffement is ſo made.
            
            
               Fireboote.
               FIreboote is neceſſarye woode to burne, which by the common lawe, leſſ
                     •
                  e for yeares, or for lyfe, may take in hys grounde, although it be not expreſſed in his leaſe
                     •
                   and although it be a leas by woorde onely without writinge: But y
                     •
                  
                  
ſake more then is néedefull, he ſhalbée puniſhed in waſt.
            
            
               Fledwite.
               FLedwite, that is to be quite from amercements when an outlawed fugitiue cōmeth to the kinges peace of hys owne will, or beinge licenced.
            
            
               Flemeſwite.
               FLemeſwit, that is, y• you may haue the cattel, or amercementes of your man or fugitiue.
            
            
               Fletwie.
               Fletwit (or Flitwit) that is to bée quit frō contention and conuiets and that you may haue plea therof in your court & the amercements, for (Flit) in engliſh is Tenſone in french.
            
            
               
               Forſtal.
               FOrſtal, that is to bée quite of amercemēts & cattelles arreſted wtin your lande, & the amercements therof cōming.
            
            
               Forſtaller.
               FOrſtaller is hée that buieth Corne, Cattel, or other marchaundize whatſoeuer is ſalable, by the way as it commeth to markets, faires, or ſuch like places to bée ſold to the intent that he may ſel the ſame againe at a more high and déere price in preiudice & hurt of the common welth & people &c.
               The paine for ſuch as are conuict thereof &c. is the firſt time, amercemēt, and loſſe of ye thing ſo bought, the ſecōd time iudgment of the pillory:
               
                  The third tyme impryſonment and Raūſome: The fowerth time abiuratiō of the towne &c.
            
            
               Franches Royall.
               FRanches Royall, is wher ye Quéene grāts to one and to his heires, that they ſhalbe quit of Tolle, or ſuch like.
            
            
               Free mariage.
               FRée mariage, is when a man ſeiſed of landes in fee ſimple, giueth it to an other man, & to hys wife, (whoe is daughter Siſter or otherwyſe of kinne to ye donor) in frée mariage, by vertue of which words they haue an eſtate in ſpecial tayle and ſhal hold the land of the bonor quit of al maner of ſeruices vntill the fowerth degree bée paſt accomptynge themſelues in the firſt degree,

except fealtie, which they ſhal doe becauſe it is incident to all tenures ſauinge frée almes. And ſuch gift may bée made as wel after mariage ſolemnized as before. And a man may gyue landes to his ſonne in frée mariage, as well as to hys daughter by the opinion of maſter Fitzh. in hys writ of Champertie. H. But it appeareth otherwiſe in maſter Litt', and in M. Brooke ti. Frākmariage. P. 10. And ſo it was holden cléere in Graies Inne in lēt An▪ 1576. 18. El. by ye right worſhipful maſter Rhodes then Reader there.
            
            
               Freeholde.
               FRéehold is an eſtate yt a man hath in landes or tenements, or profit to bée taken in fée ſimple,

taile, for terme of hys owne life, or for terme of an others life. And vnder that, there is no frée hold: for hée that hath eſtate for yeares or holdeth at wil hath no frée hold: but they are called Chattels.
               And of fréeholds there are ii. ſorts, that is to ſay fréeholde in deede, & fréehold in lawe.
               Fréehold in déede, is whē a man hath entred into lands, or tenemētes and is ſeyſed therof really, actually & in déede: as if the father ſeyſed of lands or tenementes in fée ſimple dieth, and his ſonne entreth into the ſame, as heire to his father, then he hath a fréehold in déed by his entry.
               Fréehold in lawe, is whē lands or tenemēts, are diſcēded to a mā & he

may enter into them when he will, but hath not yet made his entry in deede, as in the caſe aforeſayd, if the father being ſeyſed of lands in fée ſimple die ſeyſed, & they diſcēd to his ſonne, but ye ſonne hath not yet entred into them in déede, nowe before his entrie he hath a frehold in law.
            
            
               Freſhſuit.
               FReſhſuit, is whē a mā is robbed, & the party ſo robbed, followeth the felon immediatly, & taketh him with the manner, or otherwiſe, and then bringeth an appeale againſt him and doth cō
                  uince him of the felony by verdict, whych thing being inquired of for the Quéene and found, the party robbed ſhall haue

reſtitution of his goodes agame.
               Alſo it may be ſayd y• the party made freſhſute although he take not the theeſe preſently, but that it be halfe a yeare, or a yeare after the robbery don, before he bee taken: ifſo bée that the partie robbed do what lyeth in him, by diligent inquire & ſearch to take him, yea, & although hée bée taken by ſome other body, yet this ſhalbée ſayde good freſhſuit.
               And ſo freſhſuit is whē the lord cōmeth to dyſtreine for rent or ſeruice, & the owner of y• beaſtes doth make reſcous, and driueth them into other ground that is not holden of the Lord, and the lord followeth preſently and taketh them: thys

called freſh ſuit, and ſo in other like caſes.
            
            
               Gager of deliuerance.
               GAger of deliueraunce is, where one ſueth a repleuin of goods taken, but hée hath not deliuery of the goodes, and the other auoweth, and the plaintife ſheweth y• the def. is yet ſeyſed &c. and prayeth that the def. ſhal gage the deliueraunce, then he ſhal put in ſuerty or pledges for the deliuerance, & a writ ſhal go foorth to the ſherife for to redeliuer the goods &c. but if a man claime propertie, hée ſhal not gage the deliuerance. Alſo if he ſay that the beaſts bée dead in the pound, hée ſhall not gage &c. Alſo a man ſhal neuer gage the deliueraunce before that

they be at iſſue, or demurrer in the lawe.
            
            
               Warde.
               WArde is when an infant whoſe aunceſter helde by knights ſeruice, is in the warde or keepinge of the Lorde of whom thoſe lands were holden, And if the tenaunt holde of dyurrs Lordes diuers landes, the lorde of whome the land is holden by prioritie, that is to ſaye, by the more elder tenure, ſhall haue the wardſhippe of the infant, but if one tenure bée as olde as the other, then hée that firſt happeth to haue y• warde of the bodie ſhall kéepe it, but in that caſe euery lord ſhal haue the warde of y• lande y• is holden of him, but if the tenaunt

holde of the Quéene in chiefe, then ſhée by her prerogatiue ſhal haue the warde of the bodie, and of al the land y• is holden of her, and of euery other lorde.
            
            
               VVarden.
               WArden moſt properly is he that hath ye ward ſhippe or kéepinge of an heire, and of land holden by knights ſeruice, or of one of them to his owne vſe, duringe the nonage of the heire, and within that time hath the beſtowinge of the bodie of the heire, in mariage at his pleaſure, wtout diſperagment.
               And of wardens there be ij. ſorts namely, garden in right, & garden in déede.
               
                  Garden in right is hée that by reaſō of his ſ
                     •
                  ry is ſeiſed of the wardſhip or keepinge of the lande, and of the heire, duringe the nonage of the heire.
               Garden in déede, is where the lorde after his ſeiſin, as aforeſaid, graū
                  teth by déede, or without déede, the wardſhippe of the lande, or of the heire or of both to an other, by force of which gran̄t, the grauntée is in poſſeſſ. 
                     •••
                   is ye grauntée called garden in déede.
               And this garden in déede maye graunt the heire to an other alſo, b
                     ••
                   that other is not preperlye called garden in déede for that is y• graunt tée of the garden in right onely, and here you may

ſée (Brother Nicholas) what miſery followeth that tenure by knightes ſeruyce if the tenaunt die leauinge hys heire within age, howe the poore childe may bée toſſed, and tumbled, chopped and chaunged, bought & ſold like a Jade in Smithfild, & y• more is maried to whome it pleaſeth his gardē, wherof enſue many euels.
            
            
               VV arning.
               WArninge is when an action of detynue of charters is brought agaynſt one, and the defendaunt ſaith, that the charters were delyuered to hym by the playntife, and by an other; vpon certaine conditiōs, and prayeth y• the other may be warned to plede

with the pleintife whether the conditions bée perfourmed or noe, and thereuppon a writte of Scire facias ſhal go foorth againſt him. And that is called warninge.
            
            
               Gauelate.
               GAuelate, is a ſpecyall and auncient kynd of Ceſſauit vſed in Kent where the Cuſtome of Gauelkind continueth: whereby the tenant ſhal forfeit his lands and tenementes, to the lord of whom they are holden, if he withdrawe frō hys Lord hys due rents and ſeruyces, after this maner as followeth.
               If any tenant in Gauelkind, withholde hys rent, & hys ſeruices of y• tenement which he holdeth

of his lord, let the Lord ſéeke by the award of his court frō 3. wekes to 3. wéekes, to find ſōe diſtreſſe vppon the tenement vntill the ſowerth court, alwaies with witneſſes: And if within y• time, he can find noe diſtreſſe in that tenement, whereby hee may haue i
                     〈…〉
                   of his tenaunt: Thē ar y• fowerth court let it be awarded, y• hée ſhall take that tenement into his hand, in y• name of a diſtreſſe, as if it wer an oxe, or a cowe, and let him kéepe it a yere, & a day, in his hand without manuring it: wtin which terme if y• tenant come, and pay his arrerages, and make reaſonable amēdes for y• wtholding: Thē let hi haue, & enioy his tenemēt as his aunceſt ours

and hée before helde it. And if he do not come before the yeare, and the daye paſt, then let the Lorde goe to the next Countye Courte with the witneſſes of his owne court, & pronounce there thys proceſſe, to haue further witneſſe, & by the award of his court (After y• Countye court holden) hée ſhall enter, and manure in thoſe lāds and tenements as in his owne. And if the tenant come after ward, and wil rehaue his tenements, & holde them as he did before, let him make agreement with the lorde according as it is aunciently ſaid.
               Hath he not ſince any thing geuen, nor hath hée not ſince any thing payd, Thē let him pay v. poūd

                  for his were before he be cōe t'or holder againe.
               
               There be ſome copies y• haue the firſt verſe thus written.
               
                  Niſith yelde, and niſith gelde.
               
               And others thus.
               
                  Nigheſith yelde, and nigheſith gelde,
               
               But theſe differ not in ſignification, other coppyes haue it after thys ſort.
               
                  Nigondſith ſelde, and nigondſith geld.
               
               That is to ſay, let him ix. times pay, & ix. times repaye.
            
            
               Gauelkinde.
               GAuelkinde is a cuſtome annexed, & goinge with lands in Kent called Gauelkind lands, holdē by aunciēt Socage

tenure. And is thought by the ſkilfull in Antiquities, to be called Gauelkind of Gyue all kyn, that is to ſay, to all the kyndred in one lyne, according as it is vſed among the Germans frō whom wée Englyſhmen, and chiefely of Kēt come: Or els it is called Gauelkynd, of gyue all kynd, that is to ſay, to all the male children, for kind in dutch ſignifieth a male child: and dyuers other like cōiectures are made by them of ye name (Gauelkind) which I omit of purpoſe for ſhortneſſe ſake, becauſe that here you looke (Brother Nicholas) as you deſired me, that I ſhould ſpeake ſom what largly concerninge other more needefull matters for your purpoſe, which you are

deſirous to know as touching Gauelkind lands, both becauſe you were borne in kent, & alſo are moſt abiding there, and therefore you think to be ignorant of y• maners or cuſtomes of your natiue cōtrey were a foul ſhāe.
               To ſatiſfie your requeſt in this: I haue therefore ſet you here downe, the auncient cuſtomes of Kent, as they haue very truely & carefully of late bin publiſhed, with ſome caſes vpon them, gathered out of thoſe bookes, that make any mencyon hereof, which will I thinke, cōtēt your deſire at ful. And firſt you muſt knowe, that theſe gauelkind cuſtomes are of good antiquytie, brought in hither by y• Saxons, Intes, & Angles, Germans,

from whom wée Engliſhmen diſcend (as is aforeſaied) and were by them vſed, and left here, and ſo continued in force, vntill Williā duke of Normandy, conquered al Englād (Kēt onely excepted) which he had by compoſition, and not by conqueſt: And in this compoſition the valyant Kentiſhmen obtained a graunt of the continuation of their cuſtomes of Gauelkynde, which euer ſins thei haue vſed in the ſame countrey: and thus they are as followeth.
            
            
               The cuſtomes of Kent.
               THeſe are the vſages, and cuſtomes, the which the cōmunalty of kent claimeth to haue in the tenementes of Gauelkynd, and in the men of Gauelkynd, allowed

in Eire béefore John of Berwike, and his companions, the Juſtices in Eire, in kent, y• 21. yere of king Ed. the ſonne of king Henry.
               That is to ſay, y• all y• bodies of Kentiſhmē be frée as well as the other frée bodies of England.
               This things hath byn ſince confeſſed to be true as it appereth in 30. E. I. in Fitzh. titulo Uillenage placi
                     •
                  . 46. where it is holden ſufficient for a man to auoyde the obiection of bondage, to ſay yt hys father was borne in Kent: But whether it will ſerue in that caſe to ſay, that hymſelfe was borne in Kent it is (for good reaſon) to be doubted.
               
                  
                     •
                  . And yt they ought not ye Eſchetor of the kynge

to chooſe, nor euer in any time did they: But the kinge ſhall take, or cauſe to bée taken ſuche a one as it ſhal pleaſe hym, to ſerue him in that whych ſhalbe néedeful.
               3 And that they may their lands & their tenemēts giue and ſel, without licence aſked of their lords: Sauing vnto the Lordes the rents and ye ſeruices due out of the ſame tenements.
               4 And that al, and euery of them, may by writ of the king, or by playnt, plede for ye obtaininge of their right as wel of their Lordes as of other men.
               5 And they claime alſo, yt the cōminaltie of Gauelkind men which hold none other then tenemēts of Gauelkind nature, ought not to cōe to ye cōmon ſummons of ye
                  
Eire but onely by the Borſholder, & fower mē of the Borowe: Except the townes which ought to aunſwere by twelue men in the Eire.
               The like to this priuiledge is enioyed at thys day in y• ſherifes Lathe, where many whole borowes be excuſed by the onely apparaunce of a Borſholder, & two, foure or ſixe other of y• inhabitants. Borſholder is ſo named of ye ſa
                     •
                  ō wordes Borber caldor, yt is to ſay, the moſt auncient or elder of the pledges.
               6 And they claime alſo, that if any tenant in gauelkynd bée attainted of ſelony, for the which hée ſuffereth Judgement of death, the kyng ſhal haue al hys goodes, and hys heire ſorthwt after hys

death ſhalbe inheritable to al his lands and tenemēts which held in Gauelkind in fée, and inheritance: And he ſhal hold them by the ſame ſeruices & cuſtomes, as hys aunceſtors helde them: whereuppon it is ſaid in Kentiſh.
            
            
               The father to the bough, And the ſon to the plough.
               But this rule holdeth in caſe of felony, and of murder onely, and not in caſe of Treaſon at al
                     •
                   And it holdeth alſo in caſe where ye offendor is iuſtiſed by order of lawe and not where he withdraweth himſelfe after the fault committed, & will not abyde his lawfull tryall. And becauſe that thys cuſtome ſhal not be cōſtrued by equity

but by a ſtraight and literal interpretation: it hath therefore bin doubted, whether the brother or vncle ſhall haue y• aduauntage therof, becauſe the woordes extend to y• ſonne onely.
               See 22. E. 3. abridged by maſter Brooke tit. Cuſtome. 54.
               7 And if he haue a wife, forthwith be ſhée endowed by the heire, if hee be of age, of the one halfe of al the landes and tenements which her huſband held of Gauelkynd nature in fée: to haue & to hold accordyng to the forme hereafter declared. And of ſuch lands y• kinge ſhall not haue the yere, nor waſt, but onely the goodes, as is béefore ſaid. The wife ſhall not loſe her dower for the

default of her huſbande, but in ſuch caſe where the heire ſhal loſe his inheritance for the offence of his father 8. Henry. 3. 8 And if any manne of Gauelkinde, eyther for felonie, or for ſuſpicion of felonie, withdrawe him out of the countrey, and bee demaunded in the countie as he ought, & be afterwarde vtlawed, or put himſelfe into the holy church, and abiure the lande and the Realme, the kinge ſhall haue the yeare and the waſt of his landes and of al his tenementes, together with al his goodes and chattels: Soe that after the yeare, and the day, the next Lord, or lordes, ſhal haue their Eſchetes of thoſe landes, and tenements, euery lorde that

which is immediatly holden of him. So is it holden in the bookes 8. E. 2. abridged by maſter Fitz. ti. Preſcriptiō 50. & 22. E. 3. abridged by maſter Brooke ti. Cuſtome 54.
               9 And they claime alſo, that if any tenaunt in Gauelkinde, and bée an inheritor of lands & tenemēts in Gauelkind, y• al his ſonnes ſhal part y• inheritāce by equal portiōs
               10 And if there bee noe heire male, let ye partitiō be made betwene the females, euen as betwene bro. But y• ſtatut of Praerog. regis cap. 16. ſayeth, That the females, ſhall not deuide wyth the males, which is to bée vnderſtode, of ſuch as bée in equall degrée of kynred as Brothers and ſiſters,

as in this ix. and. x. deuiſion. For if a man haue iſſue iij. ſonnes, & the eldeſt haue iſſue a daughter, and die in the life of his father, and the father dieth. In this caſe the daughter ſhalioyne with the two other brethren her vncles, for that ſhée is not in equal degrée wt them, as her father was, whoſe heire neuertheleſſe ſhe muſt of neceſſity be.
               11 And let the meſſuage alſo be departed betwene them, but the Aſtre ſhall remayne to the yongeſt ſonne or daughter, and be the value thereof deliuered to each of the parceners of y• heritage, frō xl. féete from yt Aſtre, if y• tenement wil ſoe ſuffer.
               By this worde (Aſtre) is ment (as is cōiectured) either the hall or

chéefe roome of the houſe▪ eyther elſe the well for water, or the ſouth ſide of the buildinge, for (Aſtre) beeinge ſounded without (ſ) may come of the latin worde Atrium, which ſignifieth a Hall, or of Hauſtrum, whichbe tokeneth the bucket of a wel, or of Auſtrum, the ſouth ſide, euery of which haue their particular cō
                  modities aboue the reſt of y• houſe or tenement, Or otherwiſe being ſoū
                  ded with (ſ) it may be deduced from ye frēch word (Aſiſtre) by contraction (Aſtre) which is as much as a ſite, or ſituation, and with the article (le) before it (Leſter) a churchyarde, or Court about a houſe. But at this daye there is no ſuch regarde made ī y• particiō, but ōly

conſideration had, that the parts them ſelues be equal & indifferent.
               12 And then let the eldeſt brother haue y• firſt thoyſe, and the others afterwarde accordinge to their degrée.
               13 Likewiſe of houſes which ſhalbee founde in ſuch meſſuages, let them be departed amongſt the heires by equall portyons, that is to wéete, by foote if néede be, Sauinge the Couert of the Aſtre which ſhal remain to the yongeſt ſonne, or daughter, as is beforeſaid Soe neuertheleſſe, that y• yongeſt make reaſonable amends to his parceners for the part which to them belongeth, by the awarde of good men.
               14 And of the aforeſayd tenements, whereof one

onely ſuit mas wont to be made before time, be there not by reaſon of y• particion but one ſole ſuit made, as it was before accuſtomed, but yet let all the parceners make contribution to y• parcener which maketh y• ſint for them.
               15 In like ſortlet y• goods of Gauelkind perſons be parted into thrée partes, after the funerals and y• debts payed, if there bée lawful iſſu on liue, ſo yt ye dead haue one part, & his lawfull ſonnes & doughters an other part, & the wife the iij. part.
               Where it is ſaid here, that y• dead ſhal haue one part, it is ment for performance of his legacies by hys executours if hée make a teſtament, or by the dyſcretyon of the

ordinary if hée die inteſtate.
               16 And if there be no law ful iſſue on liue, let y• dead haue the one halfe, and y• wife on liue y• other half. The ſelfe ſame order y• the cuſtōe here ſpeaketh of in y• xv. & xvj. diuiſiō, is at this day obſerued in y• City of London, and the ſame in effect, was longe ſince vſed throughout the whole Realme. For it is euydent both by the lawe of kinge Canutus, by maſter Glanuile, by y• words of Magna carta ca. 18. by maſter Fitz. in his Natura breuiū
                   in the writ d' Rationabili parte bonor' f. 122. L. y• y• wife & children had their reſonable partes of the goods by the cōmon lawe of ye realme, & that y• common lawe was ſoe, it appereth

alſo in 30. E. 3. 25. et 21. 30. H. 6. And it was ſaid for lawe M. 31. H. 8. abridged by maſter Bro. ti▪ Rationabili parte bonarum pl'. 6. that it hath bene often put in vre as a comon lawe, and neuer de murred vpō, and therfore it ſeemeth that it is common lawe, howſoeeuer it came to paſſe at length y• it was admitted for lawe, but in ſuch countries only, where it was continued by daylie vſage, & that al ye writs in the Regiſter, de Rationabili ꝑte bonorū
                   haue mē
                  cion of the ſpecial cuſtōe of the ſhire, in which the part is demaunded, and ſoe is the Booke 28. Henrici 6. 4. But as at thys daye partycion of Chattelles is not vſed

throughout the whole Realme, though in the meane time it hath not loſt the force of common lawe as many thinke, & as may bée gathered by the opinion aforeſayde holden for lawe an. 31. H. 8. So is it (as ſome think) vaniſhed quit out of all vre within thys Countrey of Rent alſo.
               17 And if the heire or heires, ſhalbe vnder the age of 15. yeares, let the nouriture of thē be committed by y• lord, to the next of the bloud to whō the enheritaunce cannot diſcend, ſo y• ye Lord take nothing for the committing thereof.
               18 And let not ye heire bée maried by the Lord but by hys owne wyl, and by the aduiſe of his

friends if he will.
               19 And whē ſuch heire, or heires, ſhal come to yt ful age of 15. yeares, let their landes and tenements be deliuered vnto thē, together with their goodes and profites of the ſame landes, remaininge aboue their reaſonable ſuſtenance: of the which profits and goods, let him be boūd to make aunſwere whych had y• education of the heire, or els the lord, or his heires which cōmitted y• ſame education.
               The lord ought to take good héede, that he credit not the cuſtody to any perſon that ſhall not bée able to aunſwere therefore. For if ye heire at his ful age of 15. yeres ſhal come to y• Lordes court,

and demaund his enheritance, although y• Lord may diſtreine the gardē to yeld his accompt (as it appereth 18. E. 2. Auowry 220,) yet in default of his abilitie, the Lord him ſelfe, and his heires, remaine charged to the heire for the ſame: But I do not heare, that the Lords take vpon thē at this day to cōmit the cuſtody of theſe infants, but yt they leaue it altogether to the order of ye next of kyn, peraduēture to auoyde the daunger in which they are, if they intermedle as is a foreſaid.
               20 And this is to be vnderſtood, yt frō ſuch time as th
                     •
                  ſe heires in Gauelkind, be of, or haue paſſed y• age of 15. yeres, it is lawful for them, their landes or tenementes,

to giue and ſell at their pleaſure, Sauing ye ſeruices to ye chiefe lords, as is beforeſayd.
               Although that this cuſtome enable the heire to make away his landes and tenementes very ſoone, namely at the fiftenth yere of his age, by meanes wherof it might be thought vnreaſonable in giuing ſuch ſcope and liberty to ſo yong yeres: yet vppon the good conſideration thereof it may appere, that the cuſtome it ſelfe doth reaſonably & carefully prouide in the behalfe of the heire for ſomuch as it licenceth hī at yt yeres not to giue his lāds, for yt he might do for nothīg, but to giue and ſel his lāds, which it meaneth he ſhould not do wtout ſufficiēt recōpence.

Such like interpretatiō, the cōmon law alſo ſeemeth to make of this cuſtome both by the opiniō of Vauaſor & Keble 5. H. 7. 31. et 41. what ſaid, yt it was 
                     〈◊〉
                   y• a releas made by w
                     ••
                  h an enfant was voyd, By y• ſētence of ye b
                     •
                  oke 21. E. 4. 24. where it is ſayd, yt an infant can not declare his wil vpō ſuch a feoffement. And by the iudgment of Hank 11. H. 4. 33. who alſo held, that a warranty or graunt of a reuerſion made at ſuch age; was to no purpoſe at all, although a leaſe wt releaſe might hapely bée good by the cuſtome, becauſe that amoūteth to a feoffement. And it is not fit that this cuſtome ſhould bee conſtrued by equity, for as much as it

ſtandeth not with any equity, to enable an infant, of litle diſcretion, & leſſe experience, to ſel his land, and not to prouide withal y• he ſhould haue Quid pro quo, and ſome reaſonable recompence for the ſame: for y• were not to defend the pupill & fatherleſſe, but to lay him wide open to euery ſlye deceipt & circumuē
                  tion. In which reſpect, their opiniō is very well to be liked of, who hold, y• if an infāt in Gauelkind, at this day wil ſell at xv. yeres of age, theſe thrée things ought of neceſſity to cōcure, if he wil haue y• ſale good & effectual. The firſt y• he be an heire, and not a purchaſer of y• land y• he departeth wtal. The ſecōd y• he haue recōpēce for it: & y• third, y• he do it

with liuery of ſeyſin by his owne hand, & not by warrant of atturney, nor by any other maner of aſſurance. And theſe mē for proofe of the firſt and ſecond point of their aſſertion, do build vpon y• words of this cuſtome, where it is ſaid frō ſuch time as thoſe heires in Gauelkind be of or haue paſſed the age of fifteene yeares, it is lawfull for thē, their landes or tenements, to gyue and ſell, in which y• words (thoſe heires) doe reſtreine the infant that cōmeth in by purchaſe. And (giue & ſel) in the copulatiue, doe of neceſſity imply a recompence, forſomuch as ſelling cannot be wtout ſōe price or thing giuē for it. And for mayntenaunce of the third matter, they haue of their part

beſides the comon vſage of the countrey, y• comō law of the Realme alſo, whych expoundeth the word (Giue) to meane a feoffement, & which not onely diſalloweth of any gyft made by an infant, but alſo puniſheth the taker in treſpas, vnleſſe he haue it by liuery from y• infants owne 
                     ••
                  ndes as appereth in 26. H. 8. 2. 9. H. 7. 24. 18. E. 4. 2. 22. H. 6. 3. and diuers other bookes.
               21 And if any ſuch tenant in Gauelkind dye, and haue a wife that ouerliueth him, let that wife by and by bee endowed of y• one halfe of the tenements whereof her huſband died veſted and ſeiſed by y• heires, if they be of age, or by the Lords, if y• heires be not

of age, ſoe that ſhe maye haue the one halfe of thoſe landes, and tenements, to holde ſo longe as ſhee kéepeth her a widowe, or ſhalbee attainted of child birth▪ after the auncient vſage, that is to ſay, that i
                     •
                   w
                     ••
                   ſhe is deliuered of childe, & the infant be herde cry, and that the hue and 
                     〈…〉
                   be rayſed, and the countrie aſſembled, and haue the viewe of the childe ſo borne, and the mother, then let her looſe her dower wholye▪ and otherwiſe not, ſo longe as ſhée holdeth her a widowe, whereof it is ſayed in kentiſh.
            
            
               He t
                     •
                  at doth wende her, Let him lende her.
               This cuſtōe hath bene 
                     •
                  llowed of, by the common

lawe longe tyme ſince, as may bee reade, Praerog. regis cap. 16. & 2. H. 3. in Fitz. t' Preſcriptiō 59. &c. But it is a doubt whether a womā ſhalbe endowed by this cuſtōe of a poſſeſſion in lawe or noe, for that y• words be (of ye tenements wherof her huſband died veſted & ſeiſed) which worde (veſted) inforceth a poſſeſſion in déede, and not in lawe onely. And therefore, if landes in Gauelkynde diſcend to a maried man▪ which dyeth before hée make his entry into the ſame, Inquire whether it be ye maner to endowe his wife thereof or noe? A woman ſhall not bée endowed by thys cuſtome of a bailliwike, or faire, or ſuch like profitte by the oppynyon

of M. Parkins fo. 84. becauſe y• wordes of this cuſtomary dower bée terres et tenements, and al cuſtomes ſhal find a litteral and ſtreight interpretatiō. And where ſhe is to be endowed by this cuſtome ſhée may very wel be endowed of a moytie, to be holden in cōmon with the heire yt ēioyeth y• other halfe &c. It is a doubt whether y• a woman entituled to dower in gauelkind may waiue her dower of the halfe after this cuſtome, & bring her acciō to be ē
                  dowed of ye 3. at ye cōmō lawe, & ſo exēpt her ſelfe frō al daunger of ye cuſtomary conditions or no? Sōe haue byn of opiniō y• ſhe is at lybertie to take y• ōe & refuſe y• other at her pleaſure: & therefore inquire thereof &c.
               
                  22 And they claime alſo, that if a man take a wife which hath inheritaunce of Gauelkinde, and the wife dieth before hym, let the huſbande haue the one halfe of thoſe landes and tenements whereof ſhe dieth ſeiſed ſoe longe as he holdeth him a widower, without doinge any ſtrippe, or waſt, or baniſhmēt, whether ther were iſſue betwene thē or no. And if he take another wife, let him loſe al.
               23 And if any tenement of Gauelkinde do eſcheat (and that eſcheat be to any lord which holdeth by fée of Hawberke, or by Serieancie) by death, or by gauelate as is her after ſayd, or be to him rēdred vp by his tenaunt which before helde it of hym

by quite clayme thereof made, or if his eſcheat bee by Gauelate as is hereafter ſayd, let thys land remaine to y• heires vnpartable: And this is to be vnderſtood, where the tenant ſo rendringe, doth reteine no ſeruice to himſelfe, but ſaueth neuertheleſſe to the other lords their fées, fermes, and the rentes wherewith the aforeſaid tenementes of Gauelkynde (ſo rendred) were before charged, by him, or them which might charge thē. To hold by fée of Hawberke, or by Serieancie (if it bee graund Serieancie) is to holde by knightes ſeruyce. Heahbeony in Saxō, is a high defence: and the Cuſtomes of Normādy cal y• fiefe or fée de Haubert

which oweth to defende the land by ful armes, yt is, by horſe, haubert, target, ſworde, or helme. And it conſiſteth of 300. acres of land, which is y• ſame (as ſome thinke) that wée called a whole Knights fée.
               24 And they claime alſo, that if any tenaunt in Gauelkinde wythholde his rent, and his ſeruices of the tenement which he holdeth of hys lorde, let the lord ſéeke by the awarde of his courte from iij. wekes, to thrée wéekes, to find ſome diſtreſſe vppon that tenement, vntil the iiij. court alwaies with witneſſe. And if wtin that time hée can find no diſtreſſe in y• tenemēt, wherby he may haue iuſtice of his tenāt, thē at y• iiij. court let it be

awarded, that hee ſhall take that tenement into his hande in the name of a diſtreſſe, as if it were an Oxe, or acowe, and let him kepe it a yeare, & a day, in his hande without manuringe it, within which terme, if the tenaunt come, and paye his arrerages, and make reaſonable amendes for the withholdinge: Then let him haue and enioye his tenement as his aū
                  ceſtors & he before helde it. And if he do not cōe before y• yere, & ye day paſt, thē let y• lord go to ye next County court wt the witneſſes of his owne court and pronounce there this proceſſe, to haue further witneſſe. And by the awarde of his court (after y• coūtie court holden) he ſhal enter, & manure in

thoſe landes and tenementes, as in his owne demeanes. And if the tenaunt come afterwarde, and wil rehaue his tenements, and hold them as he did before, let him mak agreemēt wt ye lord according as it is aūciētly ſaid
               Hath he not ſince any thing giuen? nor hath le not ſince any thing paid: Then let him paye fiue pound for his were, beefore he becōe tenant or holder againe.
               Some copies haue the firſt verſes thus.
               Let him ix. times pay, & ix. times repaye.
               This cuſtōe is touched by the waye by maſter Frowike 21. H. 7. 15. & by him thought to be good but whether it be at this daye put in vre, enquire further.
               
                  25 Alſo they clayme, that no manne ought to make an othe vppon a booke, (neither by dyſtreſſe, nor by the power of the lord, nor his Bailife) againſt his will, wt
                  out y• writ of the kynge (vnleſſe it bée for fealtie to be done to his Lord) but onely before the Coroner, or ſuch other miniſter of the king, yt hath Royal power to enquire of treſpaſſe cōmitted againſt y• Crowne of our Lord the king.
               26 And they clayme, y• euery Kētiſhman may eſſoine an other, either in y• kinges court, or in the county or in y• hundreth or in the court of his lord where eſſoine lyeth, and that aſwell in caſe of common ſute, as of plea.
               
                  Moreouer they clayme by an eſpeciall déede of kinge Henry, the father of kinge Edwarde that of the tenements which are holden in Gauelkinde, there ſhal no battayle bée ioyned, nor graund aſſiſe taken by xii. knightes, as it is vſed in other places of ye Realme: yt is to wit, where the tenaunt & demaundant hold by Gauelkind: But in place of theſe graund aſſiſes, let Juries be taken by xii. men being tenaunts in Gauelkind, ſo y• four tenāts of Gauelkind chooſe xii. tenaunts of Gauelkynd to be Jurors.
               And yt Charter of the king of this eſpecialty, is in the cuſtody of Sir John of Norwood, the

day of S. Elphey, in Caunterbury the yeare of king Edward ye ſonne of king Henry the xxi.
               Theſe be the vſages of Gauelkind, and of Gauelkindmen in Kent, which were béefore the conqueſt, and the Cō
                  queſt, and euer ſince till nowe.
               The end of the cuſtomes.
               Hauinge thus ended ye cuſtōes as you ſée (Brother Nicholas) there remayneth nowe to bée ſhewed what lands wtin this Countrey of Kent, be of the nature of Gauelkind, and what not.
               Firſt therefore, it is to be vnderſtanded, yt all y• lands wtin this Shire which be of aunciēt Socage tenure (as was ſaid at the béegynnynge) be alſo of the nature of

Gauelkind. And y• lands holden by auncient tenure of knightes ſeruice, be at the cōmon lawe, & are not departible after the order of this cuſtome except certen which béeing holden of old tyme by knyghtes ſeruice of the Archbiſhop of Caū
                  terbury, are neuer the leſſe departible, as it may appere by ye booke 26. H. 8. 4. And that grewe by reaſon of a graunt made by kynge John, to Hubert the Archbiſhoppe there, the tenor of which is as followeth.
               John by the grace of God Kyng of Englande▪ Lorde of Ireland, Duke of Normā
                  dye, of Aquitane, and Earle of Angieu: To all Archbyſhoppes, Biſhops,

Abbots, Earles, Barons, Juſtices, Shirifes, Gouernours, and officers, and al Bailifes, and his faithful ſubiects, gréeting. Knowe yée yt wée haue graunted, and by this our preſēt Charter haue confirmed to our reuerend and déerely beloued father Hubert Archbiſhoppe of Caunterbury, and hys ſucceſſors for euer, that it ſhall bée lawfull for them, to conuert thoſe lāds which menne of the fée of the Church of Caunterbury do hold in Gauelkind in to knightes fee.
               And yt ye ſame Biſhops & their ſucceſſours, haue the like power and libertie for euer, ouer thoſe men and their heires, that ſhal hold thoſe lāds ſo 
                     ••
                  uerted into knights

ſée which the Archbiſhop hath, & his ſucceſſors after him ſhall haue, ouer other knights of ye ſée of the Church of Caunterbury & their heires. And that thoſe men and their heires haue the ſame & al ſuch libertie for euer which other knightes of the ſée of the Church of Caunterbury and their heires haue. Prouided alwayes yt neuertheleſſe their accuſtomed rent of pence, be holy payed out of their landes as before time their giftes, auerages, and other ſeruices which iſſued out of the ſame landes be conuerted into a rēt of pence of like value. And y• y• ſame rent be paied as y• other rēt of pence is. Wherefore we wil & ſtraightly cōmaund, y• whatſoeuer

the aforenamed Archbiſhop and his ſucceſſours after him ſhall doe concerninge thoſe landes which are to bée conuerted into knightes fée accordinge to the forme & manner aboue written, abide ratified and cōfirmed for euer. Forbiddinge any perſon to preſume againſt the déed of the Archbiſhoppe or hys ſucceſſors in this behalf. Witneſſe E. Biſhop of Ely, & S. of Bathe G. y• ſonne of Peter Earle of Eſſex, Williā Marſhall Earle of Pēbrooke, Ro. of Harecourt, Garine y• ſōne of Gerald, Peter of Stoke, Ric. of Reuers Rob. of Tateſhal, yeuen by y• hād of S. Archdeacon vnto Williā at Rupem auriual, y• 4. day of May the third yeare of our raigne.
               
                  But for aſmuch as it is diſputable, whether this Charter of Kynge John, be of ſufficiēt vertue to change ye nature of Gauelkynde land, or no, and for that the certeintie of the landes ſo conuerted into knightes fée, doth not any where appere, (ſaue onely that in the booke of Aide leuied in this ſhire, Anno 20. E. 3. it is foure or fiue tymes noted, that certeine lands in Kent bee holden in knightes ſeruice, by the newe licence graunted to the Archbiſhoppe) this ſhall ſuffiſe for that, and it ſhall followe to be proued, that al the landes of auncient tenure in knightes ſeruice, be ſubiect to the ordinary courſe of diſcent at the common lawe:

And that may ſufficiently be done both by the expreſſe wordes of a note in 9. H. 3. abridged by maſter Brooke ti. Cuſtomes 57. and in maſter Fitzherb ti. Preſcription 63. And by the opinion of the Juſtices 26. H. 8. 4. as alſo by pleyne recital in the act of parliament made 31. H. 8. ca. 3. by which ſtatute, the poſſeſſiōs of certen gentelmen there were deliuered from this cuſtomary diſcent, and incorporated to the common lawe, for (amongeſt other thinges) in that act it is ſaied, That from thence forth ſuch their landes ſhalbe chaunged from the ſaied cuſtome, and ſhal diſcend, as lands at the commō lawe, & as

other lands being in the ſaid coūty of kent, which neuer were holdē by ſeruice of Socage, but alwaies haue bene holden by knights ſeruice, do diſcende. By which words, it is very euident, that y• makers of that eſtatute vnderſtoode al lands holden by knights ſeruice, to be of their proper nature, diſcendable after y• comō lawe, & that Socage tenure was the onely ſubiect, in which thys our cuſtome of Gauelkinde diſcent preuailed, & helde place.
               But when mencion is here made of Socage, & knightes fée, it muſt alwayes be vnderſtanded a tenure longe ſince, and of auncyent tyme contynued, and not nowe newely, or lately

created, for ſo it may fal out otherwiſe, then is alreadye reported. As for example, if land aunciētlye holden by knightes ſeruice, cōe to y• Quéens hands, whoe afterwarde giueth ye ſame out againe to a cōon perſō, to be holdē of her manor of Eaſt Grene within Socage, this lande (not with ſtandinge the alteration of y• tenure) remaineth diſ
                     ••
                  
                  dable to y• eldeſt ſonne only, as it was before, as alſo, in like ſort, if lands of auncient Socage ſeruite come to ye Crowne, and be deliuered out agayne, to be holden either of the Quéene in Capite, or by knightes ſeruice of any manor, it ought to diſcēd according to y• cuſtde not wtſtanding yt ye tenure be altered, & if this be true

in the graūt of ye Quéene her ſelfe: then much leſſe may the Archbiſhope by a newe creation of tenure, make to his tenants any alteratiō of this olde cuſtome & maner, For as the pleadinge is, That the landes aforeſayed, are of the tenure and nature of Gauelkynde, euen ſo the truith is, that the preſent tenure onely guideth not the dyſcent, but that the tenure and the nature together, doe gouerne it. And therefore, as on the one ſide, the cuſtome cannot attache, or take holde of that which was not béefore in nature ſubiect to the cuſtome, that is to ſaye, accuſtomably departed: So on the other ſyde, the practiſe of the cuſtome, longe time

continued, may not bee interrupted by a bare alteration of the tenure, as it was holden by the Juſtices, Annd 4. et 5. Phi, et Mary, as Judge Daliſon hath left reported. And alſo as it appereth by the booke 26. H. 8. 4. where it is ſaied, that if a man ſeyſed of Gauelkinde land holden in Socage, make a gift in taile and create a tenure in knights ſeruice, that yet this lande muſt deſcende after the cuſtome it did before the change of the tenure.
               Moreouer, as y• change of the tenure cannot prenaile againſt thys cuſtome: Soe neyther the continuance of a contrarie vſage, may alter this preſcription. For it is holden 16. E. 3. in Fitz.
                  
                  ti. Preſcription 52. that albeit the eldeſt ſonne only hath (and that for many diſcents together) entred into Gauelkind lād and occupied it wtout any cōtradiction of the yonger brothers, that yet the lande remaineth partible betwene them, when ſoeuer they will put to their clayme. Agaynſt which aſſertion, y• which is ſaid 10. H. 3. in Fitzh. titulo Preſcription 64. namely of the iſſue taken thus. Whether the lande were parted or no, is not greatly forceable. For al though it be foe, that the lande were neuer parted in déede, yet if it remayne partible in nature, it may bee parted whenſouer occaſion ſhal bée miniſtred. And therfore, euen in the fourme

of pleadinge vſed at this day (That the land alwaies &c. was partible, and parted) it is playnelie taken, that the worde (partible) onely is of ſubſtaunce, and that the worde (parted) is but a worde of forme, and not material, or trauerſable at al, yea ſo inſeperable is thys cuſtome from the lande in which it obtaineth, that a contrarye dyſcent (contynued in the caſe of the Crowne it ſelfe) cannot hinder, but that (after ſuch tyme as the land ſhall reſorte agayne to a common perſonne) the fourmer olde cuſtome ſhall gouerne it. As if landes of Gauelkind nature come to the quéens hāds by purchaſe,

or by Eſchete as holden of her manor of Dale, nowe after her death, al her ſonnes ſhall inherite and deuide them. But if they come to her by forfaiture in treaſon, or by gift in parliament, ſoe y• her grace is ſeiſed of thē in right of the crowne, then her eldeſt ſonne only (which ſhalbée kinge after her) ſhall enioye them, in which caſe although thoſe lāds which the eldeſt ſonne (beinge kinge) did poſſeſſe, doe come to his eldeſt ſonne after him (beinge kinge alſo) and ſoe from one to an other, by ſundrye diſcentes, yet the oppinion of Syr Anthonye Browne was 7. Elizabeth, that if at any time after the ſame landes be

grannted to a common perſon, they ſhall reuolt to their former nature of Gauelkynde and be partible amongſt his heires males, notwithſtanding that they haue runne a contrary courſe in dyuers the diſcentes of the kings before. But much leſſe may the vnity of poſſeſſion in the Lorde fruſtrate the cuſtome of Gauelkind diſcent as it may appere, 14. H. 4. in y• lōge Recordare, abridged by maſter Brooke tit. Auowry 46. and tit. Cuſtomes 19.
               Nowe followeth to bée ſpoken howe farre this cuſtome extendeth it ſelfe within this our Countrey of Kent &c.
               It is commonly taken that the cuſtome of

Gauelkynde is generall, and ſpreadeth it ſelfe throughout the whole Shire into al lands ſubiect by auncient tenure vnto the ſame, ſuch places only excepted, where it is altered by act of parliament. And therefore in 5. E. 4. 18. and 14. H, 4. 8. it is ſaid, that the cuſtome of Gauelkynde is (as it were) a common lawe in Kent. And the booke 22. E. 4. 19. affirmeth, that in demaunding Gauelkind land, a manne ſhall not néede to preſcribe in certeine, and to ſhewe that the Towne, Borough, or Citie, where the lāds bée, is an Auncyent Towne, Borough, or Cytie, and that the cuſtome hath byn there

(tyme out of mynde) that the landes wythin the ſame Towne, Borough, or Citie, ſhould diſcend to all the heires males &c. But that is ſufficyentlye inough to ſhewe the Cuſtome at large, and to ſay, that the land lieth in Kent, and that all the landes there bée of the nature of Gauelkynd. For a writ of partition of lands in Gauelkynde (ſayth M. Littleton) ſhall bée as generall, as if the lands were at the common lawe, although the declaratyon ought ſpecyally to contayne mencion of the Cuſtome of the Countrey. Thys vnyuerſalytie conſydered, and alſo the ſtrayte bonde (whereby the

cuſtome is ſo inſeperably knit to the land, as in maner nothinge but an act of parliament canne clerely diſſeuer them) it followeth, that no place Citie, Towne, or Borough within this ſhire, can bée exempt from this cuſtome although the ſame hath not at any tyme byn there put in vre, no more then the Eldeſt ſonne (in the caſe before) may for the like reaſon preſcribe agaynſt his yoūger Bretheren &c.
               Thus much béeyng ſpoken touchynge the name, tenure, nature, generalty, and order of Gauelkynde: it ſhall nowe bee ſhewed of what quality the rents, remaynders, actyons,

and ſuch other thinges (of the which ſome b
                     •
                  e iſſuing out of theſe lāds, ſome bée annexed vnto them, and ſome bée rayſed by reaſon of them) ſhalbée. And of thē ſome ſhal enſue the nature of the land, and other ſome ſhal kéepe y• ſame courſe that common lawe hath appointed. And therfore if a rent be graunted in fée out of Gauelkynde land, it ſhal diſcend to all the males as the land it ſelfe ſhal do, as appereth in 14. H. 8. 5. 26. H. 8. 4. & 4. E. 3.
               But if ii. iointenantes of land in Gauelkynde grant a rent charge out of that land to I. S. & to his heires: And I. S. dieth hauinge iſſue ii. ſonnes, this rēt ſhal not diſcēd to both y• ſonnes

of I. S. but to the heire at the common law becauſe that the cuſtome is in ſuſpence during the ioynture by the opinion of the right worſhipfull Chriſtopher Yeluerton Eſquire, at hys readyng in Grayes Inne in lent An. 1573.
               So if a tenauncy bée of Gauelkynde nature, yet the rent ſeruyce by which it is holden may diſcend according to the common lawe, as Ald' & Chart' in 7. E. 3. were of opinion.
               If a remainder of Gauelkind land bée tayled to the heires males, they altogether ſhall inherit as Fitzherbert & Norwich thought 26. H. 8. 4. But that is to bée vnderſtoode of a diſcent onely, for if landes of

Gauelkynde nature be leaſſed for life, the Remaynder to the ryght heires of John Style which hath iſſue fower ſonnes and dieth, and after the leſſée for lyfe dyeth, nowe the eldeſt ſonne onely of I. Stile ſhall haue thys land, for hée is right heire, and that is a good name of purchaſe 37. H. 8. in maſter Brooke ti. Done et Remaynder 42. But if the landes had byn gyuen to John Stile for lyfe, the remaynder to hys next heire male, thys had byn an eſtate taile in John Stile him ſelfe, and then the lande ſhould haue diſcended to al his ſonnes, in ſo much as in that caſe ye wordes (next heire male) be not a

name of purchaſe. Howbeit it was greatly doubted 3. & 4. Phil. et Mariae (as Juſtice Daliſon reporteth) if a remainder bée deuiſed by teſtament (to the next heire male) whether in that caſe the eldeſt brother onely ſhal haue it, in ſo much as (in the vnderſtandinge of the lawe, whych is a iudge ouer al cuſtomes) he is the next heire male and therefore inquire of it.
               As touching vouchers, it appeareth 11. E. 3. that al the heires in Gauelkynd ſhalbe vouched for the warraunty of their Aunceſter, and not the eldeſt onely. But the opinion of Maſter Littleton li. 3. cap. 13. and of the Iuſtices 22. E. 4. is clere yt the elde
                     ••
                  
                  
ſonne onely ſhalbe rebutted, or barred by the warranty of the aunceſtour, to be ſhort, the eldeſt ſonne onely ſhal enter for the breache of a condition: But the reſt of the brethren ſhalbée ioyned with hym in ſuinge a writte of Attaynt to refourme a falſe verdict, or Errour to reuerſe an erronious iugement: And they al ſhalbe charged for the debt of their aunceſtour, if ſo be yt they al haue aſſets in their handes. But if the eldeſt onely haue aſſets remayninge, and the reſidue haue aliened their partes, then he onlye ſhalbe charged after the mind of the booke 11. E. 3. &c. And thus much for this part ſhal ſuffice.
               Nowe a woorde or ij.

of other thinges confuſely, yet apertaininge to this matter, notwythdinge not ſoe neceſſarie for your purpoſe to bée knowen as thoſe aforeſayde. It appereth in a written report at large of 16. Edwardi 2. which is alſo partlye abridged by maſter Fitzherbert, titulo Preſcription, that it was tryed by verdicte, that noe manne ought to haue common in Landes of Gauelkinde, howbeit the contrarye is well knowen at this day, & that in many places ye ſame booke ſaith, yt the vſage of Gauelkinde is, that a man may lawfullye inchaſe, or driue out into the high waye to their aduenture, the beaſtes of any

other perſonne that hée ſhall fynde doynge dammage in his lande, and yt he is not compellable to impounde them, which thing is practiſed at this day.
               The parlyament 15. Henrici ſexti cap 3. mindinge to amplifye the priuiledges of Gauelkynde, graunted to the tenauntes of that lande, exemption in Attaints, in ſuch ſort as the inhabitaunts of auncyent demeane, and of the fiue portes before had: But within thrée yeares after vppon complaynt of ſome of the Countrey which enfourmed the Parlyament houſe that there was not in the whole Shire thirtye or fortye perſonnes, that

holde to the value of xx. pounde lande, out of Gauelkinde, who in default of others, and by reaſon of that exemption, were continuallye moleſted by returnes in Attaintes, that act was vtterly repealed.
               The ſtatute 14. H. 8. cap. 6. gyueth libertye to euery manne (hauing highwaie through hys lande in the welde that is worne déepe, and incommodious for paſſage) to lay out another waye in ome ſuch other place of hys lande, as ſhalbée thought méete by the vyewe of two Juſtyces of the peace, and twelue other men of wyſdome and diſcretion.
               The general law, made 35. H. 8. 17. for the

preſeruation of Copeiſes woodes thorough out the Realme, maketh plaine exception of all woodes within this wealde, vnleſſe it be of ſuch as bée common &c. And here an ende of thys matter. ſauinge that I wil make maſter Litteltons annſwere to ſuch as happelye wil demaunde what reaſon thys cuſtome of gauelkinde diſcent hath thus to deuyde lande a monge al the males cō
                  trary to the manner of the whole Realme béeſides: The yonger ſonns (ſayth he) be as good gen telmen as the elder, and they (beinge a like déere to their common aunceſtour, from whom they claime) haue ſo much the more néede of their frēds

helpe as (thorowe their minority) they be leſſe able then the elder Brother to helpe thēſelues &c.
            
            
               Gelde.
               GElde, that is to bee quite of ſeruile cuſtomes which were wōt to be geeuen, and are yet giuen, as hornegelde and ſuch like.
            
            
               Grithbrech.
               GRithbrech that is the kinges peace broken, becauſe (Grith) in Engliſh is pax in latin.
            
            
               Hangwite.
               HAngwite, that is to be quite of a théefe or relon hāged without iugement, or eſcaped out of your cuſtody.
            
            
               
               Hariot.
               HAriot is in ii. ſortes the one hariot Cuſtome, the other haryot ſeruice.
               Hariot ſeruice (ſome fay) is alwaies expreſſed in a mans graunt, or déede that hée holdeth by ſuch ſeruyce to pay hariot at the time of his death, and thys hariot is payable after ye death of the tenaunt in fée ſimſimple.
               Hariot Cuſtome, is where hariotes haue byn payed tyme out of mynde by cuſtome. And thys may bée after the death of tenant for lyfe &c. But to ſpeake therof generally.
               Hariot is the beſt beaſt (whether it be horſe

Oxe, or Cowe) that the tenaunt had at the tyme of his death. And may bée either ſeyſed, or a diſtreſſe taken for it, whether it be hariot ſeruyce, or hariot cuſtome, to the Lordes vſe of whom the tenaunt held, by hys Bailife, or other officer béelonginge to hys manour.
               But of right the Lord, nor hys officer ſhould not take hariot before it bée preſented at the next court holden, that the tenant is dead, and that ſuch a beaſt is due to the Lord for his hariot.
            
            
               Haybote, or Hedgebote.
               HAybote, or hedgebote, is neceſſarie ſtuffe to make and mend hedges, which leſſée for yeares, or for lyfe of common

right may take vpon the ground to him leaſed, although it bée not expreſſed in his leaſe, and although it bée a leaſe by woordes without wrytinge.
               Haybote alſo may bée takē for neceſſary ſtuffe, to make Rakes forkes and ſuch like inſtrumēts wherewith men vſe in ſommer to tedde & make hay: and ſo a leſſée for yeares tooke it, & it was allowed him by hys leſſor, the rather, as I ſuppoſe, for that ſuch inſtruments are commonly made of ſlender vnder wood, which by the common lawe leſſee for yeres may cut and take as is aforeſaid.
            
            
               Hidage.
               HIdage, that is to bée

quit if the king ſhal taxe al the land by hides.
               Note that a hyde of land is a whole ploweland. And this kynde of taxinge by hides was much vſed in old tyme, as well for prouiſion of armour, as paymentes of money, & that chefely in kinge Etheldredes daies (a kinge in thys Countrey before ye conqueſt) who in the yeare of Chriſt 1006. when as the Danes landed at Sandwich in Kēt, taxed al his lād by hides thus. That euery 310. hydes of land ſhould find one ſhip forniſhed, & euery 8. hides ſhould find one Jacke & one ſallet, for ye defence of ye Realme.
            
            
               Hotchpot.
               HOtchpot, is a medlynge, or mixinge together,

and a partition of lands giuen in frankmariage, wyth other lands in fée ſimple dyſcēded as for example, a man ſeyſed of 30. acres of land in fee ſimple hath iſſue ii. daughters, & gyueth wt one of his daughters to a man yt marieth her x. acres of the ſame land in frankemariage, and dieth ſeyſed of the other 20. acres: Nowe if ſhe that is thus maried wil haue any part of the 20. acres whereof her father dyed ſeyſed: Shée muſt put her lands gyuen in frankmariage, in hotchpot, that is to ſay ſhée muſt refuſe that gyft in frankemariage, and ſuffer the land to bée commixt and mingled together, wt the other land whereof her father

dyed ſeyſed, ſo that an equall deuiſion may bee made of the whole betweene her and her Siſter: and thus for her 10. acres ſhée ſhall haue xv. els her Siſter wyll haue the xx. acres, of whych their father died ſeyſed.
            
            
               Home Sokene.
               HOme ſoken (or hane ſoken) y• is to be quit of amercements for entringe into houſes vyolently & without licēce, & contrary to the peace of the kinge. And that you hold plea of ſuch treſpas done in your court, and in your land.
            
            
               Homicide or māſlaughter.
               HOmicide or manſlaughter, is the killing of a man feloniouſly, without malice fore

thought: It is alſo defined thus: Homicide is the killing of a man, by a man: and if ſuch kyllinge be don by a dogge, oxe, or other thinge, it is not properly called homicide: for it is called homicide of a man, & to kil as y• killing of a man.
            
            
               Hornegeld.
               HOrnegeld, y• is to be quit of a certeine cuſtome exacted by tallage thorowe all the lande, as of whatſoeuer horne beaſt.
            
            
               Houſebote.
               HOuſebote is neceſſary timber, y• leſſée for yeres, or for life of common right may take vppon y• groūd to repaire y• houſes vpon y• ſāe groūd to him leaſed, although it bée not expreſſed

in ye leaſe, and although it be a leaſe by wordes wt
                  out déed: But if hée take more then is néedefull, hée may bée puniſhed by an action of waſt.
            
            
               Hundred.
               HUndredes were deuiſed by Alfred y• kinge, after that hée had deuided the whole Realme into certeine partes or Sections, whych of the Saxon word Scynan ſignifyinge to cut, he termed Shires, or (as wée yet ſpeake.) Shares, and portions: Theſe Shires hée alſo brake into ſmaller partes, wherof ſome were called Lathes of y• woord Ielapian, which is to aſſemble together: others Tithinges ſo named becauſe there were in each of them to the

number of ten perſons, whereof each one was ſuertie and pledge for others good abearinge: others hundreds becauſe they contayned iuriſdiction ouer an hundred men or pledges, dwellinge paraduenture in ii. or iii. or more pariſhes Boroughes, or townes, lyinge and adioyninge neuertheleſſe ſomewhat nere together, in which he appointed adminyſtration of Juſtice to bée exercyſed ſeuerally amonge them of ye ſame hundred, and not that one ſhould runne out diſorderly into an others hundred, lath, or tithing, wherein he dwelled not. Theſe hundreds cōtinue to this day in force, although not altogether to y• ſāe purpoſe, wherūto at

the firſt they were appointed yet ſtyll very néedful both in tyme of peace for good order of gouermēt diuers ways, & alſo in warre for certeinty of leuying of mē: as els for the more ready collections of payments graunted in parliament to the kynges and Quéenes of thys Realme.
            
            
               Hundred.
               HUndredum, that is to bée quit of money or cuſtomes to bee done to the gouernours & hundredors.
            
            
               Ideot.
               IDeot is he that is a foole naturally from hys birth, and knoweth not howe to accompt or number twenty pence

nor cannot name hys father, or mother, nor of what age hymſelfe is, or ſuch like eaſie and common matters: ſoe that it appereth he hath noe maner of vnderſtā
                  dinge of reaſon nor gouernement of him ſelfe what is for his profit, or diſprofit &c. But if hée haue ſoe much knowlege that he can reade, or lerne to reade by inſtruction and informatyon of others, or can meaſure an elle of cloth, or name the daies in the wéeke, or begette a childe, ſonne or daughter, or ſuch lyke, whereby it may appere that he hath ſome light of reaſon, then ſuch a one is noe Ideot naturallye.
            
            
               Vnlawful aſſembly.
               
                  VNlawfull aſſemblye, is where people aſſemble them ſelues together to do ſome vnlawful thing againſt the peace, although that they execute not their purpoſe in déede.
            
            
               Imparlance.
               IMparlaunce is when an action of dette, treſpaſſe, or ſuch lyke is brought againſt a man, and after that the pleintife hath counted, or declared, the defendaunt prayeth the Court that hée may haue tyme to put in hys aunſwere, at an other daye in the ſame terme, or in the next terme followinge, this ſtay of aunſwere is called imparlaunce.
            
            
               
               Impriſonment.
               IMpryſonment is noe other thynge, but the reſtraynt of a mannes libertye, whether it bée in the open féelde, or in the Stockes, or Cage in the ſtreates, or in a mans own houſe as wel as in the common gaole. And in all theſe places the partye ſoe reſtrayned is ſayed to be a priſoner, ſoe longe as hée hath not hys lybertye fréely to goe at al times whether he wil, without baile, mainpriſe, or other aucthoritye.
            
            
               Infangethefe.
               INfangethefe, that is that théeues taken with in youre demeſne or fée

conuicted of thefts, ſhalbe iudged in your court.
            
            
               Information.
               INformation for the Queene is that which for a common parſon is called a declaration, and is not alwaies done directly by the Quéene, or her atturney, but rather by ſome other man who ſueth or infourmeth as wel for ye Queene, as for him ſelfe vppon ye breach of ſome penall lawe or ſtat wherin a penalty is giuen to ye party that wil ſue for ye ſame, but no action of det to recouer it, then it muſt be had by information.
            
            
               Ioynture.
               IOynture is an eſtate and aſſuraunce made to a woman in conſideration

of mariage for terme of her life, or otherwiſe, whether it bée before or after ye mariage. And if it bée after the mariage then ſhée may at her libertie after the death of her huſbande refuſe to take or haue the landes ſoe aſſured for her Joynture, and demaund her dower at the cōmon lawe.
               But if it be made before mariage then ſhée may not refuſe ſuch ioiniure, nor haue dower accordinge to the common lawe, vnleſſe that when ſhe bringeth her writte of dower, the defendaunt pleadeth ſuch a plea that will not barre her of her dower, then ſhee ſhalbee endowed As if he ſay in barre, that her huſbande was not

ſeiſed of ſuch eſtate wher of ſhe myght bee endowed, or any ſuch plea, and doth not ſhewe that ſhe h
                     •
                  th a 
                     ••
                  mture made &c. and therefore demaunde iudgement of that action, or iugement if ſhe ſhalbee alſo endowed, or any ſuch lyke plea &c. and this was the oppinion of y• right worſhipful maſter Brograue at his reading in Graies June in Sōmer Anno 1576. 18. Eliz. vppon a braunch of the ſtat made An. 27. H. 8. c. 10. cōcerning iointures & dowers.
               And by him of thoſe things whereof a woman may bée endowed, ſhe may haue ioynture, as of mines, veſturam terr
                     •
                  , woodes, Townes, Iles, meadowes, and ſuch like. Alſo of an aduowson,

of a reuerſion depending vpō an eſtate for life, of a windmil, a high chamber, a rectorie and ſuch other, and they are called tenemēts, Alſo of a villen, for hée is an heredytament, & of all theſe profet may come to the woman. But of thoſe thinges whereof noe profet will cōe, but rather a charge, a ioynture cannot be made.
            
            
               Theft.
               THeft is a deceiptfull taking away of an other mans goods, but not from his parſon, with a minde to ſteale them, a gaynſt hys will whoſe goods they were.
               And theft is in two ſorts, ye one ſo called ſimplie, & the other pety or little theft.

The firſt is where the thynge ſtollen exceedeth the value of xij. d. and y• is felony.
               The other (which is called littel or p
                     •
                  tiet theft) is where the thing ſtollen doth not excede ye value of xij. d. and that is no felony.
            
            
               Laſtage.
               LAſtage, that is to bée quite of a certeine cuſtome exacted in faires any markets for caryinge of thinges where a man will.
            
            
               Leſſor and leſſee.
               LEſſor is he that leſſeth landes or tenementes to an other for terme of life, yeres, or at wil, and hee to whome the leaſe is made, is called leſſee.
            
            
               
               Leuant, & couchant.
               LEuant, & Couchant is ſayde, when the beaſtes or Cattell of a ſtraunger are come into an other mans ground, & there haue remayned a certen good ſpace of time ſo longe that they haue wel fedde, & alſo reſted them ſelues.
            
            
               Wager of lawe.
               WAger of lawe, is when an accion is brought againſt one wt
                  out eſpecialty ſhe wed, or other matter of recorde, as an accion of debt vpō contract or detinue, then the defendāt may wage his lawe, that is to ſay, ſwere vppon a booke, and certaine perſons wyth him, that hée oweth nothing to the playntife in manner and fourme as hée hath declared. But

in an action of debt vppon a leaſe for terme of yeres, or vpon the arrerages of accompt before auditors aſſigned, a mā ſhal not wage his lawe. And whē one ſhal wage his lawe, hée ſhal bring with him vi. viii. or xii. of his neighbours as the court ſhall aſſigne hym, to ſwere with him. And if at that day aſſigne he faile of his law, then hée ſhalbe condemned.
            
            
               Liuery of ſeyſin.
               LIuery of ſeyſin, is a ceremony vſed in conueyance of landes or tenemēts where an eſtate in fée ſimple, fée taile, or a fréehold ſhal paſſe: and it is a teſtimonial of the willing departing from all that which he who

makes the liuerie hath in the thinge whereof liuerie is made: And the receyuinge of the liuery, is a wyllyng acceptance by the other partie of all that whereof the other hath diſmiſſed him ſelfe: And was inuented as an open and notorious thing, by meanes wherof the common people might haue knowledge of the paſſinge or alteration of eſtates from manne to manne, that thereby they might bée the better able to trie in whō the right and poſſeſſion of landes and tenements were if they ſhould be impanelled in Juries, or otherwyſe haue to doe concernyng the ſame.
               The common maner

of deliuery of ſeyſin is after this ſort done: If it bée in the open feelde where is no building or houſe, then one that can read taketh the writinge in his hand, if the eſtate ſhal pas by déed, and declareth to the ſtāders by, the cauſe of their méetyng there together &c. and then openly readeth the deed in Engliſh, and after that it is ſealed, the partie who is to depart from the ground, taketh the déede in his handes together with a clodde of the earth, & a twigge or bowe if any there be, and all this hée delyuereth to the other partie in the name of poſſeſſion or ſeyſin, according to the forme & effect of the déed, which before them

was there reade. But if there bée a dwellynge houſe or buildinge vpon the land, then thys is done there at the doore of the ſame none béeyng left at that tyme wythin the houſe, and y• partie deliuereth all the aforeſaid together wyth the rynge of the doore, in the name of ſeyſin or poſſeſſion, & hée that receiueth the libertie entreth in firſt alone and ſhutteth to the doore, and preſently openeth it agayne, and letteth them in &c. If it be of a houſe whereto is noe land or ground, the liuerye is made and poſſ. taken, by the deliuerie of y• ringe of the doore & déed onely. And where it is without déed either of landes, or tenementes, there the

partie declareth by word of mouth béefore wytneſſe, the eſtate that hée meaneth to depart with, and then deliuereth ſeyſin or poſſeſſion in maner as is before ſay
                     •
                  e: and ſo the land or tenement doth paſſe as well where there is no déede as by déede, and that by force of the lyuerie of ſeyſin: It was agreed in Grayes Inne by the right warſhipful maſter Snagge, at his readyng there in Sōmer an. 1574 that if a feoffour deliuer the viewe of the land, in name of ſeyſin, that it is good, becauſe that hée hath a poſſeſſyon in him ſelfe. But otherwyſe yt is of an atturney, for hee muſt goe to the lande, and

take poſſeſſion him ſelfe, béefore that he can gyue poſſeſſion to an other, accordinge to the words of hys letter &c. And where liuerie of ſeyſin is by viewe, if the feoffée doe not enter after &c. nothynge paſſeth, for hée ought to enter in déede.
            
            
               Lotherwite.
               LOtherwite, that is y• you may take amēdes of him which doth defile your bondwoman without your licence.
            
            
               Mahim, or maim.
               MAhim, is where any mēber is hurt or takē away, whereby ye party ſo hurt is made vnperfect to fight: As if a bone bée taken out of the

hedde: or a bone bée broken in any other part of the body: or a foote, or hand, or finger, or ioynt of a foote, or any member bée cut: or by ſome wound the ſinewes bée made to ſhrinke, or other member, or the fingers made crooked, or if an eye bée put out, or the foretéeth broken, or any other thinge hurt in a mannes body by meanes whereof hee is made the leſſe able to defend him ſelfe.
               But the cuttinge off of an eare, or noſe, or breaking of the hinder téeth, or ſuch like, is no may▪ him, becauſe it is rather a deformity of ye body, thē diminiſhing of ſtrength. And if the Juſtyces ſtand in doubt whether the hurt be a maihim or

not, they vſe, and wil of their great diſcretiō take the helpe and opinion of ſome ſkilful Surgeon, to conſider thereof, before they determine vpon the caſe.
            
            
               Mainpriſe.
               MAinpriſe is when a mā is arreſted by capi as, then the Judges may deliuer his bodie to certeine menne for to keepe and to bringe him before them, at a certaine daye, and theſe be called mainpernours, and if the partye appeare not at the daye aſſigned, the mainpernoures ſhalbe amerced.
            
            
               Mannour.
               MAnnour, is a thinge compounde of diuers thinges, as of a houſe

lande, arrable, paſture, meadowe, woode, rent, auowſon, court baron, and ſuch like make a manor, & this ought to be by longe contynuaunce of time, to the contrary
                     •
                   whereof mans memory cannot tel, for at this day a manor cānot be made, becauſe a court baron cā
                  not nowe be made, and a manour cannot be wt
                  out a court baron, & ſuters, or fréeholders, two at the leaſt, for if all the fréeholdes except one eſcheate to the lord, or if he purchaſe al except one, there his manor is gone, for that it cannot. bée a mannor without a court Baron (as is aforeſaid) and a court baron cannot bée holden but before ſuters, & not before one ſuter, & therfore where but

one fréehold or fréeholder is, there cannot bée a mannour.
            
            
               Manumiſſion.
               MAnumiſſion is in ii. ſortes, the one is a manumiſſion expreſſed, the other a manumiſſiō implyed or ſecreat.
               Manumiſſion expreſſed is when the Lord maketh a déed to his villen to enfraunches hym by this word (Manumittere) which is as much to ſay as to let one goe out of an other mans hands or power.
               The manner of manumittinge or infraunchiſing in old time moſt vſually was thus. The Lorde (in preſence of hys neyghbours) toke the bonde manne by the heade ſaying, I wil

that this manne be frée, and therewyth ſhewed him forwarde out of hys handes, and by this hée was frée without anye more a doe. Manumiſſyon implyed wythout this woode (Manumittere) is when the lorde maketh an obligation to his villē to pay him money at a certein daye, or ſuith him wher he might enter without ſute, or graunteth vnto his vyllen an annitie, or leſſeth lande to him by déede for yeres, or for life, & in dyuers ſuch like caſes, ye villen thereby is made frée.
            
            
               Maximes.
               MAximes be the foundations of the lawe, & the concluſions of reaſon, and are cauſes efficient, & certein vniuerſall propoſitions ſoe ſure and

perfect that they may not bée at any time impeached or impugned, but ought alwaies to bée obſerued and holden as ſtrong principalles and aucthorities of thēſelues although they cannot be proued by force of argument or demonſtratiōs logicall, but are knowen by enduction by ye way of ſence & memory. As for example, it is a maxime that if a man haue iſſue 2. ſonnes by diuers women, and the one of them purchaſe landes in fée and dieth wythout iſſue, the other brother ſhall neuer be hys heyre &c.
               Alſo it is an othermaxime that lāds ſhal diſcēd frō the father to ye ſōne▪ but not frō the ſōne to ye
                  
father for that is an aſcention &c. & diuers ſuch like there be.
            
            
               Maynour.
               MAynour is when a théefe hath ſtolne, and is followed with hue and cry, and taken, hauing yt founde about him which he ſtole, that is called the maynour. And ſo we cō
                  monly vſe to ſaye when we finde one doing of an vnlawfull act, that wée tooke him with the maynour, or maner.
            
            
               Miſpriſion.
               MIſpriſion, is when on knoweth that an other hath committed treaſon or felony, and will not diſcouer him to the Q. or to her councell or to any magiſtrat, but doth conceale the ſame.
               
                  A chapleine had fixed an olde ſeale of a patent to a newe patent of non reſidence, and this was holden to bée miſpriſion of treaſon onely, and noe counterfeiting of the Q. ſeale.
               Alſo if a man knowe mony to be counterfet, & bringe the ſame out of Irelād hither into England and vtter it in payment, this is but myſpriſion of treaſon, and no treaſon, & ſoe it is in diuers ſuch like caſes.
               And in al caſes of miſpriſion of treaſon ye partie offendor ſhall forfayt his goods for euer, and y• profets of his landes for terme of his life, and his body to priſon at the Q. pleaſure.
               And for miſpriſion of felonie or treſpas ye offē
                  dour

ſhalbée committed to priſon vntill hée haue founde ſuerties or pledges for his fine, which ſhalbe aſſeſſed by ye ducretion of yt Juſtices before whom he was conuict.
               And note, that in euerie treaſon or felonye is included miſpriſion, and where any hath cōmitted treaſon or felony, the Q. may cauſe ye ſāe to be indited and arramed but of miſpriſion onely if ſhe will.
            
            
               Shewinge of deedes, or Recordes.
               SHewinge of déedes, or Recordes, is as if for example, an actyon of dette be brought againſt one vppon an obligation or by Executors &c. there after that the pleyntife

hath declared, he ought to ſhewe his obligatiō, or y• executour the teſtamēt to the court, and ſoe it is of Recordes.
               And the diuerſitye béetwene ſhewing of deeds or Recordes & hering of déeds or records is thus, he y• pleades the deede or record, or declares vppon it, to him it doth appertaine to ſhewe the ſame. And the other agaynſt whom ſuch déede or record is pleaded or declared, and is thereby to bée charged, may demaunde hearing of the ſame déed or record, which his aduerſarie brigeth or pleadeth againſt him.
            
            
               Mortgage or Morgage.
               MOrtgage or Morgage is whē a mā maketh a feoffement to another on ſuch condition, that if the feoffour pay to the

feoffée at a certaine day xl. li. of money, that then the feoffour may reenter, &c. In thys caſe the feffée is called tenaunt in morgage. And as a mā may make a feoffement in fée in morgage, ſo hée may make a gift in tayle, or a leaſe for terme of life, or for term of yeares in morgage. And it ſeemeth that the cauſe why it is called morgage, is for that it ſtandeth in doubt whether the feoffor will pay the money at the day appointed or not, and if hée fayle to pay, then y• land which hée layed in gage vppon condition of paymēt of ye money, is gone from him for euer, & ſo dead to him vpō cōditiō: But if he pay y• money, then is the gage dead as

to y• tenāt, yt is to ſay the feoffée, & for this cauſe it is called in latin mortuum vadium as maſter Littleton ſayth, or rather mortuum vas, as I thinke.
            
            
               Mortmaine.
               MOrtmaine was whē lands were geuen to a houſe of religion, or to a cōpany which be corporat by ye kings graūt, then the land is cōe into mortmain, that is to ſay in Engliſh a dead hand, and the kynge or the lord of whō ye lād to holden may enter into thē.
            
            
               Mulier.
               MUlier, is a word vſed in our lawe, but howe aptly I cannot tell nor doe wel knowe howe it ſhould come in y• ſence as wée there take it:

For accordinge to the proper ſignificatiō, mulier is a defiled woman like as it is vſed by vlpianus in a certen place after this ſort, if I thought that I had bought a virgin, when it was a defiled woman, the bargayne was not good. Hereby you may ſée yt multer is a woman that hath had ye company of a man: But to leaue the right ſignification: Mulier is taken in our law for one that is lawfully begotten and borne: and is alwayes vſed in compariſon with a baſtarde, onely to ſhewe a difference betwene thē, as thus for example: A man hath a ſonne by a woman before mariage, that iſſue is called

a baſtard, and vnlawful: And after they entermary, and haue an other ſonne, this ſecond ſonne is called mulier, that is to ſay lawfull, and ſhalbée heire to hys father: but that other cannot bée heire to any manne, becauſe it is not knowen nor certen in the iudgement of the lawe, who was hys father, and for that cauſe is ſayd to bée no mannes ſonne, or ye ſonne of the people, and ſo wythout father, according to this old verſe:
               To whom the people father is, to him is father none and all.
               To whom the people father is, wel fatherleſſe wée may him cal.
               And alwaies you ſhal find this addition to thē
                  
(baſtard eldeſt, & mulier yongeſt) when they bée compared together.
            
            
               Murder.
               MUrder is a wilful killinge of a man vppon malice forethought, and ſeemeth to comeof the Saxon woord Mordren which ſo ſignifieth: And Mordridus, is the murderer euen vntil this day amonge them in Sexonie, from whence wée haue moſt of our words as hath byn often ſaid.
            
            
               Negatiua preignans.
               NEgatiua preignans, is when an action, or information, or ſuch like, is brought againſt one, and the defendant pleadeth in barre of the actyon, or otherwyſe, a negatiue plea, whych is not ſoe ſpecyall an

anſwere to the actyon but that it includeth alſo an affirmatiue. As for example: if hée in reuerſion enter vppon tenant for life ſuppoſinge that hée hath aliened in fee, (which is a forfaiture of hys eſtate) and the tenaunt for life ſaith that hée hath not aliened in fée, this is a negatyue wherein is included an affirmatiue: for although it bée true, that he haue not aliened in fée: yet it may bée that hée hath made an eſtate in tayle (whych is alſo a forfayture) and then the entry of hym in the reuerſion is lawefull &c. Alſo in a Quare impedit the Quéene makes tytle to preſent to a Prebende for that the

Temporaltyes of the Biſhoprick were in her hāds by the death of W. late Biſhop &c. The defendant ſaith that it was not voyd being the temporalties in the Quéens handes by the death of W. this is a negatiue preignans, for it may bée in the Quéenes hāds otherwyſe then by the death of W. and it ſuffiſeth the Quéene if it bée in her handes by any meanes &c. Soe it is where an Information was brought in the Cheker againſt John Stile, for that he bought wooll beetwéene ſhering time and the Aſſumptyon, ſuch a yeare of John N. The defendaunt ſayth that hée dyd not buy any of John N. as it is alledged &c. this

is called a negatiue preignans, for if he bought it of any other, yet hée is culpable for the buyinge.
            
            
               Niefe.
               NIefe is a womā that is bonde, or a vyllen woman, but if ſhée mary a frée manne, ſhee is thereby made frée for euer (although yt her huſbande die and ſhe ſuruiue hym) becauſe that ſhée and her huſband are but one perſon in lawe, and ſhée ought to bée of the ſame nature and condytion in law to al intents that her huſband is. But her huſband is frée to all intentes without any condityon in lawe or otherwiſe, and ſo by conſequens the wife ought to bée, and is frée

according to y• nature of her frée huſband, & then if ſhe were once frée and clerely diſcharged of bō
                  dage to al entents, ſhe cā
                  not be niefe after, wtout eſpecial act done by her, as diuorce, or cōfeſſiō in court of Record, and that is in fauour of liberty, & therefore a frée woman ſhal not be bounde by taking of a villē to her huſband. But their iſſue ſhal bée villens as their father was, which is contrary to the Ciuile lawe, for there it is ſaid, y• birth followeth the belly. Bō
                  dage or villenage had beginninge amonge y• Hebrewes & his original proceding of Canaan y• ſōne of Cham, who becauſe that hée had mocked his father Noe to ſcorne lying deſolutly whē he was

drunke, was puniſhed in his ſonne Chanaan wt penalty of bondage.
            
            
               Nihil dicit.
               
                  NIhil dicit is when an action is brought againſt a man, & the defē
                  dant appéeres, the plaintife declares, & the defendant wil not aunſwere, or pleades to the action, & doth not maintaine hys plea, but makes defaut, nowe vpon this defaut, he ſhalbe condemned becauſe he ſaith nothing.
            
            
               Nomination.
               NOmination is where one may in right of his maner or otherwiſe, nominate and appoint a worthy clarke or man to a perſonage, vicarage or ſuch like ſpiritual promotion.
            
            
               Nonabilitie.
               NOnabylitye is where

an action is broughte againſt one, and the defendaunt ſaieth, that the playntife is not able to ſue any action, and demaundeth iudgement if hée. ſhalbee aunſwered. There are vj. cauſes of nonability in the pleintife, as if he bée an outlawe, or an alien borne, but that dyſabilitye is in actiōs reales and mixt onely, and not in actyons perſonalles, except hee be an alien enemye, or condempned in premunire, or profeſſed in religion, that is to ſaye, the Roomiſh religion, or accurſed, or a villen and ſueth hys Lorde, but this laſt is noe ple for an other y• is not lord to the villen.
            
            
               Bare, or naked Contract.
               BAre Contract, or

naked promiſe, is where a manne bargaineth, or ſelleth his lāds or goods, or promiſeth to geue to one money or a horſe, or to builde a houſe, or doe ſuch a thinge at ſuch a daye, and there is no recompence appoynted to him for the doinge therof: As if one ſaye to an other, I ſel or geue to you al my landes or goodes, and there is nothing appoynted aſſigned or agréed vppon what the other ſhal giue or pay for it, ſo yt there is not one thinge for an other, this is a naked contract, and voyde in lawe, & for not perfourmaunce thereof noe action lyeth, for of a naked cōtract commeth noe action.
            
            
               Oredelfe.
               
                  O Redelfe is where one claimes to haue y• ore that is founde in his ſoile or ground.
            
            
               Outfanthefe.
               OUtfangthiefe, that is y• theues orfelōs of your lād or fée out of your lād or fée taken, wt felony or a ſtealing, ſhalbe brought backe to your court, and there iudged.
            
            
               Owelte.
               OWelte is when there is Lorde meſne & tenant, and ye tenaunt holdeth of the meſne by the ſame ſeruices, that the meane holdeth ouer of y• lorde aboue him. As if y• tenāt hold of y• meſne by homage, fealty, & xx. s. of rēt yerely, & ye meſne holdeth ouer of ye lord aboue

by homage fealty, & xx. s. rent alſo, this is called owelty of ſeruices.
            
            
               Hearing of Recordes and deedes &c.
               HEaringe of Records & déeds is if for example an actiō of det be brought againſt a man vppon an obligation, and the defendant appéeres to the action, and then praieth yt he may heare the obligatiō where with the plaintife chargeth him.
               Soe it is when as executors bringe an action ofdet, and the defendant demaundeth to heare the teſtament, vpon this demaund it ſhalbe read vnto the deſendaunt, But if it be in an other 
                     •
                  erme or after y• the defendant hath imparled, then hée ſhal not heare it. And ſoe

as is ſayed of déedes, is to be vnderſtoode of recordes that are alleged againſt him.
            
            
               Pape.
               PApe is an auncyent name falſely arrogated, or proudly vſurped by ye Biſhop of the only Citye of Roome in Italie, and is commonlye engliſhed the Pope, a name truely much frequented in our auncyent yere bookes, ſpecially in the times of thoſe kings, who to much abādoning their emperiall aucthoritie, and abaſinge themſelues far beneath their eſtate, were not a ſhamed, to ſuffer an alyen & outlandiſh Biſhop, that dwelt aboue fiftéene hū
                  dred miles from them, to bee ſoueraigne ouer

them in their owne dominions, and to take frō them not onely the diſpoſition of certen ſmall triſles of none accompt, but alſo the nomination of Archbiſhoppes, Biſhops, Abbots, Deanes, prouoſts appropriations of benefices preſēta
                     •
                  ' to perſonages, vicarages, & generally of al ſpirituall perſons to their preferments ſometymes by lapſe, and ſometimes otherwiſe whereby the kings princely prerogatiue was very much abridged wtin their owne Realmes.
            
            
               Partition.
               PArtityon is à deuyding of lāds diſcēded by the cōmon law, or by cuſtome amōg coheires or parceners wher there

be ii. at y• leaſt whether they bée ſonnes, daughters, ſiſters, aūtes, or otherwyſe of hyn to the aunceſtour from whom the lād diſcended to thē.
               And this particion is made iiij. wayes for the moſt part, wherof thrée are at pleaſure and by agreement among them, the fourth is by compulſion.
               One particyon by agréement is when they them ſelues deuide the lande equally into ſo many partes, as there bée of them coparceners, & each to chooſe one ſhare or part, the eldeſt firſt, & ſo y• one after other, as they bée of age, except y• the eldeſt by conſent make the particion, then the choiſe belongeth to y•
                  
next, and ſoe to the eldeſt laſt accordynge as it is ſaied. Whoe ſo maketh the partition, the other muſt haue the choyſe.
               An other partition by agreement is whē they chooſe certen of their frends to make diuiſion for them.
               The third partition by agréement is by drawing of lots thus: firſt to deuide the land into ſo many parts as there bée parceners, then to writ euery part ſeuerally in a little ſcrolle, or peece of paper or parchment, and to put the ſame ſcrolles vp cloſe into a hat, cap, or other ſuch like thing, and then each parcener one after an other as they bée of age to drawe out thereof one peece or

ſcrolle wherein is written a part of the land whych by thys drawinge is nowe ſeuerally allotted vnto them in fée ſimple.
               The fowerth partition which is by compulſion is when one or ſome of the coparceners would haue partition and other ſome wil not agrée there to: Thē they y• ſo would haue partitiō may bring a writ de partitione facicienda againſt y• others that would not make partition, by vertue whereof they ſhalbée compelled to depart &c. Wée in Kent (Brother Nicholas) where the landes are of Gauelkynd nature, cal at this day our partition Shiftinge euen y• very ſame woord that the Saxons

vſed namely (Scyſtan,) which ſignifieth to make partitiō betweene coheires, and to aſſigne to each of them their portion, in latyn it is called Herciſcere.
               
            
            
               Parties.
               PArties to a fine, or déede, are thoſe that leuie the ſame fine, and alſo they to whom the fine is leuied: And they that make a déede of feoffement, and they to whō it is made are called parties to the déede, and ſo in any other like caſes.
            
            
               Patron.
               PAtron is hée that hath a parſonage, vicarage, frée chappel, or ſuch like ſpiritual promotion béelongynge to his maner, and may or ought to gyue the ſame beneūce

when and as often as it falleth voyd. And thys beynge patron, or patronage had beginninge for the moſt part by one of theſe three wayes, namely either by reaſon of the foundation, for that the patron or hys aunceſtours, or thoſe frō whom he claimes were ſounders o
                     •
                   builders of the Church, or by reaſon of Dotation, for y• they did endowe or giue iāds to the ſame for mayntenaunce thereof, or els by reaſon of the ground becauſe the Church was ſet or builded vpon their ſoyle or ground: & many times by reaſon of them al three.
            
            
               Perquiſites.
               PErquiſites are aduā
                  tages and profits that cōe to a manner by caſualtie,

and not yearely: as Eſcheates, Heriots, Reliefes, waifes, ſtraies forfaytures, amercementes in Courtes, wardes, mariages goods and landes purchaſed by villaines of ye ſame manor, and diuers ſuch like thinges that are not certen but happē by chāce, ſometimes more often then at other times.
            
            
               Plaintife.
               PLayntife is hée that ſueth or complaineth in an aſſ. or in an action perſonal, as in an action of det, treſpas, diſceit, detinue, and ſuch other.
            
            
               Pledinge.
               PLeding is y• which cō
                  meth after y• coūt, namely y• which is contayned

in the barre, replication, and reioynder, and not that contayned in the count it ſelfe, and therefore defauts in the matter of the Count are not compriſed within miſpleading, or inſufficient pleading, nor are remedied by yt ſtatute of Jeofailes: But onely that miſpleading, or inſufficient pleading, committed in the barre, replication, and reioynder, are there prouided for.
            
            
               Pound.
               POundes are in two ſortes, the one pounds open, the other poundes cloſe.
               Pounde open, is euery place wherein a dyſtreſſe is put, whether it bée cōmon pound ſuch

as are in euery Towne or lordſhip, or whether it be backſide, Court, yard, paſture, or els whatſoeuer, where the owner of the diſtreſſe may come to geue them meat and drinke without offence for their beinge there, or his comming thither.
               Pounde Cloſe is ſuch a place, where the owner of the diſtreſſe may not come to giue them meat and drinke, wythout offence, as in a cloſe houſe, or whatſoeuer els place.
            
            
               Poſſeſſion.
               POſſeſſion is ſaied two wayes, eyther actuall poſſeſſion, or poſſeſſion in lawe.
               Actual poſſeſſiō, is whē a manne entreth in déed into lands or tenements

to him diſcēded, or otherwiſe. Poſſeſſion in lawe is whē lāds, or tenemēts are diſcended to a man, and hee hath not as yet really, actually, and in déede entred into them And it is called poſſeſſion in lawe, becauſe that in the eye, and conſideration of the lawe, hée is demed to be in poſſeſſion, for aſmuch as hée is tenant to euery mans action that will ſue concerning ye ſame lands, or tenementes.
            
            
               Preamble.
               PReamble taketh hys name of the prepoſition (Pre) before, and the verbe (Ambulo) to goe, ſee ioyned together, they make a compound verbe of the firſt coniugatyon (Preambulo)

to go before, and h
                     •••
                  
                  of the firſt part or beeginning of an act, is called y• preamble of the act, which preamble is a key to open the minds of the makers of the act, and ye miſchiefes that they in tende to remedy by the ſame, as for example the ſtatute made at Weſt▪ minſter the firſt, the 37. chapter which giueth an attaint, the preamble of which is thus. For as much as certain people of ye realme, dout very little to giue falſe verdictes or othes, which they ought not to do, wherby many people are diſherited and loſe their right, it is prouided &c.
            
            
               Preſcription.
               PReſcription is when one hath had or vſed any thinge ſith the time whereof no minde is to

to the contrary.
            
            
               Preſentment.
               PReſentment is when a manne which hath ryght to géeue a benefice ſpiritual nameth the perſonne to whome hée will geue it, and maketh a writing to the Biſhop for him, that is a preſentation or preſentmēt.
            
            
               Pretenſedright or Title.
               PRetenſed right or title is where one is in poſſeſſion of landes, or tenements, and an other who is out of poſſeſſion, claimeth it, or ſueth for it. Nowe the pretenſed right or title is ſaid in him, who ſoe doth ſue or clayme. And if he afterward come to ye poſſeſſiō of the ſame lāds, or tenements,

his right or title is extin
                     •
                  t, or ſuſpendedin the lande.
            
            
               Priuie or priuite and Pris uies.
               PRiuie, or priuite is where a leaſe is made to hold at wil, for yeres, for life, or a feoffement in fée, and in diuers other caſes, nowe béecauſe of this that hath paſſed betwéene theſe partyes, they are called priuies, in reſpect of ſtraungers betwéene whom noe ſuch dealinges, or conueyances hath ben.
               Alſo if there be Lorde and tenaunt, and the tenaunt holdeth of ye lorde by certein ſeruice, there is a priuitie betwene thē becauſe of the tenure, and if the tenaunt be diſſeyſed by a ſtraunger, there

is no priuitie béetwéene the diſſ
                     ••
                  our and y• lord, but the priuitie ſtyll remaineth béetwéene the Lord and the tenant th
                     •
                  t is diſſeyſed, and the Lord ſhall auowe vpon him, for that he is his tenant in right and in the iudgment of the lawe, Priuies are in diuers ſortes, as namely priuies in eſtate, priuies in déede, priuies in lawe, priuies in right, and priuies in bloode.
               Priuies in eſtate is where a leaſe is made of the manner of dale to A. for lyfe, the rem
                     •
                  ynder to B. in ſee, there both A. and B. are priuies in eſtate, for their eſtates were both made at one time. And ſoe is

it in the firſt caſe heare where a leaſe is made at wil, for life or yeres or a feoffement in fée, y• leſſées, or feoffées, are called priuies in eſtate, & ſo are their heires &c.
               Priuyes in déede is where a leaſe is made for lyfe, and afterwarde by an other déede the reuerſion is graunted to a ſtraunger in fée, thys grauntee of the reuerſion is called pryuie in déede, béecauſe that hée hathe the reuerſyon by deede.
               Priuie in law
                     •
                  is where there is Lorde and tenaunt, the tenaunt leſſeth the tenauncye for lyfe and dyeth without heire, and the reuerſion eſcheates to the lord, hée is ſaid priuie in lawe, béecauſe that hée hath

his eſtate onely by ſhe lawe, that is to ſaye by eſcheat.
               Priuie in ryght, is where one poſſeſſed of a terme for yeres graunts his eſtate to an other vppon cōdition, & maketh his executours and dieth, nowe theſe executors are priuies in right, for if the condityon bee broken, and they enter into the lande, they ſhall haue it in the right of their teſtatour, and to his vſe. priuie of blade is the heire of y• feoffour or donor &c.
               Alſoe if a fine be leuied, the heires of him yt leuied the fine are called priuies.
            
            
               Priuiledges.
               PRiuiledges are lyberties, and Fraunchiſes,

graunted to an offyce, place, Towne, or manner by the Quéenes great Charter, letters patentes, or act of parliament. As Tolle, ſake, Socke, Infangtheefe, vtfangethéefe, turne tolle, oredelfe, and diuers ſuch like, for which looke in their proper titles and places.
            
            
               Next frende.
               NExt frend and warden in Socage is all one, and is where a mā ſeyſed of landes holden in Socage dieth, hys iſſue within age of 14. yeares, then the next frind, or next of kinne to whom the lands cannot come or diſcende, ſhall haue the keepinge of the heire, and of the land, to the only vſe of the heire,

vntil he come to the age of 14. yeares, and then at that yeares hée may enter and put him out, and bringe hym to accompt: but in that accompt hée ſhalbée allowed for all reaſonable coſtes and expences beeſtowed either vppon the heire, or his land.
               And the next frind or next of kynne to whom the inheritaunce cannot diſcend is thus to be vnderſtoode: if the landes diſcend to the heire from his father, or any of the kyn of his fathers ſide: thē the mother, or other of the mothers ſide, are called the next of kynne to whom the inheritāce cannot dyſcende, for beefore that it ſhal ſo dyſcende, it ſhall rather

eſcheat to the Lorde of whom it is holden: and ſo it is to be vnderſtoode where the landes come to the heire from hys mother or any of ye kyn of his mothers ſide: Thē the father or other of the fathers ſide, are called the next of kin to whom the inheritaunce cannot diſcende: but ſhal rather eſcheat to the Lorde of whom it is holden.
            
            
               Proteſtation.
               Proteſtation is a ſauinge to the partie (that ſo pleadeth by proteſtation) to bée concluded by any matter alledged or obiected agaīſt him, vpō which he cānot ioin iſſu: And is no other thing but an excluſion of

the concluſion, for hée that taketh the proteſtation excludes the other party to conclude hym. And thys proteſtatyon ought to ſtand with the ſequele of the plea, and not to bée repugnant, or otherwiſe contrary.
            
            
               Purchaſe.
               PUrchaſe is the poſſeſſ. that a manne hath in landes or tenements by his owne act, meanes or agréement, and not by title of 
                     •
                  iſcent, from any of his aunceſtours.
            
            
               Quarentine.
               QUarentine is where a man dieth ſeyſed of a maner place and other lands whereof his wyfe ought to bée endowed, then the woman ſhall

hold the manner place xl. dayes, within which time her dower ſhalbée aſſigned.
               But if ſhée marie wtin the 40. daies, ſhée ſhall looſe her quarentine.
            
            
               Fifteene.
               FIftéene is a payment graunted in parliamēt to the Quéene, by the Temporaltie, namely the 15. part of their goods: And was vſed in auncient tyme, to bée leuied vppon their Cattayle goynge in their groundes, which thynge was very troubleſome, and therefore nowe for the moſt part, that way is altered, and they vſe to leuy the ſame by the yarde, or Acre, or other meaſure of lande: By meanes whereof it

is nowe leſſe troubleſome, and more certen, then before it was. And euery Towne, and coū
                  trey doe knowe, what ſumme is to be payed amonge them, and howe the ſame ſhalbe rayſed. Wée read that Moyſes was the firſt that did number the people, for he nūbred the Iſraelits, and therefore the firſt taxe, ſubſidy, tribute, or fiftéene was inuented by him amonge the Hebrues, as Polidore Uirgil doth thinke.
            
            
               Regrator.
               REgrator is hée that hath corne, vittailes or other thinges ſufficient for his owne neceſſary néede, occupation, or ſpendinge, and doth

neuertheleſſe engroſſe, and buy vppe, into hys handes more Corne, vittailes, or other ſuch thinges to the entent to ſell the ſame againe at a highe rand déerer price, in faires, marketes, or ſuch like places.
            
            
               Reioynder.
               REioynder, is when the defendant maketh aunſwere to the Replication of the plaintyfe.
               And euery Reioynder ought to haue theſe ii. properties ſpecially, that is to ſay, it ought to bee a ſufficient aunſwere to the Replication & alſo to followe and enforce the matter of the barre.
            
            
               Reliefe.
               
               REliefe is ſometimes a certen ſome of money that the heire ſhall pay to the Lord of whō thoſe landes are holden, which after the diſceaſe of his aunceſtour are to him dyſcended as next heire: ſometymes it is the payment of an other thinge, and not money: And therefore reliefe is not certen, and a like for all tenures, but euery ſundry tenure hath (for the moſt part) hys ſpeciall reliefe certayne in it ſelfe: Neyther is it to bée payed alwayes at a certen age, but varyeth therein alſo acording to the tenure. As if the tenaunt had landes holden by knyghtes ſeruics

(except great Sergeantie) and die his heire being of full age, and helde his lands by the ſeruice of a whole knightes fée, the Lord of whome that lands are ſoe holden ſhal haue of the heire 100. s. in the name of relyefe, And if he helde by leſſe then a knightes fée, hee ſhal pay leſſe, and if more then more, hauinge reſpect alwaies to the rate for euery knightes fée an hundred ſhillinges. And if hée helde by graunde ſerieantie (which is alwayes of the Quéene, and is alſo knightes ſeruice) then the relyefe ſhalbée the value of the lande by the yeare, beſides al charges iſſuinge out of the ſame.
               Reliefe that the lorde ſhal haue for lands holdē
                  
in Socage, is ſoe much more as the rent that the tenaunt holdeth his lande in Socage by, as if hee holde by a penye rent and die, the lorde ſhal haue that peny rent, and a peny ouer for reliefe, of what age ſoeuer the tenaunt be, at the death of his aunceſtour. And note that inſome caſes the lord ſhal haue his reliefe immediatly after the death of his tenaunt, if it ſoe be, that the tyme of the yeare wil ſuffre the ſame to be gotten, as money, corne, fleſh, fiſh, ſpices, or any ſuch like, and for default of payement, the lorde maye therefore of cōmon right preſently diſtraine.
               But in ſome caſes the Lorde muſt ſtay for

his reliefe a certen time, when neceſſitie ſoe conſtraineth. As if the tenāt helde by a roſe, a chery, a ſtrawbery, or ſuch like, & die in winter, he ſhal not haue reliefe til roſes, cheries, and ſtrawberies are naturally freſh and ripe, which is about midſomer, & then he ſhal haue one for rent, & an other for reliefe.
               There is an other kind of reliefe that is payd after the death, change, or alienation of fréeholders that hold in auncient demeſne, and otherwiſe, & is paied as a knowledge of the tenure betwene ye lord and the tenant. The ſame is not certein how much, But doth vary according to ye cuſtome of the mannour, or tenure,

and is to be preſented by the homage or ſutours at the next court day of the ſame maner.
               And note that alwaies when the reliefe is due, it muſt bee payed at one whole payment and not by partes, although that the rent bée to be payed at ſeueral feſtes.
            
            
               Remainder.
               REmaynder of lande is the lande that ſhal remaine after the particuler eſtate determined, As if one graunt lanoe for terme of yeres or for lyfe, the remaynder to I. S. that is to ſaye, that when the leaſe for yeares is determined, or leſſée for life is dead, that then y• land ſhal remaine, ſhalbe, or abide, with, to, or in I. S.
            
            
               
               Replication.
               REplication is when y• defendaunt in any action maketh an aūſwere, and the plaintife maketh an aunſwere to that, that is called the replicatiō of the plaintife.
            
            
               Repriſes▪
               
               REpriſes, are deductions, payments, and dueties that goe yearely and are payed out of a manour. As rent charge, rent ſecke, pentions, corodies, annuities, & ſuch like.
            
            
               Reſceipt.
               REſceit is when an action is brought agaynſt the tenaunt for terme of life, or tenaunt for terme of yeres, and he in the reuerſion commeth in and praieth to be

receiued to defende the land, and to plede wyth the demaundaunt. And when hée commeth it behoueth that hée bée alway redy to plede with the demaundant.
            
            
               Reſeruation.
               REſeruation is taken diuers waies, & hath diuers natures, as ſome times by way of exception to kéepe that which a mā had before in him, as if a leaſe bee made for yeares of ground reſeruing ye great trées growing vpon the ſame, nowe ye leſſée may not meddle wt thē nor wt any thing yt commeth by reaſon of thē ſo longe as it abideth in, or vpon the trées, as maſt of Oke, Cheſtnut, Aples, or ſuch like, but if they fall from the trées to the ground,

then they are in right the leſſées, for y• ground is ſet to him, and al theruppon not reſerued &c.
               Sometimes a reſeruation doth get and bringe forth an other thynge which was not before. As if a m
                     •
                   leaſe his lāds reſeruing yerely for ye ſāe xx. li. &c. and diuers other ſuch reſeruatiōs thereby.
               And note ye in auncient time, their reſeruations, were as wel (or for the more part) in victualles whether fleſh, fiſh, corne, bread, drink, or what els, as in mony vntill at the laſt, and that chiefely in the raigne of kinge Henry the firſt by agrement, y• reſeruation of victuals, was changed into ready money, as it hath hither ſo ſince continued,
            
            
               
               Retraxit.
               REtraxit is the preterperfectēce of Retraho compound of Re, and Traho, which make Retraho, to pull backe, and is when the party plaintife or demaundant commeth in proper perſon into the court where his plea is, and ſayth that hée wil not procéede any farder in the ſame &c. Now this ſhalbe a barre to the accion for euer.
            
            
               Reeue,
               REeue is an officer, but more knowen in auncient tyme then at thys day: for almoſt euery manour had then a Réeue, and yet ſtyll in many coppy hold manners (where the old cuſtome any thing preuayleth)

the name & offyce is not altogether forgotten: And is in effect that which nowe euery Bailife of a mannour practiſeth: Although the name of Bailiſe was not then in vre amonge vs being ſince brought in by the Normans: But the name of Réeue, aūciently called Gereue, (which particle (Ge) in continuance of tyme was altogether left out and loſt) came from the Saxon woord Gerefa, which ſignifieth a ruler: And ſo in déede his rule and aucthoritie was large wythin the compas of his Lordes manour and amonge hys menne and tenauntes as well in matters of gouernement in peace and warre, as in the

ſkylfull vſe and trade of huſbandry: For as hée did gather his Lordes rentes, pay Repriſes, or duetyes iſſuings out of the manner: ſet the ſeruants to worke, fel & cut down Trées to repaire the buildinges, and encloſures, with diuers ſuch like for his Lordes commoditity: So alſo he had aucthority to gouerne and kéepe the tenants in peace, and if néede required, to leade them foorth in warre.
            
            
               Reuerſion.
               REuerſion of lande, is a certen eſtate remayning in the leſſour or donour, after the particuler eſtate and poſſeſſion conueyed to an other.
               
                  And it is called a reuerſion in reſpect of the poſſeſſiō ſeperated from it: ſo that hée that hath y• one hath not the other at the ſame time, for béeinge in one body together, there cannot be ſaid a reuerſion, beecauſe by the vnitinge, the one of them is drowned in the other: And ſo the reuerſion of lande, is the land itſelfe when it falleth.
            
            
               Riot.
               RIot is where 3 (at the leaſt) or more doe ſome vnlawfull act: as to beat a manne, Enter vppon the poſſeſſ. of an other, or ſuch like.
            
            
               Robbery.
               RObbery is when a mā taketh any thing

from the parſon of an other feloniouſely, although the thinge ſo taken bée not to the value but of a peny, yet it is felony, for which the offendor ſhal ſuffer death.
            
            
               Rout.
               ROut, is when people doe aſſemble themſelues together and after doe procéede, or ryde, or goe foorth, or doe moue by the inſtigation of one, or more who is their leader: This is called a Rout, béecauſe they do moue, and procéede in Routes and numbers.
               Alſo where many aſſemble them ſelues together vpon their owne quarrels and braules, as if the inhabitaunts of a

Towne wyll gather them ſelues together, to breake hedges, wales, ditches, pales, or ſuch like to haue cōmō there, or to beate an other that hath done to them a cō
                  mon diſpleaſure or ſuch like, that is a Rout and agaynſt the lawe although they haue not done or put in executyon their miſcheuous entent.
            
            
               Sake.
               SAk, this is plea and correction of treſpas of men in your court, becauſe (Sak) in Engliſh is Ache
                     •
                  ō in french, and Sak is put for Sik as to ſay for ſik ſak, alſo for what hurt, and Sak is put for forfait.
            
            
               
               Scot.
               SCot, that is to be quite of a certen cuſtome, as of common tallage made to the vſe of y• ſhirife or his Bailifes.
            
            
               Shewinge.
               SHewing that is to bée quit with attachment in any court and before whomſoeuer in plaintes ſhewed & not auowed.
            
            
               Sok.
               SOk this is ſuit of mē in your court according to the cuſtome of y• Realme.
            
            
               Sokmans.
               SOkmans, are the tenants in auncient demeſne, that holde their lands by Socage, that is by ſeruice with y• plough, and therefore they are called Sokmans, which is as much to ſay, as

tenants or mē that hold by ſeruice of the plough, or plowmen. For Sok ſignifieth a plough.
               And theſe Sokmans, or tenants in aunciēt demeſne, haue many and diuers liberties gyuen and graunted to them by the law, as wel theſe tenants that holde of a common perſon in auncient demeſne as thoſe that hold of the Quéene in auncient demeſue: as namely to bée frée from payinge tolle in euery Market, Faire, towne, and Cytie throughout the whole Realme, as well for their goodes and cattels that they ſel to others, as for thoſe thynges that they buy for their prouiſion, of other. And thereuppon

euery of them may ſue to haue letters patentes vnder ye Quéenes ſeale directed to her officers, & to ye Maires, Bailifes & other officers in the Realme to ſuffer them to bée tolle frée. Alſo to bée quit of pōtage, murage, and paſſage, as alſo of taxes and tallages graū
                  ted by parlyament, except that the Quéene taxe auncien demeſne as ſhée may at her pleaſure for ſome great cauſe. Alſo to bée frée frō payments towardes the expenſes▪ of the knightes of the Shire yt come to the parliament.
               And if the ſhirife will diſtreine them or any of them to bée contributory for their lands in auncyent demeſne, then one of thē or all as

the caſe requireth maye ſue a writ directed to the ſhirife cōmaunding him that hée doe not compell them to bée contrybutories to the expenſes of the knightes, and the ſame writte doth commaunde him alſoe, that if he haue alreadye dyſtrayned them therfore, that hée redelyuer the ſame diſtreſſe.
               Alſoe that they ought not to bée impanelled, nor put in iuries and enqueſtes in the countrey out of their manner or lordſhip of auncyen demeſne, for the lands that they holde there (except that they haue other lāds at the common lawe, for which they ought to be charged) and if the ſherife doe returne them in panelles, then they

may haue a writ againſt him de non ponen dis in aſſiſis et iuratis. And if he doe to the contrarye, then lieth an attachmēt vpon yt againſt him. And ſo it is alſo, if the bailifes of fraunchiſes that haue returne of writtes will returne any of the tenauntes which holde in aunciēt demeſne in aſſiſes or iures.
               And alſo to be exempt from leetes, and the ſhirifes turne, wyth dyuers other ſuch like lyberties.
            
            
               Spoliation.
               SPoliation is a ſuit for the fruites of a church or for the church itſelfe, and is to bee ſued in the ſpyrytuall Court, and not in our courtes. And thys ſuyt lyeth for one

incumbent againſt an other incumbent, where they both claime by one patron, and where the ryght of the patronage doth not come in queſtion or debate. As if a parſonne be created a Biſhoppe, and hath diſpenſation to kéepe his be nefice ſtill, and afterwarde the patron preſents an other incumbēt which is inſtituted, & inducted: Now ye Biſhop may haue agaynſt that incumbent a Spoliation in the ſpiritual court, becauſe they clayme both by one patron, and the ryght of the patronage doth not come in debate, and béecauſe that the other incumbent came to the poſſeſſiō of ye benefice

by the couſe of the ſpirituall lawe, that is to ſay by inſtitutyon and induction, ſoe that he hath couler to haue it and to bee perſon by the ſpiritual lawe, for otherwiſe if he be not inſtituted and inducted &c. ſpoliatyon lieth not againſt hym, but rather a writ of treſpas, or an aſſiſe of nouel diſſeiſin &c.
               Soe it is alſoe where a perſon doth accept an other benefice, by reaſon whereof the patron preſentes an other clerke whoe is inſtituted and inducted, nowe the one of them may haue ſpoliation againſt the other, & thē ſhal come in debate if he haue plurality or not. And ſo it is of depriuation &c.
               The ſame lawe, is

where one ſayeth to the patron, that his clerke is deade, where vppon hée preſentes an other. There the firſt incumbent which was ſuppoſed to be deade may haue a ſpoliation agaynſt the other, and ſoe in diuers other ſuch like caſes.
            
            
               Stallage.
               STallage that is to bée quite of a certeine cuſtome exacted for ye ſtreat takē or aſſigned in faires and markets.
            
            
               Suit couenant.
               SUit couenant is when your aunceſtours haue couenaunted wyth my aunceſtors to ſue to the court of my aunceſtors.
            
            
               Suit cuſtome.
               
                  SUit cuſtome is when I and my aunceſtours haue bene ſeyſed of your owne ſuitand your aunceſtours, tyme out of minde &c.
            
            
               Suit rial.
               SUit 
                     ••
                  al is when men come to the ſhiriffes tourne or léets, to which court al men ſhalbee cō
                  pelled to come to knowe the lawes, ſoe that they ſhall not be ignorant of the thinges that ſhalbée declared there howe they ſhalbe gouerned. And it is called rial ſuyt becauſe of their allegeaunce, and thys appereth by common experience when one is ſworne, his othe is that hée ſhalbe a loyall and faythfull manne to the Quéene. And thys ſuyt is not for the

lande which hée holdeth within the Countie, but by reaſon of his perſon, and hys abode there, and ought to bée done twiſe a yere, for defaut whereof, he ſhalbe amerced and not diſtrayned.
            
            
               Suit ſeruice.
               SUit ſeruice is to ſue to the ſherifes tourne or léete, or to the lordes court frō iij. wekes to iij. wekes by y• whole yere, & for default thereof, a 
                     •••
                   ſhalbee diſtrayned and not amerced. And this ſuit ſeruice is by reaſon of the tenure of a mans landes.
            
            
               Taxe and Tallage.
               TAxe and Tallage, are payments as tenthes, fiftenthes, ſubſydyes,

or ſuch like graunted to the Queene by Parlyament.
               The tenaunts in auncien demeane are quite of theſe texes & tallages graunted by parliament except y• the Quéene do taxe aūctēt demeſne, as ſhe may whē ſhe thinks good for ſome great cauſe Sée auncient demeſne.
            
            
               Tenure in capite.
               TEnure in capite is where any holde of y• Queene as of her perſon beinge Quéene, and of her Crowne as of a Lordſhippe by it ſelfe in groſſe, & in chiefe aboue al other lordſhipes. And not wher they hold of her as of any manor, honor, or caſtel, except certein auncient honors, which appere in the Eſchequer.
            
            
               
               Teſtament.
               TEſtament is thus defined or expounded in maſter Plowdēs comentaries, a teſtament is the witneſſe of the mind, and is compound of theſe 2. words teſtatio & mentis, which ſo ſignifieth, truth is, that ateſtament is a witnes of the mynde, but that it is a compoūd word, Aulus Gelliꝰ in his vi. booke ca. 12. doth deny y• ſame to an excellent lawyer one Seruius, ſulpitius, & ſaith that it is a ſimple word, as are theſe: Calciamentum, Paludamentum, pauimentum, & dyuers ſuch like: And much leſſe is aggreamentum a compounde woorde of aggregatio, and mentium as is ſayde before in that

title, for there is no ſuch latin word ſimple or cō
                  pound, but it may neuertheleſſe ſerue well for a lawe lattyn woorde.
               And therefore thus it may be better defined: A teſtament is the true declaration of our laſt will of that wée would to bée don after our death &c. And of teſtamēts there bée ii. ſortes, namely a teſtament in writinge, & a teſtamēt by wordes, which is called a nuncupatiue teſtament.
               The firſt is alwayes in writing as is ſayd.
               The other is when a man being ſicke, and for feare leaſt death or want of memory, or of ſpeach, ſhould come ſoe ſoddenly and haſtely vppon hym that hée ſhould be

preuented if hée ſtayed the writinge of hys teſtament, deſireth hys neyghbours and frends to beare witneſſe of hys laſt wil, and then declareth the ſame preſently by wordes before them, which after his deceaſe in proued by witneſſes, and put in writinge by the ordinary, and then ſtandeth in as good force (except for lands) as if it had at y• firſt in the lyfe of the teſtatour byn put in writinge.
            
            
               Them.
               THem, that is y• you ſhall haue all y• generation of your vill
                     •
                  ynes with their ſutes & cattel whereſoouer they ſhalbe ſound in Englād 
                     ••
                  cent that if any 
                     〈…〉
                   ſhall remayne 
                     〈…〉
                   yeare, and a day in any

priuiledged towne ſo y• hee ſhalbée receaued into their cōmmaltie or guild as one of them, by that meanes hée is deliuered from villenage.
            
            
               Thefbote.
               THefebote is when a mā taketh any goods of a theefe to fauour and maintaine him: And not when a man taketh hys owne goodes that were ſtolne from him &c. The puniſhment in auncient time of theefeboote was of life and member: But now at this day Maſter Stamford ſayth it is puniſhed by raūſome, and impriſōmēt but enquire farder for I thinke it bée felony.
            
            
               Title.
               TItle, is where a lawful cauſe is c
                     •
                  e vpon a man

to haue a thing which an other hath, & hee hath no action for y• ſame, as title of mortmam, or to ē
                  ter for breach of a cōditiō
               
            
            
               Title of entrie.
               TItle of entrie, is whē one ſeyſed of lande in fee maketh a feoffement thereof vpon condition, and the condrtyon is broken: Nowe after the condition thus broken, the feoffour hath title to enter into ye land and may ſo doe at hys pleaſure, and by hys entrie the fréeholde ſhalbe ſayd to bée in him prepreſently. And it is called title of entrie, becauſe that hée cannot haue a writ of right agaynſt his feoffée vpō cōdition: For his right was out of him by the feoffemēt, which cannot be reduced without entrie, & the entrie

muſt be for the breach of the condition.
            
            
               Tolle, or Tolne.
               TOlle or tolne, is moſt properly a payment vſed in Cities, Townes Markets, and faires for goodes & cattell brought thither to bee bought and ſold: And is alwayes to bée payed by the buyer, and not by the ſeller, except there bee ſome cuſtome otherwiſe.
               There are diuers other tolles, as turne tolle and that is where tolle is payed for beſtes that are driuen to bée ſolde although that they bée not ſold in déede.
               Alſo tolle trauers, that is where one claymeth to haue an halpeny or ſuch lyke tolle of euery

beſt that is driuen ouer his ground.
               Through tol, is where a Towne preſcribes to haue tolle for euery beſt that goeth through their Towne a certen: or for euery ſcore or hundred a certen, which ſéemeth not to be ſo vnreaſonable a preſcription or cuſtōe asſōe haue thought, although it bée through the Quéenes high way (as they call it) where euery man may lawfully goe, if that there bée one thinge for an other, as if there bée a bridge or ſuch like commodity prouided at the coſtes & charges of the Towne, for the eaſe of trauailers y• driue that way, whereby their Journey is either ſhortned or bettered, why then may not

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
tolle bée lawfully, and wyth good reaſon demaunded of them &c. But diuers Citizens & Townes men are frée frō paying tolle by grāt of the Quéene, or her aūceſtours, or do claime the ſame by preſcription or cuſtome. So alſo ſpiritual perſons, and religious men (as they call thē) were quit of paying tolle for their goodes and marchandiſes bought & ſold, but now the ſtatute of kinge H. 8. wyll that they ſhall not marchandize: But enquire whether ye intent of ye ſtatute be obſerued among thē at this day or not, ſome ſay it is not.
               Alſo tenāts in auncient demeſne ought to be quit thorough the whole Realme of payinge tolle,

as appereth before in ye title Sokemans. And in all theſe caſes where tolle is demaūded where it ought not to bée payed of them that ſhoulde goe, buy, and ſell tolle frée, there the party or parties greued may haue a writ, De eſſendi quietum de tolonio, againſt hym or them that ſoe demaunde tolle contrarye to the Quéene or her progenitours graunt, or contrarye to cuſtome or preſcription.
            
            
               Sheriffes tourne.
               SHeriffes Tourne is a court of Rceorde in al thinges that parteyne to the tourne. And it is the Quéenes léete thorowe al the County, and the ſherife is iudge. And whoſoeuer hath a léete,

hath the ſame aucthority wtin y• prcint, as ye ſhrufe hath wtin the tourne.
            
            
               Treaſure found.
               TReaſure found is whē any mony, gold, or ſiluer, plate, or bolleyne, is found in any place, and noe manne knoweth to whom the propertye is, then the property therof belongeth to the Quéene, and that is called treaſure troue, that is to ſaye, treaſure founde. But if any myne of mettal bée founde in any grounde, that alwaye pertayneth to the lord of the ſoile, excepte it bée a myne of gold or ſiluer which ſhall be to ye Quéene in whoſe grounde ſoeuer it bee founde.
            
            
               Viewe.
               
                  VIewe is when anye action real is brought & the tenāt knoweth not wel what lande it is that the demaundant aſketh, then the tenantſhal pray the viewe, that is to ſay, yt he may ſee ye lād which he claimeth. But if the tenant hath had the viewe in one writ, and after the writte is abated by myſnaminge of the towne, or by ioynture, and after the demaundaunte bringeth another writte againſt the tenant, then the tenant ſhal not haue the viewe in the ſeconde writ.
            
            
               Viſcount.
               VIſcount is a magiſtrate, and officer, of great aucthoritie, whom wee cōmonly cal (Sherife) or to ſpeake more

truely (Shire reue) and was at the firſt called (Shiregereue) y• is to ſay the keeper of the Shire, or the reue or ruler of the ſhire, for (Gereue) being deryued of the Saxon woorde (Gereccan to rule) was firſt called (Gerecfa) and then (Gerefa) which betokeneth a ruler. And hereof commeth (Portreue) or rather (Portgereue) a nā
                  
                     •
                   that in olde tyme was geuen to the head officer of a towne, and ſignifieth the ruler of the town for that (Port) comming of y• Latine worde portus) ſignifieth a port towne, And (Gereue) beinge deriued as is aforeſaid, ſignifieth a ruler, ſoe that (Portgereue) or (as we nowe ſhorter ſpeake it)

(Portreue) is the ruler of the towne.
               And thus was the head officer or gouernour of the Citie of Londō long ſynce (before they had y• name of Maier or Bailife) called, as it doth appere in diuers old monuments: But chiefely in the Saxon Charter of William baſtard y• cenquerour, which thus beginneth. William cheking, gréeteth William the Biſhoppe, and Godfrey the Portreue, and al the Citizens that in Lō
                  don bée &c.
               So alſo they of Germany (from whom wée & our language together firſt came) call amonge thē one gouernour burgréeue, an other Margreue, & an other landſgreue

with ſuch like &c.
               Thus much is ſaide onely to ſhewe y• right Etymon and antiquity of the word (Shirife) to which officer, our common lawe hath alwaies accordingly giuen great truſt, and aucthoritie, as to bee a ſpeciall preſeruer of the peace: and therefore all obligations that he takes to y• ſame end, are as recogniſances in lawe. Hée alſo is a iudge of record, when he holdes the Léetes or tournes which ar courts of record.
               Alſo hée hath the returne of writs, and impanelling of Juries, and ſuch like &c.
            
            
               Voucher.
               VOucher is when a Precipe qd' redd' of

lande is brought againſt a man, & an other ought to warrant the land to y• tenant, then the tenaunt ſhal vouch him to warranty, and theruppon he ſhal haue a writte called Summonias ad warrantizādum, & if y• ſhirife returne, y• he hath nothing by the which he may bée ſummoned, then there ſhal go forth a writ called Sequater ſub ſuo periculo, & whē he commeth hée ſhall plede wyth the demaundaunt, and if he come not, or if hee come and cannot barre the demaundant, then the demaundaunt ſhal recouer the land againſt the tenant, & the tenāt ſhal recouer aſmuch land in value agaynſt the vouche, and thereuppon he ſhall haue a writ called capias
                  
ad valenciam vers le vouch.
            
            
               Vſes.
               VSes de terre ad ſon cōmencement ap̄s que le cuſtome de ꝓperty comence enter homes, Come ou vn eſteant ſeiſie de terres en fee ſimple, fait vn feffem̄t al vn aut' ſans aſcun cōſiderac', mes ſolem̄t meaning q'le auter ſerroit ſeiſie al ſō vſe, et q' il m̄ voile prender le cōmodity et profits de les terres et q'le feffee doit aū le poſſeſſiō et franketenement de ceo al meſme le vſe &c. Ore apres ceo, ſur bone conſiderations, et pur auoyder diuers miſchiefes & inconueniences, ſuit le ſtatut

of an. 27. H. 8. cap. 10. prouided, which vniteth the vſe and poſſeſſion together, ſo that who hath the vſe of land, the ſame hath the poſſeſſ. thereof, by vertue of that eſtatute.
            
            
               Vſury.
               VSury is a gayne of any thynge aboue the principall, or that whych was lent, exacted onely in conſideration of the loane, whether it bee of corne, meat apparel, wares, or ſuch like, as of money. And here much might be ſaid and manie caſes might be put concerninge vſurie, which of purpoſe I omit, onely I wyſhe, that they who accompt them ſelues religious

and good chriſtiās, would not deceyue them ſelues by couller of the ſtatute of vſurie, becauſe it ſaieth that it ſhal not be lawful for any to take aboue x. li. in the 100. li. for a yere &c. whereby they gather (although falſely) that they may therefore take x. li. for y• lone of a 100. li. with a good conſcience becauſe the ſtatut doth after a ſort diſpence withal (for that it doth not puniſhe ſuch takynge) which thing it cannot do with the lawes and ordinances of god, for god wil haue hys decrées to bée kept inuiolable, who ſayth, lēd looking for nothinge thereby &c. By which wordes is excluded, either the takinge of xl. li. v. pounde, yea or

of one peny aboue the principal: But rather let ſuch thinke that that ſtatute was made vpō like cauſe that moued Moyſes to giue a byll of dyuorce to y• Iſralites, as namely to auoyd a greater miſchiefe, & for the hardneſſe of their harts.
            
            
               Vilawrie.
               VTlawrie is whē an exigent goeth foorth againſt any man, & proclamation made at v. counties, then at the v. county if the def. appere not, ye coroner ſhall giue iudgment that he ſhalbe out of the protectyon of the Queene, & out of the eyde of the lawe: and by ſuch an vtlary in actions perſonals, the party outlawed ſhall forfayt all his goodes and cattels to

the burden or trouble of the goodes: for hys eaſe ſake and more ſpéedy trauaylinge, without hu
                     •
                   & crye, flyeth away, and leaueth the goodes or any part of them behynd him &c. Then y• Quéens officer, or the Réeue, or Bailife to the Lorde of the mannour (wythin whoſe Juriſdictyon or circuit they were left) that by preſcriptyon, or graūt from the Quéene hath the fraunchyſe of wayfe: may ſeyſe the goods ſo wayued to their Lordes vſe, whoe may kéepe them as his owne proprr goods: except that the owner come wt freſh ſuite after the felon, and ſue an appell, or gyue in euidēce againſt hī at his arrainmēt vpō y• indictment,

and be attainted thereof &c. In which caſes the firſt owner ſhall haue reſtitution of hys goodes ſo ſtollen & wayued.
               But although as hath bin ſaid waife is properly of goodes ſtolne: yet waife may 
                     •
                  ée alſo of goods y• are not ſtolne: as if a man be purſued with hue, and crye, as a felon, and he flieth, and leaueth his owne goods &c. theſe ſhalbée taken as goodes wayued, and forfait as if they had byn ſtolne.
            
            
               VVaiue.
               WAiue is a woman that is vtlawed, & ſhée is called wayue, as left out or forſaken of the law: & not an vtlawe as a man is: For wemen

are not ſworne in léetes to the Quéene, nor to y• lawe, as men are, who therefore are within the lawe, whereas wemen are not, and for yt cauſe they cannot beſaid out of the lawe in ſo much as they neuer were wtin it: But a man is called vtlawe, becauſe that hée was once ſworne to the lawe: and nowe for contempt hée is put out of the lawe, and is called vtlaw, as one ſhould ſay without benefite of the lawe.
            
            
               VVarwit.
               WArwite (or wardwite as ſome copies haue it) that is to be quite of giuing of money for kéepinge of watches.
            
            
               
               VVrecke.
               WReke or varech as the Normans frō whō it cāe cal it, is where a ſhip is periſhed on the ſea, and no man eſcapeth a lyue out of the ſame, and the ſhippe, or part of the ſhippe ſo periſhed, or the goodes of the ſhip come to the lande of any Lorde, the lorde ſhall haue that as a wrecke of the ſea, but if a man, or a dogg, or cat, eſcape a liue, ſo yt the party to whōe y• goodes belonge come wt
                  in a yere and a day and proue the goodes to bée his, he ſhal haue them a gayne, by prouiſion of the ſtatute of Weſtminſter the firſt cap. 4. made in king Ed. 1. daies, who therin followed the decrée of Henry the firſt,

before whoſe dayes, if a ſhippe had bene caſt on ſhore, torne wyth tempeſt, and were not repayred by ſuch as eſcaped on lyue wythin a certeyne tyme, that then thys was taken for wrecke.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            The olde Tenures.
            
               Seruice de chiualer.
               TO holde by knightes ſeruice, is to holde by homage, fealty, and eſcuage, and it draweth to it warde, mariage, & reliefe, and know thou that knights ſeruice is ſeruice of landes or tenementes to beare armes in warre in the defence of the Kealme, and it o weth ward & mariage by reaſō that none is able nor of power, nor may haue knowledge to beare armes, before yt he be of ye age of 21. yeres. And for ſo much that the Lorde ſhall not léeſe that that of ryght hée ought to haue, and yt the power of the realme, nothinge be made weke. The lawe wil becauſe of his tēder age, yt ye
                  
Lord him ſhall haue in his ward till the full age of him, that is to ſay xxi. yeres.
            
            
               Graund serieantie.
               To hold by graund ſerieanty is as if a man hold certain lands or tenementes of the king to go wt him in hys hoſte, or to beare hys banner wt him in his warres, or to leade hys hoſte, or ſuch like, and thereto belongeth warde mariage and reliefe, as it appereth in ye tretiſe of wards and reliefes in the ſtatute made the 28. of Edwarde the I.
            
            
               Petit Serieantie.
               ¶ To hold by petit ſerieantie is as if a mā hold of the kinge lands or tementes, yelding to him a knife, a buckler, an Arrowe, a Bowe without ſtring, or other

like ſeruice at the will of the firſte feoffour, and there belōgeth not ward mariage ne reliefe. And marke well that a man may not holde by graūd nor petit ſerieantie, but of the king.
            
            
               Eſcuage.
               ¶To holde by eſcuage is by knight ſeruice, and there belongeth warde, mariage, and relief. And marke wel that a man may not holde by eſcuage, bnt that he hold by homage, for that eſcuage of common ryght draweth to him homage, as it was indged Termino H. 21. E. 3. cap. 42. fol. 52. Auowrye 115. And note wel, that eſcuage is a certeine ſomme

of money, and it ought to be leuied by the Lord of hys tenaunt after the quantitie of his tenure, when eſcuage runneth by all Englande. And it is ordeined by al the coū
                  ſell of Englande howe much euery tenant ſhall geue to his lord, & that is properly for to maintein the warrrs béetwéene Englande, and them of Scotlande or of Wales, and not betwene other lands, for that, that thoſe foreſayed landes ſhoulde bee of right belonginge to the Realme of Englande.
            
            
               Homage aunceſtrel.
               ¶ To holde by homage aunceſtrel is where I or my aūceſtors haue holdē of you & of your aunceſtors frō time out of mind

whereof no mynde runneth, by homage, fealtye and certayne rent. And it is not to holde by knightes ſeruice, and there belōgeth not ward maryage, nor relyefe. And note well that homage maye bée ſayed in two manners, that is to ſay, homage aunceſtrell, and homage de fayt. Homage aunceſtrell is there, where you or your aunceſtours haue holden of me and myne aunceſtors duringe the time of mans remēbrance by homage, fealty, & rent. Homage de fayt is there, where I enfeoffe your ſelfe, to hold of me by homage and rent, and in ſoe much that this homage beginneth by my deede, it is called homage de fait.

And note wel yt homage aū
                  
                     ••
                  ſtrel draweth to him voucher, yt is to ſay, warrantie of aūceſtours, but not homage de fait.
            
            
               Curteſie dengleterre.
               ¶ To hold by the curteſy of Englande is, there where a man taketh a wife inheritrix, and they haue iſſu a ſōne or daughter, and the wife dieth, whether ye iſſue be deade or a liue, ye huſbande ſhal hold this lād for terme of his life by the curteſie of England, and by ye law. And in this caſe the fée, and the right remaineth in the perſon of hym of whome he holdeth. And for that this tenant may not alien in fée, nor for terme of anothers lyfe, and if he doe, it is lawful to him in the reuerſion to enter.
            
            
               Fee ſimple.
               ¶ To holde in fee ſimple

is to holde to any man or woman, to him and to his heires, and to his aſſignes for euermore.
            
            
               Franke tenure.
               ¶ To hold in frée hold is to holde for terme of his own life, or for term of an other mannes life, And in this caſe the fée & the right remaineth in y• perſon of him, of whom he holdeth. And for that this tenāt may not aliē ī fée nor for term of life: And if he doe, it is well lawful to him in whom the fée and the right abydeth to enter.
            
            
               Dower.
               ¶ To hold in dower, is where a man inherit taketh a wife and dieth, ye heire ſhal enter, and endowe the wife of ye third part of al that that was to her huſbande in hys

life, in fée ſimple or fée taile, and ſhée ſhall holde theſe landes for terme of her life as her frée holde.
            
            
               Terme dans.
               ¶ To holde for terme of yeres is not but chattel ī effect, for no action is mayntenable againſt y• termour, for the recouering of the fréehold, for no fréehold is in hym. A leaſe for terme of yeres is a chattel real, and the other chattel perſonall, & al goodes which are remouable are chattelles perſonals.
            
            
               Mortgage.
               ¶ To holde in morgage is to hold for a certayne terme vpon condition, y• if the leſſour pay ſo much money at ſuch a day, that he may enter, and if not, that the other ſhall haue a fée ſimple or fée tayle, or frée holde. And in

euery caſe where landes or tenements be géeuen to a manfor a certaine terme vpon condition of the part of the leſſor for to make y• leſſee to haue more lōg time or terme, if the other do not as the condition is, the landes and tenementes vntyll the day that the condytion ſhould bee done, bée holden in morgage, as in a deade gage.
               ¶ And note well that if land be let to a man in morgage in fée ſimple or in fée tayle vpon condition, that if the firſt leſſour, as is before ſayd, pay ſo much money at ſuch a day that hée may enter, & if not, that the leſſée haue the ſāe eſtate in the lands, that the leſſour did him graunt at y• 
                  
                     •
                  eginnynge. And if before the day aſſygned,

the leſſée be diſſeyſed, he ſhal haue aſſiſe of nouel diſſeiſin. And in caſe that if the leſſée take a wife & die leſſed before the day aſſigned, the womā ſhall bée endowed.
               And note wel, that if ye leſſour after the death of the leſſée pay not the mony at y• day aſſigned, then y• woman ſhal hold her dower, and the iſſue her heritage. And in caſe the leſſour at ye day aſſigned pay the money to the heire of the leſſée, then he may put out the woman and the heire alſo, of all the lande firſt let. And if a man géeue landes to an other in the tail, yelding to him a certaine rent by the yeare, & one entre for defaut of paimēt, y• donée taketh

a wife and dieth ſeyſed the woman ſhalbee indowed. And in caſe that after the rent be behind, the donour may enter & put out the woman and the heire alſo. And note well, that if landes bée let to a man in morgage in fée vppon condition, the leſſée doth alien, the leſſour ſhalbée charged to pay the money to the alienée, & not to the ſeffée as it is ſaid.
            
            
               Burgage
               ¶ To holde in burgage is to holde as if the burgeis holde of the king, or of another Lord lands or tenementes, yeldinge to him a certain rent by y• yere, or els there where another man then burgeis holdeth of any Lord landes or tenementes

in burgage yeldinge to him a certayne rent by yeare.
            
            
               Socage.
               ¶ To hold in ſocage, is to hold of any lord lands or tenements yelding to him a certaine rent by ye yeare for all maner ſeruices. And note wel that to hold by ſocage is not to hold by knightes ſeruice, nor there longeth ward, mariage, nor reliefe. But they ſhal double once their rent after the death of their aunceſtours according to that, yt they be wont to pay to their Lorde. And they ſhall not bée ouer meaſure greued, as it appereth in the treatyſe of wards and reliefes. And note well yt ſocage may bée ſayde in thrée manners, that is to ſay. Socage in free tenure,

Socage in auncient tenure, & Socage in baſe tenure. Socage in frée tenure is to holde fréely by certaine rent for all maner of ſeruices as is before ſayd, and of that the next kms body ſhall haue the ward to whom the heritage may not diſcend, til the age of xiiii. yeares, that is to ſay, if the heritage come by the part of the father they of the parte of ye mother ſhal haue the ward, & cō
                  trary wiſe.
               ¶ And note wel that if the gardeine in ſocage do make waſt he ſhall not bée peched of waſt, but hée ſhall yelde accompt to the heire when hée ſhall come to his full age of xxi. yeares, and looke the Statute of Marlebridge cap. xvij. for thys

matter. Socage in aunciēt tenure is that where the people in aunciēt demeſne helde, whych vſe no other wrytte to haue then the writte of ryght cloſe which ſhalbe determined according to the cuſtome of the mannour and the Monſtrauerunt for to diſcharge thē whē their Lorde diſtrayneth them for to do other ſeruice that they ought not to do. And thys writ of Monſtrauerunt ought to be brought againſt the lord, & thoſe tenants hold al by one certain ſeruice, & theſe bée frée tenantes of auncient demeſne.
               Socage in baſe tenure is where a man holdeth in auncient demeſne, that may not haue the monſtrauerunt, and for that it is called y• baſe tenure.
               
                  ¶ To holde in fée ferme is to holde in fee ſimple yeldinge to the lorde the value, or at the leaſt the fourth part by yere, and hée oughte to doe noe other thinge, but as it is cōteined in the feffemēt, and hee that holdeth in fée ferme ought to doe fealty and not reliefe.
            
            
               Franke fee.
               ¶ To holde in franke fée is to holde in fée ſimple landes pledable at the cō
                  mon lawe.
            
            
               Baſe fee.
               ¶ To holde in fée baſe is to holde at the wil of the Lorde.
            
            
               Villenage.
               ¶ To holde in pure vyllenage, is to doe al that ye Lorde wyll him commaunde.
               ¶ The definitiō of villenage is villein of bloude, and of tenure, And it

is he of whome the Lord taketh redemptyon to mary his daughter, & to make him frée, & it is hée whom the lord may put out of his lāds and tenements at his wil, & alſoe of al his goods and cattel. And note wel yt a ſokmā is no pure villeine, nor a villeine oweth not ward mariage nor reliefe, nor to do any other ſeruices real. And note wel that the tenure in vyllenage ſhall make noe frée man villeine, if it be not continued ſith tyme oute of mynde, nor vyllayn land ſhal make no frée manne villeine, nor frée lande ſhall make noe villeine frée, except that the tenāt haue contynued frée ſith the tyme of noe minde, but a villeine ſhal make frée land villein by ſeyſin

or claime of ye lord. And note wel that if a villain purchaſe certaine land, & take a wife, & alien and dieth before the claime or ſeyſin of ye lord, ye wife ſhalbée endowed. And note wel, yt in caſe that the lord bring a Precipe quod reddat againſt the alien the which voncheth to warraunt the iſſue of the villaine which is villeine to the Lorde, hée ſhal haue the voucher, & by proteſtation ye Lorde may ſay that (notwithſtandinge that hee plede with his villeine) yet his villeine ſhall not bée enfraunchiſed. And note well that a baſtarde ſhall neuer bee iudged bylleyne, but by knowledge in court of recorde. And note well that if det be due by a Lord to a

free man, and he maketh two men his executours the which bée villeynes to the ſayed Lorde and dyeth, the villeines ſhall haue an actyon of dette agaynſt their Lorde, notwythſtandinge that he plede with them. And if he make proteſtation they ſhall not bée for ſo much enfraunchiſed, for that that they be to recouer the dette aforeſaid to the vſe of an other perſon that is to ſay to the vſe of their teſtatour and not to their owne vſe. And if the tenāt in dower haue a villeine which purchaſeth certaine land in fee, and after the tenaunt in dower entreth, ſhée ſhal haue the land to her & to her heires for euer more, & the ſame lawe is of tenaunt

for terme of yeres of a villein.
               And note wel that the Lorde may roble his villain, bete and chaſtice at his wil, ſaue onely that he may not maime him, for then he ſhal haue appell of mayme agaynſte him.
               ¶ And note well, that a villaine may haue iij. actions againſt his lorde, yt is to ſay appel of death of his aunce ſtour, appel of rape don to his wife, & appel of maime. And note well, if two parceners bring a writ of Nyefe, & one of thē be nonſute, the nonſuite of hym ſhalbée iudged yt conſuit of them both, ſoe that if the nonſuite be after apparance, they ſhalbée put oute from that actiō for euer,

for the lawe is ſuch in fauour of liberty. And note well, if two haue a vylleine in comen, & one of them make to him a manumiſſion, he ſhal not be made frée againſt both. And note wel, that in a writ de Natiuo habendo, it behoueth that the lorde ſhewe howe hee cōmeth priuy of the bloode of the villeine of whome hée is Lorde &c. And if hée, nor none of hys aunceſtours were not ſeyſed of none of hys blood, he ſhall not wynne by his action, if y• villein haue not knowledged in court of record him ſelfe to bée his villein. And note wel, that in a writ of Niefe may not be put more niefes then ij. & this was firſt brought in in y• hatred of

bondage. But in a writ de Libertate probanda, may bée put as manye nyefes as the plaintife will.
               ¶ And note well that if the vylleyne of a Lorde bée in auncien demeſne of ye king, or other towne priuileged, within a yere and a day, the lorde may ſeiſe him, and if he dwel in the ſame towne or other place fraunchiſed by a yere and a daye without ſeiſin of the Lord, he hath noe power to ſeyſe him after, if hée goe not in eſtraie out of the foreſaid fraunches.
            
            
               Taile.
               ¶ To hold in the taile is, where a man holdeth certaine lāds or tenements,

to him and to his heires of hys body béegotten. And note wel, that if y• land be géeuen to a man and to his heires males, and hée hath iſſue male, hee hath fée ſimple, and that was adiudged in ye parliament of our Lord the kynge. But where landes or tenementes bée géeuen to a man and to his heirs males of his body begotten, then hée hath fée tayle, and the iſſue female ſhal not bée enheritable, as it appereth the xiiii. yere of Edward the third in aſſiſe.
            
            
               Taile apres poſſibilitie.
               ¶ To hold in the taile after poſſibilitie of iſſue extinct is, where lād is geuē to a mā & to his wife & to the heires of their ii. bodyes ingendred, and one of them ouerlyueth

the other wythout iſſue betwéene them béegotten, hée ſhall holde the lande for terme of hys owne life, as tenaunt in the taile after poſſibilitie of iſſue extinct. And not withſtanding that he do waſt, he ſhal neuer be impeched of that waſt. And note that if hée alien, hée in the reuerſion ſhal not haue a writte of entre in conſimili caſu. But hée may enter, and hys entre is lawfull per Robertum Thorpe chiefe Juſtice.
            
            
               Frankmariage.
               ¶ To holde in frankemariage is to holde in the ſeconde tayle lymit in the ſtatute of Weſtminſter ſeconde cap. 1. And the feoffour ſhal acquite y• feoffée of al maner of ſeruices vnto ye 5. degrée be paſt, and ye feffour

ſhal do all the ſeruice and ſuites duringe ye ſayde terme. And after the heires of the feoffée ſhall doe it, for that that the priuitie of bloud is paſt. And if hée bée diſtrained for ſeruyce, hée ſhal haue a writ of Meſne agaīſt him ſuppoſing that he held the lands of him, but he ſhal not haue the foreiudgement if it be not in aduauntage of his iſſues.
               And note well, that after the fowerth degrée be paſt, he ſhall bee attendaunt of as much ſeruice to the donour, as the donour is attendant to the Lord paramount. And if hée do felony for which he is attaint, the king ſhal haue his lands for terme of his life naturall.

And after hys death, hys iſſue ſhal inheryte, as by force of the tayle. And in this caſe, none ſhall haue hys lands by way of eſchete, no more then in any other taile. And in caſe that the tenant die without heire of hys body begotten, the lande ſhall reuert to the donour as it ſhoulde in the common tayle. And if a manne let his land to another in franke mariage yeldynge to hym a certayne rent by yeare, hée ſhall hold this land in the common tayle, and not in frankemariage for by the rent reſerued, theſe woordes (in liberum maritagium) bée al vtterly voyd, ſo that y• tenure ſhalbée intended

after the tenure in the common taile.
               And note wel that the gift in franke mariage hath a condition annexed to it, notwithſtanding that it be not openly declared in the déede of the gift as it appereth by the ſtatut of weſtin̄ ſecond, ca. primo, de Donis cō
                     dicionalibus.
               
               And note wel that a manne ſhall not géeue landes nor tenementes in frankemariage, but where the womanne is priuie of bloud to the donour, 
                     •
                   elſe the m
                     •••
                  e nor the womā ſhal haue no other eſtate by the feoffement but for term of life.
            
            
               Frank almoigne.
               To holde in franke almoigne is to hold landes or tenements for to ſerue Godde and holye

Church to endow without doynge any other manner of ſeruice. And note, well that in thys caſe the donor is moſne, and oughtto acquite him fréely againſt the chiefe Lorde, and alſo they that holde in frankealmoigne ſhall doe no fealtie, but they that hold in franke mariage, ſhall do fealtie.
            
            
               Elegit.
               To hold by Elegit is where a manne hath recouered debt or dammage by a writ againſt another or by confeſſyon or in other manner, hée ſhal haue within the yere againſt hym a writte Judicial called Elegit to haue execution of the halfe of al his lāds and cattels, (except oxen and beſtes of the plowe)

tyll the debt or dammages hée vtterly leuied or payed to him, & duringe the terme hée is tenant by Elegit. And note wel if hee bée put out within ye terme he ſhall haue aſſyſe of nouell diſſeyſin, and after a rediſſeiſin if néede be, and thys is géeuen by the ſtatut of Weſtminſter 2. ca. 18. and alſo by the equity of the ſame ſtatute, he that hath his eſtate if hée bée put out ſhall haue aſſiſe and a rediſſeiſin if néede be, and alſo if hée make his executours and dye, and his executours enter and after be put out, they ſhall haue by the equity of the ſame ſtatute ſuch action as hée hym ſelfe before ſaid, but if he be put out, & after make hys executours and dye,

his executours may enter, and if they be ſtopped of their entre, they ſhall haue a writte of treſpas vpon their matter and caſe.
               And note well if hée do waſt in al the lande or parcell, the other ſhall haue againſt him immediatly a writte Judicyall out of the firſt recorde called a venire facias ad computandū, by which it ſhalbée inquired if hée haue leuied all the money or parcel, and if he haue not leuied thē money, then it ſhalbe in quired to how much the waſt amounteth, and if the waſt amount but to parcel, then aſmuch of ye mony, as ye waſt amoū
                  teth ſhalbée abridged of

y• foreſaid money which was to be leuied. But if he haue done more waſt then the foreſaid ſumme of money which was to be leuied amounteth, the other ſhall bée diſcharged by and by of all the ſaid money, and ſhal recouer the land, and for the ſuperfluity of y• waſt made aboue that that amounteth to the ſayde ſumme, hée ſhal recouer his dāmages ſingle, and the ſame lawe is of hys executours, & alſo of him that hath his eſtate. And note that if hée alien in fée or for terme of life, or in tayle all or parcell of the lād which he holdeth by Elegit, if y• alienation bée made wtin the terme or after, hée which hath right ſhalhaue againſt hi

one aſſiſe of nouel diſ
                     •
                  ciſine. And they both muſt be put in the au
                     •
                  ſe the alienor and the alienée, and notwythſtandinge that the alienour die preſētly, yet he which hath right ſhal haue an aſſiſe againſt the alienée alone as if the alienour had bene a playne tenant for terme of yeres, and that is by the equitie of the ſtatut of W. 2. cap. 25. for that that he hath not but a chattel in effect, and the ſame law is of his executours and of him which hath hys eſtate as is aforeſaid.
               And note wel that in an Elegit, if the ſhirife retorne y• he had nothinge y• day of there conuſance made, but y• he purchased lands after the tyme, then the partye plaintife

ſhal haue a newe writto haue execution thereof, the ſame lawe is of a ſtatute merchaunt. And note wel that after a fiery facias a mā may haue the Elegit, but not contrary wiſe, for ſoe much y• the Elegit is of more higher nature then thefieri facias. And note wel that if a man recouer by a writte of debt and ſueth a fieri facias, and the ſhirife retourne that the party hath nothig where of hee maye make grée with the party, then the plaintife ſhal haue a capi as ſicut alias, and a pluries, and if the ſhirife retourne at the capias mitto vobis corpus, and hée haue nothinge whereof hée may make grée to y• party, he ſhalbée ſent to the priſon of the Fléet, &

there ſhal abide tyll hée haue made agrement wt the party, & if y• ſhirife retourne non eſt inuentus then there ſhall goe forth an exigent againſt hym. And note wel y• in a writ of debt brought againſt a perſonne of holy church, which hath nothinge of lay fée, & y• ſhirife retourneth, y• he hath nought by which he may be summo ned, then ſhall the plaintife ſue a writ to the Biſhop that hée make hys clerke to come, and the biſhop ſhal make hym 
                     •
                  o come by ſequeſtration of y• church. And note wel, y• if a man bringe a writ of debt & recouer, & make his executors & dieth, they ſhal haue executiō not wt
                  ſtanding y• it be within y• yere by a fieri facias.
            
            
               Statut merchant.
               6 To holde by Statute

merchaunt, is where a man knowlegeth to pay certayne money to another at a certaine day before the maior, bailife, or other wardē of any town yt hath power to make execution of the ſame ſtatute, & if ye obligée pay not y• debt at ye day, & nothing of his goods, lands, or tenementes may be found within the warde of the maior or warden béefore ſaied, but in other places without, thē ye reconiſée ſhal ſue the reconiſaunce & obligatiō wt a certification to the chauncery vnder the kinges ſeale, & he ſhal haue out of the chaū cery a capias to ye ſhirife of ye coūty where he is to take him & to put hym in priſon, if hée bée not a clarke, til hée bée not a clarke, til hée haue made gréement of ye debt. And

one quarter of the yere after that, that hée ſhalbée taken, hée ſhall haue his lād deliuered to himſelfe to make gree to ye party of the debt, & he may ſelit while he is in priſon, and his ſale ſhalbe good & law ful. And if he do not grée wtin a quarter of a yere, or if it be retourned that he be not foūd, then y• reconiſée may haue a writ of the chauncery which is called Extendi ſacias, direct to al ſhirifs, where hée hath landes, to extende hys landes and goods, & to deliuer ye goods to him, and to ſeiſe him in hys landes, to holde them to him and to hys heires and his aſſignes, til that the debts be leuied or payed, and for that tyme hée is tenaunt by

ſtatut merchaunt. And note wei, that in a ſtatute merchaunt the reconiſée ſhall haue executyon of al the landes which the reconiſour hadde the daye of the reconiſaunce made, and any tyme after, by force of the ſame eſtatute. And note well, that when any waſte or deſtruction is made by the reconiſée, his executors, or by him that hath eſtate, the reconiſour or his executours ſhal haue the ſame lawe as is before ſayd of the tenant by Elegit.
               And note wel, if the tenaunt by ſtatut merchaunt holde ouer hys terme, he that hath right maye ſue againſt him a venire facias ad computandum, or els enter by &

by as vppon tenaunt by Elegit.
               ¶ There be thrée maner ofrents, that is to ſaye, rent ſeruice, rent charge and rent ſecke. Rent ſeruice is, where a manne holdeth of an other by fealtie, and for to doe ſuit to his court, and yelding to him a certaine rent by the yere for all manner of ſeruices.
               ¶ And note wel, that if the Lorde be ſeiſed of the ſeruice & rent before ſaid & they be behinde, and he diſtraine, and the tenant reſcue the dyſtreſſe, hée may haue Aſſyſe, or a writte of reſcous, but it is more neceſſarye for hym to haue aſſyſe then a writ of reſcous, for that by aſſiſe he ſhal recouer his rent & his damages

but by a writte of Reſcous, hée ſhall not recouer but the thynge and the dammages.
               ¶ And note well that if the lorde be not ſeyſed of the rent and ſeruyce and they bée behynde, and hee dyſtrayne for them, and the tenaunt take againe the diſtreſſe, hee ſhall not haue aſſiſe but a wrytte of Reſcous, aud ſhal not néede to ſhewe bys right. And note wel that if the Lord diſtreine his tenaunt in ſocage for knights ſeruice whiche is not denyed him, & auowe for y• ſame ſeruice in court of record, he ſhalbe charged by the ſame ſeruice by Fynch termino Hillarij Anno xlvj.
               And note well y• if the

Lord may not find a diſtreſſe by two yeare, hée ſhal haue againſt the tenaunt a writte of Ceſſauit per biennium as▪ it appereth by the ſtatute of Weſtm. 2. cd. 21. And if the tenant dye in the meane time and his iſſue enter, the Lord ſhal haue againſt the iſſue a writ of entre vpō y• Ceſſauit, or if the tenaunt alien, y• lord ſhall haue againſt the alienée the foreſayd writte. But if the Lorde haue iſſue and dye, and the tenaunt bée in arrerages of the ſayde rent and ſeruice in the time of the father of the iſſue, & not in the time of the iſſue, he may not diſtrain for y• arrerages in y• time of his father, and hee ſhal haue none other recouery

agaynſt the tenaunt or any other, for that that ſuch aduantage is géeuen by the lawe to the tenaunt. And note well that rent ſeruice is that to the which belongeth fealtie, but to rent charge & rent ſeck belongeth not fealtie, but it belongeth to rēt ſeruyce of common right.
            
            
               Rent charge.
               Rent charge is where a man graūteth certaine rent going out of hys lands or tenemēts to another in fée ſimple, or in fée taile, or for terme of life by déede vpō condition, yt at what time the rent bée bēehinde, it ſhall bèe wel & lawefull to the grauntée to hys heires or aſſygnes or diſtrayne in the ſame lāds or tenementes. And note wel, that if the rent

be behind, it is wel lawful to the grauntée at his election to haue a writte of annui
                     •
                  y, or els he may diſtraine, and if the diſtreſſe bée taken agaynſt his will from him, and he was neuer ſeiſed béefore, he hath noe recouery, but by writ of Reſcous, for ye diſtreſſe firſt taken, geueth not to him ſeyſin, onely if hee ha
                     •
                   the rent beefore, for if he were ſeyſed of the rent before, and after the rent bée behind and hée dyſtraine, & reſcous to hym bée made, hee ſhall haue aſſiſe, or a writte of reſcous.
               And note wel, that in euery aſſiſe of rēt charge and annuell rent, or in a wrytte of annuitie, it béehoueth to him that bringeth the writte

to ſhewe forth an eſpecialty, or els he ſhall not maintaine the aſſiſe, but in a Mordaunceſtour or formedon in the diſcender or other writs (in the which title is geuen or compriſed) brought of rent charge, or annuell rent, it néedeth not to ſhewe eſpecialtie.
               And note well that if a mā graūt a rēt charge to an other, & y• grauntée purchaſe the halfe of the land whereof the rent is going out, all the rent is extinct, and if the grauntée releaſe to the grauntour parcell of the rent, yet al the rent is not extinct. But in rēt ſeruice the lawe is otherwyſe, for notwithſtandinge y• y• Lorde hath purchaſed y• halfe of y• lād wherof y•
                  
rent is going out, yet y• rent is not extinct, but for the halfe, & the cauſe of the diuerſity is that rent ſeruice may bée ſeuered to one portion, but not rent charge.
               And note wel that if rent charge be graunted to two ioyntly, and the one releaſe, yet the other ſhall haue the halfe of the rent. And alſo if one purchaſe the halfe of the lande whereof the rent is goyng out, the other ſhall haue the halfe of the rent of hys companion: And if the diſſeyſour charge y• land to a ſtraunger, and the diſſeiſie bringe an aſſiſe and recouer, the charge is defeated. But if hée that hath right, charge the lande, and a ſtraunger faine a falſe action

againſt him & recouer by defaut, the charge abydeth. And note wel, that in caſe that purparty bée béetwéene two parceners and more land bée allotted to one then to the other, and ſhée that hath more of the lande, chargeth her land to the other and ſhée happeth the rent, ſhée ſhal mainteyne aſſyſe without eſpecialty. And if y• graū
                  tée haue in fée ſimple or in fée tayle, and hath iſſue and dieth, if the iſſue bringe a formedon, or aſſiſe of mordaunceſter, hée ſhall neuer bée charged to ſhewe an eſpecialty.
            
            
               Rent ſecke.
               Rent ſecke is where a man holdeth of me by homage fealty & other ſeruice, yeldyng to mée a

certaine rent by ye yere and I graunt this rent to another, reſeruinge to mée the ſeruice.
               And note wel that in rent ſeck if a man be ſeiſed of the rent, and the rent bée behind, hée may not dyſtrayne, but hee ſhall haue aſſiſe of nouel diſſeiſin.
               And note well that if rent ſecke be graunted to a manne and to hys heires, and the rent bée béehind, and the grauntour dye, the heire may not diſtrayne, nor ſhal recouer the arrerages of the tyme of his father, as it is before ſaid of rēt ſeruice.
               And in the ſame maner it is to ſay of rent charge, or annuel rent. But in al theſe rentes

before ſaid the heire may haue for the arrerages in his owne time ſuch aduauntage as hys father had in his life.
               And note well that in rent ſecke if a manne bée not ſeyſed of the rent, and it bée behind, hée is without recouery, for that that it was his owne folly at the beginning when the rent was graunted to hym, or reſerued, that hée tooke not ſeyſin of the rent as a peny or two pence. And note well that a manne may not haue a Ceſſauit ꝑ biennium or another writte of entre ſur Ceſſauit for no rent ſecke béehynd by ii. yeares, but onely for rent ſeruice, as it appeareth in the ſtatute.
               
                  ¶And note well that in rēt ſecke it behoueth him that ſueth for y• rent ſeck for to ſhewe a déede to ye tenaunt, or els the tenāt ſhal not be charged with the rent, but where the rent ſecke was rent ſeruice before, as in thys caſe, lord, meſne, and tenaunt, and euerie of thē holdeth of other by homage and fealtie, and the tenant of the meſne x. s. of rent, the lorde paramoūt purchaſeth y• lands or tenementes of the tenaunt, all the ſeign
                     •
                  orye of the meſne but the rent is extinict. And for this cauſe thys rent is béecome rent ſecke, and the rent ſeruyce chaunged, for hée maye not dyſtrayne for thys rent, and in this caſe hée that

demanudethe the rent ſhal neuer be charged to ſhewe a déede. Alſo in a writte of mordaunceſtour, ayel, or beſayle, of rent ſecke it néedeth not to ſhewe a ſpecyaltie for that theſe writtes of poſſeſſion doe comprehende a tytle wythin thē ſelues, that is to ſay, that the aunceſtour was ſeyſed of the ſame rent and continued hys poſſeſſion, by cauſe of which ſeyſine the lawe ſuppoſeth that it is alſoe auerrable by the countreye, yet learne, for ſome ſuppoſe that it béehoueth of neceſſity to ſhewe forthe a déede, for that that rent ſecke is a thinge againſt cōmon right as wel as rent charge. But in aſſiſe of nouel diſſeiſin and

in a writte of entre ſur diſſeiſin brought of rent ſecke, it béehoueth of neceſſitie to ſhewe forth a déede, for that that rent ſecke is a thinge againſt a common right, except in the caſe before ſayed where it was rent ſeruice before.
               And aſſiſe of nouel dyſſeiſin, & a writte of entre ſur diſſeiſine conteygne within them no title, but ſuppoſe a diſſeiſine to be done to y• plaintife, & of y• entendement of the lawe the diſſeiſin géeueth noe cauſe of auermēt againſt commen right, but of neceſ
                     •
                  itye it behoueth to ſhewe forth a déede.
            
            
               Suit ſeruice.
               ¶ Suit ſeruice is to come to the court from thrée

wéekes to thrée wéekes by the whole yere, and for that a man ſhabe diſtrayned not amerced. Suit real is to come to y• court of léete and that is not but two times in the yere, and for that a man ſhalbée amerced and not diſtrained.
            
         
         
            
            Termes of the lawe.
            
               ¶ Abatement de brief ou plaint.
               
               ABatemēt de br'ou plaint, eſt quāt vn accion eſt port perbr' ou plaint, en que faut ſuffic' et bone matter, ou autermēt le matt▪ all', neſt certeinemēt alledge, ou ſi le pl', ou defendant, ou lieu, ſōt miſnoſme, ou ſil appt variance 
                     •
                  enter le br' et le ſpecialtie, ou record, ou q̄ le brief ou declaration ſoūt vncerteine, ou pur mort del pl' ou def. et purdiūs aut's ſēblable cauſes q̄ux ieo omiſe de pur
                     •
                  , car de c̄ ſolem̄t, vn poet faire vn grād diſcourſe, et ieo det'm̄ de ſatiſfier vous, (bō frie
                     ••••
                  ich.) 
                     ••
                  bn̄ q'ieo poy, ou
                     •
                  cy moult breuit', et cy petit troubl▪
                  
a moy meſme cōc ieo poy, dōques ſur ceux defautes, le def. poet prie, q̄le br' ou plaint abatera, cē adire, que le ſuite del pl' enuers luy ceſſera pur ceſt temps, et que il cōmē
                  cer a auter temps ſon fuit, et port' vn nouel brief ou plaint, ſil ſoit iſſint diſpoſe a faire.
            
            
               Abatement en terres.
               ABatement en terres ou ten̄tes, eſt quant vn hōe moruſt ſeiſie de terres ou tenemēts, & vn eſtranger, ceſt adire, vn que nad droit, entra en m̄s les terres ou ten̄ts, deuant que le heire fayt ſon entrie, ceſt entrie de le eſtraūger, eſt appel vn abatemēt, et il vn abator: Mes ſi le heire enter primes apres

le mort de ſō aū
                  ceſtour, et le eſtrāger enter ſur le poſſeſſion del heire, ceſt entrie de le eſtranger, eſt vn diſſeiſin al heire.
            
            
               Abbe.
               ABbe fuit le ſoueraign̄, hed, ou principal de ceux meaſons de papish religiō, q̄ux quant ils fuerent fuerent appel abbeis, et ceſt abbe enſeble oue les moignes d' meſme le meaſon, queux fueront appel le couent, foūt vn corporation.
            
            
               Abbettours.
               ABbettors ſoūt en diuers caſes diūſemēt priſe, vn kynd de Abbettours ſōt ceux, q̄ maliciouſmēt ſauns dr'turel cāe ou deſert procur' aut's de ſuer faux appeals d' murd'

ou felony, enūs hōes, al entent de troubler, & greeuer eux, & pur faire eux en infamy & ſlaūder. Abbettors en murder, ſont ceux q̄ cōmaund, procure, councel, ou comfort auters de murder. Et en aſcū caſe tiels Abbett' ſerrōt priſes cōe principals, et en aſcun caſe forſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   cōe acceſſories. Iſſint en auter felonies, et lour p̄ſēce a le choſe fait, ou lour abſence de la, fayt vn difference en le caſe. Il y ad Abbettoures auxi en treaſon, mes ils ſoūt en caſe come principals, car ē treſ. il ny ad aſc̄ acceſſories.
            
            
               Abeyance.
               Abeyance eſt quātvn leas eſt fait pur terme de vie, le remaind' al

droit hr's de I. S. le q̄l I. S. eſt en vie al temps del grant: Ore cē grāt de rem' paſſa hors del graūt' maintenāt, vnc' il ne veſta maintenāt, ne priſt effect en le graūtee, cē adire le dr' heire de I. S. mes eſt dit deſte en abeiance, ou cōe les Logitiens appel ceo, in potencia, ou in Intellectu, et come nous diomꝰ in nubibꝰ, cē a ſcauoier en le conſideration d' le ley: Que fi I. S. moruſt relinquens vn dr' heire en vie, et viuans le leſſee pur vie, don'
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ceo eſt vn bon rem', et a ore veſt, et vient en le dit droit heire, ē tiel ſort, que il poit graūt, forfait, ou auterment dyſpoſe ceo, et ceſſa deſte ore en abeiance,

pur ceo que il eſt vn a ore d' Abilit'pur prēd' ceo, pur ceo q' I. S. eſt mort et ad relinq' vn droit heir'ē vie le quel ne puit eſtre viuant I. S. car durant ſon vye, nul poit proꝑment eē dit ſon heire. Itē ſi vn hōe ſoit patron dū eſgliſe, et p̄ſent aut' a c': Ore eſt le feein le ꝑſō, mes ſi l' perſō moruſt, et le eſgliſe ē deuenus void, dō
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   eſt le fee en abeyāce, tā
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   il ſoit vn nouel ꝑſon p̄ſent. Car le patron nad le fee, mes tāt' le dr' de p̄ſēt, et le fee ē en lencūbēt que eſt p̄ſent, et puis ſon mort, il nē en aſc', mes en abeiance tan
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   il ſoit vn nouel incū
                  bent come eſt auādit.
            
            
               ¶ Abiſherſinge.
               
               
                  ABisherſinge (et en aſc̄ copies miſsher ſing) hoc eſt quietum eſſe de amerciamentis corā quibuſcū
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   de intranſūptione ꝓbata.
            
            
               Abiuration.
               ABiuration eſt vn ſerement que hōe ou femme preignont quaunt ils ont commiſe felonye, et fue al eſgliſe ou Cemitorie pur tuitiō de lour vies eſliſāt pluiſtoſt ꝑpetual baniſhm̄t hors del Realme, que a eſtoier a le ley, et deſtre trie del felony. Et ceſt ley ſuyt inſtitute per Saynt Edvvarde le confeſſour vn Roy d' ceſt Realme deuaunt le conqueſt, et fuit groūd ſur le ley d' m̄
                  cy, et pur le amour &

reūence, ſauns doubt, q' il et aut's ſes ſucceſ. porteront al meaſon ddieu, ou lieu de praiers, et adminiſtrac' de ſon parol et ſacram̄ts, le quel nous appellomꝰ le eſgliſe. Mes cōe vnſemely choſe il fuit ou eſt, et cōe diſtant de le nature de le mea ſon de dieu, de faire el vn ſuccouror et defē
                  dour d'horrible murderers et larons, voꝰ poies cōſiderer (frere Nicholas) et l' meliour qn̄t vous penſiſt quid noſtre ſauiour Chriſt diſt reprehendans les Iewes, et perauenture auxi ꝓpheſeāt de ceſt: Domus mea domꝰ orationis vocabitur, at vos feciſtis eam ſpeluncā latronum.
            
            
               
               Abridgement deplaint ou demaund.
               ABridgem̄t d' plaint ou dd', eſt lou vn port vn aſſiſe, brief de dower, br' de gard, ou tiels ſemblables, ou le br' eſt, de libero tenemento, cōe en br' de dovver, le br' eſt, rationabilem dot' q' eam cōtingit de libero tenemento W. ſō bar'. Et en vn br' de gard, le br' eſt, cuſtod' terr' & her' &c. et le pl' ou dd' ant, dd' diuers acres ou ꝑcels de terre, et le t' pleade non tenure, ou iointenancy, ou aſcū aut' tiel ſemblable plea al ꝑcel del terre dd', en abatement del br', donques le pl' ou demaūd't poet abridger ſō playnt ou dd' al ceſt parcell,

ceſt adire, il poet omit hors ceſt part, et prie q'let' rn̄dera al reſt a que il nad vnc' plede aſcun choſe. Le cauſe eſt pur ceo q̄ entiels br'esle certeintie neſt miſe, le dd' eſt generalment, de libero ten̄to, et nient obſtāt le dd' dant ad abridge ſon plaint ou dd' en part, vnc'le briefe demurt bone, de libero tenemento pur le reſidue.
            
            
               Acceptance.
               ACceptance eſt vn prendrans en bon gree, et cōe vn agreement al aſc' choſe fait deuant, le quel puet eſte auoide et vnfayt (ſi tiel acceptāce nad eſtre) per luy ou ceux que iſſynt accepta,

Sicom
                     •
                   pur exāple vn Abbot leſſe t're de ſō meaſon pur ans reſeruāt rent et moruſt, et puis vn aut' ē fait abbot, le q̄l accepta, ceſt adire, priſt ou receyue le rent qn̄t il eſt due, et doet eſte pay, ore ꝑ ceſt acceptance le leas eſt fait ꝑfect & bone, le quel auterm̄t l' Abbot puet aſſets bien, auoid et fair' fruſtrate. Semblable ley eſt, ſi vn hōe et ſa ſem̄ ſeiſie de terre en droit del fēe, ioin̄, et foūt leaſe, ou feoffem̄t reſeruant rent, et barō moruſt, el accept ou receyua le rent, per q̄l le feoffement ou leas eſt fait perfect et bō, et ſerra barre a luy de porter ſō brief appel vn Cui in vita.
            
            
               
               Acceſſories.
               ACceſſories ſont en deux ſorts, lū ante factū, laut' poſt factum.
               Acceſſory ante factum, eſt celuy que cō
                  maunda ou procura auter de faire vn felonie, et neſt la preſent quant lauter le fayt, mes ſil ſoit p̄ſent, dō
                  ques il eſt auxi principall.
               Acceſſory poſt factum, eſt celuy que receiua, fauora, ou ayda vn felon conuſant del fait que il ad fait.
               Auxi vn puet eſtre acceſſorie del acceſſorie, ſicōe vn feloniſement receiua auter q̄ eſt acceſſorie del felonie, la le receyuer eſt vn acceſſorie.
            
            
               
               Accion.
               ACcion eſt vn ſuite done per le ley de recoū choſe, cōe acc̄ de dette, et tiels ſemblables.
            
            
               Accions perſonals.
               ACcions perſonals ſont tiels acciōs per q̄ux hōe claim̄ det ou auter bn̄s & chateux, ou dam̄ pur eux, ou dam̄ pur tort fayt a ſō perſon.
            
            
               Accion populer.
               ACcion populer eſt vn acciō q̄ eſt don̄ ſur le breach daſc' penal ſtatute, le q̄l acciō cheſc' hōe q̄ voet poet ſuer, pur lui m̄ et le royne, ꝑ Informac', ou aut'm̄t, cōe le ſtat allowe, et le caſe requir'. Et de ceux actions

il y ad vn infinit number, mes vn pur example eſt quāt aſcū deliury que ſont impanel et iure, de paſſer enter party, et party indifferentmēt, priſt aſcū choſe de lū part, ou auter, ou de ambid' ꝑties pur lour verdict dire al c'part, donques asc' hōe que voet deins le an prochein enſuāt le offēce fait, puit ſuervn brief, appel Decies tantum, enuers luy, ou ceux q̄ iſſint p̄ſt pur lour verdict dire. Et pur ceo q̄ ceſt action neſt done al vn home ſpecialmēt, mes gen̄almēt al aſcun les people del Royne qui voet ſuer il eſt appel vn action populer.
            
            
               
               Accions reals.
               ACcions reals, ſō
                  
                     •
                   tiels actions per q̄ux le dd't clayme title a aſcū terres ou tenem̄ts, rēts ou comō, en fee ſimple, fee tail, ou pur terme de vie.
            
            
               Accorde.
               ACcorde eſt vn agreement perent' deux al meins, ou pur ſatiſfie vn offēce, que le vn ad fait al auter: Ou il eſt vn contract, oue diūs articles, deū fait aſc' ſur le vn part, et aſcūs ſur le aut', lou il ſerr' Quid pro quo, &c. Le primer eſt, qn̄t vn hōe ad fait vn trn̄s ou tiel ſemblable al auter pur le quel il ad agree oueluy, ſatiſfie et cōtent luy, oue aſc' recōpēc' a or' exec', et

fait en fait. Et pur ceo q̄ ceſt recōpence ē vn plein ſatiſfaction pur le offēce, il ſerr'vn bō barre en le ley ſi laut' voit ſuer arrer'vn acc̄ pur m̄ le trn̄s. Le aut'ē quod I. S. leſſa vn chā
                  ber pur ans al H. G. et il eſt ouſt'agre perent' eux, q̄ le dit H. G. ſerr' al boorde oue le dit I. S. et pur le dit chā
                  ber et boorde il paiera al dit I. S. vn certein ſome &c. coſt vn contract et accorde oue articles en ambideux partes.
            
            
               ¶ Acquital.
               
               ACquital ē, quāt il y ad ſn̄r, meſne, et t', et le t' tiēt de le meſne certē terres ou ten̄ts en frankalmoygne,

frankmariage, ou tiels ſēblables. Et meſne tient ouſter auxi de le ſn̄r paramount (ou de haut luy.) Ore doit le meſne acquit' ou diſcharge le t' de tout et cheſc' man̄ de ſeruice, que aſcun auter voet aū ou dde de luy concernātm̄s les terres ou ten̄ts, pur ceo que le t' doit faire ſeruice a le meſne tantſolemēt, et nemy al diūs ſn̄rs pur vn ten̄t, ou parcel de terre. Meſme le ley ē, ou il eſt ſn̄r, meſne, et t', come auantdit, et le meſne graunta al tenaunt (ſur le tenure fait perenter eux) pur acquit', et diſcharger luy de touts rents ſeruic' et tiels ſēblables. Ceſt diſcharge eſt appell acquital.
            
            
               
               ¶ Acquitance.
               
               ACquitance ēvn diſcharge en eſcript, dū ſōme d' mony, ou aut' duity, quel doit eē paie ou fait, Sicōe vn ſoit oblige de paier mony ſur vn obligac', ou rent reſerue ſur vn leas, ou tiel ſē
                  blable, et le party a q' le money, ou duety doit eēpay, ou fait, ſur le reſceit de c', ou ſur aut' agremēt perenter eux ewe, fait eſcript, ou bill de ſon maine en diſcharge de c', teſtemoynant q̄ il ē pay, ou auterment contēt, et pur ceo acquite, et diſcharge luy de c', le quel acquitance ē tiel diſcharge et barre ē le ley, q̄ il ne poit d
                     •
                  e er recouer m̄le ſome ou duity auterfoits, contra

a c', ſil poet mōſtro lacquitance.
            
            
               Additions.
               ADdition eſt ceo, q̄ eſt done al home, mes principalment al def. en actions, ou ꝓces d' outlary giſt, cōe en det, et tiels ſemblables, ouſter ſon ꝓper noſme et ſirnoſme, ceſt adire pur monſtrer de quel eſtate, ou degree, ou miſtery il eſt, et de que ville, ou hamlet, ou countie.
               Additions de eſtate ſount ceux, yeoman, Gentlehome, Eſquier, et tiels ſemblables.
               Additions de degree ſount ceux que noꝰ appellomus noſmes de diguitie, come Chiualer, Counte, Marques, et Dux.
               Addic'de miſterye,

ſoūt ceux, Scriuener, Printer, Maſon, Carpenter, Tayler, Smith et iſſint touts aut's de ſemblable nature, car miſtery eſt le craft ou occupatiō, ꝑ que hōe gaine ſon liuing.
               Addic' de villes, cōe Sale, Dale, ettiels aut's et iſſint de les auters.
               Et lou vn home ad houſhold en deux lieux, il ſerr' dit dem̄r' en ambid', iſſint q̄ſon addiciō en vn de eux ſuffiſt.
               Et cē fuit ordeine ꝑ vn eſtat' fait en le primer an de H. 5. ca. 5. al entent, que vn hōe ne ſerroit greeue ne trouble ꝑ l' vtlary dū aut', mes q̄ ꝑ reaſō de le cert' addic', cheſcū hōe puit eē certeinm̄t conus, et portera ſa burden demeſne.
            
            
               
               Adiournement.
               ADiournement eſt quāt aſcū court eſt diſſolue, et determine et aſſigne deſtre gard arrere al aut' lieu, ou temps.
            
            
               Adminiſtratour.
               ADminiſtrator eſt celuy a que lo
                     •
                   dinary cōmit 
                     •
                  adminiſtrac' des bn̄s la mor
                     •
                  
                  pur defaut de executors, & acciō giſt vers luy et pur luy cōepur execut, et ſerr' charge ieſques al value des biens le mort et nient ouſter ſil n
                     •
                   ſoit ꝑ ſon faux plee, ou pur ceo que il ad vvaſte les bn̄s le mort. Mes ſi le adminiſtrat' deuie, ſes executours ne ſount Adminiſtrators, mes couiental Ordinarie

de commit nouel adminiſtration, mes ſi vn eſtrāge q' neſt adminiſtratour ne executour priſt les biens le mort, & miniſtr' de ſō tort demeſn̄, il ſerra charge et ſue come executour et nemye cōe adminiſt' in aſcun acciō q' eſt port vers lui ꝑ aſcū creditours. Mes ſi lordinarie fayt vn briefe ad colligendum bona defuncti, ceſtuy q' ad tiel letter neſt adminiſtratour, mes laction giſt vers lordinary auxi bn̄ cōe ſil priſt les bn̄s a ſon maine demeſn̄ ou p le maine daſcū ſon ſeruant per aſcun auter commaundement.
            
            
               ¶ Actes.
               
               ACtes de parliament ſont leies poſitiue, que conſiſt de deux

partes s. de les parols del act, et del ſenſe de ceo, et ils ambideux ioint ēſēble fōt le ley.
            
            
               Admirall.
               ADmiral ē vn offic' ſouth l Roigne, q' ad aucthoritie ſur le meere tātū, pur voier le nauie repaire, et maint' pur ſuppreſſe et chaſe dehors eſtumeurs de meere, et de fair' en choſes ꝑenter party et party, cōcernaunt choſes fayt la; et pur ceſt purpoſe il ad ſon court appel le Admiraltie, vncore il poet cauſer ſon Citation deſte ſerue ſur le terre, et prender le corps del party, ou biens en exec
                     •
                  c' ſur le terre. Itē il ad cogniſ. del mort ou mayhem dū hōe fait ē aſc' grād

niefe fleetant en grād riūs en l't'redebaſe les ponts de eux ꝓchein al meere. Auxi pur arreſt' niefs en les grād ſtreames pur les viages del Roigne et realme, et ad iuriſdicc' en l's diſts ſtreams durāt m̄s les viages.
            
            
               Aduowſon.
               ADuouſon eſt lou vn hoe et ſes hr's, ont droit de preſent' lour clerkal ordinary, al vn pſonage, ou auter eſpiritual benefice qn̄t il deuient voide. Et celuy q' ad tiel dr't de preſent, eſt appell Patron.
            
            
               Age prier.
               AGe prier eſt quant action eſt port vers lē fant de terre, q̄ il ad ꝑ diſcent, la il mr'a la matt'al court, et prier

q̄ lacc' demurra tan
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   a ſon plein age de xxi. ans, et iſſint ꝑ agarde d'court le ſuit ſurceſſera: mes en briefe de dower et en aſſiſe, & auxy en tiels actions ou lenfaunt vyent ey
                     •
                  s de ſon tort demeſne ilnaūa ſa age.
               Auxi nota que ſont pluſoures diuerſityes de ages. Car le ſn̄r aūa aide de ſō t' in ſocage pur ſa fyle maryer quāt le file le ſeignior eſt del age de vij. ans. Et auxi ayde pur faire ſon fites et heire chiualer quaunt il eſt dage de ſepte ans.
               Auxy feme que eſt eſpouſe al age de ix. ans, ſi ſon baron murruſt ſeiſi aūa dower et nemy deuant ix. ans.
               Auxi xiiij. ans ē lage

de feme quel ne ſerra en garde ſi el fuyt de tyel age al temps de mort ſon aunceſtour, mes ſi el fuyt deinsage de xiiij. ans & en garde ſō ſeigniour, donques el ſerra en gard tā
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   al age de xvj. ans, et auxi xxj. ās eſt lage de heire male deſire en garde et ap̄s hors de garde, et auxi il ē lage de male et female de ſuer ou deſte ſue des t'res q̄ ils ōt ou claime 
                     •
                   diſcent, et de faire touts man̄s contracts bargaines, et niēt deuāt: mes ſi tiel en fāt deins age de 21. ās 
                     •
                  ō ſes bn̄s, et le donee eux priſt, il poit aū vn acc' de tn̄s, mes auterm̄t il eſt ſil deliū eux.
            
            
               Agreement.
               A Greem̄t eſt en ceſt man̄ define ou expounde

en mr' Plowdens Comētaries: Aggreamentū eſt vn ꝑol cōpound de deux ꝑolx, ceſt a ſcauoier, de Aggregatio, et mentium, ceſt a dire agremēt de mentes, iſſintq̄ agreament' ē aggregatio ment', in re aliqua facta, vel facienda: Et ꝑ le cōtracc' de les deux parolx, Aggreg. et mētiū, et ꝑle correpc̄ et br' perlance de eux, ils ſont fait vn ꝑol cē a ſcauoier Aggreamē
                  tū, le q̄l nē aut' choſe q̄'vn vniō, collec', copulac', et coniunc' de deux ou pluſ, mēts en aſc̄ choſe fait, ou deſte fait. Voies apres en Teſtament.
               Et ceſt agrement eſt en trois man̄s. Le prim̄ eſt vn agrem̄t exec'

                  
                     •
                  n fait al cōmencem̄t. Le ſecond ē vn agremēt puis vn act fayt per aut', et ē vn agrement auxi. Le tierce ē vn agreement execut' ou deſte fait en temps vnc'a vener. Le prim̄, que eſt vn agrement execut' en fait al commencem̄t, eſt tyel de q̄ mēc' ē faiten le ſtat' de 25. E. 3. cap. 3. de pannis, en quart' ſtat' que dit, que les bn̄s et choſes achates ꝑ foreſtaller
                     •
                   que de c'ſerrōt attaints ſoient forfaits al Roigne, ſi le achat' ent vſt fait gree al vē
                  dor, en quel caſe, ceſt parol (gree) q'eſt aut'ment appel agreem̄t, ſerra entende agreement execute. s. paim̄t pur les choſes. Le ſecond maner de agrement,

eſt lou vn fayt vn choſe ou act, et vn auter agree ou aſſent a ceo apres, cōe ſi vn fait diſſeiſin a mō vſe, et ap̄s ieo agree a ceo, ore ieo ſerra diſſeiſor ab initio, et tiel agreement ē vn agreemēt puis vn act▪ fait.
               Le tierce agreemēt eſt quant ambid' pties a vn temps ſount accords q' tiel choſe ſerra fait en tēps avener. et ceo agreem̄t eſt executory entant que le choſe ſerra fayt apres, et vnc' la, lour ments accorde a vn temps, mes entāt que le perfourmance ſerra ap̄s, et iſſint le choſe ſur q' lagreement fuit fayt remayne a faire, ceo agreemēt ſerra dit executory. Et c' le ſtat'

de 26. H. 8. ca. 3. ꝓue, ou il dit q̄ cheſc̄ vicar perſon & tiels &c. deuant lour actual poſſeſſ. ou medling oue les profits de lour benefice, ſatiſfiera, cōten̄ &c. ou agreera a paier al vſe le Roigne, les prim̄ fruites &c. et ſi aſcun tiel perſō, vicar, &c. ent' en actual poſſeſſion &c. ceo agreement, eſt deſte intend executory cōe le cō
                  mō vſage ꝓue, car eſt vſe, q' il oue vn ou ij. oue luy faier' deuxvel trois obligations pur ceo, deſte pay en cert' iours apres. Et ceſt agreem̄t executorie eſt deuide en deux poīts, vn eſt agreem̄t execu tory, q' eſt cert' al cō
                  mencem̄t, cōe eſt dit darrain̄ deuāt del prim̄
                  
fruits. Laut' eſt, lou le certeinty nap ꝑt al pri mes, et les parties ſoūt accords q' le choſe ſer ra ꝑform̄, ou pay ſur le certein tie conꝰ cōe ſi vn vend'al aut'tout ſon wheat en tiel taſſe en ſon barne nyent threshe, et il eſt agree perenter eux, que il payera pur cheſc' buſhel xij. d'. quant il eſt threſh cleane et mea
                     •
                  .
            
            
               Aide.
               AIde eſt quaunt t' 
                     •
                   terme de vie, t' en dower, t' ꝑ la curteſy, ou tenant en taile, ap̄
                  
                     •
                   poſſibilitie diſſue extinct, eſt impled', dō
                  ques pur ceo q̄ ils nōt q̄ eſtate pur terme de vie, ils prayont aide de ceſty en le reuerſiō et proces ſerra fait per briefe vers luy, de ve 
                     •
                  
                  
& pleder oue le tenaunt en defence del terre ſil voile, mes il couient q̄ ils accorde en ple, car ſils vary le ple le ten̄t ſerra priſe, & don
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   leide prier eſt en vain: mes ſil ne vient al ſecond briefe le tenaunt reſpondera ſole. Auxi tenaunt a terme dans, tenant a volunt, tenaunt per Elegit, & tenaunt per ſtatnt merchant, aueront ayde de ceſty en la reuerſion, et le ſeruant & baily de lour maſter quant ils ount fait aſcun choſe loialment en le droit lour maſter, aueront aide.
               Aide de Roy eſt en femble caſe come eſt dit deuant de comen perſon, & auxy en pluſours auters caſes

lou le roy puit auer perde coment que le tenant ſoyt tenant en fee ſimple il auer' aid. Come ſi vn rent ſoyt demaund vers tenant le roye: que tient en chiefe il auera aide, et iſſint nauera de auter perſon.
               Auxi lou vn citie ou borovve ad vn fee farme del roy, et aſcū choſe eſt demaunde vers eux que apptaine al fee ferme, ils auerōt aide pur le ꝑde l' roy.
               Auxy home auera ayde de roye en lieu de voucher. Auxi le baillife de roy, collectour, et purueyour aueront ayde de roy auxybyen come les officers de auters perſons.
            
            
               
               Alien.
               ALien eſt celuy que pere et il m̄ fuerōt ābideux nee hors de legeāce le Roigne. Et ſi tiel aliē, neſteant vn enemy del roign̄, mes vn alien amy, vient et demurr'cy en Engleterre et ad iſſue, ceſt iſſu nē alien, mes Angloys. Iſſint ſi vn Angloys ala ouſter le meere oue le licence del roign̄, et la ad iſſu, ceſt iſſue neſt Alien.
            
            
               Alienation.
               ALienation idē eſt quod alienum facere, d' alter, ou mitte le poſſeſſion de terre, ou auter choſe de lun home al auter.
            
            
               Ambidexter.
               AMbidext'ē cel
                     •
                  y q̄ qn̄t vn matt' ē en

ſuit 
                     •
                  enter hōes, priſt mony de lun part, et del aut', ou pur labor le ſuit, ou tiels ſemblables, ou ſil ſoit del iury, pur dir' ſō verdict.
            
            
               Amendment.
               AMendem̄t eſt qn̄t error ē en le ꝓces, les Iuſtices poient c̄ amend' ap̄s iudg. Mes ſi error ſoit en iudgn̄ t dōe, ils ne poiēt amēd' ceo, mes le ꝑty eſt mis al br' de errour. Et en pluſours caſes lou le de
                     •
                  . appiert en l'clark que eſcriera le rec̄, il ſerra amend. Mes tiels choſes que vient per information del partie, come le ville miſteri, et huiuſmodi, ne ſerr' amend, car il doet enformer veray a ſon peril.
            
            
               Amercement.
               
                  AMercem̄t plus properm̄t eſt c̄ en vn court baron, leete, ou lawday, q̄l en vn court de rec̄ deuant luſtices eſt appel vn fin̄, et eſt vn penaltie aſſeſſe ꝑ le hom̄ pur vn offence fait encoūt'm̄ l'court, cōe pur def. de ſuit de court, ou pur nō amē
                  ding de aſc̄ choſe q'il fuit appoint d'redreſſer ꝑ cert' tēps al darr' court iour deuant, ou pur tiel ſemblabl' cāe.
            
            
               Amercement royal.
               AMercem̄t royal eſt qn̄t vn viſc', coron̄ ou aut' graūd officer del roigne eſt amercy ꝑ les Iuſti
                     •
                  ' pur ſō miſdemening en l' office.
            
            
               An, iour, et waſt.
               AN▪ iour, et waſt, eſt vn forf. qn̄t vn hōe ad fayt petit treaſon,

ou felony, et ad terres q̄ux il tient de aſc' cō
                  mon ꝑſon, q̄ux ſerra ſeiſi pur le roigne, et remaine en ſa maines per le ſpace de vn an, et vn iour ꝓcheine le attainder, et donques les arbres ſerr'defoſſe, les meaſōs ſerra raſes, et l's paſtures & prees arres, et plowed. Vn choſe le plꝰ de greeū le offenders, et terrefy auters de fall eſt tiel, en demonſtrans com̄t l' lei deteſtat' lour offence cy auant, iſſint 
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   il execute iudg. et punishm̄t ſur lour mute et mort choſes.
            
            
               Annuitie.
               ANnuitie ē vn cert▪ ſūme dargent grā
                  
                     •
                   al auter en fee ſimple, ſee taile, pur terme de

vie, ou pur terme de ans, a receiū del graū
                  tour ou ſes hr'es, iſſint que nul franktenem̄t eſt charge de ceo.
            
            
               Appell.
               APpel eſt lou vn ad fait murder, robberie, ou felony, donques la feme ceſti qui eſt tue auera vn action de appell vers le murderer, mes ſil nad feme dōques ſon procheine heire male aūa le appel a aſcū temps deyns lan & iour ap̄s le fact. Et auxy ceſty que eſt iſſint robbe auera ſon appel deyns meſme la temps. Et ſi le def. ſoit acquite il recoūa dam̄ vers lappellour et labbettors, et ils aūont lenpriſō
                  met dun an, et ferrot fine al roy.
               
                  Vn appel de mayhē neſt en man̄ forſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   action de trn̄s, car il ne recoūa forſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   dam̄s.
            
            
               Appellant.
               APpellant ē le plaintife en le appell.
            
            
               Appellour.
               APpellour ou approuer eſt ceſty q' ad fait aſcun felonye, le quel il confeſſe et a ore appel, ou ap ꝓue, ceſt adire, accuſe auters q' fueront coadiutors ou helpers oue luy en faſans de ceo, ou auters felonies, le q'l choſe il voet ap ꝓuer, et pur 
                     •
                   eſt appel en latin Probator.
            
            
               Appendant & Appurtenant.
               Appendant & Appurtenant, ſount choſes q' ꝑ tēps de p̄ſcription oūt belong,

pertaine, et ſoūt ioine al aut' principal choſe oueſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   q̄l ils paſſōt, et va cōe acceſſory al m̄ prīcipal choſe, ꝑ vertue de ceux parols: Pertinētijs: cōe terr', aduowſōs, cōmōs, piſcaries, chimins, courts et diūs tiels ſēblables, al vn maner, meaſon, office, ou tiels auters.
            
            
               Apportionment.
               APporcionm̄t ē vn deuiding en partes dū rent (le q̄l eſt deuidable) et nient ent'ou whole, et entaunt q̄ le choſ' pur l'q̄l, ou hors de q̄, il fuit deē pay, eſt ſeperate et deuide, le rent auxi ſerr' deuide ayent reſpect a les ꝑts. Sicōe vn home ad vn rent ſeruic'iſſuāt hors de terres, et il purchas parcel de le terre, le

rent ſerra apportion accordaunt all value del terre.
               Iſſint ſi home tient ſon terre dū auter per Homage, Fealtie, Eſcuage, et certein rent, ſi le ſn̄r de que le terre eſt tenꝰ purchaſe parcel de le terre, le rent ſerra apportion.
               Item ſi home leſſa, terres et biens pur ans reſeruaunt rent, et apres vn eſtraūger recouer le terr', dōques le rent ſerra apportion, pur ceo que les biens ne ſont recouer mes remayne: Et iſſint eſt ſi forſque part de terre ſoyt recouer, le rent ſerra apporcion, ceſt adire, deuide, et le leſſee payera, ayant reſpect a ceo que eſt recouer,

et a ceo que ore remayne en ſes maines, accordaunt al value.
               Mes vn rent charge ne poet eſte apportion, ne choſes q' ſount entyer, ſicome vn tient terres per ſeruice de payer a ſon ſeignior annuelment a tiel feaſt vn Chiual vn eſperuer, vn roſe, vn chery, ou tiels ſemblables: La ſi le ſeigniour purchaſe parcel de la terre, cē ſeruice eſt tout ale, pur ceo q' vn chiual, eſꝑuer, vn roſe, vn chery, et tiels auters, ne poyent ēe deuide, ſeuere, ne apportion ſauns dammage al entierty.
            
            
               Appropriations.
               
               Appropriations fueront quant ceux meaſōs d' le Roomish religion, et ceux religious perſons, 
                     •
                  ōe Abbes, Priours, et tiels ſē
                  bles, ount laduovvſō de aſcun Parſonage al eux et a lour ſucceſſours, et obteyne licence de lour ſaynt peere le pape que ils m̄s et lour ſucc' de 
                     •
                  ' en auant, doyent eſte perſons la, et ſeruer le cure. Et iſſint al commencement appropriatyons ſuerount fait ſolemēt a ceux perſōs ſpiritual, que puiſſoyent miniſter les
                     •
                  acramentes et fayer deuine ſeruice, 
                     ••
                  e Abbes, Priors, Deanes, et tiels ſemblables: a pres

per petit et petit, ils fu eront enlarge, et fait as auters, ceſtaſſauoir, al dean̄, et chapt', q̄l ē corps corporate cōſiſtant de pluſors, quel corps inſemble ne puiſſoit dire deuine ſeruice. Et q' pluis fuit al Nonnes, que fuerōt Prioreſſes, de aſc' nū
                  ry, q̄l fuit choſe horrible, entaunt que ils ne puiſſoient miniſter ſacram̄ts, ne preacher, ne dire al parochiens deuine ſeruice. Et tout ceo fuit ſur pretence de hoſpitalitie, et maintenance de c'. Et de ſupplyer les dits defectes, vn vicar fuit deuyſe quel ſerroyt deputye all Priores, ou Deane et Chapter, et auxy al darreyne al dites Abbes

et auters, adire deuine ſeruice, et il aūoit forſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   petit porc̄ et ils a q̄ le appropriation fueront fait, reteinont le graund reuenue, et fefoient riens pur ceo, per quel meanes, hoſpitalitye fuit decay en le lieu, ou il doit eſtre chefement garde, noſment en le parish ou le benefice fuit, et ou les profites creſſoient.
               Et iſſint il continue tanque a ceſt iour al graund hinderance de lerning le empoūishm̄t d' le miniſtery, et l' infamy del goſpel et profeſſor de ceo.
            
            
               Approouement.
               APprouemēt ē lou vn hōe ad cōmon en le vvaſt terre del ſn̄r, et le ſn̄r encloſe

part del waſt pur luy m̄ relinquāt nient obſtant ſufficient comō oue egreſſe, etregreſſe pur les comoners. Cē encloſure ē appel approuement.
            
            
               Arbiterment.
               ARbiterment eſt vn award, determinac' ou iugemēt quel pluſors font al requeſt d' deux parties al meins, pur et ſur aſc' det, 
                     •
                  n̄s ou auter controuerſy evve perent' les dits parties. Et eſt appell en latine, Arbitratus, et arbitriū, et ils q̄ fōt le avvarde, ou arbiterment, ſount appel Arbitri, en Engloies, Arbitrators.
            
            
               Areſt.
               Arreſt eſt quant vn eſt priſe et reſtraine

de ſon liberty, nul ſerra arreſt pur debte, treſpas, detinue, ou auter cauſe de action, mes per vertue dun p̄
                  cept, ou cōmaundm̄t hors de aſcun court. Mes pur treaſon, felony, ou debruſer de peace, cheſc' home ad auctority de arreſter ſās garr' ou p̄cept. Et ou vn ſerra arreſt pur felony, il couiēt q̄ aſc̄ felony ſoit fait, etque il ſoit ſuſpect de m̄ le felony, ou auterm̄t il poit auer enuersluy q̄ iſſint luy arreſt vn br▪ de faux impriſonmēt.
            
            
               Arrerages.
               ARrerages, ſount duityes arrere nyēt pay apres les iours, et temps, en quel ils fuerount dues, et

doient auer eſte paies ſoient il rent de man̄ ou aſcun auter choſe reſerue.
            
            
               Aſſets.
               ASſets eſt en deux ſorts, lun appel aſſets per diſcent, laut' aſſets ent' mains. Aſſets per diſcent eſt lou vn hōe ē oblige ē vn obligae' et moruſt ſeiſi de t'res en fee ſimple q̄ux diſcend a ſon heire, mes il ne fiſt executors, ou ſil fait executours ne relinquiſ
                     •
                   ſufficiēt bn̄s pur diſchargencē obligation, donques ceſt terre ſerra appell aſſettes, ceſt adire ſufficiēt de paier cē det, et per ceſt meanes le heire ſerra charge cy auant que le terre iſ
                  
                     •
                  int a luy diſc
                     •
                  d voile

ſtretch. Mes ſil ad alien deuāt q' le obligation ſoit miſe en ſuit, il eſt diſcharge. Auxi quāt vn hōe ſeiſie de terre en taile, ou en dr't de ſa feme, alien ē oue garrātie, et ad en value tant t're en fee ſimple q' diſcend a ſō heire, q' eſt auxi heire en tail' ou heir' al fēe, ore ſi le heire apres le mort ſon aunceſtour ꝑt vn br'de Formed', ou ſur Cui in vita, pur le t're iſſint alien, dō
                  ques il ſerra barre per reaſon del garrantie et le t're iſſint diſcēd, q̄ eſt tāt en value cōe ceo que fuit vende, et iſſint ꝑ ceo il nad receiue aſcū p̄iudice▪ et pur ceo ceſt terre eſt appell aſſets per diſcent.
               
                  Aſſets ent' mains, eſt qn̄t vn hōe endet cōe deuāt eſt dit, fait executors, 'et relinquiſt a eux ſuffic'de paier, ou aſc' cōmoditie, ou ꝓſit eſtvenus al eux en dr't lour teſtat', cē appel aſſets ē lour maīs.
            
            
               Aſſignee.
               ASſignee eſt celuy a q̄ vn choſe eſt appoint, ou aſſign̄ deſte occupy, pay, ou fait, et eſt touts foits tiel perſō, q̄ occupy ou ad le choſe iſſint aſſign̄ ē ſō droit dem̄, et pur luy m̄. Et d' aſſignees il y ſōt ij. ſorts, noſm̄s Aſſignee en fait, et aſſignee en ley. Aſſignee ē fait eſt qn̄t vn leas eſt grāt al vn et a ſes aſſ. ou ſās ceux 
                     •
                  ols, aſſignees, et l' graūtee don graūt, ou vend' le dit leas al auter, il eſt ſon aſſignee en fait.
               
                  Aſſign̄ en ley ē cheſcū execut' noſme ꝑ le teſta' en ſon teſtamēt. Sicōe vn leas ſoit fait al vn hōe et a ſes aſſignees (ſicōe eſt auātdit) et il fait ſes execut's et moruſt ſans aſſignem̄t del leas al aſcū auter: Ore les execut's aūa m̄ le leas pur ceo q' ils ſount ſes aſſignees en ley. Et iſſint ē en diūs aut's ſemblables caſes.
            
            
               Attainder.
               ATtaind' eſt vn cō
                  uicc' daſc' perſō dū crime, ou faut, doūt il ne fuit cōuict deuāt: Sicōe vn hōe fait felony, treaſō, ou tiels ſē
                  blables, et d' c'ē ēdict, arr', et troue gilty, er ad iudg. dōq's il ē dit deē attaint. Et c' poet eſte deux voies, 
                     •
                  ū ſur appar', laut' ſur def.
               
                  Le attainder ſur apparance eſt ꝑ confeſſion, battayle ou verdict. Le attainder ſur def. eſt per proceſſe.
            
            
               Auerment.
               AVermēt eſt lou vn hōe pled' vn ple en abatem̄t de briefe ou barre dactiō, q̄l il diſt, il ē priſt de ꝓuer cōe l' court voit agard, cē offer de ꝓuer ſō plee, eſt appel vn auerm̄t.
            
            
               Auerpeny.
               Auerpeny hoc ē quiet' eſſe de diuerſis denarijs pro aueragijs domini regis.
            
            
               Auncien demeſne.
               AVnc' demeſne, ſōt cert' tenures tenꝰ de ceux manours q̄ux

fuer' en les maines de ſeint Ed. la confeſſor et les q̄ux il fiſt eſcrier en vn liuer appel Domes day, ſub titul' regis, et touts les terres tenꝰ del dit man̄s ſōt aunc demeſn̄, et les tenāts 
                     •
                  e ſerrōt implede hors del dit man̄, et ſils ſont ils poyent mr' le matt' et abater le br', mes ſils rn̄d' al briefe et plede et iudg' don̄, dō
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   les terres ſōt deuenꝰ frāke fee a touts iours. Auxi toutes tenāts en aunc' demeſn̄ ſōt franke de toll pur touts choſes cōcernāt lour viand' & huſbā
                  dry in aunc' demeſne, et pur les terres ils ne ſerront mis ne impanel ſur aſcun enqueſt. Mes toutes les terres en auncien demeſne

queux ſoūt en maines le roy ſoūt frank fee, et pledable al comen ley. Voyes plus apres en le title Sokmans.
            
            
               Auowry.
               AVowry eſt lou vn priſt diſtres pur rent ou auter choſe, & laut' ſua Repleuin, dōq's celuy qui auoit priſe, iuſtifiera en ſon plee pur quel cauſe il le priſt, et iſſint auowa le priſe, et ceo eſt appel ſon auovvrie.
            
            
               Baile.
               BAile eſt quant vn hōe eſt priſe, ou arreſt pur felony, ſuſpition de felony, endict de felony, ou en aſcū tiel caſe, iſſint q' il eſt reſtraine de ſon libertie, Et eſteant ꝑ la ley baylable offer ſuerty 
                     •
                  l eux q' oūt aucthority

a lui bail', les q̄ux ſuerties ſoūt obl' pur luy al vſe le Roign̄ en vn c̄t' ſōm̄ d' money, ou corps pur corps, que il apperera deuāt les Iuſtic de gaol' deliuery al ꝓchein ſeſſiō &c. Donques ſur les bōds de ceux ſuerties, come eſt auāt dit, il eſt baile, cē adire, miſe al liberty tā
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   le iour appoint pur ſō apparāc'.
            
            
               Bailement.
               BAlemēt ē vn deliūy de choſes (ſoiēt il
                     •
                   de eſcripts, biēs, ou ſtuffe) al aut', aſc': foits deē redeliūarer' al bailor, cē adire, al celuy q̄ iſſint deliū ceo, aſcun foits al vſe del bayly, cē adir', de luy a q' il ē deliuer, et aſcun foits auxi deſte deliuer ouſter a vn tierce perſō.

Cē deliuere eſt appel vn bailement.
            
            
               Bailife.
               BAilife eſt vn officer q' appertient al vn manor, pur order le huſbandrie, et ad aucthoritye de payer quitrents iſſuāts hors del man̄, ſuccide arbres, repaiter les meaſons, faire pales, haies, diſtrein̄ aūs ſur le t're et diuers tiels ſemblables. Ceſt officer ē celuy, q̄ les aūc' Saxons oūt appel vn Reeue: car le noſme (Bailife) ne fuit dōq̄sconꝰ ent' eux: mes viēt eins oue les Normās, et eſt appel en latyn, villicus.
            
            
               Bakberinde theefe.
               BAkberind' Theefe eſt vn lar' q' ē priſe oue le manner ceſt adire, ayāt cē troue ſur luy (eēant purſue oue

hue et crie▪) le quel il ad emblee, ſoit il money, linen, woollē, ou auter ſtufe, mes il eſt plus properment dit, quant il eſt priſe, portans tiels choſes q̄ il ad emblee en vn bundel, ou fardel ſur ſō dorſe.
            
            
               Bargaine & ſale.
               BArgaine et ſale, eſt quant vn recōpēce eſt dōe per ambideux les parties al bargaine Cō ſi vn bargaine et vēd' ſō t're al aut'pur argēt. Icy le terre ē vn recompence a luy pur largent, et le argent ē vn reōpēce al auter pur l' t're, et cē vn bō cōtract et bargaine, et fee ſimple paſſa nyent obſtant il ne dit, a auer et tener le terre a luy & a ſes heires.

Et per tiel bargaine et ſale, terres poyent paſſe ſauns liuery de ſeyſin, ſi le bargaine et ſale ſoyt per fayt endent, ſeale, et enrolle, ou en le countie lou le terre giſt, ou en vn des courts del Roygne de recorde al Weſtminſter deins v. moyes procheyne apres le date de meſme le eſcript endent accordaunt all ſtatut en ceſt caſe fayt en le 27. An. de H. 8. cap. 16.
            
            
               Barre.
               BArre eſt quaunt le defendant en aſcun action plede vn plee que eſt ſufficient reſpons, & ceo adnul laction del pleintife a touts iours.
            
            
               
               Baſtarde.
               BAſtarde eſt celuy que eſt nee daſc' fēe nient eſpouſe iſſint q' ſon pere neſt conus ꝑ order del ley, & pur ceo il eſt dit filius populi, mes per la ley ſpiritual ſi vn engender vn infant ſur aſcun fēe que infaunt eſt nee hors del eſpouſels, & puis il mary m̄ la fēe: donques tiel infaunt ſerra dit mulier et nemy baſtarde, mes per le ley Dengleterre il eſt baſtard, et pur ceo quaunt tyel eſpeciall baſtardye eſt allege, il ſerra trye ꝑ pais, & nemy per leueſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , mes general baſtardy ſerra trie per certificatiō del Eueſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  .
               Et ſi vn femme ſoyt groſe de infaunt, per

ſon baron, que moruſt et el priſt auter baron, et apres lenfāt eſt nee, ceſt ſerr'dit lē
                  fant le primer baron. Mes fi el fuit priuem̄t inſeint al temps del mort ſon primier baron, donques il ſerra dit lenfant le ſeconde baron, ſed quaere, et voyes loppinion de Thorpe 21. E. 3. 39.
               Auxi ſi vn hōe prent feme que ſoyt groſement inſeint per aſcū auter que ne fuit ſon baron, et puis lenfant ē nee deins les eſpouſels, donques il ſerra dit lenfaunt le baron meſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   il fuit nee forſque vn iour apres les eſpouſels ſolempnes.
            
            
               Battaile.
               
                  BAttaile eſt vn aunciēt trial en nr'e ley quel le def. en vn appele de felony poit eſlier, ceſtaſſauoir, a cō
                  bater oue lappellant pur proofe ſil ſoit culpable del felony ou non: quel combate ſil ſucceda ſi biē del part le defendaunt que il vanquish lappellant, il alera quite, et luy barrera de ſon appel a touts iours. Mes ſi vn ſoit endite de felony et vn appel eſt port ſur m̄ lendictement, la le def. ne gagera battaile. Battaile auxi poit eſtre en vn br' de droit.
            
            
               Bigamy.
               BIgamy fuit vn coū
                  terplea (deuiſe al Coūcel de Lions ſur

miſlike de ſecōd mariage) deſte obiect quant le priſoner demaunde le benefite del Clergie, ceſtaſſauoir, ſon liuer come noſment a dire, que il que demaund le priuiledge del clergy, fuit mary a tiel feme en tiel lieu deins tiel dioces, et que el eſt mort, et que il ad apres marie vn aut' feme deins m̄ le dioces, ou deins aſcun aut'dioces, et iſſint Bigamus: Ou ſil nad eſte forſque vn temps mary, donques adire que el, que il ad eſpouſe eſt, ou fuit vn vief, ceſt adire le relict dun tiel &c. Le quel choſe ſerra trye per Leueſq' de le dioces, ou le eſpouſals ſount alleage. Et

eſteaunt iſſint certify per Leueſque, le priſoner perdera le benefite delclergie: Mes all ceſt iour, per force de le act fait en Anno 1. E. 6. cap. 12. ceſt nul plea, mes que il poet auer ſon clergie ceo nyent obſtaunt.
               Iſſint eſt Br. ti. Clergie Pla. 20. al meſme purpoſe. Et ſur ceo, ſi vous eſtis deſirous (Frere Nicholas) de voyer queux reaſons ils ount que perſuade enuers ſeconde Eſpouſels, lege, enter diuers auters, Fraunces Petrarch de Remedijs vtriuſque fortunae le primer liū et lxxvi. dialogue entite led de ſecund'nuptijs,

quel liuer ore tarde nr' frere mr' Thomas Twyne ad bien et oue bon grace (cōe ils que poient iudg er diont) tranſlate hors d'latine en Englois, et moult aptment appell ceo Phyſicke encounter fortune.
            
            
               Blodewit.
               BLodewit, hoc eſt quietū eſſe d' Amerciamentis d' ſanguine fuſo, et que teneantur placita in curia veſtra et habeatis amerciamenta inde prouenientia quia (wit) angl' miſericordia latine.
            
            
               Boote.
               BOote ē vn viel pol▪ et il ſignifie, helpe ſuccor, ayde, ou aduantage, et eſt communement

ioint oue vn auter parol, qui ſig nification il augment cōe ceux Brigboote, Burghboot, fireboot, hedgeboote, ploweboote, et diuers tiels ſēblables, pur queux ſignifications, voies en lour proper titles.
            
            
               Brodehalpeny.
               BRode halpeny (en aſe's copies Bordehalpeny) hoc eſt quietum eſſe de quadam conſuetudine exacta pro tabulis leuatis.
            
            
               Brugbote.
               BRugbote (et ē aſcūs copies Bridgbote) hoc eſt quietum eſſe de auxilio dando ad reficiendū pontes.
            
            
               Burghbote.
               Burghbote, hoc ē qui etū eſſe de auxilio dādo ad faciēd'burgū
                  
Caſtrum, Ciuitatem vel muros proſtrata.
            
            
               Burghbrech.
               BVrghbrech, hoc eſt quietum eſſe de tranſgreſſionibus factis in ciuitate vel burgo contra pacem.
            
            
               Burgh Engliſh.
               BVrgh English ou Borow english eſt vn cuſtome en vn aū
                  cient burgh, que ſi vn home ad iſſue diuers fits et moruſt, vncore le puiſne
                     •
                   fits ſolement enheritera et auera touts les terres et tenements, que fuerent al ſon pier de que il moruſt ſeyſie deyns meſme le burghe per diſcent, come heire a ſon pier per force de cuſtome de meſme le burgh.
            
            
               
               Burglarie.
               BVrglarie eſt quant vn debruſe et enter en le meaſon dun auter en le nuit, oue felonyous intent de robber, ou occider, ou de faire auter felonie, en queux caſes nyent obſtant il nemport riens, vncor' il eſt felony, pur que il ſerra pendue, Auterment eſt ſil ſoit en le iour, ou que il debruſe le meaſon en le nuit, et nentra pas en ceo a ceſt temps. Mes ſi vn ſeruāt voile conſpire oue auters de robber ſon maſter, et a cel intent il ouert les doores et feneſters de ſon maſter en le nuit pur eux, et ils vyent en le meaſon per ceſt voye,

ceſt burglarie en les eſtraūgers, et le ſeruāt eſt vn laron, mes nemy burglar'. Et c' fuit loppinion de le right woorshipful Sir Roger Manwood chiualer, plus digne ſeigniour chiefe Baron de le Eſchequer, a le quarter Seſſion tenus en Caūterbury en Ianuarie darrayne. 1579. 21. Elizab.
            
            
               Caruage.
               CAruage, hoc eſt qui etū eſſe ſi dn̄s rex talliauerit totā terrā ſuam ꝑ carueas, Nota q̄ vn carue d' terre eſt vn plovve land.
            
            
               Ceſſion.
               CEſſion, eſt quāt vn Eccleſiaſtical perſō eſt cree en Eueſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , ou quant vn perſon dun ꝑſonage p̄ſt vn auter bn̄fic' ſans diſpenſ. ou

auterment nient qualifie &c. En ābideux caſes lour prim̄ bn̄fices ſont deuenꝰ void, et al ceux q' il ad que fuit cree Eueſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , le roigne p̄ſentera pro illa vice, quicun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ſoit patron de eux: Et en lauter caſe le patron poet preſenter.
            
            
               Challenge.
               CHallenge eſt lou iurours apperont pur trier vn iſſue, dō
                  ques ſi aſcun des ꝑties ſuppoſont q' ils ne ſōt pas indifferent, la ils poient eux challenge et refuſe. Il y ad diūs challēges, vn eſt challenge al array, lauter a le polles. Challenge al array eſt quant la panel eſt fauourablement fait par le vicōt

ou aut' officer. Challenge par le polis ſoūt aſcūs principal, et aſcū per cauſe come ils appel ceo. Principal ē quāt vn des iurrours eſt le fits, frere, ou coſin al pleintife ou defendant ou tenaunt a luy, ou q̄ il auoyt eſpouſe la file le playntife, et pur ceux cauſes il ſerra retrait.
               Auxy in plee de mort de home et en cheſcun action reall et in actyons perſonel ſi ſe dette ou dammages amount a xl. marke il eſt bon challenge que il ne puyt diſpender xl, s. per an de frākt'.
               Challenge ꝑ cauſe, eſt ou le party all' vn matter que neſt principal challenge, come que le fits dū desiurad

eſpouſe la fil' le pl', & donq̄s conclude & pur ceo il eſt fauourable, quel ſerra trye per auter del enq̄ſt ſi il ſoit fauourable ou indifferent, et ſi ils diont q̄ il eſt fauourable et nemy indifferēt, dō q̄s il ſerra treit, aut'm̄t il ſerra iure. Auxi vn felon q̄ eſt arraygne, puit challenge xx. iurrours parēptory ſaūs aſcun cauſe, et ceo eſt in fauorem vitae, et taunt que il voil' oue cauſe, mes donques il ſerra trye ſi pur tyel cauſe il ſoit indifferēt ou nemy.
            
            
               Champertours.
               CHampertours ſoūt ceux que mooua pleas et ſuites, ou cauſe deſte moue per

lour, ou auters ꝓcurem̄t, et ſue a lour coſtages et charges demeſne, pur auer part del terre, ou gaines en variance.
            
            
               Charge.
               CHarge eſt lou vn home graunta vn rent iſſant hors del ſō terre, et q'ſi le rent ſoit arere, que lyſt a luy ſes heires, et aſſignes a diſtrayne tanque le rent ſoit pay, ceſt appell vn rent charge: mes ſi vn graunt vn rent charge hors del terre vn auter, & puis purchaſe le terre, le graunt eſt voide.
            
            
               Charters de terres.
               CHarters de terres, ſont eſcripts, faits, euidēces, et inſtrum̄ts, fait de vn hōe al aut', ſur aſc' eſtat' cōueied
               
                  ou paſſe perent' eux, d' terres ou ten̄ts, mr'ās l' noſm̄, lieu, et quā
                  titie del terr', le eſtate, tēps, et maner del feſance de ceo, les parties al le eſtat' deliū et priſe, les teſtemoignes preſent al ceo oue auters circumſtaunces.
            
            
               Chattels.
               CHattels ſont en ij. ſorts, cē adire, Chattels Reales, et Chattals ꝑſonals. Chattels reals, ſount leaſes purans, Gardes, et a tener a volunt.
               Chattels perſonals ſont touts moueables bn̄s, cōe argent, plate▪ bn̄s del meaſō, chiuals vaches, blees, et tiels ſēblables.
            
            
               Childewite.
               
                  CHildvvite, hoc eſt quod capiatis gerſummam de natiua veſtra corrupta et preignata ſine licentia veſtra.
            
            
               Chimin.
               CHimen eſt le haut voy ou cheſc'hōe paſſa, q• eſt appel via Regia, et vncore le Roy nad auter choſe la, forſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   le paſſage pur luy & pur ſon people, car le franktenement eſt en le ſeigniour del ſole et touts les ꝓfits creſſaunt la, come arbres & auters choſes.
            
            
               Choſe en action.
               CHoſe en action eſt quant vn home ad cauſe, ou poit port' vn action pur aſcū duity

due a luy, cōe vn acc' d' det ſur vn obligac', annuitie, rent, couenāt, garde, biens, trn̄s, ou tiels ſemblables, et pur ceo que ils ſount choſes de q̄ux vn hōe nē poſſeſſe, mes pur re couery de eux, ē miſe a ſon acc', ils ſont appel choſes en accion. Et tiels choſes en acc', qui ſount certeine, le Roigne poit graūt, et le grauntee poet vſer vn action pur eux en ſon noſme demeſne tātſolen̄
                  
                     •
                  t: Mes vn cō
                  mon ꝑſō ne poet grā
                  ter ſō choſe en acc', ne le Roygne m̄ ne poet graūt ſa choſe en acc' le q̄l eſt vn c̄t', cōe trn̄s & tiels ſemblables.
            
            
               Circuit de action.
               CIrcuit de action, eſt quant vn actiō ē
                  
droituralment port pur vn duity, mes vn c̄ circū le bush cōe ſē
                  ble: pur ceo que il puit cybien eē auterm̄t reſpondu, et det'mine et le ſute ſaue, et pur ceo que m̄ le acc' fuit pluis que beſoigne, il eſt appel circuite de action, Cōe ſi home graūt vn rent charge de x. li. hors de ſon manor de dale, et puis le grauntee diſſeiſiſt le graunt' de m̄le maner de dale, et il port vn aſſiſe, et recoū le terre et xx. li. dam', le q̄l xx. li. eſteant pay, le graū
                  tee del rent ſue ſon acc' pur x. li. de ſō rēt due durant le tēps de le diſſeiſin, le q̄l ſi nul diſſeiſin ad eē, il doit aū evve. Ceſt appell circuit de action, pur

ceo que il puit auer eſte pluis briefement reſpondu, car ou le graūt' doit receiue xx. li. dam', et pay x. li. rēt, il puit aū reſceiue forſ 
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   le x. li. tantſolement pur les damm̄, et le grauntee puit auer recoupe et tenus arrere le aut'x. li. en ſes mains per voy de detain̄ pur ſon rent, et iſſint per ceo puitauer ſaue ſon action.
            
            
               Claime.
               CLaime eſt vn challenge ꝑ aſc' hōe del proꝑty ou ownership dun choſe que il nad en poſſeſſion, mes que eſt detaine de luy per tort.
            
            
               Clergie.
               CLergie eſt vn aūcient

libertie del eſgliſe papiſicke, le quel ad auxy eſte confirme oue nous en dyuers parlyamentes, Et eſt quant vn preſter, ou vn deins holye orders (come ils appel ceo) ou aſcun auter quicunque, en que eſt nul impediment ou impoſſibilitie deſtevn preſter, eſt arraine de felony ou tiels ſēblables deuāt vn tēporal Iudge &c. et le priſoner pria ſon clergie, ceſt adire pur auer ſon liuer, quel eſt a taunt ſicome il vſt pree deſte diſmiſſe del temporal Iudge, et deſte deliuer al ordinarye de purger luy meſme del meſme offēce. Ceſt priuilege al prim̄ ne fuit cy gen̄al,

en reſpect del parties que pendra benefite per ceo, come il apres deuient, Car al comencement eſteant vn papish inuention les patrons deceo fuerent molt partiall, et voylent que aſc' prē
                  droit commoditie per ceo, mes lour papiſtical preſters ſolemēt et tiels queux fuerent deins orders, come eſt auātdit: et c' comēce ent' eux, pur part per lour graund ſuperbitie diſdeynance dēe ſouthe le obedience de lour natural Roies et temporall correctiō, et pur part de policie, pur hont ne le male maners de lour ſpiritualty doient vener al ouert vyewe et examynation del

layitie (cōe ils diſtinguish eux) et nul merueile, car deins vn petit de les prim̄ ans del raigne le roy H. le 2. le clergie del Realme ad cōmit plus que vn cent ſeueral murders ſur ces ſubiects, cōe le roy fuit certeinm̄t enfourme, ouſter moult robberies et aut's outrages: pur remedy de q̄l order fuit ewe per le roy, ſō nobilitie, et oue grād faire le clergie conſent a ceo, que ſi aſcun clerke de ceo en aunt commit felony ou treaſon, il doet primer eſte degrade, et apres deliuer al lay power de receiū la come a ſon offence appient &c. al darr'en fauord' vie (vn choſe deſte extend endifferentment

al cheſcun hōes) et pur le amour de erudic', il fuit grāt al cheſc' home queux puiſſent lieſer, no obſtāt ils ne fuerēt preſters, ne deins orders. Et puis en parliamēt fait ſur bon conſiderations, il ad eſte reſtraigne et repeale en diuers caſes, come en vvilful murder, burglary, et tiels auters.
            
            
               Clerke attaint. Clerke conuict.
               CLerkes ſoūt en 2. ſorts, cē adire clerks attaint, et clerks conuict. Clerk attaint eſt ceſtuy q̄ pria ſon clergie apres iudg. ſur luy done de le felony, et ad ſon clergie allowe, tiel clerk ne poet fair' ſon purgation.
               
                  Clerke conuict eſt ceſtuy que prya ſon clergy deuaunt iudgment done ſur luy de le felonye, et ad le clergy a luy graūt, tiel clerke poet faire ſō purgation.
            
            
               Colour.
               COlour, ē vn fayned matter le q̄l le def. ou tenant vſe en ſon barre, quāt vn acc' de trn̄s, ou vn aſſiſe eſt port enuers luy, en le quel il dōe le demaū
                  dant, ou pl' vn shew, prima facie que il ad bone cauſe de action, ou en verity il nē iuſt cauſe, mes tauntſolement vn colour, ou viſour dun cauſe. Et il ē vſe al entent que le determination del action doet eſte per

les Iudges, et nemy per vn ignorant iury de xij. homes. Et pur c' vn colour doet eſte vn matter en ley, ou difficult al lay gentes, come pur example. A. port vn aſſiſe de terre enuers B. & B. dit que il meſme leſſa meſme le terre al vn C. pur terme de vie, et apres graunt le reuerſion al A. le demaundant, et puis C. le tenaunt pur terme de vie moruſt, apres que deceaſe, A. le demaundaunt claymant le reuerſion per force del graunt (ou C. le tenaunt pur vie ne vnques atturne) entra, ſur que B. entra, enūs que A. pur meſme entre port ceſt

aſſiſe &c. ceſt vn bon colour, pur ceo q' le ley gents penſant, q̄ le terre voile paſſe per le graūt ſans atturnem̄t, ou en fait il ne voyle paſſe &c.
               Auxi en vn actiō de treſpas, colour doet eſte done, et de eux ſoūt vn infinit nūber, vn pur example: En vn action de trn̄s pur priſel de auers del pl', le defendaunt dit, que deuant le pl' riens auoit en eux, il meſme fuit poſſeſſe de eux come de ſes proper biens, et eux deliuer al A. B. pur eux rebayler a luy quando &c. et A. B. eux done al plaintife, et l' plaintife ſuppoſe le propertie deſtre en A. B. al tēps del done, priſt

eux, et le defendaunt eux repriſt del pl', ſur q̄le pl' port le action, ceſt vn bone colour et vn bone plea.
            
            
               Colour de office.
               COlore officij, eſt toutes dits priſe▪ in malem partem, et ſignifie vn act malement fait per le coūtenance de vn office, et il port vn diſſimulant viſage del droit office, ou le office neſt que vegle del fauxitie et l' choſe eſt grounde ſur vice, et loffice eſt come vn ſhadovve al ceo.
               Mes Ratione officij, et virtute officij, ſount pryſes toutes foytes in bonam partem, et lou l' office eſt l' iuſt cauſe del choſe, et le choſe eſt purſuant

ſuant al office.
            
            
               Colluſion.
               COlluſiō eſt lou vn action eſt port vers vn auter per ſon agreement demeſne, ſi le pleyntife recouer, tiel recouerie eſt dit per colluſiō: et en aſcuns caſes le colluſion ſerra enquire, cōe en vn Quar' impedit, aſſiſe, et tiels ſemblables: Mes en auowry, ne en briefe dentre, ou aſcun action perſonall, le colluſiō ne ſerra enquire.
            
            
               Common ley.
               COmmō ley, eſt pur le pluis part priſe 3. voyes. Primerment pur les leyes de ceſt realme ſimplie ſās aſcū aut' ley, cōe cuſtomarie ley, Ciuil ley,

Spiritual ley, ou quecun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   auter ley ioyne al ceo. Cōe quant il ē diſpute en nr'e leyes denglet're, quid doet de droit eē determine ꝑ le cōmō ley, et quid per le ſpiritual ley, ou le court del Admiral, ou tiels ſem blables.
               Secondariment il ē priſe pur les courts le roy, cōe le bank l'roy ou cōmō place, tantſolem̄t pur mr' vn differēce ꝑent' eux et les baſe courts, cōe cuſtomary courts, courtes barons, coūty courts, pipowders, et tiels ſē
                  blables, come qn̄t vn ple d' terr'eſt remoue hors de aūc' dem̄ pur ceo que le terre eſt franke fee, et pledable al cōmon ley, ceſt adir' ē le court le roy▪
                  
et nemy en aunc' demeſne, ou en aſcū aut' baſe court.
               Tiercemēt, et pluis vſualmēt, ꝑ le cōmon ley eſt entendue, tiels leys que fuer' generalmēt priſe, et tenus pur ley, deuant q' aſcū eſtatute fuit fait pur alter ceo, cōe pur example. Tenant pur vie, ne pur ans, ne fuerent deſte punish pur feſance vvaſt al commonley, tan
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   le ſtatute de Gloceſter. ca. 5. fuit fait le quel don̄ vn action d' vvaſt enuers eux: mes tenant per le curteſie, et ten̄t en dovver, fuerount punishable de vvaſt al common ley ceſt adire, ꝑ le vſual, et cō
                  mō receiued leyes del realme, deuaūt le dit

ſtatute de Gloceſter fuit fait.
            
            
               Comon.
               COmon eſt le droit que hōe ad de mitter ſes beaſtes a paſture, ou de vſer et occupier le terre q̄ neſt ſon proper ſole.
               Et nota q̄ ſont diūs comons. s. comon in groſe, comon appendaunt, comon appurtenaunt, et comon per cauſe de vi
                     •
                  inage.
               Comon in groſe eſt lou ieo per mon fayt graūt a vn auter que il aūa comō in ma t're
               Comon appendant eſt lou home eſt ſeyſie de certeyne terre, a que il ad comon in aut' ſoile, ettouts ceux que ſerront ſeiſie del dyt terre auerount

le dit common ſolement pur ceux beſtes que compeſt ſa terre a que il eſt appendant except oyſons, chyuers, et porceaux.
               Et touts iours ceſt common eſt per preſcription, et de comō droit, et il eſt appendaunt al terre erable ſolement, et nemy al auter terre ou meaſō.
               Comon appurtenāt eſt in m̄ le maner cōe comon append', mesē oueſ'
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   tants man̄s des auers cibiē porceaux, chiuers, et tiels ſēblabl' cōe chiuals, vaches boefes, brebes, et tiels q̄ compeſter le terre. Et tiel comon poit eē fait a ceſtiour, et poet eē ſeūe delt're a q̄ il eſt appurtenāt, mes iſſint ne poit comō appēd'.

Comon per cauſe de viſinage, eſt lou les tenants de deux ſeign̄s q' ſont ſeiſies de deux villes dont lū giſt pris lauter, et cheſc' de eux ont vſe de tēps dont memorye ne court de auer common en auter vylle oueſque toutes beaſtes cominable.
               Mes lū ne poit mit ſes auers en le terre lauter car la ceux de lauter ville poient eux diſtr' dammage feſant, ou auer action de tn̄s, mes ils eux mittera en lour camps dem̄, et ſils eſtraye en les camps del auter ville, ils la doient eux ſufferer. Et les in habitaunts de lun ville ne miſterount evns taunts come ils voile,

mes aient regarde al frankten̄t del inhabitants de lauter ville car auterm̄t il ne ſoyt bon vicinitie, ſur que tout ceſt matter depende.
            
            
               Condition.
               COnditiō eſt vn reſtraint ou bridle annexe et ioine al choſe, iſſint que ꝑ le non performance et feſans d' ceo le party al condiē recoūa p̄iudice et ꝑde et per le parformance et faired' c', comodity et auantage.
               Et touts condic' ſōt ou cōdic' actual et expreſſe, queux ſont appel condic' en fait, ou ils ſōt condic' implicite ou tacite, et nient expreſſe, les q̄ux ſont appels conditiōs en ley.
               
                  Auxi touts conditions ſount ou condic' precedent et vaount deuaūt leſtate et ſoūt execute, ou ſubſequēt et veniēs apres leſtate et executorie.
               Le condition precedent, fait gaine et obtain̄ le choſe, ou eſtat' fait ſur condic' per le perfourmance de m̄.
               Le conditiō ſubſequent fait gard et cō
                  tenue le choſe, ou eſtate fait ſur conditiō ꝑ le performāce de c̄.
               Actual et expreſſe condition q' eſt appel vn condic' en fait, eſt vn cōdie' knit & annexe ꝑ expreſſe ꝑols, al feoffemēt, leas, ou grāt ou en eſcript, ou ſaūs eſcript, Sicōe ieo enfeffe vn hōe en terres reſeruant rēt deſte

pay a tiel feaſt 'ſur cō
                  dic. q'ſi le feoffee faile de payment al iour, q̄ donques il ſerra loyal pur moy de reenter.
               Conditions implicite ou tacite, et nient exp̄ſſe q̄ux ſont appel condic' en ley, ſōt qn̄t vn hōe grāt al aut' le office deſte gard' dun pke, Seneſchal, Bedle, baylife, ou tiels ſēblables, pur term̄ de vie, et nient obſtāt que la ne ſoit aſc' condic' expreſſe en l'graūt, vnc' le ley ꝑ le couertment dū condic', le q'l eſt q̄ ſi le grauntee ne execute pas touts points appartain̄tal ſō offic'ꝑ luy m̄ ou ſō ſuffic' depute, dō
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   il ſerr' loyal purle grātor dent' et diſch. luy de ſon office. Cōdition precedent et vaant deuant
               
                  ē qn̄t vn leas ē fait al vn pur vie ſur cōdic' que ſi le leſſee pur vie voile paye al leſſour xx. li. a tiel iour q̄ dō
                  ques il aūa fee ſimple: Icy le condic' preceda et va deuaunt le eſtate en fee ſimple, et ſur le pſo
                     •
                  mance de l'e condic', gayn̄ et get le fee ſimple. Condic' ſubſequēt et veniēs ap̄s eſt qn̄t vn graunta al I. S. ſon man̄ de dale en fee ſimple ſur condition, q'le grauntee paiera a luya tiel iour xx. li. ou auterment q̄ ſon eſtate ceſſera, icy le conditiō eſt ſubſequent et ſequerens le eſtate en fee ſimple, et ſur le performance de c', fait garde et continue leſtate.
            
            
               Confiſcate biens.
               
                  COnfiſcate bn̄s, ſont bn̄s al queux le ley entitle le Roine, quāt ils ne ſont pas clayme per aſc' auter. Come ſi home ſoit endite que il feloniſem̄t emblea les biens de I. S. lou en verity ils ſont ſes bn̄s dem', et ils ſount miſes en court vers luy come maineur, et don
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   il eſt dd' q'il dit al m̄s les bn̄s, et il eux denie, ore per cē denier de eux, il ꝑdra ceux biens, coment q̄ apres il ſoit acquite del felony, et iſſint en aut's ſemblable caſes.
            
            
               Contract.
               COntract ē vn bargen ou couenant ꝑ enter ij. parties, ou vn choſe eſt don pur auter q̄ eſt appel quid

pro quo, cōeſi leo vēd mon chiual pur argēt ou ſi ieo couenant de faire leaſe a vous de mō man̄ de dale ē cō
                  ſiderac' de xx. li. q̄ voꝰ dones a moy, ceux ſōt bon cōtracts, pur ceo q' il ad vn choſe pur auter, mes ſi vn home fait ꝓmiſe a moy que ieo auera xx. s. et que il voyle eſte dettour a moy de c̄, et puis ieo demaund le xx. s. et il ne voile a moy delyuer, vncore ieo nauera iammes action pur recouer ceſt xx. s. pur ceo que ceſt promys ne fuit contract, mes nudus pactus, Et ex nudo pacto non oritur actio, mes ſi aſcun choſe fuit done pur le xx. s. meſque il ne fuit forſque al value

de vn denier, dōques il fuit bone contract.
            
            
               Conuſance.
               COnuſaunce de plee eſt vn priuiledge que vn citie ou ville ad del graunt le roy, de tener plee de touts contractes, et des terres deyns le precinct del fraunches: et quāt aſcū home eſt impled' pur aſcun tiel choſe en le court de roy, les maires ou bailifs d' tiel frāches, ou lour att' poiēt dd'er conuſāce del plee. s. que le plee et le matt' ſerra pled' et determine deuaunt eux:
               Mes ſi le Court al Weſtminſter ſoit loialment ſeiſie del plea deuaunt que conuſaunce ſoit demaund, donques ils naueroūt

conuſaunce pur ceſt ſuit, pur c' que ils oūt negligentmēt ſurceſſe lour temps d' demād, mes ceo ne ſerr' barre al eux daū conuſance en aut' action, car ils poyent demaund conuſance en vn actiō, et omit ceo en auter action a lour pleaſur'. Et nota que conuſance ne giſt en preſcription, mes ils couient monſtre letters le roy.
            
            
               Corody.
               COrody, fuit vn reaſonable allowāce d' meat, pan̄, boier, argēt veſtam̄ts, loggis, et tiel ſuſtenance, q̄ de cō
                  mon dr't cheſc' foūd' de Abbeis, Priories, Nūries, et aut's meaſ. de religion papiſtick, oūt en m̄s les meaſōs

quant ils fuerent, purſon pier, frere, coſin, ou auter home que il voyet, prendroit ceo, ſil fuit vn meaſon de moygnes, et ſil ſoyt founder dun meaſon de Nūnes ou muliers, donq̄s c'pur ſa meere, ſoer, coſin, ou aut' mulier q'il voile direct al ceo, et touts iours ceſt prouiſo fuit ewe, q' il que ad corodie en vn meaſō de moignes, ne doit mittre vn fēe de prender ceo, Ne ou corodie fuit due ē vn Nūry, la il ne fuit loial de appoynter vn home d'receiuer ceo, car en ambideux caſes, tiel preſentation fuit deſte reiect. Et cē corody fuit due cybn̄ al vn cōmon ꝑſon qui fuit founder

ſicōe ou le roy m̄ fuit founder. Mes ou le meaſon fuit tenus en frankealmoygne, la le tenure m̄ fuit vn diſcharge de corodie encounter touts homes, Sinon il fuit ap̄s charge voluntarimēt, come ou le roy voet miſter ſon br'e al Abbey pur vn corodie pur vn tiel, le quel ils admit, la le meaſon doet eē charge a touts iours ſi l' roy ſoit foū
                  dor, ou nemy.
            
            
               Coroner.
               COroner eſt vn aunciēt officer de truſt et de graund aucthoritie, ordeine deſte vn principal conſeruat▪ ou gard' de la peace, a porter recorde des plees del corone, et de

ſon view demeſne, et de diūs auters choſes, mult en number, &c. Mes al ceſtiour, ou le aucthority d'l Coroner nē cy grand, ſicōe en auncient temps il fuit, per que loffice nē ewe en ſemblabl' eſtimac'. Ou autermēt le viſcount et ils q' oūt aucthoritie de elect le coroner ne ſount cy careful ſicome ils doient eē en lour electiō, et pur ceo il eſt a ore tantoft deuenus arer' al meſme l' point, que il fuit en temps le roy Edvvarde le primer, quaunt ceſt ſtatut ſequēs fuit fait. Pur ceo q̄ petits gēts & meins ſages ſoient eſlius ore de nouel cōmunelm̄t al offic' del coron̄, et meſtier ſerroit q̄ ꝓdes

homes, loyals, et ſages, ſe entermellent de cel offic': Puruiew eſt, que per touts les counties ſoient eſlues ſuffiſantes homes coroners, des plus loyals et plus ſages chyualers &c. Et nyent obſtant le letter de cē eſtatute ne ſoyt preciſement obſerue, vncore al meynes le entent doyt eſte ſequor cy pres come poet que pur le defaut de chiualers, Gentle homes furnish oue tiels qualities ſicōe le eſtatut miſe (d' que il y ad diūs) poiēt eſte eſlieu, oue ceſt addic', que ils ſoient vertuous, et bō conus chriſtians.
            
            
               Corporation.
               COrporation eſt vn choſ' ꝑmanēt q̄ poet

auer ſucceſſion: Et en vn aſſembly et ioining enſemble de diuers en vn felowship fraternitie, et ment, d' que vn eſt l' Teſt et principal, l's auters ſōt le corps, et cē Teſt et corps ioint enſemble, fount le corporac'.
               Et de corporations aſcuns ſount appels ſpiritual, et aſcuns tē
                  poral, et de ceux que ſont ſpirituall, aſcuns ſont corporations de mort perſōs en ley, et aſcuns auterm̄t, et aſcuns ſont per aucthoritie del Roy ſolem̄t, et aſcūs ount eſte dun mixt aucthority. Et d' ceux q̄ux ſōt tēporall aſcuns ſount per aucthoritie d'l roign̄ auxi et aſcūs ꝑ le common ley del realme.
               
                  Corporation ſpiritual, et de mort ꝑſons en ley, eſt lou le corporation conſiſt dun Abbey et Couent, et ceux ount lour commencem̄t del roy, et le home de Rome, quāt il ad a faire cy.
               Corporation ſpiritual et de able perſōs en ley, eſt lou le corporation conſiſt dun deane et chapter, Et ceſt corporation ad commencement del roy ſolement.
               Corporation Temporal per le roy eſt, lou eſt vn mair' et cō
                  minaltie.
               Corporation temporal, per aucthoritie del common ley, eſt le aſſēblie en ꝑliamēt, le q̄l cōſiſt del roin̄, le teſte del corporation

et del ſn̄rs ſpiritual et temporal, et de les cō
                  mōs del realm̄, l'corps del corporac'.
            
            
               Corps politike.
               COrps politike ſont Eueſques, Abbes, Priours, Deans, Perſon dun eſgliſe, et tiels ſēblables q̄ux ont ſucceſſion.
            
            
               Corruption de ſangue.
               COrrupc' de ſāgue eſt qn̄t le peere eſt attaint de felony ou treaſon, don
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ſon ſā
                  gue eſt dit deſte corrupt, per reaſon de q̄l ſes enfants ne poyent eſte hr's a luyne a aſc̄ auter aunceſter. Et ſil fuit noble, ou gentle hōe deuant, il et touts ſes enfants ꝑ ceo ſont faits ignoble et vngentel eyant regarde

al nobility ou gent
                     •
                  ie q'ils claime per lour pier, quel ne poit eſte ſane arrere ſans aucthority del parliam̄t.
            
            
               Couenant.
               COuenant eſt vn agreement fait perenter ij. perſons, lou cheſcun deux eſt tenus al auter, de perfourmer certeine couenauntes pur ſon parte.
            
            
               Couerture.
               COuerture, eſt quāt vn hōe et vn fēe ſōt eſpouſe: Ore le temps de le continuance de ceſt mariage perenter eux, eſt appel couerture, et le femme eſt appel vn feme couert.
            
            
               
               Couin.
               COuin eſt vn ſecret aſſent, det' mine en les ceurs de deux ou pluſors, al preiudice dun auter: Come ſi t'pur t'me d'vie, voile ſecretment conſpire oue vn auter, que lauter recouer a vers le t' pur vie, le terre que il tient &c. en preiudice de celuy en le reuerſion.
            
            
               Counterplea.
               COunterplee, ē lou vn port vn actiō, et le tenaunt en ſon reſpons, et plée vouche ou appell pur aſcun home, pur garraunt ſon tytle, ou prayer ayde de auter que ad meliour eſtate, come

de ceſty en la reuerſion, ou vn eſtraunge al actyon vyent & prayera deſte reſceu de ſauer ſon eſtate: ſi le demaund' replye a ceo et mōſter cauſe que il ne doyt tyel home voucher, ou que il ne doit de tiel home ayde auer, ou que tiel home ne doit eſte reſceu, ceſt plee eſt appel vn counterplee.
            
            
               Cinque portes.
               CInque portes, ſone certen hauen villes, cinque in nūber, as queux ad eē graunt lōge tēps paſſe mults libertyes (que auters port villes nount) et ceo primerment en le temps del Roy Edwarde appel le confessor

(q' fuit deuāt le conqueſt) et fuer' encreaſe ap̄s, et c' eſpecialm̄t en les iours de les deux Ed. l' prim̄, et 2. (ap̄s l' cōq̄ſt) cōe ap pt en l'liūd Doomeſday et aut's viels monum̄ts q̄ux en cē lieur eēants haut tedious d' cit', ieo entende frere N. d' omit, et miſe voꝰ cy le copy de vn aūc' rec' en frācois, le q'l l' worshipful, nr' louing et bō pier, moūſier I. Twine, de Caūt' dōe a moy hors de ſon liū appel W. Biholt, aſc' tēps vn moigne de le Abbey d' S. Auguſtin̄ en que vous ſcauois que fuer' auncientm̄t accōpt le Cinks ports et lour members, q̄ux ſeruices ils deuoient, ou lour court doit eē tenꝰ, deuāt q̄, et d' q̄ux

choſes ils poient tener plea, oue tiels ſemble digne dēe conus, et ꝑ c' vous entendes auxi q̄ le viel rude verſe fait faux noſme d' les v. ports ē noſm̄t eux ſolō'
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   cē man̄, Douer Sādwicus, Rie, Rumney, Frigmareuentus, Douer, Sandvvich, Rie, Rūney, Winchel ſey, q̄ eſt entend Frigmareuentus &c. q̄l recordieo voile englois cibn̄ come mon petite ſciēce en cē viel frēch voile dōe a moy cōge. Et iſſint il eſt.
               Ceux ſont les chiefe villes des Cinkes po
                     •
                  ts.
               
                  1 Haſting. 
                  2 Romeney. 
                  3 Heth 
                  4. Douer. et 
                  5 Sandwich.
               
               Les members del port de Haſting ſont ceux.
               
                  1 Peueneſe. 
                  2 Bolewareheth. 
                  3 Petite Iames, 
                  4 Bekeſbourne 
                  5 Grenethe. 
                  6 Rie. et 
                  7 VVinchelſe.
               
               A ſcuns adde a ceux le mere banke ē Sefford,

Hideney, et Nor thie.
               Le chiefe port de Haſtinge one les mē
                  bres auant dits deuient trouer au Roy de an en an, ſi meſtre ſoit per meere vint et vne nefes. Ceo eſt a ſauoir, la ville de Haſtinge iij. nefes, la Peueneſe vne nefe, wole worchetie et Petite Iham̄e vne nefe, Bekeſbourne vne nefe, Greneshe ij. homes, oue deux armours oue ceux de Haſtinge La ville de Rye v. nefes, la ville de winchelſee x. nefes.
               La membres del ꝑt de Romenal ſōt. 2. 1. Vieu Romenal, et 2. Iyde.
               
               Aſcuns adde al ceux Prormhel, Oſwardstōe

et denge marreis Romenal oue les auāt dits members deuient a roy come auant eſt dit 5. niefes, dount Lyde doit vn nief.
               Le port d'Hethe oue ſon mēbre vveſtheth deuient troū 5. niefes au roy, cōe auāt ēdit.
               Les mēbers d'l port de Douer ſoūt ceux.
               
                  1. Folkeſtone, &
                  
                  2. Feuerſham.
                  
               
               Aſcūs adde Meregate &c.
               Meſme cel port de Douer, oue les auātdits mēbers doit troū au roy 21. niefs, ceo ē a ſeauoir Douer xix. niefes, Folkeſtone vn nefe, et Fauershā vn niefe.
               Les mēbers del port de Sandvvyz ſount ceux.
               
                  
                  1. Stoner. 
                  2. Forwich, 
                  3 Dale. 
                  4 Seire.
               
               Aſcuns adde Reaculure.
               Meſme cel port de Sandwich oue les mē
                  bers auauntdits doyt troū en ſeruice le roy come auaunt eſt dit v. niefes.
               Summe lvij. niefs.
               Quant le roy vodra auer ſon ſeruice des auauntdits niefs, ils aueront xl. iours de ſū
                  mons, et ils troueront au roy en cheſcū nief xx. homes, et le maſtr' byen arme, et byen atire pur faire le ſeruice le roy.
               Et irrount les niefes en proper coſtages des cynke ports la ou eux ſerrount ſūmons. Et quant les niefs ſerrount

la venus, eux demurront xv. iours en ſeruice le roy al proper coſtages des Cynkes portes. Et apres les xv. iours paſſes ils demurrount au coſtages le roy, ſil en ad a faire.
               Le maſtr' de la niefe prendra le iour vi. deniers. Le Conſtable vj. deniers, Et cheſcū des auters mariners iij. deniers.
               Et eſt a ſauer que la Court de Shipvveye que eſt chiefe Court des cynke portes, ou cheſcū Maire de cheſcun port, ou duſſe, diz, ſyz, ou quater, et le Maire d' cheſcun port ſicome eux par letters del gardeyne des Cynke portes

ount eſtre ſūmonus, et ſicome le port eſt greinder ou meinder ſauns eſſoine doit vener, doyt eſtre ſummonus per letters del dit gardeine a toutes les portes que illeoques ſuit deuient enuoies.
               Et doit la ſummons a la ſuite fere et a ſū
                  mounder aſcun comunant a reſponder a aſcun, de aſcun plee conteiner quaraunte iours del iour d' la receyt des letters le dit gardeine. Et auauntdit court doyt eſtre ſummons pryncipalment, pur treaſon fait encounter le roy ou royes, pur fauſure de ſeale le roy, ou de ſa money, pur treaſure troue de ſouth le

terre, pur ſeruice le roy dediſt, ou detenue, pur faux iudgement per aſcun communant rendu.
               Et nul cōmunant al aſcū plee vers meſme la comunāt meſā reſpond'ne doit, forſ
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   a la court auātdit.
               Et plee illeoques meſne vers aſcun baron des Cinkes ports challenge per le baylife de cel port de que baylie meſme le baron eſt, doyt eſtre aiournee dekes al port dount icel baron eſt, ſil ne ſoit de trn̄s fayt au roy, pur ceo q̄ les dits barons oūt coniſaunces de touts maners de plees horspris plees de corone. Et quant y ceux barons auerount defailes endroyture

faire. Le dit Gardeine a la pleynt de celuy a qui ils auerount defayles de droyture entranticel port a droyture faire ſicome il eſt contenue en la chartre.
               Ouſtre c' la auauntdit court ne doyt eſtre tenue de la feaſt del Natiuitie de ſeint Marie ieſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  s a la feaſt de ſaint Andrevv pur les faires de German̄. Ouſtre ceo quant les Barons des Cynke portes ſont en le ſeruice le roy ſur meere, ou a la ſūmons le roy, ou al maundement le roy.
               Ouſtre ceo ne doyt pas tenue forſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   per vn iour.
               En vn eſſoign̄ tantsolement

giſt en le auauntdit Court en cheſcun plee.
               De ſuit nul eſſoign̄ giſt ſicome il eſt auauntdit et pur ceo q' Maire qui de langour ou enfermete ſudeine illeo
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  s venir ne purr, auter purra a cel iour ſon lieu tenir, iſſint ne pur taunt que retourne ſoit ſait par ſō baylife.
               Ne auters princypalment deuient eſtre charges de aſcū iudgment rendu en meſm̄ la Court forſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ceux noſmes queux par les Bayllyffes illeoques ountēe returnes &c.
               Ouſter tout ceo, ꝓuiſiō de niefs et hōes come eſt auaūtd
                     •
                  t, ieo ay vievv en vn auter

recorde (briefement eſcript) q̄ cheſc' niefe doit auer vn garſion, que la eſt appell vn Gromet. Iſſint que en ſomme les cinques ports ſont charges oueſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   57. niefes. 1197. hōes, et 57. garſions ou Gromets.
            
            
               Damage feſants.
               DAmage feſants eſt quant les beſts dū eſtraunger, ſount en auters terres, ſaūs aucthoritie del ley ou licence del tenant de le terre, et la maunger treade, ou auterment ſpoila les blees, graſſe, boyes, ou tiels ſembles, en q̄l caſe le tenant que ils iſſint damage, poet pur ceo la prender, diſtreine et impounde eux,

cibien ſil ſoit ē le nuit cōe en le iour. Mes ē aut's caſes, cōe pur rēt et ſeruices et tiels ſemblables, nul poit diſtrein̄ en le nuit temps.
            
            
               Danegelde.
               DAnegeld, hoc eſt quietū eſſe de quadam cōſuetudine qui cucurrit aliquo tempore, quā quidē Danj leuauer' in Angl'.
               Ceo cōmence prim̄ē tēps le roy Etheldred q̄ eſteāt en graūd diſtreſſe ꝑ le cōtinual im uaſiō d'les Danes, pur purchaſer paxe fuit cō
                  pelled' charger ſō paies et people oue importable paim̄ts: car il p̄merm̄t don al eux al v. ſeūal paies 113000. li. et puis graūt al eux 48000. li. annualm̄t.
            
            
               
               Deane et Chapter.
               DEane et chapter ē vn corps corporate ſpiritual, conſiſtāt de pluſors able ꝑſōs en ley, cōe noſm̄t le deane (q'eſt le principal) et les Prebēds: et ils iointfont le corporation. Et ſicōe cē corporac' poiēt iointment purchaſe t'res et ten̄ts al vſe de lour eſgliſe et ſucceſſours: Iſſint auxi cheſc'de eux ſeūalment poet purchaſe al vſe de luy et ſes heire, come nous iournalm̄tvoiom 'eux faier mult abūdātm̄t.
            
            
               Declaration.
               DEclaration eſt vn monſtrāce en eſcript de le griefe et complaint de le demaundant

ou plaintife, enuers le tenant ou defendant, en q' il ſuppoſe de auer receyue tort. Et ceſt declaration, doit eſte playne, et certein, pur ceo que il impeach le defendant ou tenāt, et auxi chaſe luy a reſpōder.
            
            
               Defendant
               DEfendant eſt celuy que eſt ſue en action perſonal, et il eſt appel tenāt en action reall.
            
            
               Demaines.
               DEmaines, ou demeſnes, ē le principal maner place del ſn̄r, q'il et ſes aunceſtours, ount evve de temps hors de memory, en lour maines dem̄, & ount occupie

', enſēble oue touts edefices et meaſōs q̄
                  cun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , et auxi les prees paſtures, boies, terre errable, et tiels ſemblables appartainant a ceo.
            
            
               Demaundant.
               DEmaund' eſt celuy q' ſue ou cōplayne en vn acc' real pur title de terre, et il eſt appel pl' en vn aſſiſe & envn action perſonel cōe en action de det, treſpas, diſceit, detinue, & tyels ſemblables.
            
            
               Demy ſancke ou ſangue.
               DEmy ſancke, ē qn̄t vn hōe mary vn fēe, et ad iſſue per luy vn fites, et el moruſt, et donques il priſt vn

auter femme et ad per luy auxi vn fits, Ore ceux deux fites ſount ſolonque vn maner freres, ou com̄ ils ſount appels, demy freres, ou freres del demy ſanke, ceſt adire frere, per le part del pier, pur ceo que ils ount ambideux vn pier, et ſount ambideux de ſon ſangue, et nemy freres per le part le mere, ne de aſcun ſanck ou clime ceſt voye, et pur ceo lun de eux ne poet eſte heire al auter, car il que voyle clayme come heire al vn per diſcent, doit eſte dentier ſanke a luyde que il claime.
            
            
               Demurrer.
               
                  DEmurrer eſt quant aſcun acc' eſt port, et le defend' plede vn plee a que le pl' dit q' il ne voile reſpond', pur ceo que il neſt ſuf ficient plee in le ley, & le def. dyt al contrary que il eſt ſufficient plee, ceſt doub
                     •
                  e del ley eſt appell vn demurrer.
            
            
               Denizen.
               DEnizen eſt lou vn alien deuiēt le ſubiect del roigne, et obteyne ſa letters patēts, pur enioier touts priuileges cōe vn ang loies. Mes vncore nient obſtant, il payera euſtōes, et diuers auters choſes come aliens ſont.
            
            
               Deodande.
               
               DEodande, eſt quāt aſcun hōe per miſfortune eſt tue ꝑ vne chiual▪ ou per charet, ou per auter choſe q' mouet, donques cel choſe que eſt la cauſe de ſon mort, que al temps de la myſfortune moua, ſerra forfayt al Roine, & ceo eſt appel Deodande, & pertaine al Almener le Royne pur diſpoſer in almes et acts de charity.
            
            
               Departure de ſon plea ou matter.
               DEparture d' ſō plea, ou matter, eſt lou vn home plede vn pleen barre, & le pleintife replie a ceo, et il apres en ſon reioynd' pled' ou mōſtre auter

matter contrary a ſon prim̄ plee en barr', ceo eſt appel vn departer de ſon barre &c.
            
            
               Departer in diſpite del court.
               DEparter in diſpite del court, eſt quāt le tenant ou defendāt appear' al action port enuers luy, et ad iour ouſter en m̄ le terme, ou eſt demaund apres faūs iour en meſme le terme, et ne appeare, mes fait defaut, cē vn departure in deſpite del court, et pur ceo il ſerra condempne.
            
            
               Deputie.
               DEputie, eſt celuy q̄ occupia en aut' droit, ſoit ceo office, ou aſcun auter choſe, et ſon forfaiture, ou miſdemen̄ cauſer loffic', ou celui q̄ deputy

il eſt de pard' ſō office ou choſe. Mes vn ne poet faire ſon deputy en toutes caſes, niſi le grāt ſoit iſſint ſicōe il ſoit oue ceux ou tiels ſemblables parols, exercendo ꝑ ſe vel ſufficientē deput' ſuū, ou ſi les parols va ouſtre, ꝑ ſe vel deputat', ſuū, aut deputat' deputati, donq̄s il poet faire vn deputy, et ſon deputy auxi poet faire vn deputy, auterm̄t nemy.
            
            
               Deuaſtauerunt.
               DEuaſtauer' bona teſtator', ē qn̄t les executors voyle deliū les legacies q'lour teſtator ad done: ou faire reſtitution pur tortes faits per luy, ou pay ſes dettes due ſur cō
                  tracts, ou auter dettes ſur ſpecialtyes, que

iours de payment ne ſount vncore venus &c. Et ne garde ſufficient en lour mains, pur dyſcharger tyels dets ſur ſpecialtyes, que ils ſount compellable p̄ſentmēt per la ley de ſatiſfier, donq̄s ils ſerront conſtrayne de paier de lour biens demeſne ceux duties, l' quel al primer per le ley ils fuerount com. pels de payer, accordant al value de ceo que ils deliueront ou pay ſauns compulſion, car tyels paymēts de dets, ou deliuerie de legacies, come eſt auantdit, deuant dets payes ſur eſpecialties, que iours de paiment ſount a ore venus, ſount accompt en le ley vn vaſtāt del bn̄s

del teſtator, cy taunt, come ſi ils ad done eux ſauns cauſe, ou vende eux, et conuert eux a lour proper vſe.
            
            
               Deuiſe.
               DEuiſe eſt lou vn home en ſō teſtam̄t don̄ ou graūta ſes bn̄s ou ſes terres a vn auter ap̄s ſon deceaſe. Et lou tiel deuiſe eſt fait des biens, ſi les executours ne voil' deliuer les bn̄s a le deuiſee, le deuiſee nad remedy per l' comē ley, mes il couyent de auer cytation vers les executours le teſtatour dappearer deuāt lordynarie de monſtrer pur quoy il ne ꝑformer le volunte le

teſtator, car le deuiſee ne poet prēd' le legacy et luy m̄ ſeruer, mes il doet eſte deliuer a luv per les executors.
               Et ore al fin̄ de mr'e a vous (frere Nich.) quant les leys de ceſt realme, et les ſapient diſcreete Iudges de c̄, q̄ux ſont les interpreters de le ley, ount fauour volunts et teſtaments, et iſſint deuiſes en yelding al eux tiel reaſonable cōſtrucc', cōe ils pēſant poet bn̄ agreer oue les mentes de les mor
                     •
                  s, conſiderāts q̄ volunts et teſtam̄ts ſōt pur le plus ꝑt, et ꝑ comō entendm̄t, fait qn̄t le teſtat' ē ore en graūd lāgour, feble, et paſſe tout ſpe rans de recoūy, car il eſt vn opinion en l'e

payes enter le greind' nombers, q̄ ſi vn hōe ꝑ chāce ſoit cy ſapiēt, cōe de faire ſō volunt en ſon bone ſane, qn̄t il eſt ſtrōg, de bō memory, ad tēps & oportunitie, et poet dd' coūcel, ſi aſc' dout ſoit de le learned, q' donques il ne doiet viuer lōge apres ceo, et pur ceo, ils ceo deferre, tā
                  que tiel temps, quant il ſoit plus conueniēt d'applier eux meſm̄s al' diſpoſition de lour almes, q' de lour terres et biens, ſinō que il ſoit, q' per fresh memory, et recital d' eux a ceſt tēps, il poet eſtr' vn cāe de miſe eux en ment, de aſcūs d'lour bn̄s, ou terres fauxm̄t purch. et iſſint moue cux al reſtitution &c.

Et ac' tēps, le eſcripture de tyels volūts, ſōt cōmunem̄t cōmyt al miniſter del ꝑoch, ou al aſc' aut' plus ignorant q̄ luy, ſil poet eſtre, q̄ ne ſcauoit q̄ux parolx ſont neceſſarie pur faire vn eſtate en fee ſimpl', fee tail', pur terme de vie, ou tyels ſemblables, preter diuers auters miſchiefs. Ieo voile pur c̄ miſe a voꝰ cy aſcuns d' ceux caſes q̄ux ſōt plus cō
                  mō en les bouches de les ignorant homes, et portount, ꝑ le ſapient interpretations de les Iudges, cōe eſt auantdit, vn larger, et plus fauorable ſēſe en volūts q̄ ē faits: Et pur c̄ prim̄m̄t, ſi vn deuiſe al I. S. ꝑ ſō volūt, toutes ſes terres et ten̄ts, icy nō ſolem̄t touts ceux

t'res q̄ il ad en poſſeſſ. paſſōt, mes auxy ceux de q̄ il ad le reuerſion, ꝑ vertue de ceux ꝑolx tenements.
               Et ſi t'res ſōt deuiſe a vn hōe, a aū a luy im ꝑpetuū, ou a aū a luy et a ſes aſſignes: en ceux deux caſes l' deuiſee auera fee ſimpl', mes ſi ſoit don̄ ꝑ feoffement, en tiel maner il nad forſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  eſtat' pur terme de vie.
               Auxi ſi vn home deuiſe ſes terres al auter, pur don̄, vēd', ou faire de c̄ a ſon wil et pleaſure, ceſt fee ſimple.
               Vn deuiſe fayt al vn et a ſes hr'es males fait vn eſtate taile, mes ſi tiels parolx ſoūt miſe en vn fait d'feoffem̄t, il ſerra pryſe en fee ſimple, pur ceo que

que il nappiert de qui corps les heires males ſerra ingendre.
               Si terres ſount done per fait al I. S. et a les heyres males de ſon corps &c. q̄ ad iſſu file que ad iſſu fits et moruſt, la le terre reuertera al donor, et l' fits del file nauer' ceo, pur c' que il ne poet a luy meſme conueyer per heires males, car ſa meere eſt vn obſtacle a ceo, mes auterment eſt d'tiel deuiſe, car la l' fits del file ceo auera rather que le volunt ſerra voyde.
               Si vn deuiſe al infant en venter matris ſue, ceſt bone deuiſe, auterment eſt ꝑ feoffem̄t grāt ou dōe, car en ceux caſes, il

doet eſtr' vn de habilitie pur prend' maintenant, ou autermēt il eſt voide.
               Vn deuiſe fait (en ſee ſimple) ſās exp̄ſſe parolx de heires, eſt bon en fee ſimple.
               Mes ſi vn deuiſe ſoit al I. N. il aūa les terres forſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   pur t'me de vie, car ceux ꝑolx ne voil' porter greind' eſtate.
               Si vn voile q' ſon fits I. aūa ſon terre poſt mortē ſon fēe, icy le fēe del deuiſor aūa le terre prim̄ pur terme de ſa vie. Iſſint ſi hom̄ deuiſe ſes byens a ſa feme, et que apres le mort ſa femme, ſon fits et heire auera le meaſon ou les byens ſount, la le fits nauera le meaſon durant le vie de le femme,

car il appiert que ſon intent fuit, q' ſa feme doit aū le meaſō auxi pur terme de ſa vie, ni ent obſtant il ne fuyt deuiſe a luy ꝑ expreſſe parolx.
               Si vn deuiſe ſoit al I. N. et a les heires females de ſon corps ingendres: apres l' deuiſee ad iſſue fits et file et moruſt, icy le file auera le terre, et nemy le fits, et vncore il eſt le pluis digne ꝑſon, et heire al ſon peere, mes pur ceo que le volūt del mort eſt, que le file doyt ceo auer, ley et conſcience voit iſſint auxi Et en ceſt point les hethens fueront preciſe, come appiert per ceux verſes de Octauius Auguſtus q' Donatus
               
                  report, il feſoyt apres que Virgil a ſon mort, donoit cōmaū
                  dement que ſes liuers doient eſtre combure pur ceo que ils fuerōt vnperfit, et vncore aſcuns perſwadount que ils doyent eſtre ſaue, come ē a fit happiment ils fueront, a q̄ il reſpond iſſint. Sed legum ſeruāda fides: ſup̄ma volūtas quod mandat, fierique iubet, parere neceſſe eſt.
            
            
               Diſcent.
               DIſcent ē vn deux ſorts ou linial, ou collaterall.
               Liniall diſcent, eſt quant le diſcent eſt conuey en meſme le line dentier ſanke, cōe aile, pier, fits, fits del fits, et iſſint debaſſa.
               
                  Collateral diſcent, ē dehors en vn auter branch dehaut, dentier ſanke, cōe le frere del aile, frere del fits, et iſſint debaſſa.
            
            
               Diſclaimer.
               DIſclaimer eſt lou le ſeigniour diſtraine ſon tenaunt, et il ſua repleuin, & le ſeignior auowa le priſe, per reſon que il tient de luy ſi le tenaunt dyt que il diſclaima de tener de luy, ceſt appel vne diſclaimer, et ſi le ſeig niour ſur ceo porte briefe de droit ſur diſclaim̄, et il ſoit troue encounter le tenant, il perdera le terre.
            
            
               Diſmes.
               DIſmes ſont deuides en troies ſorts, noſment,

Prediall diſmes, Parſonel diſmes, et Mixt diſmes.
               Prediall diſmes, ſont diſmes, que ſont pay de choſes q̄ux vient de le trrre ſolem̄t, cōe, feine, fruits delarbors. et tiels ſēblables. Perſonal diſmes, ſont diſmes q̄ ſont paies de tiels profits q' veigne ꝑ le labor, it induſtry del ꝑſō dū hōe, cōe ꝑ empc', et vēdic', gaine de marchātdize, & de manuel craft hōes, laborers et tiels q' labor pur fallery, cōe carpē
                  ters, maſōs, et tiels ſē
                  blables.
               Mixt diſmes, ſont les diſmes de vitels, agnes, porcels, et tiels ſē
                  blables, q̄ encreaſe ꝑtm̄t del t'r', ſur q'ils ſōt depaſtures, et partm̄t 
                     〈1… paragraphs〉
                  
               
            
            
               
               Diſſeiſin ſur diſſeiſin.
               DIſſeiſin ſur diſſeyſin eſt, quaunt le diſſeiſour eſt diſſeiſie p
                     ••
                   vn auter.
            
            
               Diſſeiſour et diſſeiſee.
               DIſſeiſor eſt celuy que myſt aſcun home hors de ſō terre ſauns order de ley, et diſſeiſee eſt celuy que eſtiſſint mis de hors.
            
            
               Diſtreſſe.
               DIſtres eſt la choſe que eſt pris et diſtrayne ſur aſcun terre pur rent arere, ou pur aut' dutie, ou pur tort fait, coment que le ꝓperty del choſe ſoit 
                     ••
                  eināt al eſtrāge, mes ſi ſount beaſtes que

pertein̄t a vn eſtrāge, il couient que ſont leuant & couchant ſur meſme le terre. s. q̄ les beaſts auoiēt eē ſur l' terre ꝑ certaine ſpace que ils oūt eux bn̄ repoſe ſur la terr' ou autermēt ils ne ſont diſtrainable. Et ſi vn diſtraine pur rent ou auter choſe ſauns cauſe loyal, donques le partie greeue auera vn Repleuin ſur ſuertie troue de purſuer ſon action, et auera la diſtreſſe a luy redeliuer. Mes ſount diuers choſes que ne ſont dyſtreinable, ceſtaſſauoir le robe dauter home en le meaſon de vn tayler, ou drape en le meaſon dun fuller, shereman, ou vveyuer, pur ceo q̄ ils ſont

cōmon artificers, et q̄ le comen preſumption eſt que tyels choſes ne perteynent al artificer, mes al auters perſons que les mettont la a ou
                     ••
                  er.
               Auxi vitel neſt pas diſtreinable, ne blees en garbes, ſinon q̄ ils ſount en vn chareot, purc' que diſtres couient eē touts foits de tiel choſe, doūt le vic̄ puit faire repleuin, et redeliū en auxi bō cas que il fuit al tēps del priſe. Auxi home puit diſtraine pur homage de ſon tenant, pur fealtie et eſcuage, & aut's ſeruices, et pur fin̄s et amercements q̄ ſōt aſſeſſe en vn lete, mes nemy en court barō. Et auxi pur damage feſaunt. s. quaunt il

troue l's beaſts ou b
                     ••
                   dū aut', fe
                     •
                  ant tort ou incūbrant ſō t're, mes home ne puit diſtrain pur aſe' rent ou choſe due pur aſe' terre, mes ſur in la t're q̄ ē charg oueſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   c̄, mes en caſe lou ieo veign̄ a diſtr', et lauter voyant mon purp̄, chaſe les beaſtes ou port le choſe de hors, al entēt q̄ ieo ne prendra pur diſtreſſe ſur le terre, donq̄s ieo puiſſe bn̄ purſue, et ſi ieo le priſt mayntenāt en la haute ch min ou en auter ſoile, la priſel eſt loial, auxi bn̄ la cōe ſur la terr▪ charge a q̄
                  cun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   la propertie des bn̄s ſōt. Auxi pur fin̄s et amerciamentes que ſount aſſeſſe en vn lete, vn puit toutes foits prendre les biens

celuy qui eſt iſſint amercy in quecunque ſoile que ils ſōt deyns la luryſdictyon del Court vt dicitur. Et quant vn ad priſe vn diſtres, il couiēt a luy de ameſn̄ a le comen pound, ou auterment il puit garder in auter foile, iſſint que il don̄ notice al partie que il (ſi le diſtreſſe ſoyt vn viue beaſt) puit don̄ a luy viand, et donq̄s ſi le beaſt murruſt pur defaut de viand', celuy que fuit diſtrayne ſerra a le parde, & donques lauter puyt diſtrayne auterfoytes pur meſme le rent ou duitie. Mes ſil ameſna la dyſtreſſe a vn forſelet, ou hors del county, que la vic̄ ne puit bn̄ faire deliūāce

ſur repleuin, donques la partie ſur le returne de viſcount auera vn briefe d' Withernam direct al viſcount que il preigne taunt de ſes beaſtes, ou taunt des biēs lauter en ſa gard, tanque il ad fayt deliuerance de la prymer diſt
                     •
                  eſſe. Auxy▪ ſils ſount in vn forſelet ou chateaw, le vicont puit prender 
                     •
                  ue
                     •
                  luy le power del county & abater le chaſtell come appie
                     •
                  t per le ſtatute weſtmonaſter' 1. C. 17. Ideo vide ſtatutum.
            
            
               Diuorce.
               DIuorc', iſſint appel d' diuortiū, veniēs del verbe diuort', que ſignifie purret' arrer', come quant vn home eſt dyuorce de ſon

feme, il luy retpur
                     •
                  e arrere al
                     •
                   ſa pier, ou auter amies, ou al
                     •
                  ieu ou▪ il luy ad, et per tiel diuorce le maryage▪ eſt defeate et deſtraye▪
               
            
            
               Donor et donee.
               DOnor eſt celuy que dōe terres ou tenements al▪ auter en 
                     •
                  aile, et celuy a q̄ il eſt dōe▪ eſt appel donee.
            
            
               Double plea.
               DOuble plee, eſt lou le defendant ou tenaūt en aſcun action plede vn plee, in que ij. matters ſont cōprehendus▪ & cheſcun per luy m̄ eſt vn ſufficient barre ou reſpōs al actyon ou matter de barre, donques tiel double plee ne ſerra

admit pur plee, ſi non que vn depende ſur lauter, et in tyel caſe, ſil ne puit auer' l' darreine plee, ſans le primer plee, dōques tyel double plee ſerr' bien ſuffer.
            
            
               Droit.
               DRoyt ē lou vn ad choſe q̄ fuit toll de auter per tort, cōe per diſſeiſin, ou eiectmēt, ou tiels ſemblables, et ceo challēge ou claim̄ que il ad que auoyt le choſe, eſt term̄ droit.
            
            
               Droit dentrie.
               DRoyt dentrie, eſt quant vn ſeiſie de terre en fee, ēd' c' diſſeiſe: Ore le diſſeiſie ad droyt dentre en le terre, et poet quaunt il voyle, ou il poet

auer briefe de droyt enuers le diſſeiſour.
            
            
               Dures.
               DVres ē lou vn hōe eſt garde in pryſon ou reſtreyne d' ſō libertie cōtrary al order de ley, et ſi tiel ꝑſon iſſint eſteant, fayt in dures aſcun eſpecialtie, ou obligation, ꝑ reaſon de tiel empriſonment, tyel fayt eſt voyde en le ley, et in actyon port ſur tyel eſpecialtie, il puit dire que il fuit fait per dures de ſon impryſonment: mes ſi home ſoyt arreſt ſur aſcun action al ſuite vn auter, meſque le cauſe del action ne ſoit bon ne voier, ſil fait aſcun obligatyon a vn eſtraūge eſteant in priſon pur tiel arreſt, vncore

il ne ſerra dit per dures, mes ſil fait obligation a luy a que ſuit il ſuit arreſt deſte diſcharge de tiel impriſonment, donques il ſerra dit dures.
            
            
               Eire Iuſtices.
               EIre Iuſtices, or Itinerant, come nous appel eux, fuerōt Iuſtices que vſe de equitare de lieu al lieu, per tout le realm̄, pur adminiſter iuſtice.
            
            
               Embraſour ou embraceour.
               EMbraſour ou Embraceour, eſt celuy que quant vn matter eſt en tryal perenter partie et partie, vyent al barre oue vn del partyes (ayant receiue aſcun revvard pur iſſint faire) et

parle en le caſe, ou priuem̄t labour l' iury ou ſtat la pur ſurueier ou ſuruieu eux, per cē meanes de mitter eux en pauour et doubt del matter. Mes hōes que ſount erudite en le ley, poient parle en le caſe pur lour fee mes ils ne poyent labour le Iurie, et ſils preigne mony a iſſint faire, ils auxi ſont embraſors.
            
            
               Encrochment.
               ENcrochment eſt dit qn̄t le ſn̄r ad happa ſeiſin de plus rent ou ſeruices de ſon tenant que de droit eſt due, ou doet eſte paye ou fayt a luy: Come ſi le tenaunt tyent ſa terre de ſon ſeigniour

per fealtie et ij. s. rent annuelment, Et ore de tardife tēps, le ſn̄r ad happa ſeiſin d' iij. s. rent, ou de homage, ou eſcuage, ou tielsſē
                  blables, dō
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   cē appel vn Encrochment de ceſt rent, ou ſeruice.
            
            
               Enheritance.
               ENheritaunce eſt tiel eſtat'en t'res ou ten̄ts, ou auters choſes, que poient eſte enherite ꝑ le heire, ſoit ceo de eſtate en fee ſimple, ou taile per diſcent de aſc̄ de ſes aunceſters, ou per ſon purchaſe demeſne.
               Et enheritaunce eſt deuide en deux ſorts, cēaſcauoir, enheritāce corporate, et enheritance encorporate.
               
                  Enhertāce corporate ſont meſuages, terres, prees, paſtures rents, et tiels ſēblables, q̄ ont ſubſtance en eux meſmes, et poient cōtinuer tout tēps. Et ceux ſont appel choſes corporal.
               Enheritance incorporate, ſont aduowſons, villes, voies, comons, Courts, piſcaries, q̄ ſont ou poient 
                     •
                  ēappēd', ou appurtenantes a enheritance corporate.
            
            
               Equitie.
               EQuite eſt en deux man̄s, diūs molt lū del aut', et ſont de cō
                  trary effectes, car lun abridge, diminish, ou toll' de l' lett' del ley. Le aut' ēlarge, amplifie, et ad a ceo.

Le primer eſt iſſit define. Aequitas eſt correctio legis generatim latae qua parte dificit, le quel correction del gen̄al parols ē moult vſe en nr'e ley, ſicome pur example, qn̄t act de parliament eſt fair, quecun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   que fait tiel act ſerra felon, et ſerr miſe al mort, vnc' ſi home de non ſanae memoriae, ou enfaunt de tend' age que nad diſcretion le fayt, ils ne ſerront felons, ne miſe al mort.
               Auxi ſi eſtatut fuit fait que toutes perſons que recetteront ou doneront manger ou boier ou aut' aide acēy q' faiera tiel act, ſerront acceſſory a ſō offence, et ſerrōt miſe

al mort ſi conuſterōt del fact, vncore lū fait tiel act et veygne a ſa ꝓper feme que ſciant ceo luy receiue et dōe manger et boier a luy el ne ſerra acceſſorie ne felon, car en le generalty de les dits parols del ley cēy de nō ſanae memoriae, ne le infaunt, ne le feme fuerount include en entent. Et iſſint equitie correct le generalty del ley en ceux caſes, et les parolx general ſont per equitie abridge.
               Lauter equitie eſt define en tiel maner, Aequitas eſt verborum legis directio efficiens cum vna res ſolummodo legis cauetur verbis vt ōnis alia in aequali genere

eiſdem caueatur verbis. Et iſſint quaunt les parolx enact vn choſe, ils enact touts auters choſes que ſōt en ſēblables degrees. Sicome le ſtatute que ordeygne que en action de det vers executours ceſty que vient per diſtreſſe reſpondera, extendera per equitie al adminiſtratours, car ceſty de eux que vyent primes per diſtreſſe reſpondera per equitie del dit act, Quia ſunt in aequali genere.
               Iſſint le ſtatute de Glouceſter done le action de vvaſt et le punishment de ceo vers ceſty que tiēt pur vie, ou ans, et per leequitie

de ceo home auera acc' d'waſt vers ceſty q' tiēt forſq' pur vn an, ou demi an, et vnc' ceo eſt hors del parolx del ſtatut, car cēy q' tiēt forſque pur demy an, ou vn an, ne tient pur ans, mes c' ē le entent, et les parols q' enact lun ꝑ equity enacteront lauter.
            
            
               Eſcape.
               EScape eſt en deux ſorts. s. volūtary, et necligent.
               Voluntarie eſcape ē quant vn arreſta auter pur felony ou auter crime, et puis luy leſſer aler ou il veult, cē leſſer de luy aller eſt vn voluntarie eſcape. Et ſi larreſt de ceſty q̄ eſcape fuit pur felony ceo ſerra dit felony ē ceſtuy que luy leſſa

deſcap, et ſi pur treaſon, il ſerra treaſon en luy, etſi pur tn̄s, donq̄s treſpas, etſic de ſingulis.
               Neglygent eſcape eſt quant vn eſt arreſt et puis eſcape encoū
                  ter le volunt ceſtuy que luy arreſt, et ne ſo it freshmēt purſue, et repriſe deuant que le purſuour perda le vieu de luy, ceo ſerra dit negligēt eſcape nō obſtant que cēy hors de que poſſ. il eſcape luy repriſt apres le vievv perdus.
               Il y ad vn eſcap̄ auxi ſauns arreſt, come ſi vn murder ſoyt fayt en le iour, & le murderer ne ſoyt pris, dō
                  ques il eſt eſcape per q̄ le vill' ou le murder fuit fait ſerra amercy.
            
            
               
               Eſplees.
               ESplees eſt ſicome le ſeiſin, ou poſſ▪ dun choſe, ꝓfit, ou cōmoditie q' eſt a prender: come dū comō les eſplees eſt le prēder del graſſe ou cōmon ꝑ les mouths de les beaſtes q' cōmon la: dun aduowſon le prend' de groſſe diſmes, dūbois, le vender de boys, dū orchard, le vender de pomes, ou auter fruit creſſāts la, dun molin ē priſel de toll eſt les eſplees, et d' tiels ſemblables.
            
            
               Eſſoine.
               ESſoine ē lou vn actiō eſt port, et le pl' ou defendant ne poit bien appearer al iour in court pur vn de v. cauſes de ſouth exp̄ſſes, donques il ſerra

eſſoyne de ſauer ſon defaut, vnd' nota que ſont v. maners de eſſoyne, ceſtaſlauoir, eſſoin̄ de ouſtre le mere et ceo ē per xl. iours. Le ij. eſſoyne de terra ſancta, et ceo ſerra pur vn an et vn iour, et ceux deux ſerront giſt al cōmencem̄t d'l ple. Le tierce eſſoin̄ eſt de male vener, et ceo ſerra al comen iours, cōe laction require et ceſt appell' comen eſſoin̄. Le iiij. eſſoyne eſt de malo lecti, et c̄ eſt ſolement en bryefe de droit, et ſur ceo iſſera briefe hors de chauncerie direct al vicoūt que il maund'iiij. Chiualers al tenāt de voier le tenant, et ſil ſoyt malade, de doner a luy ioure apres vn

an & vn iour. Lev. eſſoine eſt de ſeruice le roy, et giſt en touts actions forſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  en aſſiſe de nouel diſſeiſin, br' de dovver, darreine preſentment, et in appel de murder, mes in ceſt eſſoin̄, il couyent al iour de mōſtre ſon garraunt, ou auterment il tornera in vn def. ſil ſoyt in plee reall, ou il perdra xx. s. pur le iurney del pl' ou plꝰ per diſcrec' des Iuſtices, ſil ſoit ē plee pſonel, vt patet ꝑ ſtatut de Gloc. cap. 8.
            
            
               Eſtoppel.
               EStoppel eſt quaunt vn eſt conclude et denie en ley de parler encounter ſon act ou fait demeſne niēt obſtantil ſoit pur dire le

veritie. Et de eſtoppels il y ad vn graūd number, vn pur exā
                  ple eſt, quant Ioh. Sti. eſt oblige en vn obligac' per le noſme de Thomas Stile, ou aſcū auter noſme, et eſt ap̄s ſue accordant al m̄ le noſme miſe en loblig▪ cē adire, Thomas Stil' ore il ne ſerra receyue adir' q'il eſt miſnoſm̄, mes ſerra chaſe a reſponder accordant al noſme miſe en loblig. ceſt adir' Thom̄ S. car peraduenture lobligee ne ſcauoyt pas ſō noſme, mes il report tantſolem̄t deloblig. m̄. Et entant q'il eſt m̄ le hōe q̄ fuit oblig', il ſerr' eſtopp̄ et deny ē ley, pur dir'l' cōtrary encoūter ſon fait demeſne, car auterm̄t il

puit prend' aduātage de ſon tort demeſne, l' q̄l l ley ne voet ſuffrer vn hōe de faire.
               Auxi ſi le file que eſt tantſolem̄t lheire la ſō pier, voet ſuer liuerie oue ſa ſoer que eſt vn baſtard, el ne ſerra apres receiue pur dire q̄ ſa ſoer ē vn baſtard, entant q̄ ſi ſa baſtarde ſoer priſt le moitie del terre oue luy, il ny ad remedy per le ley.
               Item ſi vn home ſeiſie de terr' en fee ſimple, voet prender vn le as pur ans de meſme le terre dun eſtranger per fayt endent, ceſt vn eſtoppel durant le t'me des ans. Et le leſſee eſt per ceo barre adire le veritie. Car le veritie eſt, que il que leſſa le terre nad riens

en ceo al tēps del leas fait, et que le fee ſimple fuit en luy que priſt le leas, mes ceo il ne ſerra receyue adire, tanque apres les ans ſerra determine, pur ceo que il appiert que il ad vn eſtat pur ans. Et il fuit ſō folly de prender vn leas de ſes terres dem̄, et pur ceo ſerra iſſint puny pur ſa folly.
            
            
               Eſtraungers.
               EStraungers ſount ils que ne ſoūt parties, ne priuies al fine leuie, ou feſauns dun fayt.
            
            
               Eſtray.
               EStray, eſt lou aſcun beaſt ou cattel, ē in

aſcū ſeignioury, et nul conuſt le owner de c̄ dō
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   il ſerra ſeiſi al oeps le royne, ou le ſn̄r 
                     •
                   ad tiel eſtraye per graūt l'royne ou per preſcripc', et ſi le owner viēt et fait claime a ceo deyns vn an et vn iour, donq̄s il le reaūa paiant pur ſon viand', ou autermēt a
                     •
                  s an, la ꝓperty de c̄ ſerra al ſn̄r, iſſint que le ſn̄r face proclamation de ceo accordant a le ley, en deux market villes.
            
            
               Excommengement.
               Excommengem̄t, eſt quant vn hōe ꝑ iudgment en le ſpyrituall court eſt accurſe, dō
                  ques il ē diſabl'de ſuer aſcun action en le court le royne, et ſil remayne excōmenge

xl. iours, & ne voyle eſte iuſtifie ꝑ ſon Ordinary, don
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   leueſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   maūdera ſa letter patent al Chauncellor, et ſur ceo ſerra maūd al vic. de prender le corps lexcommengee ꝑ vn briefe appell de Excōmunicato capiendo, ieſque il ad fait gree al eſgliſe pur le contempt & tort, & quaunt il eſt iuſtifie, & ad fait gree, donques leueſque maunder' ſa letter al royne certifient ceo, et donques ſerra maunde al viſcount de luy deliū ꝑ vn br' appel de Excommunicato deliberando.
            
            
               Exchaunge.
               EXchaunge, eſt lou

vne home eſt ſeiſi de certeine terre, et vn auter home eſt ſeiſie de auter terre, ſi ils per vn fayt endent ou ſauns fayt (ſi les terres ſount en vne countye) exchaunge lour terres, iſſint que cheſcun de eux auera aut' terre a luy iſſynt exchaunge en fee, fee taile, ou term̄ de vie, ceo eſt appel vn exchāge, et eſt bon ſans liuerye et ſeiſine. Et in exchaunge il couient que les eſtates a eux limitte per lexchange ſount egalles, car ſi vne ad eſtate in fee in ſa terre, & lauter ad eſtate in auter terre forſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   pur terme de vye, ou en tayle, donquestiel eſchange eſt voyde, mes ſi les

eſtates ſont egalles, et ſes terres ne ſont de egal value, vncore lexchāge eſt bō. Auxi vn exchange de rent pur terre eſt bōe. Iſſint exchaunge inter rent & comen eſt bon, et ceo couient eſte per fayt. Et il couient toutes foits que ceux parolx (exchange) ſont en le fait, ou auterment ryens paſſa per le fayt ſinon que il ayet liuere & ſeiſin.
            
            
               Execution.
               Execution, eſt lou iudgement eſt dōe en aſcun actiō que le plaintife recouera la terr', le det, ou damages, come le caſe eſt, et quant aſcun bryefe eſt agarde de luy mitter en poſſeſſion, ceo

eſt appel briefe de execution, et quaunt il ad le poſſeſſion de le terre, ou eſt paye de dette ou dammages, ou ad le corps le def, agarde al priſon, dō
                  ques il ad executiō, & ſi le ple ſoit en coūty ou court barron ou hundred, & ils alyenont le iudgement en fauour del partie, ou per auter encheaſon, don
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   le demaundant auera briefe d'Executione iudicij. Mes en briefe de dette home nauera recouerie de null' terre, mes de cel que le defendaunt auoit ioure de iudgement rendue. Et de chateux home auera executyon ſolement des chateux, queux il auoitiour de execution
            
            
               
               Executour.
               EXecutor eſt quant home fait ſon teſtament et darreine volunt, et in ceo noſma le ꝑſō 
                  
                     •
                   executera ſon teſtamēt, don
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ceſty que eſt iſſint noſm̄, eſt ſon executour, et tiel executour auera action vers cheſcū dettour de ſon teſtatour, et ſi lexecutor ad aſſets, cheſcun a 
                     •
                   le teſtatour fuit in dette auera action vers lexecutours ſil ad obligation ou eſpecialty, mes en cheſcun caſe lou le teſtatour puiſſoit gager ſon ley, nul acc' giſt vers executour.
            
            
               Extinguiſhment.
               
                  EXtinguishment eſt lou vn ſeigniour dun manor ou aſcun auter ad vn rent iſſant daſcun terre, et il purchaſe meſme la terre, iſſint que il ad tiel eſtate en la terre, come il auoyt en le rent: donques le rent eſt extinct pur ceo que vn ne puyt auer rent iſſuant hors de ſon terre demeſne. Et quant aſcun rent ſerra extient, il couyent que le terre et le rent ſount en vne maine, & auxy q̄ leſtate que il ad ne ſoyt defeſible, et que il ad auxi bon eſtate en le terre, come en le rent, car ſil ad eſtate en le terre forſque pur terme de vie, ou dans, et ad vn fee ſimple en le rent,

donques le rent neſt extinct, mes eſt ere ſuſpence pur cel tēps, & donques apres le terme le rent eſt reuiue. Auxy ſi ſoit ſeigniour, meſne, et tenāt & le feigniour purchaſe la tenauncye, dōques le menalty eſt extinct, mes le meſne aūa la ſurpluſage de rent, ſi aſcun ſoit cōe vn rēt ſecke. Auxi ſi home ad chimin appendant, & puis purchaſe le terre en q'le chimin ē, don
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   le chimin ē extinct, et iſſint ē de vn cōen appenddant.
            
            
               Extortion.
               EXtorc̄ ē vn tort fait ꝑ vn officer, come vn Maier, Bailiffe, Viſc',

Eſcheator ou auter officer, colore officij ſui, en prendrans exceſſiue revvarde, ou fee, pur executiō de ſō dit office ou auterment, et nē aut' choſe en fait q' plain̄ robberie, mes plus odible q̄ robberie, car robberie eſt apparant, et toutes dits ad oue lui le coū
                  tenaunce de vice, mes extortiō eēāt cy haut vice cōe robberie eſt, port oue luy vn coū
                  tenance d' vertue, per reaſon de que il eſt le plus dure deē trie, ou diſcerne, et pur ceo le plus odible. Et vncor' aſcūs il y ad q' ne voilēt dem̄re, mes ſtretch lour office, credit, et conſcience pur purchaſer money, cybiē per extortion, come

auterment, accordāt al diſans de le poet Virgil.
               Quid non mortalia pectora cogit auri ſacra fames?
            
            
               Failer de recorde.
               FAyler de record, ē quant vn actiō de trn̄s ou tiels ſēblables, eſt port enuers vn, et le def. dit, q' le pl' deuant ceo, port vn acc' pur m̄ le trn̄s, en auter court, et recouer dam̄ &c. Et dd' iudgemēt del court ſil auera arrere ceſt actyon &c. Et le playntife dit nul tiel recorde, ſur que le def. ad iour done a luy, pur ameſner eins le record, a q̄ iour il fayle: ou ameſne

eins vn tiel, q' nē barr' al ceſt action, dōques il eſt dit de fayler de recorde, et ſur ceo le playntife auera iudgment de recouer &c.
            
            
               Fayt.
               FAyt eſt vn proue, et teſtimonie de le agreement del partie que fayt il eſt, al choſe contayne en le fayt: Come vn fayt de feoffemēt eſt vn proue del liuery de ſeiſin, car le terre paſſa per la liuerie de ſeyſin, mes quant le fayt et le lyuerie eſt ioint enſemble, ceſt vn proue del liuerie, et que le feoffour eſt content que le feoffee auera le terre.
               Et nota que toutes faits ſount ou indent, de q̄ il ad deux, troys,

ou pluſours, come le caſe require, de que le feoffor, grauntor, ou leſſour ad vn, le feoffee, graūtee, ou leſſee vn aut', et peraduent' aſc' auter perſon auxi vn aut', &c. ou autermēt ils ſont fayts pol, ou ſingle, et forſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   vn, le q̄l le feoffee, grauntee, ou leſſee ad &c.
               Et cheſcun fait conſiſt de troys principal choſes (et ſils troys ne ſount ioine enſemble, il neſt perfect fait de lier les parties) noſment, eſcripture, ſigillation, et deliuerie.
               Le primer point eſt eſcripture, ꝑ q' eſt declar' les noſmes del ꝑties al fait, lour habytatiō, lour degrees, le choſe grāt, ſur q̄ux cō
                  ſiderac', leſtate limit,

le temps quant il fuit graunt, et ſi ſimplem̄t, ou ſur condition, oue auters tiels ſemblables circūſtances, mes ſi les parties al fayt, eſcript en le fine lour noſmes demeſn̄, ou miſe a ceo lour markes (cōe il eſt cōmunement vſe) il ne fait aſcū matt' (cōe ieo ſuppoſe) car ceo neſt entende ou il eſt dit que cheſcū fait couient de auer eſcripture.
               Le ſeconde poynt eſt Sigillation, que eſt pl' teſtimony de lour conſents al ceo containe en le fait, come appiert per ceux ꝑolx: In cuius rei teſtimonium &c. touts foites miſe en le fin̄ d' fayts, ſ
                     •
                  uns queux parolx, le fayt eſt inſuffycient.

Et pur ceo q' noꝰ ſumꝰ ē ſigillat' et ſining de faits, il ne ſerra de hors (frere Nich.) icy a mr'e a vous, pur l' amour de antiquitie, le man̄ de ſigning et ſubſcribing de faits en nr' aunceſtors les Saxons temps, vn fashiō differēt de ceo que nous vſe en ceux nr' iours, en c' q' ils a lour fayts ſubſcribe lour noſmes (cōmunem̄t adding l' ſigne del croſſe) et en le fine miſe vn graūd number des teſtimonies, nyent vſant a cel temps aſcun maner de ſigil. Et nous a ceſt iour pur plus ſuertie, auxibien ſubſcribe noſtre noſmes (nient obſtant c̄ neſt mult neceſſar' cōe ieo ay deuāt dit) miſe nr'

ſigils, et vſe le aide de teſtimoignes auxy.
               Ceſt primer fashion ount contynuaunce per tout tanque al temps del conq̄ſt per les Normās, que maners per petit et petit al darrayne preuayle ēter nous: Car le primer Charter ſigil en Engleterre eſt penſe deſte ceo del roy Ed. le confeſſor al Abbey de Weſt minſter, que (eſteaunt educate en Normandy) port en ceſt realme ceo, et aſcun auter d' lour guiſes oue luy. Et apres le veniās de Guillam le Cōqueror, les Normans eſtemans de le cuſtome de lour paies (come naturalment toutes nations fount) reiect le manner que l
                     •
                  s trouōt cy, et retein̄
                  
lour proper, come Ingulphus le Abbot de Croyland que vyent eins oue le conqueſt teſtimoygne, diſens: Normāni, cheirographorū confectionem, cum crucib aureis, et alijs ſignaculis ſacris, in Anglia firmari ſolitā, in cerae impreſſionē mutant, modūque ſcribendi Anglicū reijciunt. Mes niēt obſt' ceo ne fuit fait tout al vn tēps, mes il ēcreaſe et vient eins ꝑ certein ſteps et degrees, iſſint que primes et pur vn ſeaſon le roy ſolemēt ou vn peu auters d' le nobility ouſtr' luy vſe de ſigiller, donques le noble homes pur le plꝰ part et nul auters, q̄l choſe vn hōe poet voier en le hiſtory de

Battel Abbey ou Richard Lucy chief Iuſtice de Engleterre en l' temps del roy Henry le ſeconde eſt report d' auer blame vn mean̄ ſubiect pur ceo que il vſe vn priuate ſigill quant ceo pertayne (come il diſt) al roy et nobility ſol'ment. Al q̄l tēps auxi (cōe Iohn Roſſe note ceo) ils vſe de ingraue en lour ſigils, lour pictures demeſn̄, et coū
                  terfaits couer oue vn lōge tunicle ſuꝑ lour Armours. Mes apres ceo les Gentlehomes del meliour ſort priſt le fashion, et pur ceo q'ils ne fueront touts guerrours, ils feſoient ſigilles engraue oue lour ſeuerall coates, ou shieldes de armes,

pur difference cōe m̄ le authour report. Al darraigne, al tēps del roy Edward le tierce, ſigils fuerōt mult cō
                  mon, iſſint que non ſolemēt tiels que portant armes, vſe de ſigiller, mes auters hōes auxi feſoyent al eux m̄s, ſignets de lour deuiſe demeſne, aſcuns prendrans les letters de lour noſmes dem̄, aſcūs flores, aſcuns et florishes, aſcuns aues, ou beaſts, et aſcūs autets choſes, come noꝰ ore vnc' iournalment voier ē vſe. Aſcūs aut' man̄ d' ſigillac' ouſter ceux ad eē over enter nous, cōe noſmēt ceo de roy Ed. le 3. p q̄l il dōe, Al Normā l' hūt', le hop, et le hop ville oue touts le bōds vpſide

dovvne, Et en Teſtmoyne q' il ſoyt veray, il morde l' cere oue ſon fong deut.
               Le ſemblable de cē (ſrere Nicholas) nr' e reuerend & bon pier, enter auters antiquities pur ma purpoſe, monſtre a moy, en vn looſe cart, mes non moult auncientm̄t eſcript, et pur c̄ il voile, q' ieo eſteema de ceo come ieo penſe bien, il fuit come enſue.
               Ieo Guillam King done a vous powlen Royden, ma hope et ma hop terres, oue touts les boundes vp et dovvne, de ceole al terre, de terre al infern̄, pur voy et vr'es a dem̄rer, de moy et mes, al toy et vr's, pur vn arke et vn brode

arrowe, when I come to hunt vppon yarrowe In witneſſe that this is ſooth, I bite this waxe with mye tooth, In the preſence of Magg, Maude, and Margery, and mye thyrde ſonne Henry.
               Alſoe that of Alberic de veer, conteyninge the donation of Hatfield to the which hée affixed a ſhort blacke hafted kniefe, like vnto an olde halpenie whitle, in ſtéede of a ſeale, with diuers ſuch lyke. But ſome peraduenture wil thinke that theſe were receyued in common vſe and cuſtome, and that they were not rather the deuyſes and pleaſures of a fewe ſinguler perſonnes,

tiels ne ſōt meines deceiue, que ils q'penſōt cheſcun charter et eſcript q' nad ſigille annexe, dēe ey auncient come le conqueſt, lou (en veritie) ſigillatiō ne fuit cōmunement vſe tan
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   al temps del roy Edward le iij. cōe ad eſte dit.
               Le tierce poynt eſt deliuerie, quel nient obſtāt il ſoit miſe darraine, neſt le meinſt, car ap̄s q' vn fait ſoit eſcript, et ſigil, ſil ne ſoit deliuer, tout le re ſidue ē a nul purpoſe, Et ceſt deliuery doyt eſte fayt per le partie m̄, ou ſō ſufficiēt garrant, et iſſint il luy liera quecun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   eſcript, ou ſigille ceo, et per ceſt darraigne act, le fait eſt fait perfect accordant

al entent et effect de c', et pur c' ē faits le deliūy eſt dēe proue &c. Iſſint poies voier q' eſcript', et ſigillac' ſans deliūry eſt a nul purpoſe, Que ſigillation et deliuerie, lou nē aſc' eſcripture worke nul choſe, Ne eſcriptur' et deliūy ſās ſigillatiō auxi, fait nul fait. Et pur c' ils tout doient iointmēt concurre pur fair' vn perfect fait, cōe eſt auantdit.
            
            
               Farme ou Ferme.
               FArme, ou ferme, ē le cheefe meſuage en vn vyllage, ou towne, et a ceo appurtenaunt graunde demeaſnes d'touts ſorts, et ad ēe vſe deſte leſſe pur terme de vie, ans,

ou a volunt.
               Item le rent que ē reſerue ſur tiel leas, ou ſemblables, eſt appel, farme, ou ferme.
               Et farmour, ou fermor, eſt celuy q'occupia le farme, ou ferme ou eſt leſſee de ceo.
               Auxi en aſc̄ lieus, & counties, cheſcun leſſee pur vie, ans, ou al volūt, nient obſtāt il ſoit dū petite cottage, ou meaſ, eſt ap pel farmor, ou fermor.
               Et nota, q' ils ſount appels farmes, ou fermes, del Saxon parol, Feormian, q' ſignifie pur feede, ou render victual. Car ē aūcient tēps, lour reſeruatiōs fuer' cibn̄ (ou pur le plus part) en victuall cōe argent, tanque al darreine, et c̄ principalm̄t

ē le tēps del roy Henry l' prim̄ (ꝑ agrem̄t) le reſeruac' de victuals, fueront conūt ē redy argent, et iſſint vnc' ad cōtinue ēt' le plus homes.
            
            
               Fee farme.
               FEe ferme, eſt quant vn tenant tiēt de ſō ſeignior en fee ſimple rendaunt a luy le value del moitie, ou de tierce party ou quater party, ou de auter parte del terre, pan, & q̄ tient en fee ferm̄ ne doyt faire auter choſe, mes ſicome eſt contein en le feffemēt forſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   fealtie, car ceo appent a touts man̄s tenures.
            
            
               Feoffement.
               FEoffement eſt lou vn done terre a vn

ter en fee ſimple, & il deliuer ſeiſin et poſſeſſion del terre, ceo eſt vn feoffement.
            
            
               Feffor & feffee.
               FEoffor eſt celuy q' enfeoffe, ou fait fefment al aut' de terres outen̄ts, en fee ſim. Et feffee ē celuy, q'eſt en feoffe, ou a q'le feffement eſt iſſint fait.
            
            
               Fireboote.
               FIreboote eſt neceſſarie boys pur arder, quel per le comō ley, leſſee pur ans, ou pur vie, poyt prender en ſon terre, nient obſtaunt il ne ſoit expreſſe en ſon leas, et nient obſtaunt il ſoit vn leas par parol tantū ſauns fait. Mes ſil

priſt plus q̄ beſoigne, il ſerra puny en waſt.
            
            
               Fledwite.
               FLedwite, hocē quietum eſſe de amerciamētis cum quis vtlagatus fugitiuus veniat ad pacem domini regis ſponte, vel licentiatus.
            
            
               Flemeſwite.
               FLemeſwite, hoc eſt quod habeatis cattalla ſiue amerciamē
                  ta hominis veſtri fugitiui.
            
            
               Fletwit.
               FLetwit (ou flytwit) hoc eſt quietū eſſe de contentione et conuictis, et quod habeatis placitum inde in curia veſtra et amerciamēta, quia (flit) anglice Tenſone gallice.
            
            
               
               Forſtall.
               FOrſtall, hoc ē quietū eſſe de amerciamentis et cattallis arreſtatis infra terram veſtram, et amerciamēta inde ꝓueniētia.
            
            
               Foreſtalier.
               FOrſtaller eſt celuy q̄ achate blees, aūs, ou aut' marchandize q̄cū
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   eſt vendibl', ple chimen qn̄t il vient al m̄kets, faires, ou tyels fēblables lieus deē vēd al intent que il poet vender c̄ auterfoits al vn plus haut et chare price, en preiudice et damage de le commō weale et people &c.
               Le penaltie pur ceux q̄ux ſōt cōuict de ceo, &c, en le pri
                     ••
                   temps amercemēt, et le pard del choſe iſſint achat'.
               Le ſeconde temps iudgment d'l pillory.

Le tierc' temps impriſonment et raūſome. Le quater temps abiuration del ville &c.
            
            
               Fraunches royall.
               FRaunches Roiall, eſt lou le Roygne graunt al vn et a ſes heirs q̄ ils ſerrōt quite de tolnet', vel h
                     ••
                  odi.
            
            
               Frankmariage.
               FRankmariage, eſt qn̄t vn home ſeiſie de terres en fee ſimpl' dōe c̄ al auter hōe et a ſa fēe (q̄ eſt ſil' ſoer ou aut' ment de kynne al donor,) en frākmariage, per vertue d' q̄ux parolx, ils 
                     •
                  unt vn eſtate 
                     •
                  n ſpecial tayle, et tiendra le terie del donor quite de touts maners d' ſeruices tā
                  que le 4. degree ſoyt paſſe, accōptants eux m̄s en l' prim̄ degree,

ſinon fealtie, q̄ux ils fieront pur ceo que il eſt incidēt a touts tenures forſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   frank almoigne. Et tiel done poet eē fait cy bn̄ ap̄s mariage ſolempnize cōe deuant. Et home poet don̄ terres al ſon fits en frankmariage cybien cōe a ſa file ꝑ le opinion de maſter Fitzh. en ſō briefe de Chamꝑtie H. Mes il apꝑt auterm̄t en maſt' Litt', et en M. Broke Ti. Frākmar' P. 10. Et iſſint il fuit tenꝰ clere en Grayes Inne ē lent An. 1576. 18. El. ꝑ le dr't woorſhypful M. Rhodes dōq̄s lector la.
            
            
               Franktenement.
               FRankten̄t ē vn eſtate q̄ hōe ad ē terres, ou ten̄tes, ou ꝓfit a prēd', en fee ſimple,

taile, pur terme de ſō vie dem̄, ou pur term̄ dauter vie. Et ſouth ē il nē frankten̄t, car il que ad eſtate pur ans, ou tient al volūt, nad aſcun frankten̄t, mes ils ſont appel chattels.
               Et de frāktenem̄ts, il y ad ij. ſorts, cē aſſauoir, frankten̄t ē fait, et frankten̄t en ley.
               Frāktenemēt ē fait, eſt quant vn home ad ent' ē terres ou ten̄ts, et eſt ſeiſie de ceo, reallm̄t, actualment, et en fait, Sicome le pier ſeiſie de terres ou tenem̄ts ē fee ſimpl' deuie, et ſō fits ent' ē eux cōe heire a ſō pier, dō
                  q̄s il ad vn frankten̄t en fait ꝑ ſon entrie.
               Frankten̄t en ley, eſt qn̄t terres ou ten̄ts ſōt diſcend' al vn hōe, et il

poet enter en eux qn̄t a luy pleſt, mes nad vnc' fait ſon entrie en fait, cōe en le caſe auantdit, ſi le pier eſteāt ſeiſie de t're en fee ſimple deuie ſeiſie, et ils diſcend al ſon fits, mes le fits nad vncore ent' ē fait en eux, ore deuant ſō entrie, il ad vn frankten̄t en ley.
            
            
               Freſhſuite.
               FReshſuit, eſt quāt vn hōe ē robbe, et le party iſſint robbe, purſua l' felon immediatment, et luy pryſt oue le maner, ou auterment, et donques port vn appeale enuers luy, et luy conuince del felony per verdict, le quel choſe eſteant enquire pur le roygne et troue, le partie robbe auera

reſtituc'd' ſes bn̄s arr'.
               Itē il poet eſte dit q̄ le partie fait freshſuit, nient obſtāt il ne priſt le felon preſentment, mes q̄ il ſoit demy an, ou vn an apres le robbery fait, deuant que il ſoit priſe, ſi ſoit iſ
                     •
                  int que le ꝑtie robbe fayt taunt que en luy eſt, per diligent enquire, et ſerch d' luy prend', nient obſtant que il ē priſe per vn aut' hōe, vncore ceo ſerra dit bone freshſuit.
               Et iſſint freshſuit eſt quant le ſn̄r vient pur diſtreigner pur rēt ou ſeruice, et le ovvner des beaſtes fayt reſcous, et enchaſe eux en auter terre que nē tenꝰ del fn̄r, et le ſeigniour enſuer preſentmēt, et repriſt eux, cē
                  
appel freshſuite. Et iſſint en auters ſemblables caſes.
            
            
               Gager de deliueraunce.
               GAger de delyuerance eſt, lou vn ſua repleuin des biens priſe, mes il nad deliūe des bn̄s, et lauter auovva, et le pleintife mr'e q̄ le defēd' ē vncore ſeiſie &c. et pria que le defendant gagera deliuerance, dō
                  ques il mittera eyns ſuertie ou pledge pur redeliuerance, et br'e iſſera al viſcount pur redeliuer &c. mes ſi home claime ꝓpertie il ne gagera delyueraunce. Auxi ſil dyt q̄ les auers ſont mort' en pound, il ne gagera &c. Auxi home ne gagera iāmais le deliuerance auant que ils

ils ſont a iſſu ou demurrer en ley.
            
            
               Garde.
               GArde eſt quant vn enfant que aūceſtour tient per ſeruice de chiualrie, eſt en le gard et cuſtodie de le ſn̄r de que ils fueroūt tenus, Et ſi le tenaunt tient de dyuers ſeigniours dyuers terres, celuy ſeignyour de que il tyent per prioritie
                     •
                  s, per le plus aū
                  cyen tenure, auera la garde del enfant, mes ſi vn tenure ſoit auxy auncyen que lauter, donques celuy que primes happa le gard del corps, gardera ceo▪ mes en ceo caſe, cheſcun ſeignyour auera le garde del terr' que eſt tenus de luy, mes ſi le tenaunt tient

de roine in chiefe, donques le roine per ſa praerogatiue auera le garde de corps et de tout le terr' que eſt tenus de el, & de cheſcun auter ſeygniour.
            
            
               Garden.
               GArden plus proꝑment eſt celuy q ad le gard ou cuſtody dun hr', et de t're tenꝰ 
                     •
                  er ſeruice de chiualry, ou de vn de eux a ſon vſe demeſn̄, durāt le nonage del hr': Et deins ceſt temps ad le beſtowinge del corps del heire, en marige al ſon volunt ſans diſperagement.
               Et de gardens il y ad ij. ſortes noſmēt, garden en droit, et gardē en fait.
               
                  Garden en droit, ē celuy q'per reaſon de ſon ſ
                     •
                  ry eſt ſeiſie del gardſhip ou cuſtodye del t're, et del heire durant le nonage del heire.
               Garden en fait, eſt lou le ſn̄r ap̄s ſon ſeyſin, cōe auantdit graū ta per fait
                     •
                   ou ſās fait, le gardship del terre ou del heire, ou dābideu
                     •
                   a vn aut', ꝑſorce 
                     〈…〉
                   graunt, le graū
                  tee eſt en poſſ
                     •
                  . don
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ē le graūtee appel garden en fait.
               Et coſt garden en ſait poit graunt le hr' al 
                     •
                  u
                     •
                  er auxi, mes ceſt 
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  erment appel garden en fayt car 
                     •••
                   eſt le grauntee del garden en dr't ſole
                     ••
                  , Er icy poies

voier (frere Nicholas) quel miſery vient ap̄s ceſt tenure per ſeruice de chiualry ſi le t'moruſt relinquauns ſon heire deins age, com̄t le pouer inf
                     •
                  t poet ēe toſſe et tūble, chappe et chāge, et achate et vēd' ſēble vn mal' chiual en Smithfeelde, et que plus eſt il ſerra mary a que pleſt ſon Garden, de que enſue mult male.
            
            
               Garniſhment.
               GArnishment eſt qn̄t vn action de detinue des charters eſt port vers vn, & le defendaunt dit que les charters fuerount deliū a lu y per le pleyntife, et per vn aut', ſur certeine conditions, & preye que lauter 
                     •
                  oyt garneye de pled'

oue le pleintife ſi les cōditions ſont perimples ou nemy, et ſur ceo vne briefe de Scire facias iſſeravers luy Et ceo eſt appell vn garnishm̄t.
            
            
               Gauelate.
               GAuelate, ē vn ſpecial et aūcient kind de Ceſſauit vſe en kēt ou le cuſtome de Gauelkind continue, per q̄l le t' forfetera ſes t'res et ten̄ts al ſeignior de que ils ſont tenus, ſil deteygne de ſon ſeignior ſes due rents & ſeruyces ſolonque ceſt manner que enſue.
               Si aſc̄ tenant en Gauelkinde reteyne ſa rent, et ſon ſeruices del tenement quil tient

de ſon ſn̄r, querge le ſn̄r per agard de ſa court de trois ſemains en trois ſemaīs, d'troū diſtreſſe ſur cel ten̄t taunt que a la quart court, a toutfet ꝑ teſmoignages, Et ſi dedens cell temps ne truſſe diſtreſſe en cel ten̄t, ꝑ queux il puiſſe ſō ten̄t iuſtiſer: Done a la quart court ſoit agard, q̄l preign̄ cel tenement en ſa main, en noſm̄ d' diſtreſſe, auxi come boef ou vache et le tient vn an, et vn iour en ſa mayne ſauns mayne ouerer, deyns quel terme, ſi le tenaunt vient, et rend ſes arrerages, et fait reſonables amēds de la detener, adone eit, et ioiſe ſon tenement ſicome les auncestours

et luy auant tiendrōt. Et ſil ne vēt deuant lan, et le iour paſſe, donc auage le ſeigniour al prochein Coūte ſuiant oue teſt moinages de ſa court, et face la ꝓnuncier cel proces pur teſtmoynage auer, et ꝑ agard de ſa court, apres ceo Counte tenue, entra et meynouera en cels terres et tenements, ſicōe en ſon demeſne, Et ſi la tenaunt vient apres, et voyle reauer ſes tenementes, & tener ſicome il fiſt deuaunt, face gree al ſeygniour, ſicome il eſt auncyentment diſt.
               
                  Neghe ſth ſelde, & ne ghe ſith geld, & v pound
                  
                  for the were: er hee become he alder.
               
               Ily ad aſcuns copies que ad le primer verſe iſſint eſcript.
               
                  Niſith yelde, and niſith gelde.
               
               Et auters iſſint.
               
                  Nigheſith yelde, and nigheſith gelde.
               
               Mes ceux ne differ en ſignification, auter copies ont ceo ſolō
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ceſt ſort.
               
                  Nigond ſith ſelde, and nigond ſith gelde.
               
               Ceſt a ſcauoier, paiera il nouies foites, & nouies foits repaie.
            
            
               Gauelkinde.
               GAuelkinde eſt vn cuſtōe ānexe et cur rant oue t'res en kent appel Gauelkind t'res tenꝰ ē aunciēt Socage

tenure. Et eſt penſe ꝑ les erudite en antiquities, deſte appel Gauelkinde de Giue al kin, ceſt adire a touts les kyn en vn lyne, accordaunt come eſt vſe enter les Germās, de que nous Anglois, et eſpecialm̄t de Kent venemus. Ou il ē appel Gauelkinde, de giue al kynd, cē adir' al touts les males, car kynd en dutch ſignifie vn male. Et diuers aut's ſēbl' coniectures ſōt fait ꝑ eux d'l noſm̄ Gauelkinde, le q̄lieo omit de purpoſe pur breuitie, pur ceo q' cy vous expectes (frere Nich.) ſicōe voꝰ moy requiraſt, q̄ieo eſcriuera largem̄t cōcern̄t aut'plꝰ needfull matt▪ pur vr' purp̄, q̄ux voꝰ

deſiraſt de ſcauoir, cō
                  cernāt Gauelkind ter res, et pur c̄ que vous lues nee en Kent, et auxi es plus demurrāt la, et pur ceo voꝰ pē
                  ſes, patriae res neſcire dedecus.
               Pur ſatiſfier vr'e dd' en ceſt: Ieo ay pur ceo miſe pur vous cy les auncient cuſtomes de Kent, ſicome ils fueroūt veramēt et carefully de puiſne temps publye oueſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   aſcuns caſes ſur eux collect hors del ceux liuers, q̄ foūt aſcun mentiō de ceſt, q'l voet ieo pēſe ſatiſtier vr'e deſire alarge. Et prim̄m̄t voꝰ 
                     •
                  cauoies, q' ceux Gauelkind cuſtōes, ſoūt de bō antiquitie port eins cy ꝑ les Saxons, Intes, et Angles, Germans

de q̄ nous Angloys diſcend (cōe eſt auātdit) et fuerount ꝑ eux vſe, et reli
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   cy, et iſſint cōtinue ē force, tanq' Guillam Duke de Normandie conquer' tout Engleterr' (Kent 
                     •
                  auntſolement forſpriſe) le q'il auoit per compoſitiō et nemy per conqueſt. Et en ceſt cōpoſition, les valiaunt Kentois obtaineroit vn graūt de le cōtinuatiō de lour cuſtōes d'Gauelkind, le q̄l touts tēps puis ils oūt vſe en m̄ l' pais, et ils ſōt cōe enſuiſt.
            
            
               Les cuſtomes de Kent.
               CEs ſōt les vſages, et les cuſtōes, les q̄ux l' cōmur al
                     •
                  ie de Kent claimāt aū en ten̄ts de Gauelkind, et en gēts Gauelkēdeis, all
                     ••
                   es

en Eire Iohn de Bervvike, et ſes companions, Iuſtices en eire, en Kent, le 21. an le Roy Ed. fits le roye Henrie.
               Ceſtaſſauoir, que touis les cors de Kenteys ſoyent Francz, auxi come les auters fraūs cors Denglet'.
               Ceſt choſe ad eſte puis confeſſe deē veray, com̄ il appiert en 30. E. I. en Fitzherbert titulo Villenage placit' 46. Ou il eſt tenꝰ ſufficient pur vn home de auoider lobiection de bōdage, adire, que ſon pier fuit nee en Kent, mes ſil voet ſeruer en cē caſe adire, q il m̄ fuit ne
                     •
                   en Kent, il ē (pur bo
                     •
                   cauſe) deſte doubt.
               2 Et que ils ne duinent le Eſchet' le roy

eſlire, ne vnques en nul temps ne feſoiēt▪ mes le roy prengne, ou face prender, tyel come luy plerra, de ceo qui ſoit miſtier a luy ſeruer.
               3 Et quilz puſēt lour t'res & lour ten̄ts don̄ & vend', ſans conge dd'er a lour ſeignorages, Saues a ſeignorages les rētset l's ſeruic' dues de m̄s les ten̄ts.
               4 Et q̄ touz, et cheſc' puſeit ꝑ br' le roy, ou ꝑ pleit, pled' pur lour dr't purchaſer, aux
                     •
                  bn̄ de lour ſeignorages, come des auters gēts.
               5 Et claiment auxi, q̄ la cōmune de Gauilkind eis▪, q̄ ne tenent mes que tenementes Gauilekēdeis, ne deuient venera le commune ſummons del

Eire, mes q' per Borgeſaldre, et iiij. homes de la Borgh, horspris les villes, que deuiēt reſpond' per xij. hōes en le Eire.
               Le
                     •
                  emble du cē priuiledge ē enioy a ceſt iour en l' Lath d'l viſcount, ou diūs entyer Borghes ſoūt excuſe 
                     •
                  l' apparāce 
                     •
                  antſolemēt dū Borgeſalder, et ij. iiij. ou ſize auters de les enhabitāts. Borshold', eſt iſſint noſme de les Saxon parolx Borher caldor cē adire, le plus aunc' ou eigne de les pledges.
               6 Et claiment auxi, q̄ ſi nul ten̄t en Cauelkēd ſoit attaint de felony, per que il ſuffre Iuiſe d'mort, eit l' roy 
                     •
                  ouz ſes chateux, et ſō eire maintenāt ap̄s ſa

mort ſoit enherite de touts ſes terres et tenements q̄ il tient en Gauelkinde en fee, et en heritage, et les tiē
                  dra ꝑ meſmes les ſeruices et cuſtomes, ſicome ſes aūceſters les tiendront dont eſt dit en Kentees.
            
            
               Ye fader to ye bogh, Ye ſonne to ye plogh.
               Mes ceſt rule tyent en caſe de felonie, et de murder ſolement, et nemy en caſe de treaſon. Et il tient auxi en caſe ou le offēdour eſt Iuſtice per order del ley, et nemy ou il ſe ſuthtrey apres le fact fayt, et ne voet permit ſon loyal tryal. Et pur ceo que ceſt cuſtome ne ſerra conſtrue per equitie,

mes per vn ſtrict et literal enterpretation, il ad eſte doubt pur ceo, ſi le ſrere, ou vncle auera le aduauntage de ceo, pur ceo que les parolx extend al ſits ſolement.
               Vide 22. Edvv. 3. abridg per M. Brooke. tit' Cuſtome. 54.
               7 Et ſi il eit femme, meintenāt ſoit dovve ꝑ le heir', ſil ſoit dage, de la moity, de toutes les terres et tenemētz q' ſon baron tient de Gauelkynde en fee, A auer et a tener ſolon
                     •
                   la form̄ de ſuthdyte. Et de tiels terres le roy ne auera an ne vvaſt, mes tātſolement les chateux, ſicome il eſt auantdit.
               Le femme ne perdra dovver pur le

defaut de ſa barō mes en tiel cas ou le hr' 
                     •
                  
                  dera ſon enheritance pur le offence de ſon pere 8. H. 3.
               8 Et ſi nul Gauelkind eis purfelon̄, ou pur ret de felonie, ſe ſuthtrei de la pees, et ſoit en coūte dd' cōe il appent, et puis vtlaghe, ou ſil ſe met en ſeint egli
                     •
                  e, et foriure la terre oue le Reaume, le Roy auera lan et le vvaſt de ces terres, & de touts ſes tenementes enſēblem̄t oue toutes ces chateas, Iſſint que apres lan, et le iour, le plus prochein ſeignyour, ou ſeignyoures eynt lour eſchetes de cels terres, & tenementes, cheſcun ſeigniour ceo

que de luy eſt tenus ſauns men. Iſſint il eſt tenus en le liūs 8. E. 2. abridged per maſter Fitherb. ti. Preſcription 50. Et 22. E. 3. abridged per M. Bro. ti. Cuſtome 54.
               9 Et claimentauxi, q' ſi aſcun tenaunt en Gauelkinde murt, & ſoit enherit' de terres et de ten̄ts en Gauelkind, q' touts ſes fites partent cel heritage ꝑ ouels porcions.
               10 Et ſi nul hr' male ne ſoit, ſoit la ꝑty fait ent' les females, ſicōe entres les freres. Mes 
                     •
                  ' ſtat' d' Prerog. regis ca. 16. dit, que faeminae non participabunt cū maſculis, q̄ eſt deē entend, de tiels q̄ ſont ē equal degre d' kinred cōe freres, et ſoers, cōe

cōe en ceſt ix. et x. deuiſiō. Car ſi vn hōe ad iſſue iij. fits, et le eigne ad iſſue vn file, et moruſt en le vie ſō peere, et le pere deuie: En cē caſe le file ioynera oue les deux aut's freres ſa vncles, pur ceo q' el neſt en equal degree oue eux, cōe ſa peere fuit, q̄ heir' niēt meins el doet de neceſſitye eſte.
               11 Et la meſuage ſoit antreci ent' eux depar ti, mesl' Aſtre demurra al pune ou punee, et la value ſoit de ceo lieure a cheſc' des par ceners de cell herytage a xl. pees de cel Aſtre, ſi le tenement le peut ſuffrir.
               Per ceſt ꝑol (Aſtre) eſt ment (cōe eſt coniecture) ou le aule, ou

principal lieu del mea ſō, ou auterm̄t le wel pur ewe, ou le ſuth ꝑt del edefice car (Aſtre) eſteant ſound ſans (ſ.) poit ven̄ del latin ꝑol Atrium q̄ ſignifie vn aule, ou de Hauſtrum q̄ betokēl' bucket dū wel, ou de auſtrum le ſouth ſide, Cheſe' de q̄ oūt lour particuler cō modities deuāt les auters del meaſ. ou ten̄t. Ou auterment eſteāt ſoūd oue (ſ) il poit eē deduce de le french 
                     •
                  ol (Aſiſter) per contrace' (Aſtre) q̄ ē tāt, cōe tonſite, ou ſituation, et oue le article (le) deuant 
                     •
                   (Leſter) vn cimitory, ou court enuiron vn meaſon, Mes al cē iour il nad 
                     •
                  iel regarde fait en le particion, mes ſolem̄t

conſideratyon ewe, q̄ les parts m̄s ſoiēt equal & indifferent
               12 Et donq̄z le eiſne frere eit la primer electiō, et les auters ap̄s per degree.
               13 Enſemēt de meaſons que ſerront trouets en tyens meſſuages, ſoyent departie entre les heires per ouel portioun, ceo eſt a ſauoyer pe
                     •
                   pei
                     •
                  s ſil eſt miſtier, Saue le Couert del Aſtre, que remeynt al pune, ou al punee, ſicome il eſt auantdiſt. Iſſi que nequedount q' le pune face reſonable gre a ces parceners de le party que a eux appent, ꝑ agarde de bon gents.
               14 Et les auauntdits tenementes dont vn

ſoule ſute tant ſolem̄t ſoleit eſtre fait auant, ne ſoit per la reſoun de la partic̄ fors vn ſoule ſute fait ſicome ſoleit auant, mes que tous les parceners facent contributiō a celuy que face le ſuite pur eux.
               15 Enſement ſeint les chateus de Gauelkin des parties en treis ap̄s les exequies et les dets rendues, ſi ily eit iſſue mulier en vie, iſſint q̄ la mort eit la vn ꝑtie, & les fites & les files muliers laut' partie, et la fēe la iij. ꝑtie.
               Ou il ē dit cy, que la mort eit vne partye, il eſt entende pur parformance de ſes legacyes per ces executors ſil fait teſtament, ou per le diſcrec' del

ordinarye ſil deuye inteſtate.
               16 Et ſi nul iſſue mulier en vie ne ſo it, ey
                     •
                   la mort la moite, et la ſeme en vie laut' moity. Meſme le order de q' le cuſtome cy parle en le 15. et 16. deuiſion, eſt al cē iour obſerue en le city d' Lō
                  dres et m̄ en effect fuit en aunc' temps vſe ꝑ tout le realme. Car il eſt euident, et per le ley d'l roy Canutus, ꝑ M. Glanuil, per les parolx de Magna Carta cap. 18. per M. Fitzh▪ en ſon Natura breuiū en le br' de Rationabili ꝑte bonor' fo. 122. L. q' lafēe et ēfāts ad lour reaſonable parts del bn̄s ꝑ le cōmō ley del realme, et q̄ le cō
                  mō ley ſuit iſſit, il ap
                     ••
                  
                  
auxi en 30. E. 3. 28. et 21. 30. H. 6. Et fuit dit per ley M. 31. H. 8. abridge ꝑ M. Brooke tit' Rationabili parte bonorum pl'. 6. q̄ ceo ad eſtre ſepe miſe en vre come vn cōmen ley, et nunquam demurr', et ideo videtur que ceo eſt le commō ley, ꝑ q' meanes quicun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   il viēt al darrain q' il fuit admit pur ley mes en tiels countries ſolement ou il fuit cō
                  tinue per cōtinual vſage, et que toutes les briefes en le Regiſter, de Rationabili parte bonorū, ount mentiō del ſpecial cuſtom̄ del countie, en q' le part eſt dd', et iſſint eſt le liuer 28. H. 6. 4. Mes come al ceſt iour ꝑticion d' chattels nē vſe

per toutle entier Realme, nyent obſtāt en le meane temps il nad parde le force du cō
                  mon ley come mults penſe, et come poet eſte collect per le oppinion auauntdit tenus pur ley Anno 31. H. 8. iſſint il eſt, (come aſcūs ſuppoſe) vanish outerment hors de vre deyns ceſt countrey de Kent auxi.
               17 Et ſi le heir', ou les heires, ſoit ou ſoiēt de deins le age de xv. ans ſoit la noriture d' eux baile ꝑ le ſn̄r al plꝰ ꝓchein del ſāk, a 
                     •
                   heritag' n
                     •
                   peut de
                     •
                  cēd iſſint q' le ſn̄r pur l
                     •
                   baile rien ne preigne.
               18 Et que il ne ſo yt marie ꝑ le ſn̄r, mes per ſa volunte demeſn̄, et per le counſell de ces

amies ſil veult.
               19 Et quant cel heire ou ceux heires, ſōt de pleine age de xv. ans, ſoient a eux lour terres, et ſour tenements lieures, enſemblemēt oue lour chateaux, et oue les en ꝓuem̄ts de cels terres, ouſtre reſonable ſuſtinance: de quel enprouemēt, et chateux, ſoyt tenu a reſpondre celuy qui de luy auera la noryture, ou le ſeigniour, ou ſes heires, que cel noritur' auera baile.
               Le ſeigniour doyt bien conſider, que il ne credit pas le cuſtodie al aſcū perſon, que ne ſerra able a reſpō
                  der pur ceo. Car ſi le heire, al ſon pleyne age de xv. ans, viendra al court del ſn̄r

et demaundant ſō enheritāce, nyent obſtāt le ſn̄r poet diſtreygno le gardein pur fair' accompt (coe il appiert 18. E. 2. Auowry 220) vncore en defaut de ſon abilitie, le ſn̄r m̄, et ſes hr'es, dem̄t charge al le heire pur c': Mes ieo ne oyer, q̄ les ſn̄rs priſt ſur eux, a cēiour de cōmit le cuſtodie de ceux enfants, mes q̄ ils relin
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   c' ouſtremēt al order de ꝓch. de amie, peraduentur' pur auoid' le daū
                  ger ē q̄ ils ſōt, ſils ent'medle come eſt auātdit.
               20 Et ceo fet a ſauoir, que del heure que ceux heirs Gauelkind ſoiēt, ou ount paſſe le age d' xv. ās, liſt a eux lour terres ou ten̄tes

doner et vend', a lour volūte, Sauues les ſeruices au cheſe' ſn̄rages come il eſt deuant dit.
               Nient obſtant q̄ ceſt cuſt
                     •
                  e enhable l' heir' pur faire alienatiō de ſes terres et ten̄ts mult ſoone, noſm̄t al 15. an d' ſa age, ꝑ means d'q' il puit eſte penſe ni
                     •
                  t reaſonabl'pur don̄ tiel ſcope et liberty al tiels iune ās, vnc' ſur le bō cōſiderac' de c', il poet appeare, q' l' cuſtōe m̄ fait reaſonabl' et careful prouiſion, en l' behalfe del heire, entant que il luy licence a tiel ans, non pur doner ſes terres, car 
                     •
                   il poet faire pur nul choſe, mes pur doner et vē
                  der ſes terres, le quel il ētēd il ne doet fair' ſaūs ſuffic' recōpence.

Semble interpretatiō le comon ley auxi ſē
                  ble de faire de cē cuſtome, et ꝑ l
                     •
                  pinion de Vauaſoure
                     •
                   Keble. 
                     •
                  . H. 7. 31. et 41. q̄ux diont, q̄ 
                  
                     •
                  l fuit aiudge q' vn releas fait per tiel enfant fuit voide▪ per le sentence del liū 21. E. 4. 24. o
                     •
                   il eſt dit, que vn enfāt ne poet declare ſon volūt ſur tiel feoffemēt. Et per le iudgmēt de Hank. 11. H. 4. 33. q' auxi tient, que vn garr', ou graūt dū reū
                  
                     •
                  
                  ▪ ſayt a tiel age, fui
                     •
                   anul purpoſe, nient obſtant vn leas oue releas puit paduenture eſte bō per le cuſtome, pur ceo q̄ il amoūta a vn feoffemēt. Et il nē bō q̄ ceſt cuſtōe doet 
                     •
                  ē cōſtrue ꝑ equity, entāt que il

neſtoit oue aſc' equity dēabler vn enf. d' petit diſcrec', et meins ex periēce, pur vend' ſō t'res, et nō puruen̄ oue c̄, q̄ il doit aū Quid ꝓ quo, et aſc' reaſonable recompence pur ceo. Car c̄ ne fuit pur defender le pupil et ſans pier, mes pur giſer luy ouert a cheſc' ſubtile deceipt et circūuention. En q̄ reſpect, lour opinion ē deē bn̄ obſerue, q̄ tient, q' ſi vn 
                     •
                  nf. en Gauelkinde, a cē iour voet vend' al xv. ans de ſō age, ceux 
                     •
                  . choſes doiēt de neceſſitie cōcurr', ſi il vo et aū l' ſal' bō et effectual. Le prim̄ q̄ il ſoit vn heire et nemy vn purch. del terres oue q̄ux il dept. Le ij. q' il ad recōpence pur c̄, et le tierce, q̄ il ceo face

oue liuery de ſeiſin per ſon maine dem̄, et nemy ꝑ garrāt de atturney, ne ꝑ aſcū aut' man̄ de aſſurance. Et ceux hōes pur proofe de le prim̄ et ſeconde part de lour aſſertiō, edifie ſur les parols de cē cuſtōe, ou il eſt dit, del heur' q̄ ceux heirs Gauelkind ſeint, ou oūt paſſe le age de 15. ās, liſt a eux, lour t'res ou ten̄ts don̄ et vēd▪, en q' les parols, (ceux heires) reſtrain̄ le infāt q̄ viēt eins per purch. Et (don̄ et vend') en le copulatiue, de neceſſitie implie vn recompence, entaunt que vendere ne po et eſte ſine praecio. Et pur mayntenaunce del tierce matter, ils ount ſur lour part,

preter le cōmō vſage del paies, le cōmō ley del realme auxi, le q'l expound le parol doner de ſignifier vn feoffement, et le q̄l non ſolemēt diſallovve de aſcū done fait per vn enfant, mes auxy punish le prend' en trn̄s, ſinō q'il ad c̄ ꝑ liuerie del maines del enfant cōe apꝑt en 26. H. 8. 2. 9. H. 7. 24. 18. E. 4. 2. 22. H. 6. 3. et diuers auters liuers.
               21 Et ſi aſc̄ tiel tenāt en Gauelkind meurt, et eit feme q̄ ſuruiue, ſoyt cel feme maintenaunt dovve de la moitie des tenements dont ſon barō moruſt veſtu, et ſſi ꝑ les hr's, ſils ſoyent de age, ou per les ſeigniours, ſi les heirs ne ſoient pas

de age, iſſint q' ele eyt la meit de celes terres et tenementes, a tener taunt come ele ſe tyent veue, ou de enfanter ſoyt attaint, per le auncient vſage, ceo eſt aſauoir, que qn̄t ele enfant, et 
                     •
                  en
                     •
                  āt ſoit oy crier, et 
                     ••
                   h
                     •
                  e et l'
                     •
                  ry ſoit leue, et le pais enſēble, et ayent viewe de lenfāt en cy faunte, et de la mere, adonq̄s perde ſon dovver enterement, et auterment nyent, taunt come ele ſe tient veue, dont il eſt dyt en kenteyes.
            
            
               Se thad ſip wende, ſe ſip lende.
               Eſt cuſtome ad eſte allovve per le common

ley longe temps puis, cōe poet cē vieu, Praerog. regis ca. 16. et 2. H. 3. en Fitherbert ti. Preſcriptiō 59. &c. Mes il eſt vn doubt, ſi vn feme ſerra endowe per cē cuſtome, dun poſſ. en leyo, u nemy, pur ceo q' les parols ſont (des tenementes dont ſon barō moruſt veſtue, et ſeiſie) quel parol (veſtue) enforc' vn poſſ. en fait, et non in leyſolem̄t. Et pur c' ſi t'res en Gauelkind diſcēd' al hōe mary, q̄ moruſt deuant que il face ſon entre en ceo, Quer' ſi ſoitle man̄ dē dower ſa feme de ceo ou nemy? vn feme ne ſerra endovve per cē cuſtōe, dū bailiwike, ou faire, ou tiel ſēblable ꝓfet ꝑ loppinion

de M. Parkins fo. 84. pur c' q' les parols de cē cuſtomary dower ſont terres et ten̄ts, et touts cuſtomes troūa vn litteral et ſtrict interpretac'. Et ou el eſt deſte endow per ceſt cuſtōe, el poet bn̄ eſte ēdow dū moitie, deē tenꝰ en cōmō oueſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   le heire, q̄ enioy laut' moitie &c. Il eſt vn doubt, ſi vn fēe ētitle al dower en Gauelkīd poet vvaiū ſa dovver del moity ſolō
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ceſt cuſtōe, et port ſa acc' deē endowe del iij. al cōmō ley, et iſſint exēpt luy m̄ de tout dā
                  ger d'l cuſtomary cō
                  dic'ou nemy? Aſcuns fuer'de opiniō q̄ el eſt al liberty de p̄nd' lū, et vvayue lauter al ſa pleaſure. Et pur ceo quaere de ceo &c.
               
                  22 Et claiment auxi, que home que prent femme, que eit heritage de Gauelkinde, et la femme murge auant luy, eit le Baron le moite de celes terres et tenements, tant come il ſe tyent veuers, dount il moruſt ſeiſi ſans eſtrepement, ou vvaſt, ou exile faire, le quel kil y eyt heire ent' eux ou non Et ſil prent femme, treſtout perde.
               23 Et ſi nul tenement de Gauelkinde eſchete (et ceo eſchete ſoit a nul ſeigniour q' tient per fee de Hawberkē, ou per ſeriauncie) per mort, ou per Gauelate ſicome il eſt ſuthdit, ou luy ſoit rē
                  due de ſon tenaunt q' de luy auaunt le tient

per quyte clamans de ceo fete, o
                     •
                   ſoit ſa eſchete per Gauelate ſicome il eſt de ſuthdit, remaine cel terre as heires impartable. Et c'eſt a ſauoir, la ou le t'enſi rēdāt nul ſeruice retent deuers ſe, ſauet nequedōt as aut's ſn̄rages, fees, ferm̄s, et les rents dont les auauntdits tenementes de Gauelkinde (enſi rendus) auaūt fuerent charges per ceux, ou ꝑ celuy, que le charger poient ou poyet.
               A ten̄ ꝑ fee de Hawberk, ou per ſeriantie (ſil ſoit grād ſerianty) et a ten̄ ꝑ ſer
                     •
                  ie' d' chiual'. Heahbeony en Sax on, ē vn haut defēce, Et les cuſtomes de Normandy appel ceo fief ou fee d' Haubert

que doit defender le terre ꝑ pleine armes, ceo eſt ꝑ chiual, haubert, target, eſpee, ou helme. Et il conſiſt d' 300. acres de terre, q̄ eſt c̄ (cōe aſc̄ pēſe) q̄ nous appellomꝰ vn entier fee de chiual'.
               24 Et claimant auxi, que ſi aſc' tenaunt en Gauelkind reteine ſa rent, et ſon ſeruice del tenement quil tient d' ſon ſeign̄: querge le ſn̄r per agarde de ſa court de tois ſemains en trois ſemaines de troū diſtreſſe ſur cel ten̄t tant q̄ ala quart court, a toutefit ꝑ teſmoinage. Et ſi dedeis cel tēps ne truſſe diſtreſſeen cel tenement per queux il puiſſe ſō tenant iuſtiſer, don
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   a la quart court ſoyt

agard, quil p̄igne cel tenement en ſa main, en noum de diſtreſſe, auſi come Boefe, ou vache, et le tiēt vn an et vn iour, en ſa main ſās oūer, maine deins quel terme, ſi le tenaunt vient, & rende ſes arrerages, & feit ran̄bles amendes de la detenue, a donq'eit, et ioiſe ſon tenement ſicome ſes aunceſtors et luy auaunt le tiendront. Et ſil ne vient deuant lan, et le iour paſſe, donq' ange le ſeignior al procheine Coūte ſuiant oue teſmoinage de ſa court, et face la pronuncier cel proces pur teſmoinage aū. Et per agard de ſa court, apres ceo Counte tenue, entra, et meynonera en

celes terres et tenementes, ſicome en ſon demeſne. Et ſi le tenant vient apres, & voile ces tenementes reauer, et tener ſicōe 
                     ••
                   fiſt deuāt, face gree al ſeigniour, ſicome ileſt auncientm̄t diſt.
               Neghe ſith ſelde? and neghe ſith geld? and fife pounde for the were, er hee become 
                     •
                  ealder.
               Aſcuns copies ad les primer verſes iſſint.
               Nigond ſith ſelde, and nigond ſith gelde.
               Ceſt cuſtōe ē touch per le voy, per maſter Frow. 21. H. 7. 15. et ꝑ luy penſe deſte bone, mes ſil ſoit a ceſt iour miſe en vre, quere plus.
               
                  25 Auxi ils claimēt q̄ nul hōe doit ſeremēt ſur liure fair', (per diſtreſſe, ne per poer de ſn̄r, ne de bayllife) encoūter ſa volunte ſās briefe le roy (ſinon pur fealty fere a ſon ſeigniour) meſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   per deuaunt Coroner, ou auter miniſter le roy, qui real power eyant de enquerer de treſpas fayt encounter la Corone noſtre ſeigniour le roy.
               26 Et claiment auxi, que cheſcun Kentoys puit auter eſſoiner en la Court le Roy, en Countie, en hūdreth, et en la court ſō ſeigniour, la ou eſſoigne giſt, auxibien de cō
                  mon ſuit, come de plee.
               
                  27 Ouſtr' ceo ils claiment per eſpecial fet le roy Henry, pier le roy Edvvarde, que de tenements que ſōt tenus en Gauelkind, ne ſoit priſe battayle; ne graund aſſiſe per xij. chiualers, ſicome ayllours eſt priſe en le realme, ceo eſt a ſauoir, la on tenaunt et le demaundant tenēt per Gauelkinde: mes en lieu de ces graūdes aſſiſes ſoyent pryſes Iures per xij. homes tenāts en Gauelkind, Iſſint que quater tenants de Gauelkind eliſent xij. tenants de Gauelkind Iurours.
               Et al chartre le roy, de ceſt eſpecyante eſt en la garde Sir Iohn de Norwood, le

iour S. Elphegh en Caūterbury, le an le roy Edward le fits le roy Henry 21.
               Ces ſont les vſages de Gauelkinde, et de Gauelkēdeys en Kēt, que fuerent deuaunt le conqueſt, et en le eonqueſt, et toutes houres ieſques a ore.
               Le fine del cuſtomes.
               Ayant iſſint fynish les cuſtomes cōe voꝰ veyes (frere Nich.) il demurt a ore deē mō
                  ſtre quel terres deyns ceſt paies de Kent ſōt del nature de Gauelkinde, et q̄ux nemy.
               Primerment pur c̄, il eſt deſſe intend, que touts les terres deyns cē shire, queux ſōt de aunc' ſocage tenure (come fuit dit auant) ſōt auxi del nature de

Gauelkind. Et l's terres tenus per aunciēt tenure de ſeruice de Chiualer, ſōt al common ley, et ne ſount departible ſolonque le order de ceſt cuſtome, excepta certen, queux eſteant tenus de aūcient temps pur ſeruic' de chiualer del Archieueſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   de Caū
                  terbury, ſont niēt obſtant departible, com̄ il poet appeare per le liuer 26. H. 8. 4. Et c̄ vient per reaſon d' vn graunt, fait per le roy Iohn, al Hubert l' Archieueſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , le tenour de qui eſt come enſue.
               Iohannes dei gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, Dux Normaniae, Aquitaniae et Comes Andegauē Archiepiſcopis, Epiſcopis,

Abbat', Comitibꝰ, Baronibꝰ, Iuſticiar', vicecom̄, Praepoſitis, miniſtris, et onibꝰ balliuis, et fidelibꝰ ſuis, ſalutem. Sciatis nos cōceſſiſſe, et praeſēti charta noſtra cō
                  firmaſſe ven̄abil' patri nr'o ac Chro. Huberto, Cātuar' Archiepiſcopo, et ſucceſſor' ſuis in ꝑpetuū, quod liceat cis terras, quas homines de feod eccleſiae Cātuar' tenent in Gauelkind, cōuertere in feod' militum. Et qd' idem Epiſcop. et ſucceſſores ſui, eandēin ōnibꝰ poteſtatē, et libertatem habeant in ꝑpetuū, in homines illos qui terras eaſdē ita in ſeoda militum conuerſas tenebunt, et in haeredes eorum

quam Archiepiſcopus habet, et ſucceſſores ſui poſt eum habebūt in alios milites de feodo eccleſiae Cantuar', et in haeredes. Et homines illi, et haeredes eorum, eandē et omnem libertat' habeant in perpetuū, quam alij milites de feod' eccleſiae Cantuar', et haeredes eorū habent. Ita tamen, qd' nihilominꝰ conſuetus redditꝰ denarior' reddatur integrè de terris ſuis, ſicut prius, p̄mia, aueragia et alia opera, q̄ fiebāt de terris ijſdem, conuertant' in reddit' denariorū aequiualentē. Et redditꝰ ille reddatur, ſicut alius redditꝰ denarior'. Quare volumus, et firmiter praecipimus, qd' quicquid

praedictus Archiepiſcopꝰ et ſucceſſores ſui poſt eum, de terris illis in feodo militū ſecundum praeſcriptam formā cōuertendis fecerint ra
                     •
                  ū in ꝑpetuū et ſtabile permaneat. Et ꝓhibemus ne quis contra factū ipſiꝰ Archiepiſcopi, vel ſucceſſor' ſuorum, in hac parte venire p̄ſumat. Teſte E. Elience, et S. Bathan, Epiſcopis. G. filio Pet', Comite Eſſex, Wilhelmo Mareſtallo, Comite de Pē
                  brock, Rob. de Harecourt, Garino fil' Geraldi, Petro de Stoke, Ric' de Reuerus, Ro. de Tateshal. Datū ꝑ man̄ S. Archid. Wilhelmi apud Rupem auriual iiij. die Maij▪ An. regni nr'i tertio.
               
                  Mes entant que il eſt diſputable, ſi ceſt charter del roy Iohn, ſoit de ſufficient vertue, pur chaunger le nature de Gauelkind terr', ou nemy, Et pur ceo que le certeyntie des terres iſſint conuert en fee de Chiualer, ne appiert en aſcū lieu (ſaue ſolement q̄ en le liuer de aide leuie en cē com̄ An. 20. E. 3. il eſt quater ou cin
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   temps note, que certein terres en Kēt, ſoūt tenus en fee de Chiualer, Per nouam licētiā Archiepiſcopi) ceſt ſufficera pur cē, et il ſerra proue, q' touts les terres de auncient tenure en ſeruice de chiualer, ſoūt ſubiect al ordinary courſe de diſcēt al commō ley.

Et ceo poet eſte ſufficientmēt fait et ꝑ les exp̄ſſe ꝑolx dū note en 9. H. 3. abridge per maſter Br. ti. Cuſtōes 57. et en maſter Fitz. ti. Preſcription 63. Et per le opinion del Iuſtices 26. H. 8. 4. come auxi par pleine recital en le act de parliamēt fait 31. H. 8. ca. 3. per que ſtat', les poſſeſſiōs de certein gentelhōes la fuerount deliū de ceſt cuſtomary diſcēt, et incorporate a le common ley, car (enter auters) en ceſt act il eſt dit. Qui de ceſt temps en auaunt, tiels lour terres ſerra change del le dit cuſtome, et dyſcendera come terres all commen leye, et ſicome

aut's t'res eſteāt en le dit coūty d' kent, q̄ux ne vn
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   
                  
                     •
                  ueronttenus per ſeruice de Socage, mes touts temps ont eſte tenus ꝑ ſeruice de chiual', diſcende. Per q̄ux parolx, il eſt euident, q̄ les feaſors de ceſt eſtat' entendount touts terres tenus per ſeruice de chiul', dēe de lour ꝓper nature, diſcendable ſolon
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   le cōon ley, et q' Socage tenure fuit ſolem̄t le ſubject, in que ceſt nr' cuſtōe de Gauelkind diſcent preuaile, et tient lieu.
               Mes qūt mencion ē cy fait de Socage, et fee de chiual', il doet touts foits eſte entēd vn tenure longe puis, et d' aūcient temps cō
                  tinue, et neī a ore nouelm̄t, oudarrainem̄t

creat, car iſſint il poit happen auterm̄t, q'eſt deuant report. Come pur exāple. Si terr' aū
                  cientm̄t tenus per ſeruice de chiualrie, viēt al maines le roigne, q' ap̄s done ceo arrere al vn comō perſon, dēe tenus de ſa manor de Eaſt Grenevvich en Socage, cēt're (nient obſtant le alterac' del ten
                     •
                  r') demurt diſcen dable al eygnee fites ſolem̄t, cōe il ſuit de
                  
                     ••
                  t cōe auxi, en m̄ le man̄ ſi t'res de aūciēt Socage ſeruice viēt al corone 
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  eliūar rere, de
                     ••••
                  s ou del Roine en 
                     〈…〉
                  te, ou ꝑ ſeruice de 
                     •
                  hiual' de aſc' man̄, i
                     •
                   doit diſcēd accord' al cuſtōe, niēt obſtāt q̄ le tenure ſoit alt', et ſi cē ſoit veray

en le graunte de le Roine m̄: don
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   mult meines poit le Archieueqſue per vn nouel creatyon de tenure, faire al ſes tenants aſc̄ alteratiō de ceſt viele cuſtome et man̄. Car ſicome le pleadinge ē, qd't' rae praed' ſūt de tenura et natura de Gauelkind, iſſint l' verity eſt, q̄ le p̄ſent ten̄ ſolemēt ne guide le diſcēt mes que le tenure et le nature enſemble, gouerne ceo. Et pur ceo, ſicōe ſur lun part le cuſtome ne poit attach, ou aū lieu en c' que ne fuit pas deuāt en nature ſubiect al cuſtōe, cē a dir' accuſtomablemēt depart: Iſſint ſur lauter part, le practiſe de le cuſtome, longe temps

continue, ne poet eſte interupt per vn nude alteration de le tenur' cōe il fuit tenꝰ per les Iuſtices, An. 4. & 5. P. et M. cōe Iudge Daliſō ad relin
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ē report. Et auxi cōe il appiert ꝑ le liū 26. H. 8. 4. ou il eſt dit, q'ſi vn hōe ſſī de Gauelkind t're tenus en ſocage, fait vn dōe en taile et create vn tenure en ſeruice de chiualer, que vnc' ceſt terre doyt diſcēd ſolon
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   le cuſtome, ſicome il fuit deuant le chaunge de le tenure.
               Ouſtre ceo, ſicōe le chaunge de le tenure ne poet p̄uaile encoū
                  ter cē cuftōe: Iſſint le contin̄ dun cōtrary vſage, ne poet alter ceſt p̄ſcripc'. Car il ē tenꝰ 16. E. 3. en Fitzherb.

ti Preſcription 52. q' nient obſtāt le eigne fits ſolem̄t ad (et c'per diūs diſcents enſēble) ent' en Gauelkind t're, et occupie c̄ſ
                     •
                  s aſc̄ cōtradice' de les puignes freres, que vnc'le terre remainera deſte part perenter eux, qn̄t ils voille
                     •
                   faire lour claime. Encont' quel aſſertion, ceo que eſt dit 10. H. 3. in Fitz. ti. Preſcription 64. noſment de le iſſue iſſint priſe. Si terra illa fuit ꝑtita necne, nē graūd ment al purpoſe. Car nient obſtant il ſoit iſſint, q' le terre ne fuit vn
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   part en fait, vnc̄ ſil demurt partible en nature, il poit eſte pt a quel temps occaſion ſerra miniſter. Et pur ceo, en le forme

de pleading vſe a ceſt iour (Quod terra illa a toto t
                     •
                  pore &c, partibilis fuit, et partita) il eſt pleinment priſe, q̄ le parol (partibilis) ſolem̄t eſt d' ſubſtāce, et q' le parol (partita) neſt forſque parol de forme, et nemy material, ou traūſable, Verament iſſint inſeperable eſt ceſt cuſtome de le terre en q' il obtaine, que vn cōtrary diſcent (cōtinue en le caſe d'l Corone m̄) ne poet hinder, meſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   q' (ap̄s tiel temps que le terre reſortera arrere al vn common parſon) le former viel cuſtome gouernera ceo. Come ſi terres de. Gauelkinde nature vient al mains le Roign̄, per purchaſe,

ou ꝑ Eſchete cōe tenus de ſa manner de Dale, ore ap̄s ſa mort, touts ſes fits enheritera, et deuidera eux. Mes ſils veigne a luy per forfaiture ē treaſon, ou per done en parliament, iſſint que ſa grace eſt ſeiſie del eux in iure Coronae, donques ſa eigne fites ſolement (q' ſerr' roy apres luy) auera eux, en quel caſe, nient obſtant ceux terres q̄ux le eigne fites (eſteant roy) ad poſſeſſe, viēt al ſon eigne fits apres luy (eſteant roy auxi) et iſſint de vn al auter per ſundrey dyſcents, vncore loppinion de Sir Anthony Brovvne fuit 7. Eli. que ſi a aſcū temps apres, ceux terres ſont

graunt al vn cōmon perſon, ils reuertera a lour primer nature de Gauelkind, et eē partible enter ſes heyres males, nient obſtant q̄ ils ad curre vn contrary courſe, en diuers les diſcēts de les royes deuaunt. Mes mult meines poet le vnitie de poſſeſſiō en le ſeignior, fruſtrate le cuſtome de Gauelkinde diſcent come il poet appeare. 14. H. 4. en le lōge Recordare, abridge ꝑ M. Brooke tit' Auowry. 46. et ti. Cuſtomes. 19.
               Ore ſequitur deſte parl' come longe ceſt cuſtome extende luy meſme deins ceſt noſtre paies de kent &c.
               Il eſt communemēt priſe, q̄ le cuſtome de

Gauelkind eſt general, et extēd luy meſm̄ per tout l' entier coū
                  tie, en toutes terres ſubiect per auncyent tenure al ceo, tiels lieus ſolement except, ou il eſt alter per act de parliamēt. Et pur ceo en 5. E. 4. 18. et 14. H. 4. 8. il eſt dit que le cuſtome de Gauelkinde eſt (cōe) vn common ley en Kent. Et le liuer 22. Edwardi quarti 19. affirme que en demā
                  dant Gauelkind t're, vn home ne beſoign̄ de preſcribe en certeine, et de monſtre que le ville, borowe, ou Citie, ou les terres ſount, eſt vn auncient ville, borowe, ou Cytie, et que le cuſtome ad eſte la

(temps hors de memorie) que les terres deins meſme vill', borovve, ou Cytie doyt diſcende a touts les heires males &c. Mes ceo eſt ſufficient de monſtre le cuſtōe a large et dedire, que le terre giſt en Kent, et que toutes les terres la ſount del nature de Gauelkinde. Car vn briefe de Partycion de terres en Gauelkinde (Mounſier Littleton di
                     •
                  ) ſerra cy general, ſicome les terres fuerount al common ley, nyent obſtant le declaration doyt ſpecyalmēt de conteine mention de le cuſtom̄ del pais. Ceſt vniuerſalitie cō
                  ſider, et auxi le ſtrict bande (per que le

cuſtom̄ eſt cy inſe perably vnite al le terre, que en man̄ nul choſe forſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   vn act de parliament poet cleremēt diſſeuer eux (il ſequitur, que nullieu, Citie, ville, ou borowe, deins ceſt shire, poet eſte exempt d' cē cuſtome nyent obſtant c̄ nad a aſcū temps eſte la miſe en vre, nyent plus q' le eigne fits (en le caſe deuaunt) poet pur ſemble reaſon p̄ſcribe encoūter ſes punees freres &c.
               Ceſt taunt eſteant parle touchaunt le nome, Tenure, Nature, generalitie, et order de Gauelkind: il ſerra ore monſtre de q̄ qualitie les rents, remaynders, actions,

et tyels auters choſes (de q' aſcūs ſoūt iſſuāt hors de ceux t'res, aſcuns ſōt ānex al eux, et aſcūs ſoūt rayſe per reaſō de eux) ſerra. Et de eux aſcuns enſuera le nature del terre, et auters retaynera m̄ le courſe q' commōley ad appoint. Et pur c̄ ſi vn rent ſoyt graunt en fee hors de Gauelkind terre, il diſcēdra a touts ſes males ſicōe le terre m̄ ferra come appiert en 14. H. 8. 5. 26. H. 8. 4. et 4. E. 3,
               Mes ſi 2. iointenāts d't'res en Gauelkind graūt vn rent charge hors de ceo terre al I. S. et a ſes heires, et I. S. moruſt ayant iſſue deux fites, ceſt rent ne diſcendera al ambydeux les fits

del I. S. mes al heire al cōmon ley, pur c̄ q̄ le cuſtōe eſt en ſuſpence durant le iointur', per le opinion de le droit woorshipful Chriſtopher Yeluerton Armiger, al ſon lecture en Grayes Inne en lent Anno. 1573.
               Iſſint ſi vn tenauncy ſoit d' Gauelkind nature, vnc' le rent ſeruice ꝑ que il eſt tenus poet diſcēd accordāt al cōmō ley. Cōe Ald' & Chart' en 7. E. 3. fueront de opinion.
               Si vn rem̄ de terr' en Gauelkind ſoit tail' al heires males, ils touts enſembl' inheritront, come Fitzherbert et Norwich penſoūt 26. H. 8. 4. Mes c̄ eſt deē intēd dun diſcēt ſolement, car ſi terres de

Gauelkynde nature ſoyt leaſe pur vie, le remaynder al droyt heires de I. Style que ad iſſue quater fits et moruſt, et apres le leſſee pur vy moruſt, or' le eignee fits ſolemēt de Iohn Style auera ceſt terre, car il eſt droyt heire, et ceo eſt vn bon noſm̄ de purchaſe. 37. H. 8. en Mounſier Brooke ti. Done et Remaynder 42. Mes ſi les terres ount eſte done al Iohn Stile pur vie, le rem̄ al ſon procheine heire male, ceſt ad eē vn eſtate taile en Ioh. Style meſme, et don
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   le terre doyt auer diſcend al toutes ſes fits, entant que en cē caſe les parolx (prochein heire male) ne ſont vn

noſme d' purch'. Mes il fuit graūdm̄t doubt 3. et 4. P. & M. (come Iuſtice Daliſon ad report) ſrvn remainder ſoit deuiſe ꝑ teſtamēt (ꝓximo haeredi maſculo) ſi en ceſt caſe le eigne frere ſolement auera ceo, en taunt q̄ (en lentendement d'l ley, que eſt vn Iudge ſur touts cuſtomes) il eſt le ꝓch' heir' male, et pur ceo quere d' c̄.
               Concernaunt vouchers, il appiert 11. E. 3. que touts les heires en Gauelkinde ſerra vouch pur le garrantie d'lour aunceſtour et nemy le eigne ſolement. Mes le opinion de mounſyer Littleton libro. 3. cap. 13. et del Iuſtices. 22. E. 4. eſt clere que le eigne

fites ſolem̄t ſerra rebut, ou barre ꝑ le garranty de le aunceſtor, briefement, le eigne fits ſolement ent' pur le breach dun condition. Mes les auters de les freres ſerr'ioine oue luy en ſuiant vn br'de Attaint pur vn faux verdit, ou Error, pur reuerſer vn erronious Iudgem̄t. Et ils touts ſerront charge pur le debt de lour aunceſtor, ſi iſ
                     •
                  int ſoit que ils touts ont aſſets en lour maines. Mes ſi le eigne tant ſolem̄t ad aſſets demurrant, et les auters aūt alyen lour parts, don
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   il ſolem̄t ſerra charge, ſolōque loppinion del liuer 11. E. 3. &c. Et ceſt tant pur ceſt part ſufficera.
               Ore vn vel deux

parols de anters choſes confuſedment, vncore appertainant al cel nient obſtant non tout cy neceſſary pur vr'e purpoſe dēe conus cōe ceux deuant dit. Il appiert en vneſcript report alarge d' 16. E. 2. que eſt auxy en part abridge ꝑ M. Fitzherb. titulo Preſcription, que il fuyt trie per verdict, q̄ nul hōe doit aū common en t'res d'Gauelkind, mes le cōtrary eſt bn̄ conus a ceſt iour en ceo en diuers lieus, m̄ le liuer dit, q' le vſage de Gauelkind eſt, q' vn home poyt loyalment enchaſe, ou chaſe hors en la haut chimen a lour aduenture, les auers de aſcun

auter perſon que il trouera dammage feaſauntes en ſes terres, et que il neſt compellable de impounde eux, q̄l choſe ē practiſe a ceſtiour.
               Le parliament 15. Henrici 6. cap. 3. vo▪ lens de amplifier les priuiledges de Gauelkynde graunta a les tenauntes de ceo terre exemption en Attaints, en tiel ſort cōe les inhabitauntes de auncient demeſne & les cinqueports deuāt ad, Mes deins iij. ās apres ſur complaint de aſcuns del paies queux enfourme le parlyament meaſon que il ne fuyt paſſe en lentier countye 30. ou 40 perſons, que

tiental value de xx. li. terre hors de Gauelkind q'en defaut de auters, et ꝑ reaſon de tiel exemption, fueront continualm̄t mo leſt per returnes en attaints, cē act fuit tout repeale.
               Le ſtatute 14. H. 8. cap. 6. done libertie a cheſc' hōe (ayāt haut chimin per ſes terres en le wealde que eſt vvorne profound, et incōmodious pur paſſage (pur miſe hors vn aut'voy, en aſcun tiel aut'lieu de ſa terr', cōe ſerr'penſe conuenient ꝑ le vieu de deux Iuſtices de le peace, et xij. auters homes de vviſdome & dyſcretion.
               Le general ley fait 35. H. 8. 17. pur le

preſeruation de Copeiſes boyes per tout le Realme fait plaine exceptyon de toutes boies deins cē wealde ſinon il ſoyt de tiels queux ſount cōmon. Et iſſint vn fine de cē matter, ſauant que ieo voile faire maſter Lit. reſpons as tiels q̄ voylent demaunde, quel reaſon ceſt cuſtōe de Gauelkind diſcent ad iſſint pur deuide terre ent'touts les males cō
                  tra al manner de tout le Realme aylours: Les punees fites (dit il) ſount auxi graund gentelhomes, come le eignee, et ils (eſteants cy chare a lour common aunceſtour, de que ils claime) ount taunt le plus beeſoigne del ayde lour

amies come (per reaſon de lour minorytie) ils ſont meins able q̄ le eigne frere pur aider lour m̄s &c.
            
            
               Gelde.
               GEld, hoc eſt quiet' eſſe de conſuetudinibus ſeruilibus que quondā dare conſueuerūt et ad huc dant', ſic hornegelde et hijs ſimilibus.
            
            
               Grithbrech.
               GRithbrech, hoc eſt pax dn̄i regis fracta, quia (Grith) angl'pax latine.
            
            
               Hangewite.
               HAngwite, hoc ē quietum eſſe de latrone ſuſpenſo ſine iudicio, velextra cuſtodiā veſtram euaſo.
            
            
               
               Hariot.
               HAriot eſt en deux ſortes, lun hariot cuſtome, lauter hariot ſeruice.
               Hariot ſeruice (aſcuns diount) eſt touts foytes expreſſe en le graunt dun home, ou en ſon fait que il tient ꝑ tiel ſeruice pur paier hariot al temps de ſon mort. Et cē hariot eſt payable apres le mort de le tenaunt en fee ſimple.
               Hariot Cuſtome, eſt lou hariots ount eſte paies tēps hors de memorie per cuſtom̄. Et ceo poet eſte apres le mort de tenaunt pur vy &c. mes a parler de ceo generalment.
               Hariot eſt le meliour beaſt (ſoyt il Chiual,

Boef, ou vach) q' l' tenant ad al temps de ſō mort. Et poet eſte ou ſeiſi, ou vn diſtreſſe priſe pur ceo, ſoyt il hariot ſeruic', ou hariot cuſtome al vſe del ſn̄r de que le tenāt tyent, per ſon bailife, ou auter offycer de ſon maner.
               Mes de droit le ſeigniour, ne ſō officer ne doet prender hariot, deuant que il ſoit preſent al ꝓcheine court tenus que le tenāt eſt mort, et que tiel beaſt eſt due al ſn̄r pur ſon hariot.
            
            
               Haybote, ou Hedgebote.
               HAybote, ou Hedgbote, eſt neceſſarie ſtuffe pur fair'etamēd' hayes, q̄ leſſee pur ās, ou pur vy, de cōmon

droit poet prend' ſur le terre a luy leſſe, nyent obſtant il ne ſoyt expreſſe en ſō leas, et nient obſtāt que il ſoit vn leaſe ꝑ parols ſaūs eſcript.
               Haybote auxi poet eſte priſe pur neceſſarye ſtuffe pur fayre Rakes, forkes & tiels ſemblables inſtrum̄ts oue q̄ux hōes vſount en Sūmer d'tedder et faire fein̄. Et iſſint vn leſſee pur ans priſt c', et fuit al luy allovve ꝑ ſon leſſour, le rather cōe ieo ſupp̄, pur c' q̄ tiels inſtrum̄ts ſōt cō
                  munem̄t fayt de ſlender ſubboys, q̄ per le cōmon ley leſſee pur ās poet ſuccid' & p̄nder cōe eſt auantdit.
            
            
               Hidage.
               HIdage, hoc eſt

quietū eſſe ſi dn̄s Rex talliauerit totam terrā per hidas.
               Nota que vn hide de t're, ē vn entier plowland. Et ceſt kinde de taxing per hides fuit mult vſe en viel tēps, cybn̄ pur ꝓuiſion de armour, cōe paiments de argent, et c̄principalm̄t, en les iours del roye Etheldred (vn roy en cē pais deuant le conqueſt (q̄ en l' an de Criſt 1006. qn̄t les Danes priſt lād as Sād wich en Kēt, taxe tout ſō t're ꝑ hides en ceſt man̄. Que cheſc̄ 310. hides d' t'r' doiēt troū vn nyefe furnish, et cheſ
                     •
                  ' 8. hides, doient troū vn iack & vn ſal let, pur le defence del Realme.
            
            
               Hotchpot.
               HOtchpot, ē vn med ling, ou mixing ensembl',

et vn partie' de t'res dōe en frākmar', oueſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   aut's terres en fee ſimple diſcendus. Cōe pu
                     •
                   example, vn hōe ſſi
                     •
                   de 30. acres d' terre en fee ſimple, ad iſſu ij. files, et done oueſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   vn de ſes files al vn hōe que luy marie x. acres d' ceo terre en frankmariage, et moruſt ſeiſie de les auters xx. acres: Ore ſi el que eſt iſſint marie voil' auer aſcun part de les xx. acres de que ſon pier moruſt ſeiſie: El doyt miſe ſa t'res dōe en frankmariage, en hotchpot, ceſt adire, el doit refuſer cē don̄ en frankmaryage, et ſuffer le terre deſte commixt, et mingle enſemble oueſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   l' auter terre de q̄ ſon pier

moruſt ſeiſie, iſſint q̄ vn equal deuiſiō poet eſte fait de lentiert ꝑēter luy et ſa ſoer. Et iſſint pur ſa x. acres, el auera xv. autermēt ſa ſoer voet auer les xx. acres, de q̄ lour pier moruſt ſeiſi.
            
            
               Homeſoken▪
               
               HOmeſokē (ou hāe ſoken) hoc ē quietum eſſe de amerciament', d' ingreſſu hoſpiciorū violent' et ſine licentia, et contra pacē dn̄i regis. Et qd' teneatis placita d' huiuſmodi trāſgreſſione facta in curia veſtra, et in terra veſtra.
            
            
               Homicide ou manſlaughter.
               HOmicide, ou manſlaughter, eſt le occid' dū hōe feloniouſment, ſauns malyce

prepence.
               Il eſt auxi define iſſint, homicidium eſt hominis occiſio, ab homine facta, ſi au
                     •
                  ē a cane, boue, vel alia re, non dicitur ꝓprie homicidium, dicitur homicidium ab homine, et caedo quaſi hominis caedium.
            
            
               Hornegelde.
               HOrnegelde, hoc ē quietum eſſe de quadam cōſuetudine exacta per tallage per totāterr', ſicut de qua cun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   beſtia cornuta.
            
            
               Houſebote.
               HOuſebote eſt neceſſary tymber, q̄ leſſee pur ans, ou pur vie, de cōmō dr't poet prend' ſur le terre, pur repaire les meaſōs ſur m̄ l' t're a luy leſſa, niēt obſtāt il ne ſoit exp̄ſſe

en le leaſe, et niēt obſtāt il ſoyt vn leas per parolx ſaūs fait: Mes ſil p̄ſt pluis q̄ beſoign̄, il poet eſte punish per vn action de waſt.
            
            
               Hundred.
               HVndreds fuerount deuiſe per Alfred le roy, apres que il ad deuide lentier Realm̄ en certeine partes ou Sections, le quel d'le Saxon parol Scynan, ſignifiant de ſcinder, il terme Shires, ou (ſicome nous vncore ꝑle) Shares, et portiōs, Ceux Shires il auxi enfringe en petytes partes, de q̄ux aſcuns fuer' apples Lathes de le parol Ielapian, que eſt, de aſſēbler enſē
                  ble, auters Tithings, iſſint noſm̄, pur c̄ q̄ la fuer' en cheſc' de eux

al number de x. ꝑſons de que cheſcun fuit ſuertie, et pledge pur auters bone behauyour. Auters hundreds pur ceo q̄ ils containe iuriſdictiō ſur vn 100 hōes, ou pledges demurrant ꝑaduenture en 2. ou 3. ou plꝰ paroches, borowes, ou villes, eſteant et adioinants nient meins ꝓchein enſemble, en le quel il appoint adminiſtrac' de Iuſtice deē exerciſe ſeueralment enter eux de m̄ le hū
                  dred, et nemy que lun irra hors▪ diſordermēt en lauter hundred, lath, ou tithing, en q̄ il ne demurt. Ceux hū dreds continue al ceſt iour en force, nyent obſtant non en tout al m̄ le purpoſe pur q̄
                  
al primerils fuerount ordeine vncore a ore mult neceſſary, et en temps de peace pur bon ord' de gouernment dyuers voyes, et auxi en guerre pur certeyntie de leuying de homes, come auterment pur le plus ſpedye collections de payments graunt en parliam̄t al les Royes, et roignes d'cē realm̄.
            
            
               Hundredum.
               HVndredū, hoc eſt quietum eſſe d' denarijs vel cōſuetudinibus faciendis prepoſitis et hūdredarijs.
            
            
               Ideot.
               IDeot eſt celuy que eſt vn ſot naturall de ſa neyſture, et ne ſcauoit de accompter ou number xx. d'.

ne poyt noſmer ſon pere ou mere, ne d'q̄l age il meſme eſt, ou tiel ſēblable playne et cōmon choſes, iſſint q' il appiert q' il nad aſcū man̄ d' intēdm̄t d'reaſō ne goūnement de luy 
                     •
                  , q'l eſt pur ſō ꝓſct, ou diſprofet &c. Mes ſil adtant entelligence que il poit lier, ou apprender de lier per inſtruction et information de auters, ou poet meaſure vn vlme d' drape, ou noſ me les iours en le ſemaine, ou engend'vn enfaunt, fites ou file, ou tiel ſēblable per q' il poit appere, q il ad aſc' lumen de reaſon: don
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   tiel nē Ideot na turalment.
            
            
               Illoyal aſſemblie.
               
                  ILloyal aſſemblie, eſt lou people eux aſſēble inſimul pur faire illoyal choſe encounter le peace, nient obſtaunt que ils ne execute lour purpoſe en fait.
            
            
               Imparlance.
               IMparlance, eſt quāt vn action de dette, treſpas, ou tiels ſemblables, eſt port ēuers vn home, et apres q' le pleintife ad count ou declare, le defendant pria le court que il poit auer temps de miſe eins ſon reſpons al auter iour en meſme le terme, ou en le procheine terme, ceſt ſtaye de reſpons eſt appel imparlance.
            
            
               
               Impriſonment.
               IMpriſōment nē auter choſe forſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   le reſtraynt del libertie dun home, ſo it ceo en le ouert champ ou en le Cippes▪ ou Cage en les eſtrets, ou en le ꝓper meaſon dun hōe, cybyen come en le cōmon gaole. Et en touts ceux lieus, le 
                     •
                  
                  tie iſſint reſtraint eſt dit deſte vn priſon̄ cy longement cōe il nad ſon lybertie frankem̄t de ire a touts tēps lou il voit, ſans baile, mainpriſe, ou aut'aucthoritie.
            
            
               Infangethefe.
               INfāgthefe, hoc ē qd' latrones capti in dn̄ico vel in feod' vr'o

de latro cinijs cōuicti,' in curia veſtra iudicet'
            
            
               Imformation.
               INformation pur le Roine ē c̄ q̄ pur vn comō ꝑſō ē appel vn declarac', et nē toutes foites fait directment per le Roigne, ou ſa atturney mes per vn aut' hōe, Qui tam pro dn̄a regina quā pro ſe ipſo ſequitur, ſur le breach de aſcun penall ley ou ſtatute, en que vn penalty eſt done al partie q' voet ſuer pur ceo, mes nul acc' de det pur recoū ceo, don
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   il doit eſte evve per Informatyon.
            
            
               Iointure.
               IOynture eſt vn eſtate et aſſurance fait al vn feme en conſiderac'de

mariage, pur terme de ſa vie, ou auterment, ſoitil deuant ou apres le mariage. Et ſi ſoit apres le mariage, don
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   el poit a ſon libertie apres le mort de ſō barō refuſer de prend' ou auer les terres iſſint aſſure pur ſa iointure, et dd' ſa dower al le comen ley.
               Mes ſil ſoit fait deuaunt mariage don
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   el ne poit refuſer tiel Iointure, ne auer dower accord' al comon ley, ſinon que quant el port ſa briefe de dovver, le defendant pleade tiel pleque ne voile luy barrer de ſa dovver, donques el ſerra endovve: ſicome il dyten barre, que ſa baron ne fuit

ſeiſie de tiel eſtate de quel el doit eſte endovve, ou aſc'tiel ple, et ne mr' que el ad vn iointur'fait &c. et pur c̄ dd'iudgem̄t del acc' ou iudgem̄t ſi el ſerra auxi endowe, ou aſcū tiel ſēblabl ple &c. Et ceo fuit loppinion de le droit vvorshipfull maſter Brograue al ſō lecture en Graies Inn en Sōmer An̄ 1576. 18. Elizabeth, ſur vn braunch del ſtat' fait Anno 27. H. 8. cap. 10. concernant Ioyntures et dovvers.
               Et per luy de ceux choſes de q' vn feme poit eſte endovve, el poit aū vn ioynture, cōe de meins, veſturā t'rae, boies, villes, Iles, meadowes, et tiels ſē
                  blables. Item dun aduowson,

dun reūſion depēdāt ſur vn eſtate pur vie, dū Windmil, vn haut chamber, vn rectorie et tiels aut's, et ils ſōt appels ten̄ts, Item dun villen, ca
                     •
                   il eſt hereditamēt. Et de touts ceux ꝓfit poet vener al fem̄. Mes de ceux choſes de q' nul ꝓfit voet ven̄, mes plꝰ toft vn charge, vn ioint' ne poet cē fait.
            
            
               Larceny.
               LArceny eſt vn deceiptful pryſel des biens dun auter hom̄, mes nemy de ſō perſon, oue vn ment de eux embleer encounter ſō volunt que biens ils fuerount.
               Et larceny eſt en deux ſortes, lun iſſint appel ſimplement, et lauter petite larceny.
               
                  Le primer eſt lou le choſe emblee exceda le value de xij. d. et ceo eſt felony.
               Le auter (que eſt appel petit larceny) eſt lou le choſe emblee, ne exceda le value de xij. d. et c' neſt felony.
            
            
               Laſtage.
               LAſtage, hoc eſt qui etum eſſe de quadam cōſuetudine exacta in nundinis et mercatis pro rebus cariandis vbi homo vult.
            
            
               Leſſor et leſſee.
               LEſſor ē celuy que leſſe terres, ou tenements al auter pur terme de vie, ans, ou al volunt, et celuy a que le leaſe eſt fait, eſt appel leſſee.
            
            
               
               Leuant & couchant.
               LEuāt & Couchāt eſt dit, quant les beaſts, o
                     •
                   cattel dū eſtraūger ſōt venu en le t're dū auter hōe, et la oūt remain vn certen bone ſpace de temps, cy long q̄ ils oūt bien manger, et auxi eux meſmes reſt.
            
            
               Ley gager.
               LEy gager eſt quāt vn acc' ē port vers vn ſās eſpecialty mr'e, ou auter matter d'recorde: cōe action de dette ſur vn contract, ou detinue, donques le defendaunt puyt gage ſaley ſil voile. s. iurer ſur vn lyuer, et certeyne perſones oueſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   luy
                     •
                  , q̄ il doyt riens al plaintife en le maner & fourme cōe il ad declare: mes

en action d'det ſur vn leas pur terme dans, ou ſur arrerages de accompt deuaunt auditours aſſigne, home ne gagera ſa ley. Mes quaunt vn gagera ſa ley, il ameſnera oueſque luy vj. viij. ou xij. de ces vicines, cōe le court luy aſſignera de iurer oueſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   luy, & ſi al iour aſſigne, il faut de ſa ley, don
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   il ſerra condempne.
            
            
               Liuerie de ſeiſin.
               LIuery de ſeiſin, ē vn ceremony vſe en cō
                  ueyance de terres ou tenements lou vn eſtate en fee ſimple, fee tayle, ou vn franktenement paſſera. Et il eſt vn teſmoigne d'le voluntarie departing de tout ceo que il que

fait le liuerie ad en le choſe de que lyuerie eſt fayt: Et le reſceyt del liuerie eſt vn voluntarie acceptaunce par le auter partie, de tout ceo de que lauter ad luy diſmiſſe. Et fuit inuent come vn ouert et notorious choſe, per meanes de que le commō people poyent auer intellygence de paſſing ou alteration de eſtates de hōe al home, q̄ per ceo ils poyent eſtre le meliour able pur trier en que le droit et poſſeſſion de terres et tenements fueront ſils doyent eſte impanell et iuries, ou auterment ount a faire cō
                  cernant ceo.
               Le common maner

de liuery de ſeiſin, eſt en ceſt ſort fayt: Si il ſoit en le ouert chāpe ou nē edifices ou mea ſon, donques vn que poet lyer priſt le fayt en ſō mayne, ſi leſtate paſſera per fayt, et declare al eux que la ſount, le cauſe d' lour venir la enſemble, et donques ouertment lia le fayt en Englois, et apres que il ē ſeale, le partie que eſt a departer oue le terre, pryſt le fayt en ſes maynes enſemble oueſque vn clodde del terre, et vn twigge ou bovve, ſil y ad aſcun la, etitout ceo il deliuer al auter partie, en le noſme de poſſeſſyon ou ſeiſin accordāt al fourme et effect d'l fayt, que deuant eux

fuit la lie. Mes ſil ſoyt vn habitation ou edifice ſur le terre, donques ceo eſt fayt la al le doore del ceo nul eſteant relinquishe a ceſt temps deins le meaſon, et le partie deliuer tout les auātdits enſemble oueſque le annuel del doore en le noſme de ſeyſin ou poſſeſſyon, et il que receyua le lyuerie entra prymes ſole et shotta le doore, et preſentmēt ouert ceo, et leſſa eux eyns &c. Sil ſoyt dun meaſon a que eſt nul terre, le liuerie ē fayt et poſſeſſion priſe per le deliuery del annuel del doore et fayt ſolement. Et ou il eſt ſauns fayt de terres ou tenemēts, la le

partie declare per parol deuaūt teſmoign̄, leſtate q' il entend de depart oue, et donques deliuer ſeiſin ou poſſeſſion, en maner come eſt auantdit, Et iſſint le terre ou tenement paſſera ▪cybyen lou il nad fayt, come per fait, et ceo ꝑ force del liuerie de ſeyſin: Il fuit agree en Graies Inne per l' droit worshipfull M. Snagge, al ſō lecture la en Sō
                  mer Anno 1574. que ſi vn feoffour delyuer le fayt en viewe del terre, en noſme de ſeyſin, que il eſt bon, pur ceo que il ad vn poſſeſſion en luy meſme. Mes auterment eſt dun atturne, car il doyt aler al terre, et

pryſe poſſeſſion luy meſme, deuaunt que il poet doner poſſeſſion al auter, accordant al parolx de ſon letter &c. Et lou liuery de ſeiſin eſt per le viewe, ſile feoffee ne entra pas puis &c. nul choſe paſſa, caril doyt enter en fait.
            
            
               Lotherwite.
               LOtherwite, hoc eſt quod capiatis emē
                  das ab ipſo qui corrūpit natiuam veſtram ſine licentia veſtra.
            
            
               Mahim ou Maime.
               MAhim eſt lou aſcun member eſt damnifie ou tolle, per que le partie iſſint dā
                  nifie eſt fait imperfect a cōbatier. Cōe ſi vn oſſe ſoit priſe hors del

teſt: ou vn oſſe ſoyt debruſe en aſcun auter part del corps, ou vn pee, ou maine, ou digit, ou ioint dū pee, ou aſcū member ſoyt ſcyer: ou per aſcun plague, les nerues ſōt fayt de shrinker, ou auter member, ou les digits fait curue, ou ſi vn oyl' ſoit miſe hors, ou les auteriour dētes debruſe, ou aſcun auter choſe en le corps dū hōe, ꝑ reaſō de q̄ il eſt fait le meines able pur defender luy m̄.
               Mes l' ſcier dū orail, ou neſe, ou lenfreind' del dents moliers, ou tiels ſēblables, nē aſcū maihem, pur c̄ q̄il eſt pluis vn deformity d' l'corps, q̄ vn defect d'l ſtrēgth. Et ſi les iuſtic' ſōt en doubt ſi le dam̄ ſoyt vn mayhem ou

nemy, ils vſe, et voylent de lour graunde diſcrec' prend' le aide et opinion de aſcun erudite Surgeon pur conſid' de c' deuāt q' ils determin̄ ſur le cas.
            
            
               Mainpriſe.
               MAinpriſe eſt quant vn hōe eſt arreſt ꝑ Capias, don
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   les Iudges poiēt deliuer ſon corps a certaine hōes pur garder, et de luy ameſn̄ deuāt eux a c̄
                  taine iour, et ceux ſōt appels mainpernors, & ſi le partye ne appere al iour aſſigne, le mainpernors ſerront amercies.
            
            
               Mannour.
               MAnour, ē vn choſe compound de diūs choſes, cōe dū meaſō
                  
terre arrable, paſture, pree, boyes, rent, auowſon, court baron, et tiel ſēblable fōt vn man̄, et ceo doit eſte ꝑ auncient cōtinuāce de tēps, cuius cōtrariū memor' hominū non exiſtit, car a ceſt iour vn man̄ ne poit eē fait pur ceo q̄ vn court ba ron ne poet eē fait a ore, et vn man̄ ne poit ēe ſās vn court barō et ſuters, ou frākt', deux almeins, car ſi touts les frankt' pret' vn eſcheate al le ſn̄r, ou ſil purchaſe tout, p̄t' vn, la ſon man̄ ē ale, pur c' que il ne poit eſte vn man̄ ſans vn court baron (cōe auantdit▪) & vn court ne poit eſte tenus mes deuant ſuters, et nemy deuāt vn ſut', et ideo lou forſq̄
                  
vn franktenemēt, ou franktenant eſt, la ne poet eſte vn manner.
            
            
               Manumiſſion.
               MAnumiſſion eſt en deux ſortes, le vn ē vn manumiſſion explicita, lauter vn manumiſſion implicita.
               Manumiſſion explicita, eſt quant le ſeignior fait vn fait al ſon villein pur luy enfrā
                  cheſer per ceſt parol manumittere, quod idem eſt quod extra manū, vel extra poteſtatē alteriꝰ ponere.
               Le maner de Manumitting ou enfrā
                  cheſing en tēps paſſe plus vſualmēt fuit iſiſſint. Le ſeign your (en 
                     •
                  ſence de ſes vicines) pryſt le villeine ꝑ l' teſt diſāt, Ieo voile

que ceſt home ſoyt franke, et oue c' il luy miſe auant hors de ſes maines, et per c' il fuit franke ſans aſc' pluis faire. Manumiſſiō implicita ſans ceſt parol (Manumittere) ē qn̄t le ſn̄r fait vn obligac' a ſō villen a paiera luy mony al vn c̄ten iour, ou luy ſue, ou il poytent' ſans ſuit, ou graūt al ſon villen vn annui tie, ou leſſa terre a luy per fait pur ās, ou pur vie, et en diūs tiels ſē
                  bles caſes, le villē per ceo eſt fait franke.
            
            
               Maximes.
               MAximes ſōt les foū
                  dations del ley, & les concluſiōs de reaſon, et ſont efficiēt, et certein vniuerſal propoſitions, cy ſure &

perfect que ils ne poient eē a aſc' temps impeache, ou impugne, mes doyt touts foyts eſte obſerue et tenus cōe fort principles et aucthorities d' luy m̄, nyent obſtant ils ne poyent eē proue per force d' argument ou demonſtrations logical, mes ſount conus per enduction per le voy de ſence & memory. Come pur example il eſt vn maxim̄ que ſi vn hōe ad iſſue ij. fits per diuers venters, et le vn de eux purchaſe terres en fee et moruſt ſauns iſſue, lauter fits ne vnques ſerra ſon heire &c.
               Item il eſt vn auter maxime que t'res diſcendra del pier al fits, mes nemy del fits al

peere car eſt vn aſcē
                  tion &c. et diuers tyels ſemblables il y ad.
            
            
               Maynour.
               MAynour eſt quant vn laron ad emble et eſt purſue oue hue et cry, et priſe, ayant 
                     •
                  eo troue oueſq' luy q̄ il ad emble, ceo ē appel le main̄. Et iſſint moisc ōmunem̄t vſe pur dire qn̄t nous trouomꝰ vn fairās de vn vnloial act, q̄ noꝰ luy priſt oueſque le mainor, ou man̄.
            
            
               Miſpriſion.
               MIſpriſion eſt quant aſc' ſceit q'vn auter ad fait treaſō, ou felony, et il ne voile luy diſcoū al Roigne, ou ſa Coūcel ou a aſcun magiſtrat, eins concela ſon offence.
               
                  Vn Chaplein ad fixe vn auncient ſeale dun patent, a vn nouel patent d' non reſidence, et c' fuit tenꝰ dēe miſpriſion de treaſon tā
                  tū, et nul coūter feiter del ſeale del Roygne. Itê ſi vn aut' ſciet money deſte faux, et port c̄ hors de Irelande en Englet', et vtt' ceo en paym̄t, c' eſt forſq̄ miſpriſion de treaſon, & nemy treaſon, et iſſint ē en diūs tiels ſē
                  blables caſes.
               Et en touts caſes de miſpriſiō de treaſō, le party offend' forfetra ſes bn̄s a toutes iours, et les profets de ſes t'res pur terme de ſon vie, et ſōcorps al priſō al pleaſure del roine.
               Et pur miſpriſiō de felony ou trn̄s le offē
                  dour

ſerr' cōmit al priſon, tan
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   il ad troue ſuertyes ou pledges pur ſon fine, que ſerra aſſeſſe ꝑ le diſcrec' de les Iuſtic' deuaunt q̄ il fuit conuict.
               Et nota q̄ en cheſcū treaſon, ou felony, eſt include miſpriſion, et lou aſc' ad fait treaſon ou felony, le Roygne poit cauſer luy deſte indit' et arraigne forſque d'miſpriſion ſolement ſil voile.
            
            
               Monſtrans de faits, ou Recordes.
               MOnſtrans de faites, ou Recordes, eſt ſicōe pur example, vn acc' de dette ſoit port enuers vn ſur vn obligac', Ou per execut' &c. la apres que le pl'

ad declare, il doit mr' ſon obligac' ou le executour le teſtamēt al court, Et iſſint eſt de Recordes.
               Et le diuerſitie perenter Monſtrauns de faits ou records, et oier de faits et recordes eſt iſſint. Il que pleade le fait ou recorde, ou declare ſur ceo, al luy il appertayne de mr'e ceo. Et laut' vers que tiel fait ou record eſt pleade ou declare, et eſt ꝑ ceo deē charge, poet demaūd oyer de ceo fait ou recorde, q̄ ſon aduerſarie port, ou pleade vers luy.
            
            
               Mortgage ou Morgage.
               MOrtgage ou Morgage, eſt quant vn fait vn feoffem̄t a vn auter ſur tiel condic' q̄ ſi le feoffor paya al

feoffee a certaine iour xl. li. dargent, q̄ adonques la feoffour puit reentre &c. en c̄ caſe le feoffee eſt appel tenaunt en morgage. Et ſicome vn home puit faire feoffem̄t en fee en morgage, iſſint il puit fair' done en le tail' ou leſſe pur term̄ de vie, ou pur terme dans en morgage. Et il ſemble que la cauſe pur que il eſt appell mortgage, eſt appell mortgage, eſt pur c' q̄ il eſtoyt ē awerouſt ſi le feoffor voile payer al iour limit le argent ou nō, & ſil ne pay p̄, dōq̄s la t're q̄ il met en gage ſur condition de paym̄t de le money, ē al' d' lui a touts iours, et iſſint mort a lui ſur condic', et ſil pay le money, donques eſt le gage mort quaunt

a le tenant. s. le feoffee, et pur ceſt cauſe il eſt appel en latin̄ mortuum vadiū, cōe M. Littletō dit, ou mortuū vas, cōe ieo pēſe.
            
            
               Mortmaine.
               MOrtmaine fuit qn̄t terres fuer' dones a vn meaſon de relygion, ou a vn cōpanie q̄ ſoūt corporate ꝑ le graūte le roy, donq̄s cē terre eſt deuenꝰ en mortmaine, cē dir' en Anglois a dead hand, et le roy ou l' ſeignior de q̄ le terre eſt tenus poet enter en eux.
            
            
               Mulier.
               MVlier ē vn parol vſe en noſtr' ley, mes cōe aptment ieo ne poy dire ne ſcay bn̄ com̄t il doit venir en tiel ſenſe com̄ noꝰ la ceo prendromus▪
                  
Car accordāt al proper ſignification, mulier ē foemina corrupta, ſicon̄i il eſt vſe per Vlpianus en vn certein lieu en tiel maner, Quod ſi ego me virginē emere putarē eū eſſet mulier, emptio non valebit. Per c̄ poies voyer q̄ mulier eſt vn fēe que ad ewe le company dun hōe, mes a relinquisher le droit ſignificatiō: mulier eſt priſe en noſtre ley, pur vn que eſt loialment engender et ncc: et eſt toutes dit's vſe en compariſon oueſque vn baſtarde, ſolement pur monſtre vn difference perenter eux cōe pur example: vn hōe ad vn fits ꝑ vn fēe deuāt mariage, cē iſſue eſt appel

vn baſtarde, et illoial: Et apres ils entermary, et ount vn auter fytes, ceſt ſecond fits eſt appell mulier, ceſt adire, loyall, et ſerra heire al ſon pier, mes le auter ne poet eſte heire al aſcun home, pur ceo que 
                     •
                  i nē conus, ne certeine en le iudgement del ley, q̄ fuit ſon pier, et pur ceſt cauſe eſt dit deſte nullius filius, ou filius populi, et iſſint ſās pier accordaunt al cē viele verſe.
               Cui pater eſt populus, pater eſt fibi nullus et omnis.
               Cui pater eſt populus, nō habet ipſe patrem.
               Et touts foits vous troues cē addic'al eux

(baſtard eigne, et mulier puiſne) quant ils ſont compare enſēbl'.
            
            
               Murder.
               MVrder eſt vn volū
                  tarie occider dun home ſur malice pretence, et ſemble de ven̄ d' le Saxon parol Mordren q̄ iſſint ſignifie. Et Mordridus eſt le murderer tanque al ceſt iour enter eux en Saxonie, de q̄ nous auomꝰ mult de nr' parols cōe a deē ſepe dit.
            
            
               Negatiua preignans.
               NEgatiua preignans eſt quant vn action, ou information, ou tiel ſemblable eſt port enuers vn, et le defendant pleade en barre del action, ou auterm̄t vn negatiue plea, q' neſt cy ſpecial

anſwere al action mes que il enclude auxy vn affirmatiue. Com̄ pur example, ſi ceſty en reuerſion enter ſur tenant pur vie ſuppoſant que il ad alien en fee, (que ē vn forfaiture de ſon eſtate) et le tenant pur vie dit que il nad alyen en fee, ceſt vn negatiue en que eſt include vn affirmatiue. Car nient obſtant il ſoyt veray que il nad alyen en fee, vncore il poet eſte que il ad fayt vn eſtate en taile (le quel eſt auxi vn forfaitur') et donques lentrie de celuy en le reuerſion eſt loyall &c. Item en vn Quare impedit le Roygne fiſt tytle de preſent a vn prebende ratione que les

Temporalties leueſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   fuerount en ſa mains per le mort de W. nuper Epiſcopi &c. Le defendaunt dyt que ne voyda pas eſteantes les Temporalties en les maynes del Royne ꝑ le mort de W. ceſt vn negatiue preignans, car il poet eſte en les mains del royne auterment que per l' mort d' W. et il ſuffiſt al roigne ſi ſoit en ſa maines ꝑ aſcun meanes &c. Iſſint eſt ou vn informatiō fuit port in ſcaccario vers I. S. pur ceo que il achate laynes enter shering temps et le Aſſumption tali anno de I. N. Le defendaunt dit quod non emit de I. N. come il eſt alledge &c. ceo

eſt appell vn negatiue preignans, car ſil c̄ achate d' aut, vnc'il eſt culpable pur le achate.
            
            
               Niefe.
               NIefe eſt vn feme q' eſt bonde ou vn villen feme, mes ſi el mary vn franke hōe, el eſt per c' fait frāke a toutsiours (com̄t q' le baron deuie, et el ſuruiue) pur c' q̄ el et ſon baron ſont forſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   vn perſon ē ley, et el couient eſte de m̄ le nature et condic' en ley a touts intents cōe ſon baron eſt. Mes ſō barō eſt frāke a toutes intentes ſauns aſcun condition en ley, ou autermēt, et iſſint per conſequens le femme couiēt eſte, et ē frāke

accord' al natur'de ſō frāke barō, et dō
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ſi el ſo it vn foits franke et clerem̄t diſch. d'villenage a touts intēts, el ne poit eſtre niefe ap̄s ſans eſpecial act fait ꝑ luy▪ cōe diuors, ou conuſās en court de recorde, et ceo eſt en fauour de liberty, et pur ceo vn franke fēe ne ſerra villen per priſel del villen al ſon barō. Mes lour iſſue ſerr' vil lens cōe lour pere fuit que eſt contrary al le ley ciuile, car la eſt dit partus ſequit vētrem. Bōdage ou villenage ad ſō cōmencem̄t en t' les Hebrews et ſō original ꝓceding d'Chanaan le fits d'Cham, q̄ pur c' q'il deriſee ſon pere Noe giiſant diſſolutem̄t qn̄t il fuit e▪
                  
briee, fuit puni en ſon fits Chanaan oueſque penalty de bondage.
            
            
               Nihil dicit.
               NIhil dicit, eſt quant vn acc' eſt port enuers vn hōe, et le def. appere, le pl' declare, et le def. ne voile reſpond', ou plede al le acc', et ne maintayne ſō ple, mes fait defaut ore ſur ceſt defaut, il ſerra condēpne, quia nihil dicit.
            
            
               Nomination.
               NOmination, eſt ou vn poit en dr' de ſō manor ou auterment nominate, et appoint vn abl' clarke, ou hōe al vn perſonage, vicarage, on tiel ſpirituall promotion.
            
            
               Nonabilitie.
               NOnabilitie eſt lou

vn actiō eſt port vers vn, & le defendaunt dit que le plaintife eſt nonable de ſuer aſcū action, et demaunde iudgment ſil ſerra reſpōde. Il y ad vj. cauſes de nonabilitye en le pl', come ſil ſoyt vtlage, ou vn alien nee, mes ceſt diſabilitie eſt en actions reales & mixt ſolement, et non 
                     •
                  n actions parſonals, ſinon que il ſoit vn alien enemy, ou condempne en p̄munire, ou profeſſe en religion, ceſt a ſcauoyer le Romish religion, ou excōmenge, vn villen et ſue ſon ſn̄r, mes cē darraine neſt ple pur auter que neſt ſn̄r al villen.
            
            
               Nude Contract.
               NVde Contract, ou
               
                  nude promiſe, eſt lou vn home bargaine, ou vend ſes terres, ou biens, ou promiſe pur don̄ al auter money, ou vn chiual, ou a edefier vn meaſon, ou faire tiel choſe a tyel iour, et nul recōpēc e appoint a luy pur le faire de c'. Cōe ſi vn dit al aut, Ieo vende ou done al voꝰ touts mes terres ou bn̄s Et la ē nul choſe appoint aſſigne ou agree que le aut' don̄a, ou paiera pur c', iſſint 
                     •
                   il nad quid pro quo, ceſt vn nude cōtract, et void en ley, et pur nō ꝑformance de ceo nul action giſt, car ex nudo pacto non oritur actio.
            
            
               Oredelfe.
               
                  O Redelfe, eſt lou vn claime de aū le ore que eſt troue en ſon ſoile ou terre.
            
            
               Outfangthiefe.
               OVtfāgthiefe, hoc ē qd' latrones de t'ra veſtra vel feodo veſtro extra terrā veſtrā vel feodū veſtrū capti cū latrocinio ad cu riam veſtram reuertā
                  tur, et ibidem iudic'.
            
            
               Owelte.
               OWelte, eſt qn̄t il y ad ſn̄r meſne et tenant, et le t' tient del meſn̄ per m̄s les ſeruices que le meſne tient ouſter de le ſn̄r paramount. Cōe ſi le t' tient del meſne ꝑ Homage, fealtie, et xx. s. de rent annuelm̄t, et le meſn̄ tiēt ouſter d' le ſeygn̄ paramount

per hom̄ fealty et xx. s rent auxi, ceſt appell Oweltie de ſeruices.
            
            
               Oyer de recordes et faites &c.
               OYer de Records et faits, eſt ſi pur example vn acc' de det ſoit port enūs vn hōe ſur vn obligac', et le defend't apꝑt al acc', et dōq̄s pria q̄ il poet oier lobligac' oueſque q' le pl' charge luy.
               Iſſint eſt qn̄t executours port' vn actyon de dette', et le defendaunt demaunde oyer del teſtament: ſur ceſt demaunde il ſerra lectu al defendant, Mes ſil ſoit en vn auter terme, ou apres q̄ le defendaunt ad imparle, donq̄s il nauera le oyer. Et iſſint

come eſt dit de faites 
                     •
                  ſt deſte intend de recordes que ſount alledge enuers luy.
            
            
               Pape.
               PApe, eſt vn aunc' noſme fauxment arrogate, ou hautm̄t vſurpe per le Eueſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   de le ſole Cytye de Rome en Italy, et eſt cōmunemēt appel en Angloys le Pope, vn noſme veraym̄t mult frequent en nr'e auncien annales liūs, ſpecialm̄t en les temps de ceux roys, q̄ux graūdmēt abandonans lour emperial aucthoritie, et abaſans eux meſm̄s mult debaſe lour eſtate, ne fuer' hont de vn alien et outlādish Eueſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   q̄ ēhabit ouſt' cin
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   diz cent miles d' eux, deē ſouer' d'haut

eux en lour dominiōs demeſne, et de toller de eux non ſolem̄t le diſpoſic' de cert' petit trifles d'nul accompt, mes auxi l' nominatiō d' Archeueſq̄s, Eueſq̄s Abbeis, deanes, prouoſts, appropriations de bn̄fices preſētatiōs al perſonages, vicarages, et generalmēt de touts ſpirituel ꝑſons a lour preferments, aſcū temps ꝑ laps, aſcun tēps aut' m̄t ꝑ q' l' prerogatiue perishe del Royes fuit moult abridge deyns lour realmes demeſne.
            
            
               Partition.
               PArtition eſt vn diuiſion d' terres diſcendus per le common ley, ou per cuſtōe perent' coheires, ou parceners, ou ils

fount deux al meynes ſoiēt ils fites, fil's, ſo ers auntes, ou autermēt de kyn al aunceſtour de que le terre diſcēd al eux.
               Et ceſt particion eſt fayt quatuour voyes pur le plus part, de q' troys lontal pleaſure et per agreemēt perent' eux, le quart eſt ꝑ compulſion.
               Vn particion per agrement eſt quant ils m̄s deuide le terre equalment en tauntes parts, cōe la ſōt d' eux co ꝑcen̄s, et cheſcun de eſlier share vn ou part, leignee primerment, et iſſint lun ap̄s lauter, cōe ils ſont de age, ſinon que le eignee per conſent fayt le partic', don
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   le election appertyent al

prochein, et iſſint al le eignee darreignemēt accord cōe il eſt dyt. Cuiꝰ eſt particio, Alterius eſt electio.
               Vn aut' partitiō 
                  
                     •
                   agreem̄t ē qn̄t ils eſlieu cert' de lour amies de faire diuiſiō pur eux.
               Le tierce partition ꝑ agree
                     •
                  t eſt ꝑ ti abens de lots iſſint: primermēt de deuider le t're en tant des partes cōe la ſoūt parcen̄s, dō
                  
                     •
                  s a ſcriuer cheſcun part ſeu
                     •
                  ralmēt en vn petit ſcrolle ou peece de paper ou parchment, et de mitt' ceux ſcrols cloſe en vn hat, cappe ou auter tiel ſēblable choſe, et dōques cheſcun parcener vn ap̄s lauter come ils ſount de age atraher hors de ceo vn piece, ou

ſcrolle en que eſt eſcript vn partt d'l terr' que per ceſt trahens ē a or' ſeueralm̄t allot al eux en fee ſimple.
               Le quater partitiō, q' eſt per cōpulſiō, eſt lou vn, ou aſc' de les coparcen̄s voylent aū partic̄ et aut's ne voilent agree al ceo, dō
                  q̄s ceux q̄ iſſint voylēt auer partic̄ poiēt porter vn br' de Partitione facienda enuers les auters queux ne voylent faire partition, per vertue de que ils ferra compelle de depart &c. Nous en Kent (
                     •
                  reere Nicholas) ou les terres ſoūt de Gauelkinde nature, appellomus a cē iour noſtre particion, Shyfting, il meſme parol quel's Scyftan

Saxens vſe, noſment que ſignifie pur faire partition perenter coheires, et pur aſſigner a cheſc' de eux lour portion. En latyn il eſt appell Herciſcere.
               
            
            
               Parties.
               PArties al fyne, ou fayt, ſount ceux queux leuie le fyne, et auxi ils a que le fin̄ eſt leuie. Et ils que fount vn fait de feoffement, et ils a que il eſt fait, ſount appels ꝑties al fait, et iſſint en auters ſēblables caſes.
            
            
               Patron.
               PAtron ē celui q̄ ad vn ꝑſonage, vicarage, frāk chappel, o
                     •
                   tielſēblabl' ſpiritual ꝓmoc' appurten̄t al ſō man̄, et poet, ou doet doner ceo benefyce

quāt et cy toft que il deuient voide. Er cē eſteant patron, ou patronage ad cōmēc' m̄t pur le pluis part ꝑ vn de ceux troys voyes, noſm̄t ou Ratione fū
                  dationis, pu
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                   que le patron ou ſes aunceſtours, ou ceux de q'il claime fueront foundours, ou edeſiers de le eſgliſe, ou Ratione dotationis, pur 
                     •
                   que ils endowe ou dōe ter 
                     •
                  es al ceo pur maintenance, ou auterment Ratione fundi, pur 
                     •
                   q' le eſgliſe fuit miſe, ou edifie ſur lour ſoil' ou terre, et diūs temps per reaſon de ils trois,
            
            
               Perquiſites.
               PErquiſites ſoūt aduauntages et profittes queux vyent al vn manner per caſualty,

et non annulement, cōe eſcheates, hariots, reliefs, waiues eſtraies, forfaitures, amerciam̄es en courts, gards, mariages, bn̄s et terres purchaſe ꝑ villeines de 
                     •
                   le maner, et diūs ſēblables choſes q̄ux ne ſoūt certen mes happen ꝑ chāce, aſcun temps pluis often q̄ a auter temps.
            
            
               Plaintife.
               PLaintife eſt celuy q̄ ſue ou cōplaynt en vn aſſ
                     •
                  ſe, ou en vn action ꝑſonel, cōe en vn action de det, trn̄s, diſceit, detinue, et tyels ſemblables,
            
            
               Pleading.
               PLeadinge eſt ceo que vyent apres le count, noſment ceo que eſt contayne

en le barre, replication, et reioinder, et nō ceo contayne en le count meſme, et pur ceo defauts en l' matter del count, ne ſoūt compriſe deyns myſpleading, ou inſufficiēt pleading, ne ſoūt remedy per le ſtatute d' leofailes, Mes ſolemēt ceo miſpleading ou inſufficient pleading, commit en le barre, replication, et reioynder, ſount la prouide.
            
            
               Pounde.
               POundes ſount en deux ſortes, lun poundes ouert, les auters pounds cloſe.
               Pounde ouert, eſt cheſcun lieu en q̄ vn diſtreſſe eſt myſe, ſoit ceo cōmō poūd tiels

que ſōt en cheſc' ville ou Seigniorie, ou ſoit ceo backeſide, court, yarde, paſture, ou aut' ment quecun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , lou le own̄ del diſtreſſe poit vener a doner eux viande ſans offence pur lour eſteant la, ou ſon ven̄ la.
               Pounde cloſe, eſt tiel lieu, lou le owner del diſtreſſe ne poyt vener a don̄ eux vyande ſans offence, cōe en vn cloſe, meaſō, ou quecun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   auter lieu.
            
            
               Poſſeſſion.
               POſſeſſion eſt dit ii. voies, ou actuall poſſeſſion, ou poſſ. en ley.
               Actual poſſ. eſt qn̄t vn hōe enter en fayt en terres, ou tenemēts

a luy diſcend, ou auterm ēt. Poſſeſſion en ley eſt quant terres, ou tenementes ſount diſcend al vn hōe, & il nad vnc' realment actualment, et en fait ent'en eux. Et il eſt ap pel poſſeſſion en ley, pur ceo q' en le oile, et conſideration del ley, il eſt penſe dēe en poſſeſſion, entant q̄ il eſt tenant a cheſcun action que voet ſuer concernaunt meſmes les terres, ou tenem̄ts.
            
            
               Preamble.
               PReamble ad ſō noſme de le prepoſitiō (pre) deuāt, et l' verbe (Ambulo) pur va, iſſint ioint enſemble, ils font vn compounde verbe de le prymer coniugation (Pream

bulo) pur vadeuāt, et de c' l' i. part ou commēce
                     •
                  t dū act eſt appel le p̄amble del act, le q̄l p̄āble, ē vn cliffe de oūt'les mēts del feſors del act, et les miſchifes q'ils intend de remedy ꝑ c̄, cōe pur ex ampl' leſtat' fait al W. le prim̄ le 37. c q'don attaint, le preamble d' q'eſt iſſint. Pur c' q̄ aſcuns gents de la terre doutent meines faux ſerem̄t faire, q̄ faire ne duiſſent, per q' multes des gents ſont diſherites & perdent lour droit, puruieu eſt &c.
            
            
               Preſcription.
               PReſcriptiō eſt quāt vn adewe ou vſe aſc̄ choſe depuis le temps dount nul memorye

al contra.
            
            
               Preſentment.
               PReſentment, eſt quant vn home q' ad droit a don̄ vn benefice ſpiritual noſme le perſon a q̄ il voit le doner, et fait vn letter al eueſque pur luy, ceo eſt vn preſentation ou preſentment.
            
            
               Pretenſed droit ou Title.
               PRetenſed droit ou title, eſt lou vn eſt en poſſeſſ
                     •
                  d' terres, ou ten̄tes, et vn auter que eſt hors de poſſeſſion, claime ceo, ou ſue pur ceo, ore le pretenſed droit, ou title, eſt dit en luy que iſſint ſue ou claime. Et ſil puys vient a le poſſeſſion de m̄ le t'res, ou tenements,

ſō droit, ou title eſt extinct, ou ſuſpend en le terre.
            
            
               Friuie ou Priuite, & Priuities.
               PRiuie, ou priuite, ē lou vn leaſe ē fait a tener a volunt, pur ans, pur vie, ou vn fef femēt en fee, et en diuers auters caſes, ore pur c'de ceo q̄ adpaſſe perent' ceux partyes ils ſont appell priuies, en reſpect de eſtraungers perent' q̄ux nul tiel conueiaunces ad eſtre.
               Auxi ſi ſoit ſn̄r et tenaunt, et le tenant tient del ſn̄r per certen ſeruice, il y ad vn priuitie perent' eux per cauſe d'tenure, et ſi le tenaunt ſoyt diſſeyſe per vn eſtraunger, il

ad nul priuitie perent' le diſſeiſour et le ſn̄r, mes le priuitie vnc▪ demurt perenter le ſn̄r et le tenaunt que eſt diſſeiſie, et le ſeigniour auowera ſur luy pur ceo q' il eſt ſon tenant en droit, et en le iugement del ley. Priuies ſont en diūs ſorts cōe noſmēt, priues en eſtate, priuies en fait, priuies en ley, priuies endroit, et priuies en ſange.
               Priuies en eſtate, eſt lou vn leas eſt fait del manner de Dale all A. pur vie, le rem̄ al B. en fee, la & A. & B. ſount priuies en eſtate, car lour eſtates fueront ambideux al vn temps. Et iſſint eſt

en le primer cas ou vn leas eſt fait al volunt, pur vie ou ans, ou vn feoffement en fee, les leſſees, ou feoffees, ſōt appel priuies en eſtat', et iſſint ſoūt lour hr'es &c.
               Priuies en fayt, eſt lou vn leas ē fait pur vie, et ap̄s per vn auter fayt, le reuerſion eſt graunt al vn eſtrā
                  ger en fee, ceſt grauntee del reuerſion eſt appell priuie en fayt, pur ceo que il ad l' reuerſion per fait.
               Priuie en ley, eſt ou il ad ſeignyour et tenaunt, le tenaunt leſſa le tenauncye pur vie, et moruſt ſauns heire, et le reuerſyon eſcheate al ſeigniour, il eſt dit priuie en ley, pur ceo que il ad

ſon eſtate ſolement ꝑ le ley ceſt adir' per eſcheate.
               Priuie en droit, eſt lou vn poſſeſſe dun terme pur ans graunt ſon eſtate al vn auter ſur condic', et fayt ſes executors et moruſt, ore ceux execut' ſont priuies en droit, car ſi le condicion ſoyt enfreint, et ils enter en le terre, ils auera ceo en le droit de lour teſtatour, et a ſon vſe. Priuie de ſanke, en le heire del feo
                     •
                  four, ou donour &c.
               Item ſi vn fine ſoit leuie, les heires de celuy q̄ leuy le fine ſoūt appell priuies.
            
            
               Priuiledges.
               PRiuiledges ſoūt lyberties & frāchiſes,

graunt al vn office, lieu, ville, ou maner ꝑ le graund charter del roign̄, letters patents, ou act de parliament cōe tolle, ſake, ſocke, Infangthiefe, vtfangthiefe, turn̄ tolle, oredelfe, et diuers tyels ſemblables pur q̄ux voies en lour ꝓper titles et lieus.
            
            
               Procheine amy.
               PRocheyn Amy et gardein en ſocage eſt tout vn, et eſt lou vn hōe ſeiſie de terres tenus en ſocage moruſt ſon iſſue deyns age de 14. ans, donques le procheine amy, ou procheine de ſanke a que les terres ne poyent vener ou diſcend, auera le gard del hr▪ e, et d'l terre, al vſe ſolemēt del heire,

tanque il vient al age de xiiij. ans, et don
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   a tiel ans, il poet ent' et luy ouſte, et port luy d' accompter, mes en ceſt accompt, il auera allowaunce pur touts reaſonable coſts et expenſes beſtowe ou ſur le heire, ou ſō terre.
               Et le prochein amy, ou prochein de ſanke a que le inheritaunce ne poet diſcender eſt iſſint deſte intende, ſi les terres diſcende al heire de ſon pier, ou aſcun del ſanke del ꝑt ſon pier, donques le meere, ou aut' d'l part le meere, ſount appel le procheine de ſanke a que lenheritance ne poet diſcēder, car deuaunt que il iſſint diſcendera, il pluis toſt

eſch
                     •
                  ter' al ſn̄r de que il eſt tenus: Et iſſint eſt deſte intende ou les terres viēt al heire de ſa mere, ou aſc' auter de ſanke de part ſa mier: donques le pier ou auter del part ſon pier ſount appelle ꝓchein de ſanke a que le inheritance ne poet diſcende, mes plus toſt eſchetera al ſeigniour de que il eſt tenus.
            
            
               Proteſtation.
               PRoteſtatiō eſt vn ſaluation al party (que iſſint pleade per proteſtatyon) deſte conclude per aſcun matter alledg' ou obiect encoūter luy, ſur que il ne poet ioyner iſſue: Et neſt auter choſe que excluſyon

del concluſion, car il que priſt le proteſtation exclud' laut' partie de conclude
                     •
                   luy. Et ceſt proteſtation doit eſtoier oue le ſequele del plea, et nemy deſte repugnant, ou autermēt cōtrary.
            
            
               Purchaſe.
               PVrchaſe eſt l' poſſeſſion q̄ vn home ad en terres, ou ten̄ts per ſon act demeſne, means, ou agreemēt, et nemy per tytle de diſcent, de aſcū de ſes 
                     •
                  unceſtours.
            
            
               Quarentine.
               QVarentine eſt lou home deuy ſeiſi dū maner place et auter terres, doūt ſa femme doit eſte endowe, dō
                  ques la femme tyendra

le maner place ꝑ quarantiours, dey
                     ••
                  s quel temps ſon dower ſerra a luy aſſign̄, mes ſi el marie infra les xl. iours, el perdra ſon quarentine.
            
            
               Quinzime.
               QVinzime ē vn paiment graūt ē parliament al roigne, per les layes, ceſtaſſàuoir le quinzime part de lour biēs: Et fuit vſe en aūcient tēps deſte leuie ſur lour auers eſteants en lour terres que fuit mult troublous, et pur ceo a ore pur le plus part, ceſt voye eſt alter et ils vſe de leuy ceo per les verges, ou acre, ou aut'meaſure d' t'r'. Per reaſon de que il

eſt a ore meins troublous, et plus certeine, que deuaūt il fuit. Et cheſcun ville, et pays ſcient, quel ſomme eſt deſte pay perent' eux, et coment ceo ſerra rayſe. Nous legimus que Moyſes fuit l'primer que number le people, car il number les Iſraelites, et pur ceo le primer▪ Taxe, Subſidie, tribute, ou Quinzime fuit inuēt per luy enter les Hebrewes, come Polidore Virgil ſuppoſe.
            
            
               Regrator.
               REgratour eſt celuy que ad blees, vittailes, ou auters choſes ſufficyent pur ſon neceſſarie oeps, occupac', ou expēc', & niēt

obſtant engroſſe et achate en ſes maynes plus blees, vittailes, ou auters tyels choſes, al entent de vender ceo arrere al vn plus haute et chare price, en faires, markets, ou tiels ſemblables lieus.
            
            
               Reioynder.
               REioynder eſt quāt le defendaunt fayt reſpons al replication del plaintife.
               Et cheſcun reioinder doyt auer ceux deux properties ſpecialment cē a ſcauoir ll doyt eſte vn ſufficient reſpons al Replication, et auxi de ſubſequer et enforce le matter del barre.
            
            
               Reliefe.
               
                  REliefe eſt aſcun foytes vn certeyne ſōme de money que le heire paiera al ſeignior de q' ceux terres ſont tenꝰ, q̄ux apres l' diſceaſe de ſon aunc' ſont a luy diſcend cōe ꝓchein heire, aſc̄ foits il eſt le payment dun auter choſe, et nemy money. Et pur ceo reliefe neſt certeyn et ſemble pur toutes tenures, mes cheſoun ſundry tenure ad (pur le pluis part) ſon ſpecial reliefe certeyn en luy meſme: Ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   eſt ceo deſte pay toutes foytes al vn certeyne age, mes il vary en c̄ auxy accordaunt al tenure. Come ſi le tenaunt ad terres tenus per ſeruice d' chiualer

(forepriſe graūd ſergeanty) et moruſt ſon hr' eſteāt de plein age, et tiēt ſes terres per le ſeruice dun entier fee de chiualer, le ſn̄r de que ceux terres ſōt iſſint tenus, aūa del hr' 100. s. nomine releuij Et ſi il tiēt ꝑ meines q̄ vn fee d' chiual', il paiera meines, et ſi plus, don
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   plus, aient reſpect touts foites al le rate pur cheſcun fee de ehiualer vn cent ſouze. Et ſil tient per graund ſerieanty (
                     •
                  
                  ▪ ē touts foits del roign̄ et eſt auxy ſeruice de chiualer) don
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   le reliefe ſerra le value del t're ꝑ an, pret' toutes charges iſſuaunt hors de ceo.
               Reliefe q̄ le ſn̄r auera pur terres tenus

en Socage, eſt tant plꝰ cōe le rent que le t' tient ſon terre en Socage per, cōe ſil tient ꝑ vn denier rēt, et moruſt, le ſn̄r aūa cē denier rent, et vn denier ouſter pur reliefe de quecun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   age le t' ſoit, al mort de ſō aū
                  ceſtor. Et nota que en aſcuns caſes le ſn̄r aūa ſon reliefe maintenant aprés le mort de ſon tenaunt, ſi il ſoit iſſint que le temps del an voit ſuffre ceo dēe evve, come money, blees, carne, pish, ſpices, ou aſcun tiel ſemblable, et pur default de payement, le ſeigniour poit pur ceo de common droit preſē
                  ment diſtraigne.
               Mes en aſc̄s caſes le 
                     ••
                  r doit demurre pur

ſō rel' vn cert' temps, qn̄t neceſſity iſſint cō
                  ſtraint, cōe ſi le t' tient ꝑ vn roſe, vn cherue, vn ſtrawbery, ou tiel ſemblable, et deuie on wynter, il naūa reliefe tā
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Roſes, cherues, et ſtrawberies ſōt naturalmēt freſhe, et ripe, q̄ ē al tēps d' Mid ſomer, et donq̄s il aūa vn pur rent, et vn aut' pur reliefe.
               Il y ad vn aut' kind de reliefe q̄ eſt pay apres le mort, change, ou alienac' de franktenants que tyent en aūc' dem̄, et auterm̄t, et eſt pay cōe vn cognuſance del tenure ꝑenter le ſeignior et le tenāt, Ceo nē certein quant: mes il vary accordaunt al cuſtome del maner, ou tenure,

et eſt deſte preſent ꝑ le homage, ou ſutors, al ꝓchein court iour de m̄ le manor.
               Et nota que touts foits qn̄t le reliefe eſt due, il doit eſte pay al vn ētier pam̄it, et nem
                     •
                   per parties, nient obſtant q' le rent ſoit deſte paye al ſeuerall feaſtes.
            
            
               Remainder.
               REmainder de terre eſt le terre que remainera apres le particuler eſtat' det' mine Cōe ſi vn graunt terre pur terme de ans, ou pur vie, le remainder al I. S. ceſt a dire, q' qn̄t le leſſee pur vve eſt mort, que don
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   le terre remainera, ſerra ou abide oue, al, ou en I. S.
            
            
               
               Replication.
               REplication eſt qn̄t le def. en aſc' action fait reſpons, & le pl' fait vn reſpons al ceo, ceo eſt appell le replication del plaintife.
            
            
               Repriſes.
               REpriſes ſount deductions, paym̄ts, & duities, que va annuelm̄t et ſōt pay hors dun manor. Cōe rent charge, rēt ſecke, pencions, corodies, annui ties, et tiels ſēblables.
            
            
               Reſceit.
               REſceit eſt quaunt vn action eſt port vers tenant pur terme de vye, ou tenaunt a terme dans, et ceſty en la reuerſyon viēt eins et pria deſte

reſceiue pur defēd' la terr'▪ et pur pled' oueſque l'demaūd'. Et qn̄t il vient, il couient q' il ſoit touts foits priſt a pleder oue le demaū
                  dant.
            
            
               Reſeruation.
               REſeruac' eſt priſe diuers voies, et ad diuers natures, cōe aſcun foits ꝑ voy de excepc' de reſerue ceo q̄ vn hōe ad deuant en luy, Cōe ſi vn leas ſoit fait pur ans de terr' reſeruāt les graund arbors creſſants ſur ceo. Ore le leſſee ne poyt meddle oueſque eux, ne oueſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   aſc' choſe q' vient ꝑ reaſon de eux cy lōge cōe il demurt en, ou ſur les arbors, cōe maſt de oke, cheſnut, pomes, ou tiels ſēblab les, Mes ſils chient del arbors al t're,

donq' ils ſōt en dr't le leſſees, car le t'r' eſt leſſe a luy, et tout ſur c' nient reſerue &c.
               Aſc' foits vn reſeruae' obtainteh et port hors vn aut' choſe q̄ ne fuit deuāt, cōe ſi vn hōe leſſe ſes t'res reſeruāt annuelm̄t pur c̄ xx. li. &c. et diūs aut' tyels reſeruations y ſount.
               Et nota q en aunc' tēps, lour reſeruat ōs fueront cy bn̄ (ou pur l' plꝰ part) en victuals, ſoit ceo, carne, pishe, blees, pane, boier, ou auterm̄t, cōe en mony, tāque al darraine, et eſpecialment, en le temps del roy Henry le prim̄ per agreemēt le ſeruatiōde victuals fuit change en priſt mony, cōe il ad tan
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   cy continue.
            
            
               
               Retraxit.
               REtraxit eſt le preterperfectence dē Retraho, compound de Re, et Traho, q' ſignifie Retraho pur euulſer arrere. Etē qn̄t le party pl', ou demā
                  dant vient en proper perſon en le court ou ſon ſuit eſt, et dit q̄ il ne voet vlterius ꝓſequi in placito illo &c. Ore c̄ ſerra vn barre al actiō a touts iours.
            
            
               Reeue.
               REeue eſt vn officer, mes plus conus en auncient temps que a ceſt iour. Car cheſcū maner ad dōques vn reeue, et vncor' en diuers coppyholde manours, (ou le viel cuſtome aſc' choſe p̄uaiuaile)

le noſm̄ et of
                     •••
                   neſt en tout obli
                     •
                  e. Et eſt en effect ceo q̄ a ore cheſcun baylife dun maner practiſe: nient obſtant le noſm̄ de bailife ne fuit donques en vre enter noꝰ eſteant puis port eins per les Normās. Mes le noſine de Reeue auncientment appell Gereue, (quel particle (Ge) en continuaunce de temps fuit ouſterment omiſe et pard) viēt del Saxon parol Gerefa, q̄ ſignifie vn ruler. Eriſſint veraſ
                     •
                  t ſō rule or aucthority fuit large deīs le compas del maner ſon 
                     ••
                  r et enter ſes homes et tenaunts cy bien en choſes de gouernement en peace et guerre, come en le

ſkilful vſe et trade de huſbandrye. C
                     •
                  r ſicōe il collect les rents del ſn̄r, payer repriſes, ou duities iſſuāts hors del maner, appoynt les ſeruants de woorker, ſuccide et decoup̄ arbres pur repayrer les edifices, et encloſures, oueſque diuers tiels ſemblables pur le commodity del ſeygour: Iſſint auxy il ad aucthoritie de gouerner, et ſeruer les tenaunts en peax, et ſil beſoigne, de conducter eux en guerre.
            
            
               Reuerſion.
               REuerſion de terre, eſt vn certein eſtat' remainant en le leſſer ou donour, apres le pertyculer eſtate et poſſeſſion conuey al vn auter.

Et eſt appel vn Reū
                  ſiō en reſpect del poſſeſſion ſeparate de c̄, Iſſint que il que ad le vn, nad laut' al meſme le temps, car eſteant en vn ſimul, la ne poet eſte dit vn reuerſion, pur ceo que per le vniting, lun eſt merge en lauter, Et iſſint le reuerſion del terre, eſt le terre meſme quant il eſchueſt.
            
            
               Riot.
               RIot eſt lou troys (al meynes) ou plures font aſcun illoyal act come de barer vn hōe, Enter ſur le poſſeſſion dun auter, vel huiuſmodi.
            
            
               Robberie.
               RObberie eſt qn̄t vn hōe prēt aſē choſe

del parſon dun auter felonyſement, comēt que la choſe pryſe ne ſoyt al value forſque dun denyer, vncore il eſt felony pur quel le 
                     •
                  offendour ſuffera mort.
            
            
               Rout.
               ROut eſt quant people aſſemble eux meſmes, et puis procedunt, ou chiuauchant, ou allant auāt, ou mouent per inſtigacion dun ou plures que eſt conductor de eux: Ceſt appel vn rout, pur ceo que ils mouent, et proceede en routs et numbers.
               Item ou plures aſſemble eux ſur lour quarelles et braules demeſne, come ſi les inhabytaunts dun

ville voyle aſſembler eux pur debruſer heis mures, foſſes, pales, ou tyels ſemblables, dauer comen la, ou de bater vn auter que ad fayt al eux vn cō
                  mon diſpleaſure, vel huiuſmodi, ceſt vn rout et encounter le ley, coment que ils nount fayt, ou myſe en executiō lour male entent.
            
            
               Sake.
               SAke, hoc eſt placitū et emenda de tranſgr' hominum in cur' veſtra, quia (Sak) Anglicae eſt Acheſon Galice, et dicitur for ſick ſack idem quod pur quel ac
                     ••
                  ſon, et ſak dicitur pro forfayt.
            
            
               
               Scot.
               SCot, hoc eſt quietū eſſe de quadam cō
                  ſuetudine, ſicut de cō
                  muni tallagio facto ad opus vic' vel balliuorum eius.
            
            
               Shewing.
               SHewing hoc eſt qui etū eſſe cū attachiamēt' in aliqua cur', et corā quibuſcū
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   in q̄
                  relis oſtēſis et nō aduocat'.
            
            
               Sok.
               SOk hoc eſt ſecta d' hominibus in curia veſtra ſecundū conſuetudinem regni.
            
            
               Sokmans.
               SOkmans ſōt les tenants en aunc' demeſne 
                     •
                  ux tient lour terres ꝑ ſocage, ceſt adire, per ſeruice del carue, et pur ceo ils ſount appel Sokmās, q' eſt taunt adire cōe

tenāts ou homes q̄ux tient per ſeruice del carue, ou homes del carue. Car ſok ſignify vn carue.
               Et ceux Sokmans ou tenants en aunciēt demeſn̄, ount pluſors et diuers liberties dōe et graunt a eux per le ley, Cybien ceux tenants queux tyent dū cōmon perſon en aū
                  cient demeſne, come ceux queux tient del roign̄ en auncient demeſne, come noſmēt deſte quite de payer tolle en cheſcun market, faire, ville, et cittie ꝑ tout le realme, cy bn̄ pur lour byens et chattels que ils vende as auters, come pur ceux choſes que ils achat' pur lour ꝓuiſiō, de auters. Et ſur ceo

cheſcun de eux poet ſuer dauer letters patents de ſouth le ſeale le Roygne a ſes officers, et al Mayres, Bayllyfes, et auters offycers en le realme d' ſuffer eux deē quite de tolle. Item deſte quit' d' Pontage, murage, et paſſage, et auxi de taxes et tallage graunt per Parliament ſinon que le Roygne taxe auncyent demeſne, come el poet al ſa pleaſur' pur graund cauſe. Auxy deſte quite d' paimēts as les expēſes del chiualers del ſhire queux vient al parlyament. Et ſi le vic' voile diſtreign̄ eux ou aſc' de eux deſtr' cōtributor' pur lour terr' en auncien dem̄, donq̄s lun de eux ou touts come

le caſe require poyt ſuer vn br'e direct al vic' luy commaund q̄ il ne cōpell eux deſte contribut oris al expē ſes del chiualers. Et celuy br' luy cōmaūd auxy, que ſil ad diſtrayne eux pur ceo, que il redeliuer meſm̄ ceſt diſtreſſe.
               Item que ils ne deuer' eſtre enpannell, ne mis en Iuries & enqueſtes en payes hors de lour mannor ou ſeigniory de auncien demeſne, pur les terres que ils teygne la (ſinon que ils ount auters terres al common ley, pur queux ils deuer' eſtre charge) & ſi le vicont retourne eux enpanelles, donques ils

poient aū vn br'enūs luy de non ponēdis in aſſiſis et iuratis. Et ſil face al cōtrary, don
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   giſt vn attachmēt ſur ceo enuers luy. Et iſſint eſt auxy ſi les bailifes de frāchiſes q̄ux ont retourne de br'es voile returne aſc' del t' q̄ux teigne en aūc' dem̄, en aſſ. ou iuries.
               Et auxy deſte exēptes del letes, et d'turnes del vic', oueſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   diuers aut's ſemblables liberties.
            
            
               Spoliation.
               SPoliatiō eſt vn ſuit pur les fruits dū eſgliſe, ou pur leſgl' m̄: et eſt deſte ſue en le ſpiritual court, et nemy en nr'e courts. Et ceſt ſuit giſt pur vn

encumbēt enuers vn auter encūbent, ou ils ambideux claime per vn patron, et lou le droit del patronag ne vient en queſtion ou debate. Cōe ſi vn perſō ſoyt cree en Eueſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   et ad diſpenſation de tener ſon rectory, & puis le patron preſent auter encumbent que eſt inſtitut' et induct: Ore leueſque poyt auer enuers ceſty encumbent vn Spoliatyon en le ſpirituall court, pur ceo que ils ambideux clayme per vn patron, & le droyt del patronage ne vyent en debate, & pur ceo que lauter encumbent vyent al poſſeſſ▪ del benefice

per le cours del ley ſpiritual, cē aſcauoier per inſtitution & induction, iſſint que il ad couler de aū ceo, et deſtre perſon per le ſpiritual ley. Car aut'ment ſil ne ſoit inſtitute & inducte &c. ſpoliation ne giſt enuers luy, mes vn br' d' treſpas, ou vn aſſiſe de nouil diſſeiſin &c.
               Iſſint eſt auxy lou vn parſon accept aut' benifice per reaſon de que, le patron preſēt vn aut'clarke, que eſt inſtitute et induct, ore lun de eux poyt auer ſpoliation enūs le auter, et don
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   viendra en debate ſil ad plurality ou non. Et ifſint eſt de depriuation &c.
               Meſme le ley, eſt
               
                  lon vn dit al patron, que ſon clerke ē mort ſur que il preſent vn auter. La le primer en cumbēt, que fuit ſurmiſe deſte mort poyt auer vn ſpoliation enuers le auter. Et iſſint en diūs aut's ſemblables caſes.
            
            
               Stallage.
               STallage hoc eſt quietum eſſe de quadā cōſuetudine exact' ꝓ platea capta vel aſſignata in nundinis & mercatis.
            
            
               Suit couenant.
               SVit couenaunt eſt quaunt voſter aunceſtors ount couenāt oue mes aunceſtours de ſuer a le court mes aunceſtors.
            
            
               Suit cuſtome.
               
                  SVit cuſtome eſt qn̄t ieo et mes aunceſtours ount eſtre ſeyſies de vr' ſuit demeſn̄ et voſtre aunceſtours de tēps &c.
            
            
               Suit ryal.
               SVuit rial eſt quant hōesvient al tourne de viſcount ou leete, a q' courts touts hōes ſerra compell de vener a conuſter l' leies, iſſint que ils ne ſerra ignoraunt de les choſes q̄ux ſerra mr's la com̄t ils ſerra gouernes. Et eſt appell rial ſuit per cauſe de lour allegeaunce, & ceo appiert per common experience quāt vn eſt iure ſon oth eſt que il ſerra loyall & foial hōe al Roigne. Et ceo ſuit neſt pur le

terr' que il tient deins le countie, mes per reaſon de ſon perſon, et pur ſon reſt la, et doyt eſtre fayt deux foites per an, pur defaut de que, il ſerra amerce et nō diſtreign̄.
            
            
               Suit ſeruice.
               SVit ſeruice, eſt a ſuer al turne del viſcount ou leete, ou al court del ſeignior de troys ſemeynes en troys ſameynes per lentier an: Et pur defaut de ceo, vn home ſerra diſtreigne et nō amerce. Et ceſt ſuit ſeruice eſt per reaſon del tenure del terres dun home.
            
            
               Taxe et Tallage.
               TAxe et Tallage ſōt paim̄ts, cōe diſmes quinzimes, ſubſidyes,

ou tiels ſēblables grāt al roigne ꝑ parliam̄t.
               Les tenants en aunc' dem̄ ſōt quites d'ceux taxes, et tallages grāts ꝑ parliament, ſinō que le roigne taxe aunciē dem̄, cōe el poet quāt a luy pleaſt pur graūd cauſe, Voies auncient demeſne.
            
            
               Tenure in Capite.
               TEnure en capite eſt lou aſcun tient del Roigne come de ſa ꝑſon eſteant roigne, et de ſa Corone, come dun ſeygniourie per luy meſme en groſſe, et en chyefe de ſuis touts auters ſeygniories. Et nemy lou ils tient de luy come de aſcun maner, honor, ou Caſtel, ſinon certeyne auncyent honors, vt patet in Seaccatio.
            
            
               
               Teſtament.
               TEſtamēt eſt iſſint define ou expoūd en M. Plowdēs cōmē
                  taries. Teſtamentum eſt teſtatio mentis, et eſt compoūd de ceux deux parolx. Teſtatio et mentis q̄ iſſint ſignifie veray il eſt, q̄ vn teſtament eſt teſtatio mentis, mes q̄ il eſt vn compoūd parol, Aulus Gellius en ſō vj. liuer cap. 12. deny ceo al vn excellent Lawier vn Seruiꝰ Sulpitius et dit q̄ il eſt vn ſimpl▪ parol, cōe ſoūt ceux, Calciamētum, Paludamentum, Pauimē
                  tū, et diūs tiels ſēblables. Et mult meynes eſt agreament' vn cō
                  pounde parol de aggregatio, et mentium, come eſt dit ē m̄
                  
title, car il ny ad nul tiel latin parol ſimple ou compound, mes il poet niēt obſtāt ſerue bien pur vn ley latyn parol. Et pur c̄ il poet iſſint eē melior defin̄. Teſtamentū eſt vltimae voluntatis iuſta ſententia de eo quod quis poſt mortem ſuā fieri vult &c. Et de teſtamēts il y ad deux ſortes, ceſtaſſauoir vn teſtament en eſcript, et vn teſtament ꝑ parolx, q̄ eſt appel vn nū cupatiue teſtament. Le prim̄ eſt touts foits en eſcript cōe eſt dit.
               Le auter ē quant vn hōe eſteant malade, et pur pauour ne mort, ou faut de memory, ou de ꝑler voet ven̄ c
                     •
                   ſuddeinm̄t, et haſ
                  
                     •
                  iuem̄t ſur lui q̄ il ſerr'

preuent, ſil demurt le ſcripture de ſon teſtament, req̄ſt ſes vicines et amies de porter teſmoigne de ſō darrayn volunt, et donq̄s declare ceo preſentmēt per parolx deuāt eux▪ q̄ apres ſō deceaſe eſt ꝓue ꝑ teſtemoignes, et miſe en eſcript per le ordinary, Et donq̄s il ē en cy bone force, (ſinō pur terres) ſicōe il ad al primer en le vy del teſtatour eſte miſe en
                     •
                  ſcript.
            
            
               Them.
               THem, hoc eſt quod habeatis totam generationē villanorum veſtro
                     •
                  ū cū eor ſectis et cattallis vb
                     •••
                  
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  in Anglia fuer' inuenta, excepto ſi qd' aliquis no
                     •
                  iuus quiet ꝑ vn̄ annū et diē ī aliqua villa

priuilegia manſerit, ita quod in eor' cōmuniā vel gildam tanquam vnus illarū repertus fuerit, eo ipſo a villenagio liberatus eſt.
            
            
               Thefbote.
               THefboote eſt qn̄t home priſt byens dun laron de luy fauourer et maintainer. Et nemy quant hōe priſt ſes byens demeſne que fuerent ēblees de luy &c.
               Le punishment en aunc' tēps de Theefebote fuit de vie et de member: Mes a ore M. Stamford dit q̄ il ē punish per raunſome et impriſonment, ſed quaere, car ieo penſe ceo eſte felony.
            
            
               Title.
               TItle eſt lou loial cāe eſt veign̄ a vn hōe

de auer choſe q̄ auter ad, et il nad aſcū acc' pur ceo, come title de mortm̄, ou dentry ſur condic' enfreynr.
            
            
               Title Dentrie.
               TItle Dentrie eſt quant vn ſeiſie de terr' en fee ſait feoffem̄t de c̄ ſur condic̄, et le condic' ē enfreint: ore apres le conditiō iſſint enfreint, le feoffour ad title dent' en le terre, et iſſint poet qn̄t a luy pleiſt, et perſon entrie le franktenem̄t ſerra dit en luy maintenant. Et ē appell title Dentrie pur ceo q̄ il ne poet aū br▪ de droit enūs ſō feoffee ſur condition, car ſon droit fuit hors de luy per le feoffement, le q̄l ne poit eē reduc▪ ſaūs entrie, et le entrie

doit cēpur l enfreind' del condition.
            
            
               Tolle, ou Tolne.
               TOlle ou Tolne eſt plus propermēt vn paiment vſe en cities, villes, markets et fairs pur biēs et cattel port la deſtr' achat' et vēd, Et eſt touts dits deſte pay per le achator, et nemy per le vendour ſinon que ſoyt aſcun cuſtome al contrarye.
               Il y ad diuers auters tolles, cōe turne tolle, et ceo eſt lou tolle eſt pay pur auers queux ſoūt driues deſte vē
                  dus, comēt que ils ne ſount vendus.
               Item tolle trauers, ceo eſt ou vn clayme dauer vn ob. ou tyel 
                     ••
                  blable toll', d' cheſē
                  
beaſt que ē driue ſu
                     •
                   ſon terre.
               Through tolle, ē lou vn ville preſcribe de auer tolle pur cheſcū beſt que ale through lour ville vn certein, ou pur cheſc' vint ou cent, vn cert', q̄ ne appiert deē cy vnreaſonable p̄ſcripc' ou cuſtōe cōe aſcūs oūt ſupp̄ niēt obſtant il ſoit p le haut chimin del roine (come il c̄ appel) ou cheſō poet loyalment paſſe:ſil y ad quid pro quo, come ſi la ſoit vn pont ou tyel ſēblable cōmodity puruieu al coſtes et charges del vill' pur le eaſe d' trauailers que chaſe m̄ voy, per q' lour iourney eſt ou abrydge ou fait l' meliour: pur que donques ne poet

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
tolle eſte dd' loialmēt et oue bon reaſon de eux &c. Mes diūs cyttizens et burgeſſes ſōt quite de pay tolle ꝑ le graunt del roigne, ou ſa aūceſtors, ou claim̄ ceo per preſcriptyon ou cuſtōe. Iſſint auxy eſpirituall perſons et religious homes (com̄ ils fuerount appels) fueront quite de tolle pur lour byēs et marchaundyſes achate et vendus &c. Mes a ore le ſtatute de Roy H. 8. voet que ils ne marchādiſer, ſed quaere ſi lentent de cē ſtatute ſoit obſerue ent' eux al cē iour ou nemy, aſcuns diont que non. Item tenaūts en aunc' dem̄ doiēt eſte quite per tout le realme de payer tolle

cōe appiert deuant en le title Sokemans. Et en touts ceux caſes ou tol eſt deēdd', ou il ne doit eſte pay de eux q̄ doient aler, achate, et vend' quite de tolle, la le partye, ou partyes greeue poyēt auer vn briefe de eſſendi quietum de Tolonio, enuers luy ou ceux que iſſint demaunde tolle contra al graunte le Roygne ou ſa progenitours, ou contra al cuſtome ou preſcription.
            
            
               Tourne del viſcount.
               TOurne del viſcoūt eſt vn court de record en touts choſes q̄ ꝑtain al tourne. Et ē l' leete l'Roigne ꝑ tout le county, et le vicont eſt iudge. Et quecunque ad vn leete,

ad m̄ le aucthority deins le precinct, ſicōe le vic'ad deins le tourn̄.
            
            
               Treaſure troue.
               TReaſure troue eſt quant aſcun mony 
                     •
                  re, argent, plate, ou boliō, eſt troue en aſcū lieu, & nul conuſt a que le property eſt, donques le propertie de ceo appertyent al Royne, et ceo eſt dyt treaſure troue. Mes ſi aſcun mineral de mettal ſoyt troue en aſcun terre, ceo toutes foites pertient al ſeigniour del ſoile, forſque que il foyt mineral de ore, ou de argent, queux ſerrount toutes foits al Roigne en quecun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ſoile q̄ ils ſont troues.
            
            
               Viewe.
               
               VIewe eſt quant aſcun action real eſt port, et le tenaunt ne ſcauoit biē quel terre il eſt que le demaundant demaūde, don
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   le tenant priera la vievve. s. q̄ il puit voier le terre que il claima. Mes ſi le tenaunt ad ewe le vievve en vne briefe, et puis le briefe eſt abatus per myſnoſmer de ville, ou per iointenure, et puis le demaundaunt port vne tyel briefe vers le tenaunt, donques le tenaunt nauera le viewe en le ſecond briefe.
            
            
               Viſcount.
               VIſcoūt ē vn magiſtrate et offic̄ d'graūd aucthority q̄ noꝰ cō
                  munem̄t appellomus (Shirife) ou d' ꝑler plꝰ

veraym̄t (Shire reue) et fuit al primes appel (Shire gereue) ceſt a dire cuſtos comitatus, ou l' reue ou ruler del county, car (Gereue) eſteāt deriue del Saxon paroll (Gereccan pur ruler) fuit al p̄mes appel (Gerecfa) et dō
                  ques (Gerefa) que betoken vn ruler. Et de ceo vient (Portreue) ou (Portgereue) vn noſme q̄ en viel tēps fuit don al chiefe officer dun ville, et ſignifie le gouernour del ville pur c'que (Port) veniens de le Latyne parol (Portus) ſignifie vn port ville. Et (Gereue) eſteát deriue cōe eſt auantdit, ſignifi vn ruler, iſſint que (Portgereue) ou (cōe nous a ore briefem̄t parle c̄)

(Portreeue) eſt le gouernour del ville.
               Et iſſint fuit le chief officer ou gouernour del citty de London longe tēps paſt (deuāt que ils ad le noſme de Maire ou Bailife) appell, cōe il appiert en diuers viel monum̄ts, mes principalmēt en le Saxons charter de Guillam Baſtarde le conquerour, que iſſint commence. William Cyng greit Will' Biſceop, And Godfrey Ges port Gerefan, & dalle tha Burwaren the on Loūdē beon.
               Iſſint ils de Germany (de q' noꝰ et noſtr' lāguage enſēble prim̄
                  m̄t viēt) appel ent'eux vn gouernour Burgreue, vn auter Margreue, et vn aut'Lādſgreue,

oue tiels ſēblables &c. Ceſt tant eſt dit tātſolem̄t pur mr'e le droyt Etymon, et antiquitie del paroll (Shirife) a quel officer nr' cōmō ley ad touts ſoits accordant done grād cōfidēce, et aucthoritie, come de eſtre vn ſpecial p̄ſeruer del peace: et pur c̄ toutes obligatiōs q'il priſt a m̄ le purpoſe, ſoūt cōe Recogniſaces en ley, Il auxi eſt vn Iudge d' record, qn̄t il tient les leetes ou tournes, les q̄ux ſōt courts d' rec'.
               Item il ad le returne des br'es, et impanelling de iuries et tyels ſemblables &c.
            
            
               Voucher.
               VOucher eſt qn̄t vn Prec' qd' redd' de

terre eſt por
                     •
                  e vers vn home, & vn auter doit garraunty le terre el tenaunt, donques le tenaunte luy vouchera a garrauntie, & ſur ceo il auera vn briefe appel ſummonias ad vvarrantizandum, & ſi vycount retourne que il nad ryens que il puyt eſte ſom̄, donques iſſera briefe appel, ſequatur ſub ſuo periculo, & quaunt il vien
                     ••
                  l pleder' oueſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   le demaundaunt, & ſi il vient & ne puyt barre le demaundant, donques le demaundant recouera la terre vers le tenant, & le t' recouera tant de t're in value vers le vouch, et ſur c' il aūa vn briefe appel capias

                  ad valentiā
                   agaynſt the vouch.
            
            
               Vſes.
               VSes of lande had béeginninge after that the cuſtome of property béeganne amonge menne. As where one beeinge ſeyſed of lands in fee ſimple, made a feoffement to an other without any conſideration, but onely meaninge that the other ſhould be ſeiſed to his vſe, and that hée him ſelfe would take 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪ commoditie and profites of the landes, and that the feoffée ſhoulde haue the poſſeſſion and franketenement thereof to y• ſame vſe &c. Nowe after thys vppon good conſideratyons, and to auoyde dyuers miſchiefes and inconueniences, was y• ſtat̄
                  
ſtatut d' An. 27. H. 8. cap. 10. puruieu, quel vnite le vſe et poſſeſſion enſembl', iſſint q̄ il q̄ ad le vſe de t're, il meſme ad le poſſeſſiō de ceo, per vertue de ceſt eſtatute.
            
            
               Vſurie.
               VSurie eſt vn gayne de aſcū choſe ouſter le pryncipall, ou ceo que fuit lent, exact ſolement en conſideratiō de le loane, ſoyt il de corne, vyand', apparel, wares, ou tyels ſemblables, come de money. Et icy mult puit eſtre dit et diuers caſes poyent eſtre miſe concernant vſurie, le quel de purpoſe ieo omit, ſolem̄t ieo pria, q̄ ceux q̄ accōpt eux m̄s religious

et bō chriſtiās, ne voilent deceiue eux m̄s ꝑ colour de le ſtatut de vſury, pur ceo q̄ il dit, q̄ il ne ſerra loyal pur aſcū de prend' ouſter x. li. en le 100. li. pur vn an &c. per que ils collect (mes fauxmēt) que ils poient per ceo prender x. li. pur le lone dun 100. li. oue vn bō cōſcience, pur ceo q̄ le ſtatut ſolon
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   vn man̄ diſpence oue ceo (pur ceo que il ne punishe tiel prēdors) quel choſe il ne poet fair' oue l's loies et ordinances de dieu, car dieu voile auer ſes decrees obſerue inuiolable, que dit, lende expectēs pur nul choſe per c' &c. per queux parolx eſt exclude, le priſel dex. li. ou v. li. d'

vn denyer ouſter le pryncipall, Mes plus penſant tiels, que ceſt ſtatute fuit fait ſur tiel cauſe que moua Moyſes de doner vn bill de diuorce al les Iſraelites, come noſment, pur auoider vn greinder miſchiefe, et pur le durytie de lour ceurs.
            
            
               Vtlagarie.
               VTlagari eſt quaunt exigent iſſiſt vers aſcun home et ꝓclamac' fait al v. coūties donques a l' v. coūtie ſi le def. nappier, l'coroner donera iudgm̄t q̄ il ferra hors de protectiō d' roign̄, et hors del eide le ley, et per tiel vtlagary in actiōs perſonels le party vtlage forfetera toutes ſes byens et chateux

le burden ou trouble des biens, pur ſō eaſe et plus ſpeedye trauaile ſauns hue et cry fua, et vvayua les biens ou aſcun part de eux arrere luy &c. Donques le officer del roign̄, ou lereeue ou bayliſe al ſeignyor del maner (deyns que iuriſdiction ou circuit ils fuerount wayfe) que per preſcription, ou graunt del roygne ad le fraunchyſe de vvayfe, poyent ſeyſer les biens iſſint wayfe al vſe de lour ſeignyour, que poet retaine eux come ſes proper byens ſinon que le owner vient oueſque fresh ſuit apres le felon, et ſue vn appell, ou done en; euidence enuers luy al ſon arraynment ſur lendictment,

et il attaynt de ceo &c. En queux caſes le primer ovvner auera reſtytution de ſes biens iſſint emblee et vvayfe.
               Mes nyent obſtant cōe ad eſte dit, vvaife eſt properment de biens emblees, vncore vvaife poet eſte auxy de biens niēt embles, Come, ſi vn home ſoit purſue oueſque hue et crie, come vn felō, et il fua et relinquish ſes biens demeſn̄ &c. ils ſerra priſe come biens vvaife, et forfayt come ſils ad eſte emblees.
            
            
               VVaiue.
               WAiue eſt vn feme q̄ eſt vtl', eteſt appel waiue, quaſi relicta ab lege, et nō vtlag' cōe hōe eſt, car femes

ne ſount iures en leetes al roigne, ne al ley come homes ſount, queux pur ceo ſount deyns le ley ou femmes ne ſount, et pur ceſt cauſe ils ne poyent eſte dyt hors del ley entaunt que ils ne vnques fuerount deyns ceo. Mes vn home eſt dyt vtlage, pur ceo que il fuit vn foytes iure al ley, et a ore pur contempt il eſt mis hors del ley, et dictus vtlagatus quaſi extra legem poſitus.
            
            
               VVarwite.
               WArwite (ou wardwite come aſcuns copies ad ceo) hoc eſt quietum eſſe de denarijs dandis ꝓ wardis faciendis.
            
            
               
               Wrecke.
               VVReke ou varech cōe les Normās de que il vient appellant ceo, eſt quant vn niefe eſt perish ſur la mere, et nul home eſcap̄ viue hors d' niefe & la niefe ou parte del niefe iſſint perish ou les biēs en la niefe vient al terre daſcun ſeigniour, le ſn̄r les auera cōe vne vvreke d' mere, mes ſi vn hōe ou vn chien ouechate eſcape viue iſſint q' la partie a que les biens ſont veigne deins lan et iour, et ꝓue les bn̄s deſt'ſes, ilaūa eux arr', ꝑ ꝓuiſion del ſtat' de W. le prim̄ ca. 4. fait en les iours del Roy Ed. le 1. q' en c' followed le decre de H. 1.

deuaunt queiours, ſi vn niefe ad eſtre miſe ſurl' shore, torne oue tēpeſt, et nemye repaier per eux q' eſcapont en vie deins vn certen temps, que dō
                  ques ceo fuit priſe cōe vvrecke.
            
         
         
            
            The olde Tenures.
            
               Seruice de chiualer.
               TEnir per ſeruyce d'chiualer eſt a tener per homage fealty, et eſcuage, et treit a luy garde mariage et reliefe. Et nota que ſeruice de chiual' eſt ſeruice de terre ou de ten̄ts pur armes port' en guerre en defēc' d' roialme, Et doit gard mariage per la reaſō q̄ nul ē able ne de power et ne puit aū conuſaunce darmes porter auaunt que il ſoit dage of xxi. ans. Et pur taunt que le ſeigniour ne perdera c'▪ q̄ de droit doit auer, & que la povver de la royalme de ryen ne ſoit enfeeble: Laley voet per cauſe de ſon tender age que ſon

ſeignyour luy aūa en ſa garde tan
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   al plein age de luy cē aſſauoir xxi. ans.
            
            
               Graund ſerieantie.
               2 Tenir per graund ſerieantie, eſt ſicome vn home tyent certaine terres ou tenements de roy dal' oue luy en ſon hoſt, ou de porter ſō banner oue luy en ſes guerres, ou ameſn̄ ſō hoſte, ou tyel ſēblable, et a c̄ appent gard mariage et reliefe, ſicōe il appiert en la treatiſe de gards et reliefe enter leſtatutes. 28. E. I.
            
            
               Petit Serieantie.
               3 Tenir per petit ſerieantie eſt ſicome vn home tiēt de roy terres ou tenements, rē
                  daunt a luy vn cottel vn eſcue, vn ſete, vn arke ſauns corde, ou

auter ſeruice ſemblables, a la volunte le primer feoffour. Et la nappent garde mariage ne relief. Et not' que home ne puit tener per graunde ſerieanty, ne per petite ſerieāty, ſinō del roy.
            
            
               Eſcuage.
               4 Tenir per eſcuage eſt a tenir per ſeruice de chiualer. Et la appent garde, mariage, et relief. Et nota que home ne puit tenir ꝑ eſcuage, ſinon que il teygne per homage, pur ceo que eſcuage de common droyte treit a luy hōage cōe il fuit aiuge in t' H. 21. E. 3. c. 42. f 52. Auowrie 115. Et nota q̄ eſcuage eſt vne certein

ſomme de argent, et doit eſtr leue ꝑle ſn̄r de ſon tenant ſolon
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   le quantitie de ſon tenure quāt le eſcuage courge ꝑ tout Eng
                     ••
                  . Et ordeyne eſt ꝑ tout le counſel Denglet', qn̄t cheſ
                     •
                   tenāt don̄a a ſon ſeignior, et ceo eſt ꝓpermēt pur ſuſteiner la guerre ꝑenter Englet r
                     •
                   et ceux de eſcoce ou de Galeys, et nō pas ꝑenter auters terres, pur ceo q̄ les auauntdits terres ſerrount de droyt appendant a la royalme Dengleterre.
            
            
               Homage aunceſtrel.
               5 Tenir per homage aunceſtrel eſt lou ieo & mon aunceſtours ont tenus de vous et de voſtr' aunceſtours de temps dount memory

ne courge, ꝑ homage, fealty, & certein rent. Et neſt pas a tener per ſeruice de chiual', et la nappent garde, mariage, ne reliefe. Et nota q'homage puit eſte dyt in deux maners, ceſtaſcauoier, homage aunceſtrel, et homage de fait. Homage aunceſtrel eſt la ou vous & voſter aūceſtors ont tenus de moy et mes aūceſtors puis le tēps de non memory, per homage, fealtye, & certeyne rent. Homage de fait ēla ou ieo enfeoffe vous m̄s, a tenir de moye per homage & rent, et entaunt que ceſt homage commence per mon fayt, il eſt homage de fait.

Et nota que homage aunceſtrel treyt a luy vouch. ceſtaſcauoir garr' del aūceſt's, mes nō pas homaged' fait.
            
            
               Curteſie dengleterre.
               6 Tenir per la curteſie Dengleterre eſt, la ou vn hōe prēt fēe enherite, & ont iſſue fits ou file, & la feme deuy ſoit la iſſue mort ou en vie, le baron tiendra ceſt terre a terme de ſa vie per la curteſy Dengleterre, et per la ley. Et en cē caſe le fee & le droyt remaint in le perſone celuy de que il tient. Et pur ceo ceſt tenāt ne puit alyen en fee ne a term̄ dauter vie, Et ſil face, by en liſt a ecluy en l' reūc' dent'
            
            
               Fee ſimple.
               7 Tenir in fee ſimple

eſt a tenir a aſcun hōe ou feme, a luy et a ſes heires et a ſes aſſign̄s pur touts iours.
            
            
               Franke tenure.
               8 Tenir en frank tenure eſt a ten̄ a terme de ſa vie demeſne, ou a terme de auter vie, Et en ceſt caſe le fee & le droit remaynt in la perſon celuy de q̄ il t
                     •
                  ent. Et pur ceo 
                     •
                  el tenaunt ne puyt pas alien en fee ne a term de auter vie: Et ſil face, bien liſt a celuy in q̄l le fee & le droyt demourt, de
                     ••
                  rer.
            
            
               Low
                     ••
                  .
               9 Tenure in dovver eſt, lou home inherite prent feme et deuie, lheire entra et endovvera la femme de la tierce partie de tout ceo que fuit a ſon baron

en ſa vie, en fee ſimple ou fee taile, et el tyendra cels terres pur term' d' ſa vie cōe ſon franktenement.
            
            
               Terme dans.
               10 Tenir a term̄ dans neſt forſ
                     ••
                   chattel en effect, car nul actyon eſt mayntenable enūs l' t
                     •••••
                   quāt a recouerer de franktenement, car nul frāktenement eſt a luy.
               Leaſe a term' dans eſt chattel real, Et lauter chattel eſt perſonal, et toutes bn̄s mouables ſont chattels ꝑſonals.
            
            
               Mortgage.
               11 Tenir in morgage ē a ten̄ a cert' term̄ ſur condic', q' ſi le leſſour paia tants den̄s a tyel iour, q̄il puit enter, et ſinō q̄ laut'eit fee ſimple ou fee tayle, ou franktenemēt. Et en

cheſcun caſe lou terres ou tenements ſunt dones a hōe a certeyn terme ſur condie' de part le leſſor pur faire le leſſee auoir plꝰ longe temps ou terme, ſi lauter ne face ſicōe la condic' ē, les terres et tenements tanque le iour q' la condic' ſerroit fait, ſont tenus in morgage, quaſi in mortgage.
               Et nota q̄ ſi 
                     •
                  err' ſoit leſſe a vn hōe en morgage en fee ſimple, ou in fee taile ſur cōdiē, q̄ ſi le primier leſſor cōe deuāt eſt dit, pay tā
                  
                     •
                  s des den̄s a tiel iour q̄ il puit enter, et ſiuō q̄ le leſſee eyt m̄ leſtate en les terres, que le leſſour luy graunt adeprimes. Et ſi deuant le iour aſſygne,

ie leſſee ſoit diſſeiſi, il auera aſſiſe de nouel 
                     〈…〉
                  . Et en caſe q̄ si le ieſſee prent feme S
                     •
                   
                  
                     ••
                  uie ſeiſie deuant le iour aſſigne, ſa feme serra endow.
               Et nota que ſi le leſſour apres le mort le leſſee ne pay les de
                  
                     〈…〉
                  s al' iour aſſeſſe, adonques la feme tyendra ſa dower, et liſſ
                     •
                  e ſon heritage. Et en cas q̄ le leſſour al' iour aſſeſſe paia les denyers al heire de le leſſee, donques il puit ouſter la femme, et le heire auxi de tout le terre primierm̄t leſſe. Et ſi vn home done terres a vn auter en le taile, rendant a luy certein rent per an, et vn enter pur faut de paym̄t, le donee prent

feme & deuie ſeiſie, la feme ſerra endovve. Et en cas q̄ ap̄s le rēt ſoit aderere, le donor puit entre et ouſta le feme & 
                     •
                  heire auxy. Et nota q̄ ſi terres ſoient leſſes a vn hōe en morgage en fee ſur c̄
                  tein conditiōs, l' leſſee alien, le leſſour ſerra charge d'paier les deniers al alienee et nō pas a ſon feoffee cōe il eſt dit. 17. Aſſ. 2.
            
            
               Burgage.
               12 Tenir in burgage eſt a ten̄ ſi cōe les burgeis teygnent de roy ou de auter ſn̄r terres ou tenementes rendant a luy vn certein rent per an, ou auterment la ou vn auter home que burgeis tient daſcū ſeygniour terres ou tenementes

en burgage rendant a luy vn cert' rēt ꝑ an.
            
            
               Socage.
               13 Tenir en ſocage ē a tenir daſcū ſeigniour terres on tenen̄its rē
                  dant a luy vn certeyn rent per an, pur touts maners des ſeruyces. Et nota que tenir per ſocage neſt pas tenir per ſeruice de chiual' ne la appent gard, mariage, ne relife, mes ils doubleront vn foites lour rent ap̄s la mort lour aunceſter ſolonque ceo q̄ ſoleint paier a lour ſeignyour, et ils ne ſerrount ouſtre meſure greeues, cōe il appiert en la treatiſe de gardes et d' reliefes. Et nota que ſocage puit eſtre dit en trois maners, ceſtaſſauoir ſocage en franktenure, Socage en aū
                  cient

tenure, et ſocag' en baſe tenure. Socage en frank tenure eſt a tenir fraunchement per certein rent pur toutes manners des ſeruices come deuant eſt dit, & de ceo le procheine amye aueral' gard a que lheritage ne purra my deſcender tanque al age lheire de xiiij. anss ceſtaſſauoir ſi lherytage veign̄ ꝑ le part le pier, ceux de parte la mere aueront le gard & econtra. Et nota q̄ ſi gardeine en ſocage face vvaſte il ne ſerra my empech de vvaſt mes rendra accompt al heire quant il viendra a pleyne age de xxj. ans. Et vide leſtatute de Marlebridg capitulo xvij. pur ceſt

matter. Socage de auncient tenure ē ceo ou gerts en auncyent demeſne tenoyēt, que no ſoilent auter brief auoir que le briefe de droit cloſe q̄ ſerr' termine ſecūdum conſ. manerij, Sc le mōſtrauerunt pur eux dyſcharge quaunt lour ſeignior eux diſtreine put faire auters ſeruices que faire ne duiſ ſent. Et cēbr' de mō
                  ſtrauerunt doyt eſtre port enuers lour ſeigniour, et ceux tenants teignent touts per vn certeine ſeruice. Et ils ſont frāktenāts daū
                  cien demeſne. Socage in baſe tenure eſt lou hōe tient en auncient demeſne que ne puyt aū l' mōſtrauer' et pur ceo il eſt appel d' baſe tenure.

14 Tenir in fee ferm̄ eſt a tener en fee ſimple rend' a le ſn̄r le va lue ou la moity ou al meins le iiij. part ꝑ an, et ne doit auter choſe faire, mes ſicōe eſt cō
                  teign̄ en le ſeffem̄t. Et q̄ tient en fee ferme doit faire fealty et nient reliefe.
            
            
               Franke fee.
               15 Tenir en frāke fee eſt a tenir en fee ſimple terres pleadable a la comen ley.
            
            
               Baſe fee.
               16 Tenir en fee baſe ē a ten̄ a la volūt le ſn̄r.
            
            
               Villenage.
               17 Tenir in pure villenage eſt a faire tout 
                     •
                   que le ſeignior luy voit commaunder.
               La difinition de villenage eſt villeine de ſāke, et d' tenure. Et il

eſt de que ſon ſn̄r prēt redempc'd' ſa file marier ou ſoym̄ enfraū
                  chiſe, Et le ſeign̄ puyt luy ouſter des terres ou ten̄ts a ſa volūt, & auxi de toutes ſes bn̄s et chateaux. Et nota q̄ ſokman neſt pas pure villein, ne villein doit pas garde mariage ne reliefe ne faire aut' ſer uices reals. Et nota q̄ tenur' en villenage ne ferr' nul frāke hōe villein ſil ne ſoit cōtinue puis le temps de non memorie, ne villeyne terre ne ferra franke home villein, ne frāke terre ne ferra villeine franke, ſinon q̄ le tenant ſoit cōtinue frā
                  chement puis le tēps de non memory, mes villein ferra franket're villein per ſeiſin ou

ꝑ claime de ſon ſeign̄. Et nota que ſi villein purchaſe certein terre et prent feme et alien & deuie deuaunt le claime ou ſeyſin de ſō ſn̄r, la fēe ſerr' endow. Et nota q' en ceſt cas q' le ſn̄r port Precipe quod reddat enuers lalien ſon villeyn le q̄l vouche a garrauntie le iſſue la villeine que eſt villein a la ſeign̄, il auera la vouche. Et ꝑ proteſtatiō le ſeignior puit ſauer (que nō obſtant que il pled' oue ſon villeine) vncor' ſō villeine ne ſerra mye enfraunchiſe. Et nota que baſtarde ne ſerra iammes aiudge villein ſinon per conuſance en court de recorde. Et nota que ſi det ſoit due per vn ſeignior a

vn home et il face ii. home ſes executours les queux ſount villeins al dit ſeignior et deuie, les villeins auerount action de dette enuers lour ſeignior, nient obſtaunt que il pled oueſque eux. Et ſil face proteſtatyon ils ne ſerront pur tant enfraunchiſe, pur ceo que ils ſount a recoū le dette auauntdit al vſe dune auter perſon, ceſtaſſauoir al vſe lour teſtatour et nyent a lour vſe demeſne. Et ſi le tenaunt in dovver eit vn villein le quel purchaſe certeyne terre en fee & puis le tenant en dovver enter, el auera la terre a luy & a ſes heirs a touts iours, & meſme la ley ē de tenant

a terme dans dū villeine.
               Et nota q̄ le ſn̄r puit robber ſō villein, naufrer et chaſtiſer a ſa volūt, ſalue q̄ il ne puit luy mayhime, car dō
                  ques il auera appel de mayhime enuers luy. Et nota q̄ villein puit auer iii. actions enuers ſon ſeign̄, ceſtaſcauoir, appel de mort ſō aūc', appel de rape fait a ſa femme, et appell de mahim. Et nota ſi deux ꝑcen̄s portent briefe de N
                     •
                  iftie, et lun de eux ſoit non ſuy, le nonſuit de luy ſerra aiudge la nonſuyte de am bydeux, iſſint que ſi le nonſuyte ſoyt apres apparaunce, ils ſerrount ouſtes de ceſt actyon a toutes ioures,

car la ley eſt tiel in fauorem libertatis. Et nota ſi deux ount vn villeine in commen, & lun de eux face a luy vn manumiſſion, il ne ſerra my enfranchiſe enuers ābideux Et nota que en br' de Natiuo habendo, il couient que le ſeign̄r monſtre coment il aueigna priuie de ſake a celuy villein de que il eſt ſeignior &c. Et ſil, ne nul de ſes aunceſters ne ſoit ſeiſi de nul de ſon ſanke, il ne gaynera per ſon actiō ſi le villeine nad pas conu en court de rec' luy eſtre ſon villeine. Et nota que en briefe de Niefe ne purront eſte mys pluſoures niefes que deux tant ſolement, & hoc introductum fuit prius

in odium ſeruitutis, Mes en briefe de Libertate probanda, purrount eſtre mis taunts niefes come le pl' voudra.
            
            
               Et nota que ſi le niefe de ſeign̄ ſoit fue en auncient demeſne de roy ou auter vill' priuilegie, deins lan & iour le ſeignior puit luy ſeyſer, & ſil demourt en la dit vil▪ ou lieu fraunchiſe per vne an & vne ioure ſauns le ſeyſin de ſon ſeygniour, il nad my povver de luy ſeyſer apres, ſil ne va en eſtray de hors le ſuiſdit fraunchiſe.
            
            
               Taile.
               18 Tenir en le taile'ē lou hōe tient certeine terres ou tenementes

a luy et a ſes heires de ſon corps engendres. Et nota que ſi la terre ſoit dōe a vn hōe et a ſes heirs males, et il ad iſſu mal', il ad fee ſimple, et ceo fuit aiudge en le parliament noſt' ſeigniour le roy. Mes lou terres ou tenem̄ts ſount dones a vn hōe & a ſes heirs males de ſon corps engendres, il ad fee taile, et liſſue female ne ſerr' my inherite, vt patet Anno xiiij. Edwardi tertij en vn Aſſ. 18. Edvvardi 3. 45.
            
            
               Taile apres poſſibilitie.
               19 Tenir en le tail' apres poſſibilitie diſſue extinct eſt, lou terre eſt done a home et ſa femme et a les heires de lour ij. corps engē
                  dres, lū d' eux ſuruiue

laut' ſās iſſu entre eux iſſāt, il tiēdra ſa terre a terme de ſa vie dem̄ cōe tenāt en le taile apres poſſibility diſſue extinct. Et nō
                  
                     •
                  obſtār q̄ il fac̄ waſte, il ne ſerra iāmays empeche de cel vvaſt. Et nota ſil aliē, celuy en la reūſiō naūa briefe dentre in conſimili caſu. Mes il puit ētrer, et ſō entre eſt congeabl' per Ro. Thorp chiefe Iuſtice. 28. E. 3. 96. et 49. E. 3. 25.
            
            
               Frankmariage.
               20 Tenir en frāk mariage eſt a ten̄ en l' ſecond tail' limit en leſtatut de Weſtm̄. 2. ca. 1. Et le feoffour quiteral' feoffee d' touts man̄s des ſeruices tā
                  que le quart degree ſoyt paſſe, et le feoffour

ferra toutes les ſeruyces et ſuites durant la dyt terme. Et puis les heires le feoffee le ferrount, pur ceo que le priuitie de ſanke eſt paſſe. Et ſil ſoit diſtreine pur ſeruice, il auera briefe de meſn̄ enuers luy ſuppoſaunt que il tyent les terres de luy, mes il nauera pas le fore iudgement ſil ne ſoyten auauntage de 
                     •
                  es iſſues.
               Et nota que apres le quart degree ſoyt pas il ſerra attendant des tants des ſeruices a le donour, come le donour eſt attendant al ſeignyour paramont. Et ſil face felony pur quoy il eſt attayn
                     •
                  , le roy auer' ſa terre pur terme de ſa vie natural.

Et apres la mort, ſon iſſu ſerra inherite come per force de la tayle. Et en ceſt caſe, nul auera ſa terre per voye deſchete, nyent pluis q̄ en auter tayle. Et en caſe que le tenant deuie ſans heyre de ſon corps engendres, la terre reuertera a le donour, come ſerroit en le commen taile. Et ſi home leſſa ſa terre a vn auter en franke maryage, rendaunt a lay vn c̄tayn rent per an, il tiendra ceſt terre en le commen taile, & nient en franke maryage, car per le rent reſerue, ceux paroix, (in liberum maritagium) ſōt tout ouſtrement voides, iſſynt que la tenure ſerra entendus

ſolon
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   la tenur' en le comen taile.
               Et nota que le done en frank maryage ad condytion annexe a luy non obſtant que il neſt pas expreſſemēt declare en la charter del done, vt patet per ſtatutū weſtin̄ ſecōd, cap. I. de Donis conditionalibus.
               Et nota q̄ home ne donera pas terres ou tenements en franke mariage, forſque lou la feme eſt pryuie de ſanke a le donoure. Car auterment naueroit home ne fēe aſcū eſtate ꝑ tiel feoffemēt forſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   a terme de vie.
            
            
               Frankalmoione.
               21 Tenir en frāk almoign̄ eſt a tenir terres ou tenemēts pur dieu ſeruir et ſaint eſglife

dower ſans faire nul auter manner de ſeruice, Et nota que en ceſt cas le donour eſt meſne & luy doit acquiter franchemēt enuers le chyefe ſeigniour, & auxi ceux q̄ teygnont en frankalmoigne ne ferroyent fealtie, mes ceux que teignont en frākmariage, ferront fealtie.
            
            
               Elegit.
               22 Tenir per Elegit ē lou home ad recouer det ou damage ꝑ br'e deuers vn auter, ou ꝑ conuſanc' ou in auter maner, il auera deyns le an deuers luy vn briefe iudicial noſme Elegit, dauer execution del moytye de toutes ſes terres & chat' (excepts boefes, et affers a ſa carues)

tanque le det ou le dam̄ ſoient ouſtremēt leues ou payes a luy, & duraunt ceſt terme il eſt tenāt per Elegit. Et nota ſil ſoyt ouſte dey ns le terme il aūa aſſiſe d' nouel diſſeiſin & apres vn rediſſeiſin ſi beſoign̄ ſoit, & ceſt dōc per leſtat' d' W. 2. cap. 18. et auxy per lequitie de meſme leſtatute celuy q̄ ad ſon eſtate ſil ſoit ouſte auer' aſſiſe et rediſſeiſin ſi beſoign̄ſoit. Et auxi ſil face ſes executours & deuye, et ſes executoures entrount & puys ſoyent ouſtes, ils auerount per lequitie de meſme leſtatut actyon come luy meſme ſuiſdit, mes ſil ſoyt ouſte et puis face ſes executours & deuye,

ſes executoures purront entrer & ſils ſoient eſtoppes de lour entre ils auerount vn bryefe de treſpas ſur lour matter & caſe.
               Et nota ſil face waſt en tout la terre, ou en parcel, lauter auera enuers iuy mayntenaunt vn briefe iudicial hors de la prymer recorde noſme venire facias ad computandum, per force de quel ſerra enquyſe ſil ad leue toutes les deniers ou parcel, & ſil nad leue les denyers, donques ſerr' enquiſe a quaunt le vvaſte amount, Et ſi le waſte amoūt ſinō a parcel, donques tauntes des denyers que le vvaſt a moūt ſerra abridge de

les ſuiſdits den̄s q̄ux fuer' eſtre leues. Mes ſil ad fait pluys waſte q̄ le auauntdyt ſōme dargent q' fuit a eſtre leue amount, lauter ſerra diſcharge maintenaunt de toutes les deniers ſuiſdits et recouera ſa terre. Et pur la ſuperfluitie de waſte fait ouſter ceo que amount a le dyt ſumme il recouera ſes dammages ſingles, et meſme la ley eſt de ſes execurors, et auxy de ceſtuy que ad ſon eſtate, Et nota ſil aliē en fee, ou a terme de vie, ou en le taile, tout la terre ou parcel d' la terre que il tient per Elegit, ſi le alienatiō ſoit fait deins le terme ou ap̄s, ceſtuy que ad droit auera vers luy

vn aſſiſe de nouel diſſeiſin. Et couiēt q' ils ſoiēt miſe en laſſ. ambideux, auxibn̄ le alienee cōe le alienour et nō obſtāt que lalien̄ deuie maintenant vncore ceſtuy q'ad droit aūa vers 
                     •
                  alienee ſole aſſ. cōe ſil vſt eſtr' ſon ſimple t' a term̄ dans, Et ce
                     •
                   eſt per lequity del ſtatute de Weſtminſter 2. ca. 25. pur ceo que il nad ſinon chatel en effect, et m̄ la ley eſt de ſes execut' & de ceſtuy q' ad ſon eſtate cōe eſt ſuiſdit.
               Et nota que en Elegit, ſi le vicont retorn̄ que il auoit ryen iour de la reconiſance fait, mes que il purchaſe terre puis le temps, adonques la partye pl'

auera nouel brief daū execution de ceo, meſ me la ley eſt dun eſtatute merchaunt. Et nota que apres le fieri facas vn nome puit auer le Elegit, mes non econtra, entaunt que le Elegyt eſt de pluis haut nature que le fieri facias. Et nota que ſi home recoū per briefe d' det, et ſue vn fieri facias & le vicontretourne que le party nad riens dont il puit faire gree a la party, donq̄s le pleintife auera vne Elegyt ou vn capias ſicut alias & pluries. Et ſi le vicount retourne a le capias mytto vobis corpus & il nad riens dont il puit faire gre a la ꝑty, il ſerra maunde al gayle de Fleete, &

illon
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   demourra tanque il ad fait gree al gty, et ſi le vic' retorne non eſt inuentus, adō
                  
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   iſſera lexigent enūs luy. Et nota q' en br' de dette port deuers perſō de ſaynt eſgliſe q' nad rien de lay fee, & le vicount returne que il nad riens ꝑque il puit eſtr' ſom̄, adonques ſuera le plaintife brief al Eueſque que il ſace venir ſon clerk 
                     ••
                   leueſque luy ferra venirpers
                     ••
                   eſtratiō del eſgli
                     •
                  e. Et notu q̄ hōe ſi port br' de det & rec', & face ſes execut' & deuie, ils auerount execution non obſtaunt que il ſoyt deins lan per 
                     •
                  n ſcire facias.
            
            
               Statut merchant.
               23 Tenir per leſtat'

merchant eſt lou hōe conuſt a paier certain denyers a vn auter a certaine iour deuaunt le maire, bayllye, ou aut' gardein daſc'ville q̄ ad poiar de faire execuc' de m̄ leſtat', & ſi l' obligeene paia l' det a le iour aſſes & rien de ſes bn̄s, terr', ou tenem̄ts ne purrōt eſtre troues deins la garde le maire ou gardeyne auantdyt, mes en auters lieus dehors, dō
                  ques le reconiſee ſuer' le reconiſance & obligation oue vn certification al chauncery deſouth le ſeale le Roy, & il auera hors de la chaūc' vn capias al vic' de q̄l coūty il ē de luy app̄n̄d' et metter en priſō ſil ne ſoit clerke tan
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   il ad fait gree de la dette. Et

vn quart▪ de lā ap̄s c̄ q̄ il ſerra pris, il auera ſa terre liuere a luy meſme pur faire gree a le party de dette. Et il puit vender tanque il eſt enpriſon, & ſa vende ſerra bone & loyal. Et ſil ne face gree deins le quarter dun an, ou ſi ſoit returne que il nē troue, & ſil ne ſoit clerke, adonques le reconiſee puit auer briefe de la chauncery queeſt appelle Extendi facias, direct al touts vic'lou il ad t'res dextender ſes terres et biēs, et ſes bn̄s a luy deliū, et luy ſeiſer en ſes terres, pur les tenir a luy et a ſes heires et a ſes aſſignes tanque le dette ſoyt leue ou pay, & per cel temps il eſt tenaunt ꝑ

ſtatute merchant. Et not a queen leſtatute merchaunt, le reconiſee auera execution de toutes les terres que le reconyſour auoyt iour de la reconiſaunce fayt, et vnques puis per force de meſme leſtatute.
               Et nota que quaunt aſcū waſt ou deſtruction eſt fait ꝑ le reconiſce, ſes execut's, ou ꝑ celuy qui ad ſon eſtate, le reconyſour & ſes executours auerōt meſme la ley com̄ eſt ſuiſdit de le tenaunt ꝑ Elegit.
               Et nota ſi tenaunt per leſtatut merchant tient ouſter ſō terme, celui qui ad droit puit ſuer enuers luy venire facias ad computandum, ou entrer tā
                  tost

vt ſur tenant per Elegit.
               Trois man̄s de rents y ſount, ceſtaſſauoire rēt ſeruic̄, rēt charge, & rent ſecke. Rent ſeruic̄ eſt lou vn hōe tyent dun auter ꝑ fealtie, & pur faire ſuite a ſa court, & rendant a luy vn certaine rent per an pur touts maners des ſeruices. Et nota, que ſi le ſeignyour ſoyt ſeiſie des ſeruices & rent auauntdits, & ils ſoyent aderere, et il diſtrein̄, et le ten̄t reſcue le diſtres, il puit auer aſſiſe, ou brief de Reſcoꝰ. Mes il eſt pluis neceſſarye pur luy auer aſſyſe que bryefe de Reſcous, pur tāt que per Aſſiſe il recouera ſon rent & ſes damages,

mes per ceſt briefe de Reſcous, il ne recouera mes les repriſes & les da
                     ••
                  . Et nota que ſi le ſeigniour ne ſoit my ſeyſie del rent & ſeruice, & ils ſount aderere, & il diſtrey ne pur eux, et le tenaunt reprent la diſtreſſe, il ne puyt mye auer aſſiſe, mes briefe de reſcoꝰ, et ne couiēt mi al ſeigniour de mr' ſon droit. Et nota que ſi le ſn̄r diſtreine ſon tenaunt en ſocage pur ſeruice de chiual' ql il ſuppoſe eſtre tenus d' luy, & auovve pur meſ
                     ••
                  s les ſeruices en court de recorde, il ſerra charge per tiels ſeruices, per Fynch. termino Hillarij Ann̄ xlvi.
               Et nota que ſi le

ſeigniour ne puit my trouer dyſtreſſe per deux ans, il auera vers le tenaunt bryefe de Ceſſauit per biennium, vt patet per leſtatut de weſtm̄. 2. cap. 21. Et ſi le tenant deuie en le meane tēps & ſon iſſue entre, le ſeign your auera vers liſſu briefe dentre ſur Ceſſauit, ou ſi le tenaunt alien, le ſeigniour aūa vers lalyenee lauant dit briefe. Mes ſi le ſeigniour ad iſſue et deuie, et le tenaunt ſo yt en arrerage de dyt rent & ſeruyces de le temps le pyer del iſſue & nemy en temps del iſſue, il ne puyt mye dyſtreyne pur arrerages en tēps ſon pyer, & il nauera aſcun auter recouere

vers le tenant ou aſcun auter, pur ceo q̄ tiel aduantage eſt done pur le ley al tenāt. Et nota q̄ rent ſeruice eſt, a quel appent fealtie, mes a rēt charge & rent ſecke ne appent pas fealtie mes il appent a rent ſeruice de commen droit.
            
            
               Rent charge.
               25 Rent charge ē lou home graūt certeyne rent iſſant de ſes terres ou tenemēts a vn auter en fee ſimpl' ou in fee taile, ou a terme de vie ꝑ fayt ſur condic', q̄ a q̄l heure q̄ le rent ſoit aderere, bien lirra a le grauntee ou a ſes heirs ou aſſignes a diſtrein̄ en m̄ la terres ou tenements.
               Et nota que ſi le rēt

ſoit aderere, bn̄ liſt a le grauntee ꝑ election dauer briefe danuitie, ou il puit diſtreyner, & ſi la diſtres ſoit reſcue de luy, & il ne fuit mye ſeyſie adeuaunt, il nad mye recouere forſque per brief de Reſcous, car la diſtreſſe primierm̄t fayt, ne done a luy ſeiſin, forſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   
                  
                     •
                  il happe le rent adeuaunt, car ſil fuit ſeyſie del rent adeuaunt, & puis le rent ſoit aderere, & il diſtreine, & reſcous a luy ſo yt fayt, il auera aſſiſe ou brief d' Reſcous.
               Et nota q̄ en cheſcū aſſiſe de rēt charge & dannuel rent, & en bryefe de Annuitye, couyent a celuy que port le briefe

de monſtre auaunt eſpecialtie, ou auterment il ne maynteynera aſſ. mes en mortdaunceſtour ou Formedon en la deſcender, et auters bryefes (en les queux title eſt dōe ou cōpris) port de rēt charge, ou dānuel rent, neſt my beſoygn̄ de mōſtre eſpecialtie. Et nota q̄ ſi hōe grāt rent charge a vn auter, et le graūtee purchaſe le moytie de la terre doūt le rent eſt iſſant, tout le rent eſt extinct. Et ſile grātee releſſe a le grauntour peel de le rent, vncor' tout le rēt nē extinct. Mes en rent ſeruice, le ley eſt auterm̄t, car non obſtant q̄ le ſn̄r ad la moitie purchaſe de la terre, dount le

rent eſt iſſant', vn c̄ le rent neſt pas extinct forſque a le moitie, et la cauſe de diuerſitie eſt pur ceo que rent ſeruice puit eſtre ſeuere a vn portiō, mes nemy rent charge.
               Et nota q̄ ſi rēt charg ſoyt grāt a ▪deux ioītment, et lun releaſe, vncore lauter auera la moitie del rent. Et auxy ſi lun purchaſe le moytie de la terre dont le rent eſt iſſant, lauter auera le moitie del rent de ſon compaignion. Et ſi le diſſeyſor charge la terre a vn eſtraunge, & le diſſeiſie port laſſiſe & recouer, le charge eſt defeate. Mes ſi celuy qui ad droyt, charge la t're, et vn eſtraūge fayne vn faux actyon

enuers luy que nad droit et recouera per der le charge demurra. Et nota que en cas que vn purpartie ſoit parenter deux parceners et pluis terre ſoit allot a lun, que a lauter, et celuy que ad pluis de terre charge ſa erre a lauter, & el happe le rent, el mainteinera aſſiſe ſás eſpecialtie. Et ſi le graūtee lauoyt en fee ſimple, ou en ſee tayle, & ad iſſue & deuie, ſi lyſſue port vn formedō, ou aſſiſe de mortdaunceſter, il ne ſerra iammes charge de mōſtre eſpecialtie.
            
            
               Rent ſecke.
               26 Rent ſecke eſt lou hōe tient de moy per hom̄, fealtie, et auters ſeruic', rēdāt a moi vn

certain rent per an, et ieo graunt ceſt rent a vn auter reſeruaunt a moy le ſeruice.
               Et nota que en rent ſecke ſi hōe ſoit ſeyſie del rent, & le rēt ſoyt aderere, il ne puit my diſtreine mes il auera Aſſyſe de nouel dyſſeyſin.
               Et'nota que ſi rent ſeck ſoit graunt a vn home et a ſes heires, et le rent ſoit aderere & le graūtor deuie, lheir ne purra mye diſtreiner, ne recouera les arrerages de temps ſon pyer, ſicome eſt auantdit de
                     •
                  rent ſeruice.
               Et en meſme l' man̄ ē adire en rēt charge ou annuel rent. Mes en toutes les rentes

auantdits lheire purr' auer pur arrerages en ſon temps demeſn̄ tiel auauntage come auoyt ſō pier en ſa vie. Vide ſtatut' 32. H. 8. 37.
               Et nota que in rent ſeck ſi hōe ne ſoit ſeyſie del rent, & il ſoyt aderere, il eſt ſans recouere, pur ceo que il fuit ſa folye demeſne adeprymes quaunt le rent fuiſt graūt a luy ou reſerue, que il ne priſt my ſeiſin del rēt ſicome vn denyer ou deux. Et nota q̄hom̄ ne puit my auer Ceſſauit per bienniū, ou auter briefe dētre ſur ceſſauit pur nul rent ſeck aderere ꝑ ij. ans, mes ils purrount tout ſolement pur rēt ſeruice vt patet in ſtat. W. 2. cap. 21.

Et nota q'en rēt ſecke il couient pur luy q' ſue pur le rent ſecke pur mōſtre fait al tenant, ou auterm̄t le t' ne ſerra mye charge del rent forſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   lou le rent ſecke fuyſt rent ſeruice adeuaunt, cōe en ceſt caſe, ſeignior, meſne, & tenaunt, & cheſcun deux tyent dauter per homage et fealty. et let' del meſne x. s. de rent, le ſeigniour paramont purchaſe les terres ou tenementes de le tenaunt, tout le ſeignorye del meſne, forſpris le rēt eſt extinct. Et pur ceſt cauſe ceſt rent ē deuenꝰ rēt ſeck et le rēt ſeruice chāge car il ne puyt dyſtrein̄ pur ceſt rent. Eten ceſt caſe celuy que

demaunde le rent ne ſerra iāmes charge de monſtre fait. Auxi en briefe de mortdaūceſter ayell ne beſayle de rent ſecke il ne beſoigne monſtre eſpecialtie pur c̄ que ceux briefes de poſſeſſion compreehndont vne title deins eux meſm̄s, ceſtaſſauoir que launc̄ fuit ſeiſie de meſme le rent & continua ſa poſſeſſion per cauſe d' quel ſeiſine le ley ſuppoſe que eſtauxi auerrable per pais, tamen quaere, car aſcuns ſuppoſont que il couient a fine force a mōſtrer auaunt fait, pur ceo q' rent ſeck ē vne choſe enconter comē droit auxibyen come rent charge, mes en Aſſiſe de nouel diſſeiſine et

en br' dentre ſur diſſeyſine port de rent ſeck, il couient de fine force monſtre auaunt fait pur ceo que rent ſecke eſt vn choſe encont' comen droit ſinon en le caſe ſuiſdit ou il fuiſt rent ſeruice adeuant.
               Et aſſiſe de nouel diſſeiſin, et br' dentre ſur diſieiſin ne conteygnent deins eux nul title, mes ſuppoſent vn diſſeiſine eſtre fait a le pleintiſe. Et dentendement del ley la diſſeiſine ne done nul cauſe dauerment encounter comen droit, mes de fine force il monſtre auant eſpecialtie.
            
            
               Suit ſeruice.
               27 Suit ſuruice eſt a venir a la court de iij.

ſemaignes en trois ſemaignes ꝑ an entier, et purceo ſerra home diſtr' & nyent amercye. Suite real ē a venir a la courtdel leete, &c' neſt forſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   deux foits en an, et pur ceo home ſerra amercy et non pas diſtraine.
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprinted at London. in Fleteſtrete within Temple Barre at the ſigne of the hande and Starre by Rychard Tottel. 1579.
            
         
      
   