
      
         
            
            A
TREATISE
OF THE LORDS
Supper, in two
Sermons.
            Imprinted at London by R. Field for Thomas
Man, dwelling in Paternoſter row, at
the ſigne of the Talbot.
1591.
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            IN the first ſermon the aduerſarie is confuted.
            In the ſecond ſermon the Communicants are prepared.
            In both are many obſeruations, and the words of the
text expounded.
            Now labor for thy ſelfe as I haue labored, for thee,
I would haue thee profit ſomewhat more by this booke;
becauſe it hath weakened me more then all the reſt.
Farwell.
         
      
      
         
            
            A Treatiſe of the Lords Supper;
in two Sermons.
            The firſt Sermon.
            
               1. Cor. 11. 23. 24.
               
                  The Lord Ieſus in the night that he was
betrayed, tooke bread:
                  And when he had giuen thanks, he brake
it, and ſaid, Take, eate: this is my bodie,
which is broken for you: this dayes
in remembrance of me.
               
            
            
               THE Word and the Sacraments
are the two breaſts
wherewith our mother
doth nurſe vs.The two breſts of the Church. Seeing euerie
one receiueth, and
few vnderſtand what they receiue; I
thought it the neceſſarieſt doctrine to
preach of the Sacramēt; which is a witnes
of Gods promiſes, a remembrāce of
Chriſts death, & a ſeale of our adoptiō:

therfore Chriſt hath not inſtituted this
Sacrament for a faſhion in his Church
to touch, and feele, and ſee, as we gaze
vpon pictures in the windowes; but
as the woman which had the bloudie
iſſue,Matth. 9. 20. touching the hemme of Chriſtes
garmēt, drew vertue from Chriſt himſelfe
becauſe ſhe beleeued: So Chriſt
would that we touching theſe ſignes,
ſhould draw vertue from himſelf, that
is, all the graces which theſe ſignes repreſent.2. Chro. 35. 6.
Therefore as the Leuits vnder
the Law, were bound to prepare their
brethren before they came to the Paſſeouer;
ſo preachers of the Goſpel ſhould
prepare their brethrē before they come
to the Supper of the Lord. For which
purpoſe I haue choſen this place to the
Corinthians, which is the cleareſt & fulleſt
declaration of this Sacrament in all
the ſcripture.
            The Lord Ieſus in the night, &c:
            The ſumme of all theſe words is,The diuiſion the
inſtitution, and vſe of the Lords Supper.
Firſt Paul ſheweth the author of
it, The Lord Ieſus; then the time when

it was inſtituted, in the night that he was
betrayed; then the manner how he did
inſtitute it, he tooke bread, and when he
had giuen thankes, he brake it, and gaue
vnto his Diſciples, &c. then the end why
he did inſtitute it, for a remembrance of
his death.
            
            Touching the author,The Author. he which is
ſignified by it, was the author of it. The
Lord Ieſus hath bid vs to ſupper,Iohn. 1. 27. 
               I am
not worthy (ſaith Iohn) to looſe his ſhoe; ſo
we are not worthy to waite at his trencher,
and yet he wil haue vs ſit at his table.
To him belongeth the power to
ordaine Sacraments in his Church,None but Chriſt may ordaine Sacraments. becauſe
he fulfilled the Sacraments of the
Law. When Chriſt came the Paſſeouer
ceaſed, becauſe he is our Paſſeouer, that
is,Iohn. 1. 29. the Lamb by whoſe bloud we are ſaued.
When Chriſt came, Circumciſion
ceaſed, becauſe he is our Circumciſion,
that is, the purifier and clenſer of our
ſinnes.Reuel. 7. 14. Now theſe two ſacraments are
fulfilled, he hath appointed two other
Sacraments for them: in ſteed of the
paſchall Lambe, which the Iewes did

eate,Iohn. 1. 29. he hath giuen vs another Lamb to
eate, which Iohn calleth the Lambe of
God, that is himſelfe, vpon whom all do
feede, whoſoeuer do receiue this Sacrament
with an aſſured faith that Chriſt
died to poſſeſſe them of life. The breaking
of the bread, doth ſignifie the
wounding of his bodie: the powring
of the wine doth ſignifie the ſhedding
of his blood. The eating of the bread,
and drinking of the wine, doth ſignifie
that his fleſh and bloud doe nouriſh in
vs life eternal, as the bread and wine do
nouriſh the life preſent.
            In ſteed of Circumciſion,Gen. 17. 10. which began
at Abrahā, he hath ordained Baptiſme,Who was therefore called Iohn the Baptiſt.
which began at Iohn, a more liuely
repreſentation of the true circumciſion
of the hart, becauſe it repreſenteth
vnto vs the bloud of Chriſt which waſheth
our ſoules,Matth. 3. 1. as the water in Baptiſme
waſheth our bodies.Reuel. 1. 5.
               Reuel. 22. 14.
            
            Touching the time:Time. 
               In the night (ſaith
Paul) therefore this Sacrament is called
The Lords Supper,
               Verſe. 23. becauſe it was inſtituted
at night when they vſed to ſup.

But what night? euen that night (ſaith
Paul) when he was betrayed: that night
which he ſhould haue curſed,Iob. 3. 3. as Iob did
the day of his birth, if he had ſuffred againſt
his will: that night when hee
ſhould haue thought to deſtroy men, as
men conſpired to deſtroy him, that
night (ſaith Paul) this Sacrament of
grace, and peace, and life began. Euen
that night when we betrayed him. Manie
nights did he ſpend in watching, and
praying for vs; & is there a night now
for vs to kill & betray him? That was a
darke night, when men went about to
put out the ſonne which brought them
light. Who can but wonder, to ſee how
Chriſt, & they for whom Chriſt came,
were occupied at one time? when they
deuiſed miſchief againſt him, & ſought
all meanes to deſtroy him, then he conſulted
how to ſaue them, and inſtituted
the ſame night this bleſſed Sacrament,
to conuay all his graces and bleſſings
vnto them, Euen that night when
they betrayed him.
            
            The reaſon why this actiō was deferred

vntill night,Why this ſacrament was inſtituted at night. is, becauſe that was the
time appointed by the Law to eate the
Paſſeouer, which was like a predeceſſor
of this Sacrament.Why it was deferred till his laſt night The reaſon why he
deferred vntill his laſt night, was, becauſe
the Paſſeouer could not be ended,
before the fulneſſe of time, and the true
Paſchal Lambe were come to be ſlaine
in ſtead of the other. Therefore how
fitlie did Chriſt ende the Paſſeouer,
which was a ſigne of his ſuffering, ſo
preſently before his ſuffering? And
beſide, how ſweetly did he confirme
his diſciples faith, when as they ſhould
ſee that the next day performed before
their eyes, which ouernight both in the
Paſſeouer, and in the Sacrament was
ſo liuely reſembled vnto them? If any
from this do gather,Why we receiue not the Lords ſupper at night. that we ought to
eate the Lords ſupper at night as Chriſt
did, he muſt vnderſtand that we haue
not the ſame cauſe to do ſo which Chriſt
had, becauſe of the Paſſeouer. And
therefore the Church which hath diſcretion
of times and places, hath altered
both the time and the place, vſing the

temples in ſtead of the chamber, and
the morning in ſtead of the euening: for
indifferent things are ruled by order &
decencie.
            Touching the maner,Verſ. 23. 24. 
               He tooke bread,
and when he had giuen thankes, he brake
it, and gaue it vnto them. He would not
eate it, nor breake it, before he had giuē
thankes to God. What neede he which
was God, giue thankes to God, but to
ſhew vs what we ſhould doe, when we
eate our ſelues?1. Theſ. 5. 18. 
               In all things giue thankes
(ſaith Paul) whereby we declare, that all
things come from God:Note. but the wicked
beleeue eaſier that God doth take, than
that he doth giue, and therefore they
neuer pray heartily vnto him for any
thing, nor feelinglie thanke him for it.
For which the Lord complaineth, ſaying:
I haue loued you,
               Mala. 1. 2. 
               yet ye ſay, wherein
haſt thou loued vs? Shewing, that we are
worſe than the Oxe,Eſay. 1. 3. which knoweth
his feeder. And if we acknowledge all
things from God,Gene. 19. 20. yet we do like Lot, Is
it not a little one (ſaith he) when he craued
to go vnto Zoar, as though it were

not much which he asked: ſo we mince
and extenuate the giftes of God, before
we receiue them and after; like them
which haue a grace for dinner, and none
for breakfaſt, as though they had their
dinners from God, and breakfaſtes of
their owne. Our exāple did not ſo: Although
it was but bread which he receiued,
yet he was more thākfull for bread,
than many which burie the fowles, and
fiſhes, and beaſts, in their belly: for if a
coūt of all were kept, for one that prayeth,Luke. 11. 3.
               Giue vs this day our dayly bread, a
hundred take their bread, and meate, &
ſleepe to, which neuer pray for it.
            
               After he had giuen thankes, he brake
it, and gaue vnto them, and ſayd, Take,
eate: for when he had giuen thankes
to God, then it was ſanctified, and bleſſed,Note.
and lawfull to eate. So when thou
ſerueſt God, then it is lawfull for
thee to vſe Gods bleſſings, then thou
mayſt eate and drinke as Chriſt did,
but not before, for theſe things were
created to ſerue them which ſerue God;
if thou doeſt not ſerue him for them,

thou encrocheſt vpon Gods bleſſings,
and ſtealeſt his creatures, which are no
more thine, than thou art his, for the
good God created all things for good
men, as the deuils poſſeſſions are reſerued
for euill men.
            Therfore as Chriſt would not breake
the bread, before he had giuen thankes
to the founder; ſo know, that there is
ſome thing to be done before thou receiue
any benefite of God, and preſume
not to vſe his creatures with more libertie
than his Sonne did, which did not
eate without giuing thankes, nor riſe againe
without ſinging of a Pſalme.Mat. 26. 30.
            
            It followeth, This is my body. Here is
the fruite of his thāks before, he prayed
that the bread and wine might be bleſſed,Gene. 27.
& they were bleſſed. As Iſaaks bleſſing
ſhewed it ſelfe vpō 
               Iaakob whō he
bleſſed; ſo Chriſtes bleſſing appeared
ſtraight vpō theſe myſteries: for it could
not be ſayd before, This is my body,
becauſe it was meere bread; but now it
may be called his body, becauſe his bleſſing
hath infuſed that vertue into it,

that it doth not onlie repreſent his bodie,
but conuey his bodie, and himſelfe
vnto vs. The efficacie of this bleſſing is
in this Sacramēt euer ſince, ſanctifying
it vnto vs as well as it did to the Apoſtles,Luke. 22. 32.
euen as Chriſts prayer ſtayed Peters
faith after Chriſt was dead.
            Now ye haue heard the meaning of
theſe wordes, He tooke bread, and bleſſed
it, and brake it, and gaue it: you ſhall ſee
with what a myſticall reſemblance they
vnite Chriſt and vs. Firſt, as Chriſt in
the Supper tooke bread to feede vs:Heb. 2. 16. ſo
in his birth he tooke our fleſh to ſaue
vs. Secondlie as Chriſt when he had taken
the bread, bleſſed the bread to make
it a ſpirituall foode: So Chriſt, when he
had taken our fleſh, powred forth moſt
rich & precious graces into it, to make
it food of life vnto vs.Iohn. 17. 19. Thirdly, as Chriſt
when he had bleſſed the bread, brake the
bread: ſo Chriſt when he had filled his
bodie with moſt precious graces, brake
it vp like a rich treaſure houſe, his hands
by the nayles, his backe by the ſtripes,
his head by the thornes,1. Pet. 2. 24. his ſide by the

ſpeare; that out of euery hole a riuer of
grace and goodnes might iſſue & flow
forth vnto vs.Epheſ. 3. 17. Laſtly, as Chriſt gaue the
bread when he had broken it: ſo Chriſt
by a liuely faith cōmunicateth his bodie
after he hath crucified it. Hereby we
are taught, that when we ſee the Miniſter
take the bread to feede vs, we muſt
conceaue that Chriſt being God from
euerlaſting tooke our fleſh to ſaue vs.
When we ſee the Miniſter bleſſe the
bread to a holy vſe, we muſt conceaue
that Chriſt by vniting the Godhead
vnto it, ſanctified his fleſh for the work
of our redemption. When we ſee the
Miniſter breake the bread to ſuſtaine
our bodies: we muſt conceaue that
Chriſt in his death brake his body to refreſh
our ſoules. When we ſee the Miniſter
giue the bread to our hāds, we muſt
conceaue that Chriſt as trulie offereth
himſelf to our faith to be receiued of vs.
            Becauſe vpon theſe wordes the Papiſts
ground their Tranſubſtantiation,
that is, that the bread is changed into
Chriſts fleſh, and the wine is turned into

Chriſtes bloud, whereby we eate the
ſame bodie which died vpon the croſſe,
& drinke the ſame bloud which iſſued
out of his ſide; that you may ſee the
blindnes of this popiſh dreame, I would
haue you but marke euery word of this
Scripture how they make againſt Trā
               ſubſtantiation,
that you may ſee them
ſlaine like Goliah with their owne
ſword.1. Sam. 17. 51. Euē as god made Caiphas ſpeake
againſt himſelf;Iohn. 18. 14. ſo the Scriptures which
heretickes alleage, do make againſt thē
ſelues,1. King. 18. 28. like the Baalites which wounded
their owne fleſh.Heretickes alledge ſcripture like the deuill. I may liken their allegations
to Sathans, when he tempted
Chriſt in the Wilderneſſe, he alledged
but one ſentence of Scripture for
himſelfe,Matth. 4. 4. and that Pſalme out of which
he borrowed it,Pſal. 91. 11. makes ſo plaine againſt
him, that he was fayne to picke here a
word, & there a word, & leaue out that
which wēt before, & skip in the middeſt
and omit that which came after, or elſe
he had marred his cauſe. The Scripture
is ſo holy & pure, & true, that no word,
nor fillable therof cā make for the deuil,

or for ſinners, or for heretickes: yet as
the deuill alledged. Scripture, though
it made not for him, but againſt him; ſo
doe the libertines, and Epicures, and heretickes,
as though they had learned at
his ſchoole. Now there is no ſentence
of the Scripture, which the wiſer Papiſtes
alledge boldlie for their Tranſubſtantiatiō,
but this, that Chriſt ſayd,
This is my bodie,
               Matth. 26. 26. by which they may
proue as well that Chriſt is a doore, becauſe
he ſayth,Iohn. 10. 7. 9. 
               I am the doore: or a vine,
becauſe he ſaith,Iohn. 15. 1. 
               I am a Vine; for his ſayings
are like. Figuratiue ſpeaches muſt
not be cōſ
                  ••
               ued litterally, but this is heretickes
fashion. If you marke, you ſhal
ſee throughout, that all the teſtimonies
which the Papiſts alledge for their hereſies,Note.
are either tropes, or figures, or alle
gories, or parables, or alluſions, or darke
ſpeaches; which when they preſume to
expounde allegoricallie, or litterallie,
without cōference of other Scriptures,
then they wander, and ſtray from the
marke, or elſe it is impoſſible that the
truth ſhuld maintaine error, that is, that

the Scripture ſhould ſpeake for hereſie,
if it were not peruerted: therfore we
ſee that Eue neuer erred,Gene. 3. 3. vntill ſhe corrupted
the text.
            Now we will enter the liſts with our
aduerſaries, & ſee whether theſe words
do prooue that the bread and wine are
turned into Chriſtes bodie.Arguments againſt Popiſh Trāſubſtantiation. 
               Paule ſaith,
Ieſus tooke bread well thē, yet it is bread:
when he had taken it, then he bleſſed it;
 what did he bleſſe? the bread which he
tooke; well then, yet it is bread: when
he had bleſſed it, then he brake it, what
did he breake? the bread which he bleſſed;
well then, yet it is bread; when he
had brokē it, then he gaue it; what did
he giue? the bread which he brake, well
then, yet it is bread: when he had giuen
it, they did eate it; what did they eate?
the bread which he gaue them; well thē,
yet it is bread: when they did eate it,
thē he ſaid, This is my body: what did he
call his bodie? the bread which they did
eate; well then, yet it is bread. If it be
bread all this while, when he did take it,
and bleſſe it, and breake it, and giue it,

and they did eate it, when is it turned
into his bodie?Matth. 22. 34 here they ſtand like the
Sadduces, as mute as fiſhes.
            Now that ye may ſee that not we
onelie ſay it is bread and wine after the
conſecration; in the 27. Verſe Chriſt
himſelfe doth call it bread and wine after
he had giuē it, as he did before. And
in Marke he ſaith,Mar. 14. 25. 
               I will drinke no more
of the fruite of the vine. Here Chriſt ſaith,
that it was the fruite of Vine which he
dranke, but his bloud is not the fruite
of Vines, but Wine; therfore wine was
his drinke, and not bloud.
            Beſide, if you would heare Paule expound 
Chriſt, he ſheweth, that all our
Fathers had the ſame ſubſtāce of Chriſt
in their Sacramentes, that we haue in
ours,1. Cor. 10. 4. for he ſaith, They all did eate the
ſame ſpirituall meate, and all drinke the
ſame ſpirituall drinke.
               Verſ. 3. 4 Straight he ſayth,
that this meate and this drinke was Chriſt.
               Verſ. 4.
Marke that he ſaith not onely, They did
eate the ſame meate that we eate, but he
ſaith, that this meate was Chriſt: and not
onely ſo, but to ſhew that Chriſt is not

a corporall meate, as the Papiſtes ſay:
he ſaith, he is a ſpirituall meate, as we
ſay; therfore you ſee that we do not eate
him corporally, no more than our Fathers,
but that as they did eate him ſpiritually,
ſo do we; for ſpirituall meate
muſt be eaten ſpiritually, as corporall
meate is eaten corporally.
            
                Agayne, for the ſignes to be turned
into the thing ſignified by thē, is vtterly
againſt the nature of a Sacrament, &
makes it no Sacrament, becauſe there is
no ſigne: for euery Sacrament doth cō
               ſiſt
of a ſigne, and a thing ſignified; the
ſigne is euer an earthly thing, and that
which it ſignifieth is a heauenly thing.
This ſhall appeare in all examples, as
in Paradiſe there was a verie Tree for
the ſigne,Gene. 2. 9. and Chriſt the thing ſignified
by it.Gen
                     •
                  . 17. 11. In Circumciſion there was a cutting
off of the ſkin, and the cutting off
of ſinne. In the Paſſe-ouer there was a
Lambe,Exod. 12. 3. and Chriſt. In the Saboth there
was a day of reſt,Exod. 23. 11. & eternall reſt. In the
Sacrifices there was an offering of ſome
beaſt,Heb. 9. 13. and the offering of Chriſt. In the

Sanctuarie there was the holy place,Exod. 30. and
heauen.Exod. 25. 24. In the Propitiatorie there was
the goldē couering▪ & Chriſt our couer.
In the Wilderneſſe there was a Rocke
yeelding water,Exod. 17. 16. and Chriſt yeelding his
bloud.Mat. 3. 16. In the Apparition there was a
a Doue,Iohn. 6. 49. & the holy Ghoſt. In the Manna
there was Bread, and Chriſt. In Baptiſme
there is verie water which waſheth
vs,Iohn. 1. 33. and Chriſtes bloud waſhing
vs; ſo in the Supper of Chriſt there is
very Bread & Wine for the ſigne,1. Cor. 11. 19. & the
body and bloud of Chriſt for the thing
ſignified, or elſe this Sacramēt is againſt
the nature of all other Sacraments.
            Againe, there muſt be a proportion
betweene the Paſſe ouer and the Lords
Supper, becauſe this was figured by the
other.Exod. 12. Now, the Iewes had in their Paſſeouer,
Bread, and Wine, and a Lambe; ſo
Chriſt inſtituting his Supper,Mat. 16. 26. left bread
and wine, and a Lambe, which name is
giuen to himſelfe,Iohn. 1. 29. becauſe he came like

                  •
                Lambe, and died like a Lambe.
            Agayne, if Chriſtes verie bodie were 
               
                  •
               ffered in the Sacramēt, thē it were not

a Sacrament, but a Sacrifice; which two
differ as much as giuing, and taking:
for in a Sacrifice we giue, & in a Sacrament
we receiue, and therefore we ſay
our Sacrifice, and Chriſtes Sacrament.
            
                Agayne, euerie Sacrifice was offered
vpon an Altar.Exod. 27. Now marke the
wiſedome of the holy Ghoſt, leaſt we
ſhould take this for a Sacrifice, he neuer
names Altar when he ſpeakes of it, but,
The Table of the Lord. Therefore it is
no doubt but the deuill hath kept the
name of Altar, that we might thinke it
a Sacrifice.
            
                Agayne, if the bread were Chriſtes
fleſh, and the wine his bloud, as theſe
two are ſeparate one from the other; ſo
Chriſtes fleſh ſhould be ſeparate from
his bloud, but his bodie is not deuided,
for then it were a dead body.
            
                Agayne, that which remaineth doth
nouriſh the bodie, and reliſh in the
mouth as it did before, which could
not be, but that it is the ſame foode
which it was before.
            
                Agayne, I would aske, whoſe are

this whitenes, and hardnes, and roundneſſe,
and coldneſſe? None of them ſay
that it is the whiteneſſe, and hardneſſe,
and roundneſſe, and coldnes of Chriſtes
bodie: therefore it muſt needes be the
whiteneſſe, and hardneſſe, and roundneſſe,
and coldneſſe of the bread, or elſe
qualities ſhould ſtand without ſubſtāces,
which is, as if one ſhould tell you
of a houſe without a foundation.
            Agayne, as Chriſt dwelleth in vs, ſo 
he is eaten of vs, but he dwelleth in vs
onely by faith. Epheſ. 3. 17. Therefore he
is eaten onely by faith.
            Agayne, none can be ſaued, without 
the communion of the body of Chriſt:
but if all ſhould communicate with it
corporally, then neither infants nor any
of our Fathers, the Patriarkes or the
Prophets ſhould be ſaued, becauſe they
receiued it not ſo.
            Agayne, Chriſt ſayth not, this wine,
               
but this cup, and therefore by their concluſion,
not onely the wine ſhould be

                  •
               urned into bloud, but the cup to.
            
               Again, Paul ſaith, They which receiue 
               
vnworthilie, receiue their owne damnation.
But if it were the fleſh of Chriſt, they
ſhould rather receiue ſaluation than dā
                  nation,
               Iohn. 6. 54.
               becauſe Chriſt ſayth, He that
eateth my fleſh and drinketh my bloud hath
life euerlaſting.
            
                Agayne, if they would heare an Angell
from heauen: when Chriſtes bodie
was glorified, an Angell ſaid to the women,Mat. 28.
               He is riſen, and is not here, as if he
ſhould ſay, his body is but in one place
at once, or elſe he might haue been
there, though he was riſen.
            
                Agayne, why doe they ſay in receiuing
this Sacrament euer ſince the Primitiue
Church, Lift vp your hearts, if
they haue all in their mouthes? To end
this controuerſie: Here we may ſay as
the Diſciples ſaid to Chriſt,Iohn. 6. 68. 
               Whither
ſhall we go from thee? I meane we need
not to goe to any other expoſitor of
Chriſt than Chriſt himſelfe. Therefore
marke what he ſayth:Iohn. 6. 60. At firſt when
Chriſt ſaid, that he was the bread of life,
& that all which would liue muſt eate
him, they murmured vntill he expounded

his words; and how did he expoūd
his wordes?Iohn. 6. 35. Thus, He that commeth vnto
me hath eaten, and he that beleeueth in
me hath drunke. After whē he inſtituted
this Sacramēt, in like wordes they murmured
not, which they would as before,
if he had not reſolued thē before, that to
eate his body, and to drinke his bloud,
was nothing but to come to him, & beleeue
in him. After he had ſayd ſo, they
murmured not, becauſe they did ſee
ſome reaſon in it. As it is plainlie ſayd,
This is my body;
               Iohn. 6. 63. ſo it is plainlie ſaid, theſe
wordes are ſpirite: that is, they muſt be
vnderſtood ſpiritually, and not literally.
But if it be fleſh indeed, why do they
not ſatisfie the ſimple people, how they
may eate this fleſh in Lent, when they
forbid thē to eate any fleſh, they muſt
needes eate it doubtfully, and he which
doubteth ſayth Iames, receaueth nothing:
therefore he which eateth the
Maſſe receiueth nothing.
            I did not alledge the Fathers in my
Sermon, but if any ſuſpend his aſſent,
till they bring in their verdit, let him

heare thē make cōfeſſiō of their beleefe.
Auguſtin ſayth,
                  Aug. vpō the 3. Pſalme. the Lord doubted not
to ſay, this is my body, when he gaue onely
a ſigne, or Sacrament of his body.
            
               Tertulian ſaith,
                  Tert. againſt Marcion the 4. booke. 4. booke 4. ca. of Sacraments. 
               this is my body, that is,
a ſigne of my body.
            
               Ambroſe ſayth, the bread and wine
remayne ſtill the ſame thing that they
were.
            
               Theodoret ſaith,In his firſt Dialogue. after the conſecration,
the myſticall ſignes do not caſt off
their own nature, but abide ſtill in their
firſt ſubſtance and forme.
            
               Origene ſayth,Vpon the 15. of Mat.
                the bread that is ſanctified
with the word of God, as touching
the materiall ſubſtance thereof
goeth into the bellie, and forth agayne
like other meates.
            
               Irenaeus ſaith,
                  Irenae. 4. book cap. 34. against Valē
                     tinus.
                that it hath two
things in it, one earthly, and the other
heauenly.
            
               Cyrill ſaith,Ad ob. Theod. Our Sacraments auouch
not the eating of a man.Anathematis.
            
            
               
               Cyprian ſayth, the Lord calleth bread
made of many graines,1. booke of Epi. 
               his body, & called
wine made of many grapes, his bloud.
            
            
               
               Athanaſius ſaith,In that Goſpel whoſoeuer ſpeaketh a word, &c. Chriſt made mention
of his aſcention into heauen, that he
might withdraw his diſciples from corporall
and fleſhly eating.
            
               Chryſoſtome ſaith,Hom. 60. to the people of Antioch.
                God giueth vs
things ſpirituall vnder things viſible &
naturall.To Caeſarus the Monke. And againe, being ſanctified, it
is deliuered from the name of bread, &
is exalted to the name of the Lords bodie,
although the nature of the bread
ſtill remaine.
            And becauſe they beleeue that the
Pope cannot erre,Againſt Eutiches the Heretike. Pope Gelaſius ſetteth
to his hand, and ſaith with the reſt,
Neither the ſubſtance of the bread, nor
nature of the wine ceaſe to be, more thā
they were before.
            Tell vs, Papiſt, doe not theſe Fathers
ſpeake as plaine as we? Canſt thou auouch.
Tranſubſtantiation more flatly
than they denie it? How had this hereſie
bene chaſed, if the diuel had hatched
it in their time?
            Thus the Scriptures on the one ſide,
and the Fathers on the other ſide did ſo
trouble three arch papiſts, Biel, Tonſtal,
               
and Fiſher,
               Vpō the Canon lect. 40. that Gabriel Biel ſaith, how
the body of Chriſt is in the Sacrament,
is not found in the canon of the Byble.
            
               Tonstal ſaith,1. book of the Sacr. pag. 46. It had bene better to
leaue euerie man to his owne coniecture,
as they were before the Councell
of Laterane, than to bring in ſuch a
queſtion.
            
               Fiſher ſaith,Againſt the captiuitie of Babylon made by M. Luther
                No man can proue by
the words of the goſpel that any Prieſt
in theſe dayes doth conſecrate the verie
bodie and bloud of Chriſt.
            Here is fulfilled,Luk. 19. 22. 
               Out of thine owne
mouth I will condemne thee. But we will
not carry the matter ſo, becauſe a iudge
muſt haue two eares, therefore now let
them ſpeake.The Papiſtes allegations for the reall preſence. Becauſe they cannot tell
how the bread and wine ſhould be turned
into fleſh and bloud, and yet appeare
bread and wine ſtill, they ſay it is
a myracle: but how do they proue it?
If they contēd it is a myracle, they muſt
ſhew vs a ſigne, for euerie myracle may
be ſeene, like all the myracles of Moſes
and Chriſt, and the Apoſtles: and
therefore a myracle is called a ſigne,Exo. 4. 8. & 21
               
becauſe it may be ſeene like a ſigne, and
the word ſignifieth a wōder, as though
we did ſee ſome thing to wonder. And
the Iewes crauing a myracle, ſaide,
Shewe vs a myracle:
               Exod. 9. as though they
were taught to iudge of myracles by
ſight. All which doth ſhew that a myracle
may be ſeene, but here no myracle
is ſeene.
            Againe, a myracle (eſpecially in the
time of the Goſpell) is an extraordinary
thing, but they make this an ordinarie
thing; for if the bread and wine
be turned into fleſh and bloud, then
myracles are as common as Sacramēts,
and ſo becauſe they haue Maſſe euerie
day, they ſhould worke myracles euery
day. Laſtly, this ſeemeth ſtrange, that
Augustine, whom they ſo much honor,
gathered all the myracles which are
written in the ſcripture, & yet amongſt
all, ſpeakes not of this; therefore then
it was counted no myracle: but Paul
ſpeakes of lying myracles,
               2. Theſſ. 2. 9. and this is one
of them.
            If they ſay that Chriſt can turneObiect.
               
bread and wine into his bodie,Obiect. & therfore
he doth.Anſwere. Firſt they muſt proue that
he will: for they can doe many things
themſelues which they doe not, becauſe
they will not: therefore it is an old anſwere,
that from Can to Will, no argument
followeth.Mar. 1. 40. The Leper did not ſay
to Chriſt, If thou can, thou will; but, If
thou wilt thou canſt.
            
            But the queſtion which they thinke
can not be anſwered, like their inuincible
Nauies,Obiect. is this. If the bread be not
his bodie, why doth he call it his bodie?
Reſolue this knot & al is cleere.Anſwer. Marke
then and we will looſe it as well as we
cā: He ſaith, This is my bodie, as he ſaith
after, which is broken for you. Why? his
bodie was not broken before he ſuffered,
how did he ſay then, which is broken,
before it was broken? There is no
ſenſe of it but this, the bread was broken,
and ſignified that his body ſhould
be broken. Now, as the breaking of the
bread did ſignifie the breaking of his
bodie, ſo the bread muſt needs ſignifie
his bodie: but as his bodie was not broken

indeed when the bread was broken,
ſo the bread could not be his body
indeed: for then his bodie ſhould haue
bene broken when the bread was broken:
yet let them obiect what they can.
            If (say they) the bread and wine be
not changed into his bodie and blood,Obiect.
why doth he ſpeak ſo darkly? he might
haue ſpoken plainer.
            I anſwere,Anſwer. though this ſeeme darke
to Papiſts, yet it was not darke to the
Apoſtles, they vnderſtood his meaning
well enough, and all the reſt for 1215.
yeares after Chriſt, before Tranſubſtā
               tiation
was ſpoken of. If the Apoſtles
had not vnderſtood his meaning, they
would not ſticke to aske him as their
manner was, vntill they were acquainted
with Chriſts phraſe, whenſoeuer
they doubted vpon any of his ſpeeches,
they were wont to come vnto him, and
ſay,Luk. 8. 9. 
               maſter, what is the meaning? but they
were vſed to ſuch phraſes: for it was
Chriſts manner to teach by ſimilitudes,
ſhewing one thing by another, which
is the plaineſt manner of teaching, and

moſt vſed in holy Scripture, eſpecially
in the types and ſhadowes of this Sacrament.
For example, Chriſt calleth
the Lamb the Paſſeouer,Mat. 26. 17. in place wherof
this Sacrament ſucceeded, and therefore
preſently after they had eaten the
Paſſeouer, Chriſt inſtituted this Sacrament
to be vſed for it. Chriſt (I ſay) called
the Lambe the Paſſeouer, and yet
the Paſſeouer was this, an Angel paſſed
ouer the houſes of the Iſraelites, and
ſtrooke the Aegyptians:
               Exod. 12. 27. this was not a
Lambe, and yet becauſe the Lamb was
a ſigne of this Paſſeouer, as the bread &
wine is of Chriſts body therfore Chriſt
called the Lambe the Paſſeouer, as he
calleth the bread and wine his bodie.
            Againe,Gen. 17. 13. Circumciſion is called the
Couenant, & yet Circumciſion was nothing
but the cutting away of a skin:
but the Couenant is, In Abrahams ſeede
all nations ſhall be bleſſed,
               Gen. 12. 3. 
               I will be their
God, and they ſhall be my people, I will defend
and ſaue them, and they ſhall ſerue &
worſhip me. This is not Circumciſion, &
yet as though Circumciſion were the

Couenant it ſelfe, it is called the Couenant,
becauſe it ſignified the Couenant,
ſo bread and wine are called Chriſts
bodie, becauſe they ſignifie Chriſts bodie.
            Againe,Tit. 3. 5. Baptiſme is called regeneration,
and yet baptiſme is a dipping of
our bodies in water; but regeneration
is the renewing of the minde,1. Cor. 6. 11. to the
image wherein it was created: this is
not Baptiſme, and yet as though Baptiſme
were regeneration it ſelfe, it is called
regeneration, becauſe it ſignified regeneration:
ſo the bread and wine are
called Chriſtes bodie, becauſe they ſignifie
Chriſts bodie.
            Againe,Luk. 22. 20. the Cup is called the new
Teſtament, and yet the Cup is but a
peece of mettall, filled with wine: but
the new Teſtament is,Iohn. 3. 36. 
               He which beleeueth
in the Sonne, ſhall be ſaued this is not
a Cup, and yet as though the Cup were
the new Teſtament it ſelfe, it is called
the new Teſtament, becauſe it ſignifieth
the new Teſtament: ſo the bread &
wine are called Chriſtes bodie, becauſe

they ſignifie Chriſts body. They which
knew that the Lambe is not the Paſſeouer,
though Chriſt called it the Paſſeouer;
that Circumciſion is not the Couenant,
though God called it the Couenant;
that Baptiſme is not regeneration,
though it be called regeneration;
that the Cup is not the new Teſtamēt,
though Chriſt called it the new Teſtament;
could they not as well vnderſtand,
that the bread and wine were not
Chriſts body, though Chriſt called thē
his bodie? As they vnderſtood theſe
ſpeeches, ſo they vnderſtoode this
ſpeech; therfore they which ſay, that the
bread and wine are Chriſtes bodie, becauſe
Chriſt ſaith,Matth. 26. 26. 
               This is my bodie. may
as well ſay, that the Lambe is the Paſſeouer,
becauſe Chriſt calleth it the Paſſe
ouer, that Baptiſme is regeneration,
becauſe Paul calleth it regeneration,
that the Cup is the new Teſtament, becauſe
Chriſt calleth it the new Teſtament.
            If euerie Sacrament was called by
the thing which it ſignified, and yet neuer

any Sacrament was taken for the
thing it ſelfe, what reaſon haue they to
take this Sacrament for the thing it
ſelfe, more than al the reſt? It is the conſent
of all writers that a Sacrament is a
ſigne, therefore not the thing ſignified:
no more then the buſh at the dore, is
the wine in the ſeller. If I cal the Prince
a Phoenix, the Vniuerſitie a Fountain,
the Court a Peacocke, the Citie a Sea,
the Countrey an Eremite, why can the
Papiſts vnderſtand me, and not vnderſtand
Chrſt? What a darke and ſtrange,
and intricate, and incredible ſpeech
had this beene for them to vnderſtand
groſly, & literally? Would they think,
that they did eate Chriſtes body, when
his bodie ſtoode before them, and he
had told them before, that his bodie
was like their bodie? Nay, this would

                  •
               aue required moe words, and made

                  •
               hem come againe, with Master, what

                     〈◊〉
                   the meaning?
               Luk. 9. 8. for they were not ſo

                  •
               ſtructed yet before the reſurrection,

                  •
               o beleeue euerie thing without que
               
                  ••
               ioning,
if it were contrarie to ſenſe

and reaſon: but as they asked, who
had giuen him any meate,Iohn 4. 33. when he ſaid
that he had meate, and they coulde ſee
none: ſo they would haue asked, what
meate is this which we ſee not? How
can euerie one of vs eate his bodie, and
yet he hath but one bodie, and that bodie
is whole when we eate it? Loe, he
ſtandeth before vs and saith, that his
bodie is like vnto ours, and yet hee
takes bread and breakes it, and giues
it vnto vs to eate, and when we eate
it,Luk. 24. 39. he ſaith This is my bodie: and yet
his bodie ſtandeth before vs ſtill. If
his bodie be like ours (as he ſaith) how
can it be eaten and be there, for ours
cannot? Thus they would haue queſtioned,
if they had not beene vſed to
ſuch phraſes: but as they could vnderſtand
him when he called himſelfe a
ſtone, and a rock, and a dore, and a window,
and a Vine, ſo they could picke
out his meaning, when he ſaid that
bread was his bodie: for he had told
them before,Iohn 16. 5. that he was the bread of eternall
life.
            
            
               
Now the bread of eternall life is not
eaten with teeth, for the bodie cannot
eate ſpiritually, no more then the ſoule
can eate corporally, and therefore he is
ſuch a bread as is eaten with faith, and
ſo himſelfe ſaith in the Goſpel of Iohn.
               Iohn. 6. 35.
Marke this eating by faith, and all the
ſtrife is ended. Fleſh and bloud indeed
need not faith to chew them, for the
teeth can chew thē well enough. Therfore
if the bread and wine were the bodie
of Chriſt, then we need not faith to
eate it, but all which haue teeth might
eate Chriſts bodie, yea the Mice might
eate it as well as men, for they eate the
ſame bread that we do, as well after it is
conſecrated, as before.
            If this be not enough to batter the
ruines of this vpſtart Hereſie, I will
come to interrogatories, and ſee whether
they haue learned it by rote, or
by reaſon. If they ground their Tranſubſtantiation
vppon theſe wordes
of Chriſt,Marth. 26. 26. 
               This is my bodie, which
hee ſpake to his Diſciples▪ I aske
them, whether they receiue that bodie

which was mortall, or that bodie which
is glorified;Neither Chriſts mortal bodie, nor his immortal bodie, can be in the ſame. becauſe one of theſe bodies
they muſt needs receiue, either his
mortall bodie, or his glorified bodie.
If they ſay, that it is his mortall bodie,
the mortal bodie wil not profite them:
for you ſee that mortall food is but for
this mortall life, neither hath Chriſt a
mortall bodie now to communicate
vnto them, becauſe it is changed to an
immortall bodie, therefore they cannot
receiue the mortall bodie, becauſe
Chriſt hath not a mortall bodie to giue
them. If they ſay that they receiue his
glorified bodie, then they muſt ſhe
from this Text, for at that time Chriſt
had no glorified bodie.
            When this Sacrament was inſtituted,
and Chriſt ſaid This is my bodie, his
bodie was not glorified, becauſe the
Sacrament was inſtituted before his
death, and his bodie was glorified after
his reſurrection. Therefore if they
receiue the ſame bodie which the Apoſtles
receiued, as they ſay they do▪ they
cānot receiue a glorified body, becauſe

then Chriſt had not a glorified bodie
to communicate vnto them. Thus the
rocks and ſands are of both ſides them,
they receiue a bodie neither mortall,
nor immortall: if Chriſt hath any ſuch
bodie, iudge you. Here they ſtand like
a foole, which cannot tell one his tale;
Nebucadnezar dreamed a dreame and
knew not what it meant.Dan. 4. 15.
            
            Beſide, I aske them to whome
Chriſt ſpake when he ſaid,Mar. 14. 24. 
               This is my
bodie. Marke ſaith, he ſpake to them,
that is, to his Diſciples: well then, if
theſe wordes, This is my bodie, were
not ſpoken to the ſignes, but to the
perſons,Chriſt ſpake not to the bread and wine, but to his diſciples. not to the bread and wine, but
to the receiuers: as the words which
follow, Do this in remembrance of me: if
theſe wordes were not ſpoken to the
bread and wine, then it is plaine that
they doe not change the nature of the
bread and wine. If the nature of them
be not altered, then the ſubſtance remaineth,
and then we receiue no other
ſubſtance with them, becauſe two ſubſtances
cannot be in one place.
            
               
What then,More in the Lords Supper than bread and wine. is there nothing in the
Sacrament but bread and wine, like a
hungrey nunſcion? Nay we ſay not
that the Sacrament is nothing but a
bare ſigne, or that you receiue no more
than you ſee: for Chriſt ſaith, that it is
his bodie, and Paul ſaith, that it is the
Communion of Chriſts bodie and bloud.
               1. Cor. 10. 16.
Therefore there is more in Sacramentall
bread, than in common breade:
though the nature be not changed, yet
the vſe is changed; it doth not onely
nouriſh the body as it did before, but it
bringeth a bread with it which nouriſheth
the ſoule: for as ſure as we receiue
bread, ſo ſure we receiue Chriſt: not only
the benefites of Chriſt, but Chriſt, although
not in a Popiſh maner: yet we
are ſo ioyned vnto him, as though we
were but one body.A ſimilitude As the ſpouſe doth
not marry with the lands & goods, but
with the man himſelfe, & being partaker
of him, is made partaker of them:
ſo the faithfull do not onely marry with
Chriſtes benefites, but with Chriſt him
ſelfe, & being partakers of him, they are

made partakers of his benefites: for
Chriſt may not be diuided from his benefites,
no more than the Sunne from
his light.Rom. 8. 32. It is ſaid, the Father gaue vs his
ſonne, and ſo the Sonne giueth vs him
ſelfe. As the bread is a ſigne of his bodie:
ſo the giuing of the bread is a ſigne
of the giuing of his body. Thus he lyeth
before vs like a Pellican which letteth
her yong ones ſucke her bloud: ſo that
we may ſay, the Lord inuited vs to Supper,
and he himſelfe was our meate. But
if you aske how this is? I muſt anſwere,
it is a myſterie: but if I could tell it, it
were no myſterie. Yet as it is ſaid, when
three men walked in the middeſt of the
fornace,Dan. 3. 25. 
               One like the Sonne of God walked
amongeſt them: So, when the faithfull
receiue the Bread and Wine, one
like the Sonne of God ſeemeth to come
vnto them, which fils them with peace
and ioy, and grace, that they maruell
what it was which they receiued, beſides
bread and wine.A ſimilitude For example thou makeſt
a bargaine with thy neighbour for
houſe or land, and receiueſt in earneſt

a peece of gold, that which thou receiueſt
is but a peece of gold, but now it is
a ſigne of thy bargaine, & if thou keep
not touch with him, happelie it will
claſpe thee for all that thou art worth;
ſo that which thou receiueſt is bread,
but this bread is a ſigne of another matter,
which paſſeth bread.
            Againe,Another ſimilitude. thou haſt an Obligation in
thy hand, & I aske thee, what haſt thou
there? and thou ſaieſt, I haue here an
hundreth pounds: why (ſay I) there is
nothing but paper, ynke, and waxe: oh
but by this ſaieſt thou, I will recouer
an hundreth pounds, that is as good.
So beloued, this is as good, that vnder
theſe ſignes, you receiue the vertue of
Chriſts body & bloud by faith, as if you
did eate his bodie, and drinke his bloud
indeede, which is horrible to thinke
that any ſhould deuour their god, thinking
thereby to worſhip him: neuer any
Heretike nor Idolater conceiued ſo
groſly of their God, before the Papiſt.
We reade of a people which did eate
men, but neuer of any people which did

eate their God. Al the Apoſtles ſay, that
it was needfull that Chriſt ſhould take
our fleſh but no Apoſtle ſaith, that it
is needfull that we ſhould take Chriſts
fleſh; for all the bleſſings of Chriſt are
apprehended by faith, and nothing is fit
to apprehēd him whom we ſee not but
faith: and therfore one of their own pillars
ſaid,Auguſtine. 
               Beleeue, & thou haſt eaten. Faith
doth more in Religion than the mouth,
or elſe we might ſay with the woman,
Bleſſed are the breſts which gaue thee
ſucke,
               Luke. 11. 27. and ſo none ſhould be bleſſed but
Mary: but Mary was not bleſſed, becauſe
Chriſt was in her bodie, but becauſe
Chriſt was in her heart, and leaſt
this ſhould ſeeme incredible vnto you,
becauſe Mary is called bleſſed among
women. When Chriſt heard the womā
ſay,Luke. 8. 21. 
               Bleſſed are the breſts which gaue thee
ſucke, he replied vnto her, Bleſſed are they
which heare the word of God, and keepe it,
theſe are my brethren, and ſiſters and mother
(ſayth Chriſt) as though the reſt
were no kin to him in heauen, though
they were kin in earth. Thus if Chriſt

were in thy body, & thou ſhouldeſt ſay
as this woman, Bleſſed is the bodie which
hath thee in it, nay would Chriſt ſay,
Bleſſed is the heart which hath me in it. If
Mary were no whit better for hauing
Chriſt in her armes, nor for hauing him
in her bodie, how much better art thou,
for hauing him in thy bellie, where
thou canſt not ſee him?Note. Muſt the Sunne
needes come to vs, or elſe cannot his
he
                  •••
                and light profite vs, nay, it doth
vs more good, becauſe it is ſo farre off:
ſo this Sunne is gone from vs, that he
might giue more light vnto vs, which
made him ſay,Iohn. 16. 7. 
               It is good for you that I go
frō you; therfore away with this carnall
eating of ſpiritual things.Prou. 31. 29. 
               Many daughters
haue done vertuouſly, but thou (ſaith
Salomon ſurpaſſeſt thē all. So, many hereticks
haue ſpokē abſurdly, but this ſurpaſſeth
thē all, that Chriſt muſt be applied
like Phiſicke, as though his bloud
could not profit vs, vnles we did drinke
it, and ſwallow it as a potion. Is this the
Papiſtes vnion with Chriſt? Is this the
manner whereby we are made one fleſh

with Chriſt, to eate his fleſh? Nay, when
he tooke our fleſh vnto him, and was
made man, then we were vnited to him
in the fleſh and not now. Chriſt tooke
our fleſh, we take not his fleſh, but beleeue
that he tooke ours, therfore if you
would know whither Chriſtes body be
in the Sacrament,A way to know whither Chriſts body be in the Sacrament. I ſay vnto you as
Chriſt ſayd vnto Thomas, touch, feele,
and ſee. In viſible things, God hath appointed
our eyes to be iudges, for as the
ſpirite diſcerneth ſpirituall obiectes,Iohn. 20. 27. ſo
ſenſe diſcerneth of ſenſible obiectes. As
Chriſt taught Thomas to iudge of his
body, ſo may we & ſo ſhould they: therfore
if you cānot ſee his body, nor feele
his body, you may gather by Chriſt ſaying
to Thomas, that he would not haue
you beleeue that it is his bodie, for my
body (ſaith Chriſt) may be ſeene, & felt.
And thus Trāſubſtātiatiō is foūd a lyer.
            Now if you aske me,Why Chriſt calleth the bread his bodie. why Chriſt calleth
the ſigne by the name of the thing
it ſelfe I aske thee agayne. Mayſt thou
ſay▪ when thou ſeeſt the picture of the
Queene, this is the Queene, and when

thou ſeeſt the picture of a Lyō, this is a
Lyon: and may not Chriſt ſay when
he ſeeth a thing like his bodie, This is
my bodie?
            
            I ſhewed you before, that euerie Sacrament
is called by the name of the
thing which it doth ſignifie, and therefore
why ſhould we ſtūble at this, more
thā the reſt? The reaſon why the ſignes
haue the name of the things, is to ſtrike
a deeper reuerence in vs to receiue this
Sacrament of Chriſt reuerentlie, ſincerelie,
and holilie, as if Chriſt were there
preſent in bodie and bloud himſelfe.
And ſurelie, as he which defaceth the
Queenes Seale, is cōuicted of contempt
and treaſon to her owne perſon; ſo he
which prophaneth theſe Seales of
Chriſt, doth not worſhip Chriſt, but
deſpiſe him, and that contempt ſhall be
required of him, as if he had contemned
Chriſt him ſelfe. This is the reaſon,
why Chriſt calleth the ſignes of his body,
his body, to make vs take this Sacrament
reuerentlie, becauſe we are apt to
cōtēne it, as the Iewes did their Manna.
            
               
It followeth,Vers. 24. 
               Do this in remembrance
of me, that is, theſe ſignes ſhal be a remē
               braunce
of my death: when you breake
the bread you ſhal remember the woū
               ding
of my body; and when you drinke
the wine, you ſhall remember the ſhedding
of my bloud. If we muſt do this in
remembraunce of Chriſts body, which
was broken like the bread, it is an argument
that his bodie is not there, becauſe
remembraunce is not of things preſent,
but of things abſent; we remember not,
but we ſee that which is before vs. This
might put the Papiſts in remembrance
that Chriſt is not ſacrificed now, when
we do but remember his ſacrifice: this
is not Chriſtes ſacrifice, but a remembraunce
of his ſacrifice; he was ſacrificed
before, and now it is applied, leaſt
his ſacrifice ſhould be in vayne.If Chriſtes bodie were in the Sacrament, it were not a Sacrament but a ſacrifice. This
was done once reallie, when he offered
himſelf vpō the Croſſe, therfore that offering
was called a ſacrifice, because he
was ſacrificed indeed; but this offering
is called a Sacrament, becauſe it is but
a ſigne of his ſacrifice. If Chriſt in this

Sacrament were offered indeed, then it
ſhould be called a ſacrifice as his once
offering was: but becauſe it is but a remembrance
of his ſacrifice, therfore it is
called a 
                  〈◊〉
                This is not a ſacrifice
of Chriſt, but a ſacrifice of our ſelues.
Leaſt we ſhould take it to be a ſacrifice
of Chriſt, Chriſt himſelfe calleth it a remembrance
of his ſacrifice, Do this in my
remembraunce. Here is our worke; as
Chriſt hath done, ſo muſt we doe, ſo
we miniſter, and ſo you receiue we can
giue you nothing but that which we
haue receiued from him, as Paule ſaith.
Therfore if Chriſt did not giue his mortall
body which ſtood before them, and
could not profit them, nor his glorified
body, which was not glorified thē, and
when it was glorified aſcended vp vnto
heauen, and there abideth, how cā theſe
iugling Prieſtes make their God again
which made them? They can no more
turne wine into bloud, and bread into
fleſh, than they can commaund a Gnat
to become a Cammell: for it is a greater
worke to make God, than to make the

world.Mat. 24. 23. Therefore as Chriſt ſaith, When
they tell you, here is Chriſt, and there is
Chriſt, beleeue them not: So when they
tell you that Chriſt is in heauen, and
that Chriſt is in earth, in this place and
that place, beleeue them not: for Elias
aſcention was a figure of Chriſts aſcention,2. King. 2. 17.
when Elias was aſcended, yet
ſome ſought for his bodie vpō earth: ſo
though Chriſt be aſcended, yet many
ſeeke his body vpon earth: but as they
could not finde Elias body, ſo theſe can
not finde Chriſtes bodie, although they
haue ſought 300. yeares. But if his bodie
were vpon earth, as they ſay, ſhould
we handle it and touch it, now it is glorified?
After his reſurrection he ſayd to
Marie,
               Iohn. 20. 17. 
               Touch me not, becauſe his bodie
was glorified, that is, not to be touched
with fingers any more, but with
faith. Therefore we read of none which
touched his bodie after it was riſen, but
onelie Thomas, to ſettle his faith. Thus
you ſee we need to ſuborne no witneſſes;
for euery word in this text which
they alledge for Trāſubſtantiatiō, doth

make againſt Trāſubſtantiatiō, whereby
if Antichriſt doth ſignifie thē which
are againſt Chriſt, you ſee who may be
called Antichriſt. There is no queſtion
in Poperie (except Purgatorie the Popes
Publicā & tasker) about which the
Papiſts are at ſuch ciuill warres among
themſelues, as about this tranſubſtātiatiō.
They cannot tell whē the chāge beginneth,
nor what manner of chāge it is,
nor how lōg the chāge continueth, ſom
hang one way, & ſome another, like the
Midianites which fought one againſt
another.Iudg. 7. 22. And no maruaile though their
conſciēces ſtagger about it: for to ſhew
you the right father of it, it was one of
the dreames of Innocentius the 3. in the
yeare of our Lord▪ 1215.A monſter of his age. ſo many yeares
paſſed before Trāſubſtātiation was named,
& thē a Pope ſet it firſt on foote ſo
it came out of Rome the grādame of all
hereſies, and for wāt of Scriptures, hath
been defended with fire, and ſword, and
ſwallowed moe Martirs, than all the
gulfes of the Papall ſea beſide.
            Now, when the doctrines of men go

for Scripture,Eight abſurdities which follow Trā
                  ſubſtantiation. you ſhall ſee how many
errours ruſh into the Church: for graūt
but this to Innocentius, as the Papiſts do,
that the bread and wine are changed into
Chriſtes body. Firſt, it will follow,
that Chriſts body is not aſcended vp to
heauen, becauſe it remaineth vpō earth,
and ſo one of the Articles of our fayth
ſhall be falſified,Acts. 19. 11. which ſaith, He is aſcē
                  ded
into heauē
                or if he be aſcēded, & deſcended
agayne, another Article will be
falſified,Rom. 8. 34. which ſaith, that he ſitteth at the
right hand of his Father,
               Acts. 3. 21. that is as Peter
ſaith, he abideth in heauen. Secondly, it 
will follow, that Chriſt hath not a true
body, but a fantaſticall body, becauſe it
may be in many places at one time: for
if his body be in the Sacramēt, he muſt
needes haue ſo many bodies as there be
Sacraments; nay, he muſt haue ſo many
bodies as there be bits in euerie Sacramēt.
Thirdly, it will follow, that his bodie 
is diuided from his ſoule, and conſequētly
is a dead bodie, becauſe the bread
is onely changed into body, and not
into his ſoule. Fourthly, at will follow,
               
that the wicked and prophane, and reprobate,
may receiue Chriſt as well as
the godly, becauſe they haue a mouth
 to eate as well as the beſt. Fiftly, it will
follow,Heb. 9. 28. & 10. 12. that Chriſts ſacrifice once for
all was not ſufficient, becauſe we muſt
ſacrifice him againe, and breake his bodie
& ſhed his bloud, as the Iewes crucified
 him vpon the Croſſe. Sixtly, it
will follow, that the bread being turned
into the body of our redeemer, hath
a part of our redemption as well as
 Chriſt. Seauenthly, it will follow, that
Chriſt did eate his owne bodie: for all
the Fathers ſay that he did eat the ſame
bread which he gaue to his Diſciples.
 Laſtly, it will follow, that a Maſſing
Prieſt ſhalbe the creator of his creator,
becauſe he makes him which made
him: all theſe abſurdities are hatched of
Tranſubſtantiation.
            Thus when men deuiſe articles of
their owne, while they ſtrike vpon the
handuill, the ſparkes flie in their face; &
they are like the man which began to
build and could not finiſh it. When I

ſee the Papiſt in ſo many abſurdities
for intertaining one error, me thinks he
ſeemeth like a Collier which is grimed
with his owne coales. Therefore as in
manners we ſhould think of Peters ſaying,Act. 5. 29.
               Whether is it meete to obey God or
men? So in doctrines we ſhould thinke,
whether it be meete to beleeue God or
men. Thus you haue heard the author
of this Sacrament,Concluſion. 
               the Lord Ieſus; the
time when it was inſtituted, in the night
that he was betraied; the manner how it
was inſtituted, after thanks giuing; the
end why it was inſtituted for a remembrance
of his death; and the diſcouery of
Tranſubſtantiation, one of the laſt hereſies
which Babylō
                hatched. Now they
which haue been Patrons of it before,
ſhould do like the father and mother of
an Idolatrer,Deut. 13. 6. & 9. that is, lay the firſt hand
vpon him to ſhorten his life. Thus I
end. Thinke what account ye ſhall
giue of that ye haue heard.
            The end of the firſt Sermon.
         
         
            
            A TREATISE OF
THE LORDES
SVPPER.
            The ſecond Sermon.
            
               1. Cor. 11. verſ. 25. 26. 27. 28.
               
                  25 After the ſame manner alſo he tooke
the cup, whē he had ſupped, ſaying. This
cup is the New Teſtamēt in my bloud:
this doe as oft as ye drinke it, in remembraunce
of me.
                  26 For as often as ye ſhall eate this bread;
and drinke this cup, ye ſhew the Lords
death till he come.
                  27 Wherefore, whoſoeuer ſhall eate this
bread, and drinke the cup of the Lord
vnworthelie, ſhall be guiltie of the bodie
and bloud of the Lord.
                  28 Let a man therefore examine himſelfe,

and ſo let him eate of this bread, and
drinke of this cup.
               
            
            
               HEre I am to ſpeake of the
ſecond ſeruice (as it were)
at the Lordes Table, and
of that preparatiō which
is like the Wedding garment,
that euerie man
muſt bring vnto this banquet. Theſe
wordes are diuerſlie repeated of the Euangeliſtes.
Here it is ſaid, This Cup is
the New Teſtament in my bloud.
               Mat. 26. 28. In Mathew
and in Marke,
               Mar. 14. 24. 
               it is ſayd. This Cup
is my bloud of the New Teſtament. This
is the firſt mētion which Chriſt makes
of a Teſtament, as though now his
promiſes deſerued the name of a Teſtament,
becauſe the ſeale is ſet vnto them,
which before this Sacrament was not
ſealed, but like a bare writing, without
a ſignet. This word Teſtament,
doth implie a promiſe, and therefore
teacheth vs, that the Sacrament doth
cōfirme and ſtrēgthen, and nouriſh our

fayth, becauſe it ſealeth the promiſe
which we ſhould beleeue.
            Here is to be noted, that Chriſt doth
not onely ſpeake of a Teſtament but he
calleth it a New Teſtamēt, which words
neuer met together before, as though
the Law were for the old man to mortifie
him, and the Goſpell for the new
man to comfort him agayne: or, as if the
old Teſtament had ſo waſht her face,
and chaunged her apparell at Chriſtes
comming, that one would not thinke
it the ſame, but a New Teſtament, becauſe
euē now ſhe was ſhadowed with a
thouſand Ceremonies, & now they are
gone from her, like a myſt at the Sunne
riſing.Iohn. 13. 34. As Chriſt calleth loue a New
Commaundement, becauſe he renewed
it like a Law worne out of memorie,
ſo he calleth the promiſe of ſaluation
a New Teſtament. Becauſe as it
was renewed to Sem, and after renewed
to Abraham, and after renewed
to Dauid, ſo now he renewed it agayne:
which ſhould bee alwaye new and
freſh vnto vs. Euerie Teſtament is confirmed

with bloud; the old Teſtament
was confirmed by the bloud of Goats,Heb. 9. 18.
and Bullockes, and Rammes, but the
New Teſtament is confirmed by the
bloud of Chriſt,Mat. 26. 28. 
               My bloud (ſaith Chriſt)
is the bloud of the New Teſtament: nay
This Cup (ſayth Chriſt) is the New Teſtament.
               Luke. 22. 20.
You may ſee thē that they may
gather as well out of Chriſtes wordes,
that the Cup is the New Teſtament, as
that the Wine is his bloud. For Chriſt
ſayth, This Cup is the New Teſtament,
as well as he ſayth, This Wine is my
bloud, or This bread is my body. Beſide,
when Chriſt ſpeakes of a New Teſtament,Heb. 8. 13.
he implieth, that the old Teſtament
is fulfilled, the Sacrifices, and Ceremonies
of the Law, did ſignifie Chriſt
before he came, therefore they are fulfilled
in his comming, no mo Sacrifices,
no moFor types and figures. Ceremonies, for the truth is
come. Sacrifices and Ceremonies are honorably
buried with the Prieſthood of
Aaron, let them reſt, it is not lawfull
to violate the Sepulchers of the dead,
and take their bodies out of the earth,

as the Witch would raiſe Samuell out of
his graue.1. Sam. 28. 14. Therfore they which retaine
Ceremonies, which ſhould be abrogated,
reliques of Iudaiſme, or reliques of
Papiſme, may be ſaid to violate the ſepulchers
of the dead, and diſturbe the
deceaſed, like the Witch, which preſumed
to raiſe Samuell out of his graue.
            This Teſtament is called a Teſtament
in bloud, becauſe the Teſtament
and will of a man is cōfirmed, when the
man is dead; ſo Chriſt cōfirmed his Teſtament
by his death. Moſes ſaith, that
life is in the bloud,
               Leuit. 17. 11. ſo the bloud of Chriſt
is the life of this Teſtament. If Chriſtes
bloud had not been ſhed, this Teſtament
made vnto vs had been vnprofitable,
as the Teſtamēt of a Father is to his
Sonne, if the Father ſhould not dye but
liue.Heb. 9. 22. Therefore the Apoſtle ſayth, without
ſhedding of bloud there is no remiſſion
of ſinnes. Therfore the Teſtament
or couenaunt of the remiſſion of
our ſinnes, is called the Teſtament in
bloud; the bloud of Chriſt is the ſeale
of the Teſtament, which we haue to

ſhew vnto God for the remiſſion of our
ſinnes, and the two Sacraments are a
feale of that bloud, to witnes that it was
ſhed.
            Againe, this is a matter regarded in
Teſtaments and Willes; to the Teſtament
of him that is dead, no man addeth
or detracteth, but as the Teſtator
made it, ſo it ſtandeth without alteration:
ſo ſhould this Teſtamēt of Chriſt,
and this Sacrament of Chriſt,Deut. 4. 2. no man
ſhould alter it now he is dead:Reuel. 22. 18. for hee
which addeth or detracteth hath a curſe
in Gods booke. Therefore Chriſt when
he inſtituted this Sacrament, commanded,
do this, that is, do as I do, leaſt they
ſhould ſwarue one whit from his owne
manner: yet how many gaudes haue
the Papiſts added to it, that he which
had heard Chriſt ſay, Do this in remembrance
of me, and ſhould ſee how they
handle the matter in their Maſſe, could
ſee nothing to remember Chriſt by,The popiſh receiuing vnder one kind confuted. but
a vaile to hide Chriſt from him. Therfore
this commandement was repeated
againe when he gaue the wine, Do this,

&c. as he commanded them to eate the
bread in remembrance of him, ſo he
commandeth them to drinke the wine
in remembrance of him: nay, he ſpeaks
more preciſely of the wine than of the
bread;Matth. 26. 27. for he ſaith of the wine, Drinke
you all of this, which he ſaith not of the
bread. Surely Chriſt did foreſee that
ſome proud Heretiks would do otherwiſe
after him, euen as it is come to
paſſe: for the Papiſt doth breake this
Commandement of Chriſt, as flatly as
Saul brake the commandement of Samuel.
               1. Sam. 15. 9.
               Samuel commanded him to kill
the fat & the leane: Saul killed the lean,
but not the fat; ſo Chriſt commandeth
to receiue bread and wine, they teach to
receiue bread, but not wine: Chriſt ſaith,
Drinke you all of this, they ſay drink not
all of this: Chriſt gaue the bread and
wine to all, they giue the bread to all, &
the wine to ſome: their Prieſts receiue
all, but the people muſt content themſelues
with halfe: the Prieſt eates and
drinks, but the people muſt not drinke
for ſpilling on their cloathes. Is this the

Church which cannot erre? Doe they
think to hemme Chriſt in their Maſſe,
and ſhut his ordinance out of their
Maſſe?Matth. 27. 35. The Souldiers diuided Chriſtes
coate, but theſe diuide his bodie, and ſeparate
the bread & wine which Chriſt
hath ioyned. Paul ſpeaketh of heretikes
which taught,Coloſ. 2. 21. 
               Touch not, taſt not,
handle not: ſo theſe ſay, touch not, taſt
not, handle not, when they ſhould ſay,
Touch,How the Popiſh Prieſtes do iniure the people. and taſt, and handle, Of all Hereſies
either old or new, there is none ſo
iniurious to the common people, as
the paſture of ſhauelings Poperie, for
they may not reade the ſcriptures; they 
may not come to Councels; they may 
not examine that which is taught thē; 
they may not be buried without a mortuarie; 
they may not drinke at the Cō
               munion,
as though their Prieſtes were
their Lords. Therefore we may ſay as a
Heathen did, There is no charitie in the
Papists Sacrament,
               Act. 5. 2. becauſe like Anantas,
the Prieſtes keepe backe that which
they ſhould diſtribute, & mangle the
Sacrifice as though Ely his Sonnes had

left their hooke to the Maſſing Friers.
Thus that yee may know who ſucceed
the Phariſies,1. Sam. 2. 13. they haue fulfilled that
which the Phariſies did, that is, By their
owne Commandements they haue made
the Commandement of God of no effect.
               Mar. 7. 13.
For whereas the purpoſe of Chriſt was
to tye our faith wholly to himſelfe, that
we ſhould not ſeek for any thing without
him, knowing that the maintenāce
of this life hath need both of meat and
drinke, to teach vs that all ſufficiencie
is in himſelfe, by bread and wine he
ſheweth, that he is in ſtead both of meat
and drinke, that is, in ſtead of al: which
ſignification is taken away where the
wine is not giuen as well as the bread.
Therefore as it is ſaid of a horrible and
odious crime,Iudg. 19. 30. 
               Conſider the matter and
giue ſentence: ſo I wiſh all to conſider
this Innouation, and giue ſentence of
it. Can there be any clearer contradiction
to the Word, or bolder checke to
Chriſt, than when he ſaith, Drinke you
all of this: to ſay; drinke not all of this?
It is euen as when God ſaid,Gen. 2. 17. 
               Ye ſhal die,
               
the diuell ſaid, yee ſhall not die. Shall we
go now to a Counſell, or a Father, or a
Doctor to inquire whether this doctrine
be like Chriſt doctrine? I do verely
thinke that none here is ſo ſimple
but that he ſeeth, that if any thing can
be contrarie to Chriſts ſpeech, this is
contrarie to it. But this is onely their
detraction from the Sacrament.
            Now you ſhall heare their additions
to the Sacrament, looke vpon their veſtures,
and their geſtures, and their Altars,
and their pix, and their incenſe, &
their beckes, and their nods, and their
turnings, all this is more then Chriſt
did, and therefore the Prophet may ſay
againe,Eſai. 1. 12. 
               Who hath required this of you?
Did Chriſt commaund you to do more
then he did, and not do as he did? Therfore
let them which haue eyes to ſee, be
thankfull for their light, when they
heare how blind they were, whom God
gaue ouer to be ſeduced.
            The fruit of this Sacrament is noted
in theſe words,Verſ. 24. 
               Which is broken for you,
which is ſhed for you, that is (as Matthew
               
interpreteth) ſhed for the remiſſion of
ſinnes.
               Matth. 26. 28. As al was made for vs,Gen. 1. ſo al which
Chriſt ſpake, he ſpake for vs, and all
which Chriſt did,2. Cor. 4. 15. he did for vs, and all
which Chriſt ſuffered, he ſuffered for
vs, that the ſinnes of men might be forgiuen,
and yet ſo few apprehend this
benefite, that the way to heauen is called
a narrow way,
               Matth. 7. 13. as though all theſe
pains did ranſome but a ſmal number,
and certaine order of men. All are not
ſaued by Chriſt death, but all which
are ſaued, are ſaued by Chriſts death: his
death is ſufficient to ſaue all, as the ſun
is ſufficient to lighten all: but if anie
man winke, the Sunne will not giue
him light: ſo, if any man contemne, &
will not receiue, Chriſt will not thruſt
him into Heauen, but euerie man ſhall
haue that which he chooſeth (as Dauid
ſaith) Bleſſing to him that loueth bleſſing,
               Pſal. 119. 17.
               and curſing to him which loueth curſing.
There wants not a hand to giue, but a
hand to take. I would (ſaith Chriſt) but
you would not.
               Matth. 23. 37. Stretch forth thy hand,
and here is Chriſtes hand, which takes

                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
make thee quake and tremble if thou
ſhouldſt ſee but another ſo diſmēbred
before thy face? Thou haſt no comfort
now but this, when I haue ſuffered I
ſhall be free; before to morrow at this
time all my paine will be paſt, though
my ſhame continue and my children
be beggers. What grace, what fauour,
what mercie, now, to pardon thee all
this, and ſaue thy life, and ſet thee at
libertie, as though thou haddeſt neuer
offended? So I and thou, and euery one
here had committed reaſon againſt
the King of Kings, and ſtood condemned
for it, not to ſuffer and then to be
free, like them which breake the lawes
of men, but to ſuffer and ſuffer, and euer
to ſuffer all that the diuels would
heape vpon vs. Then came the mercie
of GOD for Chriſt which ſhed his
blood, like an vmpire betweene God
and vs, and ſaid as Eſaiah ſaid to Hezekiah,
               His wordes are not ſo, but the effect of his words. 2. King. 20. 5. Luk. 7. 15. 
               Thou ſhalt not die but liue, looſe
him, let him go, for he is mine. So we
were ſtayed like the widdowes ſonne
when hee was carried to his graue.

This is the benefite of Chriſts death, and
this Sacrament is the remembrance of
it, and therefore whenſoeuer we receiue
it, this addition commeth with it,
which is ſhed for the remiſſion of ſinnes:
               Matth. 26. 28.
our fault was ſo hainous and grieuous,
that no ranſome could counteruaile it,
vnleſſe GOD himſelfe had ſuffered
for vs. Being in this extremitie, neither
man, nor Angel offered his life for
vs, but the Prince himſelf, which ſhold
haue crucified vs, came to be crucified
of vs, for vs, that we might ſay with
ſtedfaſt faith,The mercifull Article. 
               I beleeue the remiſſion of
ſinnes, not the ſatisfaction of ſinnes, but
the remiſſion of ſinnes. Marke this diſtinction
againſt Popiſh merites of
works, or penance, Chriſt hath ſatiſfied
and not we; we are remitted and not
Chriſt: therfore we ſay in our Confeſſion,
I beleeue the remiſſion of ſins, which
I may call the merciful Article, becauſe
it is the quinteſſence and ſweetneſſe of
all the twelue. Therefore who but Antichriſt
durſt depraue it? If there be a
ſatisfaction for our ſins by our works,

or by our Pilgrimages, or by our Maſſes,
or by our penance, let Chriſt neuer
be called a forgiuer, but an exchanger
like the Pope, which ſelleth his pardons.
Wretched creatures which will
not receiue the Lord when he comes to
their dore.Reuel. 21. 6. Chriſt ſaith, take for nothing
and they ſay no, we will not take, but
buy. Vile baſe miſerable men diſdaine
to take grace of God without ſatisfaction,
but they wil cope with the Lord,
& giue him ſo manie Pilgrimages, faſt
ſo many dayes, heare ſo many Maſſes,
& pay ſo many works for it, vntill they
haue done as much good as they haue
done euill. Our ſinnes are infinite, and
God is infinite, but our workes are
finite, in number and meaſure, how can
they anſwere then to that which exceedeth
number and meaſure? Therefore
be content with Ioſephs brethrē to
take your money again, & ſay that you
haue corne for nothing,Gen. 42. 25. that is, you are
ſaued for nothing, or elſe when you ſay,
I beleeue the remiſſion of ſinnes, you lie
vnto God, becauſe you do not beleeue

the remiſſion of ſinnes, but ſatisfaction
for ſinnes, like the Papiſts.
            It followeth,Verſe. 26. 
               As often as yee ſhall eate
this bread, and drink this cup, ye ſhall ſhew
the Lords death till he come. Here are
three inuincible argumēts againſt Popiſh
Tranſubſtantiation,Three argumēts againſt Tranſubſtā
                  tiatiō in one verſe. like the three
witneſſes vnder which euerie worde
doth ſtād Firſt we are ſaid to eat bread;
then it is not fleſh but bread.Deut. 17. 6. Secondly,
we are ſaid to ſhew the Lords death; then
it is but a ſhew or repreſentation of his
death. Thirdly, it is ſaid, vntill he come;
if he be to come, then he is not come; if
he be come, how can we ſay, vntill he
come. The effect of this verſe was
ſhewed in theſe words, Doe this in remembrance
of me: for to ſay, Do this in
remembrance of me, and to ſay, ſo oft as
you do this, you ſhew my death, is much at
one: ſo that if you call this Sacrament
a ſhew of Chriſtes death, as it is called
here, then it is not Chriſt, or if you call
it a remembrance of Chriſt, as it is called
there, yet it is not Chriſt, but a ſhew,
or remembrance of Chriſt: but this is

ſuch a ſhew, and remembrance, that the
next verſe ſaith,Verſe. 27. 
               Whoſoeuer receiueth it
vnworthely, is guiltie of the bodie & bloud
of Chriſt.
            
            Will yee know who receiueth vnworthily:What it is to receiue vnworthyly.
In verſe 29. Paul ſaith, he diſcerneth
not the Lords bodie: that is,
which putteth no difference betweene
this bread and other, but eateth like a
child, the meat which he knoweth not:
and after the bread ſeemeth ſtones to
him, and the wine poyſon, becauſe his
conſcience telleth him, I haue receiued
vnworthily, before I could ſay like Dauid,
               Iohn. 10. 27.
               My heart is prepared. My ſheep (ſaith
Chriſt) know my voice: as they diſcerne
Chriſts words, ſo they diſcerne Chriſts
bodie, and therefore ſo often as they
come to the Lords Table, they ſeeme to
come into the Lords preſence: there
they greete and kiſſe and imbrace one
another with affections, which none cā
know,Luk. 1. 41. but they that feele, like Iohn,
which leaped in the wombe, ſo ſoone as
Chriſt came neare him?
            Will ye know beſide, what it is to be

guiltie of the bodie & bloud of Chriſt?How receiuers may be guiltie of Chriſtes death.
euen as Iudas was guiltie for betraying
him, and Pilate for deliuering him,
and the Iewes for crucifying him; ſo
they are guiltie which receiue this Sacrament
vnworthily,Mar. 14. 44. as Pilate and Caiphas
and Iudas were.Mark. 15. 15. If they be guiltie
of Chriſts death,Mark. 15. 25. they are guilty of their
owne death to, as if they had committed
two murthers: and therefore Paul
ſaith after,Verſ. 30. that many of the Corinthians
died onely for the vnworthy receiuing
of this Sacrament. As the word is
the ſauour of death to them which receiue
it vnworthily, ſo the Sacrament is
the ſauour of death to thē which receiue
it vnworthily:1. Cor. 2. 16. it neuer goeth into their
mouth, but they are Traitors ipſo facto,
and may ſay to Hell, this day I haue taken
poſſeſſion of thee, becauſe I am
guiltie of Chriſts bloud. Therefore it
followeth immediatly,How we ſhould be prepared before we cōe to the Lords Table. 
               Let a man examine
himſelfe before he eate of this bread,
or drinke of this wine, as if he ſhould ſay,
if he which receiueth this Sacramēt vnworthily,
be guiltie of Chriſtes death,

like Iudas which hanged himſelfe: if
theſe ſignes be receiued to ſaluation or
damnation like the word, the next leſſon
is, to examine your ſelues before
you receiue, leaſt you receiue like the
ſonne of perditiō,Ioh. 13. 27. which ſwallowed the
bread and the diuel togither. Therfore,
Let a man examine himſelfe, and ſo let him
eate: that is, let him examine firſt, & receiue
after:1. Sam. 9. 13. for if we ſhould receiue the
bread of the earth reuerētly, how ſhold
we receiue the bread of heauen? When
Iehonadab came to Iehu his chariot, he
ſaid,2. King. 10. 15. 
               Is thy heart vpright as my heart is
toward thee? So when we come to the
Lords Table, he would haue our hearts
vpright to him, as his heart is to vs, for
who feaſteth his enimies and mockers?
The golden Ring ſitteth higheſt at our
table,Iames. 2. 2. but the wedding garment ſitteth
higheſt at this Table. It is ſafer eating
with vnwaſhen hands, than with an
vnwaſhen hart. The Iewes were taught
to chooſe the Lambe of the Paſſeouer
on the tenth day of the firſt moneth, in
which moneth they cāe out of Egypt: &

on the fourteenth day after,Exod. 12. 3. & 6. they were
taught to eate him, ſo they had foure
dayes reſpit betweene the chooſing, and
the killing, to prepare and ſanctifie
thēſelues for the Paſſeouer, which was
a ſigne of the Lords Supper. This admoniſhed
them, that the matter now to
be performed, was verie waightie, and
therfore they were deepely to conſider
it, for now was the action, & ſumme of
all ſaluatiō in handling: if they did prepare
themſelues ſo before they did receiue
the figure of this Sacrament, how
ſhold we be prepared before we receiue
the Sacramēt it ſelfe? Therfore as Ioſiah
commanded the Leuites to prepare the
people:12. Chro. 35. 6. ſo Paul aduiſeth the people to
prepare themſelues, that is, to examine
whether they haue faith, and loue, & repentāce,
before they come to this feaſt.
By this al may ſee, firſt that Paul would
haue euerie lay man ſo skilfull in the
ſcripture,Al are bound to know the Scriptures. that he be able to examine
himſelf by it; for this admonition is not
to thē which miniſter the ſacramēt, but
to al which receiue the ſacrament. And

the rule by which we muſt examine
ourſelues, is the law which we ſhould
obey: therfore if the rule be vnknowne,
the examination muſt be vndone. Our
doctrine muſt be examined by the doctrine
of the Prophets and Apoſtles;Act. 17. 11.
our prayers muſt be examined by the
ſixe petitions of Chriſts prayer;Note. our beleefe
muſt be examined by the 12. Articles
of faith; our life muſt be examined
by the ten Cōmaundements of the
Law.Exod. 20. 1. &c. Now, he which hath his Touchſtone
may trie gold from copper, but he
which hath it not, takes one for the other.2. Cor. 13. 5.
Therfore, before Paules Examine,
you had need to learne Chriſts Search,
               Iohn. 5. 39.
               Search the Scriptures and they wil lighten
you to ſearch your ſelues. This is the
doctrine with which I will end, and the
neceſſarie point for which I chuſe this
text, to teach you (if I could) that Chriſtian
Arte how to examine your ſelues.
            
               Let a man examine himſelfe before he
eate.
               Verſ. 28. Here is firſt an examination.The diuisiō. Secondly,
an examination of our ſelues,
Thirdlie, an examination before we

come to the Sacrament. Touching the
firſt, here Paule ſayth, Examine your ſelues,
but in 2. Cor. 13. he doubleth his
charge, Prooue your ſelues, and agayne
at next word, Examine your ſelues; as
if he ſhould ſay, this worke muſt be
done when it is done, becauſe it is neuer
throughlie done, and therefore we muſt
double our examination, as Paule doubleth
his coūſell. If a mā ſuſpect his enemie,
he will trie him with a queſtion, if
that will not ſearch him, he will put
forth another; if that be ſpied, he will
moue another, like one which putteth
diuers keyes into a locke vntill it open.
So he which examineth, muſt try and
try, proue and proue, ſearch and ſearch,
for the Angell of darknesse is like an
Angell of light,2. Cor. 11. 14. and we haue no way
to diſcouer him,1. Iohn. 4. 1. but that of Iohn, Trie
the ſpirites. God examineth with trials,
the deuill examineth with temptations,
the world examineth with
perſecutiōs: we which are thus examined,
had need to examine to. If any mā
skill not what Examining meaneth, the

verie word. Examine, is ſo pregnant,
that it prompteth vs how we ſhould
examine; for it ſignifieth to put our
ſelues vnto the Touch-ſtone, as if we
would trie Gold from Copper. Therfore
one ſaith, that Examination is the
eye of the ſoule,A deſcriptiō of true examination. whereby ſhe ſeeth her
ſelfe, and her ſafetie, and her danger,
and her way which ſhe walketh, and
her pace which ſhe holdeth, and the
end to which ſhe tendeth: ſhe lookes
into her glaſſe, and ſpieth euerie ſpot
in her face, how all her graces are
ſtayned, then ſhe takes the water of life,
and waſheth her blots away. After,
ſhe lookes agayne, and beholdeth all
her giftes, her faith, feare, loue, patience,
meekeneſſe, and marketh how euerie
one doth floriſh, or wither. If they fade
and decay; that ſhe feeleth a conſumption,
then ſhe taketh preſeruatiues, and
reſtoratiues of prayer, and counſell, and
repentance, before the ſickneſſe grow:
thus euery day ſhe letteth downe a bucket
into her heart, to ſee what water
it bringeth vp, leaſt ſhe ſhould corrupt

within, and periſh ſodenly.
            To heare, and read, pray, and faſt, and
communicate, is a worke of many, but
to examine thoſe workes, is the faſhion
of few,Iere. 8. 6. and therfore Ieremie cōplaineth,
No man ſayth, what haue I done? as if he
ſhould ſay, no mā examineth himſelfe:
and therfore in all the Scripture it is ſaid
but of one,Iob. 9. 28. 
               that he feared all his workes, as
though he durſt not thinke, nor ſpeake,
nor do any thing before he had examined
what it was, from whence it came,
and whether it went:Mat. 13. 44. ſo the more precious
treaſure is deeper hid in the groūd.
            The ſecond point is,1. Theſſ. 5. 21. to Examine our
ſelues, Paule ſaith, Trie all things, much
more ſhould we trie our ſelues. The
good ſower doth ſow his own ground,Mat. 13. 25.
but the bad ſower doth ſow another
mans ground, as the deuill did. The Diſciples
of Chriſt ſaid,Mat. 26. 22. 
               Maſter, is it I? not
Maſter, is it he? The Diſciples of Iohn
asked,Luke. 3. 10. 
               Maſter, what ſhall we do? not Maſter,
what ſhall they do? we muſt obey
ſome, and heare others, and admoniſh
others, & loue all, but examine our ſelues.

That which we applie vnto others,
the Apoſtle applieth vnto our ſelues;
for when we ſpeake of an examiner, we
intend one which examineth other:
when we ſpeake of an accuſer, we intēd
one which accuſeth other: when we
ſpeake of a Iudge, we meane one which
iudgeth others, but the Scripture crieth,
Examine thy ſelfe,
               1. Cor. 11. 13. 
               accuſe thy ſelfe, iudge thy
ſelfe, that is, be not curious to ſearch a
mote in thy brothers eye,Mat. 7. 3. but pull out
the beame which is in thy owne eye.
This doth ſhew that they which ſit in
Gods chaire to iudge others, commonly
haue greater faults themſelues, than
they whom they vſe to iudge: and therfore
Chriſt calleth their fault a beame,
and the others a mote.Pſal. 4. 4. This made Dauid
ſay, Examine thy heart, thy heart is
thy owne heart, therefore thou muſt
examine whether thou pray, whether
thou watch, whether thou faſt; and not
whether he pray, whether he watch, as
the Phariſie examined the Publica,Luke. 18. 11. leaſt
thou haue Peters checke: when he examined
what Iohn ſhould do, Chriſt ſaid,

               What is that to thee?
               Iohn. 21. 22. 
               follow thou me.
Thou art a priuate man, and haſt a priuate
examination, therfore let thy queſtion
be, What haue I done? and make
thy Anatomie of thy ſelfe.
            See beloued, we may not beleeue our
ſelues before we haue examined our ſelues:
for we are falſe hearted; and the notableſt
coſiner that deceiueth moſt,
for one time that he deceiueth others,
ten times deceiueth himſelfe. Becauſe
the fleſh is a wylie ſeruaunt, and will lye
like Gehezi to his own maſter,2. King. 5. 25. and face
him that it hath not ſinned, when it cō
               meth
from ſinne:2. King. 5. 26. therefore as Eliſha examined
his ſeruāt, ſo the ſoule muſt examine
her ſeruant, that is, man muſt be
ielous of himſelfe, and take himſelfe for
a lyer, for a flatterer, for a diſſembler,
vntill he be throughly acquainted with
himſelfe: for no mā is ſo often beguiled,
as by himſelfe, by truſting his double
heart, and taking his owne word without
further triall. If Paule had bid vs
examine others,Luke. 22. 31. we would haue ſifted
thē like Sathan Sathā hath deſired to fift

thee, ſaith Chriſt to Peter, ſo we haue a
deſire to ſift others: euen Peter which
was ſifted of Sathan, longed to ſift Iohn,
and know what he ſhould do, before he
karkened to his owne charge. Therfore
the helpe of examination is a needfull
preſeruatiue, although we were as ſoūd
as Peter. They which are ſuſpected of
crime do not examine thēſelues, but are
examined of others, leaſt they ſhould
be partiall: but a Chriſtian muſt examine
himſelfe of his crime, and be his
own iudge, his own accuſer, & his own
condemner: for no man knoweth the
ſpirit of man but the ſpirite which is
in man,1. Cor. 2. 11. which will condemne him if he
be guiltie, and tell him all that he hath
done, and with what minde he did it, &
what he deſerueth for it. This is the priuate
araignement, or cloſe Seſſions,
when Conſcience ſits in her chaire to
examine, and accuſe, and iudge, and
condemne her ſelfe, becauſe ſhe will
not be condemned of God.
            Thus holie men haue kept their Seſſions
at home, and made their hearts

the foreman of the Iury, and examined
themſelues as we examine others, the
feare of the Lord ſtood at the doore of
their ſoules, to examine euery thought
before it went in, and at the doore of
their lips, to examine euery word before
it went out, whereby they eſcaped
a thouſand ſinnes which we commit, as
though we had no other worke. So thou
ſhouldeſt ſit in iudgement of thy ſelfe,
and call thy thoughtes, and ſpeaches &
actions to giue in euidēce againſt thee,
whether thou be a Chriſtian, or an Infidell,
a ſonne or a baſtard, a ſeruaunt or a
rebell, a Proteſtant or an hypocrit; if
thou finde not faith, nor feare, nor loue,
nor zeale, when thou examineſt thy
ſelfe, let no man make thee beleeue that
thou art holy, that thou art ſanctified,
that thou art a Chriſtian, that thou art a
beleeuer, that thou art a Goſpeller, becauſe
thou art worſe than thou ſeemeſt
thy ſelfe; for euery man is partiall to
himſelfe when he is moſt hūbled. Therfore
if my heart tell me that I do loue
God, whom ſhall I beleeue before my

ſelfe?Prou. 25. 3. As Salomon faith, No man cā ſearch
the heart of the king: ſo Paule ſaith; No
man knoweth the ſpirite of any man,
               1. Cor. 2. 11. 
               but
the ſpirite which is in man, that is, no mā
feeleth the heart of man ſo well as him
ſelf. And yet himſelfe, although he haue
liued with it euer ſince he was borne,
doth not know his owne heart vnleſſe
he examine it narrowly, no more than
he knoweth his owne bones, or his
vaines, or his ſinewes, or his arteries, or
his muskles, how many are in his body,
or where they lye, or what they do. This
ſeemes ſtraunge that a man ſhould not
know his owne heart, yet it is true that
the beſt of vs al doth not know his own
heart, though he haue dwelt with it frō
his mothers wombe. For Chriſt ſaith to
his diſciples,Luke. 9. 55. euen to his diſciples, You
know not of what ſpirite you are, that is,
you think better of your ſelues thā you
are, and know not what the clocke ſtriketh
within. There is a zeale without
knowledge, and there is a knowledge
without zeale; there is a faith without
obedience, and there is an obedience
without fayth; there is a loue without

feare, and there is a feare with loue,
and both are hypocrites. Therefore
as Dalilah ſearched where Sampſons
ſtrength lay,Iudg. 16. 6. ſo let euery man ſearch
where his weakeneſſe lyeth, and alway
be filling the emptie gap.
            
                Now this examination muſt go before
vs to the Sacrament. Euerie meate
worketh according as it is digeſted, &
this meate worketh according as it is
receiued. Therefore when Chriſt had
taught what we ſhould doe in receiuing
the Sacrament, now Paule ſheweth
what we ſhould doe before we receiue
the Sacrament, Let a man examine
himſelf. But ſome will come before
they examine themſelues, and therfore
as the Prieſtes of the Law, had authoritie
to put by lame and blind ſacrifices,
ſo the Miniſters of the Goſpell haue
power to put by lame and blind receiuers,
and he which doth not ſo, giueth a
ſword into their hands to kill them ſelues.
If the Paſtor would vſe this examination
duely, it were the onely way to
make euery one examine himſelfe, leaſt
he be put by like Non proficients. As

               liphtah diſcerned the Ephramites, becauſe
whē they ſhould pronoūce Shibboleth,
they pronounced Sibboleth: ſo all
which cannot pronounce Chriſt, that is
giue a reaſon of their faith, are to be
thruſt from this Table.
            There is hearing,Luke. 8. 18. and a preparatiue
before hearing. There is a praying,
and a preparatiue before praying.
There is a receauing,Eccle. 4. 17. and a preparatiue
before receauing; which if it be wanting,
the receauer receaueth vncomfortablie,
the prayer prayeth idlie, the
hearer heareth vnfruitefullie, like thoſe
which eate before hunger, and drinke
before thirſt.
            This preparatiue before hearing and
praying, and receiuing, doth ſignifie,
that there is a kinde of Phiſicke in theſe
three, for preparatiues are miniſtre
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               
wayes before Phiſick, & as the prepa
                  ••
               
               tiue
which goeth before, maketh way
to the Phiſicke, or elſe it would doe no
good, but hurt: ſo vnleſſe examination
go before the Sacramēt, we ſeale vp the
threatnings which are written againſt
vs, in ſtead of the promiſes which are

made vnto vs, for the Sacramēt is a ſeale,
and therfore ſealeth good or euill, as euerie
other ſeale doth.
            The preparatiue before we receiue, is
to Examine.
               Luke. 1. 76. As Iohn was the forerunner
of Chriſt,The ſecond examinatiō. ſo examinatiō is the forerunner
of the Sacrament, like the harbinger,
which rideth before to prepare
the rowme.Iob. 1. 5. For, if Iob commanded his
ſonnes to ſanctifie thēſelues before they
did come to his ſacrifice, how ſhould
we ſanctifie our ſelues before we come
to Chriſtes Sacrament, wherein we are
commaunded to doe as the Lord him
ſelfe did which inſtituted it? It is ſaid,
that the Chamber wherein Chriſt did
inſtitute this Sacrament,Luke. 22. 12. was trimmed;
the Chamber wherein the Apoſtles receiued
this Sacrament was trimmed: If
Iudas Chamber, his inner Chamber had
bene trimmed ſo to, he had receiued
this Sacrament with as much comfort
as the other Diſciples did: but becauſe
his heart was not trimmed, therefore he
was the firſt which was condemned for
the vnworthie receiuing of this Sacrament.Gene. 3. 6.
               Adam did not thinke that death

had bene in an Apple, ſo you would
not thinke that death ſhould be in
bread: but as a coale hath fire in it beſide
the coale it ſelfe, which fire doth either
warme or burne; ſo this meate
hath another meate in it beſide that
which is ſeen, which doth either ſaue or
deſtroy: therefore he which commeth
to this ſpirituall meate, muſt examine
whether hee haue a ſpirituall mouth,
as well as a carnall mouth, or elſe he
ſhall receiue no more than he ſeeth, and
that which he ſeeth not ſhall deſtroy
him.Mar. 2. 22. 
               No man (ſaith Chriſt) putteth new
wine into old veſſels, leaſt the veſſels breake
and the wine leake. This Wine is new
Wine, therefore put it into new veſſels,
holy veſſels, ſanctified veſſels, or elſe it
will leake forth & breake the veſſell, &
thou ſhalt haue no more taſt of it, than
while the reliſh of bread is in thy
mouth. When Chriſt commeth to our
houſe, ſhall we not looke whether our
Chamber be trimmed, as the Chamber
was trimmed againſt his cōming to the
Paſſe-ouer? But how ſhal we trimme it?
            When a man takes an office, he examineth

his ſubſtaunce: when he takes a
trade, he examineth his skill: when
he goeth to fight, he examineth his
ſtrength, but theſe wants are no wants
when he goeth to the Sacrament. Wilt
thou know now vpon what articles
thou muſt inquire at that time, that is,
how thou ſhouldeſt examine thy ſelfe?
            As ſome prayer may be at all times,1. Theſſ. 5. 16.
and ſome reioycing may be at all times;
ſo ſome examination is at all times.
Thus Iob examined himſelfe euerie
day,Iob. 9. 28. nay, euery houre, becauſe he ſcanned
all that he did.
            But there is a ſpeciall examination
before the Sacrament, becauſe it is the
bread which is receiued to ſaluation, or
dānation;1. Cor. 11. 29. becauſe it is the feaſt, to which
whoſoeuer commeth without his wedding
garment,Mat. 22. 11. ſhalbe caſt into vtter
darkneſſe, becauſe it is a ſeale which ſealeth
a curſe or a bleſſing. Therefore hauing
obſerued that examination is the
neceſſarieſt leſſon in Chriſtianitie, and
leſſe knowne than other, I haue ſtudied
ſince my Sermō to lay downe three examinations
which you ſhould vſe at all

times, and a ſpeciall examination, for
the Communicants Catechiſme, which
leadeth immediatly to the Sacramēt as
a gueſt is handed to the Table. In the
firſt examination I wil ſhew thee a rule
how thou ſhalt trie others ſpirites, and
how thou ſhalt trie thine owne.
            Thou ſhalt trie ſtraunge ſpirites by 
their manner of ſpeaking,The firſt examination vpon the markes of true ſpirits & the falſe, in our ſelues or other. plainlie, or
doubtfullie, boldlie, or fearefullie, therfore
we read that the oracles of the heathen
had a double meaning, and that
the falſe Prophets neuer ſpake boldlie,
but where their patrons were readie to
fleſh them.1. King. 22. 11
            
            By the proportion of faith: for euerie 
hereſie is contrarie to ſome article of
our beliefe, as euerie ſinne is againſt
ſome of the ten Commandements.
            By the euent of their ſpeaches: for 
they take not effect,Deut. 18. 22. as it is ſayd in the
18. of Deut. and therefore they are called
falſe Prophets.Mat. 7. 15.
            
            By their fruits: for none of the falſe 
Prophets were good men.Mat. 7. 16.
            
            By their ſucceſſe: for if they be not of 
God, they will come to nought, as the

               Arians and Manichees and Pelagians
are vaniſhed, as if they had neuer bene,
ſo time ſhall weare out euerie doctrine
that is not truth. This is thy rule to trie
others ſpirits.
            
                Thou ſhalt trie thine owne ſpirit by
the motions that it hath to good, or euill.
For as a good ſtomach turneth all
that it eates, into good nutrimēt, and a
bad ſtomach turneth all that it eates into
raw humors: ſo a good minde cōuerteth
all that it heareth, & all that it ſeeth,
and all that it feeleth, vnto ſome profite,
but a bad minde maketh a temptation
of euery thing: therfore it is ſaid, To the
cleane all things are cleane,
               Rom. 14. 14. and ſo, to the
vncleane nothing is cleane;Titus. 1. 15. that is, they
defile themſelues with euerie thing.
            
                Secondly, by the firſt cauſe, or preparation
which thou haddeſt vnto it,
for whatſoeuer it be, thy thoughts will
be where thou loueſt: to verifie that
ſaying,Mat. 6. 21. 
               Where a mans treaſure is, there
will be his heart, for lightlie, the beginning
is a picture of the end, and the
act is like the thought which ſet it a
worke.
            
               
Thirdly, by the manner of thy conſolation 
in it, whether it be of knowledge,
or ignorance, whether it be conſtant,
or mutable, calme, or boyſterous,
ſimple, or mixt; for as a cleare fountain
yeeldeth cleare ſtreames, ſo a pure hart
hath pure ioyes.
            Fourthly, whether it bring to Chriſt,
or take any thing from him to thy ſelf,
like al the parts of Popery, which mangle
his honour either to Angels, or to
Saints, or to Pope, or to Images. If it abide
all theſe queſtions, and draw thee
not from any good, then thou maiſt
ſay, it is from God, water the ſeede O
Lord, which thou haſt ſowne. This is
the fruite of thy firſt examination. In
the ſecond, by making thee diſcerne
whether another be a Chriſtian, I will
teach thee to know whether thy ſelfe
be a Chriſtian, which that thou mayſt
reach to, obſerue this directiō, and thou
ſhalt ſee of what ſide thou art.The 2. examinatiō vpō the differences between the wicked & the godly.
            
            It muſt needes be, that they which
walke to contrarie endes, ſhould go diuers
wayes: therefore there be mo differences
betweene the children of God,

And the children of the world, than
there be betweene men and beaſts.
            
                Firſt, they are diſtinguiſhed in Will:
for the wicked ſtriue to bring Gods wil
to their will,Num. 22. 19. like Balaam, which when
he had an anſwere, ſtayed for another:
but the faithfull labour to bring their
will to Gods will, like Chriſt, which
ſaid,Matth. 26. 39. 
               not as I will, but as thou wilt.
            
            
                They are diſtinguiſhed in Faith. All
men haue not faith (ſaith Paul) but the
iuſt liue by faith:
               2. Theſſ. 3. 2. as if he ſhould ſay,Rom. 1. 17. the
iuſt beleeue, and the vniuſt beleeue not.
The iuſt beleeue, and applie that they
beleeue to thēſelues.Iam 2. 19. The wicked may
beleeue like the diuels, but their faith
is like a gadding hen, which carieth her
eggs to other, & neuer layeth at home,
ſo they beleeue that other ſhalbe ſaued,
but not themſelues.
            
                They are diſtinguiſhed in Hope, for
becauſe the wicked hope not for any
mends of God, therefore they neuer defer
their reward, but if they doe any
good,Matth. 6. 2. they are trumpets of it thēſelues,
for fear it ſhould not be blaſed inough,
and therefore Chriſt ſaid, that the Phariſes

had their reward alreadie, becauſe
they were boaſters of their works;2. Tim. 3. 2. and
if they doo no good but euill, yet they
would be magnified as much for euill, as
other are for good. But the faithful are
likened to handmaides,
               Pſal. 123. 2. which wait their
reward,Matth. 6. 3. 
               their left hand ſeeth not when
their right hand doth well, and they are
afraid to take honor of men, for loſing
their honour with God,Iohn. 1. 21. like Iohn Baptiſt;
which made his vertues meaner
than they were, and debaſed himſelfe,
when he might haue got a name aboue
his Lord.
            They are diſtinguiſhed in obedience,
               
therefore Chriſt teacheth vs to iudge
men by their fruites as an vnfallible
rule:Matth. 7. 17. for the euill tree will bring forth
euil fruit, and the good tree good fruit,
and neither can change his propertie,
although the euill fruite is ſometimes
beautiful, and the good fruit ſometimes
blaſted. All ſlip, but in the wicked, one
ſin teacheth another, and in the faithful,
one ſinne preuenteth another.
            They are diſtinguiſhed in Repentance,
               
for the wicked do but weepe for their

ſinnes paſt, but the godly purpoſe to
ſinne no more:Exod. 10. 16. ſo Pharaoh, Saul, and Iudas
ſaid,1. Sam. 15. 30. 
               I haue ſinned, but Shadrach,
Meſhach,
               Matth. 27. 4. and Abednego ſaid,Dan. 3. 18. 
               We will not
ſinne: therefore the heart of the godly
is called a contrite heart,
               Pſal. 51. 17. but the heart
of the wicked is called a heart that cannot
repent.
               Rom. 2. 5. Beſide, as Chriſt caſt out a
legion of diuels at once,Luk. 8 30. ſo the godly
would be purged of all their ſinnes together,
but the wicked neuer conſent
to leaue all, but as Naaman ſaid, Let the
Lord ſpare me in this:
               2. King. 5. 18. ſo euer he excepteth
one ſin, which is his beloued ſin, like
Herod,
               Matth. 14. 3. which reformed manie things,
and yet would not leaue his brothers
wife.
            
                They are diſtinguiſhed in Charitie,
for yee ſhall neuer ſee the wicked loue
their enimies: and therefore when the
Phariſes could not loue their enimies,
they taught that men might hate their
enimies:Matth. 5. 43. and Chriſt ſpeaking of Publicans
and ſinners,Luk. 6. 32. exhorteth his diſciples
not to loue like them, becauſe they loued
none but their friends.
            
                They are diſtinguiſhed in Prayer, for

the wicked cannot pray, therefore Dauid
ſaith,Pſal. 14. 4. 
               they call not vpon the Lord, as if
they had not the ſpirit of prayer,
               Zach. 12. 10. & therfore
Chriſt calleth their prayers babling,
               Rom. 8. 16.
for they thinke not of God when
they ſpeake vnto him.Matth. 6. 7.
            
            They are diſtinguiſhed in Patience;
               
no hypocrite can beare the croſſe, but
ſaith like Caine,
               Gen. 4. 13. 
               It is heauyer than I can
ſuffer;
               Act. 16. 25. but Paul and Silas ſing in priſon,
for a faithfull man would haue ſomething
to humble him, and reioyceth to
beare his maſters markes,Gal. 6. 17. becauſe the
wounds of a louer are ſweete.
            They are diſtinguiſhed in the vſe of
               
               aduerſitie for this is a proper and peculiar
marke of Gods children, to profite
by affliction: and therefore we read not
in all the puniſhments of the wicked,
that one of them ſaid like Dauid,
               Pſal. 119. 71. 
               It is
good for me that I haue bene afflicted.
            
            They are diſtinguiſhed in Humilitie,
               
for the wicked are not humbled before
the Croſſe,Exod. 8. 8. 15. like Pharao that neuer ſorowed,
but when he ſuffered: but
the Apoſtles learned humilitie of their
maiſter before their perſecution came.Mat. 11. 29.
            
            
               
                They are diſtinguiſhed in their iudgment
of the word, for to the wicked it ſeemeth
the hardeſt and ſimpleſt, and vnpleaſanteſt
booke that is, and therefore
Paul ſaith,1. Cor. 1. 18. 
               that it is fooliſhneſſe vnto thē.
But to the godly, it ſeemeth the wiſeſt,
and eloquēteſt, and ſweeteſt, and eaſieſt
booke of all other, as though God did
ſodainly bring the vnderſtanding of it
to them,Gen. 27. 20. as Iacob ſaid of his veneſon, according
to that,Iohn. 7. 17. 
               He that will do his will
ſhall know his doctrine.
            
            
                They are diſtinguiſhed in their
iudgement of God. The wicked are perſwaded
now and then of Gods mercie
for the preſent time while they feele it,
as the Iewes praiſed him alwayes when
he did as they would haue him:Exod. 15. 20. but
they cannot perſwade themſelues, that
God will be mercifull to them ſtil, like
Iob,
               Iob. 13. 15. which ſaid, Though the Lord kill me,
yet will I truſt in him: therefore the hope
of the righteous is called,Prou. 14. 32. 
               hope in death.
Beſide,Prou. 23. 18. if the wicked loue God, it is but
for his benefits,1. Sam. 10. 6. as Saul loued him for
his kingdome. And this is alway to be
noted, that in the wicked, the fear of hel

is greater than their hope of heauē, but
in the faithfull the hope of heauen is
greater than their feare of hell.
            They are diſtinguiſhed in their delights:
               
               for the ſport of the vngodly is folly,
               Dan. 5. 4.
like Belſhazzars: and therefore when
they are ſicke, or troubled, they neuer
runne to the Word for comfort, as
though Gods promiſes pertained not
to thē, but to feaſts, or tables, or tales, or
muſick,1. Sam. 16. 23. as Saul did to the harp: but al the
delights of the godly are like Dauids
daunce about the Arke,2. Sam. 6. 14. they are neuer
merrie, but when they are doing well,
not at peace, but when their prayers
haue ouercome God,Gen. 32. 28. like Iacob.
            
            They are diſtinguiſhed in their opinions
               
               of death: for the faithfull long to
be diſſolued,Phil. 1. 23. and although they might
liue euer in continuall proſperitie, yet
they would not ſtay ſo long out of heauen:Luk. 2. 29.
but the wicked would neuer be
diſſolued; becauſe death comes alway
vnto thē like a Iayler to hale vnto priſon,1. King. 22. 8.
as Ahab ſaid to Micaiah, that he
neuer propheſied good to him. Hereby a
man ſhal know whether he haue faith;

for if he beleeue the promiſes, he wil be
glad to receiue them.
            
                They are diſtinguiſhed in their ſenſe
of ſinne. Wicked men feele the lothſomnes
of their vices, but none but the
faithfull feele the defects of their righteouſnes.
The natural man neuer complaineth
of his good works, but vaunteth
of them: but a godly man findeth
fault with his prayers, and his almes,
and his watches,Eſay. 64. 6. like Iſaiah that ſaid, his
righteouſneſſe was like a menſtruous
Cloth.Pſal. 16. 2. As Chriſt met the tēpter in the
wilderneſſe,Mat. 4. 1. & 2 a place of prayer, & faſting,
and meditation; ſo a godly man meeteth
the tempter in his prayers, and in
his faſtes, and in his meditatiōs, that is,
he findes ſome let or ſpot, or want in
all his deuotions. Therfore, vnleſſe thy
righteouſnes miſlike thee, aſwell as thy
prophaneſſe, know that yet thou art no
further than the wicked.
            
                They are diſtinguiſhed in their ends:
for the childrē of God propoſe the glorie
of God, & leuell all their thoughts,
ſpeaches and actiōs, as if they were meſſengers
ſent to carie him preſents of honour.

Thus did Dauid,
               Pſal. 103. 1. when he ſaid, All
that is within me, praiſe the Lord: as
though himſelfe had rather be without
praiſe, than his maſter: but the childrē
of the world ſet vp their owne glorie
for their marke; like Nebuchadnezzar
which ſaid,Dan. 4. 27. 
               for the honour of my maieſtie.
Therefore they ſpeake, and looke, and
walk, as if they did ſay to their tongue,
and eyes, & feete, & apparel, as Saul ſaid
to Samuel,
               1. Sam. 15. 30. 17 
               Honor me before this people.
            
            Laſtly, they are diſtinguiſhed in perſeuerance:
               
for the zeale of the wicked
laſteth not,Exod. 32. 8. & therfore God ſaith, They
are ſoone turned out of the way: but the
zeale of the faithful was repreſented by
the fire of the temple which neuer went
out.Leuit. 6. 12. By theſe differences thou maiſt ſee
how much thou doeſt differ from the
wicked, or whether thou be of their
band.
            Then come to the third examination,The third examinati
                     ••
                  
               
As the diuell tempteth thee to ſee
what thou wilt do for him,Matth. 4. 9. ſo thou muſt
tempt thy ſelfe, and get of thy ſoule
what it would do for God, and what it

would do for God, and what it would
ſuffer for him, which hath ſuffered
death for it. Therefore here we will ſet
downe certaine intergatories whereof
thou ſhalt examine it.
            Firſt, whether thou haſt the hart of
Ioſhua,
               Ioſh. 24. 15. to worſhip God as boldly as
thou doeſt, though al the world did renounce
him, and euery one did mocke
thee, as they did Noah while he built
the Arke?
            Whether thou wouldſt not denie
Chriſt as Peter did,Math. 26. 70. if thou were in Peters
ſtraights, and nothing to ſuccour
thee but thy policie?
            Whether thou wouldſt not ſteale, if
thou diddeſt ſee a booty as fit as Achan,
               Ioſh. 7. 21.
which thou mighteſt catch vp, and no
man ſpie thee?
            Whether thou wouldſt refuſe a bribe
like Eliſha,
               2. King. 5. 16. if thou diddeſt meete with
one which were as willing and able to
giue it as Naaman?
            
            Whether thou wouldſt not deceiue,Luk. 16. 6.
if thou were in ſuch an office as the
falſe Steward,Although this is a parable, yet it carieth the ſignification of an hiſtory whoſe maſter referred

all vnto him, and knew not when he
kept any thing backe?
            Whether thou wouldſt not fulfill
thy luſt as Dauid did,2. Sam. 11. 4. if thou haddeſt
his oportunitie and allurement, and
mighteſt do it without daunger of law
like a King, as Dauid might?
            Whether thou wouldſt not tell a lie
as Abraham did,Gen. 12. 13. if it ſtood vpon thy
life, which made him twiſe diſſemble
that his wife was his ſiſter,Gen. 20. 2. leaſt he
ſhould die for her beautie?
            Finally, if it ſhould be ſaid vnto thee
as the diuell ſaid to Chriſt,Matth. 4. 9. 
               All theſe
will I giue thee, if thou wilt fall downe and
worſhip me, that is no more, but if thou
wilt ſin, whether thou wouldeſt yeeld
or no.
            If thou haue ſinned thus and thus
before, I wil not ſay therefore the Lord
will not heare thee,Pſal. 66. 18 but Dauid ſaith, If
I regard wickednes in my heart, the Lord
will not heare me, that is, if for any cauſe
a man purpoſe and carrie a minde to
ſin when he is tempted, the Lord is ſo
far from helping him, that he wil ſtand

like Ball,
               
                  
                     •
                  . King. 18. 26. as though he did not heare
him; for he hath a Traitors minde as
deepe as any, which thinks, for a dukedome
I wold betray my Prince, though
he neuer play the Traitor in his life
Thus ye haue heard how to trie ſpirits
and how to diſcerne a Chriſtian from
an hypocrite, and how to oppoſe your
hearts, that yee may be ſure to iudge
rightly what ye are.
            Now we come to that examination,The fourth examination
which is the epitome or abridgment of
all theſe; for memorie is ſhort, and all
are not of one ſtrength, but ſome run,
and ſome goe, and ſome creepe, and all
do well, ſo long as they ſtriue to perfection.Heb. 6. 1.
The matters whereof principally
the minde ſhould be examined before
the Sacrament,The receiuers articles. are theſe.
            
                Firſt, whether thou haue faith, not
onely to beleeue that Chriſt died, but
that he died for thee:Eſai. 59. 20. for as the ſcripture
calleth him a Redeemer,Iob. 19. 25. ſo Iob calleth
him his Redeemer.
            
            
                The ſecond article is, whether thou
be in charitie, not whether thou loue

thē which loue thee, but whether thou
loue them which hate thee: for Chriſt
commandeth vs to loue our enimies.
               Matth. 5. 44.
            
            The third article is, whether thou 
repent, not for thy open and groſe ſins,
but for thy ſecret ſinnes, and pettie ſins,
becauſe Chriſt ſaith,Matth. 12. 36. 
               that we muſt giue
account for euerie idle word.
            
            The fourth article is, whether thou 
reſolue not to ſin againe for any cauſe,
but to amend thy euill life, not when
age commeth, or for a ſpurt, but to begin
now and laſt til death, for Chriſt is
Alpha,
               Reuel. 22. 13. and Omega, both the beginning,
and the end, as well in our liuing, as in
our being, which hath made no promiſe
to them which begin,Reuel. 2. 10. but to them
which perſeuere.
            The laſt article is, whether thou canſt 
finde in thy heart to dye for Chriſt, as
Chriſt dyed for thee, for we are bid, not
onely to follow him, but to beare his
croſſe: and therefore we are called ſeruants,Luk. 12. 38.
to ſhew how we ſhould obey; &
we are called ſouldiers,2. Tim. 2. 3. & 4. to ſhew, how
we ſhould ſuffer.
            
               
Theſe are the receiuers articles, wherof
his conſcience muſt be examined,
before he receiue this Sacrament: happie
is he which can ſay,Matth. 19. 20. 
               All theſe haue I
kept:
               Gen. 8. 11. for the Doue was not ſo welcome
to Noah, as this man is to Chriſt. But
if thou finde not theſe affections within,
but a neſt of vices, leaue thine offring
at the Altar,Matth. 5. 24. and returne to thine
examination againe, for thou art not a
fit gueſt to ſup with the Lord, vntill
thou haue on this Wedding garment.
               Matth. 22. 11.
How is it then that ſome regard their
other garments more than this?The preparation of cū
                  trie folke before they receiue. 
               Paule
ſaith, Examine your ſelues, and they examine
their apparell, if they haue new
clothes in the countrey, then they are
readie to receiue. I haue knowne many
kept from the Sacrament a whole yeare
togither by their maſters, for nothing
but for want of a new ſute to ſet them
forth with their fellowes.
            Others reſpect whether it be a faire
day, that they may walke after ſeruice,
making that day vpon which they receiue,
like a Schollers Thurſeday, which
         
      
   