
      
         
            
               
                  
                     


                     
THE
POORE MANS
TEARES,
Opened in a ſermon, preched
by Henrie Smith.
                  
                  Treating of Almes deeds, and
releeuing the poore.
                  LONDON
Printed by Iohn Wolfe, & are to be
ſold by William Wright
1592.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE POOREmans
teares.
                  
                     
                        MAT. 10.
He that ſhal giue to one of the leaſt of theſe
a cup of colde water in my name: hee
ſhall not looſe his reward.
                  
                  
                     THE argument I
haue to intreate
off, is onelie of
giuing Almes to
the poore; and
when, & in what
ſort we ought to
releeue the pore
Herein for your better inſtruction, I
will ſhew what Almes is: how, and
to whome Alms muſt be giuen, and
wherefore wee are to giue Almes. I
know in theſe daies, and in this iron



age, it is as hard a thing to perſwade
men to part with money, as to pull
out their eies and caſt them away, or
to cut of their handes and giue them
away, or to cut off their legges and
throw them awaie: Neuertheleſſe, I
cannot but wonder that men are ſo
ſlow in giuing of almes, and ſo hard
hearted tovvards the releefe of the
poore, when the promiſes of GOD
warrant them not to looſe their reward.
S. Iohn ſaith,1. Iohn 3. hee that hath the
ſubſtance of this world, and ſeeth his
brother want, howe can the loue of
God bee in him? This is a queſtion
which can hardly bee anſwered of a
great number: no it will not be conſidered
of a number, nor regarded
of a number. And yet the Euangeliſt
hereby laieth open vnto all perſons,
that hee which hath wealth, ſeeing
his brother in want, and will not releue
him, he loſeth the loue of God;
which loue is ſo great as is the loue
of a naturall mother vnto her owne



child: nay more then that, it is a loue
ſo firmelie ſetled, that it is vnpoſſible
to be remooued.
                  There are many rich perſons,Luke 16. that
thinke skorne to releeue the pore, of
whoſe hard dealing we haue a preſident
in the ſixteenth of Luke. The
rich man in his life time woulde not
releue Lazarus, but deſpiſed him; yea
he forgot God, and thought there
was no God (but his gold) that cold
in iuſtice puniſhe him for deſpiſing
the poore. Lazarus died for vvant,
and ſo did Diues for all his wealth;
who ſoone after, (being in hell) beheld
Lazarus in heauen, triumphing
in Abrahams boſome, while hee vvas
tormented in hell fire. This fire burneth,
skaldeth, skortcheth, and tormenteth;
of which, when the riche
man felt the ſmart, (though all too
late) he ſorrowed and repented, and
would faine haue ſent word thereof
vnto his friends: but he could haue
no meſſenger for al his lordly liuings



nor no releaſement of his torments,
for all his bagges of golde. Nowe to
whome would he haue ſent worde?
Forſooth to a number of his friends,
that indeed think ther is no God nor
deuill: no heauen nor hell, nor no
torments in hel fire after this life. But
I would aduiſe thoſe of that opinion
to doe as Thomas Didimus did by
Chriſts wounds, that ere hee would
beleeue, put in his hands & felt. And
therefore to all ſuch I ſay, as will not
beleeue it, let them goe thither and
feele; then doubtleſſe they will find
it ſo, and ſay it is ſo. This example of
Diues may admoniſh ſuch hard hearted
perſons to be mollified with the
teares of the poore: that they maie,
when Diues hath dined, let Lazarus
haue the crums.
                  We read in Mathewe,Math. 25. that vvhen
Chriſt commeth to iudgement, hee
will ſay to them on the left hand, go
from me ye curſed into helfire which
was prepared from the beginning:



by which appeareth, that hell fire is
not onelie hot, but it is euerlaſting
hot, and neuer hath ende: Let therefore
hell-fire, & the eternal torments
thereof, admoniſh you to bee mercifull
to the poore. To this alſo may
bee added, what hee will ſay to the
righteous, goe you into euerlaſting
ioyes whiche neuer ſhall haue
end: When I came among you as a
ſtraunger you receiued me: when I
was naked you clothed me, & when
I was hungrie, you fed and refreſhed
mee, which prooueth that the kingdome
of heauen belongs vnto thoſe
that harboureth ſtrangers, cloatheth
the naked, feedeth the hungry, comforts
the ſicke, and doth perfourme
ſuch charitable actes of compaſſion:
yet not as the papiſt doth to account
it meritorious, but as a faithfull chriſtian
to doe it in faith and true zeale
of a chriſtian life, for euerie tree that
bringeth not forth good fruit, is hewen
downe and caſt into the fire. It is



not enough for vs onelie to bear fair
leaues, but we muſt alſo bring foorth
good fruit: otherwiſe let vs be ſure,
our Sauiour Chriſt will forſake vs.
                  The Prophet Eſay ſaith;Eſay 58 if thovv
breake thy bread vnto the pore, and
powre forth thy hart vnto them, thy
light ſhal riſe in darknes, thy dimnes
ſhal be as the moone-tide; and God
ſhal ſtil guide thee: wherby apeareth
that thoſe deeds of charitie are commonlie
performed by the righteous,
that ſtil ſeek to enioy the pleaſures of
heauen, vvhich 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſo farre beyonde
the common immagination of men,
that no heart can thinke, no eare can
heare, no tongue can ſpeake, nor pen
can write, the vnſpeakable pleaſures
thereof.
                  Then if the ioyes of heauen bee
ſo great, (as doubtles they bee) and
that through good life and good
deeds, wee are to inherite the kingdome
of heauen, we ought the more
carefullie to ſee to the continuall reliefe



of the poore, and do aſmuch as
in vs lieth to prouide for them, euery
one according to his abilitie. Let me
therefore admoniſhe you in Gods
name, to mollifie your heartes vvith
the pittifull teares of the poore, that
ſo you may giue continuall almes to
their reliefe, that when Diues hath dined,
Lazarus may haue the crums.
                  Chriſt ſaith, it is a deed more bleſſed
to giue them, then to take from
them; for the excellencie of chriſtians
conſiſteth in leading a godly life
and giuing of alm
                        ••
                     s: And the excellency
of all things is ſhewed in their
giuing. The ſunne giueth his light,
the Moone her light, the Sarres their
light, the Clowdes their water, the
Trees their fruit, the earth her herbs,
the hearbes their flowers, the flovvers
their ſeeds, and the ſeeds their increaſe:
yea, beaſts and birds fowles &
fiſhes, giue naturallie in their kinde,
and are more careful and louing one
to an other then we, which made Iob


                     
ſay, go to the beaſts of the fielde and
they wil teach thee. For man is moſt
vnnaturall to man, and ſo far digreſſing
from nature in his kinde, that let
ſome vngodlie rich cormorants ſee
a poore perſon beg: this is their preſent
ſentēce of him: whip the roags,
to Briderwell with theſe roagues, it
is pittie theſe roagues be ſuffered to
liue: then if they fall ſicke, let them
fammiſh, ſtarue, and die, all is one to
him; for of him they ſhall receiue no
comfort.
                  
                     Auguſtus Caeſar thought that day to
be loſt, wherein hee did not benefite
any poore perſon, and with money
releeue him from penurie. And I
know, ſome godlie men that take delight
in releeuing the pore with their
continuall almes, not ſuperſticiouſly
to bee ſeene of men, but ſecretlie to
be ſeene of God. The Lord increaſe
the number of them, and make their
example redownde to the reliefe of
thouſands.
                  
                     
Almes is a charitable reliefe giuen
by the godlie to the ſick, to the lame,
the blinde, the impotent, the needy
the hungrie and pooreſt perſons: euen
ſuch as ar daily vexed with continuall
want: to whome euen of duty,
and not of compulſion, we ought
to impart: ſome part of that which
God hath mercifullie beſtowed vppon
vs: For as we dailie ſeeke for benefits
at gods hand, which he dooth
continuallie giue vs: ſo ought vvee
(therwith to releeue the poore) ſith
God hath ſo commaunded vs. The
performance whereof, we ought not
to driue off from time to time, but to
doe it when they deſire to haue it
done: for the true obedience of god
dooth forbid vs to prolong or driue
off the doing of good things: as appeareth
in Noah, who when hee was
commanded, did enter the Arke:
Abraham, when he was commāded,
did forthwith offer vp his ſon Iſaake,
and did circūſiſe his house vpon the



ſame day hee was appointed. A learned
writer called Nazienſin ſaith of
himſelfe, that when in his youth hee
had once loſt the tenor of good life
graie hears was got about his head,
ere he recouered it againe: whereby
I gather, that when we are young, if
we harden our harts againſt the pore
if wee doe not willinglie impart our
bread to them, but driue their hungrie
ſtomackes ſtubbornly from our
doores: that doubtleſſe gray heares
wil come vpon our heads before we
can finde the right waie to pittie and
compaſſion.
                  O let vs take heede that our harts
be not hardened againſt the poore,
nor that wee giue our almes to get
glorie of the world: but ſo let vs giue
our almes, that the one hand maie
not know what the other doth; yea
we ought to giue it with ſuch equalitie
that our poore neighbours may
be releeued; to whome indeede we
ought to become contributors, as



                     Iob and Toby did. All people haue not
one bellie, for as one chimnie may
be hot, ſo another may be cold: One
pot moyſt with lickor, when another
may be drie; one purſe emptie,
when another is full. And one poore
mans belly full when an others is
emptie. That is a good common-wealth,
that looketh to euerie member
in the common-wealth: And
thoſe men worthie of riches, that
looketh daily to the feeding of their
poore neighbours. Let therfore the
teares of the poore admoniſh you to
charitie, that when Diues hathe
dined, Lazarus may haue the crums.
                  Now let vs proceed and conſider
what we muſt giue, and to whome
we muſt giue, in the text we are willed
to giue though it be but a cup of
cold water, or a peece of bread: this
containeth matter both for the taker
and the giuer: Bread will ſerue
beggers, and they muſt be no chooſers:
yet bread will not ſerue ſome



beggers that boldly on Gads hill,
Shooters hill, and ſuche places take
mens horſes by the heads, and bids
them deliuer their purſes, for theſe
fellowes are of the opinion of the
Anabaptiſts, that euerie mans goods
muſt be common to them, or elſe
they will force them to part it: but
theſe are ſawſie beggers, and ought
to haue almes at Tiburne: as for other
ſort of beggars, and other poore
perſons, they muſt be content to
take vp their croſſe, endeuour themſelues
paciently to ſuffer their ordinarie
greeuances: and remember
that mans nature may bee ſatisfied
with a little.
                  As touching how much wee ſhall
giue, we are taught that if wee haue
much, we ſhould giue accordingly:
If we haue but little, giue what wee
can ſpare: S. Luke councelleth vs if
we haue two Coates, wee muſt giue
one to him that hath not: & of meate
likewiſe: but as touching this queſtion,



litle need to be ſpoken, when our
owne couetous heartes are readie
enough to frame excuſes.
                  Some will make a queſtion of
their almes and ſaie they know not
what the partie is that demaundeth
reliefe or beggeth almes of them: O
ſaith ſome I ſuſpect he is an idle perſon,
diſhoneſt, or perhaps an vnthrift
and therefore refuſeth to giue anie
reliefe at all. To this I anſwere they
are needleſſe doubtes, for we ought
to releeue them if wee knowe them
not for ſuch perſons: And let theyr
bad deedes fall on their own necks,
for if they periſh for want, we are in
danger of Gods wrath for them: but
to giue vnto ſuche as wee knowe of
lewd behauiour, thereby to continue
them in their wickedneſſe, were
verie offenſiue: we are not ſtill tyed
to one place for giuing our charitie,
but it ſtretcheth far, for we are commanded
not onely to releeue our
owne countrimen, but alſo ſtrangers,



and ſuch as dwell in forraigne
nations.
                  Againe, heere the giuer may learn
to giue freely, for the thing he giueth
is but bread or water: Bread is the
fruite of the earth, and for the earth
giues it vs, we may the better giue it
againe. But bread in this place ſignifieth
all thing neceſſarie: for the fare
and cheere in olde time was contayned
vnder the title of bread, and all
maner of drinke vnder the title of
water: but in this as in all other
thinges the ſimplicitie of the olde
world is quite gone out, and newe
and corrupt thinges are lately crept
in. In the old time Iacob deſired hee
might haue bread in his iourney, but
now the caſe is altered, for wee muſt
haue ſundrie diſhes of contrarie deuiſes,
framed for the taſte of the
mouth and pleaſantneſſe of the ſtomacke,
which is vſed with great ſuperfluitie,
and farre more coſt then
needeth: better now to fill the belly



then the eye, although to content
the common multitude: the eye is
the onely thing which muſt be pleaſed.
Yet when you are in the midſt
of all your iollitie and coſtly fare, let
the teares of the poore admoniſhe
you to releeue them, that when
Diues hath dined, Lazarus may haue
the crummes.
                  The teares of men, women and
children are greeuous and pitifull:
and teares giue cauſe of great compaſſion,
eſpecially the teares of ſuch
as therewith are conſtrained to beg
for their reliefe: But if the teares of
the rich for the loſſe of their goods,
or the teares of parents for the death
of their children, or the tears of kind
natured perſons for the loſſe of frēds
or other wronges ſuſtained, ought
generallie to be regarded and pitied;
Then much more ſhould the teares
of thoſe breede great compaſſion in
the hearts of chriſtians, whome beggery,
want, and extreames of miſerable



hunger conſtraineth to ſheade
teares in moſt greeuous and lamentabe
ſort. O what ſhall a man ſay vnto
thoſe pittiful faces, which ar made
moiſt through the extreams of hunger,
wherein are moſt bitter & ſharpe
effects: (A thing aboue al extreams)
to a hungry bodie.
                  Euerie bitter thing is ſweete, and
euerie fowle thing ſeem cleane, hunger
made the apoſtles glad to eat the
eares of corne. Dauid glad to eat the
ſhewe bread. Lazarus deſirous to eat
crummes, and Elias content with
meale: In the deſtruction of Hieruſalem,
it made the mother eate hir
owne childe, and in the waylinges
of Ieremie people eate their own ordure:
It made people crie to Pharao
for bread: it made an aſſes head, and
the dung of Pigions to bee eaten in
Samaria, and others to ſwound and
lie dead in the ſtreets. The affliction
of hunger cauſed little teares, and
brought all theſe thinges to paſſe.



                     Dauid ſaith that God numbred all hys
teares in a bottle Dauids teares were
worthy to be preſerued: But if euer
teares were worthie to be numbred;
the teares that are ſhedde for famine
howſoeuer men neglect to regard
thē, they are vndoubtedly gathered
togither into Gods bottle, & thence
they raine as waters out of vialles in
way of reuengement of thoſe that
take no compaſſion of ſuch a wofull
ſpectacle.
                  Teares are the laſt thing that man
woman or childe can moue by, and
where teares moue not, nothing wil
moue. I therefore exhort you by
the lamentable teares, whiche the
poore do daily ſhed through hunger
and extreame miſerie to be good vnto
them, to be charitable and mercifull
vnto them; and to releeue thoſe
whō you ſee with miſerie diſtreſſed.
                  The ſcripture ſaith, giue to euerie
one that asketh, God gaue hearbes
and other foode vnto euery liuing



thing, euery common-wealth that
letteth anie member in it to periſh
for hunger is vnnaturall and an vncharitable
commonwealth. But men
are now adaies ſo full of doubts thorough
a couetous deſire to themſelues
that they cannot abide to
part with anie thing to the pore, notwithſtanding
that God hath promiſed
he will not forget the worke and
loue which you haue ſhewed in his
name to the poore and diſtreſſed.
                  Some wil ſay for their excuſe, that
they are ouercharged by giuing to a
number of perſons: and therefore,
they cannot giue to ſo manie beggars:
for by ſo doing, he might ſone
become a beggar himſelfe. Dauid anſwereth
this obiection very well, and
ſaith thus; I neuer ſaw the iuſt man
forſaken, nor his ſeed beg his bread:
wherby he meant, that in all the time
that hee had liued, or that any man
liuing the yeares of Dauid, ſhal skarſlie
ſee, that vpon an vpright heart in



giuing a man, ſhould be brought to
beggerie.
                  The anſwere to this ordinarie obiection
or excuſe of worldlings; I ſay
in the defence & behalfe of the pore.
There are a number that will denie a
poore bodie of a pennie, and pleade
pouertie to them, though they ſeeme
to ſtand in neuer ſo great extreames,
when in a far worier ſort they wil not
ſtick imediatlie to ſpend ten or twentie
ſhillinges. The riche worldling
makes no conſcience to haue ten or
twentie diſhes of meate at his table,
when in troth, the one halfe might
ſufficientlie ſatisfie nature: the reſt
run to the reliefe of the pore, and yet
in the end he might depart better refreſhed
with one diſh, thē commonly
he is vvith twentie. Some will not
ſticke to haue tvventy coats, tvventie
houſes, tvventie farmes, yea tvventy
Lordſhippes, and yet goe by a poore
perſon, vvhome they ſee in great diſtreſſe
and neuer releeue them vvith



one penny, but ſay God helpe you, I
haue not for you. There is Lawyers
vvill not ſticke to vndo tvventy pore
men, and Marchants that make it no
conſcience to eat out tvventie other
that haue the hundreths out at vſery,
their cheſts cramd full of crownes, &
their cofers full of golden Gods, or
gliſtring Angels, that wil go by twentie
poore, miſerable, hungrie, impotent,
and diſtreſſed perſons, and yet
not beſtow one peny on them: And
though they doe moſt ſhamefullie
aske it: yet can they moſt ſhameleſly
denie it, and refuſe to performe it.
                  The people of this world can very
eaſily find a ſtaffe to beat a dog, they
are neuer without excuſes, but readie
to finde delaies, and verie pregnant
to deuiſe nevv ſhifts to keepe in their
almes. Novv will I ſhew you reaſons
vvhy we ſhould giue. God ſaith, who
ſo giueth to the poore, lendeth vnto
the Lord, and ſhall be ſure to finde it
againe, and receiue for the ſame an



hundreth folde. And againe, bleſſed
is he that conſidererh of the pore &
needie: the Lord ſhall deliuer him in
the day of trouble. Heereby appeareth,
that vve ſhall receiue our almes
againe, except vvee doubt whether
Gods vvorde be true or no. For confirmation
whereof, the Prophet Dauid,
ſaith: the teſtimonies of God are
true and righteous. And God ſpeaketh
by the mouth of the Prophet Eſay
ſaying: The word is gone out of
my mouth, and it ſhal not returne, the
promiſe which God made to Sara,
vvas found true: his promiſe made
to the children of Aegypt was found
true: his promiſe to Ioſua, in the ouertrhowing
of his enemies, was
found true. God promiſed Dauid his
kingdome, to Salomon hee promiſed
wiſedome, to Pharao deſtruction by
water, to Saule, the loſſe of his kingdome,
and to Salomon, the deuiding
of his kingdome: all which, and farre
more prooued true. Then let vs not



doubt in Gods promiſes, for from
time to time they haue beene found
true and iuſt. Let vs conſider that we
muſt die and leaue our goods, vvee
know not to whome: then while we
are here, let vsdeſtribute thereof vnto
the pore, that we may receiue our
rewarde in the kingdome of heauen.
God ſaith by S. Luke: O foole, this
night will I fetch away thy ſoule, and
then, that which thou haſt got, vvho
ſhall poſſeſſe it? Heere is a queſtion
worth the noting, and meet for riche
men to conſider: eſpeciallie ſuch as
hoord vp wealth, & haue no regarde
to the reliefe of the poore. Doe they
thinke, that the wealth which they
haue gathered together, will come to
good after their deceaſe: No, it will
melt and conſume away like butter
in the Sunne: The reaſon is, becauſe
they wold not do as God hath commanded
thē, in the diſtributing part
of that to the poore which was lent
them by the Lord.
                  
                     
The children of God in the ſixt of
the Apocalips crie out: how long O
Lord, thou that art holy and true: doeſt
thou not iudge and reuenge our
bloud vpon thoſe that dwell on the
earth; whereby appeareth that God
exerciſeth good men, & thoſe whom
hee loueth in the troubles of this
world, which we account long; yet
is their time but ſhort, although their
trouble makes it ſeem long but theſe
I ſay ought to be content, & all thoſe
that doe truſt in God muſt bee content,
to releue one another for atime,
ſince after a ſhort time, we ſhal doutles
find the fruits of our almes again:
ſhort is mans life while we are in this
worlde: Dauid compareth it to a vapour,
to a bubble, to winde, to graſſe,
to a ſhadow, to a ſmoake, and euerie
fading thing that conſumeth in a moment.
Eſay compareth it to the remoouing
of a Tabernackle, and Iob
to an Eagles wing, or a Weauers ſhittle:
ſo that our life is but ſhort, and



after a few daies, though you thinke
them manie: whatſoeuer you mercifullie
beſtow vppon the poore heere
on earth: You ſhal certainlie find the
ſame againe both in heauen and on
the earth.
                  
                     Salomon in the 12. of the Prouerbs
ſaith,Prou. 12. he that ſtoppeth his eare at the
crie of the poore,Eccle. 34. ſhall crie himſelfe
and not bee heard.1. Cor. 4. The bread of the
poore is in the waies of the rich:Eccle. 7. hee
that keepeth it from them, is a man of
bloud. S. Paule ſaith, no man giueth
but he that hath receiued. And Ieſus
Syracke ſaith, ſtretch foorth thy hand
vnto the poore, that thy mercie and
bleſſing may be made perfect Baſil an
auncient father of the church, dooth
charge the rich with waſt, for vvhich
they ſhall ſurelie anſwere. Art thou
not (ſaith he) a robber in keeping an
other mans ſubſtance, and to reckon
it as thine owne. It is the breade of
the hungry which thou doeſt detain;
the coat dew to the naked, thou lockeſt



in thy wordrop: the ſhooes that
appertaines to the barefoot, lies drying
in thy houſe; and the gold which
ſhould releeue the pore, lies canckering
in thy cofers: which ſaying, as it
teacheth the liberalitie due vnto the
poore: ſo it blameth the careles rich,
that account all to be their owne, and
will part with nothing, keeping to
themſelues more then is ſufficient.
But to ſuch ſaint Iames ſaith, that at
the latter daie, the mite in the crums,
the moathes in the garments, & the
ruſt in the golde, ſhall fret them like
canckers. Ambroſe ſaith, it is no leſſe
ſinne to take from him that rightlie
poſſeſſeth, thē being able not to giue
to him that wanteth.
                  The right rich man that duelie deſerueth
that name, is not knowen by
his poſſeſſion, by his coſtly fare, and
coſtlie building, by his ſumptuous
pallace, by his plate, Iewels, and ſubſtance,
but by conſidering the poore
and needie: Whereof Auſtine ſayth



thus: the rich are prooued by the pouertie
of others: ſo that ſtill the ſcriptures
and fathers preſcribe not an indifferencie,
but a neceſſitie: not at
pleaſure, but vpon duty, that the pore
and needie ſhalbe conſidered and releeued.
                  Where is the large liberallity be
come, that in time paſt was rooted in
our forefathers, they were content
to be liberall, though they applied it
to euill purpoſes, the ſucceſſours of
thoſe which in time paſt gaue liberallie
to maintain Abots, Friers, Monks,
Nunnes, Maſſes, Durges, Trentals,
and all idolatrie: ſeeing the abuſes
thereof, may now beſtow it to a better
vſe: namely, to foſter and feed the
pore members of Chriſt.
                  The worlde is as great as it hath
beene, the people now are more rich
then they haue beene, and more couetous
then they haue beene: yea,
they haue more knowledge then euer
they hadde: yet want the deſire



they haue had to become liberall
and ſeeme therein moſt wilfull ignorant.
                  The extorcioner can ſpare nought
vnto the poore, for ioyning houſe to
houſe, and land to land, though hee
haue the poore mans curſe for it: the
Prophet Eſay ſaith, the extortioner
dooth no good to the poore, but dailie
ſeeketh to roote them foorth of
doores: the pride of apparell maketh
vs forgette the patched of the
pore. Our coſtlie fare, their extreame
hounger, and our ſoft lodging, their
miſerable lying.
                  Oh howe liberall vvere people
in times paſt to mainetaine ſuperſtition:
and nowe hovve harde
hearted are they growen to keepe
the poore from famine, will ye make
a skorne of the poore and needie:
The poore novve periſheeh by the
Riche menne, and noe manne
conſidereth it: This is not the
right duetie of faithfull Chriſtians:



this ought not to be the fruits of our
profeſſion, nor this is not the mercy
which we learne by the word.
                  Therefore towardes the reliefe of
the pore I ſay, giue, and giue gladly:
for the bread that is giuen with a ſtony
hart, is called ſtony bread, though
neceſſarie to bee taken by the poore,
to ſlake hounger: yea, it is but ſower
bread: ſuch a giuer in mine opinion,
is next kinſeman vnto Sathan: for he
gaue Chriſt ſtoans in ſtead of bread:
but this man giueth chriſtians ſtonie
bread. The VViſeman ſaith, lay vppe
thy almes in the hands of the poore,
and know that in the end, what thou
keepeſt thou ſhalt loſe, but that thou
giueſt to the poore, ſhalbee as a purſe
about thy necke. For as this life waxeth
olde, and our daies paſse away, ſo
ſhal this vaine pelfe paſſe away from
vs, neither ſhall riches helpe in the
day of vengeance, but the corruption
abideth, which fretteth like a canker.
Then what ſhall it profite to get



all the worlde, and when the worlde
forſaketh vs, that ſhalbe moſt againſt
vs, that beſt we loued while we were
in the world. Let euerie man therefore
perſwade himſelfe, that his ſoul
is better then thoſe ſubtill riches: the
poſſeſſion wherof is variable and vncertaine:
for they paſſe from vs much
more ſwiftlye then they came to vs.
And albeit we haue the vſe of them,
euen till the laſt day, yet at length we
muſt leaue them to others. Then ere
you die, lay them forth for the profit
of your poore bretheren: learne to
forſake the couerous world, before it
forſake you, and learne counſaile of
our Sauior Chriſt, who aduiſeth you
to make friends of the wicked Mammon.
                  Wee ſee daily,Luke 16. that euerie one is
good to the poore, (as we commonlie
ſay) but they will giue thē nought
but wordes: then I ſay, great boaſt &
ſmal roaſt makes vnſauerie mouthes:
yet if words will doe anie good, the



poore ſhall not want them. For it
doth coſt nothing to ſay alaſſe good
ſoule, God helpe thee, God comfort
thee, I would I were able to helpe
thee: and ſuch commonlie will ſaie
ſo, that haue ſtore of wealth lying by
them. Such ſtill wiſh wel vnto themſelues,
in wiſhing themſelues able:
but of ſuch wiſhing, and for ſuch wiſhers,
I ſaye as a beggar ſaide to a Biſhop,
who made like anſwere, that if
ſuch wiſhes were worth but one halfpenie
to the poore: I doubt, they
would not be ſo liberall. I wiſh you
good bretheren leaue wiſhing, & fall
to ſome doing: you locke vp and will
not looſe, you gather together, euen
the deuill and all, and why? Becauſe
you would faine hatch the Cokatriſe
egge: you nurſe vp a canker for your
ſelues, yea keepe the packe that ſhall
trouble your voyadge vnto God, as
Chriſt ſaith: O how hard ſhall it bee
for a rich man to be ſaued, it ſhall bee
eaſier for a Camell to goe through a



needles eie. This hee ſaith not, becauſe
no rich man ſhal be preſerued,
but becauſe the mercileſſe riche man
ſhall be damned. VVee are admoniſhed
to liberalitie by ſundrie naturall
examples, the cloudes if they be full,
doe yeelde foorth their raine, much
raine is a burden to cloudes, & much
riches are burthens to men. It is ſayd
of Abraham in the 13. of Gene is,
that he was burdened with gold: yet
Abraham was a good man, but it burdened
his head to be buſie vvith the
cares of golde. Againe, to eat much,
to drinke muche, and reſt much, is a
burthen to the ſoule, though it bee
pleaſant to the bodie. And in the 12.
of Luke it apeareth, that aboundance
of riches, maketh one to eate muche,
drinke much, and reſt much: then
were it not for the couetous mindes
of thoſe that haue much, they might
impart to the poore one part of that
which they duily ſpend in ſuperflity.
If this bee not amended, I let you to



vnderſtand that the poore muſt crie,
and their voyce ſhall bee heard, their
diſtreſſe conſidered, & our vengance
ſhalbe wrought I tell you troth, euen
in Ieſus Chriſt that the poore hath
cried vnto the Lorde, and hee hath
heard them. With ſpeed therefore open
your eares: if not to man, yet to
Chriſt, who continually commaundeth
vs to giue and beſtow vpon the
poore and needie. Giue and it ſhall
be giuen you ſaith he by S. Luke, and
ſetteth before our eies the example
of the poore widowes mites, as alſo
the example of a couetous rich man,
who demanding how hee might obtaine
eternall life, was anſwered thus
by him, go ſell all thou haſt, and giue
to the poore, not that it is neceſſarie
for euerie man ſo to do, or that a man
cannot be ſaued without hee doe ſo:
but thereby teaching him perticulerly
to lothe the worlde, and generallie
ſeeke meanes for the daily cheriſhing
and the refreſhing of the poore. Doe



not continually feede your equals
for that is offenſiue: but when your
may ſpare to ſpend and banquet your
ſelues, then call the poore and impotent
and refreſh your poore diſtreſſed
neighbors and brethren. And when
Diues hath dined, let Lazarus haue
the crummes. And ſtil remember the
ſaying of S. Matthew: Bleſſed are the
mercifull, for they ſhal obtain mercy.
                  To conclude (beloued in the
Lord) let me entreate you rich men
to cōſider it is your dutie, to remember
the poore and their continuall
want: you that eate till you blowe,
and feede till your eies ſwell with fatneſſe,
that taſt firſt your courſe meats
and then fall to finer fare: that haue
your ſeuerall drinkes for your ſtomacke,
and your ſortes of wine for
your appetite impart ſome of your
ſuperfluitie vnto the poore, who being
comforted by you, will doubtleſſe
pray for you that God worlde
bleſſe you and yours, and increaſe



your ſtore: a thouſand fold which if
they ſhould forget, yet the promiſes
of God remaine inuiolable towardes
you for the ſame.
                  If the proud would leaue their ſuperfluitie
in apparell, their exceſſe in
imbrodery, their vanitie in cuttes,
gardes and pownees, their exceſſe in
ſpangling their fantaſticall feathers
and needleſſe brauerie, the greater
part woulde ſuffice towardes the reliefe
of the poore, and yet haue ſufficient
to ſuffiſe nature.
                  Let the glutton ſeeke onely to ſuffice
nature and leaue his dayly ſurfetting
in belly cheere, then might the
poore be fed with that which he oftentimes
either lothſomely vomites
forth, or worketh as an inſtrument to
ſhorten his owne life. Let the whormonger
leaue off his dalliance, and
his inordinate expences for maintaining
of his wickedneſſe; and it ſhall
be good for his bodie, and better for
his ſoule, yea his purſe ſhall bee the



heauier, and he thereby better able
to relieue the poore.
                  Let euerie artificer and trades-man
liue orderly, auoyding ſuperfluous
expences, not ſpending his money
vainely at dice, tables, cardes, bowling,
betting, and ſuch like, but liue
as becommeth ciuill chriſtians in the
feare of God: they may haue ſufficient
for the maintainance of themſelues
and their famelie, and yet the
poore may be by them ſufficiently
releeued.
                  Let vs conſider that we who haue
our beginning from God, ought generally
to bend all our actions towardes
the pleaſing of God, and
doing as he commaundeth vs, wee
pleaſe him: for if we helpe the poore
wee helpe him, and doing all charitable
actions to the poore, hee accompteth
it as done to himſelfe.
                  Let vs generally learn, not to contemne
or deſpiſe the poore, but according
to our abillities helpe them



and conſider of their extreames: and
at any hand not to diſdaine and vpbraid
them with the titles of baſe
rogues or ſuche like, but in all godly
chriſtian meanes to cheriſh and comfort
them with ſuch charitable relief,
as wee may in reaſon affoorde vnto
them, yea and to conſider of their caſes,
as if it wer our owne.
                  Let vs take example of good Cornelius
the Captaine, of whome mention
is made in the Acts of the Apoſtles,
to whome the Angell of God
appearing in a viſion, ſaid thus; Cornelius,
thy praier and thine almes is
come vp before God▪ 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      heere the
reward, and alſo of whom thou ſhalt
be rewarded.
                  Let vs conſider of their miſerie
that with hungry chappes, and lanke
bellies, would willingly feed on that,
which you waſtfully conſume, the
poore I ſay woulde finde good comfort
of that whiche commonly you
fling to your dogges, and on your



dung-hils: and let vs haue regard to
their coldneſſe, their nakedneſſe,
their miſerie & greeuous neceſſitie:
thinke of this and comforte them:
And let vs be mindfull that pouertie
and want compelleth many an honeſt
perſon to take in hand the performance
of much vilde and ſlauiſh
buſineſſe: and that therefore they
deſerue to be ſuccoured with mercie
and pitie rather then to bee deſpiſed
for their poore eſtate: O think of the
harde hearted perſons were in their
miſerable eſtate, how glad wold you
be to be refreſhed that now wil skarſly
yeeld one penie to their reliefe.
                  Laſtly, let vs call to mind the exāple
of the widow of Sarepta, who though
her prouiſion and ſtore were but litle
when the preacher of the Lord
came to her to aske her bread, anſwered
I haue nothing but a little flower
in a barrell, and a little oyle in a cruſe:
which notwithſtanding ſhe willingly
beſtowed vpon him: for which, a



thing worthie memorie followed:
for her barrell was againe filled with
flower, and her pot with oyle: this
was the Lordes doing for foſtering
the poore prophet of the Lord, ſure
the plentie that commeth by the
poore is much, for the field of the
poore is fruitfull, it ſurrendreth again
the fruit to them that giue ought, yea
if it be but a cup of cold water,Mark. 10. as ſaith
our Sauiour Chriſt. To whome be
all honour, power and dominion,
now and for euer, Amen.
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                     
A
HARMONIE,
FROM HEAVEN.
Sommoning all men vnto
the hearing of the
trueth.
                  By Henrie Smith.
                  LONDON
Printed by Iohn Wolfe, & are to be
ſold by William Wright.
1592.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  A harmony from heauen
ſommoning all men to the hearing
of the truth.
                  The text. All Nations.
                  
                     THe Apoſtle Paul writing
to Timotheus telleth
him,1. Tim. 2. 4. that GOD
would haue all men
come to the knovveledge
of the truth, &
bee ſaued: in which words the Apoſtle
giueth him to vnderſtande, that
there is none other waye, either for
Prieſt or people to come vnto God,
but by that ordinarie meanes, vvhich
is the hearing of his word the which
the Apoſtle calleth his truth: becauſe
it is not onely true of it ſelfe, but alſo
doth witnes of his truth, who is truth



it ſelfe: by the verie ſame name doth
our Sauiour Chriſt call gods worde,
when making his praier to his heauenlie
father (for the elect) he ſaith:Iohn. 17. 17.
father, ſanctifie them in thy truth; and
immediatlie addeth, thy word is the
truth. The next thing that the apoſtle
aduertiſeth Timothy of, that this truth
being rightlie knowen, bringeth ſaluation
to them that ſo know it, & this
the Apoſtle confirmeth by an argument
taken from his owne faith,Rom. 1. 16. whē
he ſaith; I am not aſhamed of the goſpell
of Chriſt, for it is the power of
God, able to ſaue euerie beleeuer.
And laſt of all, the Apoſtle hath ſette
downe the generalitie of this trueth,
both in ſaying to Timothie, that god
would haue al men to be acquainted
with it, & to the ſaints at Rome, that
it is able to ſaue euery beleuer. Herof
it cometh, that he writing to the Colloſſiās,
exhorteth thē not ſo much to
the hearing of this trueth taught thē;
as to an inward intertainment of the



ſame, when he ſaith: let the worde of
Chriſt dwell in you plentifullie in all
wiſdome,Coloſ. 3. 16. teaching and admoniſhing
your own ſelues, teaching thēſelues,
becauſe many of the Coloſsians ſeemed
to be ignorāt of that which they ſhuld
know, and admoniſhing themſelues,
becauſe a number of them did know
much, but practiſed litle. So that, ſuch
is the entertainment that gods word
ought to finde amongſt vs, as Dauid
promiſed thereunto, when hee ſaid:
O Lord, teach me the way of thy ſtatutes,
and I ſhall keepe it euen vnto
the ende. And wee are taught to entertaine
gods worde, by the example
of Iohn, who receiuing the litle book
at the hand of the Angell, was commanded
to eate that booke, partlie to
teach vs,Pſal. 119. 33. that gods worde muſt abide
within vs,Apoc. 10. 10▪
                      and partlie to ſignifie,Mat. 4. that
our bodelie breade ſerueth not our
ſoules neceſſitie. Eſay ſaid, that he had
carefully carried gods meſſage: for I
was founde (ſaith hee) of thoſe that



ſought me not, and haue bene made
manifeſt to them that asked not after
me,Eſay 65. 1. howbeit hee was not ſo carefull
in ſpeaking, but the people were as
careleſſe in hearing: for the whiche
cauſe, hee vttereth this complaint:
Lord who hath beleeued our report,
or to whome is the arme of the Lord
reuealed? When Ieremie had faithful▪
lie deliuered the meſſage of the Lord
his GOD, in rebuking thoſe Ievves
which burned incenſe to the Idols
of Aegypt:Eſay 53. 1. hee ſaith, that all the men
that knewe that their wiues had burned
incenſe to ſtraunge Gods, and a
great manie women which ſtoode
by,Ier. 44, 14. 15 gaue him this anſwere: the word
which thou ſpeakeſt vnto vs in the
name of the Lord, we will not heare
it of thee, but what we thinke good,
that will we doo. Such was the wickednes
of the people ſo manie yeares
paſt, as appeareth in manie places of
gods worde: among the which, that
of the Babylonians was not the lea
                        ••
                     


                     
which moued Ieremie to ſend Sheraiah
vnto them with the booke,Iere. 51. 63. & with
a ſtrait charge, that when he had read
it vnto them, hee ſhould bind a ſtone
vnto it, and caſt it into the riuer Euphrates,
to teach the Babylonians &
all men, that as the hard ſtone cauſed
that good booke to ſincke in the
water, ſo the hardnes of our ſtonie
hearts, is not onelie the depriuing of
vs, of many good bleſſings, but alſo
a violent ſincking of our ſoules in
ſinne.
                  The iuſt conſideration whereof,
mooued the Apoſtle Paule,
                     Rom. 2. 4. 5. to expoſtulate
the matter with euerie harde
harted ſinner in this ſort: doeſt thou
not know that the bountefulneſſe of
God, leadeth thee to repentance, but
thou after thine harde heart that can
not repent, doeſt heape vp to thy ſelf
wrath againſt the daye of wrath, and
of the declaration of the iuſt iudgement
of God, and yet to ſee vvhat
ſmal preparation there is vnto repentance,



euerie godly man wiſheth like
zealous Ieremie: Oh that mine head
were a fountaine: and that mine eies
were riuers of teares, that I might
weepe day and night for the ſlain of
my people: ſo greeuous is the way of
the vngodlie vnto the child of God,
that he cannot account it any better
thing, then a race wherin they runne
ſtriuing, who ſhall come firſt to the
deuill, when they lead a life as voyde
of repentance, as if ſinne were ſeene
and allowed, and hel fire but an olde
wiues fable. What made Ieremie ſo
wearie of his people, but that he ſavv
them wearie of well doing, for ſighing
and ſorrowing thus he ſaith. Oh
that I had a cottage in the wildernes
of wayfaring men, that I might leaue
my people & go from them, for they
are all adulterers, and an aſſemblie of
rebels.
                  So long as Steuen the Martyr talked
to the Ievves of their petigree, they
harkened vnto him diligentlie, but



when he rebuked their ſinnes, ſaying
that they were a ſtiffenecked people,
and of a hard heart, reſiſting the holy
ghoſt, in perſecuting the prophets,
and putting to death the Lord of life.
Then they ſtopped their eares, and
gnaſhing their teeth, ran vppon him
and ſtoned him to death.Acts 7. &c. So fareth it
at this day amongſt men, that many
are aſwell contented to heare pleaſant
things, as the Iewes were to harken
to Steuen, repeating their parentage▪
But if a man ſhall hit all ſorts of
ill manners, aſwel as ſpeake to al ſorts
of men: they holde it as a principle,
that hee forgetteth his Text, who remembreth
their ſinnes, notwithſtanding
they knowe, that it is the Miniſters
duetie to tell the houſe of Iacob
their ſinnes,Eſay 58. and to let Iſraell heare of
their tranſgreſſions, and the peoples
part, not onelie to be content, but alſo
deſirous to know their duties, and
to ſhewe their deſire in the forwardeneſſe
of their comming before him



that ought to teach: Otherwiſe we
might imagine, that God ſpake but
in ſport,Malac. 2. 7. when hee ſaide by his Prophetes,
the Prieſts lippes ſhall preſerue
knovvledge and the people
ſhall ſeeke it at his mouth: For ſo
thought the euill diſpoſed people in
Ezechiels time, vvho vſed to hear him
preach with the like affections that
manie bring novve a daies. Concerning
vvhoſe fruitleſſe hearing, God
infourmeth Ezechiell, by ſaying vnto
him: Sonne of man, the children of
my people talke of thee by the walks
and in the dores of houſes, & ſpeake
one to another, euery one to his brother,
ſaying: come I pray you and
heare what is the word that cōmeth
from the lord. They come vnto thee,
as the people vſed to come, and my
people ſit before thee, and heare the
wordes; but they will not do them;
for with their mouthes they make
ieſts, and their heart goeth after their
couetouſneſſe, and loe thou art vnto



them; as a ieſting ſong of one that
hath a pleaſant voyce, and can ſing
well; for they heare thy wordes, but
they do them not.
                  Theſe people & the people, which
were in the time of Hoſea the Prophet,
may meetly be matched with
the men of our age, who were as ready
to raile on the prieſt, as hee was
preſt to reproue their ſinne.Hoſeah. 4. For ſaith
Hoſea, theſe people are as thoſe that
rebuke the prieſt. It is moſt true that
the want of ſaluation proceedeth eyther
of the lack of teaching, or of the
want of faith to beleeue rightly that
which is taught.
                  The firſt of theſe is approued by the
wordes which the holy Ghoſt ſpake
by the mouth of this prophet laſt named
(thus) my people are deſtroyed
with lacke of knowledge.Hoſeah. 4. 6 &c. The other
by the teſtimonie of our ſauiour
Chriſt himſelfe, who ſending hys
Eleuen to preach and baptiſe;Mark 16. 16 ſayth
he that beleueth, and is baptiſed ſhall



be ſaued; he that beleeueth not ſhall
be damned; why went the rich man
to hell? but either for one of theſe
cauſes afore named; or for thē both
(that is to ſay) becauſe he neuer frequented
the word of God; whereby
faith is begotten in the heartes of the
hearers; or if hee heard the ſame
worde, yet it was heard ſo careleſly
that it tooke no roote at all: and indeede
that anſwere which Abraham
made to his requeſt, ſeemeth to auer
the trueth of that whiche I ſay; for
when requeſt was made by that helhound,
that a meſſenger might go
from the dead to his fiue brethren,
which were yet at his fathers houſe.
&c. Abraham replied (thus) they haue
Moſes, and the Prophetes. Let them
heare them; for as Abraham ſayth, if
that whiche Moſes hath ſet downe in
Gods iuſtice, cannot better our braſen
faces: and heartes of Adament,
nor they vnualuable, and moſte aſſured
promiſes made by Chriſt to



his elect, and recorded by his prophetes,
cannot driue vs from ſinne,
and draw vs to himſelfe. Then there
is no more hope of vs, in hearing
the worde of God, then was of Symon
and Iudas.
                     Acts 8. 13. Though they heard
the worde,Acts 1. 18. and receiued the Sacramentes,
for our life is no other waie
reformed by a careleſſe kinde of hearing,1. Kings. 12.
then Ieroboam redreſſed the religion
in Iſrael, when hee ſet vp two
golden Calues, the one in Dann, and
the other in Bethel,
                     Iudith. 3. 8. that the Iſraelites
might worſhip them them, or Nabuchadneezer
in his kingdome, when
he deſtroyed Idols, that he might be
worſhipped as God. It is a matter ſo
true that no man can ſo muche as
imagine, much leſſe ſpeake the contrarie,Eſay 5. 4.
without great offence that
God hath done ſo much for his vine,
as by anie meanes might be, in ſomuch
that Dauid the king of Iſrael
neuer hadde greater cauſe then the
prince and people of England haue,



to ſay of the goodneſſe of God,Pſal. 147. 20 hee
hath not dealt ſo louingly with anie
nation as with vs, in giuing to vs ſo
long vſe of his lawes, and yet, he that
compareth the paſtors painfull preaching
with the peoples little profiting,
in moſt places of this land, ſhall
finde iuſt occaſion to thinke that the
ſonne of God hath pronounced
that ſame curſe vppon this Engliſhe
vine: which hee vttered againſt that
fruitleſſe figtree mentioned by Marke
in theſe wordes,Mark. 11. 14. 
                     Neuer fruite growe on
thee henceforth: God grant that there
be not ſome men: who meaſure the
meate by the man, like thoſe proud
Citizens,Luke 19. 14. whiche ſaide wee will not
haue this man to reigne ouer vs, and
loathe the meſſage becauſe they like
not the meſſenger, like thoſe skornfull
Iewes, that tolde Ieremie to his
face: the worde which thou ſpeakeſt
to vs in the name of the Lord, vve
will not heare it of thee,Iere. 44. 14. 15. but whatſoeuer
we thinke good, that will wee



do, but that they may knowe thoſe
men which labour among them; and
haue the ouerſight of them in the
land,1. Theſ. 5. 12 and not barely knowe them;
but alſo loue them for their good
workes ſake. Thus hauing finiſhed
the former circumſtances as compendiouſly
as I promiſed: I proceed
to the next wordes, the whiche containe
in them, the ſecond part of a
chriſtian miniſters dutie, which is to
miniſter the ſacramentes rightly,
whereof one is ſet downe in his due
order by the inſtitutor Chriſt hymſelfe,
when he ſaith, baptiſing them
in the name of the father, and the
ſonne, and the holy ghoſt. Nowe
becauſe the worde Baptiſme hathe
diuers ſignifications in the ſcripture:
I will heere ſet downe, as manie of
them as my memorie can recorde.
Firſt the worde Baptiſme according
to the true meaning of the Greeke
text: Baptiſma doth not ſignifie onely
addicting, but ſuche a dipping in



the water as doth cleanſe the partie
dipped, and for that the Primitiue
Churche did vſe to put the partie
baptiſed quite vnder the water. Therfore
Paule writing both to the Romaines
and Colloſsians,
                     Rom. 6. 4. vſeth theſe
wordes:Coloſ. 2. 12. wee are buried then with
him in baptiſme into hys death: that
like as Chriſt was raiſed vp from the
dead, by the glorie of the father:
So we alſo ſhould walke in newneſſe
of life: in the whiche wordes the Apoſtle
ſheweth what reſemblance
their baptiſme hath with Chriſt hys
death and reſurrection. Secondlie,
baptiſme is vſed for a bare waſhing,
in whiche ſenſe our Sauiour ſpake,
when hee ſaide to the Phariſies,
                     Marke 7. 8. you
lay apart the commaundementes of
God and obſerue the traditions of
men, as the waſhing of pottes and
cuppes and manie ſuche thinges yee
doe, and in the ſame ſenſe wee read
in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes,
                     Heb. 9. 10. when
the authour ſaith that the olde Tabernacle,



conſiſted of manie waſhinges
and ceremoniall rightes, vntill
the daie of reformation came.
Thirdly, by baptiſme wee may vnderſtand
affliction, as our Sauiour
Chriſt did, in ſaying to Iames and
Iohn the ſonnes of Sebedeus,
                     Marke 9. 38. can you
be baptiſed with that baptiſme wherwith
I muſt bee baptiſed, and to
hys Diſciples, I muſt bee baptiſed
with a baptiſme: but howe am I
payned vntill I bee ended.Luke 12, 50 Fourthly
baptiſme is a liberall diſtribution
of the graces of GOD as appeareth
in theſe wordes. Iohn baptiſed
with water,Actes 1. 5. but you ſhall be
baptiſed with the holy Ghoſt within
theſe fewe dayes.
                  Fifthly, the worde baptiſme is taken
for doctrine onely, as in that
place wherein the holie Ghoſt hauing
occaſion to ſpeake of Apollo a
Iewe of Alexandria, ſayth that hee
was mightie in the Scriptures,Actes 18. 42 and
did knowe but the baptiſme of Iohn


                     
only. And laſt of al Baptiſme is taken
for a reuerent order of miniſtring
that Sacrament in the Churche, and
the whole ſanctification of the parties
baptiſed as in the wordes of this
preſent part of Scripture, baptiſing
them. &c.
                  But to ſpeake of the Sacrament
it ſelfe. It hath beene vſuall with almightie
God from time to time
to confirme hys couenauntes with
ſeales ſet to the ſame: for example
wee ſee, that there is a Rainbowe in
the cloudes; the reaſon whereof is,
that GOD hauing in his iuſtice deſtroyed
the olde worlde for ſinne:
(onely Noah and his famelie being
excepted) the ſame GOD in hys
mercie made a couenant with Noah,
that hee would neuer deſtroy it ſo againe
for confirmation thereof: hee
ſet the Raynbow in the Clowdes as
a ſeale to that couenant betwixt himſelfe
and Noah;
                     Geneſ. 9. 13. 14. So was circumciſion
giuen to Abraham, as a ſeale of confirmation



in that promiſe, that in
his ſeede,Gen. 17. 10. 11. all the nations of the earth
ſhould be bleſſed: So that as manie
as were circumciſed, were within
the compaſſe of that couenaunt, in
ſtead whereof, wee haue baptiſme,
the whiche whoſoeuer ſhall refuſe:
wee accompt him, as cut off from
Gods Church.Marke 10. Chriſt Ieſus gaue inuiſicle
grace, by viſible laying hys
handes vppon children and other
ſicke people:Iohn 20. 22. So hee gaue the gift
of his holy ſpirite vnto his Diſciples:
when hauing breathed vppon them,
he ſayd: receiue you the holy ghoſt.
The Sscramentes were ordayned
in the church of God for 3. vſes: firſt
that we ſhould acknowledge al thoſe
to be our fellows ſeruants, whom we
ſee to haue put on the ſame liuerie
with our ſelues, and in this ſenſe ſaid
the Apoſtle Paule: all thoſe that are
baptized into Chriſte,Galat. 27. 3. haue put on
Chriſt. Secondly, the Sacramentes
do put a manifeſt difference betwixt



the true church and the falſe,Actes 2. 39. as Peter
hath taught vs, in ſaying repent, and
be baptized euerie one of you in the
name of Ieſus Chriſt, for to vſe the
promiſe made vnto your children, &
all that are yet farre off, euen ſo many
as God ſhall call: and our Sauiour
ſaith, to ſuch belongeth the kingdomof
God: that is, to ſuch as lead an innocent
life.Mark 10. 14.
                  
                  The third vſe of the Sacraments,
is to ſeale vp in the hearts of the elect
all thoſe promiſes which GOD hath
made vnto them in Ieſus Chriſt his
Son, and their Sauiour: in the which
ſenſe Paule ſpake, when hee ſaid, that
Abraham receiued the ſign of circumciſion,Rom, 4. 11.
as a ſeale of that righteouſnes
which he had by faith, and in the verie
ſame ſenſe our Sauiour ſaith, hee
that beleeueth and is baptized ſhall
be ſaued.Marke 16. 16. But it is to bee conſidered,
that the Inſtitutor ſetteth downe the
form of adminiſtring the ſacraments,
when he ſaith, baptizing them in the



name of the father, of the ſonne, and
of the holie Ghoſt. Hee commaundeth
to baptize in the name of the father
and of the ſon, becauſe the holie
Ghoſt proceedeth from the father &
the ſonne, and in the name of the holie
Ghoſt: for except a man be borne
of water and the ſpirite,Iohn 3. 5. he cannot ſee
the kingdom of God. When our ſauior
offered to waſh Peters feet, he imagined
it to be a nedles work,Iohn 13. &c. for thou
ſhalt neuer waſh my feet ſaid he: but
when Chriſt aunſwered, that ſuch as
are not waſhed by him, haue no part
with him: that is, neither part of his
ſpirite, nor of his kingdom. Peter bethinking
himſelfe better, would not
haue his feet onlie, but alſo his hands
aud head waſhed: howbeit it is not
neceſſarie to waſhe any more then is
vncleane: as Peters feet defiled vvith
dirt and mire, ſo our ſoules ſpotted
with ſins, muſt be cleanſed by Chriſt
his bloud onely. And after this manner
it is neceſſarie, that euerie one of



vs ſhould be waſhed: wherof the outward
putting of water vpon the partie
baptized, is a liuelie figure. Iohn
Baptiſt was ſanctified in his mothers
wombe, as the Angell had foreſhewed.Luke 1. 15.
But when our Sauiour Chriſt
came to him to be baptized,Math. 3. 13 
                     Iohn put
him backe, and ſaid: I haue neede to
bee baptized of thee, and commeſt
thou to me?Pſalme 51. 5 That kingly prophet Dauid,
was a man after gods own heart,
yet he ſaith of himſelfe: I was borne
in iniquitie, and in ſin hath my mother
conceiued mee. Iob was called
by God himſelfe a iuſt and vpright
man,Iob 1. 8. &c. fearing God, and eſchewing euill:
whoſe peere was not found vppon
the face of the earth: notwithſtanding
all this, he ſaith of himſelfe:
who can bring a cleane thing out of
filthines?Iob. 14 4. the which queſtion is all
one with Paules affirmation, who ſaieth:
ſuch as the roote is, ſuch are the
braunches,Rom. 11. 16. as if hee had ſaid with Adam,
the father of vs all was vndefiled



then are wee his ſons cleane alſo. But
if he were once dead in ſinne, beeing
our roote, then howe could wee his
imps haue life of our ſelues. All this
was ſpoken of originall ſinne; as for
actuall ſins, namely, thoſe ſins which
we continuallie commit, they are as
palpable as the darknes of Aegipt, the
which as Moſes ſaith, was ſo groſſe,
that it might be felt:Exo. 10. 21 22. in ſo much, that
Dauid ſaith, when God looked down
from heauen vppon the children of
men,Pſal. 14. 2. 3. (that is) when hee conſidered
mans conuerſation: they were all ſo
farre gone out of the way, that there
was none that did good, in ſo much
that the prophet repeateth it with an
Emphaſis, and ſaith, no not one. And
the man of God Moſes, ſaith: when
God beheld the boldnes of the olde
world in ſinning,Gen. 6. 5. 6. it repēted him that
he had made man: that is, he was ſorie,
that man whome he had made to
liue well, ſhould liue ſo ill. The continuall
ſinne of Sodome brought fire



and brimſtone from heauen to conſume
them in the ſame.Gen. 19. 24. 
                     Dauid feeling
the burthen of his ſinnes, began to
ſincke vnder them:Pſalm 38. 4. for (ſaith he) my
ſins are gone ouer my head, and are
like a ſore burthen, too heauy for me
to beare. Paule hauing by the vertue
of the law,Rom. 7. 7. learned his ſinnes, (for he
had not knowen ſin, except the lawe
had ſaid, thou ſhalt not ſinne) fell to
lamenting of them thus. O wretched
man that I am, who ſhall deliuer me
from this bodie of death: where it is
to be noted, that he calleth his bodie
a bodie of death, in reſpect of ſinne,
which giueth power to death ouer
our bodies.1. Cor. 15. 56. And to conclude, of ſuch
force is ſinne in vs, that if the goodnes
of God had not ſo praeordained,
that the vnbeleeuing husband is ſanctified
by the beleeuing wife, and the
vnbeleeuing wife, by the beleeuing
husband,1. Cor. 7. 14. our children ſhould be verie
vncleane.
                  Againe, beeing waſhed or baptized



in the name of the father, ſonne,
and holie Ghoſt: wee are aduertiſed,
that wee muſt giue godlie, chriſtian,
and holy names vnto our children in
in token of their ſacred profeſſion,
for holie is he that hath called vs, and
that we may be the more forward ſo
to doe. It will be worth our labour to
conſider of a few examples, tending
to the ſame purpoſe,Luke 1. 62. 63. as of Zachary the
father of Iohn the Baptiſt, who being
dum when that his ſon was born, his
friends made ſignes vnto him, howe
he would haue him called, and askeing
for writing tables, writte, ſaying
his name is Iohn: the which vvorde
Iohn is as much as (to ſay) Grace: and
thus was Zacharie commaunded by
the Angell to name him.Luke 1. 13. The ſcripture
accordeth plentifull examples of
thoſe that haue giuen names to their
children, affoordeth to ſuche occaſions
as haue been offered in the time
of their trauell: As when Raell went
with her husband Iacob toward Bethell


                     
to builde an aultar vnto God:
She trauailed in child-birth, and in
trauelling dyed: but before ſhee departed,Gen. 35. 18.
ſhee called his name Benony:
that is, the ſonne of her ſorrowe; but
his father Iacob called him Benony;
that is the ſonne of his right hand. So
Leah hauing born to Iacob foure ſons
ſhe ſaid, now will I prayſe God, &c.
And that ſhee might the better beare
in minde her promiſe, ſhe named her
laſt ſon Iudah.
                     Gen. 29. 35. When the man of Beniamin
came frō the Iſraelites with his
clothes rent, and duſt vpon his head
in token of heauineſſe, and certified
father Ely,
                     1. Sam. 4. 12. that Gods Arke was taken
by the Philiſtines, and that his two
ſonnes were ſlaine: the old father fel
backeward out of his ſeate, and
broke hys necke, and his daughter
in lawe. Phynies wife being flighted
with feare: fell in trauell and dyed in
child bed: but before her death, ſhe
called her ſonne Icabod (that is) the
glorie of God, meaning thereby that



ſhe accōpted the glorie of God to be
taken from Iſrael, when Gods Arke
which was a figure of his Churche,
wherein wee glorifie his name) was
taken awaie by the enemie. And ſecondly
to admoniſhe all parentes ſo
to nuiture vp their children, that
they may ſeeke to maintaine the glorie
of God better then Ely did, for the
wickedneſſe of whoſe children: As
alſo for the fathers default in not correcting
them, God had threatned before
that if he once began with him;1. Sam. 3. 11. 12. 13. 14. &c.
he would make an end with him: ſo
that as the Prophet ſaith: children
being the fruite of the wombe, as
they are come from God, are a good
bleſſing and an heritage that commeth
of the Lord,Pſalm. 12. 7. becauſe hee it is,
from whom euerie good and perfect
gift doth proceede: yet in reſpect of
men, ſo may the matter be handled
that they ſhall finde no ſuch croſſe or
curſe as graceleſſe: or vnruled children:
ſuch as Eſau,
                     Gen. 26. 35 and his two wiues



who were a griefe of minde, and
a heart breaking to Iſaak their father,
and Rebekah their mother.
                  It is true that the verie godlieſt
men and women, haue rather deſiſired
ſonnes then daughters at the
handes of God, but they did it for
good and godly purpoſes: As when
Abraham deſired a ſonne to the end
that Eliezer the ſteward of his houſe
being a ſtranger,Geneſ. 15, 2. Namely a man of
Damaſcus ſhould not be the heyre of
his goods. So did Anna pray to God
for a ſonne when ſhe ſaid, O Lord of
hoſtes, if thou wilt looke on the trouble
of thine handmaid & remember,
me, &c. And giue vnto thine handmayd
a manchilde:1. Sam. 1, 11. &c. then will I giue
him vnto the Lord al the daies of his
life &c. And as the verie name of a
ſonne is in price and preferred at this
day, ſo hath it beene heeretofore, as
when Phineas wife being neere her
deathe in trauell:1. Sam. 4. 20 the midwife with
the reſt thinking to comfort her,



ſaid; feare not for thou haſt borne a
ſonne, when the angell ſayd to Abraham
this time twelue monethes; Sarah
thy wife ſhall beare a ſonne. Sarah
laughed as partly doubting,Gen. 18, 10. 12. and
partly ioying that ſo ſage a woman as
ſhee ſhould conceiue a ſonne by ſo
aged a man as Abraham was. That
ſame Angell that certified Zachario;
                     Luke. 1. 13. 14.
that Elizabeth his wife ſhoulde beare
Iohn the Baptiſt ſaid, not onely that it
ſhould be a ſonne: but ſuch a ſonne
as ſhould bring ioy to him and many
more.Luke 1. 26 verſe 30 And that Angel Gabriell, that
was ſent of God Mary, the mother of
our ſauiour, according to his humanitie,
ſaith, that in ſtead of feare ſhee
had found fauour with God: and his
reaſon is this: for thou ſhalt beare a
ſon, and ſhalt call his name Ieſus:
As if he had ſaid, it is a great bleſſing
of God to beare a childe: and a greater
to beare a man childe: but to be
ſo farre in Gods fauour as to beare
ſuch a ſonne, as ſhalbe the ſauiour



of the worlde, it is the greateſt grace
which hath beene heard of: in the
which, God make his Church ioyfull;
and for the which in ſpeciall,
and for all the reſt of his bleſſinges in
generall, God make vs thankefull,
Amen.
                  
                     Iohn 10. 9.
I am the doore: by me if any man enter
in, he ſhalbe ſaued, and ſhall go in, and
go out, and ſhall find paſture.
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                     
                     A
MEMENTO,
FOR MAGISTRATES.
                  By Henrie Smith.
                  LONDON
Printed by Iohn Wolfe, & are to be
ſold by William Wright.
1592.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  A Memento for Magiſtrates.
                  
                     THe Apoſtle Paul writing
to Timotheus amongſt
manie other
things,1. Tim. 5. 17. aſſureth him,
that thoſe Elders
which rule well, are
worthie of double honour. And the
Authour of the 45. Pſame,Pſal. 45. 7. ſpeaking
of the gouernement of Salomon ſaith.
The Scepter of thy kingdoome is a
right Scepter, for thou loueſt righteouſnes
and hateſt iniquitie; in which
words the Author aduoucheth, that
he cannot rule rightlie, that loueth
not to iudge iuſtlie, and that he vſurpeth
aucthoritie that dealeth partiallie:
for wee muſt remember, that hee
meaſurerh Salomons worthineſſe to



raign by his wel ſwaying of the ſcepter,
the which Salomō
                      could not haue
handled ſo commendablie as he did,
if he had not bene carried away with
an earneſt deſire to deale indifferentlie
amongſt men in cauſes of controuerſie,
but moſt plainly appeareth his
great deſire of godly gouernment in
that heartie praier which hee vttered
vnto almightie God, (when he ſaid)
giue vnto thy ſeruant O Lord an vnderſtanding
and a wiſe hart,3. king. 3. to iudge
thy people, that I may diſcerne betwixt
good and euill. In this praier
it is plaine, that although hee was a
King, yet he calleth himſelfe the seruaunt
of God, for promotion commeth
neither from the Eaſt, nor from
the Weſt, nor yet from the ſouth, but
from God, who plucketh down one,
and ſetteth vppe another. And Salomon,
hauing praied for wiſdome and
vnderſtanding,Pſal. 75. 7. 8. hee ſheweth wherevnto
he wold applie thoſe good gifts
of God, euen vnto the glorie of him



that gaue them, to iudge thy people,
that I may diſcerne betwixt good &
euill (ſaith hee) for by him Kinges
raigne,Prou. 8. 15. and by him Princes decree
Iuſtice.Exod. 18. When Iethro the father in law
of Moſes, came out of the land of Madian
to ſee Moſes being at the mount
of God, which was mount Sinai, and
beheld how the people flocked vnto
Moſes their magiſtrate for iudgement
& iuſtice, by due conſideration therof:
Iethro found theſe three in conueniences:
Firſt, that Moſes wearied
himſelfe with ſitting in iudgement
from the morning vntill night. Secondly,
that he was too tedious vnto
the people which attended vppon
him in all that time. And thirdly, that
notwithſtanding his carefulneſſe in
iudgement, and their earneſt expectation
of iuſtice, hee was not able to
diſpatche ſo manye matters as vvas
brought before him: but with a light
hearing, and a little regarding of manie
mens cauſes. Wherefore, Iethro


                     
beeing a man verie deſirous that iuſtice
might proceede, that no mans
matter ſhould ſleightlie be ſlipt ouer,
counſaileth Moſes to make more Magiſtrates
in Iſrael, and to the end that
this might be perfourmed the better,
Iethro dooth point at the diſpoſition
of thoſe men which ſhould bear rule,
for (ſaith he) thou ſhalt chooſe out amongeſt
all the people, men of courage,
dealing trulie, fearing God, and
hating couetouſnes, and them ſhalt
thou make gouernours ouer the people.
                  By this you may perceiue, how Iethro
in counſailing, and Moſes in practiſing,
did both aime at iuſtice and
true iudgement. For it is not a meane
matter, or light labour, for men of
yeeres to ſit from morning to night
in iudgement: no, their yeares, antiquitie,
& conſequentlie their bodies
imbeſilitie cannot eaſilie endure it,
beſides the care of common cauſes
heard at home, and that which is the



biggeſt burden of all, the continuall
good of the Common-weale, which
they meditate carefullie, when vvee
ſleepe ſecurely is not to be forgotten,
but herin are many Magiſtrats greatly
to be blamed, in that they cauſe the
people to attend vpon thē from morning
vntil night, with expenſes great
and continuall, whileſt they find no
end of poore mens matters, becauſe
they wiſhe no ende of ſpending money.
                  Are their mindes ſet vpon righteouſnes
which deale thus? No, no:
they are the ſame that the Prophete
ſpake of,Pſal. 31. 12. when he ſaid, the vngodlie
ſeeketh occaſion againſt the righteous,
and knaſheth vpon him with his
teeth, for the crafty counſeller taketh
occaſion to hinder his Cliants iuſt
cauſe, that he might ſtill feede vppon
the poore mans purſe: the Lawyer,
who careth not to deale vnfaithfully
is like the chriſtall glaſſe, which flatteringly
ſheweth vnto euerie man a



faire face, how iuill fauoured ſo euer
he be. So can he perſwade the ſimple
ſwain, that his cauſe wil bear a ſtrong
action, bee it neuer ſo weake. Oh remember
what God ſaid vnto Iſraell,
you ſhall not do what ſeemeth good
in your owne eies,Deut. 12. but what I command
you: Then know, that you do
not that which he hath commanded
becauſe you deale not with mercie
and truth, for if euer the time required,Pſal. 25.
and occaſion was offered to
mooue that queſtion to Magiſtrates,
which Dauid did in his daies: namelie,Pſal. 82. 2.
how long they will proceede to
giue vniuſt iudgement, and to accept
the perſon of the vngodlie. Nowe is
the time and occaſion preſent, for I
doe not doubt, but it is too true, that
the Prophet hath ſpoken; who ſaith,
that the vngodlie are more ſet by thē
the righteous;Abac. 1. and this is the cauſe
that wrong iudgement dooth proceed.
How can iuſtice ſit, when there
is no ſeat appointed for her, you may



be ſure ſhe vvill not haue to do with
the ſtoole of wickednes,Pſal. 94. where miſchiefe
ſtandeth in ſtead of iuſtice. It
was a woorthie commendation that
Dauid vttered in the praiſe of Ieruſalem▪
                     Pſal. 122. 3.
when hee ſaid; there is the ſeate
for iudgment, the which appointing
of that ſeat for iudgement, was an argument
that they loued iuſtice: and
firſt the place vvherein it vvas ſet, aſſureth
vs heereof, for it was ſet in the
gate, vvher through men might haue
paſſage to and from the iudgement
ſeat. Secondly, the maner of framing
that ſeat in the gate: namely, that the
Iudges of force muſt ſit with their
faces towards the riſing of the ſunne,
in token that their iudgement ſhuld
bee as pure from corruption, as the
ſun vvas cleare in his chiefeſt brightneſſe.
Oh happie houſe of Dauid,
vvhoſe ſeat vvas ſet ſo conueniently,
vvhoſe cauſes vvere heard ſo carefullie,
and matters iudged ſo iuſtlie. The
Iſraelites thought themſelues well apaid,



vvhen they had the gouernement
of Debora that vertuous VVoman,Iudg. 5. 8.
for all vvas laied a bed, vntill ſhe
came vppe a mother in Iſraell; and as
ſhee was a good gouerneſſe in her
time, ſo ſhee loued thoſe that
were like vnto her ſelfe: for ſaieth
ſhee, my heart is ſet vpon the gouernours
of Iſraell. Dauid was a good
King vvhile he liued,Pſal. 89. as it did appeare
by the teſtimonie of God himſelfe,
who ſaid of him, I haue found Dauid
my ſeruant, with my holie oyle haue
I annointed him. Secondly, by his
appealing to God for iudgement in
this caſe,Pſal. 26. 1. when he ſaith, be thou my
iudge O Lord, for I haue walked innocently,
&c.
                  And laſt of all, by that good counſell
which hee gaue vpon his deathbedde
vnto Salomon his Sonne, who
was to ſucceed him in that kingdom,3. king. 2. 3.
for (ſaith he) thou ſhalt proſper and
come to great honor, if thou keepeſt
the commandements which GOD



commanded Moſes, when Phillip the
King of Macedonia, did caſt of the
earneſt ſute of a poore widowe, with
this ſlender anſwere; go thy way, for
I haue no leaſure to heare thee now.
She replied thus, and why haſt thou
leaſure to be a King: as if ſhee ſhould
haue ſaid, God hath giuen thee time
to raigne, and power to gouern, that
thou mighteſt applie them both vnto
that end wherefore they are giuen
thee:Prou. 20. for mercie and truth preſerueth
a King, and with louing kindnes his
ſeat is vpholden. When Salomon praied
to God for an vnderſtanding hart
that he might do iuſtice among gods
people: it is ſaid, that his praier pleaſed
God paſſing well, becauſe Salomon▪
                     
asked wiſedoome rather then
wealth,3. King. 3. and knowledge rather then
honor: for thereby he gaue euidence
that his heart was ſet vpon righteouſnes:
for out of the aboundaunce of
the heart the mouth ſpeaketh. It is a
moſt excellent praier which the Prophet



maketh, when he ſaith; giue thy
iudgement vnto the King,Pſal. 72. 1. O Lorde,
and thy righteouſnes vnto the kings
ſonne, &c. then ſhall hee iudge the
people according vnto right, and defend
the poore, wherein the Prophet
praied for himſelfe, while he gouerned
the kingdome of Iſraell, and for
his ſucceſſors in the ſame, hauing relation
vnto that promiſe ſpoken of in
the 132. Pſalme:Verſe 9. the Lord hath made
a faithfull oath vnto Dauid, and hee
will not ſhrincke from it, ſaying: of
the fruit of thy bodie ſhall I ſet vpon
thy ſeat: if thy children keepe may teſtimonies
which I ſhall learne them.
And the Prophet proceedeth to ſay,
then ſhall he iudge the people according
vnto right, and defend the pore,
by the word (then) hee inſinuateth,
that when God giueth grace to the
Magiſtrate; then hee cannot chooſe
but do right, and defend thoſe which
doe ſuſtaine wrong. But when the
Prophet ſaith, (and defend the pore)



Some man would thinke that he had
ſaide enough before, and therefore
might haue cut of this ſpeach, but it
is to be remembred, that as ſick men
nedeth not the Phiſition, or the way
fairing man his weapon at one time
onelie, but as often as the patient is
ſicke, ſo often hee muſt haue the Phiſitions
counſaile, and as often as the
traueiler is aſſaulted, ſo often hee vſeth
his weapon. In like ſort the pore
man oppreſſed often, doth as often
neede the defence of the Magiſtrate:
And therefore, hath the Magiſtrate
the ſword is alwaies caried before him,
& this ſword is alwaies caried before
rather the behind the Magiſtrat, that
he might rather remēber iuſtice, then
caſt the care thereof behind his back,
the laſt, but not the leaſt thing to bee
marked of the Magiſtrate is; that iuſtice
is ſet foorth with a paire of ballaunces
in the one hand, whiche admoniſheth
him to waie thoſe matters
iuſtlie which are brought before



him: And within the other hand a
two edged ſword,Pſal. 94. 15 to the intent that
iuſtice might returne to iudgement,
(that is) that thinges iuſtlye iudged,
might bee rightly rewarded on both
ſides:3. king. 3. whereof King Salomon hath
giuen a good preſident. Firſt, in finding
out the true mother of the ſmothered
childe, which is a point of
iudgement. Secondlie, in reſtoring
the liuing childe to his owne mother,
whiche was a point of iuſtice.
And theſe partes of a Chriſtian Magiſtrate
duetie are ſo neceſſarilie
lincked togeather, that ſo often as
one of them is wanting, the lavv receiueth
a maime at the hand of the
Magiſtrate.Iohn 19. As when Pilate iudged
Chriſt guiltleſſe,Act. 24 but yet put him to
death: and when Paules cauſe was
heard and approoued, yet hee was
left in priſon: Therefore, it is good
counſaile, and worthie to bee hearkened
vnto, which Dauid gaue vnto
all Kings and Magiſtrates, that they



bee learned and wiſe: for if the Magiſtrate
be not wiſe,Pſal 2. 10. (words) may carie
the matter away. As when Daniel
when he was accuſed of diſpiſing the
decree of Nabucadnezer the King of
Babilon,Bel and Dragon. 
                     Ieremie to bee an enemie to
the common-wealth of Iſraell,Iere. 18. 
                     Elias
to bee a troubler of the ſtate,3. king. 18. 
                     Paule to
be a factious & ſeditious fellow,Acts 24. 
                     Naboath
to haue blaſphemed God and
king Ahab:
                     3. king. 21. and as at the importunate
crye of the Iewes, Chriſt was put to
death,Luke 23. and Barrabas the murtherer ſet
at libertie. The ſpeciall wiſedome of
God,Exod. 4. matched Moſes the Magiſtrat,
with Aron the miniſter, thereby gyuing
vs to vnderſtand, that when the
word & the ſword go together, there
can be none other but good gouernment.
As for example, ſo long as the
good prieſt Iehoiba,
                     4. king. 12. & the godly king
Ioas liued together, God was worſhiped,
and his people guided according
vnto his word: for the man of God
counſailed vertuouſly, and the King



practiſed carefully: whereunto that
ſaying of Solon doth verie well agree,
who being asked when the common
wealth did beſt floriſh: he anſwered,
when the people obey the magiſtrat,
and the magiſtrate obeyeth the law:
for lawes are better vnmade then vnkept;
no doubt there want not ſuch,
as wilſay with thoſe head ſtrong people
in Dauids daies:Pſal. 2. 3. let vs break their
bonds in ſunder, and caſt away their
coardes from vs, and our lawes haue
bene a long time like to ſpiders webs,
ſo that the great buzzing bees break
through, & the little feeble flies hang
faſt in them.
                  But admitte that you replye and
ſaye, they are made ſtronger, then
in the daies of our forefathers, yet are
they like vnto walled Citties in the
time of warre, at the which time, bee
your walkes neuer ſo ſtrong, they are
beaten downe: if they want men and
munition, ſo if your lawes wiſelie
made, doe want Patrones to defend



them, they will ſoone be little worth,
therefore it was not the worſt vvarning
that Iethro gaue to Moſes,
                     Exod. 18. that he
ſhould make ſuch magiſtrats as were
men of courage: For as Criſippus ſayd
ſomtimes, ſo it is true at all times, that
if a magiſtrate ruleth amiſſe, hee ſhall
procure the diſpleaſure of God, (if
well) hee ſhall be hated of men, and
herof it commeth, that Valerius Maximus
writeth to Antigonus the Emperour,
who vvhen he ſhould put on
his imperiall crovvn and roabes, ſtepping
vppon the cloath of eſtate, vttered
theſe vvordes vvith a very loude
voice.
                  Oh cloath of more honourable
then happie eſtate, vvherewith, if a
man vvere ſo thorouglie acquainted,
that hee coulde number the cares
that concerne thee, 
                        •
                     hee woulde
not ſtoope for thee, though hee
might haue thee for the taking vp,
for great and vvaightie is that charge
vvhiche is layde vppon a Chriſtian



magiſtrate in common-wealthes affaires,
& of no leſſe continuance then
care: wherfore, Haimo would haue euery
magiſtrate to remember theſe 3.
things: 1. that himſelfe is but a man.
2. that he gouerneth men like to him
ſelfe, and 3. that he ſhall not alwaies
bee a magiſtrate, as the Prophet hath
taught, when he ſpake thus in the perſon
of GOD: I ſaid you are Gods,
but you ſhal die like men, and fall like
one of the Princes: and yet ſhall they
not be ſo excuſed, but muſt alſo giue
accomptes of their gouernment, as
did that Steward: mentioned by S.
Luke. It is good therefore, not onely
for thoſe men that haue the election
of Magiſtrats, to make ſuch choiſe of
officers as Iethro inioyneth Moſes:
                     Pſal. 82. 6.
and as God himſelfe commaunded
Iſrael, when hee ſaid, you ſhall make
him king, whome the Lord our God
ſhall chuſe: but alſo verie meete for
thoſe magiſtrates being ſo elected,
to haue a care, that as they are in place



aboue other men: ſo in good life
they go before the people: for this
was it, that the Iſraelites deſired God
to graunt vnto Ioſua beeing newly
made their gouernour. Namely a
faithful heart to go in and out before
them: For ſaid they, euen as wee obeyed
Moſes in all things, ſo will wee
obey thee:Ioſua. 1. Onely the Lord thy God
be with thee, as hee was with Moſes.
And it was a neceſſarie praier: for
howe fowle a fault were it, that the
man which is appointed to puniſhe
adulterie, ſhould be more worthie of
correction for the ſame kind of ſin,
then the partie puniſhied. Like vnto
the whore-hunting Iudges of Samaria:
                     Ierm. 5.
mentioned by the Prophet Ieremie,
in his fift chapter: or that hee
whiche is appointed to iudge according
to lawe, ſhould doe anie thing
contrarie to the law: As angrie Ananias,
commanded that Paul ſhould be
ſmitten contrary to law:Acts 25▪ 2. in this point
doth the Lord ſchoole the king of



                     Iuda, by his Prophet Ieremie, who ſaieth,
heare the word of the Lord thou
King of Iuda, that ſitteſt in thy kinglie
ſeat of Dauid:
                     Iere. 22. 24. thou, and thy ſeruaunts,
and thy people that goe in
and out at this gate: thus the Lorde
commaundeth, keepe equitie and
righteouſnes: deliuer the oppreſſed
from the power of the violent, doe
not greeue nor oppreſſe the ſtranger,
the fatherleſſe, nor the widowe, and
ſhed no innocent bloud in this place,
and if you keepe theſe thinges faithfully:
then ſhall there come in at the
doore of this houſe, kings to ſit vpon
Dauids ſeate, &c. But if you will
not be obedient vnto theſe commandements.
I ſweare by mine own ſelf,
ſaith the Lord (this houſe ſhall be
waſte) for example, the ſame prophet
ſpeaking there of the wicked
gouernement of Seluin the ſonne of
good king Ioſias, that gouerned Iuda,
(ſayth) did not thy father eate and



drinke, and proſper well ſo long as
hee dealt with righteouſneſſe, from
whence came this, but becauſe hee
had mee before his eies (ſaith the
Lord.)
                  Nowe when Ieremy ſaith that Ioſias
had God before his eies; hys
meaning is all one with Dauids intent,
when he ſaith, God ſtandeth in
the parliament of princes, he is iudge
among Gods, to giue all Magiſtrates
a Memento, that God is preſent in
all their aſſemblies and iudgeth them
that iudge vnder him whereof they
had neede to bee put in minde: for
oftentimes Mycheas prooueth too
true a prophet in ſaying, that the
great man will ſpeake what his heart
deſireth, and the hearers muſt allowe
it well: of the whiche ſorte of men
the verie beſt is, but as a thiſle
whiche a man can hardly touche
vnpricked, and the moſte iuſt like
a bramble, wherevnto the ſillye



ſheep ſeeking to be ſhrowded frō the
ſharp ſhowers, is oftē forced to leaue
hir fleece behinde: whoſe vnworthy
comming to their places. Ioatham
hath well deſcribed in the perſon of
Abimilech, when he ſaide, the trees
of the woode went to annoint a king
ouer them: and ſaide vnto the Oliue
tree: Reigne thou ouer vs: but the
Oliue tree anſwered, ſhall I leaue my
ſatneſſe,Iudges 9. which both Gods and men
praiſe in me: and go to be promoted
ouer the trees. Then they came
to the fig-tree, and ſaide, come thou
and reigne ouer vs; the fig-tree aunſwered:
ſhall I leaue my ſweetneſſe
and good fruit, and go to be promoted
ouer the trees, They ſaid vnto the
vine: Reigne thou ouer vs, but the
vine aunſwered, ſhoulde I leaue my
wine wherewith I cheere God and
men, to be promoted ouer the trees:
then they ſaid vnto the bramble, wilt
thou raigne ouer vs. Then ſaide the



bramble, if it be true indeed that you
will ſubmit your ſelues to my authoritie,
and put your truſt vnder my
ſhadow, or elſe fire proceed from the
bramble and conſume you. By this
parable we are taught generally that
euerie man is to be content with that
eſtate wherin God hath placed him,
and that for the moſte part the verie
beſt worthie, do refuſe profered promotion,
and on their part well deſerued,
whereas on the contrarie, the
moſte vnfitly furniſhed with iuſtice
and true iudgement, and the leaſt deſeruing
in a commonwealth: are of al
other moſt ambitious. Such an one
was Abſalon, who ſtole awaie the
heartes of Iſrael with this flattering
ſpeech.2 king 
                           •
                        . Oh that I were made Iudge
in the land, that euerie man whiche
hath any plea or matter in the lawe
might come to me that I might do
him iuſtice, but this is the iuſt reward,
of ſuch as before conuenient
time, and apt occaſion to be offered,



do ambitiouſly ſeek the ſeat of iudgment,
euen vntimely and vnnaturall
death,2. king. 18. for Abſolon was hanged by the
hayre of his head,Iudges 9. & a woman with a
peece of a milſtone daſhed out Abymelechs
brains, though Abſalon be abſent
& Abimilech brained long ſince,
yet it is to be ſuſpected that many mē
get preferment, by their practiſes, cō
                     ming
in ſuch ſheep skins as are fayre
wordes and flattering ſpeeches, but
God graunt that they proue not like
vnto thoſe iudges whome Zophonie
feared not to liken vnto Lyons:Cap. 3. 2. 3. who
finding their praie in the euening,
chop vp all, not leauing ſo muche as
the bones vntill the morning, Salomon
ſaid wel,Prou. 20. 
                           •
                        . that many would be accompted
good doers, but where ſhal
we finde a faithfull man: ſome men
haue ſaid well with Abſolon, before
they came to preferment, but they
can nowe bee contented to ſee many
men, to ſue ſeuen yeares for their
right, and yet ſuffer them to ſuſtaine



wrong becauſe neceſſitie hathe no
law forſooth. Go to, go to, ſome body
will anſwere for that one day. A
man woulde thinke, that neceſſitie
ſhould haue the moſte lawe, becauſe
he hath leaſt money & feweſt frends.
Magiſtrates might learne ſuch a leſſon
of God himſelf, as it being rightly
practiſed, they could not chuſe but
do iuſtice, & this is it, when almigtie
God intended to deſtroy Sodome and
Gomora, before he would do ſo thogh
their ſins were monſtrous great, he
conſidered thus of the matter, the
crie of Sodome and Gomorrha is great,
and their ſinne is exceeding greeuous.Gen. 18.
I will go downe nowe and ſee
whether they haue done altogether
according to that crie which is come
vnto me or not, that I may know. Lo
let all magiſtrates learne by the example
of God himſlfe, to go down
and ſee (that is) to apply their eares
to heare dilligentlie, and their
mindes to meditate iuſtlie of each



mans matter, if you aske me why, I
anſwere as God himſelfe doth, that
they may know vidz. that they may
diſcerne betwixt truth and falſhood,
right and wrong: this is that queſtion
which Dauid demanded of Saules
counſellors, that egged him on to
hurt him that neuer harmed them:
are your mindes ſet vpon righteouſnes,
O ye congregation, and do you
iudge the thing that is right. O yee
ſonnes of men, ſaith he, the ſame prophet
in all his troubles deſiring God
to ſtand on his ſide againſt his oppreſſors,
thought it as conuenient to
craue of God, the conſideration of
his cauſe as to aske his aid againſt his
aduerſaries,Psal. 11. 1. and therefore prayeth
thus. Ponder my words, O Lord
conſider my meditation, &c. So Magiſtrates
haue not onelie authoritie
to make and eſtabliſe good lawes:
but alſo to determine betwixt men
according to the ſame, vnto whoſe
ſenſor the ſubiect muſt ſubmit himſelfe



as the Apoſtle prooueth to the
Romaines, when hee ſaith:Rom. 13. let euerie
ſoule ſubmit it ſelfe vnto the authoritie
of the higher powers, for all power
is of God, wherefore, whoſoeuer
reſiſteth that power, reſiſteth the ordinance
of God, and purchaſeth vnto
himſelfe damnation. For Magiſtrates
are not to bee feared of them
that doe well, but of them that doe
nill: wilt thou not feare, do wel then,
ſo ſhalt thou haue praiſe, for he is the
miniſter of God for thy wealth: but
if thou doeſt euill, then feare, for hee
beareth not the ſworde for naught,
but is the miniſter of GOD to take
vengeance vpon them that doe euill,
where it is to be remembred, that the
ciuill magiſtrate, who beareth the
ſword, is called the miniſter of God,
as well as that ſpirituall magiſtrat that
preacheth the woorde: and that no
doubt, to the intent hee might take
care as well to maintaine true religion,
as to miniſter deſerued diſcipline



for it ſtandeth with all diuine and
humaine reaſon, that if all maiſters
& fathers ought to haue a more thē
ordinarie care to inſtruct and helpe
forward their families in Chriſtian
religion, ſo much as in them lyeth;
much more ought the magiſtrate to
meditate by all meanes poſſible to
performe his dutie therein; who is a
father ouer all families: I cannot ſet
this forth in any playner ſpeach then
Dauid hath done in this ſhort ſaying;
kiſſe the ſonne, leaſt hee be angrie;
and ſo you periſhe in the right way;Pſalm. 2. 12.
by which ſpeache the prophet teacheth
that God cannot be honored by
any other means then by that which
Chriſt his ſonne hath taught; who
ſaith himſelfe in the fift of Iohn; hee
that honoureth the ſonne,Iohn 5. 23. honoreth
the father: hee that diſhonoureth
the ſonne, diſhonoureth the father,
ſo that hee meaneth in this
place; that if you worſhippe not the
ſonne as he hath commanded; then



you diſhonor him; if you diſhonour
him; then you anger him; if you anger
him, he caſteth you off: if he caſteth
you off, then you are from the
right waye, and if you are from the
right way, then you periſh. For the
auoyding whereof, all godly Magiſtrates
haue had a ſpeciall care to meditate
in the lawe of the Lord: ſuch
were Moſes, Ioſua, Dauid, Salomon, Aſa,
Ioſophat, Iſachias, &c. Of whoſe good
example, God grant all godly magiſtrates
to make good vſe. Amen.
                  
                     Pſalm. 98. 10.
With righteouſneſſe ſhall hee iudge the
world, and the people with equitie.
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                     


                     
THE
VVEDDING
GARMENT.
                  
                     Rom. 13. 14.
Put yee on the Lorde Ieſus
Chriſt.
                  By Henrie Smith.
                  LONDON
Printed by Iohn Wolfe, & are to be
ſold by William Wright.
1592.
               
               
                  
                  To the Reader.
                  To controll thoſe falſe copyes of this ſermon,
which were printed without my
knowledge, (patched) as it ſeemeth out of
ſome borrowed notes,Gen. 43. 11. and to ſtop the printing
of it again without my corrections, as
it was intēded, becauſe they had got it licē
                     ced
before, although vt 
                        •
                     erly vnwilling for
ſome reſpectes to haue it publiſhed, whiche
made me withſtand their importunitie ſo
long, yet ſeeing more inconuenience then I
thought of, I ſuffered that which I could
not hinder. And nowe hoping that it is
Gods will to profite ſome by it, as Iacob
parted from Beniamin, ſo that which
muſt be, let be, and the Lord giue thee a
blesſing with it.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  THE WEDDING
GARMENT.
                  
                     
                        Rom. 13. 14.
Put ye on the Lord Ieſus Chriſt.
                  
                  
                     I Haue choſen a Text
whiche is the ſum of
the Bible. For all ſcripture
runneth vppon
Chriſt like the title of
a booke,Reuel. 8. becauſe Chriſt is the Alpha
and Omega, the beginning and the
end of mans ſaluation, therefore hee
is figured in the law foretolde in the
Prophetes, and fulfilled in the Goſpell.
Some places point to his diuinitie,
ſome to his humanitie, ſome
to his kingdome, ſome to hys prieſthoode,
ſome to his prophecie, ſome
to his conception, ſome to hys
byrth, ſome to his life, ſome to his
miracles, ſome to his paſſion, ſome to
his reſurrection, ſome to his Aſcention,



ſome to his glorification, all
point vnto the Sauioure like Iohn
Baptiſt,Iohn 1. 29, when he ſaid, This is the lamb
of God which taketh away ths ſinnes of the
world. Therefore learne Chriſt, and
learne all.
                  Now to teache vs how we ſhould
heare, and how we ſhould loue, and
how we ſhould feare, and howe wee
ſhould beleeue, and how we ſhould
followe Chriſt, that wee may knowe
when we haue learned him. The Apoſtle
ſaith, Put yee on the Lord Ieſus
Chriſt: as though this word did containe
all our duties vnto Chriſt, To
put him on, which ſeemes to bee the
leuell of this phraſe (if you mark how
it commeth in) for before Paul ſayth
Caſt away the workes of darkneſſe, and put
on the armour of light.
                     Verſe 12. Then he nameth
the workes of darkeneſſe,Verſe. 13. which wee
ſhould caſt off: viz. gluttonie, drunkenneſſe,Verſe 14.
ſtrife, enuie, chambering,
wantonneſſe, after he nameth the armour
of light, which wee ſhould put



on, and calleth it by the name of the
giuer, The Lord Ieſus Chriſt. In ſteed
of gluttonie,Pſal. 109. 88 and drunkenneſſe, and
ſtrife, and enuie, and chambering,
and wantonneſſe, and other patches
of the deuill, wherwith man clothed
himſelfe as with a Garment. The Apoſtle
giueth him another garment,
which hee calleth Ieſus Chriſt: hee
doth not oppoſe vertue to vice, as
one would thinke when he had ſayd,
Caſt off gluttonie, hee ſhoulde haue
ſaide, Put on ſobrietie: when hee
had ſaide, Caſt of wantonneſſe, hee
ſhoulde haue ſaid, Put on continencie.
When he had ſaid, Caſt of enuie
he ſhould haue ſaid, Put on loue: but
in ſtead of all vertues, hee commendeth
the example of Chriſt for euerie
vertue, and oppoſeth it to euerie
vice, as if hee ſhould ſay, Hee which
thinketh onely to followe Chriſt,
needeth not bee ledde by the hand
from vertue to vertue, but hys
example will teache him what hee



ſhall follovve, and what hee ſhall
flee, better then all preceptes in the
world.
                  Therefore this is the beſt thought
in euerie action for a man to thinke,
What Chriſt would doe, which was
made not onely redemption and ſaluation
to ſaue vs, but wiſedome and
example to guide vs. Therefore hee
ſaith:1. Cor. 1. 30. 
                     Learne of mee, and followe mee, as
though we ſhould thinke before we
ſpeake,Mat. 11. 29. whether hee would ſpeake ſo,Marke 10. 21
and conſider before we do, whether
he would do ſo, and do all by his example,
as the ſcholler writeth by his
copie, or els we do not learne of him,
but of our ſelues, and then vvee go awry,
like a child vvhich ſcribleth with
out a rule. If thou reſolueſt to ſpeake,
and doe no othervviſe then Chriſt
vvould ſpeake and do himſelfe, thou
ſhalt bee ſure to doe all thinges well,
becauſe thou follovveſt a ſtraight
patterne. Therefore ſtudy what this
meaneth.Iohn 3. 4. 
                     To put on Chriſt. It is a



ſtraunge ſpeeche, and a ſtrange Garment,
they vvhich cannot tell like
Nichodemus vvhat Chriſt meaneth,
vvhen he ſaith, that we muſt be born
againe, cannot tell vvhat Paule meaneth
vvhen hee ſaith, Put on Chriſt:
as if one man ſhould put on another.
I thinke manie heere may goe to the
Apoſtle, as the Apoſtle went vnto
Chriſt,Luke 1. 9. and aske.Gal 3. 27. What is the parable?
This phraſe is read in none but
Paule, which hath written moſt of iuſtification
by Chriſt: and therefore
hee vſeth all phraſes to expreſſe
hovve vvee ſhould applye Chriſt vnto
vs, and in no tearms he hath ſhewed
it more liuely then in this phraſe,
Put on Chriſt. For it ſignifieth that
Chriſt dooth couer vs like a Garment,Rom. 4. 7.
and defende vs like an Armoure.
Hee hideth our vnrighteouſneſſe
with his righteouſneſſe, hee
couereth our diſobedience with his
obedience, he ſhadoweth our death
vvith his death, that the vvrath of



God cannot find vs, iudgement cannot
ſpie vs, the curſſe cannot ſee vs,
for the garment which couereth and
hideth vs.Gen. 27. But as Iacob got the bleſſing
in the name and apparell of Eſau
his elder brother. So in the name
and apparell of Chriſt our elder brother,
vvee receiue the bleſſing, and
are receiued into fauour like Chriſt
himſelfe. For God ſaith not: This
is my beloued ſonne vvhich pleaſeth
mee,Math. 3. 17. 
                     But in whome I am well pleaſed:
meaning, that not onely Chriſt pleaſeth
GOD, but wee pleaſe God in
Chriſt:1. Cor. 11. 3. 
                     For Chriſt is our head.
                     Epheſ. 5. 23. Therefore,
as one looking in the face of a
man, doth like him ſtraight if hee like
his face: ſo God beholding vs in the
face of Chriſt, doth loue vs ſtraight,
becauſe the face dooth pleaſe hym:
But Chriſt is not our heade, vnleſſe
we be his members, Chriſt is not our
Garment vnleſſe wee put him on: as
Chriſt did put on our garment, when
hee cloathed himſelfe with our fleſh,



and tooke our infirmities, and bore
our curſſe: ſo we muſt put on his garment,
that is, his righteouſneſſe, his
merites and his death, vvhich is as
ſtraunge a veſture to vs, as our fleſhe
was to him,Reuel. 3. 4. and much adoe we haue
to put it on,Mat. 22. 11. and when it is on,Mat. 7. 23. there
is great cunning to weare it cleanelie
and comelie from ſoyling and renting,
that ſuch a precious Garment
be not taken from vs againe. Therefore,
manie ſeeme to weare this Garment
vvhich ſhall be thruſt from the
banquet, becauſe they weare it not:
as thoſe which wil ſay when the Lord
ſhall come to iudgement,Luke 13. 26. 
                     Wee haue
ſeene thee in our ſtreetes, wee haue heard
thee in our Synagogs, we haue propheſied,
wee haue caſt out deuils, wee haue wrought
miracles by thy name: as though if any
had put him on, or borne his marks,
they were the men which were marked
like his ſeruaunts, therefore who
but they ſhall enter into Heauen?
Yet Chriſt ſaith, I know you not, there



is their revvarde, I know you not: as if
he ſhould anſwer, you weare not my
Liuerie,Luke 13. 27. you beare not my Cogniſance
for all your ſhewes, therefore,
depart from mee: So hee put them
off, becauſe they had not put him
on: For though they had ſeene his
perſon, and hearde of his vertues,
yet they had not faith to applie his
mercies, his merites, his death, and
his righteouſneſſe vnto them, without
which no man can put on Chriſt
nor weare him. Faith is the hande
which putteth him on. Faith taketh
firſt his righteouſnes, & couereth her
vnrighteouſnes, then ſhee taketh his
obedience, & couereth her diſobedience,
then ſhe taketh his patience, &
couereth her impatiency, then ſhe taketh
his temperance, & couereth hir
intemperancie, then ſhee taketh his
continency, and couereth her incontinencie,
then ſhe taketh his conſtancie,
and couereth her inconſtancie:
then ſhee taketh his ſaith, and couereth



her diffidence: then ſhee taketh
his humilitie, & couereth her pride:
then ſhee taketh his loue, and couereth
her rancour. And ſo taketh one
roabe after another, aud tricketh her
ſelfe vntill ſhee haue put on Ieſus
Chriſt: that is, vntill ſhee appeare in
the ſight of God, like Ieſus Chriſte,
cloathed with his merits and graces:
that God hath no power to be angry
with her, becauſe ſhee commeth ſo
like his Son. This is to put on Ieſus
Chriſt, as you ſhall ſee more liuelie,
vvhen you haue taken a vievv of the
garment, for we are to ſpeak of chriſt
the Garment, and of our putting it
on. There be many faſhions of apparell,
but they are too light, or too heauy,
or to ſad, or too courſe, or to ſtale,
and all weare out. At laſt the Apoſtle
found a faſhion, that ſurpaſſeth them
all: it is neuer out of faſhion, meete
for all ſeaſons, fitte for all perſons,
and ſuch a profitable weede, that the
more it is worne, the freſher it is.



what faſhion haue you ſeene comparable
to this?2. Sam. 10. 4. It is not like the
clothes of Dauids Ambaſſadours,
which couered their vpper parts,1. Sa. 17. 29. but
not their lower partes:2. king. 14. 2. not like Saules
armour, which tried Dauid when he
ſhoulde fight with it. Nor like the
counterfait of Ieroboams wife,Iohn 9. 45. which
diſguiſed her ſelfe to goe vnknowne:
nor like to the old rags of the Gibeonites,
whiche deceiued Ioſua, nor like
the paultrie ſuite of Michah, which he
gaue once a yeare to his Leuite, nor
like the gluttons flaunt,Iud. 17. 10. which ietted
in purple euery daie; nor like the
light clothes whiche Chriſt ſaide are
in kinges Courtes,Math. 11. 8. and make them
lighter that weare them.Luke 16. 19. But it is like
the Garmēt of the high Prieſt,Exod. 28. 21. which
had all the names of the Tribes of
Iſraell, written vpon his breſt: ſo all
the names of the faithfull are written
in the breaſt of Chriſt, and regiſtred
in the booke of his merites:Mal. 3. 16. it is like
Elias Mantell which deuided the waters:2. king. 2. 8.


                     
So hee deuideth our ſinnes and
puniſhmentes, that they whiche are
clothed with Chriſt,Deut. 26. 5. are armed both
againſt ſinne and death. It is like the
Garments of the Iſraelites in the wilderneſſe,
which did not weare: fortie
yeeres together, they wandered in
the deſart, and yet ſaith Moyſes, their
ſhooes were not worne, but their
apparell was as when they came out
of Egypt: So the righteouſneſſe of
Chriſt doth laſt for euer,Math. 17. 2. and hys
mercies are neuer worne out.Heſt. 6. 11. As
Mardocheus ſhined in the kings robes
before the people: So and more glorious
are the faithfull in the robes of
Chriſt before God. When Chriſt
was transfigured vppon the Mount.
Mat. ſaith, that his face ſhined like the
ſunne, and his clothes were as white
as the light:Pſal. 136. 1 So when we are transfigured
into the image of Chriſt wee
ſhall ſhine before other menne lyke
lights: and therefore Chriſtes Diſciles
are ca
                        •
                     lled Lightes,
                     Math. 5. 14. becauſe they



were clothed with light, and ſhined
to the world.
                  
                     Salomon was not ſo glorious in all
his royaltie,Mat. 6. 29. nor the Lillies whiche
are brauer then Salomon, as he which
is clothed with Chriſt, becauſe the
apparell vppon him is better then all
the worlde about him. Therefore if
Dauid ſaide,1. Sam. 1. 14. 
                     Weepe yee daughters of Iſraell
for Saule which clothed ye in purple:
I may ſay, reioyce ye daughters of Iſraell,
for Chriſt which hath clothed
you with righteouſneſſe, as it were
with a veſture, before you come to
the banquet.
                  This is the wedding Garment
without whiche no manne can feaſt
with the Lord.Math. 12. 12 This Garment is called
an Armour, becauſe it defendeth
vs from all the aſſaultes of the deuill
the fleſh,Epheſ. 9. 1. the world, the heat of perſecution,
& the cold of defection. This
Garment is called Light,
                     Rom. 1. becauſe it is
the beautie and glory of them which
weare it.Matth. 6. This Garment is called a



                     kingdom, becauſe none but kinges do
weare it, that is, they are inthroned in
the kingdom of chriſt, & made kings
ouer the world, the fleſh and Sathan:
whiche weare this Garment,Iud 16. 6. like the
hair of Sampſon which while he wore
he was like a king, and all his ennemies
had no power to hurt him.
                  This Garment Paule hath ſent vnto
you, to go before the king of heauen
and earth, a holy Garment, a roiall
garment,Rom. 5. 1. an immaculate garment,
an euerlaſting garment:Rom. 14. 17 a garment
whereof euery hem is peace of conſcience,Math. 9. 20.
euery pleat is ioy in the holy
ghoſt, euerie ſtitch is the remiſſion of
ſome ſin, and ſaueth him which weareth
it. If he which touched the hem
of Chriſtes garment was healed, hee
which weareth the garment, nay hee
which weareth Chriſt himſelfe, ſhall
not hee bee healed of all his ſores,
though he wer wounded from head
to foot? You neede not cloath him
now which ſaith.Math. 25. 43 
                     VVhen I was naked ye



did not cloath me,
                     Math. 21. 8 nor caſt your Garments
in his way,Gen. 9. 23. as they did, when
hee came to Ieruſalem,Luke 10. 34. but take hys
Garmentes, and ſuffer your ſelues to
be clothed,This Samaritan; doth not ſignifie Chriſt, but yet may be reſembled to Chriſt. as Noah did, to couer
your nakedneſſe. As the good Samaritane
put him vppon his owne beaſt,
which was ſpoiled with theeues, and
bound vp his ſores when hee was
wounded. So Chriſt Ieſus mounteth
the faithfull vpon his righteouſneſſe,
& healeth their ſins, as though
he ſhould couer them with his Garments,Gen. 3. 1.
whom the world, the fleſh, &
the deuill haue robbed of their Garmentes,
that is, the righteouſneſſe
whiche they had in Paradice before
the ſerpent came: ſo if wee put on
Chriſt, we are clothed with his obedience,
whereby our wickedneſſe is
couered: we are clothed with his merits
wherby our ſinnes are forgiuen:
we are clothed with his death: wherby
our puniſhment is releaſed, we are
clothed with his ſpirit, whereby our



hearts are mollified and ſanctifikd, &
renued till we reſemble Chriſt himſelfe.
This is the Apoſtles meaning,
to put on Chriſt, as it is vnfolded in
Col. 3. 12.Col 3. 12. Where he bringes forth all
the robes of Chriſt, & ſortes them, &
ſaith, put on mercie, put on meeknes,
put on humility,verſe 20. put on patience, put
on loue, all which before hee called
(the newe man) ſo that to put on
Chriſt, is to put on the new man with
all his vertues, vntil wee be renued to
the Image of Chriſt, which is like a
new man amongſt men. They which
labor to be righteous, and yet beleue
that Chriſts righteouſneſſe ſhall ſaue
them, haue put on Chriſt as Paule
would haue them. We are not taught
to put on Angels, nor ſaintes, nor the
Virgin Mary, nor Paul himſelf, to couer
our ſins with their righteouſnes,
as the Papiſts do, but we are cōmanded
to put on Chriſt, and couer our
ſins with his righteouſneſſe. The body
hath many Garmēts, but the ſoule



hath one garment. Euerie clout will
couer our ſores, but the fineſt ſilke
will not couer our ſinnes. Therefore
when we ſeeme braue to others, wee
ſeeme foule to God, becauſe his eie
is vpon our ſinnes, which lie naked,
when all the reſt is couered, vntil we
put on Chriſt, & then wee heare that
voice, Thy ſinnes are couered. And then
wee haue that bleſſing:Math. 9. 2. 
                     Bleſſed is the
man, whoſe ſinne is couered. So wee are
cloathed and bleſſed togither.Pſal. 32. 1. Yet
this garment is out of requeſt, too
rough for ſome, too graue for others,
too baſe for others. And therefore
in ſteade of putting on Chriſt, they
put him off, in ſtead of welcomming
him,Luke. 1. 37. they diſcharge him, like the Gad
                        •
                     rens,Math. 8. 34.
that they may keepe their
Swine,Matth. 27. 135. that is, their beaſtly pleaſures
whiche hee would caſt into the Sea.
Theſe are like the fooliſh ſouldiours
which ſhould haue made chriſt their
garment, and they caſt lots vpon hys
garments, and deuided them, and ſo



ſpoiled them. So do the papiſts deale
with this garment, they ſay it is not
fit for them, & therefore they breake
it and mangle it, and peece it with
rags of their owne inuentions: they
ſay it is too light, & notable to beare
off the ſtormes of death, and heate of
hell, and therefore choſe rather to
make themſelues garmentes of their
merites, and their Maſſes, and their
penance, and their pardons, and their
pilgrimages:Gen. 3. 7. and 31. like Adam & Eue, which
made themſelues coates of figleaues,
which God deſtroyed again, to ſhew
that when men haue patched al their
leaues of maſſes, of pardōs, of pilgrimages,
and ſatisfactions together, yet
they will not couer their nakedneſſe,
nor keep of the heate of gods wrath,
but are like the curtall skirts of Dauids
Ambaſſadours,2. Sam. 10 4 which hid not
their ſhame. Therfore when we may
goe in our maiſters attire, ſhall wee
ſcrubbe like beggars patched in our
rags? Mine owne garmentes defile



me,Iob. 9. 31. ſaith Iob: Our owne Garments,
our owne righteouſneſſe defileth vs,
for what garmēt, what righteouſnes
haue we of our owne, but that which
like a menſtruous cloath,Eſay 64. 6. which had
more need to be waſhed it ſelfe, then
to wipe that which is foule. Therefore
Chriſt muſt make vs Garments
or elſe when our backes flaunt it like
courtiers, our ſoules ſhall ſtrippe like
beggers.Gen. 9. 20. And the Deuils will ſpore
themſelues like Cham, to ſee our nakedneſſe.
                  Firſt the Father made vs Garmēts
in Paradiſe,Gen. 3. 21. now the ſonne makes vs
Garmentes in the wilderneſſe, naie,
the Sonne is made our Garment, as
Paule ſaith, Chriſt vs made vnto vs
righteouſneſſe:
                     1. Cor. 1. 30. that is, Chriſtes righteouſneſſe,
muſt bee our Garment,
or els wee ſhall bee aſhamed when
our righteouſneſſe doth not reache
to couer our nakedneſſe, but ſtill
ſome part will peepe bare vntill hee
caſt his righteouſneſſe vppon it, and



then all is couered.1. Sam. 17. 40. As Dauid needed
no other armor againſt the Gyant,
then a Sling: ſo we neede no other
garment againſt ſin then Chriſt.
There wanteth nothing but this, to
put it on.
                  Nowe let vs ſee howe to put this
Garment on. Many fumble about it,
like children which had need of one
to put on their clothes. Some put on
Chriſt as a cloake, whiche hangeth
vpon their ſhoulders, and couereth
them when they go abroad to bee
ſeene of men: they can caſt on the
cloake of holineſſe, and ſeeme for a
while as holy as the beſt, but ſo ſoon
as they come home, the cloke goeth
of, and the man is as he was, whoſe
vizard was better then his face. Thus
Hypocrites put on chriſt, as manie
retaine vnto noble men, not to doe
them anie ſeruice, but to haue their
countenaunce. Many put on chriſt
like a hat, which goeth off to euerie
one whiche meetes them: ſo euerie



temptatiō which meets them, makes
them forget what they heard, what
they promiſed, what they reſolued,
and change their waie, as though
they had not repented at all. So the
common people like your ſelues put
on Chriſt, they are zealous, ſo long
as they are in the Church, and beare
their breſtes, and caſt vp their eyes,
like the Publican, when they heare a
ſentence whiche mooues them,Luke 18. 11. as
though they woulde doe no more againſt
that ſaying while they liue.
But the next buſineſſe putteth all out
of mind, till they come to the church
again. Some put on chriſt as a gloue,
which couereth but the hand, ſo they
put on the face of Chriſt, or the tong
of Chriſt, but their hands worke, and
their feete walke, as they did before:
So manie profeſſors of Religion put
on Chriſt, whiche call but for diſcipline
& reformation, that they might
get a name of zeale and ſinceritie, to
couer ſome fault, which they would



not be ſuſpected of. Thus euerie man
woulde couer himſelfe with Chriſt,
but they haue not the skill, or they
haue not the will to put him on.
What will you doe then? Though
the garment be neuer ſo good, yet
it is not good to them that doe not
weare it. For what profite haue we of
the garmēts which we do not weare?
they neither keepe vs from heate
nor colde. Therefore Paule doth
not bring you a garment to laie by
you for the mothes, but hee biddes
you put it on. Heere is the cunning
nowe in putting it on. If Paule had
taught vs this, then you would hearken
vnto him. Well, you ſhall heare
what Paule ſaith to the putting of it
on. Firſt (ſaith Paule) you muſt caſt
away the workes of darkeneſſe,
                     Verſe. 12. 
                     and then
put on the armour of light. Firſt you
muſt put off, and then put on: As the
Eagles feathers will not lie with anie
other feathers, but conſume them,
which lie with them: So the Wedding



Garment will not weare with
filthy garmentes, but ſcornes like the
Arke, that Dagon ſhould ſtand by it.
If any man may not weare womens
apparell for lightneſſe,1 Sam. 5. 8 may he weare
the deuils apparell, and cloth himſelfe
with pride,Deut. 22. 5. with couetouſneſſe,
with enuy, with hypocriſie, with vncleanneſſe,
and when hee is like the
deuil ſit at Gods table?Math. 2. 21. No man (ſaith
chriſt, patcheth a newe peece to an
old Garment, and wilt thou patch an
old peece to a new Garment: God
forbad the people to weare linſey
wolſey,Leui. 19. 19. becauſe it was a ſigne of inconſtancie,
but this is inconſtancie it
ſelfe. He doth not put on chriſt, but
putteth off chriſt,Iob. 19. 23. and putteth on
Beliall,Reu. 3. 15. whiche faſhions himſelfe to
God, and the world too. As Chriſts
coate was without ſeame, ſo they
muſt be without ſtaine that weare it.
For when a man putteth on faire
clothes, hee maketh himſelfe fayre
too, and auoideth euery foule thing,



leaſt it ſhoulde foule his clothes: So
muſt he which putteth on Chriſt: for
the fineſt garment is ſooneſt ſtained.
Therefore when thou haſt put on
this Garment, thou muſt waſhe thy
ſelfe, and picke thy way, and chooſe
thy workes, and handle nothing
that is foule for marring thy clothes,
that is, thou muſt not thinke as
thou diddeſt, nor ſpeake as thou
diddeſt, nor liue as thou diddeſt,
but remember that thou haſt changed
thy Maiſter, and ſerue him with
whom thou art bound.Iude 9. For if God
and the diuell could not agree vpon
Moſes body, for one to haue one
part, and the other another part, but
God would haue all: Much leſſe wil
God agree that the deuill ſhoulde
haue part of the ſoule, which woulde
not yeelde him part of the bodie.
Thus haue you heard what you muſt
put off: now heare how Chriſt muſt
be put on.Reue. 10. 9. As the Angel taught Iohn
to read the booke when he bad hym



eate it: ſo we muſt put on Chriſt, as if
we did eate him, not as the papiſts do
in their Maſſe, but as the meate is
turned into the ſubſtance of the bodie,
and goeth through euerie part of
man: So Chriſt and his word ſhould
goe from part to part, from eare to
heart, from hart to mouth, frō mouth
to hand, till we be of one nature with
thē, that they be the verie ſubſtance
of our thoughtes and ſpeeches, and
actions, as the meate is of our bodie.
This is, to eat Chriſt and his worde,
or els we do not eate them, but chew
them, and when our taſte is ſatisfied,
ſpue them out againe.Epheſ. 3. 30. Thus we muſt
put on Chriſt, for the word ſignifieth
ſo to put him on, as if thou wouldeſt
put him in, that he may be one with
thee, and thou with him, as it were in
a bodie together. As he hath put on
all our infirmities, ſo we muſt put on
all his graces, not halfe on, but al on,
and claſpe him to vs, and girde hym
about vs; and weare him euen as we



weare our skinne, which is alway about
vs. Then there ſhall be no need
of wyers, nor curls, nor perriwigges,
the husbandes ſhall not be forced to
racke their rents, nor inhaunce their
fines, nor ſell their landes, to decke
their wiues.2. King. 2. But as the poore mantle
of Eliah ſeemed better to Eliſha then
all the robes of Salomon, ſo the wedding
garment ſhall ſeeme better then
all the flantes of vanitie, and put euerie
faſhion out of faſhion, whiche is
not modeſt and comely like it ſelf. If
you will know farther how to put on
Chriſt, you ſhall ſee hovve your text
vvil catechiſe you in his three names.
Lord, Ieſus, Chriſt. The Apoſtle
ſeemeth to ſpell out the way vnto vs,
hovv vve ſhould weare this garment.
Firſt, vvee muſt put him on as Lord,
then vvee muſt put him on as Ieſus:
Laſtly, we muſt put him on as chriſt.
Thou muſt put him on as Lord, that
is, thy ruler to commaund thee, and
thy Tutor to gouerne thee, thy maiſter



to direct thee, thou muſt bee no
mans ſeruant but his, take no mans
part againſt him,Act. 4. 19. but ſay with the Apoſtle,
VVhether is it meete to obey God
or you? Thou muſt put him on as Ieſus,Ioſua hath the like name but not from God, nor to that end.
that is, thy ſauiour, in whome
thou truſteſt, thy protector on whom
thou depēdeſt, thy redeemer in whō
thou beleeueſt. Thou muſt not looke
for thy ſaluation from Angell, nor
Saint, nor any thing beſide him. For
the name of Ieſus ſignifieth a Sauiour,Luke 1. 69.
and is giuen to none but him,
and he is not onely called the Sauiour,Iud. 3. 9.
but the ſaluation, in the ſong of
Simeon, to ſhew that he is the onely
Sauiour, for there bee manie Sauiours,
but there can be but one ſaluation:
as there may be many tortures,
& yet but one death. Therfore when
he is called the ſaluation, it implieth
that there is no Sauiour beſide hym.
Thou muſt put him on as Chriſt,Luke 3. 33.
that is,Act. 3. 22. a king to rule, a Prophet to
teach,Heb. 8. 3. a Prieſt to pray and ſacrifice



and pacifie the wrath of GOD for
thee.Mat. 1. 16. For this name Chriſt doth ſignifie
that hee was annointed a king,Heb. 1. 8.
a Prieſt and a Prophet: for man, a
king to rule him, a Prieſt to offer ſacrifice
for him, a Prophet to teache
him, ſo that he putteth on Chriſt as
Lord, whiche worſhippeth none but
him, ſo that hee putteth on Chriſt as
Lord, which worſhippeth none but
him.Gal. 3. 17. Hee putteth on Chriſt as Ieſus,
whiche beleeueth in none but him,
and hee putteth on Chriſt as Chriſt,
which worſhippeth none but him,
beleeueth in none but him, and heareth
none but him. You put on
Chriſt firſt, when you are baptiſed.
then you were ſealed and conſecrated
to his ſeruice, ſo ſoone as you
came into the worlde, you vowed
to renounce the worlde and followe
God: how many haue put on chriſt
thus, and ſince haue put him off againe,
whiche haue broken the firſt
promiſe that euer they made, and



were neuer faithfull to God ſince.
You put on Chriſt againe,Rom. 6. 3. when you
are called and ſanctifieed, that is,
when you caſt off the olde man,
whiche is corrupt with the luſtes of
the fleſhe,Epheſ. 4. 22. the pride of life, and the
cares of this worlde, and put on the
new man, which is regenerat in righteouſneſſe
and holineſſe to the image
of Chriſt, or likeneſſe of Adam in
his innocencie, for to put on the new
man, is to become a newe man, as if
thou were borne againe, and conceiued
of the holy Ghoſt. Of this Iob
ſpeaketh when he ſaith,Rom. 12. 2. 
                     I put on Iuſtice
and it couered me▪
                     
                     Iob. 29. 14. you put on Chriſt
againe,1. Cor. 10. 16 when you receiue this holie
Sacrament, and are partakers of hys
body and bloud, that is, the merites
of his obedience & paſſion by faith,
which heareth him, as if ſhe did ſee
him, and ſeeth him, as if ſhe did feele
him, and feeleth him, as if ſhe did taſt
him, and taſteth him, as if ſhe did digeſt
him, then chriſt is become yours



and dwelleth in you, & feedeth you
with his grace to eternall life, as the
bread and wine ſuſtaineth the lyfe
preſent.
                  Laſtly,Phil. 3. 21. whē you haue put on Chriſt
in theſe three ſortes,1. Cor. 15, 49. whiche is your
Garment for this worlde, after you
ſhall put on Chriſt in heauen, and be
clothed with his glorie, and that ſhal
be your laſt veſture, whiche ſhall neuer
weare out.
                  Thus haue you heard what is meant
by putting on Chriſt, firſt to cloathe
our ſelues with righteouſnes and holineſſe
like Chriſt, and then becauſe
our owne righteouſneſſe is too ſhort
to couer our armes, and legges, and
thighes of ſinne, but ſtill ſome bare
place will peere out and ſhame vs in
the ſight of God: therefore we muſt
borrow Chriſtes Garments,Gen. 27. 15. as Iacob
did his brothers & couer our ſelues
with his righteouſneſſe, that is, beleeue
that his righteouſneſſe ſhall
ſupply our vnrighteouſneſſe, and hys



ſufferinges ſhall ſtand for our ſufferings,
becauſe he came to fulfill the
lawe, and beare the curſe, and ſatisfie
his father for vs, that all which beleeue
in him might not die, but haue
life euerlaſting.Ioh. 3. 16.
                  
                  Nowe I haue ſhewed you this
goodly Garment, you muſt goe to
another to help you to put it on, and
none can put this Garment vppon
you, but he which is the Garment,
the Lord Ieſus Chriſt. Therefore
to him, let vs
praie.
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   