
      
         
            
            
            THE
ABORTIVE
OF AN IDLE
HOVRE:
OR
A CENTVRIE OF
EPIGRAMS.
            
               AND
A MOTTO VPON
THE CREEDE.
By Sr T. VV.
            
               Scribimus indocti, docti
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   poemata paſſim.
            
            
               LONDON
Imprinted by T. D.
1620.
         
         
            
            Vinum, & Vinegrum.
            
               I Neither hang out Buſh nor Signe, t'inuite
            The commers by to taſte, what VVine I ſell:
            T'is new, but hard, the pallat to delight:
            Yet I haue often heard ſome others tell,
            That I haue VVine, ſome much more ſweete then other:
            Beleeue them not, for they may be deceau'd,
            T'were better taſte thy ſelfe, then truſt an other:
            I paſſe not if thou taſte, or taſte not, ſo I leau't:
            It's that I made my ſelfe, t'was neuer bought,
            Many pay deare, for that's exceeding nought▪
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE
Abortiue of an idle
Houre.
            
               Ad Lectorem. Epigr. 1.
Apologia pro Libello.
               
                  THe Epigrams which you ſhall read
               Are ſome good,Sunt bona, ſunt quaedam mediocria, ſunt mala plura, Quae legis hîc: aliter non fit Auite liber: Ep. Mar. moſt part nought,
               Indifferent ſome; or elſe indeed
               A booke, no booke is thought.
            
            
               In Hermaphroditos Anglicanos. Ep. 2.
               THeVirginibus Tyrijs mos eſt geſtare pharetram. Virg. Tyrian maides in ſhooting tooke great pride,
               And always wore their quiuer by their fide;
               Our Brittaine brutes, or rather Monſter-dames,
               Whoſe necks are compaſſ'd with hells yellowe flames,
               I muſt tell troth, though I be ſhent for blabbing,
               They were Steeletto's, for their prid's in ſtabbing.
            
            
               In Druſum. Ep. 3.
               VVHen Druſus waits vpon St. George his day,
               He prays his friends not to moleſt him then,
               For then hee's not his owne man, doth he ſay,
               He's ſo imployd, as other Lordings men;
               The man's ſo farre for being then his owne,
               That Druſus and his clothes alike are knowne.
            
            
               In Leuem. Ep. 4.
               LEuis through much experience vnderſtands▪
               
               Women haue cauſe to fancie falling—bands.
            
            
               
               In Monoculum. Ep. 5.
               VVE deem them craftie, which with one eye look;
               But I dare take my oath vpon—no booke,
               Monoculus did nere deceiue his brother,
               Hee'd ſee with two eyes, if he had another.
            
            
               In Lenonem. Ep. 6.
               LEno proteſts it is not paſt foure yeares,
               Since ſhoe-tie-roſes were in eſtimation;
               And he was one that had the firſt he ſwears,
               T'is like; for he loues ſtill to be in faſhion.
               But for his credit and the time, I'le add,
               He eight years ſince a paire ofNon Roſae mundae, Roſes had.
            
            
               In Leuem. Ep. 7.
               I Will not,Two negatiues make an affirmatiue. no, and that's as much as I,
               This phraſe coſt Leuis hir Virginitie.
            
            
               In Littletonicos. Ep. 8.
               AN auncient tenure Cornage is ye know,
               And heretofore hath bin of more eſteeme:
               Now horns in euery place ſo common grow,
               That men ridiculous this Tenure deeme;
               But Inns-of-Court-men ſhould not Cornage ſcorne,It ſummons them to dinner
               
               For they are much behoulding to the Horne.
            
            
               In Thraſonem. Ep. 9.
               THraſo is loath, that his well-wiſhing friends
               Should ſee his courſes, or know what he ſpends;
               But when to borrow neede doth vrge him, then
               He ſtands not on't,Nouerint vniuerſi. Bee't knowne vnto all men.
            
            
               
               In Allum. Ep. 19.
               ALLus proteſts, that he can drinke no wine,
               He loues it not, t'will make his headpeece light;
               With ale or beere (ſayth he) I'le rather dine,
               Than hurt my ſtomacke, or my wits afright.
               At wine his lipps ſhall not ſo much as ſmacke,
               But you may dayly make him drunke with ſacke.
            
            
               In Quercium. Ep. 11.
               QVercius turns ouer many Phyſicke bookes,
               But doth not practice, yet on water lookes;
               I haue not heard his phyſicke ere ſau'd any,
               But once I heard, he would haue poyſond many.
            
            
               In Lucifugum. Ep. 12.
               LVcifugus was with a Ghoſt ſo haunted,
               That he thought euery place to be enchaunted;
               He could no ſoner moue him to one place,
               But ſtill his Ghoſt had got before his face.
               Lucifugus ow'd mony to his hoſt
               This was his night and day moleſting G.
            
            
               De ſimulachro Thomae Bodlei equitis aurati,
Bibliothecae Oxonienſi dicato. Ep. 13.
               HEre may you ſee though Bodley but in part,
               Apollo's image and Lyſippus art.
               To wiſhe for more then part of him were vaine,
               For all the earth cannot theAnima. whole containe.
            
            
               
               In Orbicularem figuram
mundi. Ep. 14.
               THe world is round, we know, that liue therein,
               T'is round in compaſſe, and t'is round in ſinne.
            
            
               In Magnaſum. Ep. 15.
               MAgnaſus is a man of worthy race,
               His noſe ſtands like a Screene before his face;
               Much worſhip did he loſe of the laſt Queene,
               Becauſe he could not for his noſe be ſeene.
               I heare he hath of late receiu'd ſome grace,
               His Noſe it ſeemes, was in ſome other place.
            
            
               In Thraſonem. Ep. 16.
               THraſo looks big, and mak's his cheeks ſeeme ten,
               As if he would out-face an hoſt of men:
               The fleſh, the deuill, and the world, I know
               He cannot conquer, though he puffeth ſo.
            
            
               In Dronum. Ep. 17.
               VVHere euer Dronus ſups, or dines, or walks,
               He thinks on Dolon, and on Dolon talks;
               He's much indebted vnto him, he ſaies;
               And ſo thinke I, but debt is ta'ne two wayes.
               In debt to him ſayth he? I know he's bound,
               Not for his loue, but t'is for many a pound.
            
            
               In Herguſum. Ep, 18.
               DRunken Herguſus is knowne euery where,
               Al ſpendthrifts know him, ſuch as loue good beere
               Cuckolds, Pandars, and periur'd drabs can tell,
               Hee's ſtrange to none, not ſcant to them in hell;
               
                  
Who knowes him not?Noſce teipſu
                        •…
                     
                   if he be ſtrange to one,
               T'is to himſelfe, himſelfe he ne're hath knowne.
            
            
               In Litorem. Ep. 19.
               LItoris holds him for a ſimple ſwaine,
               That get's not forty pounds a yeare by's wits;
               But he (me thinks) makes ſmall vſe of his braine,
               His ſhifts are bad, nor dainty are his bits;
               Yet thoſe, to whom the man is better knowne,
               Affirme he vſeth all he hath, that's—.
            
            
               In Herguſum. Ep. 20.
               HErguſus, I had almoſt quite forgot
               To aske thee why of late thou art ſo hot;
               I will not blame thy liuer, nor thy heart,
               Thy heate proceeds from ſome inferiour part.
            
            
               In Thraſonem. Ep. 21.
               THraſo proteſts his neighbours goods to couet,
               Is ſinne ſo vile, no crime may be aboue it;
               To wiſh his wife, he ſweares, mauger the Deuill
               Can be no ſinne; for, ſhee's his greateſt euill.
            
            
               In Biberium. Ep. 22.
               BEcauſe I ſayd Biberius was diſcreete,
               In that he vs'd few words when we did meete,
               One fell a laughing, and this ieaſt did breake,
               Biberius drinks vntill he cannot ſpeake.
            
            
               De Inſignibus Oxonienſium. Ep. 23.
               I Neuer did behold ſince I was borne,
               An Oxe or Bull whoſe head had not one horne:
               
                  
The Citizens of Oxforde had of yore
               A Bull that ſcant had halfe a horne, before
               The learned Tribe, which indecorum ſcorns,
               Out of their loue gaue them a paire of HORNS.
            
            
               In Britannicas Amazones. Ep. 24.
               THey ſay a new Plantation is intended,
               Neare or about the Amazonian riuer,
               But ſure that manniſh race is now quite ended;
               O that great Ioue of all good gifts the giuer,
               Wold moue King Iames once more to ſtore that clyme,
               With the Mall-cut-purſes of our bad time.
            
            
               De Corde & Lingua. Ep. 25.
               THe tongue was once a ſeruant to the heart,Non loquitur os ſecundum cor.
               
               And what it gaue ſhe freely did impart;
               But now Hypocriſie is growne ſo ſtrong,
               She makes the heart a ſeruant to the tongue.
            
            
               To his worthy friend Captaine Butler,
Gouernour of Bermuda, or the
Summer Ilands. Ep. 26.
               I Marueil I, what miſchiefes or what euils
               Hath made men call your Iles the Iles of Deuils,
               Is't for the perillousBy reaſon of Rocks, the entrance into thoſe Ilands is very dangeous. Rockes, or for theIn the beginning of that plantation, great ſtore of hoggs were found there. Swine,
               In whom our Lord the Legion did confine?
               What ere it be, let's heare no more complaints▪
               
               So gouerne you, they may be Iles of Saints.
            
            
               In Thraſonem. Ep. 27.
               THinke not amiſſe of Thraſo in your hearts,
               Becauſe he brags, and ſets forth his good parts,
               
                  
For I haue knowne ſome backward to reueale
               That which they loſt, becauſe they did conceale.
            
            
               In Leuem. Ep. 28.
               LEuis was troubled with a iealous man,
               Which long perplex't the ſilly womans mind,
               But taking heart, ſhe ſtudies all ſhe can
               For's iealous humor remedy to find:
               She ſo contriu'd, that through a little chinke
               He ſaw that done, which earſt he did but thinke.
            
            
               In Mortem. Ep. 29.
               DEath, wher's thy ſting? I hope th'art taken downe,
               I feare thee not in Citie, Court, nor Towne;
               Thou need'ſt not boaſt thou rob'ſt men of their breath,
               For he that conquer'd Hell did conquer Death.
            
            
               In Quercium. Ep. 30.
               QVercius queaſie ſtomack feeds on muttons,
               Great eaters ſin (ſaith he) and termes them glutons;
               To thruſt himſelfe out of the count of ſinners,
               One legg of mutton ſerues him minc't ten dinners.
            
            
               De Luna. Ep. 31.
               VVOmen from Luna's cuſtome much doe ſtray,
               She makes hornes monthly, but they e'ry day.
            
            
               In Lenam. Ep. 32.
               LEna was once of gallants much eſteem'd,
               But now ſhe is as one vnworthy deem'd,
               
                  
By thoſe of whom ſhe hath bin often vs'd,
               She is contemned, ſcoft at, and abus'd;
               The reaſon's this; All men affect and wiſh
               To haue the youngeſt fleſh and ouldeſt fiſh,
            
            
               In Terguſum. Ep. 33.
               HOmer did drink, and Homer could not ſee,
               But Homer drunke not out his eyes, like—
            
            
               In Littletonicum quendam. Ep. 34.
               THe morrow next after an Ember Faſt,
               Litoris brags of his laſt nights repaſt;
               Partrich and Pheaſant, tut, with him's no diſh;
               I thinke ſo to, wher's neither fleſh nor fiſh:
               He alway keepes his bed, when he ſups beſt,
               But Morpheus ſtill is maſter of the feaſt.
            
            
               In Allum. Ep. 35.
               INe're did wiſh thee well, thou ſaidſt to day,
               Now therefore Allus marke what I ſhall ſay:
               I wiſh thy noſe for euer may looke red,
               For, vvhen t'is pale (I feare) thou wilt be dead.
            
            
               In Ebrioſum Ep. 36.
               FIe man, ſayth ſhe; but I tell miſtris Ann,
               Her drunken husband is no drunken man;
               For, thoſe whoſe wits are ouercome with drinke,
               Are voyd of reaſon, ſuch are beaſts I thinke.
            
            
               In Petraeam. Ep. 37.
               WHo ſayth Petraea hath no abſtinence?
               Thoſe that ſay ſo, haue but a little ſenſe,
               
                  
For moſt men know, ti's euident and plaine
               That none from Church doth more then ſhe abſtaine.
            
            
               In Thraſonem. Ep. 38.
               THraſo I thinke doth neare of anger dreame,
               Although his Coller ſeems to be extreame.
            
            
               In Lexum. Ep. 39.
               VVHen Sword and Buckler was in eſtimation,
               Lexus ſayth, then a man might haue ſome play;
               But ſince this noble fight grew out of faſhion,
               A boy might kill a man in any fraye:
               Lexus in honour of this ould defence,
               Hacks many aOne end of a Sur-loin of Beife called the buckler peece, by reaſon of a large flat bone in that part. Buckler in an other ſenſe.
            
            
               In Lizam. Ep. 40.
               LIza doth nothing well, her ſiſter ſay's
               But this proceeds from enuie, I can tell,
               For which I muſt her ſiſter much diſprayſe;
               Since many know that Liza drinketh well.
            
            
               In Curuum. Ep. 41.
               VVHen Curuus firſt Siluanus daughter ſaw,
               Her heat of youth his froſtie bloud did thaw;
               Which ſo inflamd the aged mans deſire,
               That he ne're ſtood on portion with her Sire;
               Nor was there cauſe, the match was not ſo bad,
               For with his wife enough (God knowes) he had.
            
            
               In Ventroſum. Ep. 42.
               FOr trees an p
                     •
                  nt-houſes I doe not care,
               As long as you (Ventroſus) preſentare,
               
                  
For in the greateſt ſhow're and ſtorms I tell ye,
               I wiſh not better ſhelter then your bellie.
            
            
               In Litorem. Ep. 43.
               Lye on Litoris, doe, hear's none controules,
               Thou maiſt as freely lye here, as in Poules;
               But now my ſmall friend, that the leſſe men ſay,
               The more they write againſt thee euery day.
            
            
               De Anglis. Ep. 44.
               IT ſeems the Engliſh men are Caniballs,
               For they eat Fooles, and fooles we know are men;
               Such as eate men haue bitter barbarous galls,
               The Engliſh haue ſo, it ſhould follow then.
               
                  Reſolutio.
                  BVt I'le reſolue this doubt equiuocall
                  Some men are Fooles, ſome fooles are men, notA vvhitmeat made of Creame and Rice, called of ſome a Ricemos, of others a Foole. all.
               
            
            
               In Magnaſum. Ep. 45.
               TH'art vaine Magnaſus for to be ſo proud,
               Becauſe ſo many, where thou com'ſt, giue place,
               And moſt of thoſe are of the vulgar croud,
               Yet were they Lords I think, t'were noe great grace:
               For one of better vnderſtanding knowes,
               They giue not place to thee, but to thy Noſe.
            
            
               In Thomanſium Long. Ep. 46.
               TH'art very fitly nam'd Thomanſius Long,
               For with thy name doth well accorde thy nature;
               Long ere thou wilt doe good, or right a wronge,
               Long in thy lyeing, likewiſe longe in ſtature,
               
                  
Th'art long in all, in Nature, ſtature, Name,
               But thou com'ſt ſhort of vertue, and good fame.
            
            
               De Muſis. Ep. 47.
               YE reuerend Poets, now but earth and clay,
               And ye the gloryes of this preſent age,
               Vouchſafe mee leaue with due reſpect to ſay,
               Ye ſeemd to flatter in your ſacred rage,
               Faining the Muſes to be women, when
               Reaſon approues them rather to be men;
               Thoſe Nine, in men are but a nine-fould ſkill,
               Which for the head is the ſupreameſt part
               Doe there inhabit, as vpon a hill,
               Well nam'd Parnaſſus, or the houſe of Art;
               Ther's ſcant nine women wiſe; men nine times nine,
               Then reaſon will, they ſhould be maſculine.
            
            
               In Piſcatorem quendam. Ep. 48.
               
                  OStendam piſcem, quoth a learned Clarcke,
               That ſcornd to vſe his mother tongue in ſchooles;
               A right wiſe ſcholler forthwith got a Barcke,
               And out he goes with all his angling tooles;
               His guide pointing to Heau'n, ere they went farre,
               Cry'd Ecce piſcem, angle for the ſtarre.
            
            
               De Oto. Ep. 49.
               Otus a Mayde both farre and neere hath ſought,
               But cannot come, where he dares ſweare is one;
               I tell him Maydes are common to be bought,
               If they be common then, ſayth he, th'are none.
               T'is true and falſe: But I miſtooke the diſh,
               Otus ment fleſh, and I ment Maydes the fiſh.
            
            
               
               In Thraſonem. Ep. 50.
               THraſo giu's out, he's riding out of towne,
               Yet ſtill I meet him ietting in his gowne;
               Which would haue made me thought it but a brag,
               Had I not knowne he kept a running Nagg:
               But if to ſpeake my conſcience I were bidden,
               He rides not halfe ſo oft, as he is ridden.
            
            
               In Britannicam Amazonem. Ep. 51.
               GOd ſaue you Captaine. Oh I haue miſtooke,
               Excuſe mee Ladie; when I firſt did looke
               Vpon your broad-brymd hat▪ and flaunting feather,
               Thoſe martiall enſignes met in you together,
               Made mee ſuppoſe a Captaine you had beene;
               Your ſex like men I neare before haue ſeene.
            
            
               In Lizam. Ep. 52.
               CRoſſe mee not Liza,Tarlton cut off all his ſkirts becauſe none ſhould ſit vpon them. ne'ther be ſo perte
               For if thou do'ſt, I'le ſit vpon thy ſkerte.
               Thou know'ſt I know thy nimble fingers ioynts,
               Then hold thy tongue, and ſtand not on thyPoynted round. points.
            
            
               In Leuem. Ep. 53.
               TH'Italians ſay, Giue me your wenches fat,
               To make them faire, wee'l quickly finde a meane,
               They'l haue them fat and faire; but wot you what,
               Thou takſt ſuch paines, that thou art carrion leane.
            
            
               In Quoſdam Punctualiſticos.* Punctualliſts Ep. 54.
               I'Le tell a ſecret, if you will not mocke it,
               Some keepe a Kalender worne in their pockit,
               
                  
To note their dayes of buiſnes and delights:
               Others doe beare about a Rowle of knights,
               So punctuall are they; Yet to their diſgrace,
               They haue miſtaken both their Day, and Place.
            
            
               In quendam Tobacciferum. Ep. 55.
               VVHen men are dry, they vſe to call for drinke,
               And ſo they wet their arrid parts, I thinke,
               My huſband bibs, and drinke doth euer cry,
               Yet his drinke doth not moyſten, but doth drye.
            
            
               DeNihil aliud eſt, ſecundum Philoſophos, quàm albi coloris apparentia, quae fit ob intetionem aſtrorum luminis, quae, vbi circulus apparet, denſiſſima ſunt & numeroſiſſima. Eſt via ſublimis, caelo manifeſta ſereno, Lactea nomen habet▪ candore notabilis ipſo: Ouid. Galaxia ſiue Lactea via. Ep. 56.
               PHiloſophers and Poets doe agree,
               A white or milkye wayQuaere de hoc. in heau'n to be:
               T'is well their iudgements there ſo much doe marke,
               For on the earth the wayes of men are darke.
            
            
               In Druſam. Ep. 57.
               DRuſa loues powdring, but ſhe hateth ſalt;
               At firſt this humour ſeemeth very ſtrange,
               Like his who loueth beere, yet hateth mault;
               But Druſa's woman-like, conſtant in chaunge.
               Which maks mee hope, that in her daintieſt fare.
               She may loue ſalt, and hate her powdred haire.
            
            
               In Capiſtra foeminea. Ep. 58.
               TRadition ſayth the Mair's of Oxforde wore,
               A Rope about their necksRopes on or about the head vvas a ſigne of ſubmiſſion. in time of yore
               But now for decencie of later yeares,
               In the Rop's place each Mai'r a Ribbin wears;
               This faſhion women vſe, which maks mee doubt,
               When that came in with them,1. Kings 20. 3
                        •
                     
                   their Ropes went out.
            
            
               
               Ad ſeipſum. Ep. 59.
               NOr pine, nor pranck, in pouerty or wealth;
               Nor curious be, nor careleſſe of thy health;
               To others doe as they ſhould doe to thee;
               Loue th'actiue life, yet not too buſie bee.
               Maturely ponder, eare thou doſt propounde,
               Prepare thy mind to want, and to abound:
               I giue my ſelfe this Counſell, to indeere
               Mee to my ſelfe, ſince to my ſelfe moſt neere.
            
            
               In Corbum. Ep. 60.
               COrbus will not, perſwade him what I can,
               The world ſhould take him for a Gentleman;
               His reaſon's this; becauſe men ſhould not deeme,
               That he is ſuch, as he doth neuer ſeeme.
            
            
               Ad laudem cuiuſdam faeminae Ep. 61.
virtute praecellentis.—
               MEn ſay th'art crooked and exceeding black,
               My eye obſerues not any thing you lack,
               And I eſteeme thee as a precious Iewell,
               In thee is that giu's my affection fewell;
               I loue thee much, what faults ſo ere men finde,
               Becauſe I know thou haſt a beuteous minde.
            
            
               In Lenonem. Ep. 62.
               GOod lawes there be, and Proclamations made
               To force the abſtinence from fleſh in Lent;
               But Leno's appetite is ſo vnſtaide,
               Fleſh he muſt haue, though after he repent;
               I wonder how he keeps worms from his mawe,
               They ſay his fleſh is leane, and freſh, and rawe.
            
            
               
               In quendam—Ep. 63.
               HOneſt Sir Iohn doth to his neighbours cry,
               Forſake the world, and learne the way to dye;
               If this be wholeſome counſell he doth giue,
               Why then makes he himſelfe ſuch ſhift to liue?
            
            
               In Aſſinium. Ep. 64.
               ASſinius weeps ſtill, for he feares to dye,
               As who ſhould ſay, teares did produce his dayes;
               Nay laugh not, till you know his reaſon why,
               Perhaps t'is ſuch, that it will merrit prayſe;
               Singing (ſayth he) portends death to the Swan;
               Why may it not preſage the like to man?
            
            
               Alluſio ad praecedens. Ep. 65.
               THis may be true; For wer't for ioy or ſorrow,
               
                  The Player▪
                   
                  Singer ſung ouer night, and dy'd next morrow.
            
            
               In Mopſam. Ep. 66.
               VVHen Mopſa mee a Noſe-gaye pray's to buye,
               I doe not geſſe her meaning ſuddainely;
               Her Noſe ſo gay is, that I oft ſuppoſe,
               She would not ſell her flowers, but her Noſe.
            
            
               In Galbum. Ep. 67.
               GAlbus, when thou wert young, I knew thee fayre,
               But you are Sun-burnt ſince that time, you ſay;
               That burnt you are, you ſhall not neede to ſweare,
               For none that knows thee will the ſame denaye.
               But many doubt, though you haue cloſely hid it,
               That t'was not Phebus, but t'was Phebe did it.
            
            
               
               In Cornutum. Ep. 68.
               VNtill Cornutus gazed in a glaſſe,* That which the eye ſees not the heart neuer rues▪
                  
               
               He litle thought that he a Monſter was:
               But when he ſaw the truth, he cry'd out then,
               Women haue pow'r to metamorphoſe men.
            
            
               In Aſſinium. Ep. 69.
               TEll me Aſſinius, how it comes to paſſe,
               That thou do'ſt hold in ſuch contempt an Aſſe;
               Knew'ſt thou as much as I, I'de vndertake,
               Thou'dſt loue an Aſſe better for thine owne ſake.* Similis ſimilem petit.
               
            
            
               De Chinenſibus. Ep. 70.
               THe men of China ſay (who are ſo wiſe)
               
                  And all the world, according to their prouerbe. We ſee with one eye, they with double eyes;
               Suppoſe they err not: yet a Chriſtian man
               Sees more with one eye, then with two they can.
            
            
               Ad Lectorem intelligentem. Ep. 71.
               REaders too common, and too many be,
               Hee's tearm'd a Reader, can reade A.B.C.
               But I'le not call for ſuch a Readers ayde,* Duplexeſt hîc ſenſus.
               
               For then poore rymes, you were but ill apayde;
               I onely craue protection from his hands,* Arsnonhabet inimicum praeter ignorantem.
               
               That carps noe more, then what he vnderſtands.
            
            
               Apologia pro ſeipſo. Ep. 72.
               I Pra'y faire Ladyes pard'ne my forward youth,
               If I haue ſlaunder'd you in telling truth;
               You ſhall noe more me thus offenſiue finde;
               But if you mend not, in a worſer kind.
            
            
               
               In Zabidium. Ep. 73.
               I Loue thee not Zabidius,Non amore Zabidi, nec poſſum dicere quare;
               
               Nor can I ſtay ſo long
               To tell thee, why I hate thee thus,
               Thy breath doth ſmell ſo ſtrong.Hoc tantum poſſum dicere, non amo te▪ Mart.
               
            
            
               In Litorem. Ep. 74.
               IF I againſt Litoris ought haue writ,
               I ſhall not need to feare his reading it;
               My youth hath ſeldome ſo much in his ſlopp
               To buy my Booke, wer't in a Brokers ſhopp.
            
            
               Ad Libellum. Ep. 75.
               IF Philomuſus reade you, my rude Rymes,
               You may haue hope to outliue preſent times;
               According to the ſentence he ſhall giue,
               Or looke you muſt to die, or looke to liue.
            
            
               In Lenonem. Ep. 76.
               TIs a great ſigne, that Leno's ſtomack's hot,
               Becauſe hee's noted to loue Lemons ſo:
               But of this reaſon ſome approueth not,
               Who better do his conſtitution know:
               For they affirme, his Lemons got by theft,
               And thoſe are caſt-onesPrieſts Lemons., ſuch as Prieſts haue left.
            
            
               De quatuor Terminis militaribus. Ep. 77.
               IF Souldiers may obtaine foure Termes of warre,
               Muskets ſhalbe the Pleaders, Pikes the Barre;
               And ſince our Termes are rare, get we but one,
               Mars ſhall eate fleſh, Iuſtinian picke the bone.
            
            
               
               In quendam Richardum. Ep. 78▪
               
               DIck went to Dunmowe for aThe old cuſtome was, that whoſoeuer repented not vvithin a yeare after their marriage, they might go to Dunmowe for a flitche of Bacon, and haue it vpon demaund. Bacon flitch,
               And claim'd the cuſtome there: But one replide,
               Although I know you (Sir) exceeding rich,
               And well may pay; you ſhall not be denide,
               So you will fetch your wife, for then I vow
               You ſhall beare hence two ſides of a fat Sow.
            
            
               In Rodulphum. Ep. 79.
               ROdulphus frets, that he is rank't no higher,
               Becauſe (ſayth he) his Title is Eſquier;
               Of the firſtNot Eſquire by honour of bloud. magnitude hee's not, may be
               Some Pippin-Squire, or one of lowe degree.
            
            
               In Aucipem. Ep. 80.
               YE harmles birds, the Fowler now doth watch ye,
               Take heed his charming muſicke doth not catch ye;
               Happy were ye, and moſt ſecure from wronge,
               If that aFiſtula dulce canit, volucres dum decipit Auceps. Fiſtula were in his tounge.
            
            
               In quoſdam Panedentes. Ep. 81.
               YE Rau'nous Eat-breads, had you chaunc't to liue,
               When Chriſt the Loafes did to the hung'ry giue;
               You eat bread ſo, that ſome prophanely thought,
               That Miracle had then beene neuer wrought.
            
            
               In Lenonem. Ep. 82.
               THe Doues will dwell in habitations cleane,
               They thriue not,Aſpicis vt veniant ad candida tecta Columbae. nor delight in any other:
               But thou haſt got a habit ſo obſceane;
               (Which thou deriu'ſt neither from Sire nor mother)
               
                  
Thou dwell'ſt in Houſes (and delight'ſt therein),
               Such as are naſtie with the ſtench of ſinne.
            
            
               In Floram. Ep. 83.
               FLora was ſicke; they ſay ſhe's now amended,
               But wanteth weight her ſicknes ſo impaird her;
               That weight ſhe wanteth ſhall be condiſcended,
               She's now ſo light, that honeſt men diſcard her.
               If ſhe be well, iudge thoſe that haue more ſkill,
               In my opinion ſhe is verry ill.
            
            
               Ad Dominam Sapientiam. Ep. 84.
               EVer young Lady, euer glorious faire,
               T'is ſtrange the ſons of men no more doe court thee▪
               
               Youth, beautie, honour, wealth, vncertaine are
               A month they vexe, if one day they diſport thee;
               How talpiſhe-blind are thoſe, who doe not ſee,
               They nothing haue (Dame Wiſdome) wanting thee?
            
            
               In quoſdam non Ignotos. Ep. 85.
               TH'antipathy of nature in theſe men,
               Deſerue an obſeruation with my pen:
               Two things they loue, greene Leeks and toſted Cheeſe,
               But Hemp they hate, and when they ſee't, they ſneeſe.
            
            
               In non Decimantes. Ep. 86.
               SOme theeues arePirats. water-Ratts, ſomeway-purſ-takers,
               Some Canters are, and other ſome Houſe-breakers;
               Ther's many ſorts of theft, many of theeues,
               The greateſtSacrilegio
                        ••
                      
                     De fures. thoſe, keepe that the Church releeues.
            
            
               
               De Naui ſubmerſa. Ep. 87.
               THe Poaſt brings newes a Ship is ſuncke hard by,At north fleete March 1619. goeing out to the Eaſt Indies
               
               Laden with goods, worth threeſcore thouſand pounds;
               T'were rude in me, to giue the Poaſt the lye,
               Yet graunt me leaue to ſhew, I haue ſome grounds,
               He talks of Goods,Chriſto in nauicula (quamuis dormiente) non perierunt. Mar. 4. 38. if one * Good were therein
               She had not ſuncke, but ſee the weight of ſinne!
            
            
               In Cornutum. Ep. 88.
               THe time hath been, thou weart a ſucking Calfe,
               And then thy mother daily vſ'd to beare thee;
               But when thou wert a weanling, halfe in halfe,
               Thy weight encreaſ'd, and then thy Sire did reare thee;
               But now th'art growne an Oxe, I know not one
               Can beare thy Horns; thou art ſo monſtrous growne.
            
            
               Ad Floram. Ep. 89.
               THe vſe of Maſks I cannot but commend,
               To keepe the beautie from the ſcorching Sun;
               But Flora I would know, what you intend,
               Whether you feare the Moone, when day is done;
               For I haue heard, that duly euery night
               You weare a Maſke, to ſmooth, but not to white.
            
            
               De ſuffocatione Matricis. Ep. 90.
               BElla is much afflicted with the Mother,
               No Phyſick can her mind's content reſtore;
               A contrary diſeaſe troubles her brother,
               Of ſome the FatherDolor patris tearmd; which lyes ſo ſore
               Vpon his heart, and thence not to be driuen
               Till he may ſay, the Father is in heauen.
            
            
               
               In Leuem. Ep. 91.
               T'Is white and red that moſt delights the eye,
               That cheek's ador'd, where thoſe two colours lye;
               But thou look'ſt green as leeks, or greeneſt glaſſe,
               Which hue in thee, confirms all fleſh is graſſe.
               Greene cures greene, conceiue me in a word.
               For thee nought's better then a Green-gooſe—
            
            
               Ad Senatores Lond. Ep. 92.
               GRaue Senators, add to your Roy'l Exchange, (pleaſure
               OneYou may call it Northſtreete. window more, through which your eyes with
               From thence may ſee your Feildes, and leuell range
               Of your young Plants; oh take not ſo much leaſure
               For a good worke, which had beene done (ſome ſay)
               Longe ſince, had not aQuaere de hoc. Stile ſtood in the way.
            
            
               De quodam iocoſo. Ep. 93.
               A Merry Greeke ſet vp a Si quis, late,
               To ſignifie a ſtranger come to towne,
               Who could great Noſes, and their heate abate;
               His lodging, ſuch an Inne, the day ſet downe,
               The hugeſt Noſes thither made repaire,
               But Leech found none, they made mine hoſt to ſtare.
            
            
               Of the Trees and Walkes in Moore-Fieldes. Ep. 94.
               YE vpright Formaliſts,Thinke vpon Midletons water. and grauelld walks,
               Of you the Spaniard, Dutch, Italian talks;
               So talke they of your Citty's great Infectour,
               Old More-Ditch and condemne the works directour
               That More-Ditch is not leſſe Ditch, or more water,
               To cleanſe the filth of thoſe,The Cutthroates of Whitecroſſe-ſtreet 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   that catle ſlaughter.
            
            
               
               In Vulpinum. Ep. 95.
               VVlpinus twice was ſicke, twice made his will,
               (With no intent, that then ſhould be his laſt)
               Gaue all to thoſe, who bore him no good will,
               Which well he knew, but policie forecaſt:
               That hope of gaine did gaine thoſe men reſpect,
               Whom all the world would otherwiſe neglect.
            
            
               In Potatores.
Ep. 96.
               YE guſling drunkards, I do much admire,
               Your throats weare not, nor that your arms do tyre
               In ſwallowing drinke, and lifting double Iuggs,
               Which fright my ſenſes, as the ſight of buggs;
               
                  O Guttur-Laine, how many ſorts of drinke,
               Run poaſt through thee, as water downe a ſincke?
            
            
               In temporis profuſores.
Ep. 97.
               THe world is ful of prodigall expenders,
               The borrowers are more then are the lenders;
               Thoſe Prodigalls commit the higheſt cryme,
               Who waſt their liues in vaine expence of time.
            
            
               In quendam morbum equinum.
Ep. 98.
               THe'rs one diſeaſe in country and in London
               Hath men and horſes ye, and women vndon;
               There cannot ſure a more contagious thing come
               Then this diſeaſe that ſpreads o're all the Kingdome;
               I dare not nam't leaſt Prides pyes in their paſſions
               Chatter againſt mee. Oh horſes! oh the Faſhions!
            
            
               
               In quoſdam Tubicinatores.
Ep. 99.
               YE roaring beggers, tell mee what you meane,
               To ſpend each Chriſtmas ſo much winde, to gleane
               Gratuities from men. O come not neere
               Where I abode, or whiſper in my eare;
               Be ſure your tongues with modeſtie be tipt,
               And then I'le tell you, beggers muſt be whipt.
            
            
               In Zoilum. Ep. 100.
               MY Booke is ſhort ſayth Zoilus, What then?
               I wiſh it ſhort, and ſweet to other men.
            
            
               Or thus. Ep. 77.
               IF Souldiers may obtayne foure Termes of warre,
               Muſkets ſhall be the Pleaders, Pikes the Barre,
               For blacke Bagges, Bandeleers, Iackets for Gownes,
               Angels our fees, wee'l take no more crackt Crownes.
               FINIS.
            
         
         
            Libellus.
            IF any aſke me now, whoſe booke I am,
            I cannot anſwere without ſignes of ſhame;
            For he that owns mee, very often ſaith,
            I am the worſt of all the bookes he hath,
            And which more grieues me, calls me triuiall rymes,
            Th'vntimely iſſue of his idle times.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A
MOTTO VPON
THE CREEDE.Nullum ſimile eſt idem. Ariſt
            
            
               KIng DauidsPſal. 14. 1. foole in paths of Athiſts trod,
            Denying him whom—I beleeue in God,
            
            Nay more ye Athiſts know (although it ſpight ye)
            
               I'le euer truſt in— The Father Almightie:* 2 Sam. 24. 13
            
            Nor feare I peſtilence, nor ſword, nor dearth,
            
               Confeſſing him— Maker of Heau'n and earth.* Rom. 8. 27.
            
            I'ts thou O Lord, the hearts of men that tr'yſt,
            Thou know'ſt my faith in thee—And Ieſus Chriſt,
               * 1 Corin. 16. 13.
            
            Mediat my ſinnes (or elſe I am vndone)
            Sweet Chriſt,1 Tim. 2. 5. with God, thou art—His onely Sonne,
            
            All men O God, thy mercie muſt recorde,
            Who mad'ſt vs, ſlaues to ſinne,1 Tim. 1. 15. free by—Our Lord;
            
            Which with aMat. 1. 16. bitter welcome was receau'd
            Into this World,* Mat. 1. 20. O Chriſt—Who was conceiu'd
            
            Not by the Carnall act of man, but moſt
            
               Miraculouſly— By the Holy Ghoſt:* Mat. 26. 48.
            
            Nor ſtayd God here, nor did his mercie vary,
            
               Chriſt was for vs— Borne of the Virgin Marie:
            When he conſummated each worke and wonder,
            Moſt innocent, for vs—He ſuffered vnder
            
            Th' accurſed Iewes, through Iudas that falſe mate,
            And the conſtrained doome of—Pontius
               Mat. 26. 48. 
               Pilate:
            
            And more for vs was buffited,Mat. 27. 24. 28. enui'd,
            Reuil'd,* 67. diſdain'd, and laſt—Was crucify'd:
            
            
               35. Ioſeph of Arimathea then (inured
            To works of mercy) beg'd his body—Dead,
               * Mat. 27. 58. 
               and buried:
            
            The Lord of life; would all our ſinnes had ended,
            And beene engrau'd with him, when—He deſcended
            
            (As we beleeue, and this our Creed doth tell)
            Into the graue, or pit, or—Into hell:
            
            
               Pſal. 68. 18. Captiuitie led captiue,* 
                     〈…〉
                  
                Death in chaine
            
               
               And for vs men— The third day roſe againe
            And by his reſurrection from the bed
            Of ſoules deceal'd,* Mat. 27. 63. 28. 6. rayſ'd mankind—From the dead:
            
            And rotten works of ſinne, talk't with th' Eleu'nHeb 9. 14.
            
            
               Gaue them a chardge— Aſcended into heau'n:Rom. 6. 2.
            
            But not as man,* Mat. 28. 9. who out of ſight forgetteth
            Their ſuits,Mar. 16. 14. and wants are abſent, ſtill—Hee ſetteth
            
            Cloſe by our God his heau'nly father, and
            For ſinners interceads—On the right hand
            
            Of maieſty inceſſantly,* Mat. 26. 64. and rather
            Then Saints and Angells, begs—Of God the father
            
            Forgiu'neſſe of all ſinnes, t'is he can right ye
            O ſinnefull ſonnes of men, eu'n he th'—Almightie:
            
            Who then wouldEph. 4. 30 greiue him? who ſo ſottiſh he
            To ſay hee's not in heau'n—From thence ſhall be
            
            The ſecond time (till when he will not budge)
            Deſcend from heau'n his Throne, and—Come to iudge
            
            WithMat. 25. 34. 41. 
               Ite or Venite ſuch as led
            
               Liu's good or ill— Both the quicke and the dead.
            And though he's now in heau'n, we muſt not grieue in,
            His corp'rall abſence; now doe—I beleeue in
            
            The Com'forter his ſpiritIohn 14. 16. gainſt whom an hoſt
            Is weake,* Rom. 8. 2. ſo pow'rfull is—The holy Ghoſt:
            
            Satan ſhall neuer leaue mee in the lurch
            Whilſt I am branch of—The Catholicke Church:
            
            Let Chriſtians learne to liue in1 Theſſ. 5. 13 peace and vnion,
            In zeale to imitate—The Communion
            
            Of heau'ns rich Citizens, wher's noe complaints
            Noriarrs of Angells, Cherubs nor—Of Saints:
            
            Ther's loue, and bliſſe, andHeb. 12. 14. peace with ſo much eu'neſſe,
            That they ne're one another aſke—Forgiueneſſe
            
            Then let's not ſpeake, but doeMat. 34. 46. the deeds that wins
            The loue of God, and the full pard'ne—Of ſinnes:
            
            So when we dye, or greiue, ther's a refection,
            Life after death, ioy by—The reſurrection
            
            
               
Nor ſhall we then, though low doth lie the head,
            Be ranck't amonge the number—Of the dead:
            
            This is a comfort ſweete, and neuer waſting,
            To be aſſur'd of—The life euerlaſting;
            
            
               Theſſ. 5. 17. Pray'rs may doe much, therefore let Preiſt and lay men,
            For this great bleſſing knit vp all with—Amen.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   