
      
         
            
            
            Verus Pater,
OR
A bundell of Truths. Containing a Prognoſtication, neceſſary at all
times, ſhewing Phyſicall precepts, and rules of
good husbandry, with ſome other Aſtronomicall
rules fit to be obſerued.
            And dedicated to the ancient memory of old Erra-Pater, and
his honeſt meaning.
            
            Printed at London for T. L. dwelling on ſnow-hill. 1
                  •••
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
Verus Pater,
Heath of Body.
         
            Part. 1. The Naturall Compoſition
of mans Body.
            
               EVery mans naturall body
is compounded and made
of ſeauen naturall things,
that is to ſay, of Elements,
of Temperaments, of Humors,
of Members, of Powers, of Operations,
and Spirits.
            
            
               Expoſition of Elements.
               AN Element being a firſt beginning, is
a thing pure and ſimple, of which all

things are made, & into which all things
are reſolued, and not diſcernable by the
outward ſenſes, being the leaſt part of
the thing made thereof; and of Elements
there are only foure, as Fire, Aire, Water,
Earth.
               
               
                  Fire, is next the Moone, and of operation
hot and dry, but moſt exceedeth in
heate; and the vertue is to moue matter
to generation, to ſeparate things of diuers
kindes, and to ioyne things of like
kinds together: it doth ripen, digeſt, mixe,
and open.
               
                  Aire, is next the fire, it is hot and moiſt,
but eſpecially moyſt: The vertue is to
make things receiue ſhape naturally or
accidentally; it cooleth the burning of the
heart, and maketh al mixt bodies penetrable
and light.
               
                  VVater, is next the Aire, it is cold and
moiſt, but moſt cold: The vertue is to
ioyne together things of diuers kinds, to
coole the violence of the fire, and to gath
                     •
                  r
together things which are diſperſt.
               
                  Earth, is next vnto the VVater; it is
dry and cold, but moſt dry: The vertue is
to harden bodies, and make them retaine
ſhape.
            
            
               
               Expoſition of Temperaments.
               
                  TEmperaments (which are the mixture
of the Elements beforeſayd) are nine,
that is to ſay, eight vnequall, & the ninth
equall: Of the eight vnequall, foure are
ſimple, and foure are compound. The
foure ſimple ace, Hot, Cold, Moyſt, Drie;
the firſt two being actiue, the latter paſſiue.
The foure compound are, Hot and
Moyſt, Hot and Dry, Cold and Moyſt,
Cold and Dry. Now the ninth equall
Temperament is either generall or ſpeciall;
if generall, then it is when there is an
equal proportion of the foure Elements,
and no more of one then of another: If
ſpeciall, then when the Elements are
proportioned as euery kind doth require,
be it man, beaſt, or plant. To theſe you
may adde the ſecond qualities, which are
deuided into two branches, either touchable
or not touchable: if touchable, they
are ſoftneſſe, hardneſſe, ſmoothneſſe,
roughneſſe, toughneſſe, bricklenes, lightneſſe,
heauineſſe, thinneſſe, thickneſſe,
ſmallneſſe, and groſſeneſſe. If they be not

touchable, then they appertaine to the
ſenſes, as noiſes to hearing, colours
to ſeeing, odors to ſmelling, &c. which
truly marked, will diſcouer any ſickneſſe.
            
            
               Expoſition of Humors.
               THe humors in man are foure, firſt
Blood, which is of the nature of the
Aire, and ſweete in taſte. Secondly,
Fleame, which is of the nature of water,
and wallowiſh in taſte. Thirdly, Choller,
which is of the nature of fire and bitter
in taſt. And laſtly, Melancholly which
is of the nature of the earth, and ſowre
in taſte. Now though theſe are generally
ouer all the body, yet they haue their particular
places, as blood about the heart,
fleame in the braine, choller in the Liuer,
and melancholly in the ſpleene; Blood
nouriſheth, fleame moueth, choller emptieth,
and melancholy filleth.
            
            
               Expoſition of Members.
               MEmbers are of two kinds, either
Semblable, or Inſtrumentall; if Semblable,
                  
then being deuided into parts, each
part is alike in ſubſtance to the whole, &
haue but one name with the whole, as
Fleſh, Bone, Senewe &c. If Inſtrumentall,
then being made of parts ſemblable
and deuided, the parts are not alike, nor
haue one name with the whole; as Head,
Hand, Foote, &c. And of theſe inſtrumentall
members foure are moſt principall,
as the Braine, the Heart, the Liuer, and the
Genitals: the firſt three preſeruing the
particular body, the laſt, the whole kind;
alſo from the Braine ſpryngeth the ſynewes,
from the heart the arteries, from
the Liuer the veynes, and from the genitalls,
the veſſells of ſéede.
            
            
               Expoſition of Powers.
               THe powers ruling in man are thrée;
The firſt Animall, & procéedeth from
the braine, giuing by the ſynewes, féeling
and moouing to the whole body; The
ſecond Vitall, and proceedeth from the
heart, giuing by the arteries, life and ſpirit
to the whole body. The third Naturall,
and proceedeth from the Liuer, giuing

by the veines nutriment to the whole body:
and from this power naturall iſſueth
foure other powers, as the power Attractiue
which draweth ſuſtenance to nouriſh;
the power Retentiue, which keepeth
it receiued; the power Digeſtiue which
digeſteth it; and the power Expulſiue
whereby it auoyds excrements.
            
            
               Expoſition of Operations.
               OPerations are the actions procéeding
from the powers, as from the
power Animall proceeds the operation
to diſcerne, to moue, and to féele: from
the power Vitall proceeds the operation
to reſtraine and to looſen the heart: and
from the power Naturall procéedes the
operation to ingender, to increaſe, to
nouriſh, to deſire, to drain, to change, to
digeſt, to retaine, and to expell. Now
theſe operations are either voluntary,
or not voluntary: The voluntary are
thoſe which a man may further or hinder
at pleaſure, as going, ſtanding or lying
downe; and thoſe not voluntary, are they
which depend not on the will of man, but

are done of their owne accord, & naturally,

                     〈◊〉
                   the moouing of the heart, paſſage of
the blood, beating of the pulſe, & ſuch like.
            
            
               Expoſition of Spirits.
               A Spirit which is the fine, pure, cleare,
and ayerie ſubſtance of man, is deuided
into two kinds, the Spirit Animall,
which giueth feeling and mouing vnto
man, and hath his pallace in the braine,
being continually watered and nouriſhed
with the caule thereof; and the Spirit
Vitall, which is the cauſe of all the
naturall heate in the body, and hath his
pallate in the heart, being nouriſhed and
preſerued partly by breathing, and partly
by blood. And theſe ſeauen thus treated
of, being preſerued in their true force and
vertue, man is euer ſound and perfit; but
corrupted or troubled, the body falls into
moſt mortall ſickneſſe.
            
            
               What impayreth mans health.
               THe things which impayre mans
health, are accounted not naturall,

and they are fire, as Ayre, Meate and
Drinke, Moueing and Reſt, Sleepe and
watching, emptines and fulneſſe, and the
Affects of the minde: any of which diſorderly
applyed, bring ſickneſſe; but orderly
vſed, they doe preſerue the body. To
theſe may be added other three, as Cauſes,
the Sickneſſe, and Accidents. The cauſes
are euill affects going before, and promouing
ſickneſſe; and they are of two
kinds, as internall, which breed within
the body, and externall, as thoſe without,
as heate, cold, or wounds.
               Sickneſſe is an euill Affect againſt nature,
and is of three kinds, the firſt in
parts alike, the ſecond in parts inſtrumentall,
and the third in both. The firſt is
ſimple, as when one quality aboundeth;
or compound, as when diuers do exceede.
               The ſecond is an euill conſtitution,
knowne by the ſhape, number, quantity,
or ſite of the member diſeaſed.
               The third a diuiſion of the vnity, as a
fracture in the bone, a wound or vlcer in
the fleſh, a rupture in the veines, a convulſion
in the ſynewes, & an excoriation
in the skinne.
               
                  
Againe, ſome ſickneſſe is called long
ſome ſhort and ſharpe; the firſt is tedious
but hopefull, the latter dangerous.
               There is Sickneſſe by it ſelfe, and
ſickneſſe by conſent; the firſt troubling
the member in which it is, the other going
from one member to an other, as
from the ſtomack to the head, or from the
head to the eie, &c.
               To euery Sickneſſe belongeth foure
times, the beginning of the ſickneſſe, the
increaſing, the ſtate, and the declination.
               Laſtly, for the ſignes of ſickneſſe they
are knowne foure ſeuerall wayes; as firſt
by inſeparable accidents, as ſhape, number,
quantity, and ſite of the part diſeaſed:
Secondly, by alteration of quality;
thirdly, by the hindrance or trouble of
any action; and laſtly, by the vrine and
excrements.
            
            
               Vſe of Phyſicke helpes.
               FIrſt, it is to bee vnderſtood that the
cure of all diſeaſes conſiſts in Bleeding,
Purging, Bathing, and Giuing Fire;
and in any of theſe conſider whether it

be to keepe the body in health, or for the
preſent cure of any part diſeaſed.
               If to keepe the body in health, then
conſider the ſtate of the body, as whether
it be in youth, at mans eſtate, in age,
or elſe old age, then the complection, as
hot, and dry, cold, and moyſt; then the
conſtitution, as groſſeneſſe, or leanneſſe;
and laſtly, the time of the yeare, as the
ſpring which is the beſt, the Summer
euill, Harueſt indifferent, and Winter
naught.
            
            
               Of Bleeding.
               TOuching bleeding, it is meete the body
be ordered & prepared thereunto, as
by a preparatiue giuen by the counſaile
of the Phiſitian, to prepare the humors;
which if time will not allow, then giue a
Gliſter ouer night, and open the veine in
the morning, and faſting, an houre or two
after the riſing of the Sun, auoyding by
all meanes poſſible, the howres of Saturne
and Mars. As for the quantity, the
melancholly man may looſe moſt blood,
the Sanguine leſſe then ye Melancholly;

the Chollericke leſſe then the Sanguine,
and the Flegmaticke leaſt of all. After
bleeding drinke a hearty draught of claret
wine with a toſt, and vſe meates of
light digeſtion for three dayes after, and
in that ſpace abſtaine from riding, running,
and leaping, vaulting, wreſtling,
fencing, tennis, bowling, bathing, and venery.
               If you will bleed according to age,
then let blood from the age of 14. to 26.
yeares, in the firſt 7. dayes of ye age of the
moone: from 26. to 38. in ye ſecond 7. daies
of the age of the moone: from 38. to 52.
in ye third 7. dayes of the age of ye Moone:
from 52. to 64. in ye fourth 7. dayes of the
age of the Moone.
               If to bleed after complexions, let the
chollericke blood, when the Moone is in
Cancer, Scorpio, or Piſces; the Flegmaticke
when the Moone is Aries, Leo, Sagittarius;
the melancholly when ye Moone
is in Gemini, Libra, or Aquarius; the Sanguine
in Taurus, Capricornus, or any ſigne
before named.
               The ſecond preparation for health,
which is purging, is vſed three ſeuerall

wayes, as by electuary, by potion or pill,
which generally may be done when the
Moone is in Cancer, Scorpio, or Piſces,
but particularly to purge by complexion,
let the melancholly purge when the
Moone is in Gemini, Libra, or Aquarius;
the chollericke or Flegmaticke, when the
Moone is in Cancer, Scorpio, or Piſces: &
for the preparing of the body let it be, 3.
5. or 7. dayes before, kept warme, cloſe,
from ayre, and ſtirre vp and downe in ye
chamber, till the medicine haue done working.
               To theſe may be added other euacuations,
as neeſing or gargariſmes, which
would bee tane when the Moone is in
Cancer, Leo, or Scorpio; vomits, which
would bee tane when the Moone is in
Cancer, or Aries; and gliſters which
would be adminiſtred when the Moone
is in Aries, Taurus, or Capricornus, and
the planet not retrograde.
               The third preparation for health is bathing,
which if it be for cleanlineſſe, let ye
Moone be in Libra, or Piſces; if for groſſeneſſe
of body, let the Moone be in Aries,
Leo, or Sagitarius; if for drineſſe of body,

let the Moone bee in Cancer, Scorpio, or
Piſces. After bathing goe to a bed with
warme and dry ſheets, and let the body
be wel chafed with dry cloathes. To this
bathing may be added ſweating, with the
like obſeruations in euery circumſtance.
               The cure of bodies diſeaſed muſt carry
all theſe conſiderations, the age of the
party diſeaſed, his ſtrength and complexion:
then in the diſeaſe conſider the beginning,
the increaſe, and the declination:
whether it be vniuerſall ouer the whole
body, or particular in a member; then the
nature of the diſeaſe, the quality of the
medicine, the manuall operation & the
inward adminiſtration.
               Laſtly, in caſe of euery deſperate cure,
outwardly Fire is to be giuen, and the giuing
of fire is called Cauterizing, which
is to be done two ſeuerall wayes, the firſt
actuall, the latter potentiall: the actuall
cauterizing is done by inſtrument or hot
iron, made according to the member offended,
either ſharpe to ſliue, or round to
open: this ſtoppeth corruption of members,
and ſtancheth blood, prouided the
ſynewes, cords and ligaments be not

toucht; and the beſt inſtruments for the
ſame are of gold, or ſiluer, ye next copper,
and the worſt iron.
               The Potentiall cauterizing is by medicine,
as medicins coroſiue, putrefactiue,
or cauſticke: for coroſiues they are either
ſimple or compound: ſimple coroſiues are
Roch-allume burnt or vnburnt, Lyme,
red Corrall, pouder of Mercury, &c. Compound
are Vnguentum Apoſtolorum,
Vnguentum Aegiptiacum, Vnguentum
Ceraceum, &c.
               
               Medicines putrefactiue are Arſnicke,
Refalgar, Cryſocollo, Aconitum, &c.
               Medicines Cauſticke are ſtrong Lye,
Vitrioll, Aqua fortis, &c. and of theſe, Coroſiues
are weaker then Putrefactiues, &
Putrefactiues weaker then Cauſticks: Coroſiues
worke in the ſoft fleſh, Putrefactiues
in hard fleſh, and Cauſticks breake
the ſkinne.
            
            
               The number of bones in a mans body.
               IN the head be nine bones, in the noſe
two, in the vpper chap eleuen; in the
neather chaps two, behind the chaps one;

the teeth are thirty, in ye chine are thirty,
in the breaſt ſeuen, in ribs twenty foure,
in the necke two, in the ſhoulders two,
from the ſhoulder to the elbow in each
arme one, from the elbow to the wriſt in
each arme two; in each hand eight, aboue
the palme foure, in the fingers of each
hand are fifteene; in the huckles two, in
the thighes two, in each knee one, from
the knee to the ſtobbe in each legge two,
in each anckle one, in each héele one, in
each ſole foure: in the toes foure & twenty:
ſo that the whole number, excepting
griſtles and appendixes to the greater
bones are two hundred forty foure.
            
            
               The number of all the principall veines in
a mans body, which may be opened on
ſpeciall occaſions.
               IN the midſt of a mans forehead is one
veine, behind his eares two; in the temples
two, vnder the tongue two, in the
necke two, in the arme foure, one leading
to the head, another to the heart, the other
to the Liuer, and the laſt to the milt:
betweene the fingers one, in the ſides

of women: bathe oft in cold water the
hands, face and mouth, and ſometimes
the whole body, and by vſe of ſugar-candy,
breake and auoyd all fleagme morning
and euening.
               In Autumne or Harueſt, bee clad as
in the Spring, and let blood or purge as
you haue occaſion; eate all wholſome and
ſtrong meates, and drinke ſtrong wines
with moderation, abſtaine from fruite,
bathe not at all, and ſléepe not after dinner;
keepe the head warme, the ſtomacke
reaſonably filled, and the body from violent
labour.
               In Winter keepe the body as warme
as may be, eate ſtrong meates and luſty,
drinke ſtrong wines and full, vſe now
and then ſpices, ſléepe moderately, and
labour ſoundly.
            
         
         
            
            Verus Pater.
Wealth of Fortune,
Or Rules of good Husbandry.
            
               Particular ſeaſons to doe Rurall
buſineſſe in.
               THe particular obſeruations for any
huſbandly buſineſſe, is to know
the ſtate of the Moon, and in what
ſignes ſhe is vnder, for ſo the work
proſpereth or decayeth. Therefore euery
carefull man or woman, muſt ſow their
ſeedes or graine, in moyſt ground when
the Moone is decreaſing, and in dry
ground when ſhee is increaſing, and vnder
Aries, Cancer, Scorpio, Libra, Sagittarius,
Capricornus, or Piſces.
               
               Plant and graft trees when the moon
is vnder Taurus, Leo, or Libra, either in
March or Aprill, October or Nouember,
the weather open, and the Sunne ſhining.
               
                  
Dreſſe your Vines in the ſame monethes,
when the Moone is at the full, &
vnder Taurus, Leo, or Scorpio, but not
earlier or later, for feare of bleeding,
which is moſt dangerous.
               Geld your Cattell from the laſt quarter
to the change, and either in the ſpring
or Fall; for the Summer breedes the magots,
& the Winter cauſeth ſwelling and
impoſtumations; and let the moone bee
vnder Aries, Sagittarius or Capricornus,
               
               Sheare ſheepe from Iune till the end
of Iuly, and the moone increaſing.
               Mowe hay in Iune and Iuly: reape
Corne in Iuly and Auguſt, immediately
after the full moone.
               Fell Timber for building, in Aprill &
May, when the Moon is in the laſt quarter;
and fuell in any time of the Spring
or Fall, and the Moone increaſing.
               Plaſh hedges, or cut the vndergrowth
of any young wood in the ſpring or fall,
the moone increaſing, and vnder Aries or
Libra.
               
               Put your Stallion to your Mares in
the moneths of Aprill or May, and the
Moone increaſing, and weane your

Foales in the full onely.
            
            
               The particular duties of euery Moneth.
               IN Ianuary let out the Plough, either
to fallow light earthes, or to plow ſtiffe
beane earthes; cut downe timber that it
may not chinke or r
                     ••
                  e; Stub vp rough
paſtures, and lay ſmooth your medowes?
dig your gardens to prepare the mould;
and trench in your meanuce: vpon your
hiues and trim them, bare the rootes of
fruite trees from the earth, break vp your
lay ground, and haue a carefull eye to the
ſheepe fold, for Ewes of the Fallowes
are now yeaning and in danger.
               In February ſow your beans and mixed
great pulſe, cleanſe your trees of moſſe
and your hedges of Caterpillers, proyne
your fruit trees, lay quickſets, plant Roſes,
or what elſe beareth prickes, graft
trees, ſlippe branches, and ſet them, and
plaſh and proyne quickſets.
               In March ſow fitches, and ſmall pulſe,
oates, and in name, barley: in the beginding
plant and grafte fruite trees, renew
thoſe roots that were bared in Ianuary:

with freſh earth; at the latter end begin
to ſow barley, and if the ſeaſon ſerue, carry
out your meanure. Now begin your
kitchin Garden, ſow your earlieſt ſéedes,
and remooue the ſlippes of thoſe flowers
that were planted in September and
October.
               In April make an end of your Barley
ſéede, ſow Hempe and flaxe, make your
Garden perfit, and ſow all ſorts of pothearbes,
ſlip hearbes and ſet them, ſet vp
your Vines, and plaſh and trim all your
curious fruite trees: it is now good to
graft all outlandiſh fruit, and to plant &
ſow their ſtrange flowers.
               In May ſow Barley vpon hot ſand
ground: plant Cowcumbers, Gourds &
Mellons, ſlip your Gilliflowers, and ſet
them in a bed thicke and cloſe together:
now Summer-ſtire all ſuch land as you
fallowed in Ianuary, and fallow ſuch
land as was not then to be plowed; now
apply your meanuring, and as the ſeaſon
will ſerue, bring home fuell, Timber
and Lynſell, and bee ſure to make good
your fences.
               In Iune ſheare your ſheepe, mowe

your low meddowes, plant, graft, or ſet
any hearb, flower, or fruit that is tender:
make an end of Summer ſtirring, and
turne all your meanure into the mould;
now fould your ſhéepe, and bee ſure to
make them beate off the dew with their
feete, before they beginne to feede in the
morning.
               In Iuly cut downe your high meddowes,
re-plant hearbes you would not
haue ſéede, begin to foyle your Summer
ſtirring, and ſtirre your latter fallowing;
gather flowers and preſerue them: looke
vpon your Rie, and if the eares beginne
to hang downeward; ſheare it, and by all
means clenſe your Barley from thiſtles,
wéeds, and other anoyance.
               In Auguſt make an end of foyling
your land, gather your plums and
ſummer fruite, ſheare your Rye & wheat,
and gather in your Oats; alſo at the end
begin to mow downe your Barley: now
geld your Lambes, and make ſale or cut
downe the wood you may ſpare for that
winter.
               In September reape your Beanes
and peaſe, ſlip all ſorts of garden flowers

and replant them. At the later end begin
to ſow Wheat and Rie, and winter rigge
that fallow land which is for Barley:
Now breake vp al Innam land for Barley
the next yeare, and meanure it: now
fould your ſheepe where you meane to
ſow Wheate and Rye, and caſt vp and
cleanſe all your draines, to keepe your
lands dry all winter.
               In October make an end of your
Wheate and Rye ſeede, and an end of
Winter rigging: Scowre ponds and diches,
and carry the ſoyle to your Corne
field that is fallowed: ſet peares, plums, &
Apples; graft, plant, plaſh or ſet any tree
or quicke goweth; remooue all ſorts of
trees, eſpecially all ſuch as beare kernels,
and gather rootes and ſeedes at pleaſure.
               In the beginning of Nouember you
may ſow Wheate or Rye in warme places,
and doe any worke to be done in October,
whether in the field, the Orchard
or the garden, eſpecially if the ſoyle bee
warme & of an hot tēper. Now is the beſt
time to prouide plow timber, to rough hew
it & faſhion it, & then lay it vp to ſeaſon,
of which the Yew tree is the beſt,

the Elme next, and the Aſh laſt. In this
moneth take your Cattell into the houſe;
malt for the whole yeere following, and
be ſure to make your Lenten prouiſions.
               In December thraſh out ſuch Corne
as you may exchange for other houſhold
prouiſion; feede Brawnes, Poultry, and
whatſoeuer quicke foode is meete to bee
eaten in Chriſtmas; make your greateſt
ſlaughter of ſwine, and vent away the
profits of your ſummer Dairy: now kéep
open your draynes, and auoyd Inundations,
and applie well either for profit or
recreation the Art of foulling in all natures;
for both land and water are now
moſt abundant, and the birds ſooneſt deceiued.
            
            
               Generall preſeruations of Corne whileſt
it is vpon the ground.
               THe euills which anoy Corne whilſt it
is in the earth, or growing vpon the
earth, are twelue in number, to wit, ſixe
naturall, and ſixe ſupernaturall.
               The ſixe naturall offenders and ſlayers
of Corne, are Moales, Myce, Field-Rats,

Piſmires, Snailes, and Wormes.
               The ſixe ſupernaturall offenders of
Corne are, Lightning, Thunder, Frost,
Miſte or Fogs, Hayle or Tempeſts, and
laſtly Blaſtings or Plannet ſtroake.
               To cure theſe in generall, obſerue to
ſow your graine as early after the change
of the Moone as is poſſible, for as the
Moone groweth, ſo corne waxeth and becomes
full, bigge and ſound; and as the
Moone waineth ſo corne decreaſeth, and
groweth, ſmall, dry, and little yeelding.
               But for the particular remedies, you
ſhall vnderſtand that to preuent Moales
(which doe digge vp the ground and eate
the rootes of the corne) when the time of
the yeere is paſt for the ordinary taking
of them (which is ſpring and fall) you ſhal
with the ſmoak of Gunpouder or Aſſafoedi
                        •
                     a
perfume their haunts, and it is a preſent
remedy.
               If your corne be anoyd with field mice
or thoſe ſhrews which haue ſwine heads,
take Arſnicke, honey, and lime, and make
it into paſte, and ſcatter it here and there,
about, and in the lands.
               For field Rats (becauſe their holes and

haunts are to be perceiued) take Poppey
ſeeds bruiſed, and Cryſocollo mixt with
cruſht wheate, and therewith bayte their
holes, or the dryeſt parts about the land,
and it deſtroyeth them.
               If Piſmires offend you, take the roots
of Gentian, & boyle them to a decocttion,
and therewith ſprinckle the places where
you ſee them begin to build or reſort, and
they will be deſtroyed.
               Where ſnailes are offenſiue, whether
they bee blacke or gray, take the corrupt
dregges of the ſtrongeſt Traine oyle, and
mixe it with ye aſhes of holly bark burnt,
& ſprinckle it about or vpon your corne,
and no ſnaile will come neare it; and yet
the graine will be the better, and the ſoyle
the fatter.
               As for wormes, if they trouble your
corne, the firſt and chiefeſt preuention,
is to Summer-ſtirre your land in the
greateſt drouth or drieſt ſeaſon you can
finde in the ſummer; & though the ground
be neuer ſo hard, rather aduenture your
plow breaking, then the abſtaining from
that order; for it both kils worms, wéeds,
and thiſtles. Or if not this, then take the

in néede of further helpe, then take Arſenicke
and Mercury ſublimate, and ſew it
cloſe and faſt in a leather bagge, and hang
it in or elſe near your garner, and no corruption
will at any time approach it.
               Oyle lees ſprinckled on corne will do
the ſame, ſo will the pouder of chaulke,
dried Wormwood, the earth of Olinthus,
or Cerinthus, or the dried leaues of Yewe
or Cypreſſe; laſtly vinegar, and Lacerpitium,
mixt and ſprinckled in a moderate
manner, infinitely preſerueth all manner
of pulſe whatſoeuer.
               As for veſſells to keepe graine in long
and without putrifaction, your ſalt fiſh
barrels inwardly well dawbed with plaſter,
is the beſt, or pitched barrels ſprinckled
with vinegar; ſo are Oyle barrels
dried and dawbed as afore-ſaid, or for
want of plaſter to dawb them with pitch
and ſope aſhes, or lime vinegar and ſope
aſhes. Laſtly, the dry hutch, cheſt, or bing
of dry Oake wood, being well ſeaſoned,
will keep corne an hundred yeeres without
putrifaction: and where they are not
to be got, there if the ſoyle be dry & without
moyſture, as in rocks, ſands, or wher

ſprings abound not, there handſome and
cloſe caucs made in the earth, and couered
ſo as the aire may not enter, will keep
corne long and ſound without taint, and
as well as any art before rehearſed.
            
            
               A generall rule to perfect all manner of
workes in Husbandry.
               THe ancient Fathers or Maſters in
Husbandry, haue appointed for euery
worke in husbandry his eſpeciall time,
and ſeaſon, as at plow-day and not before
to fallow, at S. Valen
                        •
                     ines day to ſowe
Beanes, at S. Chadds day to ſow all ſorts
of ſmall pulſe and Oates; a fortnight before
our Ladyes day in March, and a fortnight
after to ſow Barley at S. Georges
day to fell great timber, at Aſcention day
to plant hearbes and flowes, at S. Iohn
Baptiſt to cut downe meddowes, and
ſheare ſheepe; at S. Iames day to reape
Rie, at Lammas Wheate, at S. Bartholmewes
day Barley, and at the natiuity of
Mary, Peaſe: alſo to ſowe Hempe and
flaxe on S. Wilfreds day; to carry it to the
water on S. Margarets day, and to begin

to ripple and brake at S. Mathewes day,
with a world of ſuch like other obſeruatious,
which the Husbandman might by
no meanes either goe before or come after.
Now let euery one vnderſtand that
the beſt time to vndertake any of theſe
workes, is fiue dayes at leaſt before any
of theſe feaſts and ſeaſons, if the weather
be conſtant and fit for the purpoſe. For
the yeeres hauing gone on ſo long, and euery
yeere loſing certaine minutes, wée
cannot chooſe but to haue loſt in our computation
diuers dayes at leaſt: and thogh
not ſo many as the Roman computation
would haue vs, which is ten, yet doubtleſſe
fiue may bee well ſuffered in any of
the Husbandmans works and labours,
and in his obſeruations he ſhall find both
the increaſe and profit. As touching the
laying of Meddowes, or dryning of your
grounds for meddow, it matters not
though you kéepe the old forme of the ancient
Husbandmen, which is, to lay your
vpland or high meddowes at the annuntiation
of the bleſſed Virgin Mary, and
your low and more fruitfull meddowes
at the feaſt of Phillip and Iacob, commonly

called May day: for the ſeaſons are fit,
and the time long enough for the growth.
            
            
               Ordinary ſignes of faire weather.
               THe flying of night bats early in the
euening, the next day will be faire: the
moone appearing in the Weſt, faire, and
cleare without vapours about her, thrée
daies before the oppoſition, and three
daies after the coniunction, ſheweth long
faire cleare weather to enſue: the flying of
Kites together, the declining of clouds
downwards, the riſing or ſetting of the
Sun cleare without any clouds: If any
miſt fall either in the ſpring or harueſt
time, ſhowes that a fayre day: the hooting
of an owle in rainy weather, the gaping
of Dawes in the morning, Ants, or
Mites remoouing their egges: the riſing
of any ſteame or miſt in the morning,
before the Sun ouer any waters, pooles,
martiſh or meddowes, the appearing of a
white circle about the moone in the forme
of a crowne: The ſwarming of bees, a
red skie in the euening, ſheweth a fayre
day to enſue. The gaping of Rauens and

crowes in Sun, the flying of humble
bees, droanes, béetles or any ſuch flies in
the euening, alſo when it lightneth the
day being cleare, ſuddaine ſhowers of
raine after any great windes, the circle or
circles about th
                     •
                   Sun, if they bee cleare
and no continuance: Looke for faire weather,
alſo in the Winter, if in the euenings
the firmament be full of ſtarres, &
the winde eaſterly, iudge froſty hard weather:
the moone being in Aries, Leo, or
Sagittarius, in Winter you may iudge
faire weather, but in Sommer immoderate
heate. And to conclude, when all
ſhrewes haue dined, and the cloudy ſubſtance
of their anger be diſperſed, their
browes ſmooth without wrinckles, their
countenance ſmiling, you may well hope
then for faire weather.
            
            
               Ordinary ſignes of windy, rainy, and other
tempeſteous weather.
               THe riſing of the Sun, thinly ouercaſt
with a cloud, if at the ſetting the Sun
be of diuers colours or clouds like water:
you may iudge of raine to follow. If at

his ſetting, it be a miſt or raine in the euening,
it is a token of rainy weather to
enſue: if the circles about the Sun be diſperſt
and broken, and are thicke & blacke,
looke for cold wind or ſnow. Alſo, the
moone being pale or ſomewhat too blacke
or thicke, raine followeth: and the earth
ſucking vp the raine extraordinarily, the
bubling of ſprings, or old ſprings flowing
faſter then they were wont, the appearing
of the rainebow in cleare weather, the extraordinary
biting of fleas, ye moiſtnes of
ſtones in any cellar or pauement, the falling
of ſoote from chimneys, alſo a violent
heat in ſummer: The Clement cloudy
and of a darke dusky ſubſtance, the
wind in the ſouth, or northweſt, the rainebow
appearing in the ſouth, ſheweth
much raine to enſue in thoſe parts, & the
greener the rainebow is, the greater raine
it doth ſignifie: the extraordinary féeding
of cattle, the moiſtnes of ſalt, the weather
extraordinary hot at ſunriſing or ſetting;
if it thunder when the wind is eaſterly, or
weſterly, belles being heard further then
they were wont to be, without the helpe
of wind, alſo thunder in the ſouth, and

wormes comming out of the earth in
great quantity in the euening, alſo woodlice
walking, the croaking of frogges,
ſowles bathing themſelues in hot weather,
mouldwarpes turning vp ye ground,
eſpecially, if the earth they turne vp bee
ſmall and dry: when the moone is 5 daies
old, marke the tipps of her hornes, if they
be blunt it ſignifieth raine, if the 4 day after
her change ſhe haue a red circle about
her, it doth ſignifie windes & raine. The
clouds diſperſed ſeeming like to flockes
of ſheepe: if the moone be in any of theſe
ſignes, Cancer, Scorpio, or Piſces, in winter
iudge wet weather, but in Summer a
pleaſant temperature: all theſe aforeſayd
are tokens of raine. If the moone be in
any of theſe ſignes, Gemini, Libra, or
Aquarius, much winde enſueth: the coniunction,
oppoſition, or quadrat aſpect of
Saturne, with the Sun or Moone ſheweth
great alteration in the aire. Iupiter,
with Mercury, or the Sun, ſheweth raging
and tempeſtuous winds: the meeting of
Mars and Venus, or Iupiter and Mars, enforceth
fearefull thunders, lightnings, &
raine. Lightning from the north, ſouth,

or ſouthweſt ſheweth wind to come from
thoſe parts: the diuing of Moorehens, or
dap-diuers ſhaking their winges, is a token
of wind: the ſparkling of the fire, or
the noiſe of the flame, the riſing of the
ſea about the ſhoare, the cakling of geeſe,
duckslor other fowles: the beames of the
Sun being red and broad, pearcing the
clouds like darts, all theſe foretell of
wind. The Hedghog hath two holes, or
vents in his caue, the one towards the
north, the other towards the ſouth, looke
which of them he ſtoppeth, thence ſhall
great ſtormes and windes follow. Great
ſtore of ſpider webs flying about: as alſo
Thunder in the morning, ſheweth
winds to enſue. Thoſe windes that begin
by day time are of more continuance
then thoſe that riſe in the night. The
northerne winds are euer more healthfull
then the ſoutherne windes: ſmall ſtore of
water in winter, doth ſignifie a moyſt and
wet ſpring to follow, and an extraordinary
hot ſummer, foretelleth of a moyſt
winter to follow: the breaking of muſicke
ſtrings made of guts, cats licking their
forefeete, and therewith waſhing their

heads, ſhew raine. If old people are troubled
with cornes, toynt akes, or any other
aches in their bodies, it is a ſigne of raine.
The crying of Hearnſhawes, and the extraordinary
crowing of Peacockes, is a
manifeſt token of raine; the bleating, playing
or skipping of ſheepe wantonly, as
alſo if ſwine doe carry bottles of hay or
ſtraw to any place and hide them, is a token
of the ſame: When cattle, horſes,
ſwine, or ſheepe, being vpon any great
common make haſt home, it is a manifeſt
token of a ſtorme to come preſently. If
any veſſells of glaſſe or any white wall,
or any thing of wood or iron, grow moiſt
and dampiſh, & yéeld any water without
manifeſt cauſe, it is a ſigne yt it will raine
not long after. If ye the clouds in ſummer,
it ſignifies foule and ſtormy weather, ſo
is it when ſmall wormes créepe to ye thrée
leaued graſſe. Thunders in the morning
ſignifie wind, about noone raine, & in the
euening great tempeſt. If it begin to
freeze with an eaſterly wind, it is a token
the cold weather is like to continue long.
If the moone riſe or appeare with 2 or 3
cleare circles about it, it is a ſigne the aire

will be very cold. It is a manifeſt ſigne

                     〈◊〉
                   cold weather, if the dew fall not in the

                     •
                  orning, eſpecially being not hindred by

                     •
                  e wind. If the ſtars in winter time ap
                  
                     •
                  eare
more bright, & cleerer then ordinary

                     •
                  hey are wont, or if they ſéeme to ſend

                     •
                  orth ſome little ſparkles, it is a ſigne of

                     •
                  treeme cold weather. If ſea-birds for
                  
                     •
                  ke
the ſea, or water foules do the like, as

                     •
                  ucks, drakes, mallards, wilde géeſe, or
ſuch like be ſéene in the beginning of
winter, to ſéeke for great and broad waters
which freeze not, or that they fly to
ſhe ſea, it is a ſigne of very long cold weather.
If for 2 or 3 dayes together the

                     •
                  louds be very whitiſh towards the euening
it is a ſigne of much ſnow: if when
it raines the ayre be troubled and ouer
                  
                     •
                  aſt,
& ye the clouds be more whitiſh then
they were wont, it is a manifeſt token of
ſnow, and ſo much the more if the ayre be
warme or ſoultry. If the ſummer bée
moyſt, wet, and cloudy, it is a ſigne that
all fruits, corne, and all kind of pulſe will
be in danger to be blaſted and corrupted.
If the Spring-time be very cloudy, and
full of miſtres and hoary froſts, namely

when trées do budde and bloſſome, and
that the feilds war gréene, it is alſo a token
to be feared the fruits of the earth to
be blaſted, rotten, or deſtroyed: great ſtore
of ſnow in winter ſignifieth a plentifull
yeare: alſo, if great ſtore of ſnow fall on
the playne, and champion fields, it is a token
that the froſt cannot continue long,
and that great plenty of fruite, hearbs,
rootes, and corne, and paſture will be;
which God in his mercy grant vnto vs.
            
            
               The cauſe of the Sunne Eclipſed.
               THe Eclipſe of the Sun is nothing elſe
but the interpoſition of the body of
the Moone betwixt vs and the Sun. And
note this, that the Sun is neuer Eclipſed,
but at a new Moone, for then the Moone is
iuſt vnderneath the Sun: for the further
the Moone goeth from the Sun, the more
her light encreaſeth: Yet the Sun is not
Eclipſed euery new Moone, the reaſon is
becauſe ſhee is ſometimes on one ſide of
the Sun, and ſometimes on the other; and
when ſhe hapneth iuſt vnder yt Sun, then
doth ſhe eclipſe & hide her light from vs.
            
            
               
               The cauſe of the Moones Eclipſe.
               THe Eclipſe of the Moone is nothing
but the interpoſition of the body of
the earth betwixt her and the Sun: for
the Moone her ſelfe, as alſo all other ſtars
whatſoeuer, the Sun excepted, are darke
and haue no light of themſelues, but that
the Sun ſhineth on them continually, and
ſo maketh them to caſt a light; and the
earth being betwéene the Sun, and the
Moone, ſhaddoweth the light of the Sun
from the Moone; and further obſerue, that
as the Sun is neuer Eclipſed, but at a
new Moone, ſo is the Moone neuer Eclipſed,
but when ſhe is iuſt at the full, for
then ſhe is fartheſt off from the Sun, and
iuſt ouer againſt him, but the earth is betwixt
them.
            
            
               Of the 4. principall Windes ſhewing
their nature and effects.
               THe Eaſt winde is hot and dry, being
temperate, ſweete and healthfull, eſpecially
at the riſing of the Sun, which

maketh it the purer, expelling all infe
                     •
                  on gathered into mans body, cauſin
                     •
                  
fayre ſun ſhine weather; yet ſharpe wind
                     •
                  
eſpecially in the winter, froſts and ſuc
                     •
                  
like cold weather.
               The Weſt winde is temperate, hot an
                     •
                  
moyſt, making all flowers, graſſe an
                     •
                  
hearbes, as alſo trées, plants, and the lik
                     •
                  
to ſpring, diſſoluing hard froſts & ſnow
eſpecially the Sun ſhining fayre & cléen
               The North winde for the moſt part
is cold and dry, bringing extremity of
cold weather, being very holſome in aſpect it draweth away noyſome contagious
infectious ayres; yet is an enemi
                     •
                  
to a forward ſpring, in the nipping of th
                     •
                  
fruits of the earth.
               The South winde is hot and moyſt,
prouoking in the generall raine, thick
                     •
                  
cloudy weather, and ſicknes.
            
            
               What Thunder and Lightning is.
               THunder and lightning is a hot and dri
                     •
                  
exhalation mixt with moyſture, attracted
into the middle Region by the extraordinary
heate, and beames of the Sun
                     •
                  
                  
cloſed in the body of a cloud, wher being

                     •
                  o contraries fighting together, breake

                     〈◊〉
                   ſubſtance of the cloud violently, ma
                  
                     •
                  ng
that extraordinary terrible noyſe

                     •
                  armed by vs thunder: and the ſudden

                     •
                  e that commeth before it to our viſible

                     •
                  ht (though both breake the cloud at an

                     ••
                  ſtant) is termed by vs lightning, which

                     •
                  th many ſtrange effects, as hurting and

                     •
                  rning the intralls, the outward skin

                     •
                  pearing faire; killing the child in the

                     •
                  ombe, the mother not hurt: melting the

                     •
                  ony in the purſe, and the ſword in the

                     •
                  kabberd, when the purſe & skabberd are

                     •
                  ot burned: betwixt theſe two contrarie
                  
                     •
                  es
of thunder and lightning is ingen
                  
                     •
                  ed
betwixt them in the cloud a groſſe

                     •
                  ubſtance, or ſtone tearmed by vs the

                     •
                  hunderbolt, which at the breaking of the

                     •
                  oud is violently caſt out, and where it

                     •
                  oth light it much indangereth.
            
            
               A neceſſary rule fit to be obſerued in good
husbandry for the auoyding of vnneceſſary
expence.
               A Peny a day is by the year one pound,
one halfe pound, one groate, one peny:

which in all commeth to one pound, te
                     •
                  
ſhillings, fiue pence.
               Two pence a day, by the yeare is tw
                     •
                  
pounds, two halfe pounds, two groats▪
two pence, which put together comme
                     •
                  
to thrée pounds ten pence.
               Thrée pence a day, by the yeare commeth
to thrée pounds, thrée halfe pound
                     •
                  
thrée groates, and thrée pence: which being
put together, commeth to four
                     •
                  
pounds, eleauen ſhillings, thrée pence.
               Foure pence a day, by the yeare commeth
to foure pounds, foure halfe
pounds, foure groats, and foure pence
                     •
                  
which being put together, commeth to
ſix pounds, one ſhilling and eight pence.
               And thus may you doe of any other
                     •
                  
ſome of fiue, ſix, ſeauen, eight, nine, ten,
eleauen, pence the day, commeth by the
yeare, obſeruing to reckon as before: as
twelue pence the day, ſay, twelue pounds▪
twelue halfe pounds, twelue groats, and
twelue pence, is in the whole yeare eightéene
pounds, and fiue ſhillings: and thus
I leaue you, & reſt alwayes your louing
friend, Verus Pater.
               
               FINIS.
            
         
      
   