
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE
WORLDE
poſſeſſed with Deuils,
conteinyng three
Dialogues.
                     
                  
                  
                     1. Of the Deuill let looſe.
                     2. Of Blacke Deuils.
                     3. Of White Deuils.
                  
                  And of the commyng of Ieſus Chriſte to
Iudgement, a verie neceſſarie and
comfortable diſcourſe for
theſe miſerable and
daungerous
daies.
                  
                     Luke. xxi.
                     Watche ye therefore at all tymes and
praie, that ye maie bee worthie to eſcape all
theſe thynges that ſhall come: And that ye
maie ſtande before the Sonne of man.
                  
               
               
                  ¶Imprinted at London, for Ihon Perin, and
are t
                        •
                      be ſold in Paules Churchyard
a
                        •
                      the Signe of the Angell.
1583.
               
               
                  
                  
                  To the Reader.
                  I Haue intituled this Booke (the
world poſſeſſed with Deuilles)
for twoo cauſes. The one, becauſe
I ſhewe there, how the Deuill ruleth
the worlde, he guideth & gouerneth
worldly and carnall men
as if thei were poſſeſſed with Deuills,
and giuen ouer by Gods iust
iudgemēt: the other, becauſe that
in holie Scripture, the worlde is
many tymes taken, for ſuche as
are not lead by the Spirit of God,
but ſerue the deuill as their prince
and God, in ſtead of their true
God, and acknowledge
him for their Creator,
Father and
Sauiour.
               
               
                  
                  ¶The title and ſomme of
the first Dialogue.
                  This Dialogue is called the Deuill lett
looſe, bothe for the reaſon before mentioned,
and alſo becauſe of fitt matter ſeruyng
to the ſame purpoſe.
                  Firste, there is talke of the greate couetouſneſſe
that now raigneth in the worlde,
and ſpecially of the couetouſneſſe of old mē:
afterward of the old age and dotage of the
worlde, and the diuiſion of the ages of the
ſame, whiche is ſet forthe in the last booke,
fathered vpon Eſdras in the Apocripha,
& conference of the contentes of that book
with that whiche Heſiodus hath written
touchyng that matter.
                  Of the decaye of vertue, and increaſe of
vice, & the Prophetes of Ieſus Chriſt & S.
Paule thervpon, touchyng the latter daies.
                  Of the franticke and decaied worlde,
whiche can not abide to bee molten againe,
and restored to the firſt estate.
                  Of the worlde wholie poſſeſſed with the
Deuill.
                  Of the Deuill lett looſe in the Apocalips,
and of the red Dragon.
                  Of the Parable and ſimilitude of the
wicked ſpirite, wandryng in the deſertes.
                  
                     
Of the iudgement of God vpon the Iewes,
and of the example thereby giuen to
Christians.
                  Of the comming of Ieſus Chriſt, of Mahomet,
and of the Pope.
                  The true Phiſicke for the diſeaſed, frantike
and poſſeſſed worlde.
                  The faultes of worldly Phiſitions, and of
their drags: and the cauſe why thei can not
caste out Deuilles, nor appeaſe the windes
and tempest, that bluster on the Sea of this
worlde.
                  Of the true meane to appeaſe them, and
to driue the Deuill out of the worlde, and
the power of the Gospell.
                  Of the ſtate of the worlde, and namely of
the courſe of Kynges and Princes.
                  Of the complaintes of the Prophets for
the wickedneſſe, vnrightouſneſſe, and theft
that is emongest men.
                  Of the Anatomie that the Prophetes
haue made of man and of the worlde.
                  Of the greateſt crime and daunger that
is now in the worlde, and how daungerous
a thyng it is to be a good man.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  ¶The firſte Dialogue of
the worlde poſſeſſed with
Deuilles called, the deuill
lette Looſe.
                  Tobie. Theophrast. Ierome.
Eustace.
                  
                     WHen we laſte commoned together
Theophrastus, touchyng
the ſtate of this preſent
world, thou tookeſt occaſion
to talke of the age of
theſame. And becauſe thou waſte then interrupted,
I would thou wouldeſt now go
foreward with that, that thou haſte to ſaie
therein.
                  
                     Theo.
                     Wee ſpake before of the greate
coueteouſneſſe that raigneth now a daies
emong men.Commentaries of Origen vpon Iob. There are certain commentaries
vpon the booke of Iob, whiche ſome
ſaie are Origens, notwithſtanding that the
ſtile of the ſame is nothyng like Origens
ſtile. And therefore, learned men whiche
are able to iudge of ſuche thynges, take
not Origen to be the aucthor thereof. But
whoſoeuer bee aucthor, he bringeth in certaine
reaſons, by whiche he doeth ſhewe

the cauſe of that greate coueteouſneſſe of
whiche we ſpake.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     What ſaieth he?
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     He firſte ſaieth:The cauſe of the greate coueteouſneſſe, whiche now raigneth. that this worlde
draweth to an ende. And therefore maie be
likened to a man that ſeeketh toward his
ende as faſt as he can: and this is the cauſe
that he giueth his whole minde and ſtudy
to dead thynges: that is to ſaie, to yearthly
thynges, whiche are as it were dead in cō
                        pariſon
of heauenly thynges. For, as thei
neither can deliuer men from corporall
or ſpirituall deathe: So can thei not followe
them after this deathe, but die with
them.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Hereby then thou meaneſt, that
the more yt men drawe to the yearthward,
and the nearer thei are to their graue, the
more deſirous are thei of yearthly riches,
whiche is but yearth as thei are. And ſo
the leſſe thei haue of it, the more thei deſire
it, how ſaieſt thou Ierome.
                     
                  
                  
                     Ierome.
                     Thou putteſt mee in remembrance
of that that Cicero ſaieth (touching
this matter) of old men.Couetouſneſſe in age.
                     
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Why, what ſaieth he.
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     He compareth them to a warfaryng
man,Cice. de ſenect. whiche hath a iourney to goe.
                  
                  
                     
                     Tobie.
                     The compariſon is very proper.The voyage of mans life.
For, all this life is nothyng but a voyage,
whiche we haue to goe whileſt we liue.
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     Now, thou knoweſt that thei,
whiche haue a iourney to goe, make firſte
prouiſion of all ſuche thinges, as thei muſt
carry with them, and ſuche thinges as are
neceſſarie for them, whether it be victuals
or money.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     If thei did not ſo, thei might
ſeme to want diſcretion.
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     But if thei be wiſe and diſcrete,
thei will burthen thē ſelues with no more
then thei needes muſt, but will make their
preparation and prouiſion, accordyng to
the iourney and waie that thei haue to go.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     It is certaine, that thei whiche
haue a hundreth or two hundreth miles to
goe, haue neede of greater prouiſion, then
thei whiche haue but fiue or ſixe miles.
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     What wouldeſt thou ſaie then,
if a man whiche hath but a mile or twoo to
go, would be more carefull for his charge,
make greater preparation for his voiage,
then if he had fiue or ſixe C. miles to goe.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     I would take hym to be a verie
fond and vndeſcrete man: for what nedeth
he to trouble hym ſelf more, then that the

neceſſitie of his voyage requireth.
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     Yet the moſte parte of old men
doe ſo.Care 
                              •
                           oges of a voyage▪ Cice. de ſenect. For, the elder that men waxe, the
more couetous and niggiſhe thei are.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Then the leſſe tyme thei haue to
liue, the more feare thei haue to want.
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     Therfore Cicero ſaith, that theſe
old dotards that are ſo nere and couetous,
and are ſo afraied to want, the leſſe waie
thei haue to goe on their voiage, the more
care thei haue for charges, and make the
greater prouiſion.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     In good ſooth that is greate follie
and madneſſe.
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     Therefore it is not ſaid without
good reaſon, that where as all other vices
waxe old as men doe, coueteouſneſſe waxeth
yong againe in age.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Then to our former talke, wee
maie well ſaie the like of the worlde, and
of his age, euen as Theophrastus did putte
vs in mynde: and therefore goe foreward
Theophrastus, with that that thou haſt further
to ſaie, as touchyng this matter.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     The Author of thoſe commentaries
vpō 
                        Iob, whiche I euen now alledged
vſeth a compariſon, touchyng the richeſſe
that men gather in their age, not vnmeete

for our matter.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Whereto doeth he liken them.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     To hiddē ſtarres.The vſe of richeſſe in age. For, as ſtarres
ſerue to no vſe when thei are hidden, but
when thei ſhewe light vnto men: ſo riches
being hiddē ſerueth to no vſe, whether thei
kepe them locked in their treaſures, without
the vſe therof, or els leaue their riches
to the wide worlde, when thei them ſelues
are hidden and laied vp in their graues.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Heereby then thou meaneſt to
proue, that the gredie and inſaſiable deſire
of riches: whiche now adaies ſo ragyngly
raigneth emong men, is a ſigne and witneſſe
of the old age & dotage of the world,
wherby we maie iudge that the ende therof
draweth nigh.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     So it is.The fowerth booke of Eſdras. Chap. 5. Furthermore although
the fourthe booke of Eſdras bee holden for
Apocripha, yet are there many good ſentences
contained therein, whiche well agree
with the matter whereof we talke.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     I would faine heare them.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     He ſaieth thus: Aſke the wombe
of a woman and ſaie vnto her: why muſte
thou haue time before thou bringeſt forth?
Require her to bryng forth tenne at once.
And I ſaie, ſurely ſhe can not, but by diſtance

of tynie. Then ſaied he vnto me: ſo
haue I deuided the nomber of the earth by
tymes, when ſeede is ſowne vpon it. For,
as a yong child begetteth not that, that belōgeth
to the aged, ſo haue I ordeined the
time which I haue created. I aſked again
and ſaied: ſeyng thou haſt now ſhewed me
the waie, I will proceede to ſpeake before
thee: For our mother whom thou haſt told
me, is yong, draweth ſhe nere vnto age? he
anſwered me and ſaid: aſke a woman that
traualleth, and ſhe will tell thee. Saie vnto
her: Wherefore are not thei whom thou
haſt now brought forth, are thoſe that were
before thee,The ſtature of a man d
                              •
                           
                           miniſhed. but leſſe of ſtature? And ſhe
ſhall anſwere thee, ſome were borne in the
flower of youth, others were borne in the
tyme of age, when the wombe failed. Cō
                        ſider
now thy ſelf, how that ye are leſſe of
ſtature, then thoſe that were before you.
And ſo are thei that come after you, leſſe
then ye, as the Creatures whiche now beginne
to bee old, and haue paſſed ouer the
ſtrength of youth.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Me thinkes theſe wordes tende
to ſhewe, that as the woman and the womans
wombe waxeth old, ſo waxeth the
yearth old, whiche is the mother of vs all,

and likewiſe all the worlde, with all thynges
therein contained.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     We ſe the experiēce thereof daily.
But marke what theſame author ſaith
further of this matter. The worlde (ſaieth
he) hath loſte his youth, and the tymes begin
to waxe old.4. Eſder. 14. The deuiſion of the ages of the worlde. For the world is deuided
into xii. partes, and x. partes of it are gone
alreadie, and halfe of the tenth parte. And
there remaineth that, whiche is after the
halfe of the tenth part. Therefore ſet thine
hous in order, and reforme thy people, and
comfort ſuche of thē as bee in trouble, and
now renounce the corruption. Let go frō
thee mortall thoughtes, caſte awaie from
thee the burthens of men, and put of now
thy weake nature, and ſet aſide thy moſte
greeuous thoughtes, and haſte thee to depart
from theſe tymes. For greater euils
then thoſe whiche thou haſt ſeen now, ſhall
thei cōmit. For, the weaker that the world
is by reaſon of age, the more ſhall the euils
be encreaſed vpon them that dwell therein.The old age of the miſerable worlde.
For, the truthe is fled farre awaie, and
lies at hande. And after he ſaieth: thus the
worlde is ſett in darkeneſſe, and thei that
dwell therein are without light. For, thy
lawe is burnt, therefore no man knoweth

the thynges that are dooen of thee, or the
workes that ſhalbe doen.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Theſe wordes ſignifie not onely
that the older the worlde waxeth,The decreaſe of vertue and increaſe of vice. the more
the ſtature and age of man deminiſheth,
and the naturall ſtrength weakeneth: but
alſo that all vertues decaie in hym, and al
vices increaſe.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     If vertue faile, neceſſarilie vice
whiche is the contrary muſte raigne, ſithe
vice is want of vertue, as ſickneſſe is wāt
of health, ſo that the more that healthe decreaſeth,A prophecie of Ieſus Chriſt and S. Paule touchyng the laſte daies.
the more ſickneſſe increaſeth.
And therefore our ſauior Chriſt, ſpeaking
of thoſe laſte daies, and of this age of the
worlde, ſaied not without cauſe. Thinkeſt
thou that whē the ſonne of man ſhall come
he ſhall finde any faithe or vprightneſſe on
the yearth.Matth. 14. For,Luke. 21. becauſe that the wickedneſſe
ſhall abound,1. Tim. 4. all charitie ſhalbe cold.2. Timo. 4.
Heare alſo what S. Paule writeth: Now
the ſpirite ſpeaketh euidently, that in the
latter tymes, ſome ſhall departe from the
faithe, and ſhall giue heede vnto ſpirites of
errour, and doctrines of Deuilles, whiche
ſpeake lies through hipocriſy, & haue their
conſciences burned with an hot iron. And
againe: This knowe alſo that in the laſte

daies ſhall come perilous times. For, men
ſhalbe louers of their owne ſelues, coueteous,
boaſters, proude, curſed ſpeakers, diſobedient
to parentes, vnthankfull, vnholy
without naturall affectiō, truce breakers,
falſe accuſers, intēperate, fierce, diſpiſing
of them whiche are good, traitours, heady
high minded, louers of pleaſure, more thē
louers of God, hauyng the ſhewe of godlineſſe,
but haue denied the power thereof.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     S. Paule hath iuſte occaſion to
call thoſe daies perilous, in whiche ſuche
men ſhal liue, and without doubt we euen
now are come to that line. For now adaies
wee ſee fewe other but ſuche as S. Paule
hath deſcribed vnto vs, after the manner
that thou haſt rehearſed.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Therefore there are fewe, which
maie be compared to our auncient fathers
in any thyng at all. For, as we haue alreadie
ſaied, euē as the force of vertue decreaſeth
daie by daie, in this weakeneſſe and
old age of nature, ſo contrary vice, loue of
pleaſure, impacience, vnſtableneſſe, vnfaitfulneſſe,
ignorance and folly encreaſe.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     When I call to remembraunce
what Ierome hath heretofore ſpoken, concernyng
the difference of ages, and the decaie

thereof, I finde that it well agreeth
with all that thou haſte now ſpoken. So
that if none cōplained, but onely the Prophetes
and Apoſtles, and other the true
ſeruauntes of God, of the corruption and
diſorder, whiche at all tymes hath been in
the worlde, and the empairyng thereof,
whiche hath alwaies increaſed, I would
leſſe maruaile. But we maie wel perceiue
that the wickedneſſe of men hath been of
long time marueilous, and that it hath frō
tyme to tyme ſo woonderfully increaſed,
that euen the Gentiles theim ſelues (who
had not the true knowledge of God, nor
perfect knowledge of vertue & vice,) haue
made moſte greeuous complaintes thereof,
as Ierome hath often recited vnto vs.
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     I haue recited vnto you, the diſcriptiō
that Ouid hath made of the 4, ages
but I haue not yet ſhewed after what maner
Heſiodus deſcribeth it, out of whom as
well Ouid as other Poets, haue gathered
their writinges. For as I haue before told
Heſiodus is one of ye moſte aūcient Greke
Poets that wee haue. And becauſe that
whiche he writeth of this matter, agreeth
very well with many of the pointes which
Theophrastus hath alledged, but chiefly

out of the bookes of Apocripha, whiche
beare ye name of Eſdras, I will recite that
whiche he writeth of the 4. ages, ſpeaking
firſt of the goldē age, thus muche in effect.
                     We must beleeue that Gods and men,
                     together first were framed,Hſiod. ope. & dies. Lib▪ 1.
                     
                     When golden age ouerſpread the yearth,
                     and Saturne ruled aboue.
                     Men liued like Gods and voide of care,
                     no labours toyle their lande,
                     Ne tedious age ne ſickneſſe grief,
                     did once their myndes remoue.
                     From ſpotleſſe life from pleaſaunt cheare,
                     and Death was but a ſleepe,
                     And fertillyearth her pleaſaunt fruites,
                     did yeeld withouten toyle:
                     Their goods were common mindes were on
                     no hatred here could creepe,
                     O happie age whoſe mery myndes,
                     were placed on ſuche a ſoile.
                     Now heare what Iuuenall ſaith touching
this Golden age:Iuuenal. ſat. 13. 
                        In tyme paſt poore
men liued in field without fraude or deceit.
And anon after he ſaieth.
                     Thei thought it ſhame and worthy death
                     if youth by age had paste,
                     Not ſhewyng honour vnto them,
                     and would the bearded man:
                     
                        
Should reuerenced be of youth,
                     though thei excede in corne and Maste
                     Suche honour beare thei vnto age,
                     ſuche reuerence beardes had than.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     
                        Iuuenall toucheth emong other
pointes one, wherein there is greate ouer
ſight at this daie. For, youth is now ſo ill
manered, ſo proud, ſo ſtout, ſo ouerwening
ſo ſhameleſſe and ſo vnbridled, that in ſtede
of honouryng their elders, thei deſpiſe thē
whiche is worthie of greate blame.
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     Thei are blame worthie in deed,
for thei peruert both the order of God and
nature, for God hath giuen expreſſe commaundement
to honour age, and to reuerence
the horie heared and graie bearded:
And though GOD had not ſo commaunded,Lawe to honour elder
                              •
                            Leuit. 1
                              •
                           .
nature ought herein to be a Schoolemiſtres
vnto vs, except we will willingly
reſiſt her as Monſters.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Wee maie eaſilie thinke this to
be true, for that the Gentiles them ſelues
were conſtrained to acknowledge it a dutie.
And thei learned not by the holy ſcripture
and lawes of God,The lawe 
                              〈◊〉
                            nature. to honour their elders,
for that it was not giuen and reueiled
to them as to the children of God: but
haue learned it by lawe of nature, whiche

is common Schoolemaiſters to all.
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     This Schoolemaiſters nature,
of whom thou ſpeakeſt, hath ſo emprinted
this in the hartes of all men, that euen
thei whiche will neither heare nor obay it,
are neuertheleſſe, conſtrained to confeſſe
it, bothe to be right honeſt and of duetie as
the Ambaſſadours of the Lacedemonians
did wel declare to the Athenians.
                        A taunt of the Lacedemonians to the Atheniās. For on
a tyme there were certaine common Playes
at Athens with Scaffoldes made,
wherevppon theſe Ambaſſadors were placed
very honorably, there was a poore old
man an Athenian, whiche gatt vp as the
reſt did, but all the ſeates were taken vp,
and becauſe he could finde no ſeate, but
was faine to ſtande, al the people laughed
hym to ſkorne, ſauyng the Lacedemonian
Ambaſſadours, whiche riſe from their ſeates
to giue hym place: The Athenians ſeyng
this courteſie, liked it well and gaue
them greate praiſe. Wherby thei ſhewed
that thei knew what was honeſtand praiſe
worthie: but none of them deſired to haue
this praiſe. Therefore the Ambaſſadours
ſaied: The Athenians can iudge bothe of
courteſie and honeſtie, but thei vſe it not.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Then are thei of the nomber of

thoſe, that knowe muche good maner, but
vſe none: and ſurely theſe Ambaſſadours
bothe ſhamed and taunted them as thei deſerued.The diſpiſing of fathers and mothers.
But to come to our matter, though
young men diſpiſe their elders, we neede
not meruaile if thei care not for their elders,
to whom thei owe duetie becauſe of
their age, ſeyng there are ſo fewe, that honour
and reuerence their naturall fathers
and mothers as thei ought, neither can awaie
with them.
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     It is not at this daie alone that
Children haue neglected their duetie towardes
their Fathers and Mothers, but
alſo the one againſt the other, and cheefly
againſt God. And therfore Heſiodus ſpeakyng
of the ſiluer age, toucheth it ſomewhat
to this effect.
                     The children of the ſiluer age,The ſiluer age.
                     
                     did next ſucceede the golde,
                     
                        Ʋnlike the firſt in wit and deede,
                     and vnder Mothers wyng:
                     Were buſied in their parentes workes,
                     tell thei were waxen olde,
                     And ſimplie lead a toilyng life,
                     and knewe none other thyng.
                     And when thei came to perfect age
                     and fell to ſhift for foode,
                     
                        
Their life did waſt, and pinyng care
                     did fret their peeuiſhe breſts:
                     And enemies ſtyng betweene theſe fooles
                     gan breede muche hatefull moode,
                     And careles thynking on their goods
                     diſpiſe their heauenly hests.
                     He ſpeaketh like a heathen of their religon
whiche was diuers according to the
diuerſitie of the Countrey, for thei had diuers
Gods which thei helde as Patrones,
as our Papiſtes helde of their Sainctes.
And becauſe they had diuers manners of
Seruices and Ceremonies, and diuers vſing
thereof, as our Papiſtes haue in their
religion. Heſiodus condēneth thoſe which
follow not the maner of Religion of their
owne Countrey. And then anon after he
addeth the puniſhment whiche God laied
vpon them, agreeyng to Ouid, whiche had
written more at large of the flood, as farre
as he knewe, followyng the holie Scriptures
as other Poets did,Gene. 6. 7. 8. which wrote before
hym, whiche is thus muche in effect.
                     When Ioue once ſawe that thei diſpiſed
                     to yeeld the Gods their due:
                     In wrath with waues he drencht the earth,
                     and formed it a newe.
                     And from thēce he commeth to the braſon

age, whereof he ſpeaketh thus muche.
                     Next after came the Braſen worlde,The Braſen age.
                     
                     vnlike the ſiluer farre.
                     Men made of Okes of courage ſtoute
                     delightyng muche in warre.
                     No reſt, no lawe, a ſtony worlde,
                     with loftie lookes and grim:
                     No force could feare their fierie moode
                     and large of bone and lim.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     When Ouid ſpeaketh of the fower
ages, (as farre as I perceiue by that,
that thou haſt rehearſed of his Metamorphoſis,
he maketh no mention of the decay
of ſtrength in mans body, but onely of the
decreaſe of vertue and encreaſe of vice.
But Heſiodus, writeth of bothe, and me
thinketh he doth not muche diſagree from
that whiche is written in the holie Scripture,
touchyng of aunceſtors before the
flood, & anon after. For euen at that tyme
the ſtrength of man beganne to deminiſhe
and decaie. Is it not true Theophrastus?
                     
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     
                        Iacob beareth witneſſe of that before
Pharo:
                        Gene. 4.7. ſaiyng. The whole time of my
Pilgrimage is an hundred and thirtie yeres,Gene. 47.
feare and euill haue the daies of my
life been, and I haue not attained vnto the
yeres of the life of my fathers, in the daies

of their Pilgrimage.Pſal. 90. And Dauid after
hym, ſaieth of his tyme: The tyme of our
life is threeſcore yeres and ten: and if thei
be of ſtrength, foureſcore yeres: yet their
ſtrength is but labour and ſorrowe, for it
is cut of quickly, and we flee awaie.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Yet notwithſtanding methinkes
Iacob and Dauid, were long before the
tyme that is compared to the Iron age,
whereof Ierome hath not yet tolde vs the
diſcription that Heſiodus maketh.
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     If thou wilt heare it, thus much
he ſaieth in effect.
                     But now the Iron age is come,The Iron age.
                     
                     with daiely care and paine:
                     With creaſing ſtrife, (ſo would the Gods)
                     yet ſome releaſe againe.
                     Of quiet life ſomewhiles thei graunt
                     t'aſwage the heauie griefe:
                     But doubtleſſe whē horie heares once come
                     thei dye without reliefe.
                     The childe vnlike the father is,
                     the geſt feares trust leſſe hoſt:
                     And friendly promiſe ſoone is broke
                     hot ſtrife doeth rule the roſt.
                     Age is diſpiſed, and youthe aſhamed,
                     to yeeld their parentes praiſe:
                     Thei minde no goods, ne render foode,
                     
                        
to freendes that were their ſtaies.
                     What ſhould I ſpeake of cruell rape,
                     or Townes by force distroyde:
                     No other maie ſtande: ne right maintaind,
                     and goodneſſe ſtill auoyde.
                     And wicked worldinges make of them
                     that miſcheefe ſtill inuent:
                     Thus voide of dueties knowledge all,
                     to wickedneſſe are bent.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Theſe are goodly vertues in
deede, this agreeth well with that, whiche
Theophrastus ſpake of before.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Hence come the troubles and cō
                        fuſion
that now raigneth in the old age of
the world, whiche is the cauſe of his great
diſeaſe and dotage. Wherefore wee haue
good cauſe to praie with Dauid:
                        Pſal. 71. ſaiyng.
Caſt me not of, Lorde in tyme of age, forſake
me not when my ſtrength faileth.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     I beleeue all that thou haſt ſpoken:
and ſhortly to tell thee myne aduiſe,
me thinkes the worlde is newe in his olde
dotage, and the older he waxeth, the more
he raueth:The ragyng worlde like an olde ape or beare. he is like vnto theſe olde Apes
or Beares, whiche the older thei waxe, the
more miſcheeuous thei are. Wherefore, I
am afraied leaſt his end be at hand. What
thinkeſt thou Ierome.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Ierom.
                     It is to be feared: for it is dangerous
when a manne giuen to ſickneſſe falleth
often ſicke: but when he falleth to ragyng
and madneſſe, it is a manifeſt ſigne
of death.Pope Leo & Clement of the houſe of Medicis haue giuen euill medicines to the worlde. Doubtleſſe the world is very ſick
ſeeyng he hath beene ſo long in the Phiſitions
hande: and great cauſe of diſpaire of
healthe is in hym, for that the Phiſitions
haue giuen hym ouer, and he now falleth
to raging, which encreaſeth daiely, ſo that
it is to be feared leaſt he run wholie madd
vp and doune ſtreates and Countreis, as
Nabucadonozer did. For if the head bee
mad what ſhall become of the members.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     What meaneſt thou by the worldes
Phiſitions and his frantike head.
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     Knoweſt thou not, that Popes
are commonly called Gods on earth.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Yes, but what of that.
                  
                  
                     Iero.
                     Knoweſt thou not that Pope Leo,
                        Medicines in Engliſhe, Phiſitions.
and Pope Clement the laſt of thoſe names
were of the houſe of Medicis.
                     
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Thereby thou wilt conclude, that
the worlde was in the handes of the Phiſitions
when theſe Popes gouerned.
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     I meane thereby, that it was a
very euill ſigne, and in maner a foreſhewyng
and prognoſtication of the thynges

that we haue ſpoken: but it was a greate
ſigne when Paule Deforneſe ſucceeded
them,The worlde is frantike. for that his name ſoundes much vpon
Franſie, vnto which we ſaie the world
is fallē. But let vs heare what Theophrastus
will ſaie to this matter.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     When I would conſider this
world, I remember a compariſon that the
Prophet Eſay vſeth,Eſay. 30. to ſhewe foorthe the
ſtate and ouerthrowe of the wicked which
were in his tyme. Hee ſheweth them that
thei ſhall be deceiued in their vaine hopes,
and that their confidence in iniquitie ſhall
bee like an olde ruinous wall, whiche ſheweth
to be whole, but ſhall ſodainly fall to
the grounde, and ouerwhelme all thoſe
that are about it.The worlde in decaie. And whē I conſider this
worlde, me thinkes it is like an olde ruinous
buildyng of whiche the ſaid, morter,
and ſtones is ſo old, that thei fall awaie by
little and little, what ſhall we thinke then
of ſuche a building but ſodaine ouerthrow
eare we beware.
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     Thou putteſt me in remēbrance
of a melancolike man,Gal. de loc. affect. that Gallen maketh
mention of. This man had heard the fable
that the auncient Poets fained of Atlas
bearyng the heauens on his ſhoulders,The fable of Atlas. and

being ouercome with melancolike humor
was ſore afraied leaſt Atlas being weried
the heauy burthen,De fac qui appar. in. lum. ſhould either let it fall,
or throwe it of on his ſhoulders, & ſo cruſh
bothe hym and all the worlde to peeces.
Plutarch alſo maketh mentiō of an other,
whiche was ſore afraied leaſt the Moone
ſhould fall, and greatly pitied and lamented
thoſe Nations whiche were vnder the
Moone: as the Etheopians, and thoſe of the
Ile of Taprobana. He would alſo haue
feared leaſt the Skie ſhould haue fallen, if
it had not beene holden vp by Atlas Cullumms.
                     
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Wee vſe a common prouerbe to
thoſe that be fearefull: what and the Skie
fall, then we ſhall catche larkes.
                  
                  
                     Iorom.
                     
                        Aristottle ſaith: that the beginnyng
of this prouerbe came, that ſome
rude and ignorant elders beleued that the
heauens were ſuſtained by Atlas, and not
onely Poets, but alſo ſome Phiſitions
haue affirmed it, naturall Philoſophers
haue affirmed the ſame.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     I care not whence the prouerbe
came, but I am ſure if that ſhould come to
paſſe, wee ſhould catche more fooles then
larkes, for there would be a greate many

catched in thoſe nettes. And I doubte not
but all that heard this poore ſoule, had
good ſporte at hym. But I doubte muche
leaſt men now adaies are more diſeaſed,Diuerſities 
                              〈◊〉
                            follie.
and farther out of their wittes, then thoſe
or ſuch like Melancolike men as thou talkeſt
of are: for thei feared that whiche thei
neede not, and wee feare not that whiche
we ſhould feare. We ſee the worlde fall in
decay, and yet think it ſhould laſt for euer.
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     Thou haſt preuented me of my
ſaiyng: but to that I will adde that which
Horace ſaieth touchyng this matter.
                     Some kinde of fooles to fearefull are,Horace ſer. Lib. 2. ſat. 3.
                     
                     and thinke eche pleaſant waie,
                     With fiers, with rockes, with diches deepe,
                     beſet and ſo their ſtaie.
                     An other ſorte farre different,
                     no wiſer then the firſt:
                     Will headlong launche to daungers deepe,
                     not castyng earſt the worſt:
                     No floud, no fire, no rocke, no bryer,
                     can ſtaie their brainleſſe wit,
                     Crie father, mother, wife, or kinne,
                     beware the rocke or pit.
                     As muche thei heare as dronken Fuſe
                     whiche Ilions parte did take:
                     And ſlept when Catie cryed full oft,
                     
                        
good mother now awake.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     I perceiue Horace ſpeaketh of
one ſorte of fooles, which feare great danger
where there is none, and with greate
trembling are afraid of their own ſhadow.
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     There is a prouerb of thoſe that
feare their owne ſhadowe: but contrariwiſe
there are other fooles, that feare no
daunger, though thei ſee it before their eyes
or bee warned of it. There is neither
freende nor foe ſhall councell them, or diſwade
them: but thei will headlong throw
them ſelues into preſent miſcheefe, and
will not chaunge their mynde, though all
the worlde had ſworne naie.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     But I doe well vnderſtand what
Horace meaneth, by talking of Fuſe, Ilion,
and Catien.
                     
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     He telleth of a pleaſant chaunce
that happened in a Tragedy whiche was
plaied, as wee at this daie doe plaie ſtage
Plaies: wherein Fuſe was one of the Players,
& plaied the part of Ilion the daughter
of Kyng Priam, and Catien plaied the
part of Polidore the brother of Ilion. Now
in the Plaie Ilion ſhould ſleepe, & Polidore
ſhould appeare to her in a dreame, and waken
her and her mother Hecuba and crie,

mother, ſiſter. And becauſe Fuſe his parte
was to ſleepe, he victuailed hymſelf with
good ſiropps, and dranke his ſkinne full,
and fell ſo faſt a ſleepe, that thei could not
plaie: ſo Catien that plaied Polidors parte,
with his criyng mother and ſiſter neuer ſo
loude could not once wakē 
                        Fuſe out of his
ſleepe. Yea Horace ſaith: that if there had
been a thouſandes Catiens and had cryed
till their hartes had aked, thei could not
haue wakened hym, hee ſlept ſo ſoundly:
which when the people ſawe, thei all cried
with one voice, mother, mother: and ſo all
the Tragedy was turned to a laughter.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     But to what purpoſe doeth Horace
alleadge this example.
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     Mary to this purpoſe: to tell of
thoſe that will runne headlōg into preſent
danger, and though men admoniſhe them
neuer ſo much, and cry to them to diſwade
them, thei will no more hearken to father
or mother, brother or ſiſter, freende or foe,
then a dronkarde ouerladen with Wine,
whiche can no more be wakened, then Catien
could waken Fuſe with al his criyng.
And thereby concludeth, that the aduenturous
fooles of theſe days are like, which
can not perceiue in what danger thei are,

nor doe more eſteeme the admonition and
warnyng that is giuen them, then if they
had not heard it, or were without ſence.
Wherefore it is muche to bee feared leaſt
it happen to vs as it did to thoſe that were
drowned with Noes floud.
                           
                              •
                           en. 7. 8. 19. Whoſe example
Chriſte laieth before vs for the ſame
cauſe,
                           
                              •
                           ath. 24. or as it happened to thoſe of Sodome
and Gomorha,
                        Theſſ. 5. whiche were ſodainly conſumed
with fire from Heauen. And that
when we ſaie peace, peace, our ouerthrow
come not ſodainly on vs, before wee haue
leaſure to ende our buſineſſe. For if our
age were of Golde,The new mel
                           
                              •
                           yng of the Worlde. Siluer, Braſſe, Iron,
or any other mettall, it might bee molten
againe and made a newe, but beyng as it
is, I haue ſmal hope. What thinkeſt thou
Theophrastus.
                     
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     If I had any hope, I ſhould rather
hope, that God would doe as he hath
promiſed by his Prophets: he ſaith he will
gather together all the Golde, Siluer,
Braſſe, Copper, Tinne, Lead, Latten, and
all other mettals, and will caſt them into
a furnaſe in the middeſt of Ieruſalem, to
purge them, and to trie out all the droſſe
and falſhoode. But it is very harde to doe
this, for the diſeaſe is incurable.
                  
                  
                     
                     Ierom.
                     Wee maie well ſaie with Titus
Liuius, that the worlde is ſo corrupt, that
wee can neither awaie with the vices, nor
the remedies neceſſarie for the ſame.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     He is a very waiwarde and vnpatient
patient, and therefore is like an olde
year then pot, whiche when it is once cracked,
can neither be molten, ſowed, nor mē
                        ded
againe, but the ſhardes ſerue either to
lade out water, or to fetch fire in. And yet
I am afraied leaſt that happen vnto hym
whiche the Lorde by his Prophets threatneth
the wicked withall: ſaiyng, that he
wil breake them like an year then pot, and
will not leaue ſo muche as one peece or
ſharde to carrie either fire or water in: Or
els that whiche Dauid Propheſieth of the
wicked, ſaiyng: Thei ſhalbe all pulled vp
like thornes, which no man handleth: and
if any man touche them, he ſhall be fenced
with Iron, or the ſtaffe of a ſpeare, and thei
ſhall be wholie burnt: Dauid doth rightly
compare the wicked to thornes, whiche euery
waie doe hurte: for thei doe not onely
hinder the earth from bearyng fruite, but
alſo pricke and hurte thē, that either come
neare them or handle them. Therefore the
Lorde threatneth the wicked as vnruly

thornes, that he will not onely cut them,
but wholie plucke them vp, and becauſe
none dare come neare them or touche thē:
he hath promiſed that their handes ſhal be
fenced with Iron that thei maie handle
them, and to giue them forkes to throwe
them into fire, to burne and conſume them
to naught.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     I once complained that menne
tranſfigured thēſelues into brute beaſtes.
But I am now more afraied, leaſt thei become
worſe and more furious, then ye man
whiche was poſſeſſed with a legiō of Deuilles:
whiche dwelte emong the graues,
and could neither be tied nor chained, but
he brake theim. I remember an old wiues
tale in our countrie, that S. Barnard had
the Deuill chained on the hill where his
Abbey ſtādeth: and becauſe he went about
to gnawe the the chaine a ſonder to get awaie:
the Smithes there about euery mō
                        daie,
before thei went to worke, ſtrike thre
ſtrokes with their hammer on the Andfild
to mende and repaire the chaine which he
had gnawē, leaſt he ſhould breake it in ſonder
and get looſe. If it bee ſo, it appeares
that S. Barnard tied him not ſure inough
or els that the Smithes did not their duetie

to mende his chaine, for it ſemeth now,
that he is not onely broken looſe hymſelf,
but hath opened hell gates for all his companions,
& ſo thei are ſpred ouer the whole
worlde. I knowe not what rule thei keepe
in hell, but I thinke verily that the deuils
are broken looſe,Apoc. 12. and goe aboute to make
an other hell in this worlde, that thei maie
haue a hell, as well for quicke as for dead.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Thou art well ſeen in old wiues
tales. But to ſpeake in earneſt, I am afraied
leaſt that Deuill, that is ſpoken of
in the Apocalips, whiche was bound for a
thouſand yeres, be let looſe and haue more
libertie now then euer he had: And leaſte
that Read Dragon, whiche is all embrued
with the blood of Martires, who with his
Angels fought in the heauens againſt S.
Michael & his Angels, be throwne doune
from heauen, that is to ſaie: frō the churche
of Ieſus Chriſte by the power of his Goſpell,
and that he is fallē on the earth with
his Angels, that is to ſaie, into the hartes
of the wicked, reprobate, and worldly men
whom he filleth with rage and furie, to ouerthrowe
the whole Churche of GOD.
Wherfore,Apoc. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . we maie well ſaie with S. Ihon
Wo bee to the inhabitantes of the yearth

and the ſea: For the Deuill is come doune
emong you in greate wrathe, knowyng
that his time is ſhort, he is in greater rage
then euer he was, fearyng the loſſe of his
kingdom. It is good reaſon, that it ſhould
happen to Chriſtiās, as our ſauior Chriſt
did foretell vnto the Iewes,Puniſhment of Iewes. by the ſimilitude
of the wicked ſpirite, whiche walked
through deſart and drie places to ſeke reſt
but founde none:Matth. 12. then he ſaied: I will returne
into myne houſe frō whence I came
and when he came he founde it emptie,
ſwept, and garniſhed: then he went in, and
tooke vnto hym ſeuen other ſpirites worſe
then hymſelf. And the ende of that man, is
worſe then the beginnyng.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     This parable ſemeth very darke
to me, what meaneth our Sauiour Chriſt
thereby.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Euen ſo happened it to the Iewes.Exod. 13. 14. 19. 20.
The lorde caried them out of Egipt,
and gaue them his lawe,Pſalm. 78. wherby he droue
the Deuill from emongeſt them. But thorowe
their Idolatrie and Synne, he gaue
them ouer to the hand of Tirantes, which
Moſes told them of before, by whoſe meanes
Sathan went about vtterly to deſtroy
the people of GOD. It appeareth more

plainly in the Bookes of the Iudges, Samuell,
the Kynges, the Chronicles, and the
Machabees, that thei were many tymes
afflicted by Gentiles & Idolaters, which
were their neighbours, and principally by
the Aſſirians, Babilonians, and Greekes,
but eſpecially by Antiochus Epiphanes,
who rightly is taken for the figure of Antichriſt,
by reaſō of his heinous enterpriſes
againſt God and his worde.1. Eſdras. 1. But the lorde
beyng alwaies mercifull to his Churche,
after he had chaſtiſed them for their ſinnes
did deliuer them frō theſe greate miſchieues,
and gaue theim ſome reſpite and conſolation.
But thei afterward forgat again
the ſcourage of the lorde, and behaued them
ſelues worſe againſt Chriſte his Apoſtles
and diſciples, then euer their predeceſſors
did againſt the Prophetes?Daniel. 9. Therefore thei
could looke for nothyng,Rom. 10. 11. but onely the viſitation
of God, more ſharply and terribly
then before, and that he ſhould deſtroy and
wholy ouerthrowe thē, giuyng them ouer
to the power of ſathan which he did, when
he called the Gentiles to the grace of the
Goſpell, and reiected theim, and gaue thē
ouer into the hands of the Romaines,Matth. 24. who
haue more cruelly handled them,Luks. 21. then any

of the tyrantes before that tyme. Wherefore
Ieſus Chriſt ſaied not without cauſe,Matth. 2. 4.
that there was neuer ſuche tribulatiō nor
vengeance of God,The Iewes are amanifeſt example of the iudgemēt of God. ſince the beginnyng of
the worlde: of whiche vengeance the ſcatteryng
of the Iewes throughout all the
worlde, is witneſſe to this daie. Whereby
we maie well perceiue, how God hath reſerued
them, as a witneſſe of his iuſte iudgement,
to al thoſe that ſtande againſt Ieſus
Chriſt or his Goſpell. For there is not
a more miſerable nor curſed people vnder
the cope of heauē: by whom God hath ſhewed
vs a great example, if we cā beware.
But we ſeme to bee holy like thē: thei had
the exāple of Sodome and Gomorha before
their eyes:Gene. 19. for thei might almoſte ſe from
their owne Countrie, the cituation of the
tounes, whiche by fire and brimſtone ſent
from heauen, were conſumed by the iuſte
iudgement of God: whoſe witneſſe remaineth
on the yeareth for euer. For, where as
before it was compared to Paradiſe, now
it remaineth ſo in Gods curſe,Gene. 13. that it beareth
no fruite that can ſuſtaine man, but it
turneth immediatly into ſmoke and aſhes.Stra. lib. 16.
As the Heathen Hiſtoriographers & Coſmographers
witneſſe,Cor. tac. li. 23. The Iſraelites and namely Cornelius

Tacitus, & Strabo, although thei knew
not the iudgement of God, from whence it
proceaded. The Iſraelites whiche held Samaria,
had there a plaine ſpectacle before
their eyes, but thei could not beware by it,
but ſo farre prouoked the wrathe of God,
that he driued theim by the Aſſirians, from
the land that he had giuen them. Likewiſe
their brethren of Iuda ſawe all theſe examples
and iudgementes of God manifeſtly,Iuda.
and could not amende, but did worſe then
Iſrael: wherefore God puniſhed them like
wiſe by the Babilonians. Their ſucceſſors
might haue been warned by the examples
and puniſhmentes of their predeceſſours.
But it behoued them (as our ſauior Chriſt
told them) to fil vp the meaſure of their fathers.Matth. 23.
And therefore God muſt needes vſe
extreme vengeaunce towardes them, and
ſo curſe them as we at this daie ſe, frō one
ende of the worlde to the other.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     I am afraied leaſt the like happē
now to vs Chriſtians.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     It is ſore to bee feared: For now
Ieſus Chriſte is come, whiche hath driuen
and diſcouered ſathā, that quietly raigned
in the worlde, and called the Gentiles and
Painims, from whom wee ſprang, to the

grace of the Goſpell, whiche euer before
ſerued the Deuill and his Idols. But we
very vnthankfully receiue the grace that
God hath ſhewed vs. Therefore we maie ſe
what vengaunce God hath vſed towardes
the Eaſte Churches, and againſte all the
Churches of Aſia and Affrica, by that
falſe Prophet Mahomette, and by the
Turke his adherentes: The moſte Churches
of Europe ought to take hede by their
example.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Thou ſaieſt true, but we wil not
paſſe for it, till wee bee as thei are, and till
theſame light vpon vs.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     If we bee not wholy blinde, wee
maie ſe how the Lorde hath poured out his
wrathe, and exerciſed his vengaunce vpon
vs, through that Romiſhe Antichriſte, for
what diſolatiō and ruine hath he brought
the Chriſtian Churche in. Now after all
this greate deſolation and ruine, which is
fallen on all Churches, Ieſus Chriſt hath
vouchſafed to viſite vs once againe with
his Goſpel, whiche we receiue euen as the
Iewes did. Wherefore I looke for none
other thing, but Gods iuſt iudgement vpō
vs, euen as thei had, and haue to this daie:
and there is none other likelihood, but that

the vtter conſumption of the worlde is at
hande,The deſtruction of Ieruſalē, a figure of the ende of the worlde when their wickedneſſe ſhall come
to the fulneſſe, as theirs of Ieruſalem did,
which was a figure of that laſt iudgement
of God that we loke for. And that was the
cauſe that our ſauiour Chriſt ioyned both
together, in the aunſwere that he made to
his Diſciples,Matth. 24. when thei queſtioned with
hym, of the deſtruction of Ieruſalem, and
the ende of the worlde.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Then haue I good cauſe to ſaie,
that the worlde is poſſeſſed with Deuils.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Naie, it is to be feared, leaſt wee
become worſe: and leaſt that wicked ſpirit
come againe, with vii. other ſpirites worſe
then hym ſelf, and that our ſtate bee worſe
then euer it was.The true Phiſicke of the diſeaſed and poſſeſſed. worlde. For the likelihoodes bee
very greate, the daunger is ſuche, that it is
impoſſible for any to remedy, but only our
Sauior Chriſte, who alone hath all power
to commaunde Deuills, whom thei feare,
and whom onely thei obey.Matth. 8. 17. But ſeyng we
haue forſaken hym, driuen hym awaie frō
vs, and will not receiue hym again,Marke. 1. when
he offereth his grace: it is no meruaile tho
there be many in the worlde poſſeſſed with
deuils, ſeyng he is gone that had onely power
to caſt them out. And therefore we are

like thoſe, that bound and chained the poſſeſſed
man, that dwelt emong the graues:
for, though thei tied hym neuer ſo faſte, it
was to no purpoſe, he brake all, till our ſauior
Chriſte came, whiche healed hym, and
made hym as meeke as a Lambe. Whiche
worldly men could not doe, by al the meanes
thei could deuiſe.The Phiſitiōs of the diſeaſed worlde. There are many
now adaies, that go about to heale the diſeaſed,
franticke, and poſſeſſed worlde, and
to driue the deuils out of hym. And thinke
to doe it, by their owne pollices, counſels,
aucthoritie, power, and richeſſe, and by the
coniurynges and adiurynges of their Ceremonies
and Traditions, but thei make
hym worſe, as wee haue prooued of long
tyme, and dooe yet ſee it daiely before our
eyes: what thinkeſt thou Ierome.
                     
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     Me thinkes when the worlde comes
out of ſuche Phiſitions handes, he is
like to thoſe that are lead to S. Matunes
in France: for if thei be but frantike when
thei are ledde thether, thei retourne from
thence ſtarke, ſtaryng madde. Alſo I feare
me, leaſt the coniurers that thou ſpeakeſt
of, ſhalbe rewarded as the ſeuen ſonnes of
Sceua the Iewe, (whiche likewiſe were
Coniurers) were, who in goyng about to

caſte out the Deuill out of the poſſeſſed
man of Epheſus, ſo prouoked hym that he
ran on them,Actes. 19. ouerthrew them, and preuailed
againſt them, ſo that thei fled out of the
houſe naked and wounded.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     The like ſhall happē to all thoſe
that goe about to appeaſe the trouble and
furie, that now poſſeſſeth the world, if thei
vſed any other meane, then the power and
wiſedome of the worde of God. For deuils
can not be caſt out, but onely by our ſauior
Chriſt, or his diſciples whiche come in his
name, power, and ſtrēgth. For, it is Ieſus
Chriſt of whō it is written: yt he appeaſeth
the noiſe of the ſeas, & the noiſe of the waues
therof,Pſalm. 65. & tumults of the people. Wherfore
there is none but he that can deliuer ye
little ſhip of the churche of God, frō ye ſwallowing
gulphes,Matth. 8. 14. and troubleſome ſeas of
this world:Ihon. 6. for it is onely to him, yt the windes
& tempeſtes obey, which are creatures
without reaſon or vnderſtandyng, neither
hearyng nor ſeyng: therfore thei feare and
acknowledge none but God, to bee their
maiſter & gouernor.The true coniuryng of Deuilles. There is none other
coniuration, that hath any power ouer thē
but onely the name of Ieſus Chriſte: and
he that cōmeth in any other name, or bryngeth

any other doctrine, ſhal not heale the
diſeaſe, but rather increaſe it. And it is not
inough to come in the name of Chriſt, and
to bryng his doctrine, but it muſt be doen
with his ſpirit, and faithe. For, the ſonnes
of Sceua did vſe the name of Chriſt, when
thei Coniured the wicked ſpirite, yea, the
name of Ieſus which Paule preached:Actes. 16. but
he obeyed thē not, for thei tooke the name
of Ieſus in vaine, not hauyng ſuche faithe
in hym and in his worde, as Paule had: and
therefore the Deuill anſwered them, that
he knewe them, but feared them not. Many
alſo in theſe daies come in the name of
Chriſt, and boaſt muche of his Goſpel, but
becauſe thei are without faithe and affection,
towardes the churche of Chriſt, their
doctrine is of no greate force. For, the power
of Ieſus Chriſt and his doctrine, conſiſteth
not in wordes, but in faith: his troth
lieth not in the tong, but in the harte. For
the Goſpell is no Goſpell, nor the woorde
of God is no worde, but onely the dead letter,
except it be ioyned with the power and
efficacie of the holie ghoſt, who is the aucthor
thereof. Neither hath it any great power
in him that vttereth it, except it be vttered
in faithe, ſo that he maie truely ſaie

with Dauid and S. Paule,
                        Pſalm. 116. I haue beleeued,2. Cor. 4.
and therefore haue I ſpoken. And, we
alſo beleue, and therefore ſpeake. For, to vſurpe
the worde of God, onely in ye mouth,
without the faithe and trothe of the ſpirite
of God, is to abuſe the name of God, as the
falſe Prophetes, Hirelynges, and Enchaunters
doe: for, the kyngdome of God
conſiſteth not in the woorde, but in the power
and efficacie of theſame.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     I beleue thee very well: & ſeyng
that there is ſo little faith in the worlde, I
do not muche meruaile, though the worde
of God take ſo little effect in many now a
daies, aſwel the Preachers as the hearers.
Furthermore, yu maieſt wel cal this world
a ragyng ſea, for it is toſſed and turmoiled
on euery ſide, with horrible & violent windes
of ambition, vainglory, auarice, extortion,
Pride, arrogancie, preſumption, ouer
wenyng, enuie, hatred, malice, and vengeaunce:
whiche haue ſo ſwollen and moued
it, and toſſed vp the waues ſo high, that I
looke euery howre whē it ſhall ouer flowe,
and droune vp the earth, as Noes flood did.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     The Geographers, and natural
Philoſophers write, that there are fower
principal windes that blowe on the earth:

beſides them there are other, euery one in
his place, but none of thē writeth commō
                        ly
of more then of xii. in all, and the violent
bluſteryng of one or twoo of theſe, is ſufficient
to trouble bothe yearth, ſea, aire, and
to ouerthrowe altogether. Let vs not then
meruaile though the ſea of this worlde, be
wonderfully troubled, & we in great danger,
conſideryng that there are more then
xii, yea, xii.C. or xii.M. contrary windes,
that ceaſe not daiely to bluſter and blowe
one againſt an other. What waues will
thei make? What tempeſtes muſte thei
moue? And yet we are in worſe caſe.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     How is it poſſible to be worſe.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Thus, thoſe mē that ſaile on this
ſea, are all in one daūger, and therfore thei
ought to laie holde on their tacklyng, and
ſet hand to the ores, & ſo help the mariners
and gouernors, to ſaue thēſelues frō dannger,
& to auoide preſent death: but thei are
ſo ouerthwarte, and ſo hate one an other,
that to be reuēged the one of the other, thei
bore holes in the Ship, wherein thei them
ſelues are, to droune their fellowes, who
cannot be drouned without them.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     I doe not well vnderſtand thee.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     When a ſhip is full of holes, are

not all thei in great daūger that are in it?
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Thei are not verie farre from
their death.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     What wouldeſt thou ſaie, if ther
were ſome in the Shippe, that would bore
holes in it, to droune their fellowes.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     I would ſaie, yt thei wer not well
in their witts, & that thei were bothe murtherers
of their fellowes, & of themſelues.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Euen the like is daily vſed emōg
men. For we ſe that thei do not onely hinder
themſelues, in ſekyng to hinder other,
but alſo vndo thē ſelues, in ſeking to vndo
other. It is euen as muche, as though the
brother, ſhould go about to droune the brother,
or one neighbor an other: ſo that thei
are not worthy to be called mē, but rather
ſea monſters, whales, & ſuche other greate
fiſhe, as eate vp the little fiſh. I would aſke
thee a queſtion. If thou ſhouldeſt ſe a man
teare his face, pul out his eyes, cut his noſe
and his eares, breake his head againſt the
walles, & thruſt a knife in his own throte:
wouldſt thou think him in his right wits?
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Who would not Iudge hym
ſtarke madde?
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     If wee marke the trade of the
worlde now adaies, we can not but Iudge

hym ſuche a one. For, ſithe we are all one
body, he that goeth aboute to hinder or vndoe
his neighbor, doeth he not lay handes
on hym ſelf? Doeth he not diſfigure his
owne body, and like a madd man teare his
owne members? And ſo vndoe hymſelf.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Doe you then meruaile though
I complaine, and that my wittes bee ſo
troubled, that I wotte not what to ſaie: I
ſee that Truth, Right, Iuſtice, and Equitie,
are not to be founde on the yearth.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Where ſhall we ſeke them then?Princes Courtes.
In the Popes courte, or in the courtes of
Princes, or great lordes that perſecute the
churche of Chriſt? Who doeth now maintaine
truthe and iuſtice, but onely ſuche as
Dauid deſcribeth theſe of Saules court to
be? that is, his mortall enemies: of whō he
complaineth thus.Pſalm. 59. Thei goe to and fro in
the euenyng,1. Samu. 19. thei barke like dogs, and go
about the citie. Behold thei bragg in their
talke, and ſwordes are in their lips. Euen
as thei that were ſent by Saule, went and
came, and cloſed Dauids houſe, whē 
                        Saule
ſought to put hym to death, to the end he
might not eſcape, and as thei rored & howled
like doggs that purſue wilde beaſtes,
euen ſo doe thei now adaies, ſeke after the

true ſeruauntes of God. We may adde to
this ſaiyng of Dauid, that that he ſaieth in
an other Pſalme, of the nature of the wicked,Pſalm. 10.
thus. He ſaieth in his harte, I ſhal neuer
be moued, nor be in dāger. His mouth
is full of curſyng, deceipte, & fraude, vnder
his tong is miſchief & iniquitie. He lieth
in waite in ye villages, in the ſecret places
doeth he murther th' innocent, his eyes are
bent againſt the poore. Wherefore doeth
the wicked condemne God? he ſaith in his
harte, thou wilte not regarde. Heare alſo
what Micheas ſaieth touchyng the ſame
matter.Micha. 7. The good man is periſhed out of
the earth, & there is none rightous emong
men, thei all lye in waite for blood, euery
man hunteth his brother with a nette. To
make good for the euil of their handes, the
Prince aſked, and the Iudge iudged for a
reward: therefore the greate man he ſpeaketh
out of the corruption of his ſoule, ſo
thei wrap it vp. The beſt of thē is as a brier
and the moſte rightous of them is ſharper
then the Thorne hedge.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     All this we ſee in our tyme.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Therfore we maie well ſaie, that
it is the tyme whereof Eſaie complaineth,Eſaie. 59.
ſaiyng:Roma. 3. Your handes are full,Pſalm. 7. and poluted

with blood, & your fingers with inquitie.
Your lips ſpeake lies, and your tong murmureth
wickedneſſe. There is none that
crieth for iuſtice, none iudgeth accordyng
to trothe, but truſt in vaine thynges. Thei
ſpeake thynges of nought, thei cōceiue labor,
and bryng forthe iniquitie. Thei haue
broken the ſerpēts eggs: and thei ſpin the
ſpiders web. He that eateth of their eggs
ſhall dye, and if thei bee broken, there will
come forthe a Cockatrice. The woorke of
wickedneſſe is in their handes, their feete
run to doe miſchief, and thei make haſte to
ſhed the blood of ye innocēt. Their thoughtes
are thoughtes of vanitie, waſt and perdition
is in their waie: thei haue not knowen
the way of peace, and there is no iudgemēt
in their pathes. Thei ſo peruerted
their own waies, that whoſoeuer walketh
in thē, ſhall not knowe peace. And therfore
heare what councell Michea giueth vs againſt
ſuche people.Mich. 7. Truſt ye not in a frēd
neither put ye confidence in a counceller,
kepe the dores of thy mouthe, frō her that
lieth in thy boſome. For the ſonne reuileth
the Father, the daughter riſeth vp againſt
her Mother, the daughter in lawe againſt
her mother in lawe, and a mans enemies

are the men of his own houſe. Therfore I
will looke vnto the lorde: I will waite for
God my Sauior, my God will heare me.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     I promiſe you, this is very good
counſell.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Who cā deny, but that Eſay was
a great Phiſitiō, and did better knowe the
Nature of man, then euer did Eſculapius,
Hypocrates, or Gallen, whiche are eſtemed
the princes of Phiſick? For in their liues,
thei neuer made ſo good & true Anatomie
of man, as the Prophet hath doen in this
place, euen now alledged, neither did thei
euer deſcribe ſo truely & liuely, al the partes
of the bodie, to make vs the better to
knowe and vnderſtand all the nature therof.A propheticall anatomie of man and of the world.
For he maketh an Anatomie bothe of
body and ſoule, wherein he ſo aptly deſcribeth
all the partes with their properties, yt
there is nothyng that cā be added vnto it.
He firſte ſheweth generally, what whole
man is, then commeth he to the principall
partes of him: that is, the hed and the hart:
and frō them, to the tong and the mouthe:
the handes & the feete, to thende his Anatomie
might be perfite, & for further declaration
thereof he ſaith:Eſay. 5
                              •
                           . iudgement is turned
backward, and iuſtice ſtandeth a farre

of, for truthe is fallen in the 
                           ••
                        reate, and equitie
cannot enter. Yea truth faileth, and
he that refraineth from euill, maketh hym
ſelf a praie, and when the Lorde ſawe it, it
diſpleaſed hym that there was no Iudgement.
And when he ſawe that there was
no man, he wondered that none would offer
hymſelf: therefore his arme did ſaue it,
and his righteouſneſſe it ſelf did ſuſtain it.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     I would he would yet ſaie more,
for there was neuer more neede. I beleue
when the Prophet ſpake this, he foreſawe,
by inſpiration of the holy ghoſte, the trade
of the worlde now adaies: for it is vnpoſſible
better to painte out our tyme, or with
liuelier colours, then he hath doen. For,
what is the worlde now, but a wilde Forreſt
and deſert of horrible theftes and murthers?
For there is now almoſt no iuſtice,
but in the force of the hande and ſworde,
whereby he carieth awaie the price, bee it
right or wrong. Is not this true Ierome?
                     
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     
                        Ouid ſaith touching this matter
that thei feare no lawes, but iuſtice and equitie
are cōſtrained to giue place to force
and violence: and right beeyng ouercome,
is throwen doune, & laied vnder the ſword
And anon after ſpeakyng of the Iron age

in his Metamorphoſis, he concludeth.
                     L
                           •
                         now lies pitie vnder foote,
                     and Ladie Iustice laste:
                     Of heauenly vertues, from this yearth,
                     in ſlaughter drouned paste.
                     He meaneth as muche in effect, as Heſiodus
before hym had ſaied, whiche is thus
muche in ſomme.
                     Now ſhamefastneſſe and Iustice eke,
                     cleane clad in white araie:
                     Are fled from hence, and bootleſſe
                     griefes, haue left to men for aie.
                     Seing then that it appeareth, that there is
nothing, but wil & might in place of reaſō
and right, it is like the exāple that Homer
bringeth forthe of king Agamemnon, who
ſaid: if ye wil not giue it me, I wil take it.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     That ſentēce was very tirānous
but what other thyng is vſed almoſte now
adaies? And Heſiodus ſpeaking of the like
thyng, bryngeth forthe an example of the
Hauke and Nightingale, wherin he doeth
as it were reproue tyrantes, and ſheweth
how the ſmall and weaker ſorte, are conſtrained
to ſuffer wrong and extortion, of
the ſtronger and violent: and that tirantes
are emong men, as priyng foule are emōg
birdes, his words are thus muche in effect

                           
                           But now to Kyngs a tale I tell,
                           whiche happly earst thei knewe:
                           The Hauke fast caught the Nightyngale,
                           and high in clouds ſhe flewe.
                           This ſillie birde, when ſhe ſo felt
                           thoſe gripyng tallents ſmart:
                           With mournyng voice ſhe waild her hap.
                           when Hauke with cruell hart
                           Gan ſaie, thou wretche why wailest thou?
                           thy better hath thee quaild:
                           Though thou in ſong more pleaſaunt be
                           my power hath now auaild.
                           I maie thee beare from place to place,
                           and ſuppe on thee this night:
                           I maie thee keepe or els releaſe,
                           who can reſist my might?
                           Hereby you ſee what follie tis,
                           to ſtriue with higher powers:
                           Might, now is right, ſo for thy meede:
                           thou getst but ſtormie ſhowers.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Truely poore men that are in tyrants
handes, are like the Nightingale in
the haukes tallents, for, ſyng thei neuer ſo
ſweetely (as the common Prouerbe is) the
belly hath no eares, let them talke, reaſon,
and ſhewe aſmuche law for themſelues as
thei will, it helpes them euen aſmuche, as
did the ſwete ſingyng of the Nightingale

out of the Faulcons tallentes. For, tyrantes
heare with none other eares, nor other
reaſon then their owne, that is their will,
therefore, whoſoeuer reſiſteth thē, is neuer
the nere, for he wrappeth hym ſelf in more
daunger, and moueth them to more wrath.
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     Therefore, we maie well ſaie of
this matter, that we daily proue that to be
true, that king Pirrhus anſwered to one of
his yong children, whiche demaunded of
him, to whō he would reſigne his kingdō,
he anſwered. To hym that hath ye ſharpeſt
ſworde emongſt you: there is almoſt none
other reaſon in the worlde now adaies.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     When I conſider the ſtates and
trades of diuers cities & tounes, mee thinkes
thei be like a den of theues: for there is
almoſte no occupation, art, or practiſe, but
hath his pillyng & pollyng, wherewith he
cutteth poore mens throtes.The ſtate of the worlde. And when I
conſider ye frendſhip & agrement that coū
                        tries,
cities, tounes, villages, neighbours,
kinſfolkes, frendes, brethren, ſiſters, & generally
all men beare one to an other, mee
thinkes I ſee, Griphons, Lions, Beares,
Bores, Wolues, Doggs, Hoggs, Foxes,
Snakes, Vipers, Scorpiōs, Cockatrices,
Egles, haukes, & other priyng birds, with

all kinds of wild beaſtes, ſhut vp together
in a parke or iron cage, which fight, ſting,
bite, teare, deuour, & conſume one an other
And who in this caſe dare come nere them
to ſet thē at one. For thei will aſſone fal vpon
hym that comes to do good, as on him
that comes to make debate, yea, rather ſouer,The greateſt daunger now a daies.
& his daunger is greater. For, it is the
greateſt & moſt dangerous ſtate now adayes,
to be an vpright man. For the Frēche
prouerbe ſaith: he yt makes himſelf a ſhepe
the Wolfe will eate hym. Wherefore, we
muſt plaie the wolfes with wolfes, & wicked
with the wicked, if we wil be at quiet,
yea, it ſo rageth now adaies, that a man cā
                        not
knowe his frend frō his foe. And therfore,A deafe man in a chafe.
they yt meddle to reforme or ſet a ſtaie
in this matter, are vſed as if thei had to do
with a deafe man, who when he is ſtriken
or angred, ſtriketh the next that commeth
nere hym, of ye next that he metes, whether
thei be his frēdes or his foes: wheither thei
come to hurt him or to help hym: for, lacke
of hearyng & vnderſtanding, he is not able
to iudge of his frends frō his enemies, but
al aduētures without reſpect, laies on lode
as though euery man were his enemie.
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     If it bee ſo daungerous to haue

to do with a deaffe man, how muche more
daungerous is it,The worlde deaffe, blind and poſſeſſed to meddle with him that
is bothe deaffe, dombe, yea, and poſſeſſed
with a Deuill, as many are in theſe daies?
Thou haſt heretofore compared the world
to one, poſſeſſed with a Legion of Deuils
but as the poſſeſſed (whiche our Sauiour
Chriſt healed) were of diuers ſortes, ſo are
thei that now adaies liue in the worlde.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Why, how knoweſt thou that?
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     Aſke of Theophraste how many
ſortes our Sauiour Chriſte healed, as he
findeth in the Scriptures: and then thou
ſhalt eaſely knowe, if all thoſe diuers kindes
of deuils, whiche then tormented men
are not now as rife, as euer thei were, or
worſe, and if there bee none poſſeſſed with
deuils now, whiche torment others alſo.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Tell what thou thinkeſt of this
matter Theophrast?
                     
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     I am contented ſo to doe, but before
wee enter any further in this matter:
I muſte deſire leaue to looke home, and I
will come againe ſtraight.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     That is good reaſon, for we will
not trouble thee, if thou haue other buſineſſe.
                  
               
               
                  
                  ¶The title and ſomme, of the
ſeconde Dialogue.
                  THE ſeconde Dialogue is entituled
(Blacke Deuilles) becauſe that mē
                     tion
is made herein, of the moste furious
poſſeſſed with Deuilles, whiche dwelt
emong graues and deſertes, and of ſuche
menne as are like vnto them, and namely of
ſuche as bee tyrauntes, perſecutours, and open
enemies of the people of God. For, this
ſort of Deuills and poſſeſſed, are leſſe tranſfigured
into Angelles of light, then ſuche
cloaked enemies as make ſhewe of frendſhip
and familiaritie.
                  As concerneth the principall poinctes,
whereof this Dialogue treateth, first there
is talke of diuerſities of ſuche Deuilles and
poſſeſſed, as our Sauiour Christ healed.
                  Afterwarde there is ſhewed thee, in
what ſence wicked menne maie bee holden
for poſſeſſed, and what maner of poſſeſſed
thei are.
                  Of good and euill Angelles, and what
thei doe about men.
                  Of the power, malice, and practiſes of
the Deuill, and how ware men ought to be
of them.
                  Of the remainyng of the poſſeſſed in

graues or deſertes, and the cauſes thereof.
                  Of ſuche as are giuen ouer to the Deuill,
and of the iuste iudgement of God on
the wicked, and the Image of their hell.
                  Of ſuche men as are of wilde and vnbrideled
nature.
                  Of the torment of the Soule and Conſeience.
                  Of the power of the brideled Deuill.
                  Of tyrauntes poſſeſſed with Deuilles.
                  Of the Crounes of the redde Dragon,
and their ſignification, and of the iugement
of God on all perſecutours, that haue perſecuted
the people of God.
                  Of the nature and difference of Blacke
Deuilles from White Deuilles, and how
daungerous aſwell the one as the other is.
               
               
                  
                  ¶The ſecond Dialogue
called Blacke Deuilles.
                  Tobie, Theophrast, Euſtace,
Ierome.
                  
                     NOw that thou art come Theophraste,
I praie thee ſhewe vs
(ccordyng to thy promiſe) the
diuerſities & Natures of thoſe
that were poſſeſſed with Deuilles, whom
our Sauiour Chriſt healed.
                  
                     Theo.
                     The Euangeliſtes witneſſe,Matth. 12. that
he caſt out many wicked ſpirites,Marke. 8. that tormēted
the poſſeſſed, wherof thei write not
at large: but there are ſome other of whom
thei write more largely & ſpecially emongeſt
whiche alſo there wer great diuerſity.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Wherevppon doeſt thou gather
that diuerſitie, whereof thou ſpeakeſt?
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     We maie gather it,The diuerſitie of the poſſeſſed healed by our Sauiour Chriſt. either by the
multitude of wicked ſpirites, that then tormented
the poſſeſſed, or by the tyme when
thei began to torment them, or by the workyng
of wicked ſpirites in them, and the
euills whiche the Deuilles did them, or by
the qualitie of the perſones ſo poſſeſſed.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Shew vs the exāple of all theſe

diuers ſortes poſſeſſed, ſo that we may better
vnderſtande, this thy diſtinction.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     There were ſome, whiche were
not tormented with one wicked ſpirit onely,
but with many, ſome likewiſe wer poſſeſſed
and tormented with the Deuil from
their childhoode, and youth: ſome other in
their age, ſome alſo there were, whiche
were not onely in greate furie and rage,
by reaſon of the Deuills whiche poſſeſſed
them, but alſo were both blinde, deaffe, and
dūbe. And touching thoſe that were poſſeſſed,
thei were not all of one qualitie, as we
ſhall perceiue more at large in this place.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     I doe not ſo muche demaunde of
thee,A Legion of Deuilles in the poſſeſſed. the exāple of thoſe that were tormented
with many euill Spirites, becauſe we
haue already talked thereof, in talkyng of
hym that was poſſeſſed with a Legion of
Deuilles.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Sainct Matthewe maketh not
onely mention,Matth. 8. of one that was ſo tormented
with a nomber of Deuilles, but ſaieth
that therewere twoo: Although Saincte
Marke and Sainct Luke, make mention
but of one onely, for that the ſtorie of hym
was ſufficient for theim, to manifeſt that
thyng that ſainct Matthew minded to ſet

forthe, for the power and grace of Ieſus
Chriſt, in the ſtorie of the twoo poſſeſſed, of
whom he writeth. To theſe twoo we maie
adde that, whiche ſaincte Luke writeth of
Marie Sagdaline,Luks. 8. ſaiyng: That our Sauiour
Chriſt caſt out ſeuen Deuills from
her, wherewith ſhe was poſſeſſed.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     What haſt thou to ſaie of theſe
kind of poſſeſſed,The errours of the Papiſts touchyng Mary Magdaline. & namely of Mary Magdaline:
for there are many that vnderſtand
that thoſe ſeuen Deuilles which our Sauiour
caſt out, were the ſeuen deadly ſinnes
whiche had ouercome her. Haſt not
thou heard the like Eustace.
                     
                  
                  
                     Eust.
                     Yea, I haue heard our Preachers
preache ſo, whiche ſaie that ſhe was a common
Harlot, before ſhe was conuerted to
Chriſt, but when he cōuertrd her, he droue
out ſeuen Deuilles out of her, that is to
ſaie: the ſeuen deadly ſinnes, whereunto
ſhe was ſubiect like a poore miſerable ſinner,
giuen ouer to all filthineſſe. I thinke
Theophrastus will not ſaie the contrarie.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     If I ſhould ſhew how many kind
of waies your Preachers are deceiued in
this thyng, and you with them, I ſhould
ſpend to muche tyme, and goe to farre frō
the cheefe matter whereof we now talke:

wherefore I will but glaunce ouer the
pointes whiche ſerue leaſt to our matter.
                  
                  
                     Euſt.
                     Wherein is it that our Preachers
are deceiued and we with them?
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Firſt,Luke. 7. in that thei take Marie
Magdaline,
                        Ihon. 12. and Marie the ſiſter of Lazarus
and Martha,
                        Luke. 7. 8. & the ſinner of whom
S. Luke ſpeaketh, al for one womā, where
in deede thei are three ſeuerall women, as
it is eaſie to bee proued by the Hiſtories of
the Goſpell: if I had tyme to talke of it,
but that I will leaue till more leaſure.
                  
                  
                     Euſt.
                     What haſt thou to ſaie more.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     That your Doctors herein doe
ſhew their ignoraunce,The number of mortall ſinnes. in forgiuyng ſuche
nomber of mortall ſinnes, as if there were
but ſeuen.
                  
                  
                     Euſt.
                     Why, thinkeſt thou that there are
moe?
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Yea, I ſaie that all ſinnes are
mortal of them ſelues, for that thei deſerue
death, euen eternall death: and ſo remaine
continually mortall to the reprobates, in
as muche as thei neither aſke nor obtaine
pardon through Ieſus Chriſt,The differēce betweene mortall and veniall ſinnes whiche maketh
them veniall to the elect of God, thorow
ſtedfaſt faith in him. But becauſe this
is not to our matter, I will wade no further

in it.
                  
                  
                     Euſt.
                     Thinkeſt thou then,The ſeuen Deuils which were in Mary Magdaline. that thoſe ſeuen
Deuilles that were in her, of their very
nature and ſubſtaunce?
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     No man can denie it, except he
will manifeſtly gaineſaie S. Luke and ouerthrow
his meaning, for he ſpeaketh not
in this place of the forgiueneſſe of ſinnes,
whiche Synners obtaine through Ieſus
Chriſte: but he manifeſtly ſpeaketh of the
merueilous woorkes of Chriſte, through
which, he not onely deliuered the poſſeſſed
of the wicked Spirites whiche tormented
them, but alſo he healed many of diuers diſeaſes,
infirmities & ſickenneſſes. Wherefore,
there is no cauſe why thei ſhould here
take thoſe Deuilles for the ſeuen deadly
ſinnes.The differēce betwixt the poſſeſſed, and thoſe that the Deuill dwelleth in by ſin. For if we will vnderſtande hereby
that our Sauiour Chriſt driueth Deuils
out of thoſe, who he deliuereth out of their
handes, and withdraweth from ſinne: wee
maie rightly ſaie, that he woorketh many
ſuche miracles daiely. But thei are miracles
in the ſoule, whereof S. Luke ſpeaketh
no whitt in the place here alleadged,
but of ſuche miracles as were manifeſtly
doen in the bodie it ſelf. For although the
Deuill dwell in thoſe that are ſubiect vnto

hym through ſinne: neuertheleſſe, we do
not properly call them poſſeſſed with Deuilles,
except thei torment their bodie, or
ſo trouble their mynde, as it tourne into a
furie or rage. And if wee ſhould take the
Deuilles for mortall ſinnes, in all the poſſed
that the Euangeliſtes make mention
of, wee could not then ſaie, that our Sauiour
Chriſte did caſt out Deuilles of very
nature and ſubſtaunce of the poſſeſſed whō
he healed, but only that he deliuered them
frō their ſinnes. For there is no more reaſon
to driue vs to take thoſe deuils (whiche
poſſeſſed Marie Magdaline) for ſinnes,
then of any other ſo poſſeſſed.
                  
                  
                     Euſt.
                     I perceiue well enough that I
ſpende my tyme in waſte to diſpute with
you. For your new Diuinitie condemneth
all the doctrine of our Doctors and Preachers,
and ye like nothyng but onely your
newe opinions.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Our opinions are not newe, neither
do we condemne the doctrine of your
Doctors and Preachers, nor of any other,
but where thei are contrarie to the pure
worde of God. And if wee condemne any
doctrine by this woorde, it is not wee that
condemne it, but God hymſelf: whoſe ſentence

we doe but pronounce as heretofore
his Prophetes, Apoſtles and Euangeliſts
haue doen.
                  
                  
                     Euſt.
                     Seing you expoūd the holy ſcriptures
as it pleaſeth you, I will let Tobie
and you goe forwarde with your matter.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     I denie not for my part,In what ſence the wicked maie be holden for poſſeſſed. but that
the poſſeſſed which ye Euangeliſts ſpeake
of, were verely poſſeſſed with Deuilles: otherwiſe
then ſinners, wicked and reprobate
are commonly poſſeſſed with ſynne,
through which the Deuil dwelleth in thē.
But on the other ſide, maie we not rightly
holde the wicked and reprobate for poſſeſſed,
which giue them ſelues ouer to the deuill,
and doe the workes of the ſame? For
though thei ſhew fairer countenaunce, thē
thoſe whom we properly cal poſſeſſed, and
ſhew them ſelues not ſo furious, neuertheleſſe,
thei many tymes execute ſtrōger and
horribler thynges, then thei do, whiche are
euen holden for very poſſeſſed.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     I doe not onely agree to that that
thou haſt ſpoken, but I ſaie further, that
this ſorte of poſſeſſed are muche more dangerous
thē the other, if a man could know
them. For, the leſſe thei are knowne the
more hurt thei doe, not only to other men,

but to their owne ſelues. And becauſe men
can not well perceiue how the Deuil hurteth
their ſoules by meanes of ſinne. God
hath ſet forth this Image before their eyes
in the perſones of the poſſeſſed whiche are
knowne to be ſuche, to the ende that by thē
thei might learne to know, by the tyranny
whiche the Deuill executeth on their bodies,
what tyranny he vſeth on their ſoules
when thei are giuen ouer to hym. Now,
when wee reade that whiche the Euangeliſtes
haue written of the poſſeſſed, let vs
cōſider in them, the eſtate of poore ſinners
whiche are in the power of Sathan.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     What ſaieſt thou to the firſt, touchyng
the poſſeſſed, whiche are tormented
with many Deuilles.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Thou knoweſt that it hath beene
a common opinion among Chriſtian men
of long tyme, that God hath giuen to eche
man a good Angel to keepe hym, and likewiſe
that euery man hath an euill Aungell
that ſtriueth with the good, and goeth about
to hurte and wholie ouerthrowe hym
whoſe euill Aungell he is.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Yea, I can yet ſaie the prayer by
rote that was taught me whē I was yong
to bequeath me to my good Aungell. But

tell me I praie thee, thinkeſt thou not that
euery man hath a good and ill Angell?
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Thou maieſt here perceiue by the
hiſtories of theſe poſſeſſed which were tormented
with ſo many Diuelles, that thei
had more then one euill Angell a peece, for
thei had as many euill Angelles as thei
had Deuilles within them.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     If God ſuffer many Deuilles at
once to fal on one man, to hurt and deſtroy
if thei can, I doubt not, but that he giueth
alſo when it pleaſeth hym many good Angelles
to his children, to guard and defend
them from thoſe wicked Angelles, whiche
are plaine Deuilles.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     The holie Scripture maketh no
expreſſe mention that God giueth any certaine
nomber of Aungelles to his elect,Of the garde and miniſtery of Angelles. to
conduct and defend them,Pſalm. 91. but it generally
teacheth vs,Hebru. 1. yt God hath created Angels to
ſerue thoſe that are appointed to life euerlaſtyng,Math. 4. 18.
and that thei be aſſigned to them,Pſalm. 34.
to defende them. And therefore the Pſalmeſt
ſaieth: That the Angels of the Lorde
are camped like an hoaſt, about them that
feare the Lorde. Furthermore, wee reade
that the charge of a whole Countrey, kingdome
or Empire is giuen by the Lorde to

one Angell,Daniel. 10. as Daniell doeth plainly declare.
Likewiſe wee reade, that God hath
ſometymes ſent many Angelles to keepe
and defende one man, as witneſſeth the viſion
of Heliſeus ſeruaunt:2. Kyng. 5. when the Lorde
cauſed hym to ſee the ſuccour that he ſent
Heliſeus his maiſter.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Seeyng wee haue ſo many enemies,
and ſo cruell, wee haue greate neede
of Gods ſauegarde, & that he ſende his Angelles
to keepe, guide, and defende vs, or
els we ſhould ſurely be but very ill kept.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Although our good God and father,Wakefulneſſe againſt ſnares & aſſaults of Sathan.
hath very well prouided for that from
the beginnyng: neuertheleſſe, we muſt not
bee careleſſe, but watche continually, as
warriours doe, that looke euery houre for
the aſſault or allaroms of their enemies.
And therefore,1. Peter. 5. after S. Peter had admoniſhed
the faithfull to caſt and laie all their
care on God, aſſuring them, yt God would
be carefull for them, he exhorteth them after
this maner: be ſober & watche, for your
aduerſarie the Deuill as a roaryng Lion
walketh about, ſekyng whom he maie deuour,
whom reſiſt ſtedfaſt in the faith. Seyng
then that the lorde hath warned vs of
the malice of our enemie, and of the deſire

                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
that he hath to hurt and ouerthrow vs, and
the diligēce that he vſeth therein, and likewiſe
of the duetie on our part to reſiſt him,
and the meanes that God giueth vs to defende
our ſelues, againſt that ſo daungerous
an enemy, certainly we ought not to
be careleſſe and ſlothfull therin. For, if we
deſpiſe the warnynges, that God by his
worde hath giuen vs, and care no more for
them, then if wee were out of daunger, doe
we not deſerue that God in iuſt iudgemēt
ſhould giue vs ouer, into the hādes of our
aduerſarie, as children of rebellion and diſobediēce.To tēpt God.
For, we are forbidden tempt
God:Dan. 6. and we bothe tempt hym and mocke
him,Math. 4. when we deſpiſe his warnynges, and
vſe not the meanes,Luke. 4. whiche he in his word
hath declared vnto vs,Pſal. 95. and by whiche he
will helpe and ſuccour vs.Heb. 4. 4. And therefore
the exāples of the poſſeſſed,1. Cor. 10. that we ſpake
of euen now,The Deuilles diligent to hurter maie ſerue to waken vs, that
we be not ſodainly ouercome with ſo cruel
an enemy,Iob. 1. 2. who as he deſireth nothing but
our vtter deſtruction,Math. 12. ſo he ceaſeth neither
daie nor night, to range and rome to and
fro, to ſet on vs at vnawares, as we ſe euidently
by the example of Iob, and in the ſimilitude
whiche wee ſpake of before, that

our Sauior Chriſt made vnto the Iewes,
touchyng the wicked ſpirite that wandered
in the deſertes, and ſought for reſt.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     If one deuill be ſufficiēt to trouble,
and torment the whole world, in what
ſtate bee the poore poſſeſſed, that are not
onely troubled with one,The power that the Deuill hath to torment men but with many.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     To th'ende that we maie the better
iudge of this matter, and perceiue the
malice and rage of our aduerſarie, lett vs
cōſider in what furie he brought thoſe poſſeſſed,
whiche anſwered our ſauior Chriſt,
that thei had a Legion of Deuilles within
them, becauſe thei were poſſeſſed with a
great nomber: as it well appeared (when
Chriſt gaue them leaue to depart) by their
enteryng into the Heard of Swine, that
were there by: and then wee ſhall well vnderſtand,
how we maie come to the knowledge
by ſuche examples, into what ſtate
the Deuill bryngeth mennes ſoules, thorowe
the ſynne that raigneth in them, and
into what tormēt and trouble he bryngeth
the whole worlde, by theſame meanes.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     I wene S. Mathew writeth that
theſe twoo poſſeſſed,Math 8. of whō thou ſpeakeſt,
came forth of the graues, & were very fearfull,
ſo that none could paſſe that waie.
                  
                  
                     
                     Theo.
                     S. Marke touchyng this matter
ſaieth,Marke. 5. that he had his abidyng of hym that
he ſpake therof, emong the graues, and no
man could bind him, no not with chaines:
becauſe that whē he was often bound with
fetters & chaines, he plucked the chaines
in ſ
                           •
                        nder, and brake the fetters in peeces,
neither could any man tame hym: and alwaies
bothe night and daie, he cried in the
mountaines,Luke. 8. and in the graues, and ſtroke
hymſelf with ſtones. Sainct Luke ſaieth
further of this matter, that he was long
time poſſeſſed with the deuill, and he ware
no Clothes, neither abode in houſe, but in
graues, and breakyng the bandes that he
was bounde with, was caried of the Deuill
into the wilderneſſe.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     There are many thynges to bee
conſidered in theſe poſſeſſed, in whiche I
would knowe thy minde.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Shewe them in order, and I wil
anſwere thee to euery of theim, as GOD
ſhall giue me grace.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     The firſt is,The abidyng 
                              •
                           f the poſſeſ
                           
                              •
                           ed in graues 
                              •
                           nd deſertes. touchyng their abidyng
in the graues and deſertes: and why
the deuill rather caried them thether, then
to any other place. For, ſainct Luke ſaieth
plainly,
                           
                              •
                           uke. 8. as thou diddeſt rehearſe euen now

that the deuill did cary thē to thoſe places.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Thou muſt vnderſtande,Torment of the body and mynde. that the
deuill doeth not onely torment the poſſeſſed
in their bodies, but alſo thei ſo trouble
their vnderſtanding, that all bodily tormē
                        tes
wer nothyng, in compariſon of the torment
of the mynde, now the deuill hauing
thus troubled their myndes, puttes horrible
and ſtraunge thynges in their imaginatiō:
ſo that many times thei knowe not,
whether thei be beaſtes, men, or deuilles:
whether thei be quicke or dedde, but euen
as their imaginations and fantaſies carry
them.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     I haue ſeen frantike,Fonde imaginations of franticke men Melancolike,
and furious men, whiche were not eſteemed
to bee poſſeſſed, and yet had ſuche
imaginatiōs, as could not be remoued out
of their heddes, though the ſtraungeneſſe
thereof were incredible. I haue heard many
tales of diuers, that haue been in that
takyng: but emongſt other, of ſome which
beeyng out of their wittes, thought thei
were ded: and had this toye rooted in their
fantaſie, that thei could by no meanes bee
perſwaded to eate meate: For, when any
man offered theim either meate or drinke,
thei anſwered, that thei were dedde, & that

ded folkes did neither eate nor drinke: ſo ye
ſome of thē haue died of honger and thirſt:
and ſome of them haue been brought to eatyng,
becauſe that other whiche fained to
be ded aſ well as thei, did eate and drinke.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     
                        Ihon Nider maketh mention of a
certaine Citezen of Vienna in Austriche
whom he ſawe whileſt he ſtudied there,Nider in formicar. Lib. 5. cap. 12. that
could neuer bee perſwaded, either to eate
or drinke, beeyng in this rauerie that thou
ſpeakeſt of, but died for hōger. Now, if diſeaſes
and euill humours that bee in man,
be able ſo to trouble his braine and vnderſtandyng,
it is not to bee doubted, but that
the Deuill can trouble hym more, and by
many other meanes, whereof men knowe
not the cauſes, whether it be that he vſe the
meanes, of the euill diſpoſitiō of thoſe that
he ſeketh, or that he doe it without the aide
or meane thereof. And therefore it is verie
likely, that thoſe deuilles whiche poſſeſſed
the men, that we euē now ſpake of, had put
ſome ſuche like toye in their phātaſie, and
made them imagine that thei were dedde.
For whiche cauſe, thei fled the company of
the liuyng, and withdrewe themſelues into
the graues (whiche wer places appointed
for the dedde) as vnto the lodgyng meteſt

for them, accordyng to their fond imaginatiō.
And becauſe deſert places be not
inhabited, thei withdrewe themſelues thether,
to flee the cōpanie of men. For, there
are ſome melancolike and furious folke, yt
ſo hate men, & are greued with the conuerſation
of others, yt thei cannot away, either
to ſee or heare any body, but deſire to bee alone
like wild beaſts. It ſemeth that theſe
twoo poſſeſſed men, were of theſe ſortes,
and therfore deſired to be in deſert places.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Thei that liue in feare of Death,The feare of death.
liue in a meruailous paine.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Thei liue in a paine whiche tormenteth
them, more then Death it ſelf.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     I doubt not thereof. But mee ſemeth
that theſe, whiche already haue opinion
that thei be ded, and bothe flee frō the
conuerſation of men with greate hatered,
& alſo this preſent life, are in muche more
miſerable eſtate. For, he that feareth death
liueth ſomewhat betwene feare and hope,
but he that hath this opinion, that he is already
dedde, is not onely out of all hope of
life, but euen in the caſe of a condemned
perſone, in the handes of the hangman, or
as the damned ſoule in perpetuall paine.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Therfore thou maieſt well think

in what torment, the Soules of the poore
poſſeſſed are, hauyng ſuche imagination.
For thei were, as hauyng alwaies preſent
death before their eyes, and diyng continually,
and yet can not wholy dye.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     How could thei imagine to bee
already dedde, and yet to dye againe, as if
thei were not wholy dedde? It ſemeth that
theſe imaginations, be quite contrary.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Thou muſt not meruaile at that,
for there is no ſtaie in thoſe, that are troubled
in minde and vnderſtāding, but chiefly
when the deuill puttes in foote: for thei
haue no certaine iudgement, to iudge any
thyng by reaſon,The torment of thoſe, that are giuen ouer to Satan. neither to vnderſtande
reaſon when it is told them. Furthermore
thou ſhalt vnderſtande, that the tormentes
of theſe, whiche are giuen ouer into the hā
                        des
of the Deuil are ſo horrible, that it caſteth
thē into vtter deſpaire: and therefore
thei ſeeke all the meanes thei can, to ridde
themſelues of it, though it be neuer ſo impoſſible.
Wherefore there is no doubt, but
that the damned, whiche beare the iudgemēt
of God, feele thēſelues ſo ouerladen,
with the burthen of his wrathe and curſe,
thei would gladly bee diſpatched: yea, ſo
ded, that there might be no memorie of thē
                        
after death, no more then of brute beaſtes.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     I doubt not but that thei had rather
their ſoules were mortall thē immortall,
and that their bodies might not riſe againe,
rather then to riſe to perpetuall torment.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Thou maieſt well vnderſtande,Matth. 26.
that it was not for nought that our Sauiour
Chriſt ſaied of Iudas:The iudgement of God on the wicked that it had been
better that man had neuer been borne.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Wherefore ſaied Chriſt ſo thinkeſt
thou?
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     He ſaid not ſimply that it had bin
good that Iudas had neuer bin borne.Prouer. 16. For
how miſcheeuous ſo euer he was GOD
made his wicked treaſon to ſerue to his
glorie. And therefore it was good that he
was borne in reſpect of gods glory, which
created all thynges to that end. But ſithe
Iudas was ſo wicked yt he miſcheeuouſly
rebelled againſt God, and therby deſerued
eternall damnation, our Sauiour Chriſte
ſpake in reſpect of ye perſon of Iudas, that
it had been better that he had neuer beene
borne, thē ſo wickedly to caſt away himſelf
for euer. Wherein our ſauiour Chriſt teacheth
vs two thynges worthie to be noted.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     What is the firſt?
                  
                  
                     
                     Theo.
                     That is: that God ſo maketh wicked
Inſtrumentes to ſerue to his glorie,
that by them he executeth his eternall ordenaunce,
and yet neuertheleſſe he puniſheth
theim for their euill imaginations
and wicked workes.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     What is the other poinct?
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     The other poinct is: that he thereby
declareth vnto vs, how horrible y• paine
of the wicked and reprobate is, in that the
greatneſſe of the ſame is not to be compared,
with the excellent gift of this mortall
life, and the benefites which we maie here
receiue.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Yet life is a good and excellent
gift of God.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     That is very true. And therefore
if it be better for man neuer to haue liued,
or neuer to haue bin made, then to be made
to beare the euerlaſting curſe of God thou
maieſt eaſily iudge, how greate a burthē it
is, to beare ſuche a iudgement. And thereby
wee maie perceiue that, whiche Ieſus
Chriſt ſpeake to Iudas concernyng this
matter, was likewiſe ſpoken to all the reprobate
& enemies of God. Ouid becauſe
we can not vnderſtande nor comprehende
them, God hath here ſet forth before our eyes

horrible images in theſe poſſeſſed mē,The Image of the hell of the wicked.
whereof wee ſpeake. For I would aſke
thee a queſtiō. Whether hadſt thou rather
(if thou were put to thy choyce) neuer to
haue been borne, or to bee for euer in the eſtate
that theſe poſſeſſed men were.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     I had rather if I had none other
reſpect but my ſelf, neuer haue been borne
into the worlde.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     And yet all that is writtē of theſe
poſſeſſed men is nothing, in compariſon of
the tormentes of the damned & reprobate:
which beginneth not onely ſo ſone as thei
are departed out of this preſent life, but euen
whileſt thei liue, ſo ſoone as thei reſiſt
God, & fight againſt their own cōſciences
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Wee maie then place thoſe wicked
ones that thou ſpeakeſt of, in the number
of theſe poſſeſſed men that make their
abidyng in the graues: as if thei were alreadie
lodged with death, and had hym alwaies
before their eyes.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Though thei make a fairer ſhew
towardes the world, then the poſſeſſed do,
and are not ſo muche tormented in bodie,
yet are thei no leſſe tormented in ſpirite &
conſcience then thei: for though thei goe about
to appeaſe it, as much as thei can, yet

the Lordes ſaiyng ſhall alwaies remaine
true which he ſpake by the mouth of Eſay:
                        Eſaie. 48.
ſaiyng. The wicked ſhal neuer haue peace
nor quietneſſe, but ſhalbe continually like
the Sea, whiche is alwaies in torment.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     As concernyng thoſe that thou
ſpeakeſt of,Thei that hate and are wearie of all men. whiche hate all men and their
conuerſation, and ſeeke to be ſollitary, becauſe
all the world doth extreamely auoyd
them, I haue knowen ſome, that in ſteede
of ioiyng in their wines and children, thei
haue ſo extreamelie hated them, that thei
could neither ſee them nor heare them, no,
nor abide any other perſon.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Thou maieſt well place thoſe in
the nomber of thoſe poſſeſſed that fled into
the Deſertes. For there are ſome wicked
ones ſo enuious and hatefull to euery mā,
through the extreame couetouſneſſe that
continually grieueth their greedie harte,
that thei would haue all the worlde them
ſelues: therefore as thei can awaie with no
man, no more can any man away with thē:
yea, thei can not awaie with them ſelues.
And this is the cauſe that thei become like
to theſe poſſeſſed men,Math 8. which not onely fell
vpon all ſuche as paſſed by and thei met,Mark. 5. ſo
that none durſt paſſe by the waie where

thei were, but alſo thei cruelly tormented
themſelues, and beate themſelues againſt
the ſtones.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     If the Deuill haue ſuche power
ouer thoſe whom he ruleth, that he cauſeth
them to torment them ſelues, yea, if thei
could to deſtroy them ſelues, we neede not
meruaile if ſuche be cruell and furious againſt
others.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Notwithſtanding, thou ſeeſt how
God hath Sathan ſo in bondes,The Deuille power brideled. and brideleth
him by his prouidence, that he cannot
woorke his will, neither in the perſon of
theſe poore poſſeſſed, nor in any other: for
though theſe poſſeſſed breake their chaines
and bonds, ſo that none could keepe them
bounde nor ſtaie them: neuertheleſſe, thei
could neither deſtroy themſelues, nor hurt
any other further then the Lorde gaue thē
leaue.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     If God had not prouided, they
might haue doen muche harme, conſidering
that thei were ſo furious, mighty and
ſtrong, that there were no bonds nor chaines
but thei brake▪
                     
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Thou maieſt well think, that that
ſtrength came not alone of them ſelues,
for thei were but men as other men are:

whereby wee maie perceiue, that the Deuilles
whiche poſſeſſed them, did employe
their force to worke ſuche thynges, as ſurmounted
the order of nature.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     It is not to bee doubted but that
their ſtrēgth came from them as thou haſt
ſaied: for it is certaine that it came not frō
the ſpirite of God as Sampſons did:Iude. 15. 16. who
alſo brake chaines and bonds, caried away
Towne gates on his ſhoulders, and ouerthrew
houſes with ye ſtrength of his hāds.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Neuertheleſſe, thou ſeeſt how
God hath theſe poſſeſſed in ſuche bondes,
that notwithſtandyng the ſtrēgth that the
deuilles gaue them, yet were thei alwaies
ſo ſubiect to Ieſus Chriſt, as if he had had
them in chaines and bondes, and although
thei fledde to the graues and deſertes, yet
when it pleaſed Ieſus Chriſte, he brought
them from thence, and cōſtrained them to
appeare before hym, as if a Iudge ſhould
call a wicked doer out of priſon: to appere
before hym, to giue ſentence againſt hym.
Now if our Sauiour Chriſt, haue ſhewed
ſuche power on theſe poſſeſſed, and ouer
the Deuilles whiche tormented them, we
maie not doubt, but that he hath as muche
power now as euer he had, to repreſſe the

cloaked poſſeſſed,Tyrauntes poſſeſſed. that are now adaies, and
alſo theſe Deuilles, by whom thei are conducted
and gouerned. But eſpecially wee
maie be well aſſured, that he will not looſe
the bridle more to tyrauntes, then to theſe
poſſeſſed, whō thei reſemble in many thinges.
For, thei are ſtrong and mightie poſſeſſed,
whom mannes power can not eaſely
reſiſte: yea, and thei bee furious, like the
lorde and maiſter that thei ſerue. And therfore,The crowne
                              •
                            and hornes of the redd Dragon.
it is written in the Apocalips, that the
red Dragon had ſeuen heddes, and on euery
hedde a croune, and he had alſo ten hornes.
For,Apoc. 12. the Deuill hath at all tymes gouerned
ſuche tyrānous Kynges and Princes,
as perſecuted the people of God. Furthermore,
lawes be giuen to men, as bondes
and bridles to reſtraine them, from all
kinde of riot or beaſtly life: And therefore
Dauid admoniſheth vs,Pſal. 32. ſaiyng Be ye not
like an Horſe, or like a Mule, whiche vnderſtande
not, whoſe mouthes thou doeſt
bind with Bit and Bridle, leaſt thei come
nere thee. But there is neither bit nor bridle,
that can reſtraine the tyrannie, and furie
of tyrauntes, by reaſon of their power,
and the practiſes that the Redde Dragon,
whiche is the Deuil, worketh in them and

by theim. Wherefore, thei maie well bee
compared to thoſe furious, violente, and
wilde poſſeſſed men. But our greateſt cō
                        fort,
is, that Ieſus Chriſte whiche is their
iudge, is able inough to cal them to iudgemēt
before him, either to bridle their rage,
or to condemne theim to the bottomeleſſe
pitte of helle to the Deuill, whom thei had
rather obeye then God. And therefore it is
written in the booke of Daniell,Dan. 7. that the
Sonne of God hath Iudged and condemned
all beaſtes: By whiche is ſignified the
empire and kyngdomes, whiche haue perſecuted
the people and chuche of God, and
haue doen ſo muche harme on the yearth.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     I vnderſtande this poincte verie
well: Now remaineth to heare, what Ierome
hath to ſaie.
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     Becauſe that the tyrantes which
openly perſecute the people, and Churche
of God, and vſe nothyng but rage, force,
and violence, doe manifeſtly declare themſelues,
to bee the enemies of God and his
churche, it ſemeth that we maie rightly cal
ſuche poſſeſſed and deuills, blacke deuils.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Why ſaieſt thou ſo?Blacke Deuils Diddſt thou
euer ſee, either blacke or white Deuilles?
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     Seyng thei are ſpirites without

bodies, thei cā neither be blacke nor white,
for thei can receiue no colour, ſithe that colours
haue no place, but in viſible and corporall
thinges. But I ſpeake this, becauſe
Painters commonly paint Deuils black,
and wee imagine them ſo to bee, whiche is
not wholie without reaſon:The Prince of darkneſſe his liuerie. For, ſeyng the
Deuill is Prince of darkeneſſe, the colour
is verie meete for his liuerie, becauſe it repreſenteth
darkeneſſe muche better, then
any other, as whiteneſſe beſt repreſenteth
light: for whiche cauſe cōtrariwiſe, Painters
commonly make Angelles white and
ſhinyng: And when thei haue appeared to
men in likeneſſe of menne, thei haue often
tymes appeared after that maner, as the
holie Scripture witneſſeth.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Seeyng the Deuill is a Prince,Math. 28.
yea,Mark. 16. the Prince of the worlde,Luk. 24. and is al
                           •
                        o
called the Prince of darkeneſſe,Ihon. 20. it is good
reaſon that he ſhould haue a liuerie,Actes. 1. 10. as oother
Princes and lordes haue,Ihon. 12. 15. and that it
ſhould be blacke.2. Cor. 3. And ſo ſeyng thou diddſt
call theſe blacke Deuilles,Luke. 22. that we talked
of,Ephe. 2. thou makeſt me imagine that thou thinkeſt,
that there are alſo white deuils: or els
thou needeſt not to haue vſed that title, as
a diſtinction of blacke Deuils from other.
                  
                  
                     
                     Ierom.
                     As wee maie rightly call thoſe
blacke deuills, whiche openly ſhewe them
ſelues to be Deuills, ſo likewiſe maie we
call thoſe white deuills, whiche trāſfigure
themſelues into Angelles of Light.White Deuils For,
although thei bee Deuilles in deede,2. Cor. 11. neuertheleſſe,
thei diſguiſe themſelues ſo,
that thei are taken for Angelles of Light,
though thei be Angelles of darkeneſſe.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     I thinke thoſe white Deuils, are
more daungerous then the blacke, for that
thei are more ſubtle and traiterous then ye
other, and are no leſſe cruell and furious.
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     There is no difference, but that
theſe white Deuils, can better couer their
crueltie and rage for a tyme, but in thende
thei are rewarded like hypocrites, euen as
thei are deuilliſhe hypocrites, their cloked
hipocriſie, crueltie, and furie, muſt be diſcouered.
And therfore it cōmeth to paſſe many
times, that theſe kind of deuils become
more fell and murtherous, then any other.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Seyng we haue ſpoken of blacke
Deuilles,Auncient blacke Diuels and white Deuilles. I would wee ſpeake a little of
white Deuils, that we might learne their
nature, and beware of them.
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     As thou haſte had examples of
blacke Deuills, in all the auncient tyrantes,

whiche heretofore haue perſecuted the
churche, whereby thou maieſt knowe their
nature, thou haſt likewiſe many examples
of white Deuils, in all ye auncient Heretikes,
and in all the Hypocrites, and houſeholde
enemies of the churche: whiche hath
euer doen more harme, then all the open enemies
that euer the Churche had, how
cruell ſo euer thei were.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Now that we are deliuered from
theſe auncient white Deuilles, I would
wee ſhould now talke of theſe of our tyme,
whiche touche vs nerer.
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     I think Theophraſt wilbe ready
whē thou wilt, to ſatiſfie thine expectatiō.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     And I will alſo be ready to heare
when it pleaſeth hym.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Then we ſhall al quickly agree.
But before we ende this talke, I wil ſhew
you one auncient exāple of a Deuill,A Deuil both white and blacke. that
was bothe blacke and white, who hath many
fellowes in theſe daies.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     What Deuill is that?
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     It is Iulian the Apostata. Whē
this Iulian became Emperour, and had renounced
the Chriſtian Religion, which he
before profeſſed, he went about with all his
might, wholy to aboliſhe it, and to eſtabliſh

that Heathen religiō, whiche he followed.
And becauſe he knewe by experience, that
the tyrantes before hym, profited nothyng
with their perſecutions againſt the Chriſtians,
but rather increaſed that Religion,
whiche thei ſought to aboliſhe, then diminiſhed
it, he tooke a contrary waie to them
muche more dāgerous then theirs. Wherin
we maie rightly ſaie, that the blacke deuils
of his predeceſſors tyrantes,Iulians deuill conuerted into a white deuill. cōuerted
themſelues into a white deuill, in the perſone
of this Apostata, for he went not about
to purſue the chriſtians, & with cruell
perſecution, torment and death, to make
them renounce their faithe, and to embrace
his Paganiſme, but rather to win them by
flattery, worldly honour, riches, giftes and
preſentes. And therefore at the firſt, he entreated
them very courteouſly,Tripart. hiſt. lib. 6. and commaūded
that none ſhould torment or trouble
th
                           •
                        m, or conſtraine them to doe Sacrifice
to their Gods, but ſuffer them quietly
to liue with their owne Religion.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     That was a wonderfull ſubtiltie
for,Alluringes of Iulian to deceiue Chriſtians. many maie ſoner be ouercome by ſuche
meanes, then by perſecution and torment.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Thou maieſt be ſure that he wan
many by that practiſe. For the ambicious,

glorious, and couetous, whiche deſired honours,
riches, and offices in the court, and
to be heaued vp into high dignitie, ſought
to pleaſe hym, perceiuyng that thei were
moſt made of that moſt fauoured his religion,
and were fartheſt from the Chriſtian
religion, whiche this Apostata hated to
the death. But notwithſtandyng all theſe
practiſes, he could not winne ſo many by
this meanes as he deſired: for, by reaſon
that there were many Chriſtian Emperours
before hym, ſince Constantine the
greate, the nomber of the Chriſtians was
greatly encreaſed, in ſo muche that Iulians
Courte was full, and the greateſt parte of
his officers & ſeruantes were Chriſtians.
For this cauſe he vſed a more ſubtill craft
and dangerous ſleight,Chriſtians in Iulians Court to deceiue the moſt
vertuous, & thoſe which moſt feared God,
and his religion. For he knewe that good
life and holie conuerſation would muche
moue the people. And becauſe y• Paſtors,
and Miniſters of the Chriſtians, were thē
of very vpright life and holie conuerſatiō,
and that by their example thei ſtirred and
drewe men to their religion, and to fellow
their doctrine, and alſo confirmed thoſe
more which had already receiued their religion,

he went about to reforme the ſtate
and liues of the Prieſtes and religious mē
of the Paynims,Another ſubtilty of Iulian to make men haue the better deuotion to the heathen religion. and their Gods & Idols,
after the example of the Paſtors and Miniſters
of the Chriſtians. And this he did,
to the ende that the Chriſtians ſhould caſt
the Gentiles in teeth, with the wicked life
of their Prieſtes and Miniſters, neither
that the Gētiles being offended therwith,
ſhould be moued to forſake their heathniſh
religion, and become Chriſtians. For thei
that haue any ſparke of the feare of God,
yea the very ſuperſtitious and Idolaters,
miſlike their Paſtours and Miniſters of
what religion ſo euer thei be, whē thei perceiue
their wicked and vicious life. For euen
the wicked them ſelues,The offence of the euill life of Paſtors looke for better
life then their own at their hands whō
thei eſteeme to bee their guides, & to haue
adminiſtratiō of thinges which thei think
holie. And therefore thei require of ſuche
perſons a ſtraighter and vprighter life thē
their own or any other. For thei think thei
haue more libertie then thei that ought to
be the example & rule of their life. Wherfore,
thei can not ſuffer that to be in them,
which thei can well ſuffer in other that are
not of that calling, yea and in themſelues,

as wee ſee the Papiſtes at this daie. For,
not onely the moſt ſuperſticious & demute
of them, but alſo the leaſt religious, the
greateſt mockers of all religion, the moſt
vicious and vnruly of all, are ſore offended
with their Prieſtes and Monkes, and crie
out againſt them, that thei leade an offenſiue
life, and a life that ſeemes not to bee
according to their profeſſion. And therfore
there are many of bothe ſortes, that care
neither for them, their calling, nor religiō.
But becauſe thei can not iudge of true religion,Hypocriſie in ſtead of holy life.
vpright life, and good conuerſatiō,
accordyng to the rule of Gods worde, thei
are contented with the life of their Prieſts
and Monkes, ſo that there bee no notable
or apparant vice in them. It ſufficeth thē,
if thei haue onely an outward ſhewe of diſcretion
and holineſſe, which thei take principally
to conſiſt in ſuperſtition, hypocriſie,
ceremonies, counterfaiting, & outward
works: and not in true Chriſtian vertues.
And therfore, whoſoeuer can beſt plaie the
ſuperſticious hypocrite, pleaſeth thē beſt,
and is beſt eſteemed amongeſt them. And
this knew Iulian the Apostata very well.A reformatiō of Iulian in the heathens Prieſtes.
Therefore, he commaunded the Prieſtes
religions and Miniſters of the heathens

God, to enforce themſelues at the leaſt to
counterfaite as nigh as thei could the life
and maners of the Paſtors and Miniſters
of the Chriſtians: and that thei ſhould vſe
themſelues ſo, that there might bee no apparant
or notable crime in them,Tripart. hiſt. lib. 6. cap. 28. whiche
might make the people miſlike thē, their
Miniſterie, or the Religion of the Gods
whiche thei ſerued. Wherefore, he forbadd
them to go to any common plaies, to Tauernes,
or to meddle with any filthie practiſe,Popiſh reformation.
or any vnhoneſt arte not ſeemely for
their callyng. To be ſhorte, he made ſuche
a reformation amōg theſe fellowes, as the
Pope and his make commonly among
them ſelues for their Prieſtes, Monkes,
and the reſt of their Clergie. For whē thei
ſee that euery mā crieth out at their pride,
pompe, brauerie, pleaſures, ditties, and at
their greate exceſſe in all thynges, at their
Epicurian life, giuen ouer to al filthineſſe
and enormitie more then any other, thei
make a ſhewe of reformation and creation
of ſuche vice and horrible ſin as raigneth
amongſt them, whiche thei can in no wiſe
excuſe: but in the meane while, thei neuer
come to the principall matter, but are contented
to dazell the eyes of the poore ignorant

with a fained apparance of ſlight reformation,
as in apparrell, in pompes, in
meates, & exceſſiue braueneſſe, in haukes,
in horſes, in paſtimes, and in the obſeruation
of their Ceremonies, and ſuche like
thynges: and as for the moſte notable and
infamous vices whiche thei can not forbeare
nor correct, it ſufficeth for reformation
thereof to woorke ſecretly, and not ſo
openly and commonly that all the worlde
perceiue it, and point at them, and that the
moſte vicious, vnruly, and moſte offenciue
them ſelues, be not offended with their offenſiue
life. In this meane while, there is
no talke at all of their falſe doctrine, nor of
the abuſe in their Religion, and in their
whole ſtate, but only in theſe things which
are ſo euidēt and intollerable, that there is
no man can beare with it, no man ſo blunt
or blinde, that can not perceiue it, and that
knoweth it not, and openly cōdemneth it.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Thē all their reformatiō is none
other thing, but onely an hypocriſie, which
ſerueth thē for a cauſe, the better to couer
their filthineſſe before men, to th'ende that
their eſtate be not diſcried, nor deffamed.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     This reformation is of leſſe appearaunce,
then the reformation of Iulian
                        
the Apoſtata. For, he did not onely reforme
the prieſtes of his religion, as I haue ſaid,
but he did alſo ſhewe hymſelf to bee a very
good Emperor, liberall, and charitable to
ye poore.The Philoſophicall life of Iulian. For, his life would ſhame a greate
many now adaies. I ſay not onely Emperors,
kinges, and Chriſten princes, Popes
Cardinalles and prelates of the Churche,
whiche are more worldly, then the world it
ſelf, but euen Monkes, Hermites, and the
moſte reformed, and the ſtraighteſt liuers
of thē all, though their appearance of holineſſe
be neuer ſo greate.Tripart. hiſt. lib. 6. For, firſte he was
very well learned in all humain learnyng
and very ſtudious, ſo that he was alwaies
at his booke, or otherwiſe occupied in ſome
verteous and honeſt exerciſe, at the leaſt in
outward ſhewe. And therfore he loued wiſe
menne,Iulians court Tripart. hiſt. lib. 6. but principally Philoſophers, with
whō his court was euer furniſhed. Since
Iulius Caeſars tyme, there was no emperor
but he, that could recite in the Senate or
coūcell, the orations or declarations of his
owne makyng. As for his court, and ye reſt
of his life, he liued more like a ſober and cō
                        tinent
Philoſopher, then like an Emperor
or worldly prince: & therefore he put awaie
his Cookes, vſyng ſuche ſober and ſimple

diet, that he needed thē not. Yea, he had no
Barber of his own, for he ſaid one Barber
could ſerue a great many men. To be ſhort
he liued a Mōkiſh life.The Monkiſh bringyng vp of Iulian. For, he was taught
and brought vp in his youth with Monkes
who in thoſe daies, wer not ſo ſore degenerated
frō the maners of th'auncient Monkerie,
as thei are at this preſent: But their
life had greate appearaunce of holineſſe.
Iulian therfore, had a ſmatche of his youthly
inſtructiō and bringing vp, which ſerued
him the better to colour his Idolatrie. For
this deuill profited ſo wel in that Monkiſh
ſchole, that he had good ſkill in diſſēbling.
To be ſhort,The diſſimulation of Iulian. he lead ſuche a life, as if there
were any at this daie: I will not ſpeake of
princes, but of prelates of ye popiſh churche
(who ought to bee the light of other) that
ſhould liue ſuche a life, in ſuche cōuerſatiō
and ſuche knowledge, men would eſteeme
them for holy men, yea, thei would worſhip
thē as yong little gods. For, after his wife
died,The continence of Iulian. he neuer maried again, but liued in cō
                        tinence
all the reſte of his life, neither was
there at any tyme, any whoredō perceiued
in hym. Furthermore, he had no ſeruaūtes
about him, to maintain pleaſure or paſtime
but onely to ſerue his neceſſitie. And as

touchyng his liberalitie & charitie,The foundation of Hoſpitalles by Iulian. wherof
I ſpake before, he erected hoſpitalles, after
the thexample of the Chriſtians, aſwell for
waifaryng ſtraungers, as for thoſe of the
countries: and cōmaūded ſuche to be erected,
throughout all his cities. And gaue to
thē greate reuenues, bothe of corne, wine,
money, and all other thynges neceſſary for
the maintenaūce of the charges therof: but
chiefly he gaue greate liuyng to the poore,
that kept the temple of the Gods. He commaunded
alſo,The charitie of the auncient Chriſtians. y• the heathens ſhould make
collections for the relief of y• poore, as chriſtians
did. For he ſaid, yt it ſhould be great
ſhame for them, if thoſe wicked Galileās,
which frō time to time had ſuffred ſo great
hinderance and loſſes, and ſo greate perſecution
for their religiō, ſhould be ſo liberal
& charitable, that not onely thei ſhould ſuſtain
the poore, whiche were of their owne
religion, but alſo ſhould ſuccor & help both
Iewes and Gentiles, whiche were their enemies,
and that he which had the Empire
of the whole worlde, and thei that followed
his religion, ſhould be more niggardes towardes
their owne, then the Galileās wer
to ſtrangers, yea, to their mortal enemies.
And therefore he thought it greate ſhame,

bothe for hym and his Religion (whiche he
would exalt aboue the chriſtian religiō) to
be ouereome in liberalitie and largeneſſe,
by the Chriſtians, whō he called Galileās
in deſpite and mockerie, (becauſe Chriſte
and his Apoſtles came out of the countrie
of Galile, whiche was the moſte deſpiſed
euen emongeſt the Iewes: as it appeareth
by diuers places of the Goſpell, and ſpecially
by S. Ihon.) And therefore he named
Ieſus Chriſt with the ſame name, callyng
hym Galilean in deſpite and mockerie.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     For,Ihon. 1. 7. ought that I cā perceiue, al
this liberalitie of Iulian,
                        Chriſtians called Galileans. yt thou haſt talked
of, proceaded not of true liberalitie, nor
true charitie, that he gaue to the poore and
needy, but for enuie of the Chriſtians, and
ſpite that he had, that their charitie and liberalitie,
did ſo muche honor their religiō,
drewe men to it, and diſhonor the Painims
religion. And therefore he would not, that
their religiō ſhould be leſſe honored in this
matter, then the Chriſtian religiō. And by
that I perceiue, that the chriſtians in thoſe
daies, had to doe with a ſubtle Deuill: who
could cunnyngly chaunge hymſelf from a
blacke Deuill into a white. But I would
wiſhe, if we can now haue Angels in ſtede

of deuills, that at leaſt we had many ſuche
deuills in that point, but principally emō
                        geſt
you that brag ſo muche of the reformatiō
of the Goſpel. For, ſeing yt you hate the
Pope, & prelates of the Churche, Prieſtes,
Monkes, and all the Religion whiche you
call Popiſhe, and that ye crie ſo muche againſt
them: I would ye would (in ſpite of
thē,The example of Iulian to the ſhame of Chriſtians. and in ſhame of thē) become more liberall
and charitable then ye bee: and that ye
had more care for the poore that are emōgſt
you, then ye haue: and yt ye would ſo honor
your religion, that ye might keepe it from
blame, and that thoſe whiche you call Papiſtes,
ſhould not ſurmount you in liberalitie
and charitie, as Iulian did to honor his
religion, in deſpite of Chriſt, and the Chriſtian
religion. For, if liberalitie & charitie
were as greate in theſe daies emong you,
as in old tyme it was emōg auncient chriſtians:
ye ſhould haue as greate a vantage
ouer your enemies, as thoſe good Chriſtians
had ouer the Gentiles. But you care
not for any ſuche honour. How ſaieſt thou
Eustace, is not this true?
                  
                  
                     Eust.
                     Though thei brag neuer ſo muche
of their religion,Charitie required in thoſe that brag of the Goſpell. and ſhewe thēſelues very
well affected to it, and deſire greately the

aduauncyng and exaltyng thereof, and the
aboliſhyng of ours, neuertheleſſe, their deuotiō
is not ſo great, that thei become one
penie ye more liberall for it, neither is their
charitie ſo great, that thei forget any iotte
of their coueteouſneſſe, whiche is greater,
more gredy and inſaciably in them, then euer
it was, or is emong vs, whom thei call
Papiſtes, or emongeſt our Prieſtes, Monkes,
and Prelates, againſt whom thei crie
out, as though all charitie were quenched
in them, and that there were no coueteouſneſſe
in all the worlde, but theirs. For, ſo
far are theſe newe Chriſtians, frō giuyng
any thing of theirs, to ye relief of the poore,
that thei euen take awaie that, whiche others
haue giuen thē heretofore. Yea, ſo far
are thei frō erectyng, or giuyng any thyng
to Hoſpitalls, that thei will not maintaine
thoſe, whiche were founded by their predeceſſors
to their hādes. There are many hoſpitals,
whiche heretofore haue bin gouerned
by prieſtes, whiche were muche better
gouerned then, then thei bee now by theſe
newe Churche reformers. For maiſters of
Hoſpitals are many tymes made, as Bailiffes,
and other officers bee made, not ſo
muche to miniſter Iuſtice, & to execute the

office cōmitted to them, as to fill their purſes,
and to make theim riche. Is not this a
godly reformation, to make maiſters of hoſpitalles,
not ſuche as are mete to gouerne
the goodes of ye poore, but ſuche as cā ſhift
for themſelues, and make the poore faſte.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     What anſwereſt yu to that Theophast?
me thinkes Eustace ſpeaketh reaſō.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     I would he had leſſe reaſon ſo to
ſaie, but yet he taketh euery thyng at the
worſt. For he loketh ſo muche at thoſe that
dooe not their duetie, that he forgetteth to
looke on thoſe that doe it. But put the caſe
that there wer greater diſorder in this matter
on our behalfe then there is. I would ye
Papiſtes (whom Euſtace now defendeth)
would ſo enuie vs, that in ſpite of vs, thei
would become more charitable and honeſt
then either thei or we bee yet, and that thei
would ſurmounte vs in all vertues. But
though thei be holden for neuer ſo zealous
in their Religion, yet I feare not that thei
will ſo diſhonor vs, as I haue wiſhed.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     I think that neither thei nor you
are ſo ſpitefully bent, to goe about to diſhonor
one an other after this ſort, how ſpitful
ſo euer ye be one againſt an ot
                           •
                        er in other
thinges. But we will leaue ſuche occaſiōs

in whiche ſome will whiten themſelues in
blackyng other, and talke we again of Iulian
the Apostata, whoſe ſtorie thou haſte
not yet ended. Thou haſt already told, how
he tranſfigured hymſelf into a white deuil
diuers waies, but thou haſte not yet declared,
how the white Deuill become blacke.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Whē he ſaw, that by all the meanes
that he could deuiſe, he could not aboliſhe
the Chriſtian Religion, and eſtabliſh
and augument the Heathen Religion, but
that contrariwiſe it increaſed more and
more, he was merueilous angrie, and in
ſuche rage, as he could not forbeare, but in
the ende manifeſtly to open it. And here
vpon he forbad the Chriſtians, the reading
of the Heathen Poetes, Orators, and Philoſophers:
to the ende that thei might not
alledge thelm for aucthoritie againſte the
Heathens. For, he vſed to ſaie: the Chriſtians
dooe pricke vs and thruſte vs through,
with our owne Fathers, becauſe thei did
confounde the Heathens with their owne
bookes: And whipped thē with their owne
Roddes, as the faithfull at this daie dooe
whipp the Papiſtes. For, if we had none other
bookes but their own, we ſhould haue
ſufficient to condemne them all of falſe religion

and abuſe. Wherefore if thei would
doe well, thei ſhould rather forbid the faithful
to read their bookes, then the holy ſcripture.
For, the diſhonor is the greater vnto
them, if thei bee condemned by their owne
writinges, & by ſuche bookes as thei make
of greater aucthoritie, then the ſcripture it
ſelf, for that thei will rule y• doctrine therof
according to ye contētes of theſame bokes.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     But did not Iulian the Apostata
otherwiſe perſecute the chriſtians, then to
forbid them the readyng of theſe bookes.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     He could not wholy forbeare perſecutyng
of thē, and would haue vſed more
crueltie, if he had durſt. But his deuil was
ſore troubled in this. For, when he would
haue plaied the black deuill, and haue ſpewed
out his ſwellyng venim, two thinges
hindered hym: The one was that, whereof
I ſpake before, that is, that he ſawe that it
profited little or nothyng to retourne to
that firſt furie, wherewith he vſed of olde
tyme to ſtirre and enflame auncient Tyrauntes,
to ſuche cruell perſecutiō againſt
the Chriſtians. For, he had often prooued
full ſore againſt his will. O how the fleſhe
and conſtancie of Chriſtians had repulſed
the ſharpe pointes of the cuttyng ſwordes

of tyrauntes, quenched their furies, & vanquiſhed
all their rage and furie. On the other
ſide, this Deuill ſawe, that in Iulians
tyme the nomber of the Chriſtians was ſo
greate, that Iulian could not vſe greeuous
and cruel perſecution amongſt them, without
his hinderaunce, and great daunger of
his perſon and Empire. For, his court, yea
and his campe were full of them. Yea how
many Lordes, Captaines, and Officers
had he in his Court that were Chriſtians?
amōgſt whom Valentinian that was Emperour
after him, was in great authoritie.
Who ſo little feared in Iulians time to declare
the honor & reuerence that he beare
to the Chriſtian religiō, and how he hated
Iulians Paganiſme, and that entring on a
daie in Iulians company into the Temple
of Fortune, (whom the Panims helde for a
Goddeſſe) he ſtrooke a Prieſt on the eare
which ſprinckled Holy water at the entrie
of the tēple, becauſe he threw a fewe drops
on his Cloake: and tolde hym that he had
ſpoyld hym, and not purged hym. For the
Panims beleeued as our Papiſtes now a
daies doe, that ſinnes were purged awaie
by Holy water. Seing then yt 
                        Valentinian
durſt bee ſo hardy in the preſence of Iulian
                        
hymſelf his Emperor & Prince, Iulian had
not ſo little vnderſtandyng but he did wel
foreſee and cōſider, what trouble he ſhould
bryng not onely his Court in, but alſo his
Empire, if his deuil ſhould become a black
deuill and tirannous perſecutor. Wherefore,
he was conſtrained to countefaite the
white Deuil, & diſſemblingly to let many
matters ſlippe, whiche neuertheleſſe were
greate greefe and harte breakyng to hym:
But he was fame to bee patient perforce.
And when he ſawe that the Chriſtian religion
proſpered more and more, when thei
had any releaſe without perſecution, this
white Deuill forgetting the maſke wherwith
he was diſguiſed, falling into a great
rage, came to his natural and firſt occupation,
and became a black Deuill as before.
And then knowyng not at whiche ende to
begin, but perceiuyng all thynges went
from euill to worſe, beeyng at his wittes
ende, he knewe not what part to plaie.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Verely hee had a troubleſome
parte to plaie, and not without cauſe, for he
had to doe with a very ſtrong aduerſarie,
when he had to do with God. For were he
white Deuill, black Deuill, or trāſformed
into what Deuill he would, God knewe

hym well enough what maſke ſo euer he
tooke on, and knew the waie how to ouerthrowe
all his enterprizes and practizes,
and to confounde and ouercome hym.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     There are many now adaies in
the world that plaie the ſame parte, and amongſt
them many that are, Apostates as
Iulian was: for thei haue had ſufficient
knowledge of the Goſpell, to be condēned
with him: But theſe fellowes are as much
troubled to play thoſe parts that thei play
as Iulian and his Deuill was. For thei ſee
yt it is impoſſible to finde water inough to
quēch the fire of the Goſpel which is kindled
round about them on euery ſide. Thei
ſee there is no hope to quenche it by their
fires, as heretofore thei haue thought. For
experience hath taught them, that one fire
quencheth not an other, but rather enflameth
it the more. Thei ſee alſo into what
daunger thei are like to bring themſelues,
if thei continue ſuche Tarmagantes and
plaie the blacke Deuils as thei haue doen
heretofore. And therefore now thei beg in
to plaie the white Deuils, more then thei
haue doen, & are contented to confeſſe that
their cruell and rigorous maner was not
the beſt nor ſureſt waie for them. For this

cauſe thei are contented to goe more gently
to work, and to hide their black Deuils
hornes more then thei had wont, til thei ſee
occaſion to ſhew them againe, more ſafely,
& accordyng as their ſhal ſee their ſtrength
encreaſe or deminiſhe, and as their deſired
meanes ſhall be graunted or debarred thē.
For looke thei neuer ſo ſmoothe, it is eaſie
to be iudged what thei pretende, and that
thei counterfaite the white Deuilles, but
onely becauſe thei cānot be black Deuils,
or ſuche as maie beare the whole ſwaie.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     I vnderſtande now what thou
meaneſt, let them play their partes as thei
can, ſeyng thei can not as thei would: and
in ye meane while make thou ready to ſhew
vs farther of white Deuilles, as thou promiſeſt,
before thou toldeſt vs of Iulian
the Apostata, and of thoſe Deuils
parts that he plaied.
                  
               
               
                  
                  ¶The third Dialogue called
White Deuilles.
                  THE third Dialogue is called White
Deuilles, for the reaſons mentioned
before in the ſecond Dialogue.
                  Firſt, there is talke of the confeſſion that
the Deuilles made of Ieſus Chriſt, likewiſe
of their worſhippyng of hym, and of the cō
                     plaintes
that tbei made of hym, and the agreemēt
that thei deſired to haue with him.
                  Of good Deuilles, and the manifestyng
of the poſſeſſed by meanes of the Gospell, of
their accuſing and complainyng of him, and
of the faire ſhewes that thei haue.
                  Of ſuche as make the Gospell ſerue for
their gaine, and can not beare the yoke of
Ieſus Chriſt.
                  Of good Sheepeheardes and hirelinges,
and how either of them diſchargeth their
callyng, and of their estimation amongeſt
men.
                  Of the administratiō of Church goods,
and the abuſe thereof, and of the fault, that
the wi
                        •
                     ked burthen the true ministers of
God withall, by meanes thereof.
                  Of the enemies, of the diſcipline of the
Churche.
                  Of the want that we haue of good Ministers,

and the contempt that wee haue
them in.
                  Of the tyrannie vſed to the Churche,
and of our chaungyng of olde Poperie into
newe.
                  Of Clarcke Popes, and Laie Popes.
                  Of the diſcorde and deuiſion that is among
thoſe that bragge 
                        •
                     f the reformation
of the Goſpell.
                  Of the chaungyng of mens traditions,
into like or worſe.
                  Of the continuall diſcord betweene God
and the Deuill, and betwene their children
and ſeruauntes.
                  Of the Churche mingled with good and
euill.
                  Of the perſecutiō and rebellion of thoſe
whiche ſaie thei be of the Churche, againſt
the true ministers of the ſame.
                  Of the foundation as well of the Popedome
of long gownes, as of ſhort gownes.
                  Of the euill reformation of the Church.
                  Of Magistrates abuſing their Offices.
                  Of Priestes and Monkes transformed.
                  Of the true reformation of the Church.
                  Of the great euill that proceedeth of the
ignoraunce of many, and of the diuerſitie
thereof.
                  
                     
Of falſe reporters and tale tellers, that
hinder the true diſcip
                        •
                     ine of the Church.
                  Of the e
                        •
                     ill iudgement of the wicked againſt
the true Ministers of the Lorde.
                  Of thoſe that alwaies deſire respite to
come to talke, and of the fault in too long
bearyng with the diſorders in the Churche.
                  Of the hypocriſie of thoſe that ſeeke excuſes
to hinder the diſcipline of the Church
                  Of the obedience that al mē owe to God.
                  Of the o
                        •
                     de and newe Gadarens, and of
the Hogges of eche of them.
                  Of the true meane to keepe or driue awaie
Ieſus Chriſt.
                  Of the diuers feare of God, and the diuers
knowledge of the Goſpell.
                  Of the cauſes that hinder many, from
followyng of the Goſpell.
                  Of thoſe that are afraied of Christes
commyng, and of the vaine feare that tyrauntes
haue, leaſt the Goſpell ſhould make
them looſe their Kingdomes and Lordſhips.
               
               
                  
                  ¶The third Dialogue
called white Deuilles.
                  Tobie, Ierome, Theophrast,
Euſtace.
                  
                     Tobie.
                     
                        SEyng we are all agreed to
talke of white Deuils, now
yt wee haue talked of blacke
Deuilles.
                  
                  
                     Eust.
                     And I am ready to
heare what thou wilt ſaie, touching them.
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     Before Theophrastus enter into
this matter, I thinke good to remember
one poinct, whiche I forgate, when I talked
of the difference, whiche wee ought to
make, betwene blacke and white Deuils.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     What is that?
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     It is, that as there is difference,
betwene blacke & white Deuils, there are
alſo diuers kindes of white deuils. For as
ſome deuils are blacker one thē another, ſo
ſome are likewiſe whiter one thē another.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     I thinke thou meaneſt thereby,
that ſome of thē haue fairer ſhewe of goodneſſe
then other ſome haue, and can better
counterfect the Angelles.
                  
                  
                     
                     Ierom.
                     That is without doubt, and therfore
in comparyng ſome with other ſome,
thei maie ſeme to be blacke Deuils, which
otherwiſe ſeme to be white.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     I doe not well vnderſtand, what
thou meaneſt.
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     I will make thee vnderſtande it
by example. Seyng the Papiſtes, whiche
reſiſt the Goſpell, be named Chriſtians as
well as other, thei maie bee counted white
Deuils, in compariſon of Iewes, Turkes
and Painims, whiche declare thēſelues to
be open enemies, bothe of Chriſt & his Goſpell:
but if thou compare them with thoſe,
that bragge of the title and reformation of
the Goſpell, the perſecuting Papiſtes wil
ſeme blacke deuils, when other ſhall ſeme
white. For, thei be bothe falſe Chriſtians,
but th'one hath a fairer ſhew then th'other,
for he couereth hymſelf with the cloake of
the Goſpell, & the reformation of theſame.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     I vnderſtand thee very well, but
let vs now heare what Theophrastus hath
to ſaie.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     The Euāgeliſtes ſaie not onely,Marke. 5.
that thoſe poſſeſſed wherof we ſpake before
came & preſented thē ſelues before Chriſt,Luke. 8.
but S. Marke and S. Luke ſaie farther,Matth. 8.
                        
that he of whō thei write, fell on his knees
before Chriſt,The Deuilles worſhippyng and cōfeſſing Ieſus Chriſt. & worſhipped hym. And furthermore,
all the thre Euāgeliſtes whiche
haue written this ſtorie, witneſſe, that both
theſe poſſeſſed cōfeſſed openly, that Ieſus
Chriſt was the Sonne of God, yea, of the
higheſt God.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Thei made almoſte as good a cō
                        feſſion
of Ieſus Chriſte,Ihon. 6. as ſainct Peter
and his fellowes did.Matth. 8.
                     
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     But thei did it not with ſuche a
hart, nor to ſuche an ende, for that thei wer
Deuilles, whiche ſpake it by the mouthes
of theſe poſſeſſed.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     I thinke no leſſe. But what was
the cauſe thinkeſt thou, that thei did ſo? for
the Deuill hateth none ſo muche as Ieſus
Chriſte, and feareth nothyng more then
that Ieſus Chriſt ſhould bee eſteemed and
acknowledged emong menne, for the true
ſonne of God, as theſe Deuilles confeſſed.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     The Deuill honoured not Ieſus
Chriſte, onely by the mouthes of theſe poſſeſſed,
but alſo by other, of whiche Sainct
Marke and Saincte Luke make expreſſe
mention.Marke. 1. Thei ſaie firſt,Luke. 8. that in the Sinagogue
of Capernaum, there was a manne
whiche had an euill Spirite, that cried out

when he perceiued Ieſus Chriſt, and ſaied
emongeſt other thynges, I knowe that
thou art the holy one of God.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Wherefore did the Deuill call
Ieſus Chriſt, the holy one of God?
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     It is as muche to ſaie, as that he
knewe Ieſus Chriſte, to be the holy one of
holy ones,Ihon. 17. that is to ſaie, the true ſonne of
God,Actes. 16. whō the Father hath ſent to ſanctifie
mankinde: we read alſo in the Actes of the
Apoſtles,The Soothſayer of Philip. that Macedonia in the toune of
Philippi, there was a maide that had a ſpirite
of ſothſaiyng, whiche gather maſtres
muche gain with ſothſaiyng, ſhe followed
Paule and his fellowes, and cried ſaiyng:
theſe men are the ſeruauntes of the moſte
high God, whiche ſhewe vnto vs the waie
of ſaluation, and this did ſhe many tymes.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     This Deuill whiche ſpake in
this ſothſaiyng maide, made no mention
of Ieſus Chriſte, in the wordes whiche he
vſed to Paule and his fellowes.
                  
                  
                     Theo
                     Though he named not Ieſus Chriſt
by name, yet he did hym the greateſt honor
that might bee. For, praiſyng the Apoſtles
and ſeruauntes of Ieſus Chriſt, as he praiſeth
them, he declareth their doctrine to be
of God, and to bryng true ſaluation vnto

mā. Now, ſeyng the Apoſtles taught, that
this ſaluation was communicated to man,
by Ieſus Chriſt, and by none other: this euill
Spirite plainly confeſſed, that Ieſus
Chriſt was the ſauior of the world, the true
ſonne of God, and generally all ye doctrine
contained in the Euangeliſtes, whiche he
approued, in the approuyng of the Miniſters
of theſame, becauſe thei preached it.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Thou haſte not yet tolde me,The confeſſiō and conſtrained praiers of Deuilles. why
theſe euill ſpirites made ſuche confeſſion,
and why thei ſhewed this honour to Ieſus
Chriſt, whom the deuill goeth about with
might and maine, alwaies to diſhonour.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     There are many cauſes that moued
them ſo to doe. Firſt, when the Deuill
muſt appere before God, he is like a tranſgreſſor,
that cōmeth before his Prince and
Iudge. Who, how wicked and rebellious
ſo euer he be, is cōſtrained ſpite of his teeth
to acknowledge hym his Prince & Iudge,
& to confeſſe ye truth vnto him of al his miſbehauior.
For, if he will not confeſſe it willingly,
the racke ſhall make him confeſſe it
whether he will or no. So theſe Deuilles
whiche were in theſe poſſeſſed, were in the
preſence of Chriſt, not onely as tranſgreſſors,
whiche are brought before the Iudge,

to haue ſentence of condemnation, but as
tranſgreſſours, whiche the Iudge hymſelf
tooke with the dee
                           •
                        e doyng, and which are
preſently condemned, becauſe thei can not
deny the fault, that thei were takē withall.
For Ieſus Chriſt tooke theſe d
                           ••••
                        s exerciſing
the greateſt crueltie that thei could,
on theſe perſones whom thei had poſſeſſed,
and ſeducyng the people as muche as was
poſſible. And becauſe thei are perpetuall enemies
of God, & are taken with the deede
doing, and cannot reſiſt his power, thei are
conſtrained by force to honor hym, & ſhewe
hym homage, and to acknowledge and cō
                        feſſe
him to be ſuche as he is Thei do it likewiſe
to flatter him, becauſe thei knew well
inough that it bootes not to reſiſt hym by
ſtrength, for he is ſtronger then thei.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Me thinketh that theſe words aagree
very well with ye other words which
the Deuils vſed to Ieſus Chriſt▪ For, thei
cried?The cōplaint of Deuilles. What haſt thou to do with vs Ieſus
the Sonne of God?Math. 8. Art thou come hetherto
torment vs before the tyme?Mark. 5. Wee praie
thee and charge thee by God,Luk. 8. that thou torment
vs not. It is alſo writtē, that thei beſought
Ieſus very inſtantly, that he would
not ſend thē out of the countrey, nor into ye
                        
bottomleſſe pitt, but if he would 
                           •
                        aſt them
out of the poſſeſſed, that he would giue thē
leaue to goe amongſt the heard of Swine
y• fed therby, and to remaine amōgſt them.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     The poſſeſſed of which S. Mark
and S. Luke make mention, whiche was
in y• Sinagogue of Capernaum, cried alſo:
Oh what haſt thou to do with vs Ieſus
of Nazareth? Art thou come to deſtroy vs?
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     By theſe wordes wee maie eaſily
iudge,Marke. 5. that the worſhippyng confeſſiō and
praier that theſe Deuilles made,Luke. 8. was but
by conſtraint, and therefore proceeded not
of any good will either of the poſſeſſed, or
of the Deuilles that were in them, but by
the power of God, whiche enforced and cō
                        ſtrained
them ſo to ſaie. Thei alſo did it, to
obtaine gentler intreating at Ieſus hand,
then thei deſerued.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     It wel appeareth, that thei know
Ieſus Chriſt, but thei will not obeie hym,
but reſiſt hym as muche as thei can. And
though thei bee not able to reſiſt hym,The Deuilles deſire attonement. yet
thei will, yet thei will fight againſt hym:
but perceiuyng that thei be too weake and
ouercome, thei giue hym faire words, thei
beſeeche hym as their maiſter. And here it
ſhould ſeeme that their furie and rage wer

ſubdued, but it is but in ſhew and by force.
Thei complaine of Ieſus Chriſte as if he
did them wrong, or that he vſed them more
vncurteouſly thē thei deſerued, and before
their tyme be come. To bee ſhort
                           •
                        , thei deſire
nothyng but peace and agreement.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     And notwithſtanding, ſeing that
the Deuill is authour of warre and ſtrife▪
peace can not greatly pleaſe hym.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Alſo he deſireth not peace for that
it pleaſeth him, but only to eſcape y• hands
of Ieſus Chriſt. For he is 
                           〈◊〉
                         th
                           •
                         enemie
whiche being beaten & ouercome, deſireth
to get out of his enemies handes that hath
ouercome him, yt afterwarde he maie more
ſtrongly and cruelly warre againſt hym.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     It is no maruaile though the deuill
vſe this ſubtiltie and diſſimulation: for
there are diuers men that 
                           〈◊〉
                         the ſame many
tymes, not onely towards m
                           •
                        n, but towards
GOD himſelf. Wherefore, in my
iudgement, we may wel compare them to
theſe poſſeſſed, & make thē their fellowes.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Tel me thy mynd more plainely.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     I haue knowen diuers, that in
tyme of health & proſperitie, haue not onely
giuen them ſelues ouer to the greateſt
filthineſſe and miſcheef that is poſſible for

any man to committ, but alſo haue openly
withſtood God, as if thei would willingly
defi
                           •
                         hym, and pluck him out of his celeſtiall
Throne. But afterwarde when God
hath laid his hand on them, either by greeuous
and dangerous ſickneſſes, or by ſome
other miſery and miſhap, ſo, that the daunger
was extreame, thei then became good
Deuils,Good Deuils when thei could do no more harme. like to thoſe of whom wee talke.
Thou neuer ſaweſt more gētle, more tractable,
nor more deuout people in outwarde
ſhew. Thei are the beſt Catholiques that
maie be found. Thei yeeld, thei promiſe to
become the honeſteſt mē in ye world. They
will neuer doe more amiſſe, but will liue a
ſtraiter and holier life, thē holy Hermites
themſelues. But when it is once paſt, and
the daūger eſcaped, thei forget all that thei
haue promiſed, and like wilde beaſtes that
haue gotte their uerkes out of the coller,
thei retourne to their firſt nature, and become
worſe then euer thei were.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     There is nothyng that more manifeſteth
thoſe ſortes of Deuiſſes and poſſeſſed,The Goſpell manifeſteth Deuilles.
then the pure preaching of the word
of God: it is then principally, that thei vſe
thoſe wordes that the Deuils vſed whiche
Ieſus Chriſt caſt out, whereof wee talked

euen now. For there are many (but chiefly)
Prieſts, Monkes, and other principall vpholders
of Antichriſt, & of his ſinagouge,
which is the Romiſh Court and Church,)
whiche many tymes plaie the prankes of
this Deuill. For thei reſiſt the Goſpell of
Ieſus Chriſt, and thoſe that maintain and
followe the ſame with might and maine,
with fire and ſworde, and by al other meanes
that thei can imagine and inuent. It
is them that crie out againſt Ieſus Chriſt,
and ſaye: What haſte thou to doe with vs:
why art thou come to tormēt vs before our
tyme? Suffer vs in peace and quietneſſe,
wee haue nothyng to ſaie to thee. I thinke
Ierome, that thou haſt often heard, the enemies
and perſecutours of the Goſpell, vſe
ſuche like wordes.
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     It is ordinarie with the wicked
enemies of God,The wicked accuſing of the Goſpell. to laie all the fault on the
Goſpell, and on thoſe that faithfully fauor
and followe the fame, accordyng to their
duetie, as if thei wer rebelles, fraimakers,
ſedicious, and troublers of common peace
and quietneſſe.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Wee haue manifeſt examples of
this that thou ſpeakeſt,Luke. 23. as well in the Prophetes
and Apoſtles,Actes. 27. as in Chriſt hymſelf,

for theſe haue all been burthened, with the
ſelf ſame accuſation.
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     The like maie be ſaied of all the
Martyres, and other faithfull Chriſtians,
whiche haue liued at all tymes in y• world.
But to retourne to our talke, of thoſe Deuilles
and poſſeſſed, I my ſelf haue heard
ſome ere now, that haue fa
                           •
                        ed to the true
Miniſters of the Goſpell, whom God had
ſent to declare his truthe: who the Deuill
ſent ye hether:The cōplaint of the newe poſſeſſed. What haue ye to doe here?
Why 
                           •
                        ary ye not in your owne countrey,
ye runnagates: what haue you to doe with
vs? We haue nothyng to doe with you, we
care not for you. Why ſuffer you vs not in
quietneſſe and peace? But I remember a
pretie ſaiyng of a Curate once, to a Preacher
that beganne firſte to preache the Goſpell
in that countrey.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Why, what ſaied he?
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     Why came ye ſo ſoone,The maner of gettyng of goodes by Prieſtes and Monkes. if ye had
taried a while longer, all had been ours.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     What ment he by that?
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     He ment that if theſe newe preachers,
had not come ſo ſone, and haue preached
then yt Goſpell, which ſo ſore warreth
againſt the Pope and all his Prieſtes and
Monkes: thei would in ſmal tyme wt their

falſe doctrine and Religion, with their abuſe
and ſu
                           •
                        tle practiſes, eaſely haue ſcraped
and gathered all the gooddes in the
worlde to themſelues, and haue lefte little
or nothyng to othes.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     He perceiued it very well: and
therefore we maie liken hym and his fellowes,
to thoſe deuils whiche crie: Why art
thou come to torment vs before our tyme?
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     Theſe kind of fellowes that ſaie,
Qui noſtra toll
                              •
                           t inimicus eſt: he that taketh
awaie ours, is our enemie. Thei regarde
not whether thei haue gotten the gooddes
that thei poſſeſſe, well or euill, wherefore
thei eſteeme all thoſe to be enemies,To whom the goodes of the Churche belong. that in
reaſon demaunde reſtitution of them, and
declare that it belongeth not to theim, but
that thei haue ſtolen it frō the churche, and
poore members of Ieſus Chriſte. And becauſe
thei haue gotten theſe greate riches
whiche thei, their parentes and frendes inioye,The cloake wherewith the Prophetes of Antichriſt couer them.
and whereby thei be maintained, and
doe get daily more and more, vnder title of
their falſe priſthood, Mōkerie, and falſe religion,
thei crie out againſt thoſe that condemne
their eſtate, as if thei were murtherers.
For thei knowe that thei cannot bee
long mainteined, if that coler or maſke be

taken awaie, wherwt thei maſke and coue
                           •
                        
all their falſhoode, abuſe, and blaſphemie.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     It is very hard for ſimple & ignoraunt
men,The colour that the Deuilles complaint hath againſt Ieſus Chriſt. to knowe the wrong, that theſe
enemies of the truthe, dooe to the true ſeruauntes
of God, by reaſon of the Deuiliſh
ſubteltie yt thei vſe, and their ſhameleſneſſe
not vnlike theſe Deuils, that complained
of Ieſus Chriſte: and aſked hym, what he
ha
                           •
                         to dooe with them, as if he had offered
them greate wrong, and warred againſte
theim without reaſon. For, as for theim, it
ſemeth that thei haue nothyng to ſaie, but
that Ieſus Chriſt ſhould ſuff
                           •••
                         thē in peace
and quietneſſe: and therefore ye fault is not
in them, as thei ſaie, that there is no agreement
betweene Ieſus Chriſte and them, if
Ieſus Chriſte did not trouble them, and
were cauſe of all the ſtrife.
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     I am afraied if thou hold on,What is firſt to be conſidered in all controuerſie. that
thou wilt become the deuills atturney, for
it ſeemeth by thy talke, that thou giueſt a
very good colour of reaſon to their cauſe.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     If wee ſhould onely regarde the
complaint of the Deuilles, without conſideryng
the principall cauſe, whervpō this
diſagreeyng is grounded, it might ſeeme
that Ieſus Chriſt was in great fault. But

we muſt conſider, who began the ſtrife.
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     Seeyng that God is the God of
peace,1. Cor. 14. and not of ſtrife,Phil. 4. and the Deuill is a
murtherer from the beginnyng,Ihon. 8. it is not
to bee doubted, but that the Deuill is the
aucthour of all the diſcord and ſtrife.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     I putt the caſe that a whorehunter
or haude,The cōplain
                              •
                            of thoſe that doe wrong againſt thoſe that receiue wrong. ſteale awaie an honeſte mans
wife, and the houſbande commeth, and demaūdeth
his wife of this ruffian, that hath
ſtollen her awaie, and reuileth this ruffian
or haude, for the wrong that he hath dooen
hym, and goeth to lawe with hym, whereby
there ariſeth great ſtrife, I would aſke
of thee who were in the faulte? Either the
houſbande, who hath had this great wrōg,
or the Rauiſher, who hath plaied hym this
wicked pranke.
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     This whorehunter or ba
                           •
                        ed, hath
as muche reaſon to complaine and 
                           〈◊〉
                         angrie,
as hath a theefe or robber, whiche is
called to account of theftes and robberies
whiche he hath committed, and whiche is
called to iudgement for theſame.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     It is certain, that ſuche fellowes
would haue nothing to doe, with thoſe that
thei haue wronged, neither with ſuche iudges,
as ſhould call them to accoumpte; and

pronounce ſentence againſt them.
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     But neuertheleſſe it followeth
not, but that thei whiche haue been thus
wronged, haue iuſte occaſiō to purſue their
right. Neither doeth it followe, but that
Iudges and Magiſtrates, dooe verie well
execute their office, in condemnyng ſuche
accordyng to their deſertes. And though
thei crie out againſt thoſe whiche ſue thē:
we haue nothyng to do with you, thei maie
well be anſwered: but we haue to doe with
you. For if the wicked and giltie might be
quitte, and eſcape the gallowes with ſuche
cōplaintes and cries, thei would al eſcape.
And if there were reaſon in theſe cōplaintes,
the Iudges and not the giltie ought to
be condemned, thei that demaunde iuſtice,
and not thei whiche haue cōmitted the fact
and deſerued correction and puniſhement.
Wherefore the common prouerbe is well
verified in ſuche, as bothe offer wrong and
complain, that the lambe hath troubled the
wolues water, & he can bothe bite & whine.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     This is the greateſt wickedneſſe
in the worlde, and yet it is daiely vſed againſt
Ieſus Chriſt and his Seruauntes,
whenſoeuer thei haue to doe with the wicked,
and reproue them of their faultes, and

goe about to bryng them vnder the yoke of
the Lorde. This is the cauſe that thei crie
out againſt the Goſpell: This is the meanes
that thei trouble the world with.The cauſe why the wicked complain of the Goſpel▪
                         This
is the cauſe that euery man crieth againſt
the ſeruantes of God: Let vs accuſe them
of fellonie. What ſaieſt thou Tobie?
                     
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     You haue talked of Prieſtes and
Mōkes, and ſuch other which you cal Papiſtes,
how thei cōplaine as ſore wronged,
becauſe thei go about to reforme them, accordyng
to the word of God, but haue you
no ſuch poſſeſſed among you? you yt 
                        
                           ••
                        unt
ſo much of the reformation of the Goſpel?
But I promiſe you I will not accuſe you
any farther in this matter, but will leaue
it to Eustace, who ſhal go forward with it▪
                     
                  
                  
                     Euſt.
                     As for me,Thei whiche abuſe the Goſpell makyng it ſerue to their owne gaine and affection. I knowe many, whiche
liked the Goſpell well, when in the beginnyng
their Preachers cried againſt the abuſe
yt thei ſaid was in the Romiſh church,
and in Prieſtes and Monkes. Thei liked
well alſo, that the goods of ye church ſhould
be taken frō Prieſts and Monkes, to haue
the gouernmēt of them themſelues, vnder
colour that the Prieſts and Monkes abuſed
them, and that thei ſhould be put to better
vſe, but God knoweth how euill thei

are beſtowed vpō many, & in many places.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     The worſt is,Thei that can not ſuffer to be reproued by the Miniſters of the Goſpell. that thoſe whiche
haue not doen herein as thei ought, and
whiche dayly forget themſelues more and
more, cannot nowadaies ſo much as ſuffer
the Preachers to admoniſhe and reproue
them, and to ſtirre them to beſtow it where
thei ought to beſtowe it, accordyng to the
order and diſcipline that heretofore hath
been vſed in the Primitiue Churche euen
ſince the Apoſtles tyme.
                  
                  
                     Euſt.
                     Therfore we may well ſaie of thē,
as Theophrastus and Ierome ſaid euē now
of our Prieſtes and Monkes. For I doubt
not, but if thei were called to account for
the beſtowyng of ſuch goods, and if it wer
taken out of their handes, as it was taken
from our Prieſtes & Monkes, and giuē to
ſuch as ſhould better▪ beſtow it, thei would
take pepper in the noſe, and fal to plaiyng
that Deuils parte wherof you ſpake euen
now in good earneſt. I am ſure thei would
at the leaſt play ye part as well as you ſaid
that our Prieſtes, Monkes, and their adherentes
plaied it, when it ſtood them vpō.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Yea, ſome of them play that part
very well, againſt their owne Preachers,
but I know not by what meanes. For firſt

ther are many that are ſo meale mouthed,
that thei dare ſcarce open their mouthes to
ſpeake one woorde that ſhould diſpleaſe in
reprouyng their faultes. Some other better
knowing their office, & leſſe eſteeming
their belly, dare boldly reproue the faultes
of 
                           •
                        hoſe that do amiſſe, and ſpecially in the
beſtowyng of the goodes of the poore, but
yet thei deale not ſo ſharply with them as
thei ought. For thei vſe them more fauourably
then thei vſed the Biſhoppes, Prieſtes
and Monkes. There is no talke of taking
away the adminiſtration from them,
but onely to correct ſuch manifeſt faultes,
as euery man doeth plainly ſee.
                  
                  
                     Euſt.
                     If thei can not ſuffer to bee admoniſhed
and reproued ſo fauourably as thou
ſaieſt, how would thei ſuffer their Preachers
to vſe them, as thei haue vſed our
Prieſtes and Monkes in like matter?
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Thou maieſt will thinke, that if
Prieſtes and Friers went about to defend
their cauſe with fire and faggot, theſe fellowes
would not ſuffer their ſwordes to
ruſt in the like cauſe, whiche thei are well
able to do▪ if thei were put to it, but the beſt

                           〈◊〉
                        ,Hirelinges & good sheepeheardes. thei haue no great cauſe to feare their
Preachers therein. For firſt, ther are more

flatterers and hyr
                           •
                        linges whiche will diſ
                           •
                        ſemble
mens faultes and encourage them
therein, then true preachers whiche will
ſpeak freely according to their office. Secondly,
the Miniſters are of very little power,
and therfore there is no daunger to be
feared that waie. Thirdly, I thinke that
thoſe whiche be of the beſt ſort among thē,
deſire the abuſe onely to bee corrected, and
that the goods maie bee employed and beſtowed
as thei ought to be. And it is al one
to them who doe it, ſo it be doen according
to the order that the Church requireth.
                  
                  
                     Euſt.
                     Mee thinkes thou art be
                           •
                        ome atturney
for the preachers that thou ſpeakeſt
laſt of, for thei that wel allow the doctrine
whiche thei preache,A ſlaunder on the good Miniſters of the Goſpell touchyng the adminiſtration of the Churche goodes. ſpeake not ſo well for
them as thou haſt doen, but contrariwiſe
accuſe them, and ſaie: that thei would haue
the adminiſtration of the Church goodes
in their own hands, to diſpoſe as thei think
good, as Prieſtes and Monkes haue doen
heretofore.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     There is a common Prouerbe
that ſaieth: when a man will hang or kill
a dogge, he will make hym beleeue that he
is mad. So there are ſome that cannot abide
ſuch preachers as neither can nor wil

be dombe dogges as thei would haue thē,
but ſaie madneſſe to their charge, to make
all men hate hym, and to the ende that thei
and their Miniſterie might haue the leſſe
aucthoritie. For, the leſſer aucthoritie that
the Miniſterie and Miniſters of the truth
haue, the greater libertie haue Sacrilegers,
Theeues, and Extortioners, and all
other wicked ones. And let the authoritie
be once taken from theſe, thei feare not the
hirelynges:Flatteryng Miniſters. for thei are dombe Dogges,
which will either barke or hold their peace
for a ſoppe, or morſell, or for a meſſe of hott
broth, or a good bang with a ſtaffe. And to
be ſhorte, thei marke what either pleaſeth
or diſpleaſeth their maiſters, to y• ende that
thei anger them not. Yea, and to pleaſe
them the better, thei ioyne with them, to
barke againſt thoſe, with whom thei ought
to ioyne, to hunt out the Wolfe.
                  
                  
                     Euſt.
                     It is poſſible that theſe of whom
thou ſpeakeſt, haue vſed the reformation of
the Goſpel (ſuche as it is) chiefly to be fingeryng
of Churche goodes. And becauſe
thei haue vſed ye title of the Goſpell to get
it into their handes, therefore thei vſe the
Miniſters that reprooue them of the euill
adminiſtration thereof (as thei liſt, fearing

leaſt thei reprooue them to the ſame ende,
that thei themſelues reproued our Prieſts
and Monkes: that is, to ſupplye the ſame
place, and enioye the ſame goodes.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     It maie be that there are ſuch as
thou ſpeakeſt of, but I think there are many

                           〈◊〉
                         ſaie otherwiſe then thei think, and
make this onely a meane to put the Preachers
to ſilence, accuſing them of vprores,
ſeditions, and to be buſie fellowes, & ſuche
as will take the authoritie & power of the
Magiſtrates in hande: And therefore thei
laie to their charge yt thei be troubleſome,
and that if their vndiſcreete pratyng were
not, all would bee quiet enough: therefore
thei crie out that thei ſhould ſuffer them in
peace, for thei haue nothyng to ſaie to thē,
ſo that no man haue any thing to ſay vnto
them, for thei haue that thei would haue.
                  
                  
                     Euſt.
                     Then accordyng to my firſt talke,
wee maie place theſe (of whom thou now
ſpeakeſt) among the number of thoſe poſſeſſed
whiche complaine of the rigour and
wrong that Ieſus Chriſt ſhewed vnto thē,
as well as Theophraſt and Ierome haue
placed of Prieſtes and Monkes.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     I wil not ſay againſt it, but there
are other as well as the
                           •
                        e, whiche doe the

like:The enemies af the diſcipline of the Churche. when any thyng is ſpoken of the obſeruing
of ſuch diſcipline, as Ieſus Chriſt hath
appointed, and his Apoſtles and Diſciples,
and al the true auncient Church haue put in
vr
                           •
                        , and practiſed according to the holy word
of God. To be ſhort, thei can be contented to
heare the preachers crie out againſt the wickedneſſe
of Prieſtes and Monkes, but in no
wiſe thei maie not awaie to heare of their
own. Thei would faine haue a Goſpell preached
without repentance, & without amendment
of life. Thei would haue ſuche libertie
vnder title of the Goſpell, as to be let loſe to
their owne pleaſures. Thei would be vnburthened
of the Popes yoke (whom thei call
Antichriſt,) but will not bee burthened with
Chriſtes yoke. Thei would be very wel content,
neither to haue Prieſtes nor Monkes,
for their findyng was coſtly, and the reſtoryng
of Church goodes very harde to heare
of: And therefore are contented to haue Miniſters
and Preachers, but not ſo many as
thei had Prieſtes, for ſauyng of charges in
maintainyng them: wherein thei ſhew them
ſelues to be good houſbandes, but great hinderers
to the poore flock of Chriſt,Lack of good Miniſters of the Goſpell. which remaine
without ſuch foode, & ſuch aboundāce
as is neceſſary for them, and all for lacke of

ſuch preachers & ſuch number as is needful.
But the worſt is,The cōtempt of the Miniſters of the Goſpell. that thei would haue our
poore Miniſters and Preachers heads vnder
their girdles, as if thei were their ſeruantes,
and toſſe them frō poſt to piller at their pleaſure.
And if the Miniſters will not do it, but
if ſome of them (well vnderſtād their office,)
vſe ſuche ſufficient honour vnto them as thei
ought, to the ende that Ieſus Chriſt and the
miniſterie of his Church be not diſpiſed and
diſhonoured, ſtraight waies thei cry out, that
ſuche Miniſters be bothe ambicious and rebelles,
and that thei will take vpon them the
Magiſtrates office. To be ſhort, if any Miniſter
go about to bryng in ſuch diſcipline and
reformation of the Churche as the Goſpell
requireth, ſtrait waies thei ſaie: Why come
you hether to trouble vs? Can not you liue
quietly your ſelues, and ſuffer other to doe
ſo to? You would pluck the ſworde out of the
Magiſtrates hande, but ye would bee well
ſwadled with it for your laboures. We haue
it by the haft, and you ſhall wryng it from vs
by the edge if ye will needes haue it.
                  
                  
                     Euſt.
                     For ought I can perceiue, ſuche fellowes
would neither haue Prieſts, Mōkes,
Preachers nor Miniſters, to the end that no
bodie might let thē, but to know as thei liſt.
                  
                  
                     
                     Tobie.
                     I beleue verely that there are ſuch
as thou ſpeakeſt of▪
                        Thei that are content with outwarde ſhewe of religion onely. but becauſe thei ſee that
thei can not liue without ſome forme of religion,
neither haue any forme of religiō without
ſome Miniſters of what qualitie ſo euer
thei bee: therefore thei are conſtrained at the
leaſt to make ſome outward appearāce. For
thei foreſee well enough, that all the worlde
would crie out on them, calling thē Athiſtes
and Epicures, & would laie to their charge,
that thei receiued not the reformation of the
Goſpell, ſuche as it is, but onely to ſcratch to
themſelues the Church goods vnder title of
the ſame, and to vſe what libertie thei liſt.
Therefore thei are contented to haue Preachers
to preache, ſo that thei rubbe them not
to harde on the gall. Againe, there are other,
which are contented to let them ſpeak what
thei will, when thei ſee that thei can not ſtop
their mouthes, and alſo whē thei can not reproue
and hinder them, but with great diſhonor
to themſelues. But when the Miniſters
are earneſt with them to liue accordyng to
the doctrine preached, there begins the ſtrife.
And herein thei be like to thoſe Monkes of
whom the Prouerbe is ſaied: Ryng to Mattins
and ſpare not, but ſay Mattins who liſt.
                  
                  
                     Euſt.
                     Me thinkes theſe of whō thou ſpeakeſt,

commit the ſame fault that thei burthen
the Pope,Chaunge of Popedome. Biſhoppes, Prieſtes, and Monkes
withal: for thei accuſe them of vſurpyng
the power of bothe ſwordes, that is to ſaie,
bothe the ſpiritual and temporall ſword: and
that which thei doe, ſeemeth to me not much
different, but only that where thei accuſe the
Pope and his Churchmen of takyng the tē
                        poral
ſword from the Magiſtrate, thei them
ſelues goe about to take awaie the ſpirituall
ſworde from the Churche and Miniſters of
the ſame, in as much as thei go about to rule
them after their owne fantaſie. For if thei
take their miniſters to be the true miniſters
of the Goſpell, thei ought to ſuffer them to
execute the charge that God and the Church
hath giuen them. If thei goe about either to
take it from them, or to hinder them therein,
thei are tyrauntes both to the Church & Miniſters
of the ſame. Wherfore the Miniſters
haue greater occaſion to complaine of them,
then thei haue of their Miniſters: for thei
need not greatly to feare, leaſt the miniſters
of the church ſet their feete on their throtes,
for that thei haue brought thē ſo low, that in
my ſimple iudgemēt, it is not to be doubted.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Thou maieſt alſo ſay, that if thei be
true Miniſters, thei will goe about no ſuche

thyng, though thei might.
                  
                  
                     Eusta.
                     I will leaue to diſpute, whether
thei be true miniſters or no, for thou knoweſt
myne opinion touchyng that: But for that
thei eſteeme them to bee ſuche, I haue good
occaſiō to ſaie thus muche againſt them. For
if thei hold them for ſuche, then maie the miniſters
iuſtly complaine of them, for takyng
awaie that ſpirituall ſworde of the Churche,
whiche God hath committed to them, aſwell
as thei complaine for takyng awaie their
ſworde. Contrariwiſe, if thei holde not their
miniſters for the true miniſters of God, why
doe thei allow them? And why are thoſe better
welcome to theim, whiche goe aboute to
pleaſe them in all thynges, like idle belles &
hirelinges, then thei that go about to execute
their charge, accordyng to the commaundement
of the worde of God? By this we maie
well perceiue, to what ende theſe fellowes
haue receiued the Goſpell, and how thei vſe
it to their gaine. Thei crie out againſte the
Pope, and yet thei goe about to ſet vp ſuche
an othe emong them ſelues, in that thei doe
that, whereof thei accuſe the Pope and his.
The difference is,Temporall Pope. that where this is a ſpirituall
Pope, thei would make a Temporall
Pope, who is more to be feared then yt Pope

whiche thei condemne, if he once take roote,
and be admitted and maintained: But I wil
leaue this talke, for it belongeth not to me.
I leaue y• charge to thoſe, whom it toucheth
nerer then me: onely touchyng this, becauſe
I feare me, leaſt the worlde fall in decaie as
faſte this waie, as euer it did, on the Pope,
Prieſtes, Monkes, and Romiſhe Churche
ſide, accordyng to our former talke.
                  
                  
                     Eusta.
                     
                        Theophrast and Ierome maie not
marueile, if I and ſuche as I am, cannot followe
the Religion and liuyng, whiche thei
followe, conſideryng that wee ſee ſo greate
diſorder and fault in thoſe, whiche doe moſte
vant of that reformatiō, which thei ſo muche
ſet out: for we perceiue, that thei cānot agre
themſelues.The diuiſion among thoſe that brag of the reformation of the Goſpell. The Miniſters are one againſt
an other. And if thei diſagree together, thei
diſagree worſe with the Magiſtrates & people,
and eche of them accuſeth other. And for
my part, me thinkes the Miniſters that haue
forſaken the Romiſhe churche, to ſet forward
that reformation, whiche thei now haue, deſerue
to be vſed as thei are. For in ſekyng to
get the Magiſtrates and peoples fauour againſt
the Pope, Prieſtes and Monkes, thei
haue ſo deſpiſed the ſtate of Prieſthoode, and
miniſterie of the Churche, and ſo magnified

the ſtate of Magiſtrates, that thei now feele
the fruites thereof. Thei thought to ſett the
Magiſtrates and people, againſte the Pope
and his Churche men, but thei haue now ſet
them againſt thēſelues. For thei now drinke
of the ſame cup, that thei gaue other to drinke
of. Thei thought thei ſhould bryng a greate
enterpriſe to paſſe, if thei could driue out the
Prieſtes and Monkes, to ſette thoſe in their
ſteede,Magiſtrates which vſurpe authoritie ouer the Churche. whom thei haue now placed. Thei
thought it a goodly reformation in ye church,
to aboliſhe all the Cannons and Decrres,
with the good ſtatutes, whiche the auncient
Fathers and Doctors had ordained, to maintaine
good diſcipline in the Churche. Thei
haue putte all into the Magiſtrates handes,
and haue made them maiſters of the church.
It is no maruaile, though thei will not onely
maintain that, whiche thei haue in poſſeſſiō,
but alſo encroche farther, to be out of the
ſubiection of all diſcipline. Yea, thei are not
contented herewith, but where thei ſhould be
ſubiecte to the diſcipline, whiche haue been
ordained in the churche, thei themſelues will
appoincte ſuche diſcipline, aſwell to the Miniſters,
as to the whole churche, as ſhal ſeme
good vnto theim. Yet when thei haue that,
thei themſelues will not bee ſubiecte to that

lawe and diſcipline, which thei haue appoincted
to other, but will diſpence with it, aſwel
for themſelues, as for thoſe whom thei fauor
as thei thinke good, euē aſwell as the Pope.
Wherfore, thei can neither blame the Pope,
nor his churche menne herein, but thei muſt
likewiſe blame themſelues, for that thei doe
theſame.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     If it bee not theſame, at the leaſt it
is verie like.
                  
                  
                     Eusta.
                     Furthermore,Mans traditions chaunged into other as ill. I cā not ſe by what
reaſon, thei can reiect the Traditions of our
good aunciente Fathers, vnder the title of
mannes Traditions, ſaiyng, that thei were
men, and that wee muſt ſtaie onely vpon the
pure woorde of the Lorde. Why, are thei not
then contented with this woorde? Why, can
thei not then awaie with ſuche diſcipline, as
Ieſus Chriſte hymſelf hath ordained: And
ſuche as his Apoſtles and diſciples haue practiſed?
For I would aſke them but this queſtion.
Seeyng thei reicte all Eccleſiaſticall
Traditions, vnder colour that wee ought to
followe onely the woorde of GOD, whiche
worde condemneth all mannes Traditions:
are not thei men as well as our predeceſſors
were? And if thei can not ſuffer the traditiōs
of our predeceſſors, what reaſon is it, that we

ſhould the rather receiue theirs, in ſteede of
the ſimple and pure ordenaunces of Ieſus
Chriſt? For I dare ſaie, that thei haue aboliſhed,
as many or more as theirs, whiche haue
better ground, and are muche more agreable
to the rule and Diſcipline of the Primitiue
Churche.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     I confeſſe for my part, that there is
greate abuſe growne, in the aunciente diſcipline
of the Churche: But me thinkes thei
ſhould be contented to correct thē, and keepe
that which is good, and accordyng to the firſt
ordenaunce of Ieſus Chriſt, & not aboliſh al.
                  
                  
                     Eusta.
                     Thou ſaieſt truthe. But thei maie
not be tolde of their faultes, whiche be verie
greate. For if thei be tolde of them, then thei
crie out: why doe you trouble vs? Are not all
thynges in good order? And, if we goe about
to ſhewe theim their diſorder by the worde of
God, and wherein their Traditions are different
from the ſame, thei anſwere, that thei
will diſpute no more, and that thei bee alreadie
reſolued, what thei ought to beleeue and
followe. And yet when we made the like anſwere
to them, and thoſe that holde the ſame
religion, thei mocked vs, and ſaid we anſwered
ſo, becauſe we durſt not ſtand to the trial
and that wee haue ſuche miſtruſt in our weapon,

that we be afraied to enter into combat.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Surely, now I perceiue that thou
art at them in good earneſt, me thinkes thou
handleſt theim as thei ought to bee handled.
For thou beateſt them with their owne rod,
and condemneſ? theim with their owne ſentēce.
But I praie thee, how art thou become
ſo greate a doctor in diuinitie? How couldeſt
thou perceiue all this that thou haſt ſpoken?
                  
                  
                     Eusta.
                     How could I not perceiue yt, which
is manifeſt to all menne: For, ſince our firſte
conuerſation together, might I not wel perceiue
that, whiche I ſawe and heard daiely?
I reporte mee to Ierome and Theophraſtus
thē ſelues, whether this be true or not? For,
although we be of Religion and opinion differēt,
yet I take thē to be ſo honeſt, that thei
will not lye againſt their owne conſcience.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     
                        Tobie and you haue made a verie
long diſcourſe, wherein ye haue very nere
touched vs, and likewiſe all theſe that dooe
bragge at this daie, of the reformation of the
Goſpell, wherin ye haue neither ſpared Magiſtrate,
Miniſter, nor people.
                  
                  
                     Eusta.
                     Yet we haue ſpared you more, then
you haue ſpared vs: or our Prelates, paſtors,
or Magiſtrates. But when wee ſaie trothe,
what neede we to ſpeake.
                  
                  
                     
                     Theo.
                     I cōfeſſe that whiche you haue ſpoken,
is not ſo falſe as I would it wer: but me
ſeemeth you doe vs wrong, in that you make
no difference, betweene thoſe that abuſe the
Goſpell (as you ſaie) & thoſe that liue accordyng
to theſame: but condemne all, as well
the good as the euill, without iudgyng the
cauſe:Condemnation without iudgyng the cauſe. wherin me thinkes ye ſhewe your ſelues,
as if ye would condemne Ieſus Chriſt,
as well as the deuills▪ whiche complained of
hym, becauſe thei are one againſt an other, &
at difference: if we condēne all thoſe that are
at ſtrife, we muſt aſwell condēne God as the
deuill: for thei were alwaies at ſtrife, & ſhall
neuer be otherwiſe,Perpetuall ſtrife betwene God and the Deuill, and his ſeruaunts. nor cā not. Now, if God
and the deuill bee at ſtrife, we maie not ſaie,
that thoſe which take Gods part in aniwiſe,
agree with thoſe that take the deuills parte.
And to take bothe parts is impoſſible: ſeyng
then that it is ſo, it can not bee but that (thoſe
whiche ſerue the deuill, and will not become
obediēt to God) will alwaies burthen ye true
ſeruantes of God, with theſaid complaintes,
that the deuils laied to Ieſus Chriſte. For, if
the deuil durſt do it to the maiſter, it is not to
be doubted, but yt he wil giue boldneſſe to his
to do the like to ye ſeruantes of Ieſus Chriſt,
ſeyng he durſt doe it to Chriſt hymſelf.
                  
                  
                     
                     Eusta.
                     I agree to all that. But you that
glorie ſo muche in the reformation of your
Goſpell, bragge to bee all faithfull, all good
men, to followe the pure worde of God, to be
all led and guided by the holy ghoſt, and condemne
all others that are not of your ſecte.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     That notwithſtādyng it followeth
not, that all thei that bragge of ſuche things,
be ſuche as thei would bee eſtemed. For, the
churche of God will neuer be without hypocrites
and falſe brethren,The euill and the good mingled together in the Churche. mingled emongeſt
the children of God, whiche bryng more dangerous
and offenſiue warre to the churche of
God, thē any other enemies whatſoeuer thei
be. And therfore there will alwaies be ſuche
Deuilles, and ſuche poſſeſſed inough in the
churche as thou ſpeakeſt of, that will cry out
on Chriſt and his ſeruantes, and complaine
on them, but yet thei are not of the Churche.
For there is great differēce betwene beyng
of the Churche,The Churche perſecuted by her owne. and beeyng in the Churche.
But where cā the deuill aſſaile Chriſt nerer,
and more ſubtilly then in his church? What
ſort of men can he better vſe to ſerue his purpoſe,
then thoſe, whiche onely will be holden
for the true mēbers of the churche, but ſuche
as ſhalbe in greateſt credite, and aucthoritie
in theſame? If thou wilt talke of Miniſters,

I would aſke of thee: when was the churche
euer without falſe Prophetes, dombe doggs
flatterers, and Hirelynges, whiche haue alwaies
warred againſt the true Prophetes &
Apoſtles, and againſt the true Miniſters of
the lorde? And haue not theſe been moſte promoted,
and beſte eſtemed emongeſt men? If
ye talke of Kynges, Princes, Lordes, and
Magiſtrates, conſider how many haue there
been found, that haue yelden ſuche obediēce
to the worde of God, whiche hath been declared
vnto theim by the Prophetes, and other
miniſters of the Lorde, and haue ſhewed thē
ſuche honour and reuerence as thei ought?
For one that hath been founde to yeld ſuche
duetie to their Miniſter, as behoued, there
haue been twentie found that haue doen the
contrary, which haue not been contented not
onely to deſpiſe the doctrine of the true ſeruauntes
of God, but haue alſo driuen them
out, and perſecuted them themſelues. And
when I ſpeake this, I ſpeake not of ſuche
Princes and Magiſtrates whiche haue had
dominion ouer ſuche people and Nations as
wer eſteemed Infidels, but I ſpeak of thoſe
that reigned ouer the people whiche were eſteemed
of God and of his Church. But how
many haue been founde among this people

whiche would haue diſpoſed the religion after
their owne fantaſies, to make it ſerue to
their affections and commodities, & whiche
haue vſurped the offices in the church, which
belonged not to them?
                           
                              •
                           eroboam. Ahaz. Ozia. 
                        Ieroboam, Ahaz, and
Ozias, whiche were Kynges ouer Iuda and
Iſraell, do ſufficiently witneſſe vnto vs. And
when all theſe wer reproued by ye Prophets,
how were thei receiued?Achab. After that Achab
with his Ieſabel had peruerted all the diuine
ſeruice,Ieſabell. by the meanes of his falſe Prophets,
what ſaid he to Hely? Was it not laied to his
charge, that it was he ye troubled all Iſraell?
Hely whiche onely went about to ſet vp the
true ſeruice of God accordyng to his lawe,Hely.
troubled all:2. Kyng. 18. and Achab whiche was cauſe
of all the ruine that was in the Churche of
God,Achabs reproche to Hely. was a good Kyng, and very zealous of
the glorie of God. Wherefore rightly Hely
anſwered him: it is thou & thy fathers houſeholde
that troubleſt Iſraell. And here doeth
Achab ſhewe hymſelf like theſe Deuilles
which complained of Ieſus Chriſt. And yet
all theſe Kynges of whom I haue ſpoken
would not be holden for Infidelles,The rebellion of the Magiſtrates and people againſt the Miniſters of the Lorde. no more
then thoſe whiche in theſe daies will be holden
for Chriſtiā Princes & magiſtrates, yea,
reformed accordyng to the Goſpell: and neuertheleſſe,

thei will receiue the Goſpel but
according to their own pleaſure. And if that
in al tymes there hath been ſuche contradiction
of Princes and magiſtrates againſt the
ſeruauntes of God, and if thei refuſed to ſubmit
themſelues to the worde of God, the rebellion
was not leſſe amōg ye people, whiche
commonly followe the maner of their Princes
and Lordes, & rather of thoſe that rebell
againſt God and his ſeruauntes, thē of thoſe
that ſhewe their duetie as thei ought to God
warde. And ſithe it is ſo, what reaſon is it to
condēne as wel the true ſeruauntes of God,
the good Magiſtrates, and other good men
which do well diſcharge their office, as their
aduerſaries, which from tyme to tyme haue
troubled the Churche.
                  
                  
                     Euſt.
                     I graunt that wer no reaſon, but this
is nothyng to my talke.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     It is al one: For it ſemeth that thou
wouldeſt haue ſo perfect a Churche, yt there
ſhould be no diſſention or diſcord: but it is in
vaine to looke for any ſuch here, as our Sauiour
Chriſt hymſelf hath well declared vnto
vs by the parables and ſimilitudes which
he vſed. For there will alwaies bee ill fiſhe among
the good in the net of the Goſpel, and
the Lordes fielde will neuer bee ſo cleane in

this worlde,
                           
                              •
                           ypocrites a
                           
                              •
                           ong the 
                              ••
                           ithfull in 
                              〈◊〉
                            Churche. but that there will bee alwaies
darneſſ mingled with the good ſeede, which
wil be ſo like in growing, y• it cā not be knowen
frō the other,Math. 13. till it ſhewe it ſelf farther.
                  
                  
                     Euſt.
                     What is the cauſe thereof?Marke. 4.
                     
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Among others there are twoo moſt
worthie to be noted.
                  
                  
                     Euſt.
                     Whiche be thei?
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     The firſt is,Matth. 13. that the Deuill doth alwaies
mingle his ſeed with the Lords ſeed,
vntill the Lorde doe cleane ſeparate them.
                  
                  
                     Euſt.
                     And what is the ſecond?
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     The ſecond is, that the very childrē
and ſeruaunts of God are neuer ſo perfectly
regenerated in the worlde,Rom. 6. 7. 8. neither can not ſo
well mortifie their olde Adam & ſinful fleſh,Imperfections in the perfecteſt.
but that there alwaies remaineth many carnall
affections in them, yea, euen in the perfecteſt,
whiche is the cauſe thei can not be ſo
perfect as thei ought to be. Wherefore, the
moſt iuſt are greatly greeued, that thei can
not become ſo obedient to the will of God as
thei deſire, and as God in his law requireth:
euē as S. Paule witneſſeth of hymſelf.Roma. 7. But
I wil leaue to talke any more hereof at this
tyme, becauſe I wil come to ye point yt 
                        Tobie
talked of touching the new temporal Pope.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Truely I would gladly heare thy

mynde therein.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     I doubt not but the Deuill would
be glad to doe as muche as you haue ſpoken
touchyng this matter, in thoſe places where
the ſpiritual Pope is beaten doune.The foundation of the ſpiritual Pope He hath
heaued vp his ſpirituall Pope, vnder ye title
of Miniſter of the Churche, and hath taken
occaſion to giue vnto hymſelf many goodly
titles, and ſuche authoritie as the ſpirite of
God giueth to ye true Miniſters of his word,
and their Miniſterie: But if the Deuill and
his falſe Prophetes and paſtors haue abuſed
the name of this holy miniſterie and the true
miniſters of the Lorde, to vſurpe tyrannie ouer
the Churche of Ieſus Chriſt vnder this
colour: it followeth not therefore that the authoritie
of the true Miniſterie of the church,
and the true miniſters of the Lord, (which is
giuen them of God and not of men) ought to
bee diminiſhed.Euill reforming of the Churche. For whoſoeuer vſeth ſuche
meane to correct the fault that the Pope and
his haue committed in this behalfe, doth not
reforme the Church, but deforme it more thē
it was before. And therefore when the true
Miniſters of the Goſpell preached in the beginnying
againſt the Pope and other falſe
Sheepeheardes whiche haue abuſed the miniſterie
of the Church, and wholy ouerthrowen

it: and whē thei haue admoniſhed Princes
and Magiſtrates to ſet to hande, that the
abuſe whiche was in the Church might bee
corrected and reformed accordyng to ye word
of God: thei preached not that the Magiſtrates
ſhould take any tyrannie ouer ye Church,
whiche thei condemned, and that thei ſhould
tread the miniſterie therof vnder their feete:
but that thei ought to beſtow their whole power
in reſtoryng of it to ſuch perfectneſſe, as
it ought to be according to Gods word. And
to the ende that the Magiſtrates ſhould not
ſticke at it,The declaration of the Miniſters to the Magiſtrates. and think that it belonged not to
them, thei ſhewed them what was their duetie,
and how muche God had honoured them
in callyng them thereto. Thei likewiſe declared
vnto them, the honour that the ſpirite
of God ſheweth to that holy ſtate in ye ſacred
Scriptures: and what diſhonour and iniury
the Pope and his prophetes haue doen vnto
it. Wherein thei did not amiſſe, but faithfully
executed their charge. If there be any that
haue paſſed their boundes therein, I will not
excuſe their fault. And likewiſe, if there be any
Magiſtrates,Magiſtrates abuſing the Goſpell aud their office. that ſtretch that farther thē
thei ought, whiche hath been preached vnto
them by the true miniſters of the Lorde, touchyng
the authoritie and power that ye Lord

hath giuen them: the fault is not in the true
miniſters, but in thoſe which abuſe their doctrine,
which is the doctrine of God. For ther
is no more reaſon to blame them in ſuch caſe
then to blame the Prophetes and Apoſtles
becauſe thei writ of the excellencie, as wel of
the miniſterie of the Goſpell, as of the ſtate
of Magiſtrates. For thei wrote not yt which
thei haue written, to giue the Deuill, falſe
prophetes, and tyrauntes, occaſion therby to
vſurp tyrannie ouer the Church, but becauſe
the troth is ſo, and that it is needfull that the
faithfull ſhould ſo vnderſtande it: for whom
thei haue both written and preached, and not
for tyrauntes or enemies of the Churche. If
there be thē any Magiſtrates in theſe daies,
whiche vnder title of authoritie and power
that God hath giuen them, will take more
authoritie and power ouer the Churche then
God willeth them, and will make the Miniſterie
of the ſame ſubiect vnto them, as the
Pope hath made thē ſubiect to hym and his,
and hath alſo made ſubiect the power and authoritie
of Princes & Magiſtrates: theſame
doe verely ſett vp a newe Pope,Popedome chaunged & not aboliſhed chaungyng
only his coate and maſke. And by this meanes
Sathan ſhall eſtabliſhe a newe Popedome,
vnder another colour, but al wil come

to one ende, though thei take an other waie.
And ſo the tyrannie that he tofore tyme hath
vſed ouer the Churche and miniſterie of the
ſame,A Popedome more daungerous then the firſt. ſhall not bee taken awaie, but onely
chaunged and diſguiſed.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Nay, it will be worſe: for it wil not
onely bee chaunged and diſguiſed, but more
inforced.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     How can that be?
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Thou knoweſt, that what power ſo
euer the Pope and his, haue ouer the church
in their eſtate, yet can thei not doe what thei
liſt, except thei do otherwiſe then thei ought
to doe. For, firſt thei cā put no man to death:
but muſt deliuer vp to ye ſecular power ſuche
as thei iudge worthy of corporal puniſhmēt,
either for hereſie, or cōmittyng of any other
crime againſt the faithe and religion. But if
the whole power of the church, be in the magiſtrates
handes, thei maie bind and looſe as
thei liſt. Thei nede not to borrowe the ſword
of an other, whiche thei enioye theimſelues.
Furthermore, notwithſtandyng the greate
abuſe in the Romiſhe Churche, yet were the
Councels, Sinodes, and auncient cannons
alwaies of ſome aucthoritie with thē. There
is neither Pope, Cardinall, nor Biſhop, that
dare vndertake to admit any into ye Miniſterie

of the Churche, except he haue paſſed the
order which he muſt paſſe, and without ſome
forme of electiō. If any be depoſed out of the
miniſterie, he ſhal not be depoſed without beyng
heard, as appertaineth to hym: that is to
ſaid, without forme of Eccleſiaſticall iudgement.
But if the whole power be in the Magiſtrates
hand, thei may place or diſplace the
Miniſters as thei liſt, without any Eccleſiaſticall
order, be it right or wrong. Thei maie
vſe thē as ſeruauntes, that whē thei are wearie
of them, thei maie put them awaie, or put
thē to death as thei liſt, I meane if the Magiſtrates
bee tyrantes, and haue none that dare
gainſaie thē, without the like daunger. And
ſo Wolues ſhalbe thruſt into the Churche of
God, and the true ſhepheardes ſhalbe driuen
out. For tyrantes will neuer abide to heare
the troth, as it ought to be told thē: and if thei
be no tyrantes, thei will be content with the
charge whiche the lorde hath giuen thē, and
will beware how thei attribute to their particular,
that whiche is common to all the
Churche, or which is ſpecially ioyned to the
Miniſters of the ſame.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     I perceiue thou ſpeakeſt reaſon:
for though the Pope and his, abuſe, and haue
of long tyme abuſed, bothe Councelles and

auncient Cannons, and that thei vſe no part
of the auncient diſcipline of the churche, but
onely the names and titles: yet dare thei not
ſo openly give themſelves over to 
                           〈…〉
                        
thei would, if that bridle were not.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Therevpon I conclude, that if this
bridle could not ſo kepe thē, within their boū
                        des,
but that thei haue ouerpaſſed them verie
muche, as you ſaie: it will be worſe, whē the
power of the churche is in the hādes of thoſe,
whiche are armed with the temporall ſword,
whiche haue none other Lawes to reſtraine
them, and keepe them in their boundes, but
ſuche as thei themſelues will take and thoſe
at their pleaſure. And beſides that, how oftē
chaunceth it, that th
                           ••
                        e of this eſtate, haue
neither learning nor knowledge, and are the
leaſt exerciſed in matters belongyng to the
Churche: And yet theſe ſhalbe thei, that ſhal
commaūde Miniſters and Preachers what
thei liſte, on paine of their ſworde: and ſhall
appoinct thē lawes touchyng their eſtate &
miniſterie, and likewiſe to the whole church.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     I confeſſe ye al theſe incōueniences
might come of ſuche tyrannie. And therfore
the true miniſters of ye Goſpell,Good Miniſters preuent the newe Popedome. perceiuyng
the ſubtiltie of ſatan in ſuche caſe, & forſeing
his pretence, preuent ſuche thynges betime.

Wherfore, thei crie no leſſe againſt ſuche tiranny
& abuſe (whē thei perceiue it) then thei
haue heretofore cried againſt the tyrāny and
abuſe of the Pope, and the Popiſhe churche.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     There are very fewe that doe ſo,Prieſtes and Monkes tranſformed. for
I know the greateſt part to belly gods, flatterers,
hirelinges, who haue the good will of
the Magiſtrates and higher powers, ſpeake
as pleaſeth them whom thei ſeeke to pleaſe,
and confirme their tyrannie: In ſteede of reprouyng
them, and fightyng in the quarrell
of the libertie of the Churche. Wherefore, if
thei haue good occaſion to call our Prieſtes
and Mōkes belly gods, and falſe Shepherdes:
your preachers are not voide of the ſame
fault, thei can plaie that parte well inough.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     I would I could in all pointes diſproue
thee herein. But I praie thee conſider
whēce thoſe belly gods are come to vs: come
not the moſte parte of them frō thoſe, whom
thou mentionedſt euen now? Thinkeſt thou
that all thoſe prieſtes and monkes, that now
hold on our ſide, are now wholy vnprieſted &
vnmonked? Thinkeſt thou not that the deuil
hath ſent thē emongſt vs, to 
                           ••
                        aſider the Goſpel,
hauing inough to 
                           〈◊〉
                         his turne beſide.
Wherefore it is no meruaile, if he goe about
to ſow thoſe 
                           •
                        ermine vnder other habite and

                        
                           ••
                        ler, where ſuche Apoſtates will 
                           〈◊〉
                         receiued
in their 
                           〈◊〉
                         habit. For he is contented
that thei vncloth ye outward habit, ſo thei
vncloche not their prieſthood or monkehood.
But tho there be ſuche, yet thanked bee God
there are other, whiche are ready & contēted
not onely to be driuen awaie and baniſhed in
maintainyng the libertie of ye true diſcipline
of the Churche, in deſpite of tyrantes, but alſo
to giue their livesin ſo good a qua
                           ••
                        ell.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     If there be any ſuche, thei 
                           〈◊〉
                         thicke
ſowē, but come thin vp: and beſides that, thei
ſhall finde very fewe, either of their 
                           〈◊〉
                        ,
or of the Magiſtrates or commēs, that
wil ſticke to thē in the maintenaunce therof:
but almoſt all ſortes of men crie out againſt
thē, and againſt rebelles & ſedicious perſons
that trouble the whole churche. Now, what
better hope of reformation, is there too be loked
for at your han̄des, then at ours? but onely
that it is like 
                           〈…〉
                         ouerthrowen with
you, then euer it was 
                           〈…〉
                        
nere) by the Popes 
                           〈…〉
                        
I dare ſaie: that I ſe already 
                           〈…〉
                        ,
that vnder title of reformatiō by the Goſpell
ſome chriſtian Princes haue in 
                           〈…〉
                        
vſurped more, tyranny▪ ouer the Churches in
their dominion, their 
                           〈…〉
                         and his

adherentes in ſixe hundred yeres.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Thou talkeſt at pleaſure of affectiō
that thou beareſt againſt vs and our religiō.
But in this meane while,True reformation of the Churche. thou cōſidereſt not
the goodneſſe of thoſe that feare God, aſwell
Miniſters, Magiſtrates, as common people.
For, as there are good Shepherdes, whiche
faithfully execute their office, vſurpyng nothing
ouer the Churche or Magiſtrates, but
honoryng thē as thei ought, according to the
worde of God: So likewiſe, are there many
true chriſtiā Magiſtrates, which let helping
hande, bothe to the churche, and miniſters of
theſame, not to oppreſſe thē, but to helpe and
further thē in their charge, aſmuch as either
of their offices requireth. And when this agremēt
is betwene the Magiſtrates and the
miniſters, the people whiche are committed
to their charge, do willingly frams themſelues,
to yeld to God and their paſtors 
                           〈◊〉
                        
his ſeruantes, the honor & obedience, whiche thei owe
                           •
                        vnto
thē. And though the nomber of
theſe be not ſo great, as it is to be wiſhed, yet
there is good hope, that the Lorde will make
perfecte that good worke, whiche he hath begun
in his churche.The ignorāce of many. For, there are many that
e
                           •
                        re rather of ignorance, then of malice! aud
for feare 
                           •
                        eaſt ſome newe tyranny ſhould bee

vſed ouer the Churche; the Magiſtrates and
the people, vnder colour of Miniſterie, then
for any hatred thei beare to good diſcipline.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     You cā very well excuſe your 
                           •
                        aultes:
this is alwaies your maner, when ye cā
                        not
gainſaie that, whiche is euident to all
men, to make ſome execuſe. And yet will ye
not accepte the excuſes of other, though thei
be neuer ſo reaſonable.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     I excuſe nothing, but that that is to
be excuſed.Ignoraunce worthie of blame. I excuſe not ye ignorance of thoſe
whiche are ignorant of the thinges that wee
talke of, and chiefly ſeeyng the Goſpell hath
been preached ſo long, and ſo plainly emong
thē. For if thei be ignoraunt, it is their owne
fault. It maie be alſo ſome preachers faults,
which haue not declared theſe things as thei
ought: neither haue had ſo greate care of the
diſcipline of ye churche, as is requiſit. Some

                           〈…〉
                        ,Fault in the Miniſters. becauſe thei are ignorant themſelues,
and vnderſtand not the gouerning of the
church. Some for not caring greatly for the
flocke to thē committed, and not bearyng ſo
feruent a zeale to the glory of God, & the edification
of his churche. Some other, becauſe
thei be flatterers, and are afraied to get the
                           ••
                        
will of men, but eſpecially of the higher ſort:
knowing that thei will not willingly ſubmit

thēſelues to diſcipline. But how ſoeuer it be,
there is difference betweene thoſe that ſinne
ignorantly, (though it be neuer ſo groſe) and
thoſe that ſinne vpon pretenced malice. And

                           •
                        n thother ſide,Falſe detractours to hinder the diſcipline of the Churche. there are ſo many falſe reporters,
& make bates emong men, but chiefly about
princes & magiſtrates, which with their
flatterers & ſlanderers go about nothing els
but to hinder yt true diſcipline bee not receiued,
and reſtored into the church, as of neceſſitie
is requiſit. And this thei do, becauſe thei
are afraied of it thēſelues, for that thei will
neither be ſubiect to god nor his church. And
theſe fellowes finde more, whiche nor onely
giue eare to theim, but alſo 
                           〈…〉
                        
detractiōs, then the good preachers find that
followe the true doctrine whiche thei preach.
Theſe are of the nōber of thoſe deuils, which
crie out againſte the ſeruauntes of God, and
complaine of them, after thei have doen the
worſte thei can againſt them, in ſekyng to ouerthrow
the whole miniſterie of the church,
and all true reformation.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Me thinkes we haue talked long inough,
of theſe maner of deuilles and poſſeſſed,
whiche complaine of thoſe whom thei
haue wronged, and accuſe ſuche as haue receiued
greate iniurie at their handes, tell me

                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
now if thou haue any more to ſaie of other
kindes, 
                           〈◊〉
                         whiche we haue not yet ſpoken.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Thou muſt further note, that thoſe
deuilles whiche complained of Chriſt, complained
not onely, that he tormented theim
before their tyme, but alſo made requeſte vnto
hym, that he would not ſende theim to the
bottomeleſſe pitte, nor out of the Countrey▪
but that he would ſuffer them there.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     What ſaieſt thou to that?
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Firſt I ſaie, that all the wicked are

                           〈◊〉
                         offēded, whē thei ſe & perceiue
their iudge.
                           
                              •
                           ow the true Miniſters of 
                              •
                           he Lorde are 
                              ••
                           dges of the 
                              •
                           icked. Now the miniſters of the Lorde
are as Iudges to the wicked, for that Ieſus
Chriſt condēneth thē by the iudgement pronounced
vnto them by the mouth & miniſterie
of his ſeruantes. And therfore it is writtē
of Ezechiel,
                        
                           
                              •
                           zech 22. that the lorde ſent hym as iudge
of ye people,
                           
                              ••
                           on. 16. whoſe Prophet he was. And Ieſus
Chriſt ſaid: that he would ſende the holie
ſpirit to his Apoſtles, whiche ſhould reproue
the worlde of ſinne, as a iudge whiche condē
                        neth
him, by the preaching of the goſpell annoūced
by the Miniſters of theſame. For the
maner of ſpeche that Ieſus Chriſte vſeth in
this place, importeth ſo muche. And this cauſeth
the wicked to murmure againſt the Miniſters
of the lorde (as theſe wicked ſpirites)

when thei are conſtrained to ſe them & heare
thē.The wicked will neuer finde tyme to heare the condemnation. Furthermore, the wicked are herein like
to thoſe wicked ſprites, whiche would alwayes
prolong the time, as the giltte which are
condemned to the gallowes. For, thei thinke
it won tyme, if thei maie delaie it ſo, that thei
be not conſtrained to come to accōpt. Theſe
deuills denied not,The reaſons of thoſe tha
                              •
                            are conuinced by the word of God▪
                         but that thei had well deſerued
to be driuen out, and ſent to the bottō
                        leſſe
pitte, becauſe thei could not deny it: but
thei feared leaſt thei ſhould be ſent thether before
that tyme. For the wicked would neuer
willyngly appere before the Iudge, & therefore
can neuer finde meete tyme to come to
iudgement. There are alſo many, whoſe cō
                        ſciences
beare thē witneſſe, that that whiche
the true Miniſters of the Goſpell preache is
trothe: & that whiche thei demaūde touching
the reformation of the Goſpell is very reaſonable.
At the leaſt thei can not gainſaie it by
the worde of God, how muche ſoeuer thei calominate
againſte it. And becauſe thei haue
nothyng els to ſaie, thei complaine that the
miniſters are too earneſt and too ſharpe, and
that the people will not ſo be won. Thei ſaie
that thei muſt go ſoftly to woorke, & by little
and little tary a time. But in the meane time
thei conſider not, that thei and the Miniſters

maie die the whileſt▪ and that it is requiſite y•
euery man make hymſelf ready in tyme, to
giue accompt to the high Iudge, who graū
                        teth
no dela
                           •
                        e whē y• houre is come. Thei cō
                        ſider
not likewiſe,
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            with 
                              〈◊〉
                            profite is 
                              ••
                           ungerous. y• ſome hath bin taried for
more then x. or xv. yere, ſome other more then
xx. or xxx. yeres: & yet thei are ſo far frō amē
                        dement,
that thei are daiely worſe and worſe.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Then wee maie well ſaie by them,
that thei are the worſe for the keepyng.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Thei waxe ſo euill, that after long
looking for, thei are leſſe ready to doe good,
then euer thei were. Thei ſo well determine
to amende, that when thei feele theimſelues
earneſtly preſſed, not onely in worde, but alſo
in deede, and that thei will tary no lōger, but
that ye ſeruantes of God will at length know
if God ought to bee heard in his Churche, or
men, and if theſe Dogs, Hoggs, Foxes, and
Wolues, whiche are in the Churche, ought
alwaies to bee ſuffered: then declare thei thēſelues
to be very Hogs, Dogs, Wolues and
Foxes. And while we let the time paſſe, thei
thei counterfect the ſhepe▪ But when we go
aboute by true markes▪ to knowe whether
thei be ſheepe or no, thei can not awaie with
this triall: Then ſhewe thei what thei cā do.
Thei are not contented to tread vnder foote

the pearles,Dogges and ſwine turne againſt the ſeruauntes of God. whiche are caſt before them, and
the holy thynges, whiche are giuen them, as
thei ha
                           •
                        e doen of long tyme, but thei tourne
againſt the ſeruauntes of God (whiche offer
them vnto them) to bite and tread thē in peeces,Matth. 7.
as Ieſus Chriſt ſaieth that Doggs and
Hoggs will doe, to thoſe (whiche againſt his
commaundemente, to caſte the Pearles and
precious ſtones of his Goſpell, before them.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     It maie be,The puniſhment of God, for too long bearyng with abuſe. that the Miniſters doe
well deſerue ſuche reward. For, ſeeyng that
Ieſus Chriſt hath forbidden them, ſo to prophane
and ſoile his holie thynges, why haue
thei ſo long doen it, againſt the commaundement
of Ieſus Chriſte.The reproche of the Papiſts for pollutyng the ſacramēts in reformed Churches. For in this caſe (mee
ſemeth) there is muche more diſorder emōg
you that brag of the reformation of the Goſpell,
then emong vs whom you cal Papiſts.
For you make no difference betwene Dogs
Hogs and ſhepe, and principally in the adminiſtration
of your Sacraments. We do not
ſo in our churches, whiche you call Popiſhe.
For whatſoeuer our curates and ſhepherdes
be, yet thei will knowe their ſheepe: and will
not receiue any (ſpecially to y• ſupper, which
thei celebrate) without thei firſt knowe what
faith or religion thei be of. But your paſtors
and Miniſters are conſtrained to receiue indifferently,

all ſuche as ſhal preſent themſelues
to your ſupper. Your reformation is ſo
well eſtabliſhed, that if a common whore, a
theefe, a robber, or a Iewe, a Turke, come to
you, your Miniſter dare not refuſe hym, except
he will indanger hymſelf to be depoſed
frō the Miniſterie, at the leaſte. Thinke you,
that offendeth vs not greatly? And that it letteth
not many men of good conſcience from
yelding to your ſect? For though you blame
our forme of religiō, yet we thinke, if we do
not better then you, wee can not lightly doe
worſe. For at the leaſt we obſerue our Ceremonies,
and that forme of diſcipline, whiche
we haue in our churches, better then you obſerue
thoſe, which you ought to obſerue, if ye
had receiued ye Goſpell, as you brag. Seyng
then that your Miniſters haue ſo long tyme
giuen to hogs & dogs, thoſe thynges whiche
you eſteme to be moſte precious and holie, is
it not good reaſon, that thoſe hogs and dogs
ſhould ſhew themſelues to be ſuche, & ſhould
puniſhe the diſhonour, whiche thei ſhewed to
God and his worde, and his holy Sacramēt
is. For you bragge to haue all theſe thinges.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     I agree, that thei haue lingered
therein too long: and that the puniſhment
whereof thou ſpeakeſt, is very iuſt. And it

cannot be otherwiſe, ſeing that Ieſus Chriſt
hath foreſhewed it. For in admoniſhyng his
Apoſtles not to giue holy thynges to dogs,
nor to caſt pearles among Swine,Math. 7. leaſt thei
treade them vnder foote, and teare them in
peeces whiche offer them: He gaue thē warnyng
hereby, propheſiyng and threatnyng
what ſhould happen vnto them, if thei failed
herein. And although our Miniſters be faultie
herein,Thei that wil deferre the tyme with God. in that thei haue deferred the time
to long, ſome for feare of diſpleaſure, & ſome
for loſing of that thei haue, watching for better
opportunitie, yet are thei burthened by
diuers, to be to haſty, to wilfull, and to raſhe.
And this is the cauſe, that ſuche alwaies deferre
the tyme ſo long.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Therefore I feare mee thei ſhall
ſweetly abye for it one daie, & ſhall then perceiue
what ſheepe thei haue in their flocke.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Seyng that God hath ſpoken it, we
neede not to diſpute whether it ſhall come to
paſſe or no. Or whether we ought to deferre
the tyme ſo long or no. Wee neede to determine
no more, or take any other councell in
it. Thei that dooe otherwiſe declare one of
theſe two: either that thei wil controll God,
as if that whiche he hath ordeined were not
well enough, and that rule which he hath giuen

to his Church were not ſufficient: or els
ſhewe themſelues rebellious againſt him, in
not obeyng him. And therfore we ought not
to appoint or limit any time, to doe yt whiche
he hath commaunded. For if we mynde to obey
hym, wee ought not to delaie any tyme,
ſeyng wee knowe his will.The hypocriſie of thoſe whiche ſeeke excuſes. And therefore I
iudge them leſſe hipocrites which ſaie plainly.
Lett vs caſt of this yoke wherewith thei
would yoke vs,Pſalm. 2. and let vs breake this bande
wherwith thei would binde vs, and let vs do
as we were wont: then thei whiche make delay,
and excuſe them ſelues with the tyme.
For thei dare not ſpeake ſo openly as the other
doe, nor vtter their mynde, becauſe thei
are ſomewhat more ſhamefaſt and hipocrites
then the other. But whileſt thei thus deferre
the tyme, thei and their miniſters maie dye:
and then muſt thei bothe appeare before the
iudgement ſeate of God, who will neither
allowe appellation or delaie.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     I am ſure if Ieſus Chriſt ſhould
haue demaunded of the Deuills which complained
of hym, what tyme thei would haue
hym graunt them, thei would neuer haue
founde conuenient tyme, but would as well
haue complained on hym a thouſand yeares
after, as then: Likewiſe, if God ſhould giue

vs our choice what tyme we ſhould obey his
commaundementes, and doe as he requireth
vs, we would be as hard to pleaſe as thei.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Therefore he demaundeth not our
aduiſe, neither putteth it to our choice, but
commaundeth:The obediēce whiche we owe to God. and when he commaundeth
we ought to obeye. And if we obeye not, nor
ceaſe from wickedneſſe, he hath as great power
to driue vs awaie, to cauſe vs to do what
ſo euer pleaſeth hym, whether we will or no,
as he had to driue out the wicked Spirites,
whiche he caſt out whether thei would or no,
notwithſtandyng their reſiſtance, complaintes,
and requeſtes. Though we reſiſt & ſeeke
neuer ſo many waies to auoyd it, yet will he
be maiſter. Yet we haue one poinct more to
conſider in the requeſt of theſe Deuilles.
That is: that thei deſire to remaine ſtill in
the Countrey, that thei might vexe other, if
thei might no more vexe thoſe poore perſons
out of whom thei were caſt.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Thei did ſhewe by that experience,
when thei entered into the Swine whiche
fedde there by: for if thei might haue doen
worſe, thei would not haue ſpared. Ther are
many men which doe the like,Deſire to doe miſchiefe. when thei can not
hinder or let the worde of GOD in one
place, thei goe to an other: For thei can no

more be without doyng miſchiefe, then theſe
Deuilles. Wherefore thei bryng all out of
order whereſoeuer thei come, and carrie this
peſtilence with them whereſoeuer thei goe.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     I knowe many ſuche Deuilles.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     And knoweſt thou none like to thē
of Genezareth?
                     
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Why aſkeſt thou that queſtion?
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Thou knoweſt that after our Sauiour
Chriſt had caſt out theſe Deuilles that
wee talke of, and that thei had drouned the
Swine into whiche thei entered, the Genezarians
were greeued with the loſſe of their
Swine,The Genezarian
                              •
                           . and that ſuche thinges happened in
their Countrey: and therefore when thei vnderſtoode
what Chriſt had doen to theſe poſſeſſed,
thei met him and praied him to depart
their Countrey.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Me thinkes thei were muche ouerſeene
therein: for ſeing thei vnderſtood of the
great power of Chriſt, and what good he had
doen (not onely in theſe two poſſeſſed, but alſo
to all the Countrey, whiche thei keepe in
greate ſubiection and feare) thei had iuſter
occaſion to beſeche hym, yea, and with great
ſute to intreate him to tary emongeſt them,
then to praie hym to depart. For what feare
and horror was all the Countrey in, hauyng

theſe twoo ſo daungerous, furious, and outragious
poſſeſſed?
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Thei ſhewed thē ſelues herein not
onely ouerſeen, but wholy madd, and hereby
ſhewe, that thei needed not to bee ſo greeued
with the loſſe of their Swine, for that the declared
themſelues to be very ſwine, yea, vile
and deteſtable Swine: For thei did ſet more
by earth then by heauē: thei eſtemed Swine
better then their own ſoules. For, thei might
well thinke what goodneſſe was to be found
at Chriſtes handes in recompence of them,
ſeyng he had ſuche power ouer the deuil him
ſelf. But ſeyng thei were ſuche filthy ſwine
themſelues, Chriſt would ſhewe by the workyng
of theſe Deuilles in the ſwine, how he
could vſe ſuche ſwine as y• Genezariās were
and all ſuche other as wer giuē ouer by gods
iuſt iudgements, according to their deſertes.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Becauſe thei were verie ſwine thē ſelues,
peraduenture thei were afraied, leaſt
he would likewiſe haue vſed them ſo.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     But to driue awaie Chriſte,The true meane to driue awaie the Deuill. who
hath power to driue awaie deuills, is not the
waie to flie frō the deuill, but to receiue hym.
Wherefore the beſt waie to driue him awaie
is to become the Sheepe of Ieſus Chriſte,
who is come to tranſforme Dogges, Hogges,

and Wolues into ſhepe and Lābes,Eſa. 11. 2
                              •
                           . and
to bee their ſhepeheard, as Eſaie propheſied.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Thou diddeſt aſke mee now, if I
knewe any that were like theſe Genezariās,
I praie thee tell me thy ſelf, who be thei that
be like them.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Although the Genezarians were
greeued for the loſſe of their ſwine, yet ſainct
Luke teacheth an other poincte,Luke. 8. that cauſed
them to doe, as thei did to Chriſte.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     What ſaieth he?
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Thei that were in great terror and
feare, ſeyng Chriſte doe as he did. For, if thei
had been onelymoued wt the loſſe, thei would
ſkante haue intreated hym,Feare of the power of god without taſte of the goodneſſe thereof. to departe their
Countrey, but would rather haue vſed commaundementes,
threatnynges, yea, and peraduenture
haue laied handes on hym (if God
would haue permitted.) But thei were aſtonied
at the power and diuine vertue, whiche
Ieſus Chriſte ſhewed before their eyes in
that coūtrey, by ſo merueilous a worke: and
therefore thei flattered hym, rather for feare,
then loue. And where theſe deſired hym to
departe their Countrey,Matth. 8. the poore poſſeſſed,
whom he had healed,Marke. 5. offer to followe hym as
his diſciples,Luke. 8. whether ſo euer he goe.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Therby thei ſhewe, yt Ieſus Chriſt

hath ſo deliuered them, frō the power of the
Deuill, that thei are leſſe poſſeſſed, then the
other of the countrey. For, if the Deuill had
not had greate power of the Genezarians,
thei would rather haue yeelded to Ieſus
Chriſt, and followed hym as Diſciples, then
to haue driuen hym out of their Countrey.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     That is certaine. For it had been
better for them, to haue departed their countrey
themſelues, yea, to haue left wiues and
Children, then euer to haue ſuffered Ieſus
Chriſt to depart from them. And therefore if
we well conſider the worke of Ieſus Chriſt,
as well in the poſſeſſed whiche he healed, as
in the Genezarians, we maie by them learne
to knowe the diffrence, that is betwene thoſe
that effectually taſte of the grace of the Goſpell,
and ſuche as haue not taſted thereof as
thei ought. Theſe poore poſſeſſed taſted therof:Diuers knowledge of the Goſpell.
and therefore thei eſtemed nothyng in the
worlde ſo muche as Ieſus Chriſt, but offered
themſelues to followe hym, whatſoeuer did
happen. Contrariwiſe the Genezarians taſted
not of this grace, but had onely a knowledge
of the diuine power, whiche thei ſawe
in Ieſus Chriſte, whiche knowledge made
theim to feare hym, but taught theim not to
loue hym, and followe hym, thereby to bee

made partakers of greater goodes, without
cōpariſon then that was, which thei thought
he had ſpoiled them. The moſte part of men
are thus diſpoſed to Godward:Feare of God without any loue towards hym. becauſe thei
knowe the power he hath to puniſh, thei fear
hym. This feare cauſeth them to honour and
worſhip hym, but not hartely: thei feare hym
as wicked ſubiectes feare their Prince, whō
thei honour and reuerence againſt their willes,
for feare of his power: And therefore all
the honour and ſeruice, that thei doe to hym,
is but onely fained. So the greateſt parte of
men feare and honor God, but yet thei wiſhe
hym ſo farre from theim, that thei might neuer
heare ſpeake of hym, or haue to doe with
hym. All thei that haue not taſted the ſweteneſſe
of the goodneſſe of GOD, are lead by
ſuche Spirite and affection towardes hym.
And this is the cauſe, that ſo fewe receiueth
the Goſpell as thei might. For, ſeeyng it is
hard,The cauſe that letteth many from followyng the Goſpell. yea, & impoſſible to followe it, but that
it wil bring ſome incommoditie, bothe to the
bodie and goodes, of thoſe that faithfully followe
it, it ſeemeth to bryng alwaies euill
lucke followeth it.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Yet there is no man but will brag
and ſaie, that he followeth the Goſpell.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     That is true, but the moſt parte

would haue ſuche a Chriſte as the Genezarians
deſired to haue: that is, that thei might
not loſe their Swine by hym: thei would alſo
haue ſuche a Goſpell.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     There are ſome that are not onely
contented that the Goſpell coſt them nothyng,Suche ſwin
                              •
                            as bothe reiect Chriſt themſelues and cauſe o
                              •
                           ther to doe the like.
but thei would gaine and be enriched
vnder colour of the ſame.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     I praie thee Tobie ſhew me what is
the cauſe that Popes, Cardinalls, Biſhops,
Prieſtes, and Monkes reſiſt the Goſpell ſo
ſtoutly, and perſecute it ſo cruelly?
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Thei will not tel thee that: for thei
ſaie, it is thei that maintaine the Goſpell,
and thoſe whō thei perſecute are Heretickes.
                  
                  
                     Theo▪
                     
                     And what cauſeth the doctrine of
the Goſpell to bee hereſie to them? None other
thyng, but that thei feare if it ſhould bee
receiued & practiſed as it ought to be amongeſt
Chriſtians, thei ſhould be driuen out of
their ſtoyes and ſtalles, wherein thei are fed
as fat as Millers Swine: for thei had rather
be ſwine to Sathan and Antichriſt to be fatly
fed in their Stoyes as thei are, then to be
ſheepe of the flock of Ieſus Chriſt, or labouryng
Oxen in the harueſt of the Lord. Thoſe
likewiſe whiche are of alliaunce to them, either
by parentage, conſanguinitie, or affinity,

or by any other meane, and ſpecially thoſe
whiche ſerue them, and liue of their deceite,
ſet more by theſe fatt Swine, then by Ieſus
Chriſt the true ſheapheards of their ſoules.
For theſe Swine fatten the porredge with
their fatt, or at the leaſt vnfattē them not, but
vnfatten inough of others, to fatten their parentes,
affines, freendes, and other maintainers
of their Mother holy Churche, whiche
Mother haue fed them ſo fat. Wherefore, it
is no maruaile though thei be lothe to leaue
her, or to be weaned frō ſuche breaſts. There
is an other ſorte, whiche though thei receiue
no profite of ſuche ſwine, yea, and knowe the
trothe of the Goſpell: neuertheleſſe, thei had
rather be ridd of Ieſus Chriſt, and driue him
out of their Countrey, then thei would driue
out ſuche ſwine, becauſe thei feare leaſt ſuch
chaunge ſhould trouble them, and leaſt thei
ſhould haue ſome hinderance touching their
bodies or temporall goods. To be ſhorte: we
ſee daiely if there bee any talke of the kyngdome
of Chriſte, the like that happened to
Herode and thoſe of Ieruſalem, when Ieſus
Chriſt was borne.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Why? what happened to them.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Sainct Mathew ſaieth:
                           
                              •
                           ath. 2. that when
by meane of the wiſe men whiche came to

worſhippe Chriſt, newes came to Ieruſalem
that the Kyng of the Iewes was borne, not
only Herode, but al the Cities of Ieruſalem
was troubled with hym.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     It is no meruaile though the Tyraūt
Herode was troubled, for he feared the
loſſe of his kyngdome, whiche by right belō
                        ged
not to hym.Mē troub at the b
                              •
                            of Ieſus Chriſt. But what needed thei of Ieruſalem
to bee troubled with ſuche newes?
Had thei not greater occaſion to reioyce?
For beſides that Meſſias was promiſed to
them, at whoſe handes thei looked for full &
perfect reſtoryng of all thynges: it is to bee
doubted, but thei had rather haue a Kyng of
their owne Countrey and blood, then ſuch a
ſtraunger and Tyraunt as Herode was.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Thou ſaieſt troth, and therefore the
faithfull whiche were the true Iſraelites among
thoſe people, reioyced very much whē
thei heard of the birth of Ieſus Chriſt, their
Kyng, their ſauiour and redeemer.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Wee haue good witneſſe thereof,
and namely in the Sheepheards to whom it
was firſt ſhewed, and after in Simeon, which
ſo longed to ſee that great goodneſſe of God
whiche he ſawe.Luke. 
                              •
                           .
                     
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     The other whiche were carnall and
worldly menne, and not true Iſraelites, but

onely in name, denied that Herode would
not ſo eaſily leaue his kyngdom, and that the
Romanes would not ſuffer any other prince
to raigne in Iuda, but themſelues, and thoſe
appoincted by them. Whereby thei thought
that there muſt needes be greate chaunge in
Iurie: and this chaunge could not bee without
great warres & troubles: whiche ſhould
greatly trouble the common ſtate, and ſo become
hinderaunce vnto theim. And becauſe
thei would liue in quietneſſe, thei had rather
remaine in the ſtate wherein thei were, (tho
it were miſerable) then fall into thoſe troubles,
whiche thei thought would be greater.
For, thei were already vſed to this yoke, and
therfore thei thought it not ſo heauie, as thei
did at the firſt, before thei were vſed to it.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Mee thinkes neither Herode nor
the Iewes,
                           
                              •
                           e vaine 
                              •
                           re that ty
                           
                              ••
                           nts haue, 
                              〈◊〉
                            the Go
                           
                              ••
                           ll ſhould 
                              ••
                           der their 
                              ••
                           gdome. neded to feare that, ſeyng Chriſt
came not to raigne after the maner of worldly
kynges, as he hymſelf witneſſeth. Therefore
neither Herode, nor the Romanes neded
to feare, that he ſhould take awaie their poſſeſſion,
                           
                              ••
                           th. 18.
neither the Iewes,
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           . 6. 18. that he ſhould
trouble their Countrey, in takyng of their
Kyngdome.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     That is verie true: But the ſtate
was then as we ſe it now, whē Ieſus Chriſt

ſheweth hym ſelf to the worlde, by the Preachyng
of the Goſpell. For, why doe tyrauntes
perſecute it? But becauſe thei feare (like
Herode) leaſte it ſhould hinder their Kyngdome?
And how many are there, that would
be glad to be lightened, of the Romiſhe Antichriſt
yoke,Worldly quietneſſe, preferred before the quietneſſe o
                              •
                            the conſciēc
                              •
                           
                         & haue greater libertie, whiche
notwithſtandyng had rather beare it, then
by ſuffryng neuer ſo little trouble, to bee deliuered
by meanes of the Goſpell: Thereby
we may well perceiue, what care ſuche haue
of their ſoules or Saluation. None but the
true children of God eſteeme Ieſus Chriſte,
and his Goſpell, better then their Swine:
and therefore, are alwaies ready to forſake
all, rather then Ieſus Chriſte, to abide all
daungers, rather then ſuffer hym to departe
from them: yea, to keepe hym with them, as
muche as thei can with all their might, and
to followe hym whether ſoeuer he goe, for
thei eſteeme the libertie of their conſcience
more, then all the Kyngdomes or Lordſhips
of the worlde.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Are there not ſome emōg you, that
bragge of the reformatiō of the Goſpell, that
are like thoſe that thou talkeſt of?
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     There are more thē I would wiſh.
For there are many, that although thei ſe an

vnſpeakeable confuſion in the Churche of
God,
                           
                              ••
                           ei that re
                              •••
                            the diſci
                           
                              ••
                           ne of the 
                              ••
                           urche to 
                              ••
                           oyd trou
                           
                              •••
                           . and in all eſtates: yet thei will heare of
no better reformation, then that whiche thei
haue, becauſe their bodies are in quiete and
reſt. Wherefore, thei feare if any ſhould goe
aboute, to eſtabliſhe better order, (to th'ende
that God bee not diſhonoured as he is, and
the people better inſtructed and ordered) leſt
ſome troubles might ariſe, whiche ſhould
trouble that worldly quietneſſe, wherin thei
would liue. And therefore, thei had rather
roote in the mire, and ſuffer other to roote
with thē, then to haue thoſe troubles whiche
thei ſo ſore feare. Wherein thei are greatly
deceiued: for the meane to liue in quiet, is
not to caſte of the yoke of Ieſus Chriſte,
                           
                              •
                           he yoke of 
                              •
                           hriſt and 
                              ••
                           e yoke of 
                              •
                           athan. but
to embrace it: and thei muſt neceſſarily bear
the yoke of Sathan, whiche will not beare
Chriſtes yoke.
                           
                              •
                           ath. 11. Now it is eaſie to Iudge,
whiche of the twoo is lighter and eaſier to
be borne, and which bringeth greater quietneſſe
(by all meanes) vnto man. For as Ieſus
Chriſt witneſſeth that his yoke is light,
pleaſaunt, and amiable, ſo he promiſeth quietneſſe
to the ſoules and conſciences of thoſe
whiche beare it, and ſubmitte themſelues to
hym and his Diſcipline, and followe him as
their Maiſter.
                  
                  
                     
                     Tobie.
                     I doubt not but theſe of whom thou
ſpeakeſt, doe proue to their coſte, that whiche
thou ſaieſt: and thinkeſt by that meane, to auoide
a light and eaſie paine, are deceiued,
finde for one paine an hundreth.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     If ſuche men knewe what it were,
to ſerue God from the bottome of their hart,
thei would not thinke or trouble: for there is
no paine in ſeruyng God, but onely in ſeruyng
the Deuill. For none ſerue GOD as
thei ought, but ſerue hym with good harte:
and to ſerue with good harte, is ſo farre frō
beyng paine, that contrariwiſe, it is a ſingular
pleaſure to vs: and as for thoſe that ſerue
the Deuill, although thei take pleaſure in euill
doyng (for that it is more naturall to thē
then to doe well) yet thei ſerue hym as bonde
and ſlaues, and the pleaſures that thei haue
in ſeruyng hym, are like the pleaſures of the
ſicke. Who (contrary to the councell of the
Phiſition) eate and drinke that, whiche deliteth
their phantaſie, and afterwarde become
ſicker thereby.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Wee haue alreadie ſpoken heretofore
of thoſe, whiche are contented to haue
the Goſpell and Religion, onely in outward
ſhewe. Me thinkes wee maie well ioyne thē
with theſe, of whiche wee now talke.
                  
                  
                     
                     Theo.
                     Wee maie well ſo doe.
                  
                  
                     Tobie.
                     Seyng wee haue ſufficiently and
largely talked, of the old and newe Genezarians;
tell vs if thou haue any more to ſaie,
touching the poſſeſſed, of whom thou madeſt
mention before.
                  
                  
                     Theophrast.
                     I haue muche more to
ſaie: but we will leaue of that
till an other tyme.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  THE
SECOND PART
OF THE DEMONIACKE
VVORLDE,
or worlde poſſeſſed
with Diuels, conteining
three Dialogues:

                        1. Of Familiar Diuels.
                        2. Of Lunaticke Diuels.
                        3. Of the coniuring of Diuels.
                     
                  
                  Tranſlated out of French into Engliſh
by T. S. Gentleman.
                  
                     ❧ 
                     Imprinted at London
for Iohn Perin, and are
to bee ſolde in Paules Church-yard,
at the ſigne of the Angel.
1583.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
                  he had heard him more at large, hee was a
greate deale the rather deſirous to deliuer
him, then euer he was before.
                  
                     To.
                     If he had continued ſtil in that mind,
it had byn much better for him.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     That is true indeede. But becauſe
there was no true feare of GOD in
him, neither yet had taken deep & good rooting
in his hart, it forthwith vaniſhed cleane
away, when he was preſſed to the contrary,
and neuer ſtraue to withſtand the crueltye
of the Iewes. And yet hee ſhewed himſelf
to beare more reuerence vnto the name
of GOD, then a great many of thoſe,
who would at this daye, be taken not only
for Chriſtians, but alſo for the very ſtaies
and pillers of the fayth. For, although
they know well inough, that the cauſes
which come before them, concerne the glory
of GOD, and his Churche, yet haue
they leſſe care to giue iudgement and condemne
them, without further enquiring,
what were the beſt way for thē to take, making
lighter account of giuing iudgement
on them, then of the leaſt cauſe in y• worlde,
whether it were of a money matter, or of any
other worldly thing whatſoeuer.
                  
                  
                     
                     Tob.
                     If there were in them but that
feare which they ought to haue, in condemning
the cauſe of God, vnder the name
and tytle of hereſie, mee thinketh they
ſhoulde therein, bee more circumſpect and
diſcreete. And for mine owne part, as ignoraunt
& vnlearned as I am, yet I euer abhorred
theſe fire tormentors, who ſo little
eſteemed of the liues of men, eſpecially in
ſuch a cauſe.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Truely, if thy firſte reaſon
which thou haſt alleadged would not ſerue
them, mee thinketh that the ſecond which
thou euen nowe diddeſt touche, might
right well ſuffyce, for them to caſt, I will
not ſay, a litle water into their Wyne, but
into their fires. For to take away the
liues of menne, is no ſmall matter in the
ſight of the Lorde. But the offence is a
great deale more haynous, when as menne
for Gods cauſe, ſhall take life away from
ſuche, as ſhoulde rather bee preſerued,
and ſuche alſo as ſhoulde bee in moſte
eſtimation, with Princes and Magiſtrates.
                     Thus then thou ſeeſt what an inconuenience
pryde bringeth with it, to thoſe that

proude and arrogant: For, ſeeing they preſume
ſo muche of them ſelues as that they
will not once vouchſafe to entertayne the
ſeruauntes of God, and to bee taught
by them, as they had neede, it is impoſſible
for them to vnderſtande the trueth, becauſe
they will at no hande vnderſtande it.
And contrariwiſe,Ieſus Chriſt is ſchoolemaiſter to the humble, and not to the proude. as Ieſus Chriſte ſhewed
him ſelfe to bee the Teacher and Mayſter
of the humble and meeke, euen ſo
reiecteth he out of his Schoole, all highe
mynded, proude, and preſumptuous perſons.
And therefore hee gaue thankes to
God his Father, in that he had reuealed his
will and trueth vnto the poore in ſpirite,Math. 11.
and hidde it from the mighty and great men
of the worlde.Iſaiah. 66. For, there are none but the
poore and meeke in ſpirite which are capable
thereof.
                     
                        And therefore, the Lorde ſayeth by the
Prophete Iſaiah, Whom will I regarde,
but onelie the afflicted, and contrite in
hearte and mynde, and him, who trembleth
at my woordes?
                           
                              〈…〉
                           . Saynt Paule alſo
telleth the Corinthians, That the Lorde
hath not called manye wiſe, ſtronge,
riche, and honourable menne of the

worlde: But the moſte feeble, moſte
vyle, and moſte contemptible. It is
alſo written,
                        1. Pet. 5. That GOD reſiſteth the
proude, and giueth grace to the humble.
And therefore Saynt Paule, diligentlye
admoniſheth all Chriſtians not to
eſteeme,
                        Rom. 12. 
                        nor preſume ouer muche of them
ſelues.
                        Philip. 2.
                     
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     True it is indeede, that humility
and honour, ſeldome or neuer agree quietly
together.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     That is moſt true. For, wheras
humilitie is not, there cannot be a teacheable,
and well diſpoſed hearte to receiue
doctrine and diſcipline: Which thing
Saynt Auguſtine confeſſeth to haue found
in him ſelfe by experience,
                           S. Aug. in his 3. Booke 5. Chap. of Confeſſ.
                         ſaying in this
manner. I then determined to applye my
mynde to the ſtudy of the holy Scriptures,
that I might ſee what they were. And
beholde,The confeſſion of S. Aug. as concerning the pride, whiche hindred him frō profiting in th
                              •
                            holy ſcriptures. I ſaw a thinge that was neuer
knowne to the proude, nor opened to children,
but was lowly in his goyng, and verie
high in his arryning, & whiche brought
greate profite, and hidden ſecretes. And
as for my ſelfe, I was euen ſuche a one,

as that I was not able to make anye entraunce
into it, or yet ſtoupe ſo lowe, as
once to be able to put my head into ye intres
therof. For I was not then of the opynion
whereof I now ſpeake, when I looked vppon
this peece of Scripture, but thought
it vnworthy to be compared to Tullies dignitie.
For, my greate pryde coulde no
                           •
                        
away with the baſeneſſe thereof, and therfore
it fled from mee: Neyther was my
wytte ſo ſharpe, as that it was once able
to pearſe into it, and yet it was ſuche, as
grewe vp amongeſt the baſeſt and meaneſt.
Howebeeit, I might haue vouchſafed
to haue beene lowlie. And becauſe I
was highe mynded, I thought my ſelfe to
be a great Clearke. Heere wee ſee howe
Saynte Auguſtine confeſſeth, that whiles
he flattered himſelfe, and eſteemed ſo much
of his owne knowledge, and of the pride of
his mynde, as that he continually diſdayned
and contemned the holy Scriptures. And
although hee had a mynde oftentimes to
giue him ſelfe to the ſtudie of them, it was
ſo farre of that he found any taſte or ſauour
in them, as that hee founde▪ leſſe ſauour in
them at that time, then he did at the firſte.

For, hee thought them to bee nothing in
reſpecte of the eloquence, and knowledge
which hee founde in the Bookes of Tullie
and of the reſt of the heathen Philoſophers.
But, after that this his pryde was come
downe and abaſed, and the opinion whiche
he had of him ſelfe and of his knowledge,
hee was of an opinion, cleane contrarye
to his firſt: And then, hee right well perceyued,
all humane eloquence, and Phyloſophie,
to be no better then bladders ſtuft
full of wind, and of no ſubſtance in reſpect
of the holye Scriptures: although to the
outwarde apparaunce they made a farre
gallanter muſter and ſhewe. And therfore,
whiles the eyes of Saynt Auguſtines vnderſtanding
were blyndfolded with ye falſe
opinion which he had of him ſelfe, he had the
more hoodwinked them with this pompe &
falſe apparaunce.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     There are at this day, a greate
many in the worlde,There are manye, that will counterfeit S. Auguſtines pride, but they will not follow his humilitie. who are in the ſelfe
and ſame predicament, that Saynt Auguſtine
was in, at that time. But I know
not, whether GOD will giue them that
grace, which he gaue vnto him, to let them

vnderſtande their pride, that thereby they
might be humbled, and for the falſe opinion
which they haue of their eloquence, knowledge
and wiſedome, to acknowledge them
ſelues to be ſuche fooles, and blockeheaded
beaſtes as indeede they are, to the end they
might bee made apte and Teacheable
Schollers in the Schoole of the woorde of
God. For, there are ſuch a number of Poeticall
braynes, & ſo learned in the tongues
and in humayne Philoſophy: that they doe
not onely make ſmal accompt of the books
of the holy Scriptures, in compariſon of
their Heatheniſhe volumes: as that, which
is of all other the moſte vyle, they eſteeme
of them no better, then of the Dreames of
olde doatyng fooles, and of doating olde
wyues tales. And as for mine own part,
let them haue as great knowledge as they
will, vntill they burſt with all, I wil eſteem
of thē no whit y• more, if they be not honeſt
men, and haue the feare of God before their
eyes.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Thou toucheſt now a diſeaſe,
which at this day raygneth more then euer
it did, yea, and that amongſt ſuch as beare

the name of Chriſtians, which is the cauſe
that we haue ſo many Libertine Atheiſtes,Libertine Atheiſts.
who ſcorne and laughe at all Religions.
And although they are not in trueth, ſetled
in any Religion, yet forſooth they woulde
not hee thought to be vtterly voyde of Religion.
And therefore, becauſe they are
of no religion, they are neuertheleſſe of all
Religions, in what Countries ſoeuer they
come vnto. For, they ſhoote at none other
marke, but temporizing, or ſeruing of
times, with euery man, a Papiſt amongſt
Papiſtes, an Epicure with Epicures, an
Atheiſt, with Atheiſtes, and to be ſhorte, a
Diuel amongſt Diuels, for they wil not be
diſquieted eyther in body or mynd neyther
yet hazarde eyther bodye or goodes. And
therefore, they will not greatly frame them
ſelues neyther after Ieſus Chriſte, nor after
the Pope, neyther after the Goſpell,
nor after the Maſſe, nor yet after any controuerſie
that is at this day for Religion amōgſt
Chriſtians, without perhaps ſome of
them ſuſtaine ſome particular loſſe therby.
For, if eyther gayne, or loſſe fall out vnto
them on eyther ſide, they will counterfayte
zeale in that Religion whiche they thinke

will bee moſte for their profite, and whiche
they ſuppoſe will beſte agree with that,
which they deſire to haue heere in this life,
as wee haue a manifeſt example, chiefly, in
the Prelates and Beneficed men of the
Popiſhe Churche. For, if they did beleeue
that there were a GOD in heauen,
and anye true religion, whereby their life
and conuerſation ought to bee gouerned,
and that they ſhoulde render an accounte
thereof in the day of Iudgement, they
woulde ſurely, be other maner of men, then
in deede they are. Howebeit, they right
well ſhew, as wel by their doctrine, as alſo
by their life and conuerſation, that they
haue as much mynde of God, as haue bruite
beaſtes, and doe as muche eſteeme of the
immortality of their ſoules, as of the ſoules
of their horſes and moyles. And therfore,
all the zeale which they haue to their Religion,
proceedeth not from any loue whiche
they beare thereunto, but onelye to the honours,
and greate wealth whiche commeth
vnto them thereby. And therefore, when
they ſee them ſelues in danger to looſe thē,
they eyther become manifeſt blacke diuels,
and beginne openlye to perſecute, or if

they haue anye knowledge and eloquence,
they ſtraight way,Libertine Balaamites. playe the iollye Balaamites.
For they commend themſelues vnto
Antichriſt to reſiſt the trueth of God,
and mainteyne his falſe doctrine, againſt
their owne conſciences: For, they themſelues
laugh him to ſcorne in their heartes,
and doe no more beleeue him, then thoſe againſt
whom they oppoſe them ſelues. But
I feare mee, I haue doone them greate
wrong to compare them vnto Balaam, becauſe
they haue not ſo muche fayth vnto
the true Religion, as Balaam hadde vnto
the Religion of the auncient Churche
of GOD, neyther haue they ſo greate a
regarde to God, as he had. But they are
as like him in all other poyntes, as like
may bee, as in deſire of honours, and
worldly poſſeſſions. And therfore although
they are in part, black Diuels, yet are they
in nature, more like vnto white and Familiar
Diuels, where, the reſt ſhew them ſelues
to bee altogether blacke Diuelles.
                     Howebeit, whatſoeuer vizers they put
on, they are alwayes in trueth, very Libertine
Atheiſtes, notwithſtandyng, that they
ſeeme outwardely the Followers of Popiſhe

Religion. And there are others alſo,
who are almoſt like them, euen of thoſe
which follow the Goſpel, if they knew they
might any way gayne thereby. But the
moſt of that ſort, ſerue in Kings and Princes
Courtes.Libertine Courtiers. For, if Kinges and Princes
fauour the Goſpell, then they know, that
if they fauour it as he doeth, that they ſhal
come to greater dignity, or at leaſt, be the
better and more firmely eſtablyſhed in that
degree and honour wherein they ſtand, for,
as they can court it well, ſo will they alſo
be the firſt that ſhall make court to the Goſpell,
and will bee come fayre whyte, and
familiar Diuels, amongſt the very angels.
But if a man ſhoulde iudge them by theyr
woorkes, fruites, and life, what Goſpell
it is that they profeſſe, it woulde be ſoone
iudged that they are very Libertine Atheiſtes.
For, a man ſhall neuer finde any reformation
of life in them, which is the chief
cauſe of the preaching of the Goſpell, and
the principal marke to be marked and knowen
by, in thoſe who haue receiued the
true faith, in the true feare of GOD, and in
a good conſcience. And ſo by that meane,
all their Goſpel wilbe come a thing where

with to ſcorne the Pope, his Prieſts, Friars,
and the reſt of his ſhorne Balaamites,
and all the abuſes of the Popiſhe
Churche, and to make ſporte and pleaſauntly
talke of them, eſpecially in the companies
of Ladies and Gentlewomen. And
if the Goſpel wil giue them any ſuch libertye,
whereby they may abuſe it, into carnal
lybertie, they will be ſure to laye faſt holde
thereon: and not ſticke to ſaye, that they
are not like vnto thoſe ſuperſtitious hypocriticall
Papiſtes, whom they laugh to
ſcorne.
                     Howbeyt, further they will not, but as for
the reſt of their life, it ſhalbe as diſſolute,
as the moſt diſſolute Papiſtes, from whom
they differ in nothing but in this, that they
haue put on a vizar of the Goſpel, that they
might therewith the better couer theyr
Atheiſme.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     Thou haſt hitherto ſpoken of
Libertine Atheiſtes, who diſſemble their
Atheiſme, vnder the colour of hauinge
ſome Religion in them, ſo farre foorth as it
tendeth either to their commodity or diſcō
                        modity.
But there are ſome others, who be
cauſe they cānot find any ſuch occaſiō, becō
                        
as it were newters,Libertine newters. beeing of neyther ſide,
as thou haſt oftentimes ſayde. And the
chiefe men whiche marche vnder this Enſigne,
and that are of this Bande, are
they which are puffed vp with eloquence, &
knowledge, and are dronken in their own
wit and vnderſtanding: As Saynt Auguſtine
confeſſed him ſelfe to bee, before
ſuche tyme as GOD had touched his heart
with his holye ſpirite, whiche is the ſpyrite
of humilitie. But, although Saynt
Auguſtine preſumed thus of him ſelfe, by
reaſon he was of ſo fine and quicke witted
a ſpirite, and of ſo verie a ſharpe vnderſtanding,
and excellent knowledge in humanitie,
as anye man that euer liued in his
time and age: yet was there alwayes in
him, ſome good ſeed of religiō. But becauſe
hee was an heathen man borne, and therefore
had not from his youth beene brought
vp in the woorde of God: but onely in humanitie
and Paganiſme, and in the Religion
wherein he was borne, hee could not
rightly iudge of the true Religion, whiche
he knewe not. And the opinion whiche hee
had of himſelfe, did ſo hinder him, as that he
could not ſearch after it, as he ought to haue

done. And after that diuers, but eſpeciallye
his mother Monica, who was a widdowe,
and became a Chriſtian before him, a very
good woman, and one that feared GOD,
had exhorted and ſolycited him, to ſearch after
the holy Scriptures: thoſe their exhortations
ſtirred him vp to the reading of the
Bible. Howbeit, hee read it not ſo reuerently
as he ſhould haue done, but rather
for faſhions ſake, by reaſon he came not appoynted
with that humilytie and modeſtie,
which afterward hee knew was meete for
the diſciples of the holy Ghoſt to come.
But when God had rebated this his pride,
with the ſpirite of modeſtie and humilitie,
then found he that in it, which before hee
knew not how to finde in it: And by that
meane, he was ſomuch the more humbled.
Howbeit, theſe glorious arrogant men, of
whome we now ſpeake, who thus glory of
their knowledge, and ſkill, are euen the verye
ſcorners and contemners of God: for
they neuer ſhew, that euer they had the true
feare of God before their eyes, nor yet any
good ſeede of religion in them. For, there
is a great many of them, who haue manifeſted
them ſelues greater Atheiſts, after they

had once gotten ſome knowledge of the goſpell,
then euer they had before, and ſince y•
time, haue euer leſſe reuerenced the worde
of God. For, the knowledge which they receyued
by the entertayning of the Goſpell,
ſerued them to none other vſe, but to diſcouer
the Idolatries, ſuperſtitions, and abuſes,
which are in the popiſh Church, that
they might laugh at them.
                     And euer ſithence that time, they are
growen euen vnto this, that they are almoſt
at the like poynt with the doctrine of Chriſtian
religion. For, as S. Paul ſaid, They
iudge thereof,1. Cor. 1. as the Grecians and wiſe
men of the world, iudged of Ieſus Chriſte,
& of his Goſpel: who thought the preaching
thereof to be fooliſhneſſe, becauſe they were
carnall men, and puffed vp with an opinyon
of their owne wiſdomes.
                     And becauſe the Grecians, were alwaies
more accounted of then any of the reſte of
the Nations, by reaſon of their ſharpeneſſe
of witte, and of the knowledge which they
had in the artes, in Philoſophy, and in all other
Letters of humanitie, S. Paule nameth
them ſpecially, although hee comprehendeth
vnder this name, all the reſt of the

heathen, as well appeareth by that, that he
oppoſeth them to the Iewes, and ſeperateth
them alſo from the Chriſtians, vnto
whome, as hee him ſelfe witneſſeth, Ieſus
Chriſt is the true wiſdome, vertue, and power
of God.
                     Nowe, if theſe Libertine Epicures and
Atheiſtes, had beene heathen borne, as S.
Auguſtine was, or, if they had as much religion
in them, being Chriſtians borne, as
hee had in his Paganiſme, they ſhoulde
neuer haue ſhewed them ſelues, to haue
beene ſo monſtrous beaſtes, as in deed they
are. But although in name, they are
Chriſtians born, they are to be accounted
of, as if they had beene borne and bredde amongſt
Infidelles and Paganes, yea euen
amongſt the Epicures, out of whoſe books
they haue ſucked and droonke, this prophan
ſpirite of Athieſme, who thus caryeth thē
away.
                     For, they haue yet leſſe Religion in
them, then euer had any of the heathen, who
not onely did not approue their doctrine,
but which is more, manifeſtly, both by word
and wrytinge condemned it, yea, and oftentimes
executed thē by publick iuſtice namely,

Athens. For, when God giueth vs ouer
ſo farre, hee then by his iuſt iudgement brutiſheth
vs in the cauſe of religion.What it is to contēne prayer. And
therefore, that we ſhall not neede any more
to pray vnto him, to beſeech him, enlighten
vs with his holy ſpirite, in the knowledge
of his holy word.
                     But, ouer and beſides, that Dauid, and
S. Peter,Pſal. 19. 119. calleth the holy Ghoſt, the word
of the Lorde,2. Pet. 1. a candle and lanterne which
lightneth a darke place,Iohn. 16. and doth enlighten
the ſimple,Pſal. 16. yet there is one thing more in it,
which the Lord hath promiſed,1 Pſal. 50. that he will
heare as manye as ſhall call vppon him in
trueth,Mat. 7. 18. be neere them, and graunt them his
holy ſpirit.
                  
                  
                     Toby.
                     This then is the effect of thy
concluſion, that proud men, and ſuch as call
not vpon the Lord as they ought, for their
inſtruction in the knowledge of his holye
will,The iudgment of God againſt the contempt and hating of his word. haue no great good lyking to ſerue
him accordingly. And becauſe they haue
no ſuch loue and lyking: but contrariwiſe
will liue as pleaſeth them, God, in his iuſt
iudgement giueth them ouer into a reprobate
ſence, and leaueth them as a ſpoyle vnto
ſeducers, and falſe teachers. Wherefore,

they alwayes receyue and allowe rather
falſhood and errour, then the trueth of the
Lord.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     In deede, becauſe they had no
loue nor liking of the trueth, but rather of
leaſinges, the Lord by his iuſt vengeaunce,
hath giuen a mighty power of errour vnto
ſuch maiſters as they haue a lyking of, and
ſuch as they are beſt worthy of. And therfore
when Moſes admoniſhed the people
of Iſrael,Deut. 13. that they ſhoulde beware of falſe
Prophetes, who might deceyue them, hee
namely ſayde, that the Lorde would tempt
his people by falſe Prophetes, who ſhoulde
make great ſhewes of trueth: and he would
doe it to this end, to proue whether his people
feared and loued him with al their hart.
or not.
                     Wherein he manifeſtly declareth, that
they which had the true feare of God before
them, and loued him in deede, would neuer
receiue the falſe Prophetes,A preſeruatiue againſt errors. and caſt off the
law, & word of God, but alwayes continue
in the doctrine, which the Lord God had
reuealed vnto them from heauen.
                  
                  
                     Toby.
                     I thank thee, I now very wel

vnderſtand this poynt, and the cauſe alſo,
why the deuill euery manner of way, hath
ſo great power ouer vs, as he hath. Moreouer,
although we haue already ſpoken of
many that are haunted with Deuilles,Of Lunatique, deaf, dumb, and blind Demoniacques. yet
haue wee not all this while ſpoken anye
whit of the Lunatique, deafe, dumb, and
blynde Demoniacques.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     It is no great matter:Mat. 12. 17. For we
will treate of them,Mark. 9. when thou ſhalt thinke
it beſt.Luk. 11.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  The Tytle and effect of the
fift Dialogue, of the world poſſeſſed
with Deuils.
                  THis fifte Dialogue is called, the dialogueue
of Lunatique Deuilles: becauſe the chiefe
matter contained therein, treateth of a Lunatique
Demoniacque, of whom the Euangeliſts
make mention, and of ſuch as may be compared
to the ſame. And beecauſe there were
many accidentes, which fell out vnto this Demoniacque,
ſomewhat is alſo ſayde, of deafe,
dumbe, and blinde Demoniacques, and howe
Ieſus Chriſt healed them.
                  What grace God graunteth to men, by the
preaching of the Goſpell.
                  In what a dangerous eſtate they are, which
are depriued of the Goſpell.
                  Of the Prophecies, of the hardening and
blynding of their hearts, which contemne the
word of God.
                  What power the Deuill hath ouer younge
children, and what be the cauſes therof, and of
Originall ſinne.
                  What occaſions the Deuil taketh at the infirmities

of men, thereby to hurt them.
                  Of thoſe meanes, by which wee giue the
Deuill libertie to haue acceſſe vnto vs.
                  Howe the Aungelles were conuerted into
Deuils.
                  Of Lunatique fooles.
                  Of the wicked Spirite which tormented
Saule.
                  Of the vengeaunce of God, vpon the mightie
men of the world.
                  Of ſuch as follow Saules ill conditions, and
which ſinne againſt their owne conſciences.
                  Of ſuch as the Deuill caſteth into the fier▪
and into the water.
                  Of the woman poſſeſſed of a Spirite, which
ſtaie money, by ſupping vp of it.
                  Of the reigne of God Mammon heere in
this world.
               
               
                  
                  ¶The fift Dialogue of the
Demoniacke world, intituled
Lunatike Diuels.
                  Theophraſt. Toby. Ierome.
Euſtace.
                  
                     Theophraſte.
                     
                        THere is no man liuing,
but that would be greatly
afeard, when as hee
conſidereth of the eſtate
where in theſe poore and
miſerable demoniackes
ſtoode, who were poſſeſſed
with a Legion of Diuels. But if
they were very miſerable, no doubt of it,
the eſtate of ye lunatike, deafe, dumb, & blind
altogether, ſeemeth vnto me to bee moſt vngracious.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     I warrant thee, the leaſt of all
theſe miſchiefes is great enough to make
the eſtate of a poore man miſerable. For,
although we bee neuer wholy blind, deafe,
nor dumb, yet ſee how we take on, when as

our ſight alone, beginneth to faile vs, and
that wee muſt bee faine to vſe ſpectacles?
Or, if wee heare not ſo well as wee were
wonted to do? or that we ſtammer, or haue
any other impediment in our tongue, and
ſpeake not ſo plainely as wee woulde. And
if we be thus at this point, wee may eaſily
iudge, what a miſerie it is to bee altogether
blinde, deafe, and dumbe. But, if we haue al
theſe at once, beſides a number of other
ſtrange diſeaſes, ioyned together with thē,
then is there a notable ſort of miſchiefes piled
vp in vs all at once.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     That is out of al doubt, and by
how much both the ſight, the hearing, & the
ſpeech are the excellent giftes of God, by ſo
much are thoſe mē moſt miſerable, who are
depriued of them.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     For mine owne part, I verily ſuppoſe
that there is no man liuing but had rather
die tenne times, then he would be only
blinde, deafe, and dumbe, although hee were
no demoniacke.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Surely, hee that ſhould be in that
eſtate, ſhoulde be more miſerable, as a man
would ſay, then the very bruite beaſt. Now
imagine that this might be, when as the diuell

ſhould be amiddeſt all his miſchieuous
turnes, whereof he is the cauſe & inſtrumēt.
And if wee muſt iudge theſe Demoniacks
to be miſerable, what ſhall we ſay by them,
who haue all theſe inconueniences in their
ſoules?
                  
                  
                     To.
                     If we could aſwel diſcerne theſe miſchiefes
in our ſoules, as we cā whē we haue
thē in our bodies, I doe not dout but yt wee
would be in greater fear of thē,2. Cor. 4. then we are.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     And yet for all this, they whome
Satan the god of this world, haue blindfolded
their eies, to the end they ſhould not ſee
the light of the goſpell, and whoſe eares he
hath ſtopped, that they ſhould not heare the
worde of God, and whoſe tongues he hath
tyed, yt they ſhould not call vpon, and praiſe
the Lorde, and ſuch as whoſe hearts he poſſeſſeth
and hardeneth, to the end they ſhould
not beleeue the goſpel, are without al doubt
a great deale more miſerable and accurſed,
then theſe dumb, deafe, and blinde demoniackes,
where of wee ſpeake.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     And yet a man ſhall finde a great
number of theſe demoniackes in the world.
                  
                  
                     The.
                     Why mā, there is almoſt nothing
els in it. For we our ſelues, haue ſomtimes
been all in this eſtate. And that which is

more, al men are ſuch by their owne nature,
vntill ſuch time as, Ieſus Chriſt commeth
vnto them, to driue out the diuel, who maketh
them ſo deafe, dumbe, and blinde. And
therefore,Deafe, dumbe, & blinde Demoniacks, healed by the goſpell. ſo often as we ſee any man conuerted
to the Goſpell, wee muſt thinke it
to bee ſuch a worke, euen a moſt excellente
work of god: neither ought we leſſe maruel
at the matter, then if wee ſawe him healing:
the deafe, dumbe, & blynde demoniacks before
our eyes. And by this we may iudge,
what grace God ſheweth to thoſe kindes
of people, out of whē Ieſus Chriſte driueth
the Diuell, by the preaching of the goſpel;
that they might ſee the light of God, whiche
without al cōpariſon, is a great deale more
to bee deſired; then the light of the Sunne,
and make them▪ heare the voyce of theyr
ſhephearde Ieſus Chriſte, and open theyr
mouthes to preach & declare his prayſe and
glory.The grace, whiche God ſheweth to men, by the preaching of the goſpel. For, there is no harmonie of the
mouth, nor yet of muſicall inſtrument, to
pleaſant to ye bodily eare, as ye voyce o
                           •
                         god
is pleaſant to the eares of the ſoules, of the
children of God. And as this greatly delighteth
them; to heare this ſo ſweete and
pleaſant a voyce, euen ſo likewiſe is it as

great a delight to thē, to haue their mouths
open, to magnifie and ſanctifie the name of
God,What a curſed eſtate they are in, which are depriued of the goſpel. and to call vpon him inceſſantly. And
contrariwiſe, we may iudge in what a curſed
eſtate they are, who bee depriued of this
benefite of the Lord. For, it is euen as
muche as if wee ſawe the Diuell viſibly
raigne amongſt the deafe, dumbe, & blinde,
neuer ceaſing tormenting of them, both in
ſoule and body, more cruelly, then the moſte
tormentious hangman in the world is able
to deuiſe to torment the moſt wicked man
that might poſſibly be committed into his
handes.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     Aſſuredly, I doe tremble when
I thinke of that whiche thou ſpeakeſt, and
when I heare thee ſpeake.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     What wouldeſt thou then ſay, if
thou ſhouldeſt ſee with thine owne eyes, the
thing as it is in deed? For, if the Infidels,
and enemies of God could perceiue and beleeue,
that they were in this eſtate, no doubt
of it, they would bee more afeard of it then
they are.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     For mine owne part, I verily
thinke, that they would fully and wholy bee
contented to die, ſo that they might but only

vnderſtand and lay hold of it.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Why then, if the eſtate of all ſuch
as remaine in the darkneſſe of error and
ignorance, be ſo accurſed, horrible, and fearful,
yet for all this, there are none of all
thoſe which are in ſuch eſtate, who are more
accurſed, then thoſe whome God reiecteth,
by reaſon they haue cōtēned his holy word,
and to whom he ſendeth his prophetes and
ſeruants, to doe that duetie which the Lorde
committed to Iſaiah, when as he ſaid vnto
him,Iſaiah. 6. 
                        Goe thy way, and tell this people,
that in hearing they ſhall not vnderſtand,
                        A propheſie of the hardening of their heartes, which contemne the goſpel.
                        and in ſeeing, they ſhall not perceiue.
Blockiſhe the hearte of this people, ſtoppe
their eares, and cloſe vp their eyes, to the
ende, they may not ſee with their eyes,
nor heare with their eares, nor yet vnderſtande
with their heartes, that they
may not bee conuerted, and ſo bee healed.
                     
                  
                  
                     Toby.
                     Surely, ſurely, this is a fearefull
propheſie.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     By this we may euidently ſee,
that euen as God by his iuſt iudgement abandoneth
the Demoniackes vnto the Diuell,

ouer whom he gaue them power, euē
ſo he abandoneth him, and diſchargeth his
handes of all ſuch as contemne his giftes &
grates,Exod. 4. 7. 8. 9. 10. to the end the diuell might cloſe vp
theyr eyes and eares, and ſo harden their
heartes as he did Pharaos, that they might
periſh accurſedly, as they deſerued and wiſhed.
For, ſeeing they toke pleaſure to blind
themſelues, becauſe they would not ſee the
light of the worde of God, and ſtopped their
eares, that they might not heare his voice,
and hardened their heartes, that they might
not beleeue the goſpel, they well deſerued,
that God ſhould forſake them.
                  
                  
                     Toby.
                     Verily, theſe men might well
bee placed, amongeſt the blinde, deafe, and
dumbe Demoniackes, ſaue that I thinke
they are not dumbe to blaſpheme the name
of God.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     If euer there were blinde,
deafe, and dumb Demoniacks in the world,
theſe are they. And the greateſt number
of thoſe, are they who ſo greatly glory of the
knowledge of the goſpel, & to be the people
of God.
                     
                        
And therefore this propheſie of Iſayah,
is alleadged and rehearſed ſixe times at the
leaſt in the newe teſtament, as well by the
foure Euangeliſts, as alſo by Saint Paule.
For,Mat. 13. euen as the preaching of Iſaiah did
blind and harden the heartes of thoſe hypocrites,Mark. 4.
and rebels that were amongeſt the
Iewes,Luke. 8. not through the Prophetes faulte,Iohn. 12.
but through their owne:Actes. 28. euen ſo was the
preaching of Ieſus Chriſte, and of his Apoſtles,Rom. 11.
amongeſt them who in their dayes
were like vnto theſe, againſt whom Iſaiah
propheſied. And we ſee that this propheſie
is dayly accompliſhed▪ not onely in Chriſtian
Papiſtes, but alſo in ſuche as greatly
boaſt of the reformation of the Goſpel: and
more in them, then in any other beſides, becauſe
they moſt villanouſly abuſe the graces
which God hath beſtowed vpon them.
And therefore, becauſe their vnthankefulneſſe
is merueilous great, it is good reaſon
their puniſhment ſhould bee the greater.
Wherefore, it is not without iuſte cauſe
that this propheſie is ſo often repeated in the
newe Teſtament, more then any other that
is in all the Bookes of the Prophetes.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     I beſeech the Lord keepe vs by his

grace, yt we fal not into any ſuch inconueniences,
to the end we become not ſuch deſperate
Demoniakes. But what ſaieſt thou
now of Lunatike Diuels?Lunatick Demoniackes. For thou haſt
not as yet, ſet downe thine opinion of thē.
                  
                  
                     The.
                     Although Saint Matthew calleth
this Demoniacke,Mat. 17. only Lunatike,Mark. 9. yet
Saint Mark ſayth,Luke. 9. that he was deafe alſo,
and Saint Luke,The power whiche the Diuell hath ouer young children, & what the cauſes thereof, are. that he was dumbe, and
they all agree together, that he was euen ſo
from his infancie.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     This is very ſtrange, that the
Diuel ſhould haue ſuch power ouer young
children.
                  
                  
                     The.
                     This is an example admonitatorie
to vs of many things, if we can wel conſider
of them.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     I pray thee tell me what things
they are.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Firſt of all, wee are hereby to
iudge of the ſtate & condition of our nature,
and how corrupt and accurſed it is, by reaſon
of ſinne, ſeeing, that euen from our infancie,
the Diuel hath ſuch power ouer vs.
For, if young childrē were without 
                           •
                        in, the
Diuel ſhould haue no power ouer them,Originall 
                              〈◊〉
                           . no
more then death which the diuel hath begotRom. 5.
                        
through ſinne. And therefore, Saint Paule
proueth, that becauſe children dye, that they
are ſubiect to originall ſinne,Bead againſt Iul. and that they
haue alreadie deſerued puniſhmente for the
ſame in this their infancie. And ſo, ſome of
the auncient doctors of the Churche, take
this example of the Lunatike infant, to
proue the ſame, againſt all ſuche as denie originall
ſinne, affirming, that young children
are innocent, and without ſinne.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     Surely, the reaſon of theſe ancient
doctors is built vpon a ſound foundation.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     If children then of this age deſerue
now ſuch iudgement at the handes▪ of
God if God will iudge them in rigour, wee
may ſoone haue an eſtimate, what vengeance
we dayly deſerue at the hands of God,
conſidering, that wee haue not this natural
corruption onely in vs, which we call Originall
ſinne, and is in young children, but
that whiche is more, wee continually carry
about with vs the curſed and damnable
fruites, by which, we inceſſantly prouoke
the heauie wrath and diſpleaſure of God
againſt vs.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     This example ought to teach vs,

to humble our ſelues vnto the Lorde our
God,Mat. 6. and inceſſantly pray vnto him That
hee woulde not leade vs into temptation,
                        Luke. 11▪
                        
                        but deliuer vs from euill. And therefore
we ought to bee very watchfull, and ſtande
vpon our guard, to the end he ouertake vs
not vpon the ſodaine. For, if this be ſo cruel
an enemie vnto young children, he ſure, hee
will vſe no great curteſie vnto vs. And if
GOD giueth him ſuche libertie to hurt
young children, out of doubte, hee wyll neuer
ſpare vs, ſeeing that we haue a great
deale more deſerued his furie and indignation,
then young children?
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Euerye man may vnderſtande
this, if hee will. But yet conſider ſomwhat
more in another point, of the malice
of Satan. It appeareth by the wordes
of Saint Luke, ſpeaking of this miſerable
Lunatike,Luke. 9. that the Diuel,Of the diſeaſe which this lunatike 
                              〈◊〉
                            had. tormented him
not continually, but that hee gaue him
ſome reſpyte, although but a little. For,
hee ſetteth it downe in theſe plaine termes,
that this Diuell, would hardly depart from
this wretched childe. Whereupon, it
muſt followe, that hee departed ſometimes
from him.
                  
                  
                     
                     Tob.
                     Is this the cauſe, why the Euā
                        geliſts
called him Lunatike.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     I doe not thinke,The falling ſick
                           
                              •••
                           s. that hee was
called Lunatike, becauſe he had the falling
ſickneſſe, which commeth by fittes, as the
Moone increaſeth and decreaſeth. For, becauſe
that this diſeaſe commeth of the infirmitie
of the brayne, it therfore followeth
the courſe of the moone. And again, becauſe
the brayne is very colde and moyſt, it agreeeth
mightily with the nature of ye Moone,
which God hath created to be of ſuch a nature,
as that it might preſerue colde and
moyſt things, as hee hath created the Sun
to bee of a hoate and drye nature, that it
might preſerue the reſt of the ſame condition,
to the ende, that all the creatures▪ of
God, might be kept in order, which God in
his Almightie prouidence hath diſpoſed.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     Is this the cauſe, why wee alſo
commonly call this diſeaſe,The hi
                              •
                            euill. the hie euil, and
that we terme them which are ſubiect there
to, to fall into the hie euill?
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     That may bee one cauſe thereof.
For it cannot take a man hier, then by
the head, or brain, when it taketh him in the

head and braine, as that he falleth to the
grounde, as a Butcher knocketh an oxe in
the head. It is alſo ſaid of this Lunaticke
infant, that the Diuell caſt him, and made
him ſometimes fall into the fire, and ſometimes
into the water, in ſuch ſort, as that it
was maruaile that hee had not beene kild a
thouſand times. It is likewiſe written, that
he fomed at the mouth, and tare himſelf horribly.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     All theſe accidents, do greatly
folow the falling ſicknes. But it is namely
ſet downe, that the diuel did all theſe things
and not the diſeaſe.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     The one of them is no let to the
other.The Diuell taketh occaſion 
                              〈◊〉
                            cauſe men hur
                              •
                            themſelues, eue
                              •
                            by their own infirmities. For although the Diuell is the Gouernour
and ruler of this doing, yet hee taketh
it from the infirmitie and diſeaſe, wher
vnto he knoweth this infant to be ſubiecte,
and occaſioneth him to doe that euill to him
ſelfe which he doth, and ſo ſerueth his turne
therewith, for the exerciſing of his crueltie
and malice towards him. And therefore, hee
watched and pryed out the tymes and ſeaſons,
when this diſeaſe came agayne to this
childe, and hee himſelfe alſo haſtened and
furthered it as much as was poſſible. And

therefore the Diuell ſurpreſed this childe,
when hee knew that hee ſhould fall into the
diſeaſe, to make him fall either into the fier
or into the water, and ſo by that meane deſtroy
him if hee coulde. And therefore S.
Luke ſaith,Luke. 9. that the Diuell, with much
a doe, departed from this childe.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     I haue alreadie conſidered of two
thinges which thou haſt ſpoken. The Firſt,
is of that which hath heretofore been handeled,
as concerning the deſire which the Diuell
hath to hurt the creatures of God, but
eſpecially men, as for example wee haue
ſeene in the Legion of Diuels, who entred
into the Gergeſites ſwine, after they had
beene driuen out of the Demontacks.
                  
                  
                     The.
                     What is that other point, whiche
thou wouldeſt ſpeake of?
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     It is euen this, That I ſee the
horrible iudgement of God, and his greate
mercy together, in one and the ſelfe ſame
perſon. For, although God had left this
poore and miſerable childe vnto the diuell,
yet hee ſo brideled vp the diuel, as that hee
coulde not hurte the childe as hee woulde:
but in good ſorte, in deſpite of all that the
Diuell coulde doe. And God preſerued
this childe, that Ieſus might heale him, at

ſuch time as hee had appointed, to the end
that his ſonne Ieſus Chriſte might be glorified
by hym, and that the worlde might
know what power hee had, ouer the moſt
wicked and terrible diuels.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Nowe in very deede, this was
very well conſidered, and ſpoken of thee,
but yet there is ſom thing more to be noted,
ouer & beſides all this, and yt is this, that ſeeing
the diuel taketh occaſion to ruſh in vpon
men,The meane by which we ſuffer the diuel to haue acceſſe vnto vs. through their infirmities, and corporal
diſeaſes, and ſo cruelly deale with them, we
may very well conſider, what occaſion hee
might take, by the infirmities, diſeaſes, and
greeuous ſinnes whiche are in our ſoules,
for the deſtroyng of vs eternally. And
therefore we had need, very carefully looke
to our ſelues, how by ſuch means, we inuite
and bid him come to vs.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     Surely, me thinketh y• we haue
a very manifeſt example of that which thou
ſpeakeſt,The example o
                              •
                            Iudas. in Iudas. Becauſe, ye diuel, ſeeing
him inclined to couetouſnes, tooke occaſion
to enter into him, yt redie & open way. For,
as I take it, ſome of the Euangeliſtes ſay,
that Satan entred into him.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     In deede,Luke. 22. Saint Luke and

S. Iohn haue ſo ſet it down.Iohn. 13. And althogh
the Diuell entered not into him to torment
his body, as his cuſtome is, to torment Demoniackes,
yet he ſo tormented his ſoule, as
that he droue him to that iſſue that he made
him hang himſelfe.Iudas a very diuell. And becauſe hee
was ſo diſloyall a Traitour,Mat. 27. where he ſhold
haue been an angel of God,Acts. 1. vnto the which
eſtate Ieſus Chriſt had called him,Iohn. 6. our Sauiour
of very right and iuſtly,Mala. 1. did not onely
cal him Demoniack, but euen plaine diuel.
For, ſeeing the true miniſters of the Lorde
be called in ye holy ſcriptures,Apoc. 2. 3. the angels of
god, thē may they iuſtly be holdē for diuels,
which abuſe their office, and band thēſelues
againſt God, where they ſhoulde thereby
honour him.The conuerſion 
                              •
                           f Angels into 
                              •
                           iuels. For, heerein they do the office
of Diuels, becauſe they abuſe their office,
and the excellent giftes which God hath beſtowed
vpon them.
                  
                  
                     To.
                     Me thinketh, that this exāple ſhold
terrifie all couetouſmen, but eſpecially, all
the wicked miniſters of the Churche who
make theyr miniſterie ſerue their couetoouſnes.Couetouſnes.
For, the diuel hath a iolly entrance
into them.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Forſooth, it is very true. But

chiefly into thoſe, which ſell and betray Ieſus
Chriſte and his Church, through their
couetouſneſſe.
                     Wee might ſay as much of other vices,
notwithſtanding that this vice of couetonſneſſe,
is one of the chiefeſt, by which the
Deuil hath Lordſhip ouer vs, & maketh vs
his ſlaues.
                  
                  
                     To.
                     I pray thee, ſhew me ſome other
examples of Lunatique Deuilles, tending
to this purpoſe, and of the occaſions, yt the
Deuill taketh by our infirmyties & ſinnes
to hurt vs withall.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     
                        Contented,
                        Eccle. 27. 
                        It is written in the
Booke called Eccleſiaſtes: That the talk
of a man whiche feareth GOD, is alwayes
wiſe: But a foole chaungeth as the
Moone.
                  
                  
                     To.
                     Why, then I perceyue, we may
very wel place fooles,Lunatique fools amongſt Lunatique
men. And ſo by that reaſon, the number
of Lunatiques ſhoulde bee great, ſeeing
that there is a great and infinite number
of fooles.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Howbeit, if they be both Lunatique
and demoniacques: yea, deafe, dumbe,
and blinde, they are the more daungerous

fooles. And yet we ſee almoſt nothing els
before our eyes. For wee ſhall ſee ſome of
them, at one time or an other, ſeeme to haue
a good lyking of God, his worde, and of
vertue, and honeſty. They haue their
momentes, and fittes, wherein they deale
wonderfully, ſo that a man would thinke
them to be become the honeſteſt men in the
world. And in the turning of an hand, they
are ſo ſuddainlye chaunged from better to
worſe, as that thou wouldeſt ſaye, that the
Deuill was entred into their bodyes, and
ſo became Demoniacques.
                     Theſe men are ſuch Demoniacques,Saule is left to the wicked ſpirit as
king Saule was. For, it is written of
him,1 Sam. 16. that after Samuel had annoynted Dauid,
to be king ouer the people of God, in
Saules ſteede, the good ſpirit of the Lorde
departed from Saule, and the euill ſpirite
of the Lord tormented him. And ſhortly after,
Saules ſeruants, called this Spirit, the
euil ſpirit of the Lord.
                  
                  
                     Toby.
                     I take it, that the holy Scripture,
ſo ſaith, vnderſtanding therby, that the
lord ſent this wicked ſpirit, in his iuſt iudgment
to puniſh him by him, as he had of lōg
deſerued.
                  
                  
                     
                     Theo.
                     There is no doubt of it.
Whereupon thou art to note firſt of all,
that the Hebrew word, which the holy ſcripture
vſeth in this place, may be diuerſlye
interpreted. For, it may alſo be interpreted,
that this wicked ſpirite, terrified, or
choked, or puffed vp, or els aſtoniſhed Saul,
and made him become blockiſh.
                  
                  
                     To.
                     But,How the Deuill hath dayly great aduantage ouer vs. before we talke any further
of this wicked ſpirite, which came vppon
Saul, after that the good ſpirit of the Lord
was departed from him. It hath heretofore
beene declared, that Saule was a great hypocrite,
and a moſt glorious man, and an
enuious Rebel to God, and had ſo prouoked
God vnto anger,1. Sam. 15. 17 as that he cauſed Samuel
to tell him,1. Sam. 31. that he ſhould be bereaued of the
kingdome,2. Sam. 11. which he had giuen him, as in
deede it was. And the cauſe why GOD
gaue him ouer vnto the wicked ſprite, came
by reaſon therof.
                     Now, Saule was not ſo wicked and curſed,
before ſuch time as the wicked ſpyrite
had taken poſſeſſion in him, neyther was he
any right Demoniacque, without he kept it
more cloſe before, then afterward he did.
                     
                        
And therefore, how are wee to vnderſtand
this, that the good ſpirite of the Lorde departed
from Saule, and that the wicked
ſpirit came vpon him, in the ſteede of the
good?
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     The example of Iudas, of
whome wee haue ſo often ſpoke, may ſerue
vs to great purpoſe, for the reſoluing of vs
in this queſtion.
                     For,Iohn. 6. when Ieſus Chriſte ſayd, that Iudas
was a Deuill, there is no doubt, but that
the Deuill reigned in the heart of Iudas
before. But becauſe that Iudas continually
more and more abuſed the giftes and
graces of God, and grew worſe & worſe,
wher he ſhould haue waxed better & better,
hee made the waye more open and plaine,
for the Deuill to enter into him.
                     Wherefore S. Iohn ſetteth it down, that
the Deuill put it in Iudas heart, to beetray
Ieſus Chriſte:Iohn. 13. and afterward hee ſaieth, as
S. Luke ſayde,Luke. 22. that Satan entred into
him.
                     It was not meant by the Euangeliſtes,
but that the Deuill was in him before, and
namely, when hee beganne to murmure againſt
the woman, who had ſpent her precious

oyntment vpon Ieſus Chriſt.Math. 26. But
their meaning is,Mark. 14. that we ſhould vnderſtād,
that the Deuill at that time,Iohn. 12. had taken larger
poſſeſſion in the heart of Iudas, and
had greater power ouer him, inſomuch that
he was maiſter of all, as experience afterwarde
manifeſtly declared.
                  
                  
                     Toby.
                     Thy meauing then is, that it
fared euen ſo with Saule.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     True in deede, for the thing is
moſt apparaunt.
                     For, euen as Iudas did a great deale
worſe, after ſuch time as S. Luke and S.
Iohn ſpake, that the Diuell was entred into
his hart, ſo that Iudas was thē come euē
vnto the fulneſſe of all iniquitie & wickedneſſe:
Euen ſo fell it alſo out with Saule,
after that the good ſpirite of the Lorde was
gone from him, and he left vnto the wicked
ſpirit. For, before that, the good ſpirit of
the Lorde, cauſed him to doe manye good
things, although Saule had not a true and
ſound heart. Howbeit, although he did him
ſelfe no good, yet did he good to others, conſidering
the eſtate wherein he was. But,
after that the good ſpirit of the Lord, had
wholy giuen him ouer to Satan, a manne

might haue ſeene him grow worſe, daylye
and hourely, ſo that hee neuer reſted, vntill
ſuch time as he had 
                           •
                        illed the meaſure of al
wickedneſſe, and for a man of his degree &
qualitie, made euen as ſhamefull an end, as
Iudas did. For, after that Saule had committed
the very worſt deedes that he could
poſſibly deuiſe, againſt God, and againſt his
ſeruant Dauid, the Deuil at laſt egged him
ſo far forth, as that hee deſtroyed him ſelfe
with his owne handes.
                  
                  
                     Toby.
                     This is a fearefull example of
Gods heauy vengeance,1 Sam. 31. eſpecially vpon ſo
noble a perſonage.God plagueth the moſt mighty kinges for their tranſgreſſions. For, if God ſpare not
kings and Princes, we are not to look that
he will ſpare any others whatſoeuer.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     It is ſo farre off, that hee ſpareth
great kinges, and mightie potentates,
becauſe they are of great magnificēce, as yt
he puniſheth them with more greeuous, notable
and fearefull tortures, then any of all
the reſt of his people. For, by how much
the more he hath made them great and excellent,
by ſo much the more are they vnthankefull
vnto his maieſtie, when as they
abuſe his graces. And againe, there are
no enemies of God, which more diſhonor

him, & do greater hurt vnto al mē, by their
euill examples, and leſſe puniſhed by men,
then they which are in the greateſt authoritie.
And therfore it cannot be choſen, but
that God him ſelfe muſt ariſe to execute iuſtice
vpon them, ſeeing that none els wil, or
can doe it: And hee muſt needes cauſe them
make a publick amends, for all the horrible
and grieuous offences, which they haue
heretofore committed, and ſtil dayly doe.
                  
                  
                     Toby.
                     To ſaye truely, hee handleth
thē very roughly, when he once beginneth
to lay his hand on them.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     But amongſt all the reſt,The Imitators of Saule. whō
the example of Saul ought moſt to terrifie,
are all glorious, proude, enuious, and hypocritical
men, and all tyrants, but eſpecially,
thoſe kindes of men,What a grienous thing it is for a man to ſinn againſt his own conſcience. whoe fight againſt
their owne conſciences, and perſecute ſuch
as they know to be moſt innocent. For,
Saule, was ſubiect to all theſe vices. But,
he moſt manifeſtly ſhewed, what great power
the Deuil had ouer him, when as he ſo
openly fought againſt his own conſcience,
which oftentimes enforced him to accuſe &
condemne his own ſelf, for the iniuries and
wronges which he had done vnto Dauid.

For, how often was he enforced to ſay, that
he was a vile and wicked man, and had done
great iniurie to Dauid,1. Sam. 24. 26. and that Dauid
was innocent, and a far honeſter man then
him ſelfe? And who enforced him this to
doe, but the very power of the trueth, and
his owne conſcience, which draue him to it,
as if he had beene racked to doe it? he right
well knew, that he did wickedly, and that he
manifeſtly fought againſt God, and yet for
all this, he no whit amended him ſelfe: but
ſtil became more trayterous, fierce & cruel,
without any regarde, either to GOD,
iuſtice or equitie, then any brute and furious
beaſt.
                     But when he made ſuch a iolly confeſſion
of his ſinnes, a man would haue thought,
that he had beene very penitent, and altogether
conuerted. A man would haue thought
that he had beene come againe to his right
wittes, and that he had beene verye well diſpoſed
to haue don much better, then before
time hee had. But hee was immediately
after, quite and clean altered, and did worſe,
then before he had done. Inſomuch, that
at the very ſame inſtant, wherein hee vſed
theſe ſpeeches, declaring the innocencye of

Dauid, he tooke his Iaueling, & thought if
he had coulde to haue run Dauid through
with it,1. Sam. 18. 24▪ 26. with his owne handes, and afterward
cauſed him to be ſought for al ouer, to
haue put him to death.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     Surely, herein he right wel ſhewed,
that he was a very Demoniacke, and
moſt Lunaticke.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     We ſee a great number of ſuch.
For, there are an exceeding mighty number
of thoſe, who, after they haue long time
fought againſt their own conſciences, haue
ſome remorſe thereof. But forſomuche
as GOD forſaketh them, becauſe they
haue forſaken him, the Deuill their maiſter,
who hath ſo great power and dominiō
ouer them, hath no more ſtay of them, then
of ſenſleſſe and mad men. And therfore they
alter their mynds euery houre. And if it ſo
fall out, as that they ſometimes light on the
right ſide, they by & by tumble ouer againe
vnto ye other ſide, ſo yt, the moone changeth
not ſo oftē as they do. But this is the nature
of al ſuch as are ſubiect to the diuel. For, after
any furious & mad ſpirit hath once got
poſſeſſion of them, they are neuer long in
one mind. Tob. Thou haſt already ſpoken

of many greate vices which greately
haunt vs, that make vs ſubiect vnto him.
                  
                  
                     The.
                     It is ſaid, that the diuel many times
caſt the Lunaticke one while into the fire,Who they are, w
                              •
                           om the diuel ouerthroweth▪ and maketh them fall into the fire. &
another while into the water. Now, whē ye
diuel eggeth vs forward, ſo that he cauſeth
vs to fall into the ſinne of couetouſneſſe, he
caſteth vs into a farre more dangerous fire,
then if he did caſt vs into a materiall fire.
For,The fire of Couetouſnes. couetouſnes, is ſuch a fire, as is impoſſible
to be quenched, by reaſon of that which
is caſt into it, but burneth ſtil more & more.
Wherefore the couetous men burne continualy
in this fire, and conſume therin much
of that that is caſt in, with them.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     If they were caſt in into a materiall
fire, they ſhoulde bee diſcharged for
being burnt any more. Howbeit, theſe men,
of whom thou ſpeakeſt, are in a farre worſe
eſtate, then if they were burnt but in a ſmal
fire.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Wee might likewiſe ſaye as
much of Whoremongers.The fire of whoredome and Lecherie. For Lechery is
a fire alſo, and as hard to be quenched, as ye
fire of couetouſneſſe. And how many do we
daylie ſee caſt into this infernall fire by the
diuel, who are there cruelly roaſted both

body & ſoule. But there are a maruellous
great number, eſpecially, of theſe Lunaticke
Demoniackes, whom the diuell very
often caſteth into this fire of whoredome
and lechery, amongeſt the ſuppoſtes of the
popiſh Church, who had rather burne in it,
contrary to the counſell of Saint Paule,The contempt of marriage puniſhed.
and the expreſſe commaundement of God,
then marry, and finde water in holy marriage
to remedy it,1. Cor. 7 wherby they might quēch
this fire, and ſo be ridde of it. But they
had rather haue the diuel keep them there,Gen. 1. 2.
then they woulde ſerue God in that eſtate
which he hath ordeyned frō the beginning.Math. 19.
                     
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     But, what are they, whom ye diuel
maketh thus fall into the water?
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Why man, there are an exceeding
number of them. We may place
in this ranke, all voluptuous and lycentious
perſons,Who they are whom the diuel cauſeth to fall into the water. who ſuffer thēſelues to ouerflow
as it were water, in their pleaſures &
delightes. And therfore they make this entree
for the Diuell to enter into thē, to the
end he might plunge and drown them ouer
head and eares, ſo that they ſhoulde neuer
be able to come out agayne. To be ſhort,
if wee woulde diſcourſe of this matter

more at large, we ſhould find, that the moſt
parte of vs, are thus dayly dealt withall by
the Diuell, who handeleth vs not onely as
hee handled the miſerable Lunaticke, but
a great deale more cruelly. For there is no
compariſon betweene the harmes whiche
the Diuell is able to doe to the bodies, and
thoſe whom he inceſſantly hurteth in their
ſoules.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     Seing we haue talked ſo long,
of ſo many ſortes of Demoniackes, I wold
gladly now know of Ierome, what he were
able to ſay to this matter, conſidering hee
hath ſo long heard vs, & neuer ſpake worde
which I maruel of. And me thinketh alſo yt
he is about to leaue his ſilence, and to ſay
ſomewhat.
                  
                  
                     Ier.
                     Surely, thou and Theo. haue ſaid
ſo much, as that you haue lefte me no great
matter to talke of.A ſtorie of a woman Demoniacke that was neuer ſatiſfied with money. But I will tell you a
Tale which once I hard done by a woman
Demoniacke, who differeth farre frō thoſe
ſortes of Demoniackes, of whom thou haſt
before ſpoken.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     Thou wouldeſt fayne tel vs here
ſome fable and old wiues tale, to make vs
forget all the doctrine whereout we might

gather ſome good matter, of the talk which
we heretofore haue had,
                  
                  
                     Ier.
                     I wil tel thee, they that told me this
hyſtorie, tolde it not vnto me for a fable, but
for a true hyſtorie. And for myne own part,
I verily beleeue, that they counterfayted
not the matter. And put the caſe it were a
counterfayte thing, yet ſhal it turne to good
purpoſe, as cōcerning thoſe matters, wherof
you haue talked.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     Thou ſhouldeſt haue gone on
with thine hiſtory, whiles we haue entertained
thee with theſe great promiſes. And
therfore let vs now heare it.
                  
                  
                     Ier.
                     Firſt of al, it was told me that this
hiſtory happened in Almayne, and that this
Demoniacke was ſo lycorous of money,
as neuer Iacke Dawe had greater delight
in it. For ſhe woulde no ſooner come neere
any man, but that her hand was ſodainly vpon
his purſe or money bagge if he had any,
that ſhe could find. And if ſhe had once
fingred it, ſhe woulde haue ſo luſtely beſtirred
her, and ſo ſuddaynely haue put the
Gold or ſiluer which ſhe had fingered vnto
her mouth, as that a man coulde not haue
beene ſo wary of her, but that ſhee woulde

haue more ſuddainelye haue licked it
in.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     I promiſe thee, this was a maruellous
ſtraunge Diuell. Why, thoſe whiche
we commonly call Saraſins, or Egiptians,
or els Bohemians, are nothing ſkilfull
in reſpecte of this Diuell, no nor yet
the Iacke Dawes, who are the notableſt
theeues for money that may bee, and will
ſometimes as quickely diſpatche it. But
what became of this Demoniacke in the
ende?
                  
                  
                     Iero.
                     I vnderſtoode by them who
tolde me the tale, that Luther was aſked
his opinion of her. For hee was then aliue,
when as this matter fell ſo out. And
the place wherein this thing happened, is
not farre frō ye place where Luther dwelt:
but I doe not well remember the name
which was told me.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     It is no matter for the name of
the place. But tel vs if thou canſt, what Luthers
aunſweare was, as touching this demoniacke,
to thoſe which aſked his counſell
herein.
                  
                  
                     Ier.
                     I vnderſtood, that he told them,
that it was an aduertiſement of God to the

Almaynes, and to all the world beſides, that
the diuell Mammon was vnchayned & let
looſe,God Mamm
                              •
                            raigning in th
                              •
                            world. and raigned in the worlde, and was
now more vnſatiable then euer he had byn
before, and therefore leaft neither purſe nor
bagge vnryfled. And that although he had
drawen drye all purſes and bagges, and licked
vp all the gold and ſiluer within them,
yet coulde hee not be through full: For it
is an vnſatiable gulfe whiche neuer cryeth
hoe.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     What meaneſt thou by this diuell
Mammon?
                  
                  
                     Ier.
                     That couetouſnes, wherof the diuel
himſelfe is both God and father.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     Indeed, me thinketh that Luther
hitte it rightlye. And if ſo bee there had
been no ſuch thing, but a fayned matter, for
ſporte, yet it carrieth a good ſence with it,
for we daylye ſee before our eyes, the practiſe
whereof Luther ſpake, both in al countries,
and alſo in all eſtates, and therefore
the Almaynes are not to bee onelye charged
therwith. For, we are able to ſay without
counterfetting, that there is a diuelliſh
couetouſnes al the world throughout. And
if a man ſhould conſider well of the matter,

we ſhould ſee couetouſneſſe, to be a verye
right ſhee Diuel, and maketh men become
hee Diuels, & maketh ſuch a nūber of Demoniacks
as the woman was, of whō thou
erſt ſpakeſt, and begetteth ſuche a number
of great & litle Diuels, to play this pageāt,
as that the whole worlde is nothing els but
a Diuelrie, altogether diueliſhed.
                  
                  
                     Ierome.
                     This was that ſhe diuel which
chiefly made Iudas ſuch a Diuel, as thou
haſt ſaide he was, and ſo, neuer ſithence that
euer ſhe ceaſſed hatching and bringing forth
of ſuch like as her ſelf, who are the greateſt
hinderers of the courſe of the goſpel, which
any way might come vnto it.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     We are then in a iolly countrey,
when as we be in ſuche an hel, and haue to
doe with ſo many ſortes of Demoniackes
and Diuels.
                  
                  
                     Ier.
                     The danger is not ſo great to haue
to doe with them, as it is to be one of the
number.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     I right wel know thy meaning.
And therefore the hardeſt matter for vs reſteth
herein, to find ye meanes how to auoyd
al theſe inconueniences, to wit, howe wee
may firſt keepe our ſelues, from falling into

theſe miſchiefes. The ſecond is, as touching
the meane, whereby we may eſchewe
the hurt which theſe diuels and Demoniackes
might doe vs.
                  
                  
                     Ier.
                     That, which thou haſt ſpoken of, is
the very beſt and chiefeſt: For, to what purpoſe
were it for a man to vnderſtand the diſeaſe,
without a man did thinke to get neceſſary
remedyes for the healing thereof, and
it were to ſmal purpoſe to thinke of them
without a man were ſure to find them.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     In very deede it would ſerue to
none other end, but the more to torment the
party grieued, and make him become more
deſperat
                           •
                        .
                  
                  
                     Ier.
                     And therefore the verye beſt way
will be, that at our firſt meeting together,
we trauel and goe about this matter.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The Title and effect of the
ſixt Dialogue, of the Demoacke
world.
                  
                     THis ſixt Dialogue is intituled,
The coniuration of Diuelles,
becauſe in it, is ſet forth, whiche
way to driue out Diuels
whiche rule and torment the
world. Wheruppon, thoſe remedies
are ſpoken of, which Saul ſought after,
that hee might bee ridde of that wicked ſpirite
whiche tormented him, and of the remedies
which Infidels, and wicked men hunt after, for
ſuch diſeaſes as come vnto them, and how men
haue recourſe vnto creatures, wheras in truth
they ſhould run vnto God.
                  Of the cauſe of Saul his madnes, and of the
right remedy that was vſed for the ſame.
                  Of the blockiſh and witching ſpirit which
God ſendeth vnto vs in his iuſt iudgement.
                  For what cauſe, faſting and prayer are auayleable,
for the driuing out of diuels.
                  How very neceſſary a thing the increaſe of
faith is.
                  Of the true vſe of faſting, and of the abuſe

thereof.
                  Of gluttonie & drunkenneſſe, cloked vnder
the title of the libertie of the Goſpell, and
namely in the perſon of the Magiſtrates, and
miniſters of the church.
                  Of the Diuels force, whē he is to be put out
of his lodging.
                  Of the victory which Ieſus Chriſt hath againſt
him.
                  Of the principall and moſt neceſſary knowledge
that is wāting in man, & of his vnthankfulneſſe,
as well towardes God, as alſo vnto
to thoſe to whom of duety he is bound.
               
               
                  
                  The ſixte Dialogue of the
Demoniacke worlde, intituled, The
Coniuration of Diuels.
                  Ierome, Tobie, Euſtace, Theophraſt.
                  
                     Ierome.
                     
                        THou deſiredſt (Tobie) to
vnderſtand what remedies
there were to keep
vs, not onely from becomming
to be Demoniacks,
but alſo to be defēded
from taking anye
hurt either by the diuels, or by the demoniacks
whom the diuels poſſeſſe and rule.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     Very true. And therefore I am
here now ready to heare what fit remedies
thou haſte brought mee for the purpoſe:
For I right well knowe, that all the
Prieſtes, Friers, and Charmers Coniurations,
and all the Coniurers that be in
the worlde, will litle or nothing auayle,
without there be ſome other helping hand
then theirs.
                  
                  
                     
                     Ier.
                     Why man, thou muſt not looke
that the diuels and Demoniackes coniure
one another.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     Why ſpeakeſt thou that?
                  
                  
                     Ier.
                     Becauſe, if there be any men in the
whole world, ouer whom the diuels raigne
and haue power, they are the people, of
whom thou erſt ſpeakeſt. And therefore if
there bee any who of right are to bee taken
for Demoniackes, euen thoſe kindes of
men, of whom we heretofore ſpake, are to
bee looked for amonges the men of that
Courte. For they are ſuche demoniackes,
as that they make all men els very demoniackes
alſo, what with their falſe doctrine,
traditions, and by meane of that wicked
ſpyrite which guideth and gouerneth them.
For, ſeeing they are the guyders and Gouernours
of others, it cannot bee choſen,
but that they whiche are guyded and gouerned
by them, muſt needs bee led by that
ſpirit, which guideth & gouerneth their leaders
and Gouernours.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     I doubt that Euſtace, wil not yeeld
vnto that thy opinion.
                  
                  
                     Ier.
                     I care not whether he will yeelde
to it or not, yet I am ſure it is true that I

haue ſayde.
                  
                  
                     Euſt,
                     If thou wilt needes haue it ſo, I
ſhall but looſe time to ſpeake againſt thee.
And therefore I ſhalbe contented to heare,
what Coniurers they are that thou canſt
bring foorth for thy parte, and ſee what
greater vertue they haue more, then thoſe
whom thou haſt diſciphered, and ſo greatly
blamed.
                  
                  
                     Ier.
                     Mee thinketh Tobie, that Theo.
hath ſhewed vnto vs a moſt excellent remedie
againſt this miſchiefe, whiche is ſo
greatly to be feared: ſo that in my opinion,
if we take it, we ſhall neuer neede anie other.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     A vnderſtand right wel, yt he hath
ſent vs backe to Ieſus Chriſt, to ſeeke this
meane and remedy at his hand. And ſurely
for myne owne parte I would neuer goe any
further.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Saul very diligently ſought after
it, but becauſe he went not to God, to whō
he ought to haue gone, he neuer found that
comfort and remedy againſt his diſeaſe, that
he looked for.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     What remedy was that?1. Sam. 16.
                     
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     His ſeruants made him beleeue

that it was beſt for him to haue ſome cunning
Muſition,The counſell which Saules ſeruants gaue him. which could play excellently
vpon an harpe. And he thought this, to be
very good counſel. Wherupō, he forthwith
ſent to haue ſuch an one gotten him: and at
laſt, Dauid was brought to him to play this
parte, for hee had therein, moſte excellent
ſkill,
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     What reaſon had they to doe
thus?
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     There was great likelihoode,
that the ſeruantes which gaue Saule this
counſel, as the hiſtorie witneſſeth, were his
Phiſitions, who had met together to conſult
of his diſeaſe.What remedies the wicked hunt after, whē they are diſeaſed. For, when anye ſickeneſſe,
or other inconuenience falleth vpon
the wicked, they neuer cōſider, that it is the
hande and rodde of the Lorde that is layde
vppon them, without they bee enforced
thereto, with the greate blowes of a
mawle, as was layde vppon Pharaoh and
the Egyptians.Exod. 12. And therefore, where they
ſhould looke vp vnto heauen, they ſtil looke
groueling downe to the earth, and runne
rather vnto creatures, then vnto the Creator.
                     And agayne, they that are about them, &

like them, neuer giue them other direction.
Wherefore, when Saul was not well at
eaſe, hee muſt needes ſende for remedy for
his diſeaſe. And his moſte excellent remedy
had beene, to haue ſent for ſome ſound
Prophete or Preacher, to haue told Saul
of the grieuous and great ſinnes which he
had committed, whereby the wicked ſpyrit
had ſo great power ouer him, to tormēt
him as he did: For, by theſe and ſuche lyke
ſpeeches, he muſt needes haue been brought
to repentance, and ſo haue fled to the mercies
of God, whereby he might haue obtained
his fauour, and remiſſion of his ſinnes:
for, if he had growne to an attonemēt with
God, through true and faithful repentance,
he ſhoulde haue founde at Gods handes,
that remedye that was moſte neceſſary for
him. For, that God, who had ſtriken him in
his iuſt iudgement, could, and alſo woulde,
haue healed him in mercy. But becauſe that
Saul, had ſo lōg dallied wt God, & perſeuered
ſo long in his wicked doing, cōtrary to
his own cōſcience, as yt god would not once
vouchſafe to giue him that grace to haue recourſe
vnto him, nor ſuffer him haue ani mā
in his Court, & about him, to giue him that
counſel.
                  
                  
                     
                     Toby.
                     I doe not thinke this counſell,
to be the beſt counſel that might haue been
giuen him:Wee 
                              〈◊〉
                            to creatures for aide, rather thē vnto God. howbeit, this is the verye ordinary
courſe, which we almoſt all take, to
runne rather vnto Phiſitions, and ſeeke remedie
at the handes of Creatures, then
vnto God, the moſt excellent Phiſition of
all.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     I doe not thinke it amiſſe, to
vſe Phiſitions, and all other meanes whatſoeuer
that men are able to helpe withall,
ſo that they be ordeyned of God.
                     But herein reſteth the faulte, that wee
forſake GOD, and runne vnto Creatures:
But if wee runne vnto GOD, yet haue
we more confidence in men, & in the creatures,
and in the meanes and inſtrumentes,
which he hath ordained, then in God y• framer
and worker of all, without whome, all
the inſtrumentes are able to doe nothing.
                     And therefore it is written of king Aza,
that GOD tooke away his life from him,
becauſe that in his ſickneſſe,1. Chron. 16. he truſted more
vnto his Phiſitions, then hee did vnto
GOD. Nowe, if God punyſhed thoſe,
whoe vſed ſuch remedies as hee had ordayned,
when as they put their confidence

in that, which they ſhould haue done in him,
we ought not to meruayle, although hee
ſeuerely dealeth with many, who are not
contented to abuſe the meanes which hee
hath ordayned, but ſeek after other meanes,
which he hath forbydden, & put therin their
whole truſt.
                  
                  
                     To.
                     They which haue recourſe to the
Deuill, and vnto Charmers, and Sorcerers,
who are his Miniſters, directe them
ſelues to other Phiſitions and meanes
then GOD hath ordayned.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Neyther doe theſe men eſcape
the heauy hande of GOD, although hee be
ſlow in comming, nor yet they which runne
vnto Idolles, and to ſtraunge Gods.
                  
                  
                     Toby.
                     But I pray thee tell me, whether
Muſicke hath any power againſt ſuch
kinde of madneſſe as Saules was,Muſick, a remedy againſt madneſſe. or not?
For, it is to be preſumed, that they which
gaue Saule counſell, to ſend for a cunning
Muſition, where of this opinion.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     There are many Melancholike,
and franticke people, whom Muſicke
ſerueth as a medicine, becauſe it reioyſeth
and tempereth mens affections, and thereby

draweth awaye their imaginations els
whether, if it be vſed as it ſhould be. But
Saules madneſſe proceeded not onelye of
a ladde and melancholicke humour, eyther
yet vppon anger and wrath. But the
principall cauſe was ſupernaturall: And
therefore, although hee founde him ſelfe
ſomewhat comforted and eaſed, when Dauid
played vppon the Harpe, yet continued
hee ſtill in his madneſſe, yea inſomuch that
he ſtill enforced him ſelfe to thruſt through
Dauid, his Muſition.
                     And therefore hee was to looke for remedie
ſome where els. For, Saules
madneſſe proceeded from the curſſe of god,The cauſe of Sauls madnes.
wherewith hee threatneth all ſuch as will
not obey his lawe,Deut. 28. that hee will ſtrike them
with blindneſſe, furye, and madneſſe: in
ſuch a ſorte, as that hee will make
them ſenceleſſe, that they ſhall be no more
able to guyde and gouerne them ſelues,The ſpirite of fury and blockiſhnes.
then thoſe blind men, that grope by ye wals
at noone dayes.
                  
                  
                     Toby.
                     Surely, this is an horrible and
very fearefull threat.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     All the reſt of the Prophetes,
which liued after Moſes, threatned the like

curſe and vengeance, namely to tyrauntes,
their Counſellors and Offycers,Iſaiah. 19. when as
they threatned them,Oſeah. 4. 5. that God would ſende
amongſt them,Iohn. 6. 12 a blockiſh, ſleepy, & drunken
ſpirite.
                  
                  
                     To.
                     I thinke, that fooliſh and wicked
Counſelles, which greatly hurt Princes,
their courtes, and principalities, proceede
from ſuch a ſpirite.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     That is queſtionleſſe. For,
ſeeing they make no account of the counſel
of God, which he delyuereth vnto them by
his worde, and ſeruauntes, they are worthy
of ſuch counſellors as are ledde with ſuch a
ſpirite:1. Kings. 22. As the falſe Prophetes of Achab:
who were, by ye iuſt iudgement of God, ſent
vnto him, to deceiue him, as he had well deſerued.
                  
                  
                     To.
                     Thou wouldeſt thē thus
conclude, that there is no ſuffycient Phiſition,
to deliuer or ridde men of ſuch inconueniences,
ſaue the moſt excellent Phiſition
of al.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Our ſauiour Ieſus Chriſt, yeelding
a reaſon,Mat. 17. why his Diſciples were not
able to heale the Lunaticque,Faſting & praies requiſite for the caſting out of Deuils. tolde them,
that that ſort of Deuilles could not bee caſt
out, but by faſting and prayer.
                  
                  
                     
                     Toby.
                     Why ſayd he ſo?
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     He himſelf declared that ſufficiently
enough, when as he as wel rebuked
his Diſciples, as alſo the father of the Lunaticque,
for their incredulitie, giuing them
therby to vnderſtand, that, yt was the cauſe,
why his Diſciples were not able to caſt out
yt Deuil, albeit they had vſed al the ſkil and
cunning they had. Wherefore, ſeeing it
was for want of fayth,Encreaſe of fayth neceſſary. it was requiſite, that
their faith ſhould be encreaſed. And this
could not be had, but by the grace of God.
For, fayth is the gift of GOD: And therfore,
as we cannot haue it without him, no
more alſo can it bee encreaſed but by him alone.
And therefore, Ieſus Chriſt exhorted
his Diſciples,Ephe. 2. to pray that it might bee encreaſed
in them. Wherfore,Iohn. 6. ſith it is ſo, we
muſt addreſſe vs vnto GOD, by hearty
and faythfull prayer. And prayer can in
no wiſe pleaſe him, without it come from
the ſoule and heart.
                     And becauſe that abſtinence or faſting,The right vſe of faſting.
greatlye auayleth the ſoule or minde, forſomuch
as being leſſe preſſed by the body, it
is better diſpoſed towardes God: therfore
the ſeruauntes of GOD, haue commonly

ioyned abſtynence and faſting with their
prayers, when as they would addreſſe them
ſelues vnto his Maieſtie, for any things
of great importaunce, and be more feruent
in prayer, according as the neceſſitie of the
cauſe requyred. And therefore, Ieſus
Chriſte meaning to let his Diſciples vnderſtande,
that they had great neede to pray
vnto GOD, for the encreaſe of their faith,
and that faſting, greatly auayled vnto praier,
becauſe it was of great effycacie: he ioyned
faſting with prayer, when as he ſpake
of fayth that was to be required, for the caſting
out of this kinde of wicked, and moſt
cruell Deuils.
                  
                  
                     Toby.
                     I doe not much meruaile, that
there are this day ſo few Coniurers, which
are able to caſt out of the worlde thoſe Deuilles,
of whome wee haue heretofore ſo
much ſpoken. For, there are but a few men,
very earneſt in prayer. And as for faſtinge;
the number is leſſe, eſpecially amongeſte
you, who ſo greatly glory of the Reformation
of the Goſpell: For, you are not contented
your ſelues not to faſt: but, which is
worſe,The abuſe of fa
                           
                              •
                           ting condēned. you ſcorne them that faſt, and condemne
them for ſuperſtitious people, and

hypocrites.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     I know right well, that thou
takeſt great pleaſure to be mery with vs,
or els thou ſpeakeſt of our doctrine according
as thou haſte hearde our aduerſaryes
talke, who can neuer ſpeake well of it, and
yet neuer eyther heard or yet vnderſtood it:
or, if euer they heard it and vnderſtoode it,
they ſpeake ill of it againſt their own conſciences.
For, who euer heard vs more condemn
faſting and abſtynence, then true praier,
and all other good workes, which God
alloweth and lyketh of.
                  
                  
                     Toby.
                     Wherefore then faſt you not
in Lent, the foure Ember dayes, the Vigiles,
and other faſting dayes, commanded by
ye Church.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     If we condemne ye ſuperſtitious
and importable abuſes,What true faſt are. which the
Papiſtes vſe in their faſtes, wee doe not for
all that comdemne the true faſtes, that are
according to the worde of GOD, and according
to the right rule of the auncient
Fathers and true ſeruauntes of God: But
contrariwiſe, wee greatly deſire, to haue
the right vſe of thoſe faſtes, to bee brought
into the Church. For, there is great differēce
between correcting the abuſes, & the

abolyſhing of good things which men haue
abuſed. And as for the common faſtes, there
are no preachers which more commēd thē,
nor who more grieuouſly reproue and condemne
gluttony, drunkenneſſe, and al diſſoluteneſſe,
or loſeneſſe of life, as well for
eating and drinking, as alſo for all other
thinges, then the true Miniſters of the
Goſpell, reproue and condemne them.
                  
                  
                     Toby.
                     I doe verely thinke, that that
which thou ſayeſt is true, but I finde fewe
which follow that doctrine. For, I ſee
manye of your ſide, whoe are no better reformed,Gluttonny and drunkennes, cloked vnder the title of the liberty of the Goſpell.
without, where peraduenture they
might at the leaſt haue faſted ſometimes,
ſo long as they held our lawe: who nowe,
not onely neuer faſt, but commonly ſurfet
both in eating and drinking, as if they had
receyued the Goſpell for none other purpoſe,
but to ſurfette at pleaſure, and
make a ſcorne at all abſtynence and ſobrietie.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     I muſt needes confeſſe, that
there are ouer many ſuch. And I will confeſſe
more vnto thee then that. For, if this
miſchiefe, whereof thou ſpeakeſt, were but
in ſome of the meaner ſorte, it were

leſſe to be lamented. But the greateſt
miſchiefe of all the reſt is this, that there
are a great number of miniſters and magiſtrates,
who are more licentiouſly giuen to
this kinde of vice of trowling and bowling,
then thoſe men, whom they ought to correct
for ſuch offences. For theſe are the ſpeciall
men, whome a man ſhall ordinarily
finde in the Cauernes and Tipling houſes,
as if their chiefeſt occupation were to
trowle and bowle, & prouoke others to all
looſenes.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     I haue hearde it oftentimes
ſpoken,Of the Gluttonie and drunke
                              •
                           
                           nes of magiſtrates and miniſters. yt there are many of the chiefeſt of
your officers amongſt you, who take great
pleaſure to giue the miniſters, which will
play the good fellowes alittle, theyr lading
(as wee ſay). And theſe officers thinke,
that they haue made a great conqueſt, when
as they haue a miniſter drunke, as it too too
often falleth out. And I doubt not, but
that Ierome hath hearde as great newes of
this as I.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     I knowe more of this, then I
gladly would, & I cānot heare it ſpoken of,
but to their great ſhame which doe, and
continue ſuch villanies. But it is eaſily

to bee ſeene, what maner of men theſe miniſters
and officers are, who thus honeſtly
behaue them ſelues, thou maiſt right well
ſay, That Rowland and Oliuer are well
met. For, becauſe theſe officers, are men
of wicked life and conuerſation, and feare
that the Miniſters woulde reproue them of
their ſinnes: They are the gladdeſt men in
the worlde, when they can get in their Miniſters
to bolle with them, to the end thereby
to brydle them, that they ſhoulde not bee
ouer greeuous in accuſing and reprehending
of them. For, when theſe Miniſters
or rather minſtrels, haue well wet theyr
whyſtle, they, ouer whom they are Paſtors,
doe aſſure themſelues then, that they wyll
not be too eager vpon them. And againe,
theſe cup whiſteling minſtrels, haue no regard,
to much crying out, becauſe they fear
that ſome man woulde accuſe them, if they
ſhould diſpleaſe thoſe who were witneſſes
of their trolling and bolling, & the reſt of
their vices whereunto they are ſubiect.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     If the caſe thus ſtandeth, I dare
aſſure thee, that you haue very venerable
Apepoſtles, to caſt out all the Diuels by
faſting and prayer, which at this preſent ſo

greatly trouble the worlde. And if there
were no Diuels at all in the whole worlde,
theſe good fellowes, in ſteede of caſting of
them out, woulde bring them in. Wherfore,
I doe not much maruel, although the Diuels
haue ſo great power of theſe drūkards
and gluttons of all ſortes and eſtates, and
namely, ouer thoſe miniſters & magiſtrates
who ryſe early in the morning, not to go to
a Sermon, but to the Tauerne and there
drink a dutant, what ſaieſt thou to it Theophraſte?
                     
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     This I ſay vnto it, that yt land,
and common weale is accurſed, which hath
gluttonous & drunkē magiſtrates & paſtors,Eccle. 10.
& riſe vp in the morning to folow drunkenneſſe
vntyll they are hoat with wine.Iſaiah. 5. And
therefore, ſeeing that all vices reigne in the
world, & more amongſt them, which ſhould
correct and puniſh thē, then amongſt any of
the reſt, it is no maruell, though there be ſo
many diuels & Demoniacks euery where,
as are. But ſuch as feare ye Lord, haue a very
good recourſe.What deuiſes and meanes th
                              •
                            Diuel hath whi
                              •
                           
                           he is to be diſplaced. In very deed, it will bee
a hard matter to make thoſe diuels departe
frō thē, but yet they ſhal, wil they, nil they, be
diſplaced, becauſe Chriſt laieth his hand on

as hee did vpon the miſerable Lunatike.
For,Mat. 17. when Ieſus Chriſte was in place, it
was ſo farre of that the wicked ſpirite
woulde departe from this poore childe,Mark. 6. as
that hee became more madde in him.Luke. 9. And
ſo likewiſe, when theſe Diuels, and demoniackes
that they poſſeſſe which are nowe
in the worlde, feele the Goſpel come neare
them, and beginne to heare the voyce thereof,
they are euen as madde, as if a man
ſhoulde ſounde out the Trumpet, to aſſault
them, and giue them the alarme. And, as the
Diuell went not out of the Lunatike, vntil
ſuche time as he had firſt tryed all his forces
againſt Ieſus Chriſte: No more wyll hee
be diſplaced of theſe Roomes, which he
hath gotten poſſeſſion of, without ſtronge
and mightie combates. And al the while
that the Diuell ſo furiouſly reſiſted Ieſus
Chriſt, the diuel a great deale more tormented
the poore Lunatike, then euer hee dyd
before, Inſomuche, that hee lay before Ieſus
Chriſte, as if hee had been dead.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     Hee dyd that, to vexe the poore
father, of that ſo very a miſerable childe, and
becauſe hee had ſo little faith, his incredulitie
was the reaſon, why this childe was no

ſooner healed. For it ſeemed, that the
preſence of Ieſus Chriſt, did him more hurt
then good.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     It might ſeeme that Ieſus
Chriſte came thyther,Victorie againſt the diuell, after he had been driuen, to his laſt ſhifts. to giue the Diuell
greater power, to the end hee might finiſh
that worke which hee ſo long before trauelled
about, which was, to kill this poore miſerable
childe. For, euery man thought
the childe to bee dead, when the Diuell leaft
him. Howbeit, it fell out cleane contrary.
For, when it was thought, that hee was
ſtarke dead, hee was quite and cleane deliuered
of the Diuell, and made through
whole.
                     Nowe, wee ſee that the like of this falleth
out dayly, we ſee how the Diuel troubleth
and tormenteth the worlde, eſpecially
in thoſe places, out of which hee knoweth
he ſhall be caſte. For, he then falleth into
ſuch a rage, as that a man woulde thinke
that the Goſpell, by which meane Ieſus
Chriſte will caſt him out, had ſet open all
the gates of hell, to let out all the Legions
of Diuels that were in it. For, then hee
fretteth and fumeth, and maketh as manie
as he hath power ouer, to fret and fume.

To be ſhort, he ſo terrifieth ye whole world,
yea, the valianceſt and moſt conſtant, as that
a man would think it ſhould be vtterly conſumed
and come to naught. But euen
then, when we thinke it ſhoulde bee cleane
waſted and deſtroyed, our Sauiour Ieſus
Chriſte, ſheweth himſelfe to be farre ſtronger
then he. And therefore, wee muſt not
ſtande in a maze when we ſee the troubles
and perſecutions, which the Diuell and his
retinue ſtyrre vp in the world, when as they
feele Ieſus Chriſte come neere them, to
caſt them out through the power of his goſpell.
We haue none other thing to doe
but to remaine ſtedfaſt and conſtant, and do
that duetie that appertaineth vnto euery of
vs: and ſo leaue the charge of all the reſt of
ye things vnto our Lord Ieſus Chriſte, who
will neuer forſake vs, nor yet ſuffer the diuell
to reigne amongſt vs.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     I tell you, it is moſt neceſſarie
that hee ſhoulde put to his helping hande.
For there is none els to withſtand the Diuels
power, nor yet ſtay and came ſuche
an enemies, whome, neuer man was able to
vanquiſh, but he alone. For, ſo far foorth

as I am able to vnderſtand by the talk that
wee haue had together, we are not only in
worſe eſtate, and more intractable and ragyng
then bruite beaſtes, but alſo then the
very Demoniackes. Whereupon, I can
not ſufficiently enough maruaile at our nature.
For, we are of that nature and condition,
that wee can ſkill ſo do any thing, but
that which ſhould be for our benefite,Man can doe anie thing, ſaue that which he ought chieflieſt to doe. & moſt
neceſſary for vs. For, there is neither Art,
Science, practiſe, nor yet occupation whatſoeuer,
which we haue not deuiſed, and can
doe it, and teach others alſo, ſauing the
art to liue well, which wee bragge to teache
to euery one, and yet are not able to teache
our ſelues, but muche leſſe able to practiſe
it. For, there is almoſt, no beaſt ſo ſauage,
cruell, furious, or villanous howeſoeuer,
but that man by Arte, is able to
vanquiſhe, tame, and maſter, and make
familiar and gentle: But it is a wonder
to ſee that hee is not able to fynde
out any Arte,Man a conqueror of all thing
                              •
                            but of himſelfe Science, Practiſe, nor
weapons, to vanquiſhe, came, and maſter
hym ſelfe, and to ouercome and ſubdue
his owne affections.
                     
                        
Horſes and Moyles are with much a doe
brought to it: But yet hath man founde
the meane to handle them, and make them
doe him ſeruice, in a ſhort time. Bulles and
Oxen are mightie and ſtrong: and yet man
teacheth them to beare the yooke, and draw
in the Cart. The Elephants likewiſe are
moſt terrible: and yet man maketh them
beare as great a burden as he luſteth. Wolues
and Beares, are very cruell: and yet
man maketh them tractable. Lions are
very fierce, proude, cruell, and terrible: and
yet man maketh them humble themſelues,
and obey him.There is diſagreement betweene the huſband and the wife. Contrariwiſe, I ſee too often
that the huſbande is not able to maiſter his
wife, nor the wife, her huſband, that they
might liue quietly together: although ſhee
be fleſhe of his fleſh,Gen. 2, 3. and bone of his bones,
and liue long time togeather,Ephe. 5. both in one
houſe,Gen. 1. 2. and eate their meate together, both at
one Table, and lye both in one bed, and
which is more, are one body, and one blood.
If man then cannot liue with himſelf, with
his owne fleſhe, and his owne blood, with
whome will hee liue? If hee cannot loue
his wife, whom God hath made of his owne
ſubſtance, and hath giuen her vnto him, for

his aide and comfort, whom will hee loue?
Likewiſe, if the wife cannot humble herſelf
and fit her ſelfe,Ephe. 5. to agree with her huſband,
whome God hath giuen her, to be her head,
and framed her out of his body, with whom
will ſhee agree, and who ſhall bee able to abide
her? There is great contrarietie betwixt
dogges and Cats, yea ſuch a naturall
hatred, as is not almoſt to bee reconciled.
And ſo likewiſe, betweene Wolues and
Sheepe: Lions and Oxen: And yet if they
had been brought vp together from their
youth, their bringing vp and company keeping,
which they had had together, woulde
worke ſome power and efficacie to diſpoile
them ſomething of their nature, & ſo ioyne
themſelues in vnitie together: Although
they bee beaſtes of ſundrie kindes, and meruellouſly
differing, and contrary one to
another. What ſayeſt thou to this
Ierome?
                     
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     Mee thinketh, it fareth with
men,A ſimilitude o
                              •
                            vnthankful men. as it fareth with flyes and ſwallowes,
who are alwayes lodged amongſt men, and
lye in theyr houſes, and yet for all that, a
man is not able to maſter them: for, the

ſwallowe buildeth her neaſt in his houſe,
and layeth her egges there, and hatcheth vp
her young ones. Man, beſtoweth houſe
roome on her, & they both ſleepe vnder one
roufe, and yet there is no familiaritie betwene
them, neither yet liue they one with
another. And in the end the Swallowe
leaueth nothing els to the good man of the
houſe for his houſe rente, but her filthie
dounge, after ſhee hath continued there a
great while, and broken him of manie a
ſleepe with her chattering and chirping.
And therfore Tully rightly compared ſwallowes
to falſe and vnfaithful friendes.Tully in his 4. Trooke to Heren. For,
as the Swallowes make them readie to
come in the Spring, and then depart when
cold weather commeth in: Euen ſo wyll
falſe friendes ſtande by vs ſo long as the
weather is faire and cleare, but when they
ſee the winter of miſhap come vppon vs,
they flie away from vs euery chone. And
therefore it was not amiſſe ſaid of Pithagoras,
                        Pithagoras Creede.
to forbid men of receiuing the ſwallowe
vnder their roufe.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     What meant Pythagoras by
that.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     His meaning was,Plutarch. that it is not

good to be familiarly acquainted wt Iang,
lers,Queſt. li. 8. ſlaunderers, and vnthankfull perſons-who
are rightly repreſented by the Swallowe.
For, a man ſhall neuer get any
good by them, but ſorrowe, griefe, hurt, and
diſhonour. And is not the flie likewiſe I
pray you, alwayes in the kitchin? The firſt
at the Table, the firſt in the diſhe, and taſteth
all the meates wee eate of. Yea, they
will doe it, although we were Emperours
and Kinges, and more then this to: They
take aſſaye oftentimes before the cooke.
                  
                  
                     Ier.
                     But what fauour find we by them
for all the benefites which they dayly haue
at our hands, in our houſes. What wage &
reward haue we of them?
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     This wee haue, they greue and beray
with their dirt, whatſoeuer faire and
beautifull thing that is within the houſe.
                  
                  
                     Ier.
                     And more then that, for they engender
vermin and corruption, neuer ceaſing
to importune, ſting, and bite vs, euē til
the blood follow withal, and are neuer contented
with all the benefits y• we beſtow on
thē, wtout they alſo ſuck & drinke our blood.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     Theſe Flyes are farre more
dangerous then man, and a great deale

more vnthankefull. I ſee fathers and
mothers alſo dayly, that cannot agree with
their children, but after, that thoſe fathers
and mothers haue waſted the odours, and
fumes of the odours, which are continually
about their children, and dandeled them, and
haue been greeued and vexed,The great vn
                           
                              •
                           hankfulneſſe of 
                              •
                           ome children, 
                              •
                           owardes their parents. and had many
a foule hand with them in the bringing of
them vp: ſo ſoone as theſe children haue bin
growne vp to rype yeeres, they would not
once acknowledge either father or mother:
They would neither ſee them, nor beare
with them: but driue them oftentimes, out
of the houſe: or els theyr parents were inforced
to driue them out, by reaſon of their
rebellion and wicked dealing. I neuer
ſaw any ſuch vnthankfulneſſe, nor crueltie
betweene Dogs and Cats, Wolues and
Lymmers, Lions and Lions whelpes. I
haue ſeene theſe Landleapers,Landleapers. who haue
lead all the countries ouer, Lions, Beares,
Apes, Aſſes, Horſes, and many other ſortes
of beaſts, and ruled them as they liſted. For,
they would make them do whatſoeuer they
pleaſed, and commanded them. They haue
made them daunce, leape, lye ſtyll, ſtand vp,
touch on the ground, make curteſie, march

march with a pyke, and winde a flate. To
bee ſhorte, I am not able to tell you in a
longtime, howe many ſundrie thinges they
haue taught them, and made them doe. For,
they taught them to doe all things. What
is the cauſe then, why man is ſo well able to
inſtruct the moſt vnteachable bruite beaſts,
and doe learne of him, and yet hee himſelfe,
not able to teach himſelfe, nor yet learne of
himſelfe that, that is neceſſary for hym to
learne, and without the which, he is in deed
no man?
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     No, not the wife of her huſbande,
nor the childe of the father.
                  
                  
                     Toby.
                     What is the cauſe then, why
doe theſe Landleapers take ſo great paine,
to teach beaſtes, after this ſort?
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     It is to none other ende, but
to make men ſporte, and thereby, get money
of them, that they myght liue the eaſelier.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     Now, what greater pleaſure can
any man haue, then to ſee his children well
inſtructed? Is there any Ape more pleaſant?
with whom may they haue any better
paſtime? And what greater commodity can
any Landleaper draw out of beaſtes, which

he ſo teacheth, then the father frō his ſonne,
the huſband, from his wife, or the brother,
from his brother, or one neighbour from an
other, if they could as wel learne of them,
as the beaſts learne of the Landleapers.
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     This is moſt certaine,☞ a man
ſhall finde a great many moe children,The Hippopotame. like
the Hippopotame, then the Storke.
                  
                  
                     Toby.
                     What manner of beaſt is that
Hippopotame?
                     
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     It is a beaſt that is bred chiefly
in Egypt, in the riuer of Nile, & ye one half
of him is like an horſe, and the other halfe
like a fiſh. And therefore, he beareth this
name, that is to ſay, a riuer horſe.
                  
                  
                     Tob.
                     What is thy meaning by naming
of this beaſt?
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     I will tell thee, They that
haue written the hiſtories of the natures of
beaſtes,Plutar. Booke. haue ſet downe the nature of this
beaſt,Whether the beaſtes bred on the land, be wiſer then they which are bred in the water. to bee ſo peruerſe and cruell, as that
ſo ſoone as hee is come to any rype yeeres,
being therto brought by ye endeuour of his
parents, that hee will kill his father, and
afterwarde haue to doe with his mother.
And howe many children, thynkeſt thou
ſhall wee finde at this day, who are

not grieued, that Fathers & mothers liue
ſo long, and thinke of nothing els, but to ſee
the end of them?
                  
                  
                     Toby.
                     And how many thinkeſt thou
there are of ſuch childrē, who bring their parentes
to the graue, with very ſorowe and
penſiuenes, to ſee their vntowardnes.
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     Alas, if man ſheweth him ſelfe
to be ſuch a one, to thoſe who haue begotten
him, and brought him vp, what good ſhall
other men hope for at his handes.
                  
                  
                     Toby.
                     But tell mee alſo, I beſeech
thee, what thou meaneſt by ſpeaking of the
Storkes?
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     I put in them, beecauſe they
are of a cleane contrary nature.The Storke. For, if wee
ſhal giue credit vnto natural Philoſophers,Plin. in his 
                              〈◊〉
                            Booke. cha. 2▪
                        
both Greeks and Latines, & to their Prouerbs,Antipelargoſis.
they bring vp & comfort their dams
in their old age, & by that meanes, ſhew thē
ſelues thankful vnto them, for their bringing
vp of thē, when they were young. How
ſayeſt thou Theophraſt, is it not ſo?
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     In very deede the Hebrewes, giue
this Fowle, which here, in our lāguage, we
call a ſtork, & giueth her in ye Hebrew tōgue
a name, which ſignifieth, mercy & curteſie.

And therefore, there is great lykelyhood,
that this name was giuen vnto her, vppon
the reaſon which thou haſte yeelded. And
therefore,Baſill. Baſill the great exhorteth all
Chriſtians,Suydas. to followe the examples of the
Storke.
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     And Suydas alſo teſtifieth,
that hereupon, an Embleame and deuiſe
was made:An Embleame 
                              •
                           nd deuice for Princes. In which, there was a kinglye
ſcepter, layd vpō an Hippopotame, & therevpon
iewbed certaine Storkes.
                  
                  
                     To.
                     What was the meaning hereof?
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     The meaning was this, That
Kings and Princes ſhould by their power
and authoritie, ſuppreſſe all vnthankefull,
wicked,
                           
                              •
                           . Crinit. de 
                              ••
                           on. diſc. lib. 4 
                              •
                           a. 13. and tyrannous perſonnes, that
would not yeelde their obedience, to thoſe,
to whom, in duetie and conſcience they are
bound, but yeelde ill for good, both to theyr
parentes, countrey, and Church, whoe had
begotten them, and brought them vp. And
contrariwiſe, they that ſhould ſuſtaine, and
maintaine, al ſuch as were Debonaire, and
acknowledged the good turnes, which
they had receyued, and had diſcharged them
ſelues of all ſuch dueties, as of right they

ought.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     And for that cauſe alſo, S. Ambroſe
ſaith, that amongſt the Romaines, the
Storke was taken to be an example of all
pietie and debonairtie.
                  
                  
                     Toby.
                     This deuiſe, wher of thou ſpeakeſt,
Ierome thinketh it, not too much amiſſe.
What ſaieſt thou to it Theophraſte?
                     
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     I will tell thee mine opinion.Mans vnthankfulnes towards God.
I doe conſider thus with my ſelfe, howe it
ſhould be poſſible, that one man ſhoulde be
faythfull to an other, when as man, is ſo
trayterous, ſo vnfaythfull, and altogether
ſo vnthankful, towardes God his Creator
who is both his Father, and ſouereine lieg
Lorde and Prince. For, howe can hee
obey a mortall man, who is a Rebell, to the
immortall GOD,Iſaiah. 40. 4. who hath both our lyfe
and death in his hand,Acts. 17. and is the ſame God,
by whome we are, liue, and dye. And therfore,
is not this a moſt horryble thing, that
man, who is but a worme of the earth, and
no man in deede, in reſpecte, and ſcarſe able
to crawle vpon the ground, ſhould be ſo vnthankfull
and rebellious? For, were it not
for the hope of eternall lyfe, wee might

right well ſay, that he were the moſt myſerable
of all the creatures in the world. And
yet he dareth him ſelfe alone, boldly reſiſte
al order of nature, and refuſe to doe his duetie,
wherunto al the reſt of the creaturs are
moſt obedient. He boldly dareth lift vp him
ſelfe, againſt the Authour, and Gouernour
of all things, who made him of the ſlyme of
the earth, and in a moment is able again to
diſſolue him. I cannot inough meruayle,
when as I conſider of this great pryde and
arrogancy of man, how he alone dareth reſiſte
his God, whome, all the reſt of his creatures,
the heauens, the earth, the ſea, the
ſtarres and planets, al the elements, beaſts,
Angels, and Deuils obey.
                  
                  
                     Toby.
                     Surely, for mine owne parte,
I woonder at it, euen as much as thou
doeſt.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     But thou wouldeſt a great deale
more woonder, if thou diddeſt more narrowly
conſider, of the infirmitie and myſerie
of man, wherewith hee is continuallye
enuyroned, and as it were almoſte quite
and cleane ſwallowed vp, ſithence the time
of his conception, and what his nature and
frame is. And therefore, ſeeing we are

entred into this talke, me thinketh, that this
cōſideration, and contemplation wil not be
amiſſe, for vs to debate on. For the which
cauſe, I am of the opinion, that wee might
handle this poynt ſomewhat more at large,
if you will agree vnto me herein. Howbeit,
I feare nothing but that we ſhould be ouer
long, becauſe there are in this behalfe many
good thinges, and worthy dilygent conſideration.
                  
                  
                     Ierom.
                     I beleeue there is none here,
but would be right gladde of it. For, it is
a matter worth the handling. But to the
ende we might all profit the more. I take
it, that our beſt way were, for the preſent, to
talk of ſome other matter between, & recreate
our ſelues a little in this faire Garden.
For, when our mindes are alwayes occupyed
about one thing, it groweth yrkeſome
vnto vs at laſt, although it were neuer ſo
pleaſaunt or profitable. Againe, we cannot
ſo well carry away all, when our mindes
are ſurcharged with ouer great a multitude
of matters, and beſides, when wee haue no
delight in that that we heare.
                  
                  
                     Euſt.
                     Without doubt, there is nothing
more certaine.
                  
                  
                     
                     To.
                     I know not my mayſters, whether
you be weary or no: But for mine own
part, I am weary of hearing of good talke,
when I ſhall tarry all day and all night about
it.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     And, I doe thinke, that there is
none of vs weary in this good cōpany: But
becauſe we may be the freſher, and followe
the matter more cheerely, I am contented
to agree to Ierome. And therefore, I
thinke it moſte expedient, that we walke a
little here in this garden, and looke vppon
the goodly flowers, which God hath created
for our vſe: to the end, that in beholding
of them, we may the better alwayes learn,
to acknowledge his great power, wiſdom,
bountie, and that therby, we may haue the
better occaſion to prayſe him, and yeelde
him our humble and hearty thankes: And
then wee maye after enter againe into our
matter. And where wee haue heretofore
ſpoken in generall, of the diſorder and confuſedneſſe
of the world, and of the daunger
wherein it ſtandeth, wee will alſo ſpeake
ſomewhat more, in perticular of man, who
is the cauſe of all the diſorder, and great
miſchiefes, that at this preſent reigne in the
world.
                  
                  
                     
                     Tob.
                     Seeing you are all of this opinion,
I promiſe you, I for my parte, wyll
not be againſt it. Let vs riſe therefore, and
get vs hence.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     Imprinted at London at the
three Cranes in the Vintree, by Thomas
Dawſon, for Iohn Perin in
Paules Church yard at the
ſigne of the Angel.
1583.
               
            
         
      
   