
      
         
            
            
            EPIGRAMME in the oldeſt cut, and neweſt faſhion. A twiſe ſeuen houres (in ſo many weekes) ſtudie No longer (like the faſhion) not vnlike to continue.
            
               The firſt ſeuen.
            
            Iohn Weeuer.
            Sit voluiſſe, Sat valuiſſe.
            At London Printed by V. S. for Thomas Buſhell, and are to be ſold at his ſhop at the great north doore of Paules 1599
         
         
            
            
            
               To the Right Worſhipfull and worthie honoured Gentleman ſir Richard Houghton of Houghton Tower, Knight: Iuſtice of Peace, and Quorum: High Sheriffe of Lanchiſhire, &c. Adorned with all giftes, that valour may giue, or vertue gaine.
            
            
               KNowing, and admiring (Right Wor.) the generall applauſe, and loue which you haue of your cuntrie, wonne (no doubt) by your vertues, ſeated in a hart of curteſie: And the experience which many ſchollers haue had of your kindneſſe, neuer to be forgotten, but with vngratefulneſſe: perſwade me you wil animate my yong Muſe, and vouchſafe to per vſe the fruites, of my not curious nor careleſſe ſtudies: albeit I muſt confeſſe farre vnworthie your Wor: view; Vnleſſe, (like the wiſeſt ſenator) you would haue

your ſerious affaires intermedled with diuers delights, to driue away the tediouſneſſe of time. Then (moſt bountifull Mecoenas) if you fauour the effect of my labour, it will ſerue you for a ieaſt, to refreſh your wearied mind, continually exrciſed in matters concerning the common wealth. And thus I commend my Booke to your mild cenſure, and your ſelfe to your ſoules content.
            
               Yours in deſire Ioh: Weeuer.
            
         
         
            
            In commendation of the worke and the Author.
            
               Nor doſt thou praiſe, a pockworne tawnie trull,
               Nor doſt thou carue a liueleſſe ſlubbred ſtone,
               Nor doſt thou fill thy page with great othes full,
               Nor doſt thou ſonnet of King Salomon:
               
               Nor doſt thou like a loue-ſicke milke-ſop gull,
               Vnto thy Miſtris for a kiſſe make mone:
               But ſalt with ſugar, honnie mixt with gall,
               Muſt needes be praiſde, muſt needes be likt of al.
            
            
               Now I am ſure thou tendes to vertues lore,
               Shewes reading, iudgement, and inuention,
               Thus writ the Epigrammatiſts of yore,
               And told the world her foule abuſion:
               Thus thou and thine ſhal euer enui de be,
               And like a Page will Enuy tend on thee.
            
         
         
            
            In Authorem.
            
               Why ſo? Alcyon maketh firſt her neſt,
               And then into the riuer lets it ſlide,
               To ſee if t'wil keepe water from her breſt;
               So thou thy neſt my friend in me haſt tride:
               I like it wel, it holdeth water out,
               Feare fier, fier is the curious ſcout.
            
            
               T. B. Gen.
            
         
         
            In Authorem.
            
               I wiſh my rough-hewne lines might gratifie,
               The firſt borne of thy pleaſing Poeſie,
               Theſe be but bloſſomes: what will be the fruite,
               When time and age, hath made thee more accute?
               Meane while how euer Momus bite the lippe,
               Each man will praiſe the weauers workmanſhip:
               When wittie verſe is worthily regarded,
               Then ſhall thy verſe be thankfully rewarded.
            
            
               I. K. Mag: Art.
            
         
         
            
            Ad Librum.
            
               So great a ſence withing in ſo ſhort a verſe,
               So great a worke within ſo ſhort a ſpace,
               So great aduiſe to find in ſo few yeares,
               Addes fame to Grant, and thee to Muſes race.
            
            
               Theſe Epigrams the buds of thy firſt ſpring,
               Shew what thy leaues in ſummer time will be,
               For more they do ſprout forth, the more thou ſing
               That th'after age thy wit may verifie,
               Thus Grant is made Pyrene our willowes baies
               This Booke the honor of thy yong wiſe daies.
            
            
               Tho: Kedgewin Gent.
            
            
               Vincit qui patitur.
            
         
         
            
            To the Author.
            
               Of Hemp and wooll our country weauers make,
               Such kind of cloth as keeps vs whole and cleane,
               This ſilken Weeuer ſubtler loomes gin take,
               And ſeu'n weeks web hath warpt with finer beam,
               His cloth diſcouereth vice,
               adorning vertues lore,
               Wherefore of greater price,
               then Weauers heretofore.
            
            
               Ed: Gurney. Gent.
            
         
         
            In laudem Authoris.
            
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ;
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  :
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ;
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
            
         
         
            
            Eiuſdem. In laudem Authoris
            
               Queris Amalthaeae cornu? num quaeris & Artis?
               Nec ſine mente iocos? & ſine dente ſales?
               Huc vertes occulos, animum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   aduerte benignum,
               Praeclarum doctae reſpice mentis opus,
               Saepe Poeta nouem, celebrauit carmine mu
                     •••
                  :
               Nunc decima audita est, carmina Mu
                     •
                  al
                     •
                  qui.
            
            
               M. Milwardmag: Ar:
            
            
               Statuto bono, ſtatuto
            
         
         
            Lectores, quotquot, quales, quicun
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                eſtis.
            
               O let my words be ſweetned in a mouth,
               (If your great highneſſe can diſcend ſo lo
                     •••
                  
               
               As daigne to view my tender-bluſhing youth,
               That twenty twelue months yet did neuer know)
               Right Malmſey reliſht: one which euer ſaith,
               
                  Good, very good nay, excellent in faith.
               
            
            
               
               Dew gracious lookes vpon mine infant Muſe,
               Nip not my bloſſoms in their budding prime,
               Theſe artleſſe lines at leiſure do peruſe,
               Only to adde more wings to idle time:
               My hou
                     •
                  ring muſe could neuer get that ſpirit,
               Which to peruſe me might your fauour merit.
            
            
               I neuer lay vpon a bed of Roſes,
               Twixt Beauties lips entombing of my tong,
               Smelling roſe-waterd odoriferous Poſes,
               Pleaſing my miſtris with a Mermaides ſong.
               Ofamorous kiſſing more then loue-ſicke lauiſh,
               Whoſe iuice might make my words the Readers rauiſh.
            
            
               The liquid waues nor did I euer plaſh
               Of ſiluer-channeld / ſi
                        •
                     
                   purling riuer,
               (Yet Nestor-old nymph-nurſing Grant wil waſh
               Hir Nymphs: & ſcorns preheminēce to giue hir)
               Nor haue I ſpent in Troinouant my dayes,
               Where all good witts (ſome ſay) are crown d with Bayes.
            
            
               
               I cannot ſhew then in a ſugred vaine,
               Wit, iudgement, learning, or inuention:
               I cannot reach vp to a Delians ſtraine,
               Whoſe ſongs deſerue for euer your attention:
               Nor Draytons ſtile, whoſe hony words are meete
               For theſe your mouths, far more than hony ſweet.
            
            
               I neuer durſt preſume take in mine hand
               The nimble-tripping Faëries hiſtory,
               I cannot, I proteſt, yet vnderſtand
               The wittie, learned, Satyres myſtery;
               I cannot moue the ſauage with delight,
               Of what I cannot, Reader then I write.
            
            
               Muſt I then caſt in Enuies teeth defiance?
               Or dedicate my Poems to detraction?
               Or muſt I ſcorne Castilioe's neere alliance?
               Nay, I muſt praiſe this Poet-pleaſing faction;
               Leſt in the Preſſe my ouerthrow they threaten;
               And of the Binders laugh to ſee me beaten.
            
            
               
               O that I had ſuch eloquence as might
               Intreate the enuious Reader boue the reſt,
               (For his deepe wiſedome cenſures all aright)
               That by his lippes I may be alwaies bleſt!
               If this ſuffice not for the enuieſt,
               Know then, I am an Epigrammatiſt.
            
            
               Iohn Weeuer.
            
         
         
            Intentio operis & Authoris.
            
               For pride with Clio Tamyras contend,
               For profit Otho, all thy Poems ſpend,
               
                  Pedro for praiſe, praiſe Burgl
                        •
                     neroes vice,
               Pleaſe thou thy ſelfe, in reading ouer thrice
               
                  Tubro thy verſe. Speake faire ye Gnatoniſts,
               
               But whip and ſcourge ye Epigrammatiſts:
               
               To whip and ſcourge, my chiefeſt meaning is,
               With ſeu'n ſower rods laid ful ſeu'n weeks in piſſe
               Yet pleaſure, profit, pride, nor praiſe allures me,
               To whip & ſcurge. But vertue that procures me.
            
         
         
            
            To the generous Readers.
            
               EPigramms are much like vnto Almanacks ſeruing eſpecially for the yeare for the which they are made, then theſe (right iudging Readers) being for one yeare pend, and in another printed: are paſt date before they come from the Preſſe, that you may put them vp in your pockets (like your old Almanacks) as not befitting this triumphant yeere of Iubile: yet I beſeech you ſhew me ſome curteſie, in hope to haue the next calculated more carefully. If you looke for ſome reaſons becauſe I keep no order in the placing of my Epiſtles and Epigrams, let this ſuffize, I write Epigrams, and there is an old ſaying:
            Non locus hominem, ſed homo locum, &c:
            
               —The placing giues no grace
               Vnto the man, but man vnto the place.
            
            Some faultes you ſhall finde in the printing, and more in the penning, all which I reſerre to your owne correction, and my ſelfe to your mild cenſures.
            
               Ioh: Weeuer.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The firſt weeke.
            
               Epig. 1. De ſe.
               NOr do I feare the Satyres venim'd bite,
               Nor choplogs teeth, ne Railors vile reproch,
               Nor male-contented Enuies poyſned ſpight,
               
                  Ioues thunderbolt, nor Momus long ſharp broch.
               Nor that I haue in high Parnaſſus ſlept,
               Or pledg'd Apollo Cups of Maſſicke wine
               Or by the fount of Helicon haue kept,
               That none dare carp theſe Epigrammes of mine;
               But that I thinke I ſhall be carpt of none,
               For who l
                     •
                  wreſt water from a ſt,
                     ••••
                   ſtone?
            
            
               Epig. 2. Ad Lectorem
               Of all my Epigrams, Reader, reade not one,
               Ne yet reade two, but rather reade iuſt none▪
               
               Then reade them all, or let them all alone.
            
            
               
               Epig. 3. In Elizzbetham.
               If that Elizium be no fained thing,
               Whereof the Poets wont ſo much to ſing;
               Then are thoſe faire fields in this Faërie land,
               Which faire Eliza rules with awfull hand:
               By BAI th' Aegyptians ſignifie the ſoule,
               Which doth the bodies appetites controule,
               ETH ſignifies mans hart, from whence we know
               The fountaine of their vitall breath doth flow.
               ELIZA giues this land the name: BAI ſoule; har
                     •
                   ETH
               Name, ſoul, hart, of this land ELIZABETH.
            
            
               Epig. 4. In Cormungum.
               
                  Cormung did wiſh wel alwaies to the poore,
               Wiſhing they had of Corne or money ſtore:
               When wiſhing would not fill the poor mans box
               The poore man wiſht, and Cormung had the pox▪
               
            
            
               
               Epio. 5 In Craſſum.
               Thou'rt medling with my hat, and medling with my ſhoos,
               Thou'rt medling with my ruffes, and medling with my hoſe:
               Thou'rt medling with my gate, and medling with my lookes,
               Thou'rt medling with my wit, and medling with my bookes:
               
                  Craſſus, thy medling hath this guerdon only gottē
               
               Medlers are neuer ripe before that they be rotten.
            
            
               Epig. 6 In Brillum.
               
                  Two Contraries more glorious farre appeare,
               
               
                  When each to other they be placedneare:
               
               Vntil I knew this axiom I did muſe,
               Why Gentlemen ſo much do Baſes vſe:
               Yet Brillus Baſes addes to Brill no grace,
               But make him baſer, whom by birth is baſe:
               Gentilitie then Brillus firſt ſhould get,
               Before baſe Brillus do in Baſes iet.
            
            
               
               Epig. 7. De Epigr
                     •
                  ſuis.
               My Epigrams were all new ready made,
               And onely on the Printers leiſure ſtaid;
               One of my friends on Sheeps greene I did meet,
               Which told me one was printing in Bridge ſtreet:
               And would (if ſo it pleaſde to come thither)
               Print with a warrant both gainſt wind & wether.
               I thanked him: my Booke to Preſſe now goes:
               But I am gulld, he printeth onely hoſe.
            
            
               Epig. 8. In Thyrum.
               
                  Thyrus, thou told'ſt one I might be aſham'd
               To print theſe papers; and it did ſore greeue thee,
               And that thou wouldſt in print be neuer nam'd:
               Thou dar'ſt not Thyrus therefore I beleeue thee;
               Yet twixt vs two this ſtrife we may ſoone ſtint
               Looke at your breeches, are they not in print?
            
            
               
               Epig. 9. De Ingenio, Fortuna, Fama.
               Witte ſcorned Fortune, followed after Fame,
               That throgh the world ſhe might extol his name;
               Fortune ſcorned Wit, and gaue him this therfore,
               He might haue Fame, but euer with it poore.
            
            
               Epig. 10. De Fama, & Amore.
               Flie thou from Loue, and it wil follow thee
               But folow Fame, and it wil flie from thee:
               Then flie from Fame, and follow Loue, if either;
               Then thou'lt looſe fame, & yet attain loue neither:
               Since diuers are the waies of Loue and Fame,
               No maruel then thogh loue oft end with ſhame.
            
            
               
               Epig. 11. In Boſcum.
               
                  Boſcus at boules his ſhoulders cannot want,
               He thinkes belike theire made of Adamant.
               What way he would his braſil bowle ſhould wēd
               That way he doth alwayes his ſhoulders bend:
               Hob, hob he cries, pox on that hob, naght's good,
               Blow wind, hold Byas, ſuccour there, Gods ()
               But Byas wrong, that oth not ſhoulders drew it
               Iuſt by an aſſe, backe to the aſſe which threw it.
            
            
               Epig. 12. De carne leporina.
               
                  Plini reports of all beaſts in their kind,
               The fleſh is beſt of a ſwift footed hare:
               It doth not onely beautifie the mind,
               But makes the bodie, face, ſurpaſſing faire:
               I wonder then why connies in requeſt
               Shuld ſo much be, when hares fleſh is the beſt.
            
            
               
               Epig. 13. In Rogerum Manners Rutlandiae Comitem.
               It's not the ſea which doth our land incloſe,
               That makes vs mightie to withſtand our foes:
               Nor farmes, nor mannours, but where manners be
               There ſtands the cittie, from foes danger free;
               If Manners then make vs our foes withſtand,
               MANNERS may wel be cald ROOT of the LAND.
            
            
               Epig. 14. In Craſſum.
               
                  Craſſus will ſay the dogge faunes with his taile,
               To men of worth he writes for's beſt auaile:
               
                  Craſſus thou lyeſt, dogs write not deedes of men,
               Then thou the dog that ſnarleſt at my pen.
            
            
               
               Epig. 15. In Monocerotem.
               
                  Monoceros hath ſtrength, but hath no witte,
               And therefore one horne will the foole befitte:
               But how can't be that he but one horne haue?
               When to his neighbour Bruſus two he gaue?
            
            
               Epig. 16. De Poeno.
               Poore Poenus had ſince ſtatute was made ſo,
               At eu'ry towne ſome cheare, but whip and go:
               But euer ſince the Clari-cords came in,
               Of whipping cheare he ſurfeited had bin:
               He neuer thankes his deereſt friends therefore,
               That ſuch good cheere prouided for the poore;
               Except the Conſtables were phiſitians good.
               To know the ſigne before they let him bloud.
            
            
               
               Epig. 17. In Felicem.
               
                  Felix the foole, I ſaid, as fooliſh writte,
               Therein my ſelfe more fooliſh I did ſhow,
               But then he prou'd himſelfe to haue no witte,
               That did not call me aſſe for ſaying ſo.
            
            
               Epig. 18.
               Aske Lygdus who a Poet is by right,
               He with harſh Horace thus will anſwere ſtraight,
               He that hath pulld his haire quite from his beard,
               And can inuent braue oths wold make one feard,
               Pulld off his nailes, and left no haire on's head,
               Thus would he haue himſelfe a Poet read;
               For Lygdus had a waſhing for three pence
               Three yeares ago, he ne're need ſhauing ſince.
            
            
               
               Epig. 19 In Nigellum
               If I ſhould chooſe, yea, for my life,
               To be thy hawke (Nigell) or wife,
               I would the hawke chuſe of the one,
               She weares a hood, thy wife weares none.
            
            
               Epig. 20 In eundem
               Dogs thou doſt loue, dogs thou doſt feede,
               Thy wife thou hat'ſt in time of neede;
               And ſtill with her thou art at ſtrife,
               Better to be thy dog than wife.
            
            
               
               Epig. 21
               One ſued for ſeruice at Florellaes ſhrine;
               
                  Florella kindly did him entertaine
               To be her ſeruant, ſhe a Saint diuine;
               This high preferment glad he was to gaine;
               To make this match her frends he forward foūd,
               If but this one thing he himſelfe would grant,
               To feoffee her by yeare in forty pound:
               He tried his wit (for wit oft comes by want)
               And brought them ſtrait within his ſtudie doore,
               And there he ſhew'd them old Orations,
               A common place-booke of ten quire and more,
               Latines, Verſes, Theames and Declamations;
               He ſwore theſe coſt four hundred pound at leaſt,
               (May be at learning he had ſpent ſo much)
               Thats fortie pound a yeare by intereſt▪
               
               But marke, her friends ſeru'd him a craftie tuch,
               You ſhal haue her (ſay they) but firſt know well,
               For ſo much coine you muſt your papers ſell.
            
            
               
               Epig. 22 De ſe.
               Some men marriage doe commend,
               And all their life in wiving ſpend;
               But if that I ſhould wiues haue three,
               (God keepe me from Polygamie)
               Ile giue the diuell two for pay,
               If he will fetch the third away.
            
            
               Epig 23 Ad Michaelem Drayton.
               The Peeres of heau'n kept a parliament,
               And for Wittes-mirrour Philip Sidney ſent,
               To keepe another when they doe intend,
               Twentie to one for Drayton they will ſend,
               Yet hade him leaue his learning, ſo it fled,
               And vow'd to liue with thee ſince he was dead
            
            Finis.
         
         
            
            
               To the right worſhipfull and noble minded Gentleman, Robert Dalton of Pilling Eſquier.
            
            
               
                  FEaring (right Worſhipfull) leſt I ſhould die altogether vngratefull, Occaſion euery day proffers herſelfe to performe more than my wit dare preſume to promiſe: and it will be long (I feare me) before they iumpe in a full point. In the meane time, take (I beſeech you) a few lines in this waste peece of paper, in part of a Schollers payment. And withall, if not a Gerfalcon, thinke yet I ſend you a Hawke, which will be agreeable to my wiſh, and your Worſhips worthineſſe.
            
            
               Ioh: Weeuer.
            
         
         
            
            
            The ſecond weeke.
            
               Epig. 1 Ad Robertum Dalton Armig.
               GRace thou (kind Dalton) with a ſmiling looke,
               Theſe rude pend lines of this my ſecōd book;
               And I, my Muſe, and Graces three wil praiſe
               Thy iudgement, wit, and valour:
               But I, my Muſe, and Graces, are too few,
               To pen thy praiſe, to whom al praiſe is due.
            
            
               Epig 2 In Tortonem
               
                  Torto hath croſt his ierkin and his hoſe,
               So without croſſes Torto neuer goes,
               (Except whenas he dallies with his whore,
               For then croſt Torto runnes vpon the ſcore;
               By all good tokens Roll a kiſſing tooke:
               And Item for, did ſet on Tortoes booke)
               His greateſt croſſe, that wil croſſe al, I dread,
               Is, he wants croſſes for to croſſe his head.
            
            
               
               Epig. 3 In Titum
               When hare-brain'd Titus.
               
               Deſunt nonnulla.
            
            
               
               Epig. 4.
               When witte is waining thus we write of want,
               As though our workes were all loſt by the way:
               Or for their goodneſſe ſtolne were we vaunt,
               And printed ſore againſt our wills we ſay;
               Lets write in want, for I haue tried this,
               Than one too many, want one better is.
            
            
               Epig. 5. De nomine in Marmore ſculpto.
               Great Marcus made his pure proud marble toom
               In Pauls Church wall, for lacke of better roome:
               Foule ſnake-ei'd Enuy, s'daining his great praiſe,
               Hath cut M. thus (‖) as thogh ſhe meant to raze
               His name quite forth of Fames immortal booke,
               And breakes the ſtones, makes all vnſeemly look:
               If ſtones and names decay, what wonder then
               Thogh death deſtroy vs weak and mortal men?
            
            
               
               Epig. 6. In Ruffinum.
               
                  Ruffinus loſt his tongue on ſtage,
               And wot ye how he made it knowne?
               He ſpittes it out in bloudy rage,
               And told the people he had none:
               The fond ſpectators ſaid, he acted wrong,
               The dumbeſt man may ſay, he hath no tongue.
            
            
               Epig 7. In eundem.
               
                  Ruffinus hath no tongue, why?
               For now he loſt one:
               
                  Ruffinus hath a tongue, why?
               He ſaies he hath none.
            
            
               
               Epig. 8. De Carione.
               
                  Cario bragges and ſweares his wife's a maide,
               A louely Lucrece, or Diana 
                  
                     •
                  ath
                     ••
                  
               
               Some ſacred ſaint in womans clothes arraide,
               And why? his children are ſo like their father:
               Yet Carioe's couſoned, do what e're he can,
               She thinks of him, lies with another man.
            
            
               Epig. 9. In Coruum.
               Now old-cook Coruus you which do yet ſcorn it,
               That your faire Fulua with her golden haire
               Should rub your head, & afterwards then horn it,
               And al becauſe you ſee no hornes appeare:
               But in thy mouth another man more ſeeth,
               In faith thou'rt hornd: thou want'ſt thine vpper teeth.
            
            
               
               Epig. 10.
                
               —Nihil his niſi carmina deſunt:
               
            
            
               
               Epig. 11. In D. D. Palmer.
               
                  Palmers in woods liu'd onely by the Palme,
               And gaue to paſſengers the ſweeteſt balme:
               In wilderneſſe when any went aſtray,
               Then Palmers ſet them in the ready way:
               So Palmer liues by our freſh Palme the Queene,
               (Victorious Palme-tree grow thou euer greene:)
               And in a wood or wilderneſſe doth tell
               The paſſengers which way they may goe well:
               (For the world is a wilderneſſe of woe,
               Like paſſengers the people in it goe:)
               Thus Palmer liues and giues the ſweeteſt balm,
               To Palmer then of right belongs the palme.
            
            
               
               Epig. 12. In Caſtilionem malum quendam Poetam.
               
                  Caſtilio writes when he might hold his tongue▪
               
               
                  Caſtilio craues, though pardon for his writing,
               That's to confeſſe vnto the world his wrong:
               Which of the world (at leaſt) deſerue's endiung:
               Well, thus the world is guilty of his ſin,
               And the world hangs, how can the world hang him?
            
            
               Epig. 13. In eundem.
               
                  Caſtilioe's ſicke vpon it,
               
                  Ioue help him in his anguiſh,
               Leſt that worſe verſe he vomit,
               So oft as he doth languiſh.
            
            
               
               Epig. 14. Ad Philerotem.
               A great demeane friend Phileros you haue,
               And ſeuen wiues all lying in their graue:
               But yet the churchyard farre more profit yeelds,
               Than all the reuenewes of your faireſt fields.
            
            
               Epig. 15. In Stratum.
               Fortie foure pence brought Stratus to a play,
               Fortie foure pounds he carried yet away:
               A Coni-catcher who calls him for the ſame?
               A Money-catcher may be Stratus name.
            
            
               
               Epig 16. In obitum pi
                     •
                  ſſimi, ſapientiſſimi, omni
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   virtutum genere cumulatiſſimi viri Richards Ʋpeheri Armig.
               How Nature triumph▪t at this Vpchers birth!
               Swore he ſhould be th▪ornament of the earth:
               In him ſhe placed her imperiall throne,
               As though mankind remaind in him alone:
               All Wiſedome, Vertue, Courage in his breſt,
               As in their faireſt lodge ſhould alwaies reſt:
               But when Death ſaw this better worke of Nature,
               And all perfections found in this one creature;
               Death likewiſe triumpht, and was wondrous glad
               That ſuch a Champion to aſſault he had:
               Whom if he killd he killd (he kild we find)
               All Wiſdome, Vertue, Courage, and Mankind.
            
            
               
               Epig. 17 In Caluum
               Some ſay that Caluus lately loſt his haire,
               By Paris garden bayting a white beare,
               The wiſer ſort affirme that he was ſhauen
               In Deuils ditch, Knaues acre, Cuckolds hauen:
               Aske Caluus, he of ſcripture makes a ſcorne,
               Naked hee le die, for naked he was borne.
            
            
               Epig. 18 In obitum Mirmedomis▪
               
               Here lies the man who whilom in a trance
               At Tiburne di'de wounded by men of France,
               
               For wading Tiburne there he got a queaſe,
               Which brought the perpendicular diſeaſe,
               And afterward of rope-ſeede tooke a ſurfet,
               Which cauſd him be canvaſt in a hempon blāket▪
               
               Well, Mirmedon was ſure to go to wrecke,
               When that red headed Taurus rulde the necke
            
            
               
               Epig. 19 In Lollus.
               The lurcher Lollus at the Ordinarie,
               Wilieſt of all mens manners in the Cittie,
               Another ſot applaudes him ſitting by
               Thus: Sir, by heau▪ns, that was wondrous wittie:
               I ouer-heard▪ and when I heard the beſt,
               In faith t'was but an ordinarie ieſt.
            
            
               Epig. 20 In eundem
               I laugh't aloude to heare this wind-falne man
               Say, that he courted (at the play) his whore;
               Shall Court run currant for a Curtezan?
               Were Ladies euer thus abuſde before?
               Then Ioue a boone yeeld, yeeld to my requeſt,
               Make me a Ladie, for his ſake at leaſt.
            
            
               
               Epig. 21 In obitum ſepulcrum Gullionis.
               Here lies fat Gullio, who caperd in a cord
               To higheſt heau'n for all his huge great weight,
               His friends left at Tiburne in the yere of our Lord
               1 5 9 and 8
               What part of his body French men did not eate,
               That part he giues freely to worms for their meat
            
            
               Epig. 22 In Coaem
               A nor Ω will Coa eſpie,
               Till ſhe aſcend vp to the corner'd Π.
            
            
               
               Epig. 23 Ad Robertum Dalton Armig.
               Kindnes it ſelfe, and Vertues vicegerent,
               Learnings maintainer, Pouerties releeuer,
               Valours bright enſigne, Honors heire apparent,
               Gentlemans behauiour, Governments vpholder,
               Theſe titls claim, theſe, more thē theſe thine own,
               If more may be, or more in mā was known.
            
            
               Epig. 24 In Vertumnum iudicem.
               Wicked Vertumnus Perylus redeem'de,
               With (Τ) though (Θ) Perilus deſeru'de,
               For Chion (Θ) though it better ſeem'de
               For Chion (Τ) for Chion neuer ſweru'de:
               With (Λ) Lolus held in law too long,
               Thus `Peril, Chion, Lolus he did wrong.
            
            
               
               Epig. 25 Ad Lectorem
               Curteous kind Reader, find my meaning out,
               Whilſt that I go the hemiſphaere about,
               My wit's in waining, darke, obſcure, and dull,
               Therefore muſt change before it be at full:
               To Phoebus or be my wit doth goe this night,
               Of him to borrow ſome tranſpiercing light.
            
            Finis.
         
         
            
            
            
               To the right worſhipfull, ſir Richard Mallineux knight, indued with the depth of wiſedome, and all good gouernement.
            
               THe wiſeſt Romans (right Worſhipfull) delighted in the counterfet gestures of Roſcius; the grauest Cato would haue his feſtiual day to frolicke in: then I thinke your thoughts intended to moſt ſerious ſtudies, will ſometimes take delight in trifles. And for a preparatiue to your mind-refreſhing pastime, here are a few pilles, which will purge melancholy: Prouided alwayes this, that litle is their vertue in operation, vnleſſe you pardon the giners preſumption.
            
               Ioh: Weeuer.
            
         
         
            
            
            The third weeke.
            
               Epig. 1 De Interlunio,
               The half fac'd Moone nights gouerneſſe did chāg
               When in the Crab the Sunne was retrograde;
               To th'hot dry Lion ſtrait ſhe meant to range,
               Till with the Dog in longitude he ſtaide:
               So this next week by theſe ſignes you may gather
               You muſt expect crab'd, dry and dogged wether
            
            
               Epig. 2 In Fuſcam
               Tell me Bollana if thou can,
               What meanes thy Miſtris weare a fan?
               So faire a fan, ſo fowle a face,
               
                  Fuſca, or fan, muſt needes diſgrace.
            
            
               
               Epig. 3 Ad D. Mounteagle.
               
                  Mounteagle, which art now thy cuntries pride,
               Vnto thy worth would I could tune my verſe▪
               
               Then Wit and Art, and all I would prouide,
               To be thy Poet, and thy praiſe rehearſe:
               But with my Art I cannot equall thee,
               Then thou thy ſelf muſt needes commend for me.
            
            
               Epig. 4 De homine in Luna.
               When Bunas view'd the wandring plannets ſeau'n
               He ſpide a knaue in Moone all cloth'd in blacke,
               Who for his theft could come no nearer heau'n,
               But bore a buſh of ſharp thornes on his backe:
               A knaue in Moone? what neede he look ſo hie?
               When in the Sunne a thouſand ſtoode him by.
            
            
               
               Epig. 5 In Ramiſtas.
               Wiſedomes adopted heire ſay what thou can,
               Ramiſts defend in Moone to be a man,
               If pleaſe him piſſe, then he doth ſend vs raine,
               If drunke, a deluge, and a watry maine:
               Come down thou man ſince Sturbridge fair foure yeere,
               Thy piſſing made vs all drinke ſingle beere.
            
            
               Epig. 6. In eoſdem.
               Frō whence doth come this root-vpriuing wind▪
               
               From the moons man, when he doth blow behind
               Snow, froſt, and haile, be ſcales in's hoary crown,
               And from his noſe the mildew drops ydowne:
               His Camphire breath doth all perfume the aire,
               Bedews the flowers, & makes the fields ſeem fair:
               Vapours ariſing from the earth his meate,
               And like a glutton he doth alwaies eate:
               I thinke thoſe men be wiſer farre then theſe,
               Who think the moon is made all of green cheeſe.
            
            
               
               Epig. 7. Ad fatorum dominum
               Hence Braurons god to Taurominion,
               
               And you leualting Corybants be gone,
               Fly thundering Bronsterops to Hyppocrene,
               
               And Mauors to Nymph-nurſing Mytilene,
               
               Grieſly Magaeraes necromanticke ſpell
               Depart to blacke nights Acheronticke Cell,
               Avaunt transformed Epidaurian,
               
               Vnto th'Antipod Iſles of Taproban:
               
               Away Cyllenius plumie-pinion'd god,
               With thy peace-making wand, ſnake-charming rod,
               And al the reſt, not daring looke vpon
               
                  Vranus blood-borne brood and fell Typhon,
               
               
                  Chymaeraes victor great Bellerephon,
               
               Thou vanquiſher of Spaniſh Geryon,
               
               Stowt Haſdruball Sicilian Lord of yore,
               Thou that deſtroyd'ſt the Calidonian Bore
               Couragious Conqueror of Creetes Minotaure,
               
               
                  Thou pride of Mermeros cloudy Semitaure,
               
               
                  Perſeus, whoſe marbl-ſtone-transforming ſhield
               Enforc'd the whale Andromeda vp yeeld,
               You Argonautes that ſcowr▪d Syndromades,
               
               And paſs'd the quicke-ſands of Symplegades.
               
               Help Demogorgon king of heau'n and earth,
               
                  Chao's Lucina at Litigium's birth:
               The world with child lookes for deliuerie,
               Of Canniballs or Poetophagie,
               
               A diueliſh broode from Ericthonius,
               
               From Iphidemia, Nox and Erebus,
               
               Chide Pegaſus for op'ning Helicon,
               
               And Poets damne to Pyriphlegeton▪
                  
               
               Or make this monſtrous birth abortiue be,
               Or elſe I will ſhake hands with Poetrie.
            
            
               
               Epig. 8 Ad Lectorem.
               Say you that I am obſcure?
               Why this is yong mens Rhetoricke,
               Owles muſt not iudge of Coruus ſure,
               For he ſpeakes nought but Rhetoricke▪
               
               Either too high, or els too plaine,
               And this is now a ſchollers vaine.
            
            
               Epig. 9 In Battum.
               
                  Battus affirm'd no Poet euer writte,
               Before that Loue inſpir'd his dull head witte,
               And yet himſelfe in Loue had witte no more,
               Than one ſtark mad, thogh ſomwhat wiſe before.
            
            
               
               Epig 10. De Ore.
               
                  Os of O, a mouth Scalliger doth make,
               And from this letter, mouth his name doth take:
               I had beene in Scalligers beleefe,
               But that I lookt in O, and ſaw no teeth.
            
            
               Epig 11 In Fuſcam.
               Is Fuſcaes fan gainſt winter, wind, and ſunne?
               She ſcornes their force ſo bright her face is done:
               Is Fuſcaes fan to flap away the flies,
               Dare they come nere her eagle-ſighted eies?
               Belike they thinke ſhe is ſome Butchers ſhop,
               Her face the fleſh whereon they vſe to lop.
            
            
               
               Epig 12 In Byrrham
               Is Byrrha browne? who doth the queſtion aske?
               Her face is pure as Ebonie 
                     •
                  eat blacke,
               It's hard to know her face from her faire maske,
               Beautie in her ſeemes beautie ſtill to lacke.
               Nay, ſhee's ſnow-white, but for that ruſſet skin,
               Which like a vaile doth keep her whitenes in.
            
            
               Epig. 13 In Roderingonem
               If Beard can make a good Diuine,
               Then Rodering is one:
               But Beard can make no good Diuine,
               Then Rodering is none.
            
            
               
               Epig. 14 In eundem
               Where Ivie-buſh hangs out ſay I,
               There you may wine for money buy:
               Yet he for all his buſhie ſigne,
               Is but a grapeleſſe dead drie vine:
               For take his beard from off his chin,
               Both bare without, and bare within.
            
            
               Epig. 15 In Fucam
               In Fucaes face the Graces ſeeme to mart,
               So like ſhe is the bluſhing roſe-red morne,
               Sure in her ſhape the Gods all bore a part,
               A withered Hermite fiue-ſcore winters worne
               Might ſhake off fiftie, ſeeing her beforne:
               Yet Fuca dare not venture in the ayre,
               For feare the water waſh away her fayre.
            
            
               
               Epig. 16 In obitum Gloriani.
               Firſt life, then death, next death was life before,
               And death gaue life, a life for euermore:
               Life was not life, til death gaue life, life better,
               To death for life then Glorian is a debter.
            
            
               Epig. 17 In Lycum paedagogum
               Many are beholding Lycus for thy paine,
               Which with their ſons and daughters thou haſt
               Beleeue me Lycus, I did often wonder
               To ſee the wenches proue ſo well you vnder: taine:
               If that but once to Learnings lore you win them
               This I dare ſweare, you can put learning in them.
            
            
               
               Epig. 18 De Daphnide Apollinem fugiente.
               
                  Daphne of Apollo neuer was afraid,
               But of the weapons which Apollo had;
               So modeſt maides of men ſtand not in feare,
               But of the weapons which we men do beare.
            
            
               Epig. 19 In Brutum
               The gallant Brutus iettes it in the ſtreets,
               Faine would haue all looke at his face he meetes.
               And leſt he paſſe vnſeene this way doth find,
               To cut his ſhooes before broad, and behind
               He puts in quills, as if his ſhooes would ſay,
               (Stand paſſengers and view me in your way)
               And yet the foole what he wold haue doth looſe
               For none looke at his face, all at his ſhooes.
            
            
               
               Epig. 20 Tranſlat. ex Martial.
               
                  Sabidi I loue thee not, nor why I wot,
               But this I wot, Sabidi I loue thee not.
            
            
               Epig. 21 De Georgio Graue non ſepulto.
               Graue was George Graue, his grauenes cauſd him die,
               
                  Graue ſhuld to graue, yet Graue doth graueles lie.
            
            
               Epig. 22 In Gulielmum Covel.
               
                  Covel thy mind thou haſt already ſeaſon'd,
               With ſalt of wit, and reliſh of all Artes,
               With Plato oft, and Aristotle reaſon▪d,
               Seeking all meanes to beautifie all partes,
               That twixt thy lips diuinitie doth fall,
               Like Berill drops from ſome faire criſtall wall.
            
            
               
               Epig. 23 In D. D. Ouerall Reg. profeſſ.
               Sad Siſters ſuted in deſpairing blacke,
               Curbe Cares vnreſt, ſing Carolles now againe,
               Leane rake-tooth'd Death is like to go to wrack;
               Of Whitaker a Phoenix breedes againe:
               One ouer Death, moreouer, ouer More,
               One ouer you, nay yet one ouer all.
               Deaths ouerthrow let Ouerall be therefore,
               A Victors praiſe of you deſerue he ſhall.
               And if my pen could Ouerall giue breath,
               Then Ouerall ſhould ſtill be ouer death.
            
            Finis.
         
         
            
            
               To the right worſhipfull, ſir Edward Warren knight, graced with al giftes both of the minde and bodie.
            
               I 
               Doe preſume (right Wor:) to offer vp to your good liking theſe ſmall indeuours far vnworthy the looking ouer of your ſo worthy ſelfe, yet becauſe I am altogether deſtitute of a better preſent, I hope this ſmall performance will be as willingly accepted, as zealouſly offered, and (hereafter) I vow thus to deuide my chiefeſt ſtudies, one part of the day ſhalbe deuoted to your Worſhips remembrance, and another of the might, in wiſhing you all health and happineſſe.
            
            
               Ioh: Weeuer.
            
         
         
            
            The fourth weeke
            
               Epig. 1 Ad auunculum ſuum Henricum Butler Armig.
               IF From the conqueſt thy antiquitie
               I would deriue, when William gaue thy mot.
               Or boaſt the Butlers true gentilitie,
               My praiſes yet augment thy praiſe would not.
               Nay praiſe would be diſpraiſe thy name to blot,
               Ne will I praiſe; or praiſe thy ſelfe alone,
               Or good deedes praiſe, or praiſes looke for none.
            
            
               Epig. 2 In Daconem
               The Diuel and Dacon both by chance did meete,
               With congies faire either did other greete,
               The Diuel would dice, but Dacon had no crowns
               
                  Dacon his ſoule pledg'd for a thouſand pounds;
               
                  Dacon could cogge, and ſo the Diuell paid
               His thouſand pounds, a thouſand more yet had:
               Is cogging then I pray you ſuch an euil?
               Nay, ti's a quiddit how to cheate the Deuill.
            
            
               
               Epig. 3 In obitum fortiſſimi ducis Io: Vpcheri.
               Sound a retrait, ye common ſouldiers ſound,
               When captains thus imperious death dare woūd,
               And ſteale to ſteele in powders ſmoakie maske,
               Where Valour lockt was in his plumed caske:
               Nay, ſpite of Death (like him) yet weeping come,
               And ſet this Verſe on his heroicke Tombe:
               
                  Here Ʋpcher lies, who ſtriuing Death reſist,
               
               
                  Dide with the fawchon in his manly fist.
               
            
            
               Epigramma
               The wiſe Gramarian reprehends my Muſe,
               Which In for praiſefull Epigrams doth vſe
               This Rule; In pro erga, contra & ad,
               
               Will proue your good wiſe gramariſine bad.
            
            
               Epi. 4 Ad Ro: Allot, & Chr. Middleton.
               Quicke are your wits, ſharp your conceits,
               Short, and more ſweete your layes:
               Quicke, but no wit, ſharpe, no conceit,
               Short, and leſſe ſweete, my praiſe.
            
            
               
               Epig. 5 In Thomam Oxburghe
               Fame loſt ſome feathers, yet I imp▪t hir plumes,
               My needle naught, Fame ſtie▪s, but yet the fumes,
               Becauſe ſhe can thy praiſes not vpreare,
               Nor with the Falcon fetch a cancelleere.
               Why thus it is when Fale'ners haue no still,
               And yet will ſhew a Falconers good wil.
            
            
               Epig. 6 In Hypocritam fabrum.
               I told thee Sutor Faber was a ſtarre,
               And that he ſhined bright aboue compare:
               But ſince he went into the Spaniſh warre,
               A rapier for a Bible he doth weare:
               The Spaniſh Cut graceth his holy face,
               His friend he croſſes with a conge or cringe,
               His wifes gowne's laid thicke with veluet lace,
               Her petticorte is furr▪d with coſtly fringe:
               So falne he is, but Stars vſe not to fall,
               He was a Comet, and deceiu'd vs all.
            
            
               
               Epig. 7. In Bunnam.
               A ſhaue-beard Barber Bunna chanc'd to meete,
               As ſhe was going all along the ſtreete;
               The Barber ſweares hee's glad they met ſo right,
               She ſhould barb him, or he barb her that night:
               What was the reaſon of this their debate?
               Or what's the cauſe why Barbers Bunna hate?
               
                  Bunna, ſhe barbs too cheap, and barbs by'th ſcore
               And whom ſhe barbes they ne're neede barbing more.
            
            
               Epig. 8. De Palmone.
               
                  Palmo, a Poet, Goldſmith, or a Glouer,
               That ſo with gloues Nans loue thou doſt retaine▪
               
               A thouſand verſes of a faithfull louer
               Could not ſuffice, but thou muſt ſend a chaine:
               
                  Nan laugh's at thee, and wiſheth in her heart,
               The chaine were longer, and the letter ſhort.
            
            
               
               Epig. 9 In Eripham vetulam.
               
                  Eripha that old trot euery day
               Wafts ore the water for to ſee a play,
               And there a withered ore-worne face ſhe ſhows
               Beſet with Rubies, and ſtoptfull of Oos.
               This water-witch a patch hath forth rheume,
               Her carkas ſhe with Aloes doth perfume;
               With muske, ciuit, olibane, myrrh, incenſe,
               Breathing out an aromaticke redolence:
               Her ſouleneſſe makes me oft mine eies vp cloſe,
               Her ſweetnes makes me wiſh I were all Noſe.
            
            
               Epig. 10 In Steronem Legiſlatorem.
               Nor do I praiſe thy heart thats ill intending,
               Nor yet thy mouth thats fooliſh and a lier,
               Nor yet thine eies, thei're purblind ſtil offending,
               Nor thy falſe tong, that is a burning fier,
               Nor hands, for hands take oft more than their fees
               Nor arms, nor legs, nor breſt, nor back, nor knees
               
                  Yet Steron giue me but one weeke thy vailes,
               And I will praiſe, thy haire, thy beard, thy nailes.
            
            
               Epig. 11 In Spurium quendam ſcriptorem.
               
                  Apelles did ſo paint faire 
                     Ʋenus Queene,
               That moſt ſuppoſde he had faire Venus ſeene,
               But thy bald rimes of 
                     Ʋenus ſauour ſo,
               That I dare ſweare thou doſt all Venus know.
            
            
               Epig. 12 In Hugonem.
               Though praiſe and pleaſe doth Hugo neuer none
               Yet praiſe and pleaſe doth Hugo euer one,
               For praiſe and pleaſe doth Hugo himſelfe alone.
            
            
               
               Epig. 13 In D. D. Plaifer.
               Was't heauenly Plato in whoſe mouth they ſay
               The Bees were wont their home combs to lay;
               From whoſe ſweet lips ſo ſweet a ſound did flow,
               As neuer Orpheus made in hell below?
               
                  Mellifluous Plaifer, ſo men call thy name,
               And why Mellifluous but for Platoes fame?
               Thy heauenly Muſickes notes charming ſo well,
               Can fetch mans ſoule faire Euridice from hell.
               Since Orpheus Harp thou haſt, & Platoes Bee,
               
                  Mellifluous Plaifer, fitteſt name for thee.
            
            
               
               Epig. 14. Ad Mathonem.
               
                  Matho I'm told that many do thinke much,
               Becauſe I call you Piller of the Church:
               
                  Matho, you bought a Deanry at beſt rate,
               And two church-liuings now impropriate,
               And ſold to Gnidus a rich Parſonage;
               (For diuers cauſes) gaue a Vicarage:
               And now hath got three liuings at one lurch:
               Art thou not then a pillar of the Church?
            
            
               Epig. 15 In obitum Roberti Shute Iust. de Reg. Banco.
               
                  Shute did ere-while the Country foſter,
               No peny now, no pater noster▪
                  
               
               O deſperate Death, how could'ſt thou dare,
               To put our Country thus to care?
               
                  Could not his Iuſtice ſet him free?
               Nor yet his Law perſwade with thee?
               Could not his honour ſtay the fire,
               Which was the credite of the ſhire?
               When Death ſuch Lawyers doth out-face,
               Then punies may not pleade the caſe.
               When Captaine once doth fall on ground,
               Then Souldiers the retaite may ſound:
               If Peeres to ground do goe ſo faſt,
               Let peſants know they muſt at laſt.
               A ſhoote was ſhot which loſt the game,
               And yet the Shute hath wonne the ſame.
               The ſhoote was ſhot vp very high,
               Which from the earth to heau'n did flie:
               Then praiſe the Shooter and the Shoote,
               Which chang'd the world for better boote.
            
            
               
               Epig. 16 In Robertum Shute fil: Rob: Pre.
               How faire yong Shute ſhootes at his fathers aime
               A few ſuch ſhootes, and Shute will win the game:
               If Shute ſhoote on as now he doth begin,
               With learnings arrow hee'le cliue honours pin:
               He le hit the white which Shute ſhot at (his father)
               He ſhootes beyond his vertues I thinke rather:
               Thus ſhootes yong Shute, if then his father Shute
               
               For him we chang'd, we need not ask much boot.
            
            
               Epig. 17 In Rubrionem & Rullum.
               
                  Rubrio, Rullus ſnout-faire Septimel,
               
               Both lou'd alike, yet could not bring about,
               Their chiefe pretence, but needs they muſt apparell
               Hir breech-torn husband. Now he walks throwout
               The ſtreetes, to tauernes goes, vnto a play,
               Neuer at home ſaue on ſome feaſting day:
               At noone, at night, by turnes enioy you ſtill,
               
                  Rubrio Rullus ſnout-faire Septimell.
               
            
            
               
               Epig. 18 In Luciam.
               If any maruaile why,
               
                  Luce ſelles her loue for gold:
               Tis ſhe may haue to buy
               Her loue when ſhe is old.
            
            
               Epig. 19. In Georoium Meriton, & Georgium Mountaine.
               Your entertaine (nor can I paſſe away)
               Of Eſſex with farre-famed Laelia;
               
               Nor fore the Queen your ſeruice on Queens day
               When ſuch a Maiſter with you beareth ſway,
               How can Queenes College euer then decay?
               No. Yet Queenes College euermore hath beene
               Is, and will be, of Colleges the Queene.
            
            
               
               Epig. 20. Ad Dudlaeum North.
               The ſparkling luſt of a pretious ſtone,
               Breedes often wonder to the looker on:
               But the reſplendance of this pearle is more,
               If laid in gold enameld with ore:
               Thy noble birth (yōg North) doth ſhine as bright,
               As doth a Chriſtall in the darkſome night:
               But learning in ſo faire and yong a molde,
               Is like a Chriſtall ſtone in burniſht golde.
            
            
               Epig. 21 In Rudionem.
               Yon goes a gallant which will get repute,
               From head to heele in his Carnation ſute,
               Slops, dublet, ſtockings, ſhooes, hat, bād, & fether,
               Red yard-long ribbin, ſee the youth coms hither,
               Who leſt his Dutchman hoſe ſhould be vnſeene
               Aboue his mid-thigh he his cloake doth pin:
               O that he had to his Carnation hoſe,
               (I wiſh him well) a faire rich crimſon noſe.
            
            
               
               Epig 22. Ad Gulielmum Shakeſpeare.
               Honie-tong'd Shakeſpeare when I ſaw thine iſſue
               I ſwore Apollo got them and none other,
               Their roſie-tainted features cloth'd in tiſſue,
               Some heauen born goddeſſe ſaid to be their mother:
               Roſe-checkt Adonis with his amber treſſes,
               Faire fire-hot 
                     Ʋenus charming him to loue her,
               Chaſte Lucretia virgine-like her dreſſes,
               Prowd luſt-ſtung Tarquine ſeeking ſtill to proue her:
               
                  Romea Richard; more whoſe names I know not,
               Their ſugred tongues, and power attractiue beuty
               Say they are Saints althogh that Sts they ſhew not
               For thouſands vowes to them ſubiectiue dutie:
               They burn in loue thy childrē 
                  Shakeſpear het thē,
               Go, wo thy Muſe more Nymphiſh brood beget them.
            
            
               
               Epig. 23 In Ed: Allen.
               
                  Rome had her Roſcius and her Theater,
               Her Terence, Plautus, Ennius and Meander,
               
               The firſt to Allen, Phoebus did transfer
               The next, Thames Swans receiu'd fore he coulde land her,
               Of both more worthy we by Phoebus doome,
               Then t' Allen Roſcius yeeld, to London Rome.
               
            
            Finis.
         
         
            
            
               To the right worſhipful, ſir Thomas Gerrard knight, Marſhall &c. ennobled with Learnings renowne, and Warres dignitie.
            
               MAny meane Poets (Schollers chiefe patron) offered their wel-meaning Poems to Alexander, whoſe rudeneſſe hee pardoned. Some to Auguſtus, which he highly rewarded. Others to Caeſar which he kindly accepted: euen ſo (right Worſhipful) as you ſtriue to ſurpaſſe theſe in Chiualrie, I doe not doubt, but you will equall them in curteſie: and thus (boldly) I referre all to your Worſhips clemencie.
            
               Ioh: Weeuer.
            
         
         
            
            The fifth weeke.
            
               Epig. 1 Ad Petrum Leigh de Vnderline Militem
               THe ancient acts lou'd Leigh, yet vndergoes
               Of his forefathers, Vnder whoſe old Line
               Haue beene kept vnder Englands chiefeſt foes:
               But if Death do not Vndergo the Line
               Of life; which now ſo long and true ſpun, ſhows
               Hee le ouergo the Knights of Vnder-line:
               And vnder few thus much I doe diuine,
               His name will be call'd Leigh of Ouer-line.
            
            
               Epig. 2 In Rufum
               Some ſay the ſoule within the braine cloſe lies,
               Some in the head, in th'hart ſome, ſom in the eies,
               Others affirme it harbours in the breaſt,
               Others wil haue it in the blood to reſt:
               Gainſt all Philoſophers I do ſuppoſe,
               
                  Rufus red ſoule lies hid in his red noſe.
            
            
               
               Epig. 3 In Stellam
               Virginitie doth Stella ſtill commend,
               That for a virgine ſo ſhe may be counted;
               Virginitie ſhe might though reprehend,
               Since ſhe with Rufus in the coach was mounted:
               For tell me Stella virgine as thou art,
               To beare a virgin, is▪t a virgins part?
            
            
               Epig. 4 In Iſcum.
               
                  Iſcus, invite your friends vnto good cheare,
               When they before invited are you heare:
               But elſe invite them not in one whole yeare.
            
            
               
               Epig. 5 In Charin vestium oſtentatorem.
               
                  Charis doth change his raiment thrice a day,
               Belike becauſe the weather is ſo hot,
               Nay tis to ſhew his needle wrought array,
               His golden breeches, and his cordwaine coate:
               I haue beene with him, neuer ſaw him ſweate,
               But once at table when he was at meate.
            
            
               Epig. 6 Ad Quintum.
               Thou askt one thing of me which I denied,
               That one thing nothing was, then thou replied,
               If it was nothing which thou askt of me,
               Then nothing Quintus I denied to thee:
               Now yet for nothing, one thing Quintus know,
               For nothing ſomething Quintus thou doſt ow.
            
            
               
               Epig. 7 In Braggadochionem.
               Did Braggadochio meete a man in field?
               Tis true, he did, the way he could not ſhun:
               And did he force great Brundon weapons yeeld;
               Nay there he lies. To vntruſſe when he begun,
               He ſtole his weapons and away did run:
               Vaine is thy vaunt, and victorie vniuſt,
               Thou durſt not ſtay till he his points vntruſt,
            
            
               Epig. 8 In Rubrionem.
               
                  Rubrio followes learning, followes mony;
               He followes pleaſure, and doth folow glorie,
               He followes goods, would follow God alſo,
               He followes Thetis, Galetaea too:
               So let him follow follies iourney make,
               He may long follow e're he ouertake.
            
            
               
               Epig. 9 In Cumberlandiae Comitem.
               I
                     •
                  't true which ſaith the Pythagorean,
               
               One ſoule doth animate another man?
               Then doth Couragious Cumberland enioy
               
                  
                     Ʋlyſſes ſoule th'eternall ſcourge of Troy:
               
               For at his becke the windes commander bendeth
               And on his full ſaile fortune ſtill attendeth.
               Wherfore his name & his al-conquering hand,
               A fatall CVMBER to our enemies LAND.
            
            
               Epig. 10 Ad Nathanielem Fletcher.
               If Iudgement, Wit, and Learning I would call,
               My ſimple worke of Epigrams to view,
               For Iudgement, Wit, and Learning, Fletcher ſhal
               Be cal'd to reade my Epigrams anew:
               But iudgement, wit, & learning ſhal not ſee them,
               Leſt iudgement, wit, nor learning he find in them.
            
            
               
               Epig. 11 In Lippum.
               You ſay he ſpendes all, nothing meanes to purſe,
               Yet for this fault moſt men excuſde wil hold him
               You ſpend iuſt nought; he ill doth, you do wurſe;
               And as your neighbours (Lippus) of late told him,
               You ſpend your ſelfe vpon an errand whore,
               He doth ſpend much, but Lippus, you ſpend more▪
               
            
            
               Epig. 12 In Othonem.
               I pray you (maiſters) do but Otho note,
               How for his lies he doth an Author quote,
               Thus he begins; Tis true yea in good faith,
               
               
                  For as They ſay and as the Fellow ſaith:
               
               But who e're heard of any that could tell,
               Where Othoe's (they) or (fellow) yet did dwell.
            
            
               
               Epig. 13 In Galbum.
               Who ſees not Galbus both to bow and crouch
               Vnto my Lo. () horſes and his coach:
               And ſaies (God bleſſe them) when they do come forth,
               And thou (fair coach) proud of my L. great worth,
               He giues him noght: here Galbus heare we ſhal
               Curſe his great horſes, coach, my Lo. and all.
            
            
               Epig. 14 In Pontum.
               This golden Foole, and ſilken Aſſe you ſee,
               In euery point a woman faine would be:
               He weares a fanne, and ſhewes his naked breſt,
               And with a partlet his Cranes necke is dreſt:
               Giue him a maske, for certes hee's afeard,
               Leſt ſun, or wind, ſhould weather-beat his beard:
               Thus when he weares a partlet, maske, and fan,
               Is Pontus then a woman, or a man?
            
            
               
               Epig. 15 In Naeuium
               Great Naeuius ſtill bids many vnto meate,
               His meate is raw that no man can it eate:
               All in a chafe, findes fault and ſtrikes the Cooke,
               That to his meate he did no better looke.
               Yet this poore Cooke is in no fault I know,
               For certes Neuius bade him roſt it raw.
            
            
               Epig. 16 Ad Thomam Holecroft De Vaile Roiall. Armig.
               Doth 
                     Ʋalorous Holecroft royalize 
                     Ʋaile Roiall,
               
               Or doth Vaile Royall royalize his name?
               His deedes too great vnuail'd to ſhew his triall,
               Then through a Vaile Ile royalize his fame:
               Thus from Vaile Royal borrow I the vaile,
               To hide his vertues when my wit doth faile.
            
            
               
               Epig. 17 In Iellam
               Thou haſt a vice if I may call it one,
               Nor good, nor honeſt, yet a vice alone,
               To come from London thou wilt neuer miſſe,
               Only thy friends to fauour with a kiſſe:
               But Iella thou doſt only that man fauor,
               Thou doſt not kiſſe nor trouble with thy ſlauor.
            
            
               Epig. 18 De Rollo.
               Perforce (Roll ſaid) from Sull a kiſſe he tooke,
               And twixt her lips his ſoul (not knowing) left him
               But then he ſent his heart his ſoule to looke,
               And her brightey-beams of his heart bereft him:
               If with that kiſſe he had not drawn a breath,
               Whereby ſuſtaind his ſouleleſſe body is,
               That day had beene his diſmall day of death,
               Wherein he ſnatcht from chaſed Sull a kiſſe:
               Tis ſtrange her kiſſe was then ſo pleaſing cold,
               When with the beſt ſhe burnt the boy of old.
            
            
               
               Epig. 19 In Ʋulpem puritanum.
               Whoſe lauiſh-tongu'd preciſme will not ſpare,
               The chiefeſt pillars of our cleargie men,
               But to a caſt of counters them compare,
               Giuing no count with Counters nor with pen:
               Nor can I count the waies he doth abuſe them,
               Though late he had beene in the Counter caſt,
               If that his cheefe caſt had not bin to vſe them,
               And craue their frendſhip, for his words or'e paſt:
               And if caſt counters yet he be not giuing,
               His caſt of counters caſts away his liuing.
            
            
               Epig. 20 De Mella.
               From one eie alwaies Mellaes teares do fall,
               And what's the cauſe? She hath but one in all.
            
            
               
               Epig. 21 In Sippum.
               Thou cal'ſt thy ſelfe Knight, Sippus of the Poſte,
               But on the pillor-I ſay knighthoods loſt,
               Yet as thou doſt for ſix pence cut a throate,
               At Weſtminster be periur'd for a groate:
               Cheate and Cros-bite, to all men do but euill,
               Thou maiſt be knight, and ride poſte to the deuil.
            
            
               Epig. 22 Ad Gulielmum Grantam.
               Suffize it Grantam that I Grantam name
               And ſay yong Grantam wil keep Grantams fame:
               Thy very name Antiquitie ſets forth,
               And Grantam proues a man of noble worth:
               Thus do I glaunce at Grantam; Grantam then
               Doth grant too great a ſubiect for my pen.
            
            
               
               Epig. 23 Ad Iohannem Egerton.
               He that would garniſh with a ſeuerall light
               Thy ſeuerall vertues, and in praiſe them dight:
               He ſhould not want that wittie treaſures ſtore,
               Which Muſes gaue to Homer once of yore:
               But wit I want, therefore Ile ſpare my ſong,
               Leſt poore in praiſe, thou count me rich in wrong
            
            
               Epig. 24 Ad Henricum Porter.
               
                  Porter, I durſt not mell with ſacred Writ,
               Nor woe the Miſtris fore I win the maide,
               For my yong yeeres are taskt, its yet vnfitte
               For youth, as eld is neuer halfe ſo ſtaid,
               Thy ſelfe which hath the ſumme of Art and Wit
               Thus much I know vnto me would haue ſaid:
               Thy ſiluer bell could not ſo ſweetly ſing,
               If that too ſoone thou hadſt begun herring.
            
         
         
            
            
               To the right worſhipful, ſir Cutbert Halſey knight, perfected with the ornament of Honor, and titles of Nobilitie.
            
               A 
               Goodwit (right Worſhipful) wil ſhew his vigour in any ſubiect, and trauell as eaſily ouer a mountaine as a molehill. But mine (vnworthy the title of wit) tyred within three ſteppes of the mountaines foote, lay plodding there this long, and now at the laſt, hath brought forth a mouſe: if you chance to ride this way, you cannot chuſe but laugh, and the pleaſant remembrance of this ſtrange ſight wil beguile the times haſte, and ſhorten the wayes length: and (perhaps) when you come home, ſerue for a boorde-ieast: which if it do, I ſhalbe ſatisfied.
            
            
               Ioh: Weeuer.
            
         
         
            
            The ſixt weeke.
            
               Epig. 1 Ad Richardum Houghton Militem
               IF that my pen were of the wing of Fame,
               And Gods immortall Nectar for my inke;
               Then could I canonize great Houghtons name:
               Til thē my Muſe ſpeaks not what ſhe doth think
               Long ſhuld'ſt thou liue in thy gold-gilded tower
               If that my Muſe could keep thee ſtil from death:
               Long bathe thy ſelfe in that thy bliſſefull bower,
               If my waſte paper could but lend thee breath:
               Yet this my duty doe not hold in ſcorne;
               My Muſe hereafter may thy praiſe adorne.
            
            
               Epig. 2 Ad Lectorem.
               Reader, this fift laſt weeke in dead mens praiſe
               I would not ſpend one line, becauſe I ſpred,
               That more then halfe the week were faſting dais,
               And that thou wert already mortified:
               Remember yet (kind Reader) if thou can,
               Thou art no more than any mortall man.
            
            
               
               Epig. 3 In tumulum Thomae Houghton Armig.
               Sicke ſad-fac'd Sorrow mixt with maladie,
               Vpon this tombe now pitch thy cole-black tent,
               Heart-breaking groanes and howling miſerie,
               Be as Cares canons from Griefes caſtle ſent,
               Gainſt Deaths pauilion all make batterie.
               In Houghtons death, Death lōg before death went
               Vnreſt, pain, anguiſh, ſighs, ſobs, tears be coūting
               Vntill ſome write Dianaes three dayes hunting
            
            
               Epig. 4 In Gulielmum Houghton.
               Faine would faire 
                     Ʋenus ſport her in thy face,
               But Mars forbids her his ſterne marching place:
               Then comes that heau▪nly harbinger of Ioue,
               
               And ioyns with Mars & with the queen of Loue
               And thus three gods theſe gifts haue given thee,
               Valour, wit, fauour, and ciuilitie.
            
            
               
               Epig. 5 In Gallam.
               
                  Galla with mutton and pottage vſde to pray,
               A month together ſaue one Venus day:
               But now her purenes Lenton meate doth faſt,
               Three 
                     Ʋenus daies in one weeke found at laſt:
               And yet ſhe ſaith there are too few by three,
               
                  Galla would haue all Venus daies to be.
            
            
               Epig 6 In Sullum.
               Thou haſt deſir'd me Sullus oft indeede,
               To thy friend Mat to do thy commendations,
               I would do more if that thou ſtoode in neede,
               Amongſt acquaintance theſe are only faſhions:
               Yet wiſh me not commend thee to thy friend,
               For I know nought in thee I can commend.
            
            
               
               Epig. 7
               My Coſens life (I heare) is new out dated,
               And all his pounds could not pay for two yeares,
               And two rich Plutoe's, for his goods which waited
               Snatcht them from me (a croſſe that all men bears)
               But ti's no matter, for goods gotten euil,
               
                  Pluto wil hane, or elſe ſome other deuill.
            
            
               Epig. 8 In tumulum Iuelli.
               Here lyeth Iuell, who knoweth not the reſt,
               Is worthie to be ignorant at leaſt.
            
            
               
               Epig. 9 In tumulum Ferdinand. Darbie.
               Be not ſo bould to ope this dead mans dore,
               Vnleſſe thou come from th'aërie houſe of woes,
               Ne dare thou once vpon this Marble pore,
               Vnleſſe thou poure thy ſight out on theſe roes,
               If to faire knighthood thou bearſt any zeale,
               Vnreſt, care, griefe, ſad diſcontent, and woe,
               On theſe fiue bells ring thou a dolefull peale,
               Volies of ſighes faſt after them let goe:
               Reſt, in vnreſt, teares-ſpitting forge be burning,
               Vntil ſome write The Muſes nine dayes mourning.
               
            
            
               Epig. 10 Ad Samuelem Daniel.
               
                  Daniel, thou in tragicke note excells,
               As Roſamond and Cleopatra tells:
               Why doſt thou not in a drawne bloudy line,
               Offer vp teares at Ferdinandoes ſhrine?
               But thoſe that e're he di'de bewitcht him then,
               Belike bewitcheth now each Poets pen.
            
            
               
               Epig. 11 Ad Io: Marſton, & Ben: Iohnſon.
               
                  Marston, thy Muſe enharbours Horace vaine,
               Then ſome Augustus giue thee Horace merit,
               And thine embuskin'd Iohnſon doth retaine
               So rich a ſtile, and wondrous gallant ſpirit,
               That if to praiſe your Muſes I deſired,
               My Muſe would muſe. Such wittes muſt be admired
            
            
               Epig. 12 In tumulum Auari.
               Here lieth he who neuer aught
               To man or woman gaue:
               And now it grieues him that thou read'ſt
               For nought this on his graue.
            
            
               
               Epig. 13 Ad Gulielmum Warner.
               Liue prince of Poets, thy affections guide,
               Where Witte attires her ſelfe in Vertues ſute,
               Whilſt Englads fame thy flowing verſe doth pride
               This be thy praiſe: Thy Albion's abſolute.
            
            
               Epig. 14 In tumulum Abrahami Simple.
               Within this place lies Abraham the Ciuil,
               
               Who neuer did good▪ who neuer did euill:
               Too ill then for God, too good for the deuill.
            
            
               Epig. 15 in Aſin
                     ••
                   quendam.
               You know (ſir Aſſe) how you did me annoy,
               To ſteale away my little tale of Troy:
               
               And asking for it, you all in a fume,
               Twixt two bigge jawes did wholy it conſume:
               To be deſtroy'd Troyes fortune ſure it was,
               Once with an Horſe, againe now with an Aſſe.
            
            
               
               Epig. 16 In Rufum
               Foule red noſde Rufus, fauour thou maiſt gaine,
               If with his children thou would take ſome paine:
               But vntill Rufus fauour fairer be,
               He ſhould not giue his fauour vnto me.
            
            
               Epig. 17 In Zoilum.
               
                  Zoilus, thou laugh'ſt but onely when I weepe,
               And when I laugh that's weeping cheer for thee,
               Then weeping Zoilus I will thee keepe,
               My booke and me ſtill laughing thou ſhalt ſee:
               Now quickly Zoilus take vp thy four quarters,
               And like a knaue goe hang thee in thy garters.
            
            
               
               Epig. 18 In obitum Thomae Fiſher à Io: 
                     •
                  iſhroc
                     •
                  iſ.
               The Fiſher did the fiſh ſo dearely loue,
               That ſtil he gaue the fiſh freſh wormes to eate,
               O then what ſhould the fiſh ſo nearely moue,
               To giue the fiſher to the wormes for meate?
            
            
               Epig. 19 In Scyllam
               By Lord nor Ladie Scylla will not ſweare,
               By God nor goddeſſe nor ſo great a thing,
               Yet ſhe commits a greater fault I feare,
               In ſwearing alwaies by her faire gold ring.
            
            
               
               Epig. 20 In Cynam.
               Nor you did ſweare not once ſince you were born
               Yet at each word you ſay you will be ſworne:
               A fault you get whilſt you a fault would flie,
               For when you ſweare not, Cyna then you lie.
            
            
               Epig. 21 Liber ad Authorem.
               I'm likt of many, many me approue,
               Some like me not, for thy ſake ne me loue:
               I do not care: who makes a banquet lookes
               To pleaſe his gueſts, & not to pleaſe the Cookes.
            
            
               
               Epig. 22. In Gulielmum Rich: Cantabr: procu.
               But that I am too poore to pen thy praiſe,
               I would preſume thy glorious name to raiſe:
               Beyond the riches of the Indian land,
               Worth more then worthleſſe Tagus golden ſand:
               But O thy vertues paſſe my praiſes pitch,
               Thy learnings fame aboue thy name is rich:
               How wel then Vertue ſorts her with thy ſame
               That art both rich in Art, and Rich in Name.
            
            
               Epig. 23 In obitum Ed. Spencer Poetae preſtantiſſ.
               
                  Colin's gone home, the glorie of his clime,
               The Muſes Mirrour, and the Shepheards Saint;
               
                  Spencer is ruin'd, of our latter time
               The faireſt ruine, Faëries fouleſt want:
               Then his Time-ruines did our ruine ſhow,
               Which by his ruine we vntimely know:
               
                  Spencer therfore thy Ruines were cal'd in,
               Too ſoone to ſorrow leaſt we ſhould begin.
            
            
               
               Epig. 24 Ad Iacobum Thornton.
               
                  Thornton well read, ſay not I do thee wrong,
               In that I haue defer'd thy praiſe ſo long,
               Thy gentleman-like parts when as I find,
               With thy graue ſtudies, all in one combinde:
               Faine would I praiſe thee, but I ſee my skill,
               Is now defectiue to my great good will.
            
            
               Epig. 25 In Ed: Wrightington.
               If ventrous youth now in his chiefeſt prime,
               To vertues loue be wholy thus addicted,
               What doth graue 
                     •
                  ld, with milke-white haires in
               Aſſure vs of one vice to be afflicted? time?
               For by and by the plant doth ſtraight appeare,
               Which afterward great ſtore of fruit will beare.
            
         
         
            
            
               To the right worſhipfull, ſir Peter Leigh of Vnderline knight, honored with all vertue coequall to his auncient worth
            
               
                  FAmes prodigall reporte (right Wor.) of your admired curteſie, and the no leſſe vertuous then valorous dispoſition of Leighs antique family, (in whoſe praiſe a better Poet might ſpend whole quiers of paper) perſwade me you will reade ouer theſe few Epigrammes, though farre differing from other wittes, preſented to the view of your Worſhip. And weigh withal well affected good will: ſo ſhall I 
                     ••
                  t
                     ••
                  ne my long deſired wiſh, and the end of this my worke.
            
            
               Ioh: Weeuer.
            
         
         
            
            The ſeuenth weeke.
            
               Epig. 1 Ad Thomam Gerard Militem
               
                  GErard, among the labours of my quill,
               Which my glad Muſe preſumingly hath writ,
               As one right worthie thee commend I will,
               For valour, wiſedome, bountihood and wit:
               But valiant Gerard, thee or thine to praiſe,
               Is for to praiſe the ſtar-beſpangled skie,
               Fame long agoe vnto the heauns did raiſe
               Thy rare exploits and Mars-like Chiualrie:
               Sith by thy deedes thy praiſe abroad doth flie,
               Thy ſelfe commends thy ſelfe, then need not I.
            
            
               Epig 2 In carum fictum amicum.
               Doſt thou thinke Chloes hee's a faithfull friend,
               For whō this wondrous cheer thou doſt prouide?
               No: he but loues ſo long as thou wilt ſpend
               Thy beefe and brawne, if that the truth were tride
               If euery day I ſhould ſo coſtly dine,
               
                  Carus I know would be a friend of mine.
            
            
               
               Epig. 3 In Sparſum.
               
                  Sparſus thou'rt ſicke ten times a veere and more,
               Yet not thy ſelfe, but vs, thy ſickneſſe hurts,
               When thou recouers wee looke euermore,
               For thy releefe ſome Pretour to disburſe:
               Fie, in one yeere be ſicke but once vnneath,
               And when thou'rt ſicke Sparſus be ſicke to death.
            
            
               Epig. 4 In Pontum
               This for a wonder many men haue made,
               That Pontus houſe ſo many chimnies had:
               The workmans skil I for the wonder tooke,
               Which made thē ſo that few could ſee thē ſmoak.
            
            
               
               Epig. 5 In Hugonem.
               Did not once thine old familiar friend
               
                  Chypus, deſire thee ten pounds to him lend;
               Sir I haue none (ſaidſt thou) ſo God me ſaue,
               Yet for his horſe eu'n then ten pound thou gaue:
               Thus for ten pounds thou 
                     •
                  t ſooner truſt a horſe,
               Than thy dear friend; & be forſworn, thats worſe.
            
            
               Epig 6 In eundem
               And doſt thou thinke thou offers Claius right,
               In cauſing him ten pounds of debt to pay,
               Becauſe that Boſcus ran the other night
               With twenty hundred in thy debt away:
               If thou canſt loſe by Boſcus twentie: then
               In faith by Claius thou may well loſe ten.
            
            
               
               Epig. 7. In Lacum
               
                  Lacus I ſaw a cruell Cappe ſtill weare,
               (O cruell cap that pulles away his haire)
               I wondred much what plague had ſo him croſt,
               That both on chin and head all was quite loſt:
               A new diſeaſe (ſome ſaid) a dry hot cold;
               Yet this diſeaſe a thouſand yeere was old.
            
            
               Epig. 8. In Portianum
               
                  Portian is taken for a traueller:
               Why? For he weares a gold ring in his eare,
               Certes and if a ring may be a ſigne,
               Who better traueller than his mothers ſwine?
               They in their Noſe he in his Eare;
               Whether then is the better traueller?
               
                  Grilliis I wot hath deeper gone then he,
               If he hath further gone, they euen be.
            
            
               
               Epig. 9
               But wodden chalices of yore,
               Yet golden prieſts were then great ſtore,
               Now golden chalices we make,
               For wodden prieſts in hand to take:
               Lets caſt our prieſts in a new molde,
               Or elſe for wood lets change our golde.
            
            
               Epig. 10 In Cacum
               
                  Cacus is angry he hath not a place
               Amongſt the Worthies of our Faërie land,
               Nor doth the peſant thinke himſelfe too baſe,
               Among the braueſt of the Lordes to ſtand:
               Hee weares braue clothes; but what weares hee within?
               An Aſſe an Aſſe is in a Lions skin.
            
            
               
               Epig. 11 Ad Muſam ſuam, de obitufortiſſimi inſigniſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   inuenis Thomae Egerton militis.
               Deſcend my Muſe into the bed of Death,
               (Embalming firſt his body with thy teares)
               And chide the Fates vntill they lend him breath,
               Becauſe they rapt him in his youthfull yeares;
               Yet ſtay my Muſe, Fates offred him no wrong,
               In vertue old he was, in yeeres though yong.
            
            
               Epig. 12 In Quintum.
               To giue a booke thou ſaiſt I may do well,
               Yet thou n'ere readſt a book, before a book thou ſell.
            
            
               
               Epig. 13 In Tubrionem
               Extramnemers or Watermen giue roome,
               For by his feather Tubrioe's ſpied to come.
               A Sculler ſir; here is a paire of Oares:
               Ift pleaſe your Worſhip, I did ſpeake before:
               I'm your firſt man; he lies, here is my boate:
               Your Worſhip lands at Pauls wharfe, doth it not▪
               
               No, Weſtminſter; O foole, doſt thou not know▪
               
               That gainſt the wind thou cannot Tubrio row▪
               
            
            
               Epig. 14 Ad Cordredum.
               O impudent! a liuing! for whoſe ſake?
               This meanes to my Lord () doſt thou make?
               Fie; thus to beg thy ſelfe, One of rare parts
               
               
                  I am (my Lord) beſide Maister of Arts,
               
               
                  
                  And: Go no further; thou art too ſhort leg'd,
               And beg no more, leſt thou thy ſelfe be beg'd:
               Yet (Cordred) thou ſhalt haue (do not deſpaire)
               The Vicarage of Saint Fooles at Steeple faire.
            
            
               Epig. 15 Satyricum in Audriam laenam.
               Looke to your ſelfe, I'le whip you miſtris Audrie,
               
               For keeping ſuch a brothel houſe of ()
               Is't true indeede? hath Sulla learn'd thy skill?
               Dri'de veines and arteries with pure blood to fil;
               In drinking cordialls fearing to be too old,
               Of Amber-greece prepared pearle and gold:
               Mandrake, Eringe and Potatie rootes,
               Fiue pound a weeke in Poticaries bookes:
               Oh ſtay, no more; for Audria I heare tell
               Is new become a bride, but in Bridewell.
               
            
            
               
               Epig. 16 Ad Richardum Houghton Militem
               O chide me not, for that I doe enroule
               Thy worthy name here (Houghton) in the end,
               For now I hope none will my booke controule,
               Leſt thine heroicke ſpirit they offend,
               Cloſe with thy Vertues then this ſeely ſcroule,
               That praiſe on thee, and it, may euer tend:
               Which if it doe I will aduenture then,
               To take a taske fit for a golden pen.
            
            
               Epig. 17 Ad Lectorem.
               If in the firſt thou count me worthy blame,
               Yet pardon me, thus Homer did offend,
               If in the midſt, then Pedo I can name,
               
                  Chaerill in all, Getulicus in th'end▪
               
               Thy fauour (Reader) then obtaine I ſhall,
               I am but bad i'th firſt, midſt, end, and all.
            
            Finis.
            
         
      
   