
      
         
            
            
            CERTAIN BOKES OF VIRGILES Aenaeis turned into Engliſh meter by the right honorable lorde, Henry Earle of Surrey.
            Apud Ricardum Tottel. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum. .1557.
         
      
      
         
            
            The ſecond boke of Virg: Aenaeis:
            
               The gates caſt vp, we iſſued out to play,
               The Grekiſh camp deſirous to behold,
               The places void and the forſaken coſtes.
               Here Pyrthus band, there force Achilles pight:
               Here rode their ſhipyes, there did their battells ioyne.
               Aſtonnied ſome the ſcathefull gift beheld,
               Behight by vow vnto the chaſt Minerut:
               All wondring at the hugeneſſe of the horſe.
            
            
               And fyrſt of all Ti
                     •
                  ostes gan aduiſe,
               Wythin the walles to leade and drawe theſame,
               And place it eke amidde the palace court:
               Whether of guile, or Troyes fate it would.
               Tapys, wyth ſome of iudgement more diſcrete,
               wild it to drown, or vnderſet with flame
               The ſuſpect preſent of the Grekes deceit,
               Or bore and gage the hollowe caues vncouth.
               So diuerſe ranne the giddy peoples minde.
            
            
               Loe forme
                     •
                  t of a rout, that followd him,
               Rindled laocoon haſted from the towre,
               Trieng far of: Owreched citezens,
               What ſo great kind of frenſie freteth you?
               Deme ye the Grekes our enemies to be gone?
               Or any Grekiſh giftes can you ſuppoſe
               Deuoid of guile? Is ſo Ulyſſes known?
               Either the Grekes ar in this timber hid:
               Or this an engin is to anoy our walies,
               To view our toures, and ouer whelme our towne.
               Here lurkes ſome craft. Good Troyans, geue no truſt
               Unto this horſe, for what ſo euer it be,
               I dred the Grekes, yea when they offer gyſtes.
               And with that word, with all his force a dart
               He launced then into that croked wombe:
               Which tremling ſtock, and ſhoke within the ſide.
               Wherwith the caues gan hollowly reſound.
               And but for 
                     •
                  aites, and forour blind forcaſt,
               The Grekes deuiſe and guile had he diſcried:
               Troy yet had ſtand, and Priams toures ſo hie.
            
            
               Therwyth behold, wheras the Phrigian herdes
               Brought to the king, with clamor, all vnknown
               A yongman, bound his handes behinde his back▪
               
               What willingly had yelden priſoner,
               
                  To frame his guile, and open Troyes gates.
               Unto the Grekes: with courage fully bent,
               And minde determed either of the rwaine,
               To worke his feat, or willing yeld to death.
               Nere him, to ge
                     •
                  e, the Troyan youth gan flock,
               And ſl
                     •
                  aue whoe moſt might at the captiue ſcorne.
               The Grekes deceit beholde, and by one profe
               Imagine all the reſt.
               For in the preaſſe as he vnarmed ſtood,
               Wyth troubled there, and Phrigian routes beſ
                     ••
                  ,
               Alas (quod he) what carth nowe, or what ſeas
               May me receyue? Catif, what reſtes me nowe?
               For whom in Grece doth no a bode remayne:
               The Troians eke offended ſeke to wroke
               Their hainous wrath wyth ſhedyng of my bloud.
               With this regrete our hartes from rancor moued,
               The brute appeaſ
                     •
                  e we aſkte him of his birth,
               What newes he brought, what hope made hym to yeld.
            
            
               Then he (al dred remoued) thus began.
               O Kyng: I ſhall, what euer me betide,
               Say but the truth: ne firſt will me denie
               A Grecian borne. ſor though for time hath made
               Sinon a wretche, ſhe can not make him falſe.
               If euer came vnto your cares the name
               Nobled by fame of the ſage Palamede,
               Whom traitrouſly the Grekes condemd to dye,
               Giltleſſe by wrongfull dome, for that he dyd
               Dyſſuade the warres: whoſe death they nowe lament:
               Un
                     •
                  erneth him my father bare of wealth
               Into his band yong, and nere of his blood,
               In my prime yeres vnto the war me ſent.
               While that by fa
                     •
                  e his ſtate in ſtay did ſtand,
               And when his realm did floriſh by aduiſe,
               Of glorie then we bare ſom fame and brute.
               But ſins his death, by falſe Ulyſſez ſleight
               (I ſpeak of things to all men wel beknown)
               A drery life in doleful plaint I led,
               Repining at my gyltleſſe frends miſchaunce.
               Ne could I fool refre
                     •
                   my tong from thretes:
               That if my chaunce were euer to return
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   to Arge, to folowe my reuenge▪
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  With ſuch ſharp words procured I great hate.
               Here ſprang my harm. Ulyſſes euer ſithe
               With new 
                     •
                  ound crimes began me to affray:
               In common cares falſe rumors gan he ſowe:
               Weapons of wreke his gylty minde gan ſ
                     •
                  ke:
               Ne reſted ay, till he by Calchas meane.
               But whereunto theſe thankleſſe tales in vaine
               Do I reherſe, and lingre fourth the time?
               In like eſtate if all the Grekes ye price:
               It is enough ye here: rid me at ones.
               Ulyſſes (Lord) how he wold this reioiſe?
               Yea and either Atride would bye it dere.
            
            
               This kindled vs more egre to enquire,
               And to demaund the cauſe: without ſuſpect
               Of ſo great miſchef thereby to enſue.
               Or of Grekes craft. He then with forged words,
               And quiuering līmes, thus toke hys tale again.
            
            
               The Grekes oft times e
                     •
                  tended their return,
               From Troye town, with long warrs all ytired,
               For to diſlodge: which would god they had done.
               But oft the winter 
                     •
                  orms of raging ſeas,
               And oft the bo
                     •
                  ſteous winds did them to ſtay:
               And chiefly when of clinched ribbes of firre
               This hors was made, the ſtorms rored in the aire.
               Then we in dont to Phebus temple ſent
               Euripilus, to wete the propheſye:
               From whens he brought theſe woful news again:
               With blood (O Grekes) and ſlaughter of a maid
               Ye pleaſd the winds, when firſt ye came to Troy:
               With blood likewiſe ye muſt ſeke your return.
               A Grekiſh ſoule muſt offred be therfore,
            
            
               But when this ſound had pearſt the peoples eares,
               With ſodem fere aſtonied were their mindes,
               The chilling cold did ouerrunne their bones,
               To whom that fate was ſhapte, whom Phebus wold▪
               
               Ulyſſes then amid the preaſſe bringes in
               Calchas with noyſe, and wild him to diſcuſſe
               The Gods intent. Then ſome gan deme to me▪
               
               The cruell wrek of him that framde the craft:
               Foreſeing ſecretly what wold enſue.
               In ſilence then, yſhrowding him from ſight
               
                  B
                     •
                  t dayes twiſe 
                     •
                  iue he whiſted, and refuſed
               To death by ſpeche to further any wight.
               At laſt, as forced by falſe Ulyſſez crye,
               Of purpoſe he brake fourth, aſſigning me
               To the altar: whereto they graunted all:
               And that, that erſt eche one dred to himſelf,
               Returned all vnto my wretched death.
               And now at hand drew nere the woful day:
               All things preparde wherwyth to offer me,
               Salt, corne, fillets my temples for to bind.
               I ſcapte the deth (I graunt) & brake ye bands,
               And lurked in a marriſe all the nyght▪
               
               Among the ooze, while they did ſet their ſailes:
               I fit ſo be that they in dede ſo dyd.
               Now reſtes no hope my natiue land to ſee,
               My children dere, nor long deſired ſire:
               On whom parchaunce they ſhall wreke my eſcape:
               Thoſe harmleſſe wights ſhal for my fault be ſlayn.
            
            
               Then by the gods, to whom al truth is known:
               By fayth vnfiled, if any any where
               Wyth mortal folke remaines: I thee beſeche
               O King thereby, rue on my trauailgreat:
               Pitie a wretch that giltleſſe ſuffreth wrong.
               Life to theſe teres, wyth pardon ekewe graunt.
               And Priam firſt himſelf commaundes to looſe
               His gyues, his bands: and frendly to him ſayd.
               Whoſo thou art, learn to forget the Grekes.
               Hencefourth be oures, and anſwere me with truth▪
               
               Wherto was wrought the maſſe of this huge hors?
               Whoes the deuiſe? and wherto ſhould it tend?
               What holly vow? or engin for the warres?
            
            
               Then he, inſtruct with wiles and Grekiſh craft,
               His looſed hands lift vpward to the ſterrs▪
               
               Ye euerlaſting lampes I teſtifye,
               Whoes powr diuine may not be violate:
               Thaltar, and ſwerd (quod he) that I haue ſcapt:
               Ye ſacred bandes, I wore as yelden hoſte:
               Leful be it for me to breke mine othe
               To Grekes, lefull to hate their naciòn,
               Lefull be it to ſparcle in the ayre▪
               
               Their ſecretes all, what ſoe they kepe in cloſe▪
               
               
                  For free am I from Grece, and from their lawes.
               So be it, Troy, and ſaued by me from ſcathe,
               Kepe faith with me, and ſtand to thy beheſt,
               If I ſpeake truth, and opening thinges of weight
               For graunt of life requite thee large amendes.
            
            
               The Grekes whole hope of vndertaken war
               In Pallas help conſiſted euermore.
               But ſith the time that wicked Diomede.
               Ulyſſes eke that forget of all guile,
               A
                     ••
                  enturde from the holly ſacred fane
               For to bereue dame Pallas fatall forme,
               And ſlew the watches of the chefeſt toure,
               And then away the holly ſtatue ſtale,
               That were ſo bold with handes embrued in blood,
               The virgin Goddeſſe veites for to defile:
               Sith that, their hope gan faile, their hope to fall
               Their powr appeir, their Goddeſſe grace wtdraw.
               Whych with no doutfull ſignes ſhe did declare.
               Scarce was the ſtatue to our tentes ybroughte,
               But ſhe gan ſtare with ſpar
                     •
                  led eyes of flame:
               Along her līmes the ſalt ſweat trickled downe:
               Yea thriſe her ſelfe (a hideous thinge to tell)
               In glaunces bright ſhe glittered from the groūd,
               Holding in hand her 
                     •
                  arge and quiuering ſpere.
               Calchas by ſea then bad vs haſt our flight:
               Whoes engins might not break the walles of Troy,
               Unleſſe at Grece they wold renew their lottes,
               Reſtore the god that they by ſea had brought
               In warped keles. To Arge ſith they be come,
               They peaſe their godds, and war afreſh prepare:
               And croſſe the ſeas vnloked for eftſones
               They wil return. This order Calchas ſet.
            
            
               This figure made they for thagreued god,
               In Pallas ſtede, to clenſe their hainous fault.
               Which maſſe he willed to be reared hye
               Toward the ſkies, and ribbed all with oke:
               So that your gates, ne wall might it receiue,
               Ne yet your people might defenſed be
               By the good zele of old deuotion.
               For if your hands did Pallas gift defile,
               To Priams realm great miſchef ſhold befal
                     •
                  :
               
                  (Which fate the Gods firſt on him ſelf return)
               But had your owne handes brought it in your town,
               Aſle ſhould paſſe, and carrie offred warr
               In Grece euen to the walles of Pelops town,
               And we and oures that deſtenie endure.
            
            
               By ſuch like wiles of Sinon the for ſworne
               His tale with vs did purchace credit: ſome
               Trapt by deceite, ſome forced by his teres,
               Whom neither Diomede, nor great Achille,
               Nor ten yeres war, ne a thouſand ſaile could daunt.
            
            
               Us caitifes then a far more dredful chaunce
               Befell, that trobled our vnarmed breſtes.
               Whiles Laocon, that choſen was by lot
               Neptunus prieſt, did ſacrifice a bull
               Before the holy Altar, ſodenly
               From Tenedon behold in circles great
               By the calme ſeas come fletyng adders twaine,
               Which plied towardes the ſhore (I lothe to tell)
               With rered breſt lift vp aboue the ſeas:
               Whoes bloody creſtes aloft the waues were ſeen:
               The hinder parte ſwāme hidden in the flood:
               Their griſly backes were linked manifold:
               With ſound of broken waues they gate the ſtrand,
               With gloing eyen, tainted with blood and fire:
               Whoes waltring tongs did lick their hiſſing mouthes.
               We fled away, our face the blood forſoke.
               But they with gate direct to Lacon ran.
               And firſt of all eche ſerpent doth enwrap
               The bodies ſmall of his two tender ſonnes:
               Whoes wretched līmes they byt, and fed theron.
               Then raught they hym, who had his wepon caught
               To reſcue them, twiſe winding him about,
               With folded knottes, and circled tailes, his waſt.
               Their ſcaled backes did compaſſe twiſe his neck,
               Wyth rered heddes aloft, and ſtretched throtes.
               He with his handes ſtraue to vnlooſe the knottes:
               Whoſe ſacred fillettes all be ſprinkled were
               With filth of gory blod, and venim rank.
               And to the ſterres ſuch dredfull ſhoutes he ſent,
               Like to the ſound the roring bull fourth loowes,
               Which from the halter wounded doth aſtart,
               
                  The ſwaruing are when he ſhakes from his neck.
               The ſeryentes twine with haſted traile they glide
               To Pallas temple, and her towres of heighte:
               Under the 
                     •••
                  te of which the Goddeſſe ſtern.
               Hidden behinde her targertes boſſe they crept.
               New gripes of dred then pearſe our trembling breſtes.
               They ſayd Lacons deſertes had derely bought
               His hainous dede, that pearced had with ſtele
               The ſacred bulk, and throwen the wicked launce:
               The people cried with fondry greeing ſhoutes,
               To bring the horſe to Pallas temple bl
                     •
                  ue,
               In hope thereby the Goddeſſe wrath tappeaſe
               We cleft the walles, and cloſures of the towne.
               Wherto all helpe, and vnderſet the feet
               With ſliding rolles, and bound his neck with ropes.
               This fatall gin thus ouerclambe our walles,
               Stuft with armd men: about the which there ran
               Children, and maides, that holly carolles ſang.
               And well were they whoes hands might touch the cordes.
               With thretning chere thus ſlided through our town
               The ſubtil tree, to Pallas temple ward:
               O natiue land, Ilion, and of the Goddes
               The manſion place. O warrlik walles of Troy.
               Fowr times it ſtopt in thentrie of our gate:
               Fowr
                     •
                  imes the harneſſe clattred in the womb.
               But we goe on, vnſound of memorie,
               And blinded eke by rage perſeuer ſtill.
               This fatal monſter in the fane we place
            
            
               Caſſandra then, inſpired with Phebus ſprite,
               Her prophetes lippes yet neuer of vs leeued
               Diſcloſed eft, foreſpeking thinges to come.
               We wretches loe, that laſt day of our life,
               With bowes of feſt the town, and temples deck.
            
            
               With this the ſkie gan whirle about the ſphere:
               The cloudy night gan thicken from the ſea,
               With mantells ſpred that cloked earth and ſkies,
               And eke the treaſon of the Grekiſh guile.
               The watchemen lay diſperſt, to take their reſt,
               Whoes werried limes ſound ſlepe had then oppreſt:
               When well in order comes the Grecian fleet,
               From Tenedon toward the coſtes well knowne,
               
                  By frendly ſilence of the quiet moone.
               When the kinges ſhip put fourth his mark of fire,
               Sinon, preſerued by froward deſtinie,
               Let fouth the Grekes encloſed in the womb,
               The cloſures eke of pine by ſtealth vnpind.
               Whereby the Grekes reſtored were to aire.
               With ioy down haſting from the hollow tree.
               With cordes let down did ſlide vnto the ground
               The great captaines, Sthenel, and Theſander,
               The fierce Uliſſes, Athamas and Thoas,
               Machaon firſt, and then King Menolac,
               Opeas eke that did the engin forge.
               By cordes let fal faſt gan they ſlide adown:
               And ſtreight inuade the town yburied then
               With wine, and ſlepe. And firſt the watch is ſla
                     •
                  n,
               Then gates vnfold to let their fellowes in▪
               
               They ioyne them ſelues with the coniured bandes.
               It was the time, when graunted from the godds
               The firſt ſlepe crepes moſt ſwete in wery folk.
               Loe in my dreame before mine eies, me thought,
               With rufull chere I ſawe where Hector ſtood:
               Out of whoes eies there guſhed ſtreames of teares,
               Drawn at a cart as he of late had be▪
               
               Diſtained with bloody duſt, whoes fect were bowl
                     ••
                  
               
               With the ſtreight cordes wherwith they haled him
               
                  
                     •
                  y me. what one▪ that Hector how vnlike,
               Which erſt returnd clad with Achilies ſpoiles:
               Or when he threw into the Grekiſh ſhippes
               The Crotan flame? So was his beard defiled,
               His criſped lockes al cluſtred with his blood:
               With all ſuch wounds, as many he receiued
               About the walls of that his natiue town.
               Whome franckly thus, me thought, I ſpake vnto,
               With bitter teres and dolefull deadly voice,
               O Troyan light, O only hope of thme:
               What lettes ſo long thee ſtaid? or from what coſtes.
               Our moſt deſired Hector, doeſt thou come?
               Whom after ſlaughter of thy many ſrends,
               And trauail of the people, and thy town,
               Alweried (lord) how gladly we behold.
               What ſory chaunce hath ſtaind thy liuely face▪
               
               
                  Or why ſee I theſe woundes (alas) ſo wide?
               He anſweard nought, nor in my vain demaundes
               Abode: but from the bottom of his breſt
               Sighing he ſayd: flee, flee, O Goddeſſe ſon,
               And ſaue thee from the furie of this flame.
               Our enmies now ar maiſters of the walles:
               And Troye town now falleth from the top.
               Sufficeth that is done for Priams reigne.
               If force might ſerue to ſuccor Troye town,
               This right hand well mought haue ben her defenſe.
               But Troye now commendeth to thy charge
               Her holy reliques, and her priuy Gods.
               Them ioyne to thee, as felowes of thy fate.
               Large walles rere thow for them. For ſo thou ſhalt,
               After time ſpent in thouerwandred flood.
               This ſayd, he brought fourth Ueſta in his hands,
               Her fillettes eke, and euerlaſting flame.
            
            
               In this meane while with diuerſe plaint the town
               Throughout was ſpred: and lowder more and more
               The din reſouned: with rattling of armes
               (Although nime old father Anchiſez houſe
               Remoued ſtood, with ſhadow hid of trees)
               I waked: therwith to the honſe top I clambe,
               And harkning ſtood I: like as when the flame
               Lightes in the corne, by drift of boiſteous winde:
               Or the ſwift ſtream, that driueth from the hill,
               Rootes vp the feldes, and preſſeth the ripe corne,
               And plowed ground, and ouerwhelmes the groue,
               The ſilly herdman all aſtonnied ſtandes,
               From the hye rock while he doth here the ſound.
            
            
               Then the Grekes faith, then their deceit appered
               Of Deiphobus the palace large and great
               Fell to the ground, all ouerſpred with flaſh.
               His next neighbour Ucalegon afire:
               The Sygean ſeas did gliſter all with flame.
               Upſprang the crye of men, and trompettes blaſt.
               Then as diſtraught I did my armure on:
               Ne could I tell yet whereto armes auailde.
               But with our feres to throng out from the preaſſe
               Toward the toure our hartes brent with deſire:
               Wrath prickt vs fourth: and vnto vs it ſemed
               
                  A ſemely thing to dye armd in the feld.
            
            
               Wherwith Panthus, ſcapte from the Grekiſh dartes,
               Ot
                     ••
                  us ſonne, Phebus preſt, brought in hand
               The ſacred reliques, and the vanquiſht Gods:
               And in his hand his litle nephew led.
               And thus as phrentik to our gates he ran:
               Panthus (quod I) in what eſtate ſtand we?
               Or for refuge what fortreſſe ſhall we take?
               Scarſe ſpake I this: when wailing thus he ſayd.
               The later day and fate of Troy is come,
               The which no plaint or prayer may auaile.
               Troyans we were, and Troye was ſomtime,
               And of great fame the Teucrian glorie erſt:
               Fierce Joue to Grece hath now tranſpoſed all.
               The Grekes ar Lordes ouer this fired town.
               Yonder huge horſe, that ſtands amid our walles,
               Sheds armed men. And Sinon victor now,
               With ſcorne of vs, doth ſet all things on flame.
               And ruſhed in at our vnfolded gates
               Are thouſands moe▪ than euer came from Grece.
               And ſome with weapons watch the narrow ſtretes,
               With bright ſwerdes drawn to ſlaughter redy bent.
               And ſcarſe the watches of the gate began
               Them to defend, and with blinde fight reſiſt.
            
            
               Through Panthus words, & lightning of the Gods,
               Amid the flame and armes ran I in preaſſe:
               As furie guided me, and wher as I had heard
               The crye greateſt, that made the ayre reſound.
               Into our band then fell old Iphytus,
               And Rypheus, that met vs by moonelight.
               Dymas and Hypanis ioyning to our ſide,
               With yong Chorebus Mygdonius ſon:
               Which in thoſe dayes at Troye did ariue
               Burning with rage of dame Caſſandraes loue,
               In Priams ayd aud reſcue of his town:
               Unhappy he that wold no credit geue
               Unto his ſpouſes woords of prophecie.
            
            
               Whom when I ſaw aſſembled in ſuch wiſe,
               So deſperatly the battail to deſire:
               Then furthermore thus ſayd I vnto them.
               O ye yongmen of courage ſtout in vaine:
               
                  For nought ye ſtriue to ſaue the burning town.
               What cruel fortune hath betid, ye ſee.
               The Gods out of the temples all ar fled,
               Through whoes might long this empire was mainteind:
               Their altares eke are left both waſt and voyd.
               But if your will be bent with me to proue
               That vttermoſt, that now may vs befall:
               Then let vs dye, and runne amid our foes.
               To vanquiſht folk deſpeir is only hope.
               With this the yongmens courage did encreaſe:
               And through the dark, like to the raueuing wolues,
               Whom raging furie of their empty mawes
               Driues from their den, leauing with hungry throtes
               Their whelpes behinde, among our foes we ran,
               Upon their ſwerdes vnto apparant death.
               Holding alway the chiefe ſtrete of the town▪
               
               Couerd with the cloſe ſhadowes of the night.
            
            
               Who can expreſſe the ſlaughter of that night?
               Or tell the nomber of the corpſes ſlaine?
               Or can in teres bewaile them worthely?
               The auncient famous citie falleth down,
               That many yeres did hold ſuch ſeignorie.
               With ſenſleſſe bodies euery ſtrete is ſpred,
               Eche palace, and ſacred porch of the Gods.
               Nor yet alone the Troyan blood was ſhed.
               Manhod oft times into the vanquiſht breſt
               Returnes, wherby ſome victors Grekes ar ſlain.
               Cruel complaintes, and terror euery where,
               And plentie of griſly pictures of death.
            
            
               And firſt with vs Androgeus there met,
               Fellowed with a ſwarming rout of Grekes:
               Deming vs, vnware, of that feloſhip:
               With frendly words whom thus he cald vnto.
               Haſt ye my frendes: what ſlouth hath taried yow?
               Your feers now ſack, and ſpoile the burning Trop,
               From the tall ſhips where ye but newly come.
               When he had ſayd, and heard no anſwer made
               To him againe wherto he might geue truſt:
               Finding himſelf chaunced amid his foes.
               Mazde he withdrew his foote back with his word:
               Like him that, wandring in the buſhes thick.
               
                  Tredes on the adder with his rechleſſe foote.
               Rered for wrath ſwelling her ſpeckled neck
               Diſmayd, geues back a
                     •
                   ſodenly for fere.
               Androgeus ſo feard of that ſight ſtept back.
               And we gan ruſh amid the thickeſt rout:
               When h
                     •
                  re and there we did them ouerthrow,
               Striken with dred, vnſkilfull of the place.
               Our firſt labor thus lucked well with vs.
            
            
               Chorebus then encouraged by his chaunce,
               Reioyſing ſayd: Hold fourth the way of health
               (My feers) that hap, and manhod hath vs taught.
               Change we our ſhields: the Grekes armes do we on.
               Craft, or manhod, with foes what reckes it which.
               The ſtaine to vs their armure they ſhall yeld.
               And with that word Androgeus creſted helme,
               And the rich armes of his ſhield did he on:
               A Grekiſh ſwerd he girded by his ſide.▪
               
               Like gladly Dimas▪ and Ripheus did.
               The whole youth gan them clad in the new ſpoiſes.
               Mingled with Grekes for no good luck to vs
               We went, and gaue many onſets that night.
               And many a Greke we ſent to Plutoes court.
               Other there fled and haſted to their ſhips.
               And to their coſtes of ſauegard ran againe.
               And ſome there were, for ſhamefull cowardrie.
               Clambe vp again
                     •
                   vnto the hugie horſe,
               And did them hide in his welknowen womb.
            
            
               Ay me, booteleſſe it is for any whight
               To hope on ought▪ againſt will of the Gods.
               Loe where Caſſandra, Priams daughter dere,
               From Pallas chirch was drawn with ſparkled treſſe.
               Lifting in vain her fia
                     •
                  ing eyen to heuen:
               Her eyen: for faſt her tender wreſtes were bound.
               Which ſight Chorebus raging could not bere,
               Reckleſſe of death: but thruſt amid the throng:
               And after we through thickeſt of the ſwerdes.
            
            
               Here were we firſt ybatred with the dartes
               Of our owne feers, from the hye temples top.
               Wherby of vs grete ſlaughter did enſue,
               Miſtaken by our Grekiſh armes and creſtes.
               Then flockt the Grekes, moued with wrath, and ire
               
                  Of the Uirgin from them ſo reſcued:
               The fell A
                     •
                  ax, and either A trides,
               And the great band cleped the Tolopes.
               As wraſtling windes, out of diſperſed whirl,
               Befight themſelues, the weſt with ſouthern blaſt,
               And gladſom Eaſt proud of Auroraes horſe,
               The woods do whiz: and fomy Nereus,
               Raging in furie with threeforked mace
               From bottoms depth doth weltre vp ye ſeas:
               So came the Grekes. And ſuch, as by deceit
               We ſparkled erſt in ſhadow of the night,
               And draue about our town, appered firſt.
               Our fained ſhields and wepons then they found,
               And by ſound our diſcording voice they knew.
               We went to wreck▪ with nōber ouerlayd.
               And by the hand of Peneleus firſt
               Chorebus fel before the altar dead
               Of armed Pallas, and Rypheus eke,
               The iuſteſt man among the Troians all,
               And he that beſt obſerued equitie.
               But otherwyſe it pleaſed now the Gods.
               There Hipanis, and Dimas both were ſlaine,
               Through pearced with the weapons of their fee
               Nor thee, Panthus, when thou waſt ouerthrown,
               Pitie, nor zele of good deuocion,
               Nor habit yet of Phebus hid from ſcathe.
               Ye Troyan aſhes, and laſt flames of mine,
               I cal in witneſſe, that at your laſt fall
               I fled no ſtroke of any Grekiſh ſwerd:
               And if the fates wold I had fallen in fight,
               That with my hand I did deſerue it wel.
               With this from thenſe I was recuiled back,
               With I phytus, and Pelias alone,
               I phytus weke and feble all for age,
               Pelias lamed by Uliſſez hand.
               To Priams palace crye did cal vs then.
               Here was the fight right hideous to behold.
               As though there had no battail ben but there,
               Or ſlaughter made els where throughout the town.
               A fight of rage and furie there we ſaw.
               
                  The Grekes toward the palace ruſhed faſt,
               And coverd with engines the gates beſet.
               And rered vp ladders againſt the walles.
               Under the windowes ſcaling by their ſteppes,
               Fenced with ſheldes in their left hands, wheron
               They did receiue the dartes▪ while their righthands
               Griped for hold them batel of the wall.
               The Troyans on the tother part rend down
               The turrets hye, and eke the palace roofe:
               With ſuch weapons they ſhope them to defend,
               Seing al loſt, now at the point of death.
               The gilt ſparres, and the beames then threw they down,
               Of old fathers the proud and royal workes.
               And with drawn ſwerds ſome did beſet the gates,
               Which they did watch and kepe in routes full thick.
               Our ſprites reſtorde to reſcue the kings houſe.
               To help them, and to geue the vanquiſht ſtrength.
            
            
               A po
                     ••
                  ern with a blinde wicket there was,
               A common trade to paſſe through Priams houſe:
               On the backſide wherof waſt houſes ſtood.
               Which way eftſithes, while that our kingdome dured,
               Thinfortunate Andromache alone
               Reſorted to the parentes of her make,
               With yong Aſtyanax his grandſire to ſee.
               Here paſſed I vp to the hyeſt toure,
               From whenſe the wretched Troyans did throw down
               Dartes ſpent in waſt. Unto a turret then
               We ſtept: the which ſtood in a place aloft,
               The top wherof did reache wellnere the ſterres,
               Where we were wont all Troye to behold,
               The Grekiſh name, and their tentes alſo.
               With inſtrumentes of iron gan we pick,
               To ſeke where we might finde the ioyning ſhronk
               From that high ſcat: which we razed, and threw down.
               Which falling gaue fourthwith a ruſhing ſound,
               And large in breadth on Grekiſh routes it light.
               But ſone an other ſort ſtept in theyr ſtede.
               No ſtone vnthrown, nor yet no dart vncaſt
            
            
               Before the gate ſtood Pyrthus, in the porche,
               Reioyſing in his dartes, with glittring armes,
               Like to the adder with venimous herbes fed,
               
                  Whom cold winter all boine hid vnder ground,
               And ſhining bright when ſhe her ſlough had ſlong
               Her ſlipper back doth rowle with forked tong,
               And raiſed breſt, lift vp againſt the ſun.
               With that together came great Periphas,
               Aut omedon eke that guided had ſomtime
               A chilles horſe, now Pyrrhus armure bare.
               And eke with him the warlike Scyrian youth
               Aſſay
                     •
                  d the houſe, and threw flame to the top.
               And he an axe before the formeſt raught:
               Wherwith he gan the ſtrong gates hew, and break.
               From whens he bet the ſtaples out of braſſe:
               He brake the barres, and through the timber pearſt
               So large a hole, wherby they might diſcerne
               The houſe, the court, and ſecret chambers eke
               Of Priamus, and auncient kings of Troy,
               And armed foes in thentrie of the gate.
            
            
               But the palace within confounded was
               With wayling, and with rufull ſhrikes and cryes.
               The hollow halles did howle of womens plaint.
               The clamor ſtrake vp to the golden ſterres.
               The frayd mothers, wandring through the wide houſe.
               Embracing pillers, did them hold and kiſſe.
               Pyrrhus aſſaileth with his fathers might,
               Whom the cloſures ne kepers might hold out.
               With often puſhed ram the gate did ſhake.
               The poſtes beat down remoued from their hookes.
               By force they made the way, and thentrie brake.
               And now the Grekes let in, the formeſt ſlew:
               And the large palace with ſoldiars gan to fill.
               Not ſo fercely doth ouerflow the feldes
               The foming flood, that brekes out of his bankes:
               Whoes rage of waters beares away what heapes
               Stand in his way, the coates, and eke the herdes:
               As in thentrie of ſlaughter furious
               I ſaw Pyrrhus, and either Atrides.
            
            
               There Hecuba I ſaw with a hundred moe
               Of her ſons wyues, and Priam at the altar,
               Sprinkling with blood his flame of ſacrifice.
               F
                     ••
                  tie bed chambers of his childrens wyues,
               With loſſe of ſo great hope of his ofſpring,
               
                  The pillers eke proudly beſet with gold,
               And with the ſpoiles of other nations.
               Fell to the ground: and whatſo that with flame
               Untouched was, the Grekes did all poſſeſſe.
            
            
               Parcaſe yow wold aſk what was Priams fate.
               When of his taken town he ſaw the chaunce,
               And the gates of his palace beaten down,
               His foes amid his ſecret chambers eke:
               Thold man in vaine did on his ſholders then,
               Trembling for age, his curace long diſuſed:
               His booteleſſe ſwerd he girded him about:
               And ran amid his foes, redy to dye.
               Amid the court vnder the heuen all bare
               A great altar there ſtood, by which there grew
               An old laurel tree bowing therunto,
               Which with his ſhadow did embrace the Gods.
               Here Hecuba, with her yong daughters all,
               About the altar ſwarmed were in vaine:
               Like Doues, that flock together in the ſtorme:
               The ſtatues of the Gods embracing faſt.
               But when ſhe ſaw Priam had taken there
               His armure, like as though he had ben yong:
               What furious thought, my wretched ſpouſe, (quod ſhe)
               Did moue thee now ſuch wepons for to weld?
               Why haſteſt thow? This time doth not require
               Such ſuccor, ne yet ſuch defenders now.
               No, though Hector my ſon were here againe.
               Come hether: this altar ſhall ſaue vs all:
               Or we ſhall dye together. Thus ſhe ſayd.
               Wherwith ſhe drew him back to her, and ſet
               The aged man down in the holy ſeat.
            
            
               But loe Polites, one of Priams ſons,
               Eſcaped from the ſlaughter of Pyrthus,
               Comes fleing through the wepons of his foes,
               Searching all wounded the long galleries.
               And the voyd courtes: whom Pyrrhus all in rage
               Followed faſt, to reache a mortal wound:
               And now in hand wellnere ſtrikes with his ſpere.
               Who fleing fourth, till he came now in ſight
               Of his parentes, before their face fell down,
               Yelding the ghoſt, with flowing ſtreames of blood.
               
                  Priamus then, although he were half ded,
               Might not kepe in his wrath, nor yet his words:
               But cryeth out: for this thy wicked work,
               And boldneſſe eke ſuch thing to enterpriſe,
               If in the heauens any iuſtice be,
               That of ſuch things takes any care or kepe,
               According thankes the Gods may yeld to thee,
               And ſend thee eke thy iuſt deſerued hyre,
               That made me ſee the ſlaughter of my childe,
               And with his blood defile the fathers face.
               But he, by whom thow fainſt thy ſelf begot,
               A chilles was to Priam not ſo ſtern.
               For loe he, tendring my moſt humble ſute,
               The right, and faith, my Hectors bloodleſſe corps
               Rendred, for to be layd in ſepulture,
               And ſent me to my kingdome home againe.
               Thus ſayd the aged man: and therewithall
               Forceleſſe he caſt his weake vnweldy dart.
               Which repu
                     •
                  ſt from the braſſe, where it gaue dint,
               Without ſound hong vainly in the ſhieldes boſſe.
               Quod Pyrrhus, then thow ſhalt this thing report.
               On meſſage to Pelide my father go:
               Shew vnto him my cruel dedes, and how
               Neoptolem is ſwarued out of kinde.
               Now ſhalt thou dye, quod he. And with that word
               At the altar him trembling gan he draw,
               Wallowing through the blodſhed of his ſon:
               And his lefthand all claſped in his heare,
               With his right arme drewe fourth his ſhining ſword.
               Which in his ſide he thruſt vp to the hilts.
               Of Priamus this was the ſatal fine,
               The wofull end that was alotted him.
               When he had ſeen his palace all on fiame,
               With ruine of his Troyan turrets eke,
               That royal prince of A
                     •
                  ie, which of late
               Reignd ouer ſo many peoples and realmes,
               Like a great ſtock now neth on the ſhore:
               His hed and ſholders parred ben in twaine:
               A body now without renome, and same.
            
            
               Then firſt in me entred the griſly feare.
               Diſmayd I was Wherwith came to my minde
               
                  The image eke of my dere father, when
               I thus beheld the king of equal age
               Yeld vp the ſprite with wounds ſo cruelly.
               Then thought I of Creuſa left alone:
               And of my houſe in danger of the ſpoile:
               And the eſtate of yong Julus eke.
               I looked back to ſeke what nomber then
               I might diſcern about me of my feeres.
               But weried they had left me all alone.
               Some to the ground were lopen from aboue:
               Some in the flame their irked bodies caſt.
            
            
               There was no moe but I left of them all:
               When that I ſaw in Ueſtaes temple ſit
               Dame Helen, lurking in a ſecret place:
               (Such light the flame did giue as I went by,
               While here and there I caſt mine eyen about)
               For ſhe in dred▪ leaſt that the Troians ſhold
               Reuenge on her the ruine of their walles,
               And of the Grekes the cruel wrekes alſo,
               The fur
                     •
                  e eke of her forſaken make,
               The common bane of Troy, and eke of Grece,
               Hareful ſhe ſate beſide the altars hid.
               Then boyld my breſt with flame, and burning wrath,
               To reuenge my town vnto ſuch ruine brought.
               With worthy peines on her to work my will.
               Thought I: Shall ſhe paſſe to the land of Spart
               All ſafe, and ſee Mycene her natiue land,
               And like a Duene returne with victorie
               Home to her ſpouſe, her parentes, and children,
               Folowed with a traine of Troyan maides,
               And ſerued with a band of Phrigian ſlaues,
               And Prtam eke with iron murdred thus,
               And Troy town conſumed all with flame,
               Whoes ſhore nath ben ſo oſt forbathed in blood?
               No no: for though on women the reuenge
               Unſemely is, ſuch conqueſt hath no fame:
               To geue an end vnto ſuch miſchief yet
               My iuſt reuenge ſhal merit worthy praiſe,
               And quiet eke my minde, for to be wroke
               On her which was the cauſer of this flame,
               And ſatiſfie the 
                     •
                  nder of my feers.
            
            
               
               With furious minde while I did argue thus,
               My bleſſed mother then appeard to me,
               Whom erſt ſo bright mine eyes had neuer ſeen,
               And with pure light ſhe gliſtred in the night,
               Diſcloſing her in forme a Goddeſſe like,
               As ſhe doth ſeme to ſuch as dwell in heuen.
               My right hand then ſhe toke, and held it faſt,
               And with her roſie lips thus did ſhe ſay.
               Son, what furie hath thus prouoked thee
               To ſuch vntamed wrath? what rageſt thow?
               Or where is now become the care of vs?
               Wilt thow not firſt go ſee where thow haſt left
               Anchiſes thy father fordone with age?
               Doth Creuſa liue, and Aſcanius thy ſon?
               Whom now the Grekiſh bands haue round beſet:
               And, were they not defenſed by my cure,
               Flame had them raught and enmies ſwerd ere this.
               Not Helens beautie hatefull vnto thee,
               Nor blamed Parts yet, but the Gods wrath
               Reft yow this wealth, and ouerthrew your town▪
               
               Behold (and I ſhall now the cloude remoue,
               Which ouercaſt thy mortal ſight doth dim,
               Whoes moiſture doth obſcure allthinges about:
               And fere not thow to do thy mothers will,
               Nor her aduiſe refuſe thow to performe.)
               Here where thow ſeeſt the turrets ouer thrown,
               Stone bet from ſtone, ſmoke riſing mixt with duſt,
               Neptunus there ſhakes with his mace the walles,
               And eke the looſe foundations of the ſame,
               And ouer whelms the whole town from his ſeat:
               And cruell Juno with the formeſt here
               Doth kepe the gate that Scea cleped is,
               Nere wood for wrath, whereas ſhe ſtandes, and calls
               In harneſſe bright the Grekes out of their ſhips.
               And in the turrets hye behold where ſtandes
               Bright ſhining Pallas, all in warlike wede,
               And with her ſhield where Gorgons hed apperes:
               And Jupiter my father diſtributes
               Auayling ſtrength, and courage to the Grekes.
               Yet ouermore, againſt the Troyan powr,
               He doth prouoke the reſt of all the Gods,
               
                  Flee then my ſon, and geue this trauail end.
               Ne ſhall I thee forſake, in ſauegard till
               I haue thee brought vnto thy fathers gate.
               This did ſhe ſay: and therwith gan ſhe hide
               Herſelf in ſhadow of the cloſe night.
            
            
               Then dredfull figures gan appere to me,
               And great Gods eke agreued with our town.
               I ſaw Troye fall down in burning gledes,
               Neptunus town clene razed from the ſoil:
               Like as the elm forgrown in mountaines hye,
               Round hewen with are, that huſbandmen
               With thick aſſaultes ſtriue to teare vp, doth threat▪
               
               And hackt beneath trembling doth bend his top,
               Till yold with ſtrokes, geuing the latter crack,
               Rent from the heighth, with ruine it doth fall.
            
            
               With this I went, and gurded by a God
               I paſſed through my foes, and eke the flame:
               Their wepons, and the fire eke gaue me place.
               And when that I was come before the gates,
               And auncient building of my fathers houſe:
               My father, whom I hoped to conuey
               To the next hils, and did him thearto treat,
               Refuſed either to prolong his life,
               Or bide exile after the fall of Troy.
               All ye (quod he) in whom yong blood is freſh,
               Whoſe ſtrength remaines entier and in full powr,
               Take ye your flight.
               For if the Gods my life wold haue proroged,
               They had reſerued for me this wonning place.
               It was enough (alas) and eke to much,
               To ſee the town of Troy thus razed ones,
               To haue liued after the citee taken.
               When ye haue ſayd, this corps layd out forſake.
               My hand ſhall ſeke my death, and pitie ſhal
               Mine enmies moue, or els hope of my ſpoile.
               As for my graue, I wey the loſſe but light:
               For I my yeres diſdainfull to the Gods
               Haue 
                     ••
                  ngred fourth, vnable to all nedes,
               Sins that the ſire of Gods and king of men
               Strake me with thonder, and with leuening blaſt.
               Such things he gan reherſe, thus firmly bent.
               
                  But we beſprent with teres, my tender ſon,
               And eke my ſwete Creuſa, with the reſt
               Of the houſhold, my father gan beſeche,
               No
                     •
                   ſo with him to periſh all at ones,
               Nor ſo to yeld vnto the cruel fate.
               Which he refuſed, and ſtack to his entent.
            
            
               Driuen I was to harneſſe then againe,
               Miſerably my death for to deſire.
               For what aduiſe or other hope was left?
               Father, thoughtſt thow that I may ones remoue
               (Quod I) a foote, and leaue thee here behinde?
               May ſuch a wrong paſſe from a fathers mouth?
               If Gods will be, that nothing here be ſaued
               Of this great town, and thy minde bent to ioyne
               Both thee and thine to ruine of this town:
               The way is plame this death for to atteine.
               Pyrrhus ſhall come beſprent with Priams blood,
               That gored the ſon before the fathers face,
               And ſlew the father at the altar eke.
               O ſacred mother was it then for this,
               That you me led through flame and wepons ſharp,
               That I might in my ſecret chaumber ſee
               Mine enmies: and Aſcanius my ſon,
               My father, with Creuſa my ſwete wife,
               Murdred alas the one in thothers blood?
               Why ſeruants then, bring me my armes againe.
               The latter day vs vanquiſhed doth call.
               Render me now to the Grekes ſight againe:
               And let me ſee the fight begon of new.
               We ſhall not all vnwroken dye this day.
            
            
               About me then I girt my ſwerd again,
               And eke my ſhield on my left ſholder caſt,
               And bent me ſo to ruſh out of the houſe.
               Lo in my gate my ſpouſe claſping my feet,
               Foregainſt his father yong Julus ſet.
               If thow wilt go (quod ſhe) and ſpill thy ſelf,
               Take vs with thee in all that may betide.
               But as expert if thow in armes haue ſet
               Yet any hope, then firſt this houſe defend,
               Whearas thy ſon, and eke thy father dere,
               And I ſomtime thine owne dere wife, ar left.
               
                  Her ſhrill loud voice with plaint thus filld the houſe,
               When that a ſodein monſtrous matuel ſell.
               For in their ſight, and woefull parents armes,
               Behold a light out of the butten ſprang
               That in tip of Julus cap did ſtand:
               With gentle touch whoes harmleſſe flame did ſhine,
               Upon his heate, about his temples ſpred.
               And we afraid trembling for dredfull fere
               bet out the fire from his blaſing treſſe,
               And with water gan quench the ſacred flame.
               Anchiſes glad his eyen lift to the ſterres:
               With handes his voice to heauen thus he bent.
               If by praier, (alnughty Jupiter),
               Inclined thou mayſt be, beholde vs then
               Of ruth: at leaſt if we ſo much deſerue.
               Graunt eke thine ayd ſather, confirm this thing.
               Scarſe had the old man ſaid, when that the heuens
               With fodein noiſe thondred on the left hand.
               Out of the ſkie by the dark night there fell
               A blaſing ſterre, dragging a brand or flame:
               Which with much light gliding on the houſe top
               In the foreſt of Ida hid her beames.
               The which full bright cendleing a furrow ſhone,
               By a long tract appointing vs the way.
               And round about of brimſtone roſe a fume.
               My father vanquiſt, then beheld the ſkies,
               Spake to the Gods, and tholly ſterre adored
               Now, now (quod he) no longer I abide.
               Felow I ſhall where ye me guide at hand.
               O natiue Gods, your familie defend
               Preſerue your liue. this warning comes of you,
               And Troy ſtands in your protection now
               Now geue I place, and wherſo that thou goe
               Refuſe I not my ſonne, to be thy feer.
            
            
               This did he ſay: and by that time more clere
               The cracking flame was heard throughout the walles,
               And more and more the burning heat drew nere.
               Why then haue done, my father dere, (quod I)
               Beſtride my neck fourth with, and ſit theron,
               And I ſhal with my ſholders thee ſuſteme:
               He ſhal this labor do me any dere.
               
                  What ſo bet
                     •
                  de, come perill, come welfare,
               Like to vs both and common there ſhal be.
               Yong Julus ſhall be are me company:
               And my wife ſhal follow far of my ſteppes,
               Now ye my ſeruantes, mark well what I ſay.
               Without the rown ye ſhall find, on an hill
               An old temple there, ſtandes wheras ſomtime
               Worſhip was don to Ceres the Goddeſſe.
               Biſide which growes an aged cipreſſe tree,
               Preſerued long by our forefathers zele.
               Behind which place let vs together mete.
               And thou father receiue into thy handes
               The reliques all, and the Gods of the land:
               The which it were not lawfull I ſhould touch,
               That come but late from ſlaughter and bloodſhed,
               Till I be waſhed in the running flood.
               When I had ſayd theſe wordes, my ſholders brode,
               And laied neck with garmentes gan I ſpred,
               And theron caſt a yellow lions ſkin,
               And therupon my burden I receiue.
               Yong Julus, claſped in my right hand,
               Followeth me faſt with vnegal pace:
               And at my back my wife. Thus did we paſſe,
               By places ſhadowed moſt with the night.
               And me, whom late the dart which enemies threw,
               Nor preaſſe of Argiue routes could make amazde,
               Eche whiſpring wind hath power now to fray,
               And euery ſound to moue my doutfull mind:
               So much I dred my burden, and my feer,
            
            
               And now we gan draw nere vnto the gate,
               Right well eſcapte the daunger, as me thought:
               When that at hand a ſound of feet we heard.
               My father then, gazing throughout the dark,
               Cried on me: flee, ſon: they ar at hand.
               With that bright ſheldes, and ſhene armours I ſaw,
               But then I knowe not what vnfrendly God
               My trobled wit from me biraft for fere.
               For while I can by the moſt ſecret ſtretes,
               Eſchuing ſtill the common haunted track,
               From me catif alas bereued was
               Creuſa then my ſpouſe, I wote not how:
               
                  Whether by fate, or miſſing of the way,
               Or that ſhe was by werineſſe reteind.
               But neuer ſithe theſe eies might her behold:
               Nor did I yet perceiue that ſhe was loſt:
               Ne neuer backward turned I my mind,
               Till we came to the hill, whetas there ſtood
               The old temple dedicate to Ceres.
            
            
               And when that we were there aſſembled all,
               She was only away deceiuing vs
               Her ſpouſe, her ſon, and all held compainie.
               What God, or man 
                     ••
                  d I not then accuſe,
               Nere wood for 
                     •
                  re
                     •
                  or what more cruell chaunce
               Did hap to me, in all Troies ouerthrow?
               A ſcanius to my feeres I then betoke,
               With Anchiſes and eke the Troian Gods,
               And left them hid within a valley depe.
               And to the town I gan me hye againe,
               Clad in bright armes, and bent for to renew
               Auentures paſt, to ſearch throughout the town,
               And yeld my hed to perils ones againe,
               And firſt the walles and dark entrie I ſought
               Of the ſame gate, wherat I iſſued out.
               Holding backward the ſteppes wher we had come
               In the dark night, loking all round about.
               In euery place the vgſome ſightes I ſaw,
               The ſilence ſelfe of night agaſt my ſprite,
               From henſe againe I paſt vnto our houſe,
               If ſhe by chaunce had ben returned home.
               The Grekes were there, and had it all beſet
               The waſting fire blown vp by drift of wind,
               Aboue the rooſes the blazing flame ſprang vp:
               The ſound wherof with furie pearſt the ſkies
               To Priams palace and the Caſtel then
               I made: and ther at Junous ſanctuair
               In the void porches Phenix, Ultſſes eke,
               Sterne guardens ſtood watching of the ſpoile.
               The richeſſe here were ſet reſt from the brent
               Temples of Troy: the table of the Gods,
               The veſſells eke that were of maſſy gold,
               And veſtures ſpoild, were gatherd all in heap:
               The children orderly, and mothers pale for fright
               
                  Long ranged on a rowe ſtode round about.
               So bold was I to ſhowe my voice that night,
               With clepes and cries to fill the ſtretes throughout,
               With Creuſe name in ſorrow, with vain teres,
               And often ſithes the ſame for to repete.
               The town reſtleſſe with furie as I ſought,
               Thunlucky figure of Creuſaes ghoſt,
               Of ſtature more than wont, ſtood fore eyen.
               Abaſhed then I woxe: therwith my heare
               Gan ſtart right vp: my voice ſtack in my throte:
               When with ſuch words ſhe gan my hart remoue,
               What helps to yeld vnto ſuch furious rage,
               Swete ſpouſe? quod ſhe. Without wil of the gods
               This chaunced not: ne lefull was for thee,
               To lead away Creuſa henſe with thee.
               The king of the hye heuen ſuffreth it not.
               A long exile thou art aſſigned to bere,
               Long to furrow large ſpace of ſtormy ſeas.
               So ſhalt thou reach at laſt Heſperian land,
               Wher Lidian Tiber with his gentle ſtreme
               Mildly doth flow along the frutfull feldes.
               There mirthful wealth, there kingdom is for thee,
               There a kinges child preparde to be thy make.
               For thy beloued Creuſa ſtint thy teres.
               For now ſhal I not ſee the proud abodes
               Of Myrinidons, nor yet of Dolopes;
               Ne I a Troyan lady, and the wife
               Unto the ſonne of Uenus the Goddeſſe,
               Shall goe a ſlaue to ſerue the Grekiſh dames.
               Me here the Gods great mother holdes.
               And now farwell: and kepe in fathers breſt
               The tender loue of thy yong ſon and myne.
            
            
               This hauing ſaid ſhe left me all in teres,
               And minding much to ſpeake: but ſhe was gone;
               And ſuttly fled into the weightleſſe aire.
               Thriſe raught▪ I with mine armes taccoll her neck:
               Thriſe did my handes vaine hold thimage eſcape:
               Like nimble windes, and like the flieng dreame.
               So night ſpent out, returne I to my feers:
               And ther wondring I find together ſwarmd
               I new nomber of mates, mothers, and men,
               
                  A rout exiled, a wreched multitude,
               From eche where flockke together, preſt to paſte,
               With hart and goods, to whatſoeuer land
               By ſliding ſeas me liſted them to lede.
               And now roſe Lucifer aboue the ridge
               Of iuſty Ide, and brought the dawning light.
               The Grekes held thentries of the gates beſet:
               Of help there was no hope. Then gaue I place,
               Toke vp my ſire, and haſted to the h
                     •
                  ll.
            
         
         
            The fowrth boke of Virgiles Aenaeis.
            
               
                  BUt now the wounded Quene, with heuy care,
               Throughout the veines ſhe noriſheth the playe,
               Surpriſed with blind flame, and to hir mind
               Ean eke reſort the proweſſe of the man,
               And honour of his race: while in her breſt
               Imprinted ſtack his wordes, and pictures forme.
               Ne to her limmes care graunteth quiet reſt.
               The next morow, with Phebus laump, the earth
               Alightned clere: and eke the dawning day
               The ſhadowes dark gan from the poale remoue:
               When all vnſound her ſiſter of like minde
               Thus ſpake ſhe to: O ſiſter Ann, what dreames
               Be theſe, that me tormented thus afray?
               What new gueſt, is this that to our realm is come?
               What one of chere▪ how ſtout of hart in armes?
               Truly I think (ne vain is my belefe)
               Of Goddiſh race ſome ofſpring ſhold he be:
               Cowardry notes hartes ſwarued out of kind.
               He driuen (Lord) with how hard deſtiny:
               What battailes eke atchiued did he recount?
               But that my mind is fixt vnmoueably,
               Neuer with wight in wedlock ay to ioyne:
               Sith my firſt loue me left by death diſſeuered,
               If geniall brands, and bed me lothed not,
               
                  To this one gilt perchaunce yet might I yeld.
               Anne, for I graunt, ſith wretched Sichees death
               My ſpouſe and houſe with brothers ſlaughter ſtaind,
               This onely man hath made my ſences bend,
               And pricked foorth the mind, that gan to ſlide,
               Now feelingly I taſt the ſteppes of mine old flame,
               But firſt I wiſh, the earth me ſwalow down:
               Or with thunder the mighty Lord me ſend
               To the pale goſtes of hel, and darknes deepe:
               Ere I thee ſtaine, ſhamefaſtnes, or thy lawes
               He that with me firſt coppled, tooke away
               My loue with him enioy it in his graue.
               Thus did ſhe ſay, and with ſuppriſed teares
               Ba
                     ••
                  ed her breſt. wherto Anne thus replied:
               Oliſter, dearer beloued then the lyght:
               They youth alone in plaint ſtill wilt thou ſpill?
               Ne children ſweete, 
                     •
                  e Uenus giftes wilt know?
               Cinders (thinkeſt thou) mind this? or graued ghoſtes?
               Time of thy doole thy ſpouſe new dead, I graunt,
               None might thee moue: no not the Libian king
               Nor yet of Tire Jarbas ſet ſo light:
               And other princes mo: whom the rich ſoile
               Of affrick breedes, in honours triumphant,
               Wilt thou alſo gainſtand thy liked loue
               Comes not to mind vpon whoes land thou dwelſt,
               On this ſide, loe the Getule town behold,
               A people bold vnuanquiſhed in warre,
               Eke the vndaunted Numides compaſſe thee
               Alſo the Sirtes, vnfrendly harbroughe:
               On thother hand, a deſert realme for thruſt
               The Barceans, whoſe fury ſtretcheth wide.
               What ſhall I touch the warres that moue from Tire?
               Or yet thy brothers threates?
               By gods puruciaunce it blewe, and Junos helpe,
               The Troiaynes ſhippes (I think) to runn this courſe
               Siſter, what town ſhalt thou ſee this become?
               Throgh ſuch allie how ſhal our kingdom riſe?
               And by the aid of Troiane armes how great?
               How many waies ſhal Cartages glorie grow?
               Thou onely now beſech the Gods of grace
               By ſacrifice: which ended, to thy houſe
               
                  Receue him: and forge cauſes of abode:
               Whiſes winter frettes the ſeas, and watry Orion,
               The ſhippes ſhaken, vnfrendly the ſeaſon.
               Such wordes enflamed the kindled mind with loue,
               Looſed al ſhame, and gaue the doubtfull hope,
               And to the temples firſt they haſt and ſeeke,
               By ſacrifice for grace, with Hogreles of two yeares
               Choſen (as ought) to Ceres, that gaue lawes,
               To Phebus, Bachus, and to Juno chiefe,
               Which hath in care the bandes of mariage.
               Faire Dido held in her right hand the cup
               Which twixt the hornes of a white Cowe ſhe ſhed
               In preſence of the Gods paſſing before
               The aulters fatte, which ſhe renewed o
                     •
                  t
               With giftes that day, and beaſtes debowled:
               Gaſing for counſell on the entrales warme.
               Ay me, vnſk
                     •
                  ifull mindes of propheſy
               Temples, or vowes, what boote they in her rage?
               A gentle flame the mary doth deuoure:
               Whiles in the breſt the ſilent wound keepes life,
               Unhappy Dido burns, and in her rage
               Throughout the town ſhe wandreth vp and down:
               Like the ſtricken Hinde with ſhaft, in Crete
               Throughout the woods which chaſing with his dartes
               Aloofe, the Shepheard ſmiteth at vnwares
               And leaues vnwiſt in her the thirling head:
               That through the groues, and landes glides in her fight:
               Amid whoſe ſide the mortall arrow ſtickes,
               Aeneas now about the walles ſhe leades,
               The towne prepared, and Cartsge welth to ſhew,
               Offring to ſpeāk, an
                     •
                  d her voice, ſhe whiſtes,
               And when the day gan faile, new feaſtes ſhe makes
               The Trotes trauales to heare a new ſhe liſtes
               Inraged al: and ſtareth in his face
               That tels the tale. And when they were al gone:
               And the dimme moue doth eft withold the light:
               And ſliding ſtarres prouoked vnto ſleepe:
               Alone ſhe mournes within her palace voide;
               And ſets her down on her forſaken bed,
               And abſent him ſhe heares, when he is gone,
               And ſeeth eke: oft in her lappe ſhe holdes
               Aſcanius, trapt by his fathers forme;
               
                  So to begile the loue cannot be told.
            
            
               The turrettes now ariſe not, erſt begonne,
               Neither the youth weldes armes, nor they auauncs
               The portes: nor other mete defence for warr.
               Broken there hang the workes and mighty frames
               Of walles high raiſed, threatning the ſkie.
               Whom aſſoone as Joues deare wife ſawe infect
               With ſuch a plage, ne fame reſiſt the rage:
               Saturnes daughter thus burdes Uenus then.
               Great praiſe (quod ſhe) and worthy ſpoiles you win.
               You and your ſon, great Gods of memory,
               By both your wiles one woman to deuower.
               Yet am not I deceiued, that foreknew
               Ye dread our walles, and bildinges gan ſuſpect
               Of high Cartage. But what ſhalbe the ende?
               Or wherunto now ſerueth ſuch debate?
               But rather peace, and bridale bandes knit we,
               Sith thou haſt ſpede of that, thy heart deſired,
               Dido doth burne with loue, rage fretes her boones
               This people now as common to vs both,
               With equal fauour let vs gouerne then,
               Lefull be it to ſerue a Troian ſpouſe:
               And Tirianes yeld to thy right hand in dowre.
               To whom Uenus replied thus: that knewe,
               Her wordes proceded from a fained minde,
               To Libian coaſtes to turne thempire from Rome,
               What wight ſo fond, ſuch offer to refuſe?
               Or yet with thee had leuer ſtriue in warr?
               So be it fortune thy tale bring to effect,
               But deſtenies I dout: leaſt Joue nill graunt,
               That folke of Tire, and ſuch as came from Troie,
               Should hold one town: or graunt theſe nacions
               Mingled to be, or ioyned ay in leage.
               Thou at his wife: lefull it is for the
               For to attempt his fanſie by requeſt:
               Paſſe on before and folow the I ſhall?
               Quene Juno then thus tooke her tale againe:
               This trauaile be it mine: but by what meane.
               (Marke in fewe wordes I ſhal thee lerne eftſones)
               This worke in hand may now be compaſſed.
               Aneas nowe, and wretched Dido eke
               
                  
                  
                     •
                  o the foreſt, a hunting minde to wende,
               To morne as ſoon as Titan ſhall aſcend,
               And with his beames hath ouerſpred the world,
               And whiles the winges of youth do ſwarm about.
               And whiles they raunge to ouer ſet the groues
               A cloudie ſhowr mingled with haile I ſhall
               Poure down, and then with thonder ſhake the ſkies,
               Thaſſemble ſcattered the miſt ſhall cloke.
               Dido a caue, the Troyan prince the ſame
               Shall enter to: and I will be at hand.
               And if thy will ſticke vnto mine: I ſhall
               In wedlocke ſure knit, and make her his own,
               Thus ſhall the maryage be: to whoſe requeſt
               Without debate Uenus did ſeme to yeld,
               And ſmyled ſoft, as ſhe that found the wyle,
               Then from the ſeas, the dawning gan ariſe,
               The Sun once vp, the choſen youth gan throng
               Out at the gates: the hayes ſo rarely knit,
               The hunting ſtaues with their brod heads of ſteele
               And of Maſile the horſemen fourth they brake
               Of ſenting houndes a kenel huge like wiſe.
               And at the threſhold of her chaumber dore,
               The Carthage Lords did on the Quene attend.
               The trampling ſteede with gold and purple trapt,
               Chawing the fomte bit, there ſercely ſtood.
               Then iſſued ſhe, awayted with great train,
               Clad in a cloke of Tyre embradred riche.
               Her quyuer hung behinde her back, her treſſe
               Knotted in gold, her purple veſture eke
               Burned with gold, the Troyans of her train
               Before her go with gladſom Julus.
               Aencas eke the goodlieſt of the route
               Makes one of them, and toyneth cloſe the throngs:
               Like when Apollo leaueth Lycia,
               His wintring place, and Xanthus floods likewiſe:
               To viſet Delos his mothers manſion:
               Repairing eft and furniſhing her quire
               The Candians, and folkes of Dr
                     •
                  opes,
               With painted Agathyrſies ſhoute, and crye:
               Enuironing the altars roundabout
               When that he walks vpon mount Cynthus top:
               
                  His ſparkled treſſe repreſt with garlandes ſoft
               Of tender leaues, and truſſed vp in gold:
               His quiuering dartes clattring behinde his back:
               So freſh and luſtie did Aeneas ſeme:
               Such lordly port in preſent countenaunce.
            
            
               But to the hils, and wilde ho
                     •
                  tes when they came:
               From the rocks top the driuen ſauage roſe,
               Loe from the hill aboue on thother ſide,
               Through the wyde lawnds, they gan to take their courſe
               The harts likewiſe, in troupes taking their flight,
               Rayſing the duſt, the mountain faſt forſake.
               The childe Julus, blithe of his ſwift ſteede
               Amids the plain now pricks by them, now thes:
               And to encounter wiſheth oft in minde
               The foming Bore in ſteede of ferefull beaſts,
               Or Lion brown might from the hill deſcend.
            
            
               In the meane while the ſkies gan rumble ſore:
               In tayle therof, a mingled ſhow
                     •
                   with hayle.
               The Tyrian folk, and eke the Troyans youth,
               And Uenus nephew the cotage? for feare
               Sought round about: the floods fell from the hils.
               Dido a den, the Troyan prince the ſame,
               Chaunced vpon. Our mother then the earth,
               And Juno that hath charge of mariage,
               Firſt tokens gaue with burning gledes of flame,
               And pr
                     •••
                  e to the wedlock lightning ſkies:
               And the Nymphes yelled from the mountains top.
               Ay me, this was the firſt day of their mirth,
               And of their harmes the firſt occaſion eke.
               Reſpect of fame no longer her witholdes:
               Nor muſeth now to frame her loue by ſtelth.
               Wedlock ſhe cals it: vnder the pretence
               Of which fayre name ſhe cloketh now her faut.
               Forthwith Fame flich through the great Libian towns:
               A miſchefe Fame, there is none els ſo ſwift:
               That mouing growes, and flitting gathers force:
               Firſt ſmall for dred, ſone after climes the ſkies:
               Stayeth on earth; and hides her hed in cloudes.
               Whom our mother the earth, tempted by wrath
               Of Gods, begat: the laſt ſiſter (they write)
               To Caeus, and to Enccladus eke,
               
                  Spedie of foote, of wyng likewiſe as ſwift,
               A monſter huge, and dredfull to deſcriue.
               In euery plume, that on her body ſticks,
               (A thing in dede much maruelous to heare)
               As many waker eyes lurk vnderneath,
               So many mouthes to ſpeake, and liſtning eares,
               By night ſhe flies amid the cloudie ſkie,
               Shriking by the dark ſhadow of the earth,
               Ne doth decline to the ſwete ſleepe her eyes.
               By day ſhe ſits to mark on the houſe top,
               Or turrets hye, and the great towns aſraies.
               As mindefull of yll and lyes as blaſing truth.
               This monſter blithe with many a tale gan ſow
               This rumor then into the common eares:
               As well things don as that was neuer wrought:
               As that there comen is to Tyrians court
               Aeneas one outſprong of Troyan blood
               To whom fair Dido wold her ſelf be wed.
               And that the while the winter long they paſſe
               In foule delight, forgetting charge of reigne,
               Led againſt honour with vnhoneſt luſt.
            
            
               This in eche mouth, the filthie Goddeſſe ſpreds,
               And takes her courſe to king Hiarbas ſtraight
               Kindling his minde: with tales ſhe feedes his wrath,
               Gotten was he by Ammon Jupiter
               Upon the 
                     •
                  auiſht Nimph of Garamant.
               An hundred hugie great temples be built,
               In his farre ſtretching realmes, to Jupiter.
               Altars as many kept with waking flame,
               Awatche alwayes vpon the Gods to tend.
               The floores embrude with yelded blood of beaſtes,
               And threſhold ſpred with garlands of ſtrange hue.
               He wood of minde, kindled by bitter brute,
               Tofore thaitars, in preſence of the Gods,
               With reared hands gan humbly Joue entreate,
               Almighty God whom the Moores nacion
               Fed at rich tables preſenteth with wine,
               Seeſt thou theſe things? or feare we thee in vaine
               When thou letteſt flye thy thonder from the cloudes?
               Or do thoſe flames with vaine noyſe vs affray?
               A woman that wandring in our coaſtes hath bought
               
                  A plot for price: where ſhe a citie ſet:
               To whom we gaue the ſtrong for to manure.
               And lawes to rule her town: our wedlock lothed,
               Hath choſe Aeneas to commaund her realme.
               That Paris now with his vnmanly ſor
                     •
                  e,
               With mitred hats, with oynted buſh and beard:
               His rape enioyth: whiles to thy temples we
               Our offrings bring, and folow rumors vaine,
               Whom praing in ſuch ſort, and griping eke
               The altars faſt, the mighty father heard:
               And writhed his loke toward the royal walls
               And louers eke forgetting their good name,
               To Mercurie then gaue he thus in charge.
               Henſe ſon in haſt, and call to thee the windes.
               Slide with thy plumes, and tell the Troyan prince,
               That now in Carthage loytreth, rechleſſe
               Of the towns graunted him by deſteny:
               Swift through the ſkies, ſee thow theſe words conuey.
               His faire mother behight him not to vs
               Such one to beme therefore twyſe him ſaued
               From Grekiſh arms: but ſuch a one
               As mete might ſeme great Italie to rule
               Dreedfull in arms, charged with ſeigniorie,
               Shewing in profe his worthy Teucrian race.
               And vnder lawes, the whole world to ſubdue,
               If glorie of ſuch things nought him enflame:
               Ne that he liſtes ſeke honour by ſom paine:
               The towers yet of Rome being his ſire
               Doth he enuie to yong Aſcanius?
               What mindeth he to frame? or on what hope
               In enmies land doth he make hys abode?
               Ne his ofſpring in Italie regardes?
               Ne yet the land of Lauin doth behold?
               Bid him make ſayle: haue here the ſum and end
               Our meſſage thus report. When Joue had ſayd
               Then Mercurie gan, bend him to obey
               His mightie fathers will: and to his heeles
               His golden wings he knits, which him tranſport
               With a light winde aboue the earth, and ſeas.
               And then with him his wande he toke, whereby
               He calles from hell pale goſtes: and other ſome
               
                  Thether alſo he ſendeth comfortleſſe.
               Wherby he forceth ſleepes and them berenes,
               And mortall eies he cloſeth vp in deth:
               By power wherof he driues the windes away.
               And paſſeth eke amid the troubled cloudes.
               Till in his flight he gan deſcrie the top.
               And the ſtepe flankes of rocky Atlas hill:
               That with his crowne ſuſteines the welkin vp:
               Whoſe head forgrowen, with pine, circled alway,
               With miſty cloudes, beaten, with wind and ſtorme:
               His ſhoulders ſpred with ſnow, and from his chin
               The ſpringes deſcend: hisbeard froſen with yſe.
               Here Mercury with equal ſhining winges
               Firſt touched, and with body headling bette:
               To the water thend tooke he his diſcent,
               Like to the foule, that endlong coſtes and ſtrondes
               Swarming wi
                     •
                  h fyſh, flyes ſweping by the ſea:
               Cutting betwixt the windes and Libian landes,
               From his graundfather by the motl ers ſide,
               Cillenes child ſo came, and then alight
               Upon the houſes with his winged feete.
               To fore towers, wher he Aeneas ſaw
               Fcundacions caſt arering lodges new.
               Girt with a ſweard of Jaſper ſtarry bright:
               A ſhining parel flameed with ſtately eie
               Of Tirian purple hong his ſhoulders down
               The gift and work of wealthy Didoes hand
               Stripped throughont with a thin thred of gold,
               Thus he encounters him: Oh careles wight
               Both of thy realme, and of thine own affaires:
               A wifebound man now doſt thou reare the walles
               Of high Cartage, to build a goodly town.
               From the bright ſkies the ruler of the Gods
               Sent me to thee, that with his beck commaundes
               Both heuen and earth: in haſt gaue me charge
               Through the light aire: his meſſage thee to ſay.
               what frameſt thou? or on what hope thy time
               In idlenes doth waſt in Affrick land?
               Of ſo great things, if nought the fame thee ſtirr,
               Ne liſt by trauaile honour to purſue:
               Aſcanus yet, that waxeth faſt behold,
               
                  And the hope of Juius ſeede thine heir:
               To whom the realme of Italy belonges,
               And ſoile of Rome. When Mercury had ſaid:
               Amid his tale far of from mortall eies
               Into light aire, he vaniſht out of ſight.
            
            
               Aeneas with that viſion ſtriken down,
               Well nere beſtraught, vpſtart his heare for dread,
               Amid his throtal his voice likewiſe gan ſtick.
               For to depart by night he longeth now,
               And the ſweet land to leaue, aſtoined ſore
               With this adiuſe, and meſſage of the Gods.
               What may he do, alas? or by what words
               Dare he perſuade the raging Quene in loue?
               Or in what ſort may he his tale beginne?
               Now here now there his reckleſſe minde gan run,
               And diuerſly him drawes diſcourſing all.
               After long doutes this ſentence ſemed beſt:
               Mneſtheus firſt, and ſtrong Cloanthus eke
               He calles to him, with Sergeſt: vnto whom
               He gaue in charge his nauie ſecretly
               For to prepare, and driue to the ſea coaſt
               His people, and their armour to addreſſe:
               And for the cauſe of change to faine excuſe:
               And that he, when good Dido lea
                     •
                  t foreknew,
               Or did ſuſpect ſo great a loue could break,
               Wold wait his time to ſpeke therof moſt meete:
               The neareſt way to haſten his entent.
               Gladly his wil, and biddings they obey.
            
            
               Ful ſoone the Quene, this crafty ſleight gan ſmell,
               (Who can deceiue a louer in forecaſt?)
               And firſt foreſaw the motions for to come,
               Things moſt aſſured fearing: vnto whom
               That wicked fame reported, how to flight
               Was armde the fleet all redy to auale.
               Then ill beſted of counſell rageth ſhe:
               And whiſketh through the town like Bachus nunne,
               As Thias ſtirres, the ſacred rites begon,
               And when the wonted third yeres ſacrifice
               Doth prick her fourth, hering Bachus name hallowed:
               And that the feſtful night of Citheron
               
                  Doth call her fourth with noyes of dauncing
            
            
               At length her ſelf bordeth Aeneas thus.
               Unfaithfull wight to couer ſuch a fault
               Coldeſt thou hope? vnwiſt to leue my land?
               Nor thee our loue, nor yet right hand betrothed,
               Ne cruell death of Dido may withhold?
               But that thou wilt in winter ſhippes prepare,
               And t
                     ••
                  e the ſeas in broile of whorling windes?
               What if the land thou ſeekeſt, were not ſtraunge?
               If not vnkno ven? or auncient Troye yet ſtoode?
               In rough ſeas, yet ſhould Troye towne be ſought?
               Shunneſt thou me? By theſe teares, and right hand,
               (For nought els haue I wretched lefte my ſelf)
               By our ſpouſals and mariage begonne,
               If I of thee deſerued euer well
               Or thing of mine were euer to thee leefe:
               Rue on this realme, whoes ruine is at hand?
               If ought be left that prater may auaile,
               I thee beſeche to do away this minde.
               The Libians and tirans of Nomadane
               For thee me hate: my Tirians eke for thee
               Ar wroth: by thee my ſhamefaſtnes eke ſtained,
               And good renoume, wherby vp to the ſtarres
               Pereleſſe I clame. To whom wilt thou me leaue.
               Redy to dye, my ſwete gueſt? ſithe this name
               Is all as now, that of a ſpouſe remaines.
               But wherto now ſhold I prolong my death?
               What? vntil my brother Pigmalion
               Beate downe my walles? or the Getulian king
               Hiarbas yet captiue lead me away?
               Before thy flight a child had I ones borne,
               Or ſene a yong Aeneas in my court
               Play vp and down, that might preſent thy face:
               All vtterly I could not ſeeme forſaken.
            
            
               Thus ſayd the Quene: he to the Gods aduiſe
               Unmoued held his eies, and in his breſt
               Repreſt his care, and ſtroue againſt his wil.
               And theſe few wordes at laſt then forth he caſt:
               Neuer ſhall I denie (Quene) thy deſerte,
               Greater than thou in wordes may well expreſſe:
               To think on thee, ne irke me aye it ſhall
               
                  Whiles of my ſlelfe I ſhall haue memory,
               And whiles the ſpirit theſe Limmes of mine ſhal rule▪
               
               For preſent purpoſe ſomwhat ſhal I ſay.
               Neuer ment I to clok the ſame by ſtelth
               Sclaunder me not, ne to eſcape by flight,
               Nor I to thee pretended mariage:
               Ne hyther cam to ioine men ſuch leage.
               If deſteny at mine own liberty
               To lead my life would haue haue permitted me
               After my wil my ſorow to redoub:
               Troy and the remainder of our folke
               Reſtore I ſhold: and with theſe ſcaped handes,
               The walles againe vnto thee vanquiſhed,
               And palace high of Priam eke repaire.
               But now Apollo, called Grineus,
               And prophecies of Licia me aduiſe
               To ſeaſe vpon the realme of Italy.
               That is my loue, my country, and my land.
               If Cartage turrettes thee Phenician borne.
               And of a Libian town the ſight deteine:
               To vs Troians why doeſt thou then enuy
               In Italy to make our riſting ſeat▪
               
               Lefull is 
                     •
                  eke for vs ſtraunge realmes to ſeeke.
               As oft as night doth cloke with ſhadowes dar
                     ••
                  
               
               The earth: as oft as flaming ſtarres apere:
               The troubled ghoſt of my father Anchiſes
               So oft in ſleepe doth fray me, and aduiſe,
               The wronged hed by me of my deare ſonne,
               Whom I defraud of the Hiſperian crown,
               And landes a lotted him by deſteny.
               The meſſ
                     •
                  nger eke of the Gods but late
               Sent down from Joue (I ſware by eyther hed)
               Paſſing the ayre, did this to me report.
               In bright day light the God my ſelfe I ſaw
               Entre theſe walles, and with theſe cares him heard.
               Leuethen with plaint, to vexe both the and me.
               Againſt my will to Italy I go.
            
            
               Whiles in this ſort he did his tale pronounce,
               With wa
                     •
                  ward looke ſhe gan him ay behold,
               And roling eies, that moued to and fro:
               With ſilence looke diſcourſing ouer al,
               
                  And foorth in rage, at laſt thus gan ſhe brayde,
               Faithleſſe, forſworn, ne Goddeſſe was thy dam,
               Nor Dardanus beginner of thy race,
               But of hard rockes mount Caucaſe monſtruous
               Bred thee, and teates of Tyger gaue thee ſuck.
               But what ſhould I diſſemble now my there?
               Or me reſerue to hope of greater things?
               Mindes he our teares: or euer moued his eyen?
               Wept he for ruth? or pitied he our loue?
               What ſhall I ſet before? or where begin?
               Juno nor Joue with iuſt eyes this beholds.
               Faith is no where in ſuretie to be found.
               Did I not him thrown vp vpon my ſhore
               In neede receiue, and fonded eke inueſt
               Of halfe my realme: his na
                     •••
                   loſt, repair?
               From deathes daunger his fellowes eke defend?
               Ay me, with rage and furies loe I driue.
               Apollo now, now Lycian propheſies,
               Another while the meſſenger of Gods
               (He ſayes) ſent down from mighty Joue himſelf
               The dredfull charge amid the ſkies hath brought.
               As though that were the trauil of the Gods,
               Or ſuch a care their quietnes might moue.
               I hold thee not, nor yet gainſay thy words,
               To Italie paſſe on by helpe of windes,
               And through the floods go ſearche thy kingdom new.
               If ruthfull Gods haue any power, I truſt,
               A mid the rocks, thy guerdon thou ſhalt finde,
               When thou ſhalt clepe full oft on Didos name,
               With burial brandes I abſent ſhall thee thaſe,
               And when cold death from life theſe lims deuides,
               My goſt eche where ſhall ſtill on thee awaite,
               Thou ſhalt abye▪ and I ſhall here thereof.
               Among the ſoules below thy brute ſhall come.
               With ſuch like wordes ſhe cut of half her tale,
               With penſiue hart abandoning the light:
               And from his ſight, her ſelf gan farre remoue:
               For ſaking him: that many things in fere
               Imagened, and did prepare to ſay.
               Heri wouning lims her damſels gan releue,
               And to her chamber bare of marble ſtone:
               
                  And layd her on her bed with tapets ſpred.
               But iuſt Aeneas, though he did deſire
               With comfort ſwet her ſorows to appeaſe,
               And with his words to baniſh all her care,
               Wailing her much, with great loue ouercome:
               The Gods will yet he woorketh, and reſortes
               Unto his name, where the Troyans faſt
               Fell to their worke from the ſhore to vnſtock
               High rigged ſhips: now fleetes the talowed kele,
               Their oares with leaues yet grene from wood they bring▪
               
               And maſtes vnſhaue, for haſt to take then night.
               You might haue ſene them throng out of the town
               Like ants, when they do ſpoile the bing of corne,
               For winters dred, which they beare to their den:
               When the black ſwarm creeps ouer all the fields:
               And thwart the graſſe by ſtrait pathes drags their pray,
               The great graines then, ſom on their ſhoulders truſſe,
               Some driue the troupe, ſom chaſtice eke the ſlow:
               That with their trauaile chafed is eche pathe.
               Beholding this, what thought might Dido haue?
               What ſighes gaue ſhe? when from her towers hye
               The large coaſts ſhe ſaw haunted with Troyans workes,
               And in her ſight the ſeas with din confounded.
               O witleſſe loue, what thing is that to do
               A mortal minde thou canſt not force therto?
               Forced ſhe is to teares ay to returne,
               With new requeſtes, to yeld her hart to loue:
               And leaſt ſhe ſhould before her cauſeleſſe death
               Leaue any thing vntried: O ſiſte
                     •
                   Anne
               Quoth ſhe, behold the whole coaſt round about,
               How they prepare aſſembled euery where.
               The ſtreming ſailes abidn
                     ••
                   but for wynde:
               The ſhipmen crowne theyr ſhips with vows for ioy,
               O ſiſter, if ſo great a ſorow I
               Miſtruſted had: it were more light to beare.
               Yet natheleſſe this for me wretched wight,
               Anne, ſhal
                     •
                   thou do: for faithles, thee alone
               He reuerenced, ſhee eke his ſecretes tolde:
               The meteſt tune thou kneweſt to borde the man:
               To my proude foe, thus ſiſter humbly ſay:
               I with the grekes within the port Aulids.
               
                  Conſured not the Troyans to deſtroy:
               Nor to the walles of Troy yet ſent my 
                     •
                  lcete:
               Nor cynders of his father Anchiſes
               Diſturbed haue out of his ſcpulture.
               Why lettes he not my wordes ſinke in his eares
               So harde to ouertreate: whither whirles he?
               This laſt boone yet graunt he to wretched loue
               Proſpectous windes for to depart with caſe,
               Let him abide: the foreſayde mariage now,
               That he betraied, I do not him require:
               Nor that he ſhould faire Italy forgo.
               Neither I would, he ſhould his kingdom leaue:
               Quiet I aſke, and a time of delay,
               And reſpite eke my furye to aſſwage,
               Till my miſhap teach me all comfortleſſe,
               How for to wayle my grief. This latter grace,
               Siſter I 
                     •
                  raue, haue thou 
                     •
                  emorſe of me,
               Whiche if thou ſhalt vouchſafe, with heapes I ſhall
               Leaue by my death redoubled vnto thee.
               Moiſted with teares, thus wretched gan ſhe playne:
               Which Anne reportes, and anſwere bringes againe.
               Nought teares him moue, ne yet to any wordes
               He can be framed with gentle minde to ye
                     •
                  de.
               The w
                     •
                  rdes withſtande, & God ſtops his m
                     •
                  ke eares.
               Like to the aged boyſteous bodied oke,
               The which among the alpes, the Northerne windes,
               Blowyng now from this quarter, now from that,
               Betwixt them ſtriue to ouerwhelme with blaſtes,
               The whiſtlyng ayre among the braunches rores,
               Which all at once bow to the earth her croppes,
               The ſtocke once ſmit: whiles in the rockes the tree
               Stickes faſt: and loke, how hye to the heauen her toppe
               Reares vp, ſo deepe her roote ſpredes downe to hell:
               So was this Lorde now here now there beſet
               With wordes, in whoſe ſ
                     •
                  oute breſt wrought many cares,
               But ſtill his minde in one remaines, in vaine
               The teares were ſhed. Then Dido frayde of fates
               Wiſheth for death, 
                     ••
                  ked to ſee the ſkyes.
               And that ſhe might the rather worke her will,
               And leaue the light (a griſely thing to tell)
               Upon the altars burnyng full of cenſe
               
                  When ſhe ſet giftes of ſacrifice, ſhe ſaw
               The holy water ſtocks waxe blacke within,
               The wine eke ſhed, chaunge into filthy gore.
               This ſhe to none, not to her ſiſter told.
               A marble temple in her palace eke,
               In memory of her old ſpouſe, there ſtood,
               In great honour and worſhip, which ſhe held,
               With ſnowwhite clothes deckt, and with bows of feaſt,
               Wherout was heard, her huſbandes voyc, and ſpeche
               Cleping for her, when dark night hid the earth,
               And oft the Owle with rufull ſong complaind,
               From the 
                     ••
                  uſe top drawing long dolefull tunes
               And many things foreſpoke by prophets paſt
               With dredfull warning gan her now affray:
               And ſtern Aeneas ſemed in her ſlepe
               To chaſe her ſtil about, diſtraught in rage:
               And ſtill her thought that ſhe was left alone
               Uncompanied great vtages to wende.
               In deſert land her Tyrian folk to ſeeke.
               Like Pentheus, that in his madnes ſaw
               Swarming in flocks the furies all of hell:
               Two Suns remoue, and Thebes town ſhew twain.
               Or like Oreſtes Agamemnons ſon:
               In tragedies who repreſented ape▪
               
               Driuen about, that from his mother fled
               Armed with brands, and eke with ſerpents black:
               That ſitting found within the temples porche
               The vglie furies his ſlaughter to reuenge.
               Yelden to wo, when phrenſie had her caught,
               Within her ſelfe then gan ſhe well debate,
               Full be
                     •
                  t to dye, the time, and eke the meane;
               And to her wofull ſiſter thus ſhe ſayd,
               In outward chere diſſembling her entent,
               Preſenting hope vnder a ſemblant glad:
               Siſter reioyce, 
                     •
                  cr I haue found the way
               Him to returne, or loſe me from his loue.
               Toward the end of the great Ocean flood
               Where as the wandring Sun diſcendeth hence:
               In the extremes of Ethiope is a place,
               Where huge Atlas doth on his ſholders turne
               The ſphere ſo rund with flaming ſtarres beſet,
               
                  Borne of Maſſyle, I heare ſhould be a Nunne
               That of theſperian ſiſters temple old
               And of their goodly garden keper was
               That geues vnto the Dragon eke his foode,
               That on the tree preſerues the holy fruit
               That home moyſt, and ſleping poppey caſtes,
               This woman doth auaunt, by force of char
                     •
                  e
               What hart ſhe liſt to ſet at libertie:
               And other ſome to perce with heuy cares:
               In running flood to ſtop the waters courſe:
               And eke the ſterres their meuings to reuerſe:
               Laſſemble eke, the goſtes that walk by night,
               Under thy feete, thearth thou ſhalt behold
               Tremble and rore, the okes come from the hill.
               The Gods and thee, dere ſiſter now I call
               In witnes, and thy hed to me ſo ſweete:
               To magike artes againſt my will I bend.
               Right ſecretly within our inner court.
               In open ayre reare vp a ſtack of wood:
               And hang theron the weapon of this man
               The which he left within my chamber ſtick.
               His weedes diſpoiled all, and bridal bed,
               Wherein alas ſiſter, I found my bane,
               Charge thereupon, ſor ſo the Nunne commaundes;
               To do away, what did to him belong,
               Of that falſe wight that might remembraunce bring.
            
            
               Then whiſted ſhe, the pale her face gan ſtaine,
               N
                     •
                   could yet Anne beleue, her ſiſter ment
               To cloke her death by this new ſacrifice:
               Nor in her breſt ſuch furie did conceiue,
               Neither doth ſhe now dred more greuous thing▪
               
               Then folowed Sichees death: wherefore
               She put her will in vre. But then the Nuene
               When that the ſtak of wood was reared vp,
               Under the ayre within the inward court
               With clouen oke, and billets made of fyrre,
               With garlandes, ſhe doth ali beſet the place,
               And with grene bows eke crown the funerall.
               And therupon his wedes and ſwerd yleft
               And on a bed his picture ſhe beſtowes:
               As ſhe that well foreknew what was to come.
               
                  The altars ſtande about, and eke the Nunne
               With ſparkeled treſſe, the which thre hundred Gods
               With a loude voice doth thunder out at once:
               Erebus the griſely, and Chaos huge,
               And eke the threefolde Goddeſſe, Hecate
               And three faces of Diana the virgin,
               And ſprinkcles eke the water counterfet
               Like vnto blacke Auernus lake in hell:
               And ſpringyng herbes reapt▪ vp with braſen ſithes
               Were ſought after the right courſe of the Moone,
               The venim blacke intermingled with milke,
               The lumpe of fleſhe twene the new borne foales eye
                     •
                  
               
               To reue, that winneth from the dāme her loue.
               She with the mole all in her handes deuout
               Stode neare the auiter, bare of the one ſoote,
               With veſture looſe, the bandes vnlaced all,
               Bent for to dye, cals the Gods to recorde,
               And gilty ſtarres eke of her deſteny.
               And if there were any God that had care
               Of louers hartes not moued with loue alike,
               Him ſhe requires of iuſtice to remember.
            
            
               It was then night, the ſounde and quiet ſlepe
               Had through the earth the weried bodyes caught,
               The woodes, the ragyng ſeas were faine to reſt,
               When that the ſtarres had halfe their courſe declined,
               The feldes whiſt, beaſtes, and fowles of diuers hue,
               And what ſo that in the brode lakes remainde,
               Or yet among the buſhy thickes of bryar,
               Laide downe to ſlope by ſilence of the night
               Gan ſooage their cares, mindleſſe of trauels paſt,
               Not ſo the ſpirite of this Phenician:
               Unhappy ſhe that on no ſlepe could chance,
               Nor yet nightes reſt enter in eye or breſt.
               Her cares redoble: loue doth riſe and rage againe.
               And ouerflowes with ſwellyng ſtormes of wrath.
               Thus thinkes ſhe then, this roules ſhe in her minde,
               What ſhall I do? ſhall I now beare the ſcorne
               For to aſſaye mine olde w
                     •
                  ers againe?
               And humbly yet a Numid ſpouſe require?
               Whoſe mariage I haue ſo oft diſdayned?
               The Troyan nauy, and Teucrian vile commaundes
               
                  Folow ſhall I? as though it ſhoulde nuaile,
               That whilom by my helpe they were releued:
               Or for becauſe with kinde, and mindefull folke
               Right well doth ſit the paſſed thankefull dede?
               Who would me ſuffer? (admit this were my will)
               Or me ſcorned to their proude ſhippes receiue?
               Oh, wo begone: full little knoweſt thou yet,
               The broken othes of Laomedons kinde.
               What then? alone on mery Mariners
               Shall I waite? or borde them with my power
               Of Tyrians aſſembled me about▪
               
               And ſuch as I with trauaile brought from Tyre,
               Driue to the ſeas, and force them ſaue againe?
               But rather dye, euen as thou haſt deſerued:
               And to this wo, with iron geue thou ende.
               And thou ſiſter firſt vanquiſht with my teares,
               Thou in my rage with all theſe miſchiefes firſt
               Didſt burden me, and yelde me to my foe.
               Was it not graunted me from ſpouſals free,
               Like to wilde beaſtes, to liue without offence,
               Without taſte of ſuch cares▪ is there no fayth,
               Reſerued to the cinders of Sychee?
               Such great complaints brake forth out of her breſt:
               Whiles Aeneas full minded to depart,
               All thinges prepared, ſlept in the poupe on high,
               To whom in ſlepe the wonted Godheds forme
               Gan aye appere, returnyng in like ſhape
               As ſemed him: and gan him thus aduiſe:
               Like vnto Mercury in voyce, and hue,
               With yelow buſhe, and comely ly
                     ••
                  es of youth.
               O Goddeſſe ſonne, in ſuch caſe canſt thou ſleepe?
               Ne yet beſtraught the daungers doeſt forſee,
               That cōpaſſe thee? nor hearſt the faire windes blowe▪
               
               Dido in minde roules vengeance and deſceite,
               Dete
                     •
                  md to dye, ſwelles with vnſtable 
                     •
                  re,
               Wilt thou not flee whiles thou haſt time of fight?
               Straight ſhalt thou ſee the ſeas couered with ſayles,
               The blaſyng brondes, the ſhore all ſpred with flame,
               And if the morow ſteale vpon thee here:
               Come of, haue done, ſet all delay aſide.
               For full of change theſe women be alway,
               
                  This ſayd, in the dark night he gan him hide.
            
            
               Aeneas of this ſodain viſion
               Adred ſtarts vp out of his ſleepe in haſt,
               Cals vp his feers: awake get vp my men,
               Abord your ſhips, and hoyſe vp ſayl with ſpeede,
               (A God me wills ſent from aboue againe)
               To haſt my flight, and writhen cabels cut.
               Oh holy God, what ſo thow art we ſhall
               Folow thee, and all blithe obey thy will:
               Be at our hand, and frendly vs aſſiſt:
               Adreſſe the ſterres with proſperous influence.
               And with that word his gliftering ſword vnſhethes▪
               
               With which drawen, he the cabels cut in twaine.
               The like deſire the reſt embraced all,
               All thing in haſt they caſt, and fourth they whurle,
               The ſhores they leaue, with ſhips the ſeasar ſpred,
               Cutting the fou
                     •
                  e, by the blew ſeas they ſwepe.
               Aurora now from Titans purple bed,
               With new day light hath ouerſpred the earth,
               When by her windowes the Quene the peping day
               Eſpyed, and nauie with ſplaid ſailes depart
               The ſhore, and eke the porte of veſſels voyde:
               Her comly breſt thriſe or foure times ſhe ſmote
               with her own hand, and tore her golden treſſe.
               Oh Joue (quoth ſhe) ſhall he then thus depart
               A ſtraunger thus, and ſcorne our kingdome ſo?
               Shall not my men do on theyr armure preſt?
               And eke purſue them throughout all the town?
               Out of the rode ſone ſhall the veſſell warpe.
               Haſt on, caſt flame, ſet ſayle. and welde your owers.
               What ſaid I: but where am I: what phrenſie
               Alters thy minde▪ vnhappy Dido now
               Hath thee beſet a froward deſtenie.
               Then it behoued, when thou didſt geue to him
               The ſcepter. So his faith and his right hand,
               That leades with him (they ſay) his countrie goodes,
               That on his back his aged father bore,
               His body might I not haue caught and rent?
               And in the ſeas drenched him. and his feers?
               And from Aſcanius his life with Iron reft,
               And ſet him on his fathers bord for meate?
               
                  Of ſuch debate perchaimee the fortune might
               Haue bene doutfull: would God it were aſſaied.
               Whom ſhould I feare, ſith I my ſelfe muſt die?
               Might I haue throwen into that nauy brandes,
               And filled eke their deckes with flaming fire,
               The father, ſonne, and all their nacion
               Deſtroied, and falln my ſelf ded ouer al.
               Sunne with thy beames, that mortall workes diſcries,
               And thou Juno, that wel theſe trauades knoweſt,
               Proſerpine thou, vpon whom folk do vſe
               To houle, and call in forked waies by night,
               Infernal furies, ye wreakers of wrong,
               And Didos Gods, who ſtandes at point of death,
               Receiue theſe wordes, and eke your heauy power
               Withdraw from me, that wicked folk deſerue,
               And our requeſt accept, we you beſeche.
               If ſo that yonder wicked head muſt needes
               Recouer port, and faile to land of force
               And if Jeues wil haue ſo reſolued it,
               And ſuch ende ſet as no wight can fordoe,
               Yet at the leaſt aſailed mought he be
               With armes, and warres of hardy nacions,
               From the boundes of his kingdom farre exiled▪
               
               Julus 
                     ••
                  e raſhed out of his armes
               Driuen to call for helpe, that he may ſee
               The giltleſh corpſes of his folke lie dead:
               And after hard condicions of peace,
               His realme, nor life deſired may he brooke:
               But fall before his time vngraued amid the ſandes.
               This I require, theſe wordes with blood I ſhed.
               And Trians, ye his flocke and all his race
               Purſue with hate, rewarde our cinders ſo.
               No loue nor leage, betwixt our peeples be.
               And of our bones, ſome wreaker may there ſpring,
               With ſword and flame that Troiās may purſue:
               And from hencefoorth when that our powr may ſtretch,
               Our coſtes to them contrary be for aye,
               I craue of God, and our ſtreames to their fluddes,
               Armes vnto armes, and offpring of eche race
               With mortal warr eche other may fordoe
               This ſaid, her mind ſhe writhed on al ſides,
               
                  Seking with ſpede to end her irkſome life.
               To Sichees nurſe Barcen then thus ſhe ſaid
               (For hers at home in aſhes did remaine)
               Cal vnto me (deare nurſe) my ſiſter Anne:
               Bid her, in haſt in water of the ſtudde
               She ſprinckle ſhe body and bring the beaſtes,
               And purging ſacrifice, I did her ſhewe:
               So let her come: and thou thy temples bind
               With ſacred garlandes: for the ſacrifice,
               That I to Pluto haue begonne, my mind
               Is to herforme, and geue end to theſe cares:
               And Troian ſtatue throw into the flame.
               When ſhe had ſaid, redouble gan her nurſe
               Her ſteppes, forth on an aged womans trot.
               But trembling Dido eger
                     •
                  y now bent
               Upon her ſterne determinacion,
               Her bloodſhot eies roling within her head:
               Her quiuering chekes flecked with deadly ſtaine,
               Both pale and wan to think on death to come,
               Into the inward wardes of her palace
               She ruſheth in, and clam vp, as diſtraught,
               The buriall ſtack, and drew the Troian ſwerd
               Her gift ſometime, but ment to no ſuch vſe.
               Where when ſhe ſaw his weed, and w
                     •
                  l knowen bed,
               Weping a while in ſtudy gan ſhe ſtay,
               Fell on the bed, and thefe laſt words ſhe ſaid.
               Swete ſpoiles, whiles God and deſtenies it wold,
               Receue this ſprite, and rid me of theſe cares.
               I liued and ranne the courſe, fortune did graunt,
               And vnder earth my great goſt now ſhall wende.
               A goodly town I built, and ſaw my walles:
               Happy, alas to happy, if theſe coſtes
               The Troyan ſhippes had neuer touched aye.
            
            
               This ſaid, ſhe laid her mouth cloſe to the bed:
               Why then (quoth ſhe) vnwroken ſhal we die?
               But let vs die for thus: and in this ſort
               It liketh vs to ſeeke the ſhadowes darck.
               And from the feas the cruel Troyans eies
               Shall wel diſcern this flame, and take with him
               Eke theſe vnlucky tokens of mydeath.
               In ſhe had ſaid, her daniſell might perceue
               
                  Her with theſe wordes fal pearced on a ſword,
               The blade embrued and hands beſprent with gor
                     •
                  
               
               The clamor rang vnto the pallace tappe,
               The brute ranne throughout al thaſto
                     ••
                  ed towne,
               With waiting great, and womens ſhril yelling,
               The roofes gan roare, the aire reſound with plaint,
               As though Cartage, or thau
                     ••
                  ent town of Tyre
               With preaſe of entred enemies ſwarmed full,
               Or when the rage of furious flame doth take
               The temples toppes, and manſiōs eke of men.
            
            
               Her ſiſter Anne, ſpriteleſſe for dread to heare
               This fearefull ſturre, with nailes gan teare her face,
               She ſmote her breſt, and ruſhed through the rout:
               And her dieng ſhe cleapes thus by her name:
               Siſter, for this with craft did you me bourd▪
               
               The ſtak, the flame, the altars, bred they this▪
               
               What ſhall I firſt complaine, forſaken wight?
               Lotheſt thou in death thy ſiſters felowſhip?
               Thou ſhouldſt haue calld me to like deſtiny:
               One wo, one ſword, one houre mought end vs both.
               This funerall ſtak built I with theſe handes,
               And with this voice cleped our natiue Gods,
               And cruel ſo abſenteſt me from thy death:
               Deſtroyd thou haſt (ſiſter) both thee and me,
               Thy people eke, and princes borne of Tyre.
               Geue, here I ſhall with water waſhe her woūdes,
               And ſuck with mouth her breath, if ought be left.
            
            
               This ſaid, vnto the high degrees ſhee mounted,
               Embraſing faſt her ſiſter now half dead,
               With wailefull plaint: whom in her lap ſhe layd,
               The black ſwart gore wiping dry with her clothes.
               But Dido ſtriueth to lift vp againe
               Her heauy eyen, and hath no power therto:
               Deepe in her breſt, that fixed wound doth gape.
               Thriſe leaning on her elbow ganſhe raiſe
               Her ſelf, vpward: and thriſe ſhe ouerthrewe
               Upon the bed: ranging with wandring eies
               The ſkies for light, and wept when ſhe it found.
            
            
               Almighty Juno hauing ruth by this
               Of her long paines, and eke her lingring death,
               From heauen ſhe ſent the Goddeſſe Iris downe,
               
                  The throwing ſprit, and 
                     •
                  ointed 
                     〈…〉
                   to looſe▪
               
               For that neither by lot of deſtiny,
               Nor yet by kindly death ſhe periſhed:
               But wretchedly before her fatall day.
               And kindled with a ſodein rage offlame:
               Proſerpine had not from her head bere
                     •
                  t
               The golden heare, nor iudged her to he
                     ••
                  .
               The dewye Iris thus with golden wings,
               A thouſand hues ſhewing againſt the ſunne,
               Amid the ſkies then did ſhe fly
                     •
                   adowne:
               On Didos head, where as ſhe gan a light:
               This heare (quod ſhe) to Pluto conſecrate.
               Commaunded I reue, and thy ſpirit vnlooſe.
               From this body: and when ſhe thus had ſaid,
               With her right hand ſhe cut the heare in twaine:
               And therwith al the kindly heat gan quench?
               And into wind the life foorthwith reſolue.
            
            Finis.
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧ Imprinted at London in flete ſtrete within Temple barre, at the ſygne of the hand and ſtarre, by Richard Tottell the. xxi. day of June. An. 1557.
            
         
      
   