
      
         
            
            
               
                  FRANCISCVS DRACO NOBILISSIMVS ANGLIAE FOVES, REI NAVTICAE AC BELLICAE PERITISSIMVS 1598
                  AVDENTES FORTVNA IVVAT 
                  Cognita Naſoni mea si quoque vita fuiſset,
                  Neptuni verè sobolem narrasset, et alis
                  Expanſis Mundum circumuditasſe per vndas,
                  Flammi
                        ••
                     m in mira metamorphosi vsque Draconem
                  Conuersum fueram semper, ſic faucibus ipse,
                  
                     Ʋnguibus atque alis, caudá
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      armatus in hoſtem.
               
            
         
         
            
            A SVMMARIE
AND TRVE DISCOVRSE
OF SIR FRANCES DRAKES
VVeſt Indian Voyage.
            
               Wherein were taken, the Townes of
Saint Jago, Sancto Domingo, Cartagena &
Saint Auguſtine.
            Imprinted at London by Richard Field, dwelling
in the Blacke-Friars by Ludgate.
1589.
         
         
            
            The Reader muſt vnderſtand, that this Diſcourſe
was dedicated, and intended to haue bene imprinted
ſomewhat before the comming of the Spaniſh
Fleete vpon our coaſt of England: but by caſualtie
the ſame was forgotten and ſlacked for a time of
ſome better leaſure.
         
         
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE
ROBERT D'EVREVX,
EARLE OF ESSEX AND EWE, VISCOVNT
of Hereford and Bourchier, Lord Ferrers of Chartley,
Bourchier and Louaine, Maiſter of the Queens
Maieſties horſe, and knight of the moſt honorable
order of the Garter, T. C. wiſheth increaſe
of all honour and happineſſe.
            
               RIght Honorable, hauing by chaunce recouered
of late into my handes (after I had
once lost the ſame) a copie of the Diſcourſe
of our late VVeſt Indian voyage, vvhich
vvas begun by Captaine Bigges, vvho ended
his life in the ſaid voyage after our departure
from Cartagena, the ſame being
aftervvardes finished (as I thinke) by
his Lieutenant Maiſter Croftes, or ſome other, I knovve not
vvell vvho. Novve finding therein a moſt true report of the
ſeruices and other matters vvhich happened in the ſayd voyage,
the ſight vvhereof is vvonderfully deſired by manie honeſt and
vvell diſpoſed perſons. I haue preſumed to recommend the publishing
thereof, vnto your Lordships protection and fauour, for
theſe tvvo cauſes. The one, for that your Lordships Honourable
diſpoſition is in the knovvledge of all men that knovv your
ſelfe, moſt thirſtingly affected to embrace in your ovvne perſon,

the braueſt enterpriſes, if the time vvould once affoord anie
ſuch fit occaſion, as might be agreeable to her Maiesties reſolution:
vvho vviſely (and long may she do it) gouerneth
all things to the greateſt aduantage of her ſelfe and people.
The other, becauſe my ſelfe hauing bene a member in the ſayd
actions, and vvas Lieutenant of Maiſter Carleils ovvne
companie, vvhereby I can vvell aſſure the truth of this report:
I thought it my bounden duetie, hauing profeſſed my
ſeruice to your Lordship before all men, to dedicate the ſame
rather vnto your Lordship then to anie other. And although
it be novve a yeare and a halfe ſithence the voyage ended,
vvhereby ſome man vvill ſay, that it is novve no nevve
matter: yet the preſent time conſidered, hovv doubtfull ſome
of our meaner ſort of people are of the Spanish preparations,
I thinke this Diſcourſe a very fit thing to be published, that
they may ſee vvhat great victories a fevve English men haue
made vpon great numbers of the Spaniardes, euen at home in
their ovvne countreyes. The beholding vvhereof vvill much
encourage thoſe, vvho by fame and bare vvordes are made to
doubt much more then there is cauſe vvhy they should. Vpon
vvhich point, as there may be much ſayd: ſo my ſelfe being no
Diſcourſer, do deſire to be held excuſed therein: and therefore
doe onely commend the trueth of this report vnto your
Lordship: vvhich vvill be alſo auovved by diuers Captaines
that vvere in the ſayd voyage. And ſo in all humbleneſſe
do take my leaue, readie to do your Lordship all faithfull ſeruice.
            
               Your Lordſhips ſouldier
and humble ſeruant.
THOMAS CATES.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A SVMMARIE AND TRVE
DISCOVRSE OF SIR FRAVNCES
DRAKES WEST INDIAN VOYAGE▪
            
            vvherein vvere taken the tovvnes of Sainct Iago,
Sancto Domingo, Cartagena and Sainct
Auguſtine.
            
               THIS worthie knight for the ſeruice
of his Prince and countrie,
hauing prepared his whole
fleete, and gotten them downe
to Plimouth in Deuonſhire, to
the nūber of fiue & twenty ſaile
of ſhips & pinnaces, & hauing
aſſembled of ſouldiers and mariners to the number
of two thouſand and three hundred in the whole,
embarqued them and him ſelfe at Plimouth aforeſayd
the twelfth day of September 1585. being accompanied
with theſe men of name and charge,
which hereafter followe.
            
               Maiſter Chriſtopher Carleill Lieutenant Generall,
a man of long experience in the warre as well by
ſea as land, & had formerly carried high offices

in both kindes in many fights, which he diſcharged
alwaies verie happily, and with great good
reputation.
               Anthonie Powell Sergeant Maior.
               Captaine Matthew Morgan, and Captaine Iohn
Sampſon Corporals of the field.
            
            Theſe principall officers had commandement
ouer the reſt of the lande Captaines, whoſe names
hereafter follow.
            
               Captaine Anthonie Plat.
               Captaine Iohn Merchant.
               Captaine Edward VVinter.
               Captaine Iohn Goring.
               Captaine Robert Pew.
               Captaine George Barton.
               Captaine VVilliam Cecill.
               Captaine VValter Bigs.
               Captaine Iohn Hannam.
               Captaine Richard Stanton.
               Captaine Martine Frobuſher Vizeadmirall, a man
of great experience in ſea faring action, and had
carried chiefe charge of many ſhips himſelfe, in
ſundry voyages before, being nowe ſhipped in
the Primeroſe.
               Captaine Francis Knolles, Rieradmirall in the Gallion
Leiceſter.
               Maiſter Thomas Venner Captaine in the Elizabeth

Bonaduenture vnder the Generall.
               Maiſter Edward VVinter Captaine in the Aide.
               Maiſter Chriſtopher Carleill the Lieutenant generall,
Captaine in the Tigar.
               Henrie VVhite Captaine of the ſea Dragon.
               Thomas Drake Captaine of the Thomas.
               Thomas Seelie Captaine of the Minion.
               Bailie Captaine of the Barke Talbot.
               Robert Croſſe Captaine of the Barke Bond.
               George Forteſcute Captaine of the Barke Bonner.
               Edward Careleſſe Captaine of the Hope.
               Iames Erizo Captaine of the white Lion.
               Thomas Moone Captaine of the Francis.
               Iohn Riuers Captaine of the Vantage.
               Iohn Vaughan Captaine of the Drake.
               Iohn Varney Captaine of the George.
               Iohn Martin Captaine of the Beniamin.
               Edward Gilman Captaine of the Skout.
               Richard Hawkins Captaine of the Galliot called
the Ducke.
               Bitfield Captaine of the Swallow.
            
            After our going hence, which was the fourteenth
of September, in the yeare of our Lord, one thowſand
fiue hundred eighty and fiue: and taking our
courſe towards Spaine, we had the winde for a few
daies ſomewhat skant, and ſometimes calme. And
being ariued neere that part of the coaſt of Spaine,

which is called the Mores, we happened to eſpie
diuerſe ſailes, which kept their courſe cloſe by the
ſhore, the weather being faire and calme. The Generall
cauſed the Vizeadmirall to goe with the Pinnaces
well manned to ſee what they were, who vppon
ſight of the ſaid pinnaces approching nere vnto
them, abandonned for the moſt parte all their
ſhippes (being Frenchmen) laden all with ſalt, and
bounde homewardes into France, amongſt which
ſhips (being all but of ſmall burden) there was one
ſo well liked, which alſo had no man in her, as being
brought vnto the Generall, he thought good to
make ſtay of her for the ſeruice, meaning to pay for
her, as was accordingly performed at our returne,
which barke was called the Drake. The reſt of theſe
ſhips being eight or nine, were diſmiſſed without
any thing at all taken from them. VVe being afterwards
put ſomewhat further off from the ſhore, by
the contrarietie of winde, we happened to meete
with ſome other French ſhips, full laden with Newland
fiſh, being vpon their returne homeward from
the ſaid New found land: whom the Generall after
ſome ſpeech had with them, and ſeeing plainly that
they were Frenchmen, diſmiſſed without once ſuffering
any man to go aboord of them.
            The day following ſtanding in with the ſhore againe,
we diſcried an other tall ſhip of twelue ſcore

tunnes or thereabouts, vpon whom Maiſter Carleill
the Lieutenant generall being in the Tiger, vndertooke
the chaſe, whom alſo anone after the Admirall
followed, and the Tiger hauing cauſed the
ſaid ſtrange ſhip to ſtrike her ſailes, kept her there
without ſuffering any bodie to go aboord vntill the
Admirall was come vp: who foorthwith ſending for
the Maiſter, and diuerſe others of their principall
men, and cauſing them to be ſeuerally examined,
founde the ſhip and goodes to be belonging to the
inhabitants of S. SEBASTIAN in Spaine, but the
marriners to be for the moſt parte belonging to
S. Iohn de LVCE & the paſſage. In this ſhip was great
ſtore of drie Newland fiſh, commonly called with
vs Poore Iohn, wherof afterwards being thus found
a lawfull prize, there was diſtribution made into all
the ſhips of the Fleete, the ſame being ſo newe and
good, as it did very greatly beſtead vs in the whole
courſe of our voyage. A day or two after the taking
of this ſhip, we put in with the Iſles of BAYON, for
lacke of fauourable wind, where we had no ſooner
anckered ſome part of the Fleete, but the Generall
commaunded all the Pinnaces with the ſhip boates
to be manned, and euerie man to be furniſhed with
ſuch armes as was needefull for that preſent ſeruice,
which being done, the Generall put him ſelfe into
his Galley, which was alſo well furniſhed, and rowing

towards the Citie of BAYON, with intent, & the
fauour of the Almighty to ſurpriſe it. Before we had
aduaunced one halfe league of our way, there came
a meſſenger being an Engliſh Marchant form the
Gouernour, to ſee what ſtraunge Fleete we were,
who came to our Generall, and conferred a while
with him, and after a ſmall time ſpent, our Generall
called for Captaine Sampſon, and willed him to go
to the Gouernour of the Citie, to reſolue him of
two pointes. The firſt, to knowe if there were any
warres betweene Spaine and England. The ſecond
why our Marchants with their goods were imbarred
or arreſted. Thus departed Captaine Sampſon
with the ſaid meſſenger to the citie, where he found
the Gouernour and people much amazed of ſuch a
ſudden accident.
            The Generall with the aduiſe and counſell of
Maiſter Carleill his Lieutenant generall, who was
in the galley with him, thought not good to make
any ſtand, till ſuch time as they were within ſhot of
the Citie, where they might be readie vpon the returne
of Captaine Sampſon, to make a ſudden attempt
if cauſe did require before it was darke.
            Captaine Sampſon returned with his meſſage in
this ſort. Firſt, touching peace or warres, the Gouernour
ſayd he knew of no warres, and that it lay
not in him to make any, he being ſo meane a ſubiect

as he was. And as for the ſtay of the Marchants
with their goods, it was the kings pleaſure, but not
with intent to endommage any man. And that the
kings conter commandement was (which had bene
receaued in that place ſome ſeauennight before)
that Engliſh Marchants with their goods ſhould be
diſcharged: for the more verifying whereof, he
ſent ſuch Marchants as were in the towne of our
Nation, who traffiqued thoſe parts: which being at
large declared to our Generall by them, counſell
was taken what might beſt be done. And for that
the night approched, it was thought needefull to
land our force, which was done in the ſhutting vp of
the day, & hauing quartered our ſelues to our moſt
aduantage, with ſufficient gard vpon euery ſtraight,
we thought to reſt our ſelues for that night there.
The Gouernour ſent vs ſome refreſhing, as bread,
wine, oyle, apples, grapes, marmalad and ſuch like.
About midnight the weather beginnes to ouercaſt,
inſomuch that it was thought meeter to repaire aboord,
then to make any longer abode on land, and
before we could recouer the Fleete, a great tempeſt
aroſe, which cauſed many of our ſhips to driue from
their ancher hold, and ſome were forced to ſea in
great perill, as the barke Talbot, the barke Hawkins
and the Speedewell, which Speedewell onely was
driuen into England, the others recouered vs again,

the extremity of the ſtorme laſted three daies,
which no ſooner beganne to aſſwage, but Maiſter
Carleill our Lieutenant generall, was ſent with his
owne ſhip and three others: as alſo with the galley
and with diuers Pinnaces, to ſee what he might do
aboue VIGO, where he toke many boats and ſome
Caruels, diuerſly laden with things of ſmall value,
but chiefly with houſhold ſtuffe, running into the
high countrey, and amongſt the reſt, he found one
boate laden with the principall Church ſtuffe of the
high Church of VIGO, where alſo was their great
Croſſe of ſiluer, of very faire emboſſed worke, and
double gilt all ouer, hauing coſt them a great maſſe
of money. They complained to haue loſt in all kind
of goods aboue thirtie thowſand Duckets in this
place.
            The next day the General with his whole Fleete
went vp frō the Iles of BAYON, to a very good harbour
aboue VIGO, where Maiſter Carleill ſtayd his
comming, aſwell for the more quiet riding of his
ſhips, as alſo for the good commoditie of freſh watering,
which the place there did afoord full well. In
the meane time the Gouernour of GALLISIA had
reared ſuch forces as he might, his numbers by eſtimate
were ſome two thowſand foot, and three hundred
horſe, & marched from BAYON to this part of
the countrey, which lay in ſight of our Fleete, where

making ſtand, he ſent to parle with our Generall,
which was graunted by our Generall, ſo it might be
in boates vpon the water: and for ſafetie of their
perſons, there were pledges deliuered on both
ſides, which done, the Gouernor of GALLISIA put
him ſelfe with two others into our Vize-Admirals
Skiffe, the ſame hauing bene ſent to the ſhore for
him: And in like ſort our General in his own Skiffe,
where by them it was agreed, we ſhould furniſh our
ſelues with freſh water, to be taken by our own people
quietly on the land, and haue all other ſuch neceſſaries,
paying for the ſame, as the place would
affoorde.
            VVhen all our buſineſſe was ended, we departed,
& toke our way by the Iſlands of CANARIA, which
are eſteemed ſome three hundred leagues from
this part of Sapin, & falling purpoſely with PALMA,
with intention to haue taken our pleaſure of that
place, for the full digeſting of many things into order,
and the better funiſhing our ſtore with ſuch ſeuerall
good things as that affoordeth very abundantly,
we were forced by the vile ſea gate, which
at that preſent fell out, and by the naughtineſſe of
the landing place, being but one, and that vnder the
fauor of many Platformes, well furniſhed with great
ordinance, to depart with the receipt of many their
Canon ſhot, ſome into our ſhips, and ſome beſides,

ſome of them being in very deede full Canon high.
But the onely or chiefe miſchiefe, was the daungerous
ſea ſurge, which at ſhore all alongeſt, plainly
threatned the ouerthrow of as many Pinnaces and
boates, as for that time ſhould haue attempted any
landing at all.
            Now ſeeing the expectation of this attempt fruſtrated
by the cauſes aforeſaid, we thought it meeter
to fal with the Iſle FERRO, to ſee if we could find
any better fortune, and comming to the Iſland, we
landed a thouſand men in a valley vnder a high
mountaine, where we ſtayed ſome two or three
houres, in which time the inhabitants, accompanied
with a yong fellow borne in England, who dwelt
there with them, came vnto vs, ſhewing their ſtate
to be ſo poore, that they were all readie to ſtarue,
which was not vntrue: and therefore without any
thing gotten, we were all commaunded preſently
to imbarke, ſo as that night we put off to ſea South
Southeaſt along towards the coaſt of Barbarie.
            Vpon Saterday in the morning, being the thirteenth
of Nouember, we fell with Cape Blancke,
which is a low land & ſhallow water, where we catched
ſtore of fiſh, & doubling the Cape, we put into
the Bay, where we found certain Frēch ſhips of war,
whom we entertained with great curteſie, and there
left them. The after noone the whole Fleete aſſembled,

               
                  Ciuitas S. IACOBI eo nomine quo Inſula vocatur, et commercium habet cum Guynea et adiuctis regionibus Africæ, vndè merces in Luſitaniam deuehunt.
La Citte de Sainct Jacques ditte du nom de liſle traficque auet la ville de guinee et les pais voiſins de la Affrique dois l
                        ••
                      tranſpo
                        •
                     e
                        •
                      les marchandiſes en lombardie.
               
               
which was a litle ſcattered about their fiſhing,
& put frō thence to the Iſles of Cape Verde, ſayling
till the ſixteenth of the ſame moneth in the morning,
on which day we deſcried the Iſland of S. IAGO,
and in the euening we anckered the Fleet betwene
the towne called the PRAY or PRAY and S. IAGO,
where we put on ſhore a thouſand men or more,
vnder the leading of Maiſter Chriſtopher Carleill
Lieutenant Generall, who directed the ſeruice moſt
like a wiſe commaunder. The place where we had
firſt to march did affoord no good order, for the
ground was mountaines and full of dales, being a
maruellous ſtonie & troubleſome paſſage, but ſuch
was his induſtrious diſpoſition, as he would neuer
leaue, vntil we had gotten vp to a faire plaine, where
we made ſtand for the aſſembling of the Army. And
when we were all gathered together vpō the plaine,
ſome two litle miles from the towne, the Lieutenant
generall thought good not to make attempt
till day light: becauſe there was not one that could
ſerue for guide or giuing knowledge at all of the
place. And therefore after hauing well reſted, euen
halfe an houre before day, he commanded the Armie
to be deuided into three ſpeciall parts, ſuch as
he appointed, whereas before we had marched by
ſeuerall companies, being thereunto forced by the
naughtineſſe of the way as is aforeſayd.
            
               
Now by the time we were thus raunged into a
very braue order day light began to appeare, and
being aduaunced hard to the wall, we ſawe no enemie
to reſiſt, whereupon the Leiutenant generall
appointed Captaine Sampſon with thirtie ſhot, &
Captaine Barton with other thirtie, to goe downe
into the towne which ſtood in the valey vnder-vs,
and might verie plainely be veiwed all ouer from
that place where the whole Army was now arriued
& preſently after theſe Captaines was ſent the great
Enſigne, which had nothing in it but the plaine Engliſh
Croſſe, to be placed towardes the ſea, that our
fleet might ſee Saint Georges Croſſe floriſh in the
enemies fortreſſe. Order was giuen that all the ordinance
througout the towne and vpon all the platformes,
which was aboue fifty peeces all ready charged,
ſhould be ſhot of in honor of the Queenes Maieſties
coronation day, being the ſeuententh of Nouember,
after the yearly cuſtome of England, which
was ſo anſwered againe by the ordinance out of all
the ſhips in the fleete which now was come neere,
as it was ſtraunge to heare ſuch a thondering noiſe
laſt ſo long to gether. In this meane while the Leiutenaunt
generall held ſtill the moſt part of his force
on the hill top, till ſuch time as the towne was
quartered out for the lodging of the whole armie,
which being done euerie Captaine toke his owne

quarter, and in the euening was placed ſuch ſufficient
gard vpon euerie part of the towne that we had
no cauſe to feare any preſent enemie.
            Thus we continued in the citie the ſpace of fourteene
daies, taking ſuch ſpoiles as the place yelded,
which were for the moſt part, wine, oile, meale, and
ſome other ſuch like things for victuall, as vineger,
oliues & ſome other traſh, as marchandiſe for their
Indian trades. But there was not found any treaſure
at all, or any thing elſe of worth beſides.
            The ſcituation of Sainct IAGO is ſomwhat ſtrange
in forme like to a triangle, hauing on the Eaſt and
VVeſt ſides two mountaines of Rocke and cliffie,
as it were hanging ouer it, vpon the top of which
two mountains was builded certaine fortifications
to preſerue the towne from any harme that might
be offered. From thence on the South ſide of the
towne is the maine ſea, and on the North ſide, the
valley lying betweene the foreſayd mountaines,
wherein the towne ſtandeth: the ſaide valley and
towne both do grow very narrow, inſomuch that
the ſpace betweene the two cliffes of this ende of
the towne is eſtimated not to be aboue tenne or
twelue ſcore ouer.
            In the middeſt of the valley cometh downe a riueret,
rill, or brooke of freſh water, which hard by
the ſea ſide maketh a pond or poole, whereout our

ſhips were watered with very great eaſe and pleaſure.
Somewhat aboue the towne on the North ſide
betweene the two mountaines, the valley wageth
ſomewhat larger then at the townes end, which valley
is wholie conuerted into gardens and orchards
well repleniſhed with diuers ſorts of fruicts, herbes
& trees, as lymmons, oranges, ſuger canes, cochars
or cochos nuts, plantens, potato roots, cocombers,
ſmall and round onions, garlicke, and ſome other
things not now remembred, amongſt which the cochos
nuts and plantens are very pleaſant fruicts, the
ſayd cochos hauing a hard ſhell and a greene huske
ouer it, as hath our walnut, but it farre exceedeth in
greatneſſe, for this cochos in this greene huske is
bigger then any mans two fiſtes, of the hard ſhell
many drinking cups are made here in England, and
ſet in ſiluer as I haue often ſeene.
            Next within this hard ſhell is a white rine reſembling
in ſhew very much euen as any thing may do,
to the white of an egge when it is hard boyled. And
within this white of the nut lyeth a water, which is
whitiſh and very cleere, to the quantitie of halfe a
pint or thereabouts, which water and white rine before
ſpoken of, are both of a very coole freſh taſte,
and as pleaſing as any thing may be. I haue heard
ſome hold opinion, that it is very reſtoratiue.
            The Planten groweth in cods, ſomewhat like to

beanes, but is bigger and longer, and much more
thicke together on the ſtalke, and when it waxeth
ripe, the meate which filleth the rine of the cod becommeth
yellow, and is exceeding ſweet and pleaſant.
            In this time of our being there, hapned to come
a Portingall to the VVeſtermoſt fort, with a flag of
truce, to whom Captaine Sampſon was ſent with
Captaine Goring, who comming to the ſayd Meſſenger,
he firſt asked them what nation they were,
they aunſwered Engliſhmen, he then required to
know if warres were betweene England & Spaine,
to which they anſwered that they knew not, but if
he would go to their Generall he could beſt reſolue
him of ſuch particulars, and for his aſſurance of paſſage
and repaſſage, theſe Captaines made offer to
ingage their credits, which he refuſed for that he
was not ſent from his Gouernor. Then they tolde
him, if his Gouernor did deſire to take a courſe for
the common benefit of the people and contrie, his
beſt way were to come & preſent himſelfe vnto our
Noble and merciful Gouernor Sir Frances Drake:
whereby he might be aſſured to finde fauour, both
for him ſelfe and the inhabitants. Otherwiſe within
three daies we ſhould march ouer the land, and conſume
with fire all inhabited places, and put to the
ſworde all ſuch liuing ſoules as we ſhould chaunce

vpon: ſo thus much he tooke for the concluſion of
his anſwer, and departing, he promiſed to returne
the next day, but we neuer heard more of him.
            Vpon the foure and twentieth of Nouember, the
Generall accompanied with the Lieutenant generall
and ſix hundred men, marched foorth to a village
twelue miles within the lande, called S. DOMINGO,
where the Gouernor and the Biſhop with
all the better ſort were lodged, and by eight of the
clocke we came to it, finding the place abandoned,
& the people fled into the mountaines: ſo we made
ſtande a while to eaſe our ſelues, and partly to ſee if
any would come to ſpeake to vs. After we had well
reſted our ſelues, the Generall commaunded the
troupes to march away homewardes, in which retreat
the enemy ſhewed them ſelues, both horſe &
foote, though not ſuch force as durſt encounter vs:
and ſo in paſſing ſome time at the gaſe with them, it
waxed late and towards night, before we could recouer
home to S. IAGO.
            On Munday the ſix & twentieth of Nouember,
the Generall commanded all the Pinnaces with the
boates, to vſe all diligence to imbarke the Armie
into ſuch ſhips as euery man belonged. The Lieutenant
generall in like ſort commaunded Captaine
Goring and Lieutenant Tucker, with one hundred
ſhot to make a ſtand in the market place, vntill our

               
                  Ciuitas S. DOMINICI ſita in Hiſpaniola Indica Angliae magnitudine fere aequalis, ipſa vrbs eleganter ab Hiſpanis extructa, et omnibꝰ circum vicinis Inſ
                        •
                     jura dat.
                  La Citte' de Sainct Dominique aſiſſe en la petite Heſpaigne Indienne aegalle priſque én grandeur a'lAngleterre. ceſte Ville a eſte ſuperbemant baſtie par lés éspagnol
                        •
                     .
elle. Commande a toutes lés Contreès Voiſines▪
                  
               
               
forces were wholly imbarked, the Vizeadmirall
making ſtay with his Pinnace and certaine boates
in the harbour, to bring the ſayd laſt company aboord
the ſhips. Alſo the Generall willed foorthwith
the Gallie with two Pinnaces to take into thē
the company of Captaine Barton, and the company
of Captaine Bigs, vnder the leading of Captaine
Sampſon, to ſeeke out ſuch munition as was hidden
in the ground, at the towne of PRAY or PLAY, hauing
beene promiſed to be ſhewed it by a priſoner,
which was taken the day before. The Captaines aforeſaid
comming to the PLAY, landed their men,
and hauing placed the troupe in their beſt ſtrength,
Captaine Sampſon tooke the priſoner, and willed
him to ſhewe that he had promiſed, the which he
could not, or at leaſt would not: but they ſearching
all ſuſpected places, found two pieces of ordinance
one of yron, an other of braſſe. In the after noone
the Generall anckered the reſt of the Fleete before
the PLAY, comming him ſelfe a ſhore, willing vs to
burne the towne and make all haſte a boorde, the
which was done by ſixe of the clocke the ſame day,
and our ſelues imbarked againe the ſame night, and
ſo we put off to ſea Southweſt.
            But before our departure from the towne of S.
IAGO, we eſtabliſhed orders for the better gouernment
of the armie, euery man muſtered to his Capetaine,

and 
                  •
               the
                  •
                miniſtred to acknowledge her Maieſtie
ſupreame Gouernour, as alſo euery man to
do his vttermoſt endeuour to aduaunce the ſeruice
of the action, and to yeeld due obedience vnto the
directions of the Generall and his officers. By this
prouident counſell, and laying downe this good
foundation before hand, all things went forward
in a due courſe, to the a
                  •
               chiuing of our happie enterpriſe.
            In all the time of our being here, neither the Gouernor
for the king of Spaine, which is a Portingall,
neither the Biſhop, whoſe authoritie is great, neither
any of the inhabitants of the towne or Iſland euer
came at vs (which we expectected they ſhould
haue done) to intreate vs to leaue them ſome part
of their needefull prouiſions, or at the leaſt, to ſpare
the ruining of their towne at the going away. The
cauſe of this their vnreaſonable diſtruſt (as I do take
it) was the freſh remembrance of the great wrongs
they had done to olde Maiſter VVilliam Hawkins
of Plimouth, in the voyage he made fower or fiue
yeares before, when as they did both breake their
promiſe, and murdered many of his men, whereof
I iudge you haue vnderſtood, and therefore needeleſſe
to be here repeated. But ſince they came not
at vs, we left written in ſundry places, as alſo in the
Spitle houſe (which building was onely appointed

to be ſpared) the great diſcontentment and ſcorne
we tooke at this their refraining to come vnto vs, as
alſo at the rude maner of killing, and ſauage kind of
handling the dead body of one of our boyes, found
by them ſtragling all alone, from whom they had
taken his head and his heart, and had ſtragled the
other bowels about the place, in a moſt brutiſh and
moſt beaſtly maner.
            In reuenge whereof at our departing we conſumed
with fire all the houſes, aſwell in the countrey
which we ſawe, as in the towne of S. IAGO.
            From hence putting ouer to the VVeſt Indies,
we were not many dayes at ſea, but there beganne
amongſt our people ſuch mortalitie, as in few daies
there were dead aboue two or three hundred men.
And vntil ſome ſeuen or eight dayes after our comming
from S. IAGO, there had not died anie one
man of ſickeneſſe in all the Fleete: the ſickeneſſe
ſhewed not his infection wherewith ſo many were
ſtroken, vntill we were departed thence, and then
ſeazed our people with extreme hote burning and
continuall ague, whereof ſome verie fevve eſcaped
vvith life, and yet thoſe for the moſt part not vvithout
great alteration and decay of their vvittes and
ſtrength for a long time after. In ſome that dyed
vvere plainely ſhevved the ſmall ſpottes, vvhich are
often found vpon thoſe that be infected vvith the

plague, we were not aboue eighteene daies in paſſage
betweene the ſight of Sainct IAGO aforeſaid,
and the Iſland of DOMINICA, being the firſt Iſland
of the VVeſt Indies that we fell withall, the ſame being
inhabited with ſauage people, which goe all naked,
their skin couloured with ſome painting of a
reddiſh tawney, verie perſonable and handſome
ſtrong men, who doe admit little conuerſation with
the Spaniards: for as ſome of our people might vnderſtand
them, they had a Spaniard or twaine priſoners
with them, neither doe I thinke that there is any
ſafety for any of our nation, or any other to be
within the limits of their commaundement, albeit
they vſed vs very kindely for thoſe fewe houres of
time which we ſpent with them, helping our folkes
to fill and carie on their bare ſhoulders freſh water
from the riuer to our ſhips boats, and fetching from
their houſes, great ſtore of Tobacco, as alſo a kinde
of bread, which they fed on, called Caſſado, verie
white and ſauerie, made of the rootes of Caſſania.
In recompence whereof, we beſtowed liberali rewardes
of glaſſe, coloured beades and other things,
which we had found at Sainct IAGO, wherewith (as
it ſeemed) they reſted very greatly ſatisfied, and
ſhewing ſome ſorowfull countenance when they
perceaued that we would depart.
            From hence we went to another Iſland VVeſtward

of it, called Sainct CHRISTOPHERS Iſland,
wherein we ſpent ſome dayes of Chriſtmas, to refreſh
our ſicke people, and to cleanſe and aire our
ſhips. In which Iſland were not any people at all that
we could heare of.
            In which time by the General it was aduiſed and
reſolued, with the conſent of the Lieutenant generall,
the Vizeadmirall, and all the reſt of the Captaines
to proceede to the great Iſland of HISPANIOLA,
as well for that we knewe our ſelues then
to be in our beſt ſtrength, as alſo the rather allured
thereunto, by the glorious fame of the Citie of S.
DOMINGO, being the auncienteſt and chiefe inhabited
place in all that tract of country there abouts.
And ſo proceeding in this determination, by the
way we met with a ſmall Frigot, bound for the ſame
place, the which the Vizeadmirall tooke, and hauing
duly examined the men that were in her, there
was one found by whom we were aduertiſed, the
hauen to be a barred hauen, and the ſhore or lande
thereof to be well fortified, hauing a Caſtle therevpon
furniſhed with great ſtore of artillerie, without
the daunger whereof, was no conuenient landing
place with ten Engliſh miles of the Citie, to
which the ſayd Pilote tooke on him to conduct vs.
            All things being thus conſidered on, the whole
forces were commaunded in the euening to imbarke

them ſelues into Pinnaces, boates, and other
ſmall barkes appointed for this ſeruice. Our ſouldiers
being thus imbarked, the Generall put him
ſelfe into the barke Fraunces as Admirall, and all
this night we lay on the ſea, bearing ſmall ſaile vntil
our arriuall to the landing place, which was about
the breaking of the day, and ſo we landed, being
New yeares day, nine or tenne miles to the VVeſtwardes
of that braue Citie of S. DOMINGO: for at
that time nor yet is known to vs, any landing place,
where the ſea ſurge doth not threaten to ouerſet a
Pinnace or boate. Our Generall hauing ſeene vs all
landed in ſafetie, returned to his Fleete, bequeathing
vs to God, and the good conduct of Maiſter
Carleill our Lieutenant generall, at which time, being
about eight of the clocke, we began to march,
and about noone time, or towards one of the clock
we approched the towne, where the Gentlemen
and thoſe of the better ſorte, being ſome hundred
and fiftie braue horſes or rather more, began to preſent
them ſelues, but our ſmall ſhot played vpon
them, which were ſo ſuſtained with good proportion
of pikes in all partes, as they finding no part of
our troope vnprepared to receaue them (for you
muſt vnderſtand they viewed all round about) they
were thus driuen to giue vs leaue to proceede towardes
the two gates of the towne, which were the

next to the ſeaward. They had manned them both,
and planted their ordinance for that preſent and
ſudden alarum without the gates, and alſo ſome
troopes of ſmall ſhot in Ambuſcado vpon the high
way ſide. VVe deuided our whole force, being
ſome thouſand or twelue hundred men into two
partes, to enterpriſe both the gates at one inſtant,
the Lieutenant generall hauing openly vowed to
Captaine Powell (who led the troope that entred
by the other gate) that with Gods good fauour he
would not reſt vntill our meeting in the market
place.
            Their ordinance had no ſooner diſcharged vpon
our neere approche, and made ſome execution
amongeſt vs, though not much, but the Leiutenant
generall beganne forthwith to aduaunce both his
voice of encoragment and paſe of marching, the
firſt man that was ſlaine with the ordinaunce being
verie neere vnto him ſelfe, and thereupon haſted
all that he might to keepe them from the reaching
of the ordinaunce. And notwithſtanding their Ambuſcadoes,
we marched or rather ranne ſoe roundly
into them, as pell mell we entered the gates with
them, and gaue them more care euerie man to ſaue
himſelfe by flight, then reaſon to ſtand any longer
to their broken fight, we forthwith repaired to the
market place, but to be more truely vnderſtood

a place of very faire ſpatious ſquare ground before
the great Church, whither alſo came as had beene
agreed, Captaine Powell with the other troope,
which place with ſome part next vnto it we ſtrengthened
with Barricados, & there as the moſt conuenient
place aſſured our ſelues, the Citie being farre
too ſpatious for ſo ſmall and wearie a troope to vndertake
to gard. Somwhat after midnight they who
had the gard of the Caſtle, hearing vs buſie about
the gates of the ſaid Caſtle, abandoned the ſame,
ſome being taken priſoners, and ſome flying away
by the helpe of boates, to the other ſide of the hauen,
and ſoe into the countrey.
            The next day we quartered alitle more at large,
but not in the halfe part of the towne, and ſo making
ſubſtantiall trenches, and planting all the ordinaunce,
that each parte was correſpondent to other,
we held this towne the ſpace of one moneth.
            In the which time hapned ſome accidents more
then are well remembred for the preſent, but amongeſt
other thinges it chaunced that the Generall
ſent on his meſſage to the Spaniardes a negro
boy with a flagge of white, ſignifying truce as is the
Spaniards ordinarie maner to do there, when they
approch to ſpeake with vs, which boy vnhappily
was firſt met withal, by ſome of thoſe who had bene
belonging as officers for the king in the Spaniſh

galley, which with the towne was lately fallen into
our hands, who without all order or reaſon, & contrary
to that good vſage wherewith we had entertained
their meſſengers, furiouſlie ſtroke the poore
boy through the body with one of their horſemens
ſtaues, with which wound the boy returned to the
Generall, and after he had declared the maner of
this wrongfull crueltie, died forthwith in his preſence,
wherewith the Generall being greatly paſſioned,
commanded the Prouoſt martiall, to cauſe a
couple of Friers, then priſoners, to be caried to the
ſame place where the boy was ſtroken, accompanied
with ſufficient gard of our ſouldiers, and there
preſently to be hanged, diſpatching at the ſame inſtant
another poore priſoner, with this reaſon wherfore
this execution was done, and with this meſſage
further, that vntill the partie who had thus murthered
the Generals meſſenger, were deliuered into
our hands, to receaue condigne puniſhment, there
ſhould no day paſſe, wherein there ſhould not two
priſoners be hanged, vntill they were all conſumed
which were in our hands.
            VVhereupon the day folowing, he that had bene
Captaine of the kings galley, brought the offendor
to the townes ende, offring to deliuer him into our
hands, but it was thought a more honourable reuenge,
to make them there in our ſight, to performe

the execution them ſelues, which was done accordingly.
            During our being in this towne, as formerly alſo
at S. IAGO there had paſſed iuſtice vpon the life of
one of our owne companie for an odious matter: ſo
here likewiſe was there an Iriſh man hanged, for
the murthering of his Corporall.
            In this time alſo paſſed many treaties betweene
their commiſſioners and vs, for ranſome of their Citie,
but vpon diſagreements, we ſtill ſpent the early
mornings in firing the outmoſt houſes: but they
being built very magnificently of ſtone, with high
loftes, gaue vs no ſmall trauell to ruine them. And
albeit for diuers dayes together, we ordained eche
morning by day breake, vntill the heate began at
nine of the clocke, that two hundred mariners did
nought elſe but labour to fier and burne the ſayd
houſes without our trenches, whileſt the ſouldiers
in a like proportion ſtood foorth for their gard: yet
did we not or could not in this time conſume ſo
much as one third part of the towne. And ſo in the
end, what wearied with firing, and what haſtened by
ſome other reſpects, we were content to accept of
fiue and twentie thouſand Duckets, of fiue ſhillings
ſixe pence the peece, for the raunſome of the reſt of
the towne. Amongſt other things which happened
and were found at S. DOMINGO, I may not omit to

let the world know one very notable marke and token,
of the vnſatiable ambition of the Spaniſh King
and his nation, which was found in the kings houſe,
wherein the chiefe Gouernour of that Citie and
countrey is appointed always to lodge, which was
this. In the comming to the hall or other roomes of
this houſe, you muſt firſt aſcend vp by a faire large
paire of ſtaires, at the head of which ſtaires is a handſome
ſpatious place to walke in, ſomewhat like vnto
a gallerie, wherein vpon one of the walles, right
ouer againſt you as you enter the ſayd place, ſo as
your eye cā not eſcape the ſight of it, there is deſcribed
& painted in a very large Scutchion, the armes
of the king of Spaine, & in the lower part of the ſaid
Scutchion, there is likewiſe deſcribed a globe, containing
in it the whole circuite of the ſea and the
earth, whereupon is a horſe ſtanding on his hinder
part within the globe, and the other fore part without
the globe, lifted vp as it were to leape, with a
ſcroll painted in his mouth, wherein was written
theſe wordes in Latin NON SVFFICIT ORBIS:
which is as much to ſay, as the world ſuffiſeth not,
whereof the meaning was required to be knowne
of ſome of thoſe of the better ſort, that came in commiſſion
to treate vpon the ranſome of the towne,
who would ſhake their heads, and turne aſide their
countenance in ſome ſmiling ſort, without aunſwering

any thing, as greatly aſhamed thereof. For by
ſome of our companie it was told them, that if the
Queene of England would reſolutely proſecute the
warres againſt the king of Spaine, he ſhould be forced
to lay aſide that proude and vnreaſonable reaching
vaine of his, for he ſhould finde more then
inough to do, to keepe that which he had alreadie,
as by the preſent example of their loſt towne they
might for a beginning perceaue well inough.
            Now to the ſatisfying of ſome men, who maruell
greatly that ſuch a famous & goodly builded Citie
ſo wel inhabited of gallant people, very brauely apparelled
(whereof our ſouldiers found good ſtore
for their reliefe) ſhould afoord no greater riches
then was found there, wherein it is to be vnderſtood
that the Indian people, which were the naturals of
this whole Iſland of HISPANIOLA (the ſame being
neare hand as great as England) were many yeares
ſince cleane conſumed by the tyrannie of the Spaniards,
which was cauſe, that for lacke of people to
worke in the Mines, the gold & ſiluer Mines of this
Iſland are wholie giuen ouer, and thereby they are
faine in this Iſland to vſe copper money, whereof
was found verie great quantitie. The chiefe trade of
this place conſiſteth of ſuger & ginger, which groweth
in the Iſland, and of hides of oxen and kine,
which in this waſt countrey of the Iſland are bred

               
                  Ciuiras CARTAGENA in India Occidentalis continente ſita, portu commodiſsimo, ad mercaturum inter Hiſpaniam et Peru exercendam.
                  La citte de cartageimes situeé en la terre F
                        ••
                     m
                        •
                      des Ind
                        ••
                      Occidentalle a' vn port fort▪ commode pour le iraſiq de' lespaigne auec le Perris.
               
               
in infinite numbers, the ſoile being very fertile: and
the ſaid beaſts are fed vp to a very large growth, &
ſo killed for nothing ſo much, as for their hides aforeſaid.
VVe found here great ſtore of ſtrong wine,
ſweete oyle, vineger, oliues and other ſuch like prouiſions,
as excellent wheate meale packed vp in
wine pipes and other caske, and other commodities
likewiſe, as wollen and linnen cloth, and ſome
ſilkes, all which prouiſions are brought out of Spain
and ſerued vs for great releefe. There was but litle
plate or veſſell of ſiluer, in compariſon of the great
pride in other things of this towne, becauſe in theſe
hote countreyes they vſe much of theſe earthen diſhes
finely painted or varniſhed, which they call
Parſellina, and is had out of the Eaſt India, and for
their drinking, they vſe glaſſes altogether, whereof
they make excellent good and faire in the ſame
place. But yet ſome plate we found, and many other
good things, as their houſhold garniture very gallant
and rich, which had coſt them deare, although
vnto vs they were of ſmall importance.
            From S. DOMINGO we put ouer to the maine
or firme land, and going all alongeſt the coaſt, we
came at the laſt in ſight of CARTAGENA, ſtanding
vpon the ſea ſide, ſo neare as ſome of our barkes in
paſſing alongeſt, approched within the reach of
their Culuerin ſhot, which they had planted vpon

certaine platformes. The harbour mouth lay ſome
fiue miles to the VVeſtward of the towne, wherinto
we entred about three or foure of the clocke in the
after noone without any reſiſtance, or ordinance or
other impeachment planted vpon the ſame. In the
euening we put our ſelues on land towards the harbour
mouth, vnder the lea
                  •
               ing of Maiſter Carleill
our Lieutenant generall, who after he had digeſted
vs to march forward about the midnight, as eaſily
as foot might fall, expreſſely commanding to keepe
cloſe by the ſea waſh of the ſhore for our beſt and
ſureſt way, whereby we were like to go through, and
not to miſſe any more of the way, which once we
had loſt within an hower after our firſt beginning to
march, through the ſlender knowledge of him that
toke vpō him to be our guide, wherby the night ſpēt
on, which otherwiſe muſt haue bene done by reſting.
But as we came within two miles of the town,
their horſemen which were ſome hundred, met vs,
and taking the Alarum, retired to their towneward
againe vpon the firſt volley of our ſhot that was giuen
them: for the place where we encountred being
woodie and buſhie euen to the water ſide, was vnmeete
for their ſeruice.
            At this inſtant we might heare ſome peeces of
artillerie diſcharged, with diuers ſmall ſhot towards
the harbour, which gaue vs to vnderſtand, according

to the order ſet downe in the euening before
by our Generall, that the Vizeadmirall accompanied
with Captaine Venner, Captaine VVhite, and
Captaine Croſſe, with other ſea Captaines, and
with diuers Pinnaces and boates ſhould giue ſome
attempt vnto the litle fort ſtanding on the entrie of
the inner hauen, neare adioyning to the towne,
though to ſmall purpoſe, for that the place was
ſtrong, and the entrie very narrow was chained ouer:
ſo as there could be nothing gotten by that attempt,
more then the giuing them an Alarum on
that other ſide of the hauen, being a mile or two
from the place where we nowe were. In which attempt
the Vizeadmirall had the rudder of his Skiffe
ſtroken through with a Saker ſhot, and litle or no
harme receaued elſewhere.
            The troopes being nowe in their march halfe a
mile behither the towne or leſſe, the ground we
were on grewe to be ſtraight, and not aboue fiftie
paſes ouer, hauing the maine ſea on the one ſide of
it, and the harbour water or inner ſea (as you may
tearme it) on the other ſide. This ſtraight was fortified
cleane ouer with a ſtone wall and a ditch without
it, the ſaid wall being as orderly built with flanking
in euery part, as can be ſet downe. There was
onely ſo much of this ſtraight vnwalled, as might
ſerue for the iſſuing of the horſemen, or the paſſing

of cariage in time of neede: but this vnwalled part
was not without a very good Barricado of wine
buts or pipes, filled with earth, full and thick as they
might ſtand on end one by other ſome part of them
ſtanding euen within the maine ſea.
            This place of ſtrength was furniſhed of ſixe great
peeces, demi-Culuerins and Sakers, which ſhot directly
in front vpon vs as vve approched. Novve
without this wall vpon the inner ſide of the ſtraight,
they had brought likewiſe two great gallies with
their proweſſe to the ſhore, hauing planted in them
eleuen peeces of ordināce which did beat all croſſe
the ſtraight, and flanked our comming on. In theſe
two galleyes wered planted three or foure hundred
ſmall ſhot, and on the land in the gard onely of this
place three hundred ſhot and pikes.
            They in this their full readineſſe to receaue vs,
ſpared not their ſhot both great and ſmall. But our
Lieutenant generall, taking the aduantage of the
darke (the day light as yet not broken out) approched
by the loweſt ground, according to the
expreſſe direction which him ſelfe had formerly giuen,
the ſame being the ſea waſh ſhore, where the
water was ſomewhat fallen, ſo as moſt of all their
ſhot was in vaine. Our Lieutenant generall commaunded
our ſhot to forbeare ſhooting vntill we
were come to the wall ſi
                  •
               e, & ſo with pikes roundly

together we approched the place, where we ſoone
found out the Barricadoes of pipes or buts, to be
the meeteſt place for our aſſault, which notwithſtanding
it was well furniſhed with pikes and ſhot, was
without ſtaying attempted by vs: downe went the
buts of earth, and pell mell came our ſwordes and
pikes together, after our ſhot had firſt giuen their
volley, euen at the enemies noſe. Our pikes were
ſomewhat longer then theirs, and our bodies better
armed, for very fewe of them were armed, with
which aduantage our ſwordes and pikes grewe to
hard for them, and they driuen to giue place. In
this furious entrie, the Lieutenant generall ſlue with
his owne hands, the chief enſigne bearer of the Spaniards,
who fought very manfully to his liues end.
            VVe followed into the towne with them, and giuing
them no leaſure to breath, we wanne the market
place, albeit they made head, and fought a while
before we got it, and ſo we being once ſeazed and
aſſured of that, they were content to ſuffer vs to
lodge within their towne, and them ſelues to go to
their wiues, whom they had caried into other places
of the countrey before our comming thither.
            At euerie ſtreetes end they had raiſed very fine
Barricadoes of earth workes, with trenches without
them, as well made as euer we ſaw any worke done:
at the entring whereof was ſome litle reſiſtance, but

ſoone ouercome, it was with few ſlaine or hurt. They
had ioyned with them many Indians, whom they
had placed in corners of aduantage, all bowe men,
with their arrowes moſt villanouſly empoiſoned, ſo
as if they did but breake the skinne, the partie ſo
touched died without great maruell: ſome they ſlue
of our people with their arrowes, ſome they likewiſe
miſchieued to death with certaine prickes or ſmall
ſtickes ſharply pointed, of a foote and a halfe long,
the one end put into the ground, the other empoiſoned,
ſticking faſt vp, right againſt our comming
in the way, as we ſhould approch from our landing
towardes the towne, whereof they had planted a
wonderfull number in the ordinarie way, but our
keeping the ſea waſh ſhore, miſſed the greateſt part
of them very happily.
            To ouerpaſſe many particular matters, as the
hurting of Captaine Sampſon at ſword blowes in
the firſt entring, vnto whom was committed the
charge of the pikes of the Vantgard by his lot and
turne, as alſo of the taking of Alonſo Brauo the
chiefe commander of that place by Captaine Goring,
after the ſayd Captaine had firſt hurt him with
his ſword, vnto which Captaine was committed the
charge of the ſhot of the ſaid Vantgard.
            Captaine VVinter was likewiſe by his turne of
the Vantgard in this attempt, where alſo the Lieutenant

generall marched him ſelfe, the ſayd Captaine
VVinter through a great deſire to ſerue by land, hauing
now exchaunged his charge by ſea with Captaine
Cecill for his band of footemen.
            Captaine Powell the Sergeant maior had by his
turne, the charge of the foure companies which
made the battaile.
            Captaine Morgan, who at S. DOMINGO was of
the Vantgard, had nowe by turne his charge vpon
the companies of the Riergard.
            Euerie man aſwell of one part as of another,
came ſo willingly on to the ſeruice, as the enemie
was not able to endure the furie of ſuch hote aſſault.
VVe ſtayed here ſixe weekes, & the ſickeneſſe with
mortality before ſpoken of, ſtill continuing among
vs, though not with the ſame furie as at the firſt, and
ſuch as were touched with the ſaid ſickeneſſe, eſcaping
death, very few or none almoſt could recouer
againe their ſtrength, yea many of them were much
decayed in their memorie, inſomuch that it was
grovven an ordinarie iudgement, vvhen one vvas
heard to ſpeake fooliſhly, to ſay he had bene ſicke
of the Calentour, vvhich is the Spaniſh name of
their burning ague: for as I told you before, it is a
verie burning & peſtilent ague. The originall cauſe
thereof, is imputed to the euening or firſt night aire
which they tearme La ſerena, vvherein they ſay and

hold very firme opinion, that who ſo is then abroad
in the open aire, ſhall certainly be infected to the
death, not being of the Indian or naturall race of
thoſe countrey people: our people by holding their
watch, were thus ſubiected to the infectious aire,
which at S. IAGO was moſt daungerous and deadly
of all other places.
            VVith this incōuenience of continuall mortality,
we were forced to giue ouer our intēded enterpriſe,
to go with NOMBRE DE DIOS, and ſo ouerland
to PANNANIA, where we ſhoulde haue ſtroken
the ſtroke for the treaſure, and full recompence of
our tediouſe trauailes. And thus at CARTAGENA
we toke our firſt reſolution to returne homewards.
            But while we were yet there, it happened one
day, that our watch called the Sentinell, vpon the
Church ſteeple, had diſcouered in the ſea a couple
of ſmall barkes or boates, making in with the harbour
of CARTAGENA, wherepō Captaine Moone
and Captaine Varney, with Iohn Grant the Maiſter
of the Tyger, and ſome other ſeamen, embarqued
them ſelues in a couple of ſmall Pinnaces, to take
them before they ſhould come neare the ſhore, at
the mouth of the harbour, leſt by ſome ſtragling
Spaniards from the land, they might be warned by
ſignes from cōming in, which fell out accordingly,
notwithſtāding al the diligence that our men could

vſe: for the Spaniſh boates, vpon the ſight of our
Pinnaces comming towards them, ran themſelues
a ſhore, and ſo their men preſently hid them ſelues
in the buſhes hard by the ſea ſide, amongeſt ſome
others that had called them by ſignes thither. Our
men preſently without any due regard had to the
qualitie of the place, and ſeeing no man of the Spaniards
to ſhew them ſelues, aboorded the Spaniſh
barkes or boates, and ſo ſtanding all open in them,
were ſuddenly ſhot at by a troope of Spaniards out
of the buſhes, by which volley of ſhot there were
ſlaine Captaine Varney, who died preſently, and
Captaine Moone, who died ſome fewe dayes after,
beſides ſome foure or fiue others that were hurt: &
ſo our folkes returned without their purpoſe, not
hauing anie ſufficient number of ſouldiers, with
them to fight on ſhore. For thoſe men they carried
were all marriners to rowe, fewe of them armed, becauſe
they made accompt with their ordinance to
haue taken the barks well inough at ſea, which they
might full eaſily haue done, without any loſſe at all,
if they had come in time to the harbour mouth, before
the Spaniards boates had gotten ſo neare the
ſhore.
            During our abode in this place, as alſo a S. DOMINGO,
there paſſed diuerſe curteſies betweene vs
and the Spaniards, as feaſting, and vſing them with

all kindneſſe and fauour: ſo as amongſt others there
came to ſee the Generall, the Gouernour of CARTAGENA,
with the Biſhop of the ſame, and diuerſe
other Gentlemen of the better ſort.
            This towne of CARTAGENA we touched in the
out parts, and conſumed much with fire, as we had
done S. DOMINGO vpon diſcontentments, and
for want of agreeing with vs in their firſt treaties
touching their ranſome, which at the laſt was concluded
betweene vs, ſhould be a hundred and ten
thouſand Duckets for that which was yet ſtanding,
the Ducket valued at fiue ſhillings ſixe pence ſterlinge.
            This towne (though not halfe ſo bigge as S. DOMINGO)
giues as you ſee, a farre greater ranſome,
being in very deede of farre more importance, by
reaſon of the excellencie of the harbour, and the fit
ſituation thereof, to ſerue the trade of NOMBRE
DE DIOS and other places, and is inhabited with
farre more rich merchants. The other is chiefly inhabited
with Lawyers and braue Gentlemen, being
the chiefe or higheſt appeale of their ſutes in law of
all the Iſlands about it, and of the maine land coaſt
next vnto it. And it is of no ſuch accompt as CARTAGENA,
for theſe and ſome other like reaſons,
which I could giue you, ouer long to be now writtē.
            The warning which this towne receaued of our

comming towards them, from S. DOMINGO, by
the ſpace of twentie dayes before our ariuall hither,
was cauſe that they had both fortified & euery way
prepared for their beſt defence. As alſo that they
had caried & conueyed away all their treaſure and
principall ſubſtance.
            The ranſome of an hundred and ten thouſand
Duckets thus concluded on, as is aforeſayd, the
ſame being written, & expreſſing for nothing more
then the towne of CARTAGENA, vpon the paiment
of the ſayd ranſome, we left the ſayd towne, and
drewe ſome part of our ſouldiers into the Priorie or
Abbey, ſtanding a quarter of an Engliſh mile belowe
the towne vpon the harbour water ſide, the
ſame being walled with a wall of ſtone, which we
told the Spaniards was yet ours, and not redeemed
by their compoſition: where upon they finding the
defect of their contract, were content to enter into
onother raunſome for all places, but ſpecially for
the ſayd houſe, as alſo the blocke houſe or Caſtle,
which is vpon the mouth of the inner harbour. And
when we asked as much for the one as for the other,
they yeelded to giue a thouſand crownes for the
Abbey, leauing vs to take our pleaſure vpon the
blocke houſe, which they ſayd they were not able
to raunſome, hauing ſtretched them ſelues to the
vttermoſt of their powers: and therefore the ſayd

blocke houſe was by vs vndermined, and ſo with
gun pouder blowen vp in peeces.
            VVhile this latter contract was in making, our
whole Fleete of ſhips fell downe towards the harbour
mouth, where they ankered the third time, &
employed their men in fetching of freſh water aboord
the ſhips for our voyage homewardes, which
water was had in a great well, that is in the Iſland by
the harbour mouth, which Iſland is a verie pleaſant
place as hath bene ſeene, hauing in it manie ſorts of
goodly and very pleaſant fruits, as the orenge trees
and others, being ſet orderly in walkes of great
length together. Inſomuch as the whole Iſland being
ſome two or three miles about, is caſt into
groundes of gardening and orchards.
            After ſixe weekes abode in this place, we put to
ſea the laſt of March, where after two or three dayes
a great ſhip which we had taken at S. DOMINGO,
and thereupon was called the New yeares gift, fell
into a great leake, being laden with ordināce, hides,
and other ſpoiles, and in the night ſhe loſt the companie
of our Fleete, which being miſſed the next
morning by the Generall, he caſt about with the
whole Fleete, fearing ſome great miſchaunce to be
happened vnto her, as in verie deede it ſo fell out,
for her leake was ſo great, and her men were all tyred
with pomping. But at the laſt hauing found her

and the Barke Talbot in her companie, which ſtaying
by great hap with her, was readie to take their
men out of her, for the ſauing of them. And ſo the
Generall being fully aduertiſed of their great extremitie,
made ſaile directly backe againe to CARTAGENA
with the whole Fleete, where hauing ſtayed
eight or tenne dayes more, about the vnlading of
this ſhip, and the beſtowing thereof and her men,
into other ſhips, we departed once againe to ſea,
directing our courſe towards the Cape S. ANTHONIE,
being the Eaſtermoſt part of CVBA, whither
we arriued the ſeuen & twentieth of Aprill. But becauſe
freſh water could not preſently be found, we
weyed anker and departed, thinking in fewe dayes
to recouer the MATTANCES, a place to the Eaſtward
of HAVANA.
            After we had ſailed ſome fourteene dayes, we
were brought to Cape S. ANTHONIE againe, thorough
lacke of fauorable wind: but thē our ſcarſitie
was growen ſuch, as neede made vs looke a litle
better for water, which we found in ſufficient quantitie,
being in deede, as I iudge, none other then
raine water newly fallen, and gathered vp by making
pittes in a plot of marriſh ground, ſome three
hundred paſes from the ſea ſide.
            I do wrong if I ſhould forget the good example
of the Generall at this place, who to encourage

others, and to haſten the getting of freſh water aboord
the ſhips, tooke no leſſe paine him ſelfe then
the meaneſt, as alſo at S. DOMINGO, CARTAGENA
and all other places, hauing alwayes ſo vigilant a
care and foreſight in the good ordering of his fleet,
accompanying them, as it is ſayd, with ſuch wonderfull
trauell of bodie, as doubtleſſe had he bene
the meaneſt perſon, as he was the chiefeſt, he had
yet deſerued the firſt place of honour: and no leſſe
happie do we accompt him, for being aſſociated
with Maiſter Carleill his Lieutenant generall, by
whoſe experience, prudent counſell, and gallant
performance, he atchiued ſo many and happie enterpriſes
of the warre, by whom alſo he was verie
greatly aſſiſted, in ſetting downe the needefull orders,
lawes, and courſe of iuſtice, and for the due
adminiſtration of the ſame vpon all occaſions.
            After three dayes ſpent in watering our ſhips, we
departed now the ſecond time from this Cape of S.
ANTHONIE the thirteenth of May, and proceeding
about the Cape of FLORIDA, we neuer touched
anie where, but coaſting alongſt FLORIDA, and
keeping the ſhore ſtill in ſight, the eight and twentieth
of May early in the morning, we deſcried on
the ſhore a place built like a Beacon, which was in
deede a ſcaffold vpon foure long maſtes, raiſed on
ende for men to diſcouer to the ſeaward, being in

the latitude of thirtie degrees, or verie neare thereunto.
Our Pinnaces manned, and comming to the
ſhore, we marched vp alongſt the riuer ſide, to ſee
what place the enemy held there: for none amongſt
vs had any knowledge thereof at all.
            Here the General tooke occaſion to march with
the companies him ſelfe in perſon, the Lieutenant
generall hauing the Vantgard, and going a mile vp
or ſomewhat more by the riuer ſide, we might diſcerne
on the other ſide of the riuer ouer againſt vs,
a fort, which newly had bene built by the Spaniards,
and ſome mile or there about aboue the fort, was a
litle towne or village without walles, built of woodden
houſes: we forthwith prepared to haue ordinance
for the batterie, and one peece was litle
before the euening planted, and the firſt ſhot being
made by the Lieutenant generall him ſelfe at their
Enſigne, ſtrake through the Enſigne, as we afterwards
vnderſtood by a French man, which came
vnto vs from them. One ſhot more was then made,
which ſtrake the foote of the fort wall, which was all
maſſiue timber of great trees like maſtes. The Lieutenant
generall was determined to paſſe the riuer
this night with foure companies, and there to lodge
him ſelfe intrenched as neare the fort, as that he
might play with his muskets and ſmalleſt ſhot vpon
anie that ſhould appeare: and ſo afterwards to bring

and plant the batterie with him, but the helpe of
marriners for that ſudden to make trenches could
not be had, which was the cauſe that this determination
was remitted vntill the next night.
            In the night the Lieutenant general tooke a litle
rowing Skiffe, and halfe a doſen well armed, as
Captaine Morgan, and Captaine Sampſon, with
ſome others beſides the rowers, and went to viewe
what gard the enemie kept, as alſo to take knowledge
of the ground. And albeit he went as couertly
as might be, yet the enemy taking the Alarum, grew
fearefull that the whole Force was approching to
the aſſault, and therefore with all ſpeede abandoned
the place after the ſhooting of ſome of their
pecces. They thus gone, and he being returned
vnto vs againe, but nothing knowing of their flight
from their fort, forthwith came a French man being
a Phipher (who had bene priſoner with them) in a
litle boate, playing on his phiph the tune of the
Prince of Orenge his ſong, and being called vnto
by the gard, he tolde them before he put foote out
of the boate, what he was him ſelfe, and howe the
Spaniards were gone from the ſort, offering either
to remaine in hands there, or elſe to returne to the
place with them that would go.
            Vpon this intelligence the Generall, the Lieutenant
generall, with ſome of the Captaines in one

Skiffe, and the Vizeadmirall with ſome others in
his Skiffe, and two or three Pinnaces furniſhed of
ſouldiers with them, put preſently ouer towards the
fort, giuing order for the reſt of the Pinnaces to follow.
And in our approch, ſome of the enemie bolder
then the reſt, hauing ſtayed behind their companie,
ſhot off two peeces of ordinance at vs: but
on ſhore we went, and entred the place without finding
any man there.
            VVhen the day appeared, we found it built all
of timber, the walles being none other then whole
maſts or bodies of trees ſet vpright and cloſe together
in maner of a pale, without anie ditch as yet
made, but who intended with ſome more time, for
they had not as yet finiſhed all their worke, hauing
begun the ſame ſome three or fower moneths before:
ſo as to ſay the truth, they had no reaſon to
keepe it, being ſubiect both to fier and eaſie aſſault.
            The platforme whereon the ordinance lay, was
whole bodies of long pine trees, whereof there is
great plentie, layed a croſſe one on another, and
ſome litle earth amongſt. There was in it thirteene
or fourreene great peeces of braſſe ordinance, and
a cheſt vnbroken vp, hauing in it the value of ſome
two thouſand pounds ſterling, by eſtimation of the
Kings treaſure, to pay the ſouldiers of that place,
who were a hundred and fiftie men.
            
               
The fort thus wonne, which they called S. Iohns
fort, and the day opened, we aſſayed to go to the
towne, but could not by reaſon of ſome riuers and
broken ground which was betweene the two places:
and therefore enforced to imbarke againe into
our Pinnaces, we went thither vpō the great maine
riuer, which is called as alſo the towne by the name
of S. AVGVSTINE.
            At our approching to land, there was ſome that
began to ſhewe them ſelues, and to beſtowe ſome
fewe ſhot vpon vs, but preſently withdrewe them
ſelues. And in their running thus away, the Sergeant
maior finding one of their horſes readie ſadled and
bridled, tooke the ſame to follow the chaſe, and ſo
ouergoing all his companie, was (by one layed behind
a buſh) ſhot through the head, & falling downe
therewith, was by the ſame and two or three more,
ſtabbed in three or foure places of his bodie with
ſwords and daggers, before anie could come neere
to his reskue. His death was much lamented, being
in verie deede an honeſt wiſe Gentleman, and a
ſouldier of good experience, and of as great courage
as anie man might be.
            In this place called S. AVGVSTINE, we vnderſtood
the King did keepe as is before ſaid, one hundred
and fiftie ſouldiers, and at an other place ſome
dozen leagues beyond to the Northwardes, called

               
                  Ciuitas S. AVGVSTINI figneis ædibus constructa a
                        •••
                     iſsi
                        •••
                     s habuit hortes, vndig ſolo fæcundiſsimo, ab Anglis iniecto igni destructa est Praeſidium hic erat iso Hispanorum,
af
                        ••
                     tque eodem numero ad 12 verſus Septentrionem leuces in loco S. Helena dicto Hæc præſidia autem eo conſilio disposita vt prohiberent Anglos et Gallos, ne interiectam occuparet regionē.
                  La Citte Sainct Auguſtin t
                        •••
                     t
                        •
                      Baſlie de Maiſ
                        •••
                     s de bois d
                        ••
                      jardins 
                        〈◊〉
                      p
                        ••••
                     ſ
                        •
                     ns et dúnne térre fort f
                        ••••
                     lle 
                        〈◊〉
                      a eſ
                        •
                      br
                        •
                     ſlee pur les Anglo
                        ••
                      il y aunt in idle Ʋne garriſon de 150 Eſp
                        ••
                     n
                        ••
                     ls et vne auttre de parrit n
                        •
                     mbre.

                        〈◊〉
                      12 lieues Ʋers les ſept
                        ••••
                     ion au 
                        〈◊〉
                      appelle Sanct heleine et ſes garriſons eſ
                        ••••
                      pour enp
                        ••
                     ier lés Angl
                        ••
                     s et les Fancois dinaahir le pai
                        •
                      giſant au millieu.
               
               
S. HELENA, he did there likewiſe kepe an hundred
and fiftie more, ſeruing there for no other purpoſe,
then to keepe all other nations from inhabiting any
part of all that coaſt, the gouernement wherof was
committed to one Pedro Melendez Marqueſſe, nephew
to that Melendez the Admiral, who had ouerthrown
Maiſter Iohn Hawkins in the Bay of MEXICO
ſome fifteene or ſixteene yeares agoe. This Gouernour
had charge of both the places, but was at
this time in this place, and one of the firſt that left
the ſame.
            Here it was reſolued in full aſſemblie of Captaines,
to vndertake the enterpriſe of S. HELENA,
and from thence to ſeeke out the inhabitation of
our Engliſh countrey men in VIRGINIA, diſtant
from thence ſome ſixe degrees Northward.
            VVhen we came thwart of S. HELENA, the ſhols
appearing daungerous, and we hauing no Pilot to
vndertake the entrie, it was thought meeteſt to go
hence alongſt. For the Admirall had bene the ſame
night in foure fadome and halfe three leagues from
the ſhore: and yet we vnderſtood, that by the helpe
of a knowen Pilot, there may and doth go in ſhips
of greater burthen and draught then anie we had in
our Fleete.
            VVe paſſed thus alongeſt the coaſt hard abord
the ſhore, which is ſhallow for a league or two from

the ſhore, and the ſame is lowe and broken land
for the moſt part.
            The ninth of Iune vpon ſight of one ſpeciall great
fire (which are verie ordinarie all alongſt this coaſt,
euen from the Cape FLORIDA hither) the Generall
ſent his Skiffe to the ſhore, where they found
ſome of our Engliſh countrey men (that had bene
ſent thither the yeare before by Sir VValter Raleigh)
& brought one aboord, by whoſe direction
we proceeded along to the place, which they make
their Port. But ſome of our ſhips being of great
draught vnable to enter, we ankered all without the
harbour in a wild road at ſea, about two miles from
ſhore.
            From whence the General wrote letters to Maiſter
Rafe Lane, being Gouernour of thoſe Engliſh
in VIRGINIA, and then at his fort about ſix leagues
from the rode in an Iſland, which they call ROANOAC,
wherein ſpecially he ſhewed how readie he
was to ſupply his neceſſities and wants, which he vnderſtood
of, by thoſe he had firſt talked withall.
            The morrowe after Maiſter Lane him ſelfe and
ſome of his companie comming vnto him, with the
conſent of his Captaines, he gaue them the choiſe
of two offers, that is to ſay: Either he would leaue a
ſhip, a Pinnace, and certaine boates with ſufficient
Maiſters and mariners, together furniſhed witha

moneths victuall to ſtay and make farther diſcouerie
of the country and coaſtes, and ſo much victuall
likewiſe that might be ſufficient for the bringing of
them all (being an hundred and three perſons) into
England if they thought good after ſuch time, with
anie other thing they would deſire, & that he might
be able to ſpare.
            Or elſe if they thought they had made ſufficient
diſcouerie alreadie, and did deſire to returne into
England, he would giue them paſſage. But they as
it ſeemed, being deſirous to ſtay, accepted verie
thankefully, and with great gladneſſe that which
was offred firſt. VVherupon the ſhip being appointed
& receaued into charge, by ſome of their owne
companie ſent into her by Maiſter Lane, before
they had receaued from the reſt of the Fleete, the
prouiſion appointed thē, there aroſe a great ſtorme
(which they ſayde was extraordinarie and verie
ſtraunge) that laſted three dayes together, and
put all our Fleete in great daunger, to be driuen
from their ankering vpon the coaſt. For we brake
manie Cables, and loſt manie ankers. And ſome of
our Fleete which had loſt all (of which number was
the ſhip appointed for Maiſter Lane and his companie)
were driuen to put to ſea in great danger, in
auoiding the coaſt, and could neuer ſee vs againe
vntill we met in England. Manie alſo of our ſmall

Pinnaces and boates were loſt in this ſtorme.
            Notwithſtanding after all this, the Generall offered
them (with conſent of his Captaines) another
ſhip with ſome prouiſion, although not ſuch a one
for their turnes, as might haue bene ſpared them
before, this being vnable to be brought into their
harbour. Or elſe if they would, to giue them paſſage
into England, although he knewe he ſhould performe
it with greater difficultie then he might haue
done before.
            But Maiſter Lane with thoſe of the chiefeſt of
his companie he had then with him, conſidering
what ſhould be beſt for them to doe, made requeſt
vnto the Generall vnder their handes, that they
might haue paſſage for England: the which being
graunted, and the reſt ſent for out of the countrey
and ſhipped, we departed from that coaſt the eighteenth
of Iune.
            And ſo God be thanked, both they and we in
good ſafetie arriued at Porteſmouth the eight and
twentieth of Iuly 1586. to the great glorie of God,
and to no ſmall honour to our Prince, our countrey
and our ſelues.
            The totall value of that which was gotten in this
voyage, is eſtimated at three ſcore thouſand poūds,
whereof the companies which haue trauelled in the
voyage were to haue twentie thouſand pounds, the

aduenturers the other fortie. Of which twenty thouſand
poundes (as I can iudge) will redound ſome
ſixe pounds to the ſingle ſhare.
            VVe loſt ſome ſeuen hundred and fiftie men in
the voyage. The men of name that died and were
ſlaine in this voyage, as I can preſently call to my
remembrance, are theſe.
            
               Captaine Powell.
               Captaine Varney.
               Captaine Moone.
               Captaine Forteſcute.
               Captaine Bigges.
               Captaine Cecill.
               Captaine Hannam.
               Captaine Greenefield.
               Thomas Tucker a Lieutenaunt.
               Alexander Starkey a Lieutenaunt.
               Maiſter Eſcot a Lieutenaunt.
               Maiſter VVaterhouſe a Lieutenaunt.
               Maiſter Nicholas VVinter.
               Maiſter Alexander Carleill.
               Maiſter Robert Alexander.
               Maiſter Scroope.
               Maiſter Iames Dier.
               Maiſter Peter Duke.
            
            VVith ſome other, who for haſt I can not ſo ſuddenly
thinke on.
            The ordinance gotten of all ſorts braſſe and iron
were about two hundred and fortie, whereof the
two hundred and ſome more were braſſe, and were
thus found and gotten.
            
               
               In S. IAGO ſome two or three & fiftie peeces.
               In S. DOMINGO about foure ſcore, whereof was
verie much great ordinance, as whole Cannon, Dimi-Cannon,
Culuerins and ſuch like.
               In CARTAGENA ſome ſixtie and three peeces,
and good ſtore likewiſe of the greater ſort.
               In the fort of S. AVGVSTINE were foureteene
peeces.
               The reſt was Iron ordinance, of which the moſt
part was gotten at S. DOMINGO, the reſt at CARTAGENA.
            
            
         
      
   