
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  SIONS
SONETS.
                  
                     Sung
By SOLOMON the King,
And
PERIPHRAS'D
By
FRA. QVARLES.
                  LONDON
Printed by W. Stansby for Thomas
Dewe, and are to bee ſold at his
ſhoppe in Saint Dunſtanes
Church-yard. 1625.
               
            
         
         
            
            
            TO
THE TRVLY
NOBLE AND NO LESSE
GOOD
THEN GREAT
LORD,
IAMES,
MARQVES
Hamleton.
            
               SIR,
            
            
               HAd theſe Lines beene
looſe, and laſciuious, I
had either pickt out a
leſſe honorable Patron,
or ſtood to the courteſie
of euery wanton Reader; But being (as

they are) of a diuine ſubiect, therefore
ſubiect to the ill-digested humours of
light heads, by your fauour (thrice noble
Lord) you are bound to protect it, being
the knowne Patron to goodneſſe. There
are too few ſuch: This makes glorious
Vice ſo bold, and baſhfull Vertue ſo inglorious.
You are a bright Starre in our
Orbe; on which, all good eyes are fixt,
and by the ſpeciall influence of which,
theſe preſented Lines, had their conception,
their birth, their being; and now
crept forth, repay themſelues to You, hope
to receiue honour from You, and ſue for
protection vnder You. So I commit them
to the honour of ſo great a fortune.
            
               SIR,
               The true honourer of your
admired worth,
FRANCIS QVARLES.
            
         
         
            
            To the Readers.
            REaders, now you haue them. May the
end of my paines be the beginning of
your pleaſures. Excuſe me for ſoaring
ſo high, elſe giue me leaue to excuſe my ſelfe;
Indeed I flue with Eagles feathers; otherwiſe
I had not flowne, or falne. It is the Song
of Songs, I here preſent you with: The Author,
King SOLOMON, the wiſeſt of Kings;
The matter myſticall, the diuineſt of ſubiects:
The Speakers, CHRIST, the
Bridegroome; the CHVRCH, the
Bride; The end, to invite you
all to the weddïng.
Farewell.
            
         
         
            
            AN EPITHALME
TO THE BRIDEGROOME.
            
               HOSANNA to the Higheſt. Ioy betide
            The heauenly Bridegroome, and his holy Bride:
            
            Let Heauen aboue be fill'd with ſongs,
            Let Earth triumph below;
            For euer ſilent be thoſe tongues,
            That can be ſilent now.
            You Rocks, and Stones, I charge you all to breake
            Your flintie ſilence, if men ceaſe to ſpeake.
            You, that profeſſe that ſacred Art,
            Or now, or neuer ſhow it,
            Pleade not, your Muſe is out of heart,
            Here's that creates a Poet.
            Be rauiſh'd Earth, to ſee this contract driuen,
            'Twixt ſinfull Man, and reconciled Heauen.
            Diſmount you Quire of Angels; come,
            With Men, your joyes diuide;
            Heauen neuer ſhow'd ſo ſweet a GROOME,
            
            Nor Earth, ſo faire a BRIDE.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            SIONS
SONETS.
            
               BRIDE. SONET I.
               
                  1.
                  
                     O That the bountie of thoſe lips diuine,CAP. 1.
                  
                  Would ſeale their fauours, on theſe lips of mine,
                  That by thoſe welcomeSenſible graces. kiſſes, I might ſee
                  The mutuall loue, betwixt my Loue and mee,
                  For truer bliſſe, no worldly ioy allowes,
                  Then ſacred Kiſſes, from ſo ſweet a Spouſe,
                  With which, no earthly pleaſures may compare,
                  Riche Wines are not ſo delicate as thay're.
               
               
                  2.
                  NOr Myrrhe, nor Caſſia, nor the choice perfumes
                  Of vnctious Narde, or Aromatick fumes
                  Or hot Arabia, doe enrich the aire
                  With more delitious ſweetneſſe, then the faire
                  Reports, that crowne the merits of thy Name,
                  With heauenly Laurels of eternall fame,
                  Which makes thePure in heart. Virgins fixe their eyes vpon thee,
                  And all that view thee, are enamour'd on thee.
               
               
                  
                  3.
                  O, Let the beautie of thy Sunne-like face
                  Inflame my ſoule, and let thy glorie chace
                  Diſloyall thoughts; Let not the World allure
                  My chaſte deſires, from a Spouſe, ſo pure;
                  But when as Time ſhall place me on thyThe Kingdom of Heauen. Throne,
                  My feares will ceaſe, and interrupt by none,
                  I ſhall tranſcend the ſtile of Tranſitorie,
                  And full of glorie, ſtill be fill'd with glorie.
               
               
                  4.
                  BVt you, my curious (and too nice) Allyes,
                  That view my fortunes, with two narrow eyes,
                  You ſay my face isThrough apparant infirmities. blacke, and foule; 'tis true;
                  I'm beauteous, to my Loue, though black to you,
                  My cenſure ſtands not vpon your eſteeme,
                  He ſees me as IGlorious in him. am; you, as I ſeeme;
                  You ſee the Cloudes, but he diſcernes the Skie;
                  Know, 'Tis myWeakneſſe of the fleſh. Maske that lookes ſo blacke, not I.
               
               
                  5.
                  VVHat if Afflictions doe diſ-imbelliſh
                  My naturall glorie, and denie the relliſh
                  Of my adjourned beautie, yet diſdaine not
                  Her, by whoſe neceſſarie loſſe, you gaine not;
                  I was enforc'd to ſwelter inAfflictions. the Sunne,
                  AndForced to Idolatrous ſuperſtitions. keepe a ſtrangers Vine, left mine alone;
                  I left mine owne, and kept a ſtrangers Vine;
                  The fault wasBy reaſon of my weakneſſe. mine, but wasBeing ſeduced by falſe prophets. not onely mine.
               
               
                  
                  6.
                  O Thou, whoſe loue I prize aboue my life,
                  More worthy farre t'enjoy a fairer wife,
                  Tell mee, to what coole ſhade, doſt thou reſort?
                  Where graze thy Sheepe, where doe thy Lambs diſport
                  Free from the ſcortching of thisPerſecutions. ſowltrie weather?
                  O tell thy Loue, and let thy Loue come thither:
                  Say (gentle Shephard) fits it thee, to cheriſh
                  Thy priuate Flocks, and let thy true LoueBy Idolatrie. periſh?
               
            
            
               BRIDEGROOME. SONET. II.
               
                  ILluſtrious Bride, more radiant and moreThrough my merits and thy ſanctification. bright,
                  Then th' eye of Noone, thrice fairer then the light;
                  Thou deareſt off-ſpring of my dying blood,
                  And treaſure of my ſoule, why haſt thou ſtood
                  Parching ſo long in thoſe ambitious beames?
                  Come, come and coole thee in theſe ſiluerThe doctrine of the true Prophets. ſtreames;
                  Vnſhade thy Face, caſt backe thoſe golden Locks,
                  And I will make theeTeacher of my Congregations. Miſtris of my Flocks.
               
               
                  2.
                  O Thou, the Center of my choiſe deſires,
                  In whom I reſt, in whom my ſoule reſpires;
                  Thou art the flowre of beautie, and I prize thee
                  Aboue the World, how e're the World diſprize thee:
                  The blinde imagins all things black, by kinde;
                  Thou art as beautifull, as they are blinde:
                  And as the faireſt troopes of Pharoes Steeds
                  Exceed the reſt, ſo Thou, the reſt exceeds.
               
               
                  
                  3.
                  THyThy moſt viſable parts. Cheeke (the garden where freſh beautie plants
                  Her choyſeſt flowers) no adorning wants;
                  There wants no reliſh ofSanctification diuiner grace,
                  To ſumme compleatneſſe, in ſo ſweet a face;
                  Thy Neck, without a blemiſh, without blot,
                  Then pearle's more orient, cleare from ſtaine or ſpot;
                  Thy Gemmes and Iewels, full of curious art,
                  Imply the ſacred treaſures of thy heart.
               
               
                  4.
                  THe Sunne-bright glorie of thy reſounding fame,
                  Addes glorie, to the glorie of my Name;
                  The more's thy honour (Loue) the more thou ſtriu'ſt
                  To honour me; Thou gayneſt, what thou giu'ſt:
                  My Father (whom our Contract hath made thine)
                  Will giue thee large endowments ofThe riebes of his holy Spirit. diuine,
                  And euerlaſting treaſure; Thus by mee
                  Thou ſhalt be rich, that am thus rich, in Thee.
               
            
            
               BRIDE. SONET III.
               
                  OH, how my ſoule is rauiſht with the joyes,
                  That ſpring like fountains frō my true loues voice!
                  How cordiall are his lips! How ſweet his tongue!
                  Each word, he breathes, is a melodious ſong;
                  Hee abſent (ah) how is my glorie dimme!
                  I haue no beautie, not deriu'd from Him;
                  What e're I haue, from Him alone, I haue,
                  And Hee takes pleaſure in thoſe gifts, hee gaue.
               
               
                  
                  2.
                  AS fragrant Myrrhe, within the boſome hid,
                  Sents more delitious, then (before) it did,
                  And yet receiues no ſweetneſſe, from that breſt,
                  That prooues the ſweeter, for ſo ſweet a gueſt;
                  Euen ſo, the fauour of my deareſt Spouſe,
                  Thus priz'd, and placed in my heart, endowes
                  My ardent ſoule, with ſweetneſſe, and inſpires
                  With heauenly rauiſhment, my rapt deſires.
               
               
                  3.
                  VVHo euer ſmelt the breath of morning flowres,
                  New ſweerned with the daſh of twilight ſhowres,
                  Or pounded Amber, or the flowring Thyme,
                  Or purple Violets, in their proudeſt prime,
                  Or ſwelling Cluſters, from the Cypreſſe tree?
                  So ſweet's my Loue; I, farre more ſweet is Hee:
                  So faire, ſo ſweet, that heauens bright eye is dim,
                  And flowers haue no ſent, compar'd with Him.
               
            
            
               BRIDEGROOME. SONET IIII.
               O Thou, the joyes of my ſuff
                     ••
                  ed heart,
               The more thou think'ſt me faire, the more thou art;
               Looke in the Cryſtall mirrours of mine eyes,
               And view thy beautie; there thy beautie lyes:
               See there, th'vnmated glorie of thy Face,
               Well mixt with Spirit, and diuineſt grace;
               The eyes of Doues, are nor ſo faire, as thine:
               O, how thoſe eyes, inſtanie theſe eyes of mineThe holy Prophets.
               
            
            
               
               BRIDE. SONET V.
               
                  MOſt radiant, and refulgent Lampe of light,
                  Whoſe midday beautie, yet ne're found a night,
                  'Tis thou, 'tis onely thou art faire; from Thee
                  Reflect thoſeThe holy Spirit. rayes, that haue englightned mee,
                  And as bright Cynthia's borrow'd beames doe ſhine
                  From Titan's glorie, ſo doe I, from thine;
                  So daily flouriſhes our freſh delight,
                  In dailyIn giuing grace and receiuing glorie. giuing, and receiuing light.
               
               
                  2.
                  NOr does thy glorie ſhine to me alone;
                  What place, wherein thy glorie hath not ſhone?
                  But ô, how fragrant with rich odour, ſmells
                  ThatThe Congregation of Saints ſacred Houſe, where thou my true Loue dwells?
                  Nor is it ſtrange; How can thoſe places bee
                  But fill'd with ſweetneſſe, if poſſeſt with Thee!
                  My heart's a Heauen, for Thou art in that heart,
                  Thy preſence makes a Heauen, where e're thou art.
               
            
            
               BRIDEGROOME. SONET VI.
               
                  THou ſoueraigne Lady' of my ſelect deſires,CAP. II.
                  
                  I, I am Hee, whom thy chaſte ſoule admires;
                  The Roſe, for ſmell; the Lilly, to the eye,
                  Is not ſo ſweet, is not ſo faire as I;
                  My vailed beautie's not the glorious prize
                  
                     Not in outward glorie. Of common ſight;In inward graces. within, my beautie lies;
                  Yet ne'retheleſſe, my glorie were but ſmall,
                  If I ſhould want, to honour thee withall.
               
               
                  
                  2.
                  NOr doe I boaſt my Excellence alone,
                  But thine (deare Spouſe) as whom, the world hath none
                  So true to Faith, ſo pure in loue, as whome
                  Liues not a Bride ſo fits, ſo chaſte a Groome;
                  And as the faireſt Lilly doth exceede
                  The fruitleſſe Bramble, or the fouleſt weede,
                  So farre (my Loue) doſt thou exceede the reſt,
                  In perfect beautie, of a loyall breſt.
               
            
            
               BRIDE. SONET VII.
               
                  LOoke how the fruitfull Tree (whoſe laden boughs,
                  With ſwelling pride, crowne Autumnes ſmiling brows
                  Surpaſſes idle ſhrubs; euen ſo, in worth,
                  My loue tranſcends the Worthies of the earth:
                  He was my Shore, in Shipwrack; and my Shelter
                  In Stormes; my Shade, when I began to Swelter;
                  If hungrie, he was Foode; and if oppreſt
                  With wrongs, my Aduocate; with toile, my Reſt.
               
               
                  2.
                  I Thirſted; and, full charged to the brinke,
                  He gaue meThe holy Scriptures. boules of Nectar, for my drinke,
                  And in his Sides, he broacht me (for a ſigne
                  Of deareſt loue) a Sacramentall wine;
                  He freely gaue; I freely dranke my fill;
                  The more I dranke, the more remayned ſtill:
                  Did neuer Souldier, to his Colours proue
                  More chaſte, then I, to ſo entire a Loue.
               
               
                  
                  3.
                  O How his beautie ſets my ſoule on fire!
                  My ſpirits languiſh, with extreame deſire;
                  Deſires, exceeding limits, are too lauiſh,
                  And wanting meanes to be effected, rauiſh;
                  Then let thyThy ſweet Promiſes. breath, like flaggons of ſtrong wine,
                  Releeue and comfort this poore heart of mine;
                  For I am ſicke, till time (that doth delay
                  Our Mariage) bring our joyfull Mariage day.
               
               
                  4.
                  TIll then, ô let my deareſt Lord, by whome,
                  Theſe pleaſing paines of my ſweet ſorrowes come,
                  Performe his vowes, and with his due reſort,
                  Bleſſe me, to make the ſullen time ſeeme ſhort:
                  In his ſweet preſence, may I ſtill be bleſt,
                  Debarr'd from whom, my ſoule can finde no reſt;
                  O let all times be proſp'rous, and all places
                  Be witneſſe to our vndefil'd Embraces.
               
               
                  5.
                  ALl you, whoſe ſeeming fauours haue profeſt
                  The true affection of a loyall breſt,
                  I charge you all, by the true loue you beare
                  To friendſhip, or what elſe yee count moſt deare,
                  
                     Vexe not his Spirit with your ſinnes. Diſturbe yee not my Loue; O doe not reiue
                  Him of his joyes, that is ſo apt to grieue;
                  Dare not to breake his quiet ſlumbers, leſt
                  You rowze a raging Lion from his reſt.
               
               
                  
                  6.
                  HArke, harke, I heare that thrice-celeſtiall voyce,
                  Wherein my ſpirits, rapt with joyes, rejoyce;
                  A voice, that tells me, my beloued's nigh;
                  I know the Muſicke, by the Majeſtie:
                  Behold he comes; 'Tis not myThe imperfections of my preſent ſtate. blemiſht face,
                  Can ſlake the ſwiftneſſe of his winged pace;
                  Behold he comes; His Trumpet doth proclaime,
                  He comes with ſpeede; A truer loue ne're came.
               
               
                  7.
                  BEhold the fleetneſſe of his nimble feet;
                  The Roe-bucke, and the Hart were ne're ſo fleet:
                  The word I ſpake, flue not ſo ſpeedie from me,
                  As Hee, the treaſure of my ſoule comes to me;
                  Hee ſtands behind my Wall, as if in doubt
                  Of welcome; Ah, thisThe weaknes of my fleſh. Wall debarres him out:
                  O, how injurious is this Wall of ſin,
                  That barres my Louer out, and bolts me in!
               
            
            
               The BRIDE in the perſon of the BRIDEGROOME.
SONET VIII.
               
                  HArke, harke, me thinks I heare my true Loue ſay,
                  Breake down that enuious barre, and come away;
                  Ariſe (my deareſt Spouſe) and diſpoſſeſſe
                  The ſoule of doubtfull feares, nor ouer-preſſe
                  Thy tender ſpirits, with the dull deſpaire
                  Of thy demerits; (Loue) thou art as faire,
                  As earth will ſuffer; Time will make thee clearer;
                  Come forth (my Loue) then whom, my life's not dearer.
               
               
                  
                  2.
                  COme forth (my Ioy;) What bold affront of feare
                  Can fright thy ſoule, and I, thy Champion, here?
                  'Tis I that calls, 'tis I, thy Bridegroome, calls thee,
                  Betide it me, what euer euill befalls thee:
                  The winter of thy ſharpe Affliction's gone;
                  Why fear'ſt thou cold, and art ſo neere the Sunne?
                  I am thy Sunne, if thou be cold, draw nearer;
                  Come forth (my Loue) then whom, my life's not dearer.
               
               
                  3.
                  COme forth (my deare) the ſpring of joyes inuite thee,
                  TheThe Elect. Flowres contend for beautie, to delight thee,
                  Their ſweet ambition's onely, which might bee
                  Moſt ſweet, moſt faire, becauſe moſt like to thee:
                  TheAngels. Birds (ſweet Heralds of ſo ſweet a Spring)
                  Warble high notes, and Hymenaeans ſing;
                  All ſing, with joy, t'injoy ſo ſweet a Hearer;
                  Come forth (my Loue) then whom, my life's not dearer.
               
               
                  4.
                  THe proſp'rousThe Congregation of the faithfull. Vine, which this deare hād did plāt,
                  Tenders due ſeruice to ſo ſweet a Saint:
                  Her hidden Cluſters ſwell with ſacred pride,
                  ToTo offer vp the friſt fruits of obedience. kiſſe the lips of ſo, ſo faire a Bride;
                  Maſqu'd in their leafes, they lurke, fearing to bee
                  Diſcryde by any, till firſt ſeene by Thee;
                  The Clowds are paſt; the Heauens cannot be clearer;
                  Come forth (dear loue) then whom, my life's not dearer.
               
               
                  
                  5.
                  MY Doue, whom dailyPerſecutions. dangers teach new ſhifts,
                  That, like a Doue, do'ſt haunt the ſecret Clifts
                  Of ſolitarie Rocks; How e're thou bee
                  Reſeru'd from others, bee not ſtrange to mee,
                  Call me to reſcue, and this brawnie Arme
                  Shall quell thy Foe, and fence thy ſoule, from harme;
                  Speake (Loue;) Thy voice is ſweet; What if thy face
                  Be drencht with teares? Each teare's a ſeuerall grace.
               
               
                  6.
                  ALl you, that wiſh proſperitie, and peace,
                  To crowne our Contract, with a long encreaſe
                  Of future joyes, ô ſhield my ſimple Loue,
                  From thoſe that ſeeke her ruine, and remoue
                  The baſe Oppoſers of her beſt deſignes;
                  Deſtroy thoſe Foxes, that deſtroy her Vines;
                  Her Vines are fruitfull, but her tender grapes
                  Are ſpoil'd by Foxes, clad in humane ſhapes:
               
            
            
               The BRIDE in her owne perſon. SONET IX.
               
                  WHat greater joy can bleſſe my ſoule, then this,
                  That my Beloued's mine, and I am His!
                  Our ſoules are knit; the world cannot vntwine
                  The joyfull vnion of His heart, and Mine;
                  In Him, I liue; in Him, my ſoule's poſſeſt
                  With heauenly ſolace, and eternall reſt:
                  Heauen onely knowes the bliſſe, my ſoule enjoyes;
                  Fond earth's to dull, to apprehend ſuch joyes.
               
               
                  
                  2.
                  THou ſweet perfection of my full delights,
                  Till that brightThe day of Iudgement. Day, deuoted to the rites
                  Of our ſolemniz'd Nuptials, ſhall come,
                  Come liue with me, and make this heart, thy Home:
                  Diſdaine me not: Although my face appeare
                  Deform'd and clowdie, yet my heart isBy ſanctification. cleare;
                  Make haſte: Let not the ſwift-foot Roe-buck flee
                  The following Hounds ſo faſt, as thou, to mee.
               
               
                  3.
                  I Thought my Loue had taken vp his reſt,CAP. III.
                  
                  Within the ſecretIn my ſoule. Cabin of my breſt;
                  I thought the cloſed Curtaines did immure
                  His gentle ſlumbers, but was too ſecure;
                  For (driuen with loue) to the falſe bed IBy ſtrict examination. ſtept,
                  To view his ſlumbring beautie, as he ſlept,
                  But he was gone; yet plainly there was ſeene
                  The curious dint, where he had lately beene.
               
               
                  4.
                  IMpatient of his abſence, thus bereauen
                  Of him, then whom, I had no other heauen,
                  I rau'd a while; not able to digeſt
                  So great a loſſe, to loſe ſo faire a Gueſt:
                  I left no path vntrac'd; noAmongſt the wiſeſt worldlings. place vnſought;
                  No ſecret Cell vnſearcht; no way vnthought;
                  I ask'd the Shade, but ſhadowes could not hide him;
                  I ask'd the World, but all the World denyde him.
               
               
                  
                  5.
                  MY jealous Loue, diſtemp'red with diſtraction,
                  Made fierce with feare, vnapt for ſatisfaction,
                  Applyes freſh fuell, to my flaming fires,
                  With Eagles wings ſupplyes my quick deſires;
                  Vp to the walls I rambled, where I ſpyde
                  TheThe Miniſters of the Word. Citie watch, to whom, with teares, I cryde;
                  Ah gentle Watchmen, you aloft deſcry
                  What's darke to vs; Did not my Loue paſſe by?
               
               
                  6.
                  AT length, when dull deſpaire had gain'd the ground
                  Of tyred hopes, my Faith fell in a ſwound;
                  But Hee, whoſe ſympathizing heart did finde
                  The tyrant paſſion, of my troubled minde,
                  Forthwith appear'd; What Angels tongue can let
                  The World conceiue our pleaſures, when we met?
                  And till the joyes of our eſpouſed hearts
                  Be madeAt the Reſurrection. compleat, the World ne're more ſhall part's.
               
            
            
               BRIDEGROOME. SONET X.
               
                  NOw reſts my Loue: Till now, her tender breſt
                  Wanting her joy, could finde no peace, nor rest:
                  I charge you all, by the true loue, you beare
                  To friendſhip, or what elſe you count moſt deare,
                  Diſturbe her not, but let her ſleepe her fill;
                  I charge you all, vpon your lifes, be ſtill:
                  O, may that lab'ring ſoule, that liues oppreſt
                  For me; in me, receiue eternall reſt.
               
               
                  
                  2.
                  VVHat curious face is this? What mortall birth
                  Can ſhow a beautie, thusThrough ſanctification by my merits. vnſtayn'd with earth!
                  What glorious Angell wanders thus alone,
                  From earths foule Dungeon, to my Fathers Throne!
                  It is my Loue; my loue that hath denyde
                  The world, for me; It is my faireſt Bride:
                  How fragrant is her breath! How heauenly faire
                  Her Angell face! Each glorifying the Aire.
               
            
            
               BRIDE. SONET XI.
               
                  O, How I'mBy heauenly contemplation. rauiſht with eternall bliſſe!
                  Who e're thought heauen a joy, cōpar'd to this?
                  How doe the pleaſures of his glorious Face,
                  Adde glorie to the glorie of this place!
                  See, how Kings Courts ſurmount poore Shephards cells,
                  So this, the pride of Solomon, excells;
                  Rich wreathes of glorie crowne his royall Head,
                  And troopes of Angels waite vpon his Bed.
               
               
                  2.
                  THe Court of Princely Solomon was guarded
                  With able men at armes; their faith rewarded
                  With fading honours, ſubject to the fate
                  Of Fortune, and the jealous frownes of State;
                  But here th' harmonious Quire of heauen attend,
                  Whoſe prize is glorie, glorie without end,
                  Vnmixt without doubtings, or degenerous feare;
                  A greater Prince, then Solomon, is here.
               
               
                  
                  3.
                  THe Bridall bed of Princely Solomon,
                  
                  (Whoſe beautie' amaz'd the greedie lookers on,
                  Which all the world admired to behold)
                  Was but of Cedar; and her Sted of gold;
                  Her Pillars ſiluer; and her Canopie
                  Of ſilkes, but richly ſtayn'd with puple die;
                  Her Curtaines wrought in workes, workes rarely led
                  By th' needles art; ſuch was the bridall bed.
               
               
                  4.
                  SVch was the bridall bed, which Time, or Age
                  Durſt neuer warrant from th' opprobrious rage
                  Of enuious fate; Earths meaſure's but a minit;
                  Earth fades; all fades vpon it; all, within it;
                  O, but the glorie' of this diuiner place,
                  No Age can injure, nor yet Time deface;
                  To bright an obiect, for weake eyes to bide,
                  Or tongues t'expreſſe: Who euer ſaw't, but dyde?
               
               
                  5.
                  VVHo e're beheld the royall Crowne, ſet on
                  The nuptiall browes of Princely Solomon?
                  
                  His glorious pompe, whoſe honour did diſplay
                  The noyſed Triumphs of his Marriage day?
                  A greater Prince, then Solomon, is here,
                  The beautie of whoſe Nuptials, ſhall appeare
                  More glorious farre, tranſcending his, as farre
                  As heauens bright Lamp out-ſhines th' obſcureſt Starre.
               
            
            
               
               BRIDEGROOME SONET XII.
               
                  HOw orient is thyThrough the gifts of my Spirit. beautie!CAP. IIII. How diuine!
                  How darke's the glorie of the earth, to thine!
                  Thy vailedThe modeſtie and puritie of thy iudgement. eyes out-ſhine heauens greater light,
                  Vnconquer'd by the ſhadie Clowd of night;
                  The curiousOrnaments of neceſſarie ceremonies. Treſſes dangle, all vnbound
                  With vnaffected order, to the ground:
                  How orient is thy beautie! How diuine!
                  How darke's the glorie of the earth, to thine!
               
               
                  2.
                  THy IuorieSincere Miniſters. Teeth in whiteneſſe doe out-goe
                  The downe of Swans, or Winters driuen ſnowe,
                  Whoſe euen proportions liuely repreſent
                  Th' harmonious Muſicke of vnite conſent,
                  Whoſe perfect whitneſſe, Time could neuer blot,
                  Nor Age (the Canker of deſtruction) not:
                  How orient is thy beautie! How diuine!
                  How darke's the glorie of the earth, to thine!
               
               
                  3.
                  THe rubie Portalls of thy ballane'dDoctrine of thy holy Prephets. words,
                  Send forth a welcome reliſh, which affords
                  A heauen of bliſſe, and makes the earth rejoyce,
                  To heare the Accent of thy heauenly voyce;
                  The maiden bluſhes of thyModeſt graces of the Spirit. Cheekes, proclaime
                  A ſhame of guilt, but not a guilt of ſhame:
                  How orient is thy beautie! How diuine!
                  How darke's the glorie of the earth, to thine!
               
               
                  
                  4.
                  THyMagiſtrates. Necke (vnbeautifyde with borrow'd grace)
                  Is whiter then the Lillies of thy face,
                  If whiter may; for beautie, and for powre,
                  'Tis like the glorie of Dauids princely Towre:
                  What vaſſall ſpirit could deſpaire, or faint,
                  Finding protection from ſo ſure a Saint?
                  How orient is thy beautie! How diuine!
                  How darke's the glorie of the earth, to Thine!
               
               
                  5.
                  THe deare-bought fruit of that forbidden Tree,
                  Was not ſo daintie, as thy Apples bee,
                  Theſe curious Apples of thy ſnowyThe old and new Teſtaments. breſts,
                  Wherein a Paradiſe of pleaſure reſts;
                  They breathe ſuch life into the rauiſhtThe ſanctified and zealous reader. Eye,
                  That the inflam'd beholder, cannotThe ſecond Death. die:
                  How orient is thy beautie! How diuine!
                  How darke's the glorie of the earth, to Thine!
               
               
                  6.
                  MY deareſt Spouſe, I'llI will withdraw my bodily preſence. hye me to my home,
                  And till that long-expectedThe day of iudgement. Day ſhall come,
                  The light whereof, ſhall chace the night, that ſhowdes
                  Thy vailed beautie, in theſe enuiousInfirmities of the fleſh. Clowdes;
                  Till then, I goe, and in my Throne, prouide
                  A glorious welcome, for my faireſt Bride;
                  Chapplets of conqu'ring Palme, and Laurell boughs
                  Shall crowne thy Temples, and adorne thy browes.
               
               
                  
                  7.
                  VVOuld beautie fayne be flatter'd with a grace
                  Shee neuer had? May ſhee behold thy face:
                  Enuie would burſt, had ſhee no other taske,
                  Then to behold this face, without a Maske;
                  No ſpot, no veniall blemiſh could ſhee finde,
                  To feede the famin of her ranc'rous minde;
                  Thou art the flowre of beauties Crowne, and thay're
                  Much worſe then foule, that thinke thee leſſe then fayre.
               
               
                  8.
                  FEare not (my Loue) for when thoſe ſacred bands
                  Of wedlock ſhall conjoyne our promis'd hands,
                  I'll come, and quit thee from this rediousThis vale of miſerie. place,
                  Where thou art forc'd to ſojourne for a ſpace;
                  No forrein Angle of the vtmoſt Lands,
                  Nor ſeas Abyſſe ſhall hide thee from my hands;
                  No night ſhall ſhade thee from my curious eye,
                  I'll rowze the graues, although grim Death ſtand by.
               
               
                  9.
                  ILluſtrious beames ſhot from thy flamingThime eye of Faith. eye,
                  Made fierce with zeale, and ſoueraigne Majeſtie
                  Haue ſcorcht my ſoule, and like a fierie dart
                  Transfixt the Center of my wounded heart;
                  The Virgin ſweetneſſe of thy heauenly grace
                  Hath made mine eyes glad pris'ners to thy face;
                  The beautie of thine eye-balls hath bereft
                  Me of my heart: O ſweet, ô ſacred theft!
               
               
                  
                  10.
                  O Thou, the deare Inflamer of mine eyes,
                  Life of my ſoule, and hearts eternall prize,
                  How delectable is thy loue! How pure!
                  How apt to rauiſh, able to allure
                  A frozen ſoule, and with thy ſecret fire,
                  T' affect dull ſpirits with extreame deſire!
                  How doe thy ioyes (though in their greateſt dearth)
                  Tranſcend the proudeſt pleaſures of the earth!
               
               
                  11.
                  THy lips (my deareſt Spouſe) are the full treaſures
                  Of ſacredDiuine harmonie. Poeſie, whoſe heauenly meaſures
                  Rauiſh with joy the willing heart, that heares,
                  But ſtrike a deafneſſe in rebellious eares:
                  Thy wordes, like Milke and Honie, doe requite
                  The ſeaſon'd ſoule, with profit and delight:
                  Heauens higher Palace, and thoſe lower places
                  Of dungeon-earth are ſweetned with thy graces.
               
               
                  12.
                  MY Loue is like a Garden, full of flowres,
                  Whoſe ſunny bankes, and choice of ſhadie bowres
                  Giue change of pleaſures, pleaſures wall'd about
                  With armed Angels, to keepe Ruine out;
                  And fromThe two Teſtaments. her BreſtsRiddles to prophane readers. (encloſed from the ill
                  Of looſer eyes) pureCeleſtiall comforts. Cryſtall drops diſtill,
                  The fruitfull ſweetneſſe of whoſe gentle ſhowres
                  Inrich her flowres with beautie', and banks with flowres.
               
               
                  
                  13.
                  MY loue is like a Paradiſe, a beſet
                  With rareſt grifts, whoſe fruits (but tender yet)
                  The world nere taſted, dainties farre more rare
                  Then Edens tempting Apple, and more faire:
                  Myrhe, Alloes, Inceſe, and the Cypreſſe tree
                  Can boaſt no ſweetneſſe, but is breath'd from thee;
                  Dainties, for taſte; and flowers, for the ſmell
                  Spring all from Thee, whoſe ſweets, all ſweets excell.
               
            
            
               BRIDE. SONET. XIII.
               
                  O Thou (my deare) whoſe ſweets, all ſweets excell,
                  Frō whom my fruits receiue their taſt, their ſmel,
                  How can my thriuingThe Faithfull Plants refuſe to grow,
                  Thus quickned with ſo ſweet aThe Sonne of righteouſneſſe. Sun as thou?
                  How can my flowers, which thy Ewers nouriſh
                  With ſhowers of liuing waters, chooſe but flouriſh?
                  O thou, the Spring, from whence theſe waters burſt,
                  Did euer any taſte thy ſtreames, and thurſt?
               
               
                  2.
                  AM I a Garden? May my Flowers be
                  So highly honour'd to bee ſmelt by Thee,
                  Inſpire them with thy ſacred breath, and then
                  Receiue from them, thy borrowed breath agen;
                  Frequent thy Garden, whoſe rare fruit inuites
                  Thy welcome preſence, to his choiſe Delights;
                  Taſte where thou liſt, and take thy full repaſte,
                  Here's that will pleaſe thy ſmell, thine eye, thy taſte.
               
            
            
               
               BRIDEGROOME. SONET XIIII.
               THou ſacred Center of my ſoule,CAP. V. in whome
               I reſt, behold thy wiſht-for Loue is come;
               Refreſht with thy delights, I haue repaſted
               Vpon thyObedience. pleaſures, my full ſoule hath taſted
               ThyStrong workes of Faith. rip'ned dainties, and hath freely beene
               Pleas'd with thoſe Fruits, that are (as yet) butThe new born fruites of the Spirit. greene:
               All you that loue the honour of my Bride,
               Come taſte her Vyands, and bee diefide.
            
            
               BRIDE. SONET XV.
               
                  IT was aToo much ſecuritie. night, a night as darke, as foule
                  As that blacke Errour, that entraunc'd my Soule,
                  When as my beſt beloued came and knoct
                  At myMy heart. dull gates, too too ſecurely lockt;
                  Vnbolt (ſaid hee) theſe churliſh doores (my Doue,)
                  Let not falſeThe pleaſures of the Fleſh. ſlumbers bribe thee from thy loue;
                  Heare him, that for thy gentle ſake came hither,
                  Long iniur'd by thisThy hardhearted vnkindneſſe nights vngentle wether.
               
               
                  2.
                  I Heard the voice, but the perfidious pleaſure
                  Of my ſweet ſlumbers, could not finde the leaſure
                  To ope my drowſie doores; My Spirit could ſpeake
                  Words faire enough; but ah, my fleſh was weake,
                  And fond excuſes taught me to betray
                  My ſacred vowes to a ſecure delay:
                  Perfidious ſlumbers, how haue you the might
                  To blind true Pleaſures, with a falſe delight!
               
               
                  
                  3.
                  WHen as my Loue, with oft repeated knocks
                  Could not auaile, ſhaking his dewie locks,
                  Highly diſpleaſ'd, he could no longer bide
                  My ſleight neglect, but went away denyde;
                  No ſooner gone, but my dull ſoule diſcern'd
                  Her drowzie error; my grieu'd ſpiritRepented. yearn'd
                  To finde him out; theſe ſeiled eyes that ſlept
                  So ſoundly faſt, awak'd, much faſter wept.
               
               
                  4.
                  THus rays'd, and rowz'd from my deceitfull reſt,
                  I op'd my doores, where my departed Gueſt
                  Had beene; I thruſt the churliſh Portalls from me
                  That ſo denyde my deareſt Bridegroome to me;
                  But when I ſmelt of my returned hand,
                  My ſoule was rapt, my powers all did ſtand
                  Amazed as theThe ſweetnes of his graces. ſweetneſſe they did finde,
                  Which my neglected Loue had left behinde.
               
               
                  5.
                  I Op'd my doore, my Myrrhe-diſtilling doore,
                  But ah, my Gueſt was gone, had giuen me o're:
                  What curious Pen, what Artiſt can define
                  A mateleſſe ſorrow; Such, ah, ſuch was mine;
                  Doubts and deſpaire had of my life depriu'd mee
                  Had not ſtrong hopes of his returne reuiu'd mee,
                  I ſought, but he refuſed to appeare,
                  I call'd but he would nor be heard, nor heare.
               
               
                  
                  6.
                  THus, with the Tyrannie of griefe diſtraught,
                  I rang'd around, no place I left vnſought,
                  No eare vnask'd; TheFalſe teachers. Watchmen of the Citie
                  
                     With their falſe doctrines. Wounded my ſoule, without remorſe or pitie
                  To Virgin teares; They taught my feet to ſtay,
                  Whoſe ſteps were apt enough to loſe their way,
                  With taunts and ſcornes they check me, and derided,
                  And call'd me Whoore, becauſe I walkt, vnguided.
               
               
                  7.
                  YOu hallowed Virgins, you, whoſe tender hearts
                  Ere felt th'impreſſion ofDiuine loue. loues ſecret darts,
                  I charge you all, by the deare faith you owe
                  To Virgin pureneſſe, and your Veſtall vow,
                  Commend me to my Loue, if ere you meet him,
                  O tell him, that his loue-ſicke Spouſe doth greet him,
                  O let him know, I languiſh with deſire
                  T' enjoy that heart, that ſets this heart on fire.
               
            
            
               VIRGINS. SONET XVI.
               O Thou the faireſt flowre of mortall birth,
               If ſuch a beautie may be borne of earth,
               Angell or Virgin, which? or both in one,
               Angell by beautie, Virgin by the mone,
               Say, who is Hee that may deſerue theſe teares,
               Theſe precious drops? Who is't can ſtop his eares
               At theſe faire lips? Speake Lady, ſpeake at large,
               Who is't? For whom giu'ſt thou ſo ſtrict a Charge?
            
            
               
               BRIDE. SONET XVII.
               
                  MY Loue is the perfection of delight,
                  Roſes, and Doues are not ſo red, ſo white,
                  Vnpattern'd beautie ſummon'd euery grace
                  To the compoſure of ſo ſweet a face;
                  His body is Heauen, for in his breſt,
                  The perfect Eſſence of a God doth reſt;
                  The brighter eye of heauen did neuer ſhine
                  Vpon an other glorie, ſo diuine.
               
               
                  2.
                  HIsHis Deitie. Head is farre more glorious, to behold,
                  Then fruitfull Ophyres oft refined gold,
                  'Tis the rich Magazen of ſecret treaſure,
                  Whence Graces ſpring in vnconfined meaſure;
                  His curl'd and danglingHis Humanitie. Treſſes doe proclaime
                  A Nazarite, on whom ne're Raſor came,
                  Whoſe Rauen-black colour giues a curious relliſh
                  To that, which beautie did ſo much imbelliſh.
               
               
                  3.
                  LIke to the eyes of Doues are his faireHis iudgment and care of his Church. Eyes,
                  Wherein ſterne Iuſtice, mixt with Mercy, lyes;
                  His eyes are ſimple, yet Majeſticall,
                  In motion nimble, and yet chaſte withall,
                  Flaming like fire, and yet burne they not,
                  Vnblemiſht, vndiſtayned with a ſpot,
                  Blazing with pretious beames, and to behold,
                  Like two rich Diamonds in a frame of gold.
               
               
                  
                  4.
                  HIsThe diſcouery of him in his Word. Cheeks are like two fruitfull beds, o're-growne
                  With Aromatick flowers newly blowne,
                  Whoſe odours, beautie, pleaſe the ſmell, the ſight,
                  And doubling pleaſures, double the delight:
                  HisHis promiſes. lips are like a Cryſtall ſpring, from whence
                  Flow ſweetned ſtreames of ſacred Eloquence,
                  Whoſe drops into the eare diſtill'd, doe giue
                  Life toThoſe that die to ſinne. the Dead, true joyes toThat liue to righteouſneſſe. them that liue.
               
               
                  5.
                  HIsHis actions. Hands are deckt with rings ofWith purenes. gold; the rings,
                  With coſtly Iewels, fitting none but Kings.
                  Which (of themſelues though glorious, yet) receiue
                  More glorie from thoſe fingers, then they gaue;
                  HisHis ſecret counſells. Breaſt's like Iuorie, circled round about
                  WithInwardly glorious. veines, like Saphyres, winding in and out,
                  Whoſe beautie is (though darkned from the eye)
                  Full of diuine, and ſecret Majeſtie
               
               
                  6.
                  HIsHis wayes conſtant, firme, and pure. Legs like pureſt Marble, ſtrong and white,
                  Of curious ſhape, (though quick) vnapt for flight:
                  His Feet (as gold that's oft refined) are
                  Like his vpright proceedings, pure and faire;
                  HisHis whole carriage. Portis Princely, and his Stature tall,
                  And, like the Cedar, ſtout, yet ſweet withall:
                  O, who would not repoſe his life, his bliſſe,
                  Vpon a Baſe ſo faire, ſo firme as this!
               
               
                  
                  7.
                  HIs Mouth-But ſtay; What need my lips be lauiſh,
                  In choice of wordes, when one alone will rauiſh?
                  But ſhall, in briefe, my ruder tongue diſcouer
                  The ſpeaking Image of my abſent Louer?
                  Then let the curious hand of Art refine
                  The race of Vertues morall, and diuine,
                  From whence, by heauen let there extracted bee
                  A perfect Quinteſſence; Euen ſuch is Hee.
               
            
            
               VIRGINS. SONET XVIII.
               THrice fairer then the faireſt, whoſe ſad teares,
               And ſmiling words, haue charm'd our eies, our eares;
               Say, whither is this prize of beautie gone,
               More faire then kinde, to let thee weepe alone?
               Thy tempting lips haue whet our dull deſire,
               And till wee ſee Him, wee are all on fire;
               Wee'le finde him out; if thou wilt be our guide:
               The next way to the Bridegroome, is theThe Church is the way to Chriſt 
                  Bride.
               
            
            
               BRIDE. SONET. XIX.
               
                  IF Error leade not my dull thoughts amiſſe,CAP. VI.
                  
                  My Genius tells me, where my true Loue is;
                  Hee's buſie lab'ring on his flowrieCongregation of the faithfull. banks,
                  
                     Giuing graces. Inſpiring ſweetneſſe, andReceiuing glorie. receiuing thanks,
                  Wat'ring thoſe plants, whoſe tender rootes areDeſpairing ſoules. drie,
                  And pruning ſuch, whoſe Creſts aſpireNot yet thorowly humbled. too high,
                  Tranſplanting, grafting, reaping fruits from ſome,
                  And couering others, that areStrengthning the weake in ſpirit. newly come.
               
               
                  
                  2.
                  VVHat if the frailtie of my feebler part,
                  Lockt vp the Portalls of my drowſie heart?
                  He knowes the weakneſſe of the fleſh incumbers
                  Th'vnwilling ſpirit, with ſenſe-bereauing ſlumbers;
                  My hopes aſſure me, in deſpight of this,
                  That my Beloued's mine, and I am His;
                  My hopes are firme, (which Time ſhall ne're remoue)
                  That Hee is mine, by Faith; I, His, by loue.
               
            
            
               BRIDEGROOME. SONET XX.
               
                  THy timely griefe, (my teares-baptized Loue)
                  Compels mine eares to heare, thy teares, to moue;
                  Thy blubber'd beautie, to mine eye appeares
                  More bright then't was: Such is theThe force of Repentance. ſtrength of Teares:
                  Beautie, and Terror, meeting in thine eye,
                  Haue made thy face the Throne of Majeſtie,
                  Whoſe awfull beames, the proudeſt heart will moue
                  To loue for feare, vntill it feare for loue.
               
               
                  2.
                  REpreſſe thoſe flames, that furnace from thine eye,
                  They rauiſh with too bright a Tyrannie;
                  Thy fires are too too fierce: O turne them from me,
                  They pierce my ſoule, and with their rayes o'recome me,
                  Thy curious * Treſſes dangle, all vnbound
                  With vnaffected order, to the ground:
                  How orient is thy beautie! How diuine!
                  How darke's the glorie of the earth, to Thine!
               
               
                  
                  3.
                  THy IuorieSincere Miniſters. Teeth in whiteneſſe doe out-goe
                  The downe of Swans, or Winters driuen ſnowe;
                  Whoſe euen proportions liuely repreſent
                  Th' harmonious Muſicke of vnite conſent;
                  Whoſe perfect whiteneſſe, Time could neuer blot,
                  Nor Age (the enuious Worme of Ruine) rot:
                  How orient is thy beautie! How diuine!
                  How darke's the glorie of the earth, to thine!
               
               
                  4.
                  THyThy viſible parts. Temples, are the Temples of chaſte loue,
                  Where beautie ſacrifis'd her milke-white Doue,
                  Vpon whoſe Azure pathes, are alwayes found
                  The heauen-borne Graces dancing in a round:
                  Thy maidenModeſtie, and zeale. Bluſhes gently doe proclaime
                  A ſhame of guilt, but not a guilt of ſhame:
                  How orient is thy beautie! How diuine!
                  How darke's the glorie of the earth, to thine!
               
               
                  5.
                  YOu, you braue ſpirits, whoſe emperiall hand
                  Enforces, what your lookes cannot command,
                  Bring forth your pamper'd Queenes, the luſtfull prize,
                  And curious wrecks of your imperious eyes;
                  Surround the Circle of the Earth, and leuie
                  The faireſt Virgins in loues faireſt beuie,
                  Then take from each to make one perfect Grace,
                  Yet would my Loue out ſhine that borrow'd face.
               
               
                  
                  6.
                  I Thou art ſhee, corriuall'd with no other,
                  Thou glorious Daughter of thy glorious Mother
                  The new Ieruſalem, whoſe Virgin-birth
                  Shall Diefie, theThe pure in heart. Virgins of the earth:
                  The Virgins of the Earth haue ſeene thy beautie,
                  And ſtood amaz'd, and in a proſtrate dutie
                  Haue ſued to kiſſe thy hand, making thine eyes
                  Their Lampes to light them, till the Bridegroome riſe.
               
               
                  7.
                  HArke, how the Virgins hallow'd with thy fire
                  And wonder ſmitten with thy beames, admire.
                  Who, who is this (ſay they) whoſe cheekes reſemble
                  
                     Aurora's bluſh, whoſe Eye heauens lights diſſemble?
                  Whoſe face is brighter then the ſilent Lampe
                  That lights the earth, to breathe her nightlie dampe;
                  Vpon whoſe brow ſits dreadfull Majeſtie,
                  The frowne whereof commands a Victorie.
               
               
                  8.
                  FAire Bride, why was thy troubled ſoule dejected,
                  When I was abſent? was my Faith ſuſpected
                  Which I ſo firmelie plighted? Couldſt thou thinke
                  My loue could ſhake, or ſuch a Vow could ſhrinke?
                  I did but walke among my tender Plants,
                  To ſmell their Odours, and ſupplie their wants,
                  To ſee my Stockes, ſo latelie grifted, ſprout,
                  Or if my vines began to burgen out.
               
               
                  
                  9.
                  THough gone was I,My Spirit. my heart was in thy breſt,
                  Although to thee (perchance) an vnkowne gueſt,
                  'T was that, that gaue ſuch wings to thy deſire,
                  T' enioy thy loue, and ſet thy ſoule on fire;
                  But my returne was quicke, and with a minde
                  More nimble (yet more conſtant) then the winde,
                  I came; and as the winged ſhaft doth flie
                  With vndeſcerned ſpeed; Euen ſo did I.
               
               
                  10.
                  REturne, (O then returne) thou childe of Peace
                  To thy firſt ioyes, O let thy teares ſurceaſe;
                  Returne thee to thy Loue; let not theSecuritie. night
                  With flatt'ringWorldly pleaſures. ſlumbers, tempt thy true delight;
                  Returne thee to my boſome, let my breſt.
                  Bee ſtill thy Tent; Take there eternall reſt;
                  Returne, ô Thou, in whoſe enchaunted eye,
                  Are Darts enough, to make an armie flie.
               
               
                  11.
                  FAire Daughter of the higheſt King,CAP. VII. how ſweet
                  Are th' vnaffected graces of thyThy wages. Feet!
                  From euery ſtep, true Maieſtie doth ſpring,
                  Fitting the Daughter of ſo high a King:
                  Thy Waſte is circled with aThe girdle of truth. Virgin Zone,
                  Imbelliſht round with many a preciousThe precious guifts of the 
                           •
                        pirit. Stone,
                  Wherein the curious Workeman did fulfill
                  The vtmoſt glorie of his Diuiner skill.
               
               
                  
                  12.
                  THyWherby there is a receit of ſpirituall Conceptions. Nauell, where thy holie Embrion doth
                  Receiue ſweet nouriſhment, and heauenly growth,
                  Is like a Chriſtall ſpring, whoſe freſh ſupplie
                  Of liuing waters, Sunne, nor Drought can drie:
                  ThyIncreaſe of the Faithfull. fruitfull Wombe is like a winnow'd heape
                  Of pureſt graine, which heauens bleſt hand did reape,
                  With Lillies fenc'd: True Embleme of rare treaſure;
                  Whoſe graine denotes increaſe; whoſe Lillies, pleaſure.
               
               
                  13.
                  THy daintieThe Old and New Teſtament Breſts, are like faire Twins, both ſwelling
                  In equall Maieſtie; in hue excelling
                  The new-falne Snow vpon th' vntrodden Mountaines,
                  From whence there flowes, as frō exub'rous Fountaines,
                  Riuers of heauenly Nectar, to allay
                  The holy thirſt of Soules: Thrice happie they,
                  And more then thrice, whoſe bleſt affections bring
                  Their thirſtie palats to ſo ſweet a Spring.
               
               
                  14.
                  THyMagiſtrates. Necke doth repreſent an yuorie Tower,
                  In perfect pureneſſe, and munited power,
                  ThineTeachers. Eyes (like pooles at a frequented gate
                  For euerie commer, to draw water at)
                  Are common treaſures, and like Chriſtall glaſſes,
                  Showes each his liuely viſage, as he paſſes:
                  ThyGlorious in all parts. Noſe, the curious Organ of thy Sent,
                  Wants nothing more, for vſe, for ornament.
               
               
                  
                  15.
                  THy Tyres of gold (inricht with glorious Gemmes,The Ceremonies of the Church.
                  
                  Rare Diamonds, and Princely Diadems,)
                  Adorne thy browes, and with their natiue worth
                  Aduance thy glorie, and ſet thy beautie forth;
                  So perfect are thy Grace, ſo Diuine,
                  And full of heauen, are thoſe faire lookes of thine.
                  That I'm inflamed with the double fire
                  Of thy full beautie, and my fierce deſire.
               
               
                  16.
                  O Sacred Simetrie! O rare Connexion
                  Of many perfects, to make one perfection!
                  O heauenly Muſicke, where all parts doe meete
                  In one ſweet ſtraine, to make one perfect ſweete!
                  O glorious Members, whoſe each ſeuerall feature
                  Diuine, compoſe ſo, ſo diuine a Creature!
                  Faire ſoule, as all thy parts vnited, bee
                  Entire, ſo ſumm'd are all my ioyes in thee.
               
               
                  17.
                  THy curious Fabricke, and erected ſtature
                  Is like the generous Palme, whoſe loftie nature
                  In ſpight of enuious violence, will aſpire,
                  When moſt ſuppreſt, the more it mounts the higher:
                  Thy louely Breſts, (whoſe beautie reinuites
                  My oft remembrance to her oft delights)
                  Are like the ſwelling Cluſters of the vine,
                  So full of ſweetneſſe are thoſe breſts of thine.
               
               
                  
                  18.
                  ARt thou my Palme? My buſie hand ſhall nouriſh
                  Thy fruitfull roots, and make thy branches flouriſh:
                  Art thou my Vine? my skilfull arme ſhall dreſſe,
                  ThyDeſpairing ſoules. dying Plants; my liuing Springs ſhall bleſſe
                  ThyYoung Conuerts. infant Buddes; my blaſting breath ſhall quell
                  
                     Oppoſers of the Truth. Preſumptuous weedes, and make thy Cluſters ſwell:
                  And all that loue thee, ſhall attayne the fauour
                  To taſte thy ſweetneſſe, and to ſmell thy ſauour.
               
               
                  19.
                  THoſe Oracles that from thy lippes proceed,
                  With ſweet Euangels, ſhall delight and feed
                  Th' attentiue eare, and like the Trumpets voyce
                  Amaze faint hearts, but make braue Spirits rejoyce:
                  Thy breath, whoſe Dialect is moſt Diuine,
                  Incends quicke flames, where Ember'd ſparkes but ſhine;
                  It ſtrikes the Pleaders Reth'ricke with deriſion,
                  And makes the dulleſt Soule a Rethoritian.
               
            
            
               BRIDE. SONET XXI.
               
                  MY Faith, not merites hath aſſur'd thee, mine,
                  Thy Loue, not my Deſert hath made me, thine:
                  Vnworthie I, whoſe drowſie ſoule rejected
                  Thy precious fauours, and (ſecure) neglected
                  Thy glorious preſence, how am I become
                  A Bride befitting ſo diuine a Groome!
                  It is no merite, no deſert of mine,
                  Thy loue, thy loue alone, hath made me thine.
               
               
                  
                  2.
                  SInce then the bountie of thy deare election
                  Hath ſtyl'd me thine, ô let the ſweet reflection
                  Of thy illuſtrious beames, my ſoule inſpire,
                  And with thy Spirit, inflame my hot deſire;
                  Vnite our Soules; O let thy Spirit reſt
                  And make perpetuall home within my breſt;
                  Inſtruct me ſo, that I may gaine the skill,
                  To ſuite my ſeruice to thy ſacred will.
               
               
                  3.
                  COme, come (my Soules preſeruer) thou that art
                  Th' vnited joyes of my vnited heart,
                  Come, let vs viſit, with the morning light
                  Our proſp'rousCongregation of the Faithfull Vines; with mutuall delight
                  Let's view thoſe Grapes, whoſe Cluſters beingBy afliction. preſt,
                  Shall make rich wines, to ſerue our Marriage feaſt,
                  That by the thriuing plants it may appeare,
                  Our joyes-perfecting Marriage draweth neere.
               
               
                  4
                  BEhold myYong Conuerts new diſcloſed Flowres preſent
                  Before thy gates, their tributarie Sent,
                  Reſerue themſelues for Garlands, that they may
                  Adorne the Bridegroome, on his Mariage day:
                  MyAſſemblies. Garden's full ofFaithfull. Trees, and euery Tree
                  Laden withFaith and good Workes. Fruit, which I deuote to thee,
                  Eternall joyes betide that happie gueſt,
                  That taſtes the dainties of the Bridgroomes feaſt.
               
               
                  
                  5.
                  O Would to God mind eyes,CAP. VIII. (theſe fainting Eyes
                  Whoſe eager appetite could ne're deuiſe
                  A dearer object) might but once behold
                  My loue (as I am) clad in fleſhly mold,
                  That each may corporally conuerſe with other,
                  As friend to friend; as ſiſter to her brother,
                  O how mine eyes could welcome ſuch a ſight;
                  How would my ſoule diſſolue, with ore-delight!
               
               
                  6.
                  THen ſhould this hand conduct my faireſt Spouſe
                  To taſte a Banquet at my MothersThe vniuerſal Church. Houſe;
                  Our fruitfull Garden ſhould preſent thine eyes
                  With ſweet delights, her trees ſhould ſacrifice
                  Their earely fruits to thee; our tender Vine
                  Should cheare thy palate with her vnpreſt Wine;
                  Thy hand ſhould teach my liuing Plants to thriue;
                  And ſuch, as are a dying, to reuiue.
               
               
                  7.
                  THen ſhould my Soule enioy within this breſt,
                  A holy Sabbath of eternall Reſt;
                  Then ſhould my Cauſe that ſuffers through deſpight
                  Of Errour, and rude Ignorance, haue right;
                  Then ſhould theſeTeares and ſorrowes. ſtreames, whoſe Tides ſo often riſe,
                  Bee ebb'd away, from my ſuffuſed eyes;
                  Then ſhould my ſpirits, fill'd with heauenly mirth,
                  Tryumph o're Hell, and find a Heauen on Earth.
               
               
                  
                  8.
                  ALl you, that wiſh the bountifull encreaſe
                  Of deareſt pleaſures, and diuineſt peace,
                  I charge you all (if ought my charge may moue
                  Your tender hearts)Not to vexe and grieue his holy Spirit. not to diſturbe my Loue;
                  Vexe not his gentle ſpirit, nor bereiue
                  Him of his joyes, that is ſo apt to greiue;
                  Dare not to breake his quiet ſlumbers, leſt
                  You rouze a raging Lyon from his reſt.
               
               
                  9.
                  WHo euer lou'd, that euer lou'd as I
                  That for his ſake renounce my ſelfe, denie
                  The worlds beſt Ioyes, and haue the world forgone?
                  Who euer lou'd ſo deare, as I haue done?
                  I ſought my Loue, and found himIn humilitie. lowly laide
                  Beneath the tree of Loue, in whoſe ſweet ſhade
                  Hee reſted; there his eye ſent forth the fire,
                  That firſt enflam'd my amorous deſire.
               
               
                  10.
                  MY deareſt Spouſe, O ſeale me on thy heart
                  So ſure, that enuious Earth may neuer part
                  Our joyned Soules; let not the world remoue
                  My chaſte deſires, from ſo choiſe a Loue;
                  For, O, my loue's not ſleight, her flames are ſerious,
                  Was neuer Death ſo powerfull, ſo imperious;
                  My jealous zeale is a conſuming fire,
                  That burnes my ſoule, through feare and fierce deſire.
               
               
                  
                  11.
                  FIres may be quencht, and flames, though ne'r ſo great,
                  With many drops ſhall faint, and loſe their heat;
                  But theſe quicke fires of loue, the more ſuppreſt,
                  The more they flame, in my inflamed breſt;
                  How darke is Honour! how obſcure and dimme
                  Is earths bright glorie, but compar'd with Him!
                  How foule is Beautie! what a toyle is Pleaſure!
                  How baſe is Wealth! how baſe a thing is Treaſure?
               
               
                  12.
                  I Haue aThe Church of the Gentiles then vncalled. Siſter, which by thy diuine
                  And bounteous Grace, our Marriage ſhall make thine;
                  Shee is mine owne, myne onely Siſter, whome
                  My mother bare, the youngeſt of her Wombe:
                  Shee's yet aVncall'd to the Truth. Childe, her beautie may improue,
                  Her breſts and ſmall, and yet too greene for loue;
                  When Time and Yeares ſhall adde perfection to her,
                  Say (deareſt Loue) what honour wilt thou doe her?
               
            
            
               BRIDEGROOME. SONET XXII.
               IF ſhee be faire, and with her beautie, proue
               As chaſte, as loyall to her virgin-Loue,
               As thou haſt bin, then in that high degree
               I'le honour her, as I haue honour'd thee:
               Be ſhee as conſtant to her Veſtall vow,
               And true to her deuoted Faith, as Thou,
               I'le Crowne her head, and fill her hand with Power,
               And giue a Kingdome to her for a Dower.
            
            
               
               BRIDE. SONET XXIII.
               WHen Time ſhall ripen theſe her greene deſires,
               And holy Loue, ſhall breath her heauenly fires
               Into her Virgin breſt, her heart ſhall bee
               As true to loue, as I am true to thee:
               O, when thy boundleſſe bountie ſhall conjoyne
               Her equall-glorious Maieſtie, with mine,
               My joyes are perfect; then, in Sacred bands
               Wedlocke ſhall couple our eſpouſed hands.
            
            
               BRIDEGROOME. SONET. XXIIII.
               
                  I Am thy Gard'ner, Thou my fruitfull. Vine,
                  Whoſe rip'ned Cluſters ſwell with richeſt Wine;
                  The vines of Solomon were not ſo faire,
                  His Grapes were not ſo precious, as thine are;
                  His vines are ſubiect, to the vulgar will
                  Of hired hands, and mercinarie skill;
                  Corrupted Carles are merrie with his Vines,
                  And at a price, returne their batter'd Wines.
               
               
                  2.
                  BVt mine's a Vineyard, which no ruder hand
                  Shall touch, ſubjected to my ſole command;
                  My ſelfe, with this laborious arme, will dreſſe it,
                  My preſence with a buſie eye ſhall bleſſe it;
                  O Princely Solomon, thy thriuing vine
                  Is not ſo faire, ſo bountifull as mine;
                  Thy greedie ſharers claime an earned hire,
                  But mine's reſeru'd, and to my ſelfe entire.
               
               
                  
                  3.
                  O Thou, that dwelleſtIn the great Congregation. where th'eternall fame
                  Of my renowne ſo glorifies my name,
                  Illuſtrious Bride, in whoſe coeleſtiall tongue,
                  Are Sacred ſpells t'enchaunt, the ruder throng;
                  O let thy lippes, like a perpetuall ſtorie
                  Diuulge my graces, and declare my glorie;
                  Direct thoſe hearts, that Errour leades aſtray,
                  Diſſolue theThe penitent. Waxe, but make obdure theThe preſumptious. Clay.
               
            
            
               BRIDE. SONET. XXV.
               MOſt glorious Loue, and honourable Lord,
               My heart's the vowed Seruant of thy Word,
               But I am weake, and as a tender Vine
               Shall fall, vnpropt by that deare hand of thine:
               Aſſiſt me therefore, that I may fulfill
               What thou command'ſt, and then command thy will;
               O leaue thy ſacred Spirit in my breſt,
               As earneſt of an euerlaſting Reſt.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   