
      
         
            
            
            THE REASONS
which
Compelled the States of BOHEMIA
to reject the Archduke FERDINAND &c.
and inforced them to Elect
a new KING.
            Together,
VVITH THE PROPOſition
which was made vppon the firſt
motion of the choyce of th'Elector Palatine to bee
King of BOHEMIA, by the States of that Kingdome
in their publique Aſſembly on
the Sixteenth of Auguſt, being
the Birth day of the ſame
Elector Palatine.
            
            Tranſlated out of the French copies
at. Dort.
Printed by.
George Waters.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            VERY CONSIDERABLE
REASONS WHY THE
Arch-Duke
FERDINAND neither could, nor indeede ought to be
admitted to the gouernment and poſſeſſion of the
Kingdome of Bohemia, &c.
            
               1.
               
                  HEE was not choſen King of Bohemia according
to the accuſtomed manner, and the
ancient obſerued priuiledges of that Kingdome;
but rather was neuer choſen at all;
onely would bee admitted and Crowned,
as ſhall bee cleared in the amplifying of this firſt, and the
third Article.
            
            
               2.
               Hee attayned to this comming in and Coronation
(which was done in the life time of the Emperor Mathias)
by ſiniſter meanes, and vnlawfull practiſes, thorough the
ſuggeſtion, and ayde of ſome vnfaithfull, and diſloyall
Members of that Kingdome; corrupted partly by guiftes
and promiſes, and partly by ſharpenes of threatnings
wherewith they were attempted by the States for the
time being, and for that purpoſe aſſembled. Which election
(notwithſtanding.) was made vpon this condition;
that if hee did not punctually obſerue his promiſes, the
States were neither by Oath, nor by any other way obliged
vnto him.
            
            
               
               3.
               Hee did not onely not obſerue the Conditions; but diuers
wayes directly, and de facto contraried that Oath
which he had made to the States, and thoſe Reuerſall letters
which hee hath giuen the Prouinces, and (which is
more) hee did not onely intrude into the gouernment
of that Kingdome in the life time of the Emperour Mathias;
but after his death, as hee hath done while he liued,
and (indeed much more) declared himſelfe an open Enemy
there; and all this, to the end, to roote out the true
Religion in thoſe partes, and to depriue and Fruſtrate the
States of that Crowne and the incorporated Countries;
as of the free Election of a King, ſo of their other Priuiledges;
and (of purpoſe) to bring them wholly vnder
the Spaniſh yoake: whereby hee Forfaicted all hee could
there pretend vnto, after the death of the Emperour Mathias;
and ſo did abſolutely diſſolue and looſe the Oath
of fidelity giuen him by that Kingdome, and thoſe Prouinces;
as ſhall hereafter in another more ample declaration,
(not yet publiſhed) bee particulary demonſtrated
to the view of all the world; this following expoſition
ſeruing in the meane time, for a briefe information on
euery point.
               For the firſt reaſon, it may be vniuerſally knowne, that
the Bohemian Nation hath alwayes, euer ſince the Countrey
was inhabited, had the free Election of their Prince;
which from time to time, (Carefull of holding their
owne due) they haue obſerued, aſmuch as in them lay
that were true to the State of their Country, as wil plainly
appeare both by Hiſtories, and by their priuiledges,
and other rules proper vnto them. And this Free Election
(their ancient Cuſtome) hath ſince alſo beene yeelded

and confirmed vnto them, authentically, from Emperours,
by their Golden Bulles, and increaſe of Priuiledges.
For example, there are yet to bee ſeene the originals, of
three Golden Bulles of th' Emperour Frederick, dated in
the yeares of out Lord, 1212, 1216. and 1231. by which
he confirmed the Kings, choſen by the States; and ſaide
expreſly: That the States of that Kingdome, haue power to
chooſe a King of their owne free will; and that the Romane Emperours
were to giue their Regall right to him whom they Elected.
This acknowledgement and confirmation hath
beene reiterated by diuers other Golden Bulles, and Letters
Patents of the Emperor Charles the 4.th in the yeares 1248
and 1370. thereby is made a reaſſurance vnto them of
the Priuledges graunted by the Emperour, Fredericke;
wherein (beſides) is a more ample mention made, that
the Bohemians haue free power to elect a King, and it is
agreeably confirmed by the Golden Bull of the ſame Emperour
(at that time King of Bohemia,) which hee granted
to the whole Romane Empire. Where ſpeaking of the
Seauen Electors, what belongs to their office in particular,
and what Principalities might fall to the Empire; the
ſeauerill Chapter hath theſe worde. 
                     That if any of their
principalities come to be 
                           〈◊〉
                        , or thence to fall to the Emperour
it ſhall bee in the power of the Emperour of the King then Raignig
to have the ordering of it, as of a thing lawfully fallen to
him and the Empire; Sauing alwayes the Priviledges, Rights
and Statutes of 
                           〈◊〉
                         touching the free Election of a King;
in caſe that Kingdome ſhould come to be voyde; and Sauing
thoſe likewiſe of the Empire that haue power and right to chooſe
a King of Bohemia, according to the tenour of their Priuiledges,
and thoſe good and ancient Cuſtomes (beſides) which they
have obtained of the Emperours & Kings of the Romanes: which

by this law and Imperiall Edict we haue no meaning to deragate
from, or to preindice in any kinde whatſoeuer; but moſt religiouſly
to protect them, and to cauſe them to be obſerved, not onely
for the preſent, but euer laſtingly for the time to come; in euery
point and Article agreeing with their true forme and tenour,
&c.
                   as it is more largely expreſſed in that Golden Bull
giuen at Neurembergh 1356. and publiſhed.
               Now howſouer Charles the 4.th. after he had confirmed
the Bull of the Emperor Frederick, did withall adde ſome
other clauſe to the confirmation (which doubtleſſe hee
did for the aduantage of himſelfe and his ſucceſſors) that
is to ſay, 
                     The intent thereof ought to be thus vnderſtood; that
in caſe the Iſſue male or Female of the direct line Reyall ſhould
come to faile; that then the Free Election of a King ſhallbee in
the power of the States of Bohemia and the Prouinces belonging
to that Kingdome.
                   This expoſition (notwithſtanding)
tooke no place, nor was euer obſerued. Firſt, becauſe it
was directly contrary to ancient Statute and Cuſtome;
and againſt the meaning of that Bull of the Emperor Frederick.
Secondly, ſuppoſe it poſſible ſuch a Law might
haue beene obſerued; it could yet extend no further then
to the race of the Emperor Charles, as deſcended from the
Houſe of Luxenburgh; that is to ſay, vntill the death of his
two Sonnes, Wenceſtans and Sigiſmund; who after they had
been Romane Emperors and Kings of Bohemia, dyed with
out any lineall Heyre; and left none to ſucceed but their
Siſter Elizabeth, married to Albertus Archduke of Auſtria;
to whom ſhee brought a Son called Vladiſlans. After the
deceaſe of this Vladiſlaus, the States of Bohemia by vertue
of their Freedomes and Priuiledges, elected a King: who
was neither to the Houſe of Luxenburg, nor of that of Auſtria:
namely King George of Kustat; whome the Houſe of

                  Auſtria was ſo farre from not approuing of, as on the contrary
Frederick the 3. the firſt of that Family, then Emperour
of the Romanes, did confirme and ratifie the Priuiledges
of the Kingdome of Bohemia to the ſaid K. George;
as doth amply appeare by the ſaide confirmation, Dated,
1459. Thence it may eaſily bee ſeene, that the foreſaide
clauſe, and condition inſerted in the Confirmation of
Charles the Fourth was vtterly aboliſhed; and by that
meanes the Kingdome of Bohemia is declared Free, and
not tyed to any particular race or Family.
               And that Bohemia hath a Freedome of Election, and is
in not kinde a Kingdome hereditary; the following example
will juſtifie: for although King George left Sonnes behinde
him, yet there was not one of them that euer came
either to gouerne, or to bee Elected there. But after the
Fathers departure, the Bohemians Elected and Crowned
Vladiſlaus; of the Family of the Princes of Lituania, Sonne
to Caſimir King of Polonia, Anno 1471. On whome the
Emperor Frederick conferred the Tenures, and confirmed
them vnto him; as it is to bee ſeene at large in the Act for
that purpoſe, 1480. Now where it will be objected that
this K. Vladiſlaus by his Letters patentes in the fauour of his
Daughter Anne, (firſt acknowledging that the States of
Bohemia meerly of their owne free will had Crowned, and
receiued his ſonne Lewijs for their King) did then ordaine
that his Sonne Lewijs comming to dye without Iſſue, the
inheritance of the Kingdome ſhould remaine with his
Daughter Anne; to that objection, this Anſwere. Since
(as hath already beene ſaid) the clauſe of reſtraint inſerted
by Charles, is wholy annihilated; and that the States haue
had their Election free; (as by examples there hath ſufficient
teſtimony been giuen) that is to ſay, That the houſe

of Auſtria inherited not the ſucceſſion of the Kingdome,
after the Election of K. George; nor euen the Sonnes of the
ſame George preferred againſt the choiſe of Vladiſlaus King
of Polonia; by the ſame authority of reaſon (therefore) it
was much leſſe in the power & prerogatiue of Vladiſlaus to
ordaine his Daughter heyre to the Kingdom, againſt the
priuiledges of the Country; without both the conuocation
& the conſent of the States, ſo as (indeed) ſhe could
not inherite the Kingdome after her Father but after her
Brother: and was Queene then, but as being the Wife of
another elected King. That there was no conuocation of
the States, it is an vnqueſtionable truth, and it followes
neceſſarily, they gaue not their conſent, neither did they
euer permither in any thing effectually to enioy the Gouernment.
But after King Lewijs was fallen in battaile,
and that the heroyick Prince Ferdinand Archduke of Auſtria
had married the Lady Anne, that ſiſter of King Lewijs;
the States of Bohem (then) of their owne Free will, and
by vertue of their Priuildges; Elected Archduke Ferdinand
for their King, 1526. Indeed the King according
to cuſtome being once crowned as Soueraigne, the Lady
Anne, afterwardes, was Crowned as his companion, and
no otherwiſe. And if euen at that time, the Freedome of
the States Election will yet be quarelled withall, let King
Ferdinands Reuerſall letters bee enquired of, they will ſatisfie
for it. They were giuen at Vienna the Thirteenth of
December, 1526. And for their better ſtrength the oath
hee gaue the States will declare it ſelfe.
               But there hath very lately beene diſcouered a ſtrange
fact-committed vpon thoſe Reuerſall Letters of Ferdinand
the Emperour done without the knowledge, much leſſe
the conſent of the body of the States. The ſaid Letters

hauing beene copyed in Parchment out of the originall,
and inſerted to the other Priuiledges of the Countrey in
a booke expreſly appointed for that purpoſe; (and that
the originall it ſelfe was placed there with other priuiledges;
and that the ſaid Reuerſall Letters, themſelues, (as it
is ſaid) were annexed to the Statutes and Ordinances of
the Country for the ſpace of Nineteene yeares together,
remaine yet to be ſeene:) It is now found out that after
the expiration of thoſe nineteene yeares, that is to ſay in
the yeare 1545. ſome perſon not yet come into publicke
knowledge, in the Regiſter of the Countries cuſtomes,
vppon the margine of thoſe Reuerſall Letters writt theſe
wordes, following: 
                     The Letters were rendred his Maieſty by
the States of Bohemia, in the generall Aſſembly of the States of
the Country at the Caſtle of Prague, on Monday after the Aſcention
of the moſt bleſſed Virgin Mary in the yeare 1545. and in
place of thoſe, were other Letters giuen to the ſaid States
of the Kingdome in the Bohemian tongue, which were likewiſe
inſerted into this booke in the leafe &c. Done at the Caſtle of
Prague, the Wedneſday after St. Aegidius day, 1545.
               
               Now that this point was in this manner euer effected,
or that the States in their full Aſſemblie did euer render
thoſe Reuerſall Letters to the King and receiued other Patentes
in their place, it can no way bee found: For in the
generall Aſſembly held the ſame yeare at the Caſtle of
Prague (which at this day remaines quoted in the Regiſter
of the Countrey) there is not any mention made
thereof; no not ſo much as in the propoſition itſelfe then
opened on the part of the King. Neither were the Letters
Patents ſuppoſed to bee giuen inſtead of the firſt aſſurances,
according to that, forme addition written in the

ſaide booke; but afterwards included in another. It may
thence bee eaſily iudged that the writer of thoſe added
words (whoſoeur he was) did it out of a priuate authority,
to pleaſe ſome other perſons. Thence likewiſe it may
very eaſily bee perceiued to what ayme, the corruption
was directed; namely by this meanes to fruſtrate and depriue
the States for the time to come to the Freedome of
their Election. As indeed thoſe Patents doe nothing agree
with the firſt Aſſurances, ſaue onely in this, That the
States ought to looke to themſelues, that the ſaid election of King
Ferdinand may not derogate nor bee preiuidiciall to their Priuiledges.
But the ſaide Reuerſals haue in them another
ſence directly contrary to all the Priuiledges and Freedomes
of the Countrey, both olde and new, and particularly
in this, that there are againe alledged the inſertions
both of Charles the 4.th in his confirmation, and of Vladiſlaus
for the aduancement of his diſpoſition towards his
Daughter; which as hath beene ſaid, is long agoe made
voyde, and was obſerued onely in one caſe alone; the
States (notwithſtanding) hauing alwayes retayned the
free Election.
               Now that this was not done to violate the Priuiledges
rather then to confirme them, wee referre to the iudgement
of the whole world. The reaſon why, the States
haue not receiued perfect knowledge of all theſe indirect
paſſages vntill now, is, that from time to time they haue
been concealed by the principall Officers of the land, who
were Romane Catholiques. For the States in the diuers
purſuites of their cauſe, aſwell to the generall Aſſemblies
of the Countrey, as otherwaies, could neuer get ſo much
as a hearing of the Priuiledges read; much leſſe a poſſeſſion
of the writings or copyes of them.
               
                  
Howſoeuer, it is euident that the Emperour Ferdinand
himſelfe, did very well iudge and conſider that this Kingdome,
and the Prouinces incorporate, were not Hereditary,
and that thoſe Letters Patents could take no place,
nor bee of force with Poſteritie againſt the ancient Priuiledges
and Statutes. It is euident in this, that the ſame
Emperour called a generall Aſſembly of the Countrey in
the yeare 1549. where hee deſired of the States of Bohemia,
that Archduke Maximilian his eldeſt Sonne, might
after his death bee receiued for their King. Which the
States accorded vnto, to the end that in the life time of
his Maieſty, his Sonne might carry the name of King, vpon
condition (neuertheleſſe) that hee ſhould not be inveſted
in the gouernment during the time of his Father.
According to which Condition (and likewiſe by vertue
of certaine interchanged Articles) the Coronation of
King Maximilian and his wife Queene Mary, ſucceeded
not vntill the yeare 1562.
               In like manner Maximilian comming to be Emperour
preſented his eldeſt Son Rodolph, and deſired he might be
accepted of and Crowned King of Bohemia for the future,
which the States conſented vnto, accepted of him, and
declared him then vpon certaine preſent conditions, and
afterwards drew from him his Letters of Aſſurance.
               
               Furthermore, were the Kingdome and the Prouinces
incorporate Hereditary to the Houſe of Auſtria, it is to
be belieued, that it had beene altogether vnneceſſary to
ſeeke to the States by requeſt for the Succeſſion; ſince
vpon the termes of Inheritance euery eldeſt Sonne comming
to furuiue the Father, there muſt haue diſcended a
right vnto his owne perſon for his title to the Crowne,
without any interceſſion: as the Archdukes of Auſtria
                  
themſelues doe exemplifie by their owne claimes to their
Countryes of inheritance. It may hereunto bee added
that from the Acceptation, and declaration of thoſe two
Kings Maximilian and Rodolphe there can no prejudice fall
vpon the Freedome of Election, ſince both of them being
the eldeſt Sonnes of Kinges of Bohemia, their ſucceſſe in
all reaſon might happen to bee the more eaſie; and yet it
was not done without both ſeeking and obtaining the
willing conſent of the States. Thence therefore there can
no argument be drawne that the States by that Act haue
quitt the right of their free Election.
               If yet there will bee ſomething inferred thence to the
contrary; the proceeding of Rodolphe himſelfe will confeſſe
that inference an errour. For being vnmarryed, and
without Children, it was the deſigne of the Archduke Mathias
as the eldeſt Brother to his Imperiall Majeſty, to procure
himſelfe firſt nominated King of Bohemia, the Emperour
yet liuing; and by the interceſſion of his Majeſty,
that afterwards hee might bee Elected and Crowned according
to cuſtome. And in this caſe where lineall heyres
haue fayled, it neuer ſufficed the conferring of the ſucceſſion
vpon another, to haue theſe wordes vſed onely:
Acceptation, Declaration, and Coronation; but there was alwayes
regard had aſwell of the one part as the other, to
the ſauing of the Free Election, which the States haue by
vertue of their ancient Priuiledges from Fredericke the
Emperour and others. As indeede the Emperour Rodolphe,
himſelfe alſo did anew in all indifferent vnderſtandings,
very authentically confirme and ratifie the ſame
Priuiledges to the States in this point, that his Majeſty
ſought and interceded to them for his Brother the Archduke
Mathias, that by vertue of their Priuiledges and

freedomes, and of their owne bounty, and free will, they
would firſt deſigne his Brother for King of Bohemia, and
afterwards Elect him. Accordingly the Archduke Mathias
obſerued the ſame ſence, and deſired hee might bee
Elected after the ordinary cuſtome. It followes that his
Majeſty the Emperour interceding, and the Archduke
being ſo Elected, they haue both of them very manifeſtly
acknowledged and confirmed that in ſuch a caſe howſoeuer,
(if not otherwiſe where the right line is extinguiſhed)
the States haue a free Election. Which beſides the
authority it receiues from Priuiledges and Cuſtomes of
auncient vſe, it hath more then ſufficiently beene ratified
likewiſe, not onely by a contract paſſed before Prague in
the yeare 1608. between his Imperiall Majeſty, the Archduke
and the Prouinces; but alſo by the propoſition
made on the parte of the ſame Emperour in the generall
Aſſembly of the States; and by the Letters of Aſſurance
from both their Majeſties Imperiall and Royall.
               Moreouer the States of the Reformed Church of the
Crowne of Bohemia, (after the perſecutions they had ſuſteyned)
were competently prouided for by his Majeſty
the Emperour Rodolphe their King with an Edict of Pacification
vpon the cauſe of Religion, and the free exerciſe
thereof, according to the agreement with the generall
Aſſembly of the States, in the yeare 1608. and as it hath
ſince beene confirmed in 1610. at the requeſt of the Electors
of the Empire ſollicited by the States. And their
ſaid Majeſties confirmed certain accords paſſed between
thoſe of the Religion of the Goſpell, and the Romane Catholiques,
as alſo betweene thoſe of the Religion of the
Goſpell themſeues. And all this for the conſer
                     ••
                  tion,
and aduancement of mutuall Amitie and agreement, in

ſuch a manner, that in whome ſoeuer the leaſt oppoſition or contradiction
that can bee imagined, ſhould be found to bee intended
againſt that Edict of Pacification, or the other accords, hee
ſhould be proceeded againſt as a diſturber of the publicke quiet.
               
               From theſe proceedings our people generally did
promiſe themſelues that thence forth they ſhould liue in
a peaceable condition together, both vnder his Majeſty
and the ſucceeding Kings of Bohemia, and that euery man
might ſerue God ſafely and obey the Magiſtrates. But incontinently
vpon it, and ſine likewiſe, theſe promiſes
met with perſons of turbulent and wicked diſpoſitions,
who, by the ſuggeſtion of an euill ſpirit haue laboured to
make the world vnderſtand, that nothing could be more
contrary, to their mindes then the free election of a King,
and the free exerciſe of Religion. And out of that maleuolent
nature refuſed to ſigne the Edict of pacification, and
the agreements paſſed with the matter depending on
them which his Imperiall Majeſty and other peaceable
Romane Catholike Eſtates had by example inuited them
vnto, but bent themſelues with all their might partly by
their ſecret Conſpiracies, and Fraudulent practices, and
partly by abuſing their offices, and by their impudent malice
to ouerthrow the whole worke of Peace, and to diſpoſe
euen his Majeſty himſelfe to the conſent of this
ruyne; not withſtanding that preſently vpon it in a publicke
Aſſembly of the States they were proteſted againſt,
that in caſe the States of the Religion of the Goſpell
ſhould come to bee yet further moleſted, the offence
ſhould be imputed to them alone, and they ſhould bee
proceeded againſt, as troublers and infringers of the publick

                     ••…
                  iet. This caution wrought no regard in them,
but on the contrary, they were ſo farre from it, as euen in

the life time of the Emperour Mathias, it was the principall
point of their ſtudy to prouide themſelues for the
time to come of ſuch a Lord as their enterpriſes might
expect countenance, and aſſiſtance from. And indeed
they did ſo ſuccesfully aduaunce their affaires, that in the
yeare 1617. they procured that Archduke Ferdinand, of
whoſe courſes all Chriſtendome haue taken notice, that
hee was no ſooner entred the gouernment of the Countrey
then he perſecuted thoſe of the Religion, in ſuch a
manner, as at laſt without making of any difference between
the condition of perſon & perſon, he chaſed them
quite away; and in the purſuite of his inhumanenes, hee
cauſed the bodyes of the Dead to bee digged out of their Graues,
and exerciſed ſuch Cruelties vpon them, as might haue tonuerted
a very barbours education to a gentlenes of Nature, by beholding,
or but by hearing onely of the hatefulnes of the Perſecuttan.
This Archduke Ferdinand was called to Prague,
adopted by the Emperour Mathias for his Sonne, and afterwards
by greatnes of threatnings, and by promiſes,
and preſents beſtowed vpon ſome diſloyall, and treacherous
members, and by their Conſpiracies with the enemies
of the Religion of the Goſpell, he was receiued, declared,
and Crowned for the King of Bohemia, to ſucceed,
but not Elected. For they would by no meanes giue eare
to the mouing of an Election during the whole time of
the giuing of voyces.
               Now touching the other thinges of paſſage in this admiſſion,
& Coronation; it ſhalbe ſpoken of in the ſecond
Article. This ſhall ſuffice to conclude with, for the firſt
point, that he was not choſen King of Bohemia according
to the accuſtomed order, nor the vertue of the ancient obſeruation
of the Priuiledges, & Statutes of the Country.
               
                  
For the ſecond reaſon; that is to ſay, how the admiſſion,
and Coronation came to paſſe, there hath ſomewhat
already beene ſpoken, and in what faſhion of cariage the
diſloyall members were brauely imployed, to reach the
end of their pernicious deſignes. To which this that followes
likewiſe offers it ſelfe. At the very time of the conuocation
of the Aſſembly of the States of the Countrey,
the States were by letters Patents forbidden to treate there
of any other thing, then the point touching a Succeſſour
to the Crowne, which is a crime not onely contrary to
the auncient obſeruation, but oppoſed alſo the decree
made in a generall Aſſembly of the Countrey, Anno 1610
where it is expreſly, deliuered, that in all the Aſſemblies
of the States, it ſhall bee free and lawfull for them; (immediately
after the deliberation of the propoſition made
on the part of the King) to ſet before them the Articles of
the publicke griefes which then ought to be taken into
mature aduice and to be ordered, and applyed remedy
vnto, before the riſing of the Aſſembly. This was the
reaſon that many of the States made difficulty to appeare
in an Aſſembly ſo exorbitant. And thoſe which were
there, gaue their teſtimonies by their voyces againſt ſuch
proceeding, as a thing infringing the franchiſes and priuiledges
of the Kingdome, adding that the Prouinces incorporate
were not called thither: with theſe (notwithſtanding)
it was concluded in the holding of the laſt Aſſembly
of the States; as pretending to haue right in the
giuing of their voyces for the Election of a King; hauing
firſt reſolued and accorded with the Prouinces. Theſe
States (I ſay) were threatned, aſwell by the vnfaithfull
members, as by others, and in ſuch a maner, as it was profeſſed

that if any man would vndertake to carry his ſuffrage
another way, hee had neede be furniſhed with two
heads, and muſt looke to be dealt withall as ſtrangely as
ſome others had been not many yeares agoe. And ſeeing
it was impoſſible to countermine their practiſes, and to
withſtand the whole faction of the Romaniſt; who had
fiſhed vp and down to call in ſuch as had little or nothing
to looſe in the Countrey, that thoſe of the Religion were
ouerborne by the plurality of voices: It muſt thē come to
this neceſſitie, that whether they would or not, they were
to giue way to the acceptation, and Coronation. Which
(neuertheleſſe) was not yeelded vnto, without cōditions.
For the Archduke Ferdinand gaue the States his Reuerſall
Letters, among the Articles whereof theſe are ſome that
follow.
               1.
               That he thanked the States, and would he carefull to acknowledge
them with gratiouſueſſe, and Royall beneuolence; in ſuch a
meaſure as they ſhould receiue all contentment from his Maieſty.
               2.
               That during the life of the Emperour Mathias hee would not
inueſt himſelfe in the Gouernment of the Kingdome; nor would
hee put himſelfe vpon it, without the knowledge and conſent,
aſwell of his Maieſty and the principall Officers and Preſidents of
the Countrey; as of the Councellours of Eſtate, and of his Maieſties
Finances, and of the chiefe Lords of the Countrey; of two
perſons of the commonalty of euery Circuit; of ſixe of the Towne
of Prague, and of other Townes deputed in the Aſſembly of the
States of the Land.
               3.
               That if during the life of the Emperour hee ſhall vndertake to
enter the Gouernment; in that caſe the Eſtates ſhall no way bee
held, or bound to render him any obedience or duty of Fidelity.
               
                  
Now in what faſhion K. Ferdinand hath made good his
Oath, and obſerued his Reuerſall Letters, it is notorious to
the whole world; and ſhall briefly be ſhowne in the third
Article following.
            
            
               3.
               Concerning then the third and laſt reaſon; namely
why King Ferdinand is rejected; and how hee hath depriued
himſelfe, and made himſelfe vncapable of the Acceptation
and Coronation; and in ſumme, of all elſe depending
thereon, which he might pretend vnto:
               It is a thing moſt noted and manifeſt, that the vnfaithfull
members; together with the pernicious ſect of the
Ieſuites, after the Coronation became ſo inſolent, that
they did inſtantly ſet a foote diuers perſecutions, not onely
as principally in the Kingdome of Bohemia, bus alſo in
the principalities of the vpper and lower Sileſia; and in
many places againſt the States of the Religion of the
Goſpell, and the free exerciſe thereof; and expreſly againſt
the prohibition contained in the Edict of pacification; beſides
this, the Churches of the Religion, ſome they cauſed to bee
blocked vp, and ſome they pull'd downe to the very ground, the
perſons they caſt into Priſon, and ther held them long. And at
laſt cut off all acceſſe and audience betweene his Majeſty
the Emperour, and the States of Bohemia, as alſo between
him and the defendants ordained by the conſent of his
Majeſty, forbad their Aſſemblies, directly againſt the meaning
of the Law, and condemned them without either accuſatiō
or hearing. The Ieſuites with much paſſion of joy
writ to Archduke Leopold the aduertiſement of this Coronation,
and put it in Print, confeſſing & reporting that
the Archduke Ferdinand, aſwell before, as at his entrance
to the Gouernment of his hereditary Countries, was
bound by Oath to affect rather the looſing of blood, and

life, then to agree in the leaſt meaſure that could be about
matter of Religion in fauour of the Heretickes, meaning
the true belieuing Chriſtians: as it may particularly and
at large bee vnderſtood in the defences and griefes of this
Land which are publiſhed.
               From theſe vnlawfull Oppreſſions it grew to this, by
the conſpiracies of thoſe falſe Stateſmen, that for a long
time they looked after no other ſubject then warre, & the
effuſion of blood; Inſomuch, as the late Emperour was
carryed away and ſuborned by them, to the inuading of
this faire Kingdome and the Inhabitants with an Army,
which hath deſtroyed a good part of it, by pillage, fire
and ſword. Wherein King Ferdinand did not onely giue
teſtimony that hee tooke contentment, but (which is
more) became himſelfe both a Counſailour, and an executor
againſt the Kingdome: and intruded into the Gouernment
thereof, to be inueſted before his time, thereby
raiſing his purpoſe to bee a cauſe of infinite vnſufferable
oppreſſions and calamities: The truth whereof is as cleere
as day. For the world can not bee ignorant that he inueſted
himſelfe in the Gouernment while the Emperour
Mathias was yet liuing; inſomuch as againſt the will of
the Emperour hee did both caſt, and impriſon Cardinall
Kleſel Preſident of the Priuie Councell, and one of whoſe
imployment his Majeſty receiued ſeruice in all his Counſailes.
Further, in that the ſaide Ferdinand did not onely
aduiſe a Warre againſt this Kingdome, but alſo imployed
his owne Forces, which he had in Friaull, to inuade the
Land, commaunding them to make ſpoyle of it and to
put the Inhabitants to Fire and Sword.
               Item for hauing himſelfe in perſon held an Aſſembly in
the Marquiſat of Marauia, againſt the Kingdom of Boheme,
                  
where hee demaunded, both to joyne the Troupes of Morauia
to thoſe of the Emperour, and their paſſage through
the ſaide Marquiſat; and then indeede, partly by faire
wordes, partly by threatnings he perſwaded the States of
Morauia to allow of the paſſage.
               Item for hauing, after the deceaſe of the Emperour,
not only taken into his pay and ſeruice all the Forces, and
open enemies of that Kingdome; but alſo cauſed all the
leuies made before, to bee aduanced, and brought in many
thouſand Spaniards, and other forces; by meanes
whereof horrible Cruelties, and Tyrannies were exerciſed,
by Fire, and Sword, and Sackings: both in Bohemia,
and Morauia, and much greater then in the time of the
Emperour Mathias, Inſomuch that they ſpared neither
olde nor young, men nor women, no not the innocent Babes,
whereof many of them were in there Mothers bellyes: and which
is more, in worſe then a Barberous faſhion digged their bodyes
out of their Graues, ſtripped them; and binding their hands and
feete together, layde them ſtarke naked in a horrible manner vpon
the Altars, and ſet them at the doores of Churches.
               
               And though it bee well knowne to the world that he
neuer entred into poſſeſſion of this Kingdome; yet not
withſtanding, he hath not forborne by his letters to make
choyce of, and to admit for his Lieutenants the aforeſaid
treacherous Patriots who are the ſource, and originall
cauſe of all this euill: ſome of which hee hath yet by his
perſon; who for being perfidious to this Kingdome and
for other great conſiderations were baniſhed, of whome
(notwithſtanuing) hee doth ſerue himſelfe both in his
Counſailes and Embaſſages, manifeſting thereby that he
doth approoue of all the miſchiefe they haue donne euen
vntill this preſent for the aboliſhing, and caſſation of the

franchiſes, and Priuiledges of the Countrey, and that hee
makes more accompt of ſuch men, then of the whole
Kingdome: by which euery one may eaſily iudge, what
the Prouinces may expect or hope for ſo ſuch a Lord.
               Eſpecially if wee conſider withall the Contracts and
treaties which haue paſſed betweene the King of Spaine and
King Ferdinand, not onely for ſo much as concerneth the
Kingdome of Bohemia, and the incorporated Prouinces
thereof, but chiefly alſo concerning the free Kingdome
of Hungarie, and that this was donne euen then, when he
was neither yet receiued, nor Crowned in any of the two
Kingdomes; which Treaties as then were kept ſecret and
concealed from the Prouinces, but diſcouered afterwards
and brought to light by a ſingular, & diuine prouidence.
               In thoſe treaties the Free Election and the Priuiledges
(which the ſaid two Kingdomes haue by vertue of that Election)
are entirely cut off, and appropriated Hereditarily
to the King of Spaine and his Succeſſors; in ſuch ſort
as the King of Spaine doth now quit and yeeld his Hereditary
right vnto King Ferdinand; but with this reſtriction,
that vpon default of Heyres males of the race of King
Ferdinand, the ſaid two Kingdomes, with the depending
Prouinces, ſhall fall by right of Succeſſion to the King of
Spaine, his Heyres and Succeſſors: As indeed the ſaide
Archduke Ferdinand, euer ſince the ſaid contracts were
paſſed, hath changed the olde ſtyle, wherewith the precedent
Emperours and Kings of Boheme alwayes contented
themſelues; for that the Emperours Ferdinand, Maximilian,
rnd Rodolphe did ordinarily write: Our Kingdomes and
Prouinces Hereditarie; but the Archduke Ferdinand doth
write now in this faſhion: Our Kingdomes Hereditarie and
Prouinces. By this wee may againe eaſily iudge, what was

the drift of King Ferdinand, and why hee would not bee
choſen, but onely acknowledged in Bohemia; namely to
ſuppreſſe the Free Election, and accordingly to be Lieutenant
of the King of Spaine in theſe Countries, vntill ſuch
time as hee had in the end entirely reduced them to the
Spaniſh yoake and ſeruitude. But if the States had then
had any knowledge of the ſaid contracts, doubtleſſe they
had ſufficient cauſe, both to contradict, and oppoſe them
ſelues againſt it. For all men know, that the Kinges of
thoſe Kingdomes which are not Hereditary, but ſubſiſt
by a Free Election, (as hath been formerly prooued touching
the Kingdome of Bohemia) cannot make any contract
with a ſtranger Prince without the approbation and
conſent of the States, and all ſuch treaties are in themſelues
voyde and of none effect. Such and the like treaties
might prooue exceeding dangerous to the Empire; for
by this meanes the King of Spaine would thruſt in a foote
to the Empire, as King of Bohemia, from whence would
neceſſarily follow that he muſt be Elector of the Empire,
by vertue of the Golden Bull of the Emperour Charles the
4.th, and ſo hereafter would affect and pretend alſo to be
King of the Romanes, at which all the Spaniſh practiſes
doe leuell and ayme, which would bee expreſly contrary
to the Golden Bull, and the Oath of the other Electors;
as alſo againſt the Ordinances and conſtitutions of the
Empire, and by this meanes the Imperial Crowne would
be quite taken away from the Germane Nation, and bee
made entirely Hereditary as they haue endeauoured, and
practiſed to make the Crowne of Bohemia. All which,
together with that hath been written by the States of Bohemia
to the Colledge of Electors lately held at Franckford:
as alſo how they proteſted againſt the Election of the

perſon of King Ferdinand to the Crowne of the Kings of
the Romanes; will plainely appeare by their writings.
               Since then in regard hereof the Prouinces haue acknowledged,
and plainely ſeene, that it was moſt dangerous,
and indeed impoſſible to enter into any treatie with
ſuch a Lord, who is not of himſelfe, who ſpeakes and
writes peaceably, but harboureth warre and bloodſhed in
his heart; much leſſe for the reaſons aforeſaid receiue
him into the Gouernment, whereof he hath many wayes
depriued himſelf: let vs conſider the pernicious conſequence
that this would haue brought with it.
               1 Firſt, hereby the ſaid treaties with Spaine would haue
beene confirmed.
               2 Secondly, the States could not expect of ſuch a Lord
any certainty or aſſurance in point of Religion or State.
               3 And thirdly, without doubt the States muſt haue payed,
not onely their owne but their enemies Forces, which
haue exerciſed ſo many Cruelties againſt them, and their
good Friends, and haue beene conſtrained to joyne with
their enemies, and March againſt their owne Friends,
which profeſſe their owne Religion.
               4 Fourthly, it would giue occaſion to our enemies to
blaſpheme the name of God, and to ſay, alas where is now
our God?
               
               5 And fiftly it came to that, that other Potentates, and
Princes, of the Religion had neuer giuen any aſſiſtance to
the ſaide States, if they had found but the leaſt inclination
in them to enter into treaty with the Archduke Ferdinand
and other enemies.
               And therefore ſeeing that for the reaſons aforeſaid, it
hath beene ſufficiently proued, that the Archduke Ferdinand
was neuer Elected King of Bohemia by the ordinary

courſe, and that hee himſelf, hath depriued himſelfe, and
hath forfeited both the Acceptation and the Coronation,
which was conditionally conferred vpon him (as before)
by not obſeruing either his Letters of Aſſurance, or
Oath: As alſo ſeeing he hath exerciſed manifeſt tyrannies
in the Kingdome, and paſſed contracts with the Houſe of
Spaine without the conſent or knowledge of the States:
For theſe reaſons, they vnderſtand, and finde themſelues
to bee free from him, and not any way tyed vnto him in
what kinde ſoeuer.
               And for the ſame reaſons, agreeable both to diuine and
humane right, (with the ayde of the Almighty) they
haue taken the Freedome to Elect another King, as ſhall
bee more fully declared to the world in a Manifeſtation
hereafter to bee publiſhed.
            
         
         
            
            A PROPOSITION
made by the States of Bohemia, in their
Aſſembly at PRAGVE vpon the Election of a
King; the 16. of Auguſt, 1619. being
the Birth-day of the Prince
Elector Palatine.
            ALbeit the Nomination of a King of
BOHEMIA, requires a mature counſell
and deliberation; which ought to precede
the nomination; in this point (neuertheleſſe)
there is not ſo much difficultie,
as in the rejecting of a King; which gaue a
beginning to this, and ſtandes in neede both of a
good Iuſtification, and of a great Power, where
the nomination hath no neede of thoſe aydes, but
but of itſelfe followes, after the rejection.
            Now therefore ſince the Rejection (as the thing
more importing vs) is already donne; the Nomination
will be much the more eaſie, prouided wee
ſtand not vpon ſuch a perfection in the choyſe, as
the whole world cannot yeeld vs. It behooues vs
to ſet apart all particular paſſions, and to haue regard
(onely) to thoſe reaſons which are Fundamentall.
For there are pointes requiſite, ſo neceſſary

to bee conſidered in the Election of a King; as it is
not for any good Patriot to giue his aduice for the
receiuing of one in whome thoſe thinges required
are not to bee found. But we may with very good
aſſurance conclude for him, in whome they meete,
more than in any other man.
            1 As in the firſt place, it is needfull that in ſuch a
perſon, there be none of theſe matters to be feared
for which King FERDINAND was rejected. That
is to ſay, that hee ought not either to perſequute, or
aduance any for the reſpect of Religion, nor to exceede
in the dependance of his owne Counſellors,
or of ſtrangers; but to joyne himſelfe with the
States. He ought not to bee opinionatiue▪ nor giuen
to doe thinges of his owne head, but to accomodate
the Cuſtomes of his Houſe, and his, to the
ordinances and liberties of this Crowne.
            2 In the ſecond place, it is required, that hee affect
the Eſtates with an acknowledgement of reputation.
            3 Thirdly, that in time both of Peace and warre,
hee gouerne his Kingdome by his owne preſence;
worthily and profitably.
            4 Fourthly, that the Confederates may receiue
no cauſe of feare from him, either of danger, or
damage.
            
               
Since then there are Fiue who are inferred into
the treatie of this Election; that is to ſay, the King
of DENMARRKE, the Elector PALATINE, the Elector
of SAXONIE, the Duke of SAVOY, and the
Prince of TRANSILVANIA, it will bee therefore
to purpoſe to conſider, that although there bee not
any one of any one of theſe Princes in his owne
particular, but is of merite both to bee Praiſed and
recommended; there is among them (notwithſtanding)
a certaine diuerſitie which euery one by
himſelfe may prudently waigh. And foraſmuch
as it is not permitted vs to iudge liberally of great
Princes; in this place (therefore) it ſhall ſuffice,
without offence to any, briefly to deduce the reaſons
for which the Elector Palatine ought to bee
eſteemed very capable of the Crowne of BOHEMIA,
and fit to maintaine the preſent eſtate of the Kingdome.
            For although he be not yet aboue twenty three;
hee is a Prince (neuertheleſſe) endued with a
great iudgement, bred vp from his Cradle in goodnes
and vertue: holdes continually about him perſons
of great quality, as well for the Field, as the
State: accuſtomed to Courteſie; in himſelfe of very
plentifull Hopes: and at this Age hee will better
forme himſelfe to the Cuſtomes of the Kingdome,

than if hee were more increaſed in yeares.
And God beſtowes not wiſdome alwayes according
to the Age of a man but vpon him that calles
to God for it in his feare.
            Hee is a Prince, moderate, vertuous and reſolute
in his Actions; quicke and ſharpe in his Diſcourſe,
true courteous towards all men; well Languaged;
holdes a faire Court, of Earles, Barons, and
Gentlemen; Loues and cheriſhes the Nobilitie:
imployes euen men of meane condition in his Seruice,
when hee findes deſert in them for it; and will
let no worthy ſeruice paſſe him without his acknowledgement,
his Subjects and Countrey (in
part the Frontiers of this Kingdome) hee gouernes
with Prudence; giues eſtimation to men of Honour;
holdes a well-ordered Councell, frequents
the Councell Table in his owne Perſon; takes exact
heede to the opinions, and propoſitions of his
Councellours; giues good cauſe to haue his owne
Iudgement approued, and commended in thinges
of importance; inclines willingly to the informations
of other men; loues the Common good, and
therein takes paines, with zeale, and without feare:
beares Compaſſion to the afflicted; ſhewes himſelfe
laborious and reſolued; is beloued of his
Subjects; carries himſelfe Peaceably with his

neighbours, of what Religion ſoeuer they be; and
for that winnes reſpect euen of thoſe of different
beliefes. For his owne Religion, hee is well affected;
yet there is not any in his Countryes though
of another Profeſſion, that findes himſelfe diſquieted
for matter of Conſcience or in the exerciſe of
his Religion; ſo as euery man may with freedome
liue vnder him, prouided his conuerſation bee honeſt,
and good.
            There is none that can accuſe him either of precipitation,
or opinionatiuenes; a thing very remarkeable.
            Hee is in good correſpondence with thoſe of
the Houſes PALATINE and of BAVIERS; and yet
for that reaſon forſakes nothing either of thoſe
rightes, or of thoſe Duties belonging to the generall
State of the Countrey.
            And howſoeuer hee is a Prince but young, and
ſhewes himſelfe courteous, and ſweet towards his
people; for all that there is neither lightnes, diſſolutenes,
nor voluptuouſnes ſeene in him; nor any
diſorder, or exceſſe at all in his Dyet; nor any
Auarice, Prodigalitie, or other thing whatſoeuer,
vnagreeable, or contrary to the reputation of a
Prince.
            For the aſſiſtance the Crowne of BOHEMIA may

expect from him; it is cleare to euery mans vnderſtanding,
that hee is not onely not in debt; and that
of his Reuenue hee can lay ſomething vp, but alſo
that the King of Great BRITAINE is his Father in
Law; the King of DENMARKE his neare Ally, and
likewiſe the Elector of BRANDENBVRGH: the
Prince of ORENGE his Vncle; the Duke of BVILLON
his Ally; the States of the Vnited Prouinces
of the Low-Countryes his Confederates: the King
of SWEDEN, and the Hanſe Townes his Friends;
and for his Correſpondents, the Duke of SAVOY,
VENICE, and SWISSERLAND. Hee is in good
credit with all the Princes Electors, and other Princes,
and States of the Empire, more particularly
with thoſe of the Vnion. Hee hath confederacies,
and auncient Alliances with FRANCE. The Prince
of TRANSILVANIA & High HVNGARIE beares
him affection. SAXONIE and BAVIER, are in good
tearmes with him. MENTZ, and the neighbour-Countryes
doe looke vpon him with Honour and
reſpect. Inſomuch as the Crowne of Bohemia by
his onely meanes may get the Amitie of all thoſe,
which wee doe now ſeeke with ſo much labour, and
trauaile; and by the ſame meanes wee may bee
conſerued, and Fortified againſt our Enemies;
which from any other treated of in the Election

can neither bee expected, nor hoped for.
            And ſince it is a certainty that this Prince would
not accept of the Election for ambitions ſake, but
onely for the Common good; wee may therefore
promiſe our ſelues that hee will euer continue in
the good affection hee hath already ſhowne towards
this Crowne, by the profitable Councels and
aſſiſtances, which aſwell in his owne perſon, as by
other wayes (according to the occaſion) hee hath
made to appeare: when ſome others, for their particular
conſiderations, haue greatly prejudized
both the States of the Kingdome of Bohemia, and
the Countries, and Prouinces confederate.
            Thoſe Prouinces confederate, who are already
in good vnderſtanding with this Prince, haue to
conſider, that they cannot ground the like confidence
vpon others: (who are too much tyed in reſpect
of the Houſe of Auſtria) for the receiuing of
a ſuccour in time of their neede. And in this caſe
the confederacie might bring them rather prejudice,
than benefite; a thing exceedingly importing
this Crowne, as may be ſeene by experience.
            Since then thoſe qualities required, are found
all to meete in the perſon of the Prince-Elector-Palatine;
and that in thoſe of the other Princes
ſpoken of in this Election (the Prince of Tranſiluania

excepted: who hath his eye vpon another
marke) though in themſelues of great woorth and
merit: in regard (notwithſtanding) of the conſtitution
of our State, there are many abilities wanting,
(as may bee eaſily ſhowne:) it will be to purpoſe
therefore no longer to deferre the Election.
And ſo much the rather, becauſe the Crowne of
Bohemia, with the Countryes confederate (now
after the rejection) will bee more diſquieted than
euer, and remayning without a Heade, wee ſhall
finde no man that will duely vndertake our protection
or Defence.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            To the Reader.
            The Reader may not expect hereof at this time ſo exact
an impreſſion as the ſubject requireth: by reaſon the
Copie (out of which it was Printed) was written ouer in
haſt, and by a ſtranger: and Printed likewiſe in haſt, the
Compoſitors alſo ſtrangers. By reaſon whereof ſome
eſcapes may haue paſſed in the Orthographie, the which
beeing but Literall, may the more eaſily bee pardoned,
both to the Printer, and the Ouer-ſeer no ordinary Corrector,
Vale.
            
               Iohn Harriſon.
            
         
      
   