
      
         
            
            
            AN EPItome of the Psalmes, or briefe meditacions vpon the same, with diuerse other moste christian prayers, translated by Richard Tauerner.
            Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.
            1539
         
         
            
            
            TO THE MOST MYGHTY, and most redoubted price HENRY the .VIII. Kynge of Englande and of Fraūce Defensor of the Fayth, lorde of Irelād, and in earth supreme head immediatly vnder CHRIST of the church of Englande, hys most hūble seruaūt Rychard Tauerner desyreth all felicitie, ioye and encrease of lawfull posteritie.
            
               PLease it your excellēt Maiestie to vnderstande, that where as, more then thre yeares passed, my verye good lorde and olde mayster my lorde Priuie seale for such qualities as he thought to haue espyed in me (whych I my selfe neuertheles acknowlege not) preferred and delyuered

me vp vnto your graces seruice, and sythens that tyme, to thintent he wolde make me the more hable & mete to serue your hyghnes in my callyng, hath enured me with dyuerse translacions and other exercises: So it is moost gracious and moost redoubted soueraigne lorde, that amōges other thynges, he hath cōmytted thys boke of prayers to my pennynge & translatynge into the Englysh tongue. The selue prayers, no doubte, be excellent, pure, syncere, godly & Christian. But my translacion, I feare, is rude, base, vnpleasaunt, grosse, and barbarouse. I feare, I saye, lest accordynge to the prouerbe I shal rēder pro aureis ferrea, lest of good latine I haue made euil English, lest I haue turned wyne into water. My courage & good wyll is much, thexpectacion of myne olde Mecoenas is of me great, finally the celsitude of youre maiestie requyreth

no base thyng. But I am sore afrayed that myne industrie herin imployed shal answere nether to your maiesties most royal dignitie, nether to my sayd lordes expectacion, nether yet to myne owne good wyl & desyre. Neuertheles how so euer my translacion is (for vnto your maiesties moost exacte iudgement & censure as vnto another Aristarchus I moost humbly submyt it) certes the incomparable benignitie of your moost gracious person, hath impelled me wyth a bolde spirite to offer and dedicate the frutes of these my labours vnto ye same, to thintent that vnder the moost noble patrocinie of youre royall name, the boke maye the more plausibly and gredely be deuoured of your louynge subiectes. Truth it is, that my poore degre & basenesse of condicion is farre vnmete to offer any thynge vnto your moost excellent hyghnes. Howbeit, yf Hethen kinges

haue very thākfully receyued of their subiectes hādes, Pome granates, hādfuls of water, and such other tryflyng thynges, estemyng rather the prompt and ready wyl of the gyuers, than the pryce of the thynges gyuen, yf also Christ hymselfe our myghty sheperde (whose vicare for the church & realme of Englande youre maiestie is recognised) not onely accepted but also preferred the two minutes of ye poore wydowe afore the precious oblacions of the rych personages, I doubt not, but your maiestie beyng a christiā Kynge and such a kynge, woll not ingratelye receyue at youre humble seruauntes hande, these hys symple lucubracions whych tende to the hygh benefyte, edificacion, and cōmoditie of youre graces people. But leste wyth my loquacitie I myght be an impediment vnto youre moost serious occupacions, I make an ende. The God of peace and

of consolacion graunte, that lyke as your hyghnes most lyke vnto the godlye kynge Ezechias ernestly go about the perfecte instauracion of the true religion and thauauncement of gods glorie, all false religion destroyed: so he woll vouchsaue, to sende you the thynge that the most wyse kynge Salomō estemed for the swetest and beste porcion of mans lyfe, and for a treasure inestimable, that is to wyte, a prudent and wyse lady to your maiesties wyfe and to our youre moost addicte subiectes Quene, whyche accordynge to the voyce of the prophete, maye be as a frutfull vyne in your maiesties house, furnyshed wyth chyldren lyke olyue braūches roūde about your graces table. For lo thus shall the man be blessed (sayeth he) whyche feareth the Lorde. What shall we saye? God hath alredy herde our moost ardent vowes and peticions. Thys lady moost excellente

is prepared of thalmyghtye for your maiestye, she is in iorney readye to be transported into your graces realme. The God of spirites mought so tempre and breath the weather and so graciously conducte her in her iorney, as she maye moost happely arriue at the tyme desyred into your graces presens, to the full contentacion of your hartes desyre, to the plausible expectacion of your graces subiectes, and fynally to the true honoure and glorie of almyghty God. For the accomplishmente wherof, we all wyth one accorde mought poure out these prayers folowing & semblable to the Lorde of all. Amen.
            Domine saluum fac Regem.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ❧A GENErall Confession of synnes vnto God, dayly to be sayde of the christen person.
            
               O Moste mercyful lorde god, and moste tendre & deare father, vouche safe I hertely beseche the, to loke downe with thy fatherly eyen of pytye vpon me moste vile & wretched synner, which lye here prostrate before the fete of thy botōles mercy. For I haue synned agaynst the trone of thy glory & before the o father, in so muche yt I am nomore worthy to be called thy son. Neuertheles, forasmuch as thou arte the god & father of al comforte,

and agayne desyrest not the death of the synner, but lyke a true Samaritane takest thought of my sely woū
               ded soule: make me I praye the, by infoūdyng thy preciouse oyle of comforte into my woundes ioyefully to rūne with the loste son vnto the lap of thyne euerlastyng pytie. For lo, yu arte my hope, and truste in whom I only repose my selfe hauyng in the full confydence and fayth, and so I say with very herte. I beleue in the o god the father, in the o god the son and in the o god the holy ghost, thre persons and one true and very god, besyde whom I knowledge none other god in heuin aboue nor in earth beneth. Yea and I accuse my selfe vnto the, deare father, that I haue greuously offended thy almighty goodnes and maiestie in the cōmyttyng of myne aboundaunt and manifold

synnes. For I haue not kepte the leaste of thy most godly cōmaundementes lyke as thy ryghteousnes maye demaunde the same of me. I haue (I saye) not honoured the, lyke my god, drad the, lyke my lord, loued the lyke my father, trusted in the lyke my creatour and sauiour. Thy holy and dradfull name, vnto whom all glory and honour belongeth, haue I vsed in vayne. I haue not sanctified the holy dayes wt workes whiche be acceptable vnto the, nor instructing my neygheboure in vertue accordingly. I haue not honoured my parentes nor bene obedient vnto them through whom (as by an instrumēt) thou hast wrought my cōmyng into this worlde. The highe powers and rulers whiche take theyr authoritie of the, I haue not bene wyllyngly obedient vnto. I haue not kepte my

herte pure from manslaughter, yea had not thy grace defended me the better, I shulde haue cōmitted the very dede also. In lyke wyse I am not pure from thefte, from aduowtry, from false witnes bearyng, but haue in my herte wished and desyred my neighbours goods and thinges. I haue folowed the prynce of thys worlde Satan (whiche hathe bene a lyer from the begynnyng) in concupiscence of the fleshe, in pryde of lyuing, in lyeng, in deceitfulnes, in lechery, in hatred and enuy, in backebytyng, in dispayre and misbeleue. My fyue wittes haue I fouly misspent, in hearyng, seyng, smellyng, tasting and fealing, which thou hast gyuen me to vse vnto thy honour & to the edification and profite of my neyghbour. But in what maner so euer that I haue offended and synned

agaynst thy maiesty (for noman knoweth throughly his synnes as thy prophete witnesseth) whither it hath bene by daye or by nyght euen from my chyldhode vnto this daye were it in wordꝭ, workes or thoughtꝭ secretly or openly, my mercyful god, I am sory for it, euen from the very botom of my herte. Yea my soule mourneth for sorowe most mercifull father that I am not a thousande tymes soryer then I am. Howbeit in token of repentaunce (thoughe all hertes be knowen wel ynough vnto the) I knocke and stryke my breaste and say in bytternes of soule. Lorde god father haue mercy, Lorde god son haue mercy, lorde god holy ghost haue mercy. Spare me of thyne infinite mercy deare lorde nowe and at the dayes of my lyfe, & let me haue parte of thyne aboundaunt grace, so

as I maye chaunge my synfull lyfe and put out of me the olde man with all his euyll concupiscence, and also that I may dye vnto the world, and that the worlde may be vnto me a crosse, and so go forth in a newe lyfe. Strengthen me (o lorde) in a trewe humble herte, in perfecte loue, hope, and truste in the. Gyue my soule the grace to desyre the only, in the onely to reioyce and repose my selfe, and ye I may vtterly renounce and forsake the vayne affyaunce of this worlde, so that thou mayste fynde me ready with the good seruaunt in the mydnyght of my death, whiche shall sodenly steale vpon me lyke a thefe ere I be ware. Be thou vnto me at that time of nede o lord a toure of strēgth a place of refuge, and a defensable god namely agaynste the face of the fende, who lyke a roryng lyon shalbe

then moste ready to deuoure me and agaynst desperaciō which then shall be busy to greue me. Let then thy comforte cleaue faste vnto me, thy mercy kepe me, and thy grace guyde me. Fetche then agayne, Lorde god father, that whiche thy puyssaunt myght hathe shapen. Fetche then againe lorde son that which thou hast so wysely gouerned & bought with thy preciouse bloude. Take agayne then, lorde holy ghoste, that whiche thou haste kepte and preserued so louyngly in this region of synne and vale of misery, thre persons and one very god, vnto whom be prayse and honour for euer and euer.
            AMEN.
         
         
            
            
               ❧THE EPITOME OF PSALMES TRANSLATED BY RICHARDE TAVERNER.
            
               A prayer for true Godlynes. PSALM. I.
               
                  
                     O LORDE god and father, I beseche the, by Christ our lorde, that of thyne īfinite mercy thou kepe me, so as at no time I folowe the counsayles eyther of the wicked, which knowe the not, or of hypocrytes which with herte seke the not, and that I entre not in the way of synners wt a minde to fulfyll the desyres and workes of the fleshe: But rather when so euer throughe fraylty of this olde and corrupte nature I shall chaunce to run a straye

(as no man is voyde of synne) thou wilte cause me to stey and plucke my fote backe agayne. Kepe me that I syt not in the seate of pestilent scorners, which clokyng theyr pharisaicall and deuelysh intentes cōdemne in other men thy veritie and gospel. Go to, bring to passe by thy holy spirite that I may bren in desyre of thy lawe, that vpon thauauncement of thy worde my mynde may alway be occupyed, yt I maye euermore chuse that is moste pleasaunt to the, and hate that, bothe in my selfe and in other, whiche to the is displeasaunt. Make, I pray the, that I may be a tree planted by the swete ryuers of gostly waters, to the intent I maye bryng forthe fruite to thy glory and profyte of my neyghbour, as often as thou shalte ministre time and occasion therunto, lest my leaues, that

is, my wordes and workes shulde fade & fall away, but that al thinges may prospere, whatsoeuer I shal do in thy name. Assyste me I pray the, that I may take rote in the grounde of lyfe, least with the vngodly lyke chaffe and duste I be blowen abrode by the moste perniciouse wynde of this world. And graunt that I may stande in the iudgement and in the assemblie of the ryghteouse, that I may entre into iudgement without punyshment, and escape euerlasting damnacion. Amen.
            
            
               For the true knowledge of Christe. psalm. 2.
               LOrde if at any tyme for thy names sake this worlde shall furiously trouble me, then with pacience and strēgth of spirite, arme thou me, and be thou at hande, that I maye braste the bandes and counsayles of

the vngodly, and cast away that vnfruitful yoke of the synfull consciēce and fear of damnacion, which euyls thou o lorde that haste thy residence in heauen doste scorne. Graunt that I may stande faste in ye statutes and preceptes of thy son our lorde Iesu Christe, whiche be honest studyes to helpe my neyghbour, procedyng of fayth vnfeined (ye which Iesus thou haste proclaymed kyng ouer Syon thy holy hyll, that is, amonges the faythful christiās) so as he only may rule me, by the spirite of his mouth, which to that intente was made thy son in time appoynted, that thou the father shuldest adopt and chuse me into thine eternal heritage, by whom nowe I am partetaker of thy kyngdome and coheyre with him. Graunt lorde, that I may with true awe euer more serue the, but not with the false

and feyned seruyce of the world neither yet cōstreynedly, but of a franke spirite and syncere trouthe, obeyeng neuerthelesse to all temporall power and humane ordinaūces, whyle they be not agaynst thy worde, yt I maye attayne vnto the vnspeakeable ioye of thy promises for thy wordes sake, not doubtyng of my saluacion, and that I maye louyngly obey thy fatherly chastisemēt, for surely sharpenes of correcciō maketh that we lose not the way of trouth. Ah good god gyue me grace that in the, I maye continually and fastly hope, and of the loke for all thynges by Christe our lorde. So be it.
            
            
               A commune prayer to the lorde for healpe in aduersitie. psalm. 3.
               FOrasmuche as many (o Lorde) ryse maliciously against me, and say within thē selues, there is surely

no health to be loked for from god vnto this felowe, take thou me vp I pray the, be thou my shylde, and my succour, and replenysh thou me with true glory in thy syght, to the intent I may boste of the and be ioyfull wt a careles herte. Harken vnto me frō thy holy hyll, as ofte as I crye vnto the: make me not to fear, yea though thousādes of men stand against me. Lord at thy hādes only is ayde and helth to be receyued & blessyng ouer thy people. Aryse therfore lord, helpe me and endowe me wt thy blessyng.
            
            
               For the lyghtenyng of the holy ghoste. psal. 4.
               HEare me when I crye for succour to the (o Christ which arte my ryghteousnes and innocēcy) and in aduersitie solace me with the ioye of thy spirite. Poure vpon me thy grace and graunt me my peticions,

lyfte vp ouer me ye lyght of thy coū
                  tenaunce (o lorde) and thy fauour, yt through thy spirite I maye knoweledge the, and with the same be hertely cherefull for euer. Graue within me (o lord almyghty) peace, fast hope brennyng loue, and fayth vnfeyned euermore to endure. So be it.
            
            
               A prayer for grace in the mornyng. psalm. 5.
               LOrde heare thou my wordes, marke my cryeng, o my kynge and my god, for vnto ye only I come to pray, neyther do I loke for succour any where els, thā of the. Thou shalte graciously herken vnto my peticion (o lord) in the mornyng, that is, that thy grace mought spryng in myne herte with the morowe lyght of comforte, the nyght of care & perturbacions being ouer passed. Suffre me not to peryshe with vngodly

folke, whom thou cursest. I come runnyng vnto the, not trustyng to myne owne ryghteousnes, but to thyne vnspeakable mercy, & towardes thy holy temple I shall addresse my selfe to worshyp the with al reuerence and feare. Lorde with the rule of thy iustyce thou shalte dyrecte me for thy names sake, thou shalt make playne thy waye before me, and my way before the, least ye spirite of malice turne me thēs. Let them reioyce which repose them selues and truste alwayes in thy succour, let thē syng hymnes & psalmes, whiche do glory and reioyce of the, let thē tryumphe whiche loue thy name. Thou shalte defende vs with thy grace, as with a shylde in tyme of sclaūder and peryll, to thintent, when we be assaulted of them, we may yet wt constaūt chere growe vp into our ful ꝑfectiō.
            
            
               
               In aduersitie for the comforte of the holy ghoste. psalm. 6.
               LOrde in thy wrathe reproue me not, neyther in the heate of thy mynde chasten me, but rather pacify and aswage my troubled spirite and haue compassyon on me, for I am sore diseased. Oh lorde play the phisicion vpō me, for my bones are greuously shaken & vexed. Howe longe lorde wyll it be thus? When shall I fele cōforte at thy handes? Retourne lorde to thine accustomed mercy and delyuer my soule, healpe me for thy mercies sake, for in death noman remembreth the, neither they which be in hell or helly tormentes of herte do gyue worthy thankes for benefites receyued of the. Succour my necessitie, o lorde, bryng me againe & kepe me, for elles I shall peryshe and be vtterly loste. Heare my wofull and

lamentable voyce, gyue answere to my requestes. Turne from me myne enemies, and ryd me of all incōmodities and greuaunces. Amen.
            
            
               A prayer that the chyldren of god may be gathered togyther. psalm. 7.
               
                  O Lorde my god, we haue trusted in the, defende vs therfore from persecutours, kepe vs. For if thou ceasest, it is certayne we shalbe trodē vnder fote. Aryse Lorde and guyde thy church assembled in spirite with a godly dispensyng of mysteries, to thintent thy name mought be glorified by the same in lyuyng & cleauyng togyther. For these vngodly persōs which be euermore snapping agaynste vs, thynke thou haste no kyngdome to gouerne, wheras it is certeyne thou hast receiued al power of thy father, and arte alway present in mens doynges. Oh my lord come

forth at laste with strength & power for theyr sake whiche be as yet somwhat weake euen redy to fall when any storme of aduersitie sodēly arise least they vtterly shrynke away. Let vs se ones at laste an end of the malice of these vngodly. Auaūce iustice for thou (o my god) doste searche the hertes and the raynes. Bryng comforte, and be our buckler, which arte wonte to helpe mē of vpright herte. Make vs (o lorde) suche, as we maye set forth thy name with louyng hertes. For thy names sake delyuer vs from perilles. SO BE IT.
               
            
            
               In necessitie a prayer accordyng to the example of Christe. Psalm. 8
               
                  O LORDE our ruler, for thy names sake (which is wonderfull in the world) haue mercy on me, & deliuer me out of al distresse by Iesus Christ whō after he had susteyned ye
                  
crosse and foule death, thou dyddest crowne with immortall glorye, makyng him lorde ouer all the workes of thy handes, and likewyse hast auaunced vs in him to the same dignitie and power. This same Christe thou haste gyuen vs and with hym all thynges. In his name we gyue thankes vnto the, cōfessyng without ende thy boūtyful benefytes towardes vs. AMEN.
               
            
            
               That the enemyes of Christe myght be spoyled of theyr power. Psalm. 9.
               REplenysh my herte (lorde) with ioye and gyue me courage, for I wyl blowe abrode thy name which arte most hygh. Stande on my syde, and defēde my quarel lyke a mighty patrone, whiche in very dede is thy quarel, O iuste iudge. Unto me pore wretch be thou a fortresse & buckeler in this my trouble and vexacion at

tyme conuenient which to the is best knowen. For thou lorde neuer forsakest them that seke the, neyther wylt thou forget ye lamētable complaynt of the pore. Be mercyfull vnto me, and beholde my wretchednes layde open to myne enemyes, yea let me rather reioyce, I beseche the, in thy sauegarde, defēce, & succour. AMEN
               
            
            
               Agaynst the enemyes and persecutours of Christe. Psal. 10.
               
                  FOR what cause (o lorde) stādest thou so farre from me and hidest thy face at times troublesome? How greate miseries suffre thy pore seruaūtes of the wicked? What so euer them lusteth, that proudly and stubburnly they dare do, none otherwyse then if thou haddest no knowledge of mens matters, or haddest forgotten thy promises and threttes which be conteyned in thy lawe? Aryse vp

lorde, put forth thyne hande, forget not thy wretched seruauntes, which canst not but se, what wretchednes and wo is euery where, specially amonges vs, whiche referre all vnto the, & dare not ones wyshe any thing after our owne wyll and pleasure, thou (I saye) arte the healper of the pore and frendles. Consider ye longe hope and awayting of the troubled, conducte theyr hertes, that they may duely call on the, in suche wyse as they may be herde. From wronges reuenge & defende them lorde. Amē.
            
            
               That we shrynke not from the truthe. Psalm. 11.
               
                  IN THE O lorde I laye vp my hope, let me not shrynke from the in aduersitie, althoughe my moste sworne and hartiest frēdes gyue me counsayle eyther to dissemble or vtterly to deny thy trouth. Breathe in

to me a mynde to endure euen to my death that shall confesse openly to al men thy worde. For thyne eyes lorde do trye the chyldren of men, aswell the ryghteous as the vnryghteous. Let not, I praye the, the snares of blyndnes and dispayre fall downe vpon vs, neyther yet the thunderboltes of vengeaunce and assaultes of the cōscience. Lyghten myne eyes that they may se what is ryght, and what vnryght, to thintent I may go forwarde constantly in the waye of trouth wt a sure & perfite fayth. Amē
               
            
            
               For the increase of fayth. Psalm. 12.
               ENcrease o lorde my faythe, and helpe myne vnbeleue. Helpe vs thy chyldren, for amonges the chyldren of men, fewe are holy and beleuyng, trouthe amonge them is not founde. Ryse vp my lorde and herkē
                  
to the gronynges of the pore & succourles. Set vp the way of comforte and health, play the valyaunt god, spreade abrode both farre and wyde, the pure and syncere worde of thy kyngdome. Defende me from this maliciouse and wycked generacion.
            
            
               The prayer of him that is enuironed with trybulacions. Psalm. 13.
               HOwe longe Lorde wylte thou forget me? Howe longe shalte thou hyde from me thy moste graciouse countenaunce? Howe longe shall I be plucked in sondre wt these pensiue thoughtes? Howe long shal my herte consume for care? Come of lorde, remembre me, caste thyne eyes mercifully vpon me, and heare me. O lorde my god, lyghten myne eyes lest with the vngodly they be indimmed, and least I dye in my synnes. Let not I pray the, myne enemyes

bragge ouer me as conquerours, neither ouerloke me as I were vanquyshed. Upon thy beneuolence and grace do I truste. Make yt my herte may reioyce in thy sauyng health, that I maye synge prayses & thankful notes vnto the, beyng by the, reposed & set in ioy after my fall. Amē.
            
            
               The prayer of a newe begone Christian. Psalm. 14.
               
                  LORDE ryd me out of myne vngodlynes, plucke from me myn ignoraūce of the, banysh my slouthfulnes of enserchyng the. For vnto this wretchednes, we be al naturally borne, neyther is there any one person, whiche can of his owne powers wynde him selfe out of this disease. Only thy grace is able to performe this thyng. I pray the, let me call on the, so ofte as I am assayed of cruel aduersitie euen with myne hole hert

and with most stedfaste fayth which euer mought haue the vpper hande and obteyne. Let me not shrynke ne quake at any maner thynge at all, saue only at thy iudgement, neyther let there be any other garrisō or defence vnto me, then thou O Lorde. Out of thy heauenly Syon, sende him whiche may delyuer thy people from the captiuitie of cōscience, that we in him may continually reioyce. AMEN.
               
            
            
               For a lyfe worthy a christian person psalm. 15.
               THat I maye inhabite thy tabernacles and haue continual residence in thy holy hyll, pourge me o lorde, and iustifie me by fayth from synnes. That done, graūt that without hypocrisie I maye hertely affirme thy trouth, detracte no man, be greuouse or hurtfull to no man,

neyther flatter ye euyll and corrupte persons, but that I maye embrase and haue in reuerence suche as fear the lorde, although ye vngodly take occasion therby, to sclaunder and speake euyll of me, finally that not only I may greue no man, but also that I may busely gyue my selfe to all maner men vnto theyr edificacyon by Christe. AMEN.
               
            
            
               A commune prayer. psalm. 16.
               
                  KEPE me LORDE that I peryshe not, for in the I trust. Be my god. Of my goodes thou haste no nede beyng thyngꝭ vnprofitable vnto the. But I can not wante thy ayde. It were euyll with me, if thou were away. That I may please the (my lorde) lest at any tyme I shulde sette vp Idolles in my hert, be thou my only weale, & heritage. By thy

spirite counsayle me in all matters. Stande at my ryght hande that I slyde not, disclose vnto me thy way that leadeth vnto lyfe, and by thy moste amyable countenaunce replenysh me with ioye. SO BE IT.
               
            
            
               Agaynst the ennemyes of Christe. Psalm. 17.
               
                  HEARE (O lorde) ryghtwysnes, gyue eare to my crye & prayer flowyng out not of a feyned mouthe but out of a true herte, let my dome come forth frō the, yea defende thine owne cause, let thyne eyes beholde that is ryght. When yu searchest me lorde, let no vntrouthe, no misbelefe be founde in me, let not my mouthe swarue ne my steppes straye frō thy pathes that my fete slyp not, whiche doutles shulde els fall downe ryght if thou barest me not vp with thy hande. To the I crye (o god) bowe

downe thyne eare vnto me. Lysten to my wordes, shewe in me a proufe and experiment of thy wonderfull boūtie, that I may knowe thou hast holpen me with thy hande, least I shulde ascribe thy gyfte eyther to fortune or to mans ayde. For thou arte the only helper alway of suche as truste in the. Kepe me euen as the ball of the eye, & vnder the shadowe of thy wynges protecte me from persons vngodly and suche as trouble me. Let me appear rych in iustice in thy syght, that I may be full saciate at the cōmyng of thy glory. AMEN
               
            
            
               In aduersitie. Psalm. 18.
               KEndel in me (lorde) a brennyng loue towardes the. Be thou my strength, my rocke, my holde, my delyuerer, my god, my hope, my shylde, my horne of health. And forasmuche

as I cal on the by thankes gyuing, delyuer me (I praye the) from myne ennemies, leade me out of these straites vnto the largenes of thy solace, be thou desirouse to dwell with me, let me kepe certeinly thy waies, that I be not founde before the in sundry sortes an vngodly person. Thy iudgementes & pleasures mought be alwayes before myne eyes. Thy lawes let not me despyse. Before the let me be sounde, preserue me from all syn, to thy miserable people be an helpe, humble the proude, expell darkenes, kendell lyght, ryd me from all temtacion, for thy wayes be holy, & thy wordes pure and cleare. There is none other god but yu, o lorde, which art my prayse: gyrde me wt strength make my wayes syncere, & gyue me the buckeler of thy sauegarde. Let thy ryghthāde strengthen me, from

the arrogant and rebelles delyuer thou me, shewe me thy boūtifull saluacion, deale mercifully with me, for I am full assured that I am of the seade of the true Dauid our Lorde Iesu Christe. AMEN.
               
            
            
               For true ministers of the gospell that they auaunce the kyngdome of Christ. Psalm. 19.
               NEwe heauens, I meane preachers of thy worde create thou excedyng many (O Lord) so as they maye royally set vp thy glorye, and declare euerywhere all the wonderfull workes of thy handes, namely suche as thou hast wrought through thy son Iesus Christe for our saluacion. Christe is ye selfe ryghteousnes vnder whose wynges resteth health, whom thou haste assigned, to haue his residence in these heauēs. Suffer, I beseche the that by the beames of his grace most louyngly spred abrode,

he may cast his lyght into the worlde, and kyndle in the hertes of men a feruour of spirite. Let hym come forth as a brydegrome frō his chambre, let him appeare couragiouse as a valiaunt champion to run thorowe his iourney, which conducteth vs euen vnto the heauens. Let vs ones haue a profe, I besech the, howe fatherly thou doest tendre vs (o father of heauen) for thy welbeloued sonnes sake. Thy lawe vnspotted mought refreshe and wyn ye our soules. Let thy recordes and couenaūtes poure downe into vs the spirite of wisdome that we may be euen as symple, vncorrupte, & pliable of herte as chyldrē. Let thy worde that maketh vs ryghteouse delyte oure hertes, let thy pure cōmaūdemētꝭ clarifie ye eyes of our myndes, & plucke downe the muffler from our face, so

as we may throughly se (into Moses fayth) Christ Iesus our lorde. Season vs with a pure and holy awe, not myxed with syn, but flowyng, euen of very loue, not staggeryng, but euermore cleauyng within vs. Put away the feare of the fleshe, which in prosperitie vaynly reioyseth, and in aduersitie desperatly trembleth. Let vs feare the, onely for thyne owne cause, so as we neyther displease the ne lose the. Make me to loue thy iudgementes, wherby thou sleyest the olde Adā in vs, for they be thynges tried, true, iuste, and good. Cause vs rather to delyte in them, then in any treasure, delices, or pleasures of this worlde. Make vs busyly to expresse them in our dedes. What person (O lorde) throughly knoweth his preuy faultes and secrete dissimulacyon? Take out of me as muche as remayneth

of the olde Adam, kepe me thy seruaūt (o lorde) from these arrogant and proude men, and suche as go about to exempte thēselues from thy true churche, so as they reygne not in myne herte thorowe theyr hypocrisie and feyned holynes, and that I assent not to theyr sediciouse mindes. So shall I be pure and cleane from these horrible synnes, rebelliō, grudging, shrynkyng from thy testament, blasphemyes of herte. Be not wery of this my talke, but rather let these indeuours of my hert be thākeful & acceptable vnto the o lorde, my maker and redemer. So be it.
            
            
               In aduersitie and greuous distresse. Psam. 20.
               IN this my tribulacion LORDE hear me, for thy names sake helpe me, & sende me succours from thyne holy place. Strengthē and comforte

me o lorde, myndefull of my prayers and longe awaytynge, that I maye do sacrifice vnto the, and in my sacrifice doynge reioyse. Or rather cal to remembraunce thou my god that selfe same sacrifice, whyche Iesus Christ thy welbeloued sōne made vnto the hys moost louynge father for me vpon the crosse, who prayed for me in the dayes of hys lyfe, and for hys humilitie & reuerēce was herde. For his sake, I saye, be mercyful vnto me, and helpe me. Out of thy heauenly towre graunt that I ones annoynted wyth thy soden and perpetuall ioye, maye plenteously displey abrode thy most excellēt name. Amē.
            
            
               To knowe Christ and hys kyngdome. Psal. 21.
               PReuent me (O Lorde my God) in al thy workes by Iesus Christ our kynge, to whome thou hast gyuen

al power in heauen and in erth, he is my health and blessynge, he is thy derely beloued sonne, he is the onely reconcilour, thorow whom we be brought agayne into thy fauour. Chere me wyth thy pleasaūt countinaunce and wyth thy holsome gyfte of repentaunce. Make me continue stronglye for thy goodnes O thou that arte aboue all. Aryse Lorde, shewe thy myght, let the worlde fele thy power, set alofte Christes kyngdome, the kyngdom of spirite & lyfe, the kyngdome of the true innocencye, and ryghtuousnes of God, destroye the aduersaries herof. Then shall we synge in spirite, prayse thy power, & gyue continual thankes to thy name wythout ceasynge. Amen.
            
            
               In tribulacion to remember the passion of Christ. Psalm. 22.
               
                  MY God, my God, remēber me, forsake me not, suffer me not to be lost, syth both nyght and daye I crye to the. Heare me my lorde. Our fathers trusted in the, and thou holpest them. When so euer they called on the, at no tyme thou fayledst thē, but was alwayes at hande to assyst them. Come forth father most derely beloued in my herte, defende me from Satans kyngdome. Thou drewest me forthe of my mothers wombe, and haste preserued me vnto thys daye. Of thy bountye & mercye (whych I besech the deny me not at thys my nede) go not awaye from me, for anguyshe and pensyffenes of herte drawe nye vnto me, and yet is there none yt can helpe me, but thou onely. Let me escape from these daū
                  gers through thy Christ my sauiour who for my sake hath suffred so spytfull

and bytter paynes, who for me was sore vexed, cruelly scourged, woūded, nayled, hāged on the crosse. Let me escape I say for his bloudes sake, whych he so largely shed for vs to cause vs obtayne forgeuenes of our synnes, and enioye the new and euerlastynge couenaunte made betwene the and vs. Stande not farre frō me o lorde, my refuge, & strength Come neare and helpe me, delyuer my lyfe from the sworde, & my soule from the wood dogges, from the lyons iawes defende me, betwene the hornes of vnicornes heare me. Thā shall I blowe abrode thy name with all prayses vnto my brethren, and in the assemblye of the holy persons I shal commende the. Despyse not the praiers of the poore, turne not away thy face, heare my crye, for I wyl recorde thys thy goodnes amonge the

myserable, distressed & troublesome consciences, that they therof maye take herte of cōforte, growe in hope, cleaue more feruently vnto the, and maye blowe abrode thy moost glorious name, and gyue the theyr hertie thankes for theyr saluacion. Amen.
            
            
               For increase of fayth in God. Psalm. 23.
               LOrde, my shepeherde, fede me thy poore catyfe shepe, then shal I lacke nothynge, let me lye in the fedynge groundes of thy plenteous worde, nygh vnto the pleasaunt ryuers of thy holy spirite, that I maye be refreshed, and bowe to thy correccion & prouidence. Turne my soule vnto the, and coole it with thy swete lycours when wyth sorowe it begynnyth to brenne, conducte me to the path of righteousnes for thy names sake, and yf I shal happen to walke

in the valey of darkenes and death, be thou present with me, that I may feare nothynge at all. The staffe of thy worde mought bere me vp, and I shal take comforte of it, sprede the bourde of thy worde before me, and I wyll fede of it to strengthen and fortifye my mynde agaynst all Satans powers, so as none of hys souldyours shall vaynquyshe me. Annoynte my heade tyll it be fatte with the oyle of gladnes and hallowynge of spirite. Make me dronke wyth thy cuppe, that I maye forget my selfe, & vtterly renounce myne owne dreames and ryghteousnes, to thintent onely thy spirite maye raygne wythin me. Let thy gracious mercy neuer leaue me in all thys lyfe, & let me abyde cōtinually in thyne house, a shepe inclosed in thy folde wythin the hurdles of thy grace and giftes,

whych arte the hyghe and myghtye shepeherde and graunter of al good thynges. Amen.
            
            
               For grace to renewe the hertes. Psalm. 24.
               REnue me, shape me agayne (O Lorde) for thyne is the worlde and all that is therin, that I may be able to clyme vp vnto thy mount, to abyde in thyne holy cytie, to receaue at thy handes helth, blessynge, mercy, and ryghteousnes. Let me be as a person new borne of the, let me ensearch the alwaye. O Christ, kynge of glory, haue thou an euerlastynge raygne in me, for thou arte stronge ynough, thou arte puyssaūt & myghtye in battell, and Lorde of hoostes, yea let the boūdes and lymytes of thy kyngdome stretch throughe the worlde. Cause all mē to do theyr homage and sute vnto the, as to the

most glorious conquerour of synne, death, and hell. Amen.
            
            
               To be admytted one of Gods flocke. Psalm. 25.
               TO the (Lorde) I lyfte vp my herte and my soule, my God I truste in the, put me not to reproche, that myne enemyes haue no cause to laugh at me. No man shalbe shamed, that trusteth in the. Shewe me thy waye, teache me thy pathes, preserue me from wickednes and vnbelefe, that I swarue not from the rule and touche stone of thy worde. Guyde me in thy trouth, & teach me, for thou arte the God of my helthe and sauetie, and daylye do I longe for the. Lorde remēber not my faultes and mysdemenours, whyche frō my chyldhode I haue cōmytted one vppon anothers necke, neyther call thou to remembraūce my stony dulnes,

and blynde ignoraunce, but rather thynke on thy tender mercye whych thou hast cōtinued towardes those that thou haste chosen from the begynnynge of the worlde, neyther is there any mā that can stoppe the from thyne accustomed wonte. Wherfore I beseche the, that I also maye be partaker of thy gracious goodnes, accordyng to the depth of thy mercy, for thou (Lorde) art ryghteous and good, therfore thou canst not but warne synners, whan they wandre frō thy waye, that they ones taught by thy spirite shuld walke in spirite and truth, and returne from wylsomnes. Doubtles Lorde thy wayes be good and faythfull, of thy mere kyndnes thou dost promyse, & thy promyse thou kepest faythfully to all such as kepe the condicions of thy couenaunt) I meane the ten cō
                  maundementes)

and whose hertes desyre is set in ye and in thy wordes both daye and nyght. Go to, Lorde call me to be one of thys nombre, & for thy names sake pardon me my gyltes, whych be excedynge greate. Make me to feare the, teache me the waye thou beste allowest, make my soule to dwell in these thy good pauillions. Let thy chyldren beynge ones taught thy worde and embrasynge the true fayth in the, be thyne heyres accordynge to thy promyse, whych arte Lorde of heauen & erth. Be oure staye, that we fall not from fayth, declare vnto vs thy heauenly secretes & thy couenaūt, vnknowen to fleshe and bloude. Thys to do is thy most pure grace, whych by fayth we receaue as in a vessell, where by we attayne to know ye, whych knowlege of the, vndoubtedly no man can

haue, onles he hath takē it of the by Iesus Christe. My eyes be fixed alwayes vpō the, draw backe my feete from the snare of synne, from ignoraunce and frō goynge astraye, loke towardes me, haue mercy vpon me, for I am left alone very heuy. How excedynge greate is the ignoraunce of my herte? Leade me (I besech the) out of these straytes and necessities. Lorde loke vpō my distresse, & wype awaye my synnes. Thou knowest howe many enemyes I haue lyenge in my necke, and whych kepe backe the knowlege of the, which haue bytterly hated me. Fence therfore my soule in thys strayte. Plucke me out of thys ignoraunce, for in the is my trust, otherwyse I shulde vtterly fal to grounde. All godly, honeste, true herted, and ryghteous persons woll the same that I woll, and make request

vnto the for ye same, I meane, that we myghte be delyuered from the grosse darkenes of our herte. Assuredly it cam only of thy goodnes, that hytherto I fel not awaye from the company of the godly, that yet dayly I loke for ayde from the, and that I cōtinue after a maner in this trade of good lyuynge. Lorde God, vouchsafe to deliuer Israel thy people, (whych trusteth to the, and hangeth vpon thy hādes) from all theyr tribulacions, by Christ our Lorde. So be it.
            
            
               For continuaunce in Christ. Psal. 26.
               LOrde be thou my iudge, and defēde me from the wyckednes of myne aduersaries, strengthen my truste that I haue towarde the, that I slyde not, pourge myne herte and raynes, for I loke onely vpon thy

mercye, that by fayth and truste vnto the truth I maye please the, and continually walke therin. So order my thynges as I haue nought to do with the wycked, nor be of coūsel wyth them, but in ye church of innocentes, of beleuers, and of sayntes kepe thou me, in whyche churche O lorde thou makest thy abode and kepeste thy resydence, so that I maye heare the swete voyce of thankes gyuynge, of prayse, and of the rehersal of thy maruelles and benefytes, to thyntent I also maye thanke and prayse the. Take not awaye my soule wyth ye vngodly, nor my lyfe wyth the bloudye, let me walke innocently in the safe conduyte of thy grace. Delyuer me, haue pytie on me, let my feete stāde fast in ye brode felde at large out of the prison of synne, that in all assebles I myghte

prayse and auaunce the my redemer and sauiour for euer. Amen.
            
            
               For strength and encrease of fayth. Psalm 27.
               ILluminate my herte Lorde and so helpe thou me, that I nede to feare no man, be thou my herte of cō
                  forte yt I be not dismayed, thoughe the whole worlde aryse agaynst me. In thy house let me styll dwell, that I maye beholde and enioye thy delices and pleasures, I meane, that I maye fele ioye in the holy spirite, aswell concernynge forgeuenesse of my synnes as the inheritaūce of heauen that is geuen me. Let me visyte thy holy temple, that is, thy chosen flocke, in whome thou dwellest. Let me go about my busynes safly, protected vnder thy wynges and rered vpon Christ my rocke. Let me be founde no churle, for ye benefites

I haue taken at thy handes. Thy name let me honoure wyth chearful herte in the church of sayntes. Herkē O Lorde, tenderly to my voyce, lamentably cryenge vnto the, be pytyful, heare me graciously, for my hert hunteth for the, and wolde God we mought dayly more and more trace the out, and continually increase frō fayth to fayth. Hyde not thy face frō me. Me thy seruaūt in thyne anger cast not awaye, be myne aydour and defensoure, fayle me not. Thy helpynge hande (O lorde god of helth) wythdrawe not from me in thys my syckenes and malady. My chefe frē
                  des haue forsaken me, but thou O Lorde take me, and let me fele sensibly that thou hast taken me. Tel me thy wayes, leade me the moost redye and gaynest waye, because of myne enemyes whych be excedyng many,

agaynst whome, yf I be destitute & deuoyde of thyne ayde I can in no wyse make resistence. These men let dryue at me with theyr vnshamefast sclaunders, but let me not be geuen vp, I praye the, vnto theyr wyll and tyrannous luste. Lorde, cause that I maye se thy good thynges in the lande of the lyuynge persons, let me wayte for the paciently, without tyrynge, beynge fylled wyth solace, & replenyshed wyth the true ioye of herte. Amen.
            
            
               A prayer of Christ in the name of the churche. psalm. 28.
               LOrd god, whych art my prayse, waxe not defe vnto me callynge on the for succours, leste I become lyke to them whych approche to the graues of damnacion. Gyue eare to the voyce of my complaynt, beholde I lyfte vp my hādes towardes thy

holy temple, counte me not amonge the wycked persōs, which, where as they appeare to be frendes in tonge to theyr neyghbours but in herte mortall enemyes: be vnskylful and ignoraūt of goddes workes, and vnfaythfull in theyr doynges. Lorde be thou my fortresse, my helpe, and buckler. After thys greuaunce let me agayne be replete wyth ioye, to thyntent I maye cherefully prayse the, for thou arte the euerlastynge strength of thy people, and the preseruour of thyne anoynted and of hys membres. Helpe (Lorde) thy people, gather together thyne heritage wyth thy worde, blesse it, & frō fayth to fayth auaunce it euen to the full age of a perfecte mā. Let them lyue perpetually in heauēs, who so euer in thys worlde despyse the honoure of fleshe for thy sake. Amen.
            
            
               
               A prayer for the power of gods worde. psalm. 29.
               THy holy name O Lorde let vs alwayes auaunce wyth honest prayses and hymnes, & let vs crowned wyth holy garlandes in spirite and truth worshyp the. Wythin vs be thy worde stronge and pythye to our comforte, make afrayed the enemyes that we maye professe and vtter thy prayses. Let thy worde endure in vs without ceasynge, guyde vs, gyue strēgth to thy people, whō vouchsafe thou to blysse in peace, So be it.
            
            
               In great tribulacions. Psalm. 30.
               FOr as muche as by the benefyte of redemption o lorde thou ryddest me out of aduersite, so as myne enemies triumphe not ouer me presumptuously, therfore I must nedes

brute and auaunce thy name wyth glory, honoure, and gyuynge of thā
                  kes. Lorde God I lamentably requyre thy helpe, saue me, rydde my soule out of hell. Defende my lyfe, that I fal not hedlyng into the pyt. Let me celebrate thy prayses, sanctifye thy name, and rendre vnto ye due thankes myndefull of thy holynes wyth most hygh pleasure of mynde. All sorow and pensyuenes do away frō me, stryke of thyn anger against me, let my lyfe please the. Let ye euenynge of teares departe, & the mornynge of solace and ioye come forth What thynge remayneth, but sorow of herte, yf thou wythdrawest thy face? for than al thynges fal, and go to wreke. Shall there any auauntage redounde vnto the, by my vtter vndoynge? Shalt thou not be more praysed and solemnised, yf I be delyuered

out of hell? Lorde heare my peticion, and haue compassiō on me, turne my sorowe into ioye. Strype me out of thys greuaunce, and cloth me wyth ioye, to thēde my tōge may blase thy name, and gyue prayses vnto the wythout stoppe. Ah Lorde my God, delyuer me oute of these strayghtes, & vnto the, wyll I synge prayses euerlastyngly. Amen.
            
            
               In persecucion for Christes cause. Psalm 31.
               IN the (O Lorde) is my cōfidence, wherfore I shall neuer be confoū
                  ded. For thy iustice sake delyuer me forthwith, for I know not any other hope, any other righteousnes, rocke, fortresse, refuge, then the, I haue none other sauiour nor helper besydes ye, for thy name sake & for thyne owne selues sake succoure me lorde, that thou mayest be espyed & knowē
                  
to be such one in dede, as I haue reported the to be. Helpe me, conduyte me frō the snare of horrour & death, plucke me out from the perylles, in whyche Satan myne enemye hath maliciously throwē me, deliuer thou me. Lo into thy handes I holly betake me O faythful and ryghteous God, ayde thou me, let not thy promyse, whervnto I haue gyuen credyte and leaned, in any wyse fayle me, for euerlastingly thou arte accustomed to helpe. Increase O Lorde this my fayth, let me forthwith ioye and boast in thy bountyfull goodnes. Haue eye to this my woo & mysery. Cōsyder my soule al ouerlayed wyth distresse and ignoraūce, suffer me not to fall into the handes of myne enemyes, lead me, I say, forth of thys strayght prisonne into open felde. Pytie me, beholde, I am greuously

pressed wyth feare, for bothe my soule and my bodye be euen for very care consumed. Certes Lorde my God, thou hast in thy hande my cause and my lyfe. From the power of myne enemyes rescue me, & from my persecutours defende me, wyth thy moost amyable coūtenaūce loke on me, which am now set wythin my conscience. Of thy goodnes vnspeakeable helpe me, let me fele some profe, some practyse of thy fauoure. Suffer me not to be confounded in thy syghte, leste beynge deceaued of my purpose, I be sent away frō the, for on the I call. Howe great goodnes is layed vp to such as fear the? Thys now disclose and make open vnto me, deare father, heuynes and anguyshe of herte do vtterly swallowe me vp. Frome wycked tonges through thy countenaunce protecte

thou me. Bestowe thy peculiar benefyte vpon me, for me semeth I am a castawaye out of thy syght, so greatly I am troubled. Therfore hearing my playnt and prayers, delyuer me Lorde by Iesus Christ thy welbeloued sonne. Amen.
            
            
               For pardon of synnes. Psalm. 32.
               PArdon my synnes, hide my offē
                  ces, laye them not to my charge, from my spirite, herte, and mouthe, do awaye all doublenes and gyle. I am a synner full of iniquite, I cō
                  fesse, but I knowe well thou wylte forgeue me, bycause I dissemble not wyth the. For who is before the an innocent & gyltles person, although he leadeth hys lyfe neuer so purelye in the eye of man? vndoubtedlye no man, for all persons praye, sayenge: (Forgyue vs our synnes) as ofte as

they come to them selues, and serche more narowly the bottome of theyr hertes. For thys cause also my mynde wylleth me to demaunde the same peticion of the, lest the floudes of sorowe and tribulaciō shulde vnwares ouerwhelme me. My hope, my fortresse, my redēption art thou Lorde, let me not be stryken wyth deadly feare. Gyue me vnderstandynge, shew the waye wherin I shal walke, becken vnto me wyth thyne eyen most graciously, lest I become brutysh & voyde of vnderstandinge as is the horse and moyle. Let me flowe in abundaūce of ioye & myrth, lyfte vp myne herte, make it careles & assured, to thende I may alwayes reioyce in the. So be it.
            
            
               A gyuynge of thankes. Psalm. 33.
               
                  MOost egall (no man can denye) and moost ryghteous is thy worde O Lorde God almyghty. All thy workes be certayne, thou louest iustice and iudgemēt, full is the erth of thy goodnes, wyth thy worde the heauens were made, and all the furniture of them, euen wyth the breth of thy mouth. Thou dyddest gather into the see waters as in a bladder, and thou dyddest put the bottomles see in ye depthes. Thou speakest the worde, and forth wyth the thynge is made, thou commaūdest & strayght it is, thyne euerlastynge coūsel shall not be chaunged, but all the coūsels of men thou breakest in sonder, be they neuer so wel beset wyth worldly wysedome & power. O Lorde be thou our God, cast thyne eyes vpon vs, for in the we trust & repose oure selfes, hāgyng of thy goodnes only.

From death reserue our soules, and our hertes frō sorow. Fede vs when the famyn eyther of bodye or of spirite come vpon vs. Be thou oure helpe and buckler, let our hertes reioyce in the, which continually do awayte vpon thy holy name. Thy good wyll O Lorde be vpon vs, as we haue trusted in the. Amen.
            
            
               For the strengthynge of the spirite in necessite. Psalm. 34.
               OUt of all distresses delyuer me Lorde, and at all tymes wyll I prayse the. Thy prayse wyll I neuer leaue of, whyche thynge beynge my sauegarde, whan the troubled and myserable persones shal vndestāde, they also sēblably shal receaue comforte and be glad. Let thyne aungel wall me aboute, that he maye delyuer me, let me fele thy gentlenes. Gyue me a sure trust in the, and also

true awe of the. My tonge preserue thou from euel, yt I bable nothynge amysse. Frō euell defende me, worke thou good in me by thy holy spirite. Gyue me peace & a mynde to deale peasably with al mē. Let thyne eyes tēder and regarde me, inclyne thine eares to my prayers, from all peryll delyuer me. Be at hande, for I am brused in herte & troubled in mynd, set me at lybertie accordyng to thy worde, let me be fauteles and an innocent in thyne eyes. AMEN.
               
            
            
               Agaynst the enemyes and suche as persecute other for Christes sake. Psalm. 35.
               COmmyt thou o lorde battayle with myne aduersaryes. Fyght agaynst myne enemyes, say thus to my soule: I am thy sauetie and defence, let my soule o lord ioye in the, and triumphe in thy sauegarde. From the myghtier, thou delyuerest

the pore, & the neady from his spoylers. Departe not from me, bestyre thy selfe, awake, addresse the to defende my ryghtouse cause, O Lorde and my god. According to thy ryghtousnes iudge my cause, that my persecutours reioyce not ouer me, I beynge of them destroyed and vaynquished, but rather for my sauegard let thē be put to shame by thy worde whych now they spytefully reiagge me wyth. Agayne, as many as wysh that I maye holde on in thy fayth & truth, let them reioyce and be made glad, for surely thy fayth and truth is my ryghteousnes, & such as wysh thy peace wol magnifye and auaūce thy name, gyuynge thankes for my delyuery, whych thynge I also shall do together wyth them, yf thou in dede shalte preserue and kepe me. So be it.
            
            
               
               For repentaunce and renuynge of lyfe. Psalm. 36.
               LOrde iustifye thou me, & gyue me the true awe of the, leste I stande proudely in myne owne conceyte. Plucke from my mouth wyckednes and leasynge, make me wyse to good workes, so as I deuise none vngodlynes. Leade me into ye ryght path. Graūt me I maye be ashamed of synne. Thy bountye (O Lorde) is in the heauēs, thy fayth and ryghteousnes reacheth euē to the cloudes, thy iustice surmounteth the moūtaynes, thy iudgementes be as botomles sees. Ah louely father make thy beneuolens towarde vs bountyfull, whych arte ye helper as well of brute beastes as of men. Under shadow of thy winges let vs trust. Fyl vs with the fatte of thy house, with the floud of thy spirituall deynties. Banket

vs, for wyth the, is the fountayne of lyfe, let vs beholde the lyghte of thy truth. Make plaine ouer vs alwaye thy goodnes and iustice. Let vs knowe the for thonly lyuynge God, wyth vpryght herte. Let vs repose our selues in the, that the foote of pryde ouerthrowe vs not, neyther the handes of the vngodly caste vs hedlonge. Amen.
            
            
               For resygnynge all into Gods handes. psalm. 37.
               GRaunte me, O Lorde, that the welth of the wycked and malicious persōs trouble menot, though they flowe in all ryches, pleasure, and glorye, for sodeynly as grasse shall they wyther awaye. On the alone wyll I truste, and study wyth honeste occupacions to obtayne thy loue. Fayth and truth thou shalte increase in me, to the intent I maye

commytte all my matters to the, I beynge wyth my selfe quyet, styll, & saufe. My iustice whych is thy gyft, displaye abrode euē as a lyght to others, my ryghteous dealynge set forth as the noonedaye. Wyth thy treasure norysh me. So shall I enioye continual peace, and in the euel daye shall I not be ashamed. Of vytayle whan other lacke I shall haue plenty, my goynges thou shalt kepe that they trippe not, my waye shalbe pleasaunt vnto the. Yf I fall, lyfte thou me vp wyth thy hande. Let my mouth practyse wysedome, my tōge speake thynges semynge, in my hert thy lawe mought be engrauen. The steppes of my feete suffre not to be slypperye, to the sekers of my herte bloude let me not be geuen, neyther when I am iudged of them, do not thou cōdemne me. Thou shalt kepe

me vp in honesty, & shewe me what is ryght, that I maye obserue it. My helth, fortresse, and strength be thou O Lorde in the stormy tymes. Thou, I say, shalt delyuer me, thou shalt saue me, because I trust in the So be it.
            
            
               A prayer of one that is troubled both inwardly and outwardly. Psal. 38.
               REproue me not in thyne angre O lorde, I besech the, neyther in thy fury chastyse me, for thyne arrowes are fastened in me, thy hande presseth me, on euery syde is mortal warre, on euery syde aduersity assauteth me, both within and wythout. Neyther in my fleshe nor yet in my mynde is ought left hoole & soūde. In thy syght (Lorde) be al my syghynges, yea my vexacion is muche more greuous, then can wyth tonge

be expressed: Ah howe greatlye do I couet to be ryd of it? In the (Lorde) I trust, heare me my God. Lo many enemyes lye vpon me, farre strō
                  ger then I am. Causeles they haue hated me, but leaue me not Lorde my God, departe not farre fro me. Brynge succours vnto me oute of hande O Lorde, God of my health. So be it.
            
            
               For one very euell intreated of hys enemyes. Psam. 39.
               MY wayes O Lorde kepe that neyther in worde nor dede I synne, whyles spytefully I am thus troden vnder foote and contemned. Refrayne my mouth, that I bragge of nothynge proudely. Let me beare alwayes before myne eyes the shortenes of thys lyfe, and what a vanitie, what a thynge of noughte be as well the mē them selues, as al theyr

thynges and doynges. Be thou O Lorde my hope, ryd me from raungynge astraye, that I be not an example of reproche to the vngodlye. Kepe me that I wyshe no euell, not so much as in thought to myne aduersary, but that I remembre he is sente of the agaynste me to my profite and auayle. Turne awaye from me destruccion, leste by the dredfull stroke of thy hāde I vtterly perysh. Heare Lorde my humble prayers & requestes, & let my teares enter vnto ye. Syt not styll, for I am a straū
                  ger wyth ye, as were my forefathers. Slacke a lytle thy hande that thus preasseth me, so as beyng a lytle eased I may yet ones loke vp afore I dye. Graunt me the comforte of thy spirite, that I may espye thy fatherly kyndnes where as nowe thou she west euen the extremite of a iudge

vnto me, whyche haue moost haynously (I can not but confesse) synned against the. But haue mercy on me O Lorde for thy names sake. So be it.
            
            
               That in peryll one shulde vtterly offre hym selfe to Christ. Psalm. 40.
               BOwe the O Lorde vnto me, for vpon the is myne attendaunce, heare my lamentable crye. Out of the horrible pytte of woo wherinto I am cast, delyuer me. Thy name be my hope, let me not bowe asyde to ye proude & holowe herted. Haue thou mercy on me (most deare father) for Iesus Christ thy sōnes sake, whych by the only euerlastynge sacrifice of hys owne body wyped away all our sinnes on ye crosse, brought vs home againe vnto the, & made vs of damned persons, ryghteous. And thys

thy wyll by al the prophetes was afore declared. Thys Christ thy sōne hath taughte vs thy ryghteousnes (by which through thy gracious fauoure we be iustified) and hath opē
                  ly at the tyme appoynted performed the thynge that lōge afore was shewed to the fathers vnder shadowes and fygures whych be nowe passed & broughte to an ende, neyther doest thou nowe requyre of vs any other thynge, but that in thy sonne we be hoole gyuen, offred, sanctifyed, and consecrate vnto the. For thys thy welbeloued sōnes sake continue thy mercy towardes me. Let thy good wyl and grace alwayes defende me, for lo innumerable daungers haue assaulted me on euery syde. Exceadynge many (I confesse) be my offē
                  ces, and therfore am I clene voyde of coūsayle, what to do. But o lorde

restore me agayne into my former degre. Hastē the, I saye, to ayde me. Suche as couete to spyll the lyfe of my soule, make them departe from me. And agayne, let thē be glad that seke the, and whych loue thy saluacion, wherwyth thou delyuerest vs, so that we alway may sprede abrode thy name. Uyle and wretched am I Lorde, but take thou charge of me, help me, restore me. Thou shalt not differ thy grace from me, o my god, for the glorye of thy name. Amen.
            
            
               For a swete and styll herte. Psalm. 41.
               THis fauoure and grace o lorde shewe thou me, that all my lyfe longe I maye succoure and releue (to my power) ye necessite of the nedy aswell wt gostly helpes, as with corporal, and yt I may employ yt labour vpon the. For doutles what so euer is bestowed vpon thē, the same thou

rekenest bestowed on the. Pytie thou me O Lorde, heale the woundes of my soule, for agaynst ye, haue I trespassed, delyuer me from myne enemyes, whyche busye them selues to noye me, that they reioyse not ouer me. Hereby shall I vnderstande thy good wyll towarde me, in that thou vouchsauest to cut myne enemyes combes, so as they triumphe not ouer me, whych had thought to haue gyuē me a foule fall. Therfore lorde God of Israel, to ye be glory, prayse, and thankynges eternall. So be it.
            
            
               A prayer of the vexed conscience. Psalm. 42.
               LYke as in a forest, the herte gapeth for thurst at the foūtaynes of waters, O Lorde God, so doutles my soule thursteth for desyre of the. My soule, I saye, longeth after the, that valiaunt & lyuynge God. But

alas whē shal I entre in, to beholde thy graciouse face? Shewe thy selfe my Lorde. How ofte shall it be sayd vnto me, where is thy God? I being thus troubled, shall water my soule wyth stremes of teares wythin my selfe, but neuertheles thys grefe of herte thy comfortable countenaūce shall aswage. Oh what ayleth the my soule? what thynge troubleth ye? what toylest thou? what rēnest thou hyther and thyther? Se thou truste in the Lorde, to whome shortely (be thou ryghte well assured,) I shall haue cause to rendre moost louynge thākes for my delyuery receaued at hys handes, accordinge as hymselfe hath commaunded, that in welth & prosperite we shulde prayse hys clemency and bountyfull goodnes the worker therof, and againe in aduersite we not forgettynge hys promyses,

shulde praye for helpe. Suffer that a day of comforte maye spryng vnto me, then shall I hyghly blowe abrode and auaunce thy name. In the meane season steye me vp wyth continuall remembraūce of thy promyses and former benefytes, that thoughe I be oppressed wyth euyls yet I dyspayre not. Teache me (O lorde) the due forme of prayer to the intent my peticion maye the better be herde. Amen.
            
            
               For the edificacion of the church. Psal. 43.
               MY quarell, O Lorde, discusse thou agaynst the vngodly panymes. From lyers and malicious wretches delyuer me, for thou God art my strength. By the, I wyll set my foote agaynste the helly power: but O Lorde why nowe doest thou pusshe me from the? why walke I

thus heuy? why in thys my trouble doest thou not comforte me? Wyth the lyghte therfore of thy spirite replenyshe my herte (O my Lorde) in such wyse as hauyng the experimēt of the thynge in dede, I maye gyue credite to the truth of thy promyse, and by the same be conduited to thy holy moūte, to the pauilions of thy chosen, to the realme of lyght, to the heritage eternall, to thintent that I cōtemnynge ye proude bragges and thretes of ye vngodly may manfully holde on my iorney vnto the (o lorde the well of my ioye) & so myght blase thy name, and for the grace of thy continuaūce rendre due thankes accordyngly. So be it.
            
            
               A prayer of the church for redempcion. Psalm. 44.
               HOw straungely Lorde dydest thou auaūce thy people in olde

tyme, whan thou gauest thē the lāde of behest, that thou dyddest promyse them, and draue out the Cananeys. For the chyldren of Israell, not by theyr owne powers, but by thy fauoure conquered the lande. In lykewyse thou haste made vs heyres of the heauenly countrey, not of our deserte, but of thy pure grace whom, in Christe afore the worlde was made thou chase. Wherfore to the we owe of ryght to rendre continuall thankes. But nowe thou hast also dryuen vs forth in such wyse as we be a reproche & mockynge stocke to the vngodly panyms, which coūt vs vnworthy whom the earth shuld beare, who do greuously vexe & torment vs both in body and mynde. Many of vs are wrapped in errours, all of vs be ashamed, whan we consyder how the vngodly haue

preuayled agaynst vs. Certes we maye be lykened to shepe readye to be slayne. They thynke to please the by the slaughter of vs. What shall we attempt to do beyng thus enuironed wyth tribulacions? Lorde, we knowe nothynge els what to do but to lyfte vp oure eyes to the, and lamētably to crye. Awake, O Lorde, continue not thy slomber, pushe vs not thus frō the. Why hidest thy face from me? Howe canst yu forget thus longe our woo and distresse? For we be vtterly oppressed and troden vnder foote. Ryse Lorde, helpe vs, for thy goodnes, for thy name, for thy glory, by Iesus Christ our Lorde. So be it.
            
            
               To Christ kynge of glory. Psalm. 45.
               LOrde Iesu Christ, sōne of God, God and mā, amonge the chyldren

of men moost fayre. Gracious be thy lyppes, louely arte thou, gētle and courteous: ther is in the no crueltye, no bytternes, thou callest most louyngly vnto the, the wofull synners by name. The father gaue the, the euerlastynge blessynge, whyche arte the true sede of Abraham, wher by al nacions of the earth be blessed. Thou arte our kinge, gyrde our loynes wyth the sworde of thy goostlye worde, to the condemnynge of thyne aduersaries and sauyng of thy true subiectes. Beate downe out of oure herte ye olde trade of lyuynge, which arte myghty in glory, and renowne. Loke vpō vs graciously, louyngly, comly, let thy workynges towardes vs take frutefull effecte. Lorde gouerne vs in truth, myldnes, & iustice Let thy ryght hāde worke myracles for thy seate is eternal, thy sceptre is

iudgement, power, iustice, and direction, thou louest righteousnes, and hatest wyckednes. Therfore thy father toke the vp to be kynge anoynted with ye oyle of gladnes, I meane the holy goost afore thy felowes the beleuers, and membres of thy body. Thy robes do smel of fragraunt odours, wherwyth thou pluckest vp the soules of beleuers, who agayne with theyr redolent smel, which they haue conceaued of the, do delite the. The quene (I meane the church of Christians) standeth on thy ryghte hande which art theyr brydegrome, decked and adorned wyth golde of charite, beset wyth wysedome of spirite, crowned wyth sondry gyftes of grace, but inwardly. Of thys bryde and brydegrome let me be the sonne O Lorde Iesu Christe. Cloth me wyth the weddynge garment, which

tyre thou haste pleasure in. The, O Lorde, wythout ceasyng let me only heare, cōstantly beleue, forgettynge all earthly thynges, make me worshyp the in spirite and truth, whych arte wyth the father all one in substaunce. Let me be brought thyther where thou arte, euen vnto thy temple wyth ioye and reioysynge of spirite, & myndefull of thy holy name. Let me worship, prayse, and magnifye the wythout ende. Amen.
            
            
               A generall commendacion to the father by Iesus Christ. Psalm. 46.
               THou onely O Lorde arte oure hope and fortresse in necessitie. Strēgthē vs that we feare not, yea though heauen shulde fall, staye, solace, fortifye vs, abolyshe the kyngdome of the vngodly cōpany, let vs feale the streames of thy spirite, thy

peace, ioye, and tranquilite. Hallowe vs for thy dwellynge place and continue in vs styll, so that we shrynke not away. Sende thy worde amōge vs, whereby the earth of oure herte maye quake and agayne relent and melt vpō the knowlege of our wyckednes. The lorde of oostes be wyth vs and be our ꝓtection. Shewe vs thy wonderful workes, let vs learne them, and cease from workes of the fleshe, denyenge and vtterly renoū
                  cynge our selues & all our thynges. Let vs worshyppe only the as oure God, moost myghtye in heauen and erth, our ryghteous maker, the worker of all goodnes in such as beleue in the, the defensour and helper of body and soule. So be it.
            
            
               For sendynge the ministers of the worde. Psal. 47.
               
                  TUrne Lorde the panymes vnto the, whyche knowe the not, that together wyth vs they may ioy & synge prayses, that together wyth vs they may be thy heritage, chosen of fauour. Gyue vs that all we may record thy renomes, furnyshed wyth knowlege and fayth of thy worde. Rayse vp many that maye defende the lāde wyth preachyng thy worde, and make sure the same agaynst the bytynge and rage of ye helly wolfe, & agaynst the ordinaunces of the lyenge prophetes, for they onely seke theyr owne gaynes. Amen.
            
            
               A praysynge of God, and for the buyldynge of the church. Psalm. 48.
               AMonge the Christiās, O lorde I praye, that thou mayest be moost diuulged & preached, for they be thy cytie and palace, whych thou

hast stablyshed agaynst the gates of hell, whyche haue receaued of thy goodnes thyne anoynted Christ Iesus, by whome thy renome is spred abrode, and whych wyth prayses cō
                  tinually do auaunce thy moste valiaunt ryght hande by thy iudgementes. Cheare thys thy flocke and congregacion by sauynge thy true subiectes, & damnyng the wycked. Unto the from all quarters let the people haue concourse, that thys thy cytie maye be buylded wyth lyuynge stones, and inlarged in length and bredth. Confirme it with thy power, gouerne and guyde it as a tenderlynge, Amen.
            
            
               For lowlynes agaynst couetouse and vayne glory. Psalm. 49.
               GUyde me lorde that I stomble not on vayne glorye or power

of thys world, for the louers of such thynges do imbrase them as theyr goddes and glorye in the same, therfore they shall perysh for euer. To suche the death of Christ was bestowed in vayne, syth they shall neuer be partakers, through theyr mysbelefe, of the meryte therof. Let me not be made lyke, I praye the, vnto the brute bestes, but instructe me in thy workes, lēde me thy fauoure that I may alway thāke ye for the honoure thou hast endowed me wyth, & that for the same I stande not foolyshly in myne owne conceyte. Amen.
            
            
               For puttynge awaye of the olde man. Psalm. 50.
               OUt of ye forthest corners of the earth on euery syde, thou shalt wyth a myghty voyce cal mē to iudgement (Lorde God omnipotent) to whom nothynge is hyd. Open thou

our eares, that we maye heare thys thy promyse, I shall be your God. In the we constauntly beleue, wyth thy foyson we be fylled. Prudentely thou doest declare and testifye that of oure goodes and sacrifices thou hast no nede, & thou doest not eyther regarde or measure them, for all be thyne, and in ye it lyeth to make the thynges we now possesse to be ours or not ours. Thou only requyrest sacrifices of thankes gyuinge. Let vs therfore disclose the botome of oure hertes to the, let vs knowlege ye our God, let vs hallowe thy name in all thynges, flowe in thy worde, rendre thankes in weele & woo, requyre thy succour in straytes and necessitie, at which tyme yu haste ꝓmysed to helpe vs, thā shall we beynge so delyuered blase thy name. Lorde God moost iuste, true of promyse, & dearest father,

the (beseche I) to sende succours vnto me euen of thyne endles goodnes, for thy renomes sake, for Iesus Christes sake thy beloued sonne, and for hys precious bloude largely shedde for vs on the crosse, so that beyng ones purged, we may come agayne in fauoure wyth the. Pytie me, heare me out of the straytes of thys synfull flesh, wherewyth on euery syde I am hampered in. Set me at large agayne O Lorde, and rydde me from myne enemyes, whych seke to drawe me away from thy true seruice. In thy comforte let me reioyse and be full of spirituall ioye, let me (I saye) euer brute thy name, not beynge vnmyndful of thy benefytes, and releue me most pytifull God, accordynge to thy worde whych is nothynge but truth. Most tender father shewe me that thy ioyfull

helth. So be it.
            
            
               A prayer vpon the psalme of Miserere, for the wypynge awaye of synnes, renuaunce of strength and spirite. Psal. 51.
               HAue mercy on me, God, accordynge to thy great tendernes of herte, for I am sore pressed wyth synnes, I can beare them no lōger, of thy bountyful mercy wype away my trespas. Tenne thousande myllions of golde I owe the, Lorde, I am not able to paye, I can not discharge my selfe. Washe me cleane frō my errours, clēse me not only of my synnes passed, but also of my hoole lyfe to come. Wyth the ploungynge of spirite in the fyre of thyne illuminacion baptyse me, whyche is the myght and strēgth of baptisme, which we receaued in our chyldhod. The same spirite mought alway cō
                  duyte vs, tyl ye infecciō & vyce which

we haue dronkē in by Adā, be perfectly takē away in the moūte of flesh: I knowlege o lord my transgressiō, afore myne eyes are my trespases, my studies and doynges be al together synne. Certes, vnto the alone haue I synned, iuste and true arte thou in the worde of thy promyse, whiche Christe declared vnto vs, I meane, that by him our synnes be released. Yf eyther the vngodly persons, or myne vnfaythfull consciēce wyll stryue agaynst the, & holde plee that thou forgeuest not the beleuer, vndoubtedly thou shalte ouercome them, and proue thē lyers. Declare thy truth, graūt grace so as my synnes beynge forgeuen, I may knowlege thy bountye & truth, for in wyckednes borne I was, and in synnes my mother conceaued me, so that of my nature what so euer I am, I am

but synne. Thys my knowlegynge of the truth, I wote wel is ryght acceptable vnto the, wher as in ye most parte of other persons thou hast eyther hydde the same or made it vnknowen. Purge and sprynkle me wyth the bloud of Iesu Christ thyn vnspotted lambe. Yf thou wash me, I shalbe as whyte as snowe, so shal I receaue these glad tydynges into my herte, that my synnes be forgeuen. Replenysh my bones wyth the ioye of spirite, whych now, consyderinge thy sharpe iudgementes be al to shakē and brused. For my spirite is stryken into a deadly dompe, and therfore my bones be dryed vp. Turne away thy face from my synnes, and then for ioye of thy fauourable forgyuenes I shall forget thē. Myne owne proper workes Lorde examyne not roughly, whych (I cō
                  fesse)

be nothynge but synnes. Yea yf thou laye them to my charge as I haue deserued, I muste nedes abyde the chylde of dānacion. Thyne vnspeakeable mercye wyth humble prayer I demaūde and craue vpon the, whych thou hast promysed, sayenge: Hys synnes I wyl not remē
                     bre. Do away therfore my synnes. A cleane herte (my god) make in me, restore in me a wyllynge and ryghte spirite. Banysh me not frō thy syght blinde not mine eyes. Let not an vnrepentaunt herte growe in me, neyther let me dispayre on thy goodnes Denye me not thy holy gooste, take not awaye agayne from me yt which thou hast ones gyuē. Render solace vnto me, for doubtles the helth and saluacion which I loke for in Christ doth assuredly appease & ascertayne my conscience vpon remission of my

synnes. Stablysh me wyth the spirite of lybertie, so shall I beynge in fayth and spirite purified and made stronge teach the wycked and suche as know the not, the waye that leadeth vnto the, so that they also shall be turned vnto the. Lorde God discharge me of my hydde and houge synnes which be knyt to my corrupt nature, I meane, werynes of thy worde, grutchyng agaynst thy commaundemētes, and blasphemy. My tonge then beynge furnyshed wyth boldnesse of spirite shall frankely & wythout tremblynge teach, confesse, & blowe abrode thy ryghtuousnes, wythout whyche no man is ryghtuous. Lorde thou shalt open my lyppes, & then my mouth shall set forth thy prayses and thy wayes. Graunt me such mouth and wysedome, as myne aduersaries shall not be able

to stryue against, namely in the quarel of thy worde. Indowe me wyth grace, to thyntent I may offre sacrifices of thankes, for nothing els verely requyrest thou. Albeit yet thou despysest not the oblacion and sacrifyce of a contrite spirite, I meane, the mortifyenge of oure owne luste and wyll, and of that olde Adam, that soiourneth in vs, vntyll we maye be able to offre the sacrifice of thankes, and wyth glad semblaunt embrace & celebrate thy ryghtuousnes espyed in the releasynge of our synnes. Wherfore for as muche as we of our selues can perfourme nothynge that good is, blesse thou O Lorde of thy benignitie and fatherly beneuolence thy Christen people. Let the walles of Hierusalem be made vp agayne by thyne auctoritie, let good workemen be sette

on worke, I meane, true teachers, pastours, and prophetes, and let vs be fashioned for lyuely stones to the holy buyldynge, let them edifye the people ryghtely, let vs obey theyr instructions duly. Thou art the good man of ye house, thurst thou oute the workemē into the haruest, that they maye gather by thy worde of fayth the people now rype and redy to be reaped into ye heauēly barnes, which workemen onles thou sende forth, shall runne of themselues vaynly. For how shulde they preach not beynge sent. Surely, in vayne we shal auaunce eyther our learnyng or habilite, yf thou tempre not the successe of our thynges, yf thou forther not our doynges, yf thou sende vs not. Lo then thou shalt receaue continual sacrifices of ryghteousnes, for on thy aulter we shal then laye the bullockes

& fatte sacrifices of oure lyppes, yea and our owne selfes therto, praysynge and worshyppynge the wythout styntynge. Amen.
            
            
               For renouncynge the company of hypocrites. Psal. 52.
               MOost holy Lorde, let vs beyng instructed and furnyshed wyth thy grace cast vp the wyly and malicious mē, which cā beare no truth, but gyue thē selues to lyes trustyng to the vayne helpes of thys worlde. Brouse thou them O Lorde, & rote them out of the lande of the lyuinge persones, whych thynge whā ye ryghtuous folke shall se, they shall feare the and reioyce. Graunt that wyth an vnconquerable truste we maye alwaye leane to the onely, let vs not resemble the baren & corrupt trees, but let vs be founde lyke to ye ranke and fruteful olyues in thyne house.

Upon thy name let vs set our hope, vppon thy name, I saye, that is so good and that helpeth moost redely all them that earnestly call theron, lyke as in thy holynes is euidentlye espyed. Wherfore let vs also rendre vnto the euerlastynge thankes, syth in vs thou workest and heapest vpō vs all those benefytes and commodities. So be it.
            
            
               For delyueraunce out of the deuyls bondage. Psal. 53.
               FOr as muche as (O Lorde oure God) not one of vs all hathe wrought of hymselfe any goodnes for all we euen of byrth be spotted & corrupted, graūt vs thy ryghtuousnes, and be thou workynge through thy holy breath in vs (kepynge the godly rest of the new Saboth), such thynges as thou allowest & be pleasaunt

vnto the, leste at any tyme we proudly seke oure owne honoure & not thyne in all oure doynges, and that beynge raunsomed and delyuered by the out of bondage, anguysh, peryll, and trouble, we mought ioye euerlastyngly. Amen.
            
            
               A prayer of the congregacion agaynst enemyes. Psalm. 54.
               AYde me Lorde for thy names sake, accordynge to thys thy promise. Who so euer calleth on the name of the Lorde, shalbe saulfe. Take on the my quarel agaynst my pursuers, defende it by thy myghte and prowesse, for my powers are vtterly none at all. Herken Lorde to my prayers, ponder the wordes of my mouth, straungers and suche as vtterly despyce ye, haue assauted me & do cast how to bryng me to death.

Succour me Lorde, be at hāde kepe me, fyght for me. Let the thynges whyche they go aboute to worke agaynst me, fal on theyr owne heades in case thou iudgest them vnworthy to be conuerted & to forthynke them selues, otherwyse although they be at thys season myne enemyes, yet of thy greate bountie and mercy pardon them theyr synnes, and gyue them ye spirite of repentaunce, to the intēt they may ones at last be made my true and hertye frendes. For the same thy benefyte, I shall imploye my selfe to be thankefull and seruiceable vnto the, specially sythe thy name is so louynge, and thou art so at hande and present in extreme necessities. Thys, I say, shalbe bruted by the mouthes of men and blowen abrode wyth moost hygh prayses. So be it.
            
            
               
               A prayer of Christes church. Psalm. 55.
               
                  O My god hear me in my prayer abhorre not my doleful plaint, take charge of me, and gyue eare. For certes, I shal neuer stynte most lamētably to crye vnto the, tyl tyme thou heare my peticion. Lo our enemy maketh proude resistence, he letteth as muche as in hym lyeth thy quarell, yea and all thynges yt shuld be helthfull and profytable vnto vs he hyndreth, he stoppeth, he furiously condemneth. I am accused wrōgfully, the vngodly persons lye in awayte of my lyfe. Frō them O lorde delyuer me, set thē besyde theyr purpose, diuide theyr tonges, let thē disagre and be confused amonge them selues, rescue my soule out of theyr hādes into peace, cut theyr combes, abate theyr pryde, brynge thē downe

They woll not turne thēselues, they wol not forthynke them of theyr folyes, for they be quyte departed frō thy feare and past all shame. My hoole cause and greue I caste vpon the, prouyde thou for me, forse that I myscary not, kepe, defēde, cōserue me, let me haue at last some ende of these hurlye burlyes & troubles, let me not hereafter reuolue ydel counsels wyth my selfe, let me not be coū
                  ted a castawaye, a slaue, a mockyng stocke any longer as heretofore I haue ben. These thynges I praye the I may obtayne, swete Sauiour for thy holy names sake, accordynge to the worde of promyse, whervnto I haue respecte wyth faste and sure truste continually. Amen.
            
            
               In bytter tribulacions. Psalm. 56.
               
                  GOd be thou mercyful vnto me, for on me they rage and make hauocke vnmercyfully. But to the alone I flee, thou arte my refuge, in the only I truste, from thy worde let me not shrynke, but styfly auowe it & glory in it. Consyder my salt teares, take compassion on me, cause myne enemyes to recule, let me fele at last that thou art my god, my Sauiour, my buckler. Rydde my soule from death, myne eyes frō bytter teares, my herte from care, my feete frō slydyng, so as I may walke afore the, in the lyght of lyfe, and that for euer more I may gyue the, worthy thankes accordyngly. Amen.
            
            
               Agaynst the suppressours of the trouth. Psalm. 57.
               HAue mercye on me God, haue mercy on me, for in the trusteth my soule, vnder shadow of thy wīgꝭ

I flee, tyll the wyckednes wherwyth I am pressed be passed from me. Unto the (O God moost hyghe) I crye, rayse me vp that am fallē to groūde whych thynge is moost easy for the to do. From thy heauen sende succours vnto me. Out of theyr hādes that intende to suppresse me, plucke me awaye. Sende thy bountyfull goodnes, whych is so trustye & certayne, wherby thou sauest vs frely wythout oure owne deserte. Thys bountyfull goodnes O Lorde we clayme as due to vs by thyne owne fre promyse. From the lyons defēde my soule, and also from the mortall souldyours and satellites of darkenes, whose teth be speares, whose tō
                  ges be two edged sweardes. Moūte aboue the heauens, that thou mayst be knowen to be the great & myghty God, syth these vngodly hel hoū
                  des

thus by theyr doynges, denye that thou doest gouerne any kyngdome in heauen. I saye, lyfte vp thy selfe, and shewe what thou canst do in thy sōne Christ, who of lōge tyme euen thorowe the deuises and dreames of men hath ben wrongfully banyshed, dryuē out, and excommunicate. Declare that he is oure onely mercy stocke and redēption, the treasure of ryches, thy cōpagnion of diuine glorye and power. Thy goodnes and grace be endles euen as the botomles sees in abundaunce amō
                  ges men, by powrynge vpon thē thy treasures and benefytes. Amen.
            
            
               For remyssion of dayly trespases. psalm. 58.
               INdowe vs wyth this grace lorde that we may alwaye speake thinges plesaūt vnto ye, yt we may alowe wyth our sentence thynges iust and

true in thyne eyes, let there be no vngodlynes in our herte. That yf any of vs through brycklenes of the corrupte nature by thy sufferaūce shall fall, yet Lorde let not suche persone harden hys herte agaynst the, whyle lyke a father thou pluckest hym backe, neyther suffre hym to stoppe hys eares agaynst thy minister chastisynge hym by thy worde, but rather let hym gladly heare and quycquely turne agayne. Be it notifyed and made playne vnto men that we beare awaye some cōmoditie of the iustice of our fayth, & that thou arte neuertheles the iust iudge of ye erth, to the glory of thy name. Amen.
            
            
               Agaynst the bloudy Phariseys. Psam 59.
               DElyuer me swete Lorde from myne enemyes, frō these bloud soupers and wycked Pharises delyuer

me, for behold they lye in awayt of my soule moost slyly, wyth all the power they can make. They cast theyr heades against me, beinge styred vp with hatred of thy worde. In thys my trouble, namely in the defēce of thyne owne quarel helpe me, let thys theyr deadly malyce displease the, let theyr coūsels take none effecte. Be thou my fense, enuiron me wyth thy goodnes, let the day starre of thy solace ryse vnto me, so yt cherfully I maye aduaunce thy mercy. Be thou my refuge, & rescue me in al myne aduersite (o my god) whych arte my ayde, succoure & helth. Amē.
            
            
               For strength of mynde to beare the crosse. Psalm 60.
               HOw hast thou O Lorde humblyd and pluckte me downe? I dare now vnnethes make my prayers vnto the, for thou arte angry wt
                  
me, but not wythout my deseruyng. Certaynly I haue synned Lorde, I confesse it, I wyll not denye it. But oh my God pardō my trespasses, release my dettes, rēdre now thy grace agayne vnto me, stoppe my woūdes for I am all to plaged and beaten, yet Lorde thys not wythstandynge I abyde pacientlye, and gyue myne attendaūce on the, continually waytynge for relefe at thy hande, & that not wythout skyll, for I haue receaued a tokē of thy fauoure and grace towardes me, I meane thy worde of promyse concernynge Christe, who for me was offered on the crosse for a raunsome, a sacrifice, & penyworth for my synnes. Wherfore accordyng to that thy promyse defēde me lorde by thy ryghthande, and gyue a gracious eare to my requestes, be thou my steye in peryls, for al mās stayes

are but vayne. Beate downe therfor myn enemyes thyne owne selfe with thy power, whych arte myne only aydour and protectour O Lorde God almyghty. Amen.
            
            
               For comforte and vertue of spirite. Psalm. 61.
               MY complayntes heare thou, O mercyfull God, marke my sutes and demaūdes. My herte is strykē ful of heuynes, set me on an hygh rocke al at large and lybertie. Thou arte my onely succoure and refuge, thy name is as a stronge towre agaynst myne enemyes. Let me dwel in thy pauilions euermore, and vnder thy wynges let me leade a mery and careles lyfe. Thys my longyng and peticion graunt me, O Lorde. Gyue euerlastynge enheritaunce to such as feare thy name. Gyue vs goodnes to thys ende that we maye

alwaye kepe thy trouth. Then shall we styl prayse thy maiesty wyth mysticall songes and psalmes. Amen.
            
            
               For pacience and denyall of a mans owne selfe. Psalm. 62.
               MY soule wythout ceasynge reioyse in the o Lorde, whych by thy worde hast offered vs helth and saluacion. For surely of the only floweth and procedeth all helth. Thou arte my God, my shoteanker, helth and proteccion. I receaue al yt good is at thy hāde, yf thou be my defensour, I shall not fayle but haue the vpper hande. Protecte thou me, that I trust neyther to power nor to ryches, but to the only. Thou hast power, I can not gaynsaye, to damne me, & agayn thou hast a louyng wyl to saue me. Let me be nūbred I besech the, not amōges the cursed and disalowed persons, but amōges thy chosen & faythful subiectes. Amen.
            
            
               
               For goostly gyftes and heauenly ryches. psalm. 93.
               MY God doutles art thou, early in the mornynge I ryse vp in my herte, & seke the, my soule & my very fleshe thyrsteth & euen longeth after the exceadyngly, I couet to se thy power (Lorde) whych sauest me, and thy glory, most glorious kinge, whyche stayest me vp what tyme I am oppressed. Thy goodnes verely is better vnto me then lyfe. Thys goodnes yf thou shewe me, I shall not leaue to magnify & brute thy renome euery where, for I shall not cease continually to yelde vnto the due & worthye thankes & to sanctifye thy name. Fyll therfore myne herte (o my God) with grace, & stuffe it wyth swetenes of spirite, euen as the body is stuffed wyth breade and foyson of meates. Then shall my mouthe extolle, prayse, and hallowe

ye, not wyth fayned lyppes but wyth a full glad courage and quyck spirite. O Lorde be thou myne helpe and refuge, and so vnder the sauegarde of thy wynges I shall leade out my lyfe peacybly. My soule mought styll cleaue faste vnto the, let thy ryghthande holde me vp, by thy name and to the glory therof let me sweare. The vndoubted trouth that I cōfesse let me ascribe and impute to the onely. The mouthes of thē Lorde whych can vtter nothyng but errours and leasynges stoppe myghtely. So be it.
            
            
               Agaynst the enemyes of Christ. psalm 64.
               THe voyce of my lamentacion & playnyng heare O Lorde. Frō daūger of enemyes delyuer my lyfe. Wythdrawe me from the assemblye of euell persōs and from the conspiracy

of the vngodly, whyche whette theyr tonges as sharpe as rasours sendynge out theyr enuenomed dartes as it were to the marke, to thyntent they may shote thorowe the innocent and harmeles persons, and that couertly, God be thou my shild, my staye, and raunsome. Endowe me wyth ioye, peace, and hope, so as euerlastyngly I maye boast & glory of the. Amen.
            
            
               For the obtaynynge of fauoure. Psalm. 65.
               PRayses O Lorde are semynge & comly for the, whych deuoute & godly persōs shulde recorde & synge in thy congregacion. Lysten to my prayers, and attende to my humble sute. What fleshly body, what earthly person oweth not to approch vnto thy presence, to become a suter vnto the? My synnes, my synnes, Lord

be wonderfully increased, but forgeue me, most mercyful Lorde, haue mercy on me, let me content & please thy mynde, accompte me O Lorde almyghty amonges thy chosen seruaūtes, graūt me accesse & cōmynge vnto thy presence, to thyntēt I may dwell in thy heauenlye palace. Fyll me wyth the goodes of thy house, & wyth the holy gyftes of thy temple. In thy iustice heare me, O God of my helth, whych arte ye only succour and refuge of all the inhabitaūtes, aswell of the lāde, as of ye see, whych repose themselues in the, be they neuer so farre asounder. Wyth thy goodnes thou vysetest the earthe whych thou enrychest & makest fat. Both to man and beast thou gyuest foode. Prayses therfore and thākes we gyue the agayne on our behalfe wythout ceasynge & ende O Lorde

almyghty as to our duety belōgeth.
            
            
               For thankes gyuynge a prayer. Psalm. 66.
               WOnderfull are thy workes O Lorde amonges the chyldren of men. Lo, thou turnest the see into drye lande, that the beleuers maye passe through the waters of tribulacions wyth myrth and ioye, whyche they haue conceaued of the. Thou haste drawen me euen thorowe fyre and water, thou hast loded me wyth afflicciō. O lorde brynge me agayne into fulnes of ioye, that I maye gyue the due thankes, lyke as in the poynte of necessitie thou hast promysed. I wyll tell euery body what benefites and goodnes thou hast heaped vpon me wythout my deserte, to thyntēt other may be moued in lyke case to setle thēselues in ye wc sure &

full truste, when they be greuouslye oppressed. Repell not my humble requestes (o my god) nether yet chaūge thyne accustomed goodnes for thy names sake. Amen.
            
            
               For the lyght and blessynge of Christ. Psalm. 67.
               THy mercy and blessynge (moost myghty god,) we craue and requyre of the full instantly. Let thy countenaunce shyne on vs, haue cō
                  passion vpon vs, that here in earth we maye fynde out the waye whych leadeth vnto the, and maye attayne thy saluacion amōges the Gentyls. O that al peoples wolde cōfesse the wyth louyng hertes, for the manyfold benefytes and pleasures which they haue receaued at thy handes, whyche wyth iustice doest gouerne men, & arte theyr leader vpon earth. Poure downe Lorde thy goodnes,

so shal the earth yelde vnto the, glorye and prayse, and vnto vs frutes for our foode and sustenaūce. Thou God the father blesse vs, thou God the sōne blesse vs, & thou god ye holy goost blesse vs. O yt all the costes of the earth (Lorde God) wolde feare & stāde in awe of the. Wolde God also that I mought studye to worke nomā eyther pleasure or displeasure, yt shulde be agaynst thy wyll. Amen.
            
            
               For consolacion and concorde of Christes church. Psalm. 68.
               ARyse Lorde, let thyne enemyes be scattered, thy haters put to flyght, the ryghtuouse and Christes disciples made pleasaūt and mery. Let them synge prayses & pleasaunt songes vnto the, let them blowe abrode thy magnificēce, let thē most hyghly auaūce thy Maiestye, let thy glorye growe, let the kyngdome of

Christ from heauen amonge ye chosen be enlarged, be thou the father of the fatherlesse, the iudge of the wydowes, and the protectour of them namely whom the worlde forsaketh, whose consciences be troubled, whome the worlde pursueth for Christes sake, whych be nedye & wrapped full of myserye. In thy house O Lorde let vs dwel in peace and concorde, gyue vs al one herte, one mynde, one interpretacion vpō thy worde. Plucke of, the bādes aswell from the consciences as from the bodyes of the myserable captyues, and of them also whych as yet be hedged in wythin the lystes of death & vnaduisedly striue agaynst grace. How drye (Lorde) is thyne heritage? I pray the, poure downe largely the showres of thy graces, let a more plenteous frutfulnes chaūce,

let thy people be strengthened with spirite. Graunt vs Lorde thy worde aboūdaūtly so as there may be many preachers of thy Gospell, whych maye wythin themselues holyly cō
                  spyre. Let thy churche the spouse of Christ deale large spoyles of the cō
                  quered Satā. All that beleue in the by Christe (O Lorde God of helth) mought lyfte the vp wyth prayses, mought renoume the, and extol the. We be entred into the viage of saluacion, conduyte vs luckely vnto ye porte, that beynge delyuered by the from the very death we may escape and come to the very lyfe. Fynysh ye thynge thou haste begonne in vs, make vs encrease frō faith to faith. Leaue vs not to oure owne wyll & choyse, for it is slyppery and readye to fall. To the thunderboltes of thy worde put violēce yt we may gyue ye
                  
glorye to the all only. Gyue to thy people courage and power to wythstande synne, and to obey thy worde in all thynges O Lorde God moste glorious and excellēt ouer al. Amē.
            
            
               In persecucion. Psal. 69.
               
                  O god succour me, for I am drowned wyth the surges & waues of aduersities, I am without al helpes. Helpe me my lorde Iesu Christ, which ones not wyth lyke, but with passyng greater myseries wast pressed, and dyddest paye that whyche thou neuer owedest, dyddest restore that wherof thou neuer was wrōge doer, thou redemedst the synnes of all men, for whych Lorde I styll cō
                  tinually thanke the. Moost mylde & tender Lorde Iesu Christ rydde me of thys distresse for thy passion and deathes sake. Lorde of strength let

them not be shamed, whyche wyth a certayne and sure hope seke for the. In tyme conuenient I make my prayers O Lorde vnto the. Accordynge to thy bountyfull mercy and trouth of thy promyse succoure me. Rydde me out of these strayghtes, heare me, for surely thy tendernes & gētle herte towardes synners is very pleasaunt. Turne thy face vnto me euen of thy depe clemēcy and pety, whych can neuer be spent nor wasted, hyde not thy countenaūce from me whych am thyne humble & liege seruaunt, for certes I am excedynge carefull and all full of wauerynge and perplexitie, wherfore I besech ye vouchsaue to receaue spedely my hū
                  ble peticions, ioyne wyth my soule (O Lorde my Sauiour and defensour,) at the leste for myne enemyes sake, whych be so extreme & cōtrary

both agaynst the and me, & alwayes ready to worke vs al kyndes of displeasure. Truely I am at thys present succourles, wythout comforte, and full of anguysh. Oh God most mercyful, let thy sauyng helpe fense me. And thā I make a vowe I shall not cease to magnify, to brute, to extolle, and glorifye thy name, & wyth hygh prayses I shal serue the, wyth ernest thankes gyuyng, to thintent that other folke beynge brought in to the lyke mysery, maye learne to flee for succours vnto the, to seke & fynde the, whych arte the onely lyfe and relief of oure hertes. It is thou (who knoweth not?) that hearest the poore, thou doest not despyse the oppressed and prisoners. Succour the Christian churche, buylde it, so that full many may inhabyte it, whyche loue thy holy name. Amen.
            
            
               
               A prayer of the church of Christ. Psalm. 70.
               COme helpe me at ones Lorde. Let them departe wyth shame and reproche, whyche wyshe me all myschief, they that ymagen & dayly lye in wayte to brynge me to vtter destrucciō. Agayne, let them reioyse whych seke the, and desyre my edificacion and furtheraunce, let them alway say: Praysed be God on hygh. Howe impotent and myserable am I O Lorde? Make hast (O my god) vnto me, stande at myne elbowe, assyste me, and delyuer me. Lynger no longer, but wyth all hast and expediciō come helpe me O Lorde and my God. Amen.
            
            
               A prayer of the faythfull in aduersyte. Psalm. 71.
               AL myne hope and hole affiaūce moost pytyfull Lorde haue I caste on the, let me be nomore, I

praye ye, shaken of, for that were sore to my rebuke & shame amōges myn enemyes. Delyuer & succour me of thy iustice. Bow downe thyne eares to me, marke my supplicacion more attentyfly & more surely, then I my selfe can conceaue or vtter it, and of thy botōles mercy help me. Be thou to me a shoteanker and sure refuge, let me wade hēce vnto the, for I am rounde aboute beset on euery syde with euels. I know thou wylt helpe me, because thou haste promysed to assyste all that call vpon the. Thou alone assuredly art my fortresse and defence, out of ye vngodly mens hā
                  des therfore rescue me lorde my god Euen from my chyldhode thou hast ben the author and foundour of my hope, my solace, & sauetie, euen from the tyme that my mother bare me, thou hast kept me. O Lorde, thou

arte myne only glorye & assuraunce. My mouth mought euen flowe and runne full of thys thy glory. Caste me not away from the in thys myne infirmitie and weaknes, forsake me not thou, though the strength ether of my bodye or of my soule forsake me. Go not farre awaye moost mercyful father from me. Make quycke spede to ayde and succoure me, for constantly I abyde and tary for the only. By reason wherof I shall not stynte to increase daye by daye thy prayses, styll readye to declare and set forthe euen to all the worlde thy ryghtuousnes and saluacion, knowynge certaynlye that thou arte styll present and at hande wyth me in all myne aduersities and mysfortunes, wyth thy heauenly grace to helpe & protecte me accordynly. Amen.
            
            
               
               For increasynge the knowlege concernyng the kyngdome of Christ. Psam. 72.
               SEt alofte (O God) the kyngdom and power of Christe thy sonne and our kynge, to thintēt it maye floryshe & sprede both farre and wyde, thy goostly iustice and iudgemente flowynge in oure hertes, so as thy poore and myserable people may be releaued & kepte in perpetual peace, the graund enemye Satā wyth hys ympes and complices beynge subdued, and the foundacion of helthe vpon earth establyshed, and consequentlye the frutes multiplyed & enlarged amōges vs. By thys meane the name of Iesu Christ our Sauioure shalbe blessed & spred abrode in to much generacions of people, for by it shall all the nacions of the erth be blessed, yea all the lande wyth the

maiestye of it shalbe fylled when all persons shalbe true Christians, euē of the ryght makynge. Amen.
            
            
               For patience and despysynge of the worlde. Psalm. 73.
               HOw good and graciouse arte thou O God of Israel, to all such as be of vpryght herte, whyche thynke no euell of the, though they see the godly persones pressed wyth aduersitie, & the vngodlye flowynge in al welth & pleasure. Stey my fete O Lord, that at no tyme they slyppe wyth any euel zele or enuy whych I might haue at the vngodly, who for the most parte passe theyr lyues quietly, and dye more quietly. I besech the, let not thy chosen persons be discouraged, or offended by thys godly prouidence in orderyng of worldly thynges, nor shrynke from the by reason therof. But rather let vs

remember in what daungers in very dede those vngodly be, and wyth how vnhappy a conclusion & terme they close theyr happye course, & on the contrary parte what pleasauntnes of cōscience, what comforte and quyetnes shal followe thys our vnquyetnes. Let me (O Lorde) delyte in nothynge els, saue only in the. Be thou my lotte, my porcion, my enheritaunce for euer and euer wythout ende. Let me not wandre lyke a vagabounde farre from the, let me not defyle my selfe wyth the stynkynge synne of adultery, let me stycke faste to ye only, In the, I saye, only let me repose and setle my selfe, praysynge the wythout ceasynge. Amen.
            
            
               For the forsaken church of Christ. Psalm. 74.
               WHerfore, o god, hast thou thus dryuen vs awaye, thus banyshed

vs? why boyleth thy āger thus agaynst the shepe of thy folde? Remember thy church, which thou hast chosen afore the creacion of ye world, whych thou redemedest by Christes bloude, and whyche is the habitacle of thy name. From her deforsours & spoylers defende her, wythdraw not thy helpynge hande. Loke howe the enemyes make hauocke of altogether, delyuer not vp the soule of the dolefull turtyll thy people vnto the rauenous beastes, & forget not thus the soules of the poore. Remember thy leage, thy testamente, thy couenaunt, whych arte the selfe trouth. Be, I saye, at hande with vs, namely for thyne owne cause, euē that we maye glorifye thy name. Aryse and debate our cause. Consyder what spyte, what wronges, the vngodlye folke worke agaynste the, forget not

the complaynt of thy sely congregacion. For lo, the hurly burly of thy enemyes growe dayly more & more. I graūt yu hast put vs backe for our desertes, but yet the regard of thyn owne glory why doest thou neglect? Thyne owne glorye therfore O my Lorde defende thou in vs thy chyldren, deliuer vs so that the enemyes maye espye thy power, and we maye haue a proufe and felynge of thy fatherly pytie towardes vs. Amen.
            
            
               For auoydynge of sclaunders. psalm. 75.
               The benefite of my redēptiō lord god whych I fele, let me knowlege and cōfesse vnto the euer more and more. For what tyme so euer I called vpon the, lo, the power of thy maiesty and grace was present with me. Wherfore vnto the let vs gyue thankes, declarynge thy wonderful

dedes. Kepe vs, that we worke no wyckednes, that we stande not proudely and peuyshly in our owne conceytes, that we grutch not stubburnly agaynst the. And for asmuche as, O Lorde, it is thy determinate wyll and sentence, that we be now scourged and punyshed, go to, of the cup of tribulacions make vs largely to drynke. Onely herein spare vs that the dregges of thy wrath we drynke not together wyth the vngodly, but rayse thou vp the horne of our comforte in the. Amen.
            
            
               A prayer for the disperpled flocke pressed wyth persecucion. Psalm. 76.
               HEretofore thy name was only bruted in Iewry, but nowe (O Lorde) thy maiestye moost glorious is moost wyde and largely solemnised throughout ye hole world. Thou arte myghty and a passyng diligent

ouerseer of all those that belōge vnto the. The sclaunderous enemyes of thy glorye, wene thou hast forsaken vs, whych be thus wrapped in aduersities. They lye spytefully euer in my necke, no man releuynge me. But thou O Lorde knowest the tyme when to helpe, and for ye moost part vnloked for, thou declarest wō
                  derfully the power of thy maiestye, in that thou at lēgth delyuerest such as beleue in the, euē to the vtter cō
                  fusion of ye vngodly. Wherfore now I praye the make quycke spede to delyuer vs out of thys present daū
                  ger and distres, for thy names sake, that is so holy, so recommended and auaunced of all godly personnes. So be it.
            
            
               A prayer of the troubled conscience. Psalm. 77.
               
                  TO yt I crye, O God, heare me. Nyght & daye I trace & hunte after the, by al meanes I can. To the only for helpe I call, accordynge as thou hast geuen me in commaū
                  dement. Well assured I am, that at length thou wolt heare me, verelye my herte can neuer be mery, whyles thou hydest thy selfe from it, yea I quake to thynke vpon the, my spirit fayleth me, so sore am I afrayed of thy iudgemēt. Whē I call to mynde the tyme of my lyfe euel spent, I am wel nygh in dispayre. No wrytinges of comforte can chere me. Oftentymes saye I to my selfe, oh is God now an other persone thē he was afore tyme? syth now we lacke those hys benefytes, wherwyth our forfathers were so hyghly enriched? Why hath God thus wythdrawen frō vs all hys pytie? is now the strength of

the worde of lyfe waxen feble, where it ought to haue cōtinued for euer? hath God forgotten hys gyftes of grace? or is hys power to haue compassion, waxen so faynt that he can not put backe his wrath agayne frō vs? These & such other be ye fansyes of my wekenesse, where the mater in dede (o lorde) is nothynge so, as he maye easely perceaue who so euer well pondereth the processe of thy grace. Certes I knowe well, thou wylt tourne agayne, and chaunge me into a better case, and set me vp alofte agayne wyth thy ryght hāde, o moost hygh kynge & sauiour. For thou my God art such one as alone canst worke wonderous thynges, so that nothynge can resyst it, Marche forwarde on my syde in al hast with thy power spedely to delyuer me frō this straite for thy holy names sake
            
            
               
               For grace and ryghteousnes of herte. Psalm. 78.
               FOr asmuch, Lord God, as thou haste shewed many wonderous sygnes in rescuyng and delyuering thy people Israel forth from Egipt and therto wroughte no smale myracles in conduytyng them thorow the wyldernes, wherby thou hast declared that in thyne handes is an incomparable power both to saue and slaye: graunt vs grace alwaye both in worde and in dede to followe thy lawe. Bowe oure eares to the wordes of thy mouth. And let thy wordes so worke in vs, yt we maye teach other ye same, let vs euermore trust on the alone, remembrynge thy workes and valiaunt dedes, leste eyther we forsake the, or be negligēt & rechles in our seruice towardes the, but rather thorow thy spirite, which graciously

thou shalt poure on our hertes, cause that faythfully and busely we maye make sute vnto the in both tymes, aswel in prosperite as in aduersitie. Fede vs continually wyth angels fode, that is wyth thy holy worde, wherby oure hertes maye be made ryghtuouse and strōge to our Lorde Iesus Christe. Be not euer more angry wyth vs syth thou knowest we be but fleshe and as a puf of wynde that sodenly vanysheth▪ and neuer returneth. Graunt that ye true Dauid Iesus Christ, maye be oure herdman, to guyde vs thorow innocency and purenes of herte, & to gouerne vs as his gracious hāde knoweth best to be done. Amen.
            
            
               Howe the chylden of God ought to praye in theyr mysfortune and aduersitie. Psalm. 79.
               
                  HOwe longe wylt thou O lorde beare vs such displeasure, how longe shal thy fume thus be hote as fyre? come home I besech the agayn to vs, bryngynge wyth the thy louynge fauoure and gyftes, loke not narowly on the offences of our auncestours and forfathers, nor yet of our owne lyfe, yea rather let thy mercy encrease vpon vs, for we are become very caytyfes and wretches, meruelously vexed of the vngodlye personnes, because thou wollest it so to be. Helpe God, for only thou hast power to delyuer vs, not yt we haue deserued the same, for surely no fauoure haue we deserued at thy handes, neyther can we clayme of duety any thynge of the, but rather after our desertes we be the chyldrē of dā
                  nacion & castawayes, yet haue thou O Lorde respecte to thy holy name

that it may be glorifyed thorow vs. Forgyue vs, I saye, our synnes, euē for thy holye names sake, that we may haue occasiō therby to hallowe it, to thintent we may accordynge to thy worthynes, and as thou arte of thyne owne nature reporte the to be euen our God, sauiour, father, kynd herted, meke, mercyfull, our only cō
                  forte, trust, defence, and raunsome. Suffer the gronynges and cōplaintes of thy prisoners to come to the, delyuer them, preserue thy deuoute and sworne subiectes, as many as be appoynted to be of thy flocke. Then shall we the pytious shepe of thy pasture wythoute ceasynge endure in settynge forth thy prayses, and euermore we shal reioyse of thy great benefytes. Amen.
            
            
               For buyldynge of the poore church greatly fallen in decaye. psalm. 80.
               
                  LOrde that arte hedman ouer thy people heare vs, rayse vp thy power, come & helpe vs, Lorde of hoostes brynge me astray and vagaraūt person home agayne, let thy countenaunce shyne on vs, and we shalbe hole. How longe wylte thou not regarde our prayers? how longe shal we fede our selues with teares? thou hast caused our neyghboures to rage and wonder on vs, our enemyes laugh vs to scorne, and extremely deale wyth vs. Lorde call vs home agayne, let thy amiable countenaunce, I saye, shyne vpon vs, & so we shalbe perfectly hole. Returne, loke, beholde, & come se thy churche of Christ, this thy vyneyarde, for lo, howe it is fowlye spoyled by the seruauntes of Satan. Lorde repare thy vyneyarde a newe, brynge it in to a goodly fashion agayne, hedge

it rounde aboute on euery syde, inclose the vyneyarde that thou haste planted wyth thy ryghthāde, dygge it vp afreshe, prouyde that it maye brynge forth frute, ouerse it yet agayne, maynteyne and defende it from villany and al harmes. Lorde God of hoostes, brynge vs home agayne frō our wylsome wandering, let thy louynge face glyster on vs, & so we shalbe save and sounde. Amē.
            
            
               That God wolde vouchsafe to teach vs. Psalm. 81.
               LOrde be thou our strength and our sauegarde, that of pleasure and courage we maye auaunce the, and set forth thy name, delyuer vs from daungers, for we cal only vpō the, And sythens of thy goodnes we be admitted to thy scole, let vs heare the alone. Suffre no straūge god to meddel any thynge amonges vs, let

vs knowe none other scoolemayster but the, let vs make diuine sute and homage to none other, fyl our mouthes wyth the swetnes of thy worde, for we open them to the only, Graūt vs those peticions that be profytable both to body and soule, leaue vs not to the fansies of our herte, suffre vs not to be wedded, ne gyuē to our owne wyl, but let vs fashion al thinges vnto thy sure worde, to ye prayse and honoure of thy name. Amen.
            
            
               For faythfull workemen to the edifyenge of Christes kyngdome. Psalm. 82
               LOrde set trustye prynces & iudges ouer thy people, that they maye ministre iustice and equitie to the poore, miserable, nedy, fatherles, and wydowes, to thyntent they may rescue & delyuer suche thy poore folkes from the wycked mens handes,

but for lacke of suche prynces & iudges, (of whych for the more parte is alwaye great skasetie) thou thy self O most deare father take in hande to defende thy people, for myserably of a surety they be oppressed, prouide thou connynge teachers to be put in authoritie ouer thy churche, that thorow thy worde they may mollifie the hard hertes, swage the troubled cōsciences, and stablysh the same in grace, such preachers, I saye, as wyl busely search not theyr owne profyt and worldly luker, but our health & felicitie. Amen.
            
            
               Agaynst Christes enemyes and the pharisaycall doctrine. Psalm. 83.
               WHo may be lyke to the, o god? noman verely, noman. Then holde thy peace no lōger, nor do not dissemble in my cause, for it is thy

cause rather then myne. Lo howe thyne enemyes triumphe and waxe proude in stomacke, they lay snares for thy people, they conspire against thy holy and chosen persons, whych be vnknowen to the worlde, to thintent to robbe them of theyr good reputacion and fame. Lorde thys matter pertayneth properly to ye, for they be confederate and knyt as it were in a leage agaynst the. Wherfore represse theyr myscheuous intētes, put them to shame, so as they maye at last espye and haue experience that thy name is puissaūt, almyghty, lordely, and that thou alone art the hyghest and chief ruler thorow out all the earth. Amen.
            
            
               For the despysynge of this worlde. Psalm. 97.
               
                  HOwe pleasaunt, O Lorde, be thy dwellyng places? & againe how vgsome, how vnpleasaūt is the tyrannye of thys worlde, and ye treason of naughty personnes? Wherfore my soule lōgeth sore to come to thy courte and heauēly palace. And herin moost tender Lorde, I beseche the that thys desyre may waxe in me euery daye hoter and hoter, so that thorowe the desyre whych I haue to come to thy heauēly māsion, I may set at nought al erthly thynges. Let all my herte and all my bodye in the only the lyuynge God be glad, mery, & ioyful, O my father, Sauiour, & delyuerer. For doubtles frō ye only cōmeth my strength & all my defēce. Let me not be gyuen to earthly & tē
                  poral thynges, but rather ernestly & only loke on thynges godly & euerlastynge, and therafter to fashion al

my dedes of thys lyfe. Let strength and fayth in the encrease, and euery gyfte of grace better then other, so that euery daye I may amende and growe vnto better. Lorde of armyes heare my prayers, god of Iacob vnderstande them. Loke (O God, our defensour and father) on the face of thyne anoynted and dearest sonne, for whose sake deale mercifully with vs, and graūt vs that fauoure and grace that our synnes may be forgyuen so, that I may be chosen to this honour to be one of thy sōnes, make me cleane & vpryght in herte, strōge in fayth towardes the, immouable from that trust whych I haue to be saued, hote in loue toward my neghboure, for thy bounteous goodnes and trouth. Amen.
            
            
               For the holy goost and the assemblynge of the church.

                  Psalm. 85.
               THy nation and those Christianes, in whome thou dwelleste take vnto ye, & as thy dearly beloued blesse them, restore vnto lyberty thy presoners boūde not only in conscience, but also in bodye, take awaye theyr wickednes, couer theyr sinnes, syth Christe hath satisfyed for them euen wyth hys bloud. Plucke away thy wrath and displeasure, refreshe vs agayne, for our helth dependeth only on the. Asswage thy malyce. O Lorde wylte thou neuer be pleased? Wylte thou styll be greued agaynst vs? No not so lorde, not so, gyue vs herte of grace, restore vs oure lyfe, that we thy people maye alwaye reioyse in the. Shewe vs (Lorde) thy goodnes, shewe vs thy sauynge health, speake to me wythin me, speake howe thy people ones shall

haue peace, so that they cluster not to vanite, but rather be stronge towarde the, let thy health be euen at hande, so as we nede not to stāde in drede. Thy prayse Lorde and magnificence mought abyde amonges vs, thy bounty and thy faythfulnes be heaped vp in vs, let thy ryghtuousnes, whereby we be frelye made ryghtuous, and peace of cōsciences mete together wythin vs, and kysse one the other. Gyue vs Lorde the goodnes of thy spirite, graunt that the erth of oure hertes maye brynge forth much frute of ryghteousnes, let thy ryghtuousnes go afore when thou cōmest to vs, by grace purifye vs, & cōduyte vs in ye strayght waye
            
            
               A prayer of Christians in theyr perylles. Psalm. 86.
               TOurne hether thyne eare, and heare me, lorde, for a very pore

and a myserable persone am I, kepe my soule, syth thou hast hallowed it wyth the worde of thy trouth, helpe thy seruaunt, for none other succour know I but of the, nor any other I wyll seke, neyther fede my mynde with vayne hope. Haue pitie on me, for euery daye I call vpon the, and shall do tyll the heate of thys trouble be abated. Comforte my soule, for vnto the, O moost tender Lorde, I lyfte vp myne herte, to the I flee, for thou arte gentyll and mercyful, and canst not denye them thy helpe that seke it at thy hande. Lorde vnderstande my prayers, consyder well my pytious complaynte, specially in thys tyme of my trouble. The supersticious fooles and fonde ypocrites busely hunt here and there for theyr defence and sauegarde, but vndoubtedly theyr helpe and leanyngstocke

can not be compared with thy hand neyther can it worke the wonderfull actes that thou workest. Their own inuention they repute as God, yea and worshippe it afore God. But it is thou that art on hygh, thou doest the wōderous dedes, thou alone art God, helper in al necessities, fountayne & hedsprynge of al goodnes, the only I cal on as my God in al straytes and daungers, thou onely shalt helpe me, for this thou mayst. Informe me Lorde in those wayes that conduyte men to the, to thintēt I maye walke in thy trouth, and so fashion my hart as I maye reioyse in the holy feare of thy name, then shal I gyue the, thankes, and with al myn hart contynually prayse thy name. Thyne endles goodnes be shed vpon me, frō the depe dōgeon plucke out my soule. And whereas

the proude men O God, & the puyssaūt lordes who hate and belye thy worde, be styffe agaynst me & make cruell pursuyte after my soule, gyue thou me grace not to faynt. Certes, thou Lorde god arte mercyful, soft, & longsufferynge, ful of goodnes & credite, tourne to me, haue cōpassion of me, make me thy seruaūt stronge & hardy, that I mought withstande myne enemyes boldly, & constantly cleaue vnto the, preserue me whych am the sonne of the churche thyne handmayde, shewe me some good token to the prayse of thy name that those yt hate me for thy cause, may se with theyr eyes yt thou stādest on my syde, & doest comfort and solace me.
            
            
               For the buyldynge of Christes church. Psam. 87.
               LAye not the foundacion of thy church Lorde on the sande, nor

on the lowe & plashy groūde, but on the holy hylles & in heauens, where Christ is the corner stone. Lorde be thou alwaye resyent in that church, let; I say, thy restynge place be in yt church, thorowe thy spirite declare thy wōderous factes, whervnto mē may repare to obtayne thy fauoure, to thintent the sayd church maye be buylt & increased by preachyng the worde of promyse & cōforte, as thou hast ordeyned the same for al men.
            
            
               In extreme daunger. Psalm. 88.
               FOr what cause (my Lorde God) hast thou put me backe, seynge now thou rūnest from me, and thou wylt not heare though I crye night and daye to the. Suffer me ones Lorde to exhibyte my supplicacion vp vnto the, bow downe thyne eare to my request, ponder in thy mynde

how I am in a pecke of troubles, euen drowned in mysery and nyghe vnto death. Death, I saye, and hell are euen afore myne eyes, neyther am I much vnlyke vnto deade mē, naye I am euen a very deade man, I had almoost sayd, that I am throwen downe euē into hell, such horrible feare hath enuyroned & assaulted my conscience, for lo no man careth for me, no man is sorye for my losse and damage, yea euen thou on whome I hange all together doest in lyke maner as they do, thy displesure is very hote agaynst me, thou ouerwhelmest me wyth waues and hole sees of troubles, I am well nygh drowned, I am holly caught & hedged in with aduersite. I know not how to escape, neyther haue I any place to flee to. Myne eyes dasell thorow great sorowe, alwaye I

crye holdynge vp myne humble hā
                  des vnto the. What profite I besech the O Lorde, or what prayse gettest thou of myne harme? Howe can I praye the beynge thus destitute and left in synnes, in darknes, in death, in hell? Set forth & brute thy mercyfull actes, thy trouth, credite, and ryghtuousnes, wherwyth franklye wythout our desertes thou makest vs ryghtuous. Why doest not rather O Lorde shyfte me from darkenes to lyght? from peryshynge vnto sauegarde, from death to lyfe, from hell to heuen? Thus doynge I shal haue occasion to prayse thy name. Why doest not thou heare hym that cryeth to the so erly afore the sonne ryse? Why doest thou so vncurteously pussh backe thy client callyng on the after the daysprynge? Why doest thou so roughly turne thy face

alwaye from me? Longe tyme haue I lyen in prison, and foūde no remedy, in so much that I was clene destitute both of Goddes helpe & mās Thou takest away frō me al the cō
                  forte I myght haue agaynst death, al the trust of lyfe, & al that mought succour me in aduersitie, & agayne thou sendest me all mysfortune, damage, and calamite. Thus playnly me thynketh thou workest me more spyte then al enemyes in the worlde coulde do, where as heretofore thou stodest my synguler good Lorde, frende, and defence agaynst al myne aduersaryes. Thy wrath hath lyen ouer heuy on my sholders, and thyn awe hath kepte my corage lowe. Lorde God I besech ye ones agayn heare my humble peticion, helpe me now in my moost nede for thy wonderous holy names sake, where by

thou orderest all thynges. Amen.
            
            
               An admonicion of the promyses made in Christe. Psalm. 89.
               THy credite and trouth are prepared in the heauens, that is, in thy sayntes, O Lorde, wyth whō thou hast made an euerlastynge couenaunt. Thou hast sworne to that same Dauid Iesus Christ that thou wylt prepare hym sede for euer, that is to saye, true beleuers in hym. There is none lyke vnto the, thou arte drad amonge the congregacion of the holy, thou art wonderful, and in myght thou doest passe all other. All thynges be thyne, thou haste made all together. But remember thy trouth and promyse, O Lorde. Helpe vs in thys distresse. In truste & loue toward the, buyld the a dwellyng house in vs, teach vs to be mery in the, that we maye walke in the

lyght of thy countenaunce, that we maye reioyse in thy name, and be exalted through thy righteousnes. Be thou the prayse of our strength, for thorowe the, we be able to all thynges, at thy pleasure we maye do all by Iesus Christ thy only begotten sonne, for he is thy derely beloued, & we also for hys sake be counted thy beloued sonnes, heyres, kynges, and prestes. Thy grace and couenaunte be wyth vs euer more. Whan thou shalt punysh vs accordynge to oure desertes, yet leaue vs not vnder the scourge, turne not thy mercye from vs, brynge vs not downe to vtter destruction, but after thou hast chastised vs, shewe thy fauoure on vs agayne. Remember our corrupte nature, and that thou madest not man for nought. No man can delyuer hymselfe frō death, no man can saue

hys owne soule from hell, thou only must do it, namely to such as beleue in the. Remember the spytefull reproches that thy Christe suffred for vs, for hys sake shewe thy mercy vpon vs. Praysed be thou O Lorde for euer. Amen.
            
            
               For the necessities of mans lyfe a thankynge. Psal. 90.
               LOrde thou arte our continuall shote anker, for thou arte God for euer. Short is oure lyfe, alwaye some of vs dye, & other some come into the worlde, and wyth the a thousande yeares be but one day, yea as the lest minute of an houre. Thys lyfe passeth as doth a dreame, euen as grasse in the felde, grene to daye and drye to morowe, yf thou be displesed, thē we be lost, yf thou chafe, thē shrynke we for feare, for thorow sinnes we be deade vnto the. Certes

Lorde, yf thou haue respecte to oure synnes, who shall stande fast, shewe vs how many be the dayes of oure lyfe, that we maye spende them wysely to ye prayse of thy name, lest we foolyshly trustyng on longe lyfe, sodenly come vnto our death. Come Lorde vnto vs, and cōforte thy people. In the mornynge replenysh vs wyth thy goodnes, that after thys longe sorowe we maye take herte of comforte agayne. Declare thy good wyll vpon vs, and set forwarde our handworkes euery day vnto better So be it
            
            
               A prayer agaynst goostly temptacion. psalm. 91.
               TRustyng on thy grace o lorde, all my hope I put in the, hyde my lyfe wyth Christ wythin the, vnderneth the shadowe of thy wynges defende me, do my God as my trust

is in the, delyuer me from the snare of Satans garde, they hunte howe to plucke me from the. From the perilous poysō of false doctrine, from theyr wyly practises so subtilye forged by greuous threatenynges and swete wordes, thy truth be my sheld Let me not stāde in feare of ye nyght euyl of vnbeleue and of thy strayte iudgement, neyther let me be afrayd of the flyenge arowe on ye day tyme, let me not be in feare of that horrible pestilence crepynge in thorowe darkenes, I meane, let me not be ignoraunt howe detestable and horrible my synnes be, that I dissemble them not, nor qualifye them. Let me not drede that mydday deuyl, which abuseth thy churche vnder a tytle & pretence of holynes. Nether let Satan, though he chaunge hymselfe in to an angel of lyght, stryke any fear

in me. Both on the ryght syde and on the lefte, aswell in prosperitie as in aduersitie, aswel in gostly busines as in corporal, let thy angels diligently wayte on me, that I do not stomble. Then shall I treade vnder foote that helly dragon. Howe gredely haue I longed after the? Lorde delyuer me, accordyng to thy worde, preserue me for thy holy names sake Of lōge tyme haue I called on the, heare me therfore (moost mercyfull God) be wyth me in thys and other myne aduersities, rescue me, make me regarded in the syghte of myne enemies, to thintent I may at large extoll thy goodnes. Put me vnto Christe, that I maye be one of hys, for he is the euerlastynge lyfe. Mercyfull Lorde let me se some spedy remedy in these daungers, and after it thy euerlastynge health. Amen.
            
            
               
               For the true forsakynge of thy selfe. Psalm. 92.
               OF duety we be bounde alwaye wyth coragious spirit to praise & hallow thy name. In the morow of ioye when al thynges shal chaūce to our hertes desyre, we shall ascribe al to thy goodnes wythout any deseruynge on our behalfe, and so shal we prayse thy mere & speciall grace, But in the night of trouble & aduersitie, we shal cal to remēbraunce thy moost faythfull and trustye promyses, that we despayre not. Certaynly Lorde we knowlege all thynges to be in thyne handes, for thou madest all thynges, thou conseruest, & gouernest all yt thou hast wrought, geue vs therfore grace bothe to put to our good wyll, and to worke that thou wyllest, for thys cā not be done by mans power. Enforme vs wyth

knowlege, stablysh vs wyth remembraunce of all good workes, prouyd that we thus beynge planted in thy house, maye so sprynge and floryshe as do the palmes and cedre trees in mount Libane. Amen.
            
            
               Of Christes kyngdome. Psalm 93
               LOrde thou art our kynge, thou hast taken vpon the all power, myght, and honoure, be thou chiefe mayster in our hertes, brynge the deuell downe. Chase farre from vs the worlde, synne, death, and hel, & what so euer our olde Adam hath heretofore possessed by any tytle or clayme. Cancell and stryke out the rygoure of the lawe by the bloude of Christe thy sonne. O Lorde, let the streames of thyne holy goost braste forthe on vs, and that wyth a great sounde & noyse, muche stronger then the ragynge

waues of worldly wysedome chefe schoolmayster of fleshly truste & affiance. Thyne holy worde which is Christes gospel, myght ouercome and throwe downe to the groūde all fleshly wysdome, that all men maye gyue credence to thy scripture, for it is true, iuste, and certaine. Let vs be founde ryghteous and holy in thy house. Amen.
            
            
               Agaynst false preachers of the lawe. Psalm. 94.
               GOd syth punyshment & vengeaūce is thyne, shew thy selfe, aryse thou whych arte the ryghteous iudge of the world, delyuer vs from these malicious enemies. Lord, how longe shall they triūphe? how longe (I saye) shall they thus scornefully spyt at thy ryghteousnes? how lōge shall they thus lyke tyrauntes entreate thy people? I beseche the ones at laste make an ende of thys

our trouble and affliccion. Lorde be thou our schoolmayster. Happy is he doubtles that maye be taught & corrected at thyne hande, wherfore let vs knowe the. In thys tyme of aduersitie graūt vs pacience, dryue not thy people from the, forsake not thyne enheritaūce, let thy iudgemēte be sette vp agayne, that we maye followe it alwaye wyth an vpryght herte. Refresh vs thorowe thy comforte in our trouble. And god be our defence and our sauegarde. Amen.
            
            
               For the schoolers of fayth. Psalm. 95.
               HOwe glad shal we be to thāke the, we that setle oure selues in the? how greatly shal we reioyse as many of vs as knowlege our selfes to be of thy schole? our trust & helth arte thou, take vs to thy proteccion, that we may be thy people and thy

shepe to be fed at thyne handes and on thy pastures. Make the beames of thy beneuolence to shyne on vs, & so worke in vs, that oure hertes be neuer stubburne agaynst the voyce of thy worde, nor that we be founde at any tyme vnbeleuynge, but that we may entre into thy rest, both here and els where, thorowe Christ oure captayne and myghty shepherde.
            
            
               For the same. Psal. 96.
               PUt a new songe into our mouth that as new men we may synge vnto the and worthely auaunce thy Sauiour Iesus Christ, by whome wonderfully thou hast wrought our health. To the wyth the same Christ id due all honoure, prayse, and glory, for thou through hym gouernest thy people in trouth. Amen.
            
            
               For to loue Christ and to be glad in hym.

                  Psal. 102.
               LOrde Iesu Christe our kynge, graunte vs grace, that euer we may be iocunde and mery in the, for thou arte exalted aboue all other goddes in euery lande, defende oure soules, that we may euermore loue the, and hate that euell is. Preserue vs from the handes of the wycked, sprynge thou that art the true lyght into our hertes, let vs reioyce in the that sauest and iustifiest vs. Then shall we continually synge prayses to thy name, geuynge thankes for benefytes and gyftes taken of the.
            
            
               A commune prayer to Christ. Psalm. 118.
               GRaunte vs (swete Lorde Iesu Christe) that we as newe men may geue the new thākes in spirite, for doubtles thou hast wrought wō
                  derfull feates, thou haste delyuered

thy selfe in peryls, thou hast raysed thy selfe from death, euen by thy heauenly power. Thyne health and sauynge power be knowen abrode to the worlde, thy ryghteousnes be spred forthe to all sortes of men, for therby only we be taken for ryghteous persons in thy syght. Remember O Lorde thy gracious fauoure and promyse towarde vs, to thintēt all the worlde maye approue the, prayse the, extol the, and gyue the cō
                  tinuall thankes. Amen.
            
            
               For Christes kyngdome. Psal. 99.
               LOrde thou surely art the kynge (though the wicked Iewes and Pharisees neuer so proudly deny ye) thou allone gouernest the consciences and hertes of men, and makeste vs ryghtuouse, euen of thy mere grace by oure fayth and belefe only.

Thou furtherest, thou settest alofte those that beleue in the, and agayne thou pardonest none that despyse the, thou alone gyuest righteousnes and iudgement, wherby we be allowed and coūted good. Encrease thā O Lorde our fayth, defende and delyuer vs from the hole route of our enemyes, and from all our anguysh and tribulacion. So be it. swete Sauiour Iesu Christ.
            
            
               For the true seruyes of God. Psalm. 100.
               LOrde God take thou yet mercy on vs, graunt vs thy grace, so as we maye be glad, and fresh in spirite to serue the purely, syncerely, & hertely, but not to the boastyng and settynge forth of our owne selues in mens eyes. Declare thy selfe to be a frende to vs thy propre people sore oppressed, and the forsaken shepe of

thy folde, stablysh thy goodnes and trouth on vs o lorde for euer. Amen.
            
            
               To be new and goostly persons. Psalm. 101.
               LOrde so shape and renewe vs that we may alway walke afore the in an innocente and pure herte, that we maye interpryse none euel, that we maye hate the breach of thy commaundemētes, & that we cleue to no man yt hath a malicious herte, nor that we rayle agaynste no man with despytful wordes, and that we haue no proude lokes, or couetous herte, nor that we do any euell what so euer it be, but that we maye loue euery one another wyth pure herte, kyndled wyth a feruente zele to set forth the glory of thy name. Amen.
            
            
               The prayer of the synner knowlegynge hys owne synnes. Psal. 102.
               
                  LOrde, heare my lowly prayer, let my crye come vnto thyne eares, In this tyme of aduersite hyde not thy face, bow downe thyn eare when I call on the. Heare me quyckely, I praye the, for loo my dayes vanish as doth the smoke. I am O Lorde a silly poore catyffe, & nought can do. On what syde so euer I tourne me, anone I mete with thy iudgemētes & wt dispayre. No wher I fynde any gentlenes, fauour, or helpe. Men be displeased with me, bicause I can not follow their appetites, nor brooke them, I am as a Pellicane in wyldernesse. Beholde, I haue no taste neyther in meate nor drynke, so sore am I charmed with thy wrathe and displeasure. I was of this opinion, yt I thought yu tokeste myne enemyes part agaynst me, so luckely after theyr hartes lust

al aduersitie cam vpō me euery one euyl in others necke. My dayes slyde away as doth the shadow, but thou Lorde art for euer. No doubte, thy memorial cōtinueth world wyth out ende. Tokens ther be excedyng many on euery syde whych may put vs in mynde of the, for thou shewest vs a proue of thy goodnes & mercye by thy creatures, by scriptures, by miracles, but chefely by our sauiour & Lord Iesu Christ thyn anoynted, wherfor yf he fayle me in peryls, vtterly am I lost. Aryse Lorde, haue mercy on thy churche, haue pytie on me, whych am a sely mēber of christꝭ body, for surely I am an outcast euery where. It is tyme o lord to shewe cōpassion. Now I saye, it is tyme to shewe vs thy mercy o lorde. Herken thā to our praier, despise it not. Lo I am a miserable p̄soner, hear therfore my gronynges,

delyuer me, and then wt great thankes I shall not stynt to glorifye and blase thy name. In thassemblie of all people shall I in ful large and goodly wise make reaporte of the. O Lord my god plucke me not hence sodēly, but in the myddes of my dayes let me remember myne ende, lest by my soden departure frome this lyfe, I be depriued of that euerlastyng lyfe. Be therfore mercyfull to me, euen for thyne holy names sake. Amen.
            
            
               A prayer to cast of the olde man. Psalm. 103.
               LOrde, it is semely that my soule shulde prayse ye, and all ye myght that is in me shuld magnify thy holy name, for the great benefites and louynge kindnes whiche thou haste done vnto me. Pardon Lorde my

wyckednes, heale ye rēnauntes of syn whych as yet be in this my corrupte nature, delyuer my lyfe from death, kepe me well fensed from myne enemyes in peryls, in death, and in hel. Enuiron me with goodnes and mercye, that I maye be stronge agaynst synne, death, & the deuell, & agaynst al the force of myne aduersaries. Fyl my mouth wyth goodes profytable both to body and sprete, yea though al the world be agaynst me yet stāde thou on my syde. Let me waxe yōge thorowe cōforte of thyne holy goost. Make me couragious and bolde in al that good is. O Lorde, of thy iudgement, ryghtuousnes, and mercye, helpe all those that suffer wronge. Lōge forbeare vs in our synnes, punyshe vs not longe, though we haue deserued it, be not euer more angry, nor let not our innumerable sinnes,

suffer theyr worthy punyshmēt, but remoue them farre awaye from vs. Be oure father, take vs in the nomber of thy chyldren. Oh howe frayle a worke be we? euen verye dust and ashes, oure dayes be as the floure in the felde: Lorde teach vs to fear the, so as we may performe thy cōmaundemētes & the condicions of thy couenaūt. Thy goodnes be euermore wyth vs present, & delyuer vs swete Lorde from all euyll. Amen.
            
            
               That God may be knowen by hys creatures. psalm. 104.
               GEue me thys grace O Lorde, that with my hole body & soule, wyth my hole myght and spirite, I maye alway prayse the by the knowlege and belefe of thy heauēly predestinacion made in Christe Iesu by a wonderous workmanshyppe of all thynges in heauen, in earth, & in the

see, and that by consyderyng the nature of all thynges I may be rauyshed euē vnto the, ye maker of them, and that here vpon I may be encoraged to trust vnto ye in al thynges, so as I maye be well assured to receaue al cōmodities at thyne hādes, both these that I already haue, and that I maye haue in tyme to come, what thynge so euer I shal stāde in nede of. Surely, at thyne hāde loke al beastes for theyr fode, euery one in hys due tyme. Al thynges wyl go to nought, yf thou turne thy face awaye. To the, therfore, be prayse and glory for euer. Amen.
            
            
               To knowe Christ. Psalm. 105.
               THorow thy boūteous goodnes let vs cōtinually blowe abrode thy prayses. Graunt vs only to call on thy name, let vs remember thy moost famous dedes, let vs talke of

reason of them, so that in the onelye we may reioyse, for in the, euermore we be glad, we serche the, beleue the, yea and to the onely we praye, and thorowe thy power we be conserued. At all tymes therfore let vs remembrynge thy benefites be not churlish nor ingrate vnto the o Lorde, syth yu wt infinite benefites endowest both vs and the hole worlde. Amen.
            
            
               In peryls for helpe. Psalm. 106.
               TO thy goodnes euermore we gyue thākes, Lorde, besechyng the also that we maye do iustice and iudgement. Graunt vs alwaye to feare the, to geue credite vnto the, to trust fastly vnto the. Remember vs lyke as thou art wonte to be fauourable vnto thy people. Uisyte vs wyth thy sauynge health, for bothe we & oure fathers haue sore synned,

we haue done wickedly and vngodly. And nowe for oure synnes we be brought low and made euen the driuels of ye worlde. But O Lorde loke vpon our nede, heare our playnte, & remember vs for that couenauntes sake, whych thou madest wyth vs. Haue remorse at lengthe of thys affliction and trouble sente frō the, as thou arte most meke and mercyful, take awaye thys scourge, shewe thy selfe frendfull. Let thy mercy defēde vs from oure enemyes, helpe vs, Lorde, our God, that we maye geue true and moost deserued thankes to thyne holy name. Praysed be thou o Lorde God for euer. Amen.
            
            
               For comforte, good officers and faythfull ministers of Goddes worde. Psalm. 107.
               THy goodnes, Lorde God, hath none ende, oftētymes thou hast

redemed, delyuered, and rescued thy people of Israel forth of a thousand daūgers, euen as oftē as they cryed vnto the, though theyr synnes were neuer so great. O Lorde haue mercy on me, for I am in great daunger. Trustynge vpō thyne infinite goodnes, I cal to the, heare me, helpe me spedely for thyne holy names sake. Brynge me from thys blacke darknes, brast asonder my bondes, sende vnto me thy worde, whereby thou madest all thynges, and relieue me thy poore wretch. O Lord sende gē
                  tell Prynces and such as be diligēt in theyr authoritie and office in asmuch as they do that pleaseth the, & in nothynge swarue frō thy wayes. Saue me from myserye and vtter dammage. Make me also haue delite and pleasure in thy workes, and that by vnderstandynge thyne vnspeakable

goodnes, I maye be thorowly gladde at myne herte, for euer more haue I full good cause to prayse thy goodnes, and to rendre due thankes vnto thy godly Maiestye. So I haue moste gentel and benigne Lorde.
            
            
               To be raunsomed and delyuered from bondage of conscience. Psalm. 108.
               LOrde god almyghty myne hert is at thys present season ready to synge prayses vnto the, & to rēder vnto the most worthy thākes. Only I desyre the, thou wol vouchsaue to deliuer me frō these greuous peryls in whych I am now wrapped. Surmount Lorde aboue the heauens & spreade thy glory ouer al the earth. Shewe thy louynge kyndnes, auaunce thy trouthe so hyghe, that it may reach vnto the heauens. Helpe me thorowe thy ryght hande, ayde &

assyste me, for surely al mānes helpe is but vayne. Let me be stronge in the, and for thy names sake, o lorde, brynge downe myne enemyes, naye thy enemyes rather, and make them to stoupe. Amen.
            
            
               The prayer of Christes church. psalm. 109.
               THou, O Lorde (of whome is al my glorye & prayse,) suffre not thys shame and villanye to be layde vpon me. The wycked & wyly foxes of thys worlde haue gaped vpō me wyth theyr lyenge tonge they sclander me and speake spytefull wordes of me euery where. Do for me nowe for thy holy names sake, I thynke longe after thy goodnes, deliuer me Lorde, for I am poore and succourles, be at hande Lorde God, and of thy goodnes helpe me, to thintente they maye knowe that thys is thyne

hande, and so learne to feare the. When they curse me, thā blesse thou me. I praye the, stande on my ryght hande to helpe & defende me against my moost fearce and cruel enemyes.
            
            
               Of the benefyte of redempcion & Christes office. Psalm. 110.
               
                  O Moost deare Iesu Christe our Lorde and our God, to the verely said the father, syt on my right hande vntyll I put thyne enemyes a fotestole vnder thy fete, whych father also made the to be Lorde and Kynge ouer all thynges that be cō
                  teined in heauen, in earth, and in the see. Lorde, play ye partes of a Kynge amōges thyne enemyes, whych pursue vs, and wolde confounde the in vs, let therfore thy royall power procede agaynst them. Subdue thys fleshe in vs vnto oure profyte, put downe al lettes and stomblyng stockes

whiche the world laye agaynst vs. Uanquyshe Sathan, so as we maye haue contynuall peax in the accordyng to thy promise. Thy father also by his othe hathe anoynted the his euerlastyng preste, after the order of Melchisedec, to thintēt thou moughtest alwaye be a mediatour and suter vnto him for vs. Swete Lorde remembre thys thy name of office takē vpon the in our cause. I beseche the, stande my good Lorde, make thy father oure gracious God, though not without iuste cause he be angry with our synnes. Shewe him thy woundes that thou sufferedest for the raunsome of oure synnes, offer hym thy bloude so plē
                  teouslye shed for the forgyuenesse of our trespasses, whiche bloude as yet is fresh in his eyes, and wt that same bloude through thy word in spirite

washe and clense vs. Thou that art the blessed sede of Abrahā, blesse vs for euer. By thy holy spirite teache vs in our hertes, for these be the offices of thy presthode. Anoynte vs wt that moost holy breathynge, so that for thy sake we may be estemed both kynges and prestes, and in especiall pure in conscience afore the, that we thy true leuites and prestes may offer goostly sacrifices, whyche thy father shall allowe and take in worth for thy sake, yt euery one of vs maye teache other thy holy worde, & euery one pray for other. Furthermore for asmuch as thou, o Christ Iesu most dearly beloued in our herte, arte named ye iudge of quyck & dead: reuēge vs of oure enemyes, & after ye shame of thys lyfe, promote vs in an other world to euerlastyng honoure, & we shal rēdre vnto ye euerlasting thākes

and prayses. Amen.
            
            
               For forgeuenes of synnes. Psam. 111.
               ASsyst me O Lorde God, and I shal thanke the wyth all my herte, by auancynge thy workes in ye metynge of the holy persones, for al thy dedes be glorious and myghtie, and lyke as al our workes be vayne and of no strength: so be al thy workes excellent, stronge, and puissaūt, Remēber me as thou hast couenaū
                  ted euermore to do. Graunt that we maye be delyuered from thys bodye of synne, and that in spirite I maye be newe shapen agayne euen for thy names sake which is right holy and reuerend. Graunt me to feare the, so that I may be rych in wysdome and vnderstandynge, and that I maye knowe the, beleue the, & trust to the euermore. Amen.
            
            
               
               For workes of charitie. Psalm. 112.
               LOrde nurture and brynge me vp in the true awe of the, that al my delyte may rest in thy worde and in thy wyl and commaundementes. Lyghten myne herte (O thou true lyght) in thys my darknesse, for thou arte most mercyful and ryghtuouse. Make me also mercyfull and tender vpon my neghboure. Graunt me abundaunce of substaunce, so that lyberally I may gyue vnto the nedy, and that also indifferently, that I haue no cause to feare any vnegall iudgement. Make that my herte be alway ready to trust and rest in the, and be euermore full of comforte & ryghteousnes. Amen.
            
            
               For the buyldynge of Christes church. Psalm. 113
               
                  THy name Lorde be praysed alwaye and euery where. Loke vpon vs thy poore & myserable subiectes. Thou arte of al the hyghest, none is checkmate wyth ye, promote thy lytle ones the outcastes of the worlde from the dust, and the nedye from ye durte. Thy church of Christe which is reputed of the vngodly persons, as a baren mother make her fruteful, so as she may brynge forth many chyldren in thy house. Amen.
            
            
               To be chosen one of Christes chyldren. Psalm. 114. and .115.
               IN wōders and tokēs which thou shewedst Lorde God by greate force, thou deliueredst thy people Israel out of Egypte. Now also accordynge to thy greate and bounteous goodnes helpe vs, that the hole glory vndiminished may be referred to thy name and not to vs in al thy valiaunt

actes. Be thou our ayde succoure and defēce. Blesse vs, that we may be founde blessed at the iudgemente, that wythout ende we maye prayse and sprede abrode thy moost blessed name amōges thy chosen holy ones. Amen.
            
            
               To be delyuered from erroure. Psam. 116.
               LOrde howe sore do I longe for thyne ayde and assystence, heare my complaynt. Bowe downe (I say) thyne eare to my requestes, I haue longe called vpon the. Snares of deathe intangled me, dreade of hell stroke me to the herte. I was drowned in waues of troubles on euery syde. Lorde beholde I call on thy name, delyuer therfore my soule, for thou arte a gentell, ryghtuouse, and mercyful God. Kepe me thy symple seruaunt, helpe me, for in the worlde surelye I am estemed but as a vyle

person and am nothynge regarded. Brynge my soule to rest thorow thy swete cōforte, pul it awaye, that deth arrest it not, kepe myne eyes frō wepynge, my fete from slydynge, so as in the lyuynge lande I may quietly walke afore the. So be it. Graunt me O Lorde in herte to beleue vnto my iustificacion, and wyth mouth to confesse vnto my saluation. Thou arte only true, thy worde is trouth, all tokens amonges men, al beckes, wordes, & workes be very vanities and lyes. Wherfor O Lorde inspire that same thy worde into my herte, yt I mought be garnyshed wyth truth vnto thy glory. Graunt me paciēce, that I maye drynke of thy cuppe of tribulacion wyth a glad & wyllynge mynde, yea though it be ful vnto the brynke, but prouyde thou that thys cuppe of drynke may be to my saluacion.

When it shalbe thy pleasure to take me frō thys mysery, or to lowse these bondes of extreme nede, where wyth I am as yet fast tyed: then let me not be founde vnkynde nor churlysh to the by forgyttynge thy benefytes, but cause that I may offer vnto the pleasaunt sacrifices, whyle I knowlege thy louynge kindnes, & extoll thy moost large and imperiall name. Uouchsafe to heare me, sythe I call vpon thy name O Lorde god almyghty. Amen.
            
            
               A blessynge. Psalm. 117.
               LOrde thy fre goodnes & trouth be euermore hangyng ouer our heades, & alwaye abyde wythin vs, thus shall we prayse and magnifye the for euer and euer. Amen.
            
            
               For goostly strength. Psal. 118.
               
                  AMiable arte thou O Lorde, thy goodnes shall endure for euer, sette me at large forth of all these straytes. Be thou with me, thē shall I feare noman, but boldlye defye myne enemyes, and ernestlye cleaue to the. Wherfor let me not fal whā they assaute me. Se yt I shrink not nor flee one fote, but be thou my strength and sauegard. Thy myghty and strong ryghthande holde me vp, and yf thou chastise me, yet slee me not. Fasten me in the cornerstone Christe, who was refused of ye mayster buylders, I meane, of ye proude hypocrites, but he was hyghly preferred at thy hande. Lyghten me, I beseche the, with the perfect knowledge of him. And I beseche the for thy raūsom, which for me thou hast payed that that daye of gladnes & ioye mought ones shyne vpon me.

Helpe me wyth thy good lucke and furtheraunce, so as wt a couragious herte I may say, blessed be he that cōmeth in the lordes name. Amen.
            
            
               For continuaunce in the way and worde of the Lorde. Psalm. 119.
               LOrd kepe me vpryght, holly bēt and wedded to thy lawe & scripture, so that I maye do nothynge but that is agreable vnto thy worde Thys I know thou requyrest of me yet it passeth my power to performe it. Se therfore that eyther I be able to do thy cōmaundementes, or at the lest way supply thou in me, yt whych lacketh on my behalfe to ye accōplishment of thy requestes. All my doynges, studyes, & endeuores I employ (asmuch as in me is) to obserue thy cōmaundemētes, to thintēt I be not foūd faultie. Ah my lord god do not thus leue me, reforme my ways syth

I am attendaunt vpon thy worde & promyse, yea and thoughe I be sore ouercharged, yet depriue me not of my good hope, Hyde and fastē in my herte thy comfortable wordes of promyse, that I fall not. Teach me thy statutes, lawes, and iudgementes. Lorde to thintent I may boldly reason and talke of thy lawe: graūt me a constant wyll to followe and to do it in dede, restore thy seruaunt vnto hys olde dignitie, after thys storme brynge me to quietnes and solace, that I maye lyue, & do thy wordes. Open myne eyes, so that in ye worde of thy pleasure I maye beholde thy wonderous wayes, whych passe all mans wytte and capacitie. Purge me of thys infamye and sclaunder, wherby I am bylyed of the wycked folke onely for thy wordes sake: Saue the lyfe of thy poore seruaunt

accordynge to thy promyse. Myne olde wayes and fashions of lyfe (I can not denye) be euell. Forsake not yet a repentant herte, poynte me the wayes that leade vnto the, thā shall I reporte thy worthy actes. Behold my soule waxeth faynt by reason of so many crymes layd to my charge, but strengthen thou me vpon thy worde, let myne herte be set on thy worde onely, and not geuen neyther to couetyse, nor yet to foolysh pryde, prycke me forward in thy way. Thy worde be wt me, so as I may dreade the, than shal I neyther stomble, nor slyde. Ah moost mercyful Lorde, for thy wordes sake, let thy goodnes & preseruacion shyne vpon me, that wyth thy worde I maye answere all myne euel willers and aduersaries. Plucke not ye trouth frō my mouth, remēber thy cōfortable worde made

for thy seruaūtes sauegarde, whych onlye is my cōforte in these my outragious paynes & anguishes, let me neuer forget it, but talke of it nyght & daye. Lorde, be thou my heritage, lotte & porcion, for thy promyse sake haue pytie on me, that I may be partaker amonge those that feare the. For the earth is plenteous thorowe thy goodnes. Shewe me thy iugementes, do well wyth thy seruaunte, as thy promyse is, and teache me to knowe that good is. Where as thou hast brought me to a lowe ebbe, and dydest set me on me knees: thou dyd dest wel O Lorde to me, for by thys meanes I recognise and knowlege the to be my promoter & setter forth vnto ryghteousnes. Let the deuoute & godly se howe thou hast preserued & kept me, yt they also may hervpon reioyse, for them also wolt thou help

in lyke maner. Thy goodnes be my comforte accordyng to thy promyse. Be thou mercyful to pardō my lyfe, myne herte be wythout blemysh and spotte al together in thy ryghtuousnes. Se that I neuer be put to confusion. Oh howe sore longe I for thyne helpe and comforte? how lōge shall I trust vpon thy promyse? Myne eyes dasell lokynge after thy worde, & awayt, whan thou shalt release my paynes. Howe longe shall I be beatē thus in this rorynge see? how longe shal myne enemyes pursue me wythout cause? Lorde assyste me of thy goodnes, encorage me, & cause that I maye kepe the wordes of thy mouth. Truely Lorde thy worde is euerlastyng, by it be al thinges made & preserued, yea by it thou madest me also. Lorde God helpe me. Thy worde be a lanterne to my

fete, & lyght in all my wayes. Thou seest Lorde I am brought downe very lowe, & had as a vyle slaue, wherfore go to, by thy worde restore me vnto lyfe, vouchsafe, I besech the, acceptably to take the fre offrynges of my mouth. And teach me thy iudgementes, by thy worde cōserue me, so yt myne hope deceaue me not, Make me stronge, O my God, that I may escape. Than shall I delyte in thy ryghteousnes, mystrustynge al that is of flesh. Let me lerne by thy secret inspiracion to feare the, & to shrynke as ofte as I shall remember thy iudgemēt, delyuer me not into myne aduersaries handes. Take me to thy defence, be thou only my succour, fauoure hym that fauoureth the, and is busy to helpe hys neghboures. Prouyde that men hurte me not by power and force. Myne eyes tryckle

thorow longe awaytynge for thyne ayde, and that thou shuldest be thy wordes mayster. Deale fauourably wyth me, as thou art good thy selfe, teach me thy iudgementes. Tourne to me, shewe thy selfe mercyfull and gracious, as thou arte wonte to be to those that loue thy name, and after thy worde reforme my steppes. Let no wyckednes raygne in me, no aduersitie ouercome me, frō violēce of men rescue me, that I maye kepe thy commaundementes. Shew thy face vnto thy seruaūt, haue cōpassiō on me. O Lorde thou art ryght, and al thy iugemētes be strayght, straitly thou haste geuen in commaundemēt, that all ye wordes of thy mouth be kept. Ah Lorde, graunt me grace diligently to do all thy commaundementes, euen wyth all my herte. Lo this thinge I craue of the, heare me

for thy goodnes, nygh thou art to al that call on the. Thy promyses be iuste, yea they be trouth it selfe, loke to my wretchednes, delyuer me, plucke thou me from al daungers. Truely I shall neuer forget thyne vnspeakable goodnes. Take, I say, Lorde my matter into thy handes. Ryd me forth of trouble, quyckē me lyke as thou hast promysed to do. Let my humble supplicaciō come in afore the, saue me euen to make thy worde good. Thyne hande be wyth me, & let me neuer leaue thy worde, but brynge aboute, yt my soule maye perpetually lyue and prayse the, rendrynge vnto the most hertye thākes for thy continuall kyndnes. Thy ryght hande, I saye, helpe me. I am as a sely shepe that strayeth in wyldernesse. Doutles of my selfe I am not able to turne to thy hyghe waye

agayne. Wherfore (moost gentell herdman and Lorde) seke thou me out, bryng me agayne vnto thy fold Neuer suffer that thy memorial, thy waye, wytnesse, iugemēt, ryghteousnes, trouth, worde, pleasure, and ordynaunce at any tyme shuld perysh, or be of no effecte, strēgth, or valure. Cause that my flesh alway may quyuer and be adrad of thy threatenynges, so that my spirite in the meane tyme be neuer hindred nor disturbed from the constaunt trust of thy promyses made & performed vnto vs, for Christ Iesus sake thy dearly beloued sonne. Amen.
            
            
               Agaynst euell tonges. Psalm. 120.
               IN thys my greuous trouble lord I call on the, wherfore heare me O most gracious Lorde. Lorde, I say delyuer me from euell tonges,

vnshamefastly raylyng agaynst thy holy trouth aswell as agaynste me, yet do I knowlege thy trouth & wol do vnto death. Wo is me that I am constrayned to leade my lyfe amonges these foreners and suche as be not thy naturall chyldren borne, I meane amōges those, yt be enemyes vnto thy peace and pursuers of thy moost hallowed name, from such pestilencies saue and kepe me, I the praye, O moost gracious Lorde.
            
            
               To put thy selfe in Gods handes. Psalm. 121.
               
                  I Lyft vp myne eyes vnto heauen, cryenge & callynge for assystence of thy grace. My god helpe me, truely thys is easy for the to do, for thou madest both heauē and earth. I besech the so to kepe me, that my foote slyde not, but haue thou a watchyng eye vpon me. Shadowe me aboute

thorow thy ryght hande, be thou my bulwarke and fortresse agaynst the vngodly, suffer not the myghtye to laye cruell hādes on me. And (o thou moost gentel and benigne Lorde) I pray the, let not myne herte be set on the vayne pleasures of thys worlde, neyther yet let me cowardly fall and shrynke, whan I am brought to aduersitie and trouble. Deliuer me frō all euell, be thou thassuraunce & warrant to my soule, cast thy tender eye towarde me, whether I go in or out O Lorde. Amen.
            
            
               For the buyldynge of Christes Church. Psalm. 122.
               
                  I Haue surely great cause to reioise euen from my herte roote, in that I se so many men daylye reformyng theyr lyfe vnto better, beynge illumined by faythe, and makynge greate prease to enter into ye Lordes house.

Enlarge therfore thorow thy worde the precincte and boundes of thy cytie Hierusalem. Repare agayne concorde, peace and true loue in vs to ye perpetual honoure of thy name. Let thy spirite shyne by a true & certaine iudgement, make thy cytizens welthy in all goodes. Let the gates of hell haue no power agaynst thy cytie so that thy churche maye lyue in rest quietly and saffely, defēde it frō all imminent daūgers, sende vs many that may preach vs peace in this cytie, and that by all meanes wol do theyr endeuours to further it. Amē.
            
            
               Constantly to endure vnder Christes crosse. Psalm. 123.
               TO the lyfte I vp myne eyes, O God, that dwellest in heauen. Cōsyder that as the seruaūtes haue a ready eye towardes theyr maister, and the maydens also vpon theyr

maystresse: euen so be myne eyes continually fixed vpon the, to thyntent at length I maye wynne thy moost gracious fauoure. Mercyfull lorde, now pytie vs, for al the worlde hath vs in greuouse disdayne. The ryche spytefully scorne vs euen to ye teeth, & the proude persons do reiecte vs. But thou O Lorde plucke vs forth of theyr handes, and make a rescue of vs agayne, to thintēt we may become subiectes to thy moost gracious goodnes whyche mought be to the prayse of thy most puyssant and glorious name. Amen.
            
            
               To be delyuered from bondage of conscience. Psam. 124.
               ONles thou haddest continually abyden wyth vs O Lorde: verely we had bene quyte lost in thys ragyng see of troubles, and had ben

caught wt these preuye snares, wher wyth our enemyes haue beset all the way wherby we shuld passe for none other entent than to wynde vs in theyr myschiefe, and to cary vs with them vnto hell. Brast theyr snares a sōder o Lorde, set vs at large, drawe vs forth from thys depe water. Thy name be oure helpe and defence, for thou hast made both heauen & erth.
            
            
               To be rydde from imminent daunger. Psalm. 132.
               GRaunt vs grace O Lorde styffely to cleaue vnto the, so as we shrynke not, but that we stande for euer, euen as moūt Sion in that same thy new cytie Hierusalē, which is Christ. And (O thou moost tender and deare Lorde) cast a stronge bulwarcke aboute vs, so as the wycked haue no power agaynst vs. Further more leaue vs not vnto our selues,

nether yet suffer vs ons to put forth our arme to do vnryghteousnes. Be gracious and free to all such as beleue in the, syth they be of honeste and true hertes. Reste, quyete, and peace be vnto Israel, euen to as many as lyue after the spirite, and not after the fleshe. Amen.
            
            
               For hym that is imprisoned eyther in spirite or in body. Psalm. 126.
               LOrde god almighty delyuer me frō thys bondage, comforte me, O my God, and fyl my mouth wyth ioye, replenysh my tonge wyth gladnes, euen from myne herte. Shewe some wonderous feate for my sake, that thy suters maye se it, and come wyth me to render vnto the worthye thankes. Certes, thou shuldest by this meanes geue them occasion the more constantly to suffer aduersitie,

and to trust assuredly vpon the. O Lorde God, raūsome me I saye, frō thys paynfull bondage, destroy this captiuitie, euen as the hote sonne cō
                  sumeth and dryeth vp the dewe that falleth by nyght. Turne my weping vnto gladnes, euen for thy names sake, as I shall euer more auaunce and magnifye it.
            
            
               To be admytted vnto Christes Sabboth or restynge daye. Psalm. 127.
               BUylde vs O Lorde, watch and kepe vs, for onles thou vouchsaue to do it: doubtles we spēde our wynde in waste. Let vs, I saye, ones ceasse from thys hurlye burlye, thys toylynge & drudgynge in the vayne trumpery of thys worlde, so as ones at last we maye religiously hallowe thy holye Saboth, and wyth longe sufferynge a wayte for thy ioyful cō
                  mynge,

castynge al our thought and care, on the only, albeit in the meane season we ought to laboure diligētly, for truely so we haue in commaū
                  dement of the, where as yet the encrease and furtheraunce of oure labours to the mayntenaunce of oure lyuynge whyle we be in thys body, we loke for at thyne handes, and not by our owne paynes takynge. Take awaye Lorde al couetyse and vayne studye of ryches frō our hertes. Let vs be founde lyke vnto the arrowes shot from a bowe, euen ernestly bent and constant in thy worde. Let oure quyuers and hert strynges be foūde full of hote and feruent zeale, alway by peticiō shotynge vnto the, so that in face of oure enemyes we neuer be steyned wyth any blot of reproche.
            
            
               To be blessed of the Lorde. Psalm. 128.
               
                  GEue vs grace, swete Lorde, to feare the, to walke in thy waies and fotesteppes, and well to prosper in our iorney. Moreouer vouchsaue to blesse vs and all thynges belongynge vnto vs, so as we also maye se many children of fayth and peace in Israel. Amen.
            
            
               For defence agaynst our enemyes. Psal. 129.
               LOrde many ther be that cōspire agaynst vs, full many that inuade vs, that make hurly burlies amōge vs and fyersly assault vs, but suffer them not to preuayle neyther to haue ye vpperhande on vs, O our moost mercyfull God, cut a sonder theyr ropes and snares. Let them returne with shame as many as work vs any trouble, but blesse thou vs O Lord for thyne holy names sake. Amen.
            
            
               
               For the troubled conscience. Psalm. 130.
               LOrde I crye vnto yt, euē in myddes of al my troubles. Wherfor I besech the, mercyfull Lorde heare my voyce. Bow downe thyne eares vnto my pyteous cōplaynt, yf thou laye to our charge our horrible & innumerable faultes, who shal escape or go quyte, whan thou shalt syt as iudge? who shalbe able to holde plee with the? yea who is he, that shal not be forced vnto vtter despayre? Truly then shulde we all peryshe. Thys notwythstādyng ther is yet in thyne handes Lorde both power and also a good wyll to forgeue vs oure synnes which thyng I know thou wolt do yf it were but to perfourme thy promyse made by thy sonne Christe our Lorde and prest, who assuredly hath payed a sufficient raūsome for

oure synnes, euen the mooste deare sacrifice of his owne bodye, to thintente yu mightest be our soueraygne Lorde God, and yt we myght knolege our synnes, and make sute vnto ye for pardon therof. Lorde graūt me to wayte for thy gracious pardon, longe to trust & hange on the, euen so longe, tyll at length thou dispetche me, as my truste is in thy promise. From daysprynge to daysprynge diligently I wayte, Lorde our god, without dout thy mercy is great, great pardō styl remaineth in thyn handes, yea thy mercy can neuer be spēt Agayn thy promises can not be vndone nor made voyde. Delyuer me then, pluck from me this incommodite, & other casualtyes of this wretched lyfe, Preserue all true Israelites in spirite, I meane al the beleuers in ye, frō these remnauntes

of synnes naturally buddyng forth of our harte. Defende vs also from all aduersities of flesh, O Lorde, of thy moost gracious clemencye, mercye and pytye. Amen.
            
            
               For the auoydyng of spirituall pryde. Psalm. 131.
               SUffer not my harte to swell in pryde, nor myne eyes to shew any proude lokes, that I take not to much vpon me, neyther arrogantly auaunce my selfe aboue Christe our heade, but make, yt I maye gredyly couet to haue good sauoure in thy worde only, as much as thou shalte vouchsaue to open vnto me. And in case thou wythholdest the mylke of cōforte whych streameth frō Christe wel vnderstanded and knowen: yet let vs not Lorde despayre, but truste wyth a quyet herte alway vpon the. So be it.
            
            
               
               To obteyne Christes benefites. Psalm. 132
               THou son of Dauid Iesu Christ arise, take seasin of thy resting place, which I beseche ye it may be amonges vs, for asmoche as by thy promyse we be entytled & recognised to be thy court and dwellyng place. God thy father which can not deceyue, hath made vs an ernest promise, confirming also the same by his solemne othe, that thou shuldest be our sauiour, maynteynour, and defēsour. Truly it is not possible for hym to go backe, and not to stande by his worde, yea euen nowe hathe he (suche is his fidelitie) performed it in dede, and what so euer helth he hath sent vs: the same also hath he confirmed by sure and substantiall witnes, aswell of his owne word as of his sacramētes, Thou also (most

deare Lorde Iesu) hast forther promised, yt thou wolt abyde wyth vs euen vntyl the worldes ende. This thy worde is oure assured ioye and comfort, for we know that euermore sythens thy deathe and bodylye departyng, thou art thobteyner of our remission and pardon, wherfore O moste gracious Lorde, through thy fauour and in the let vs fynd mercy, and that for euer. In al our workes, and procedynges prosper vs, saue vs, & fyll vs with ioye. Thyne halowynge mought shyne clere vpon vs, thy kyngdome and crown abyde with vs, and in thy peax euermore preserue vs. Amen.
            
            
               For Christiane charite and cōmunion of sayntes. Psalm. 133.
               INspire vs ī suche wise, O Lord, yt as most louynge brethren quietly and peaciably we may dwell to

gether in thyne house. Brynge to passe, I saye, that by true and faythfull loue, we maye be ioyned and fastened euery one to other, as membres of Christes body. Thyne oyle of hallowynge, I meane, euen thyne holy goost mought waxe hote and fragrant amonges vs, vpon vs let fall thy dewe of blessynge, & the plentyfull encrease of all thynges, bothe bodely and goostly, to thintent accordynge vnto thy moost fre promyse, we may obteyne euerlastynge lyfe.
            
            
               For continuaunce of grace. Psal. 134.
               GRaunte vs thy seruauntes alwaye to auaunce ye our Lorde, & in thyne house to walke vpryghte wythout blemish or cause of reproch yea in our trouble and affliccion to lyfte vp innocente and pure handes vnto the, prayenge on thys maner

vnto the. Blesse vs O God, for thou arte the maker of heauen and earth. Amen.
            
            
               A generall prayer of Christians for helpe from God. Psalm. 135
               DYspose our hertes Lorde, that we thy seruaūtes may worthely prayse and lyfte vp thy name, for we knowe thou arte gentyll, meke, mercyfull, & free. Thy name is gracious, frendfull, and ryght amyable to all that cal on the in tyme of theyr aduersite, of thy mere goodnes thou hast chosen vs to be thyne owne seuerall people. Thou alone arte the great & very God, thou madest both heauen and earth, euen accordynge to thyn owne pleasure thou dealtest thy benefytes and gyftes of grace to euery one of them, namely to thy electe & chosen, euen agaynst Satan

and the hole kyngdome of ye vngodly. Wherfore, Lorde, let the remembraunce & prayse of thy name euermore be feruent amonges vs. Reason thou, debate thou, iuge thou thy peoples cause, surely they suffer passynge great wronges. But stande thou, I say, good & gracious Lorde vnto thy seruauntes, be mercyful to them. Ryd them frō theyr greuouse daungers, so as in moost large wyse thou mayst be bruted and auaūced in Sion, and in thyne holy Hierusalem. Amen.
            
            
               A prayer to put God in mynde of hys accustomed goodnes. Psal. 136.
               MOost gentell Lorde, thy goodnes and mercy surely abydeth for euer, though we neuer so muche fall and vanyshe awaye, thy grace doth nothynge wydder nor decaye.

Thys thy grace O Lorde by many tokens and proues thou hast plentyfully declared vnto vs, euē from the begynnyng of the worlde. And euen nowe at thys daye doest thou not ceasse largely to hepe these thy manyfolde benefytes on vs, Stablysh therfore thy goodnes and aboūdaūt grace towarde vs, O Lorde, & wyth no sodē displeasure turne not away from vs. But be thou mercyful and tender vpon our myserie. And from oure enemyes and all aduersitie for thyne euerlastynge goodnes sake defende vs O Lorde. Amen.
            
            
               For the captiues vnder Antichrist. Psalm. 137.
               LOrde we be refuse personnes brought vnder captiuite, thralle and bonde vnder the power of thyn aduersary. And yet thys our lamentable and pyteous complaynt thou

semest not to ponder, thou regardest not oure supplicacion, and that not wythout good cause, for we graunte we haue trespased heinously against the. Howbeit syth the vngodly thus laugh vs to scorne, condemnynge the songes that we synge the, and ye prayses that we geue the, yea ye word also that we preach of the: O Lorde I beseche the, shewe some proufe of thy selfe, declare thy name & power amōges those thy spyteful enemies. Brynge downe Antichristes kyngdome wt all hys vngodly sectes for surely ouerlonge it hath oppressed vs, yea and at thys daye it styll letteth and holdeth vnderfote very many, whyche els spedelye wolde haue runne to the kyngdome of fredome. Pull it therfore downe O Lorde wyth al hys stōblynge blockes, euell exāples, & croked doctrine, neuer suffer

it to recouer agayne. Than shall we beynge quyetly set at rest serue ye euen wyth herte al our lyues longe.
            
            
               For delyueraunce in peryls. Psalm. 138.
               LOrde let me fele by experience how good thou arte, and howe trustye. Delyuer me euē to make thy promyse good, than shall I neuer cease to thanke the wyth all myne herte, and to magnify thy moost glorious name, for by thy open worde thou haste made it excedynge glorious beyonde all other thynges. Certes, my god and father vpon the do I call. Gyue my soule perfyte strength, in suche wyse as I maye set forth and blowe abrode thy prayses to the hygh auauncement of thy name. Cause thou (O my God) that all kyngdomes of the earthe maye

heare thy worde, maye walke in thy wayes. Hallowe thy name, & blowe abrode thyne excellent glory. Graūt to gouernours and other in authoritie this grace, that they may knowlege the to be aboue them all. Lorde loke vpon ye lowly hertes, that thou mayst promote them. Marke well the proude hertes afarre from the, to thintent thou mayst brynge them lowe, and cast them forth of thy presence. In this straight saue my lyfe, strengthē thyne hāde agaynst myne enemyes, and take my part agaynst them. Lorde thy goodnes is euerlastynge, cast not away thyne owne hā
                  dyworke, haue pytie on me, & helpe me. Plucke me forth of these peryls, for thyne holy names sake.
            
            
               For denyenge of thy selfe, and holly to yelde the vnto Christ. Psalm. 139.
               
                  LOrde thou knowest me so well as any man doth els, lo I and all that euer I haue, be holly in thy handes. Thou madest me, thou fashionedst me, thou hast endowed me wyth all thynges necessary, euen frō my byrth vnto thys daye. I can not prayse ynough thy wonderous prouision thus practised amonges all creatures, it is more then is possible for man, ones to conceyue it in hys thought. What other thynge doest thou requyre of vs, than to yelde vp oure selfe wyth all that is ours vnto the? I meane holly to resigne vnto thy pleasure all that belonge to the necessary reliefe eyther of bodye or of soule, and the same agayne hū
                  bly to requyre at thyne handes, for Christ Iesus sake. Wherfore my God, I besech the, for thyne holy names sake, take charge of me. Graūte

me constantly to trust on the, vtterly refusyng my selfe, so as in al peryls I sue for no help, but onely at thyne handes, lyke as thou haste in ryght large maner made me a promyse of the same. Make a tryal of me, proue myne harte. Take from me all euyll thoughtes, disceyt, double dealyng, and lyes, thus shalt yu cleane purge myne harte, & mercyfullye leade me on the waye of perpetuall felicite.
            
            
               Agaynst the enemyes of Christes trouth. Psalm. 140.
               Delyuer me, O Lorde, frome the vngodly and styfe necked personnes, for thou seest howe in theyr hartes they ymagē mischeue, & haue greate pleasure to pycke quarels, theyr tonges be more sharpe then any adders styng. And vnder theyr lyppes lurketh poysone of adders. But O mercyfull Lorde, let me not

fall in theyr handes, that they handle me not after theyr owne luste, Thou only arte my God, thou must heare my pyteous playnte. Lorde yt rulest al to gether, yt arte the strēgth and power of my defēce, be thou as a sallet on my heade, when so euer ye vngodlye shall assaulte me, neyther suffre thou ye wycked thus to prosper in theyr matters. Encrease not theyr croked and malicious stomackes, leste they take harte of grayse & spytefully reuile the. Loke vpon thy poore wretches cause, and rydde me out of these dayly greuaunces, then shall I wyth a ryghte vp harte and pleasaunt countenaunce extoll and magnifie thy name. Amen.
            
            
               To kepe thy tonge, and to eschewe the infection of the worlde. Psalm. 141.
               
                  TO the I crye, O Lorde, heare me spedely, let my prayer be as a swete taste and sauoure in thy presence, and the lyftynge vp of myne handes as an euenynge sacrifice. Lorde set a watch about my mouth, kepe my lyppes & my tong also, that they speake nothyng amisse (as do ye vngodly) but that they call purely & syncerelye vpon the, and reporte thy worthy prayses. Bow not myn hart to luste after euell, nor to folowe the fashion of ye wycked and abominable synners, leste I happen to cloke my wyckednes wyth other synnes, as hypocrites do. Let me not lyue as they wolde haue me do, but rather as it shall beste please the. Let me not approue neyther theyr counsels, nor theyr dedes, though they cast neuer so goodly a shewe & fayre face to the worlde. Let me not herkē
                  
to the tyessynges and swete beytes of the vngodly whych counsayle me to fylthy & vnclene thynges, but rather let me gyue good eare to ye rightuouse and godlye man, thoughe he sharply correct and chyde me, let me alwaye haue a readye eye towarde the, only in the to trust, and to apply my selfe vnto the. Cast not away my soule, neyther suffer thou it to perish Kepe me, that I be not tangled with the snares of the vngodly, and from the priuie trappes of malicious persons saue me. Defende me, Lorde, thorowe thy grace only, for in al our deuyses and workes can nothynge be founde sure for vs to trust vpon.
            
            
               The prayer of any captiue accordynge to the forme of Dauid whan he was hyd in the caue. Psal. 142.
               
                  WIth my voyce I crye to the, afore the I open my lamentations in thy bosome I disclose the secret word of myne hart, my dolours and greafes I shewe vnto ye. Myne harte is almooste lyke to braste, so greate is my discomfyture. Thou knowest all my fashions, O Lorde, and thou seeste wel ynough how the vngodlye haue layed theyr snares for me. Lo, I caste myne eye on thys syde, and yt syde, aswel on my frēdes as on my kynsfolkes, but all in vayne, none of them all helpeth me. And agayne I can not rūne away, I am so laden and ouercharged wt yrons. O Lorde my maker and father, nowe vnto the I crye, yu arte my only shoteanker, defēce, & helpe. Thou art my portion and herytage in all contreyes, yea I haue none other possession but the onely. To the

therfore I stycke altogether, knowynge certaynly that so nothyng can go amysse wyth me. Consyder then my lamentable complaynt, beholde, how I am lowe brought. From the cruel pursuers, which be much more of power then I am, defēde me. Delyuer me from thys prison, and horrible feare of synne and death, that I maye set out thy name. All the holy ones aswell Angels as men make sute for me, desyrynge the for my cō
                  forte. They shal not cease vntyl they obteyne theyr request, I meane, vntyl thou forgyue me my synnes, and sende me comforte in thys distresse, wyth pacience and longe sufferynge This ones obteyned, the godly shal flocke about me, and shall not stynte to gyue the thākes, whā they se that yu ryddest me forth of these daūgers

to ye hygh prayse of thy name. Lorde be mercyfull vnto vs, take part wt vs, then shall we for euer lyfte vp & magnifie thy glorious name, Amē.
            
            
               In greate trouble of conscience. Psalm. 134.
               LOrde heare my prayer, receyue my supplication, herken to my playnt for thy ryghtuousnes. Trye not the lawe with thy seruaunt, for truely then shall no lyuyng man be founde vngyltie, yea not one of thy sayntes shulde escape quyte at thy barre, oneles thou graunte hym thy gracious pardon, in so muche euen the very starres be not pure & faultlesse afore the. In the angels thou foundest synne. Now myne enemies hūte for my soule, they beate & dryue it downe, they thrust it into darke doūgeons where felons conuict & cō
                  demned to death, were wonte to be

kepte. My spirite is sorowfull, my herte is heuy & sad wythin my brest. To the I holde vp my handes, requyrynge the of mercy: for lyke as ye drye grounde longeth for a shoure of rayne, so my soule thinketh longe tyl it haue thyne helpe and succour. Heare me spedely: yf yu do not, I am in despayre. My spirite is al wery of thys bondage, I haue byd my lyfe farewel. Wherfore O god, hyde not thy face, yt I be not lyke vnto those, that be hurled into the pytte of damnacion. After thys nyght of myserye ouerpassed, let the pleasaūt morning of cōforte luckely shyne on me, that by tyme I maye heare and fele thy goodnes, for in the is all my truste. Poynte me the waye that I shall walke in, for yf yu be not my guyde, I muste nedes wander and straye out of the waye. To the, Lorde, I lyfte

vp my soule, and that wyth al myne harte. I besech the, take me forth of myne enemyes handes. Thou onelye arte my succour and sauegarde. Teache me to worke, what so euer shall be thy pleasure, for thou arte my God. Let thy good spirite conduyte me into the lyuyng lande, encourage my spirite for thy names sake. Forth of these troubles for thy ryghtuousnes delyuer me. Destroy myne enemyes, as thou arte gracious and fauourable towarde me. Those that woll worke me sorowe and greife, plucke forth of the way, for I am thy seruaūt, & for thy sake suffer I all thys hurly burly. As thou art God, so helpe thou me.
            
            
               To be exempt from thys worlde thorowe the spirite. Psalm. 144.
               
                  FOr all thy benefytes we shall auaunce the wyth prayse and glorye for euer, O Lorde our God, namely syth thou hast kepte vs in thy fayth, & in the cōfession of thy worde Thys goodnes, O Lorde, continue thou styl in me, encrease & strengthē thou my fayth euery daye more and more. Compel my flesh thorowe thy spirite to hys bounden duetye and obedience. Be thou my defence, my buckler, bulwarke, rescuer, and raunsomer. Lorde bow downe the heuēs, & come downe, put forth thyne hāde from aboue, to drawe me from these depe waters, frō the cruelty of these boystouse straūgers, who be none of thy chyldren. Delyuer me, and wyth all myne herte I shall synge the a new songe, & render ye new thankes. And herof I am right wel assured yt I cā lacke no goodnes, o lorde God

yf I haue the my gracious Lorde and defender.
            
            
               Of the kyngdome of God, and that Christ maye dwell in our hertes by fayth. Psal. 145.
               
                  I Wyl exalt the my soueraigne, O God, & prayse thy name for euer. I shall reporte thy wonderful prayses from tyme to tyme, for thou arte of great power, & worthy to be praysed, neyther can any man attayne to the knowlege of thy moost excellent maiestye. Thy workes shalbe spokē of for euer, I meane thy endles power, thy myracles, and glory, in that thou hast done to vs thy pore folkes manyfolde and boūteous benefites onely of thy mere loue, fauoure, mercye, longe forbearynge, and ryghteousnes. In all thy dedes the holy persons shall prayse the for euer, specially for the magnificence of thy power

royal, and for that power which thou practisest to the subduynge of all thynges for oure sauegarde and lyfe. Thy mercy excedeth al thyne other workes. In wordes that thou promysest thou arte trusty and true, and in all thy workes, ryght holy. Lorde haue mercy on me, and be my father for Iesus Christ sake, bow to my peticion, for thyne endles mercy, fidelite, & holynesse. Lorde gouerne my herte, I am weake, but make me stronge. I am spente and decayed, but make me lustye agayne, I am pyned and famyshed, but fede thou me wyth thy goodnes. O herdman and nurse of all thynges lyuynge, which of thy mere goodnes fyllest al creatures that haue lyfe in them & whyche in all thy doynges dealest ryghteously: wyth all myne herte O Lorde I call on the, be at hande, be

my ioye and comforte accordynge to thy promyse. Preserue me alway frō the snares and trappes of Satan, that I be not wronge led, but that my mouth maye continually brute thy prayses and gyue worthy thankes vnto thy name.
            
            
               For lyberty of fayth. Psalm. 146.
               MY soule, & what so euer thynge is in me, shal prayse & auaunce thy name, o Lorde god. God be thou my refuge, and helper, for thou createdst all thynges & performest ducly all that euer thou hast promysed to those that put theyr trust in the. Whan thou shalt syt as iudge, than shall they haue ryght, whyche nowe be oppressed by wrongfull power. Thou geuest fode in tyme of hōger, where and whan so euer we haue nede therof. Louse vs that be boūd,

louse vs thorowe thy fre worde. Cary vs vnto the fredome of the true fayth, (whych surely perteyneth not to all men,) gyue vs lyght, for we be blynde, set vs vp, for we be throwen downe, make vs ryghteouse, for we be wycked. Be thou O Lorde fauourable vnto vs, though we deserue it not, haue regarde of the sely straungers, poore men, wydowes, fatherles and other myserable persons of the worlde, whych be sore hongry & thursty, longynge for thy ryghteousnes. Kepe them and prouyde for them all thynges necessary, led them frō ye vngodly wayes. Obteyne O Lorde an euerlastynge raygne in vs. Amen.
            
            
               A feruent prayer of the dysperpled church. Psam. 147.
               IT is conuenient and semyng O Lorde, yt thy prayses be recorded

& thy name hallowed, for thou buyldest, gatherest together, and enhauncest the cōpany of thy chosen, & knowest howe to call euery one of them by hys proper name. Heale, o Lorde, those that be broused in herte, comforte the comfortles, bynde vp oure grene woundes, that we may escape thys syckenes, both of soule and of conscience. Lorde, thou arte wonderous great, and by reason of the excellēcy of thy bottomlesse knowlege, no man can worthely esteme thy maiesty, as it is in dede. Gouerne and saue vs thy poore catyffes, prayse & thankes be vnto the for euer, for asmuche as of thyne endles goodnes thou makest such large prouisiō for all thynges. And now, O Lorde, let vs alwaye perfectly dreade the, trustynge euermore on thy goodnes. Amen. Lorde God, we shal wythout

ende glorifye thy maiesty, in case we maye be sure and safe in thy kyngdom, Let vs be cōtent wyth thy blessynge, wherby we haue thynges necessary vnto our lyuynge. Graunte vs thy worde, sende it vs by trustye and faythfull workemen, for ye word is fruteles and barē, onles it be sent from the. Cause it to runne hastely and wyth great power, so as it maye melte the harde frosen hertes, mollifye the stubburne stomakes, make ye colde myndes warme, comforte the heuy, enforme the ignoraunt, admonysh the strayers, and brynge them to the ryght way agayne, and fynally rayse vp the deade to lyfe euerlastynge. Amen.
            
            
               Of the makynge, fall, and restorynge of man. Psalm. 148.
               GRaūt O Lorde that we thy seruauntes beynge moued by thy

synguler gyftes of grace mought magnifye the, as yu arte moost worthy, by beholdynge of thy creatures be they in heauen, in earth, or in the see, for vnto them al by one certayne trade and course of gouernaunce, thou ministreste thynges necessary to theyr vse and cōmodite thorough thy worde, and by yt same selfe word thou conseruest them, wherby thou fyrst createdst them, euen by Iesus Christe. Euery thynge accōplysheth that worke, whervnto thou fyrst ordeynedst it, euen after thyne owne hartes lust, onely man rebelleth, and that to his owne harme, he alone is agaynst thy gracious pleasure and nothynge remembrynge thy glorye gredely seketh his owne glorie, by reason of which misdemenour he was vtterly caste awaye, and all his posterite wyth hym. This notwithstandynge

(mooste louynge father) thou hast recoueryd hym agayne by meanes of thy worde, whiche worde nowe at length (the tyme appoynted fullye complet and finyshed) was made flesh, euen Iesus Christ oure Lorde. Graunt vs, we besech the, to haue a lyuely fayth in him, reforme, renue, and restore vs in hym, slaye thou in vs, what so euer nature plā
                  ted in vs by our generation, shape vs newe men, thorowe that same power, wherby Iesus Christe rose agayne to lyfe in the holy ghost, that we forgetfull of our selfs maye seke thyne honour onely, enhaunsynge thy name, for thou settest alofte the horne of thy people. Let vs come vnto the, & in the continue for euer.
            
            
               Of the true worshyp in spirite and truth Psalm. 149.
               
                  PUt into our mouth a new songe and renew our hartes by grace. Let vs contynually synge it abroad in the commynge to gether of holyones, let vs reioyse and be glad in ye oure maker & redemer. In gladnes of spirite with fre & wyllynge harte, let vs prayse the. Be content Lorde and well pleased wyth thy people, endowe them wyth gyftes, and in sauegard promote them, in thy glorie let thy holyons be glad, yea & be proude of the in theyr consciences. Theyr hartes mought auaūce the, let them myghtely laye on & stryke beynge armed wyth thy worde and wt the sworde of thy spirite, agaynst all that wrastle agaynst thyne holye name. Amen.
            
            
               A praysynge of God. Psalm. 150.
               
                  THe, O Lorde, in thyne owne selfe we prayse, which farre excedest all prayse. In thy holynes we prayse the, for thou alone arte holy, by whom and none other, we also be made holy. In ye defēce of thy ryght hāde we prayse the, for it shall stand sure for euer, yea it is oure stronge warrante & sauegarde, & euermore shalbe. In thy power we prayse the, wherby thou blessest and cursest. In thy glorye so excedynge greate we prayse the, wherby in Christe thou makest vs also ryght gloriouse. Breath vpon vs thy grace & spirite, that we maye for euer do this oure duetye, and that we maye by ye same spirite be ruled, led, ordred, moued, & taught. Amen. Lord, it is theyr dueties, euen as manye as haue breth within them, to blowe abroade thy prayses, for of the they all haue lyfe,

but thy chosē haue euerlastyng lyfe, through Iesus Christe oure Lorde, with whome thou the father of heuē in the holy gooste art God lauded & praysed worlde wythout ende. Amē.
            
         
         
            ¶The seuen peticions of the Pater noster.
            OUr father, whych art in heauē, hallowed be thy name.
            Thy kyngdome come.
            Thy wyll be done in earth, as it is in heauen.
            Gyue vs thys day our dayly bread.
            And forgyue vs oure trespaces, as we forgiue them yt trespas agaīst vs And let vs not be led into tēptacion But delyuer vs from euyll. Amen.
         
         
            ¶The Crede, or the .xij. artycles of the Christen fayth.
            
               
               I Beleue in God the father almighty, maker of heauen, and earth. And in Iesus Christ hys only sonne our Lorde. Whych was cōceyued by the holy goost, borne of the virgyne Mary. Suffred vnder Ponce Pylate, was crucifyed, deade, buryed, & discēded into hel. And the thyrd day he rose agayne from death. He ascē
               ded into heuen, & sytteth on ye ryght hande of God the father almyghty. From thence he shall come to iudge the quycke & the deade. I beleue in the holy goost. The holy catholyke church. The cōmunion of sayntes: the forgyuenes of synnes. The resurrection of the body. And the lyfe euerlastynge. Amen.
         
         
            ¶The ten cōmaundementes of almyghty God.
            THou shalte haue none other goddes but me.
            Thou shalte not make to thy selfe

any grauē Image, nor any lykenes of any thynge, yt is in heuē aboue, or in erth beneth, nor in ye water vnder the erth, thou shalt not bow downe to them nor worship them.
            Thou shalt not take ye name of thy Lorde God in vayne.
            Remember that thou kepe holy the Sabboth daye.
            Honour thy father, and thy mother.
            Thou shalt do no murther.
            Thou shalt not cōmyt adultery.
            Thou shalt not steale.
            Thou shalt beare no false wytnesse agaynst thy neyghbour.
            Thou shalte not desyre thy neyghbours house, thou shalte not desyre thy neyghboures wyfe, nor hys seruaūt, nor hys mayde, nor hys Oxe, nor hys Asse, nor any thynge that is thy neyghboures.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            THE PRINCIPAL PRAYERS OF the BYBLE moste necessary for christen men, gathered out by RICHARD TAVERNER.
            
               The prayer of Moises to the Lorde for the synnes of the people. Exod. 32.
               
                  LOrde why hoyleth thy wrath againste thy people, whome thou haste brought forth of the lād of Egypte? (that is to wete out of ye captiuitie and bōdage of the deuil) Let not these Egyptiās (I meane these vngodly and deuelishe persons) say, God dealeth craftely with them euen to rydde thē out of the world. Let thy wrath be asswaged

ouerthe wyckednesse of thy people. Amen.
            
            
               An other prayer of Moses to the some entente. Exod 32.
               OH, this people haue synned an heynouse syn, and haue made thē golden goddes. Eyther forgyue them this offense, or els wipe me out of this boke, whiche thou hast written, Amen.
            
            
               For the synne of the people grudging agaynste god, a prayer of Moses. Num. 14.
               THe Lorde is pacient and ful of mercy, bearing awaye synne & trespase, and leauyng none gyltles. Thou doest visite the vnrighteousnes of the fathers vpon the children euē to ye thyrde and fourthe kyndred Forgyue (I beseche the) the synne of thꝭ thy people, accordīg to thy great

mercy, as thou haste bene mercifull vnto them commyng out of Egypt euen vnto this place.
            
            
               An other of Moses & Aaron for the people Num. 16.
               MOst myghty god of spirites of all flesh. Wilte yu for the syn of one be wroth with al the multitude?
            
            
               For the stubbernes of the people, the true p̄acher on this wyse as Moses dyd, may make his prayer vnto god. Deut. 9.
               DEstroye not (Lord) thy people & enheritaūce, whom thou haste deliuered through thy greatnes and whom thou hast brought out of the Egypt of this worlde. Remēbre thy seruauntes, Abraham, Isaac, & Iacob, loke not vnto the stubbernes of this people, neither to theyr wyckednes and offēses, for it is thyne owne people and enheritaūce which thou

hast chalēged for thyne owne in thy greate myght & stretched out arme, Amen.
            
            
               A prayer of Esdras for the synnes of the people. 1. Esd. 9.
               MY God, I am confounded, and dare not lyfte vp myne eyes vnto the my god, for our wyckednes is growen ouer oure hed, and oure trespaces are waxen great vnto the heauen, euen from the tyme of our fathers. yea & our selues also haue greuously synned vnto this daye, & because of our wyckednes haue we, our kynges, and preestes bene delyuered into the hand of the kinges of the naciōs, into the swerde, into captiuitie, into spoyle, and into confusion of face, as it is come to passe this daye. But nowe is there a lytle and sodayne graciousnes come from the

Lorde our God, so that some of vs are escaped, to thintēte he may gyue vs his peace in his holy place, that our God maye lyght our eyes, and gyue vs a lytle lyfe in our bondage For we are bonde men, yet our god hath not forsaken vs in our bōdage but hath inclined mercy vnto vs in the syght of the hethen kynges yt he shulde gyue vs lyfe, & promote the house of our God, and so set vp the desolacion therof, and gyue vs an hedge ī Iuda and Hierusalem. And nowe O our God, what shall we say after this, for we haue forsaken thy cōmaundementes, which thou hast commaunded by thy seruauntes & Prophetes, and sayde. The lande wherevnto ye go to possesse it, is an vncleane lande, throughe the fylthynes of the people of the landes, in their abominaciōs, wherewith they

haue made it full of vnclennes on euery syde. Therfore shall ye not gyue youre doughters vnto their sonnes, and their doughters shal ye not take vnto youre sonnes, & seke not their peace and wealth for euer, that ye maye be stronge, and enioy the good in the lande, and that ye & your children maye haue the inheritaunce of it for euermore. And after al this that is come vpō vs because of our most naughty dedes and our greate trespace: thou our god hast spared our wyckednesse, & hast gyuē vs a deliueraunce as it is come to passe this day, to ye entente we shuld not turne backe, and let go thy commaundementes neyther be ioyned ī matrimony with the people of these abominacions. Wilte thou then be wroth at vs, tyl we be vtterly consumed, so that nothinge remayne, and

tyll there be no delyueraūce? O lord of Israel thou art righteous, for we remayne yet escaped, as it is this day. Behold in thy presence are we ī our trespace, for herevpon is there no standinge before the.
            
            
               The prayer of Nehemias for the synnes of the people before the Lord. Nehem. 1.
               
                  O Lorde God of heauē, yu greate & terrible God thou that kepest couenaunte and mercy with them that loue the, and kepe thy cō
                  maundementes: let thyne eares harken, & thyne eyes be open, that thou mayst heare ye prayer of thy seruaūt which I praye nowe before the, day and night for the children of Israel thy seruauntes, and knowledge the synnes of ye chyldrē of Israel, which we haue cōmitted agaynst the. And I and my fathers haue sinned also,

we haue bene led out of the waye by vanities ī that we haue not kept thy cōmaundementes, statutes, & lawes which thou commaundedst thy seruaunt Moses. And they are thy seruauntes & thy people whome thou hast delyuered through thy greate power and myghty hand. I beseche the lorde let thyne eare bowe downe to the prayer of thy seruaūtꝭ whose desire is to feare thy name. Amen.
            
            
               A confession and solemne prayer of the leuites and of the church for synnes with a rehersal of the benefytes of God. 2. Esd. 9.
               LOrd thou alone hast made heauen, and the heauen of heauens with all their companye, the earth & all that is therupon, the see and all that is cōteyned therin, thou gyuest lyfe vnto all, and the host of heauen bowe them selues vnto the. Thou
art the Lorde god, that didest chose

Abraham & foundest his hert faythfull before the, and madeste a couenaunt with him to gyue hym & his sede the land of the Cananites, Hethytes, Amorites, Pheresites, Iebusites, and Gergesites, And thou madest good thy wordes, for thou art righteous, and dydest consydre the mysery of oure fathers in Egypte, & herdest their cōplaynte by the redde see, and shewedst tokens & wonders vpon Pharao, and on al his seruaū
                  tes, & on all the people of his lande.
               For thou knewest that they were presumptuous & cruel agaynst thē, and so madest thou the a name, as it is this daye. And the red see dyddest thou deuyde before thē, so that they wēte thorow the myddes of the see drye shoed. As touching their ꝑsecutours thou threwest them in to the depe as a stone, into the ragyng

waters, and leddest thy people on the daye tyme in a clowdye pyller, & on ye nyght season in a pyller of fyre to shewe them lyght in the waye that they went. Thou cāmest downe also vpon mount Sinai, and spakest vnto them frome heauen, & gaueste them right iudgementes, true lawes, good commaundementes & statutes, and declaredst vnto thē thy holy Sabboth and commaundedst them preceptes, ordinaūces, & lawes by Moses thy seruaunt, and gauest them breade from heauen, whē they were hungry, and broughtest forthe water for them, out of the rocke whē they were thirsty, & promisedst thē, that they shulde go in and take possession of the land, ouer which thou haddest lyfte vp thyne hande, for to gyue thē. But they and our fathers were proud and hardnecked, so that

they folowed not thy commaundementes, and refused to heare, & dyd not remēbre the wonders that thou dyddest for them, but became obstinate and hedy, in so muche that they tourned backe to their bondage in their disobediēce. But thou my God forgauest, & wast gracyous, mercyfull, pacient, and of greate goodnes and forsokest them not. And though they made a molten calfe and sayde: this is thy god that brought the out of the land of Egypt and did greate blasphemyes, yet forsokest thou thē not in the wyldernesse, according to thy great mercy. And the cloudy pyller departed not frome them, on the daye tyme to leade them the waye, neyther the pyller of fyre ī the nyght season, to shewe them lyght in the waye that they went. And thou gauest thē thy good spirite to enforme

them, & withheldest not thy Manna frome their mouth, and gauest them water whē they were thirsty. Fourty yeres longe madest thou prouision for them in the wildernesse, so that they lacked nothinge. Their clothes waxed not olde, and their fete swelled not, and thou gauest them kyngdomes and nacions, and thou dyuidedst them according to their porcions. And their children multipliedst thou as the sterres of heauen, and broughtest them into the land wherof thou haddest spokē vnto their fathers that they shuld go into it, and haue it in possessiō, And the chyldrē went and possessed the lād and thou subduedst before them the inhabitauntes of the lande, and gauest thē into their hande, and their kynges & the people of the land, yt they myght do with them what they wolde. So

they wan their stronge cyties & the fat land, & toke possession of howses that were full of all maner goodes, welles dygged out, vyneyardes, oylegardens, and many fruteful trees, and they dyd eate, and were fylled, & became fat, and lyued in welth thoroughe thy greate goodnes. But this notwithstādinge they were disobedient, and rebelled agaynst the, and threwe thy lawe behynde their backes, & slew thy Prophetes which exhorted them so earnestly that they shulde conuerte vnto the, and dyd great blasphemyes. Therefore thou gauest them ouer, into the hande of their enemyes that vexed them, But ī tyme of their trouble they cryed vnto the, and thou herdest them from heauen, & of thy greate mercy thou gauest them sauiours, which helped them out of their enemyes handes,

But whē they came to rest, they turned backe agayne to do euyll before the. Therfore leftest thou them ī the hāde of their ennemyes, so that they had the dominion ouer them. And then they conuerted and cryed vnto the, and thou hardest thē from heauen, and many tymes hast thou delyuered thē accordinge to thy greate mercy, and warnedst them, that they shulde turne agayne vnto thy lawe But all this notwithstanding, they were proud and herkened not vnto thy commaundementes, but synned agaynst thy lawes (which a man shuld do and lyue in them) and they tourned the shulder awaye, and becam styfnecked and wold not heare.
               And many yeres dydest thou forbeare them, and warnedest thē thoroughe thy spirite euen by thoffice of thy prophetes, and yet wolde they

not heare. Therfore gauest thou thē into the hande of the nacions in the landes. But for thy greate mercyes sake thou didest not vtterly cōsume thē, neyther didest thou forsake thē, for thou art a gracyous and mercyful god. Now therfor our god, thou greate god, myghty & terrible, thou that kepest couenaunt and mercy, turne not awaye thy face frō all the trauayle that hath happened vnto vs, and vnto our kynges, Princes, Preestes, Prophetes, Fathers & all thy people, sythens the tyme of the kynges of Assur vnto thys daye. Thou art righteous in al that thou hast brought vpon vs, for thou hast done trulye. But we on our behalfe haue ben vngodly, our kynges, princes, prestes, & fathers haue not done after thy lawe, nor regarded thy cō
                  maūdemētes, and thy earnest exhortacions,

wherwith thou hast exhorted them, and haue not serued the in their kyngdomes, and in thy greate goodnes that thou sauedst them.
            
            
               A prayer of the church for synnes Sap. 15.
               THou (O oure God) art swete, longe sufferyng and true, and with mercy ordrest thou all thynges Though we syn, yet are we thyne, for we knowe thy greatenes. If we syn not, then are we sure that with the we be alowed. For to knowe the, is perfect ryghteousnes, yea and to knowe thy ryghteousnesse & power, is the rote of immortalitie.
            
            
               An other for synnes. Hier. 3.
               LO we are thyne, for thou art the Lorde our God, the hylles fall, and all the hygh pryde of the moū
                  taynes, but the sauegarde of Israll

standeth only vpon god our Lorde Confusiō hath deuoured the labour of our fathers from oure youth vp, yea their shepe and bullockes, their sonnes & doughters, So do we also slepe in our confusion, & shame couereth vs, for we and our fathers euē from our youth vnto this day haue synned agaynst the Lorde our God & haue not obeyed the voyce of the Lord our god.
            
            
               The lamentations of Hieremye for the synnes of the people. Hiere 13.
               PIteously let me wepe, & let the teares gusshe out of myne eyes. For the lordes flocke is taken. saye therfor vnto the kinge & the rulers, humble youre selues, set you downe on the earthe, for the crowne of your glory shall fall from your heade. Lyfte vp youre eyes, and behold thē
                  
that come from the North, where is the flocke that was gyuen the: thy noble catell, to whome wylte thou make thy moue, when he come vpon the, for thou hast taught them thy selfe agaynst thy selfe & made them masters ouer the. Shall not sorowe come vpon the, as on a woman trauelyng with child? And if thou woldest saye in thy hert, wherfor come these thinges vpon me, surely euen for the multitude of thy wyckednes, thy hynder partes & thy fete be discouered. If ye man of Inde can chaūge his skyn, and the cat of the mountayne her spottes, then maye ye that be exercysed in euyl do good. Therfore wyll I scattere you (sayeth the lord) lyke as the stouble that is takē awaye with the southe wynde. This shall be your lot and the porcion of your measure, wherwith ye shall be

rewarded of me, sayeth the lorde, because ye haue forgoten me, and put youre trust in disceytefull thinges. Therfore haue I tourned thy clothes ouer thy head and discouered thy thyghes, yt thy priuities myght be sene, thy aduoutrye, thy deadlye malice, thy beastlynes, and thy shamefull horedome. For vpon feldes & hylles I haue sene thy abominacions. Wo be to the o Ierusalem, wilt thou not be clensed, syth thou art yet vnclene?
            
            
               The prayer that Baruch prescribed vnto the captyues in Babylon for their synnes. Baruch. 23.
               THe Lord our God is ryghtous and we with our fathers are brought to open shame, as it is to se this daye. And as for these plages that are come vpon vs alredye, the lorde had deuised them for vs, yet

wolde we not praye vnto the Lorde our God, that we myght euery man tourne from his naughty wayes. Therfor the Lord hath caused such plages to come vpon vs, for he is ryghteous in al his workes, that he hath cōmaunded vs, which we also haue not done nor harkened vnto his voyce, for to walke in the commaundementes of the Lorde, that he had gyuen vnto vs. And now O Lord God of Israell thou that hast brought thy people out of the lande of Egypte with a myghtye hande, with tokens and wonders with thy greate power & oute stretched arme and hast goten thy selfe a name, as it is come to passe this day, O Lord oure god we haue synned, we haue don wickedly, we haue behaued our selues vngodly in all thy ryghtousnesse. Tourne thy wrath frō vs (we

besech the) for we are but a fewe left amonge the Heythen, where thou hast scatered vs. Heare our prayers (O Lord) and our peticions, brynge vs out of bondage, for thyne owne sake, get vs fauoure in the syght of them which haue led vs awaye, that allandes may knowe that thou arte the Lord our god, and that Israell and his generaciō calleth vpon thy name. O Lorde loke downe frome thy holy house vpō vs, encline thine eare and heare vs. For the dead that be gone downe to their graues, and whose sowles are out of their bodyes, gyue vnto the Lorde neyther prayse nor ryghteousmakyng, but the soule that is vexed for the multitude of her synnes, which walketh heuely and weakely, whose eyes begyn to fayle, such a soule gyueth prayse and ryghteousnesse vnto the

lorde, O Lorde we powre out oure prayers before the, & require mercy in thy syght, not for any godlynes of our forefathers, but because thou hast sent out thy wrathe and indignacion vpon vs, accordinge as thou dydest threaten vs by thy seruaūtes the Prophetes. O Lorde our God thou hast entreated vs after all thy goodnes and accordinge to all thy great louyng mercy, lyke as thou spakest by thy seruaunte Moses in the daye when thou dyddest commaunde hym to wryte thy lawe before the chyldren of Israel, sayenge. If ye wyl not harkē vnto my voyce then shall this greate multitude be tourned into a very small people for I wil scatter them abrode, notwithstanding I am sure that this folke will not heare me, for it is an hardenecked people, but in the lande of

their captiuitie they shall remembre thē selues, and lerne to knowe that I am the lord their god, whē I shall gyue them an hart to vnderstande, and eares to heare: then shall they prayse me in the lande of their captiuite, and thinke vpon my name. Then shall they tourne them from their harde backes, and from their vngodlynes. Then shall they remē
                  ber the thinges that happened vnto their fathers, which synned agaynst me. So will I brynge them agayne in to the lande, which I promysed wt an othe vnto their fathers Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, & they shall be lordes of it, yea I will encreace them, and not minishe them. And I wil make an other couenaunte with them, suche one as shall endure for euer, namely that I will be their God, and they shalbe my people, &

I will no more dryue my people the childern of Israell out of the lande that I haue gyuen them. And now O Lorde almyghtye, thou god of Israell, our soule that is in trouble & our spirite that is vexed, crye vnto the. Heare vs (o lorde) and haue pity vpon vs, for thou arte a mercyfull god. God be gracyous vnto vs for we haue synned before the. Thou endurest for euer, shuld we then vtterly peryshe? O lord almighty thou god of Israel: heare now the prayer of the deade Israelites and of their children, which haue synned before the, and haue not harkened vnto the voyce of ye lorde their god, for which cause these plages hange now vpon vs. Oh lord remēbre not the wickednes of our forefathers, but thynke vpon thy power and name now at this tyme, for thou art the lorde our

God, and the (o lorde) will we prayse For thou hast put thy feare in oure hartes, to the intente we shulde call vpō thy name and prayse the in our captiuitie & that we myght tourne frome the wyckednes of our forefathers that sinned before the. Behold we are yet this day in our captiuite wheras thou hast scatered vs to be an abominacion, curse, and syn, lyke as it hath happened vnto oure forefathers, because of all their wyckednes and departinge frome the, euen frome the that arte the Lorde oure God. Amen.
            
            
               The prayer of Daniel the prophete for his owne synnes and for the synnes of the hole nacion. Daniel. 9.
               
                  O Lorde thou greate and fearful god, thou that kepest couenaūt and mercy with them that loue the and kepe thy commaundementes,

we haue synned, we haue trespassed, we haue bene disobedient and haue gone backe, we haue departed from thy preceptes, and iudgementes, we wolde neuer folowe thy seruauntes ye prophetes, that spake in thy name to our kynges and princes, to oure forefathers and to all the people of the land. O lorde ryghteousnesse belongeth vnto the, but to vs open shame, as it is com to passe this day vnto all Israell (that is to saye thy churche or congregacion) whyther they be farre or nyghe, thorowe all landes, wherin thou haste scatered them because of the offēces they dyd agaynst the. O lorde vnto vs to our kynges and princes, to our forefathers euen to vs al that haue offended the, belongeth open shame. But vnto ye (o lord god) perteyneth mercy and forgyuenes, wher as we on our

behalfe are gone backe frome the, & haue not obeyed the voyce of the lord our god, to walke in his lawes which he layde before vs, by his seruauntes the prophetes, yea all Israel haue gone backe from thy lawe so that they haue not harkned vnto thy voyce, wherfore the curse and othe, that is written in the lawe of Moses the seruaūte of god (against whome we haue offended) is poured vpō vs. And he hath performed his wordes, which he spake agaynst vs, and agaynste oure iudges that iudged vs, to brynge vpon vs suche a plage as neuer was vnder heauen, lyke as it is nowe come to passe in Ierusalem, yea all this plage, as is writen in the law of Moses, is come vpō vs. Yet we neuer made any supplicacion before the, o lorde, that we myght tourne agayn from our wickednes,

and thinke vpon thy trouth Therfore hath the lorde made hast to bring this plage vpon vs, for the lord our god is ryghtwyse in all his workes which he doth, for we wolde not harken to his voyce. And nowe O lorde oure god, thou that with a myghty hand hast brought thy people oute of Egypte to get thy selfe a name (as thou hast at this daye) we haue synned O lorde and done wickedly agaynst all thy rightousnesse.
               Let thy wrothfull displeasure be tourned awaye I beseche the frome vs, for through the haynouse offēce of vs and oure forefathers, is thy churche abhorred of all them that are aboute vs. Now therfore O our god heare the prayer of thy seruaūte & let thy face shyne ouer thy Sanctuary yt lyeth wast. O my god bowe downe thyne eare & herken, at least

for thyne owne sake, open thyn eyes and see, howe we be spoyled, for we do not cast our prayers before the in our owne ryghtousnes, but only in thy greate mercyes, O lorde heare, O lorde forgyue, O lorde consydre, tary not ouer longe, but for thyne owne sake do it.
            
         
         
            PRAYERS IN TYME OF ADVERSITIE AND FOR A MANS OVVNE SYNNES
            
               A prayer and an open confession of the people of Israel to be delyuered from their ennemy. Iudic. 10.
               WE haue synned agaynste the, for we haue forsaken our own god, & haue seruyd Baalym. Lorde we haue synned, do thou vnto vs, what so euer please the, and delyuer vs only at this tyme. Amen.
            
            
               
               In warres agaynst Turkes and inuadours, the prayer of kynge Asa. 2. Paral 14.
               LOrde it is all one with the to helpe them that haue no power with fewe or with many. Helpe vs o lorde our god, for we truste to the, & in thy name be we come agaynste this multitude. Thou arte the lorde oure God, let no man preuayle against the. Amen.
            
            
               If god sende the trouble eyther for a punyshment of thy synnes or to proue thy pacyence therwith, praye thus. Tobia. 3.
               
                  O Lorde thou arte rightous, and all thy iudgementes are true, yea all thy wayes are mercy, faythfulnes and iudgemente. And nowe o lorde be myndefull of me, and take no vengeaunce on my synnes, neyther remēbre my mysdedes, neyther the mysdedes of my elders, for we haue not bene obedient vnto thy cō
                  maūdementes,

therfore are we spoyled, brought in to captiuitie, in to death, into derision and shame vnto all nacyons. And nowe O lorde thy iudgementes are great, for we haue not done according to thy commaū
                  dementes, neyther haue we walked innocētly before the. Wherfore now o lorde deale with me accordinge to thy wyll, and commaunde my spirite to be receyued in peace, for more expedient were it for me to dye, then to lyue,
            
            
               The prayer of Manasses kynge of Iuda when he was in pryson, for remission of synnes, and for gods fauour and delyueraunce. 2. Paral. 36.
               
                  O Lord almyghty, god of our fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, and of the ryghteouse sede of them, which hast made heauen and earth with all the ornament therof, which haste ordeyned the see by the

worde of thy cōmaundement, which haste shut vp the depe, & haste sealed it for thy fearfull & laudable name, drad of all men & honorable before the face of thy vertue, the fearse anger of thy threteninge is aboue measur heuy to synners. But the mercy of thy promesse is greate & vnserchable, for thou art the lorde god most hyghe aboue al the earth, longe sufferinge and excedynge mercyfull & sory for the malyce of men. I haue prouoked thyne anger & haue done euyl before the, in cōmitting abominacyons & multiplieng of offences. And now I bow ye knees of my hart requiringe goodnes of the o lorde. I haue synned lorde I haue synned and knowe my wyckednes, I desire the by prayer o lorde forgyue me, O lorde forgyue me, and destroye me not with myn iniquities, neyther do

thou alwaye remembre my euels to punyshe thē, but saue me (which am vnworthy) after thy greate mercye & I wyll prayse the euerlastingly, all the dayes of my lyfe, for all ye vertue of heauen prayseth the, & vnto the belongeth glorye, worlde without ende. Amen.
            
            
               The prayer of Mardocheus in the pursute of Haman, whome the byshop of Rome at thys daye resembleth. Hester. 15.
               
                  O Lorde, thou valyaunt & myghty kynge (for all thinges are in thy power) yf thou wilt help and delyuer Israel, ther is no mā can with stande the, for thou hast made both heauen and earth, thou arte lorde of all, and there is none can resist the o lorde. Thou knowest al, thou wotest lorde it was neyther of malyce ne of presumption, neyther for any desire of glory, yt I wolde not bowe downe

my self and worship the most proud Haman, for I wolde gladlye yf it might haue tourned Israel to good haue kyste euen his fotesteppes, but I feared leste I shulde haue gyuen Gods glorye vnto a man, & because I wolde worship none but only the. Wherfore, O Lorde, thou God and kynge haue mercy on thy people, for they ymagen howe to brynge vs to nought, yea their desire is full set to destroye and ouerthrowe the people that haue euer bene thyne. Oh despise not thin own good which thou hast delyuered and brought forth of Egypte euen for thyne owne cause. Heare my prayer, be mercyful to thy people, whome thou haste chosen for an heritage to thy selfe, Tourne our complaynte and sorowe into ioye, so as we maye lyue, o lorde, and prayse thy name. O Lorde suffer not the

mouthes of them that prayse the to be destroyed,
            
            
               The oration and blessing of Iob in his most greuous aduersitie and losse of goodes. Iob. 1.
               NAked came I out of my mothers wombe, and naked shall I retourne agayn. The lorde gaue, and the Lorde hath taken away, as it hath pleased the lorde so is it done Nowe blessed be the name of the lorde. Amen.
            
            
               A prayer that we may be deliuered frome our aduersaries. Esai. 37.
               
                  O Lorde of hoostes, thou god of Israell which sittest vpon cherubin, thou arte the god alone of al the kyngdomes of the worlde, thou only hast created heauen and earth. Enclyne thyne eare Lorde and consyder, open thyne eyes and se, delyuer vs from the hande of our aduersaries

to thintēt all the kyngdomes of the earthe maye knowe that thou only art the lorde. Amen.
            
            
               The prayer of Esaye when the people were sore plaged Esaye. 65.64.
               LOke downe frome heauen, and beholde the dwellynge place of thy sanctuary and thy glorye, Howe is it that thy gelousy, thy strength, the multitude of thy mercyes & thy louyng kyndnes will not be entreated of vs? yet arte thou our father. Abrahā knewe vs not, neyther was Israell acquaynted with vs. But thou Lorde arte our father and redemer, and thy name is euerlastyng. O lorde wherfore haste thou led vs out of thy way? Wherfore hast thou hardened our hertes that we feare the not? Be at one with vs agayne for thy seruauntes sake, whiche be

of the generacion of thyne heritage Thy people hath hadde but lytle of thy sanctuary in possession, for our enemyes haue taken it in. And we are become euen as we were at the beginning, what tyme we were not vnder thy dominion nor called on thy name. O that yu woldest cleaue ye heauē in sonder, come downe: & that the mountaynes myght melt a way at thy presence, lyke as an hote fyre, and that the malicious myght boyle as the water dothe vpon the fyre, wherby thy name myght be knowen amonges thyne enemyes, and that the panyms might tremble before ye, that yu myghtest come downe wyth thy wonderous strange workes, thā shuld the hylles melt at thy p̄sence, for sythens the begynnynge of the world, was none (except thou o god) yt harde or perceyued, neyther hathe

any eye sene what yu doste for them that put theyr trust in the. Thou helpest him that dothe ryghte withe cherefulnes, and them that thynke vpon thy wayes. But lo thou arte angry, for we haue synned and haue bene euer in sinne, yea there is not one hole, we are all as an vncleane thynge, and al our ryghtuousnesses are as clothes stayned with ye floures of a woman, we fal eueryone as the leafe, for our synners cary vs awaye as the wynde. There is no man that calleth vpon thy name, & that stādeth vp to take holde by the. Therfore hydest thou thy face from vs, and cōsumest vs because of our synnes. But nowe o lorde thou that art our father, we ar the clay & thou arte oure potter, and we are all the worke of thy handes. Be not to sore displeased (o lorde) and kepe not our

offences to long in thy remēbraunce but consydre that we all are thy people. The cyties of thy sanctuarye lye wast. Syon is a wyldernes, and Ierusalem a deserte. Oure holy house whiche is our beuty, wheare our fathers praysed yt is brente vp, yea all our commodities and pleasures are wasted away, wilt yu not be ētreated (Lorde) for all this? wylt thou holde thy peax, & scourge vs so sore?
            
            
               An other prayer of Hieremye Hierem. 17.
               HEale me (o lorde) and I shalbe hole, saue thou me and I shall be saued, for thou arte my prayse. Be not thou terrible vnto me, O Lorde, for thou arte he in whome I hope, whē I am in peryl. Let my persecuters be confounded, but not me, let them be afrayed & not me. Thou

shalt brynge vpon them the fyme to their plage, and shalt destroye them ryght sore, Amen.
            
            
               An other prayer of Hieremye. Hier. 31.
               
                  O lorde thou hast chastened me, & thy chastenynge haue I receyued as an vntamed calfe, Conuerte thou me and I shall be conuerted, for thou arte my lorde God, for as sone as thou tournedst me I repented my self, And when I vnderstode I smote vpon my thyghe, I confessed and was ashamed, because I suffred reproche of my youthe.
            
            
               A prayer of Hieremye vnder the person of Christ which euery Christen maye saye in tyme of aduersitie. Lamenta. 3.
               THou haste herde my voyce, O lorde and haste not tourned awaye thyne eares from my sighyng

and cryeng, Thou haste approched nere me, when I called vpon the & hast sayde, feare not. Thou (O lord) haste maynteyned the quarell of my soule, and haste redemed my lyfe, O lord thou hast sene my blasphemers take thou my quarell vpon ye. Thou haste well considered howe they go about to do me harme, and that all their counsayles are agaynste me. Thou haste herde their dispytefull wordes (o lord) yea and al their imaginacions agaynste me. Thou seyst also their syttynge downe and their rysynge vp, they make their songes of nothinge but of me. Rewarde them o lorde accordinge to the workes of their handes. Gyue them the thinge, yt their owne herte is afrayd of, euen thy curse. Persecute them, o Lorde, with thyne indignacion, and rote thē out frō vnder ye heauē. Amē
               
            
            
               
               The prayer of Iudas Machabeus when he shuld encountre with his ennemyes. 1. Machab. 4.
               BLessed arte thou o sauyoure of Israell, whych dydest destroye the violent power of the gyaunt in the hande of thy seruaunt Dauid & gauest the host of the heythen into ye hand of Ionathas the son of Saul, his weapen bearer, put this hooste nowe into the hand of thy people Israell, and let them be confounded in their multitude & horsemen. Make them afrayde and discomfyte the boldnesse of their strength, that they maye be moued throughe their destruction. Caste them down through the sworde of thy louers, then shall al they that knowe thy name, prayse yt for euer with thākesgyuyng, Amē.
            
            
               The prayer of Nehemias for the people oppressed of the Heythen. 2. Machab. 1.
               
                  
                  O Lord god maker of al thinges thou fearfull and stronge, thou ryghteous and mercyfull, thou that art only a gracious king, only lyberal, only iust, almyghty and euerlastinge, thou that delyuerest Israell from all trouble, thou that hast chosen the fathers and haste halowed them, receyuinge the offringe for the hole people of Israel, preserue thyn owne porcion and halow it. Gather those togither yt are scatered abroad from vs. Delyuer them that are vnder the heythens bondage, loke vpon them which are despysed and abhorred, that the heythen may knowe and se, howe thou arte our god. Punyshe them that oppresse & proudlye put vs to dishonoure. Amen.
            
         
         
            
            OF THE BYBLE THANKESGYVYNges and prayses vnto God, of the fathers.
            
               The songe of Moses and the chyldren of Israell for their delyueraunce from. Pharao. Exod. 15.
               LEt vs singe vnto the lorde, for he is become glorious, the horsman he hath ouerthrowen in the se. The lord is my strength & my song, and is become my saluacion, he is my god and I will glorifye him, he is my fathers god and I wil extolle him vpon hyghe. The lorde is as a stronge man of warre, almyghty is his name. Pharaos charettes & his hoste, hath he cast into the see. His pyked capitaynes were drowned in the red see, the depe waters haue couered them, they sonk to the botome

as a stone. Thy hāde lorde is gloriouse in power, thyne hande hath all to shaken thyne enemyes, and withe thy greate glory thou hast destroyed thyne aduersaries. Thou senteste forth thy wrath, and it consumed thē euen as stubble with the brethe of thyn anger. The water gathered togither and the floudes stode styll as a rocke, and the depe water cōgeled togither in the myddest of the see. The ennemye sayde I wyll folow & ouertake them and will deuyde the spoyle, I will satisfye my lust vpon them, I will draw my swerde, & myn hande shall destroy them. But thou bluest with thy breth, and the see couered them, they sanke as leade in the mighty waters. Who is lyke vnto the o lorde amonges the goddes? who is lyke the so glorious in holynes, fearfull, laudable, and whiche

shewest wonders? Thou stretchedst thy right hande and the earth swalowed them, with mercy thou caryedst thy people whiche thou delyueredst, and broughtest them with thy strength vnto thy holy lande. The nacions hearde, and were afrayde, panges came vpon the Philestines. Then the Dukes of the Edomites were amased, and tremblynge came vpon the myghtyest of the Moabytes, all the inhabitauntes of Canaan waxed faynte harted. Let feare & drede fall vpon them, throughe the greatnesse of thyne arme, whyle thy people passe thoroughe, O Lorde. Brynge them in and plante them in the moūtaynes of thyn enheritaūce, the place lord which thou hast made to dwell in, the sanctuary lord which thy hādes haue prepared. The lorde raygne euer & alwaye, For Pharao

went on horseback with his charettes & horsemen into the see, and the lorde broughte the waters of the see vpon thē, But the children of Israel went on drye lande through the see.
            
            
               Anna thankyng the lord for his benefyte, on this maner syngeth to god. 1. Kynges. 2.
               MY herte reioyseth in the lorde, myne horne is hygh in the lord and my mouthe is wyde open ouer myne ennemyes for I reioyce in thy sauinge. There is none so holye as thou o lorde, no there is none saue thou. Neyther is ther any strengthe lyke vnto our God. Talke not to moche proudely, let olde thinges departe oute of your mouthes, for the lorde is god of knowledge and iudgeth the thoughtes. The bowes of the stronge are broken & the weake be endued with strength. They that

of late were full, haue let forth them selues for bred, but the hongry be satisfyed, in so moche the baren hathe borne seuen, and she that had many childern is waxed feble. The lorde kylleth & quickeneth agayn, he bringeth downe to hell and fetteth vp agayne. The lorde maketh poore and maketh rych, bryngeth lowe and heueth vp on hyghe, he rayseth vp the poore out of the dust, and lyfteth vp the beggar frome the dongehyll, to set hym amonge princes, and make him holde the seate of glory. For the pyllers of the earth are the lordes, & he hath set the rounde worlde vpon thē. He wil kepe the fete of his sayntes, but the wycked shall kepe sylēce in darkenes. For noman in his owne myght shall be stronge. The lordes aduersaries shall be made to feare him and out of heauen he shal

thunder vpon them. The lorde shall iudge the costes of the worlde & shal gyue myght vnto his kinge, and exalte the horne of his Christ. Amen.
            
            
               A songe that Dauid sounge vnto the lorde in the day that the lorde delyuered him out of the hande of his enemyes 2. Reg. 22.
               THe lorde is my rocke, my castle and my delyuerer. God is my strengthe and in him woll I truste, my shylde and the horne that defendeth me, myne hyghe holde and refuge, O my sauyoure saue me from wronge, I wyll prayse & call on the Lorde, and so shall I be saued from my enemyes, for the waues of death haue closed me about, and the floudes of Beliall haue feared me, the cordes of hell haue compased me about, and the snares of deathe haue ouertakē me. In my tribulacion I called to the lord, & cryed to my god,

and he herde my voyce out of hys temple, and my crye entred in to his eares. The earth trembled & quoke, and the fundations of heauen moued & shoke because he was angrye. Smoke wēt out of his nosethrylles & consumyng fyre out of his mouth that coales were kyndled of it, he bowed the heauen and came downe, & darknes was vnderneth hys fete. And he rode vpon Cherub & flewe, and appeared vpon the winges of the wynde, and he made darkenesse a tabernacle round about him with water gathered together in thycke cloudes. Of ye bryghtnes that was before him, coles were set on fyre. The Lorde thundred from heauen, & the most hyghe put out his voyce, & he shot arowes & scattered them, & hurled lyghtenynge and turmoyled them. The botom of the See appered,

& the foundations of the worlde were sene, by reason of the rebuking of the lorde, and thorough blastinge of the breth of his nosethrylles, he sent frome aboue and fet me & plucked me oute of myghtye waters. He delyuered me from my myghty enemye and from them that hated me & were to stronge for me. When they had compased me in the daye of my tribulation, the lorde stayed me vp and brought me out into roumth, & delyuered me bycause he delyted in me. The lorde rewarded me accordynge to my ryghteousnes, and according to the purenesse of my handes he dealt with me. For I kept ye wayes of the lorde, and dyd no wickednes nor forsoke my God, But I had all his lawes in my syght, and turned my face from none of his ordinaunces. I was pure vnto him

warde, and kepte my selfe from wickednes, & ye Lorde dyd to me againe accordynge to my ryghtuousnesse, & after my purenesse that I had in his syght. With ye holy thou shalte be holy, and with the man that is vncorrupte, thou shalt be vncorrupt, with the pure, thou shalt be pure, & with the froward thou shalt be froward also. Certaynely the people that are in aduersitie thou shalt help, and on the proud shalt thou cast thyn eyes. Thou art my lyght O lord, and the lorde shall lyghten my darkenesse. Loo with thyn helpe I wil run thorough an host of men, & by the ayde of my god I wil spryng ouer a wal. The waye of god is vndefyled, and the word of the lord fyned as golde, and he is a shylde to al that trust in him. Who is a god saue the lorde, & who myghty saue our god? God is

my strength in warre, and ryddeth the waye before me. He maketh my fete as swyft as an hyndes, and setteth my fete fast vpon my holde. He teacheth my handes to fyght, that a bowe of brasse is to weake for myne arme. And thou hast saued me with thy shylde, and kepest me for euer in mekenes. Thou madest me rowme to walke in, that my fete shulde not stumble, I followed myne enemyes and destroyed them, and turned not agayne vntyll I had consumed thē I wasted them and so clouted them that they coulde in no wyse aryse, but fell vnderneth my fete. Thou compasedest me aboute with myght to batell, and madest them that rose agaynst me to stoupe vnder me. Thou madeste myne ennemyes to tourne their backes to me, and them

that hated me, & I destroyed them. They loked for helpe, but none cam to saue them, vnto the lord they cryed but he herde them not. The lorde mought lyue, and blessed be he my strēgth, & exalted be god the strēgth that saueth me. It is god that auengeth me, and that bringeth downe ye people vnder me, and delyuereth me from my enemyes. Thou lyftest me vp on hyghe from them that ryse agaynste me and delyuerest me from the wicked men. Therfore I will prayse the O lorde amonge the heythen, and will singe vnto thy name.
            
            
               A blessing of Tobias the elder, wherwith he blessed the lorde in the ende of his lyfe. Tob. 13.
               GReate art thou, o lorde for euer more, and thy kyngdom world withoute ende. For thou scourgest & healest, thou ledest vnto hell & bryngest

oute agayne. Yea there is none that maye escape thyne hande. O ye chyldern of Israel, gyue thankes vnto the lord, and prayse him in the syghte of the heythen. For amonge the heythen whiche knowe him not, hath he scatered you, that ye shulde shewe forth his meruelous workes, & cause them to knowe, that there is none other god almyghtye, but he. He hath chastened vs for oure mysdedes, & for his owne mercyes sake, shall he saue vs. Consider then how he hath dealte with you, and prayse him with feare and drede, and magnify the euerlastinge kinge in youre workes. Certes I will prayse him euen in the place of my captiuitie, for he hath shewed hys maiestie vnto a synneful people. Turne you therfor o ye synners, and doo ye ryghteousnesse before god, trustinge veryly he

wyll shew his mercy vpō you. Assuredly I and my soule wolle reioyce in god. Prayse the Lorde all ye his chosen, holde the dayes of gladnes and be thankeful vnto him. Oh my soule blesse thou the lorde. Amen.
            
            
               The blessynge of Seraphin Esay. 6.
               HOly arte thou, holy arte thou, holy arte thou, thou arte the lorde god of hostes, all the earth is full of thy glory.
            
            
               Thankinges. Esay. 23.
               
                  O Lord, thou art my god I wyll prayse the, and magnifye thy name, for thou bryngest meruelouse thinges to passe, accordinge to thyn olde counselles trulye & stedfastly.
            
            
               An other of the same. Esay. 26.
               
                  O Lorde gyue vs peax, for thou workest in vs all oure workes.

O lorde our god, though suche lordes haue dominacion vpon vs as know the not, yet graunt, yt we may hope only in the & kepe thy name in remembraunce. Amen.
            
            
               A blessynge with an admiration of the meruelouse counsels of god. Hiere. 32.
               
                  O Lorde god, it is thou that hast made heauen & earth with thy greate power and hygh arme, & ther is nothinge to harde for the. Thou sheweste mercy vpon thousandes, thou doest recompense the wyckednes of the fathers, into the bosom of the childern that come after them. Thou art the greate & myghty god, whose name is the lorde of hostes greate in counsayll, and infinite in thoughte. Thyne eyes loke vpon al the wayes of mens children, to reaward euery one after his waye and

accordynge to the frutes of hys inuentions.
            
            
               The songe and thankesgyuynge of the blessed virgin Mary. Luc. I.
               MY soule magnifieth the Lorde, & my spirite reioyseth in God my sauiour. For he hath loked vpon the pore degre of his handemayde, Behold now frome hense forth shall all generacions call me blessed, for he that is myghty hath done to me greate thinges, & holy is his name. And his mercy on them that feare him thorowout all generacions. He vttered strength with his arme, he disperpled the proude in the imaginacion of their hertes. He deposed the myghty from their seates, and aduaunced them of lowe degree. He fylled the hungry with good thīges and sente away the ryche empty. He

remembred mercy, and helped his seruaunte Israell, Euen as he promysed to our fathers, Abraham and to his sede for euer.
            
            
               The prophecy and gyuynge of thankes of zachary. Luc. 1.
               PRaysed be the lorde god of Israell, for he hath visited and redemed his people. And hath raysed vp an horne of saluaciō vnto vs in the house of his seruaunte Dauid, Euen as he promysed by the mouth of his holy Prophetes, which were sythens the worlde beganne, that we shulde be delyuered from our ennemyes & from the handes of all that hate vs, To thintent he myght fulfyll the mercy promysed to our fathers and remembre his holy couenaunt. And performe the oth which he sware to our father Abraham, to

gyue vs, that we beyng ones delyuered oute of the handes of our ennemyes, myght serue him without feare, all the dayes of our lyfe, in holynes and ryghtousnes before him. And thou childe shalt be called the Prophete of the hygheste, for thou shalt go before the face of the Lorde to prepare his wayes, To gyue knowledge of saluacion vnto his people for the forgyuenes of sinnes, Through the tendre mercy of oure god, wherby the daye sprynge from aboue hath visited vs, to gyue light to them that sate in darkenesse & in shadow of death, & to gyde our fete in the waye of peax.
            
            
               Thankes of Paul for his conuersion vnto Christ. 1. Tim. 1.
               VNto God kynge euerlastinge immortall, inuisible, and wise

only, be honour and prayse for euer and euer. Amen.
            
            
               A songe of the triumphers ouer the beast. Apoc. 15.
               GReate and meruelouse are thy workes, Lorde god almyghty, iuste and true are thy wayes, kyng of sayntes. Who shall not feare, O Lorde, and glorifie thy name? For thou only arte holye, & all gentyles shall come and worshyp before the, for thy iudgementes are made manifest.
            
            
               A blessynge of the people by kyng Salomon. 3. Reg. 8.
               BLessed be the Lorde, that hath gyuen rest vnto his people Israel according to all that he promysed, so that ther is not one worde escaped of all ye good promyses which he promysed by the hand of Moses his seruaunte. The Lorde our God be with vs, as he was with our fathers

& forsake vs not, neyther leue vs, but let him bowe our hertes vnto him, yt we walke in all hys wayes and kepe his commaundementes, ordinaunces, and rites which he cō
                  maunded our fathers. And let these my wordes whiche I haue prayed before the lord, come nygh vnto the lorde our god daye and nyght, that he defend the quarell of his seruaūt and of his people Israell euermore to thintente all nacions of the earth maye knowe that the lorde is God, and none other but he, and let oure hertes be sounde with the lorde our god, that we may walke in his ordinaunces and kepe his lawes. Amē.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ PRAYERS FOR SVCcours and reliefes of lyfe, for wysdome, for humylitie and for other naturall gyftes
            
               A prayer of Salomon for a competency of lyfe. Prouerb. 30.
               TWo thinges I require of the, that thou wylte not denye me before I dye. Remoue from me vanitie and lyes, gyue me neyther pouertie nor ryches, only graunt me a necessary lyuyng, least yf I be to ful I mought happely denye the, & say what felow is the lorde? or constrayned through pouerty, I mought fal vnto stealyng, & forsweare the name of my god. Amen.
            
            
               A prayer for obteynyng of wysdome.

                  Sap. 9.
               GOd of my fathers, and lorde of mercyes, thou that haste made all thinges with thy worde, and ordined man thoroughe thy wisdome, that he shulde haue dominion ouer the creature which thou haste made that he shulde ordre the worlde accordynge to equitie & ryghteousnes and execute iudgemente with a true herte, gyue me wisdome, which is euer about thy seate, and put me not out from amonge thy chyldren. For I thy seruaūt and sōne of thy hādemayde am a feble person, of a short tyme, and to yonge to the vnderstā
                  dinge of iudgement & of thy lawes. Yea though a man be neuer so perfect among the childern of men, yet yf thy wisdome be not with him, he shalbe nothing worth. Oh send her out of thy holye heauens, and from

ye trone of thy maiestie, that she may be with me & labour with me that I maye knowe what is acceptable in thy syght. For she knoweth and vnderstādeth al thinges, & she shall conducte me ryght soberly in my workes, and preserue me in her power. So shall my workes be acceptable. Amen.
            
            
               A prayer for mekenes and the obteyning of chastitie Eccle. 23.
               
                  O Lord thou father & god of my lyfe, let me not haue a proude loke. But turne awaye all voluptuousnes from me. Take from me the lustes of the bodye, let not the desyres of vnclennes take holde vpon me, and gyue me not ouer into an vnshamefast and obstinate mynde. Amen.
            
            
               
               The prayer of Iesus the sonne of Sirache, in necessitie and for wisdome. Eccle. the laste.
               
                  I Thanke the O Lorde and king, and prayse the o god my sauiour I wil yelde prayses vnto thy name, for thou art my defender and helper frō the snare of traitorours tōges, and from them that are occupied in lyes. Thou hast bene my helper frō suche as rose agaynst me, and haste deliuered me according to thy great mercy, and for thy holy names sake. Thou hast delyuered me from the roarynge of them that prepared thē selues to deuoure me, out of the hā
                  des of such as sought after my lyfe, frō the multitude of them that troubled me and went aboute to set fyer vpon me on euery syde, so that I was not brent in the myddes of the fyer. From the depe of hell, thou delyueredst me, from the vncleane

tongue, from lyenge wordes, from the wycked iuge, and from the vnryghteouse tōgue. My soule shall prayse the Lorde vnto death, for my lyfe drewe nye vnto hel. They compased me roūd about on euery syde, and ther was no man to helpe me, I loked about me, if ther were anye man that wold socoure me, but ther was none. Then thought I vpon thy mercy, O Lorde, and vpon thy actes that thou haste done euer of olde, namely that thou delyuereste such as put their trust in the, & ryddest them out of the handes of the false panims. Thus lyfted I vp my prayer from the earth, and prayed for delyueraunce from death, I called vpon the lord my father, that he wolde not leaue me with out healpe in the daye of my trouble, and in the tyme of the proude. I praysed thy

name continually, yelding honour and thākes vnto it, and so my prayer was herde. Thou sauedst me frō destructiō and delyueredst me from the vnrighteouse tyme. Therfore wil I knowledge, and prayse the, & auaūce the name of the Lord. Whē I was yet but yonge, or euer I wēt a straye, I desired wisdome openly in my prayer, I came therfor before the temple and I sought her very busyly. Then floryshed she vnto me as a grape that is sone rype. My herte reioysed in her, then wente my fote ye right waye, yea frō my youth sought I after her, I bowed downe my eare and receyued her, I founde in my selfe much wisdome & prospered greatly in her. Therfore wyll I gyue ye glory vnto him that gyueth me wisdome, for I am aduised to do therafter, I wil be gelouse to cleaue

vnto that is good, so shal I not be cōfounded. My soule hath wrestled with her, and I haue bene diligent to be occupied in her. I lyfted vp myne hādes on hygh, then was my soule lyghtened thorough wysdome so that I knowledged my folyshnes. I ordred my soule after her, she and I were one herte from the begynnyng, and I found her in clennesse, and therfore shal I not be forsaken. My hart longeth after her & I gate a good treasure. Thorough her the lorde hath gyuen me a newe tongue, wherwith I wil prayse him Oh come vnto me ye vnlerned, and dwel in the house of wysdome, with drawe not your selues from her, but talke and comon of these thynges, for your soules are very thursty. I opened my mouth and spake, Oh come and bye wysdom without mony,

bow down your necke vnder her yoke, and your soule shal reaceyue wisdome, she is euen at hande and is content to be found. Behold with your eyes, how I haue had but lytle labour, & yet haue found muche rest. Oh receyue wisdome, & ye shall haue plenty of syluer and golde in your possession. Let your mynde reioyce in her mercy, and be not ashamed of her prayse, worke her worke by tymes, & she shal gyue you youre rewarde in due tyme.
            
            
               The prayer of Abacuc the prophete for ignorancies Abacuc. 5.
               
                  O Lord when I herde speake of the, then I was afrayde. The worke that thou hast taken in hand shalt thou performe in his tyme, O Lorde when thy tyme cometh thou shalt declare it. In thy very wrath

thou thinkest vpon mercy. The lord God is my strength, he shall make my fete as ye fete of an herte, and he which gyueth the victory, shal bring me to my hye places syngyng vpon psalmes. Amen.
            
            
               A prayer of the faythful congregacion that they maye speake the word of god boldely Actu. 4.
               LOrde thou arte god, which hast made heauen and earth, the see and al that in them is, which by the mouth of thy seruaunt Dauid hast sayde, why dyd the heathen rage, & the people ymagyne vayne thynges? The kynges of the earth stode vp, and the rulers came togyther agaynst the Lorde and agaynst his Christ. For suerly agaynst his holy son Iesus, whom thou hast anoynted, both Herode and also Poncius Pylate with the Panyms and the

people of Israel gathered them selues togyther to do euen what so euer thyn handes and thy counsayle determyned before to be done. And now Lord behold their threatenynges, and graunt vnto thy seruauntes with al confidence to speake thy word, & that thou wolt stretch forth thyne hande, to thintente that healyng, sygnes, and wonders may be done by the name of thy holy sonne Iesus. Amen.
            
            
               
               ¶ A PRAYER VNTO THE Lorde Iesus for the peax of the church, made by the most excellent clerke Erasmus.
               LOrde Iesus Christe whiche of thyne almyghtynes madest al creatures both visible and invisible, which of thy godly wisdom gouernest & settest al thinges in moste goodly ordre, which of thyn vnspeakeable goodnes, kepest, defendest, and furderest al thinges, whiche of thy botomles mercy restorest the decayed, renewest the fallē, raysest the deade, vouchesaue (we praye the) at last to cast down thy countenaunce vpon thy beloued spouse the church but let it be that amyable and mercyful countenaunce wherwith thou pacifyest al thinges in heauen, in

erth, and that be aboue heuens and vnder the erth, vouchesaue to cast vpon vs those tendre and pytiful eyes with whiche thou ones dydest behold Petre that greate shepeherd of thy churche, and forthwith he remembred himself and repēted, with which eyes, thou ones dydest vewe the skattered multitude & wert moued with compassion that for lacke of a good shepeherd they wādred as shepe disperpled and strayed a sunder. Thou seist (O good shepeherd) what sundry sortes of wolues haue broken into thy shepecotes, of whom euery one cryeth, here is Christ, here is Christ, so that if it were possible the very perfecte persons shulde be brought into errour. Thou seest wt what wyndes, with what waues, with what stormes thy sely shippe is tossed, thy shippe wherin thy lytle

flock is in peryl to be drowned, And what is now left but that it vtterly synke and we all perishe? Of this tempest and storme we may thanke our own wyckednes and synfull lyuyng, we espye it wel and confesse it. We espye thy rightuousnes and we bewayle our vnrightuousnes, but we appele to thy mercy which (according to the psalme of thy prophete) surmounteth all thy workes. We haue now suffred moch punishemēt beyng sowsed with so many warres, cōsumed with such losses of goodes, skourged with so many sortes of diseases and pestilencies, shaken with so many floudes, feared with so many straunge sightes from heauen, & yet appere there no where any hauē or port vnto vs being thus tyered & forlorne amonges so straūge euyls, but styl euery daye more greuouse

punishementes & more seme to hāge ouer our heddes. We complaine not of thy sharpenes most tendre Sauiour, but we espy here also thy mercye, forasmoche as moch greuouser plages we haue deserued. But O most mercyful Iesu, we beseche the that thou wilt not cōsidre ne weygh, what is due for our deseruīges, but rather what becommeth thy mercy, without which neither the Angelles in heuen can stande sure before the, moch les we sely vessels of clay. Haue mercy of vs O redemer which art easie to be entreated, not that we be worthy of mercy, but gyue thou this glory vnto thyne owne name. Suffre not, that the Iues, the Turkes, and the rest of Panyms, which eyther haue not known the, or do enuye thy glorye, shulde continually tryumphe ouer vs, and say, wher is

their god, where is their redemer, wher is their sauiour, wher is theyr brydegrome that they thus bost on? These opprobrious wordes and vpbraydinges redownde vnto the O lorde while by our euils men weygh and esteme thy goodnes, they thinke we be forsaken whome they se not amēded. Ones whē thou slepst in the ship, and a tempest sodenly arisyng thretned death to all in the shippe, thou awookest at the out crye of a fewe disciples, and streight weye at thyn almyghty word the waues couched, the wyndes fel, the storme was sodenly tourned into a great calme. The dombe waters knewe their makers voyce. Now in this farre greater tempest, wherin not a few mens bodies be in daunger, but innumerable soules, we beseche the at the crye of thy hole church which be in

daunger of drowning that yu wolt awake. So many thousandes of mē do crye, lord, saue vs, we perish. The tempest is past mans power, yea we se that the indeuours of them that wold helpe it do turne clene a cōtrarie wey. It is thy worde that must do the dede Lord Iesu. Onlye saye thou wt a word of thy mouth, Cease o tempest, and forthwith shal the desyered cawme appere. Thou woldest haue spared so many thousandes of most wycked men, yf in ye citie of Sodome had bene founde but tenne good men. Now here be so many thousandes of men, whyche loue the glorie of thy name, whych syghe for the bountie of thy house, & wylte thou not at these mens prayers let go thyne anger and remēber thyne accustomed & olde mercyes? Shalte thou not wyth thy heauenly policie

turne our foly into thy glorye? Shalte thou not turne the wycked mens euels to thy churches good? For thy mercy is wonte then moost of al to succoure when the thynge is wyth vs past remedye, and neyther the myghte, nor wysdome of mē can helpe it. Thou alone bryngest thynges that be neuer so oute of order into order agayne, whyche arte the only author & maynteyner of peax. Thou framedst that olde confusion whych we call Chaos, wherin wyth out order, wythout fashion confusely laye the discordaunt sedes of thynges, and with a wonderful order the thynges that of nature fought together thou dyddest alye and knytte in a perpetuall bande. But how muche greater confusion is thys, where is no charitie, no fidelitie, no bondes of loue, no reuerence neyther of lawes

nor yet of rulers, no agrement of opinions, but as it were in a mysordred quere euery man syngeth a contrary note? Amonge the heauenly planetes is no dissension, al foure elementes kepe theyr place, euery one do theyr office whervnto they be appoynted. And wylt thou suffre thy spouse, for whose sake all thynges were made, thus by continuall dyscordes to perysh and go to wreke? Shalt thou suffre the wycked spirites, whyche be authours & workers of discorde to beare suche a swynge in thy kyngdome vnchecked? Shalt thou suffre that stronge captaine of myschefe, whom thou ones ouerthrewest, agayne to inuade thy tētes & to spoyle thy souldyours? When thou wert here a man conuersaunt amō
                  ges men, at thy voyce fled ye deuels. Sende forth, we besech the o Lorde,

thy spirite, whiche may dryue away out of the brestes of al thē that professe thy name the wycked spirites, maisters of ryotte, of couetise, of vayne glorie, of carnal lust, of mischief and of discord. Create in vs, O our God and king, a cleane hart, and renew thy holy spirite in our brestes plucke not from vs thy holy gost. Rendre vnto vs ye ioye of thy sauīg helth, and with thy princypal breath strengthen thy spouse and the herdmen therof. By this spirite thou reconciledst the erthly to the heuenly, by this thou didest frame and reduce so many tonges, so many nations, so many sundry sortes of men into one bodie of a church, which body by the same spirite hāgeth to the their hed.
               This spirite, if thou wol vouchesaue to renewe in al mēs hartes, thā shal also these forein miseryes cease

or if they cease not, at lest they shal turne to the profite & auaile of them which loue the. Stey this confusion set in ordre this horrible Chaos (O Lorde Iesu) let thy spirite stretche out it self vpon these waters of euil waueryng opinions. And bicause thy spirite, which accordyng to thy prophetes sayng conteyneth al thinges, hath also ye science of speaking, make, yt lyke as vnto al them which be of thy house is al one lyght, one baptisme, one God, one hope, one spirite: so they maye haue also one voyce, one note and song, professing one catholike trouth. When thou didest mounte vp to heuen triumphauntlike thou threwest about frō aboue thy precious thynges, thou gauest gyftes amonges men, thou dealtest sundry rewardes of thy spirite. Renewe agayn from aboue thy

old bowntifulnes, gyue that thinge to thy churche nowe feyntynge and growyng downward, that thou gauest vnto her shoting vp at her first begynyng. Gyue vnto princes and rulers the grace to stande in awe of the, that they so may guyde the cō
                  mon weale, as they shuld shortly rē
                  dre accōptes vnto the that arte king of kinges, gyue wysdome to be alweyes assistēt vnto them, that what so euer is best to be done, they maye espye it in their myndes and pursue the same in their doynges. Gyue to thy bishops the gyft of prophecye, yt they may declare and interprete holy scripture not of their own brayn but of thyne inspyring. Gyue them the threfold charitie, whiche thou ones demaundedst of Peter what tyme yu didest betake vnto him the charge of thy shepe. Gyue to thy prestes the

loue of sobernes and of chastitie.
               Gyue to thy people a good wyl to folowe thy commaundementes and a redynes to obey suche persons, as yu hast appoynted ouer thē. So shal it come to passe, if throughe thy gyft thy princes shal cōmaund that thou requyrest, if thy pastours and herdmen shall teache the same, and thy people obeye them bothe, that the olde dignitie and tranquilitie of the church shal retourne agayne with a goodly ordre vnto the glorie of thy name. Thou sparedst the Niniuites appointed to be destroied as sone as they conuerted to repentaunce. And wilt thou despice thy house falling down at thy fete, whiche in stede of sacke cloth hath syghes, and in stede of asshes teares? Thou promisedst forgiuenes to such as tourne vnto the, but this selfe thing is thy gyft, a

mā to tourne with his hole hart vnto the, to thintent al our goodnes shuld redoūd vnto thy glorie. Thou art ye maker, repare thy worke that thou hast fashioned. Thou art the redemer, saue that thou hast bought Thou arte the Sauiour, suffer not them to perish that do hang on the. Thou art the Lord and owner, chaleng thy possession. Thou art ye hed, helpe thy membres, Thou arte the kinge, gyue vs a reuerence of thy lawes. Thou art the prince of peax, breath vpō vs brotherly loue. Thou art the god, haue pytie on thy humble besechers, be thou accordinge to Paules sayng, al thinges in al men to thintēt ye hole quere of thy church with agreyng myndes and consonaunt voyces for mercy obteyned at thy handes may gyue thankes to ye father, son and holy gost, whiche after

the most perfect exemple of concord be distincted in propertie of persons and one in nature, to whom be prayse and glorie eternally. Amen.
            
            
               A prayer before thou takest bodily sustenaunce
               WE wretched & alweis nedynge bodyes, for this meate whiche thou hast halowed and giuen vs for the relief and sustētation of our bodyes do reuerently giue thākes vnto the O God almyghty and heuē
                  ly father, beseching the also here wt, to bestow and comunicate vnto vs ye meate of Angels, that true heuēly breade, I meane our Lorde Iesu Christ, so as wt him our mynde may

be fedde, and that by his fleshe and bloude we maye be fostered, nourished, and made stronge. Amen.
            
            
               A prayer after thou hast taken bodely sustenaunce
               Forasmoch as O Lord almighty and moste mercifull God thou hast with thy gyftes liberally fedde vs and refreshed our bodyes: cause that after this repast, we maye diligētlie obserue what thing yu woldest haue done by vs and what not, and also fulfyll and execute in dede the same with a redye and pure mynde accordingly, By Iesus Christe our Lorde. So be it.
            
            
               For spirituall ioy.
               LOrd Iesu, thou that art the redemer & confortor of mankind, which to suche as renounce and abhorre

for loue of the al the vayne & false pleasures of this worlde haste prepared by thy holy gost farre better and higher pleasures whiche the worlde knoweth not, and doest tempre the greuaunce and incommoditie of this lyfe with inward & preuye consolacions by renewyng vnto vs euer amonge some token & ynklyng of the blesse to come, wherby we beyng refreshed & recreate might with more cherefull myndes runne vnto the. I beseche the that the annoyntyng of thy holye spirite maye euermore shake of from me the werines of this wretched worlde and cheare my harte with a blessed and holsom ioye, which said spirite did also annoynte the O Lord what tyme thou wert here cōuersaunt amonges vs with the oyle of ioye before thy felawes and brethern whiche with the

father and ye same spirite doest lyue and raygne for euer and euer. Amē.
            
            
               For the kepyng and defense of a good name and fame.
               THat wise man which was priuie of thy secretes O heuenly father) taught vs yt an honest fame is a treasure right preciouse, when he saith, Better it is to haue a good name then preciouse oyntmentes. But this so excellēt and good thing we neyther can get nor kepe but by thy ayde and helpe. Now suerly the wel and fountaign of a good name is a fautles lief. This therfor in especial we demaunde and craue of ye O Lorde almyghty. Yet neuertheles forasmoch as oftentymes innocencie and fautles liuinge is not ynough neyther yet a suer buckler &

defense namely against such as vnder their lyppes beare the poyson of serpentes, yea & oftentymes it happeneth that when we suppose to be amonges our trusty frēdes we dwel with Ezechiel amonges scorpions and venemouse serpentes: we crye with thy holy prophete, O Lord delyuer my sowle from wycked lyppes and a gylefull tonge. But if neuerthelesse it be sene to thy goodnes to exercise thy seruauntes also with this affliction to thintent they may the better be brought to godlynes & perfection: graūt (we the praye) that with Paule thy most valyaūt Chā
                  pion we may by reproche and glory by infamye and good name abyde styl in thy cōmaūdemētes throughe Iesu Christ which also himself whā he walked here in erth, was reuiled,

sklaūdered, euyl spoken of, and called to hys tethe a Samaritane, a wyne drynker, a deceyuer of the people, and one that had a deuil. The same nowe raigneth with the in glorie togither wt the holy gost Amen.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ❧ THE TABLE OR CONTENtes of this present boke
            
               Fyrst a generall cōfession of synnes vnto God dayly to be sayd of euery Christian person.
               AN Epitome that is to saye an abbrigement or brief meditacion vpō euery one of the hūdreth and fyfty Psalmes in order, drawē out most christianly by a ryght excellent lerned man for the edificacion and profyte of the ryght christians.
               After these meditaciōs we haue added the Lordes prayer called the Pater noster.
               
                   
                  
                     〈1 paragraph〉
                   
               
               The articles of the christē fayth or religion called the Crede.
               The tenne commaundementes
               THe principall prayers of the Bible most necessary for christian persons to praye dayly.
               A very swete and deuoute prayer vnto the Lorde Iesus for the peace of the church, made by the moost excellent clerke Erasmus.
               A prayer before thou takest bodely sustenaunce.
               
                  A prayer after meate.
               A prayer for spiritual ioye.
               A prayer for the kepynge and defence of a good name and fame.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            ¶Imprinted at London in Fletestrete at the signe of the whyte hart. 1539.
            
               Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.
            
            
         
      
   