
      
         
            
            
            THE Firſt part of the Contention betwixt the two famous hou
               ſes of Yorke and Lancaſter, with the death of the good Duke Humphrey:
            And the baniſhment and death of the Duke of Suffolke, and the Tragical end of the prowd Cardinall of Wincheſter, with the notable Rebellion of Iacke Cade:
            
            
               And the Duke of Yorkes first clayme to the Crowne.
            
            LONDON
            Printed by Valentine Simmes for Thomas Millington, and are to be ſold at his ſhop vnder S. Peters church in Cornewall: 1600
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The firſt part of the Contention of the two famous Houſes of Yorke and Lancaſter, with the death of the good Duke Humphrey.
            Enter at one doore, King Henry the ſixt, and Humphrey Duke of Gloster, the Duke of Somerſet, the Duke of Buckingham, Cardinall Bewford, and others.
            Enter at the other doore, the Duke of Yorke, and the Marqueſſe of Suffolke, and Queene Margaret, and the Earle of Saliſbury and Warwicke.
            
               Suffolke.
               
                  AS by your high imperiall Maieſties command,
               I had in charge at my depart for France,
               As Procurator for your excellence,
               To marry Princes Margaret for your grace,
               So in the auncient famous Citie Towres,
               In preſence of the Kings of France & Cyſſile,
               The Dukes of Orleance, Calaber, Brittaine, and Alonſon.
               Seuen Earles, twelue Barons, and then the reuerend Biſhops,
               I did performe my taske and was eſpouſde,
               And now, moſt humbly on my bended knees,
               In ſight of England and her royall Peeres,
               Deliuer vp my title in the Queene,
               Vnto your gracious excellence, that are the ſubſtance
               Of that great ſhadow I did repreſent:
               The ha
                     ••••
                  ſt gift that euer Marqueſſe gaue,
               
                  The faireſt Queene that euer King poſſeſt.
            
            
               King.
               Suffolke ariſe.
               Welcom Queene Margaret to Engliſh Henries Court,
               The greateſt ſhew of kindneſſe yet we can beſtow,
               Is this kind kiſſe: O gracious God of heauen,
               Lend me a heart repleate with thankfulneſſe,
               For in this beauteous face thou haſt beſtowd
               A world of pleaſures to my perplexed ſoule.
            
            
               Queene.
               Th'exceſſiue loue I beare vnto your grace,
               Forbids me to be lauiſh of my tongue,
               Leſt I ſhould ſpeake more then beſeemes a woman:
               Let this ſuffice, my bliſſe is in your liking,
               And nothing can make poore Margaret miſerable,
               Vnleſſe the frowne of mightie Englands King.
            
            
               King.
               Her lookes did wound, but now ſpeech doth pierce,
               Louely Queene Margaret ſit downe by my ſide,
               And vnckle Gloſter, and you lordly Peeres,
               With one voice welcome my beloued Queene.
            
            
               All.
               Long liue Queene Margaret Englands happineſſe.
            
            
               Queene.
               We thanke you all.
               Sound Trumpets.
            
            
               Suffolke.
               My lord Protector, ſo it pleaſe your grace,
               Here are the Articles confirm'd of peace,
               Betweene our ſoueraigne and the French King Charles,
               Till terme of eighteene months be full expirde.
            
            
               Humphrey.
               
                  Inprimis, It is agreed between the French king Charles, and William de la Poole, Marqueſſe of Suffolk, embaſſador for Henry king of England, that the ſaid Henry ſhal wed and eſpouſe the lady Margaret, daughter to Raynard King of Naples, Cyſſels, and Ieruſalem, and crown her Queen of England, ere the 30. of the next moneth.
            
            
               Item.
               It is further agreed between them, that the Dutches of Anioy and of Maine, ſhalbe releaſed and deliuered ouer to the King her ſa.
               Duke Humprey left it fall▪
               
            
            
               Ki.
               How now vnkle, whats the matter that you ſtay ſo ſodenly.
            
            
               Hum.
               Pardon my Lord, a ſodain qualm came ouer my hart,
               
                  VVhich dimmes mine eies that I can ſee no more,
               Vnckle of Wincheſter I pray you reade on.
            
            
               Cardinal.
               
                  Item, It is further agreed betweene them, that the Dutches of Anioy, and of Maine, ſhal be releaſed and deliuered ouer to the King her father, and ſhe ſent ouer of the King of Englands owne proper coſt and charges without dowry.
            
            
               King.
               They pleaſe vs well, lord Marqueſſe kneel down, we here create thee firſt Duke of Suffolke, and girt thee with the ſword. Coſin of Yorke, we here diſcharge your grace from being Regent in the parts of France, till terme of 18 months be ful expirde.
               Thankes vnckle Wincheſter, Gloſter, Yorke, and Buckingham, Somerſet, Salſbury, and Warwicke.
               
               VVe thanke you all for this great fauour done,
               In entertainement to my princely Queene,
               Come let vs in, and with all ſpeede prouide
               To ſee her Coronation be performde.
               Exit King, Queene, and Suffolke, and Duke Humphrey ſtaies all the reſt.
            
            
               Humph.
               Braue Peeres of England, Pillers of the ſtate,
               To you Duke Humphrey muſt vnfolde his griefe,
               VVhat did my brother Henry toyle himſelfe,
               And waſte his ſubiects for to conquer France▪
               
               And did my brother Bedford ſpend his time
               To keepe in awe that ſtout vnruly Realme?
               And haue not I and mine vnckle Bewford here,
               Done all we could to keepe that land in peace?
               And is all our labors then ſpent in vaine,
               For Suffolke hethe new made duke that rules the roaſt,
               Hath giuen away for our King Henries Queene,
               The Dutches of Anioy and▪ ſame vnto her father.
               Ah lords, fatall is this mariage canſelling our ſtates,
               Reuerſing Monuments of conquered France,
               Vndoing all, as none had nere beene done.
            
            
               Card.
               VVhy how now coſin Gloſter, what needes this?
               As if our King were bound vnto your will,
               And might not do his will without your leaue▪
               
               
                  Prowd Protector, enuy in thine eies I ſee,
               The big ſwolne venome of thy hatefull heart,
               That dare preſume gainſt that thy ſoueraigne likes.
            
            
               Hum.
               Nay my Lord, tis not my words that troubles you,
               But my preſence, prowd Prelate as thou art:
               But ile be gone, and giue thee leaue to ſpeake,
               Farewell my Lords, and ſay when I am gone,
               I prophecied France would be loſt ere long.
               Exit Duke Humphrey.
            
            
               Card.
               There goes our protector in a rage,
               My lords, you know he is my great enemy,
               And though he be Protector of the land,
               And thereby couers his deceitfull thoughts,
               For well you ſee, if he but walke the ſtreetes,
               The common people ſwarme about him ſtraight,
               Crying, Ieſus bleſſe your royall excellence,
               With, God preſerue the good Duke Humphrey.
               And many things beſides that are not knowne,
               Which time will bring to light in ſmooth Duke Humphrey,
               But I will after him, and if I can,
               Ile lay a plot to heaue him from his ſeate.
               Exit Cardinal.
            
            
               Buck.
               But let vs watch this haughtie Cardinall,
               Coſen of Somerſet, be rulde by me,
               Weele watch Duke Humphrey and the Cardinall too,
               And put them from the marke they faine would hit.
            
            
               Som.
               Thanks coſin Buckingham, ioyne thou with me.
               And both of vs with the Duke of Suffolke,
               Weele quickly heaue Duke Humphrey from his ſeate.
            
            
               Buck.
               Content, come let vs about it ſtraight,
               For either thou or I will be P
                     ••••
                  ctor.
               Exit Buckingham and Somerſet.
            
            
               Salſb.
               Pride went before, Ambition followes after,
               Whilſt theſe do ſeeke their owne preferments thus,
               My lords, let vs ſeeke for our countries good,
               Oft haue I heard this haughtie Cardinal
               Sweare, and forſweare himſelfe, and braue it out,
               
                  More like a Ruffin then a man of church.
               Coſen Yorke, the victories thou haſt wonne,
               In Ireland, Normandie, and in France,
               Hath wonne thee immortall praiſe in England.
               And thou braue Warwicke, my thrice valiant ſonne,
               Thy ſimple plainneſſe and thy houſe-keeping,
               Hath wonne thee credite amongſt the couunon ſort,
               The reuerence of mine age, and Neuels name,
               Is of no little force if I commaund,
               Then let vs ioyne all three in one for this,
               That good Duke Humphrey may his ſtate poſſeſſe,
               But wherefore weepes Warwicke my noble ſonne?
            
            
               War.
               For griefe that all is loſt that Warwicke wonne.
               Sonnes. Anioy and Maine, both giuen away at once,
               Why Warwick did win them, & muſt that then which we won with our ſwords, be giuen away with wordes?
            
            
               Yorke.
               As I haue read, our Kings of England were woont to haue large dowries with their wiues, but our king Henry giues away his owne.
            
            
               Salſb.
               Come ſonnes, away, and looke vnto the maine.
            
            
               War.
               Vnto the Maine, oh father, Maine is loſt,
               VVhich Warwicke by maine force did win from France,
               Maine chance father you meant, but I meane Maine,
               
               Which I wil win from France, or els be ſlaine.
               Exit Salſbury and Warwicke.
            
            
               Yorke.
               
                  Anioy and Maine, both giuen vnto the French,
               Cold newes for me, for I had hope of France,
               Euen as I haue of fertill England.
               A day will come when Yorke ſhall claime his owne,
               And therefore I will take the Neuels parts,
               And make a ſhow of loue to prowd Duke Humphrey:
               And when I ſpie aduantage, claime the Crowne,
               For thats the golden marke I ſeeke to hit:
               Nor ſhall prowd Lancaſter vſurp my right,
               Nor hold the ſcepter in his childiſh fiſt,
               Nor weare the Diademe vpon his head,
               Whoſe church-like humors fits not for a Crowne:
               
                  Then Yorke be ſtill a while till time do ſerue,
               Watch thou, and wake when others be aſleepe,
               To prie into the ſecrets of the ſtate,
               Till Henry ſurfeiting in ioyes of loue,
               With his new bride, and Englands deare bought Queene,
               And Humphrey with the Peeres be falne at iarres,
               Then will I raiſe aloft the milke-white Roſe,
               With whoſe ſweete ſmell the ayre ſhall be perfumde,
               And in my Standard beare the Armes of Yorke,
               To graffle with the houſe of Lancaſter:
               And force perforce, Ile make him yeeld the Crowne,
               Whoſe bookiſh rule hath puld faire England downe.
               Exit Yorke. Enter Duke Humphrey, and Dame Ellanor Cobham his wife.
            
            
               Elnor.
               Why droopes my Lord like ouer ripened corne,
               Hanging the head at Cearies plenteous loade?
               Whatſeeſt thou Duke Humphrey King Henries Crowne?
               Reach at it, and if thine arme be too ſhort,
               Mine ſhall lengthen it. Art not thou a Prince,
               Vnckle to the King and his Protector?
               Then what ſhouldſt thou lacke that might content thy mind?
            
            
               Humph.
               My louely Nell, far be it from my heart,
               To thinke of Treaſons gainſt my ſoueraigne lord,
               But I was troubled with a dreame to night,
               And God I pray, it do betide no ill.
            
            
               Elnor.
               What drempt my lord? Good Humphrey tel it me,
               And ile interpret it, and when thats done,
               Ile tell thee then what I did dreame to night.
            
            
               Humph.
               This night when I was laid in bed, I dreampt that
               This my ſtaffe mine Office badge in Court,
               Was broke in two, and on the ends were plac'd,
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   of the Cardinall of Wincheſter,
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     ••
                  lliam de la Poole firſt Duke of Suffolke.
            
            
               Elnor.
               Tuſh my Lord, this ſignifies nought but this,
               
                  That he that breakes a ſticke of Gloſters groue,
               Shall for th'offence make forfeit of his head.
               But now my lord, ile tell you what I dreampt,
               Me thought I was in the Cathedrall Church
               At Weſtminſter, and ſeated in the chaire
               Where the Kings and Queenes are crownde, and at my feete
               Henry and Margaret with a crowne of gold,
               Stood ready to ſet it on my princely head.
            
            
               Humph.
               Fie Nell, ambitious woman as thou art,
               Art thou not ſecond woman in this land,
               And the Protectors wife, belou'd of him,
               And wilt thou ſtill be hammering treaſon thus?
               Away I ſay, and let me heare no more.
            
            
               Elnor.
               How now my Lord! what, angry with your Nell
               For telling but her dreame? the next I haue
               Ile keepe to my ſelfe and not be rated thus.
            
            
               Humph.
               Nay Nell, ile giue no credit to a dreame,
               But I would haue thee to thinke on no ſuch things.
               Enters a Meſſenger.
            
            
               Meſſen.
               And it pleaſe your grace the King and Queene tomorrow morning will ride a hawking to Saint Albones, and craues your companie along with them.
            
            
               Humph.
               With all my heart I will attend his grace:
               Come Nell, thou wilt go with vs I am ſure.
               exit Humphrey.
            
            
               Elnor.
               Ile come after you, for I cannot go before,
               But ere it be long ile go before them all,
               Deſpight of all that ſeeke to croſſe me thus,
               Who is within there?
               Enter ſir Iohn Hum.
               VVhat ſir Iohn Hum, what newes with you?
            
            
               ſir Iohn.
               Ieſus preſerue your maieſty.
            
            
               Elnor.
               My maieſtie, why man I am but grace,
            
            
               
               ſir Iohn
               Yea, but by the grace of God and Hums aduiſe,
               Your graces ſtate ſhall be aduanſt ere long.
            
            
               Elnor.
               What haſt thou conferd with Margery Iordane, the cunning witch of Ely, with Roger Bullinbrooke and the reſt, and will they vndertake to do me good?
            
            
               ſir Iohn
               I haue Madam, and they haue promiſed me to raiſe a ſpirit from the depth of vnder ground, that ſhall tell your grace all queſtions you demaund.
            
            
               Elnor.
               Thanks good ſir Iohn, ſome two daies hence I geſſe
               Will fit our time, then ſee that they be here:
               For now the King is riding to Saint Albons,
               And all the Dukes and Earles along with him:
               When they be gone, then ſafely they may come,
               And on the backſide of my Orchard here,
               There caſt their ſpells in ſilence of the night,
               And ſo reſolue of the thing we wiſh,
               Till when, drinke that for my ſa
                     ••
                  , and ſo farewell.
               exit Elnor.
            
            
               ſir Iohn
               Now ſir Iohn Hum, no words but mum,
               Seale vp your lips▪ for you muſt ſilent be,
               Theſe gifts ere long will make me mighty rich,
               The Dutches ſhe thinkes now that all is well,
               But I haue gold comes from another place,
               From one that hyred me to ſet her on,
               To plot theſe treaſons gainſt the King and Peeres,
               And that is the mightie duke of Suffolke,
               For he it is, but I muſt not ſay ſo,
               That by my meanes muſt worke the Dutches fall,
               Who now by coniurations thinkes to raiſe:
               But whiſt ſir Iohn, no more of that I trow,
               For feare you loſe your head before you go.
               exit. Enter two Petitioners, and Peter the Armourer's man.
            
            
               1 Peti.
               Come ſirs, let vs linger here abouts a while,
               Vntill my Lord Protector come this way,
               
                  That we may ſhew his grace our ſeuerall cauſes.
            
            
               2 Peti.
               I pray God ſaue the good Humphries life,
               For but for him, a many were vndone,
               That can get no ſu
                     ••
                  our in the Court,
               But ſee where he comes with the Queene.
               En
                     ••
                  r the Duke of Suffolke with the Queene, and they take him for Duke Humphrey, and giues him their writings.
            
            
               1 Peti.
               Oh we are vndone, this is the Duke of Suffolke.
            
            
               Queen
               Now good felows, whom w
                     ••
                  ld you ſpeak withal?
            
            
               2▪ Peti.
               If it pleaſe your maieſtie, with my Lord Protectors Grace.
            
            
               Queene
               Are your ſutes to his grace? let vs ſee them firſt,
               Looke on them my Lord of Suffolke.
            
            
               Suffolke.
               A complaint ag
                     •••••
                   the Cardinalls man,
               What hath he done?
            
            
               2 Peti.
               Mary my lord, he hath ſtolne away my wife,
               And th'are gone togither, and I know not where to find them,
            
            
               Suffolk.
               Hath he ſtolne thy wife, thats ſome iniury indeed,
               But what ſay you?
            
            
               Peter Thump.
               Mary ſir I come to tell you that my maſter ſaid, that 
                     〈◊〉
                   Duke of Yorke was true heire vnto the Crowne, and that the King was an vſurer.
            
            
               Queene
               An vſurper thou wouldſt ſay.
            
            
               Peter
               Yea forſooth an vſurper.
            
            
               Queene
               Didſt thou ſay the King was an vſurper?
            
            
               Peter
               No forſooth, I ſaid my maſter ſaid ſo, th'other day when we were ſcowring the Duke of Yorkes armour in our garret.
            
            
               Suff.
               Yea mary this is ſomething like,
               Who's within there?
               Enter one or two.
               Sirra take this fellow and keepe him cloſe,
               And ſend out a Purſeuant for his maſter ſtraight,
               Weele heare more of this before the King.
               
                  Exit with the Armourers 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               Now ſit whats yours? let me ſee it,
               VVhats here?
               A complaint againſt the Duke of Suffolke for incloſing the commons of long Melford.
               How now ſir knaue?
            
            
               1 Peti
               I beſeech your grace to pardon mee, I am but a meſſenger for the whole towne-ſhip
               He teares the papers.
            
            
               Suffolke.
               So now ſhow your pention to Duke Humphrey.
               Villames get ye gone, and come not neare the Court,
               Dare theſe peſants write againſt me thus?
               exeunt Petitioners.
            
            
               Queene.
               My Lord of Suffolke you may ſee by this,
               The Commons loues vnto that haughtie Duke,
               That ſeekes to him more then to King Henry,
               VVhoſe eies are alwaies poring on his booke,
               And ne're regards the honour of his name,
               But ſtill muſt be protected like a child,
               And gouerned by that ambitious Duke,
               That ſcarce will moue his cap nor ſpeake to vs,
               And his prowd wife, high minded Elanor,
               That ruffles it with ſuch a troope of ladies,
               As ſtrangers in the Court takes her for the Queene.
               The other day ſhe vaunted to her maides,
               That the very traine of her worſt gowne,
               Was worth more wealth then all my fathers lands,
               Can any griefe of mind be like to this?
               I tell thee Poole when thou didſt runne at Tilt,
               And ſtolſt away our ladies hearts in France,
               I thought King Henry had beene like to thee,
               Or elſe thou hadſt not brought me out of France.
            
            
               Suffolk.
               Madame, content your ſelfe a little while,
               As I was cauſe of your comming to England,
               So wil I in England work your ful content:
               And as for prowd Duke Humphrey and his wife,
               I haue ſet lime-twigs that will intangle them,
               
                  As that your grace ere long ſhall vnderſtand.
               But ſtay madame, here comes the King.
               Enter King Henry, and the Duke of York and the Duke of Somerſet on both ſides of the King, whiſpering with him: and enter Duke Humphrey, Dame Elnor, the Duke of Buckingham, the Earle of Salſbury, the Earle of Warwicke, and the Cardinall of Wincheſter.
            
            
               King.
               My lords, I care not who be Regent in Fraunce, or Yorke, or omerſet, alls one to me.
            
            
               Yorke.
               My lord, if Yorke haue ill demeande himſelfe,
               Let Somerſet enioy his place, and go to France.
            
            
               Som.
               Then whom your grace thinke worthy, let him goe,
               And there be made the Regent ouer the French.
            
            
               Warwicke
               Whom ſoeuer you account worthy,
               Yorke is the worthieſt.
            
            
               Cardinall.
               Peace Warwicke, giue thy betters leaue to ſpeak.
            
            
               War.
               The Cardinal's not my better in the field.
            
            
               Buck.
               All in this place are thy betters farre.
            
            
               War.
               And Warwicke may liue to be the beſt of all.
            
            
               Queen.
               My lord in mine opinion, it were beſt that Somerſet were regent ouer France.
            
            
               Humph.
               Madame, our King is old enough himſelfe,
               To giue his anſwer without your conſent.
            
            
               Queen.
               If he be bold enough, what needes your grace
               To be protector ouer him ſo long?
            
            
               Humph.
               Madame, I am but Protector ouer the land.
               And when it pleaſe his grace, I will reſigne my charge.
            
            
               Suffolk.
               Reſigne it then, for ſince that thou waſt King,
               As who is King but thee? the common ſtate
               Doth (as we ſee,) all wholy go to wracke,
               And millions of treaſure hath beene ſpent,
               And as for the Regent ſhip of France,
               I ſay Somerſet is more worthy than Yorke.
            
            
               Yorke.
               Ile tell thee Suffolke why I am not worthy,
               Becauſe I cannot ſlatter as thou canſt.
            
            
               
               War.
               And yet the worthy deedes that Yorke hath done,
               Should make him worthy to be honored bare.
            
            
               Suff.
               Peace headſtrong Warwicke.
               
            
            
               War.
               Image of pride, wherefore ſhould I peace?
            
            
               Suff.
               Becauſe here is a man accuſde of Treaſon,
               Pray God the Duke of Yorke do cleare himſelfe.
               Ho, bring hither the Armourer and his man.
               Enter the Armourer and his man.
               If it pleaſe your grace, this fellow here, hath accuſed his maſter of high Treaſon, and his words were theſe.
               That the duke of Yorke was law ful heire vnto the crowne, and that your grace was an vſurper.
            
            
               Yorke
               I beſeech your grace let him haue what puniſhment the law will afford, for his villany.
            
            
               King.
               Come hither fellow, didſt thou ſpeake theſe words?
            
            
               Armor.
               Ant ſhal pleaſe your maieſty, I neuer ſaid any ſuch matter, God is my witneſſe, I am falſly accuſed by this villaine here.
            
            
               Peter
               Tis no matter for that, you did ſay ſo.
            
            
               Yorke
               I beſeech your grace let him haue the law.
            
            
               Armor.
               Alas my Lord, hang me if euer I ſpeake theſe words, my accuſer is my prentiſe, and when I did correct him for his fault the other day, he did vow vpon his knees that he would be euen with me, I haue good witneſſe of this, and therefore I beſeech your maieſty do not caſt away an honeſt man for a villaines accuſation.
            
            
               King
               Vnckle Gloſter, what do you thinke of this?
            
            
               Humph.
               The law my Lord is this by caſe, it reſts ſuſpitious,
               That a day of combate be appointed,
               And there to trie each others right or wrong,
               Which ſhall be on the thirtith of this month,
               With Eben ſtaues, and Standbags combating
               In Smithfield before your Royall Maieſty.
               exit Humphrey.
            
            
               Armor.
               And I accept the combate willingly.
            
            
               Peter
               Alas my Lord, I am not able to fight.
            
            
               Suff.
               You muſt either fight ſirra, or elſe be hangde:
               
                  Go take him hence againe to priſon▪
               
               exit with 
                     〈◊〉
                   The Queene lets fall her gloue, and hits the Dutches of Gloſter a boxe on the care.
            
            
               Queene
               Giue me my gloue, why minion can you not ſee
               She ſtrikes her.
               I crie you mercy Madame, I did miſtake,
               I did not thinke it had beene you.
            
            
               Elnor.
               Did you not, prowd French-woman,
               Could I come neare your daintie viſage with my nailes,
               I'de ſet my ten commandements in your face.
            
            
               King
               Be pacient gentle Aunt,
               It was againſt her will.
            
            
               Elnor
               Againſt her will good King▪ ſheele dandle thee,
               If thou wilt alwaies thus be rulde by her:
               But let it reſt, as ſure as I do liue,
               She ſhall not ſtrike dame Elnor vnreuengde.
               exit Elnor.
            
            
               King
               Beleeue me my loue, thou wert much too blame,
               I would not for a thouſand pounds of gold,
               My noble vnckle had beene here in place.
               Enter Duke Humphrey
               But ſee where he comes, I am glad he met her non
               Vnckle Gloſter, what anſwere makes your grace
               Concerning our Regent for the Realme of France?
               Whom thinkes your grace is meeteſt for to ſend?
            
            
               Humph.
               My gracious Lord, then this is my reſolue,
               For that theſe words the Armourer doth ſpeake,
               Doth breede ſuſpition on the part of Yorke,
               Let Somerſet be Regent ouer the French,
               Till trial's made, and Yorke may cleere himſelfe.
            
            
               King.
               Then be it ſo my Lord of Somerſet,
               We make your grace Regent ouer the French,
               And to defend our rights gainſt forraine foes,
               And ſo do good vnto the Realme of France,
               Make haſte my Lord, tis time that you were gone,
               The time of truce I thinke is full expirde.
            
            
               Somer.
               I humbly thanke your royall maieſtie,
               
                  And take my leaue to poſte with ſpeede to France.
               exit Somerſet.
            
            
               King
               Come vnckle Gloſter, now lets haue our horſe,
               For we will to Saint Albones preſently,
               Madame, your hawke, they ſay is ſwift of flight,
               And we will trie, how ſhe will flie to day.
               exeunt omnes. Enter Elnor, with ſir Iohn Hum, Roger Bullenbrooke a Coniurer, and Margery Iourdaine a Witch.
            
            
               Elnor.
               Here ſir Iohn take this ſcrole of paper here,
               Wherein is writ the queſtions you ſhall aske,
               And I will ſtand vpon this Tower here,
               And heare the ſpirit what it ſaies to you,
               And to my queſtions, write the anſweres downe.
               She goes vp to the Tower.
            
            
               ſir Iohn.
               Now ſirs begin and caſt your ſpels about▪
               
               And charme the fiends for to obey your wills,
               And tell Dame Elnor of the thing ſhe askes.
            
            
               Witch.
               Then Roger Bullenbrooke, about thy taske,
               And frame a circle here vpon the earth,
               Whilſt I thereon all proſtrate on my face,
               Do talke and whiſper with the diuells below,
               And coniure them for to obey my will.
               She lies downe vpon her face. Bullenbrooke makes a cir
                        •
                     le.
               
            
            
               Bullen
               Darke night, dread night, the ſilence of the night,
               Wherein the Furies maske in helliſh troupes,
               Send vp I charge you from Soſetus lake,
               The ſpirit Askalon to come to me,
               To pierce the bowells of this centricke earth,
               And hither come in twinckling of an eie,
               Askalon, Aſcenda, Aſcenda.
               It thunders and lightens, and then the ſpirit riſeth vp.
            
            
               ſpirit.
               Now Bullenbrooke, what wouldſt thou haue me do?
            
            
               Bullen.
               Firſt, of the King, what ſhall become of him?
            
            
               
               ſpirit.
               The Duke yet liues that Henry ſhall depoſe,
               Yet him out liue, and die a violent death.
            
            
               Bullen.
               What fate awaits the Duke of Suffolke▪
               
            
            
               ſpirite.
               By water he ſhall die, and take his end.
            
            
               Bullen
               What ſhall betide the Duke of Somerſet?
            
            
               ſpirit.
               Let him ſhun caſtles, ſafer ſhal he be vpon the ſandy plaines, where caſtles mounted ſtand. Now queſtion me no more, for I muſt hence againe.
               He ſinkes downe againe.
            
            
               Bullen.
               Then downe I ſay, vnto the damned poole,
               Where Pluto in his firie waggon ſits,
               Riding amidſt the ſingde and parched ſmoakes,
               The Rode of Dytas by the riuer Styx,
               There howle and burne for euer in thoſe flames,
               Riſe Iordane, riſe, and ſtay thy charming ſpells:
               Sonnes, we are betraide.
               Enter the Duke of Yorke, and the duke of Buckingham and others.
            
            
               Yorke
               Come ſirs, lay hands on them, and bind them ſure,
               This time was well watcht: what Madame, are you there?
               This will be great credit for your husband,
               That you are plotting treaſons thus with Coniurers,
               The King ſhall haue a notice of this thing.
               exit Elnor aboue.
            
            
               Buck.
               See here my Lord what the diuell hath writ.
            
            
               Yorke
               Giue it me my Lord, ile ſhew it to the King:
               Go ſirs, ſee them faſt lockt in priſon.
               exit with them.
            
            
               Buck.
               My Lord, I pray you let me go poſte vnto the King,
               Vnto Saint Albones, to tell this newes.
            
            
               Yorke
               Content▪ away then, about it ſtraight.
            
            
               Buck.
               Farewell my Lord.
               exit Buckingham.
            
            
               Yorke
               Who's within there?
               Enter one.
            
            
               One.
               My Lord.
            
            
               
               Yorke
               Sitra, go will the Earle of Salsbury and Warwicke▪ to ſup with me to night.
               exit Yorke
            
            
               One
               I will my lord.
               exit. Enter the King and Queene with her hawke on her fift, and Duke Humphrey and Suffolke, and the Cardinall, as if they came from hawking.
            
            
               Queene
               My lord, how did your grace like this laſt flight?
               But as I caſt her off the wind did riſe,
               And twas ten to one old Ione had not gone out.
            
            
               King
               How wonderfull the Lords workes are on earth▪
               
               Euen in theſe ſeely creatures of his hands!
               Vnckle Gloſter, how hie your hawke did ſoare,
               And on a ſodain ſowſt the partridge downe.
            
            
               Suff
               No maruel, if it pleaſe your maieſtie,
               My lord Protectors hawke doe towre ſo well,
               He knowes his maſter loues to be aloft.
            
            
               Hum.
               Faith my Lord it is but a baſe mind,
               That can ſoare no higher then a Faulcons pitch.
            
            
               Card.
               I thought your grace would be aboue the clowdes.
            
            
               Hum.
               Yea my lord Cardinall, were it not good
               Your grace could flie to heauen.
            
            
               Card.
               Thy heauen is on earth, thy words and thoughts beat on a crowne, prowd Protector, dangerous Peere, to ſmooth it thus with King and common-wealth.
            
            
               Hum.
               How now my lord, why this is more then needes, church-men ſo hote! good vnckle can you dote?
            
            
               Suff.
               Why not? hauing ſo good a quarrel, and ſo bad a cauſe.
            
            
               Hum.
               As how, my lord?
            
            
               Suff.
               As you, my lord, and it like your Lordly lords Protectorſhip.
            
            
               Hum.
               Why Suffolke, England knowes thy inſolence.
            
            
               Queen
               And thy ambition Gloſter.
            
            
               King.
               Ceaſe gentle Queene, and whet not on theſe furious Lords to wrath, for bleſſed are the peace-makers on earth.
            
            
               
               Card.
               Let me be bleſſed for the peace I make,
               Againſt this prowd Protector with my ſword.
            
            
               Hum.
               Faith holy vnckle, I would it were come to that.
            
            
               Card.
               Euen when thou dareſt.
            
            
               Hum.
               Dare! I tell thee Prieſt, Plantagenets could neuer brooke the dare
            
            
               Card.
               I am Plantaganet as well as thou, and ſon to Iohn of Gaunt.
            
            
               Hum.
               In Baſtardie.
            
            
               Card.
               I ſcorne thy words.
            
            
               Hum.
               Make vp no factious▪ numbers, but euen in thine own perſon meete me at the Eaſt end of the groue.
            
            
               Card.
               Heres my hand, I will.
            
            
               King
               Why how now Lords?
            
            
               Card.
               Faith coſin Gloſter, had not your man caſt off ſo ſoon, we had had more ſport to day, come with thy ſword and buckler.
            
            
               Hum.
               Faith prieſtile ſhaue your crowne.
            
            
               Card.
               Protector, protect thy ſelfe well.
            
            
               King
               The wind growes high, ſo doth your color, lords.
               Enter one crying, a myracle.
               How now! now ſirra, what miracle is it?
            
            
               One
               And it pleaſe your grace, there is a man that came blind to ſaint Albons, and hath receiued his fignt at his ſhrine.
            
            
               King
               Go fetch him hither, that we may glorifie the Lord with him.
               Enter the Mayor of ſaint Albons, and his brethren with muſicke, bearing the man that had beene blind, betweene two in a chaire.
            
            
               King
               Thou happy man giue God eternall praiſe,
               For he it is that thus hath helped thee.
            
            
               Humphrey
               Where waſt thou borne?
            
            
               poore man
               At Barwicke ſir, in the North.
            
            
               Hum.
               At Barwicke and come thus far for help?
            
            
               poore.
               Yea ſir, it was told me in my ſleepe,
               That ſweet ſaint Albons, ſhould giue me my ſight againe.
            
            
               Hum.
               What art thou lame too?
            
            
               
               Poore man
               Yea indeed ſir, God help me.
            
            
               Humphrey
               How cam
                     •
                  ſt thou lame?
            
            
               Poore man
               With falling off on a plum-tree.
            
            
               Humphrey
               Wart thou blind, and would clime plum-trees?
            
            
               Poore man
               Neuer but once ſir in all my life,
               My wife did long for plums.
            
            
               Humphrey
               But tell me, wart thou borne blind?
            
            
               Poore man
               Yea truly ſir.
            
            
               Woman.
               Yea indeed ſir, he was borne blind.
            
            
               Humphrey
               What art thou, his mother?
            
            
               Woman
               His wife ſir.
            
            
               Humphrey
               Hadſt thou beene his mother,
               Thou couldſt haue better told:
               Why let me ſee I thinke thou canſt not ſee yet.
            
            
               Poore man
               Yes truly maſter, as cleere as day.
            
            
               Humphrey
               Saiſt thou ſo! what colour's his cloake?
            
            
               Poore man
               Why red maiſter, as red as bloud.
            
            
               Humphrey
               And his cloake?
            
            
               Poore man
               Why thats greene.
            
            
               Humphrey
               And what colour's his hoſe?
            
            
               Poore man
               Yellow maiſter, yellow as gold.
            
            
               Humphrey
               And what colours my gowne?
            
            
               Poore man
               Blacke ſir, as blacke as ieat.
            
            
               King
               Then belike he knowes what colour ieat is on.
            
            
               Suffolke
               And I think ieat did he neuer ſee.
            
            
               Humph.
               But cloakes and gownes ere this day many a one▪
               
               But tell me ſirra, what's my name?
            
            
               Poore man
               Alas maſter I know not.
            
            
               Humphrey
               Whats his name?
            
            
               Poore man
               I know not.
            
            
               Humphrey
               Nor his?
            
            
               poore.
               No truly ſir.
            
            
               Hum.
               Nor his name?
            
            
               poore.
               No indeed maſter.
            
            
               Hum.
               Whats thine owne name?
            
            
               poore.
               
                  Sander, and it pleaſe you maiſter.
            
            
               Hum.
               Then Sander ſit there, the lyingeſt knaue in Chriſtendome.

If thou hadſt been borne blind, thou mightſt aſwell haue knowne all our names, as thus to name the ſeuerall colours we do weare. Sight may diſtinguiſh of colours but ſodainly to nominate them all it is impoſſible. My lords, ſame Albons here hath done a miracle, and would you not thinke his cunning to be great, that could reſtore this cripple to his legs againe?
            
            
               poore man
               Oh maiſter I would you could.
            
            
               Humphrey
               My maiſters of Saint Albons,
               Haue you not Beadles in your Towne,
               And things called whips?
            
            
               Mayor
               Yes my lord, if it pleaſe your grace.
            
            
               Hum.
               Then ſend for one preſently
            
            
               Mayor
               Sirra go fetch the Beadle hither ſtraight.
               exit one.
            
            
               Hum.
               Now fetch me a ſtoole hither by and by.
               Now ſirra, if you meane to ſaue your ſelfe from whipping.
               Leape me ouer this ſtoole, and runne away.
               Enter Beadle.
            
            
               poore.
               Alas maſter I am not able to ſtand alone,
               You go about to torture me in vaine.
            
            
               Hum.
               Well ſir, we muſt haue you find your legs,
               Sirra Beadle, whip him til he leape ouer that ſame ſtoole.
            
            
               Beadle
               I will my Lord, come on ſirra, off with your doublet quickly.
            
            
               poore.
               Alas maſter, what ſhall I do? I am not able to ſtand.
               After the beadle hath hit him one girke, he leapes ouer the ſtoole and runs away, and they run after him, crying, a miracle, a miracle.
            
            
               Hum.
               A miracle, a miracle, let him be taken againe, and whipt through euery market Towne till he comes at Barwicke where he was borne.
            
            
               Maior
               It ſhal be done my Lord.
               exit Mayor.
            
            
               Suff.
               My lord Protector hath done wonders to day,
               He hath made the blind to ſee and the halt to go.
            
            
               Hum.
               Yea but you did greater wonders, when you made whole Dukedomes flie in a day.
               
                  Witneſſe France.
            
            
               King
               Haue done I ſay, and let me heare no more of that.
               Enter the Duke of Buckingham.
               What newes brings Duke Humphrey of Buckingham?
            
            
               Buck▪
               
               Ill newes for ſome my lord, and this it is,
               That prowd dame Elnor our Protectors wife,
               Hath plotted Treaſons gainſt the King and Peeres,
               By witchcrafts, ſorceries, and coniurings,
               Who by ſuch meanes did raiſe a ſpirit vp,
               To tell her what hap ſhould betide the ſtate,
               But ere they had finiſht their diuelliſh drift,
               By Yorke and my ſelfe they were all ſurprizde,
               And heres the anſwer the diuell did make to them.
            
            
               King
               Firſt of the King, what ſhall become of him?
            
            
               Reads
               The Duke yet liues, that Henry ſhall depoſe,
               Yet him out liue, and die a violent death,
               Gods wil be done in all:
               What fate awaits the Duke of Suffolke?
               By water ſhall he die and take his end.
            
            
               Suff.
               By water muſt the duke of Suffolke diet
               It muſt be ſo, or els the diuell doth lie.
            
            
               King
               Let Somerſet ſhun caſtles,
               For ſafer ſhall he be vpon the ſandy plaines,
               Then where caſtles mounted ſtand.
            
            
               Car.
               Heres good ſtuffe: how now my lord protector?
               This newes I thinke hath turnde your weapons point,
               I am in doubt youle ſcarcely keepe your promiſe.
            
            
               Humph.
               Forbeare ambitious prelate to vrge my griefe,
               And pardon me my gracious ſoueraigne,
               For here I ſweare vnto your maieſty,
               That I am guiltleſle of theſe hainous crimes,
               Which my ambitious wife hath falſly done:
               And for ſhe would betray her ſoueraigne lord,
               There renounce her from my bed and boord,
               And leaue her open for the law to iudge,
               Vnleſſe ſhe cleere her ſelfe of this foule deed.
            
            
               King
               Come my lords this night weele lodge in S. Albons,
               
                  And to morrow we will ride to London,
               And trie the vtmoſt of theſe treaſons forth,
               Come vnkle Gloſter along with vs,
               My mind doth tell me thou art innocent.
               exeunt omnes. Enter the Duke of Yorke, and the Earles of Salſbury and Warwicke.
            
            
               Yorke
               My lords, our ſimple ſupper ended, thus
               Let me reueale vnto your honors here,
               The right and title of the houſe of Yorke,
               To Englands Crowne by lineall deſcent.
            
            
               War.
               Then Yorke begin, and if thy claime be good,
               The Neuills are thy ſubiects to commaund.
            
            
               Yorke
               Then thus my lords.
               Edward the third had ſeuen ſonnes,
               The firſt was Edward the blacke Prince,
               Prince of Wales.
               The ſecond was Edmund of Langley,
               Duke of Yorke.
               The third was Lyonell Duke of Clarence.
               The fourth was Iohn of Gaunt,
               The Duke of Lancaſter.
               The fifth was Roger Mortemer, Earle of March.
               The ſixt was ſir Thomas of Woodſtocke.
               William of Winſore was the ſeuenth and laſt.
               Now, Edward the black prince he died before his father, & left behinde him Richard, that afterwards was King, crowned by the name of Richard the ſecond, and he died without an heire. Edmund of Langly duke of Yorke died, and left behind him two daughters, Anne and Elinor.
               Lyonel duke of Clarence died, and left behind, Alice, Anne, and Elinor, that was after married to my father, and by her I claime the Crowne, as the true heyre to Lyonell Duke of Clarence the third ſonne to Edward the third. Now ſir. In the time of Richards raigne, Henry of Bullenbrooke, ſonne

and heire to Iohn of Gaunt, the Duke of Lancaſter, fourth ſon to Edward the third▪ he claimde the crown, depoſde the mirthful King, and as you both know, in Pomphret Caſtle harmles Richard was ſhamefully murthered, and ſo by Richards death came the houſe of Lancaſter vnto the Crowne.
            
            
               Salſ.
               Sauing your tale my lord, as I haue heard, in the raigne of Bullenbrook, the Duke of York did claime the Crown, and but for Owen Glendor, had bin King.
            
            
               Yorke
               True, but ſo it fortuned then, by meanes of that monſtrous rebell Glendor, the noble Duke of Yorke was done to death, and ſo euer ſince the heires of Iohn of Gaunt haue poſſeſſed the Crowne. But if the iſſue of the elder ſhould ſucceed before the iſſue of the yonger then am I lawfull heire vnto the kingdome.
            
            
               War.
               What plaine proceedings can be more plaine? he claimes it from Lyonel duke of Clarence, the third ſon to Edward the third, and Henry from Iohn of Gaunt the fourth ſon. So that til Lyonels iſſue failes, his ſhould not raigne. It fails not yet, but flouriſheth in thee and in thy ſons, braue ſlips of ſuch a ſtocke. Then noble father, kneele we both togither, and in this priuate place be we the firſt to honor him with birth-right to the Crowne.
            
            
               Both:
               Long liue Richard Englands royall King.
            
            
               Yorke
               I thank you both: but lords, I am not your king, vntil this ſword be ſheathed euen in the heart bloud of the houſe of Lancaſter.
            
            
               War.
               Then Yorke aduiſe thy ſelfe, and take thy time,
               Claime thou the Crowne, and ſet thy ſtandard vp,
               And in the ſame aduance the milke-white Roſe,
               And then to guard it▪ I wil rouſe the Beare,
               Inuiron'd with ten thouſand ragged-ſtaues
               To aide and help thee for to win thy right,
               Maugre the proudeſt lords of Henries bloud,
               That dares deny the right and claime of Yorke,
               For why, my mind preſageth I ſhall liue
               To ſee the noble Duke of Yorke to be a King.
            
            
               Yorke.
               Thanks noble Warwick, and York doth hope to ſee

The Earle of Warwicke liue, to be the greateſt man in England▪ but the King. Come lets goe.
               exeunt omnes. Enter King Henry and the Queene, Duke Humphrey, the Duke of Suffolke▪ and the Duke of Buckingham, the Cardinal, and dame Elnor Cobham, led with the Officers, and then enter to them the Duke of Yorke, and the Earles of Salſbury and Warwicke.
            
            
               King
               Stand forth dame Elnor Cobham dutches of Gloſter, & heare the ſentence pronounced againſt thee for theſe treaſons, that thou haſt committed gainſt vs, our States, and Peers. Firſt; for thy haynous crimes, thou ſhalt two daies in London do penance barefoot in the ſtreetes, with a white ſheete about thy bodie, & a wax taper burning in thy hand: that done, thou ſhaltbe baniſhed for euer into the Ile of Man, there to end thy wretched daies, and this is our ſentence irreuocable. Away with her.
               
                  Elnor Euen to my death, for I haue liued too long. exeunt ſome with Elnor.
               
            
            
               King
               Grieue not noble vnckle, but be thou glad,
               In that theſe treaſons thus are come to light,
               Leſt God had pourde his vengeance on thy head,
               For her offences that thou heldſt ſo deare.
            
            
               Humph.
               Oh gracious Henry, giue me leaue awhile,
               To leaue your grace, and to depart away.
               For ſorrowes teares hath gripte my aged heart,
               And makes the fountaines of mine eies to ſwell,
               And therefore good my Lord let me depart.
            
            
               King
               With all my heart good vnckle, when you pleaſe,
               Yet ere thou goeſt, Humphrey reſigne thy ſtaffe,
               For Henry will be no more protected,
               The Lord ſhal be my guide, both for my land and me.
            
            
               Humph.
               My ſtaffe, yea noble Henry, my life and all,
               As erſt thy noble father made it mine,
               And euen at willing at thy feet I leaue it,
               As others would ambitiouſly receiue it,
               And long hereafter when I am dead and gone,
               May honourable peace attend thy throne.
            
            
               King
               Vnkle Gloſter, ſtand vp and go in peace,
               
                  No leſſe beloued of vs, then when
               Thou wert Protector ouer my land.
               exit Gloſter.
            
            
               Queene
               Take vp the ſtaffe, for here it ought to ſtand,
               Where ſhould it be but in King Henries hand?
            
            
               Yorke
               Pleaſe it your maieſtie, this is the day
               That was appointed for the combating,
               Betweene the Armourer and his man, my Lord,
               And they are ready when your grace doth pleaſe.
            
            
               King
               Then call them forth, that they may try their rights.
               Enter at one doore the Armourer and his neighbours, drinking to him ſo much that he is drunken, and he enters with a drum before him, and his ſtaffe with a ſand-bagge faſtened to is: and at the other doore, his man with a drum and ſand-bag, and Prentiſes drinking to him.
            
            
               1 Neighbor
               Here neighbor Horner, I drink to you in a cup of ſack.
               And feare not neighbor, you ſhall do well enough.
            
            
               2 Neigh.
               And here neighbor, heres a cup of Charneco.
            
            
               3 Neigh.
               Heres a pot of good double beere, neighbour drinke and be mery, and feare not your man.
            
            
               Armonrer
               Let it come, yfaith Ile pledge you all,
               And a fig for Peter.
            
            
               1 Prentiſe
               Here Peter, I drinke to thee, and be not affeard
            
            
               2 Pren.
               Here Peter, heres a pint of Claret wine for thee▪
               
            
            
               3 Pren.
               And heres a quart for me, and be mery Peter,
               And feare not thy maiſter, fight for credit of the prentiſes.
            
            
               Peter
               I thanke you all, but Ile drinke no more,
               Here Robin, and if I die, here I giue thee my hammer,
               And Will, thou ſhalt haue my aperne, and here Tom,
               Take all my mony that I haue.
               O Lord bleſſe me, I pray God, for I am neuer able to deale with my maſter, he hath learnd ſo much fence already.
            
            
               Salſb.
               Come leaue your drinking, and fall to blowes:
               Sirra whats thy name?
            
            
               Peter
               Peter forſooth.
            
            
               Salſb.
               Peter, what more?
            
            
               Peter.
               Thump.
            
            
               
               Salsb.
               Thump, then ſee that thou thump thy maſter.
            
            
               Arm.
               Here to thee neighbor, fil al the pots againe, for before we fight, look you, I will tell you my mind, for I am come hither, as it were of mans inſtigation, to proue my ſelfe an honeſt man, & Peter a knaue, & ſo haue at you Peter, with down right blowes, as Beuis of Southampton fell vpon Askapart.
            
            
               Peter
               Law you now, I told you hees in his fence already.
               Alarme: and Peter hits him on the head and fels him
            
            
               Arm.
               Hold Peter, I confeſſe, treaſon, treaſon.
               he dies.
            
            
               Peter
               O God I giue thee praiſe.
               he kneeles downe.
            
            
               Pren.
               Ho well done Peter: God ſaue the King.
            
            
               King
               Go take hence that triator from our ſight,
               For by his death we do perceiue his guilt,
               And God in iuſtice hath reueald to vs,
               The truth and innocence of this poore fellow,
               Which he had thought to haue murthered wrongfully:
               Come fellow follow vs for thy reward.
               exeunt 
                     〈◊〉
                   Enter Duke Humphrey and his men, in mourning cloakes.
            
            
               Humph.
               Sirra, what's a clocke?
            
            
               ſeruing.
               Almoſt ten my Lord.
            
            
               Humph.
               Then is that wofull houre hard at hand,
               That my poore lady ſhould come by this way.
               In ſhamefull penance wandring in the ſtreetes,
               Sweete Nell, ill can thy noble mind abrooke,
               The abiect people gazing on thy face,
               With enuious lookes laughing at thy ſhame,
               That earſt did follow thy proud Chariot wheeles,
               When thou didſt ride in triumph through the ſtreetes.
               Enter Dame Elnor Cobham barefoote, and a white ſheete about her, with a waxe candle in her hand, and verſes writen on her back and pind on, and accompanied with the Shiriffes of London, and ſir Iohn Standly, and officers, with billes and holbards.
            
            
               Seruing.
               My gracious Lord, ſee where my lady comes,
               Pleaſe it your grace, weele take her from the Shiriffes?
            
            
               
               Humph.
               I charge you for your lines ſtir not a foote,
               Nor offer once to draw a weapon here,
               But let them do their office as they ſhould.
            
            
               Elnor
               Come you my Lord to ſee my open ſhame?
               Ah Gloſter, now thou doeſt penance too,
               See how the giddie people looke at thee,
               Shaking their heads, and pointing at thee here,
               Go get thee gone, and hide thee from their ſights▪
               
               And in thy pent vp ſtudie rue my ſhame,
               And ban thine enemies: Ah mine and thine.
            
            
               Hum.
               Ah Nell, ſweet Nell, forget this extreame griefe,
               And beare it patiently to eaſe thy heart
            
            
               Elnor
               Ah Gloſter, teach me to forget my ſelfe,
               For whilſt I thinke I am thy wedded wife,
               Then thought of this, doth kill my wofull heart,
               The ruthleſſe flints do cut my tender feete,
               And when I ſtart, the cruell people laugh,
               And bids me be aduiſed how I tread,
               And thus with burning Tapor in my hand,
               Malde vp in ſhame with papers on my backe,
               Ah Gloſter, can I endure this and liue?
               Sometime Ile ſay I am Duke Humphreys wife,
               And he a Prince, Protector of the land,
               But ſo he rulde, and ſuch a Prince he was,
               As he ſtood by, whilſt I his forlorne Dutches,
               Was led with ſhame, and made a laughing ſtocke,
               To euery idle raſcall follower.
            
            
               Hum.
               My louely Nell, what wouldſt thou haue me do▪
               
               Should I attempt to reſeue thee from hence,
               I ſhould incurre the danger of the law,
               And thy diſgrace would not be ſhadowed ſo.
            
            
               Elnor
               Be thou milde, and ſtir not at my diſgrace,
               Vntill the axe of death hang ouen thy head,
               As ſhortly ſure it will: For Suffolke he,
               The new made Duke▪ that may do al in all
               With her that loues him ſo, and hates vs all,
               And impious Yorke and Beuiford that falſe prieſt,
               
                  Haue all lymde buſhes to betray thy wings,
               And flie thou how thou can they will intangle thee.
               Enter a Herald of Armes.
            
            
               Herald.
               I ſummon your grace, vnto his highnes Parlament holden at ſaint Edmunds bury, the firſt of the next month.
            
            
               Humph.
               A Parlament and our conſent neuer craude
               Therein before. This is ſo deine.
               Well, we will be there.
               
                  exit Herald. Maiſter Shiriffe, I pray proceede no further againſt my lady, then the courſe of law extends.
            
            
               Shiriffe
               Pleaſe it your grace, my office here doth end,
               And I muſt deliuer her to ſir Iohn Standly,
               To be conducted into the Ile of Man.
            
            
               Humph.
               Muſt you ſir Iohn conduct my lady?
            
            
               Standly
               Yea my gracious lord, for ſo it is decreede,
               And I am ſo commaunded by the King.
            
            
               Humph.
               I pray you ſir Iohn, vſe her nere the worſe,
               In that I intreat you to vſe her well,
               The world may ſmile againe, and I may liue▪
               
               To do you fauor if you do it her,
               And ſo ſir Iohn farewell.
            
            
               Elnor
               What? gone my lord, and bid not me farewell?
            
            
               Hum.
               Witneſſe my bleeding heart, I cannot ſtay to ſpeake.
               exit Humphrey and his men.
            
            
               Elnor
               Then is he gone, is noble Gloſter gone,
               And doth duke Humphrey now forſake me too?
               Then let me haſte from out faire Englands boundes,
               Com
                     •
                   Standloy, come, and let vs haſte away.
            
            
               Standly
               Madame, lets go vnto ſome houſe here by.
               Where you may ſhift yourſelfe before we goe.
            
            
               Elnor
               Ah good ſir Iohn▪ my ſhame cannot be hid,
               Nor put away, with caſting off my ſheete:
               But come, let vs go, maſter Shiriffe farewell,
               Thou haſt but done thy office as thou ſhouldſt.
               exeunt omnes
               Enter to the Parlament.
               Enter two Heralds before, then the Duke of Buckingham, and the

Duke of Suffolke, and then the Duke of Yorke, and the Cardinall of Wincheſter, and then the King and Queene and then the Earle of Saliſbury, and the Earle of Warwicke.
            
            
               King
               I wonder our vnckle Gloſter ſtaies ſo long.
            
            
               Queene
               Can you not ſee, or will you not perceiue,
               How that ambitious duke doth vſe himſelfe?
               The time hath beene, but now that time is paſt,
               That none ſo humble as Duke Humphrey was:
               But now let one meete him euen in the mome,
               When euery one will giue the time of day,
               And he will neither moue nor ſpeake to vs,
               See you not the Commons follow him
               In troupes, crying, God ſaue the good Duke Humphrey,
               And with long life Ieſus preſerue his grace,
               Honoring him as if he were a King:
               Gloſter is no little man in England,
               And if he liſt to ſtir commotions,
               Tis likely that the people will follow him:
               My lord, if you imagine, there is no ſuch thing▪
               
               Then let it paſſe, and call it a womans feare,
               My lord of Suffolke, Buckingham, and Yorke,
               Diſproue my allegations if you can,
               And by your ſpeeches, if you can reproue me,
               I will ſubſcribe and ſay, I wrong de the Duke.
            
            
               Suffolke
               Well hath your grace foreſeene into that Duke,
               And if I had beene licenſt firſt to ſpeake,
               I thinke I ſhould haue told your graces tale,
               Smooth runs the brooke whereas the ſtreame is deepeſt▪
               
               No, no my ſoueraigne▪ Gloſter is a man
               Vnſounded yet, and full of deepe deceit.
               Enter the Duke of Somerſet.
            
            
               King
               Welcome Lord Somerſet, what newes from France▪
               
            
            
               Somer.
               Cold newes my lord, and this it is,
               That all your holds and Townes within thoſe Territories.
               Is ouer come my Lord, and all is loſt.
            
            
               King
               Cold newes indeede Lord Somerſet,
               But Gods will be done.
            
            
               
               Yorke
               Cold newes for me, for I had hope of France,
               Euen as I haue of fertill England.
               Enter Duke Humphrey.
            
            
               Humph.
               Pardon my liege, that I haue ſtaid ſo long.
            
            
               Suffolke.
               Nay Gloſter, know, that thou art come too ſoon,
               Vnleſſe thou proue more loyall then thou art,
               We do arreſt thee on high treaſon here.
            
            
               Humph.
               Why Suffolkes duke thou ſhalt not ſee me bluſh
               Nor change my countenance for thine arreſt,
               Whereof am I guiltie, who are my accuſers?
            
            
               York.
               Tis thought my lord, your grace tooke bribes from France,
               And ſtopt the ſouldiers of their pay,
               By which his maieſtie hath loſt all France.
            
            
               Humph.
               Is it but thought ſo, and who are they that think ſo?
               So God help me, as I haue watcht the night,
               Euer intending good for England ſtill,
               That pennie that euer I tooke from France,
               Be brought againſt me at the iudgement day,
               I neuer robd the ſouldiers of their pay,
               Many a pound of mine owne proper coſt
               Haue I ſent ouer for the ſouldiers wants,
               Becauſe I would not racke the needie Commons.
            
            
               Car.
               In your Protectorſhip you did deuiſe,
               Strange torments for offendors, by which meanes
               England hath beene defamde by tyrannie.
            
            
               Hum.
               Why tis well knowne that whilſt I was protector,
               Pittie was all the fault that was in me:
               A murtherer, or foule felonious theefe,
               That robs and murthers ſeely paſſengers,
               I torturd aboue the rate of common law.
            
            
               Suffolke.
               Tuſh my lord, theſe be things of no account▪
               
               But greater matters are laid vnto your charge,
               I do arreſt thee on high treaſon here,
               And commit thee to my good Lord Cardinall,
               Vntill ſuch time as thou canſt cleere thy ſelfe.
            
            
               King
               Good vnckle obey to his arreſt,
               I haue no doubt but thou ſhalt cleere thy ſelfe,
               
                  My conſcience tels me thou are innocent.
            
            
               Humph.
               Ah gracious Henry theſe daies are dangerous,
               And would my death might end theſe miſeries,
               And ſtay their moodes for good King Henries ſake,
               But I am made the Prologue to their play,
               And thouſands more muſt follow after me,
               That dreads not yet their liues deſtruction,
               Suffolkes hatefull tongue blabs his hearts malice.
               Gewfords firie eies ſhewes his enuious mind,
               Buckinghams prowd lookes bewraies his cruel thoughts,
               And dogged Yorke that leuells at the Moone.
               Whoſe ouerweening arme I haue held backe:
               All you haue ioynd to betray me thus:
               And you my gracious lady, and Soueraigne miſtris,
               Cauſeleſſe haue laid complaints vpon my head,
               I ſhall not want falſe witneſſes inow,
               That ſo amongſt you, you may haue my life.
               The prouerb no doubt will be well performde,
               A ſtaffe is quickly found to beate a dog.
            
            
               Suffolke
               Doth he not twit our Soueraigne lady here,
               As if that ſhee with ignominious wrong,
               Had ſubornd or hyred ſome to ſweare againſt his life?
            
            
               Queene
               Yea but I can giue the loſer leaue to ſpeake.
            
            
               Humph.
               Far truer ſpoke then ment, I looſe indeed,
               Beſhrew the winners hearts, they play me falſe.
            
            
               Buck.
               Heele wreſt the ſence and keep vs here al day,
               My Lord of Wincheſter ſee him ſent away.
            
            
               Card.
               Who's within there? take in Duke Humphrey,
               And ſee him garded ſure within my houſe.
            
            
               Humph.
               O! thus king Henry caſts away his crouch,
               Before his legs can beare his body vp,
               And puts his watchfull ſhepheard from his ſide,
               Whilſt wolues ſtand ſnarring who ſhal bite him firſt.
               Farewel my ſoueraigne, long maiſt thou enioy,
               Thy fathers happie daies free from annoy.
               Exit Humphrey, with the Cardinals men.
            
            
               King
               My lords, what to your wiſedomes ſhall ſeeme beſt,
               
                  Do and vndo, as if our ſelfe were here.
            
            
               Queene
               What wil your highneſſe leaue the Parlament?
            
            
               King
               Yea Margaret, my heart is killed with griefe,
               Where I may ſit and ſigh in endleſſe mone,
               For who's a traitor? Gloſter he is none.
               exit King, Salsbury, and Warwicke.
            
            
               Queene
               Then ſit we downe againe my lord Cardinall,
               Suffolke, Buckingham, Yorke and Somerſet,
               Let vs conſult of prowd duke Humphries fall,
               In mine opinion it were good he dide,
               For ſafetie of our King and common wealth.
            
            
               Suffolke
               And ſo thinke I madame, for as you know.
               If our King Henry had ſhooke hands with death,
               Duke Humphrey then would looke to be our King,
               And it may be, by pollicie he workes,
               To bring to paſſe the thing which now we doubt,
               The foxe barkes not when he would ſteale the lamb,
               But if we take him ere he do the deede,
               We ſhould not queſtion, if that he ſhould liue,
               No, let him die, in that he is a foxe,
               Leſt that in liuing he offend vs more.
            
            
               Car.
               Then let him die before the Commons know,
               For feare that they do riſe in Armes for him.
            
            
               York
               Then do it ſodainly my Lords.
            
            
               Suff.
               Let that be my lord Cardinalls charge and mine.
            
            
               Car.
               Agreed, for hee's already kept within my houſe.
               Enter a Meſſenger.
            
            
               Queene
               How now ſirra, what newes?
            
            
               Meſſen.
               Madame, I bring you newes from Ireland,
               The wilde Onele my lord, is vp in Armes,
               With troupes of Iriſh Kernes that vncontrold,
               Do plant themſelues within the Engliſh pale,
               And burne and ſpoile the Country as they go.
            
            
               Queen
               What redreſſe ſhall we haue for this my Lords?
            
            
               Yorke
               Twere very good, that my Lord of Somerſet
               That fortunate champion were ſent ouer.
               To keepe in awe the ſtubborne Iriſhmen,
               
                  He did ſo much good when he was in France.
            
            
               Somer.
               Had Yorke beene there with all his far fetcht
               Pollicies he might haue loſt as much as I.
            
            
               Yorke
               Yea, for Yorke would haue loſt his life▪ before
               That ſhould haue reuolted from Englands rule.
            
            
               Somer.
               Yea, ſo thou might'ſt, and yet haue gouernd worſe then I.
            
            
               Yorke
               What worſe then nought, then a ſhame take all.
            
            
               Somer.
               Shame on thy ſelfe, that wiſheth ſhame.
            
            
               Queene
               Somerſet for beare, good Yorke be patient,
               And do thou take in hand to croſſe the ſeas,
               With troupes of armed men to quell the pride,
               Of thoſe ambitious Iriſh that rebell.
            
            
               Yorke.
               Well Madame, ſith your grace is ſo content,
               Let me haue ſome bands of choſen ſouldiers,
               And Yorke ſhall trie his fortune gainſt thoſe Kernes.
            
            
               Queene
               Yorke thou ſhalt, my lord of Buckingham,
               Let it be your charge to muſter vp ſuch ſouldiers,
               As ſhall ſuffice him in theſe needfull warres.
            
            
               Buck.
               Madame I wil, and leuie ſuch a band
               As ſoone ſhal ouercome thoſe Iriſh rebells:
               But Yorke, where ſhal thoſe ſouldiers ſtay for thee?
            
            
               Yorke
               At Briſtow, I will expect them ten daies hence.
            
            
               Buck.
               Then thither ſhall they come, and ſo farewell.
               exit Buckingham.
            
            
               Yorke
               Adiew my Lord of Buckingham.
            
            
               Queene
               Suffolke remember what you haue to do,
               And you Lord Cardinal concerning Duke Humphrey.
               Twere good that you did ſee to it in time.
               Come let vs go, that it may be performde.
               exeunt omnes, manet Yorke.
            
            
               Yorke
               Now Yorke bethinke thy ſelfe and rouſe thee vp,
               Take time whilſt it is offered thee ſo faire,
               Leſt when thou wouldſt, thou canſt not it attaine,
               Twas men I lackt, and now they giue them me,
               And now whilſt I am buſie in Ireland,
               I haue ſeduede a head ſtrong Kentiſh man,
               Iohn Cade of Aſhford,
               
                  Vnder the title of ſir Iohn Mortimer,
               To raiſe commotion, and by that meanes,
               I ſhall perceiue how the common people,
               Do affect the claime and houſe of Yorke,
               Then if he haue ſucceſſe in his affaires,
               From Ireland then comes Yorke againe,
               To reape the harueſt which that coyſtril ſowed,
               Now if he ſhould be taken and condemnd,
               Heele nere confeſſe that I did ſet him on,
               And therefore ere I go, ile ſend him word,
               To put in practiſe and to gather head,
               That ſo ſoone as I am gone, he may begin
               To riſe in Armes with troupes of country ſwaines:
               To help him to performe this enterprize,
               And then Duke Humprhey, he well made away,
               None then can ſtop the light to Englands crowne,
               But York can tame and headlong pul them down.
               
                  
                     exit York.
                  
                  
                     Then the curtaines being drawne, Duke Humphrey is diſcouered in his bed, and two men lying on his breſt and ſmothering him in his bed: and then enter the Duke of Suffolke to them.
                  
               
            
            
               Suff.
               How now ſirs, what haue you diſpatcht him?
            
            
               One.
               Yea my Lord, he is dead I warrant you.
            
            
               Suff.
               Then ſee the clothes laid ſmooth about him ſtil,
               That when the King comes, he may perceiue
               No other, but that he dide of his owne accord.
            
            
               2
               All things is hanſome now my Lord.
            
            
               Suff.
               Then draw the curtaines againe, and get you gone,
               And you ſhal haue your firm reward anon
               
                  
                     exeunt murderers.
                  
                  
                     Then enter the King and Queene, the Duke of Buckingham, and the Duke of Somerſet, and the Cardinall.
                  
               
            
            
               King
               My lord of Suffolke go call our vnckle Gloſter,
               Tell him, this day we will that he do cleare himſelfe.
            
            
               Suff.
               I will my Lord.
               exit Suffolke.
            
            
               King.
               And good my lords, proceed no further againſt our vnkle Gloſter,
               Then by iuſt proofe you can affirme,
               
                  For as the ſucking child or harmleſſe lamb,
               So is he innocent of treaſon to our ſtate.
               Enter Suffolke.
               How now Suffolke, where's our vnckle?
            
            
               Suff.
               Dead in his bed, my Lord, Gloſter is dead.
               The King falls in a ſwoone.
            
            
               Queene
               Ay me, the King is dead: help, help, my lords
            
            
               Suff.
               Comfort my Lord, gracious Henry, comfort.
            
            
               King
               What doth my Lord of Suffolke bid me comfort?
               Came he euen now to ſing a Rauens note,
               And thinkes he that the cherping of a Wren,
               By crying comfort through a hollow voice,
               Can ſatiſſie my griefes, or eaſe my heart?
               Thou balefull meſſenger, out of my ſight,
               For euen in thy eie-balls murther ſits,
               Yet do not go: come Baſaliske
               And kill the ſeely gazer with thy lookes.
            
            
               Queene
               Why do you rate my lord of Suffolke thus,
               As if that he had cauſde Duke Humphreys death?
               The Duke and I too, you know were enemies,
               And you had beſt ſay that I did murther him.
            
            
               King
               Ah woe is me, for wretched Gloſters death.
            
            
               Queene
               Be wee for me, more wretched then he was,
               What doſt thou turne away and hide thy face?
               I am no loathſome leaper, looke on me,
               Was I for this nie wrackt vpon the ſea?
               And thrice by aukward winds driuen backe from Englands bounds,
               What might it bode but that well foretelling
               Winds ſaid, ſecke not a ſcorpions neaſt.
               Enter the Earles of Warwicke and Salſbury.
            
            
               War.
               My lord, the Commons like an angry hiue ofbees,
               Run vp and downe, caring not whom they ſting,
               For good Humphreys death, whom they report
               To be murthered by Suffolke and the Cardinal here.
            
            
               King
               That he is dead (good Warwicke) is too true,
               But how he died, God knowes, not Henry.
            
            
               War.
               Enter his priuy chamber my lord, and view the body.
               
                  Good father ſtay you with the rude multitude til I returne.
            
            
               Salsb.
               I will ſonne.
               exit Salsbury. Warwicke drawes the curtaines and ſhewes Duke Humphrey in his bed.
            
            
               King
               Ah vnckle Gloſter, heauen receiue thy ſoule,
               Farewell poore Henries ioy, now thou art gone.
            
            
               War.
               Now by his ſoule, that tooke our ſhape vpon him▪
               
               To free vs from his fathers dreadful curſe,
               I am reſolu'd that violent hands were laid,
               Vpon the life of this famous Duke.
            
            
               Suff.
               A dreadfull oath ſworne with a ſolemne tongue,
               What inſtance giues Lord Warwicke for theſe wordes?
            
            
               War.
               Oft haue I ſeene a timely parted ghoſt,
               Of aſhie ſemblance, pale and bloudleſſe:
               But loe, the bloud is ſetled in the face,
               More better coloured, then when he liude,
               His well proportioned beard made rough and ſterne,
               His fingers ſpread abroad as one that graſpt for life,
               Yet was by ſtrength ſurpriſde, the leaſt of theſe are probable,
               It cannot chuſe but he was murthered.
            
            
               Queene
               Suffolke and the Cardinall had him in charge.
               And they I truſt ſir, are no murtherers.
            
            
               War.
               Yea, but twas well knowne they were not his friends,
               And tis well ſeene he found ſome enemies.
            
            
               Card.
               But haue you no greater proofes then theſe?
            
            
               War.
               Who ſees a heifer dead and bleeding freſh,
               And ſees hard by a butcher with an axe,
               But wil ſuſpect twas he that made the ſlaughter?
               Who finds the partrige in the puttockes neaſt,
               But will imagine how the bird came there,
               Although the Kite ſoare with vnbloudy beake?
               Euen ſo ſuſpitious is this Tragedie.
            
            
               Queene
               Are you the Kite Bewford, where's your talants?
               Is Suffolke the butcher, where's his Knife?
            
            
               Suff.
               I weare no Knife to ſlaughter ſleeping men,
               But heres a vengefull ſword ruſted with caſe,
               That ſhall be ſcoured in his 
                     〈…〉
                   heart,
               
                  That ſlanders me with murthers crimſon badge,
               Say if thou dare prowd Lord of Warwickſhire,
               That I am guilty in Duke Humphreys death.
               exit Cardinall.
            
            
               War.
               What dares not Warwick, if falſe Suffolk dare him▪
               
            
            
               Queene
               He dares not calme his contumelious ſpirit,
               Nor ceaſe to be an arrogant controwler,
               Though Suffolke dare him twentie hundreth times.
            
            
               War.
               Madame be ye ſtill, with reuerence may I ſay it,
               That euery word you ſpeake in his defence,
               Is ſlaunder to your royall maieſtie.
            
            
               Suff.
               Blunt witted lord, ignoble in thy words,
               If euer Lady wrongd her lord ſo much,
               Thy mother tooke vnto her blamefull bed,
               Some ſterne vntutred churle, and noble ſtocke,
               Was graft with crab-tree ſlip, whoſe fruite thou art,
               And neuer of the Neuils noble race.
            
            
               War.
               But that the guilt of murther bucklers thee,
               And I ſhould rob the deaths man of his fee,
               Quitting thee thereby of ten thouſand ſhames,
               And that my ſoueraignes preſence makes me mute,
               I would falſe murtherous coward on thy knees,
               Make thee craue pardon for thy paſſed ſpeech,
               And ſay it was thy mother that thou meantſt,
               That thou thy ſelfe waſt borne in baſtardy,
               And after all this fearefull homage done,
               Giue thee thy hyre, and ſend thy ſoule to hell,
               Pernitious bloud-ſucker of ſleeping men.
            
            
               Suff.
               Thou ſhouldſt be waking whilſt I ſhead thy bloud,
               If from this preſence thou dare go with me.
            
            
               War.
               Away euen now, or I will drag thee hence.
               Warwicke pulls him out. Exit Warwicke and Suffolke, and then all the Commons within, cries, downe with Suffolke, downe with Suffolke. And then enter againe the duke of Suffolke and Warwicke, with their weapons drawne.
            
            
               King
               Why how now lords?
            
            
               
               Suff.
               The traiterous Warwicke with the men of Berry,
               Set al vpon me, mightie ſoueraigne.
               The commons againe cries downe with Suffolke, downe with Suffolke. And enter from them the Earle of Saliſbury.
            
            
               Salſb.
               My Lord, the Commons ſends you word by me,
               That vnleſſe falſe Suffolk here be done to death,
               Or baniſhed faire Englands territories,
               That they will erre from your highneſſe perſon,
               They ſay, by him the good Duke Humphrey died,
               They ſay, by him they feare the ruine of the Realme:
               And therefore, if you loue your ſubiects weale,
               They wiſh you to baniſh him from forth the land.
            
            
               Suff.
               Indeed tis like the Commons rude vnpoliſht hinds,
               Would ſend ſuch meſſage to their ſoueraigne,
               But you my lord were glad to be imployd.
               To trie how quaint an Orator you were,
               But all the honor Salsbury hath got,
               Is, that he was the Lord Embaſſadour,
               Sent from a ſort of tinkars to the King.
               The Commons cries, an anſwere from the King, my Lord of Salſbury.
            
            
               King
               Good Salsbury go backe againe to them.
               Tell them we thanke them for all their louing care,
               And had not I beene cited thus by their meanes,
               My ſelfe had done it: therefore here I ſweare,
               If Suffolke be found to breathe in any place,
               Where I haue rule, but three daies more, he dies.
               exit Salſbury.
            
            
               Queene.
               Oh Henry, reuerſe the doome of gentle Suffolkes baniſhment.
            
            
               King
               Vngentle Queene, to cal him gentle Suffolke,
               Speake not for him, for in England he ſhall not reſt,
               If I ſay, I may relent, but if I ſweare it is irreuocable:
               Come Warwicke, and go thou in with me,
               For I haue great matters to impart to thee.
               exit King and Warwicke, manet Queene and Suffolke.
            
            
               
               Queene
               Hell fire and vengeance go along with you,
               Theres two of you, the diuell make the third,
               Fre womaniſh man, canſt thou not curſe thy enemies?
            
            
               Suff.
               A plague vpon them: wherefore ſhould I curſe them?
               Could curſes kill as do the Mandrakes groanes,
               I would inuent as many bitter termes,
               Deliuered ſtrongly through my fixed teeth,
               With twice ſo many ſignes of deadly hate,
               As leane facde Enuy in her loathſome caue,
               My tongue ſhould ſtumble in mine earneſt words,
               Mine etes ſhould ſparkle like the beaten ſlint,
               My haire be fixt on end, as one diſtraught,
               And euery ioynt ſhould ſeeme to curſe and ban,
               And now me thinkes my burthened heart would breake.
               Should I not curſe them: poiſon be their drinke,
               Gall, worſe then gall, the daintieſt thing they taſte,
               Their ſweeteſt ſhade, a groue of ſypris trees,
               Their ſofteſt touch, as ſmart as lyzards ſtings,
               Their muſique frightfull, like the ſerpents hiſſe.
               And boding ſcrike-owles make the conſort full,
               All the foule terrors in darke ſeated hell.
            
            
               Queene.
               Enough ſweete Suffolke, thou tormentſt thy ſelf.
            
            
               Suffolke
               You bade me ban, and will you bid me ceaſed
               Now by this ground that I am baniſht from,
               Well could I curſe away a winters night,
               And ſtanding naked on a mountaine top,
               Where biting cold would neuer let graſſe grow,
               And thinke it but a minute ſpent in ſport.
            
            
               Queene
               No more, ſweete Suffolk, hie thee hence to France,
               Or liue where thou wilt within this worldes globe,
               Ile haue an Iriſh that ſhall find thee out,
               And long thou ſhalt not ſtay, but ile haue thee repeald,
               Or venture to be baniſhed my ſelfe,
               Oh let this kiſle be printed in thy hand.
               That when thou ſeeſt it, thou maiſt thinke on me:
               A way, I ſay, that I may feele my griefe,
               For it is nothing whilſt thou ſtandeſt here.
            
            
               
               Suff.
               Thus is poore Suffolke ten times baniſhed,
               Once by the King, but three times thrice by thee.
               Enter Uawſe.
            
            
               Queene
               How now, whither goes Vawſe ſo faſt▪
               
            
            
               Vawſe.
               To ſignific vnto his maieſty,
               That Cardinall Bewford is at point of death,
               Somtimes he raues and cries as he were mad,
               Sometimes he calls vpon Duke Humphreys ghoſt,
               And whiſpers to his pillow as to him,
               And ſometime he calls to ſpeake vnto the King,
               And I am going to certifie vnto his grace,
               That euen now he cald alowd for him.
            
            
               Queene
               Go then good Vawſe, and certifie the King.
               exit Uawſe.
               Oh what is worldly pompe! all men muſt die.
               And woe am I for Bewfords heauy end,
               But why mourne I for him, whilſt thou art here?
               Sweete Suffolke hie thee hence to France,
               For if the King do come, thou ſure muſt die.
            
            
               Suff.
               And if I go, I cannot liue: but here to die,
               VVhat were it elſe, but like a pleaſant ſlumber
               In thy lap?
               Here could I, could I, breeath my ſoule into the ayre,
               As milde and gentle as the new borne babe,
               That dies with mothers dug between his lips,
               VVhere from thy ſight I ſhould be raging mad,
               And call for thee to cloſe mine eies,
               Or with thy lips to ſtop my dying ſoule,
               That I might breath it ſo into thy body,
               And then it liude in ſweete Elyziam;
               By thee to die, were but to die in ieaſt,
               From thee to die, were torment more then death,
               O let me ſtay, befall what may befall.
            
            
               Queene
               Oh mightſt thou ſtay with ſafetie of thy life,
               Then ſhouldſt thou ſtay, but heauens deny it,
               And therefore go, but hope ere long to be repeald.
            
            
               Suff.
               I goe.
            
            
               
               Queene
               And take my heart with thee.
               She kiſſesh him.
            
            
               Suff.
               A iewell lockt into the wofulſt caske,
               That euer yet containd a thing of worth;
               Thus like a ſplitted barke ſo ſunder we:
               This way fall I to death.
               exit Suffolke.
            
            
               Queene
               This way for me.
               exit Queene. Enter King and Salſbury, and then the curtaines be drawne, and the Cardinall is diſcouered in his bed, rauing and ſtaring as if he were mad.
            
            
               Car.
               O death, if thou wilt let me liue but one whole yeare,
               He giue thee as much gold as wil purchaſe ſuch another Iland.
            
            
               King
               Oh ſee my lord of Salsbury how he is troubled,
               Lord Cardinall, remember Chriſt muſt haue thy ſoule.
            
            
               Car.
               Why died he not in his bed?
               What would you haue me to do then?
               Can I make men liue whether they will or no?
               Sirra, go fetch me the ſtrong poiſon which the Pothicary ſont
               Oh ſee where Duke Humphreys ghoſt doth ſtand, (me:
               And ſtares me in the face: looke, look, combe down his haire,
               So now hees gone againe: Oh, oh, oh.
            
            
               Sall.
               See how the pangs of death doth gripe his heart,
            
            
               King
               Lord Cardinal, if thou dieſt aſſured of heauenly bliſſe,
               Hold vp thy hand, and make ſome ſigne to vs.
               The Cardinall dies.
               Oh ſee, he dies, and makes no ſigne at all,
               Oh God forgiue his ſoule.
            
            
               Sals.
               So bad an end did neuer none behold,
               But as his death, ſo was his life in all.
            
            
               King
               Forbeare to iudge, good Salsbury forbeare,
               For God will iudge vs all:
               Go take him hence, and ſee his funeralls be performde.
               exeunt omnes. Alarmes within, and the chambers be diſcharged, like as in were a fight at ſea. And then enter the captaine of the ſhippe and the Maſter, and the Maſters mate, and the duke of Suffolke

diſguiſed, and others with him, and Walter Whickemore.
            
            
               Cap.
               Bring forward theſe priſoners that ſcornd to yeeld,
               Vnlade their goods with ſpeed, and ſincke their ſhip,
               Here maſter, this priſoner I giue to you:
               This other, the Maſters Mate ſhall haue,
               And Walter Whickmore, thou ſhalt haue this man,
               And let them pay their ranſomes ere they paſſe.
            
            
               Suff.
               Walter!
               he ſtarteth.
            
            
               Walter
               How now, what doeſt thou feare me?
               Thou ſhalt haue better cauſe anon.
            
            
               Suff.
               It is thy name affrights me, not thy ſelfe:
               I do remember well, a cunning wiſard told me,
               That by Walter I ſhould die:
               Yet let not that make thee bloudie minded,
               Thy name being rightly ſounded,
               Is Gualter, not Walter.
            
            
               Walter
               Gualter or Walter, all's on to me,
               I am the man muſt bring thee to thy death.
            
            
               Suff.
               I am a Gentleman looke on my Ring,
               Ranſome me at what thou wilt, it ſhall be paid.
            
            
               Walter
               I loſt mine eye in boording of the ſhip,
               And therefore ere I marchant-like ſell bloud for gold,
               Then caſt me headlong downe into the ſea.
            
            
               2 Priſo.
               But what ſhall our ranſomes be?
            
            
               Maſter
               A hundreth pounds a peece, either pay that, or die.
            
            
               2 Priſo.
               Then ſaue our liues, it ſhall be paid.
            
            
               Walter
               Come ſirra, thy life ſhall be the ranſome
               I wil haue.
            
            
               Suff.
               Stay villaine, thy priſoner is a prince,
               The Duke of Suffolke, William de la Poole.
            
            
               Cap.
               The Duke of Suffolke folded vp in rags?
            
            
               Suf.
               Yea ſir, but theſe rags are no part of the duke,
               Ioue ſometime went diſguiſde, and why not I?
            
            
               Cap.
               Yea but Ioue was neuer ſlaine as thou ſhalt be.
            
            
               Suff.
               Baſe Iady groome, King Henries bloud,
               The honorable bloud of Lancaſter,
               
                  Cannot be ſhead by ſuch a lowly ſwaine,
               I am ſent Ambaſſador for the Queene to France,
               I charge thee waffe me croſſe the channell ſafe.
            
            
               Cap.
               Ile waffe thee to thy death, go Walter take him hence
               And on our long boates ſide, chop off his head.
            
            
               Suff▪
               
               Thou darſte not for thine owne.
            
            
               Cap.
               Yes Poole.
            
            
               Suff.
               Poole?
            
            
               Cap.
               Yea, Poole, puddle, kennell, ſincke and durt,
               Ile ſtop that yawning mouth of thine,
               Thoſe lips of thine that ſo oft haue kiſt the Queene,
               Shall ſweep the ground, and thou that
               Smildſt at good duke Humphreys death,
               Shalt liue no longer to infect the earth.
            
            
               Suff.
               This villain being but Captain of a Pinnais,
               Threatens more plagues then mighty Abradas,
               The great Macedonian Pyrate,
               Thy words addes fury and not remorſe in me.
            
            
               Cap.
               Yea but my deedes ſhall ſtay thy fury ſoon.
            
            
               Suff.
               Haſt not thou waited at my trencher,
               When we haue feaſted with Queene Margaret?
               Haſt not thou kiſt thine hand and held my ſtirrop?
               And barehead plodded by my footcloth Mule,
               And thought thee happy when I ſmild on thee?
               This hand hath writ in thy defence,
               Then ſhall I charme thee, hold thy lauiſh tongue.
            
            
               Cap▪
               
               Away with him VValter, I ſay, and off with his head.
            
            
               1 Priſ.
               Good my lord, intreat him mildly for your life.
            
            
               Suff.
               Firſt let this neck ſtoope to the axes edge,
               Before this knee do bow to any,
               Saue to the God of heauen, and to my King,
               
                  Suffolkes imperiall tongue cannot pleade
               To ſuch aiady groome.
            
            
               Walter
               Come, come, why do we let him ſpeake▪
               
               I long to haue his head, for ranſome of mine cie.
            
            
               Suff.
               A ſworder and bande to ſlaue,
               Murthered ſweete Tully:
               
                  Brutus baſtard hand ſtabdo Iulius Caeſar,
               And Suffolke dies by Pyrates on the ſees.
               exit Suffolke, and Walter
            
            
               Cap.
               Off with his head, and ſend it to the Queene,
               And ranſomeleſſe this priſoner ſhall go free,
               To ſee it ſafe deliuered vnto her:
               Come lets go.
               exeunt omnes. Enter two of the Rebels with long ſtaues.
            
            
               George.
               Come away Nick, and put a long ſtaffe in thy pike, and prouide thy ſelfe, for I can tell thee, they haue bin vp this two daies.
            
            
               Nicke
               Then they had more need to go to bed now,
               But ſirra George, whats the matter?
            
            
               George
               Why ſirra, Iack Cade the Diar of Aſhford here,
               He meanes to turne this land, and ſet a new nap on it.
            
            
               Nick
               Yea mary he had needſo, for tis growne threedbare,
               Twas neuer mery world with vs, ſince theſe gentlemē came vp
            
            
               George
               I warrant thee, thou ſhalt neuer ſee a lord weare a leather aperne, now adaies.
            
            
               Nicke.
               But ſirra, who comes more beſide Iacke Cade?
            
            
               George
               Why theres Dick the Butcher, & Robin the Sadler, and Wil that came a wooing to our Nan laſt ſunday, & Harry and Tom, & Gregory that ſhould haue your Pa
                     •
                  nil, & a great ſort more is come from Rocheſter, & from Maidſtone, & Can terbury, & al the townes here abouts, and we muſt al be lords or ſquires, aſſoone as Iacke Cade is King.
            
            
               Nicke
               Harke, harke, I heare the Drum, they comming.
               Enter Iacke Cade, Dicke Butcher, Robin, Will, Tom▪ Harry and the reſt with long ſtaues.
            
            
               Cade.
               Proclaime ſilence.
            
            
               All.
               Silence.
            
            
               Cade.
               I Iohn Cade ſo named for my valiancio.
            
            
               Dicke
               Or rather for ſtealing of a Cade of ſpra
                     ••
                  .
            
            
               Cade.
               My father was a Mortimer.
            
            
               Nicke
               He was an honeſt man, and a good Brick-laier.
            
            
               Cade
               My mother came of the Braſes.
            
            
               Wil.
               She was a Pedlers daughter indeed, and ſold many laces.
            
            
               
               Robin
               And now being not able to occupy her furd packe▪
               
               She waſheth buckes vp and downe the countrey.
            
            
               Cade.
               Therefore I am honorable borne.
            
            
               Harry
               Yea, for the field is honorable, for he was borne
               Vnder a hedge, for his father had no houſe but the Cage.
            
            
               Cade
               I am able to endure much.
            
            
               George
               Thats true, I know he can endure any thing,
               For I haue ſeene him whipt two market daies togither.
            
            
               Cade
               I feare neither ſword nor fire.
            
            
               Wil.
               He need not feare the ſword, for his coate is of proofe.
            
            
               Dick
               But me thinkes he ſhould feare the fire, being ſo often burnt in the hand▪ for ſtealing of ſheepe.
            
            
               Cade
               Therfore be braue, for your captain is braue▪ and vows reformation: you ſhal haue ſeuen half-peny loaues for a peny, and the three hoopt pot, ſhal haue ten hoops, and it ſhalbe felony to drink ſmal beere, and if I be the King, as King I wil be.
            
            
               All.
               God ſaue your maieſtie.
            
            
               Cade
               I thank you good people, you ſhal al eate & drink of my ſcore, and go al in my liuery, and weel haue no writing▪ but the ſcore and the tally, and there ſhall be no lawes, but ſuch as comes from my mouth.
            
            
               Dicke
               We ſhall haue ſore laws then, for he was thruſt into the mouth the other day.
            
            
               George
               Yea and ſtinking law too, for his breath ſtinkes ſo, that one cannot abide it.
               Enter Will with the clarke of Chattam.
            
            
               Will
               Oh Captaine, a pryze.
            
            
               Cade
               VVhoſe that, VVill?
            
            
               Wil.
               The Clarke of Chattam, he can write and reade & caſt account, I tooke him ſetting of boies copies, and he has a book in his pocket with red letters.
            
            
               Cade
               Sounes, hees a coniurer, bring him hither,
               Now ſir, whats your name?
            
            
               Clarke
               Emanuell ſir, and it ſhal pleaſe you.
            
            
               Dicke
               It will go hard with you, I can tel you,
               For they vſe to write that o'th top of letters.
            
            
               Cade
               And what do you vſe to write your name?
               
                  Or do you as ancient forefathers haue done,
               Vſe the ſcore and the tally?
            
            
               Clarke.
               Nay true ſir, I praiſe God I haue bin ſo wel brought vp, that I can write mine owne name.
            
            
               Cade
               Oh he has confeſt, go hang him with his penny inckhorne about his necke.
               exit one with the clarke. Enter Tom.
            
            
               Tom.
               Captain: news, newes, ſir Humphrey Stafford and his brother are comming with the Kings power & mē to kil vs al.
            
            
               Cade
               Let them come, hees but a Knight is he▪
               
            
            
               Tom
               No, no, hees but a Knight.
            
            
               Cade
               VVhy then to equal him, ile make my ſelfe Knight
               Kneele downe Iohn Mortimer,
               Riſe vp ſir Iohn Mortimer.
               Is there any more of them that be Knights▪
               
            
            
               Tom.
               Yea his brother.
               He knights Dicke Butcher.
            
            
               Cade
               Then kneele downe Dicke Butcher,
               Riſe vp ſir Dicke Butcher.
               Now ſound vp the drumme. Enter ſir Humphrey Stafford and his brother, with drumme and ſouldiers.
            
            
               Cade
               As for theſe ſilken coated ſlaues, I paſſe not a pinne,
               Tis to you good people that I ſpeake.
            
            
               Staf.
               VVhy country-men, what meane you thus in troups,
               To follow this rebellious traitor Cade?
               VVhy his father was but a Brick-laier.
            
            
               Cade.
               VVell, Adam was a Gardnar, what then?
               But I come of the Mortimers.
            
            
               Stafford.
               Yea, the Duke of Yorke hath taught you that.
            
            
               Cade
               The Duke of Yorke, nay, I learnt it my ſelfe.
               For looke you, Roger Mortimer the Earle of March,
               Married the Duke of Clarence daughter.
            
            
               Staff.
               VVel, thats true▪ but what then?
            
            
               Cade
               And by her he had two children at a birth.
            
            
               Staff.
               Thats falſe.
            
            
               
               Cade
               Yea, but I ſay, tis true.
            
            
               Ail.
               Why then tis true.
            
            
               Cade.
               And one of them was ſtoln away by a beggarwoman,
               And was my father, and I am his ſonne,
               Deny it and you can.
            
            
               Nicke
               Nay looke you, I know twas true,
               For his father built a chimney in my fathers houſe,
               And the brickes are aliue at this day to teſtifie.
            
            
               Cade
               But doſt thou heare Stafford tel the King▪ that for his fathers ſake, in whoſe time boies plaid at ſpanne-counter with French crownes, I am content that he ſhall be King as long as he liues: mary alwaies prouided, Ile be Protector ouer him.
            
            
               Staff.
               O monſtrous ſimplicitie!
            
            
               Cade
               And tell him, weele haue the Lord Sayes head, & the duke of Somerſets, for deliuering vp the dukedomes of Anioy and Mayne, and ſelling the towns in France, by which meanes England hath bin maimd euer ſince, and gone as it were with a crouch, but that the puiſſance held it vp. And beſides, they can ſpeake French, and therefore they are traitors.
            
            
               Staff.
               As how I prethee?
            
            
               Cade
               Why the French men are our enemies, be they not? And then can he that ſpeakes with the tongue of an enemy be a good ſubiect?
               Anſwere me to that.
            
            
               Staff.
               Well ſirra, wilt thou yeeld thy ſelfe vnto the Kings mercy, and he will pardon thee and theſe, their outrages and rebellious deedes?
            
            
               Cade
               Nay, bid the King come to me and he will, and then ile pardon him, or otherwaies ile haue his crowne tel him, ere it be long.
            
            
               Staff.
               Go Herald, proclaime in all the Kings townes,
               That thoſe that wil forſake the Rebel Cade,
               Shall haue free pardon from his maieſtie.
               exit Stafford and his men.
            
            
               Cade
               Come ſirs, ſaint George for vs and Kent.
               exeunt omnes.
               Alarums to battaile, and ſir Humphrey Stafford and his brother is

ſlaine. Then Iacke Cade againe, and the reſt.
            
            
               Cade
               Sir Dicke Butcher, thou haſt fought to day moſt valiantly, and knockt them downe as if thou hadſt bin in thy ſlaughter houſe, and thus I will reward thee: the Lent ſhall be as long again as it was: thou ſhalt haue licence to kil for foure ſcore and one a weeke: drum ſtrike vp, for now weele march to London, for to morrow I meane to ſit in the Kings ſeate at Weſtminſter.
               exeunt omnes.
               Enter the King reading of a Letter, and the Queéne with the Duke of Suffolkes head, and the Lord Say, with others.
            
            
               King
               Sir Humphrey Stafford and his brother is ſlaine,
               And the rebels march amaine to London,
               Go backe to them, and tell them thus from me,
               Ile come and parly with their generall.
            
            
               Reade.
               Yet ſtay, ile reade the letter once againe:
               Lord Say, Iacke Cade hath ſolemnly vowd to haue thy head▪
               
            
            
               Say.
               Yea, but I hope your highneſſe ſhall haue his.
            
            
               King
               How now Madam, ſtill lamenting and mourning for Suffolks death, I feare my loue, if I had bin dead, thou wouldſt not haue mournd ſo much for me.
            
            
               Queene
               No my loue, I ſhould not mourn, but die for thee▪
               
               Enter a meſſenger.
            
            
               Meſſen.
               Oh flie my Lord, the rebels are entered
               Southwarke, and haue almoſt wonne the bridge,
               Calling your grace an vſurper,
               And that monſtrous rebel Cade, hath ſworne
               To crowne himſelfe King in Weſtminſter,
               Therefore flie my Lord, and poſte to Killing worth.
            
            
               King.
               Go old Buckingham and Clifford gather
               An Army vp, and meete with the rebells:
               Come Madam let vs haſte to Killingworth,
               Come on Lord Say, go thou along with vs,
               For feare the rebell Cade do find thee out.
            
            
               Say
               My innocence my Lord ſhall pleade for me:
               And therefore with your-highnes leaue, Ile ſtay behind.
            
            
               King
               Euen as thou wilt my Lord Say:
               
                  Come Madame, let vs goe.
               exeunt omnes.
               Enter the Lord Scayles vpon the Tower walls walking.
               Enter three or foure cittizens below.
            
            
               L. Scayles
               How now, is lacke Cade ſlaine?
            
            
               1 Cutizen
               No my Lord, nor likely to be ſlaine,
               For they haue wonne the 
                     •
                  ridge,
               Killing all thoſ
                     •
                   that withſtand them,
               The Lord Maior craueth 
                     ••
                  d of your honor from the Towes,
               To defend the cittie from the rebells.
            
            
               L. Scayles
               Such aide as I can ſpare, you ſhall command,
               But I am troubled here with them my ſelfe,
               The Rebels haue attempted to win the Tower,
               But get you to Smithfield and gather head,
               And thither I will ſend you Mathew Goffe:
               Fight for your King, your country, and your liues,
               And ſo farewell▪ for I muſt hence againe.
               exeunt omnes.
               Enter Iacke Cade and the reſt, and ſtrikes his ſword vpon London ſtone.
            
            
               Cade
               Now is Mortimer Lord of this cittie,
               And now ſitting vpon London ſtone, we commaund,
               That the firſt yeare of our raigne,
               The piſſing conduit run nothing but red wine,
               And now henceforth, it ſhall be treaſon
               For my that calls me otherwiſe then
               Lord Mortimer.
               Enter a ſouldier.
            
            
               ſould.
               Iacke Cade, Iacke Cade.
            
            
               Cade
               Zounes, knocke him downe.
               they kill him.
            
            
               Dicke
               My Lord, theres an Army gathered togither
               Into Smithfield.
            
            
               Cade
               Come then, lets go fight with them,
               But firſt go on and ſet London bridge on fire:
               And if you can, burne downe the Tower too,
               Come lets away.
               exeunt omnes.
               Alarmes, and then Mathew Goffe is ſlain, and al the reſt with hi
                     •
                  
                  ▪ then enter Iacke Cade again, and his company.
            
            
               
               Cade
               So ſirs, now go ſome and pull downe the Sanoy,
               Others to the Innes of the court, downe with them all.
            
            
               Dicke
               I haue a ſute vnto your Lordſhip.
            
            
               Cade.
               Be it a lordſhip Dicke, and thou ſhalt haue it
               For that word.
            
            
               Dick
               That we may go burne all the Records,
               And that all writing may be put downe,
               And nothing vſde but the ſcore and the tally.
            
            
               Cade
               Dick it ſhall be ſo, and henceforward al thing ſhalbe in common, and in Cheapſide ſhall my palphrey go to graſſe. Why iſt not a miſerable thing, that of the skin of an innocent lamb, ſhould parchment be made, and then with a litle blotting ouer with inke, a man ſhould vndo himſelfe?
               Some ſaies tis the bees that ſting but I ſay, tis their wax, for I am ſure I neuer ſeald to any thing but once, and I was neuer mine owne man ſince.
            
            
               Nicke
               But when ſhall we take vp thoſe commodities
               Which you told vs of?
            
            
               Cade
               Mary he that wil luſtily ſtand to it,
               Shall go with me and take vp theſe commodities following:
               Item, a gowne, a kirtle, a peticote and a ſmocke.
               Enter George.
            
            
               George
               My Lord, a prize, a prize, heres the Lord Say,
               Which ſold the townes in France.
            
            
               Cade.
               Come hither thou Say, thou George, thou buckrum lord, What anſwer canſt thou make vnto my mightines, For deliuering vp the townes in France to Monſier buſſe mine cue the Dolphin of France?
               And more thē ſo, thou haſt moſt traiterouſly erected a grammer ſchool, to infect the youth of the realm, & againſt the kings Crowne and dignitie, thou haſl built vp a paper-mil, nay it wil be ſaid to thy face, that thou keepſt men in thy houſe that daily reades of bookes with red letters, and talkes of a Nowne and a Verb, and ſuch abominable words, as no chriſtian care is able to indure it: and beſides al that, thou haſt appointed certain iuſtices of peace in euery ſhire to hang honeſt men that ſteal for their liuing, and becauſe they could not reade, thou haſt hung

them vp: onely for which cauſe they were moſt worthy to liue: thou rideſt on a foothcloth, doſt thou not?
            
            
               Say.
               Yes, what of that?
            
            
               Cade
               Mary I ſay thou oughteſt not to let thy horſe weare a cloake, when an honeſter man then thy ſelfe goes in his hoſe and dublet.
            
            
               Say.
               You men of Kent.
            
            
               All
               Kent what of Kent?
            
            
               Say
               Nothing but terra bona.
               
            
            
               Cade
               
                  Bonum terum, ſounds whats that?
            
            
               Dick
               He ſpeakes French.
            
            
               Will.
               No, tis Dutch.
            
            
               Nick
               No, tis Outtalian, I know it well inough.
            
            
               Say.
               Kent, in the Commentaries Caeſar wrote,
               Termd it the ciuil ſt place of al this land,
               Then noble country-men, heare me but ſpeake,
               I ſold not France, I loſt not Normandie.
            
            
               Cade
               But wherefore doeſt thou ſhake thy head ſo?
            
            
               Say
               It is the palſie, and not feare that makes me.
            
            
               Cade.
               Nay thou nodſt thy head, as who ſay, thou wilt be euen with me, if thou getſt away, but ile make thee ſure enough, now I haue thee: go take him to the ſtandard in Cheapſide & chop off his head, & then go to Milend-green, to ſir Iames Cromer his ſon in law, and cut off his head too, and bring them to me vpon two poles preſently.
               Away with him. exit one or two with the Lord Say.
               There ſhall not a nobleman weare a head on his ſhoulders,
               But he ſhall pay me tribute for it:
               Nor there ſhal not a maid be maried, but he ſhal ſee to me for her:
               Maiden head or elſe, ile haue it my ſelfe,
               Mary I will that married men ſhal hold of me in capite,
               And that their wiues ſhal be as free as hart can think, or tongue can tell.
               Enter Robin.
            
            
               Robin
               O captaine! London bridge is a fire.
            
            
               Cade
               Runne to Billingſgate, and fetch pitch and flaxe and ſquench it.
               Enter Dicke and a ſergeant.
            
            
               
               ſer.
               Iuſtice, iuſtice, I pray you ſir, let me haue iuſtice of this fellow here.
            
            
               Cade
               Why, what has he done?
            
            
               ſer.
               Alas ſir, he has rauiſht my wife.
            
            
               Dick
               Why my lord he would haue reſted me,
               And I went and entred my Action in his wiues paper houſe.
            
            
               Cade
               Dicke follow thy ſute in her common place,
               You horſon villaine, you are a ſergeant, youle
               Take any man by the throte for twelue pence,
               And reſt a man when hees at dinner,
               And haue him to priſon ere the meate be out of his mouth:
               Go Dicke, take him hence, cut out his tong for cogging,
               Hough him for running, and to conclude,
               Braue him with his owne mace.
               exit with the ſergeant. Enter two with the Lord Saies head, ind ſir Iames Cromers, vpon two poles.
               So, come cary them before me, and at cuery lanes end, let them kiſſe together.
               Enter the duke of Buckingham, and Lord Clifford, the Earle of Comberland.
            
            
               Cliff.
               Why country men and warlike frends of Kent,
               What meanes this mutinous rebellion,
               That you in troupes do muſter thus your ſelues,
               Vnder the conduct of this traitor Cade?
               To riſe againſt your ſoueraigne lord and King,
               Who mildly hath his pardon ſent to you,
               If you forſake this monſtrous rebell here?
               If honour be the marke whereat you ayme,
               Then haſte to France, that our forefathers wonne,
               And winne againe that thing which now is loſt,
               And leaue to ſeeke your countries ouerthrow.
            
            
               All.
               A Clifford, a Clifford.
               They for ſake Cade.
            
            
               Cade
               Why how now, will you forſake your generall,
               And ancient freedome which you haue poſſeſt,
               To bend your neckes vnto their ſeruile yokes,
               Who if you ſtir, will ſtraightwaies hang you vp?
               
                  But follow me, and you ſhall pull them downe,
               And make them yeeld their liuings to your hands.
            
            
               All.
               A Cade, a Cade.
               They runne to Cade againe
            
            
               Clif.
               Braue warlike friends heare me but ſpeake a word,
               Refuſe not good, whilſt it is offered you,
               The King is mercifull, then yeeld to him,
               And I my ſelfe will go along with you,
               To Winſore caſtle whereas the King abides,
               And on mine honor you ſhall haue no hurt.
            
            
               All.
               A Clifford, a Clifford, God ſaue the King.
            
            
               Cade.
               How like a feather is this raſcall company
               Blowne euery way,
               But that they may ſee there wants no valiancy in me,
               My ſtaffe ſhall make way through the midſt of you,
               And ſo a poxe take you all.
               He runs thruoh them with his ſtaffe, and flies away.
            
            
               Buck.
               Go ſome and make after him, and proclaime,
               That thoſe that can bring the head of Cade,
               Shall haue a thouſand crownes for his labor.
               Come march w
                     •
                  y.
               Enter King Henry and the Queene, and Somerſet.
            
            
               King.
               Lord Somerſet, what news heare you of the rebel Cade?
            
            
               Som.
               This my gracious lord, that the lord Say is don to deth,
               And the cittie is almoſt ſackt.
            
            
               King.
               Gods wil be done, for as he hath decreed, ſo it muſt be:
               And be it as he pleaſe, to ſtop the pride of thoſe rebellious mē.
            
            
               Queene
               Had the noble Duke of Suffolke bin aliue,
               The rebell Cade had bin ſuppreſt ere this,
               And all the reſt that do take part with him.
               Enter the Duke of Buckingham and Clifford, with the rebells with halters about their neckes.
            
            
               Cliff.
               Long liue King Henry, Englands lawfull King,
               Loe here my Lord, theſe rebells are ſubdude,
               And offer their liues before your highneſſe feete.
            
            
               King
               But tell me Clifford, is their captaine here▪
               
            
            
               Cliff.
               No, my gracious lord, he is fled away, but proclamations

are ſent forth, that he that cā but bring his head, ſhal haue a thouſand crownes. But may it pleaſe your maieſty, to pardon theſe their faults, that by that traitors meanes were thus miſled.
            
            
               King
               Stand vp you ſimple men, and giue God praiſe,
               For you did take in hand you know not what,
               And go in peace obedient to your King,
               And liue as ſubiects, and you ſhall not want,
               Whilſt Henrie liues, and weares the Engliſh crowne.
            
            
               All
               God ſaue the King, God ſaue the King.
            
            
               King
               Come let vs haſte to London now with ſpeed,
               That ſolemne proceſſions may be ſung,
               In laud and honor of the God of heauen,
               And triumphs of this happy victory.
               exeunt omnes. Enter Iacke Cade at one doore, and at the other, maſter Alexander Eyden and his men, and Iacke Cade lies downe picking of hearbs and eating them.
            
            
               Eyden
               Good Lord how pleaſant is this country life▪
               
               This little land my father left me here,
               With my contented mind, ſerues me as well,
               As all the pleaſures in the court can yeeld,
               Nor would I change this pleaſure for the court.
            
            
               Cade
               Sounes heres the Lord of the ſoile ſtand villain, thou wilt betray me to the King, and get a thouſand crowns for my head, but ere thou goeſt, ile make thee eat yron like an eſtridge, and ſwallow my ſword like a great pin.
            
            
               Eyden
               Why ſawcy companion▪ why ſhould I betray thee?
               Iſt not enough that thou haſt broke my hedges,
               And entred into the ground without the leaue of me the owner,
               But thou wilt braue me too?
            
            
               Cade.
               Braue thee and beard thee too, by the beſt bloud of the realme, look on me well, I haue eate no meat this fiue daies, yet and I do not leaue thee and thy fiue men as dead as a door nail, I pray God I may neuer cate graſſe more.
            
            
               Eyden.
               Nay, it neuer ſhalbe ſaid whilſt the world doth ſtand, that Alexander Eiden an Eſquire of Kent, took ods to combat with a famiſht man, look on me, my lims are equall vnto thine, and euery way as big, then hand to hand ile combat thee. Sitra

fetch me weapons, and ſtand you all aſide.
            
            
               Cade.
               Now ſword, if thou hewſt not this burly-boned churle into chines of beefe, I beſeech God thou maiſt fall into ſome ſmiths hand and be turnd into hobnailes.
            
            
               Eyden
               Come on thy way.
               They fight, and Cade fals downe.
            
            
               Cade
               Oh villain, thou haſt ſlaine the floure of Kent for chiualry, but it is famine & not thee that has done it, for come ten thouſand diuels, & giue me but the ten meals that I wanted this fiue daies, and Ile fight with you all, and ſo a pox rot thee, for Iacke Cade muſt die.
               he dies.
            
            
               Eyd.
               Iack Cade, & was it that monſtrous rebell which I haue ſlain: oh ſword I honor thee for this, and in my chamber ſhalt thou hang as a monumēt to after age, for this great ſeruice thou haſt done to me, ile drag him hence, and with my ſword cut off his head and beare it with me.
               exit Enier the Duke of Yorke with drum and ſouldiers.
            
            
               Yorke
               In Armes from Ireland comes Yorke amaine,
               Ring bells alowd, bonfires perfume the ayre,
               To entertaine faire Englands royall King:
               Ah ſancta Maieſta, who would not buy thee deare?
               Enter the duke of Buckingham.
               But ſoft, who comes here? Buckingham, what news with him▪
               
            
            
               Buck
               Yorke, if thou meane wel, I greet thee ſo.
            
            
               York
               Humphrey of Buckingham, welcome I ſweare,
               What comeſt thou in loue, or as a meſſenger?
            
            
               Bu.
               I come as a meſſenger from our dread lord & ſoueraign
               Henry, to know the reaſon of theſe Armes in peace?
               Or that thou being a ſubiect as I am,
               Shouldſt thus approach ſo neare with colours ſpread,
               Whereas the perſon of the King doth keepe?
            
            
               York
               A ſubiect as he is!
               O how I hate theſe ſpightfull abiect termes,
               But Yorke, diſſemble till thou meete thy ſonnes,
               Who now in Armes expect their fathers ſight,
               And farre hence I know they cannot be:
               Humphrey Duke of Buckingham, pardon me,
               
                  That I anſwerd not at firſt, my mind was troubled,
               I came to remoue that monſtrons rebell Cade,
               And heaue prowd Somerſet from out the Court,
               That bafely yeelded vp the townes in France.
            
            
               Buc.
               Why that was preſumption on thy behalfe,
               But if it be no otherwiſe but ſo,
               The King doth pardon thee, and grants to thy requeſt,
               And Somerſet is ſent vnto the Tower.
            
            
               Yorke
               Vpon thine honour is it ſo?
            
            
               Buc.
               Yorke, he is vpon mine honor.
            
            
               Yorke
               Then before thy face, I here diſmiſſe my troupes,
               Sirs, meete me to morrow in ſaint Georges fields,
               And there you ſhall receiue your pay of me.
               exeunt ſouldiers.
            
            
               Buc.
               Come Yorke, thou ſhalt go ſpeake vnto the King,
               But ſee, his grace is comming to meete with vs.
               enter King Henry.
            
            
               King
               How now Buckingham, is Yorke friends with vs
               That thus thou bringſt him hand in hand with thee?
            
            
               Buc.
               He is my lord, and hath diſchargde his troopes
               Which came with him, but as your Grace did ſay,
               To heaue the duke of Somerſet from hence,
               And to ſubdue the rebells that were vp.
            
            
               King
               Then welcome cooſin Yorke, giue me thy hand,
               And thankes for thy great ſeruice done to vs,
               Againſt thoſe traitrous Iriſh that rebeld.
               enter maister Eyden with Iacke Cades head.
            
            
               Eyden
               Long liue Henry in triumphant peace,
               Lo here (my Lord) vpon my bended knees,
               I here preſent the traitorous head of Cade,
               That hand to hand in ſingle fight I ſlew.
            
            
               King
               Firſt, thankes to heauen, and next, to thee my friend,
               That haſt ſubdude that wicked traitor thus,
               Oh let me ſee that head that in his life
               Did worke me and my land ſuch cruell ſpight▪
               
               A viſage ſterne, cole blacke his curled lockes,
               Deepe trenched furrowes in his frowning brow,
               
                  Preſageth warlike humors in his life.
               Here take it hence, and thou for thy reward,
               Shalt be immediately created Knight:
               Kneele downe my friend, and tell me whats thy name.
            
            
               Eyden
               Alexander Eyden, if it pleaſe your grace,
               A poore Eſquire of Kent.
            
            
               King
               Then riſe vp ſir Alexander Eyden Knight,
               And for thy maintenance, I freely giue
               A thouſand markes a yeere for to maintaine thee,
               Beſide the firme reward that was proclaimde,
               For thoſe that could performe this worthy act,
               And thou ſhalt waite vpon the perſon of the King.
            
            
               Eyden
               I humbly thanke your grace, and I no longer liue.
               Then I prooue iuſt and loyall vnto my King.
               exit. Enter the Queene with the Duke of Somerſet.
            
            
               King
               O Buckingham, ſee where Somerſet comes▪
               
               Bid him go hide himſelfe till Yorke be gone.
            
            
               Queene
               He ſhall not hide himſelfe for feare of Yorke,
               But beard aud braue him prowdly to his face.
            
            
               Yorke
               Who's that? prowd Somerſet at liberty?
               Baſe feareful Henry that thus diſhonor'ſt me,
               By heauen, thou ſhalt not gouerne ouer me,
               I cannot brooke that traitors preſence here,
               Nor will I ſubiect be to ſuch a King,
               That knowes not how to gouerne, nor to rule,
               Reſigne thy crowne prowd Lancaſter to me,
               That thou vſurped haſt ſo long by force,
               For now is Yorke reſolu'de to claime his owne,
               And riſe aloft into faire Englands Throne.
            
            
               Somer.
               Prowd traitor, I arreſt thee on high treaſon,
               Againſt thy Soueraigne Lord, yeeld thee falſe Yorke.
               For here I ſweare thou ſhalt vnto the Tower,
               For theſe prowd words which thou haſt giuen the King.
            
            
               Yorke
               Thou art deceiued, my ſonnes ſhall be my baile,
               And ſend thee there in ſpight of him.
               Ho, where are you boyes?
            
            
               Queene
               Call Clifford hither preſently.
               
                  Enter the Duke of Yorkes ſonnes, Edward the Earle of March, and crooke-backe Richard, at the one doore, with drum and ſouldiers, and at the other doore, enter Clifford and his ſonne with drumme and ſouldiers, and Clifford kneeles to Henry, and ſpeakes.
            
            
               Cliff.
               Long liue my noble Lord and ſoueraigne King.
            
            
               Yorke
               We thank thee Clifford:
               Nay, do not affright vs with thy lookes,
               If thou didſt miſtake, we pardon thee, kneele againe.
            
            
               Cliff.
               Why, I did no way miſtake, this is my King:
               What is he mad? to Bedlam with him.
            
            
               King
               Yea, a bedlam frantike humor driues him thus,
               To leauy Armes againſt his lawfull King.
            
            
               Cliff.
               Why do not your grace ſend him to the Tower▪
               
            
            
               Queene
               He is arreſted, but will not obey,
               His ſonnes he ſaith ſhall be his ſuertie.
            
            
               Yorke
               How ſay you boyes, will you not?
            
            
               Edward
               Yes noble father, if our words wil ſerue
            
            
               Richard
               And if our words will not, our ſwords ſhall.
            
            
               Yorke
               Call hither to the ſtake, my two rough beares.
            
            
               King
               Call Buckingham, and bid him arme himſelfe.
            
            
               Yorke
               Call Buckingham, and all the frends thou haſt,
               Both thou and they ſhall curſe this fatall houre.
               Enter at one doore the Earle of Salſbury and Warwicke, with drum and ſouldiers: and at the other, the duke of Buckingham, with drum and ſouldiers.
            
            
               Cliff.
               Are theſe thy beares? weel bayte them ſoone,
               Diſpight of thee and all the friends thou haſt.
            
            
               War.
               You had beſt go dreame againe,
               To keepe you from the tempeſt of the field.
            
            
               Clif.
               I am reſolu'd to beare a greater ſtorme,
               Then any thou canſt coniure vp to day,
               And that ile write vpon thy Burgonet,
               Might I but know thee by thy houſhold badge.
            
            
               War.
               Now by my fathers age old Neuells creſt,
               The Rampant beare chaind to the ragged ſtaffe,
               This day ile weare aloft my burgonet,
               
                  As on a mountaine top the Caedar ſhowes,
               That keepes his leaues in ſpight of any ſtorme,
               Euen to affright thee with the view thereof.
            
            
               Clif.
               And from thy burgonet will I rend the beare,
               And tread him vnderfoote with all contempt,
               Diſpight the Beare-ward that protects him ſo.
            
            
               Yong Clif.
               And ſo renowned ſoueraigne to armes,
               To quel theſe traitors, and their compliſes.
            
            
               Rich.
               Fie, charity for ſhame, ſpeake it not in ſpight,
               For you ſhall ſup with Ieſus Chriſt to night.
            
            
               Yong Clif.
               Foule Stigmatike, thou canſt not tell.
            
            
               Rich.
               No, for if not in heauen, you le ſurely ſup in hel.
               exeunt omnes. Alarmes to the battaile, and then enter the duke of Somerſet and Richard fighting, Richard kills him vnder the ſigne of the Caſtle in ſaint Albons.
            
            
               Rich.
               So, lie thou there▪ aud breathe thy laſt.
               Whats here, the ſigne of the Caſtle?
               Then the propheſie is come to paſſe,
               For Somerſet was forewarned of Caſtles,
               The which he alwaies did obſerue,
               And now behold, vnder a paltry ale-houſe ſigne,
               The Caſtle in S. Albons,
               Somerſet hath made the Wiſſard famous by his death.
               exit. Alarme againe, and then enter the Earle of Warwicke alone.
            
            
               War.
               Clifford of Comberland, tis warwicke calls,
               And if thou doſt not hide thee from the Beare,
               Now whilſt the angry Trumpets ſound Alarmes,
               And dead mens cries do fil the empty avret
               Clifford I ſay, come forth and fight with me,
               Prowd Northerne Lord, Clifford of Comberland,
               Warwicke is hoarſe with calling thee to armes.
               Clifford ſpeakes within.
               Warwickeſtand ſtill, and view the way that Clifford hawes with his murthering curtelaxe, through the fainting troupes to find thee out.
               
                  Warwicke ſtand ſtill, and ſ
                     •
                  rre not till I come.
               E
                     ••••
                   Yorke.
            
            
               War.
               How now my Lord, what a foote▪
               
               Who kild your horſes
            
            
               Yorke
               The deadly hand of Clifford, noble lord,
               Fiue horſe this day, ſlaine vnder me,
               And yet braue Warwicke I remaine aliue,
               But I did kil his horſe he lou' de ſo wel,
               The bouieſt gray that ere was bred in North. Enter Clifford, and Warwicke offers to fight with him.
               
               Hold War wicke, and ſeeke thee out ſome other chaſe
               My ſelfe will hunt this Deare to death.
            
            
               War.
               Braue lord, tis for a crowne thou fightſt,
               Clifford farewell, as I entend to proſper wel to day▪
               
               It grieues my ſoule to leaue thee vnaſſaild
               exit Warwicke.
            
            
               Yorke
               Now Clifford, ſince we are ſingled here alone,
               Be this the day of Doome to one of vs,
               For now my heart hath ſworne immortall hate
               To thee, and all the houſe of Eancaſter.
            
            
               Clif.
               And here I ſtand, and pitch my foote to thine,
               Vowing neuer to ſtir, til thou or I be ſlaine,
               For neuer ſhall my heart be ſafe at reſt,
               Till I haue ſpoild the hatefull houſe of Yorke.
               Alarmes, and they fight, and Yorke kills Clifford.
            
            
               Yorke
               Now Lancaſter ſit ſure, thy ſinewes ſhrinke,
               Come fearefull Henry groueling on thy face,
               Yeeld vp thy Crowne vnto the Prince of Yorke.
               exit Yorke. Alarmes, then enter yong Clifford alone.
            
            
               yong Clif.
               Father of Comberland,
               Where may I ſeeke my aged father forth?
               O diſmall ſight! ſee where he breathleſſe lies,
               All ſmeard and weltred in his luke-warme bloud,
               Ah, aged pillar of all Comberlands true houſe,
               Sweete father, 
                     〈◊〉
                   thy murthered Ghoſt I ſweare,
               
                  Immortall hate vnto the houſe of Yorke,
               Nor neuer ſhall I ſleepe ſecure one night,
               Till I haue furiouſly reuengde thy death,
               And left not one of them to breatheon earth.
               He takes him vp on his backe.
               And thus as olde Ankiſes ſonne did beare
               His aged father on his manly backe,
               And ſought with him againſt the bloudy Greekes:
               Euen ſo will I: but ſtay, heres one of them,
               To whom my ſoule hath ſworne immortall hate.
               Enter Richard, and then Clifford layes downe his father fights with him, and Richard flies away againe.
               Out croorktbacke villaine, get thee from my ſight,
               But I will after thee, and once againe,
               When I haue borne my father to his tent,
               Ile tue my fortune better with thee.
               exit yong Clifford with his father. Alarmes againe, and then enter three or foure, bearing the duke of Buckingham wounded to his Tent. Alarmes ſtill, and then enter the King and Queene.
            
            
               Queene
               Away my Lord, and ſlie to London ſtraight,
               Make haſte, for vengeance comes along with them,
               Come, ſtand not to expoſtulate, lets go.
            
            
               King
               Come then faire Queene, to London let vs haſte,
               And ſummon a parlament with ſpeede,
               To ſtop the fury of theſe dyre euents.
               exeunt King and Queene. Alarmes, and then a flouriſh, and enter the duke of Yorke and Richard.
            
            
               Yorke
               How now boyes, fortunate this fight hath beene,
               I hope to vs and ours for Englands good,
               And our great honor, that ſo 
                     〈◊〉
                   we loſt,
               Whilſt faint-heart Henry, did vſurpe our rights:
               But did you ſee old Salsbury ſince we
               With bloudy minds did buckle with the foe,
               I would not for the loſſe of this right hand,
               That ought but well betide that good old man.
            
            
               
               Rich.
               My Lord, I ſaw him in the thickeſt throng,
               Charging his lance with his old weary armes,
               And thrice I ſaw him beaten from his horſe,
               And thrice this hand did ſet him vp againe,
               And ſtill he fought with courage gainſt his foes,
               The boldeſt ſprited man that ere mine eies beheld.
               Enter Salſbury and Warwicke.
            
            
               Edw.
               See noble father where they both do come,
               The onely props vnto the houſe of Yorke.
            
            
               Salſb.
               Well haſt thou fought this day, thou valiant Duke,
               And thou braue bud of Yorkes increaſing houſe,
               The ſmall remainder of my weary life,
               I hold for thee, for with thy warlike arme,
               Three times this day thou haſt preſerude my life.
            
            
               Yorke
               What ſay you Lords, the King is fled to London▪
               
               There (as I heare) to hold a Parlament.
               What ſaies Lord Warwicke, ſhall we after them?
            
            
               War.
               After them, nay before them if we can:
               Now by my Faith Lords twas a glorious day,
               Saint Albons battell wonne by famous Yorke,
               Shal be eternizd in all age to come,
               Sound Drums and Trumpets, and to London all,
               And more ſuch daies as theſe to vs befall.
            
            exeunt.
            FINIS.
         
      
   