
      
         
            
            
            ¶ Two notable Sermons. Made by that worthy Martyr of Chriſt Maiſter Iohn Bradford, the one of Repentance, and the other of the Lordes ſupper neuer before imprinted.
            ¶ Peruſed and allowed according to the Quéenes Maieſties Iniunction.
            
            1574
            ¶ Imprinted at London by Iohn Awdely, and Iohn Wyght,
         
         
            
            
            ¶ TO THE CHRIſtian Reader Tho. Sampſon wiſheth the felicity of ſpéedy and full conuerſion to the Lord.
            GOdly learned men doo wryte and publiſh bookes to profit the age in which they do liue, and the poſteritie. This deſire was in the Authour of this treatiſe Maiſter Iohn Bradford, who was the Preacher and publiſher of this Sermon of repentaunce. And now, to the ende that we which do liue in earth after him, and are the poſteritie, may take as much or more profit by it then they dyd, to and for whom in his lyfe tyme he did both preach and publiſh it, the ſame hys labour is by new emprintyng publiſhed againe. Nothing is added to toys Sermon, or altered in it: onely to the ſermon of repentaunce before printed, is added an other Sermon of the Lords ſupper, which he alſo made, and was neuer printed before. And aptly ſhalt thou ſée, good Reader, theſe two Sermons ioyned together. For in diligent peruſing of the laſt, thou ſhalt ſée how neceſſarely he draweth the doctrine of repentaunce to them al, which

do with due preparation receiue the holy Sacrament of Chriſt. I doo not knowe which of the Sermons I ſhoulde moſt prayſe. I wiſh that by reading both, thou mayeſt make thy great profite. In both theſe Sermons thou ſhalt reade Bradford preaching repentance with his own pen.
            They are counted the moſt profitable Teachers, which haue themſelues good experiance by practiſe in themſelues, of that which they doe teach to others: ſuch as may ſafely ſay, Brethren be ye folowers of me, and looke on them which walke ſo 
               
                  
                     •
                  il. 3. 17. 
               as ye haue vs for an example. And ſurely ſuch a paterne was Maiſter Bradford in his lyfe tyme, of thys doctrine of repentaunce which in both theſe Sermons he teacheth, that I which did know him familiartye, muſt needes geue to God thys praiſe for hym, that among men I haue ſcarcely knowen 
                  •
               oue lyke vnto hym. I dyd knowe when, and partlye howe it pleaſed God by effectuall callyng to turne his hart vnto the true knowledge and obedience of the moſt holy Goſpell of Chriſt our Sauiour. Of which God dyd geue him ſuch an heauenly hold and liuely

ſéeling, that as he did then know that many Luke. 7. ſynnes were forgeuen him: ſo ſurely he declared by déedes that he loued much. For where he had both giftes and calling to haue employed himſelfe in ciuill and wordly affaires profitably, ſuch was his loue of Chriſt, and zeale to the promoting of his glorious Goſpell, that he chaunged not onely the courſe of his former, lyfe, as the woman dyd. Luke. 7. but euen his former ſtudy, as Paule dyd chaunge his forprofeſſion and ſtudy.
            Touching the firſt, after that God touched his hart with that holy and effectual calling, he ſold his chaines, rynges, brooches, and iuels of gold which before he vſed to weare, and did beſtow the price of this his former vanitie in the neceſſarye releife of Chriſtes poore members, which he could heare of or fynde lying ſicke or pining in pouertie. Touching the ſecond, he ſo declared his great zeale and loue to promote the glory of the lord Ieſus, whoſe goodnes and ſauing health he had taſted, that to do the ſame more pithely, he chaū
               ged his ſtudye, and being in the inner Temple in London at the ſtudye of the

common lawes, he went to Cambridge to ſtudy Diuinitie, where he heard D. Martin Bucer diligently, and was right familyar and deare vnto hym. In thys godly courſe he dyd by Gods bleſſyng ſo profit, that that bleſſed Martyr D. Ridley then Biſhop of London dyd as it were inuite hym and hys godlye Companion Maiſter Thomas Horton to become fellowes of Penbrake hall in Cambrydge: And afterwardes the ſayd D. Ridley called our Bradford to London, gaue him a Prebend in Paules church, lodged hym in his own houſe there, and ſet hym on worke in preaching. And beſides often preachyng in London, and at Paules croſſe, and ſundry places in the countrey, and ſpeacially in Lankeſhire, he preached before King Edward the ſixt, in the Lent the laſt yeare of his raygne, vpon the ſecond Pſalme, and there in one Sermon, ſhewing the tokens of Gods iudgement at hand for the contempt of the Goſpell, as that certayne Gentlemen vpon the Sabboth day, going in a whirry to Paris garden to the Barebayting, were drowned: and that a Dog was met at

Ludg
                  •
               te carping a péece of a dead chylde in his mouth, he with a mighty and propheticall ſpirite: ſayd: I ſummon you all, euen euery mothers chylde of you, to the indegement of God, for it is at hand as it followed ſhortly after in the death of King Edward. In which ſtate and labour of preaching he continued tyll the cruelty of the Papiſtes 
                  •
               ut him of: ſo an thou mayeſt reade in the hiſtorye of hys lyfe and death, compiled by that faythfull ſeruaunt of the Lord Ieſus M. Iohn Fox.
            
            In déede he had many pulbackes, but God ſtyll helped forward his choſen ſeruāt in that trade of lyfe to y• which he had called hym: in which he ran forward ſo happely, that he did outrunne me & other hys companions. For it pleaſed God with great ſpéede 
                  •
               s make hym ready and ripe to martyrdome: in which through Chriſt he hath now gayned the crowne of lyfe. But in all ſtops and ſtayes hee was much helped forward by a continual meditation, and practiſe of repentaunce and 
                  •
               ayth in Chriſt, in which hee was kept by Gods grace, notable exerciſed all the dayes of his lyfe. Euen in this meane

time he heard a Sermon which that noble Preather Maiſter Latimer made before King Edward the ſixt, in which he did earneſtly ſpeake of reſtitution to be made of thinges falſely gotten: whych dyd ſo ſtrike Bradford to the hart for one daſh with a pen which he had made without the knowledge of his Maiſter (as full often I haue heard him confeſſe with plentie of teares) beyng Clarke of the Treaſurer of the Kynges campe beyonde the teas, & was to the deceiuing of the King, hat he could neuer be quyet tyll by the aduiſe of the ſame Maiſter Latimer a reſtitution was made. Which thyng to bring to paſſe he did willingly forbeare and forgoe all the priuate and certaine patrimonie which he had in earth. Let all bribers & polyng offi
                  •
               ers, which get to them ſelues great reuenues in earth by ſuch ſlibbery ſhiftes, folow this example, leſt in taking a contraryecourſe, they take a contrary waye, and neuer come where Bradford now is.
            But beſides this, our Bradford had his dayly exerciſes and practiſes of repentance, His maner was to make to hym

ſelfe a Cataloge of all the groſſeſt & moſt enorme ſynnes which in his lyfe of ignorance he had committed, and to lay the ſame before hys eyes when hes went to priuate praier, that by the ſight and remembraunce of them, he might be ſtirred vp to offer to God the ſacrifice of a contrite hart, ſéeke aſſurance of ſaluation in Chriſt by faith, thanke God for his calling from the waies of wickednes, and praye for encreaſe of grace to bee conducted in holy lyfe acceptable and pleaſing to God. Such a continuall exerciſe of cōſcience he had in priuate praier, that he did not count himſelfe to haue prayed to his contentacion, vnleſſe in it hee had felt inwardly ſome ſmyting of hart for ſynne, and ſome healing of that wound by faith, féeling y• ſauing health of Chriſt, with ſome chaunge of mynde into the deteſtation of ſynne and loue of obeying the good wyll of God. Which thinges do require that inward entring into the ſacret parler of our hartes, of which Chriſt ſpeaketh, and is that ſmiting of the breſt which is noted in the Publicane Math. 7 and is the ſame to the which the Pſal

miſt exhorteth thoſe men looſe in ſynne. Pſalme. 4. 5. Tremble ye and ſynne not: ſpeake in your ſelues, that is, enter into an accompt with your ſelues, when you are on your couches, that is, when ye are ſolitary and alone, and be quiet or ſilent, that is, when ye haue thus ſecretly and déepelye conſidereth of your caſe and dealing. ye ſhall ceaſe to thinke, ſpeake, and do wickedly. Without ſuche an inward exceriſe of praier our Bradford dyd not pray to his full contentacion, as appeared by this: He vſed in the morning to go to the common praier in the Colledge where he was, and after that he vſed to make ſome praier with his Puplls in his chameer. But not content wyth this, he then repaired to his own ſecretd praier, and exerciſe in praier by himſelfe, as one that had not yet praied to his own mynde. For he was wont to ſay to hys familiars: I haue prayed with my Pupils, but I haue not yet prayed with myſelfe. Let thoſe ſecure men marke this well, which pray without touch of breſt, as th
                  •
                Phariſey dyd: and ſo that they haue ſayd an ordinary praier, or heard a

common courſe of praier, they think they haue prayed well, and as the terme is, they haue ſerued God well, though they neuer féele ſtyng for ſynne, taſte of groning or broken hart, nor of the ſwéete ſauing health of Chriſt, thereby to be moued to offer the ſacrifice of thankes geuing: nor chaunge or renuing of minde, but as they came ſecure in ſynne & ſenſeles, ſo they do depart without any chaūge or affecting of the hart: Which is euen the cradle in which Satan rocketh the ſynnes of this age a ſleepe, who thinke they do ſerue God in theſe curſory prayers made onely of cuſtome, when theyr hart is as farre from God as was the hart of the Phariſey. Let vs learne by Bradfordes example to pray better, that is, with the hart, and not with ihe lyps aloue: Quia Deus uon vocis ſed cardis auditor eſt, as Cyprin ſaith, that is, becauſe God is the hearer of the hart, and not of the voyce, that is to ſay, not of the voyce alone without the hart, for that is but lyb labour. This conſcience of ſyn and exerciſe in prayer had Bradford, cleane contrary to that curſed cuſtome of thoſe

graceles men, which do ioy to make large and long accompts of their lewdnes and glory therein, ſo feeling their delightes with their lyues paſſed, as the Dog returneth to ſmell to his caſt gorge, and the horſe to hys dung: ſuch as the Prophet 
                  
                     •
                  ſay 39. ſayth: They declare their ſyns as Sodome, they hide them not, wo be to their ſoules. It goeth with them as in the daies of Ieremiah it went with thoſe. Iere. 3. 3 Thou haddeſt a whores forehead: Thon wouldeſt not be aſhamed. God geue theſe men better grace, els let them be aſſured they ſhal find wo wo to their very ſoules.
            An other of his exerciſes was this: He vſed to make vnto him ſelfe an Ephemeris or a Iournal, in which hee vſed to write all ſuch notable thinges as either hee did ſée or heare eche day that paſſed. But what ſo euer he did heare or ſée, he did ſo pen it, that a man might ſée, in that booke the ſignes of his ſmitten hart. For if he did ſée or heare any good in any man, by that ſight he found & noted the want thereof in hym ſelfe, and added a ſhort prayer, crauing mercye and grace to amende. If he dyd heara or ſée any plague

or miſery▪ he noted it as a thing procured by his own ſyns; and ſtyl added: Domine miſerere me
                     •
                  , Lord haue mercy vpon me. He vſed in the ſame booke to note ſuch euyll thoughtes as did ryſe in him, as of enuying the good of other men, thoughtes of vnthankfulnes, of not conſidering God in his workes, of hardnes and vnſenſiblenes of hart when he dyd ſée other moued and affected. And thus hee made to him ſelfe and of himſelfe a booke of daily practiſes of repentance.
            Beſydes this, they which were familiar with him, might ſee how he being in their company, vſed to fall often into a ſodaine and deepe meditation, in which he would ſyt with fixed countenaunce and ſpirite moued, yet ſpeaking nothing a good ſpace. And ſome times in thys ſilent ſytting, plentye of teares ſhould trickle downe his cheekes. Sometime he would ſytinit, and come out of it with a ſmyling countenaunce. Often times haue I ſytten at dinner and ſupper with hym in the houſe of that godly harbourer of manye Preachers and Seruauntes of the Lorde Ieſus, I meane Maiſter▪ 
               Elſyng,
               
when either by occaſion of talke had, or of ſome view of Gods benefites preſent, or ſome inward cogitation and thought of his own, he hath fallen into theſe déepe cogitacions, and he would tell me in the ende ſuch diſcourſes of them, that I eyd perceiue that ſomtimes his teares trickled out of his eyes, as well for ioy as for ſorow. Neither was he onelye ſuch a practiſer of repentance in himſelfe, but a continuall prouoker of others thereunto, not onely in publike preaching, but alſo in priuate conference and company. For in all companies where he dyd come, he would fréely reproue any ſynne and myſbehauiour which appeared in any parſon, eſpecially ſwearers, filthy talkers, and popiſh praters. Such neuer departed out of his company vnreproued. And this he did with ſuch a diuine grace and Chriſtian maieſtie, that euer he ſtopped the mouthes of the gaynſayers: For he ſpake with power, and yet ſo ſweetely, that they might ſée their euyll to be euyll and hurtfull vnto them, and vnderſtand that it was good in déede to the which he laboured to draw them in God.
            
               
To be ſhort, as his lyfe was, ſuch was his death. His life was a practiſe, and example, a prouocation to repentance. At his death, as the foreſayd hiſtory witneſſeth, when he was burned in Smitefield, and the flames of fire dyd ſlye about hys 
                  •
               ares, his laſt ſpéech publiklye noted and heard was this: Repent England, Thus was our Bradford a Preacher and an example of that repentance which he dyd preach. Ionas preached to Niniue repentance, and al Niniue, the King, Princes, people, old and yong repented, To England Bradford dyd peeache and yet doth preach repentaunce, and ſurely England hath now much more cauſe to repent then it had when Bradford lyued & preached repentance. For all ſtates & ſortes of parſons in England are now more corrupt ſhen they were then.
            Let therefore now Bradfordes ſermon, his lyfe, his death moue thée O England, to repent al thy peryll. I wiſh & warne, that as in Niniuie ſo in England, al from the higheſt to the loweſt do vnfainedly repent: They which are of the Lourt, they which are of the Church, they whi
                  •
               a

are of the Citye, they which are of the cuntrey, Princes, Prelates, and people: let all and euery one repent and depart from that euyll which he hath in hand, and turne wholy to the Lorde. And I do humbly beſéech thy Maieſty, oh glorious Lord Ieſus, which diddeſt come to bleſſe Iſraell, turniug euery one of them from their ſynnes, to worke now by thy ſpirite in our hartes the ſame ſound repentance which the holynes dyd preache to men when thou ſaydeſt? Repent, for the kingdome of God is at hand. This worke in vs, O gracious God our Sauionr. Amen. And uow Reader I leaue thée to the reading and practiſing of that repentance which Bradford heare teacheth.
         
         
            
            ¶TO THE CHRIſtian Reader Iohn Bradforde wyſheth the true knowlsdge and peace of Ieſus Chriſt, our alone and omni ſufficient Sauiour.
            
            
               GReat and heauy, is Gods anger againſt vs, as the moſt greeuous plague of the death of our late King (a Prince of all that euer was ſithē Chriſts aſcenſion into heauē, in any Region peereles) now fallen vpō vs, doth prognoſticate For when Gods iudgement hath begun with his Childe this our deare dearlyng, let other men thinke as they can, I ſurely cannot be perſwaded otherwiſe, but that a greeuous and bitter cup of Gods vengeaneis ready to be poured out for ve Engliſh men to drinke of. The whelpe God hath beaten to fray the bandeg. Iudgement is begun at Gode houſe, In Gods mercy to himwardes he is taken away

that his eyes ſhould not ſée the miſeries which we ſhall feele. He was to good to tary with vs ſo wicked, ſo froward, ſo Hebr. 11. peruers, ſo obſtinate, ſo malicious, ſo hipocriticall, fo couetous, vncleane, vntrue, proude, and carnall a generation. I wyll not go about to paynt vs out in our colours. All the world which neuer ſaw England, by heareſay ſeeeth England. God by his plagues and vengeaunce, I feare me, wyll paynt vs out, and point vs out. We haue ſo mocked with him and his Goſpel, that we ſhall féele it is no bourding with him.
            ¶ Of long tyme we haue couered our couetouſnes and carnalitie vnder the cloke of his Goſpell, ſo that all men ſhal ſee vs to our ſhame when he ſhall take his Goſpel away & geue it to a people y• wil bring forth y• fruites of it: then ſhal we appeare as we be. To let his Goſpel tary with vs, he cannot, for we deſpiſe it, contemne it, are giu
                  •
               ted with it. We diſdaine his Manna: it is but a vile meate, thinke we. We would be againe in Egypt, and ſ
                  •
               t by the greaſy ſteſhpots, to eute againe our Garlike Onions, and Léekes. 
                  •
               ithens Gods

Goſpell came amongeſt vs, we ſay now he had neuer plenty, therefore againe let vs go and woyrſhip the Queene of heauen. Chyldren begynne to gather Iere. 44. Iere. 7. ſtickes, the Fathers kindle the fire, and the women make the cakes to offer to the Quéene of heauen, & to prouoke the Lord to anger. The earth cannot abide now the wordes & Sermons of Anios: the cauſe of all rebelliou is Amos & his Amos. 7. preaching. It is Paule and his felowes that makes all out of order. Sumnia, the Goſpel is now 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                and Acte. 17. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                the out caſt & eurſſe of the Realme, & ſo are the Preachers: therefore out of the doores with them. So that I ſay, God cannot let his Goſpell tary with vs, but muſt néedes take it away to do vs ſome pleaſure therein: for ſo ſhall we thinke for a tyme. as the Sodomitanes thought when Lot departed frō them: as the ol
                  •
                world thought Gene. 19. Gene. 6. when Noe crept into his Arke: as the Ieroſolomitanes thought whē the Apoſtels went thence to P
                  ••
               tis. Then w
                  •
               r they mery, then was at paſtime. When Moiſes was abſent, then went they to eating and drinking, and roſe againe 
                  ••
                
               Exod 2
               
play. Then was all peace, all was wel, nothing amyſſe. But alas, ſodainlye came the floud and drowned them. Gods wrath wared hote againſt them. Then was weale away, mourning and woe, then was crying out, wringing of hands, renting of clothes, ſobbing and fighyng for the miſeries fallen, out of the which they could not ſcape. But oh ye mourners and cryers out, ye renters of clothes, why mourne ye? What is the cauſe of your miſery? The Goſpell is gone, Gods word is little preached, you were not diſquieted with it: Noe troubleth you not, Lot is departed, the Apoſtels are gone. What uow is the cauſe of theſe your miſeries? Wyl you at the length confeſſe it is your ſyunes? Nay now it is to late, God called vpon you, and you would not heare him, therfore yell and cry out nowe, for he wyll not heare you. You bowed your eares from hearing of Gods law, therefore your praier is execrable.
            But to come againe to vs Engliſhmen, I feare me I ſay, for our vnthaukfulues ſake, for our impietie and wyeednes, as God hath taken away our

King, ſo wyll he take away his Goſpel: yea ſo we would haue it, then ſhould all be well, thinke many. Well, if he take that away, for a tyme perchaunce we ſhall be qutel, but at length we ſhall féele the want to our wee, at length he wyll haue at vs, as at Sodeme, at Ieruſalem, and other places. And now he beginneth to brue ſuch a bruing, wherin one of vs is lyke to deſtroy an other, and ſo make an open gappe for forren enemies to deuour vs, and deſtroy vs. The father is agaynſt the ſonne, the brother againſt the brother, and Lord with what conſcience? Oh be thou mercyfull vnto vs, and in thine anger remember thy mercy, ſuffer thy ſelfe to be intreated, be reconciled vnto vs, nay reconcile vs vnto thée. Oh thou God of iuſtice, iudge iuſtly, oh thou Sonne of God which cameſt to deſtroy the works of Satan, deſtroy hys furours nowe ſmoking, and almoſt ſet on fyre in this Realme. We haue ſyuned, we haue ſynned, and therefore art thou angry, O be not angry for euer. Geue vs peace, peace peace in the Lord: ſet vs to w
                  ••
                againſt ſynne, againſt Satan, againſt

our carnall deſires, and geue vs the victory this way. Thys victorye we obtayne by faith. This faith is not without repentaunce, as her Gentlemau Uſſher before her. Before her, I ſay, in diſceruing true fayth from falſe faith, 
                  •
               yp faith, Engliſhmens faith: for els if ſprings out of true faith.
            Thys Uſſher then Repentaunce if we truly poſſeſſed, we ſhould be certain of true faith, and ſo aſſured of the victorie our death, hell, and Sathan. Hys workes then which he hath ſtyred vp would quaile, God would reſtore vs politike peace, right ſhould be right and haue right, Gods Goſpell ſhould tary with vs, religion ſhould be cheriſhed, ſuperſtition ſuppreſſed, and ſo we yet ſomething happy, notwithſtanding the great loſſe of our moſt gracious Liege ſoueraine Lord. All theſe would come to paſſe you ſae, if the Gentleman vſſher I ſpeake of, I meane Repentance, were at Inne with vs. As if he be abſent, we may be certaine that Lady Faith is abſent. Wherfore we cannot but be van quiſhed of the world, the fleſh, and the Deuill, and ſo wyll Sathans woorkes

proſper, though not in althings to blear our eles, yet in that thing which he moſt of al deſyreth. Therfore to repentaunce for our ſelues priuately, and for the Realme & Church publikely, euery one ſhuld labour to ſtyrre vp both our ſelues and others. This, to the end that for my part I might help, I haue preſently put forth a ſermon of Repentance, which hath lien by me halfe a yeare at the leaſt for the moſt part of it. For the laſt ſommer as I was abroade preaching in the countrey, my chaunce was to make a Sermon of repentance, the which was earneſtly of diuers deſired of me, that I ſhould geue it them written, or els put it forth in print. The which thing to graunt, as I could not (for I had not written it) ſo I told them that had ſo earneſtly deſired it. But when no nay would ſerue, but I muſt promiſe them to write it as I could: I conſented to ther requeſt, that they ſhould haue it at my leaſure. This leaſure I prolonged ſo long, that as (I weene) & offended them: ſo did I pleaſe my ſelfe, as one more glad to reade other mens wrytinges, then in ſuch ſort to publiſh mine

own for other men to reade: not that I woulde others not to profyt by me, but that I knowing how ſclender my ſcore is, would be loth for the enemies to haue iuſt occaſion of euyll ſpeakyng and wreſting that which ſimply is ſpoken. But when I conſidered this preſent time, to occaſion men now to looke vpon althinges in ſuch ſorte as might moue them to godlines, rather then to any curious queſtioning, I for the ſatiſfying of my promiſe, and profyting of the ſimple ignoraunt and rude, haue now cauſed this Sermon to be printed: the which I beſech God for his Chriſtes ſake, to vſe as a meane whereby of his mercy it may pleaſe him to worke in me and many others true hartye repentaunce for our ſinnes, to the glory of his name.
            Thus fare thou well in the Lord

                  The .x
                        •
                     . of July 1553.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ A fruitfull Sermon of Repentaunce, made by the conſtant Martyr of Chriſt M. Iohn Bradford. 1553.
            THe lyfe wee haue at thys preſent, is the gift of God, in whom we lyue, moue and are, and therefore he is called Iehoua. For the which lyfe as we ſhould be thankfull, ſo we may not in any wyſe vſe it after our own fantaſy, but to the ende for the which it is geuē and lent vs, that is, to the ſetting forth of Gods praiſe and glory by repentaunce, cōuerſion, and obedience to his good wyl and holy lawes whereunto hys long ſuffering doth (as it were) euen draw vs if our harts by impenitency were not hard euen. And therfore our life in ye ſcripture is called a walking, for that as the body dayly

drawech more and more neare hys ende, that is the earth: euen ſo our ſoule draweth dayly more and more neare vnto death, that is, ſaluation or damnation, heauen or hell.
            Of which thing, in that wee are moſt careles and very fooles (for we alas, are the ſame to day we were yeſterday, and not better or nearer to God, hut rather nearer to hell, Sathan, and perdition, beyng couetous, idle, carnal, ſecure. negligent, proud. &c.) I thinke my labour cannot bee better beſtowed, then with the Baptiſt, Chriſt Ieſus, and hys Apoſtels, to harpe on this ſtring which of all other is moſt neceſſary, and that in theſe daies moſt ſpeciallye. What ſtryng is that, ſayth one? Forſoth brother the ſtring of Repentance, the which

Chriſt our Sauiour did vſe firſt in his miniſtery, and as his Miniſter at this preſent I wil vſe vnto you al: Repent, for the kingdome 
               Math. 4. 
               of heauen is at hand.
            
            This ſentence thus pronounced & preached by our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, as it doth cōmaūd vs to repent, ſo to the doing of the ſame it ſhoweth vs a ſufficient cauſe to ſtyrre vs vp thereunto, namely for that the kingdome of heauen (which is a kingdome of all ioy, peace, ritches, power, and pleaſure) is at hand, to all ſuch as do ſo, that is, as do repent. So that the meaning hereof is, as though our ſauiour might thus ſpeake preſently: Syrs, for that I ſee you all walking the wrong way, euen to Sathan & vnto hel fyre, by folowing the kingdome of Sathan which now is coloured

vnder the vaine pleaſures of this life, & fooliſhnes of the fleſh moſt ſubtelly, to your vtter vndoing and deſtruction: behold anō ma
                  •
               ke well what I ſay vnto you The kingdom of heauen, that is, an other maner of ioy and felicitie, honour and ritches, power and pleaſure then you now perceyue or enioy, is euen at hand, and at your backes, as if you wyll turne againe, that is, repent you, you ſhall moſt truly and pleaſauntly feele, ſee, & inherit. Turne again therfore I ſay, that is, Repent, for this ioy I ſpeake of, euē 
               the kingdome of heauen is at hand.
            
            Here we may note firſt the corruption of our nature in that to this cōmaundement, Repent you, he addeth a cauſe, for the kingdom of heauen is at hand, For by reaſon of the corruption and ſturdines

of our nature. God vnto all his commaundements commonly eithrr addeth ſome promiſe to prouoke vs to obedience, or els ſome ſuch ſufficient cauſe as cannot but tickle vs vp to harty inbouryng for the doing of the ſame: as here to the commaundement of doing penance he addeth this aetiologe or cauſe, ſaying: For the kingdome of heanen is at hand.
            
            Againe, in that he ioyneth to the commaundement the cauſe, ſaying: For the kingdome of heauen is at haud, we may learne that of the kiugdome of heauen, none (to whō the miniſtery. of preaching doth appertain) can be partaker, but ſuch as repent & do penance. Therfore dearely beloued, if you regard the kingdome of heauen, in that you cānot enter therin except you repent, I beſech you all

of euery eſtate, as you wold your own weale, to repent and do penance. The which thing that ye may do, I wyll do my beſt now to helpe you by Gods grace.
            But firſt, becauſe we cānot wel tell what repentance is, through ignorance and for lacke of knowledge and falſe teaching: I wyll (to begin withal) ſhew you what repentance is. Repentance or penante is no Engliſh woord, but we borow it of the Latiniſtes, to whom penance is a forethinking in Englyſh, in Greeke a beyng wyſe afterwardes, in Hebrew a conuerſion or turning, the which conuerſion or turning, in that it cannot be true & harty, vnto God eſpecially, without ſome good hope or truſt of pardon for that which is already done and paſt, I may well in thys ſort define it

namely, that penance is a ſorowing or forethinking of our ſinnes paſt, an earneſt purpoſe to amend, or turning to God with a truſt of pardon.
            This definition may be diuided into three partes: Firſt a ſorowing for our ſyns: Secondly a truſt of pardon, which otherwiſe may be called a perſwaſion of Gods mercy by the merites of Chriſt for the forgeuenes of our ſyns: And thirdly, a purpoſe to amend, or conuerſion to a new life The which third or laſt part cannot be called properly a part, for it is but an effect of penance, as towardes the end ye ſhall ſee by Gods grace. But leaſt ſuche as ſeeke for occaſion to ſpeake euyll, ſhould haue any occaſion, though they tary not out the end of thys Sermon: I therefore diuide penauce

into the three foreſayde partes: of ſorrowing for our ſyn of good hope or truſt of pardon, and of a new life. Thus you now ſee what penance is: a ſorowing for ſyn, a purpoſe to amend, with a good hope or truſt of pardon.
            This penance not onely differeth from that which men commonly haue taken to be penance, in ſaying & doing our enioyned Lady Pſalters, ſeuen Pſalmes, faſtynges, pylgrimages, almes deedes, and ſuch like things but alſo from that which the more learned haue declared to conſiſt of three partes, namely Contrition, Confeſſion, & Satiſfaction.
            Contrition they cal a iuſt & a ful ſorow for their ſin. For this word iuſt & ful, in one of the differences betwene contritiō and attrition.
            Confeſſion they cal a numbring

of al their ſins in the eare of their ghoſtly father; for as (ſay they) a Iudge cannot abſolue without knowledge of ye cauſe or matter, ſo cannot the Prieſt or ghoſtly father abſolue from other ſynnes, then thoſe which he doth heare.
            Satiſfaction they calamendes making vnto God for their ſyns by their vndue workes, opera indebita, woorkes more then they neede to do, as they terme them. This is their penāce which they preach, write, & alow. But how true this geare is, how it agreeeth with Gods woord, how it is to be alowed, taught, preached, and writtē, let vs a litle conſider. If a man repent not vntil he haue a iuſt and full ſorrowing for his ſyns (dearely beloued) when ſhal he repent? For in aſmuch as hell fire, & the puniſhment of the Deuils,

is a iuſt puniſhment for ſyn: In as much as in all ſyn there is a contempt of God, which is all goodnes, and therefore there is acontempt deſerte or all ylnes: alas who can beare or feele this iuſt ſorowe, this full ſorow for our ſyns, this their contricion, which they do ſo diſcern frō their attrition? Shal not man by this doctrine rather diſpaire, then come by repentāce? If a mā repent not vntil he haue made confeſſion of all his ſyns in the eare of his ghoſtly father: if a man cannot haue abſolution of his ſyns vntil his ſins be told by tale and number in the Prieſtes eare (in that, as Dauid ſa
                  ••
               h non can vnderſtand, much leſſe. then vtter all his ſyns, Delicta quis intelliget: who can vnderſtand his ſins in that Dauid of him ſelfe complaineth els where, how that his

ſyns are ouerflowed his head, & as a heauy burthen doo oppreſſe him, alas ſhal not a man by this doctrine be vtterly driuē from repentāce? Though they haue gon about ſomthing to make plaiſter for their ſores, of confeſſion or attrition to aſwage this geare, bidding a man to hope wel of his cō
               trition, though it be not ſo full as is required, and of his confeſſion though he haue not numbred all his ſyns, if ſo be ye hee do ſo much as in him lyeth: dearely beloued in that there is none but y• herein he is gilty (for who doth as much as he may) trow ye that this plaiſter is not lyke ſalt for ſore eyes? Yes vndoutedly, when they haue done al they can for ye appeaſing of conſciēces in theſe points, this is the ſumme that we yet ſhould hope wel, but yet ſo hope, that we

muſt hand in a māmering & douting, whether our ſyns be forgeuen. For to beleue remiſſionē pecca tornm, that is, to be certain of for geuenes of ſynnes, as our Crede teacheth vs, they count it a preſumption. Oh abomination, and that not onely herein, but in all their penance as they paynt it.
            As concerning Satiſfaction by their opera indebita, vndne works that is, by ſuch workes as they neede not to do, but of their own voluntarines & wylfulnes (wylfulnes in deede, who ſeeth not monſterous abhomination, blaſphemy, and euen open fighting agaynſt God? For if ſatiſfction cān be done by man, then Chriſt died in vaine for him that ſo ſatiſfieth, & ſo raigneth he in vaine, ſo is he a Biſhop & a Prieſt in vain. Gods law requireth loue to God Deut 6. 2
               
with all our hart, ſoule, power, Math. 22, Mark. 20 L
                     •
                  ke. 10. might, & ſtrength, to that ther is nothing can be done to 
                  ••
               dward which is not conteined in this cō
               maūdement: nothing can ve don ouer & aboue this. Againe, chriſt Iohn. 3. requireth to manwarde, that wee ſhould loue one another, as he loued vs. And trow we ye we can do any good thing to our neighborwar
                  •
                whych is not herein compriſed?
            Yea, let them tel me when they do any thing ſo in the loue of god & their neighbour, but that they had nede to cry, Remitte nobis debita noſtra: Forgeue vs our ſyns. So Math. 6. far are we of frō ſatiſfying. Doth not Chriſt ſay: VVhen you haue 
               L
                     •
                  ke. 17. 
               done althings that I haue commaunded you, ſay that you be but vnprofitable feruantes? Put nothing to my Aoc. 22. Deu. 4. 1. word ſaith God. Yes workes of ſupererogation (yea ſuperabomination)

ſay they. VVhat ſoeuer thinges are true (ſayth the Apoſtle ſaint Paul) whatſoeuer thinges are honeſt, whatſoeuer thinges are iuſt, whatſoeuer things are pure, whatſoeuer thinges pertaine to loue, whatſoeuer thinges are of good report, if there be any vertue, or if ther be any praiſe, haue you them in your minde, and do them, and the God of peace ſhalbe with you. I wene this wel looked on, wyl pull vs from popiſh ſatiſfactory workes, which do deface Chriſtes treaſures & ſatiſfaction.
            In heauen and in earth was there none found that could ſatiſfie Gods anger for our ſinnes, or get heauē for man, but onely the ſonne of God Ieſus Chriſt, the Lyon of the tribe of Iuda, who by hys bloud hath wrought the worke of ſatiſfactiō, and alonely is worthy all honour, glory, and

praiſe, for hee hath opened the booke with the ſeuen ſeales.
            Dearely beloued, therefore abhorre this abomination, euen to thinke that there is any other ſatiſfaction to Godward for ſynne, then Chriſtes bloud onely. Blaſphem it is, and that horrible, to thinke otherwyſe. The bloud of Chriſt purifieth (ſaith ſaint Iohn) from all ſynne, and therefore he is called the Lambe ſlaiue from the beginning of the world, becauſe there was neuer ſyn forgeuen of God, nor ſhalbe from the beginning vnto the ende of the world, but only thorow Chriſts death: prate the Pope and his prelates as pleaſe them, wyth theyr pardous, Purgatorie, Purgacious, Placeboes, Trentals, Dirigies, woorkes of ſupererogation, ſuperabomination. &c.
            
               
               I am he (ſaith ye Lord) which putteth away thine offences, and that for 
               Eſay. 45. 
               mine own ſake, and wyl no more remember thine iniquities. Put me in remembraunce (for we wil reaſon together) and tel me what thou haſt for thee, to make the righteous. Thy firſt father offended ſore. &c. And thus writeth S. Iohn: If any man ſyn, we haue an Aduocate (ſaith he with 
               1. Iohn. 2. 
               the father, euen Ieſus Chriſt the righteous, and he is the propitation or ſatiſfaction for our ſyns. As in the. 4. chapter he ſayth, that God hath ſent his Sonne to be a propiciation or ſatiſfaction for our ſyns, accordyng to that which Paule writeth, where he calleth Chriſt a mercyful and faythful Prieſt, to purge the peoples ſyns: So that Hebr. 2. blinde buſſards & peruers Papiſts they be which yet wil prate our merites or workes to ſatiſfy

for our ſyns in part or in whole, before Baptiſme or after. For to omit the teſtimonies I brought out of Iohn & Paule, which the blynd cannot but ſe
                  •
               : I pray you remember the text out of Eſay, which euen now I rehearſed, being ſpoken to ſuch as wer then y• people of God & had bene a long time, but yet were fallen into grenous ſyns after their adoption into the number of Gods childrē 
               It is for myne own ſake (ſaith God) that I put away thy ſyns. Where is your parting of the ſtake nowe? If it be for Gods owne ſake, yf Chriſt be the propiciation, then recant, except you wyll become Idolaters, making your workes God and Chriſt. Say as Dauid teacheth: Not to vs Lord not to vs, but to 
                     •
                  hy name be the glory.
            
            And it is to be noted, that God

doth caſt in their teeth euen the ſyn of theyr firſt father, leſt they ſhould thinke that yet perchaūce, for the righteouſnes & goodnes of their good fathers, their ſyns might be the ſooner pardoned, & ſo God except their workes.
            If they had taken ſatiſfaction for that which is done to ye Congregation publikely by ſome notable puniſhment, as in the primatiue Church was vſed to open offenders, ſparkles whereof and ſome traces yet remaine, when ſuch as haue ſynued in adultery go about the church with a Taper in their ſhiertes: Or if they had made ſatiſfaction for reſtitution to manward of ſuch goodes as wrongfully are gotten, the which true penāce cānot be with out: Or if by ſatiſfaction they had ment a new life to make amends

to the Congregation thereby, as by their euyll lyfe they did offend the Congregatiō, in which ſenſe the Apoſtle ſeemeth to take that which he writeth in. 2. Corin. 7. where the old Interpretour calleth Apologian, ſatiſfactiō, which rather ſignifieth a defence or anſwering againe: If I ſay, they had taken ſatiſfactiō any of theſe waies, then they had done well, ſo that the ſatiſfaction to God had bene left al onely to Chriſt.
            Againe, if they had made confeſſion either for that which is to God priuatelye, eyther for that which is to the Congregation publikely, eyther for that which is a free conſulation wyth ſome one learned in Gods booke & appointed thereunto, as firſt it was vſed and I wiſh were now vſed amōgeſt vs, either for that which

is a reconciliation of one to another, it had bene ſomthing: yea if they had made it for faith, bicauſe it is a true demonſtratiō of faith, as in Paule we may ſee, when he calleth Chriſt the captaine of our confeſſion, that is of one faith (& Rom. 1. ſo Confeſſours were called in the primatiue Church, ſuch as manfully did wttnes. their faith with the peril of their liues: if I ſay, they had taken it thus, then had they done rightwell.
            And ſo Coutrition, if they had left out their 
                  •
               nblil dſtinction betwene it & attrition by this word iuſt or full, making it a harty ſorow for theyr ſynnes, then wee would neuer haue cryed out againſt them therfore. For we ſay penance hath three partes, Contrition, if you vnderſtand it for a harty ſorowing for ſyn, Confeſſion,

if you vuderſtand it for faith of free pardon in Gods mercy by Ieſus Chriſt. and Satiſfaction, if you vnderſtand it not to Godwardes) for that onely to Chriſt muſt bee left alone) but to mauwarde in reſtitution of goddes wrōgfully or fraudulently gottē, of name hindred by our ſlaūders and in newnes of lyfe: although, as I ſayd before, and anou wyll ſhew more plainly by gods grace that thys laſt is no part of penance in deede, but a plaine effect or fruit of true penance.
            I might here being in exāples of their penauce, how perilous it is to be embraced: but let the example of their ground Sire Iudas ſerue, in whom we ſee al the parts of their penāce, as they deſcribe it, & yet no withſtāding he was dāned. He was ſory inough

as the effect ſhewed: he had their contricion fully, out of the which he confeſſed hys fault ſaying: I haue betrayed innocent bloud, and thervnto he made ſatiſfaction, reſtoryng the money he had receyued. But yet all was but loſt, he hanged vp himſelfe, his bowels burſt out, & he remaineth a child of perdition for euer. I would wiſh that this example of Iudas in whom ye ſee the parts of their penance, contrition, confeſſion, & ſatiſfaction, would moue them to penance, & to deſcribe it a litle better, making hope or truſt of Gods free mercy a peece thereof, or els with Iudas they wil marre all
            Perchaunce theſe wordes, contrition, confeſſion, and ſatiſfactiō were vſed as I haue expounded them at the firſt. But in that we ſee ſo much daunger and hurt by

vſing them without expoſitions either let vs ioyne to them open expoſitions alwaies, or els let vs not vſe them at all, but ſay as I write. that penānce is a harty ſorow for our ſyns a good hope on truſt of pardon through Chriſt, which is not without an earneſt purpoſe to amend, or a new lyfe. This penance is the thing wher to all ye ſcripture calleth vs. This penance do I now cal you al vnto: this muſt be continually in vs and not for a Lent ſeaſon, as we haue thought: this muſt increaſe dayly more and more in vs: with out thys we cannot be ſaued.
            Search therfore your harts al, al ſwearers, blaſphemers, hers, flatterers, baudy or idle talkers, ieſters, bribers, couetous, perſons, droukards, gluttons, who
                  •
                mongers, theeues, murtherers,

ſlaunderers, idle liuers, negligēt in their vocation. &c. All ſuch and all other as lamēt not their ſyns, as hope not in Gods mercye for pardon, & purpoſe not hartely to amende, to leaue their ſwearing, dronkennes, whoredome, couetouſnes, idlenes. &c. all ſuch, I ſay, ſhal not nor cannot enter into Gods kingdome, but hell fire is prepared for them, weeping and gnaſhing of teeth, whereunto, alas, I feare me, very many wyll needes go, in that very many wil be as they haue bene, let vs euen to the wearing of our toung to the ſtumps, preach and pray neuer ſo much to the contrary, and that euen in the bowels of Ieſus Chriſt, as now I beſech you all, all, all, and euery mothers childe, to repent and lament your ſynne, to truſt in Gods mercy, and to

amende your lyues.
            Now me thinkes ye are ſomewhat aſtonied: wherby I gather that preſently you deſire this repentāce, that is, this ſorow, good hope, and newnes of lyfe. The which that you may the rather attaine and get to your comforts as I haue gone about to bee a meane to ſtir vp in you (by Gods grace) this deſire of repentance, ſo through the ſame grace of God wyl I go about now to ſhew you how you may haue your deſire in this behalfe.
            And firſt concerning this part, namely ſorow for your ſyns, and harty lamenting of the ſame: For this if you deſire the hauing of it you muſt beware y• you thinke not that of your ſelues or of your own freewyl, by any meanes you can get it. You maye eaſelye deceiue

your ſelues and mock your ſelues, thincking more of your ſelues then is ſeemely. All good thinges, and not peeces of good thinges, but al good things, ſaith S. Iames, come from God the Iames. 1. father of light. If therefore penance be good (as it is good) then the partes of it be good. Frō God therfore do they come, and not of our free wyll. It is the Lord that mortifieth, that bringeth down, 1. Reg. 2. that humbleth, ſaith the ſcriptur in ſundry places, After thou haddeſt ſtricken my thigh (ſaith Ieremy) I was aſhamed. Loe he ſayth, after 
               Iere. 31. 
               thou hadſt ſtricken me: and therfore praieth he, euen in the laſt words almoſt he writen: Turne vs Lord and we ſhall be turned. The which thing Dauid vſeth verye often. Lamen. 5 Wherfore firſt of al, if thou wouldeſt haue this part of penance, as

for the whole, becauſe it is Gods gift, ſo for this part go thou vnto Acte. 11. 2. Tim. 2. God, & make ſome litle praier, as thou canſt, vnto his mercy for the ſame, in this or like ſort.
            Mercifull father of our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, bicauſe I haue ſynned and done wickedly, & thorow thy goodnes haue receiued a deſire of repentance, wherto this thy long ſufferaunce doth draw my hard hart. I beſeche thee for thy mercies ſake in CHRIST, to worke the ſame repentance in me and by thy ſpirit, power, & grace ſo to humble, mortify, and teare my concſience for my ſyns to ſaluatiō, that in thy good time thou mayeſt comfort and quicken me again through Ieſus Chriſt thy dearely beloued Sonne. Amen.
            After this ſort I ſay, or otherwyſe, as thou thinckeſt good, if

thou wilt haue this firſt part contrition or ſorow for thy ſins, do ye beg it of God thorow Chriſt. And when thou haſt aſked it, as I haue laboured to driue thee from truſting in thy ſelfe, ſo now I go about to moue thee from flattering of thy ſelf, from ſluggiſhnes and negligence, to be diligent to vſe theſe meanes folowing.
            Unto prayer, which I would thou ſhouldeſt fyrſt vſe as thou canſt, ſecondly get thee Gods law as a glas to toote in, for in it and by it commeth the true knowledge of ſynne, without whych knowledge there can bee no ſorrow. For how can a man ſorow for his ſynnes, which knoweth not hys ſynnes? As when a man is ſycke, the fyrſt ſtep to health, is to know his ſycknes: euen ſo to ſaluation, the firſt ſtep is to

know thy damnation due for thy ſynnes.
            The law of God therfore muſt be gotten and wel tooted in, that is, we muſt looke in it ſpiritually, & not corporally or carnally, as ye outward word or letter doth declare and vtter: and ſo our Sauiour teacheth vs in Mathew, expounding the ſixt & ſeuenth commaūdements, not onely after the outward deede, but alſo after the hart, making there the anger of the hart, a kynde of murther, luſting after an other mans wyfe, a kinde of adultery,
            And this is one of the differences betwene Gods law and mās lawe, that of this (mans law I meane I am not contemnable, ſo long as I obſerue outwardli the ſame. But gods law goeth to the roote & to the hart, condemning

me for the inwarde motion, allthough outwardlye I lyue moſt holyly. As for example: If I kil no mā, though in my hart I hate mans law condemneth me not: but otherwyſe doth Gods lawe. And why? for it ſeeth the fountain whence the euil doth ſpring. If hatred were taken out of the hart, then loftynes in lookes, detraction in toūg, and murther by hand could neuer enſue. If luſting wer out of the hart, curioſity in countenaunce, wantonnes in wordes, baudy boldnes in body would not appeare,
            In that therfore this outward euyll ſpringes out of the inward corruption: ſeyng Gods law alſo is a law of liberty, as ſayth ſaynt Iame. 2. Iames: and ſpirituall, as ſaith ſ. Paule: perfectly & ſpiritually it Roma. 7. is to be vnderſtand, if we wyll

truly come to the knowledge of our ſyns. For of this inward corruption, reaſon knoweth but litle or nothing. I had not knowen Rom. 7. (ſayth Paul) that luſting (which to reaſon, and to them which are guided only by reaſō, is thought but a triſte) I had not knowen ſayth he, this luſting to haue ben ſyn, if the lawe had not ſayd, Non concupiſces, Thou shalt not luſt.
            
            To the knowledge therefore of our ſyn (without which we cannot repent or be ſory for our ſyn) let vs ſecondly get vs Gods law as a glaſſe to toote in: and that not onely literally, outwardly, or partly, but alſo ſpiritually, inwardly, and throughly. Let vs conſider the hart, and ſo ſhal we ſee the foule ſpots we are ſtayned withal, at leſt inwardly, wherby we the rather may be mooued to

harty ſorow and ſighing. For as ſ. Auſten ſaith, it is a glaſſe which feareth no body: but euen looke what a one thou art, ſo it paynteth thee out.
            In the law we ſee it is a foule ſpot, not to loue the lord our God withal) all I ſay) our hart, ſoule, power, might and ſtrength and that continually.
            In the law it is a foule ſpot, not onely to make to our ſelues anye grauen Image or ſimilitude, to bowe thereto. &c. but alſo not to frame our ſelues wholy after the image whereto we are made, not to bow to it, to worſhip it.
            In the law we ſee that it is a foule ſpot, not onely to take Gods name in vayne, but alſo not earneſtly, hartely, and euen continually to call vpon his name onely, to geue thankes vnto him, to beleue,

to publiſh, and lyue his holy word.
            In Gods lawe we ſee it is a foule ſpot to our ſoules, not onely to bee an open prophaner of the Saboth day, but alſo not to reſt from our own wordes & works, that the Lord might both ſpeake and worke in vs and by vs, not to heare his holy word, not to communicate his Sacraments, not to geue occaſion to others to holynes by our example in godly workes and reuerent eſteming of the miniſtery of his word.
            In Gods law we ſee it a foule ſpot to our ſoules, not onely to be an opē diſobeyer of our Parents Magiſtrates, Maiſters, & ſuch as be in any autority ouer vs, but alſo not to honour ſuch euen in our harts, not to giue thankes to God for them, not to pray for thē
               
to ayde, to helpe, or relieue thē, to heare with theyr infirmities. &c. In Gods law we ſee it is a foule ſpot in our ſoules, not onely to be a manqueller in hatred, malyce, proud lokes, brags, backbiting, rayling, or bodily ſlaughter: but alſo not to loue our neyghbours, yea our ennemies, euen in our harts, & to declare the ſame in all our 
                  •
               eſtures, wordes, & workes.
            In Gods lawe we ſee it a foule ſpot to our ſoules, not only to be a whore monger in luſting in our harts, in wanton looking, in vncleane and wanton talking, in actual doing vnhoneſtly with our neighbours wyfe, daughter, ſeruant. &c. but alſo not to be chaſte, ſober, temperate in hart, lookes, tong, apparel, deedes, & to helpe others therunto accordyngly. &c.
            In gods law we ſee it is a foule

ſpot to our ſoules, not onelye in hart to couet, in looke or word to flatter, lye, colour. &c. in deede to take away any thing which pertayneth to another: but alſo in hart, countenance, word & deede, not to keepe, ſaue, & defend that which pertayneth to thy neyghbour, as thou woldeſt thine own
            In Gods law we may ſee it a foule ſpot, not onely to lie or bear falſe wytnes againſt anye man, but alſo not to haue as great care ouer thy neighbours name, as ouer thine own.
            Synne in Gods law it is we may ſee and a foule ſpot, not onely to conſent to euil luſt, or carnal deſires, but euen the very naturall or carnall luſtes and deſyres themſelues for ſo I may cal thē, nature it ſelfe being now ſo corrupted are ſin, and ſelfe loue, and

many ſuch lyke. By reaſon wherof I trow there is none that tooteth well herein, but though he be blameles to the world, and faire to the ſhew, yet certainly inwardly his face is foule arayed, and ſo ſhamefull, ſaucy, maungy, pocky and ſcabbed, that he cānot but be ſory at the contemplation thereof, & that ſo much more, by how much he continueth to loke in this glaſſe accordingly.
            And thus much concerning the ſecōd meane to the ſtirring vp of ſorow for our ſin, that next vnto prayer, we ſhould toote in Gods law ſpiritually. The which tooting if we vſe with prayer as I ſayd let vs not doubt but at the length Gods ſpirite wyl woorke as now to ſuch as beleue, for to the vnbeleuers al is in vain, ther eyes are ſtark blynd, they can ſee

nothing) to ſuch as beleue (I ſay) I truſt ſomthing is done euen al ready. But if neyther by prayer nor by tooting in Gods law ſpiritually, as yet thy hard vnbeleuing hart feeleth no ſorrow nor lamentyng for thy ſyn, thirdly, looke vpon the tag tyed to Gods law: for as to mans law there is a tag tyed, that is a penalty, ſo is ther to Gods law a tag tyed, that is a penaltie, and that no ſmall one, but ſuch a great one as cānot but make vs to caſt our curryſh tayles betwene our legs, if wee beleue it, for all is in vayne if we be faythles, not to beleue before we feele.
            This tag is Gods malediction or curſe. Maledictus omnis (ſaith it) qui non permanet in omnibus quae ſcripta ſūt in libro legis, vt faeiat 
                     •
                  am, 
               
                  •
               oe, accurſed (ſayth he is all, no

exception, all, ſayth God, which continueth not in al thinges (for he that is gilty of one, is gilty of the whole, ſayth ſ. Iames:) in all thinges therfore, (ſaith the holy Ghoſt) which are written in the booke of the law to do them. He ſayth not to heare them, to talke of them, to diſpute of them, but to do them.
            Who is he now that doth theſe? Rara auis, fewe ſuch Byrdes, yea none at al. For al are gone out of the way, though not outwardly by word or dede, yet inwardly at the leaſt by default and wanting of that which is required: ſo that a childe of one nightes age is not pure, but (by reaſon of byrth ſyn in daunger of Gods malediction: much more then we, which alas haue droonken in iniquitie as it were water, as Iob ſayth, But Iob. 15.
               
yet alas we quake not,
            Tell me now, good brother, why dooyou ſo lyghtly conſider Gods curſe, that for your ſynnes paſt you are ſo careles as though you had made a couenaunt wyth death and damnatiō, as the wicked did in Eſayes time? What is Gods curſſe? At the Popes curſe with booke, bel & candle, oh how trembled we, which heard it but onely though the ſame was not directed vnto vs, but vnto others For this Gods curſe which is in comparable more ſel and importable, and is directed to vs, yea hanging ouer vs all by reaſon of our ſyns, alas, how careles are we? Oh faithles hard harts. Oh I
                  •
               zab
                  •
               ls geſtes, rocked and laid a ſleepe in her bed. Oh wicked Apo
                     •
                  . 
                     •
                  . wretches, which being com into the depth of ſyn, do contemne the

ſame. O ſorrowles ſynners and ſhame les ſhrinking harlots.
            Is not the anger of a Kyng death? and is the anger of the Kyng of all kinges a matter to be ſo lyghtely regarded as we do regard it, which for our ſynnes are ſo retchles, that we ſlug and ſleepe it out? As waxe melteth a way at the heate of the fire (ſaith Dauid) ſo do the wicked periſh at the face or countenance of the Lord. If, dearely beloued, hys face be ſo terrible & intollerable for ſinners and the wicked, what trow we his hand is? At the face or appearing of Gods anger, the earth trembleth: but wee earth, earth, yea ſtones, yron, flyntes, tremble nothing at all. If we wil not tremble in hearing, wo vnto vs, for then ſhal we be craſhed in peeces in feeling, If a Lion rore

the beaſtes quake: but wee are worſe then beaſtes, which quake nothing at the roring of the Liō I meane the Lord of hoſtes. And why? becauſe the curſe of God, 2. Tim. 2. hardnes of hart is already fallen vpon vs, or els we could not but lament and tremble for our ſyns. if not for the ſhame and foulnes therof, yet at the leaſt, for the malediction and curſe of God, which hangeth ouer vs for our ſynnes.
            Lord be mercyfull vnto vs for thy Chriſts ſake and ſpare vs, in thyne anger remember thy mercy towardes vs. Amen.
            And thus much for the thyrd thing, to the mouing of vs to ſorow for our ſyns, that is, for the tag tyed to Gods law. I meant for the malediction and curſe of God. But if our harts be ſo hard that thorow theſe we yet fele not

harty ſorow for our ſyns, let vs fourthly ſet before vs examples paſt and preſent, old & new, that therby the holy ſpirite may be effectual to worke in his time thys worke of ſorowing for our ſyn.
            Looke vpon Gods anger for ſyn in Adam and Eue, for eating a peece of an apple. Wer not they the deareſt creatures of God, caſt out of Paradiſe? Were not they ſubiect to mortalitye, trauail, labour. &c? Was not the earth accurſed for their ſyns? Do not we all, men in labour, women in traueling with child, & all in death, mortality & miſerye, euen in this life feele the ſame? And was God ſo angry for their ſyn, and he being the ſame God, wyl he ſay nothing to vs for ours (alas) much more horrible then the eatyng once of one peece of an apple?
            
               
In the tyme of Noe and Lot Gene. 6. Geneſ. 19. God deſtroyed the whole world with water, and the cities of So doma and Gomorrha. Seboim & Adamah with 
                  •
               ire and brimſtone from heauen for their ſins, namely for their whooredomes, pryde ydlenes, vnmercyfulnes to the poore, tirāny. &c. In which wrath of God euen the very Babes, Birdes, foules, fiſhes, heroes, trees, and gras periſhed: & think we that nothing wil be ſpoken to vs, much worſe & more abominable then they? For al men may ſee if they wyll, that the whoredomes, pryde, vnmercifulnes, tyranny. &c. of England, far paſſeth in this age, any age yt euer was before. Lots wife looking backe, Geneſ. 9 was turned into a ſalt ſtone: and wyl our looking backe again, yea our runing backe againe to our

wickednes do vs no hurt, If we wer not already more blnid then beetels, we would bluſh. Pharae his hart was hardened ſo that no myracle coulde conuert him: if ours were anye thing ſoft, wee would begyn to ſob.
            Of ſixe hundred thouſand men Ioſua & Caleb. alonely but twaine entred into the land of promiſe, bicauſe they had ten times ſinned againſt the Lord, as he him ſelfe ſayth: and Num. 14. trow we that God wil not ſwear in his wrath, that we ſhall neuer enter into his reſt, whych haue ſynned ſo many ten times as we haue toes & fingers, yea heares of our heades and beardes (I feare me) and yet we paſſe not.
            The man that ſware, & he that Leuit. 24, Num. 15. gathered ſtyckes on the Saboth day, were ſtoned to death: but we think our ſwearing is no ſyn,

our bidding, rioting, yea whorehunting on the Saboth day pleaſeth god, or els we would ſomething 1. Reg. 5. amend our maners.
            Helias negligence in correcting his ſonnes, nypped his necke in two: but ours which pamper vp our children lyke puppets, wyll put vs to no plounge. Helias ſonnes for diſobeying their Fathers admonition, brought ouer them Gods vengeance: and will our ſtubburnes do nothing.
            Saules malyce to Dauid, Acabs 3. Regu. 21. 22. diſpleaſure againſt Naboth brought their bloud to the groūd for Dogs to eate, yea their children were hanged vp and ſlaine 4. Reg. 21. 4. Reg. 10. for this geare: but we continue in malice, enuye and murther, as though wee were able to wage warre with the Lord.
            Dauids adultery with Bethſa

be was viſited on the child born, on Dauids daughter defiled by her brother, and on his children one ſtaying an other his wiues defiled by his own ſonne, on him ſelfe driuen out of his Realme in his old age, and otherwyſe alſo, although he muſt hartely repented his ſynne: but we are more dere vnto God thē Dauid, which yet was a man after Gods own hart, or els wee coulde not but tr
                  ••
               ble, and begyn to repent.
            The ritch gluttons gay paunch fylling: what did it? It brought him to hel: & haue we a plackard that God wyl do nothing to vs?
            Achams ſubtyl theft prouoked Gods anger aganiſt all Iſraell: and one ſubtiltie, yea open extortion is ſo fyne and politicke, that God cannot eſpy it.
            Eiezi his couetouſnes, brought

it not the leproſy vpon him, & on all his ſee
                  •
               e? Iudas alſo hanged himſelfe But the couetouſnes of England is of an other cloth and colour. Wel, if it were ſo the ſame Tayler wyll cut it accordingly.
            Anania and Saphira by lying, linked to them ſodaine death: but ours now prolongeth out life the longer, to laſt in eternall death.
            The falſe witneſſes of the two Iudges againſt Suſanna, lyghted on their owne pates, and ſo wyll ours do at length,
            But what go I about to auouch auncient examples, where dayly experience doth teach. The ſweat the other yeare, the ſtormes the winter folowing, wyll vs to way them in the ſame ballances. The hanging and killing of men them ſelues, which are (alas) to ryfe in all places, require vs to regiſter

them in the ſame roles. At the least in Children, Infantes, and ſuch lyke, which yet cannot vtter ſyn by word or dede, we ſee Gods anger againſt ſynne in puniſhing them by ſyckenes, death, my ſhape or otherwiſe, ſo plainly that we cannot but grone and groont agayne, in that: we haue 
                  •
               uſhed out this geare more aboundantly in word and deede.
            And here with me a litle looke on Gods anger, yet ſo freſh, that we cannot but ſmell it, although we ſtop our noſes neuer ſo much I pray God we ſmell it not more freſh hereafter, I mene it forſoth (for I know you looke for it) in out deare late ſoueraygne Lord the kings Maieſty. You al know he was but a child in yeares: defiled he was not with notorious offences. Defiled quoth he? nay

rather adorned wyth ſo manye goodly giftes & wonderfull qualities, as neuer Prince was from the begynning of the worlde, Should I ſpeake of hys wyſedome, of hys ripenes in iudgement, of his learning, of his godly zeale, heroycall hart, fatherly care for hys Commons, nurcely ſolicitude for religion? &c. Nay ſo many thinges are to be ſpoken in commendation of Gods exceding graces in this child, that as Saluſt writeth of Carthage, I had rather ſpeake nothing, then to little, in that to much is to lyttle, this gift God gaue vnto vs Engliſh men before all nations vnder the ſunne, & that of his exceding loue towardes vs. But alas and welaway: for our vnthankfulnes ſake, for our ſins ſake, for our carnality and prophane liuing, Gods

anger hath touched not onely the body, but alſo the minde of our Kyng by a long ſycknes, and at length hath taken him away by death, death, cruell death, fearefull death.
            Oh, if Gods iudgemēt be begun on him, which as he was the chefeſt, ſo I thinke the holyeſt, and godlyeft in the Realme of England, (alas) what wil it be on vs, whoſe ſyns are ouergrowen ſo our heades, that they are climed vp into heauen. I pray you my good brethren, know that Gods anger for our ſyn towardes vs, cannot but be great, yea to fell, in that we ſee it was ſo great, that our good King could not beare it What followed to Iewry after the death of Ioſias? God ſaue England, & geue vs repentances my hart wil not ſuffer me to cary

longer herein. I trow thys wyll thruſt out ſome teares of repeutance.
            If therefore to praier for Gods feare, the tooting in Gods glas, & the tag therto wyl not burſt open thy blockiſh hart, yet, I trow the toſ
                  •
               ing to and fro of theſe examples, and ſpecially of oue late Kyng, and this troubleſome time wyll tumble ſome teares our of thyne hart, if thou ſtyll pray for gods ſpirit accordingly. For who art thou (thinke alwayes wyth thy ſelfe) that God ſhould ſpare thee more then them whoſe examples yu haſt heard? What friends haſt thou? Were not of theſe Kings, Prophets, Apoſtels, learned, and come of holy ſtockes? I deceiue my ſelfe (think thou with thy ſelfe) if I beleue that God being the ſame God y• he was, wyl

ſpare me, whoſe wickednes is no ſeſſe, but much more then ſome of theirs. He hateth ſynne now as much as euer he did. The longer he ſpareth, the greater vengeance 
                  •
               il fal: the deper he draweth his dow, the ſorer wil ye ſhaft pearce.
            But if yet thy hart be ſo hardened that all this geare wyll not moue thee, ſurely thou art in a very euil eſtate, and remedy now know I none. What ſaid I none know I none: Yes, there is one which is ſureſby, as they ſay, to ſerue, if any thyng wyl ſerue. You looke to know what this is. Forſoth the paſſion and death of Ieſus Chri
                  ••
                You know the cauſe why Chriſt became man and ſuffered as he ſuffered, was the ſins of his people, that he might ſaue them frō the ſame. Conſider the greatnes of the ſore, I mean ſyn

by the greatnes of the Surgion and of the ſalue, Who was the Surgion: No Angel, no Saint, no Archangel, no power, no creature in heauen nor in earth, but onely he by whom althings wer made, all thinges are ruled alſo euen Gods own dearling & onely beloued ſonne, becomming man.
            Oh what a great thing is thys that could not be done by the Angels, Archāgels, Poteſtates, powers, or al the creatures of God, without his own ſonne, who yet muſt needes be thruſt out of heauen, as a man would ſay, to take our nature & become man: Here haue ye the Surgion: great was the cure that thys mighty Lord tooke in hand.
            Now, what was the ſalue. For ſoth deare geare, & of many compoſitions: I cannot recite al, but

rather muſt leaue it to your harty con
                  •
               idetations. Three and thirty yeares was he curyng our ſore. He ſought it earneſtly by faſting, watching, praying. &c. The ſame night that he was betrayed, I reade how buſy he was about a plaſter in the garden, when he liing ſ
                  •
               at on the ground, praying with teares, & that of bloud not a few, but ſo manye as dyd flow down on the ground againe, criing on this ſort: Father? ſaith he) if it be poſſible, let this cup depart fr
                     •
                   me, that is, if it be poſſyble that els the ſyns of mankinde can be taken a way, graunt that it may be ſo. Thou heardeſt Moiſes criyng for the idolaters: Thou hear deſt Lot for the Zoarites: Samuel. Dauid, and many other for the Iſraelites, and deare, father, I onely am thine own ſo
                  •
               ne, as

thou haſt ſaid, in whom thou art well pleaſed, wylt thou not heare me? I haue by the ſpace of three & thirty yeres done alwayes thy wyl: I haue ſo humbled my ſelfe that I would become an abiect a mongeſt men to obey thee. Therfore, deare father, if it be poſſible, graunt my requeſt, ſaue mākind now without any further labour ſalues, or plaſters, But yet (ſayth he) not as I wyll, but as thou wylt.
            
            But ſir, what herd he? Though he ſwet bloud & water in making his plaſter for our ſore of ſyn, yet it framed not. Twyſe he cryed without comfort: yea though to comfort him God ſent an Angel, we yet know y• this plaſter was not allowed for ſufficient, vntyll hereunto Chriſt Ieſus was betrayed, forſaken of all his Diſciples, for worne of his dearly beloued

bound lyke a theefe, belyed on, buffered, whipped, ſcourged, crowned with thornes, derided, crucified, racked, nayled, hanged vp betwene two theeues, curſed and rayled vpon, mocked in miſery, and had geuen vp the ghoſt: then bowed dowue the head of Chriſt, that is, God the Father, which is the head of Chriſt, then alowed he the plaſter to be ſufficient & good for the healing of our ſore, which is ſyn. Now would God abide our breth, becauſe the ſtinck, that is, damuation or giltynes was taken away by the ſweete ſauer of the breth of thys Lam
                  •
               e, thus offered once for al.
            So that here, dearely beloued we as in a glaſſe may ſee, to the brooſyng of our blockyſhe hard hartes, Gods great iudgement and anger agaynſt ſynne. The

Lord of Lords, ye King of Kings Gene. 6. Geneſ. 19. the brightnes of Gods glory, the ſonne of God, the dearling of his Father, in whom he is wel pleaſed, hāgeth betwene two theues, crying for thee & me, and for vs al: My God, my God, why haſt thou forſaken me? Oh hard harts that we haue, which make tuts for ſyn. Looke on this: toote in the very hart of Chriſt p
                  •
               arced with a ſpeare; wherein thou maieſt ſee and reade Gods horrible anger for ſynne. Woe to thy hard hart that pearred it.
            And thus much for the firſt part of repentaunce, I meane for the meanes of working contricion. Firſt vſe prayer: then looke on Gods law: thirdly, ſee his curſe: Geneſ. 19 fourthly ſet examples of his anger before thee: and laſt of all ſet before thee the death of Chriſt.

From this and prayer ceaſe not, tyl thou fecle ſome harty ſorrow for thy ſyn. The which whē thou feeleſt, then labour for the other part, that is, fayth on this ſort.
            As firſt in contrition I wylled ſhee not to truſt to thy free wyll for the aſſayning of it, ſo doo I Ioſua & Caleb. wyll thee in thys. Fayth is ſo far from the reach of mans free wyl, that to reaſon it is plaine fooliſhnes. Therfore thou muſt firſt go Num. 14. to God, whoſe gyft it is: thou muſt I ſay, get thee to the father of mercy whoſe worke it is, that as he hath brought thee downe by contrition and humbled thee, ſo he would geue thee fayth, raiſe thee vp, and exalt thee.
            On this maner therefore, with Leuit. 24, Num. 15. the Apoſtles and the pore man in the Goſpell that cryed: Lord encreaſe our fayth: Lord helpe my vnbeliefe,
               
pray thou and ſay: O mercyfull God and deare Father of our Lord and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, in whom as thou art wel pleaſed, ſo haſt thou commaūded Tim. 2. vs to heare him, for aſmuch as he often byddeth vs to aſke of thee, and thereto promiſeth that thou wylt heare vs and graūt vs that which in his name we ſhall aſke of ther: loe gracious Father, I am bold to beg of thy mercy thorow thy ſonne Ieſus Chriſt, one ſparckle of true faith and certaine perſwaſiō of thy goodnes & loue towardes me in Chriſt, wherethrough I beyng aſſured of the pardon of al my ſyns, by the mercies of Chriſt, thy ſonne, may be thankfull to thee, loue thee and ſerue thee in holynes and righteouſnes al the daies of my lyte.
            On this ſort I ſay, or otherwiſe

as God ſhalmoue thee, pray thou firſt of all, & looke for thy requeſt at Gods hand without any doubting, though forthwith thou feeleſt not ye ſame: for oftentimes we haue thynges of God geuen vs long before we feele them as we would do. Now vnto this praier vſe thou theſe meanes folowing.
            After praier for faith, which I would ſhould bee firſt: ſecondly, becauſe the ſame ſpringeth out of the hearing, not of Maſſes, Mattins, Cannons, Councels, Docttors, Decrees, but out of the hearing of Gods woord: get thee Gods woord, but not that part which ſerueth ſpetially to contrition, that is the law: but y• other part, which ſerueth ſpecially to conſolation and certain perſwaſion of Gods loue towards thee, that is, the Goſpel or publication

of Gods mercy in Chriſt, I mean the free promiſes,
            But here thou muſt know, that there is two kindes of promiſes: one, which are property of the law, an other which are properly of ye Goſpell. In the promiſes of the law we may in deede behold Gods mercy, but ſo that it hangeth vpon the cōdition rfour worthynes, as if thou loue the Lord with all thy hart. &c. thou ſhalt finde mercy. This kinde of promiſes, though it declare vnto vs Gods loue, whych promyſeth where he needeth not, yet vnto him that feeleth not chriſt, which is the ende of the law, they are ſo far from comforting, that vtterly with the law they bring man to great diſpaire: ſo greatly we are corrupt, for none ſo loueth God as he ought to doo. From theſe

therfore get thee to the other promiſes of the Goſpel, in which we may ſee ſuch plenty and franke lideralitie of Gods goodnes, that we cannot but be much comforted, though we haue very deepely ſynned.
            For theſe promiſes of the Goſpel do not hang on the condition of our worthines, as the promiſes of the law do: but they depend and hang on Gods truth, that as God is true, ſo they cannot but be performed to all them which lay hold on them by fayth, I had almoſt ſayd, which caſt them not away by vnbeliefe:
            Marke in them therefore two things, namely, that as wel they are free promiſes without any condition of our worthines, as alſo that they are vniuerſal, offered to all, al (I ſay) which are not ſo

ſtubburne as to keepe ſtyll theyr handes whereby they ſhould receiue this almes in their boſoms 1. Reg. 
                     •
                  . by vnbeliefe. As concerning Infantes and children, you know I now ſpeake not, but concerning ſuch as be of yeares of diſcretiou And now you looke that I ſhuld geue you a faſt of theſe promiſes which are both free & vniuerſall excepting none but ſuch as excepe themſelues. Well, you ſhall haue one or two for a ſay.
            In the third of Iohn ſayth our 3. Reg
                     •
                  . 21. 2
                     •
                  . Sauiour: So God the Father loued rhe world, that he would geue his dear lyng, his own onely ſonne, that all that beleue in him ſhould not periſh 
               4. Reg. 
                     ••
                  . 4. Reg. 10. 
               but haue euerlaſting lyfe. Loe ſyr, he ſaith not that ſome might haue life: but all, ſayth he. And what al: Al that loue hym with al their harts: al that haue lyued a godly

               life Nay al that beleue in him Although thou haſt liued a moſt wicked and horrible lyfe, if now thou beleue in him, thou ſhalt be ſaued. Is not this ſweete geare?
            Againe ſayth Chriſt: Come vnto me al ye that labour and are laden, and I wyll refreſh you, Let vs a little looke on this letter: Come vn to me. Who ſhould come? Lords, Prieſtes, Holy men, Moonkes, Friers? Yea Coblers, Tinkers, whores, theeues, murtherers alſo, if they lament their ſynnes. Come vnto me (ſaith he) all ye that labour and are laden, that is, which are afrayd of your ſynnes, And what wylt thou do Lord? And I wyll refreſh you, ſayth he.
            Oh what a thing is thys: And I wyll refreſh you. Wot you who ſpake this? He that neuer told lye: He is the trueth, there was

neuer guile found in his mouth: and now wyll hee be vntrue to thee good brother, which art ſory for thy greeuous ſyns: no forſoth Heauen and earth ſhal paſſe & periſh, but his word ſhal neuer faile
            Saint Paule ſayth? God would haue all men ſaued, Loe, he excepteth none. And to Titus: The grace of God bringeth ſaluation to all men. As from Adam all haue receiued ſynne to damnation: ſo by Chriſt all haue grace offred to ſaluation, if they reiect not the ſame. I ſpeake not now of infantes, I ſay: nor I neede not to enter into the matter of predeſ
                  •
               inatiō. In preaching of repē
               
                  •
               auce, I would gather wher I could with Chriſt
            
               As ſurely as I lyue (ſayth God) I wyll not the death of a ſynner. Are y• a ſynner? Yea. Lo, God ſweareth he wyll not thy death. How

canſt thou now periſh? Conſider with thy ſelfe what profit thou ſhouldeſt haue to beleue thys to be true to others, if not to thy ſelf alſo. Sathan doth ſo. Rather cō
               ſider with Peter, that the promiſe of ſaluation pertayneth not onely to them which are nye, that is to ſuch as are fallen a litle: but alſo to all whom the Lord hath called, be they neuer ſo farre of.
            Loe, now by me the Lorde calleth thee thou man thou woman that art very far of. The promiſe therfore pertaineth to thee: nedes muſt thou be ſaued, except thou with Sathan ſay, God is falſe: and yet if thou do ſo, God is faith ful, and cannot deny him ſelfe: as thou ſhalt feele by his plagues in hell, for ſo diſhonouring God, to think that he is not true. Wyl he be found falſe now? The matter

hangeth not on thy worthynes, but it hangeth on Gods truth. Clap hold on it, and I warrant thee Chriſt is the propitiatiō for our ſyns, yea, for the ſyns of the whole world: beleue this man, I know thou beleued it: ſay therefore in thy hart ſtyl, Domine adauge mihi ſidē: Lord increaſe my faith: Lord help my vnbeliefe. Bleſſed are they which ſee not (by reaſō) this geare, but yet beleue. Hope man, paſt all hope, as Abraham did.
            And thus much for a taſte of theſe promiſes, which are euery wher, not onely in the new teſtament, but alſo in the old. Reade the laſt ende of Leuiticus. 26. The Prophet Eſay. 30. where he ſaith: God tarieth looking for thee to ſhew thee mer
                     •
                  y. Alſo the. 40. and ſo fourth to the. 60. Reade alſo the 2. Regum, 24. Pſal, 33. Ioel, 2. &c.
            
               
How be it, if this geare wyl not ſerue, if yet thou feeleſt no fayth, no certaine perſwaſion of Gods loue: then vnto prayer and diligent conſidering of the free and vniuerſal promiſes of the Goſpel thirdly ſet before thee thoſe benefites which God hath 
                  •
               ofore geuen thee, & preſently geueth thee Conſider how he hath made thee a man or a woman, which might haue made thee a Toade, a Dog And why did he this? Uerely becauſe he loued thee. And troweſt thou, that if he loued thee when thou waſt not, to make thee ſuch a one as he moſt graciouſly hath made thee: wyll he not now loue thee being hys handy woorke? Doth he hate any thing that he made? Is there vnablenes with him. Doth he loue for a day, and ſo farewel: No forſoth, he loueth

to the end, his mercy endureth for euer. Say therfore with Iob Operi manum tuarum, porrige dexteram, that is, To the woorke of thy handes put thy helping hand.
            
            Againe, hath he not made thee a Chriſtian man or womā, wher if he would, he might haue made thee a Turke or Payn
                  ••
               ? Thys thou knoweſt he did of loue. And doeſt thou thinke his loue is leſſoned if thou lament thy ſynne? Is his hand ſhortened for helping thee? Can a woman forget the chylde of her wombe? and though ſhe ſhould do it, yet wyll not I forget thee, ſaith the Lord He hath geuen thee lyms, to ſee, heare, go &c He hath geuen thee 
                  〈◊〉
               , r
                  •
               aſon, diſcretion. &c. Hee hath long ſpared thee and borne with thee when thou neuer purpoſedſt to repent, and now then

repenting, wyll he not geue thee mercy? Wherefore doth he geue thee to lyue at thys preſent to heare me to ſpeake this, and me to ſpeake this, but of loue to vs all? Oh therfore let vs pray him, that he would adde to this, that we might beleue theſe loue tokens that hee loueth vs, and in deede he wyll do it. Lord open our eyes, in thy giftes to ſee thy gratious goodnes, Amen.
            But to cary in this I wyll not. Let euery man conſider Gods benefites paſt and preſent, publyke and priuate, ſpiritual and corporall, to the confirming of hys fayth concerning the promiſes of the Goſpell for the pardon of hys ſynnes. I wyll now go about to ſhew you a fourth meane to confirme your fayth in thys geare, euen by examples. Of theſe ther

are in the ſcriptures very many, as alſo dayly experienc
                  •
                both diuerſly teach the ſame, if we were diligent to obſerue things accordingly: wherfore I wyl be more briefe herein, hauyng reſpect to time, which ſtealeth faſt away.
            Adam in Paradiſe tranſgreſſed greuouſly, as the painfull puniſhment which we al as yet do feele proueth, if nothing els. Though by reaſon of hys ſyn he diſpleaſed God ſore, and ran away from God, (for he would haue hid him ſelfe, yea hee would haue made God the cauſ
                  ••
                of his ſyn in that he gaue him ſuch a 
                  •
               ate, 
                  •
               o farre was he from aſking mercy) yet all 
                  •
               hys notwithſtanding, God turned his f
                  •
               ar
                  ••
                wrath neyther vpon him nor Eue, which alſo required not mercy, but vpon the the ſerpent Sathan: promiſing

vnto them a ſeene Ieſus Chriſt by whom they at the length ſhuld 
                  •
               e deliuered. In token whereof, though they were caſt out of Paradiſe for their nurture, ſo ſerue in ſorow which would not ſerue in ioy; yet he made them apparel to couer their bodies, a viſible Sacrament and token of his inuiſible loue and grace concerning their ſoules. If God was ſo merciful to Adam which ſo fore brake his cōmaundement, & rather blamed God then aſked mercy, trow eſt thou, oh man, that he wyll not be merciful to thee, which blameſt thy ſelfe, and deſireſt pardon?
            To Cain he offered mercy, if he would haue aſked it. VVhat ha
                     •
                  t thou done, ſayth God? The voice of thy brothers bloud cryeth vnto me out of the earth. Oh mercifu
                  •
                Lord (ſhould Cain haue ſayd) I confeſſe

it▪ But alas, he dyd not ſo, and therfore ſaid God: Now, that is, in that thou deſyreſt not mercy, now, I ſay, be thou accurſed. &c. Loto the reprobate he offered mercy, and will he denye it thee which art his child. Gene 9 Geneſ▪ 
                  
                     •
                  9
            
            Noah, did not he ſyn and was dronke? Good Lot alſo both in Sodome diſſembled a little with the Angels, prolonging the time, and out of Sodom he fell verye Geneſ. 
                     •
                  9 foule: as did Iudas, and the Patriarches againſt Ioſeph, but yet I weene they foūd mercy. Moyſes, Myriam, Aaron, though they ſtumbled a litle, yet receaued they mercy: yea the people in the wyldernes often ſynned & diſpleaſed God, ſo that he was purpoſed to haue deſtroyed them. Let me alone, ſayth he to Moyſes, that I may deſtroy them: but Moyſes

dyd not let him alone, for he praied ſtyll for them, and therefore God ſpared them. If the people were ſpared through Moyſes prayer, they not praying with hym, but rather woorſhipping their golden calſe, eatyng, drinking, & making 
                  •
               olly good there, Ioſua & Caleb. why ſhouldeſt thou doubt whether God wil be merciful to thee? hauing, as in dede thou haſt, one much better then Moſes to pray Num. 14. for thee and with thee, euen Ieſus Chriſt, who ſytteth on the 
                  •
               ight hand of his father, & prayeth for vs, being no leſſe faythful in his fathers houſe the Church then Moyſes was in the Synagoge. Dauid y• good Kyng, had a foule foyle when he cōmitted Leuit. 24, Num. 15. whordome with his faythful ſeruants wife Bethſabe: wherunto he added alſo a miſcheuous murther,

cauſing her huſbād his moſt faithful ſoldiour Ury to be ſlaine, wt an honeſt company o
                  •
                his moſt valiant men of war, & that with the ſweard of the v
                  •
               circumciſed. Tim. 2.
            
            In this his ſyn, though a great while he lay a ſleepe (as many do nowe a dayes, God geue them good waking) thinking y• by the ſacrifices he offered all was wel, God was content: yea at length when the Prophet by aparable had opened the poke, & brought him in remembrance of his own ſynne in ſuch ſort, that he gaue iudgement againſt himſelf: then quaked he, his ſacri
                  •
               ices had no more taken away his ſyns, then our ſyr Iohns 
                  •
               rentals and wag ging of his fi
                  •
               gers ouer ye heads of ſuch as lye aſleepe in their ſins (out of the which when they are awaked, they wyl wel ſee that it

is neyther Maſſe nor Mattins
                  •
                bleſſ
                  •
               ng nor croſſyng wyll ſerue) 
                  ••
               en I ſay, he cryed out ſaying: Peccaui Domino, I haue ſynned layth he againſt my Lord & good God which hath don ſo much for me. I cauſed in deede Ury to bee killed. I haue ſynned, I haue ſinned. What ſhal I do? I haue ſinned and am worthy of eternall damnation. But what ſaith God by his Prophet: Dominus (ſayth he) tranſtulit peccatum tuū, non morieris: The Lord hath taken away thy ſyns, thou ſhalt not dye. Oh good God, he ayd but Peccaui, I haue ſynned out yet from his hart and not from the lyps onely, as Pharao and Saule did, & incontinētly he he
                  •
               reth: Thou ſhalt not dye, the Lord hath taken away thy fyns, or rather hath layd thē vpon an other, yea tranſlated thē vpon the

back of his ſonne Ieſus Chriſt, who bare them, & not only them, but thine & myne alſo, if that we wyl now cry but from our harts, Peccauimus, we haue ſinned good Lord, we haue done wyckedly, enter not into iudgement wyth vs, but be mercyful vnto vs after thy great mercy, and according to the multitude of thy compaſſions do away our iniquities &c. 
                  •
               or in deede God is not the God of Dauid onely: Idem deus omnium, he is the God of all. So that Quicuuque inuocauerit nomen domini, ſaluus erit: He or ſhe whoſoeuer they be that call vpon the name of the Lord, ſhalbe ſaued. In confirmation whereof this hiſtory is wrytten, as are alſo the other which I haue recited, and many mo which I myght recite: As of Manaſſes y• wicked king; which

ſlew Eſay ye Prophet, & wrought very much wyckednes; yet the Lord ſhewed mercy vpon hym beyng in pryſon, as his prayer doth teach vs. Nabuchodonozer though for a tyme he bare Gods anger, yet at the length he found mercy. The City of Niniue alſo found fauour with God, as dyd many other, which I wyll omyt for times ſake, & will bring forth one or two out of the new Teſtament, that we may ſee God to be the ſame God in the newe teſtament, that he was in the old.
            I myght tell you of many, if I ſhould ſpeake of the lunatike ſuch as were poſſeſſed wyth deuyls. lame, blynde, dumme, deafe, lepers, &c. but time wyll not ſuffice me: one or two therefore ſhall ſerue. Mary Magdalen had .vii. deuils, but yet they were caſt out

of her, & of al others ſhe was the firſt that Chriſt appeared vnto after his reſurre
                  ••
               ton. Thomas 1. Reg. 
                     •
                  . would not beleue Chriſtes reſurrection, though many tolde hym which had ſene and felt hym: by reaſon whero
                  •
                a man might haue thought that his ſynnes would haue caſt hym away. Except I ſhould ſee and feele (ſayth he) I wyll not beleue. Ah wylfull Thomas: I wyll not, ſayth he. But Chriſt appeared vnto him, & would not leeſe him, as hee wyll not do thee 3. Reg
                     •
                  , 21, 22. good brother, if that wyth Thomas yu wylt keepe company wyth the Diſciples as Thomas dyd. Peters fal was ougly, he accurſed 4. Reg. 21▪ 4. R
                     •
                  g. 
                     ••
                  . hym ſelfe if euer he knew Chriſt and that for feare of a gyrle, and thys not once, but euen three dyuers tymes, and that in the hearyng of Chriſt hys Mayſter:

but yet the third time Chriſt looked backe, & caſt on hym his eye of grace, ſo that he went out and wept vitterly: and after Chriſtes reſurrectiō not onely did the Angels wyl the woman to tel Peter that Chriſt was riſen, but Chriſt himſelfe appeared vnto hym ſeuerally: ſuch a good Lord is he.
            The theefe hanging on ye croſſe ſayd but this: Lord when thou cō
                  meſt into thy kingdome remember me, & what anſwer had he? This day ſayth Chriſt, ſhalt thou be with me in Paradiſe, What a comfort is this, in that he is now the ſame Chriſt to thee & me and vs all, if we wyll run vnto hym: for he is the ſame Chriſt to day & to morrow vntyl he come to iudgement Then in deede he wyll be inexorable: but now is he more ready to geue then thou to aſke. If thou

cry, he heareth thee, yea before thou cry. Cry therefore, be bold man, he is not parciall. Call, ſaith he, and I wyll heare thee: Aſke Eſay. 3
                     •
                  . and thou ſhalt haue. Seeke and Math. 7. thou ſhalt find, though not at the firſt, yet at the length. If he tary a white, it is but to try thee. Nam 
               Hebr. 10. 
               veniens veniet, & non tardabit. He is comming and wyll not be long.
            
            Thus haue you foure meanes which you muſt vſe to the attayning of fayth or certaine perſwaſiō of Gods mercy towards you, which is the ſecoud part of penāce, namely prayer, the free & vniuerſal promiſes of Gods grace the recordation of the benefites of God paſt & preſent, the examples of Gods mercy. Which although thei might ſuffice, yet wil I put one mo
                  •
                to them, which alonely of it ſelfe is ful ſufficient, I

meane the death of the ſonne of God Ieſus Chriſt, which if thou ſet before the eyes of thy minde, it wyll confirme thy plackard, for it is the great ſeale of England, as they ſay, yea of all the world, for the coufirmation of al patents & perpetui
                  •
               ies of the euerlaſting lyfe whereunto we are all called.
            If I thought theſe which I haue before recited, were not ſufficient to confirme your fayth of Gods loue towardes ſuch as doo repent, I would tary longer here in. But becauſe both I haue ben long, and alſo I truſt you haue ſome exerciſe of conſcience in this dayly (or els you are to blame) I wyll but touch and go. Conſider wyth your ſelues what we are, myſers, wretches, and enemies to God. Couſider what God is, euen hee whych hath all power,

Maieſty, might, glory, ritches. &c perfectly of himſelfe & nedeth no thing, but hath althinges. Conſider what Chriſt is: concernyng his god head coequal with his father, euen he by whom althinges wer made, are ruled & gouerned: concerning his manhod the only dearlyng of his father, in whō is all his ioy. Now ſyr, what a loue is this that this God which needeth nothing, would geue wholy his own ſelfe to thee his enemy, wreaking his wrath vpon hym ſelfe in this his ſonne, as a man maye ſay, to ſpeare thee, to ſaue thee, to wyn thee, to buy thee, to haue thee, to enioy thee for euer. Becauſe thy ſynne had ſeparated the
                  •
                from hym, to the ende thou mighteſt come e
                  •
               tſones into his company agayne, and therein remaine, he himſelfe became, as a

man would ſay, a ſynner, or rather ſyn it ſelfe, euen a maledictiō or curſe: that we ſynners, we accur
                  •
               ed by our ſyn, myght by hys oblation or offering for our ſyns, by hys curſe, be delyuered from ſynne and from malediction. For by ſyn he deſtroyed ſynne, kylling death, Satan, & ſyn by rheir own weapons and that for thee & me (man) it we caſt it not away by vnbeliefe. Oh wonderfull loue of God. Who euer heard of ſuch a loue, the Father of heauen for vs hys ennemies to geue hys owne deare ſonne Ieſus Chriſt, and that not onely to be our brother, to dwel among vs, but alſo to the death of the croſſe for vs? Oh wonderful loue of Chriſt to vs al, that was content and wylling to work this feate for vs. Was ther any loue lyke to this loue?
            
               
God in deede hath commended his charitie & loue to vs herein, that when we wer very enemies vnto him, he wold geue his own ſonne for vs. That we being men might become, as you would ſay, Gods, God would become man That we being mortal might be come immortal, y• immortal God would become mortal man. That we earthlye wretches myght be Citizens of heauen, the Lord of heauen would become, as a man would ſay, earthly, That we being accurſed myght bee bleſſed God would bee accurſed. That wee by our father Adam beyng brought out of Paradiſe into the puddle of all paine, myght be redeemed and brought into Paradiſe 
                  •
               gaine, God would be our father, and an Adam thereunto. That we hauing nothing might

haue all things, God hauyng all thynges would haue nothyng. That we being vaſſails & ſlaues to all, euen to Sathan the feend, might be Lordes of all, & of Sathan, the Lord of all would become a vaſſal and a 
                  •
               laue to vs al, and in daunger of Sathan. Oh loue imcomprehenſible. Who can otherwiſe thinke now, but if the gracions good Lord diſdayned not to geue hys owne ſonne, hys owne hartes ioy for vs his very ennemies, before we thought to beg any ſuch thing at his hands, yea before we were: who I ſay, can thinke otherwyſe, but that with him he wyl geue vs al good thinges? If when we hated him & 
                  •
               led away from him, he ſent his ſonne to ſeeke vs, who can thinke otherwiſe, then that now we louing him, and lamenting becauſe

we loue him no more, but that he wyl for euer loue vs? He that geueth the more to his enemies, wil not he geue the leſſe trow you to his friends? God hath geuen his own ſonne, then which thing nothing is greater to vs hys enemies: & we now being becom his friendes, wyll he deny vs fayth & pardon of our ſins, which though they be great yet in compariſon they are nothing at al? Chriſt Ieſus would geue his own ſelfe for vs, when we willed it not, & wyll he now deny vs faith if we wyll it? This wyl is hys earneſt, that he hath giuen vs truly to looke in deede for the thing wylled. And looke thou for it in deede, for as he hath geuen thee to wyl, ſo wil he geue thee to do.
            Ieſus Chriſt gaue his lyfe for our euyls, & by his death delyuered

vs: Oh then, in that he liueth now and cannot dye, wyll he forſake vs▪ His hart bloud was not to deare for vs when we aſked it not: what can then bee now to deare for vs aſking it? Is he a chaungeling? Is he inutable as mā is? Can he repent him of his gif
                  •
               es? Dyd he not foreſee our falles: Payd not he therefore the price? Becauſe he ſaw we ſhould fal ſore, therefore would he ſuffer ſore. Yea if his ſuffering had not bene inough, he would yet once more come again. God the father I am ſure, if ye death of his ſonne incarnate would not ſerue, wold himſelfe & the holy ghoſt alſo becom incarnate & dye for vs. This death of Chriſt therfore looke on as the very pledge of Gods loue towards thee, whoſoeuer thou art, how deepe ſoeuer thou haſt

ſinned. See Gods hands are nailed they cannot ſtrike thee, hys feete alſo he cannot run trō thee, his armes are wyde open to embrace thee, his head hangs down ſo kyſſe thee, his very hart is opē, ſo that therin ſee, to
                  •
               te, looke, ſpy Gene. 9 Geneſ. 19 pe
                  •
               pe, and thou ſhalt ſee nothing therin but loue, loue, loue, loue to thee: hyde thee therfore, lay thy head there with the Euangeliſt.
            This is the clyft of the rocke Geneſ. 19 wherein Helias ſtoode. This is the pillow of down for all akyng heades. Anoynt thy head wyth this oyle: let this oyntment enbaulme thy head, & waſh thy face Tary thou here, & cock ſure thou art, I warrant thee. Say with Paul: what can ſeparate me from the loue of God? Can death, can pouerty, ſycknes, hunger, or any miſery perſwade thee now, that God loueth thee not? Nay, nothing can

ſeparate thee from the loue wher wyth God hath loued thee in Chriſt Ieſus: whom he ioueth, he loueth to ye end. So that 
                  •
               ow Leuit. 24, where aboundaunce of ſyn hath 
                  •
               en in thee, the more is the aboudance of grace. But to what end▪ Forſoth that as ſyn hath raigued to death, as the
                  •
                ſeeſ
                  •
               , to the kylling of Gods ſonne, ſo now grace muſt raigne to lyfe, to the honouring of Gods ſonne, who is now a lyue, and cannot dye any more.
            So that they which by 
                  •
               ayth feele this, cānot any more dye to God, 
                  ••
               t: o ſyn, whereto they are dead and buried with Chriſt. As Chriſt therefore liueth, ſo do they and that to God, to righteouſ
                  ••
               s and holynes. The life which they lyue, is In fide filii bei, in the faith of the ſonne of God, Wherby you ſee that now I am ſlipt into that which I made the third part of

penance, namely newnes of lyfe, which I could not ſo haue done, if that it were a part of it ſelfe in deede, as it is au effect or fruit of the ſecond part, that is, of fayth T
                     ••
                  . 
                     •
                  . or truſt in Gods mercy. For hee that beleueth, that is, is certainly perſwaded ſynne to be ſuch a thing, that it is the cauſe of al miſery, and of it ſelfſo greatly angereth God, that in heauen nor in earth nothing could appeaſe his wrath, ſaue alonely the death and precious bloud ſheddyng of the ſonne of God, in whom is all the delight and pleaſure of the father he I ſay, that is perſwaded thus of ſyn, the ſame cānot but in hart abhor & quake to do or ſay, yea to thinke any thing willingly which Gods law teacheth him to be ſyn.
            Agayne, he that beleueth, that is, is certainly perſwaded Gods loue to be ſo much to wards him,

that where through ſyn he was loſt & made a firebrād of hell, the eternal father of mercy, which is the omniſufficient God, & nedeth nothing to vs or of anithing that we can do to deliuer vs out of hel and to bring vs into heauen, dyd ſend euen hys owne moſt deare ſonne out of hys boſome, out of heauen into hel, as a man would ſay to bring vs, as I ſayd, from thēce into his own boſom & mercy, we being hys very enemies: he, I ſay that is thus perſwaded of Gods loue towards hym, & of the price of his redemptiō, by the deare bloud of the Lambe imaculate Ieſus Chriſt, the ſame man cannot but loue God againe, & of loue do that, & hartely deſire to do better, the which myght pleaſe God. Trow you that ſuch a one, knowing this geare by faith, wil willingly walter & wallow in his

wilful luſts, pleaſures & fātaſies Wyll ſuch a one as knoweth by faith Chriſt Ieſus i
                  •
                haue geuen his bloud to waſh hym from hys ſyns, play the Sow to walter in his puddle of filthy ſyn & vyce againe? Nay rather then he wil be defiled again
                  •
               
               ▪ by wilful ſynning he wil waſh often the feete of his affections, watching ouer y• vice ſtyll ſticking in hym, which as a ſpring continuallye ſendeth out poiſon inough to drown & defile him, if the ſweete water of Chriſtes paſſiō in Gods ſyght did not waſh it, & his bloud ſatiſfy the rigour of Gods iuſtice due for the ſame. Thys bloud of Chriſt ſhed for our ſins, is ſo deare in ye ſight of him that beleueth, that he wy
                  •
               l abhorre in his hart to ſtampe it & tread it vnder his feete. He knoweth now by his beliefe that it is to much that he therto hee hath

ſet to little by it, and is aſhamed therof, Therefore for the reſidue of hys lyfe he purpoſeth to take better beede to himſelfe then before he did. Becauſe he ſeeth by hys faith ye greuouſnes of Gods anger, ye foulnes of ſyn, the greatnes of Gods mercy, & of Chriſtes loue towardes him, he wyll now be heedye to pray to God to geue hym his grace accordingly, that as with his eyes, toung, handes feete. &c. he hath diſpleaſed God, doing his own wyl: euen ſo now with the ſame eyes, toung, eares handes, feete. &c. he may diſpleaſe his own ſelfe, and do Gods wyll. Willingly wyll hee not doo that which myght renue the death of the ſonne of God He knoweth he hath to much ſynne vnwyllingly in him, ſo that thereto he wyl not adde willing offences.
            This willing & witting offending

& ſynning, whoſoeuer doth flatter him ſelfe therin, doth euidently demōſtrate & ſhew that he neuer yet in dede taſted of Chriſt truly. He was neuer truly perſwaded or beloued how ſoule a thing ſin is, how greuous a thing Gods anger is, how ioyfull and precious a thyng Gods mercy in Chriſt is, how exeeding broade, wyde, hye & d
                  •
               eepe Chriſtes loue is, Perchance he can write prate, talke & preach of this geare: but yet he in part by faith neuer felt this geare. For if he did once feele this geare in dede, then would he be ſo far from continuing in ſyn willingly & wittingly, that wholy and hartely he would geue ouer himſelf to that which is contrary I mean to a new lyfe, renuing Reg. 
                     •
                  
                his youth euen as the Egle doth
            For as we being in ye ſeruitude of ſyn, demōſtrate our ſeruice by

geuing ouer our members to the obeying of ſyn from iniquitie to iniquity: euen ſo we being made free from ſynne by faith in Ieſus Chriſt, & endued with Gods ſpirite, a ſpirit of liberty, muſt nedes demonſtrate this fredom & liberty by geuing ouer our members to the obedience of the ſpir it: by the which we are lead & guided from vertue to vertue, & all kynde of holynes. As the vnbeleuers declare their vnbeliefe by the working of the euil ſpirit in them out wardly the fruits of y•, 
                  ••
               eſh: euen ſo the beleuers declare their faith by the working of Gods good ſpirit in them outwardly the fruits of the ſpirit. For as the deuyll is not dead in thoſe which are hys but worketh ſtyll to their damnation: ſo is not God dead in them which be his, but worketh ſtyl to their ſaluation. The which working

is not the cauſe of the one or the other being in any, but onely a demonſtration, a ſigne, a fruit of the ſame: as the Apple is not Eſay. 3u. the cauſe of the Appletree, but a Math. 7. fruite of it.
            Thus then you ſee briefly that newnes of lyfe is not in deede a Hebr. 10. part of penance, but a fruit of it, a demonſtration of the iuſtifying faith, a ſigne of Gods good ſpirit poſſeſſing the hart of the penitēt: as the old lyfe is a fruit of impenitencie, a demonſtration of a lip faith or vnbeliefe, a ſigne of Sathans ſpirit poſſeſſing the hart of the impenitent, which al thoſe be that be not penitent. For meane I know none. He that is not penitent, the ſame is impenitent: he that is not gouerned by Gods ſpirit, the ſame is gouerned by Sathans ſpirit. For al that the Chriſtes are gouerned with the ſpirit

of Chriſt, which ſpirite hath his fruites. Al other y• be not Chriſts are the deuils. He that gathereth Num▪ 14 not 
                  ••
                Chriſt, ſcattereth abroad.
            Therfore dearly beloued, I befech you to conſider this grace, & deceiue not yourſelues. If you be not Chriſtes, then pertain you to the deuil, of which thing ye fruits of the fleſhe doth aſſure you, as whordom, adultecy, vncleannes, wantōnes, idolatry, witchcraft, enuy ſtrife, contention, wrath, ſedition, murther, dronkēnes, glut tony, blaſphemy, ſlothfulnes, idlenes, baudy talking, ſc
                  •
               ādering, &c If theſe apples grow out of the appletrees of your haries, ſurely ſurely the deuel is at Inne with you, you are his birdes: whom when hee hath well fed, he wyll broth you & eate you, chaw you and champ you worlde wythout end in eternall wo and myſery.

But I am otherwyſe perſwaded of you al. I truſt you be al Chriſt Ieſus hys people and chyldren yea brethren by fayth.
            As ye ſee your ſins in Gods law and tremble, ſigh, ſorow and ſob for the ſame, euen ſo you ſee hys great mercies in his Goſpell and free promiſes, & therfore ar glad, mery & ioyfull, for that you are accepted into Gods fauour, haue your ſins pardoned, & are endued with the good ſpirit of God, euen the ſeale & ſigne manuell of your election in Chriſt before the beginuing of the world. The which ſpirit, for that he is the ſpirit of life geuen to you to worke in you, with you, & by you here in thys life, ſāctification & holynes, wher unto you are called that ye might be holy, euen as your heauenly father is holy: I beſech you all by admonition and warning of you

that you would ſtyr vp the giftes of God geuen to you generally & particularly, to ye edifying of his Church: that is, I pray you that you would not moleſt the good ſpirit of God by rebelling againſt it when it prouoketh and calleth you to go on forwards, that the which is holy, might yet be more holy, hee which is ryghteous, myght be more righteous, as the euil ſpirit moueth and ſtirreth vp the filthye to be yet more filthy, ye couetous to be more couetons, the wicked to be more wycked.
            Decclare you now your repentance by woorkes of repentance Bryng fouth frutis, and worthy fruites, Let your ſorowing for your euyls demonſtratine it ſelfe departing frō the euyls you haue vſed, Let your certainty of pardon of your ſyns through Chriſt and your ioyin him be demōſtrated

by purſuing of ye good things which Gods word teacheth you. You are nowe in Chriſt Jeſus Gods workmanſhip, to do good workes which God hath prepared for you to walke in. For the grace of God that bringeth ſaluation vnto all men, hath appeared & teacheth vs that we ſhould deny vngodlynes & worldly luſtes and that we ſhould lyue ſoberly, righteouſly, & godly in this preſent world, looking for that bleſſed hope & glorious appearing of the mighty God, & of our ſauiour Ieſus Chriſt, whych gaue him ſelfe for vs, to redeme vs from all vnrighteouſnes, & to purge vs a peculiar people vnto himſelf, feruently geuē vnto good works. Againe Titus. 3. for we our ſelues alſo wer in times paſt vnwiſe, diſobedient, deceiued, ſeruing iuſtes & diuers pleaſures, liuing in maliciouſnes

and enuy, full of hate & hating one another. But after, that the kindnes and loue of God our Sauiour to manward appeared, not by ye deedes of righteouſnes which we wrought, but of his mercy he ſaued vs by the foū
               
               
                  •
               aine of the new birth, & with the renning of the holy Ghoſt, which he ſhed on vs abnudantly thorow Ieſus Chriſt our Sauiour, that wee once iuſtified by his grace, ſhould be heires of eternall lyfe through hope. This is a true ſaying. But I wyll make an end, for I am to tedious,
            Dearely beloued, repent your ſyns, that is, be ſory for y• which is paſt, beleue in Gods mercy for pardon, how deepely ſoeuer you haue ſinued, & both purpuſe & ear neſtly pernſe a new life, bringing forth worthy & true fruites of repentance. As you haue geuē ouer

your members from ſyn ſo ſyn, to ſerue the deuyll, your tounges to ſweare, to lie, to ſlaiter, to ſcold, to ieſt, to ſcoſt, to baudy talk, to vain ianglyng, to boaſting. &c. your handes to picking, groping, ydlenes, fighting. &c your feete to ſkipping, going to euil, to daūſing. &c your eares to heare fables, lyes, fanities & euil things. &c: ſo now geue ouer your members to godlynes, your toūgs to ſpeake, your eares to heare, your eyes to ſee, your mouthes to laſt your hands to worke, your feete to go about ſuch thiuges as maye make to gods glory, ſobrie
                  •
               y of life, & loue to your brethrē, & that daily more and more diligently: for in a ſtay to ſtand you cannot, either better or worſe you are to day then you wer yeſterday. But better I truſt you be & wil be, if you marke wel my theme, yt is, Repent you. The

which thing that you would do, as before. I haue hūbly beſought yon: euē ſo now yet once more I do agayn beſech you, & that for ye tender mercies of God in Chriſt Ieſus our Lord, Repent you, repent you, for the kingdom of heauen (yt is, a kingdom ful o
                  •
               al ritches, pleaſures, myrth, beauty, ſwetenes, & eternall felicitie) is at hand. The eye hath not ſene the like, ye eare, hath not heard ye like, ye hart of man cannot conceiue the treaſures & pleaſures of this kingdō, which now is at hand to ſuch as repent, that is, to ſuch as are ſory for theyr ſins, beleue Gods mercy through Chriſt, & earneſtly purpoſe to leade a new life. The God of mercy through Chriſt his ſōne graunt vs his holy ſpirit, & work in our hartes this ſorow, fayth, & new life, which through his grace I haue ſpoken of, both now & for euer.
            Amen.
         
         
            
            ¶ An other Sermon made alſo by the ſayd Maiſter Iohn Bradford, vpon the Supper of the Lord.
            
            THere are two Sacramentes Two Sacramentes in chriſtes church. in Chriſtes Church: the one of initiation, that is, wherewith we be enraled as it were, in to the houſhold & family of God, which Sacrament we call Baptiſme: the other wherwith we be conſerued, fed, kept & nouriſhed, to continue in the ſame Familye, which is called the Lords ſupper or the body and bloud of our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, broken for our ſyns, and ſhed for our trauſgreſſions.
            Of the former Sacrament, that is, of Baptiſme, to ſpeake now I am not purpoſed, becauſe occaſiō and tyme ſerue not ſo therto. Of the ſecond therfore wyl I ſpeake

ſomthing by Gods grace, if that Baptiſme is in place of circumciſion, firſt you remēber this, that Baptiſme in Chriſts Church now ſithen Chriſtes death, is come in place of Circumciſiō, which was in the ſame church afore Chriſts comming. Whereby we may ſee Chriſtian mens chudrē ought to be bapriſed that Chriſtian Parents ſeéme to bee no loſſe bound to offer theyr Infants and Sabes to be baptiſed, that they may be takē and accōpted of vs as mēbers of Chriſtes miſtical body, wherunto thei are receiued and ſealed: then wer the Hebrues their children to be taken as pertayning to the coue naunt & league with God wherin they were enroled, alonely the circumſtance of the eight day, not neceſſarye to be obſerued being now abrogated.
            But to come agayne, of the Galat, 4. Lords Supper I am purpoſed

preſently to ſpeake, through the helpe of God, becauſe we are aſſembled in Chriſt (I hope) to celebrate the ſame. Now that the things which I ſhall ſpeake may be better obſerued and caryed away of you, I wyl tell you how & in what ſort I wyll ſpeake of it. Three thynges would I haue marked, as the principals and ſcopes wherto I wyl referre al yt I ſhal at this time ſpeake therof. They be theſe: Who, what, and wherefore. That is, (to make it more plaine) who dyd inſtitute this thing which we are about to celebrate, this is the firſt. The ſecond is, what y• thing is which is inſtituted. And the laſt is, wherfore and to what end it was inſtituted: whereby we ſhall be taught how to vſe it.
            For the fyrſt, who did inſtitute

thys Sacrament and Supper: who dyd inſtitute this Sacrament, you all do know that things are more eſteemed ſometyme for the dignity and authority of the perſon: ſometime for the wiſedom of the perſon, ſometyme for the power and magnificence of the perſou, and ſometime for the tender loue and kyndnes of the perſon. If neede were I could by examples ſet forth euery one of theſe, but I hope it is not neceſſarye. Now then, how can the thyng which we be about to celebrate, but be eſtemed of euery one highlye, in that the Auth or of it doth want no dignity, no authority, no wyſedome, no power, no magnificence, no holmes, no tender loue and kindnes, but hath al dignity authority, wiſdome, power magnificence, holynes, tender lone, mercy, glory, and all that can be

wiſhed abſolutely? He is God eteruall, coequall, and ſubſtantiall wyth the Father & with the holy Ghoſt, the image of the ſubſtance of God, the wyſedome of the Father, the brightnes of hys glory, by whom all things were made, are ruled and gouerned. He is the Kyng of all Kyngs, and the Lord of all Lords, He is the Meſſias of the world, our moſt deare and louing brother, Sauiour, Mediatour, Aduocate, Interceſſor, Huſbaud, Prieſt. So that the thyng which commeth from hym, cānot but be eſtemed, loued, and embraced, if dignity, authority, wiſdom power, glory, goodnes, & mercy lyke vs. Yea, if auy thing that can be wyſhed lyke vs, theu cannot thys whych our Lord dyd inſtitute, but like vs, and that ſo much the more, by how much it is oue

of the laſt things which he did inſtitute & commaunde. God open our eyes to ſee theſe thynges accordingly: ſo ſhall we come with more reuerence to thys Table of the Lord, which thing he graunt for hys mercies ſake, Amen. And thus much for the fyrſt, who dyd inſtitute thys Sacrament.
            Now to the ſecond, what the 2 what the Sacramēt is. Sacrament is. If we ſhall aſke our eies, our noſe, our mouth, our taſte, our handes, and the reaſon of man, they wyll all make a conſonant anſwer, that it is bread & wyne. And verelye herein they ſpeake the truth and lye not, as by many thyngs may be proued, although the Papiſts prate their pleaſure to the coutrary.
            And here, my dearely beloued, I thynke I ſhal not be either tedious or vnprofitable vnto you, if

that I tary a litle in ſhewing this verity, that the ſubſtance of bread and wine remaine in the Sacrament after the wordes of conſecration (as they call them) be ſpoken. Wherby we may learne how ſhameles beaſtes they be, whych Upon trā
                  ſubſtantiation all popery almoſt is buylded. would enforce men to beleue trā
               ſubſtātiation, which is an errour wherupon in a maner dependeth all popery. For it is the ſtay of theyr Prieſthood, whych is neyther after the order of Aaron, nor after the order of Melchiſedech, but after the order of Baal, whych thing is ſomthyng ſeene by theyr number. For the falſe prophets & Prieſtes of Baal were alwayes many moe in number, when the wycked were in authority, then the true Prieſtes and Prophetes of the Lord, as the holy hiſtories of the Bible do teach. Reade the

third of the Kings the. 18, chap.
            That in the ſupper of the Lord The Sacrament of the popyſh Maſſe is not the crament of chriſtes body. or in the Sacrament of Chriſtes body (which the Papiſts call the ſacramēt of the Aulter, as though that were Chriſtes Sacrament, which thing they cā neuer proue: For it being peruerted & vſed to a contrary ende, as of ſacrifieyng propitiatorily for the ſyns of the quicke and of the dead, of idolatry by adorning or worſhipping it by godly honor. &c. is no more Chriſtes Sacrament, but an horrible prophanation of it, and therefore as Chriſt called Gods Temple, which was, called au houſe of prayer, for the abuſing and prophanyng of it by the Prieſtes, a den of the eues: ſo this which the Papiſts call the ſacrament of the Aultar, full truly may we call au abominable Idol: And therfore

I would all men ſhoulde knowe that the ſacrament of the Aultar as the Papiſtes now do abuſe it, omittyng certayne ſubſtantiall poyntes of the Lords iuſtitution and putting in the ſteede thereof their own dregs and dreaues, is not the ſacrament of Chriſts body, nor the Lords ſupper: wherof when we ſpeake reuerently as our duty is, we would not that men ſhould thinke we ſpeake it of the popiſh Maſſe: (that I ſay in the Supper of the Lord, or in the ſacrament of Chriſts body there remaineth the ſubſtance of bread and wine, as our ſenſes and reaſon to teach, theſe many thinges alſo do teach the ſame.
            Firſt the holy Chriſt doth plainly tell vs, by calling it often bread The firſt reaſon againſt trā
                  ſubſtantiation. aftrr the wordes of conſecration, as 1. Cornith. 10. Is not the bread

which we breake a partakyng of the body of Chriſt, ſayth Paule? Loe, plainly he ſaith: the bread which we breake, not onely calling it bread, but addyng thereto breakyng, which cannot be attributed eyther to Chriſtes body, whereof no bone was brokē, either to any accident, but muſt needes be of a ſubſtance, which ſubſtance if it be not Chriſtes body, cannot be but bread. As in the .xi. chapter foure times he plainly calleth it: He that eateth of this bread: He that receiueth this bread. &c, And in the Actes of the Apoſtels we reade, how that (in ſpeaking of the Communion) they met together to breake bread. &c So that it is playne that the ſubſtauce of bread and wyne doo remayne in the Supper after the wordes of conſecration: as alſo may appeare playnly by Chriſts

own wordes, which calleth that which he gaue them in the Cup, wyne or the fruit of the vyne, as both Mathew and Matke doo write. Wherby we ſet that there is no tranſubſtantiation of the wyne, and therfore may we alſo ſee, that there is no tranſubſtantiation of the bread.
            As for the Paniſtes cauillyng, An aunſwer to the Papiſtes cauill for ye foreſayd reaſon. Math. 26 Exod. 7.
                how that it hath ye name of bread becauſe it was bread, as Symon the leper was called ſtylle prous, though hee was healed: or as Moſes rod, beyng turned into a ſerpent, was called a Rod ſtyll, it proueth nothing. For there was in the one a playne ſight, and the ſenſes certified that Simō was no leper: and in the other playne mention that the rod was turned into a Serpent. But concernyng the Sacrament, neyther the ſenſes

ſee any other thiug thē bread, neither is ther auy mentiō made of turning. And therefore theyr 
                  •
               auill is plainlye ſeene to be but a cauyll and of no force. But to come a gaine to bryng moe reaſons againſt Tranſubſtantiatiē:
            Secondly, that the ſubſtance of The 
                     ••
                  cōd reaſon againſt trā
                  ſubſtan. Math. 19 Mark. 14 Luke. 22. 1. Cori. 11.
                bread remaineth ſtil, the very text doth teach. For the Euangeliſts and the Apoſtle Saint Paule do wytnes, that Chriſt gaue that to his Diſciples, and called it hys body whych hee tooke, on which he gaue thankes, and whych he brake: but he tooke bread, gaue thankes on bread, & broke bread Ergo he gane bread, & called bred hys body, as he called the cup the new teſtament. So that it foloweth by this, that there is no tranſubſtantiation. And thys reaſon I my ſelfe haue promiſed in writing

to proue by the authority of the Fathers, namely Ireneus, Tertullian, Orgine, Ciprin, Epiphanius, Hierommus, Auguſtinus, Theodorete, Cirill, Bede, it ſo be I may haue the vſe of my bookes, The third reaſon againſt trā
                  ſubſtantiacion.
            
            Thirdly, that in the Sacrament there is no tranſub ſtantiation of the bread, by this reaſon I doo proue: Lyke as by our Sauiour Chriſt the ſpirit of truth ſpake of the bread, This is my body, ſo ſaith the ſa
                  •
                ſpirit of truth of the ſame bread: That we many are one body 
               1. Cor. 10. 
               and one bread. &c. So that as it appeareth the Sacrament not to be the Church by tranſubſtantiation, euen ſo is it not Chriſtes natural body by trauſubſtanciation
            Fourthly, I proue that there is The iiij. reaſon againſt tr
                     •
                  
                  ſubſtantiation. no tranſubſtantiation by Luke & Paules wordes ſpoken ouer the Cup. For no Leſſe are they effi
                  •
               
               tuall
 to tranſubſtantiate the cup, then their wordes ſpoken of the bread are operatorius & myghty to tranſubſtātiate the bread. For as they ſay of the bread, Thys is my body, ſo ſay they of the Cup, This cup is the new teſtament: which thing is abſurde to be ſpoken or thought, either of the cup or of the thing in the cup by tranſubſtanti ation. Yea rather in ſaying theſe wordes, This cup is the new Teſtament, we are taught by their coupling thys word Cup to the demonſtratiue This, how we ſhould in theſe wordes, This is my body know that this word This doth there demonſtrate bread.
            Fiftly, that the ſubſtaunce of bread remaineth in the Sacramēt, The fyft reaſon. as ye reaſons before brought forth do proue, ſo doth the definition of a Sacrament. For the

Fathers do affirme it to conſiſt of Ireneus Auguſtinus. Chryſoſtomus. an earthly thyng and of an heauenly thing, of the woord and of the element, of ſenſible thinges and of thinges which be perceyued by the mynde. But tranſubſtantiatiō taketh cleane away the earthly thing, the element, the ſenſible thing, and ſo maketh it no Sacrament. And therfore the definition of a Sacramētful wel teacheth, that bread which is the earthly thing, the ſenſible thyng, and the element, remayneth ſtyl, as Saynt Auguſtine ſayth: The word commeth to the Element, (he ſaith not, taketh away the Element,) and ſo it is made a Sacrament. The ſyxt reaſon againſt trā
                  ſubſtantiation.
            
            Sixtly, the nature, and propertion of a Sacramēt teacheth this alſo which I haue affirmed. For as Cipriane writeth that Sacramentes

beare the names of the 
                  
                     •
                  ipriax in Sermone de Chryſmat. Auguſtinus ad Bonifacium. thynges which they ſignifye: ſo doth ſaynt Auguſtine teach that if Sacramentes haue not ſome ſignification with the things wherofthey be Sacraments, then are they no ſacraments. Now, in the Lordes ſupper this ſimilitude is firſt in nouriſhing, that as bread nouriſheth the body: ſo Chriſtes body broken feedeth ye ſoule. Secōdly in bringing together many into our, that as in the ſacrament many graynes of corne are made on bread, many grapes ar made one liquour and wine: ſo the multitude which worthelye receiue the Sacrament, are made one body with Chriſt and hys Church. Laſt of all, in one vnlykelr lykelynes or ſimilitude: that as bread eaten turneth into our nature: ſo we rightly eating the ſacrament

by faith, turne into the nature of Chriſt. So that it is playne to them that wyll ſee, that to take the ſubſtance of bread away, is cleane againſt the nature and property of a ſacrament.
            I wil ſpeake nothing how that this their doctrine of tranſubſtatiation, beſide the manyfold abſurdities it hath in it (whych to rehearſe I omyt,) it vtterly ouerthroweth the vſe of the Sacrament, and is cleane contrary to the end wherefore it was inſtituted, and ſo is no longer a ſcrament, but an Idole, & is the cauſe of much Idolatry, conuerting the peoples harts from an heauenly conuerſation to an earthly, and turning the Communion into a priuate action, and a matter of gaſyng and piping of adoring & worſhipping the worke of mens

handes for the liuing God, which dwelleth not in▪ Temples made with mens handes, much leſſe lyeth he in pixes and cheſts, whoſe true worſhip is in ſpirit & verity, which God graunt vs all to render vnto him continually. Amen. The, vij. 
                     〈…〉
                  
               
            
            The Sacrament of Baptiſme doth alſo teach vs, that as ye ſubſtaunce of the water remayneth there: ſo in the Lords ſupper remaineth the ſubſtaunce of bread after cōſecration. For as by Baptiſme we ar engraffed into Chriſt ſo by the Supper we ar fed with Chriſt. Theſe two ſacramentes the Apoſtle gladly coupleth together. 1. Corinth. 10. and. 1. Corint. 12. VVear baptſed into one body (ſaith he) and haue dronke all of one ſpirit, meaning it by the Cup, as Chryſoſtome and other great learned men do wel interprete it. As therfore

in Baptiſme is geuen vnto vs the holy Ghoſt, and pardon of our ſyns, whych yet 
                  •
               ye not lurking in the water: ſo in ye, Lords ſupper is geuen vnto vs the communion of Chriſtes body & bloud that is, grace, forgeuenes of ſyns innocency, lyfe, immortality, with out any tranſubſtantiation or including of the ſame in the bread. By Baptiſme the old man is put of, and the new man put on, yea Chriſt is put on, but without trā
               ſubſtantiating Calat, 3. the water. And euen ſo it is in the Lords ſupper. Wee vp ſayth ſpirituallye in our ſoules do feede ou Chriſtee body broken: doo eate hys fleſh and drynke hys bloud: doo dwell in hym and he in vs, but wythout trauſubſtantiation.
            As for the tauill they make that An aunſwer to the Papiſtes cauill for y• foreſayd reaſon. wee are baptiſed into one 
                  •
               ody,

meaning therby ye myſtical body, & not the natural body of Chriſt, wherby they would enforce that we are fed with the natural body of Chriſt, but we are not ingraffed into it, but into the myſticall body, and ſo put away the reaſon aforeſayde: as for thys cauill, I ſay, we may ſoone auoyde it, if ſo he that we wyl conſider how that Chriſt whych is the head of the myſticall body, is not ſeperate frō the body, and therefore to be engraffed to the myſtical body, is to be engraffed into the natural body of Chriſt, to bee a member of his fleſh, and bone of his bones as Pope Leo ful wel doth witnes in ſaying, that Corpus regenerati fit caro crucifixi: The body (ſayth he) of the regenerate is made the fleſh of Chriſt crucified. And here to I could adde ſome reaſons for

the excellēcy of Baptiſme. I trow it be more to be begotten, then to be nouriſhed. As for the excellent myracle of the pa
                  •
               efaction of the Trinifie, and the deſcendyng of the holy Ghoſt in Baptiſme in a viſible forme, the lyke whereto was not ſeene in the Lordes ſupper, I wyl omyt to ſpeake of further then that I would you ſhuld know how it were no maſtery to ſet forth the excellency of this ſacrament, as well as of the ſupper.
            It is a playne ſygne of Antichriſt, The .viij. reaſon. to denye the ſubſtaunce of bread & wyne to be in the Lords ſupper after conſecration. For in ſo doing and graunting tranſubſtantiation, the propertye of the humane nature of Chriſt is denyed. For it is not of the humane nature, but of the deuine nature to be in many places at once. As

               Didimus de ſpiritu ſācto doth proue there by the diuinity of the holy Ghoſt. Now graunt tranſubſtantiation, and then Chriſtes natural body muſt needes be in many places, which is nothyng els but to confound the two natures in Chriſt, or to denye Chriſtes humane nature, whych is the ſelie ſame that ſaint Iohn ſaith, to denye Chriſt to be come in the fleſh And this who ſo doth, by the teſtimony of ſaynt Iohn in an Antichriſt in his ſo doing, whatſoeuer otherwiſe he do prate. Reade ſaynt Auguſtine in hys Epiſtle to Dardanus, and his .l. and .xxx. treatiſe vpon S. Iohn, and eaſely you ſhall ſee how that Chriſtes body muſt needes be in one place. Oportet in vno loco eſſe: but hys truth is in all places.
            If ther be no ſubſtance of bread The nidth reaſon.
               
in the Sacrament, but tranſubſtantiation, then Chriſts body is receiued of the vngodly, and eaten with their teeth, which is not onely againſt ſaint Auguſtine, calling this ſpeech, except you eate the fleſh of the ſonne of man &c. a figuratiue ſpech: but alſo againſt the playne ſcriptures, which affirme them to dwell in Chriſt & Chriſt in them, and they to haue euerlaſting lyfe that eate hym, whych the wicked haue not, although they eate the ſacrament. He that eateth of this bread (ſaith Chriſt (ſhal lyue for euermore. Therefore they eate not Chriſtes body, but (as Paule ſayth) they eate in iudgement and damnation, whych I trow be an other maner of thyng then Chriſtes bodye. And thys doth ſaint Auguſtine affirme, ſaying: none do eate Chriſtes body

which is not in ye body of Chriſt, that is (as he expoundeth it) in whom Chriſt dwelleth not, and hee in Chriſt. Which thing the wicked do not, becauſe they want fayth and the holy ſpirite, whych be the meanes whereby Chriſt is receyued.
            To the thinges which I haue brought herefoorth to improue tranſubſtantiation, I could bring in the fathers to confyrme the ſame, which ſucceded continuallye many hundreth yeares after Chriſt. Alſo I could ſhewe that tranſubſtantiation is but a new doctrine, not eſtabliſhed, before Sathan (whych was tyed for a thouſand yeares) was letten loſe. Alſo I could ſhew that euer hetherto ſynce it was eſtabliſhed, in all times it hath bene reſiſted and ſpoken againſt. Yea, before thys

doctrine the church was nothing ſo endowed with goodes, lands, and poſſeſſions, as it hath beene ſynce. It hath brought no ſmall gayne, no ſmall honour, no ſmall eaſe t the Cleargy, and therefore no maruel though they ſtriue and fyght for it. It is their Maozim, it is their Helena, God deſtroy it with the breath of hys mouth, as ſhortly he wylfor his names ſake Amen.
            If tyme would ſerue, I could & would here tell you of the abſurdities whych come by thys doctrine, but for tymes ſake I muſt omyt it. Onely for Gods ſake ſee this, that thys their doctrine of tranſubſtantiation is an vntruth, already I haue proued, & forget not that it is ye whole ſtay of all Popery, and the piller of their Prieſthood: whereby Chriſtes

Prieſthood, Sacrifice, Miniſtery and truth is letted, yea peruerted and vtterly ouerthrown, God our Father, in the bloud of hys ſonne Chriſt, open the eyes and myndes of all our Magiſtrates, and all other that beare the name of Chriſt, to ſee it in time, to Gods glorye and their own ſaluation. Amen.
            Now to returne to the ſecond matter what the Sacrament is, you ſee that to the ſenſes and reaſon of man it is bread and wyne. which is moſt true, as by the ſcriptures and other wyſe I haue allreadye proued, and therefore away with tranſubſtantiation,
            But here leſt we ſhould make it no Sacrament, for a ſacrament conſiſteth of twoo thynges, & leſt a man ſhould by thys gather; 
                  〈◊〉
                we make it none other thyng 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
bare bread and a naked ſigne, and ſo rayle at their pleaſure on vs, ſaying: How can a man be giltre of the body and bloud of Chriſt by vnworthy receiuing of it, if it bee but bare bread, and ſo forth? For thys purpoſe I wyll nowe ſpeake a little more hereabout, by gods grace, to ſtop their mouthes and to ſtyre vp your good harts more to the worthy eſtimation & perception of this holy myſterye. When a louing friend geueth to thee a thing, or ſendeth to thee a token (as for an example a napkyn, or ſuch like) I thinke thou doeſt not as thou ſhouldeſt doo, if that with the thyng thou conſidereſt not the mynde of thy friend that ſendeth or geueth the thing, and according the runto, eſtemeſt and receyueſt it: And ſo of thys bread thinke I, that if thou doo

not rather conſider the mynde of thy louer Chriſt, then the thyng which thou ſeeſt: yea if thou doo not altogether conſider Chriſtes mynde, thon dealeſt vnhoneſtly & ſtrumpetlike with hym. For it is the propertye of ſtrumpets to conſider the thynges geuen and ſent them, rather then the loue & mynde of the geuer and ſender: whereas the true louers do not conſider in any poynt the thinges geuen or ſent, but the mind of the party. So wee, if we bee true louers of Chriſt, muſt not conſider barely the outward thyng which we ſee, and our ſenſes perceyue, but rather altogether we muſt & ſhould ſee and conſider the minde of Chriſt, and therafter and according to it, to eſteme the ſacramēt.
            But how ſhall we knowe the mynde of Chryſt? For ſooth as a

mans mynde is beſt knowen by his word: ſo by Chriſtes woord ſhall we know his mynde. How his wordes be manifeſt and moſt playne: This (ſayth he) is my dody: therefore accordingly ſhould we eſteeme, take, and receiue it. If he had ſpoken nothing, or if he had ſpoken doubtfully, then might we haue bene in ſome doubt. But in that he ſpeaketh ſo plainly, ſaying, This is my body; who can, maye, or dare bee ſo bold as to doubt of it? He is the truth and cannot lye, he is omnipotent and can do all thinges: therefore it is his body. This I beleue, this I confeſſe, and pray you all hartely to beware of theſe and ſuch lyke wordes, that it is but a ſygne or a figure of his body: Except you wil diſcern betwixt ſignes which fignify ouely, and ſygnes whych

alſo doo repreſent, confirme and ſeale vp (or as a mā may ſay) geue wyth their ſignification. As for an example: An Iuye buſh is a ſygne of wine to be ſold: the buddyng of Aarous rod dyd ſygnifye Aarons Prieſthood alowed of the Lord: the reſeruation of Moſes rod dyd ſignifye the rebellion of the children of Iſrael: the ſtones takē out of Iordane, Gedeons fleeſe of wool. &c. ſuch as theſe, be ſigne ſignificatiue, and ſhewe no gyft, But in the other ſygnes, whych ſome call exhibitiue, is there not onely a ſignification of the thyng but alſo a declaration of a gyft, yea in a certayne maner a geuing alſo. As Baptiſme ſignifieth not onely the clenſing of the cōſcience from ſyn by the merites of Chriſtes bloud, but alſo is a very clenſyng from ſynne. And therfore it

was ſayd to Paule that he ſhould aryſe and waſh away hys ſyns, & not that he ſhould aryſe and take onely a ſygne of waſhyng away hys ſyns. In the Lordes ſupper the bread is called a partaking of the Lordes body, and not onely a bare ſigne of the Lordes body.
            This I ſpeake not as though the elements of theſe ſacraments were trauſubſtantiate) whych I haue already impugned either as though Chriſtes body wér in the bread or wyne, eyther were 
                  •
               yed to the elementes, otherwyſe then ſacramentally and ſpiritually, eyther that the bread and wine may not and muſt not be called ſacramentall and externall ſignes: but that they myght be diſcerned frō ſignificatiue and bare ſignes onely, and be taken for ſignes exhibitiue and repreſentatiue.
            
               
By thys meanes a Chriſtian comcience wil call and eſteme the bread of the Lord as the body of Chriſt. For it wyll neuer eſteeme the Sacraments of Chriſt after their exteriour appearance, but after the words of Chriſt. Wherof it commeth that the Fathers, as Chryſoſtome and others doo ſpeake with ſo ful a mouth when they ſpeake of the Sacrament, for their reſpect was to Chriſtes woordes, If the Schoolemen which folowed them, had had the ſame ſpirit whych they had, then would they neuer haue conſented to tranſubſtantiation. For wyth great admiration ſome of the Fathers doo ſay, that the bread is chaunged or turned into the body of Chriſt and the wyne into hys bloud: meaning it of amutation or chaunge not corporal, but ſpirituall,

figuratiue, ſacramental, or myſticall. For now it is no cōmon bread nor common wyne, beyng ordayned to ſerue for the foods of the ſoule. The ſcolemen haue vnderſtood it as the Papiſtes nowe preach of a ſubſtautial chaūging, as though it were no great myracle that common bread ſhould now be aſſumed into that dignity that it ſhould bee called Chriſtes body, and ſerue for a celeſtial food and be made a Sacrament of hys body and bloud.
            As before therfore I haue ſpoken, Chriſtes preſence in the ſupper, I would with that this Sacrament ſhould be eſteemed & called of vs Chriſtiā men, after Chriſtes wordes, namely Chriſtes body, and the wyne Chriſtes bloud, rather then otherwy e. Not that I meane any other preſence of Chriſtes body. then a preſence of

grace, a preſence to fayth, a preſence ſpiritually, & not corporally, really, naturally, and carnally, as the Papiſtes do meane. For in ſuch ſort Chriſtes body is onely in heauen on the right hand of God the father almightye, whether our faith in the vſe of the Sacrament aſceudeth and receyueth whole Chriſt accordingly.
            Yea, but one wyl ſay, that to cal An obiection, the Sacrament on that ſort, is to geue an occaſion of idolatry to the people, which wyll take the Sacrament which thei ſee, ſimply for Chriſtes body, as by experience we are well taught, and therfore it were better to call it bread, and ſo leſſe harme ſhould be, eſpecially in this age.
            In this obiection I aunſwer, that in dede great idolatry is cō
               mitted 
                  
                     •
                  n anſwer to and about this Sacrament,

and therfore men ought, as much as they can, to auoyd from occaſioning or contirming it. But in as much as the holy Ghoſt is wyſer then man, & had foreſight of the euils that might be, and yet notwithſtanding doth cal it Chriſtes body: I thinke we ſhould do euyl, if we ſhould take vpon vs to reforme his ſpeech. If Miniſters did their duties in Catechiſyng & preaching, then doubtles to call the Sacrament Chriſtes body, & to eſteme it accordingly, cold not geue occaſion to idolatry, and cō
               tirme it: Therfore wo vnto them that preach not.
            There be two euyls about the Sacraments, which to auoid the holy Ghoſt hath taught vs. For leſt we ſhould wyth the Papiſts thinke Chriſtes bodye preſent in or with the bread really, naturally,

and corporally to bee receyued with out bodelye mouth (where ther is no other preſence of Chriſtes body then ſpirituall, and to the fayth) in many places he keepeth ſtyll the name of bread, as in the epiſtle to the Corinthians the tenth and eleuenth chapters. And leſt we ſhould make to lyght of it, making it but a bare ſygne, & no better then common bread, the holy Ghoſt calleth it Chriſtes body whoſe ſpeech I wiſh we wold follow, and that not onely as wel to auoyd the euyl which is now a daies moſt to be feared cōcerning the Sacrament, I meane of contemnyng it, as alſo for that no faythfull man cōmeth to the Sacrament to receyue bread ſimply, but rather, yea altogether to communicate with Chriſts body and bloud. For els to eate and drinke

(as Paule ſayth) they haue houſes of their own. The contempt of the Sacrament in the dayes of Kyng Edward hath cauſed theſe plagues vpon vs preſentlye, the Lord be mercyful vnto vs, Amen. And thus much for the obiection of eaſlyng the Sacrament by the name of Chriſtes body.
            Why (ſayth one) to call the Sacrament An other obiection of Chriſts preſence in the Sacrament. Chriſtes bodye, and to make none other preſence then by grace or ſpiritualy to faith, which is of things hoped for, & of things which to the bodely ſenſes do not appeare, is to make no preſence at all, or to make hym none otherwyſe preſent, then he is in hys woord when it is preached, and therefore what neede wee to receiue the Sacrament, in as much as by thys doctrine, a man may receiue hym dayly in the fi
                  ••
               d as

wel & as much as in the church, in the celebration and vſe of the Sacrament.
            To this obiection I firſt aunſwer, that in deede neyther the ſcripture nor Chriſtian faith wyl geue vs leaue to make any carnall, reall, naturall, corporall, or any ſuch groſſe preſence of Chriſtes naturall body in the Sacrament For it is in heauen, and the heauens muſt haue it (as ſayth Peter) tyll Chriſtes commyng to iudgement, except we would deny the humanity of Chriſt, & the veritye of mans nature in hym. The preſence therfore which we beleue and confeſſe, is ſuch a preſence as reaſon knoweth not, & the world cannot learne, nor any that looketh in this matter with our eyes, or heareth with other eares, then wyththe eares and

eyes of the ſpirite and of fayth. Whych fayth though it bee of thinges hoped for, & ſo of things abſent to the corporall ſenſes, yet this abſence is not an abſence in deede, but to reaſon and the old man, the nature of fayth being a poſſeſſion of thynges hoped for. Therfore to graunt a preſence to fayth, is not to make no preſence at all but to ſuch as knowe not fayth. And thys the Fathers taught, affirmyng Chryſt to bee preſent by grace, and therefore not onely a ſignification, but alſo an exhibition and geuyng of the grace of Chriſtes body, that is, of lyfe and of the ſeede of immortalitie, as Cypriane wryteth. We eate lyfe and drinke lyfe ſayth S. Auguſtine. 
               
                  •
               efecle a preſence of ye Lord by grace or in grace ſayth Chryſoſtome. We receiue the celeſtial

foode that commeth from Athanaſius. aboue, ſayth Athanaſius. We receyue the property of the natural cōiunction and knitting together ſayth Hylerius. We perceyue the Hylarius nature of fleſh, the bleſſyng that geuethlyfe in bread and wyne, ſayth Cyrillus. And els where he Cyrillus. ſayth, that wyth the bread and wyne we eate the vertue of Chriſtes proper fleſh, lyfe, grace, and the property of the body of the onely begotten Sonne of God, which thyng behimſelfe expoundeth to be life. Baſilius ſaith, that we by the Sacrament receiue the Baſilius. myſtical Aduent of Chriſt, grace; and the very vertue of his very nature. Ambroſe ſayth, that we Ambroſius. Epiphanius. Hieronimus. receiue the Sacrament of ye true body. Epiphanius ſayth, wee receiue the body or grace. And Hierome ſayth, that wee receiue ſpirituall

fleſh, which he calleth other fleſh then that which was crucified. Chryſoſtome ſayth, that we receiue in
                  •
               uence of grace, & the Chryſoſtomus. grace of the holy Ghoſt. Saynt Auguſtine ſayth, that we receyue grare and veritye, the inniſible Auguſtinus. grace and holynes of the members of Chriſtes body. All the which layings of the Fathers do confirme this our fayth and doctrine of the Sacrament, we graū
               ting in all thynges herein vnto them, and they in lyke maner vnto vs. And therefore the lying lyps which both be lye the Doctours as though they graunted a carnall & a re
                  ••
                preſence of Chriſtes holy naturally and corporally after the Papiſtes declaration and meaning: and which belye vs alſo, as though we d
                  •
               yed all preſence of Chriſt, and ſo made it

but a bare ſigne. Theſe lying lips the Lord wyll deſtroy if they repent not, and with vs beleue and teach the truth, that the Sacrament is a food of the ſoule a matter of fayth, and therfore ſpiritually and by ſayth to bee talked of and vederſtanded, whych fayth they want, and therfore they erre ſo groſſely in that they woulde haue ſuch a preſence of Chriſt as is contrary to all the ſcriptures, & to our Chriſtian religion: wherby commeth no ſuch commoditie to the receiuer, as by the ſpiritual preſence which we teach, and according to Gods word do affirm.
            For we teach theſe benefites to be had by the worthy receiuing of this Sacrament, namely that we abyde in Chriſt and Chriſt in vs. Agayne, that we attayne by it a celeſtiall lyfe, or a lyfe wyth

God: more ouer that by fayth and in ſpirite wee receiue not onelye Chriſtes body and vioud, but alſo whole Chriſt God and man. Beſydes theſe we graunt that by the worthy receiuing of this Sacrament, we receiue remiſſion of our ſyns, and confirmation of the newe Teſtament. Laſt of all by worthy receiuing, we get an increaſe of incorporation wt Chriſt and amongeſt our ſelues whych bee hys members: then whych thinges what more can be deſired? Alas, that men conſider nothing at all how that the couplyng of Chriſtes body and bloud to the Sacrament, is a ſpirituall thing, and therfore there needes no ſuch carnall preſence as the Papiſtes imagine. Who wyll deuye a mans wyfe to bee with her huſband one body and fleſh, although

he be at London, and ſhe at Yorke? But the Papiſtes are carnall men, guided by carnall reaſon onely, or els would they know how that the holye Ghoſt becauſe of our infirmitye vſeth metaphorically the wordes of abiding, dwelling, eating & drinking of Chriſt, that the vnſpeakeable coniunction of Chriſt wyth vs might ſomthing be knowen. God open their eyes to ſee it. And thus much for this.
            Now to that part of the obiection which ſayth, that we teache Chriſt to be none otherwyſe preſent in the Sacrament then in his word, I would that the obiectors would wel conſider what a preſēce of Chriſt is in his word. I remember that ſayut Auguſtine writeth how that Chriſtes body is receiued ſometime viſibly, and

ſometime inuiſibly. The viſible receypt hee calleth that whych is by the Sacrament: the inuiſible receypt hee calleth that which by the exerciſe of our fayth with ourſelues we receiue. And S. Hierom in the third booke vpon Eccleſiaſtes, affirmeth that we are fed wt the body of Chriſt, and we drinke his bloud not onely in myſterye, but alſo in knowledge of bolye ſcripture. Wherein he playnlye ſheweth that the ſame meate is offered in the words of the ſcriptures, which is offered in the ſacrament, ſo that no leſſe is Chriſtes bodye and bloud offered by the ſcriptures, then by the Sacramentes. Upon the 147. Pſalme he writeth alſo, that though theſe wordes, He that careth my fleſh, and drinketh my bloud, may be vnderſtand in miſtery, yet he ſaith it

is more true to take Chriſtes body and his bloud for the word of the ſcriptures, and the doctrine of God. Yea vpon ye ſame Pſalme he ſayth playnly, that Chriſtes fleſh & bloud is poured into our eares by hearing the word, and therefore great is the perill if we yeld to other cogitations whileſt we hear it. And therfore, I trow, S. Auguſtine ſaith, that it is no les peryll to heare Gods word negligently, then ſo to vſe the ſacrament. But hereof may no man gather, that therefore it needeth not to receiue the Sacrament, or to affirme that a man maye as much by himſelfe, mediating the word in the field, receiue Chriſts body, as in the Church in ye right vſe of the Sacrament. For Chriſt ordayneth nothing in vayne or ſuperfluouſly, he ordayneth nothing

wherof we haue not nede. Although his authoritye is ſuch that without anye queſtonyng hys ordinances are to be obeyed.
            Agayne, though in the fielde a man may receiue Chriſtes body by faith in the meditation of the word, yet deny I that a mā doth ordinarely receyue Chriſtes body by ye onely meditation of Chriſtes death, or hearing of hys word, with ſo much ſight and by ſuch ſenſible aſſurance) whereof God knoweth our infirmity hath no ſmall neede) as by the receipt of the ſacrament, not that Chriſt is not ſo muche preſent in hys woord preached, as he is in or with his ſacrament: but becauſe there are in the perception of the Sacrament more wyndowes open for Chriſt to enter into vs, then by hys woord preached or

heard. For there, I meane in the word, he har
                  •
                an entraunce into out harts but onely by the eares, through the voyce and ſound of the wordes: but here in the Sacrament he hath an enterance by all our ſenſes, by our eyes, by our noſe, by our taſte, & by our handling alſo. And therefore the Sacrament full well may be called, ſeeable, ſenſible, taſtable, & touchable wordes. As therfore when many windowes be opened in an houſe the more lyght may come in, then when ther is but one opened: euen ſo by the perception of the Sacraments a chryſtian mās conſcience hath more helpe to receiue Chriſt, then ſimply by the word preached, heard or meditated. And therfore he thinketh the Apoſtle ful wel calleth the ſacramentes obſignations or ſealings

of Gods promiſe. Reade Roma. the. 4. of Circumciſion. And thus much for the aunſwer to the obiectiōn aforeſayd.
            Now to returne from whence we came, namely to the conſideration of the ſecond thing what the Sacrament is: I haue told you that it is not ſimply bread & wyne, but rather Chriſtes body, ſo called of Chriſt, and ſo to be called and eſtemed of vs. But here let vs marke what body & what bloud Chriſt called it. The Papiſtes ſtyll babble. Thys is my 
               Chriſtes preſence in the ſupper, 
               body: This is my bloud, but what body it is, what bloud it is, they ſhewe not. Looke therefore my dearly beloued, on Chriſtes own woordes, and you ſhall ſee that Chriſt calleth it his body broken▪ and hys bloud ſhed. Marke, I ſay, that Chriſt calleth it his body

which is broken, hys bloud which is ſhed preſently, and not which was broken or ſhalbe broken, which was ſhed or ſhall be ſhed, as the Greeke textes doo plainl
                  •
                ſhew: therby teachyng vs that as God woulde haue the Paſſeouer called, not which was the Paſſeourr, or whych ſhall be the Paſſeouer, but playnlye the Paſſeouer, to the end that in the vſe of it, the paſſyng ouer of the ſtriking Angell ſhould be ſet before their eyes as preſent: ſo in the celebration of the Lords ſupper the verye Paſſion of Chriſt ſhould bee as preſent, beholde a with the eyes of fayth. For which end Chriſt our Sauiour did ſpecially inſtitute this Supper, ſaying: Do ye this in remembrance of me, or as Paule ſayth: Shew you thr Lordes death tyll he come.
            
            
               
The Supper of the Lord then is not ſimply Chriſtes body and bloud, but Chriſtes body broken and hys bloud ſhed. Wherefore broken? Wherfore ſhed? Forſeth that tencheth Chriſt himſelfe ſaying: Broken for you, Shed for your ſyns, and for the ſyns of many. Here now then we haue occaſion in the vſe of the Sacrament to call to mynd the greatnes and greuouſnes of ſyn, which could not be taken away by any other meanes then by the ſheding of the moſt precious bloud, and breaking of the moſt pure bodye of the onely begotten Sonne of God Ieſus Chriſt, by whom all things were made, all thinges are ruled & gouerned. &c. Who conſidering this geare ſhall not be touched to repent? Who in receipt of this Sacrament, thinking that Chriſt

ſayth to him: Take, eate, this is my body wyich is broken for thee: This is my bloud which is ſhed for thy ſyns, can but tremble at the greevouſnes of his ſins, for the which ſuch a price was payd? If there were no plague at al els to admoniſh man of ſyn, how greuous a thing it is in Gods ſight, ſurely that one were enough. But, alas, how are our hartes bewitched through Sathans ſubtilties & the cuſtome of ſyn, that we make ſyn a thing of nothing. God open our eyes in tyme, and geue vs repentance, which we ſee this Sacrament doth, as it were, enforce vs vnto in the reuerence and true vſe of the ſame.
            Againe, in hearing that thys which we take and eate is Chriſtes body broken for our ſyns, & his bloud ſhed for our iniquities,

me are occaſioned to call to mynd the infinite greatnes of Gods mercy and truth, and of Chriſtes loue towardes vs. For what a mercy is this, that God would for man, beyng loſt through hys wylfull ſinnes, be content, yea deſirous to geue hys owne onelye ſonne, The image of his ſubſtaunce, the brightnes of his glory, being in his own boſome, to be made man for vs, that we mē by him might be, as it were, made Gods? What a mercy is this, that God the Father ſhould ſo tender vs, that hee would make this hys ſonne, being coequal with him in diuinity, a mortall man for vs, that we might be made immortal by him What a kindnes is thys, that the almighty Lord ſhould ſend to vs his enemies, hys deare darlyng to be made poore, that we by him

might be made ritch? What bowels of compaſſiō was this, that the omnipotent Creator of heauen and earth would delyuer his own onely beloued ſonne for vs creatures, to be not onely fleſh of our fleſh, and bone of our bones, that we myght by hym through the holy Ghoſt be made one with him, and ſo wyth the Father by communicatyng the merites of his fleſh, that is righteouſnes, holynes, innocency, and immortality: but alſo to be a ſtayne ſacrifice for our ſyns, to ſatiſfy his iuſtice, to conuert or turue death in to lyfe, our ſyn into righteouſnes, hell into heauen, miſery into felicitye for vs? What a mercy is this, that God wyll rayſe vp this his ſonne Chriſt, not onely to: iuſtify and regenerate vs, but alſo in his perſon to demōſtrate vnto

vs our ſtate which we ſhall haue▪ for in hys comming we ſhall be lyke vnto hym. Oh wonderfull mercy of God, whych would aſſume this his Chriſt, euen in humane body into the heauens, to take and keepe ther poſſeſſion for vs, to leade our captiuity captiue, to appeare before hym alwayes praying for vs, to make ye throne of Iuſtice a throne of mercy, the ſeate of glory a ſeate of grace, ſo that with boldnes we may come and appeare before God to aſke and finde grace in tyme conuenient. Againe, what a verity and conſtant truth in God is thys, that he would, accordyng to hys promiſe made fyrſt to Adam, and ſo to Abraham and others in his time, accompliſh it by ſending his ſonne ſo graciouſly? Who would doubt hereafter of any thing that

he hath promiſed? And as for Chriſtes loue, oh whoſe hart can be able to thinke of it any thing as it deſerueth? He beyng God wold become mā: he beyng ritch would become poore: he beyng Lord of all the world, became a ſeruaunt to vs all: he being immortall, would become mortall, myſerable, and faſt of all Gods curſes, yea euen of hell it ſeife for vs. His bloud was nothyng to deare, hys lyfe he nothing conſidered to bryng vs from death to lyfe. But thys hys loue needeth more harty waying, then many wordes ſpeaking, and therefore I omit and leaue it to your conſiderations. So that in the receiuing of this ſupper, as I would you wold tremble at Gods wrath for ſyn, ſo would I haue you to couple to that terrour and feare,

true fayth, by which ye myght be aſſured lye perſwaded of Gods mercy towardes you, & Chriſtes loue, though al thinges els preached the contrary.
            Do euery of you ſurely thinke when you heare theſe wordes. Take, eate, this is my body broken for your ſynnes: Drinke, this is my bloud ſhed for your ſyns, that God the eternal father embracing you, Chriſt calleth and cleppeth you moſt louingly, makyng himſelfe one with you, and you one wyth hym, and one wyth another amongeſt your ſelues: You ought no leſſe to be certayne now that God loueth you, pardoneth your ſyns, and that Chriſt is all yours, then if you dyd heare an Angell out of heauen ſpeakyng ſo vnto you. And therefore reioyce and be glad, and make thys Supper

               Eutharichiam, a thankeſ geuing, as the Fathers named it. Be no leſſe certaine that Chriſt and you now are all one, then you are certayne the bread and wyne is one wyth your nature and ſubſtaunce, after you haue eaten and dronken it. Howbeit in thys it differeth, that you by fayth are, as it were, chaunged into Chriſt, and not Chriſt into you, as the bread is: for by fayth he dwelleth in vs & we in hym. God geue vs fayth in the vſe of this Sacrament to receyue Chriſt, as he geueth vs handes to receiue the element, ſymbole, and viſible Sacrament, God graunt vs not to prepare our teeth and belly (as S, Auguſtine ſayth) but rather of his mercy he prepare and geue vs true and lyuely fayth to vſe thys and all other his ordinances to his

glory & our comfortes. He ſweepe the houſes of our hartes, & make them cleane, that they may be a woorthy harborough and lodging for the Lord. Amen.
            
            Now let vs come and looke on wherfore the Sacrament was inſtituted. the third and laſt thing, namely wherefore the Lord did inſtitute this Sacrament. Our nature is very obliuious of God and of all his benefites. And agayne, it is very full of dubitation and doubting of Gods loue & of his kyndnes. Therefore to the end theſe two thinges might be ſomething reformed and holpen in vs, the Lord hath inſtitute this Sacrament: I meane that wee myght haue in memory the principal benefites of all benefites, that is, Chriſtes death, & that we might be on all partes aſſured of communion with Chriſt, of all kyndnes

the greateſt that euer God dyd geue vnto man. The former to be the end wherfore Chriſt did inſtitute this Sacrament, he him ſelfe doth teache vs, ſaying: Do ye this in remembraunce of me. The latter the Apoſtle doth uo ieſſe ſet forth in ſaying: The bread whih we brake, is it not the partaking or communion of the body of Chriſt? Is not the cup of bleſſyng which we bleſſe, the partaking or cō
                  munion of the bloud of Chriſt? So that it appeareth the end wherefore this Sacrament was inſtituted, was and is for the reformacion and helpe of our obliuion of that which wee ſhould neuer forget, and of our dubitation of that wherof we ought to be moſt certayne.
            Concerning the former, namely of the memory of Chriſtes deare

what cōmodity it bringeth with it, I wyl purpoſely for times ſake omit. Onely a lirle wyll I ſpeake of the commodities cōming vnto vs by the partaking and communion we haue with Chriſt, Firſt it teacheth vs that no man can cō
               municate wyth Chryſt, but the ſame muſt needes communicate with Gods grace & fauour, wher thorow ſyns are forgeuen. Ther fore this cōmoditye cōmeth herethorow, namely that we ſhould ve certaine of the remiſſion & pardon of our ſynnes. The which thing we may alſo perceue by the cup, in that it is called the cup of the new Teſtament: to whych Teſtament is properly attributed on Gods behalfe obliuion or remiſſion of our ſyns. Firſt I ſay therefore the ſupper is inſtituted to this ende, that he which worthely

receiueth, ſhould be certaine of the remiſſion & pardon of hys ſyns and iniquities, how many and great ſoeuer they be. Now great a benefit this is, onely they know which haue felt the burthē of ſyn, which of all heauy thinges is the moſt heauye. Agayne, no man can cōmunicate with Chriſtes body and bloud, but the ſame muſt communicate with his ſpirite for Chriſtes body is no dead carcaſe. Now he that cōmunicateth with Chriſtes ſpirit, cōmunicateth as with holynes, righteouſnes, innocency, & immortalitie, and wyth all the merites of Chriſtes body: ſo doth he with God and all his glory, & with the Church, & all the good that euer it or any member of it had, hath, or ſhall haue: This is the cōmunion of Sainctus which we beleue ☞ Note though I apply thys thus: yet I woulde not yt any men ſhuld think that cōmunionē ſāctorum in the Creede is not ſet foorth there for the better explication of that which preceedeth it, namelye. what ye holy catholike Church i
                     •
                  
               
               
in our Creede, which hath wayting on it remiſſion of ſynnes, reſurrection of the fleſh, and lyfe enerlaſting.
            To the end that we ſhould be moſt aſſured and certayne of all theſe, Chriſt our Sauiour did inſtitute this his Supper, & therfore would haue vs to vſe it. So that there is no man, I trow, which ſeeth not great cauſe of geuing thankes to God for this holy Sacrament of the Lord, wherby if we worthely receine it, we ought to be certayne that all our ſyns what ſoeuer they be, are pardoned clearly: that we are regenerate and borne agayne into a liuely hope, into an inheritaunce immortall, vnderiled, and which can neuer wither away: that bee are in the fellow ſhyp of God the Father, the Sonne, and the holy

Ghoſt: that we are Gods Tenples, at one with God, and God at one with vs: that we are mē
               bers of Chriſtes Church and felowes with the Sainctes in all felicity: that we are certayne of immortalitie in ſoule and body, & ſo of eternall lyfe, then whych thyng what can be more demaunded? Chriſt is ours, and we are Chriſtes, he dwelleth in vs, and we in him. Oh happy eyes that ſee theſe things, and moſt happy hartes that feele them. My deare brethren, let vs pray vnto ye Lord to open our eyes to ſee theſe wō
               derfull thinges, to geue vs fayth to feele them. Surely we ought no leſſe to bee aſſured of them now in the worthy receiuyng of this Sacrament, then we are aſſured of the exteriour ſymboles and Sacramentes. If an Angell

from heauen ſhould come and tell you theſe things, then would you reioyce & be glad: And my deare hartes in the Lord, I euen now, though moſt vnwyrthy, am ſent of the Lord to tel you no leſſe, but that you worthely receiuing this Sacrament, ſhall receiue remiſſion of all your ſyns, or rather certainety that they are remitted, and that you are euen now Gods darlinges, Temples, and fellow inheritours of al the good that euer he hath, Wherefore ſee that you geue thankes vnto the Lorde for this his great goodnes, & prayſe hys name for euer.
            Oh, ſayth one, I cold be glad An obiection of 
                     •
                  nworthy receiuyng. in very deede, and geue thankes from my very hart, if that I dyd worthely receiue thys ſacrament But (alas) I am a very greuous ſynner, & I feele in my ſelfe very

little repentance and fayth, and therefore I am a frayde that I am vnworthy.
            To the anſwering of thys obiection The aunſwar. I thinke it neceſſarye to ſpeake ſomthing of the worthy receiuing in this Sacrament, in as great breuity and playnes as I can. The Apoſtle wylleth al men to proue and examine themſelues before they eate of the bread, and drinke of the cup: for they that eate and drinke vnworthely, eate and drinke damnation. Therefore this probacion and examination is neceſſary. If men wyll try their golde and ſyluer, whether they be coper or no, is it not more neceſſary
                  •
                that men ſhould trye their conſciences? Nowe howe this ſhould be, the Papiſts teach amyſſe in ſendyng vs to their auriculer confeſſion, which is impoſ

ſible. The true probacion and tryall of a Chriſtian con
                  •
               cience conſiſteth altogether in faith and repentance. Faith hath reſpect to the doctrine and articles of our beliefe, repentance hath reſpect to maners & conuerſation. Concerning the former, I meane of faith, we may ſee the Apoſtle teacheth vs. 2. Corint 11. Concerning the latter for our conuerſation, thoſe ſyns which are called commonly mortall or deadly are to be remoued. Theſe ſyns are diſcerned from other ſyns by the Apoſtle, Rom. 6. in ſaying: Let not ſyn raygne and beare aſwynge in your mortall bodies. For truly then wee ſynne deadly, when we geue ouer to ſynne, and let it haue the bridle at his liberty, when we ſtriue not agaynſtie, but allow it and conſent to it. How be it, if we ſtriue

againſt it, if it diſpleaſe vs, then trulye though ſynne be in vs (for we ought to obey God without all reſiſtaunce or vnwillyngnes) yet our ſyns be not of thoſe ſyns which ſeperate vs from God, but for Chriſtes ſake ſhall not be imputed vnto vs beleuing.
            Therfore my dearely beloued, if that your ſynnes doo now diſpleaſe you, if you purpoſe vnfaynedly to be enemies to iyn in your ſelues and in others, as you may, during your whole lyfe, if you hope in Chriſt for pardon, if you beleue according to the holy ſcriptures and articles of the Chriſtiā fayth ſet forth in your Creede, if I ſay, you nowe truſt in Gods mercy through Chriſtes merites, if you repent, and earneſtly purpoſe vefore God to amende your lyfe, and to geue ouer yourſelues

to ſerue the Lord in holynes and righteouſnes al the daies of your life, although before this preſent you haue moſt greuouſly ſynned. I publiſh vnto you that you are worthy geſtes for this table, you ſhall be welcome to Chriſt, your ſyns ſhall be pardoned, you ſhall be endned with hys ſpirit, and ſo with communion with hym and the Father, & the whole Church of God, Chriſt wyll dwell in you, & you ſhall dwell in hym for euermore. Wherefore behaue your ſelues accordinglye wyth ioyfulnes and thankes geuing. Do you nowe appeare before the Lord: make cleane your houſes, & open the dores of your hartes by repentance and faith, that the Lord of hoſtes, the kyng of glory may enter in: and for euer hereafter beware of all ſuche thynges as

myght diſpleaſe the eyes of hys Maieſty. Flie from ſyn as from a Toade, come away from popery and all Antichriſtian religion, be diligent in your vocations, be diligent & earneſt in prayer, harken to the voyce of God in hys word with reuerence, lyue worthys your profeſſion. Let your lyght in your lyfe ſo ſhine, that men may ſee your good workes, and glorify your father which is in heauen. As you haue beene darkenes, & followed the works of darknes, ſo now henceforth be light in the Lord, & haue ſociety with the workes of light. Now hath God renue
                  •
                hys couenaunt with you, in Gods ſight now are you as cleane, and healed frō all your ſores of ſynnes. Go your wayes, ſyn no more, leſt a worſe thing happen vnto you. See that

your houſe beyng new ſwept, be furniſhed with godlines and vertue, and beware of idlenes, leſt the deuil come with ſeuen ſpirits worſe then himſelfe, and ſo take his lodging, and then your latter end wyll be worſe then the firſt.
            God our Father, for the tender mercy and merites of hys ſoune, be mercyful vnto vs, forgeue vs al our ſyns, and geue vs his holy ſpirit, to purge, cleanſe, & ſanetify vs, that we may bee holye in hys ſight through Chriſt, & that we now may be made ready & worthy to receiue thys holy Sacrament, with the fruits of the ſame to the full reioyning & ſtrengthening of our harts in the Lord. To whom be all honour & glory, world without ende.
            Amen.
            To God be all praiſe for euer.
         
      
      
         
            
            Imprinted at London by Iohn Awdeley, and Iohn Wyght. The .xxx. of September. Anno Domini. 1574.
         
      
   