
      
         
            
            The thyrde and laſt parte of the Secretes of the reuerende Maiſter Alexis of Piemont, by him collected out of diuers excellent Authours, with a neceſſary Table in the ende, conteyning all the matters treated of in this preſent worke. Engliſhed by Wyllyam Warde.
            
            
               ARMIPOTENTI
ANGLIAE
            
            
               PRINTED AT LONDON by Roulande Hall, for Nycholas Englande. 1562.
         
      
      
         
            
               
               
               Secretes and ſoueraigne receptes well experimented and tryed by diuers Authours.
               
                  Agaynſt euery greefe or payne of the head, except the Pockes.
                  
                     TAke red Roſes, Camomill flowres, Melilot, Calamint, Sothernwood, of eche two handfulles, ſeeth them in fourtye pounde of water & good wyne, vntil half be conſumed. And with this beyng hote let the Pacient waſhe his legges euerye nyghte and mornynge, from the knees downewarde, and hys armes from the elbowe downewarde. Alſo he muſt not haue hys ſtomacke full.
               
               
                  A preſeruatine agaynſte the fallynge ſyckenneſſe or epilepſia.
                  TAke the beſte caſtoreum, that you can fynde, and aſſa ſetida, of eche halfe a Dragme, rootes of Piony wel beaten into pouder a dragme, aromaticum roſatum two dragmes, of all theſe beynge well mixte and mingled together with Syrope of Mynte, make ſeuen Pilles, to be taken twyſe or thryſe a weeke when you goe to bed. It hath been often proued.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the fallynge ſyckenneſſe.
                  THe Pacient beynge tourmented with this diſeaſe it is good to make hym ſmell burnte Fethers, or olde Shoes, for that reuiueth and maketh them come to them ſelues.
               
               
                  Another ſoueraygne remedye for the ſame.
                  TAke a hūdred Swallowes, an vnce of caſtoreum, as much Wyne as ſhall ſuffice, & of the beſt that can be found. Diſtil all together and geue the Pacient drynke thereof thre Dragmes faſtyng. This water is alſo verye good for men that be apoplectique yf they be waſſhed with it.
               
               
                  Agaynſte the Palſey.
                  
                     TAke myrrhe, maſtir, of eche two dragmes franken ſence a dragme and alhalfe, Cloues, Synamome, Nuttmegge, Lignum Aloes. Mace of eche a dragme. Beate all theſe into very fine pouder. And the pouder beyng ſprinkled with aqua vite, and dried againe you muſte yet once ſprinkle it againe, and continuinge ſo ſprinkling and drieng it fyue tymes. Then beate it ſmal againe. And with this pouder parfume a foxe ſkin laieng two dragmes therof vpon quick coles to the intent that the parfume be receyued through oute all the ſkynne, and ſo laied vpon the member that is infected. Orels (whiche is better) let the ſkinne poudered with the ſayde pouder, be layed whote vpon the paraliticke member and ſo worne: And you ſhall ſoe a merueylous effecte.
               
               
                  Another waye.
                  TAke a pounde of Aqua vite, the roofe of iua, the roote of acorus, ye roote of Iſope, of ech two dragmes blacke Peper, Cloues, Nutmegge, of eche a dragme, Mace half a dragme: All this you muſt ſtampe well, & bynde it in a fyne lynnen clothe and let it ſtiepe in Aqua vite thre hole dayes, then drene oute the water, of this water take halfe an vnce: water of iua and of Endiue of eche three dragmes: geue it the Pacient to drincke in the breake of the daye, and let him not eate in ſire houres after. The Pacient ſhall feele a greater effect if the ſame day that he drinketh the water, he alſo waſhe the ſore member with it.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the franſey.
                  THe bodye beinge purged, it is good to ſhaue the head, and to laye vpon the ſeame of the crowne of the head quicke Pigeons (hauing firſt clefte them in the backe, and drawen out the entrayles) leauyngs them ſo vpon his head vntill they ware colde: or els litle whelpes of a moneth olde their garbiſhe pluckt out: or if you will the lunges or lightes of a ſheepe or wether hote. But becauſe one of the principall cauſes of the franſie is the tourment of watchinge, you muſt labour



to prouoke ſlepe as much as you can, by remedies mete therefore: as with waſhing his legges from the knees downewarde, and his armes from the elbowe downewarde, with the decoction of violet flowers, of Nenuphar, of the ryne of Mandragore rootes, and annoyntynge his temples, the ioyntes of the arme euen to the hande, and of the legge vnto the foote with the oyle of Nenuphar and poplar mixt together.
               
               
                  A tryed remedye agaynſte the greate payne, ryngynge and defneſſe of the eares.
                  TAke the oyle of Caſtoreum two vnces, oyle roſet, and oyle of better Almondes of eche an vnce, of Aqua vite two vnces, mingle al together and ſeeth it vntill the Aqua vite be conſumed. Than euery night at euen whan he goeth into his bedde, droppe foure droppes into his eares, and ſtoppe them with Cotton ſauourynge ſome what of Muſke. It is a thynge proued.
               
               
                  Another remedye well knowen and tryed.
                  SEeth in ſome potte a pounde of Walnut oyle, and whan it ſmoketh, make the ſmoke enter into the pacientes eares by a founell.
               
               
                  A remedye to ſtenche the bleedyng at the noſe.
                  TAke the iuyce of Plantaine, Roſe water, and the beſt Uinaigre you can, of eche foure vnces: yelkes of Egges well beaten two vnces: of acatia mixte with the ſayde thynges halfe an vnce: mingle al together, and annoynte your forehead with it and your throte with ſome cloth.
               
               
                  Another for the ſame well proued, and of a merueylous ſtrength.
                  THe Pacient ſhall take the water of panis porcinus as much as ſhal neede, ye which he ſhal take vp at the noſe, & incontinent he ſhal feele him ſelfe holpen.
               
               
                  Another ſoueraygne remedye.
                  TAke the blood of a man (that is to ſay that bledeth at the noſe) an vnce or two: and burne it vpon ſome plate of iron, then make it into fine pouder, & blow it into his noſtrelles, and he ſhalbe well.
               
               
                  
                  Another for the ſame.
                  TAke of the beſt Uinagre you can get, Plantayne water of eche two pounde, wete certayne lynnen cloutes in it, and laye them to the ſoules of hys feete, and palmes of hys hands, and agaynſt the lyuer, and the bloode ſhal furth with ſtent.
               
               
                  For the tooth ache, a remedye proued.
                  TAke halfe an vnce of Hierapicra: two Dragmes ofHiera Picra a medicine to purge fleme and collor. Mythridate, and halfe an vnce of Aqua vite, and with all theſe mingled together, you ſhal often times a daye annoynte the tooth that aketh and rounde the gomme that he ſtandeth in: for this is ſingular yf the ache comme of cold.
               
               
                  Anoher remedie whether the ache be by cold or heate.
                  TAke ſtronge whyte Wyne halfe an vnce, of the rootes of Iuſquiame in Englyſhe whyte Henbane, an vnce: Let all be well ſodden together, vntyll the thyrd part or half of the wyne be conſumed, we this hote wyne waſh al the gomme of that tooth that aketh and keepe it a good whyle in your mouth, on the ſyde where the tooth is.
               
               
                  Another for the ſame.
                  TAke Sage flowers, Roſemary, Betony, Sticados arabic, Marioram, of eche a handefull and a halfe: of Nigella or melanthium in Englyſhe Geth, of perythrum in Engliſhe Pelytorye of eche two Dragmes. Let all this bee ſodden together, in a ſufficient quantitie of whyte wyne vntil the halfe be conſumed: then ſtraine it and ſtampe theſe herbes, and make thereof a plaiſter and laye it vpon the Jawe of the akynge tooth, & kepe the wyne that is ſtrained out in your mouth as whote as you maye endure it.
               
               
                  Another remedie.
                  ALſo, if the ſayde tooth be hollowe, mixe halfe an vnce of Triacle together with Negella and pyrethrum of eche halfe an vnce, and a Dragme of Aqua vite.



And of this mixture fyll vp the hole of the tooth. But yet if all this (after you haue proued it) helpe you but a lytle or nothyng, put to eche of theſe remedies two or three graynes of the iuice of Poppye, called in Latyn Opium, and laye all as is ſayde vnto the griefe that troubleth you.
               
               
                  A remedye for the ſtynkynge of the mouth of noſe.
                  TAke a pounde and a halfe of Roſe water, a pounde of Uiolet water, halfe a pounde of Marioram water, beate into pouder Nutmegges, Lignum aloes, Synamom, Galingale, Zedoaria, of eche two Dragmes, mixe all with theſe waters, and ſtyll it in a Limbecke. This done, parfume the water with eyght graynes of fyne Muſke. The head beynge purged with this water, that is to ſaye, takyng it vp euery daye at the noſe into the head: but yet faſtynge, and the noſe fyrſt well purged, you ſhal ſee a merueylous effect.
               
               
                  Another for the ſame.
                  IT is a thing proued and tryed, and very good to take faſtyng euery daye at the beginning of dinner, or els from day to daye an Alephangine pille.
               
               
                  A verye good gargariſme or gargellynge of the throte agaynſt the Quinſey.
                  TAke two pounde of Lycorous water, the iuyce of Plantaines, the ſucke of Mulberies, the ſucke of Myrtelberries, of eche two vnces: all this mixte together, ſeeth it well: than ſtraine it and let it coole agayne, and than let the Pacient gargle & waſhe his throte ſlightly withall.
               
               
                  For the ſame.
                  IT is a remedye proued and tryed, to blowe wyth a Reede in hys throte fyne pouder of Plantayne leaues dryed.
               
               
                  Another for the ſame.
                  IT helpeth muche alſo to annoynt the ſoore wyth the oyles of Camomille, of Uioletts, of ſwete Almonds,



and of the greaſe of a Henne, as much of the one as of the other, mixing it al together, and to annoynt therewith the ſoore place, with the application of newe ſhorne or vnwaſhed wulle.
               
               
                  An excellent plaiſter to ſoften or rype an impoſtume in the throte.
                  TAke of Swallowes neſtes a pounde, and make thereof a plaiſter with as muche Oyle of ſweete Almondes, and of Camomille as ſuffiſeth to make it, and laye it hote to the Pacientes throte.
               
               
                  Agaynſt ſpytrynge of bloode commynge of the Lunges or Lyghtes.
                  TAke the ſucke or iuyce of Purſelane and Playntayne of eche an vnce: beate into pouder a dragme of redde Corall, and halfe a dragme of the ſtone Hematites in Engliſhe bloodſtone: and all beyng mirte together geue it to the Pacient at all tymes when he ſpitteth bloode.
               
               
                  For the ſame another remedy tryed and proued.
                  MAke into very ſmall pouder gumme Arabic, Tragacantha, Hartes horne burned, of a bloodſtone burned, and redde Corall burned, of eche halfe a Dragme, and of Bole armenicke two ſcruples: mixe all with the yelke of a rawe Egge, and geue it the Pacient when he ſpitteth bloode.
               
               
                  Another remedy founde very ſyngular.
                  ROſte well two Dragmes of Rubarbe, together with the ſeede of Purſelane and Coriander prepared, of eche a Dragme, make all into verye ſmall pouder, and mingle a Dragme of this pouder with as muche iuyce of Purſelane as ſhall ſuffice, and geue it to the Pacient whan he ſpitteth bloode.
               
               
                  Another remedy of merueylous great vertue.
                  TAke of the iuyce of Milfoyle two vnces, of a bloodeſtone burned, and well beaten into pouder two



Dragmes, and geue it to the pacient colde.
               
               
                  Another ſecrete for the ſame, certayne and experimented and good at all houres.
                  TAke the ſhelles of ſome rawe Egges, take awaye the lytle ſkinne that is within, and drye them ſo that they maye be made into pouder verye fyne. Than mixe two Dragmes of this pouder with three vnces of Plantayne water, and geue the pacient of it euer whan he voydeth bloode, and you ſhall ſe that the Lunges wil be ſounde. But if you wil that this medicine worke with more ſpeede, and greater efficacie, mire it with two Dragmes of the ſayde pouder, with halfe an vnce of ſyrop of drye Roſes, halfe an vnce of Purſelane, and as muche of ſyrop of Mirtell, whiche thing you ſhal geue ye Pacient fiue daies together. And this thus taken he may be wel aſſured that from thence forwarde the vayne wyll neuer breake more.
               
               
                  For the ſame.
                  IT is a remedie moſt certayne and proued as well to heale this ſickennes chaunced to a man, as for to preſerue one from it before it come, to eate euerye mornyng faſting a ſcruple of Rubarbe roſt.
               
               
                  Another for the ſame.
                  EUerye daye at nyghte whan the Paciente woulde ſlepe, let hym ſuppe a ſponefull of mundified Barley. For, at the laſt, the effect is very great, as well to preſerue him, as to heale hym of it.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the vlceration of the Lunges or Lightes, and ſpettell full of matter and corruption.
                  TAke a pounde of the tayles of riuer Creuices, and foure pounde of Cowe or Ewes mylke: and ſeeth all together vntil halfe the mylke be conſumed. And than ſtampe well the tayles of the Creuices or Crabbes, and diſſolue them in good mylke, putttynge to them halfe a handfull of Barley flower, and aſmuch



of amylum, of ſweete Almonde milke foure vnces, the yelke of a newe layed egge, and foure vnces of Sugre very whyte: mengle all together, and ſ
                        •
                     t it on the fyre to ſeeth, ſturring it alwayes ſoftly, vntil it be wel ſodden. This doen let the ſicke man eate of this compoſition at mornynge and euenynge as muche as he ſhall thinke good: and he ſhall fynde hym ſelfe very wel.
               
               
                  Another for the ſame.
                  TAke vi. Dragmes of white Poppy ſede, of Endiue ſede draagme & a half, wt as much Sorrel ſede, kernels of Quinces made cleane two Dragmes, the ſeedes of Melons, Gourdes, Cytrons, Cowcumbers, of eche an vnce and a halfe, of Gomme Arabick, Tragacantha, of amylū, of eche a dragme, of ye ſuyce of L
                        ••
                     orous two Dragme, of the Lunges of a Fore a Dragme and a halfe, Penides the waighte of the whole, mixe and burne al ſlightlye: Than make it into a fyne pouder, wherof you ſhal take two Dragmes, mingling it with an vnce and a halfe of the ſyrop of Juiuves, & thre vnces of the water of Snayles diſtilled▪ 
                     
                        ••
                     a
                        •
                      geue thys drinke luke warme to the Pacient in the breake of 
                        •
                     he daye.
               
               
                  Another for the ſame.
                  MIngle halfe an vnce of verye whyte Sugre with ſyxe vnces of the mylke of an Aſſe newe mylked, and take a lytle of it at the breake of the mornyng, ſ
                        •
                     epinge a lytle vpon it, and at nighte whan you go to bedde, continuynge ſo a moneth at the ſprynge, and twentye dayes together in Harueſt.
               
               
                  A remedye for ſhort wy
                        •
                     ded men.
                  TAke an vnce and a halfe of Licorous made cleane, with as much Cetrac the graines or cornes being taken away, Juiubes, & Sebeſten or Mixa of echetenne, the roote of Em
                           •
                        la campana. purified or made clean balfe an vnce, the roote of Foole foote or Horſe hoofe, called of the Apoticaries Vngula caballina, two Dragmes



let al ſeeth in a ſufficient quantitie of water, vntil the halfe be conſumed, than ſtraine it, and diſſolue with that which is ſtrayned three vnces of the beſt Manna, or elles an vnce and a half of the flowers of Aceſis, and geue it to the Pacie
                        ••
                      at the fyrſt tyme when the pain taketh him, it is a thing tryed, ſo ſinguler that it wyll heale the ſicke man, ſo that the Phiſition ſhall bee no more troubled with him.
               
               
                  A drynke for the ſame diſeaſe, to be taken euerye daye thryſe.
                  SEeth wel and longe two vnces of the Juyce of Emula campana, with as much of the Juyce of Iſope, and a pounde of the water of Foole foote or Horſe hoofe: and make thereof a ſyrope with as muche Sugre as ſhalbe neceſſarye, of the which the Pacient ſhal take in the morning two vnces without water, and as muche as at noone, and whan he entreth into his bedde: and as longe as the paro
                        •
                     iſme and fitte of his payne, it is good to put amonge it foure droppes of gomme Armeniack, with t
                        ••
                      vnces of Oximel ſimple, and giue theOximel honny and vinaigre ſodden together. Pacient drynke of it.
               
               
                  Another tryed ſecret good for poore folke.
                  MIxe a pounde of wylde Mallowe or marche Mallowe rootes dried in the ſhadowe, with foure pounde of ſodden honnye well ſcommed: ſturre it vpon the fyre vntill it be lyke an Electuarye, whereof let the Pacient take often tymes, and he ſhal fynd himſelfe eaſed.
               
               
                  For the ſame, and good alſo for the poore ſorte.
                  TAke of cleare condite water two pounde, of Leeks chopped very ſmal thre vnces, of freſhe butter two vnces, of the beſt Sugre an vnce and a halfe, and the yelke of an Egge. All this being very well beaten and ſtyrred by the fyre, ſhalbe geuen to the Pacient at dinner and ſupper.
               
               
                  A remedy agaynſt the plureſye.
                  
                     IT is a thing wel tried that at the firſt aſſault or comming of the payne of the ſyde, it is verye good to be let bloode in the vayne called Baſilica, of the oppoſite arme: but if the blood be let out at the fourth acceſſe or comming, or ſoone after, the Plureſie wyll by and by voyde away: not withſtanding you muſte neuer let the Pacient blood but his bellye muſt fyrſte be purged and loſed, either with taking ſome caſſa at the mouth, or els with ſome ſoft gliſter.
               
               
                  A decoction for the ſtomacke, verye good agaynſt the Plureſye.
                  BEing let blood, as it appertayneth, take the ſucke or iuyce of Iſope, capilorum Veneris, Figges, Dates, Sebeſten, dried Reaſynges, mundified Barley, Licorous made cleane-of eche half a handful: ſeeth all in water as much as may ſuffice, & put for to diſſolue in it thre vnces of grained Manna. But if the Pacient be a poore man take an vnce and a half of Pulpa caſsiae, whiche is the inner part of it called alſo Medulla, in ſtede of Manna, and giue this drinke. xxiiii. houres after hys letting bloode, and very earlye in the mornyng, it is a thing certaine that in prouing this the Pacient ſhalbe healed, although he were not let blood but a litle before the fourth acceſſe, becauſe the matters and ſubſtaunce that nouriſhed the diſeaſe in the larger condites are purged awaye.
               
               
                  Another remedye moſte certayne agaynſt all Plureſyes, as proued as diuine, for to preſerue a man that he dye not of it.
                  MAke an oyntment of two vnces of Dialth
                           •
                        a mirte with half an vnce of ſwete Almond eoyle, wherwith being hote annoynt the ſore ſyde, caſtynge vpon it the pouder of halfe an vnce of Commin ſtamped very ſmall and boulted. That doen, heate a Cabbedge leafe vpon the hote coales, and ſpreade with old Butter but not ſalt, laying it hote vpon the griefe: the payne will ceaſe merueylouſlye, and will reſolue into



matter of an impoſtume, ſo that at the laſte you ſhal haue the honour of it, and the Pacient health▪ Yet you muſt note that this remedie muſt not be vſed but at the fourth acceſſe, or els after. This remedy may alſo ſerue in euery great griefe diſparſed thorowe oute al the bodye beneth the head.
               
               
                  An oyntment to rotte or rype the plureſye.
                  TAke two vnces of Mucilage or Mucago of the ſede of Cabedge, with as muche Mucago of the ſede of Marche Mallowes, Mucago of Figges an vnce, of Cowe milke thre vnces, of freſhe Butter two vnces, oyle of ſweete Almondes two vnces and a halfe: mire al this together, ſturryng it alwayes vpon a ſmal fyre and make thereof a ſoft oyntment with as much waxe as ſhal neede. This doen, ſpreade it vpon newe ſhorne and vnwaſhed Wulle, and laye it vpon the griefe, renewyng it in foure and twentie houres three or foure tymes.
               
               
                  A playſter for the ſame.
                  STampe well in a morter foure vnces of the rootes of wylde Mallowes well ſodden, putte to it an vnce of Butter, an vnce and a halfe of honny, of Pigeons dunge two Dragmes: Mingle all together, and laye it hote right vpon the payne, and ſoone after the corruption wil breake.
               
               
                  For the ſame.
                  IT is a remedy well proued, although it be not much vſed, to geue ye pacient in. xxiiii. houres foure tymes foure vnces of the water Tartarum terreſtre hoate. For in ſo doyng, the cure ſhalbe ſo fayre that you ſhall ſee the impoſtume broken and purged from all corrupte and rotten bloode. And more ouer he ſhall be preſerued from ſpitting bloode, and from the conſumption of the Lunges.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the hote cogh, that is to ſay, when the pacient is ſo vexed with it, that he can not well ſlepe.
                  
                     TAke a dragme of the Pilles of cynogloſſa in Engliſh houndes tongue, with ſyrope of Roſes, and make thereof fyue Pylles, whereof the Pacient ſhall take one euery daye at the entryng into his bedde.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the ſame, if his voyce be hoarſe with it.
                  TAke Diacodion, and of the pouder of Tragacante cold, Penides, of eche. ii. dragmes, Bole armenick a Dragme: Make all this into a very fyne pouder, and with the ſyrop of Myrtle make Pilles lyke Peaſon, of the which whan the Pacient goeth to his bedde he ſhall holde one vpon his tongue, and he ſhalbe wel.
               
               
                  A tryed electuary for the ſame.
                  TAke Diapenidion without ſpecies, Loch ſani & experti, of eche an vnce, of Penides. ii. vnces, & we as much ſyrop of Iſope, as ſhall ſuffice for to incorporate all: make thereof an Electurye: whereof the ſicke man ſhall holde ſome in hys mouth lickynge it.
               
               
                  Agayne for the cogh.
                  TAke a pounde of freſhe butter without ſalte, thre yelkes of newe layed Egges, two vnces of the 
                        ••
                     owre of Amylum, and an vnce of Sugre melted in the water of Uiolets: Mingled all together, and ſtyrre it alwayes vntil it be well ſeaſoned and of a good taſt. It is a good remedy whiche maye ſerue you as well in ſteade of meate, as of medicine.
               
               
                  Pylles for the cogh.
                  TAke two Dragmes of Agaricke prepared, & mixe it with a Dragme and a halfe of Frankenſcence made into pouder, and with the iuyce of Iſope, ſo make thereof ten Pilles, of the which the Pacient ſhal take one euery night whan he goeth to bedde. It is a remedye verye good, as well for yonge-children, as for olde folke.
               
               
                  An oyntment for the ſame.
                  
                     TAke olde Butter that is not Salte, the Oyle of ſwete Almondes, and of whyte Lyllies of eche an vnce, halfe an vnce of Mucelago of the ſeede of wylde Mallowes, with as muche of Mucilago of the ſeede of Mallowes, and half a ſcruple of Saffron: mixe all together, and make thereof an oyntment with a litle Ware: wherewith beinge hote, you ſhall annoynt your breaſte.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the tremblyng and payntyng of the hearte. This is verye good, but eſpeciallye for women, which are much ſubiect therevnto.
                  TAke the Pilles of dryed Cytrons, Zedoariae, Doronici, calami aromatici, of eche a Dragme, of Grami Paradiſi, halfe a Dragme, of the rootes of Bugloſſe dryed two Dragmes, of fyne Muſke halfe a Scruple, Epithimi halfe a Dragme: Let al be made into pouder as wel as is poſſible, and the pouder after ſifted: whereof beynge mingled with the water of Turmentill, the Pacient ſhall take a Dragme and a halfe, at the breake of the daye, and in the euenynge whan he wyll ſlepe a Dragme. And he ſhall ſee him ſelfe ryd and quit of his pain within ſeuen dayes.
               
               
                  A remedye agaynſt the ſame, and verye good to reſtore the ſtrength, beynge weakened with to great heate of agues.
                  TAke two Dragmes of the beſt Synamom, halfe a Dragme of Mace, of Hyacinthes, Smaragds of Rubies of eche halfe a Dragme, of perced or vnperced pearles, of eche a Scruple, of Golde and Siluer beaten into pouder, of eche a Dragme: Let al together be made into a verye fyne pouder, whereof ſtyring it with Sugre diſſolued in Roſe water, you ſhal make litle Balles of two Dragmes a peece. I haue ſeene my ſelfe that many haue been with this confection preſerued from the plague in a very daungerous tyme.
               
               
                  
                  Another remedie, wherewith I haue alwayes founde my ſelfe verye well.
                  MAke a drynke with two vnces of the ſucke of Bugloſſe purged on the fyre, and two Dragmes of very whyte ſugre mixte together, and drynke it luke warme euerye nyght whan you go to bedde, and before ten dayes be paſt you ſhalbe cured.
               
               
                  An Epitheme agaynſt the ſame payne.
                  TAKE Roſe water, Borage water, the water ofEpithema is a medicine layed to the region of the hart or lyuer to cole it. 
                     Meliſſophylum, in Englyſhe Baulme, Sorrel water of eche ſixe vnces, of Sandall whyte and rede, and of the ſede of redde Roſes, of eche a Dragme and a half, Lignum aloes, of the fleſhe of the hart of a Bucke, and of Hartes horne burned, of eche a Dragme, of red Corall, of Ben whyte and redde, of eche halfe a Dragme, of the flowres of Bugloſſe, and of Borage, of eche a handefull. Let that be made into pouder that can be, and let all ſeeth together vntill the thyrde parte of the water be conſumed: Than put to it three vnces of the beſt Malmeſey, and two vnces of the beſt whyte Uineigre with a ſcruple of Saffron: mingle al this together and laye it whote vpon the ſicke mans hearte, with a linnen clothe cleane dyed in grayne, early in the mornyng and at nyght before ſupper. For admit that than he feele his griefe or not: yet neuertheleſſe this is a thing experimented and very good.
               
               
                  An oyntment very good for poore folke, that are not able to bye thefore ſayde medicine or nouriſhment.
                  TAke three vnces of yellowe Nenuphar, two Dragmes of the pouder of the ſame flowres of Nenuphar, of redde Sandall, of redde Coral, and of Sorrel ſeede, of eche a ſcruple, of Perles, of Lignum aloes of the fleſhe of the hart of a Bucke, of eche halfe a ſcruple, thre graines of Camphyre, of whyte waxe waſhed in the water of Nenuphar, Cytryn or yellowe as much as ſhall nede. That which muſt be made in pouder, being ſo made, make thereof a ſofte oyntment, wherewith



you ſhall annoynt the pacient mornyng and euenyng aboute the heart, before his meales, and he ſhall be well.
               
               
                  Another compoſition very good in the tyme of a plague as well to preſerue as to heale.
                  TAke an vnce of the beſt Triacle, halfe vnce of the iuyce of Lemons, a ſcruple of Saffron, of the two ſortes of Pearles, of redde Corall, and of Sorrell ſeede, of eche halfe a Dragme: two Graynes of Camphyre: mingle all together very wel with two or three droppes of odoriferous whyte wyne, and make thereof an oyntment: a certayne quantitie whereof you ſhal ſprede vpon a crymſon ſilke cloth, laying it hote vpon the Pacientes hearte, renewynge it mornynge and euenynge.
               
               
                  Another oyntment verye good, and principally for chyldren that are troubled with wormes.
                  TAke halfe an vnce of aloes epa
                           •
                        icum, a ſcruple of Saffron, two Dragmes of the iuyce of Cytrons, a Dragme of pleaſaunt whyte wyne: mixe all well together, and ſpreade it vpon ſome linnen clothe, and lay it vpon his heart.
               
               
                  A remedye agaynſt the wormes in yonge children.
                  TAke ye flowre of bitter Lupines, aloes epaticū
                      of eche thre Dragmes, of the iuyce of worme wodde two Dragmes, all wel mixed together, let it be ſpredde vpon ſome cloth or cloute, and laye it vpon the chyldes Nauell.
               
               
                  A remedy agaynſte the payne of the ſtomacke.
                  TAke two vnces of the cromme of the bread of Bran ſprinkle it with the wyne of Pomegranettes betwene ſwete and ſowre, and plaintaine water of eche foure vnces: preſſe that harde, and giue the wine tempered with the ſayde water, vnto the Pacient: If the paine come of the continuall and great burnyng of an ague, take this drinke an houre before it comme and



you ſhal finde it of a merueylous vertue. But if y• pain be excedinge, it ſhalbe good to geue vnto the Pacient this 
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      folowing, at what houre ſo euer it be that the payne taketh him.
                  Take thre Dragmes of the Electuarie of Succo roſarum, two ſcruples of Philonium romanum: Mire them and make thereof a Bolus, whiche ſhal greatly profite him.
               
               
                  Another remedye for the ſame, whan all other wyll not profyte hym.
                  TAke ſyrop of Roſes, ſyrop of Wormewod of eche an vnce and a halfe, a grayne of Opium, ſeeth them ſlightlye one wawme, and ſtirrynge it together with thre vnces of the broth of a Henne, you ſhall giue the Pacient drinke.
               
               
                  A 
                        •
                     omentation or nouryſhment verye ſyngular for the ſame.
                  TAke redde Roſes, the flowres of Camomille, of Wormewod, of Mynte, of eche a handefull: heate the ſayde herbes vpon whote burning tyles ſprinkled with whyte wyne, and laye them often tymes vpon his ſtomacke.
               
               
                  Another.
                  IT is a thing tryed agaynſt the payne of the ſtomacke ſo that it come not of colde, and alſo to bée preſerued from the ſame, to take daye by daye before meales, two ſcruples of Pilles of waſhed Aloes.
               
               
                  Another agaynſt the ſame.
                  TAke halfe an vnce of waſhed Aloes, and three vnces of honnye Roſet, ſeeth this in two pounde of water, vntil there remaine but halfe, than ſtraine it through a ſtrainer, & geue thereof vnto y• Pacient, euery daye early in the mornyng two vnces: this will beale and cure his grief, or els wil preſerue him from it if he be not already taken with it.
               
               
                  Another remedy.
                  
                     IT is a thinge well proued, that the ſicke man take earlye in the morninge a Dragme and a halfe of the beſt Mythridate: & ſtraight vpon it drynke a draught of Malmeſey, and by and by he ſhalbe healed or eaſed.
               
               
                  Another very good.
                  TAke fyue vnces of Camomille water diſtilled, and of Nutmegges well beaten into pouder halfe an vnce, if you giue it whote vnto the Pacient, whan the payne hath him, he ſhalbe eaſed.
               
               
                  Another remedye proued.
                  TAke flowres of Camomille, Melilot, Mynt, Pulegruin, Calamy
                        •
                     t, Southernewodde, Senegre
                        •
                     e, ſeede of Lyne, of eche a handefull, red Roſes, Sp
                           •
                        ea ſquinanti, of eche two Dragmes, Danci, carui, Any
                        •
                     e, Dill, Fenel, of eche halfe a handeful, Galingale, Zedoaria, of eche two dragmes, Cloues, Nutmegges, Lignū aloes Ma
                        •
                     e, redde Corall, of eche a Dragme: let all ſceth in a ſufficient quantitie of water and edoriferous whyte wyne vntill the thyrde parte be conſumed: than with a ſponge ſteeped in whote 
                        •
                     ycoure nouriſhe therewith his ſtomacke morning and euenyng before he eate, and this wil bryng his ſtomacke in good ſtate.
               
               
                  A nouriſhment very good agaynſt the ſame.
                  TAke a pounde of oyle of Spike made in Bal
                           ••
                        o marie, warme it luke warme, and with newe ſhorne and vnwaſhed Wulle ſteeped in it, nouriſh therewith the ſtomacke, and at the laſt binde it vpon it.
               
               
                  A lytle bagge to carye aboute one agaynſt the ſame diſeaſe.
                  TAke wormewod, Mint, Pulegium▪
                      Calamint, of eche halfe a handful, Nutmegge, Cloues, Mace, Lignum aloes, of eche adragme: make all into a fine pouder, and put it in a litle bagge, par
                        •
                     umyng it with odoriferous whyte wyne, and than lay it vpon your ſtomack: if you continue to cary it about you, you ſhal feele your ſelfe merueylous well.
               
               
                  
                  A drynke for the ſame.
                  I Haue found my ſelfe alwayes very well, as well for beyng preſerued from this payne of the ſtomacke, as delyuered of it, being troubled with it. To witte in takinge ſixe vnces of honnye roſat ſtrained, a Dragme and a halfe of Nutmegges, and two vnces of the beſte water of a Uine, and ſeeth them altogether vntil the water of the Uine be conſumed, and in takyng faſting euerye mornynge three ſponnes full of that whiche is ſtrayned.
               
               
                  Another remedye to lay to the ſtomacke.
                  TAke Maſticke, Cloues, Nutmegges, of eche a dragme, halfe a Dragme of Mace, and as much of Synamome: make hereof a verye fyne pouder. Than toſt the vpper or neither cruſt of a lofe of Branne, and dippe it in whote Malmeſey, ſtrowing vpon it of y• ſaid pouder, and ſo layinge it vpon your ſtomacke whote, the payne will go away incontinent.
               
               
                  Another remedy well tryed and proued, and good, chiefely for yonge chyldren vexed with the payne of the ſtomacke: which is knowen, yf they vomite or belche.
                  TAke the crommes of Branne bread foure vnces, roſt or toſt it, and beate it ſmall into pouder, and after incorporate the pouder with the iuyce of wormewodde, and mynt of eche as much as ſhal ſuffice and put to it more a dragme of Nutmegges. Of al this being mixt together make an oyntment, and laying it vpon your ſtomacke, it will eaſe and ceaſe the payne, the belching and the vomiting.
               
               
                  A remedy agaynſt an apoſtume in the ſtomacke.
                  IT is a thing wel tryed, that if the Pacient take euery mornynge at the breake of the daye, ſixe vnces of Camomill water diſtilled, he ſhalbe cured and healed of the impoſtume already begon in him.
               
               
                  
                  Agaynſt the ſame.
                  TAke foure vnces of Emula purified, two vnces of wormewodde newlye extract and make in forme of Loch, with as much Sugre as ſhall neede, and geue it to the Pacient morninge and euenynge before hys meales.
               
               
                  A playſter for the ſame.
                  TAke two pounde of whyte honny, halfe an vnce of greene wormewodde, an vnce and a halfe of the rootes of marche Mallowes: ſeeth al together vntill it be verye well ſodden, put vnto it ſome flower of Senegren, and of Lyneſeede, of eche half a handefull. Than put to it ſome oyle of wormewodde, as much as ſhal ſerue to make a plaiſter, the whiche you ſhall laye vppon youre ſtomacke, renewynge it euenynge and mornynge.
               
               
                  A nouriſhment or kepyng of the ſtomacke in hys naturall heate by waſhyng or bathyng it.
                  TAke two pounde of Turpentyne, the ſucke or iuyce of wormewod, and of wylde Mallowes of eche foure vnces, of freſhe Butter an vnce, of Saffron a Dragme, of oyle of Wormewod two vnces: mixe all, and ſeeth it one wawme: and beinge whote weate ſome linnen cloth in it, and therewithal waſhe and bath your ſtomacke morning and euening. And you ſhal ſe that by and by the matter wil diſſolue.
               
               
                  A remedy agaynſt vomityng.
                  YF the vomityng come at a certaine day or houre, it ſhalbe good that the Pacient, before or at the houre that he muſt vomite, do eate ſome morſell of toſted bread, ſtieped in foure vnces of the wyne of ſowre Pomegranetts, drinkyng alſo afterward the wyne.
               
               
                  An oyntment very good agaynſt cholerick vomiting.
                  TAke oyle of Quinces, oyle of Roſes, of eche an vnce: halfe an vnce of wormewod, of red Coral, and of red



Roſes of eche halfe a Dragme, of Nutmegges a Dragme: beate to pouder that whiche maye be beaten, and with a litle waxe make thereof a ſofte oyntment, and annoynt the Pacients ſtomacke with it mornyng and euenyng before his meales.
               
               
                  Another remedye agaynſt phlegmaticke vomitynge.
                  TAke the yelke of an Egge roſted, a ſcruple of frankenſence, with as much Maſticke, make into pouder that which may be made into pouder, and put with the egge. And the Pacient ſhalve wel yf he take of it euery morning faſtyng.
               
               
                  A remedy agaynſt the Hycket oryexynge.
                  MYngle a pounde of ſtrong and odoriferous white wyne, with a Dragme of Galingale beaten into pouder, and make thereof a drinke, whereof the Pacient ſhal take whote, eueninge and morning two vnces, two houres before his meales.
               
               
                  Another.
                  IT is a thing founde very good, to geue the Pacient euery mornyng three houres before he eate, a ra
                        •
                     ine of greene Ginger, and by and by vpon that let hym drynke two draughtes of Malmeſey: and he ſhal quickly be healed.
               
               
                  Remedyes agaynſt the payne of the Lyuer, come through ventoſitie.
                  TAke the roots of Galingale, and Zedoaria, of eche two Dragmes, a Dragme of Spica, with as much Squinantum, Cloues, Nutmegges, of eche halfe a Dragme: Let al be made into a ſmal pouder: and make thereof an Electuary with ſcommed Honny, as much as ſhall nede: whereof you ſhal take ſome euenyng and morning before you eate.
               
               
                  Another of a very great effect.
                  
                     MIxe together two vnces of Diarhodon abated, Trium ſandolorum an vnce, of the beſt Rubarbe made in fyne pouder a Dragme, and with ſyrope of Succorye, make an Electuarye, whereof the Pacient ſhall take euening and morninge before al other meate, the quantitie of a Walnut.
               
               
                  A remedy founde very good agaynſt the Lyuer that is appoſtumate or corrupted.
                  TAke foure vnces of Diarhodon abated, of the beſt Rubarbe wel made into fine pouder, mingle all with the ſyrop of Succorye and make thereof an Electuarie. Let the thing that the Pacient ſhal take euery mornyng two houres before his meale, be of thre dragmes.
               
               
                  For the ſame.
                  IT is a thinge tried, that if you doe put newe ſhorne and vnwaſhed Wulle to ſteepe in the oyle of whyte Lilies, and the oyle Nardus celcica, laye it right where the paine is, & it ſhal kepe that the lyuer corrupt not.
               
               
                  Remedyes agaynſt the Dropſye.
                  TAke drie Wormewod, drie Agrimonye, drie Soldanella▪
                      of eche two Dragmes, of Spica two ſcruples: all this being made into a fine pouder, lay to ſtepe in the water of the rootes of Eldern tree, as muche as ſhal ſuffice, and geue of it to the Pacient, euerye morning at the breake of the day two Dragmes.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the ſame.
                  TAke three vnces of the iuyce or ſucke of Iris, Galingale, Zedoaria▪
                      of eche two Dragmes, of Synomom, of Cloues, of eche half a dragme of Soldanella, halfe an vnce. Al this being made into a very fyne pouder, make thereof an Electuarye with as muche ſcommed honny as ſhal ſuffice, of the which Electuary you ſhal geue halfe an vnce vnto the Pacient euerye morning two houres before he eate.
               
               
                  
                  A drynke of great vertue and ſtrength agaynſt the wyndye dropſye.
                  MYngle together two vnces of the water of the rotes of Walwort or Danewort, with foure vnces of the water of Elderne tre, and in drinkyng this early in the mornyng thyrtye dayes together, you ſhal be verye well.
               
               
                  Another remedye verye good to take after a purgation.
                  TAke a pounde of Goates dunge, with as much of Oxe dunge, and drie it in an ouen, and ſo make it into a ſmall pouder, incorporatyng it with iuyce of wormewod, and oyle of Rue, as much as ſhal ſuffice as it were to make therewith an oyntment. And ſprede ſome parte of it vpon a lynnen cloth, layinge it whote vpon the Pacientes belly whan he goeth to bedde.
                  The nexte morninge folowinge, take foure vnces of ſtronge and odoriferous wine, and ſeeth it with a hand full of Sage, and as much Roſemary, vntil the fourth parte of the wyne be conſumed: with the which beinge hote, you ſhall waſhe his bellye. All this done, take an vnce of Diagalanga, of Roſatum aromaticum, 
                           •
                        riū ſandalorum, Diarrhodon abated, of eche halfe an vnce: mixe all together with Roſat honnye, and make thereof an Electuarye; and giuing him a mouthful of it incontinent after hys bellye is waſhed.
               
               
                  Remedyes agaynſt the Dropſy, called aſcites. A drinke verye good to take once a weeke.
                  TAke as muche of the ſucke or iuyce of Iris or Gladiolus▪
                      as halfe an Egge ſhell wyll holde, minglyng it together, with it foure vnces of Melicrat, with half a dragme of the beſt Rubarbe well beaten in pouder. This drynke beyng geuen whote and early in the morninge vnto the Pacient: it is a wonder to ſee with what vertue and ſtrength it worketh.
               
               
                  
                  A ſynguler good Electuarye for the ſame, vvhiche ought to be declared or diſcloſed but to your ſpeciall frendes.
                  TAke Agrimony, Cuſcuta, dryed Grapes, Licorous Mirabola
                        •
                     s, Cytrons of eche halfe an vnce, of the rootes of Pa
                        •
                     ſ
                        •
                     ye, of Fenell, of Capers and Agaricke, of eche an vnce. All this groſ
                        •
                     ye ſtamped muſt be ſodden vntill the compoſition of halfe the water, and ſtrayne it: and in ſtrainyng it put to it halfe a pounde of Honnye, and foure vnces of Sugre, and ſeeth it agayne vntil it be as thicke as Honnye. This done, put to it halfe a Dragme of the beſt Rubarbe, two Dragmes of gommie Turbith, a Dragme and a halfe of the leaues of Chameloe
                           •
                        , whiche hath leaues lyke to an Oliue, tempered in Uinaigre, two Scruples of Diagridium corrected, of Spica halfe a Dragme, with as muche of Ginger: and make of al this an Electuarye, of the which you ſhal geue the Pacient twyſe a weeke. Note yet that the greateſt quantitie may not be aboue halfe an vnce. And as for you remember to giue hym rather leſſe than more, or as muche, hauynge alwayes reſpect to the ſtrength or weakenes of the Pacient.
               
               
                  An oyntment for the ſame.
                  MYxe an vnce of Vnguentum ſa
                           •
                        da
                           •
                        ium, wt half an vnce of y• oyle of Nardus celtic
                           •
                        
                        ▪
                      & as muche of the Oyle of Camomille, wherewith forget not to comforte euery daye his Liuer mornynge and euenynge, by annoynting the place right againſt it.
               
               
                  Another oyntment verye good.
                  TAke a pounde of Turpentine, of Frankencenſe, Maſticke, Myrhe, of eche two Dragnies, Nutmegges, Cloues, Galingale, Zedoaria, of eche a Dragme and a halfe: the iuyce of Walwort or Danewort, the iuyce of wylde Cowcumbers of eche an vnce: and let that be made in pouder that can be: and all put in a Limbecke, let it diſtille for to haue the oyle of it, wherewith you ſhall annoynte all his bellye. It is a



ſpecial good remedie, not only to aſwage the ſwelling of the bellye in this ſicknes, aſcites or dropſie: but alſo to take awaye al waterye ſwellynge in what membre of the bodye ſo euer it be: yea it is good alſo for the ache or payne of the ioyntes, and of other partes come by colde.
               
               
                  A remedye agaynſt the yellowe Iaundiſe.
                  AP
                        •
                     rgation firſt taken, take two vnces of grounde wormes dryed in the ſhadowe, and prepared in wyne▪ of the beſt Rubarbe a Dragme, of Dogges dunge dried half an vnce. Of all this together make a fine pouder, and geue vnto the Pacient euerye morning an vnce and a halfe faſtinge, and continuynge ſo fiftene dayes he ſhalbe wel.
               
               
                  Remedyes agaynſt the collicke.
                  TAke two vnces of ſtronge whyte wyne, of Nutmegges, and Cloues, of eche halfe a Dragme, of Galingale a Dragme, ſtampe theſe groſſelye, and laye them one nighte in the ſayde wyne, and in the morninge geue it the Pacient to drynke with a litle whyte Sugre. And let him continue thus drynkyng it twiſe a weke faſtinge. It is a thinge that I haue tried to be very good to preſerue a man from the collicke.
               
               
                  A remedye neuer to haue the collicke more.
                  TAke two pounde of the ryne or pillinges of thicke Rape rootes, and foure pounde of whyte Honnye, boyle it together vntil the halfe be conſumed.
                  Than mixe with it ſome pouder of Synomome, and Cloues, Nutmegge, Mace, blacke Pepper, of eche two Dragmes, and kepe it in ſome veſſel. Of the whiche rynes or pillinges take euerye mornynge faſtynge halfe an vnce.
               
               
                  Another remedye to take in the payne and tourment of the collicke.
                  
                     MYxe halfe an vnce of the Electuarye of Dates, with a Dragme and a halfe of Philonij romani and make thereof litle gobbets, the whiche you ſhall geue to the Pacient faſtinge, euer when the paine taketh him. And you muſt note that in cace of neceſſitie a man may geue this medicine, yea before the diſgeſtion of the ſaide diſeaſes.
               
               
                  A very good pouder that healeth quickly the ſayd ſycknes.
                  MYxe a Dragme and a halfe of whyte Mulberrye leaues dried in the ſhadowe, with a Dragme of the ryne or pillinges of a Radiſhe roote dryed alſo in the ſhadow, and a dragme and a halfe of the litle karnelles or ſtones of meddlars. All beinge made into pouder, geue vnto the Pacient two dragmes in good and odoriferous whyte wyne.
               
               
                  A remedye which I haue founde to be verye good for all griefe or payne of the guttes or entrayles.
                  TAke Diagalinga, and Diabugloſſa
                           •
                        um of eche two dragmes Philouij romani foure ſcruples, mixe al together, and make thereof lytle gobbets or lumpes: which you ſhal geue vnto the Pacient at euerye tyme the paine tourmenteth him, and ſpeciallye when he is yet faſtynge.
               
               
                  A glyſter wherewith I haue cured manye.
                  TAke thirtene vnces of ſtronge whyte wine, foure vnces of freſhe butter, ſixe vnces of common oyle, Annice, Dill, Fennell, wilde Carwayes, called of the Apoticaries carui agreſte, Dauci, ameos, carthami, of eche two dragmes: mixe them & ſeeth them al vntil the half of the wyne be conſumed. Than ſtraine it, addinge to that which is ſtrained two vnces of Honnye roſet, an vnce and a halfe of red Sugre, two dragmes of common ſalt, and the yelke of an Egge, mixe all this together and make thereof a glyſter.
               
               
                  Another agaynſt the ſame.
                  
                     SEeth a pounde and a halfe of ſtronge whyte wyne, with two vnces of hote ſkaldynge water, vntill the ſayde water be conſumed, and make onely a gliſter of the luke warme wyne: it is a thyng tryed that after the other gliſters this wil helpe you much, yf the ague be not with it.
               
               
                  Another for the ſame.
                  TAke eyghte vnces of the oyle of Rue, thre vnces of the oyls of Caſtoreum, two vnces of Philomium romanum. an vnce of Benedicta, of other thinges as before, ſauing that you muſt put as lytle ſalte to it as is poſſible, to the end that the vertue of the Philomium mai remayne in his. This gliſter is proued ſo good, that where as all other wyll not helpe, it will delyuer you; yea in a great nede or daunger.
               
               
                  An oyntment agaynſt the ſame.
                  TAke oyle of Caſtoreum, oyle of whyte Lilies, oyle of Rue, oyle of Cheiri, of eche three vnces: the iuyce of wylde Mallowes, the iuyce of artemiſia, of eche foure vnces, of ſkaldyng water ſixe vnces, ſeeth al together, vntill the water be conſumed: than put to it M
                           •
                        lanthinum, Maſtick, Granum Paradiſil Galingale, of eche a Dragme and a halfe: of Peper, Cloues, Nutmegge, Lignum aloes, of eche a Dragme. Make all this into a fyne pouder, and ſeeth it againe with a ſmall fyre, and make thereof an oyntment with a little waxe, and ſo annoynt the place where the griefe is, layinge vpon it cleane waſhed Wulle and warme. You ſhal ſee a merueylous operation.
               
               
                  A verye good receipt, whiche Pope cleme
                        •
                     t the ſeuenth tooke in his laſte ſyckennes.
                  TAke Maſticke, Frankenſence of the male kynde, Mace, of eche halfe a pounde, Galingale, Zedoaria, of eche foure vnces, Cloues, Synamome, Xilobalſa
                        
                           •
                        i, carpobalſami, of eche two vnces: of Ginger, Cardamony,



longe Pepper, blacke Pepper, of eche halfe an vnce Turbit, Agaricke, Rubarb
                        •
                     , of eche two Dragmes: the rootes of Endiue, rootes of Bugloſſe, and Borage, of eche two handefull: Betonye, Rue, the flowers of Sticados, Arabicke, Marioram, Sage, Roſemarye, of eche halfe a handfull: Let al be groſſely ſtamped and beaten together, and put into an hundred pounde of ſtronge whyte wyne, and let it reſt and remaine there three dayes together. And at the thre dayes ende preſſe it harde, and ſtrayne the wyne out, and put it incontinent into a Limbecke, for to diſtill out of it Aqua vite. This done put into the water of the firſt diſtillation a pounde of mannes bloode of the bodye of a very healthful and ſleſhie man, put it agayne to diſtill. Do ſo in diſtillyng it alwayes vntil nyne tymes. That done take an hundred leaues of Gold
                        •
                     foyle of the beſt and the fyneſt that can be had, fyftye leaues of Siluerfoyle very fyne, Jacynthes, Emeraudes, Rubies, Granades, of the two ſortes of Pearles, red Corall, red Roſes, of eche a Dragme and a halfe, of verye fyne Muſke, halfe a Dragme: Mingle all this together and make it all into a pouder, putting the ſayde pouder into the laſt water diſtilled, and let it lye in it. xxiiii. houres. That done, put all again into the Limbecke and diſtil it with a ſmall fyre: The which water being thus diſtilled the tenth time, you muſte put into ſome thicke violle and ſtoppe it wel, or els al the water woulde vaniſh away. It is merueylous good agaynſt al colde diſeaſes, either within or without the bodye, taking of it onely a Dragme, or foure droppes with a lytle whyte wyne. But if the diſeaſe be hote withoute an ague, as other ſome be by reaſon of ſome hote matter, geue the Pacient of the ſayde water mixte with water of Endiue, at euery tyme the payne taketh him. Neuertheleſſe yf you wyl ſee with your eyes the merueylous Myracle that this water doth, geue fyue or ſyxe vnces of it vnto any ſyckman which hath loſt al his ſtrength and force with a lytle wyne, ſodainly you ſhal ſee al his ſtrength come agayne to him. Alſo aſſure your ſelues that there is no



remedye more ſoueraigne agaynſt the plague, and ſo dayne death, than to drinke of it euery morning before you goe o
                        •
                     te of youre houſe fiue or ſire droppes with ſtronge wine, or with the water of Endiue: or elles to waſhe your noſtrels within and without, with the reſt of all your face with the ſame, or with a little wyne mixte with it, puttinge nothinge elles to it. I haue founde my ſelfe alwayes very well at all tymes of the plague by meanes of the ſame. Yea, namely it is good alſo for thoſe that haue the diſeaſe called apoplexia or fallinge ſicknes, if they waſhe their necke withall. This water is called Eliſir vitae benedicti.
               
               
                  A remedy agaynſt the laxe or flyx
                        •
                      come of choler.
                  TAke ſire vnces of y• ſucke or iuyce of Quinces: the iuyce of Endiue, the iuyce of Sorrell, of eche three vnces, Sorell ſeede, Plaintaine ſeede, of eche two Dragmes: red Coral, red Roſe ſeede, of eche a Dragme Plaintaine water foure vnces: ſeeth al together vntil 
                        •
                     he thirde parte of the water and iuyce be conſumed. Than ſtraine it preſſing it harde, making thereof a ſyrop with as muche fyne ſugre as ſhall ſuffice, whereof the Pacient ſhal take two vnces morning and euening two houres before he eate any thynge. This drinke is well tried, and very good.
               
               
                  Annoyntment verye good for the ſame.
                  TAke oyle Roſet made of Olyues not rype, oyle of Quinces, oyle of Myrtel of eche an vnce, red Roſes and redde Corall of eche a Dragme: Maſticke▪ Nutmegge, of eche halfe a Dragme, make that into pouder that maye be made, making thereof an oyntment ſoft with a li
                        •
                     le waxe, wherewith annoynt your ſtomacke and the lower part of your belly.
               
               
                  Remedies agaynſt the laxe diſenterycke.
                  TAke ſire Dragmes of My
                           •
                        abolaus citrinis burned, Plantaine ſeede, Sorrell ſeede, Endiue ſeede, and all



parched of eche three Dragmes: of the 
                        •
                     ower Cordiall flowers, beſide Uiolettes, of eche a handefull: ſeeth all in a ſufficient quantitie of water, wherein firſte ſome ſteele muſte be quenched, vntill the halfe be conſumed: Than ſtraine it, mixing with that which is ſtrained two Dragmes and a half of the beſt Rubarbe parched & of Pholonij per
                           ••
                        ci foure Scruples. This drinke is founde very good by experience.
               
               
                  Another drynke very good.
                  TAke two Dragmes of Frankenſence of the male kynde with as much Maſticke: a Dragme of boale Armenick red Corall, Hartes horne burned, of eche halfe a Dragme: of the ſtone called the bloodſtone burned two Scruples: Make al into a fine pouder and ſteepe it in red wyne y• bindeth, and ſo geue the ſycke man a Dragme and a half of it whan he goth to bedde.
               
               
                  Another remedye.
                  TO eate in this bloodye flyre euerye mornynge faſtinge halfe a Dragme of Rubarbe parched, is a thing wel tried and very acceptable.
               
               
                  Another drynke verye good in cac
                        •
                      the Pacient 
                        •
                     a
                        •
                     e therwyth anye greate doloure in hys bellye (as often tymes it happeneth) by reaſon of exulceration and 
                        •
                     nawynge of the guttes.
                  TAke thre vnces eyther of Goates mylke or ſhepes milke, wherein muſt firſt be quenched ſome redde hote ſteele, an vn
                        •
                     e and a halfe of the iuyce of Plantaine, Aromaticum roſatum a Dragme, myngle al together, and make a drinke for one tyme. Whereof geue the Pacient three dayes together: and the flyxe ſhall ſoone after ſeaſe.
               
               
                  Another remedye when the payne is great.
                  TAke Myrtel berries. ii. dragmes, Sorrel ſede, Plantain ſede, of eche, ii. dragmes: of frankenſence male



thre graynes, of newe yellow waxe two Dragmes: of Synamome two Scruples: put al this into the bellye of a Turtle doue pluckt, ſowyng her vp agayne: than roſte her with a lytle fyre, and let the Pacient eate of her three or fyue dayes together. Or if you wil make a Coulys of her: and it is certaine that he ſhalbe healed.
               
               
                  Suffumigations or ſmokynges for the ſame. The fyrſte.
                  LAye an vnce of Turpentyne vpon a plate of yron made hote in the fyre, and let the Pacient receyue morninge and euenynge the ſmoke at his foundement thorowe a cloſe ſtoole. And continuynge ſo three or foure dayes, there is no doubt but he ſhalbe cured.
               
               
                  The ſeconde.
                  STampe well twoo poonde of the dunge of a yonge aſſe, and drye it in an Ouen, and ſee y• it burne not. This done, take a parte of it & put it morninge and euenynge vpon hote coales vnder a cloſe ſtole: to the ende that the Pacient ſyttyng vpon it maye haue hys foundement ſmoked therewith. It is a remedy of great vertue agaynſt the bloodye flyre of yonge children, yf firſt they be purged with a litle Rubarbe.
               
               
                  Another remedy for the ſame.
                  SEeth a pounde of apiaſtrum in Engliſhe Baulme, together with a handefull of Taxus barba
                           •
                        us in red wine and ſtronge vineygre of eche ſufficiently, vntyll the thyrde part be conſumed. Than ſtrayne out the wyne, and the vinaigre, & byndng theſe herbes faſt in a bagge good and longe, laye it hote euenyng and mornynge vpon his foundement. And continuyng ſo, you ſhall haue a good ende of it.
               
               
                  An oyntment very good for the bloody flyxe.
                  TAke Trochyſkes or lytle balles of Carabe, lytle balles of Terra figillata, of eche thre Dragmes, Galliae muſ
                           •
                        at
                           •
                        , Galliae alefangine, of eche a Dragme and a half, red Coral, red Roſe ſeedes, Maſticke, Frankenſence,



of eche a Dragme. Let all this be made in pouder, and put in verye ſtronge red Uinaigre▪ xxiiii. houres together, and afterwade drie it by the fyre or in the Sunne. That done, make it all agayne into pouder, puttynge oyle of Quinces, oyle roſat rawe, or ſharpe, oyle of Maſtick of eche two vnces, with as muche whyte waxe as ſhall ſuffice. And with this annoynt the Pacientes bellye.
               
               
                  Remedyes agaynſt the ſwellyng and oppilation or ſtoppynge of the Splene.
                  TAke two vnces and a halfe of the iuyce of wylde-Mallowes, or marſhe Mallowes purified, two vnces of the iuyce of Calaminte, two Dragmes of Sene dried, and make thereof an Electuarye, miringe al this with as much as ſhall ſuffice of ſkommed Honnye, and giue of▪ it vnto the Pacient a ſponnefull, thre houres before his meales. It is a remedye merueylous good.
               
               
                  A vomentation or nouriſhynge by waſhynge for the ſame.
                  TAke of the rootes of wylde or marſhe Mallowes, & of Garden Mallowes, of eche two vnces, Senegrene ſeede, Lineſcede, flowers of Camomil, Melilote, of eche a handefull: Calamint, Bauline, cuſcuta, Pulegium, Anyce, carui, Fennell, of eche a handefull: ſeeth all this in a ſufficient quantitie of ſtronge whyte Uinaigre, and waſhe the place right againſt the Splene, euery daye bathing it, and the Pacient ſhalbe very wel at hys eaſe.
               
               
                  An oyntment agaynſt the ſame.
                  TAke oyle of Rue, oyle of Capers▪ oyle of Camomille, of eche a pounde: of the ſtrongeſt and beſt whyte wyne you can get halfe a pounde, rootes of wilde or marſhe Mallowes, rootes of other Mallowes rootes of Ferne, of eche halfe an vnce: Braye well the rootes, and ſeeth them with all the reſt, vntill there



remaine no more wyne: after that take it, and preſſe oute the Oyle, puttinge it to a pounde of the beſte and ſtrongeſt whyte Uinaigre with an vnce of panis porcinus wel ſtamped and purified, ſeething it wel againe, vntil the Uinaigre be conſumed, and than ſtraining it againe, preſſe it barde that the oyle maye come out.
                  Unto theſe oyles thus ſtrayned oute, you muſte put oppoponacis, Bdellij, Galbani, a
                           •
                        moniaci, of eche two dragmes: diſſolue thy gommes in ſtrong Uinaigre, miring them with the other thinges, and ſeethinge it ſlightlye once againe that the vertue of the gommes vaniſhe not awaye: make thereof a ſoft oyntment, with verye good yellowe ware, wherewith annoynte the place right againſt the Splene euery daye mornynge and euenyng.
               
               
                  Another fomentation or bathing for the ſame.
                  IT is a thing experimented that if you waſhe or bath onely the Splene with very ſtrong Uinaigre whereinPyrites, euery ſtone of the which there maye fyer be ſtroken. there hath bene quenched the ſtone called Marchaſita, whiche George Agricola calleth Pyrites, laying the clothe dipped in it, righte vpon the place of the Spiens. Doing thus you ſhall not ſeeke anye other remedie, for this wil abate all the ſwellyng.
               
               
                  Remedies agaynſt the payne, ſwellyng and ventoſitie of the Matrice.
                  SEeth togither rootes of matricaria an vnce, Dauci, half an vnce, whyte Honny two vnces, ſkommyng well the Honny vntil it be throughly ſodden: and ſtraynyng and preſſing it harde, myngle this Honnye with two vnces of the broth that a Henne hath bene ſodden in, and three vnces of the decoction of anyce, and giue the woman drnike of it tenne dayes together: ſhe ſhalbe healed. Wherefore kepe it well in mynde.
               
               
                  Another tryed of ſome women.
                  
                     TAke a dragme of Nutmegges, a dragme and a half of y• roots of Matricaria, a ſcruple of Spica, ſeeth al this in ſixe vnces of good whyte wyne, vntil the thirde parte be conſumed. Than ſtrayne it out, putting into that whiche ſhalbe ſtrayned two Dragmes of verye whyte ſugre, and ſo gyue of it vnto the woman, at the breake of the daye, and at all tymes when the payne ſhall take her.
               
               
                  Another remedy very good, and well knowen of women.
                  TAke a ſweete apple, and make him hollowe within, make a pouder of Nutmegges, Mace, Synamom, of eche half a dragme, Cloues half a ſcruple▪ put all this within the apple with a lytle Sugre, and roſte it vnder hote aſhes, and giue of it vnto the woman euer when the payne commeth vnto her. But yf the payne encreaſe ſo muche that her lyfe is in doubt, put to all this two graines of opium, and ſodaynely the payne wil depart.
               
               
                  Another.
                  TAke Calamint, Matricaria, flowers of Cammomille, of Sage, of Roſemary, of eche a handefull: Seeth all in lye, or aſhye water of a ſufficient quantitie, vntil the thyrde part be conſumed with the whych water waſhe the legges of the woman, from the knees to the feete.
               
               
                  A fomentation or nouryſhyng.
                  TAke a handfull of Artemiſia, with as much of the flowers of Camomille, Mynte, and Calamynte, make hote a tyle, and powre ſome good and odoriferous wyne vpon it, and after put alſo the herbes vpon it for to laye them ſo hote vpon the Matrice, at euerye tyme that the payne commeth. Neuertheles, take heede that you waſhe or bath her not, becauſe that all moyſture is euil for her.
               
               
                  A very good oyntment.
                  
                     MYre a pounde of the oyle of Cheiri with foure vnces of the oyle of Sureau, heate it and annoynte the vpper parte of the Matrice with it, dippinge ſome lynnen cloth in the oyle, and laying it hote vpon the Matrice. This alſo layed vpon a womans belly after this ſort when ſhe is in labour, will eaſe and mitigate her paine.
               
               
                  A plaiſter or cere clothe to laye vpon the Matrice yf the griefe be olde or inuerate.
                  TAke an vnce of dryed Matricaria, with as muche of the flowers of Cheiri, dried: half an vnce of Gallia muſcato. or els alefangine, if the woman be poore of Galbanum, Bdellium▪ Serapini, of eche two Dragmes: Olibani, Maſticke, of eche a Dragme and a halfe: Diſſolue theſe gommes in oyle of Cheiri, makinge into pouder the reſt that maye be made: and make thereof a playſter wyth a lytle pitche, waxe and oyle of Sefanni, ſpreadyng it vppon ſome leather, and layinge it vpon the place of the Matrice, and renewe it euery eyght dayes.
               
               
                  Remedyes to make a womans tyme to come that is let or hyndered by ſome cauſe.
                  TAke two vnces of the iuyce of Sauyne, and purifie it, mixing with it two dragmes of Synamome wel made into pouder: foure graynes of Saffron, two vnces of the water Radiſhe rootes diſtilled with a lytle Sugre, for two tymes: this prouoketh merueylouſly the flowers of a woman. Wherefore beware ye geue it not vnto a woman greate with chylde. For all that prouoketh her flowers, maketh her alſo to labour before her tyme.
               
               
                  Another remedye verye good alſo to cauſe a woman to brynge forth the chylde before the tyme, yf the woman be in daunger of it.
                  MYre two graynes of Saffron, and two dragmes of Sugre in foure vnces of Pymperuell water, making thereof a drinke, and giue it to the woman at twyſe, at the breake of the daye, and when ſhe



goeth to bedde.
               
               
                  A waſhyng very good for the ſame.
                  TAke Calamint, Pulegium, Sage, artemiſia, Roſemarie of eche a handefull, rootes of Iris or Gladiolus, the rootes of Walworte or Daneworte, rootes of Sureau, of eche half a handful: ſeeth all in good whyte wyne inough, vntil thre partes be conſumed. Wherewith waſhe the woman in the mornyng, and when ſhe goeth to bed, from the haunches downeward. Further more, the mornyng after ſhe is waſhed, you ſhall geue her to drinke a dragme of olde Triacle, three graynes of Saffron, and two vnces of the water of artemiſia, mixte together. This is ſo certayne, that if ſhe vſe it fyue tymes onely ſhe ſhal haue her flowers.
               
               
                  Agaynſt to much abundaunce of flowers.
                  MAke a verye fyne pouder of halfe an vnce of the inwarde ſkyn that couereth the kernels of wilde Fylberdes, giuing a dragme thereof vnto the woman, incontinent the to muche commyng ſhal ceaſe.
               
               
                  An oyntment agaynſt the ſame.
                  TAke the iuyce of Plantan, the iuyce of Solatrum, the iuyce of Rubarbe, of eche halfe an vnce, red Coral, Frankenſence of the male kynde, Maſtick, of eche a dragme and a halfe: Coriander prepared, ſeedes of redde Roſes, of eche two Scruples, ſeedes of whyte Iuſquiamum, the ryne of the rootes of Mandragora, of ech half a dragme: ſtrong red Uinaigre half an vnce, make in fyne pouder all that may be made, and mingle al together, with the whiche beinge luke warme, annoynt the ſoules of the womans feete euerye night whan ſhe goeth to bed, and you ſhal ſee a good & fortunat effect.
               
               
                  Againſt the prefocation or ſtranglyng of the matrice.
                  SEeth in ſtronge wyne the rootes of Gladiolus, the rootes of Galamint, the rootes of C
                        •
                     clamen, in Engliſhe rape Uiolet, of eche a handeful, vntil half the



wyne be conſumed: than ſtrayne them, and with that whiche is conſtrayned out waſhe the womans knees morninge and euening: for it is very good.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the ſame of what cauſe ſoeuer it come.
                  MYre a dragme of aſſa faetida, and halfe a Dragme of Daucus, with Honnye roſet, and make thereof fiue Pylles, and taking one of them euery mornyng, they are very good, as well to preſerue a woman from it as to heale her of it.
               
               
                  Another agaynſt the ſame.
                  TAke two ſcruples of the beſt Agaricke, two Dragmes of Turpentine, ſeedes of Daucus, and aſſa faetida, of eche halfe a ſcruple, mingle them and make lytle balles, of the which you ſhall geue the woman euery daye. For it is a thing very good to heale her, or els to kepe her from it.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the ſame.
                  TAke water diſtiled of the rootes of Daucus, of wylde Poppye fyue vnces, Honnye roſet an vnce and a half: mixe al together, and giue the woman drinke of it. For whether the payne be alreadye or is lyke to come, ſhe ſhalbe cured or preſerued from it.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the ſame.
                  TAke two dragmes of caſtoreum, a dragme of the ſame womans heare, mixt with a litle Roſen of a Pyne tree, and make thereof greate Pilles as bigge as Filberdes, with one of the whiche Pilles perfume her noſtrels, at the tyme of the prefocation or ſtranglinge of the Matrice, and incontinent ſhe ſhalbe eaſed.
               
               
                  Remedyes to be vſed when the Matrice commeth out of her naturall place, or falleth.
                  YOu ſhall mixe oyle of Maſticke with oyle of roſat, greene or raw of eche two vnces, then cupularum glaudium, the flowers of wylde Pomegranade tree, the



ryne of Pomegranades, Myrtelberries, of eche a ſcruple, of Frankenſence, maſtick, Acatia, Hypociſtidos half a dragme: mi
                        •
                     e them and make thereof a very fyne pouder. And then caſtyng it vpon the necke of the Matrice and dippe your fyngers in the oyle, and ſo put the matrice vpwarde with them.
               
               
                  A plaiſter verye good.
                  TAke Sorrell ſeede, the ſeede of Plantaine, and of Coriander prepared, of eche two dragmes: redde Corall, ſeedes of red Roſes of eche a dragme, Hypociſtidos, acacia, Frankenſence of eche a dragme and a half: Galles, the Pilles of Pomegranades, flowers of Pomegranads, of eche. ii. dragmes: beate al into a fine pouder, gathering together the pouder, wt the oyle of veriuyce roſat, & makinge thereof a plaiſter with waxe & pitche aſmuch as ſhal ſuffiſe, & ſpreade it vpō a peice of leather, a parte of the which you ſhall laye vpon the womans belly, right againſt the place of the matryce along vnto both her haunches. And this ſhall help her.
               
               
                  Remedies for the Matryce corrupted or apoſtumated. A playſter for to diſſolue it.
                  TAke the flowers of Camomille, melilot, Matricaria, the leaues of mallowes, the rootes of Uiolettes, Branckvrſyue, of eche a handefull: the rootes of wilde or marſhe mallowes cut very ſmall three vnces: ſeeth it al in a ſufficient quantitie of water vntil ye half be conſumed: then put to it a bandful of flowre of Lineſeede, with as much of flower of Synegrene, of Butter hennes greaſe, of eche as much as wyl greaſe ouer the plaiſter, the whiche you ſhall laye vpon the appoſtumate or corrupt place. Notwithſtandyng remember that to euery griefe of the Matrice (as we haue our ſelfe well tryed and proued) all moyſte fomentation or bathyng is hurtfull, and therefore beware in any ca
                        •
                     e you doe it not.
               
               
                  Another playſter for the ſame.
                  
                     TAke the iuyce of greene Camomil, and the iuyce Matricaria, of eche two vnces: mixe them together with a pounde of the plaiſter of Melilot, and laye it vpon the corrupt place: It is certayne that doinge ſo often tymes, it wyll waxe rype and rotte.
               
               
                  A playſter.
                  TAke ſyxe vnces of Dyaquilon withoute Gomme: two dragmes of Saffron, an vnce and a halfe of the iuyce of Matricaria: make thereof ceratum or plaiſter with waxe, and a lytle Roſen of a Pyne tree, and laye it vpon the place of the corruption: it is a ſinguler thynge.
               
               
                  Remedies againſt the vlcers or corrupt matter of the matrice.
                  TAke two vnces of the oyntment of common Tutia, diſſolue it well in eyghte vnces of Ewes mylke, and ſquirt it into the Matrice. This is very good.
               
               
                  A drynke for the ſame.
                  TAke ſyxe vnces of newe and freſhe mylke, myngle it with an vnce of Honny roſet, and geue it to the woman tenne dayes together, thre houres before ſhe eate any thyng. And this is alſo very good.
               
               
                  Remedies agaynſt the whyte flyxe of women.
                  TAke gomme Arabicke, Dragacante, Amylum of eche two dragmes, of Maſticke, a dragme: make all into a fyne pouder, and with a litle good Sugre diſſolue it in the iuyce of Quinces: Make thereof balles of two dragmes a peece: of the whiche geue one to the woman, euery mornyng three houres before ſhe breake her faſte, wherevpon incontinent let her drynke a draught of red ſtipticke wyne, doynge the the lyke at night before ſupper. And this ſhal helpe her ſo that in ſhort ſpace ſhe ſhalbe healed.
               
               
                  
                  Another agaynſt the ſame.
                  TAke the yelke of two egges rawe and new layed, Frankenſence of the male kynde, boale Armenick Terra ſigillata of eche halfe a dragme, make into pouder, that which may be made, minglinge all together, and geue to the ſicke woman: a mouthfull of it euerye morninge, ſixe houres at the leaſt before ſhe eate anye thyng. This remedye is ſo excellent that I haue cured manye with it.
               
               
                  A drynke.
                  TAke foure vnces of red ſtiptick and byndyng wine wherein you muſt often tymes quenche firſt ſome hote Steele, gomme Arabick, Dragacante, of eche halfe a dragme, mingle it together and make a drynke of it: Whereof you ſhal geue the woman fiftene dayes together earthly in the morning: and there is no doubt but ſhe ſhalbe healed.
               
               
                  A pouder agaynſt the ſame.
                  MYxe halfe an vnce of Date ſtones well beaten in to pouder with a dragme of Dragons bloode in red wyne, and geue the woman one Dragme of it at the breake of the day, and another when ſhe goth to bedde, and ſhe ſhalbe healed.
               
               
                  Remedies agaynſt pyſſyng hore. A Syrop.
                  TAke Syrop of Uioletts, and of Nenuphar, of eche an vnce, mingling with it Plantaine water, Porcelaine, of common colde ſeedes, of eche an vnce. This Syrop digeſteth the collericke matter, and taketh awaye the bytyng humours that cauſe the heate in piſſynge.
               
               
                  A drynke agaynſt the ſame, to take three houres before dynner and at noone.
                  
                     MIxe foure vnces of the water of Mallowes with two vnces of Syrop violet. Drinke this continually ſeuen dayes: and at the eyght day mixe with it an vnce of lenytife Diaſebeſtes, with a dragme and a half of Diaprunis laratyue, & make thereof a drinke with the water of the decoction pectorall, the whiche you ſhal geue to the Pacient.
               
               
                  Agaynſt Gon
                        •
                     rhaea, which is when a mans ſcede goth from hym vnwittynglye.
                  TAke foure vnces of Ewes milke, & mixt it with. ii. dragmes of Hares hear burned and wel made into pouder: geue the Pacient drinke of it twiſe a daye morning and euening two houres before he eate.
               
               
                  An oyntment agaynſt the ſame.
                  TAke two vnces of Olibani, acacia, and Hypociſtidos, of eche two dragmes, of Galles a dragme, Labdany, halfe a dragme: oyle of Maſticke, oyle of Spike, oyle of Myrtle, of eche halfe an vnce: Make that into a fine pouder that can be made pouder, and make therof a ſofte oyntment with a ſufficient quantitte of waxe, putting to it at the ende halfe a ſcruple of Camphyre, with this oyntment annoynt his raynes and the chine of the backe, his flankes and the place aboute the priuie membres, euening and morninge.
               
               
                  Another remedye merueylous good.
                  TAke half an vnce of Tutia, prepared, Sarcocolla, waſhed aloes hepaticum, Sugre candie, of eche thre dragmes: mingle it and make it into a fine pouder, whereof diſſolue one dragme in womans milke, and therewith ſquirt the mans yard a good way in, fyue or ſixe tymes a day, and he ſhal incontinent be healed. But if there be any vlceration he ſhal alſo ſoone be ridde of it.
               
               
                  Remedies for them that piſſe bloode.
                  TAke water of Plantain, of nightſhade in Latin Solanum, Sorrell, Endiue, Wormewod, of eche foure



vnces, whyte Sandall and red, Been whyte and red, of red Roſes, of eche a dragme and a half, Spondium two dragmes, of Spica tenne graines: of the beſt Uinaigre thre vnces: make that into fine pouder whiche maye be made, and make thereof Epithema for the lyuer.
               
               
                  An oyntment for the ſame.
                  TAke the iuyce of Plantain, of nightſhade, of Sorrell, of eche an vnce, oyle roſet, oyle of Myrtel, of eche halfe an vnce, Hypociſtidos, red Coral of eche a dragme: make that into pouder that is to be made, and make of it an oyntment very ſoft with a litle waxe and annoyntinge the raines of the Pacient, from the haunche vnto the place about the priuie members, and to the roote of his yarde. And he ſhalbe wel eaſed.
               
               
                  A playſter for the ſame.
                  TAke Plantain ſeede, Sorrel ſeede, Purcelin ſeede, of eche two dragmes, gomme Arabicke, Dragacante, of eche a dragme and a halfe, Hypociſtidos, acacia, bole Armenicke, ſylke burned, of eche a dragme, Terra ſigillata. Hares heare burned of ech a dragme: make al together in a fine ſmal pouder, and make thereof a plaiſter with oyle roſat greene or rawe, waxe & pitche, as muche as ſhall ſuffice: the whiche you ſhal lay vpon the raynes of the Pacient. It is proued and tryed to be verye good.
               
               
                  Remedyes agaynſt the grauell.
                  IT is a thyng certaine, that if the Pacient ſwallowe downe thre dragmes of newe Caſſa euery day before dynner, he ſhal neuer haue the grauell.
               
               
                  Another.
                  TAke the ſtone that is found in the heads of Crabs half an vnce: burne it, and make it in pouder very fyne, mixing the pouder with the water of Saxifrage, and ſo geue it to the Pacient.
               
               
                  Another remedy wel tryed, whereby I haue often tymes founde my ſelfe eaſed.
                  
                     TAke oyle of Scorpions made of oyle of bitter Almondes, Turpentine, freſhe Butter of eche half a pounde, of Saffron a Scruple: beate all this in ſome veſſell on the fyre, and with a linnen cloth bathe and waſhe often tymes a daye from the heighte of the haunches, vnto the roote or beginninge of the priuie members.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the ſame.
                  DIſſolue thre dragmes of he Goates bloode prepared in ſufficient quantitie of Broo
                        •
                     e flowers water diſtilled, and geue it to the Pacient.
               
               
                  Another verye good.
                  MIre an vnce of the iuyce of grene Lemmons with three vnces of Malmeſey, and gene it the Pacient to drynke all at one tyme, when he 
                        •
                     eeleth hys griefe.
               
               
                  Receiptes to haſten the chylde byrth, and to mitigate the payne of the trauayle and labour.
                  TAke Genyper berries, and bay Berries of eche ſeuen: great Synamome halfe a dragme, whole Synamom a dragme. Put al together in a turtle Doues belly that is fat and 
                        ••
                     eſhye, and put her on a Spyt and roſte her, and baſte her with Hennes greaſe, the which you ſhal geue to the woman euerye daye for her ſupper. It is a thing as notable as any other can be. Yet in the meane tyme you muſt note, that none of theſe receipts muſte be geuen to a woman great wyth childe, vnleſſe ſhe haue paſſed the moone of the nynth moneth that ſhe was with chylde.
               
               
                  Another.
                  TAke freſhe Butter waſhed in Uiolet water three vnces, mucilago of Cabbage two vnces, mucilago of wylde or marche Mallowes, mucilago of Figges of eche halte an vnce, and mixe it together.



And if the woman be nigh her tyme, let her put euerye daye into the entry of her Matrice, a cloute wete and dipt in this lycour, and ſhe ſhall bryng forth her childe without great trauaile and difficultie.
               
               
                  Another.
                  TAke ſyxe pounde of good whyte wyne, Calamint, Sage, Roſemary, of ech half a hādful: ſeeth al together vntill the fourth part of the wyne be conſumed: with the which the woman drawing nigh to her tyme ſhall waſhe her legges, once a daye eyther morninge or euenynge.
               
               
                  Another.
                  TAke an vnce of the pilling of Radiſhe rootes with as muche Mercurie, thre graynes of Saffron, a dragme of groſſe Synamome wel beaten into pouder, two dragmes of the iuyce of Sauyne. Mingle and ſtampe wel altogether, byndyng it in ſome fyne lynen cloth vpon the necke of the Matrice. If the woman labour in great daunger, ſhe ſhall ſodeynly be delyuered.
               
               
                  Another remedye verye good, but yet ſuch one that may not be geuen but in great neceſsitie, or when the childe is dead within her bellye.
                  MIxe together two vnces of the iuyce of Sauyne, a dragme of Boras mynerall well made in pouder, and an vnce of odoriferous whyte wyne, and geue it the woman to drinke, and the effect wyl ſoone folowe.
               
               
                  Remedyes when a man pyſſeth agaynſt hys wyll.
                  IT is a thynge verye good and tryed, to geue euerye mornynge to the Patient a Cytryn myrab
                        •
                     lan well conſerued.
               
               
                  Another for the ſame.
                  Take Plantaine water, 
                        ••••
                      water▪ Sorrell water, nyght ſhade water, of 
                        ••••
                      halfe a 
                        〈…〉
                     
                     wodde



water foure vnces, kyndes o
                        •
                      
                     Cero
                           •••
                        ia ſandalia an vnce: Spondij, two dragmes▪ red Coral, red Roſe ſeedes, Plantain ſeedes, of eche two dragmes, of Spike tenne graines, of very good Uinaigre thre vnces: mire altogether, and with a whyte linnen cloth dipped therein and well cleanſed, waſhe and bathe the Lyuer with it and the raines of the backe. That done, take oyle Roſet, oyle of Myrtel, oyle of Quinces of eche an vnce. Make into pouder that may be made, and make thereof an oyntment very ſofte with a lytle waxe, annoyntynge incontinent the Pacients raynes of the backe and hys bellye.
               
               
                  Remedies agaynſt the ſtone in the bladder.
                  TAke Liton tripon, thre dragmes, ten bitter Almondes wt aſmuch of y• kernells of Peches: braye all thys well together, and make thereof litle balles wyth Sugre, the which you ſhal geue to the Pacient euerye moneth ten dayes together, at the breake of the daye, 
                        •
                     lepy
                        •
                     ge a lytle vpon it, and you ſhall ſee a good ende and iſſue of it.
               
               
                  A remedy and preſeruatiue agaynſt the ſame.
                  TAke foure vnces of Turpentine, and burne it vpon ſome plate of Iron red whote, vntil it maye be made into pouder: of the whiche pouder, take two dragmes, water of Sa
                        •
                     ifrage foure vnces, mingling al together, make thereof a drinke, which you ſhall geue the Pacient twiſe a weke, at the breake of the day continuyng ſo two monethes together. If he haue not yet the ſtone, he ſhall without doubt be preſerued from it: but if he haue it, he ſhal alſo be healed of it.
               
               
                  Another for the ſame.
                  TAke ſi
                        •
                     re Dragmes of Turpentine ten tymes waſhed in water, and make thereof lytle balles called Bol
                        •
                     , with the iuyce of Saxifrage, and a lytle Sugre, and geue it to the Pacient as is aforeſayde.
               
               
                  
                  Remedyes for to heale the Emerhodes or Pyles. A very excellent oyntment.
                  THe body beyng purged take oyle Uiolet waſhed in water of Uioletts, and freſhe butter waſhed, of eche an vnce: make there of a ſofte oyntment with the yelke of an Egge, half an vnce of oyle of Lineſeede, and aſmuch waxe as ſhal ſuffice: annoint the Emorrhodes or Pyles with it twiſe or thryſe a day There is no ſuch remedy as this is, when women lye in childe bed becauſe of the retention of their flowers thei are often tymes, yea almoſte dayly moleſted wyth theſe Emorrhodes or Pyles very ſoore.
               
               
                  A playſter agaynſt the ſame.
                  TAke of the cromme of bran bread a pound, of ewes mylke, or cowe milke, or elles goates milke, two pounde: Seeth all together vntil two or three partes be conſumed: than put to it two vnces of the greaſe taken of the chyne of a goate, and an vnce of the pouder of grounde wormes, mingling al together, and ſo lay it whote vpon his foundement.
               
               
                  An exce
                        •
                     lent and very good hote bath or baine for the ſame.
                  YOu ſhal take the leaues of Mallowes rootes and al the rootes of wilde or marſhe Mallowes, of holy
                        •
                      Hocke, Uiolets, Cabbage, the flowers of Taxus barbatus, Camomille, Melilot, Syngrene, Lyneſeede▪ of eche a handeful and a half: ſeeth al in a ſufficient quan titie of water of the riuer, or ſome other freſhe water, vntil halfe be cōſumed: than powre it whote into ſome tubbe, cauſing the Pacient to ſit in it twyſe a daye, in the morning and at night, the ſpace of an houre.
               
               
                  Another remedye of verye great vertue.
                  TAke. ii. vnces of the iuyce of leckes, an vnce of the iuyce of Perſly, butter made of cow milke, walnut oyle▪ oyle of y• decoctiō of ca
                           •
                        aputia, of eche an vnce & a



halfe, oyle of Radiſhe rootes an vnce, of the ſuet that is about the kydneys of a Goat an vnce and a halfe: let all be well ſturred and brayed in a morter. This being hote, yf you laye it with fat well vpon and aboute the Emorhodes twyſe a day, vſyng ſo thirtie dayes long, I haue proued the remedie to be of great efficatie and vertue, that withoute doubt I dare aſſure the Pacient of heath.
               
               
                  Remedyes agaynſt the ſwellyng of the coddes.
                  TAke oyle of whyte Lylyes, oyle of Roſes complete of eche two vnces, of the greaſe that is waſhed of from newe ſhorne Wulle an vnce and a halfe, wete ſome fattye Wulle in it, and laye it whote vpon his Coddes: and then wil the ſwellyng go awaye with the payne.
               
               
                  Another agaynſt harde ſwellynge.
                  TAke Reſyns dried and carnelles pluckte out three vnces, Barley flower two vnces, as muche of the flower of whyte Cyche peaſon, half an vnce of the flower of Syngrene, as muche of the flower of Lyneſede, an vnce and a halfe of Honnye: mingle all wel together, ſtampynge it in a morter, and laye it whote vpon hys Coddes.
               
               
                  A good playſter for the ſame.
                  TAke gomme Arabicke, Dragacante, of eche two dragmes, Galbanum, Armoniacke, of eche a dragme and a halfe, Beane flower and the flower of whyte Cyche peaſon, of eche an vnce: Diſſolue the gommes in oyle of ſwete Almondes, and a lytle Uinegre, then mire all well together, and make thereof a plaiſter with Pitche & Waxe, as much as ſhall ſuffice.
               
               
                  An oyntment agaynſt the ſame.
                  TAke oyle of whyte Lylyes, and oyle of Camomille, of eche an vnce, of Comyn two dragmes, Labdany,



Galbany, of eche an vnce: Diſſolue the Gommes in ſtronge Uinaigre, and make in pouder that whiche is to be made: And make of this a ſoft oyntment, with a lytle Waxe, wherein wete ſome newe ſhorne and vnwaſhed Wulle, and laye it vpon hys Coddes.
               
               
                  A playſter.
                  SEeth a poūde of white Cyche peaſon in good white wyne, vntyl they be thorowly ſodden: than ſtampe them wel in a morter, puttynge to them two vnces of Camomille flower, a dragme of Saffron, two vnces of oyle of whyte Lylyes: mixe al together, and lay it whote vpon his Coddes, leauynge the playſter vpon them nyght and daye.
               
               
                  Remedyes agaynſt the ſciatica.
                  TAke the Bloſſoms or flowers of Camomille, Meliote, Syngreene, Dill, Lyneſeede, of eche two handfulles: Wormewodde, Mynte, Pennyriall, Calamynt, Southernewod, the flowers of Sticados arabick, Bytonye, Maioram, the herbe Paraly ſis, Sage, Roſemarye, Germander, of eche a handful and a halfe, ſeeth all this in two hundred pounde of cleare condyte water, vntil the thyrde part be conſumed: than ſtrayne it, and ſeeth it agayne wel, putting to it half a pounde of quicke Brimſtone, foure vnces of Saltpeter, prepared, and thre vnces of ſait Gemma: ſeeth them agayne and ſtrayne them: and than kepe that whiche is ſtrayned for your vſe. The ſycke man ſhall euerye mornyng bathe him ſelfe the ſpace of eyghte dayes together, tarying in it an houre wel couered, the head only bare. The houre paſte, commyng out of the bathe, and al his body wel dryed and wyped, let hym go into his warme bed, and anone after let him take a dragme of greate Triacle, mixte with an vnce and a halfe of Sugre roſet, and ſlepe therevpon two houres, and in the meane tyme beyng well couered let him ſwete, and thoſe that kepe him, let them wy
                        •
                     e him and drye him well, and by and by after they ſhall annoynt the place where the



paine holdeth him, that is, al the legge frō the haunch or huckle bone, with the oyntment Marciaton vnguentum agrippae, vnguentum of aragon, of eche an vnce mixed together. Continuynge than all in this order, and as I haue ſayd eyght dayes, I dare aſſure ye pacient health.
               
               
                  Remedies againſt inflamations of bloode, which groweth into an impoſtume in ſome parte of the bodye or members, called phelgmone. A playſter to rype and rotte the impoſtume.
                  TAke a pounde of Cow milke that was neuer fleeted: a pound & a half of bread wel crommed ſmall: three vnces of the iuyce of Cabbage, halfe a dragme of Saffron, thre vnces of the oyle of whyte Lilies mixe all together, and laye it hote vpon the ſore place.
               
               
                  Another for the ſame.
                  TAke thre vnces of Diaquilum without gommes, the iuyce of cabbage an vnce and a halfe, of Saffron a dragme: make hereof a good and fat oyntment and thick wt yellow waxe as much as ſhal neede: the which being ſpred vpon leather, the Pacient ſhal weare a day or two continually, and he ſhal finde him ſelfe wel.
               
               
                  Another to rotte or rype incontinent.
                  CHawe wel faſting half a pound of whete, and temper it well with a greate deale of ſpettell: take alſo two vnces of oyle roſet complete, and a dragme of Saffron, mingling all together, and laye it vpon the ſoore place, renuyng it often tymes. The ſignes of the rypenes of it are theſe, when it is ſoft, mouing vp and downe lyke a waue of water, when it greueth the Pacient no more, when the feuer ceaſeth and continueth no more. The impoſtume beinge thus broughte to a ripenes, prepare your ſelfe to launce or perce it. But if the Pacient be afrayed of y• yron or fier, breake it with this that foloweth: take two vnces of Diaquilum ſimple,



an vnce of leuen, half an vnce of oyle of ſwete Almondes: mixe all, and ſpreade it vpon a peece of leather, or cloute, putting in the middes of it a dragme of Pygeons donge made in pouder, and ſo lay it vpon the place where the breaking of the ſoore ſhalbe moſt commodious. You maye alſo take halfe an vnce of leuen, a Dragme of common Salte, two Dragmes of the beſt Uinaigre, foure ſcruples of the pouder of Cantarides, mixe all together, & bray it wel in a morter, vntil it be turned into a paſt or do we as it were: of the which you ſhal put to it halfe a dragme, or according to the quantitie of the matter that muſte come out, couering that againe with the Ceratum or plaiſter afore ſayde.
                  The impoſtume being broken, and wel made cleane, if you feare that there wyll come muche bloode againe, take incontinent the yelkes of two Egges, two Dragmes of Salte, a dragme of bole Armenick, and ſteepe or dippe certain peeces of towe in it, and lay them vpō the place where it is broken, and let them lye foure and twentie houres together.
               
               
                  Agaynſt a Ryngworme or Tetter, that runneth all ouer a mans face, or agaynſt the diſeaſe that is called Eryſipilas or Lychen, of ſome Mentagra, the Frenche men call it feu volage, as it were a runnynge fyer.
                  THE remedye is good to myngle at the begynnynge the iuyce of Plantaine, Marygoldes, Solatrum, barba Iouis, in Englyſhe Syngreene, of eche ſyxe vnces, wyth three vnces of Roſe water, and wetynge certayne cloutes in it, laye them vpon the ſoore or King worme. Yet you muſte take heede that ye take awaye the cloutes, as ſoone as they beginne to waxe whote, to the ende that the heate▪retournynge from the lynnen cloutes to the ſoore, doe not encreaſe the payne, or elles that the lynnen clothes beyng dryed with the heate doe not cleaue to the ſkynne and plucke it with them.
                  
                     For if it ſhould be ſo, there would be daunger in it becauſe of the vlcers or ſcabbes that woulde come of it.
               
               
                  Another remedye very good to heale the ſame, when it doth but begynne or increaſe.
                  TAke Lytarge of Siluer, ſi
                        •
                     e vnces, the iuyce of Plantaines three vnces, oyle roſet two vnces, of the beſt Uinaigre an vnce, mixe and braye all this wel in a morter of Lead vntill it be lyke an oyntment of the colour of Lead, of the whiche beinge ſpred vpon ſome lynnen cloth you ſhal lay ſome vpon the ſoore, renuyng it euening and morning, and looking to it diligently vntil you be ſure of the ſtate of it and of the increaſe. Whan it beginneth to declyne (whiche thinge you ſhall knowe becauſe it will chaunge from a whyte colour vnto a red) take heede you laye no colde thynge vnto it: for it maye be that you maye make ſome dead fleſhe red and darke come or growe in it, and ſo there ſhoulde be greate daunger, that by reaſon of the colde thinges the Kingworme or 
                        •
                     etter ſhould tourne into an Heſtiomem. But my counſell is to take the flowers of Camomille, Melilot, Syngreene, of eche a handfull; and to ſeeth the ſame in ſufficient water vntil there remaine but the halfe. Than to ſtrayne it, and to waſhe euery day the place with a ſponge wette in it: and afterwarde to waſhe it with ſome-whote whyte wyne. For that is it that keepeth the member from mortifying in ſuch a diſeaſe. If the thyng be growen to an vlcer, either by the foly of the Phiſition, or els by the euill gouernement of the Pacient, or by the euill matter whiche coulde not be amended by medecines, take lytarge of ſiluer three vnces, the oyntment of Populeon, Ceruſe waſhed, Infrigidantis Galeni; of eche halfe an vnce, oyle roſet complet an vnce. Mixe al together and bray it wel in a morter, vntil it be as it were an oyntment, which you ſhall vſe vntill the diſeaſe be conſolydate and ſounde.
               
               
                  
                  Agaynſt 
                        ••
                     omatycke ſvvellynge.
                  IF this infirmitie be in the legge, take twenty pound of water made with Aſhes, flowers of Camomille, rootes of Walwort or Daneworte, of eche a handefull, common Salte halfe a pounde, of the beſt whyte Uinaigre foure vnces, mixe and ſeeth all together vntill the halfe be conſumed, than ſtraine it, and waſhe the legge with it.
               
               
                  Remedyes for the ſcabbes▪ An oyntment very good for to annoynt yonge chyldren who becauſe of theyr tendernes, can not endure a purgation.
                  TAke foure vnces of oyle roſet, a dragme and a halfe of common Sa
                        •
                     t, an vnce of freſhe Butter waſhed and ſo bray and ſturre al well together, vntil it become vnto a ſoft oyntment.
               
               
                  Another oyntment verye good for lytle chyldren▪ and olde folke, to vſe before and after a purgation.
                  TAke Turpentine waſhed in Roſe water foure vnces, of y• iuyce of Lemons an vnce & a half, of freſh Butter an vnce, the yelke of one Egge, of common ſalte two dragmes▪ of oyle ro
                        •
                     et two vnces, myxe and ſturre together all a greate whyle in a morter, vntill it become an oyntment. With the which by a fyre when he goeth to bedde annoynte the ſcabbye parte of the bodye, or ells all the bodye: but as thyn as may be.
               
               
                  Another remedye.
                  TAke the water of Lapatium 
                           ••
                        utum, diſtilled two poūd the iuyce of Plantaine foure vnces, Roſe water thre vnces, the iuyce of Lemmons two vnces, Litarge ſixe vnces, Ceruſe halfe an vnce, quicke Brymſtone three dragmes, make a very ſmall pouder of that whiche maye be made pouder, and mingle it with the ſayde waters, letting all ſtande. xxiiii. houres longe. That done, put all in a Lymbeck, and diſtill it with a



ſmall fier. This water ſerueth not onely for to heale the common ſcabbe: but alſo to make the cruſtes of old vlcers and ſcabbes and of the pockes to fall of, & to take cleane awaye the cicatrice or ſcabbe thereof.
               
               
                  A bayne or bathe for the ſame.
                  TAke the leaues of Lapatium acutum, the leaues of 
                        •
                     umitorye, the leaues of Mallowes with the rootes, leaues of Borage of eche three handefull, of bran bounde in ſome cloth two handefull, of rye three handful: ſeeth al this in ſufficient water vntil the third part be conſumed, then ſtraine all, and whyle the Pacient is annoyntynge let him bath all his bodye in the ſame baine in the breake of the daye, and withoute taryinge any longe time, let him go into his warme bedde, and there let him ſlepe and ſweate.
               
               
                  Againſt the ſcurfe or leprie, called in Latin pſora.
                  AFter a purgation, I commend much the annoynting at night when he goeth to bed, all the partes of the body infected with this diſeaſe, with oyle of Tartre or of Lees of wyne, and three vnces of verye ſtronge whyte wyn
                        •
                     .
               
               
                  A remedye agaynſt pu
                        ••
                     es, bladders, blyſters, or wheles and agaynſt the ſmall pockes. An oyntment.
                  TAke an vnce of Peche karnels burned and made into a pouder, the iuyce of Plantaine and of Syngreene, of eche halfe an vnce, Ceruſe or Lead waſhed a dragme and a halfe: make of this a ſofte oyntment as muche as ſhal ſerue you.
               
               
                  Another remedye well tryed.
                  
                     TAke two dragmes of Camphyre, an vnce of Ceruſe waſhed, half a pounde of red Ci
                        ••
                     es, a pound of the inner parte of Melons withoute the pilles, ten Swallowes egges, two dragmes of Pearles, thre dragmes of the ſeedes of Xilon or Gp
                           •
                        sipium, the tree that beareth Cotton, two dragmes of Salte foure vnces of the iuyce of Lemons, half an vnce of whyte wyne lees: make that in pouder that ought to be, and put al together in ten pounde of water of Lapatium acutum diſtilled, leauing it ſo two dayes and two nightes. This done, diſtillall together in a Limbecke, with the which water ſo diſtilled, the Pacient ſhal waſhe his face three or foure tymes a daye. It hath been proued very good.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the ſtronge cogh of yonge chyldren.
                  SEeth in wyne ſome 
                        •
                     sope and ſome S
                           •
                        rpellum, or Sauorye, or elles ſteepe ſome Jeniper berries in wyne, and giue the child to drinke of which you will.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the ſtynkyng ſvveate.
                  TO thoſe that ſo ſweate, make a clothe ſteeped in wyne wherein Myrtle leaues or the herbe it ſelfe, or els his fruit hath been ſodden.
               
               
                  Againſt the payne of the eyes.
                  TAke Mallowes, Uiolets that grow in Lent, topp
                        •
                      of blacke berry trees, dried Roſes, Ueruine, Willowe or Oſier that groweth on the 
                        •
                     illes, waſhe your eyes with theſe at night, and make a plaiſter of the herbes with the yelke of an Egge, and laye it vpon your eyes.
               
               
                  For a whyte ſpotte in the eyes.
                  BUrne cockle ſhels of the ſea, and Olibanum, aſmuch of the one as of the other: make them into a pouder wt cuttle bones burned, and laye that vpon your eyes twyſe or thriſe a weeke.
               
               
                  Againſt the difficultie of bringing forth child, and the retention of the ſkynne that the childe is wrapped in, called in Latine Secundina or Secundae.
                  
                     TAke the rootes of Parſlye, and leaues of Leekes, wringe the iuyce oute, and mingle it with a lytle oyle, and geue it the woman to drynke, puttynge a lytle Uinegre into her Matrice, and ſhe ſhall incontinently be deliuered with gods helpe.
               
               
                  A remedye when the foundement commeth out.
                  FIrſt waſhe or bathe verye well the foundement (be it either of a man or of a woman) with the decoction of wyne and Worme wodde ſodden together, and annoynt it rounde aboute with ſome reſtrayntiue oyntment. After this ſtrawe vppon it Aſhes made of Willowe and of hys rootes, and of the finne bones of ſome fyſhe ſalted, and put in the foundement agayne with ſome linnen cloth: and doyng thus twiſe or thriſe a daye, he ſhall fynde him ſelfe very well.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the payne of the guttes.
                  SEeth in water ſome nightſhade with aſhes, and lay it vpon the place where the paine is. For this alſo is good rawe Siſamum, ſodden with his ſeedes, and layed vpon the painefull place.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the difficultie in makynge water, ſauynge for that whiche commeth of the ſtone. For Men.
                  SEeth water Creſſes, and make thereof Ca
                           •
                        aplaſma a plaiſter, and laye it vpon the place about the priuie members, cauſyng ye man to ſit in the decoctiō of it.
               
               
                  For Women.
                  MAke them an vnderſmoking thorow a cloſe ſtoole with wylde Minte, with Neppe or Catte minte, and with Pulliole or Pulegium. We make ſometime as well for the man as for the woman, an eſtewe or baine wherein hath been ſodden ſome Jeniper, Neppe



                     Pulica
                           •
                        ia, in Engliſh flea worte, wylde Mynte, Bay leaues, Pulegium, Wormewod and Tanſey, geuinge toBenedicta ſimplex, is an electuarie, verye medecinable for the goute. the Pacient being in this bayne, Benedietam ſimplicem. But if the ſtone be the cauſe, then ſeeth in water Saxifrage with the rootes of Sanguinaria, or decoction vntill halfe of the water be conſumed, the whiche geue vnto the Pacient: but if he deſyre wyne, geue it him with ſome of this water in it, continuynge ſo foure or fiue dayes, and twyſe or thryſe a daye. If he piſſe not for all this, it is a ſigne that the ſtone is thorowlye growen and hardened. But than if it ſticke in the bladder, take Mallowes, Criſta marina, in Engliſhe Sampere, lytle wylde Cabbages, Saxifrage, Pellitorye of the walle, water Creſſes, Ameos, and the ſeedes of Nettels, ſeeth all this in lycour, whereof let the thyrde part be wine, the other parte oyle and the fourth parte ſalte ſea water, bathinge and waſhinge well with this decoction the partes aboute his priuie members, and laying vpon them the herbes.
               
               
                  Agaynſt crabbelyce.
                  AGainſt the Crabbelyce that breede aboute the priuie members and vnder the arme pyttes, annoynt thoſe places with aſhes layed in oyle: but againſt thoſe that ſticke in the eye browes, take an vnce of Aloes, Ceruſe, Olibanum, of eche fiue vnces: make all into pouder, and make of it an oyntment with larde cut ſmall as muche as ſhal ſuffice.
               
               
                  Agaynſt a Cankar.
                  NOte that the leaues of wylde Juie ſodden in wyne, and layed to it are very good for it.
               
               
                  Againſt the litle wormes and itching of the hands or body.
                  AGainſt the itche and wormes in what ſoeuer part of the bodye that it be, but chieflye in the face and forehead, you muſt ſteepe weate in wyne with the



pouder of olibanum, and lay it vpon the place as it were a playſter.
               
               
                  Againſt the ſwelling of the coddes.
                  TAke Mallows, Wormwoode, Ueruene, biſmalua or march Mallows, tanſie, and two cabbedges, ſeeth all this in olde ſtrong wine, and bathing and waſhing them twiſe or thriſe a day. As for ye herbes, ſtampe them and ſeeth them in Honnye, laying them vpon the coddes with wyne.
               
               
                  For to make the wormes come out of the handes and feete.
                  TAke a hote tyle, and ſome veſſell ful of water, then put ſome ſeedes of Iuſquiamum vpon the red whote tyle, holding your handes or feete ouer the ſmoke of it, you ſhal ſee the wormes fall into the water lyke lytle heares. Another waye: Burne Ote ſtrawe into aſhes, & put it into water as hote as you maye endure it, holding your bandes and feete in it, and endurynge the heate vntill it waxe colde: than ſtraine and preſſe it ſo harde vntil there remaine no moore water, ſeperatyng it faire and ſoftly. You ſhall finde the wormes as it were litle threades, which the ſmoke of the Juſquiam hath drawen out. If the place doe itche, and is eaten with wormes, burne ſtrawe into aſhes, and toſſe it and mingle it in water as bote as you can endure it: put in your hande or foote that hath the wormes, and they wyll come oute. Than afterwarde heale the knawing as you do ſome other ſoore.
               
               
                  A remedye for the deafnes of the eares.
                  TAke the fatte or greaſe of eeles newe killed that ſwimmeth vpon the decoction of them, the iuyce of caprifolium, Barba Iouis▪
                      and a handfull of Antes or Piſmers egges, bray and ſtraine all, mixing it and ſething it with oyle. The decoction made, put to it ſome Uinaigre or wyne ſufficiently, that it may be the more penitratiue & perſing: this done, powre ſome of it into the eare that is not deffe, ſtopping the other that hath



the impediment, and lying vpon the good eare: and beware he go not the nexte daye into the winde: but let him kepe his houſe, lying all the daye longe ſometime on the good eare and ſometyme on the yll.
               
               
                  A remedye againſt fiſtuleys.
                  TAke the leaues of red Cabbages, and their ſeedes, the rootes of great r
                           •
                        bra tinc
                           •
                        orum of eche an equall quantitie, braye all and ſeeth it well vntill three partes be conſumed: than ſtraine it, putting to it ſome honnye. And ſeethinge it againe vntill it be thicke. Whereof you ſhall geue the Pacient two ſpones full, morninge and enenynge.
               
               
                  For the ſcabbes of the handes.
                  TAke Lapatium acutum, and fumitorie, making thereof as it were an oyntment with hogges or 
                        •
                     wines greaſe and Maye Butter, wherewith annoynte youre handes.
               
               
                  A water of a great and meruelous effect, for to keepe mans body e from many infirmities and diſeaſes.
                  TAke fonre pounde of diſtilled Aqua vite, of verye good wyne, two pound of ſalt burned, two pound of quenched Brimſtone, foure vnces of whyte Tartre, foure vnces of the wodde of a Filberd tree. iii. vnces of rocke ſalte. Let all this be brayed, ſyfted and mixed together, powring vpon the foreſayde Aqua v
                        •
                     
                     te, and putting it in a Limbecke to diſtill.
               
               
                  What operations come of ſuche diſtillations.
                  THe firſte diſtillation draweth vnto it the powres of all the ſpirites of man, that no venimons beſt can approche or come nighe him: with it is kepte fleſhe and fiſhe as with baulme, it healeth and cleanſeth lentils and other ſpottes of the face: it driueth away all maner of ſcabbes from the body, and cleanſeth watrynge eyes.
                  
                     The ſeconde driueth awaye impoſtumes, and other ſuperfluities of the bodye: it pulleth oute and healeth loſe teeth, and putteth, awaye all ſwellynge of the Lyuer.
                  The thyrde cleanſeth all ſpottes and ſcurfe, it healeth ſtinking of breathe, and purgeth all flegme of the ſtomacke, as meate not diſgeſted.
                  The fourth putteth oute of the bodye, all colde and congeled bloode.
                  The fyfte delyuereth the bodye from the fallynge ſyckenneſſe.
                  The ſixte dryueth away all languiſhe and infirmitie come of the goute.
                  The ſeuenth putteth the goute from the feete.
                  The eyght excelleth the Baulme, which▪ you ſhoulde keepe well.
                  The nynth, if you mixe with it, and diſſolue golde in it, is a preſeruatiue for the lyuer.
                  The tenth, if you put a droppe of it in any veſſell of golde full of wyne, a frothe and ſkumme will ſwimme vpon the wine whiche is verye golde in deede, ſo that what ſo euer you touche with it ſhalbe faire golde. Yet you muſte note that after euerye diſtillation you muſt ſtampe and ſyfte the leeſe as at the firſt tyme.
               
               
                  Another water or Balſamum almoſt for the ſame thinges.
                  TAKE a pounde of Turpentine thriſe diſtilled, a pounde of Aloes thriſe alſo diſtilled, a pounder of Amber rawe, Maſcatum brayed vpon a ſtone in maner of ſome liquide oyntment, putting to all this a lytle oyle, and ſo incorporating it and diſtilling it nine tymes. It is a Baulme that may wel be kepte, for it is ſo parfite that it abideth firſt all triall of fyer & water.
                  Secondly, it wyl pearce thorow the hande.
                  Thirdlye, in annoyntinge your face it kepeth your youthful colour.
                  Fourthly, it faſteneth and conſolidateth all inciſion or cuttinge.
                  
                     Fiftly, it purgeth merueylouſly the eyes.
                  Sirtly, annoynting all the bodye with it, it is ſayde that it ſhall neuer rotte or corrupte, nor euer▪ breede wormes. This hath Hermes the Philoſopher written and confirme it as moſt trewe, for as muche as I haue proued and tryed it.
               
               
                  A pouder very good to conſerue the ſyght.
                  TAke Betony, Rue, Selandine, Saxifrage, Leuiſtici. Pulegium, Annice, Synamome Euphraſia, in Engliſh eyebright, of eche a handful, Grani Paradiſi, Ginger, fennel, perſly, Iſope, Organny, Oſier of y• mountains of eche a dragme, Galingale an vnce, of Sugre an vnce Make all this into pouder, and eate of it euerye daye with your meate: for the ſighte is thereby preſerued. And if your ſight be periſhed or halfe gone, it wil heale it and recouer it perfitly againe. This pouder is found and thus ordeyned by maiſter Gerarde, which tryed it vpon him ſelfe: for he hauing vſed ſpectacles the ſpace of twelue yeres together, and yet ſcant coulde ſee with them, nor reade the greateſt letters that were (ſo much was his ſight periſhed) after he vſed this pouder but a whole Lent together, only in this ſort as I haue tolde you: he recouered ſo his ſighte agayne, that all the reſt of his life after, he conlde read the ſmalleſt letter that was, very perfitly.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the payne of the flankes or the plureſye.
                  TAke a wilde Bores tothe of the vpper Jawe, & the greateſt, and make thereof a pouder, whereof you ſhal giue the Pacient to drinke with a litle broth, and he ſhalbe cured.
               
               
                  Againſt quartayne agues.
                  TAke the greaſe or fatte that is vnder the manes of borſes, and ſeeth it in a newe earth pot: and when you feele the ague come, annoynte the chyne of your backe, & you ſhalbe healed in thre times ſo doing.
               
               
                  
                  To heale old woundes and cankers of the leggs.
                  TAke cuttyngs or ſhearings of ſhomakers leather, and ſeeth them, and the greaſe or fatte that you ſhall get of them, ſet it by it ſelfe: than take of the herbe that groweth at the foote or roote of Willowes the fineſt that is, and the moſſe that loketh lyke Ueluet: drie it well and make it into a pouder: and laye of it vpon the wounde, and with the ſayd greaſe annoint round about the wound, and he ſhal ſhortly be whole.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the ſcurfe.
                  TAke Barrowes greaſe what quantitie you wyll, and ſeeth it with a glaſſefull of wine, and halfe a pound of Beane flower in maner of an oyntment: than take vryne or piſſe, and heate it as whote as you can endure it, where with you ſhall waſhe your head, and than annoynt it with the ſayde greaſe, and it ſhal be whole within fiftene dayes.
               
               
                  Agaynſt ventoſitie, collicke, or payne of the matrice.
                  TAke a dragme of intrailes made in pouder, a dragme of Stecas, geue it the pacient to drinke in a newe layed egge, and ſhe ſhalbe healed.
               
               
                  For the hardnes or brawne of the feete.
                  DYppe your feete in whote piſſe, & whan the hardnes or braune is molified, take a launcet or 
                        •
                     yſſours, and launce it rounde about: and than by and by put ſome iuyce of Syngrene vpon it, and the nexte morowe it wyll be well.
               
               
                  To make very perfite Vinaigre.
                  TAke the cromme of a whote lofe newe drawen out of the Ouen, a glaſſe of ſtrong Uinaigre, wherein you ſhal put ſome Ginger, Pepper, Pyrethrum of Leuant, Calamus aromaticus, the which thinges being brayed and ſtamped together, you ſhal put into Uinaigre: Than take the cromme of a whote lofe, and put it ſo that it maye receyue to it all the foreſayde



thinges. Than drie the ſayde lofe in an Ouen, and make thereof a pouder, and put the ſayde pouder in a Hoggeſhead of wyne, and it will become verye perfite Uinaigre.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the fallyng ſyckennes.
                  TAke the Matrice of a Sowe, the whiche beinge made in pouder you ſhall geue to eate or to drinke vnto the Pacient, and as ſoone as he hath receyued it, the ſickennes wil remoue from the brayne, and ſprede into his fingers endes, tormentinge him verye ſoore: but whereas the ſayde matter ſhall aſſemble and 
                        •
                     ome together, make a rupture: and the matter wyll▪ 
                     
                        •
                     ome out as yellowe as Saffron, and he ſhalbe quicklye healed.
               
               
                  For children that bee broke.
                  TAke white Paper, and chawe it well with your teeth, and make thereof a plaiſter, as great as wil couer al the broke, binde it in a ſwadle band with a linnen clothe: Than laye it to his coddes, and make faſt the ſwathing bande: but you muſt renewe euerye day the paper chawed, and he ſhalbe whole.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the payne of the Splene.
                  TAke of the longes or lightes of a Fore made into pouder, and vſe to geue to the Pacient to drinke or to eate of in good white wine, & he ſhalbe cured.
               
               
                  For to ſtenche bloode.
                  TAke mans blood dried in the Sunne, and make it into pouder, & if it cha
                        •
                     ce that there be any vaine broken or hurte, whereby there commeth 
                        •
                     ut abundaunce of bloode, lay of the ſayde pouder vpon it, and it ſhalbe ſtenched.
               
               
                  For to heale in foure dayes the ſcaldynge with water, or anye other thynge, withoute oyntments or Playſters. It hath bene tryed and founde trewe.
                  
                     TAke an Onion and cutte him ouerthwarte, and wringe oute the iuyce vpon the ſcalded place, doing ſo euerye daye twiſe and it wil heale it.
               
               
                  For to ſtenche bloode.
                  TAke a ſowre Orenge, & make a hoole in y• toppe where the flower grewe, keepe that vpper peece that you ſhall take of, that you maye afterwarde cloſe vp the hoole agayne: yet before you ſtoppe it vp, you ſhal take the ſuet or greaſe of a he Goate, the bigneſſe of a Walnut, and put it into the hoole: than ſet the Orenge vpon the coales or embers, that it maye incorporate, and diſſolue: Than annoynt along down your backe bone, and ouerthwart the flankes with the ſame lycoure, and it ſhall heale you within thre or foure tymes by the grace of god.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the wormes in lytle chyldren.
                  TAke a lampe ful of oyle Olyue, and lay an yron in the fyer, and whan it is red whote quenche it in the ſayde oyle in the lampe: then annoynt thereof the noſtrelles, the throte and the nauell, and ſtraight way you ſhall ſee a great miracle.
               
               
                  To heale the Emorrhodes or Pyles.
                  TAke Dogges dung foure vnces, halfe a pounde of common oyle, put them together in a new earthen pot and ſeeth them a lytle: then take oute ſome of the dung, and braye it vpon a trenchour: then ſeeth it again in the ſaide oyle, and put to it thre vnces of new waxe, to the intent that all maye come to incorporate together: and before you annoynt the Emorrhodes or Pilles with the ſame oyntment, you ſhall waſhe them with whyte wyne, and in foure daies he ſhalbe whole.
               
               
                  Agaynſt all kyndes of payne and griefe.
                  
                     TAke a glaſſeful of the iuyce of Leucoron, which is our winter Gylofer, or Uiolets faſtinge, and you ſhal ſee a merueylous effect.
               
               
                  Agaynſte ſtyfnes or ſhrynkynge of ſynowes, called the crampe, or ſwelling, comming of the wounde taken of ſome venimous beaſt, in Latine Spaſmus or Spaſma, or conu
                        •
                     lſio.
                  TAke Hogges dunge as muche as you will, halfe a pounde of oyle roſet: ſeeth all in a newe yearthen potte, and laye it as whote as you can endure vpon the ſoore place, and it wil heale it.
               
               
                  For them that can not pyſſe by reaſon of certayne grauell, and viſcoſitie or carnoſirie, which is aboundance of fleſh.
                  TAke the iuyce of Radiſhe rootes, of lytle Leekes whiche are founde vnder the grounde, and drye them, and make them into pouder: put all together, and geue euery morninge a certaine quantitie of it to the Pacient to drynke, and he ſhall be healed in ſhorte ſpace.
               
               
                  Agaynſt deffeneſſe.
                  TAke a quick Eele, and put him on a ſpit alyne and roſt him: take the greaſe that commeth out of him: Than take a Garlyke head roſted vpon the coales orcenders, and take one codde or huſke of the ſame Garlyke at a tyme, and put it into the ſayde greaſe, and ſo put it whote into his eare, holdyng his eare vpwarde the ſpace of one Credo, and you ſhall ſee the fylthie humour come out of his eare, & he ſhalbe healed.
               
               
                  Agaynſt opilation or ſtoppinge.
                  TAke wylde or marſhe Mallowes, what quantitie you wyll, and ſeeth them in runnynge water: than



take of it about a glaſſefull whote with ſugre Candye morning and euening, and you ſhalbe cured.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the gyddineſſe of the ſyght.
                  GEue euerye morninge vnto a chylde to eate ſome ſweete Fennell, and let the ſame chylde licke the Pacientes eyes, and he ſhalbe cured.
               
               
                  For them that can not broke their meate, b
                        •
                     t vomite it agayne.
                  TAke minte wel ſtamped and the crommes of bread burned in the fyer, and vinaigre: and make thereof as it were a ſauce, and ſprede it vpon ſome linnen clothe with the pouder of Cloues: heate it vpon a bricke or tyle, and laye it vpon his ſtomacke, and you ſhall ſee a goodly experience.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the head ake by to muche drynkynge.
                  TAke Rue leaues, and braye them with Uinaigre, and put Roſes to them and bitter Almondes, and with this rubbe your head, and you ſhalbe eaſed.
               
               
                  Agaynſt all the payne of the head.
                  TAke halfe a dragme of Bay berries, of Scammonia, and of Saffron a dragme, braye all well together with Uinaigre and Roſes. And when your head aketh, annoynt it where it greueth you with this oyntment, & you ſhal ſe the vertue to be merueylous great.
               
               
                  Againſt the paine of the head that continueth alwayes.
                  TAke leaues of blacke Juye, and braye them, & put them with Uinagre, oyle and wyne, as muche of one as of the other: ſeeth this together, & annoynt your forehead and your temples, and it ſhall eaſe you verye muche by gods Good grace.
               
               
                  Another waye.
                  
                     IF the pacient thinke that his hedde eleaueth in ſonder by reaſon of the great pain: take yuye, and make iuyce of it, the which you ſhall mingle wt oyle roſet: and with a linnen cloute you ſhall annoynte faire and ſoftly his noſtrels, his temples, and his forehead. And if the paine be vehement, lay ſome of it vpon the ſcull of his head.
               
               
                  Another waye.
                  TAke the brayne of a crowe, and ſeeth it and than eate it: for there is none ſo greate a paine of the head, or none ſo olde but that it will heale it with a ſinguler vertue.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the Mygrame happening ſodenlye.
                  TAke Bengewine and braye it with Uina
                        •
                     gre, and annoynt your forehead with it, and your temples and it will mitigate the paine.
               
               
                  Agaynſt itchyng of the head.
                  TAke a ſheepes gall, and mixe it with white chake and therewith rubbe your head, and let it drie vpon it, and it wyl heale you.
               
               
                  Agaynſt vlcers or ſcabbes of the head as well of men as of women.
                  TAke the gall of a Bull, and mingle it with Uinaigre, and hauing made it luke warme, rubbe your head with it, and you ſhall finde a merueilous remedye by the grace of almighty God.
               
               
                  Agaynſt olde and putrified woundes.
                  BRaye Celandine, and than mixe it with olde ſuet, and laye it ſo vpon the vlcers or ſcabbes, and you ſhalbe healed incontinent God wyllyng.
               
               
                  For to keepe that the fleſhe growe not to muche in a wounde.
                  
                     TAke the lyghtes or lunges of a ſheepe whote, and laye it vpon the wounde, and the fleſhe ſhalbe equall with the ſkynne.
               
               
                  To heale and take awaye the ſ
                        •••
                     fe.
                  TAke a handfull of Rue, and halfe an vnce of quicke Brimſtone, and ſeeth it with good olde wine: and ſo waſhe your head with it: but yet your head muſt firſt be waſhed with luke warme water, as men are wont to do moſt commonly, and it ſhalbe cured.
               
               
                  For to kyll Lyce.
                  TAke the whaye that remaineth of cheeſemaking, & put to it a lytle Uinaigre, and drinke of it certain dayes: and al the lyce wyl dye, and there wyll breede no more aboute you.
               
               
                  Agaynſte the diſtillation of the brayne, and heauines of the heade.
                  TAke Beete rootes and braye them well, and than take the iuyce of them and receyue it vp into your noſtrels. And that will drawe vnto it all the humour of the head, and cauſe it to come out.
               
               
                  Agaynſt murres or catarres that beginne to growe.
                  YOu muſte abſtayne from ſupper, and from eatyng of anye herbes, and from ſalt and fat thinges. For the catarre commeth of indiſgeſtion of the meate, and by the rawnes of the ſtomacke. Therefore aboue al thinges you ought to aſtaine from fat meates. And when you are amended, you maye take your ſupper as before your ſicknes you might haue done.
               
               
                  For to reſtrayne the murre or catarre.
                  
                     TAke fiue partes of wine, and the ſixte of honnye, mingle all together, and let it coole, and make of it a gargariſme.
               
               
                  A remedy for that diſeaſe when the heare of the bearde or head falleth of, of it ſelfe.
                  FYrſte you muſte ſhaue with a raſour the place, and than rubbe it well with an onyon: that done, take barley parched and made into pouder, and mixe it with Beare ſuet, and ſo lay it vpon the place, and the heare wyll growe agayne.
               
               
                  To keepe that the heares ſhall not fall of.
                  TAke the pouder of Walnuttes, of heath Cypres burned, of the aſhes of a Mule or Mulets hoofe burned, of the oyle of Myrtell, the aſhes of rats burned, and their dung made in pouder. Alſo the aſhes or freſhe dung of a Hedgehogge, and ſome Sandaracha, in Engliſhe yelowe▪ Oker: mixe all the ſayed thinges with Uinaigre and ſoft Pitche, and laye it vpon your head, & it wil kepe your heare from falling of.
               
               
                  To make the heares of a mannes beard or head to grow.
                  YE ſhal take y• which groweth ſomtime in y• hoxe or paſterne of an Aſſe, which is like vnto lytle warts and burne them, and make pouder of them, the which you ſhal put in old oyle, & than laye it vpon the place. This thing hath ſuche vertue that if a man annoynte or rubbe the iawes or chinne of a woman, ſhe ſhal haue the heare growe vpon the ſame place.
               
               
                  For to make heares growe.
                  YE ſhall take a Hedgehogge, and burne it al to coales, and put the pouder or aſhes made fine & ſmall, with Beares greaſe: and laye this oyntment ouer



all the head of a balde man, and it will make his heare growe as faire as euer it was.
               
               
                  For to curle heare a rare ſecrete.
                  TAke the aſhes of ſheepes hornes burned, and mixe it with oyle, and rubbe your head often tymes with it: but you muſt be firſt polde.
               
               
                  For to make heare blacke.
                  TAke Swallowes dung, and put it in good Uinaigre in a Uiolle, or ſome verniſhed earthen potte, than burye it in a dung hill, or in horſe dung, and leaue it ſo. xxxv. dayes full. And than annoynte your head, being polde, with this medecine in the ſhadowe with a Painters penſille. But before you do thus, you muſt annoynt your face with deare ſuet, to the intent that none of the colour of the ſayde oyntment doe ſpot or black your face. And while this colour & dying doth drie, holde in your mouth ſome oyle, to the ende that your teeth waxe not blacke with it: and the fourth day that you haue thus annoynted your head, you muſte waſhe it well, and all is done.
               
               
                  To keepe that the heares waxe not hoare or whyte.
                  MYxe the aſhes of grounde wormes burned in oyle and rubbe your Combe with it when you kembe your head, and your heare ſhall neuer chaunge colour in your olde age. It is a ſecrete that women commonlye vſe.
               
               
                  For to make the heares blacke.
                  TAke Cypre leaues brayed, and mixte with Uinaigre: and annoynte your heare with it, and that ſame will dye your whyte heares into blacke, and in their place ſhall growe alſo blacke heares.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the payne in the eyes.
                  
                     TAke rawe cabbages, and braye them and ſteepe in the ſayde iuyce of them ſome whyte bread, and annoynt your forehead, and it wyll take awaye the paine of your eyes.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the dymneſſe or daſelyng of the ſyght.
                  TAke ſalt Armoniack buryed and well brayed: and mixe it with the piſſe of a yonge childe, and therewith annoynt often tymes your eyes, and laye of it vpon them, and it will take awaye the daſelyng.
               
               
                  Another waye.
                  TAke the iuyce of Fennell rootes brayed, put to it as much good purified honnye, and ſeeth all with a ſmall fier vntill it be as thicke as honnye. Than put that in a boxe of braſſe. And when you haue neede mixe it with conſerue water or womans mylke: and certainely it wil put▪away the daſelyng and dimneſſe of the ſight incontinent, yf you lay of it vpō your eyes.
               
               
                  Agaynſt a webbe or ſpotte in the eye.
                  TAke the gall of a whyte Cocke, and braye it with water, and lay it to your eyes or put ſome in your eyes, and it will take awaye the webbe or ſpotte, and will conſume the droppes of bloode that are in the eyes, and ſtrengthen the ſight.
               
               
                  For to take away the hurtfull heares of the eye brovver.
                  YOu muſt plucke of the heares of the eyes diligently whiche hurte and hinder the eyes: and than annoynte the place with he Goates bloode hote, or Hares bloode, or elles of the bloode of a Batte or fl
                        •
                     nder mouſe, or rubbe it with the milke of a Bitche, or with a needle of copper, whiche being ofte heated and quenched in vinaigre, with the which you ſhall touche the place, and the heares will neuer growe agayne.
               
               
                  
                  Againſt all payne of the eares.
                  YE ſhall take a ſeruple of the gall of a Goate, and as much honny, braye all together, and heate it in a fier panne, putting it into his eare, and ſtoppe it with Wulle, and it wil he ale al the paine, yea though there were a canker in it.
               
               
                  Agaynſte the payne of the eares and defnes, and for to purge the apoſtumes or corruption of the eares.
                  MYxe Bengewine and newe Goates milke together, and put amonge them ſome of an Oxe gall, and oyle of Cedar, as muche of the one as of the other. Put all this luke warme into the Pacientes eares and it wil wonderfully appeaſe the payn of them and comfort the weake hearyng, and alſo the apoſtumes of the eares.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the payne of the eares.
                  HEate wylde Bores pyſſe vpon the fyer, and put it into the Pacientes eare, for it is a ſingular remedie. The ſayde pyſſe may be kept in a violle of glaſſe, or better in the bladder it ſelf of the Bore.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the noyſe or ryngyng of the eares.
                  MYxe together the greaſe of a Gooſe, with the iuyce of Saffron, and the iuyce of Garlicke, or Garlicke brayed: Than powre it into his eares, and certainly it wyll heale him.
               
               
                  Againſt all infirmitie of the eares.
                  YE ſhall take ground wormes, and ſeeth them with gooſe greaſe: and droppe of the ſame decoction into the pacients eares, and whatſoeuer payne it be it wyll heale it.
               
               
                  
                  Agaynſt defnes and hardenes of hearyng.
                  TAke an Oxe galle▪ and the pyſſe of a he Goate: Mixe all together, and put of it into the deffe eare and incontinent he ſhalbe healed.
               
               
                  Againſt the payne of the eares, defnes, durt, or fylthe, wormes or water that is in them.
                  TAke the iuyce of onyons, and mingle it with honnye, and than droppe it into the eares, and it will cleare and heale them.
               
               
                  For to ſtenche bleedyng at the noſe.
                  TAke verye ſtronge Uinaigre, and powre of it into the eare of that ſyde that he bleedeth, and if he blede of bothe ſydes, put Uinaigre into bothe his eares, and it ſhall ſtenche it.
               
               
                  To heale the ſyckennes called noli me tangere.
                  TAke the iuyce of the berbe called Dracunculus, or Ser pentine, & put of the ſame iuyce into his noſtrels, or dippe in a linnen cloth, and laye vpon the ſoore and the next day take it away, for it will brynge with it all the rootes of the ſoore.
               
               
                  Agaynſt ſtinkyng of the mouth.
                  TAke the roote called acorios, or calamus aromaticus, and chawe of it faſting, as it were Maſticke, holdynge it a good ſpace in your mouth, and it wyll make you haue a ſwete breath and mouth.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the toth ache.
                  TAke the roote of Juſquiam, and ſeeth it in Uinaigre, and holde of the decoction thereof in your mouth, and it ſhall heale you.
               
               
                  
                  Another waye.
                  TAke grounde wormes, and ſeeth them in oyle, and than bray them wel, and put of the decoction into the eare, on that ſide that the aking toothe is of, and the paine will ceaſe.
               
               
                  For to make teeth fall out.
                  TAke grounde wormes, and burne them vpon a redde whote tyle, and than take the aſhes of the ſayde wormes ſo burned, and put it into the hollowe and akynge teeth, and couer them with waxe, and they wil eaſely fall out without any payne at all.
               
               
                  For to make teeth whyte that be blacke.
                  TAke whyte bread, & of a pommyſe ſtone, as much of the one as of the other, burne all together, and make thereof a pouder, wherewith you ſhal rubbe your teeth, and thei will be very whyte.
               
               
                  For them that be hoarce.
                  YOu muſte ſwallowe downe, three morninges together the yelke of a newe laye egge rawe.
               
               
                  To heale the diſeaſe called the kynges euyll.
                  TAke Barley flower, liquide pitche, waxe, and oyle of equall quantitie, mixe all together, and ſeeth it wel, and put into it a lytle piſſe of a yonge 
                        •
                     bilde, and ſterring it well about, laye it vpon the ſore in maner and forme of a plaiſter, and it wil heale it.
               
               
                  Howe to knowe the kynges euyll.
                  TAke a grounde worme alyue, and laye him vpon the ſwellinge or ſore, and couer him with a leafe: if it be the kinges euill, the worme will chaunge



and tourne into earth, if it be not, he will remaine whole and founde.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the cogh, and diſtillation of the breſt, and lunges, and running of the eyes, payne of the bladder, and when the pype of it is ſtopped, whiche cauſeth that a man can not pyſſe but with great difficultie. Alſo for thoſe that ſpyt bloode at the mouthe, or pyſſe bloode: and for the flyxe, and collicke, and payne or heauynes of the bellye and cholere: and alſo agaynſt a vomitynge without an ague. Alſo againſt all paine of the bodye excepte of the head: and eſpecially againſt the vlceration of the lunges, yf you giue the Pacient an electuarye or two of it.
                  TAke ſixe dragmes of myrrhe, fiue dragmes of frankenſence, foure dragmes of the iuyce of poppy called opium, ſixe dragmes of Saffron, foure dragmes of the ſeede of white Juſquiam called Henbane, and foure dragmes of the pille or ryne of the roote of black Juſquiam: you ſhall beate into pouder the ſayde barke or ryne by it ſelfe, and ſift it fine and ſmall thorowe a ſarce or ſyue, and than grinde the Saffron: and than the ſeede of the whyte Juſquiam or Henbane, and than after the Myrrhe and the Frankenſence. With the whiche you ſhall mixe the Juyce of the Poppye, hauynge been layed before in water.
                  And this done, you ſhall put ſtrayghte waye to it a lytle water, to the intent you maye make thereof Trochiſcos or lytle Balles or Tablettes, of the weyghte of halfe a Dragme. You ſhall take of it at nyght with thre mouthfuls of water. Thys prouoketh ſteepe, and aſſwageth all griefe, as is aforeſayde. If you wyll you maye make Pylles of it: for it is all one, as concernynge the vertue of it.
               
               
                  Agaynſte all vehement coghes.
                  
                     TAke the iuyce of Leekes brayed, and ſeeth it with oyle, and geue it to the Pacient to drinke, and it ſhall profite him greatlye.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the cogh be it neuer ſo great.
                  TAke Brimſtone made in pouder, as muche as you can take vp betwene your three fingers: Giue the ſame vnto the Pacient with an Egge half roſted, before breakefaſt, fyue dayes together, if it be a man, but if it be a childe three morninges. And there is no cogh ſo vehement, but it will heale it within the ſayde tyme God wyllynge.
               
               
                  For one that hath ſwallowed downe a blood Sucker.
                  TAke Uinaigre wherein there hath bene firſt quenched ſome redde hote yron: and into the ſame put ſome butter, and heate it by litle and litle, and giue it him to drinke, and it wil make the bloode Sucker come out. It hath bene proued.
               
               
                  Agaynſt an olde and inueterate cogh.
                  TAke quicke Brimſtone, and beate it into pouder, and wrap it in olde Hogges or Barrowes greaſe: And than the firſt day giue thre Pilles thereof vn to the Pacient, the ſeconde day two, and the thyrd day one. And the ſaide Pilles muſt be made ſo that he may ſwallowe them downe.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the bloody flyxe comming of the artere or ſynew of the lunges, or of the lyuer.
                  TAke the roote of Conſyre called Marquerites, & waſhe it in colde water and ſcrappe it with a knife of Juery or bone. Giue vnto the pacient to drinke two vnces or more of it, and as muche as he can eate. But note that he muſt not touche any Uinaigre that daye,



though it haue greate vertue to ſtaye the bloode, for trewely it taketh awaye the effecte and vertue of this roote, if you geue him any with it.
               
               
                  For to reſtraine a great and vehement vomitynge.
                  TAke a litle quicke Brimſtone, and as much of the ſcraping of a Hartes horne: all being brayed and made in pouder, mingle and temper it in a ſofte Egge, and drinke it, and it will ſtoppe the vomiting.
               
               
                  For them that can not kepe theyr meate in theyr ſtomack but vomite it vp agayne.
                  YE ſhal take a litle aloes and giue it them to drinke with colde water, and it wil make them kepe their meate in their ſtomacke.
               
               
                  To quenche and aſſwage thruſte.
                  YE ſhall take water and oyle mixed together, and heate it a litle and drinke, and vomite it vp againe by and by. And if neede be do ſo againe, and it will quenche your vehement thruſte.
               
               
                  Another waye.
                  YE ſhall take the yelke of a Henne egge halfe roſt & mixed with oyle, and ſwallowe it downe, and it will take awaye your thruſte.
               
               
                  Another.
                  YE ſhall take a ſtone in a Fountaine, and laye it quickely vpon your tongue, and holde it ſo a while and it wyll quenche your thruſte.
               
               
                  To ſtoppe the hycket.
                  TAke a ſpone full of Uinaigre made of the Herbe Scilla or Squilla, and drinke it, and by and by the hicket



wyll ceaſe, by the grace of almightye God.
               
               
                  For to ſtoppe the hycket that commer
                        •
                      often.
                  TAke whote water, and put your handes into it, and holde them there a good whyle, and the hicket wil ceaſe, it hath bene proued and found true.
               
               
                  A ſoueraine remedy for them that haue wry necks by reaſon of ſhroken ſynowes: alſo for them that haue the goute.
                  TAke the ſtones of a Beuer, called Caſtoreum, white Pepper and Perſeley of eche equal quantities: bray al together & ſift them. This done, take a ſponefull of it, and put in ſo muche honnye, and two mouthe fulles of whote water, and giue it the Pacient to drinke before breakefaſt, and he ſhal be healed.
               
               
                  To take away the ſmellyng vnder the arme hooles.
                  TAke very olde Bengewine, and make it into pouder, and ſyfte it: and than rubbe your arme hooles with it, and they ſhall ſmell well.
               
               
                  Againſt apoſtumes and ſwelling at the roote of the nailes.
                  TAke an akorne brayed with ſope, and lay that vpon it, and they ſhall be well.
               
               
                  To make a mannes nayles growe incontinent which be fallen of.
                  TAke the herbe that is called Pentaphillon or Quinque
                           •
                         follium, in Engliſhe Cinkfoyle, and braye it with any greaſe: and lay it vpon the place and the naile will come againe incontinent.
               
               
                  Againſt the diſeaſe called Mentagra or Lichen, whiche is a foule breaking out or coueryng al the face with a ſcabbe and beginneth at the chynge.
                  TAke the freſhe braunches of a figge tree, and ſeeth them in Uinaigre, & than bray them well, & with this annoynt the ſoore, and vndoubtedly he ſhall be cured and healed immediatlye.
               
               
                  
                  To take awaye the ſeabbe of a runnyng tetter, or ryngworme of the face.
                  TAke the rootes of wylde cowcumbers, and ſeeth them vnto the thyrde part, then braye them well and put to them ſome lytarge of Siluer, and ſome Brimſtone in pouder, as muche of the one as of the other, and put to it alſo a lytle Waxe: and than rubbe and annoynt the ſoore place with it, & it will heale it.
               
               
                  Agaynſt Burgeons and puſhes in the face, aſwell by the heate of the Sunne as otherwyſe.
                  TAke the yelke of an Egge and braye it with honnye and Ceruſe, and ſo annoynt your face with it, and it wyll cure them verye well and perfitly.
               
               
                  Agaynſt all ſpots, pimples, puſhes, or vlcers in the face.
                  TAke Maſticke, and the herbe called lappa maior, in Engliſhe clotte or greate burre, ſope, waxe, olde oyle, lytarge of Siluer, as muche of the one as of the other: mingle al together, and ſeeth it like an oyntment, and annoynt the place with it, & it wil heale it.
               
               
                  To take away the blackenes of the necke, and ſpots of the face.
                  TAke Beane flowre and temper it with the Juyce of the inner parte of Pompons, and make thereof eyght Trochiſci or lytle Balles, whiche you ſhal drie in the ſhadowe. And when you wyll goe to your bayne or bathe, you ſhall take as muche as you ſhall thynke good of the ſayde Balles, whyche you ſhall breake and mixe with water, and annoynt the blackeneſſe or ſpots with it before you enter into your bath. And when you begynne to ſweate, then rubbe the places with it, and waſhe them, and the ſpottes wyll goe out. It is proued and found trewe.
               
               
                  
                  Agaynſt the bruſyng of the face by a fall or ſlyppe.
                  TAke the rynde or barke of a Radiſhe roote, and braye it well, and mixe it with Honnye, and annoynt the place and it will heale you.
               
               
                  Another waye verye good.
                  YE ſhal take new ſofte cheeſe made of Goats milke braye it with honnye, and laye it vpon the place, and couer it with a clothe, and it will take awaye the bruſynge immediatly by the helpe of God.
               
               
                  Agaynſt wartes and malanders.
                  YE ſhall take the herbe called in Latine Scorpius, becauſe it hath ſeedes lyke vnto a Scorpions tayle: braye it well, and put to it a graine of ſalt, and lay it vpon the wartes, and they will fall of.
               
               
                  Agaynſte ſwellynge of the ſtomacke, paine of the raynes, grauell, fleame, collicke, the emorrhodes or pyles: alſo to ſtaye the flowres of a woman, and for thoſe that haue an infected lyuer and ſplene: alſo for thoſe that coghe ordinarily, and for them that haue the fallyng ſyckennes.
                  TAke an vnce of the roofe of Enula campana, three vnces of Fennell ſeede, two vnces of blacke Pepper. Stampe eche of theſe thinges by them ſelfe, and ſifte them verye fyne. Than putte all into honny halfe ſodden, and geue the Pacient of it the quantitie of a haſell nutte with whote water. Some take it with Oximel, other ſome with wyne, and other take it alone in a ſpoone, to make them piſſe the ſtone and grauell.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the payne of the Splene.
                  TAke a dragme of the roote of Enula campana, dryed and made in pouder, and than ſift it fine, and gene it the



Pacient faſtinge with olde wyne, and this wyll cure the Spiene.
               
               
                  Another.
                  TAke eueumis auquimis made in pouder as muche as you can take vp with your thre fingers, and braye it with wine, and giue it the Pacient to drinke before breakefaſt, and it will take away the payne.
               
               
                  For the payne of the loynes or haunches.
                  TAke the roote of Iris or gladiolus, and braye it with quicke Brimſtone and Beares greaſe, and laye it vpon your loynes lyke a plaiſter, and you ſhall fynde a ſoueraigne remedye.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the ſwellyng or vlcers of the raynes of the backe, and kydneyes.
                  TAke the leaues of drye Roſes, the ſeedes of blacke Poppye, and the kernelles or berries of Pyneaple, of equall quantitie. Stampe eche of theſe thinges by it ſelfe, and mingle all together, and take of it the bigneſſe of a walnut, and put it in two mouth fulles of wyne ſodden, and three of water, and geue it the Pacient to drinke, and it will heale him although he piſſed bloode.
               
               
                  Agaynſte the payne of the grauell, and for to make a man pyſſe.
                  YOu ſhall take a lytle amber ſtone, of the roote of Cyperns, and of blacke Pepper, ſtampe it, and than ſeeth it, and giue it to the pacient to drynke a ſpone full faſting, and it wil make hym pyſſe, and aſwage the paine of the grauell.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the payne of the raynes.
                  
                     TAke a pounde of wylde or marſhe Mallowes, freſh ſheepes dunge, & the old leafe of a hogge, which is the fatte that lyeth by the backe, and the ribbes, whiche huſbandes vſe to rolle vp and keepe to make ſaulues, of eche two pounde: Stampe theſe thynges and mingle them together. That done, laye it vpon Wulle new ſhorne and vn waſhed, and ſo laye it vpon the raines of your backe in maner of a plaiſter, and it will ſhortlye take awaye the paine.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the grauell.
                  TAke the rootes of aſparagus, in Engliſhe Sperage, of Saxifrage, the roote of clotte or great Burres, the roote of Smallage or Alexanders, the roote of Ebulus, in Engliſhe Walwort or Danewort, thre garlyke heades, the leaues of Willowes, and a lytle perſley. Stampe all theſe thinges and mingle them together, and giue the Pacient to drinke of it thre morninges with ſodden wyne, or with ſome ſweete wine, or wyne made ſweete with honnye, and it will make him piſſe the grauell.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the payne of the bladder and grauell.
                  TAke the ſkinne of a Ha
                        •
                     e newe 
                        •
                     leane, and put it heare and all in an earthen potte, or laye it vpon a cleane tyle, & that done put it to the fyer, ſo that you maye make a pouder of the ſame ſkynne, the whiche pouder beyng ſifted, you ſhall keepe in ſome cleane veſſell. And when you ſhall neede it take thereof three ſpone full in youre drynke: whiche thynge ſoone appeaſeth the greefe of the bladder, and the the grauell. Neuertheleſſe the remedye woulde haue greater vertue, yf you tooke the whole Hare alyue, and put hym in a newe earthen potte, and ſtoppe all the hooles with plaiſter or with claye, ſo that there come no aire oute. Than yf you put the ſayde potte into an Ouen, and lette it burne with a ſmall fyre, and whan it is



thorowly burned, make it into a very fyne pouder, and ſift it fynely, and than vſe it for your purpoſe. This is verye good for them that haue the grauell, and that piſſe bloode, yf it be taken with a lytle wine.
               
               
                  Agaynſte the bloodye ſlyxe, or frettynge torment in the bellye.
                  TAke mylke, and quenche whote flynte ſtones in it, o
                        •
                     elles ſome whote iron, and that done dyuers tymes, giue it to drinke vnto the Patient (prou
                        •
                     
                     ded that he haue not the ague) and he ſhalbe healed.
               
               
                  Agaynſte the ſtraynynge, frettynge, and grypyoge of the bellye.
                  TAke ſeuen or nine of the longe and red berries of a wylde roſe tree, and let them be type. Bray them well, and geue to the Pacient with olde wyne, yf he haue not the ague: but if he haue the angue, gyue them him with water. And if neede be, you ſhall gyue them him ſo thre dayes together, and he ſhal finde it a ſoueraigne remedie.
               
               
                  For thoſe that haue frettyng and gryppyng in the belly, and the laxe.
                  TAKE the yelke of Egges rawe or roſ
                        •
                     e, wylde greene Reaſyns, Galles as muche of the one as of the other in weyghte: Myre all together in brayinge it, and gyue it to the Pacient whote and he ſhalbe cured by the grace of God.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the collicke.
                  
                     TAke a Henne a lyue, and ſee that ſhe eate not in two dayes: than kyl her, and take the lytle ſkinne that is in her breſte, or throte bole, and drie it and make it in pouder, the whiche you ſhal geue the Pacient, with ſome harſhe or groſſe wine ſomwhat ſharpe. And the Pacient muſt be faſting, and not hauing ſupped the night before, but kept in a good diet.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the payne of the collicke comming ſodainly.
                  TAke the heele of a Hare, and carye it about you, and the ſodaine collicke ſhall neuer take you.
               
               
                  Agayne the payne of the guttes or bowelles.
                  YOu ſhall take Baye leaues, and ſeeth them in water, and giue the Pacient drynke of thys decoction and he ſhalbe healed.
               
               
                  For to ſtoppe the laxe.
                  TAke the rootes of Hartes horne next to the head, and make a fyne pouder of it with a fyle: and of this pouder giue a dragme vnto the Pacient with redde wyne a gobblet full: and this wil ſtoppe the laxe if he vſe it three morninges.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the frettyng of the bellye or laxe.
                  YOu ſhall take one Pomegranade or many, and put them in an earthen potte, the which you ſhall ſtop well and lute aboute with Potters claye, to the ende there come no aire oute. This done, ſet it in an Ouen to be burned: than the Pomegranade being wel made into pouder, keepe it. And when you haue anye fretting or gripyng in your bellye, commyng ſodenly, drinke a lytle of the ſame pouder with wyne, and you ſhall be ſoone cured.
               
               
                  
                  For to knowe a ſecret or hydden dyſeaſo of any man and to heale the ſame.
                  TAke a yonge whelpe that yet ſucketh, and let him lye nyght and day with the man the ſpace of thre dayes, duryng the whiche tyme the pacient ſhall take milke in his mouth, and ſpite in to the whelpes mouthe. Than take the ſayde whelpe and cleaue him in peeces, and you ſhal know the ſicke part of the man by that of the dogge, which you ſhal ſee either infected or whole and ſounde. For certainlye the whelpe draweth to him ſelf the ſecrete and hidden diſeaſe whereof he dieth, and the man ſhalbe healed, and you maye burye the dogge.
               
               
                  For them that voyde blood at theyr fondement, and for thoſe that haue theyr bloode broken.
                  YOu ſhall take the yonge ſpringes of nettels verye tender, braye them well in a morter, and take the iuyce of them, and giue it the Pacient to drinke alone in the morninge, or with ſome ſtronge Uinaigre and colde water, three dayes together, and there is none ſo corrupt bloode but it will purifie, nor no laxe ſo greate but it will ſtoppe it.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the wormes that engender in mens bodyes.
                  YOu ſhall take the galle of a Bulle, and dippe ſome Wulle in it, and lay it vpon the Nauell, and it wil make the wormes come out of the bodye.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the gripyng of the bellye and deſyre to go to the ſtoole and yet do nothyng.
                  TAke cowe milke ſodden, and geue the Pacient often tymes drinke of it and he ſhall be whole.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the payne of the collicke.
                  
                     TAke the lytle byrde called in Latyne Vpupa in Engliſhe a Lapwinge, and burne her whole with her fethers, and take of the aſhes, and giue it the Pacient to drinke in wine.
               
               
                  Againſt the vlcers or fyſtules in the foundement of a man.
                  TAke Date ſtones and burne them and than make them into a fine pouder, & laye often tymes of the ſame vpon the fiſtules or vlcers, or vpon the hole of the foundement, and he ſhalbe whole.
               
               
                  For to heale the emorrodes, or thoſe that loſe their blood.
                  TAke Leekes and braye them well, and take the iuyce of them, the whiche you ſhal giue the Pacient to drynke before breakefaſt, and the Emorrodes will ſoone ceaſe by the grace of God.
               
               
                  Agaynſt the vlcers of the foundement, and agaynſt the diſeaſe called commonly ſainct Fiacres ſyckennes.
                  TAke the pyſſe or ryne of a Pomegranade, breake it and ſeeth it in good wine, than bray it wel, and laye it vpon the ſoore place lyke a plaiſter, and it will without fayle heale the diſeaſe.
               
               
                  For to rype or breake an apoſtume or ſwellynge in the gryne.
                  TAke naſ
                           •
                        urtium, and bray it with pitche, and lay it vpon the ſwelling or apoſtume, and he ſhalbe whole.
               
               
                  Another.
                  TAke vnſlekt lyme, two garlicke heades, the yelkes of thre egges, mingle al together, and lay it vpon the ſore place like a plaiſter: this wil put away all the payne and ſwellinge of the apoſtume.
               
               
                  Againſt hurt or flawing of the ſkyn by chaſing and going either of the feete or betwene the thighes.
                  
                     TAke a morter of leade, and a peſtle of the ſame, and put in the ſaide morter ſome oyle roſet, and the yelke of an egge: the which things you ſhal grinde vntill thei become thicke: and till ſome of the leade be mingled with the ſaid oyntment. And when it is thick like a plaiſter, ſprede it vpon a fyne & ſoft linen cloth, and laye it vpon the paine, and continue thus three daies vntill the paine be whole.
               
               
                  Againſt the ſwellyng and payne of the ſoles of the feete.
                  TAke the Moſſe that groweth in the water, but let it be greene, bray it wel with oyle olyue, and laye it vpon the place with a linnen clothe, and it will ceaſe the payne, and take away the ſwellyng.
               
               
                  To make wartes fall of.
                  WHen you kyll a Hogge, let hym that hath the wartes receyue the bloode euen whote vpon the place where the warts be, and aſſone as it is drie let him waſhe it of. And if it be a woman that hath theſe wartes, ſhe muſte take the bloode of a ſowe, and ſhe ſhalbe healed of them.
               
               
                  For to take away the felons and catts heares, which breake out with wheales in the fyngers, and alſo knoppes growyng in the feete.
                  TAke grounde wormes, ſtampe them and with a litle oyle laye them vpon the ſoores, and they wyll brynge them awaye, and heale them.
               
               
                  For to aſſwage the payne of the goute quickely, and for all griefe of the feete.
                  YOu ſhall take grounde Wormes, and put them in Uinaigre, that they maye purge them ſelues of all the ordure and fylthe. The nexte mornynge



wype them drie, and putte nyne vnces of them in a pounde of greaſe, brayinge them a good whyle, to the intent you maye incorporate them: and there with annoynt your feete, and the payne ſhall eaſe.
               
               
                  Another waye.
                  TAke a Fore and ſeeth him well, than ſtraine the decoction of him thorowe a linnen clothe, wherewith you ſhall bathe and waſhe often tymes your feete, and it will take away the paine.
               
               
                  For to get out anye thyng that ſticketh in a mans bodye as thornes and ſuche other.
                  TAke a peece of a Sponge or Wulle dipped in piſſe and laye it vpon the thynge that ſticketh in the fleſhe, and it will come out without paine. Or els take ſome larde, and ſeeth it in it owne greaſe, and than laye it vpon the ſoore place and bynde it, and it wyll drawe out all thing that ſticketh in the fleſhe.
               
            
            
               
                  Here foloweth certaine receiptes againſt the Plague.
               
                  A compoſition preſeruatiue agaynſt the peſtilence, excellent as it were Tryacle or Mythridatum.
                  TAKE Pympynell dryed an vnce and a halfe, Sordij veri, rootes of Gentian, Imperatoriae, Zeduariae, of eche ſixe dragmes, Calamint, apiaſtrum or citraginis, enula campana rootes, tormentillae, whiche is a kynde of cinkfoyle, Baye berries, the ſeede of card
                           ••
                        s benedictus, which is one of the kyndes of the herbe called atractilis an Orenge or Citron, oxalidis, which is a kynde of Sorrell, Bole armenicke prepared of eche thre dragmes, lykoryſe ſcraped Glyeaniſi ſeminis, ye ſedes of Scariol
                           •
                        
                     


                     
which is intibus ſatiua of the kyndes of Endiue and Succorye, Cynamomi exquiſiti, of eche two dragmes, Gylloflowers, redde Roſes, Coriander prepared, the ſeede of Baſill, Corticis citrij ſicci, Santali lutei vel rubri, Agollochi, that is Xilaloe, vel ligni aloes, the ſcraping of Juorie, red Coral, Pearles of eche a dragme and a halfe: Saffron two ſcruples. All theſe beinge beaten verye ſmall, mingle them with Sugre of equall quantitie, or elles with Oxymelite or ſyrupo aceta
                           •
                        o or oxyſacchara▪
                      or rather the Syrope of Lymons: But vnto weake ſtomacks contrary lette it be made lyke to a liquide con
                        •
                     ection, eyther opiatae vel maſſae, or els let there be an electuarie per tabellas of a dragme weyght, or foure ſcruples, yf you adde vnto euery vnce of Sugre a dragme of the ſayde pouder. You ſhall take of it two or three houres before your meales. If it be pouder, the quantitie ſhalbe a dragme or halfe a dragme at the leaſt, with ſome conuenient lycour of thoſe whiche are nowe named: If it be opiatae, the quantitie of a Cheſtnut or Walnutte. If it be in forme of a maſſe and thicke you ſhall make two or thre Pylles or mo verye ſoft for to take at one tyme, drinking after it ſome ſuche lycour as I haue already ſpoken of. Whan it is in lytle tablettes, you maye take one or two.
               
               
                  Another compoſition in pouder on in another maner for the ſame.
                  TAke y• rootes of angelica, Gentian, Zedoaria, of y• rotes of tormentilla, ye ſeedes of oxalidis citrij mah; Synamome elect, which a kinde of caſsia, of yellowe or red Sandale or Sandars, cardu
                           •
                        s benedictus, of eche two dragmes the pille of an Orenge, a dragme and a halfe: the ſcraping of Juorie a dragme, redde Corall half a dragme, of the beſt Sugre lyke weyght, put to all theſe things as the pouder ſhall ſeeme pleaſaunt & good. Or yf you wil ſeeke another way as is ſpoken of the firſt preſeruatiue. As concerning y• quantitie of this cōpoſ
                        •
                     tiō at euerye tyme, & the tyme of vſyng it, let it be as the other



before. But if you wil haue thē both, let them not be of lyke ſorte, but the one in pouder or in tablettes, the other in opiate or maſſe with pilles.
               
               
                  Common pylles verye good for the ſame.
                  TAke aloes probatae & lotae two vnces, of Saffron an vnce, of good Myrrhe as muche, or els Myrrhe and ammoniacum diſſolued in white wyne, of eche halfe an vnce, mixe them with honny roſef. And in winter you may put to it Zedoaria, Agallochi or red Sanders of eche a dragme. But in ſommer take away the Myrrhe and ammoniacum, and put to it bole armenicke prepared three dragmes, red Corall halfe a dragme, Camphyre halfe a ſcruple. You ſhall commonly take a pille or twaine before your meales. Sometyme you ſhal procede vnto a dragme after your firſt ſlepe.
               
               
                  Antidotes or medecines preſeruatiues and comfortable, of ſmall coſt, eaſye to fynde and prepare for poore folke.
                  1. TAke Garlike, and drinke a litle wine after it: or a figge with a Walnut, and Rue and a lytle
                  2. ſalte ſpecially in winter.
                  3. Take twentie leaues of Rue with two Walnuts and as many figges, and a graine of ſalt, al being mixt together receyue it in the morning.
                  4. Take ſixe leaues of Rue with Uinaigre.
                  5. Take the roote of the herbe called in Latyn Imperatoria of ſome Laſerpitium gallicum in Engliſhe Pelli
                        •
                     orie of Spaine.
                  6. Take the roote of angelica.
                  
                  7. The roote of Gentian.
                  8. The roote of Zedoaria.
                  9. Of carduus benedictus.
                  
                  10. Of carlina.
                  
                  11. Take the herbe called Scordium, of the one, of



the two, or of 
                        •
                     o, in ſmall pouder the quantitie of a Dragme, eyther in a ſofte maſſe made with ſodden Honny and Uinaigre, or with ſome handſome Syrop, as of Lemons, or in opiate, the bygneſſe of a Cheſtenutte or of a Cyche peaſe with Wyne in Winter, in Sommer wyth Roſe water, or wyth the Juyce of Sorrell.
                  12. Take Sorrell alone, or with Pimpernell tempered in Uinaigre, and drinke of it in the morning.
                  13. Or the Juyce of them, where with you may make a toſ
                        •
                     e in Sommer.
                  14. Or Jenyper berries; greene Pimpernell leaues, of Betonye, of Pule
                        •
                     ion, of Sorrell as muche of the one as of the other, brayed together, ſodden with ſodden Honnye, and a lytle Uinaigre lyke a conſerne.
               
               
                  Another medecine.
                  15. Take Jenyper berries, Bole armenicke of eche two Dragmes, or of equall weyghte. Being ſtamped let it be layed in ſwete oyle and Uinaigre, or in Oximilite, in a meane forme, either opiate or maſſe. Yf it be opiate, take as much of it as a Cheſtnutte. Yf it be maſſe take one great pille and drinke after it a litle Hydromel or Oxymel, or wyne.
               
               
                  The thynges of fauour or ſweete ſmell, as pouder, balles, waters, parfumes, and fyrſt a pouder for many purpoſes.
                  TAke Iris florentiana foure vnces, of Maioram in Latyne ſamſuehum, redde Roſes, Cloues, of eche an vnce, Meliſſophilli, Nucis odorate or muſcate, Zedoaria, Cynamome, Agallochi, yellowe Sanders, Maſticke, Storax calamita, Bengewine, of eche half an vnce, calami odorati, ſpicae nardi radicis, of eche a Dragme: Juncus odoratus two ſcruples.
                  
                     Make of theſe a pouder to ſmell, to be beaten and broken in ſome peece of ſylke or fyne linnen clothe. Beate alſo theſe thinges groſſely for to parfume and to waſh your head and beard: or elles let them lye a certayne tyme in whyte wyne and roſe water, and afterwarde ſtraine them. And keepe that whiche ſhalbe ſtrayned for to vſe when you will, or let them be ſtilled in ſome double veſſell, that there may be aqua aromatica. As I ſaid it is for to parfume your chamber morninge and euening, being layed vpon coales, or this pouder to giue a good odour keping it about you or in ſome place betwene your garments and linnen, or to make a lytle bagge of it, or to mixe it with ſome lycour meete for to waſhe your head and bearde, or otherwyſe to weate your handkercher in it, or ſome peece of ſponge to ſwell to or to make diſtilled water of it, for to ſmell to.
               
               
                  A parfume.
                  TAke coales of Wille wes eyghte vnces, Ladani pu
                           •
                        i, two vnces, Frankenſence of the male kinde of the wodde and berries of Juniper of eche an vnce, Agallochi or Xilaloes, Bengewine, Storar calamita, of eche halfe an vnce, Nutmegges, yellowe Sanders, of eche three dragmes, Cloues, Storax liquida, of eche two dragmes, Zedoaria, calamus aromaticus, of eche a Dragme, gomme tracaganthae, diſſolued in roſe water ſufficiently. And make lytle parfumes of what faſhion it pleaſeth you.
               
               
                  A ſmellynge balle.
                  TAke pure Labdanum, two vnces, Bengewine an vnce and an half, the coales of Willowes an vnce Storax calamita ſire dragmes: Iris florentiana, halfe an vnce, Cloues three dragmes: Maioram, yellow or red ſanders of eche two dragmes: redde roſes calamus aromaticus of eche two ſcruples, Leuige
                           •
                        tur. Than take the 
                        •
                     yl
                        •
                      of ſweete Almondes, Bengewine of eche ſire dragmes Storar calaminta half an vnce. Let theſe things ſeeth



together with ſire dragmes of Roſe water.
                  Than ſtraine it, and let that whiche is ſtrayned be made ſoft with two vnces of whyte Waxe, and Storax liquida a dragme. Make it lyke a ce
                           •
                        eatum or plaiſter with the which the other things muſt be ſtamped and incorporated with a whote peſtell. Put to it a dragme and a halfe of Muſke, or els two ſcruples.
               
               
                  Another ſweete balle meeter for the Sommer.
                  TAke redde roſes and Uiolets, of eche three vnces and a halfe, the berries and leaues of Myrtle yf you can get them, coales of Willowe, of eche an vnce: Jenyper berries, the Pilles of Orenges, of eche ſire dragmes, yellowe or redde Sanders two dragmes: Bengewine a dragme, Camphyer two ſcruples. Make hereof a pouder. Than take oyle of Roſes an vnce and a halfe, Storax calamita, Bengewine of eche two dragmes: an vnce of roſe water, or as much as ſhall ſuffice. Make that ſoft that is ſtrained with two vnces of whyte Waxe. Make a ceratum, and beate all the reſt together with a whote Peſtell. Put to it a litle Muſke fiue or ſixe graines.
               
               
                  Outwarde remedies to purge the ayer, the eaſyeſt, the preſenteſt, and thoſe that are of the ſmalleſt pryce for men of ſmall habilitie.
                  PArfume ſome Jenyper berries of the roote clouen a ſunder and dried, and of the other drogges before mencioned for the fyrſt out warde remedy.
                  2. Uinaigre alone, or mixte with Roſe water, for to ſprinkle your chamber.
                  3. For to hold oftentymes in your mouth, and chaw, namelye whan you go out and keepe companye with men, there alſo the Pille and ſeede of a Citron, which geueth a good odour: Cinamome, Cloues, the rootes of angelica or Zedoaria, and ſuch lyke, as are afore mencioned.
                  
                     4. For to ſmell with a Sponge, or with a Handkercher daye and nyght, Malmſey, or other ſtronge wyne and ſweete, as Muſcadell alone, or els with roſe water, wherein there hath bene tempered ſome aromaticall drogge already ſpoken of, as Cloues or nutmegs.
                  5. Or good Uinaigre twyſe as much as of colde water with a litle Camphyre, ſpecially in Sommer.
               
               
                  A pouder agaynſt the wormes.
                  TAke Coriander prepared fiue dragmes, Jenyper berries three Dragmes, Sothernwodde, Hartes horne, corallinae, of eche two dragmes: whyte Agaricke newe made in balles: Nutmegge, Cynamome elect, of eche two ſcruples, make of this a metely fine pouder.
               
               
                  The whole ſumme of the regiment and gouernyng of a mannes ſelfe.
                  1. IT is neceſſarie that you be kept nete and cleane, and all thinges in your houſe, flyinge diligentlye and as muche as you can all euill ayre.
                  2. Auoide al exceſſe and ſuperfluitie, ſpecially in drinking and eating, and from women.
                  3. Alſo from trauaile, and from exceſſe in ſleeping and watchinge.
                  4. Beware of moyſt meates and corruptible, and of all thinges that is cauſe of rawnes, and other euyll humours.
                  5. Lyue ſoberly, drinke and eate at ordinary houres, and in good order.
                  6. Take your reſte, and vſe ſome neate and good exerciſe or occupation.
                  7. Mayntayne and keepe youre naturall or accuſtomed voyding.
                  8. Be merye.
               
               
                  A ſoueraigne pouder agaynſt the venyme of the plague for ryche men and for prynces.
                  
                     TAke Saphyre, Hyacinthe, Smaragdus, of one of theſe, or two, or of all, one Dragme: of Pearles, Bole armenicke of the beſt, the ſeedes of Oxalis, of eche two Dragmes: of the ſcraping of 
                        •
                     uorie two ſcruples, of Unicornes horne a ſcruple, of the ſeedes of Ocimum halfe a ſcruple, yellowe or redde ſanders: Agallochi or Xilaloes of the beſt. Doronici, Cynamom exquiſite, ſaffron, of eche three graynes, Muſke ſyxe graines. Make hereof a fyne pouder. You maye leaue out the Muſke for them that loue it not.
                  The vſe of the ſaide pouder and for other that folow ſhalbe declared afterwarde.
               
               
                  A pouder for poore folke, of no leſſe efficacie and ſtrength than the ſeconde.
                  TAke bole armenicke of the beſt two dragmes: the ſeede of Oxalis three dragmes, aloes hepaticum lotum redde Corall of eche a Dragme, the pouder of Diamargariti frigidi two ſcruples: the pouder of Diatrio ſantalon eyght ſcruples, the pylles of drye Orenges, Cloues, Cynamome, Saffron, of eche fyue Dragmes. Make thereof a fyne Pouder. You ſhall vſe the ſayde Pouders with Conſerues, or wythoute them, wyth Syroppes, diſtilled waters, or rather wyth Juyces, and other ſuche conuenient lycours
               
               
                  A drynke for poore folke, and in a places, where there is none or verye lytle Iuyce, eyther of Syrope, cytrons, Lemons or Pomegranades.
                  YOu ſhall take the pouder preſcribed for poore folke conditi roſati, or conſerue of Roſes, conditi boraginis, or rather coraginis, of eche a Dragme and a halfe:



of the ſucke of Oxalis two vnces Succi arantij. Succi coraginis extract with Roſe water: of good whyte Uinaigre of eche an vnce, and make thereof a drinke.
               
               
                  A drynke often tymes tryed, profytable, and wholeſome, the whiche as many men ſaye, was neuer found vaine.
                  TAke pouder of Motherworte, of the firſt, or of the ſeconde two dragmes: the ſeedes of Sancti or of Orenges: of Myrrhe, of eche a dragme: the ſcrapinges of Hartes horne a dragme, mixe them together well beaten. You muſte drinke this with whyte Uinaigre before a fier: and as ſoone as there appeareth anye ſwellynge in the gryne or flanke, or vnderneth the arme hooles, or any where elles, the remedye muſte be readye: for it prouoketh great ſweate whereby the venim or infection anoydeth in euerye parte.
                  The Pacient thus ſweatinge his infected ſweate beſyde a fyer, muſt be rubbed and dried with whote linnen clothes, whiche muſt be alwayes chaunged, vntil the ſauour of the ſweate begonne with rubbynge.
                  Of the ſayde pouders alſo a man maye make conſerues or opites after this maner that foloweth.
               
               
                  Opiate.
                  TAke of the fyrſte or ſeconde pouder, Orenge pilles conſerued, of eche an vnce and a halfe. conditi roſati, that is to ſay, the conſerue of Roſes, the conſerue of Bugloſſe of eche two vnces, of the ſyrope of the iuyce of Citrons or Lemons or Orenges, or elles of Oxalis or omphacini, as much as ſhal ſuffice. Make therof a liquide electuarie in forme of an opiate. Whereof take an vnce or more, & drink after it ſome of the foreſayde lycours, and ſuch as here followe. It ſhalbe wel done, to mingle an vnce of Purcelane with the licours as foloweth.
               
               
                  
                  A drynke meete after euery takyng of the ſayde opiate, or to be mixte with the takynges of the ſame opiate, for the ſtrongeſt or meaneſt men, accordynge to the place and tyme.
                  TAke the Juyce of Citrons or Lemons thre vnces; of the wyne of ſowre Orenges of whyte Roſe water, of eche an vnce. And mixe them together.
               
               
                  A drynke for poore folke.
                  TAke the Juyce of Sorrell verye cleare thre vnces, of bitter or ſowre Orenges, good whyte & cleare Uinagre, roſe water, of eche an vnce. Make thereof a drinke, putting to it a lytle Sugre if you wil.
               
               
                  A drynke to cauſe one to ſweate.
                  TAke good triacle or Mythridatum a dragme, bolearmenick of the beſt, or of the pouder of one of the herbes called cardiacae, afore diſcribed halfe a dragme: Scabioſe water two vnces: water of Oxalis, Bugloſſe or Borage of eche an vnce: and make thereof a drinke.
               
               
                  Another drynke eaſye for poore folke.
                  TAke the decoction of Scabioſe, and of the flowers of redde Poppye a glaſſefull with a lytle Sugre.
                  Or a Ptyſane made with Barley and An
                        ••
                     e ſeede and the rootes of Perſley. Or of the decoction of Cyche peaſon, the rootes of Perſley, the rootes of Succorye: the one or the other decoction with ſharpe Syrop two vnces, or with Sugre and a lytle whyte Uinaigre.
                  Theſe drinkes muſt be taken whote, the Pacient beinge well couered in his bedde. The Triacle and Mythridate, although they be of great efficacie in this behalfe, yet they are not meete for women with childe, nor for yonge children. The vſe alſo of them ought not to be often, nor in greate quantitie, when the feuer is



great. Some mennes aduiſe is to mingle the medecine for ſweating wt ſome diſtilled water, or with the decoction of herbes, concerning the part to the whiche the venimous matter hath his courſe. Nowe yf a man knowe that the matter goeth to the head, they wyll that the pacient take it for to ſweate wt ſome diſtilled water, or with the decoction of Betony: but if it go to the vitall partes or to the breſt and hart, with the water or decoction of Borage, whiche is very Bugloſſe. Yf it go to the belly and bowels, with lycour of Wormewodde. Yf to the lyuer, then with the decoction, or water of Agrimonie, which is the true cupatorium.
                  
               
               
                  An epitheme or medecine to laye the region of the harte to coole it.
                  TAke Roſe water foure vnces: water of Uiolettes and of Nempher of eche thre vnces: water of Bugloſſe, of Oxalis, of wine of pomegranads of good Uinaigre, of eche two vnces: of Coriander prepared three dragmes, redde Roſes, flower of Pearles of eche a Dragme: of redde Sanders halfe a dragme: of bothe Coralles, of Camphyre, of eche a ſcruple: Saffron half a ſcruple, myngle them togyther. And make thereof an Epitheme.
               
               
                  An Epitheme for the Harte good for poore folkes, whiche maye alſo ſerue for the Lyuer.
                  IT is made of twelue vnces or a pounde of Roſe water, of three vnces of good whyte Uinaigre, puttynge to it in Sommer whyte and redde Sanders, of eche a dragme. Yf it be in Winter, in ſtede of Sanders you ſhall put to it Cloues, the flowers of Nardus celtica, or of Lauendar of eche a dragme.
               
               
                  An Epitheme or medecine for the Lyuer.
                  TAke the water of Succorye in Latine ambubeia, Roſe water, of Oxalis of eche foure vnces: whyte



Uinaigre: wyne of Pomegranades of eche two vnces: pouder of Diarhodon abbatis two dragmes: the pouder Diamargariton frigidum, whiche is a confection made with Pearles, one dragme: redde Sanders halfe a dragme: Camphier halfe a ſcruple. Make thereof an Epitheme.
               
               
                  Locall medecines, and fyrſt a plaiſter or oyntment, for to drawe and diſſolue.
                  TAKE the rootes of Narciſſus, or of Flowerdeluce with his oyle, and braye it with Honny. It is good for a delycate bodye, and eaſeth all the payne.
               
               
                  Another eaſye drawyng medecine.
                  TAke Rue or Dogon brayed with Triacle, or Triacle alone, or of a Radiſhe roote cutte into lytle rounde peeces, and laye on one after another, and chaunge it often tymes.
               
               
                  Another very good in maner of a plaiſter.
                  TAke Diachylum, two vnces, Ammoniacum, Galbanum, of eche halfe an vnce and put them together.
               
               
                  Medecines of the kyndes that burne the ſkynne or fleſhe called medicamenta cauſtica, or veſicatoria, whereof the fyrſt is very ſtronge.
                  APlaiſter of Cantarides, and of vnſleckt lyme mixed with oyle of Walnuttes in ſteede of a lancet, for to get out the ſwellynge.
               
               
                  Another plaiſter.
                  TAKE the rootes of Narc iſſe or of Lilies ſodden with aſhes, of Pigeons dung of eche equal parts: of melligo anacardina called mel anacardinum as much as ſhall ſuffice. And mak thereof a plaiſter.
               
               
                  
                  Another ſtronger.
                  TAke fermentum acris, ſowre Leuen, Sope, Figges, olde Walnuttes, of eche half an vnce, iris florentinae muſtarde ſeede, vnſleckt lyme, Calcanthum, that is to ſaye romain Uitriol, beaten together of eche two dragmes: as muche Turpentine as is nedefull. Make of it a plaiſter.
               
               
                  A medecine that cleanſeth and purifieth.
                  THe yelke of an Egge mixte with a lytle Barley flowre or wheate flowre, putting to it honnye roſet. It is verye ſweete & mete for a delycate body.
               
               
                  Another of the ſame very good.
                  TAke the Juyce of Garlyke ſixe vnces: the Juyce of Wormewodde, good Honny of eche three vnces: Barley flowre or Wheate flowre, or flowre Darnell or Bearebarley two or three dragmes. Seeth it vntill it be ſome what thicke, and make of it an oyntment that mundifieth or purgeth the ſoore.
               
               
                  A playſter incarnatyfe.
                  TAke the leaues of Pimpernell, of Betaine, Ueruin, ſemperuiui tertij, commonly called Vermicularis of the leſſe Centorie, of eche a handefull and a halfe: ſeeth it in whyte wyne vnto the halfe. And being ſtrained put to it Roſen, Waxe, ſheepes ſuet, of eche three vnces. Seeth all together with a lytle womans milke put in it, vntill the Juyces be conſumed. Than whan you haue taken it from the fier, put to it when it beginneth to be colde, Roſen, Turpentine, three vnces, cleare Maſticke and proued ten dragmes, aloes hepaticum two dragmes: mingle them and ſturre them with a porſ
                        •
                     cke, and make of it a plaiſter.
               
               
                  
                  A repercuſsyfe and reſolutyue oyntmente agaynſte the Canker.
                  TAke Lead burned and waſhed; Pompholix which the Apoticaries do cal Nil, Frankenſence, of eche two vnces, Wormewodde, of that which is called abſinthium ponticum halfe an vnce, oyle of Roſes three vnces, Waxe ſyxe dragmes: the iuyce of nightſhade, as muche as is ſufficiente for the thickeneſſe of the oyntment.
               
               
                  A playſter dyapompholigos of Theodoricke, for to ſtoppe the gnawyng and eatyng of the canker. It is repercuſfiue, refrigeratiue and deſiccatiue.
                  TAke good oyle of Roſes, whyte Waxe, of eche two vnces: the iuyce of the redde graines or berries of the herbe called Solanum two vnces: redde Lead waſhed an vnce: Lead burned and waſht, Pompho lygos commonly called Tutia, of eche half an vnce: frankenſence of the male kinde two dragmes. Make thereof a playſter.
               
               
                  An oyntment verye ſweete for cankers that haue corrupte matter in them, whiche alſo alayeth the payne of thoſe that haue no corrupt matter in them.
                  TAke good Waxe, Turpentine, Bulles ſuet, the newe & freſh marow of a Deere or Calfe, oleum rici 
                           •
                        ium, newe and freſhe Gooſe greaſe, Honny elect, Frankenſence, Diphrix, Pomphilix, of eche equal porcions, and of oeſipum thryſe as much, without y• Frankenſence the authour thinketh it wil be ſweeter, but with it more reſolutyue and wyll rype it the ſooner, and is better for Cankers that haue no corrupte matter in them.
               
               
                  An oyntment of a merueylous vertue agaynſte the eatyng and running of the canker, and to take away al the griefe of the ſame.
                  
                     TAke Kue or Sumach ſextarios three. Pilles of Cipres thre vnces, Galles not ripe, Caſſia of eche an vnce & a half: Vinū adrianum, that is to ſay: wyne that byndeth, and olde wyne of good odour fyue ſextarios. All theſe thynges beyng bruſed together, laye them in wyne three dayes, and then ſeeth them three or foure wawmes ſtyring it with a ſlyſe of Cypres. Then hauyng wronge all oute diligentlye, and caſte awaye the thycke of it, the Juyce wyll ſeeth in the thyckenneſſe of Honnye, for to be kepte āfterwarde in a veſſell of Glaſſe.
                  Thys oyntment muſte be vſed alone without anye mixture aganyſt the ſayde diſeaſe, addynge to it ſometyme a lytle wyne. Yf the medecine be to thycke you muſte make it liquide and ſofte, for the ſyckenneſſe whiche poſſeſſeth the priuye partes of a woman, that is to ſaye, the necke of the Matrice. Yf you diſſolue it in the milke of an Aſſe, it mitigateth the paine, alſo is very profitable for al other ſcorching of y• ſkynne that runneth in length, & extendeth more and more, and bryngeth no inflamation. It is good for to drye vp the eares that haue bene of longe tyme ſubiecte to a runnynge and putrified matter of bloode corrupted.
                  Alſo for the Gaumes that bee infected and wythered, alſo agaynſte vlcers that bee harde to heale, and can not bee cutte, but wyth greate payne, yf it bee mingled moderately and reaſonablye. But howe is it that ſofte and gentle remedies ſhoulde reſiſte ſuche a diſeaſe, to the whiche the rougheſt and the moſte wyldeſtgeue place. The ſayde oyntment is to bee prepared as foloweth.
                  Take Sumach a pounde: Pylies of Cipres three vnces: of vnrype Galles, of Caſſia, of eche an vnce. Vi
                           •
                        um adrianum, that is to ſaye: Vinum aſtringens, foure pounde.
               
               
                  A plaiſter mitigatiue, and very gentle for Cankers, ſpecially of the breſtes or pappes.
                  
                     TAke Saffron, Poppye, Frankenſence of the male kynde of eche a dragme: Lithargyri, Plumbi vſti loti two dragmes, Ceruſe prepared and vnce and a halfe: whyte Waxe two vnces, Gooſe greaſe, newe and freſhe butter of eche three vnces. Roſacei boni foure vnces. The pouder being brayed with the Juyce of Morella muſt be mingled with the thinges molten.
               
               FINIS.
            
            
               
                  Here after folowe manye goodly receyptes, touchynge the handelynge of dyuers metalles, all well tryed and approued.
               
                  And fyrſte for to harden yron.
                  TAKE Ueruine, and bray it ſtalkes and all, and keepe the 
                        •
                     uyce of it in ſome glaſſe. Now when you will harden any yron, put to the ſame ſuyce as much of piſſe, with the iuyce of a litle worme called in Latyne Spondilis, in Dutche Engherlincker. And let not your yron be to whote, but when you ſee that it is indifferent whote, quenche it in the ſaide mixion, and let it coole of it ſelfe vntill you ſee ſytle ſpottes vpon it ſomewhat yellowe▪ and than put it to the ſayde water. If it waxe verye blewe, it is a ſygne that it is not hardened inough.
               
               
                  For to harden knydes, and other ſuche 
                        •
                     yke.
                  
                     TAke the marowe of a Horſe, wherein you ſhal coole your Iron.
               
               
                  For to harden a fyle or other inſtrument of yron.
                  TAke olde ſhoes and burne them, and make them into a pouder, and put to it as much ſalt: caſt this mixture vpon and vnder the Fyles in a Cof
                        •
                     r or Cheſt of yron couered with a couer of yron: and lay the pouder ſo that it may bee as much aboue as vnder, the thickenes of a ſtrawe. Couer the ſayde coſer with his couer, and put it into y• fyer vntil it be redde whote: after this let it fall into ſome colde water, & you ſhall haue the Fyles good and very hard. You may annoynt them alſo with oyle of Lyne or he Goates bloode▪
                  
               
               
                  To harden any other ſubſtaunce materiall.
                  TAke the iuyce of Cynkefoyle, with the iuyce of Wormewodde, and put it in ſome Glaſſe, than take wormes which you ſhall ſtampe, and ſtrayne thorowe a linnen clothe, and rubbe the whote yron with all, and than quenche it in the ſayde iuyces.
               
               
                  To make any inſtrument of ſteele harde and ſharpe.
                  TAKE the leaues and rootes of Bugloſſe ſodden in water, wherein you ſhall quenche your inſtrument of yron.
               
               
                  Another.
                  TAke Dragontion with his rootes, and as muche Ueruine: ſeeth this in cleare water, and lette it coole, and ware cleare, and ſo annoynte your inſtrument with it. Alſo take mannes pyſſe mixte with cleare water, made luke warme: in this quenche your inſtrument. Alſo you may harden it in good Muſtarde made with ſtronge Uinaigre. Alſo when you wyl harden any thing you muſt ſee that it be cleane neate and polliſhed.
               
               
                  
                  For to kepe it from 
                        •
                     leanyng when it is a hardenyng.
                  TAke Tallo we and melte it, than powre it in colde water vntill it waxe thicke and ſwymme in the water the thickneſſe of a fyngar. Than take your inſtrument whote, and put it firſt thorow the Tallow and then into the water. Some quenche alſo ſhurtes of maile in the iuyce of Rape rootes.
               
               
                  To make yron or ſteele ſofte.
                  IF you will make yron or ſteele as ſofte as copper, take vnſleckt lyme with as much Alume, well ſtamped firſte in ſome morter: mixe wel theſe two things together, and laye them vpon ſome lynnen clothe the thicknes of a fynger or half a finger, and wrappe your inſtrument that you will haue made ſoft in it, and lay it ſo in ſome ſmall fyer the ſpace of an houre, vntil the fier go out, and that your inſtrument be cold of it ſelf, and than ſhal you finde it as ſofte as copper.
               
               
                  Another.
                  LAye your yron or Steele in a ſmall fyer, and when the fyer is out, let your yron coole of it ſelfe.
               
               
                  Another.
                  TAke the water of Radiſhe rootes and quench your yron or ſteele in it. Alſo you maye take the aſhes mixte with vnfleckte lyme, and make thereof lye, the whiche you ſhall let runne thorowe the ſayde ſubſtaunces: in thys lye ſteepe youre yron or ſteele the ſpace of a nyghte, and ſo ſhall you make it meete to cutte or engraue in. Afterwarde if you will harden it agayne you may quench it in colde water.
               
               
                  Another.
                  
                     TAke the yellowe flowers lyke to Marygoldes, the leaues bee large and as brode as the nayle of a mans finger: take them ſtawkes and all, & ſtampe them, and ſtraine them thorowe a linnen clothe, and keepe the iuyce in a pot. Than put your yron or ſteele in the fier vntill it be redde whote, and then quenche it in the ſaide water, and it wil be as ſoft as copper.
               
               
                  Another.
                  TAke ſome great ſnayles, and other great grounde wormes of equall portion, and the thyrde parte ſalte. Than take an earthen pot, or ſome other platter of earth ful of holes, wherin you: ſhal pouder or ſalte your ſnayles and wormes, and receyue the ſalte whiche ſhall melt and droppe from them into another pot ſet vnderneth, and the thickeſt ſubſtaunce will remaine in the veſſel full of holes, the whiche you maye caſt awaye. This done laye a ſtone vpon the pot, and ſeeth it vntill it fome or froth no more: then take it from the fier, and let it coole. In this water you maye quenche your yron or ſteele being redde whote, and by this meanes you ſhal make it as ſoft as copper, and for to harden it againe, you muſte make it redde whote, and quenche it in colde water.
               
               
                  Another.
                  TAke the herbe called Fole foote, and diſtill it: then make your yron red whote, and quenche it in the ſame water. Alſo take ſnayles and ſtampe them with good Uinaigre, wherein you may quenche your yron or ſteele: Or quenche yron in the bloode of an Eele, and it wil be lyke wyfe ſofte.
                  Alſo take yron or ſteele, and wrappe it in Potters claye with a we ate linnen cloth, and lay it in the fier, and afterwarde let it coole of it ſelfe. Take alſo the iuyce of Marubium, and the iuyce of Milfoyle, with the iuyce of Radiſhe rootes mixt with good wyne, and



quenche your yron in the mixtion.
               
               
                  To make Chriſtal ſoft ſo that you may breake it in peeces.
                  TAke burned leade and Chriſtal as much of the one as of the other, and breake it vpon a ſtone, than put this mixture into a melting pot, and melt it, and ſo ſhal you make it into what forme or faſhiō you will. The ſame may you breake and bruſe as you wil.
               
               
                  Another.
                  TAke quick lyme and aſhes of equal quantitie, and lye with it, paſſinge and ſtrainyng it thorowe the aſhes and lyme nyne or tenne tymes. That done ſteepe your ſteele or Chriſtall in the ſame lye, the ſpace of▪ xxiiii. houres, 
                        •
                     nd you ſhal finde it ſoft.
               
               
                  For to ſoften yron.
                  TAke the water that is vpon the bloode of a man whan he is let bloode, whiche you ſhall handſomly powre from the bloode. Than lay your yron in the fier vntil it be whote, than with a litle fether wet in the ſaid water rub it ſo long with it vntil the water vaniſhe awaye, and it will be ſoft.
               
               
                  Another.
                  TAke ſcommed honny, the new piſſe of a he goate, alome, borace, oyle oliue and ſalt: mingle all well together, and quench your yron in the mixtion.
               
               
                  To ſoften a lytle that which is to harde.
                  THat which is to hard, keepe it ſo longe in the fyer till it be very whote: Than take Tallowe, with the whiche you ſhall rubbe your matter, and let it ſo coole.
               
               
                  To mollifie and ſoften yron or ſteele, in ſuch ſort that you may bow and winde it which way you wyll.
                  
                     TAke Camomille flowers with one parte of herbe Robert, and one part of Ueruine: put all this in a potte with whote water, and ſo ſtoppe it that no ſmoke maye come out: than ſeeth it, and quenche your yron in it.
               
               
                  To ſoder all thynges, and fyrſt yron.
                  TAke an vnce of ſalte Armoniacke, an vnce of common ſalte, an vnce of Tartre calcined, an vnce of belle metall, three vnces of Antimonium: ſtampe wel all together and ſift or bolt it: this done put all in a linnen cloth, and wrappe it rounde about with potters claye well prepared the thickeneſſe of a fynger and let it ware verye drye: than put it betwene two pot ſhardes vpon a ſmall fyer, and let it heate by litle and litle. Afterwarde make the fyer greater, vntill your whole maſſe become red and melt together: than let it ſo coole, and after make it into a pouder.
                  And when you will ſoder any thing, laye the two peeches that you wyll ſoder vpon a table, as nere the one to the other as you can, but you muſt laye ſome paper vnder the peeces.
                  This done, caſt of the ſaid pouder betwene the ioyntes, and a litle vpon them: than make ſome cruſte of potters, but yet ſo that it be open aboue: after this put ſome Borace in whote wyne vntill it be al conſumed, than with a lytle feather rubbe the ſayde pouder, and incontinent it will beginne to boyle and ſeeth: and when you ſee it boyle no more, it is a ſigne that the ſodering and conſolidation is made. And if there be any excreſcence or riſyng vp, you muſt diminiſhe it by rubbinge it, for it wil not be fyled.
               
               
                  To ſoder any whote thinge.
                  TAke gomme water, chawke made in pouder, and make thereof a dowe or paſte, wherewith you ſhal anoynt the thing that is a ſonder, laying it vpō a



table as is afore ſayde: than take awaye the dowe or paſte that is vpon the ioyninge of the two peeces, and leaue it on bothe ſydes: than annoynte the ioynt with Sope, and holde a whote cole ouer it, and by and by the ſaide ſubſtaunce will melt. After this take awaye the ſayde dowe or paſt and it done.
               
               
                  To ſoder copper.
                  TAke balfe an vnce of copper, thre quarters of an vnce of whyte Arſenick: melt the copper, and deuide your Arſenick in two partes, and caſte one part into the copper molten, mingle al together, than caſt into it alſo the other part: and than powre it vpon a ſtone, and beate it ſmall.
               
               
                  To ſoder yron.
                  FYle well to purpoſe and proporcion the ioyntes of the yrons, and than lay them in the fier, as is afore ſaide, caſting vpon it ſome Ueniſe glaſſe, and it wil be ſodered.
               
               
                  A pouder that wyll make all metall pliable and ſofte.
                  TAke a quarterne of Antimonium, axinigia vitri, and ſalte of equall quantitie: Make all together in a pouder: than take of the ſame pouder three parts, and one part of the metall and melt it.
               
               
                  Another vpon braſſe.
                  TAke ſalt ſtamped, Tartre, Saltpeter, axinigia vetri, aſhes of Uines, or Lyes of wyne, quicke lyme: Make al this in pouder, and laye it vpon the place that you will ſoder.
               
               
                  For to graue in yron or ſteele, kny
                        •
                     es and harneſſe.
                  
                     TAke one part of coales made of bir
                        •
                     he ſtampt, two pactes of Uitrſoll, with as much ſalt armoniack: Than ſtampe all together with Uinaigre, vntill it be lyke vnto a ſoft dow or paſt. Now whan you wil graue in yron or other thinges, make firſt the deſcription or figures that you wil graue, and that with Uermilion mixt with oyle of Line, and let it dried, and afterward couer it with the ſaide ſubſtaunce the thickeneſſe of a finger, the whiche the whoter it is layed vpon it, the ſooner it wil be done, but you muſt take hede you burne it not. And whan it is weldrie, take away the ſaid pouder, and waſhe wel the grauing. Alſo ſome take two partes of Spaniſhe greene, or one parte of common ſalt, and in ſtamping it in ſome morter, they put to it ſome ſtronge Uinaigre, and than doe it as is aforeſaide. Take alſo Uitrioll, Alom, Salt, Uinaigre, coales of Birche, and do as before.
               
               
                  To graue with water.
                  TAke Spaniſhe greene called Uerdet, quicke Siluer, Sublime, Uitrioll, and Alome of eche equally, ſtampe wel all together, and put it in a glaſſe, leauing it ſo halfe a day, ſtirring it often times: Than make youre deſcription or figures as you will, with Waxe or artificiall O
                        •
                     re and Oyle of Lyne mixt together, or Uermillion mixt with Oyle of Lyne, than annoynte it with that water, and let it alone ſo the ſpace of a daye: But if you will haue your deſcription verye deepe graued, leaue it ſo ſtanding longer.
                  But if you will engraue writynges or Images, you ſhall make a grounde of Wa
                        •
                     e, wherein you ſhall make youre deſcription with the poincte of a Bodken euen to the bottome: Than powre the water vpon it whiche water will engraue it. Or elles you may laye vppon your deſcription made as before is ſaide, ſome Marcurium ſublimatum, and than caſte ſome good Uinaigre vpon it, and let it alone ſo halfe an houre.
               
               
                  
                  Another ſtronger and moore bytyng.
                  TAke a quarter of an vnce of Spaniſhe greeue, alumen plumae, ſalte Armoniacke, Tartre, common Salt, of eche a quarter of an vnce, all being well ſtampt and mixte with ſtronge Uinaigre, leaue it ſo the ſpace of an houre. And if you will that your deſcription bee highe or ra
                        •
                     ſed vp, write it with artificiall O
                        •
                     re and Oyle of Line▪ brayed and mingled together: and let it 
                        •
                     r
                        •
                     e well: Than heate the ſaide water in a panne leaded within, letting it alone vpon the fier. Than take youre ſteele and holde it ouer the ſaide panne, vpon the which you ſhal powre of the ſaid water with a ſpone, and ſo the water wil fal againe into the panne and there ſhalbe nothing loſt▪ Do thus t
                        •
                     e ſpace of a quarter of an houre, but let not the water be t
                        •
                      whote, leſt that the Oyle which was mixt with the Uerniſhe go not out.
                  This done, rubbe ouer the ſaide ſubſtaunces with aſhes or quicke Lime, and than ſhall you finde that whiche before was annoynted, whole and highe, and the other engraned.
               
               
                  To make a colour of golde or ſiluet to lave vpon metall▪ and to make alſo a ground of golde or ſiluer, vpon yron▪ belles, or ſtones, which ſhal not go of with water.
                  TAke one part of Ocre, the ſeconde part of minium, the fourth part of Bole armenicke, and as muche Aqua
                        •
                     ire, and bray wel altogether with Oyle of Line 
                        ••
                     ede▪ and put t
                        •
                      it alſo the bigneſſe of a litle nut 
                        •
                     f 
                        〈…〉
                      and▪ iii▪ or. iiii▪ droppes of Uerniſhe. Yf the colour bee to thicke, 
                        •
                     nt a litle more of the ſaide oyle to it: Than ſtraine it th
                        •
                     r
                        •
                      we a fine linnen clothe into ſome cleane beſſel, and it wil be as thicke as honny and than rubbe what you will with it, and let it drie, and than laye your golde or ſiluer. vpon it.
               
               
                  A colour of golde to ſet vpon braſſe or copper.
                  
                     TAke a lytle potte well leaded, and put into it three vnces of oyle of lineſeede, than take halfe an vnce of Maſticke, and halfe an vnce of aloes hepaticum ritrinum, and make it well into a pouder, and put it into the ſaide oyle, and couer it cloſe with another pot wherein you ſhall make a litle hole aboue, that is to ſay in the bottom of the ſayde potte that ſhalbe vppermoſt. Annoynt the ſaide potte well with potters earth and let them bee ſo cloſe one vpon another, that nothing may come out: than put in aboue a ſticke brode at the ende, with the whiche you may ſtyrre it: and let all ſeeth as they do Painters verniſhe. This done poliſhe well that which you wyll gylt, and laye the ſaide colour vpon it, and drie it in the Sunne, and if there be not inough, put more on vntil it be well.
               
               
                  Another.
                  TAke drye Uerniſhe, Amber, Alome, of theſe two as much of the one as of the other: than take Uerniſhe, and oyle of lineſeede: ſeeth all together on a fier of coales in a potte well leaded, that it may be wel mirt together: then aſſaye it vpon a knife, and if it be to thicke, put more oyle to it: but if it be to cleare or to thinne put more Alome to it.
               
               
                  Another.
                  TAke halfe an vnce of aloe hepaticum citrinum, halfe an vnce of Amber, theſe two being made in pouder ſet them on a moderate fier. in a potte well leaded, but let it not be to whote at the firſt. And when all is molten, powre ſome boyling oyle vpon it, ſturring and mixing it well together with alitle ſticke: after this let it coole, & ſtraine it thorow a linen cloth.
               
               
                  Another.
                  TAke halfe an vnce of bole Armenick, halfe an vnce of whyte gomme, and ſet it vpon a fier of coales,



putting to it an vnce of oyle of Line ſeede, and whan you may draw it in length lyke a threede, it is made.
               
               
                  A colour of golde vpon braſſe.
                  TAke oyle of Lyne ſeede well clarified on the fier: than put to it Amber, and aloe hepaticum citrinum, of eche alyke, and being wel ſtampt, mingle it ſo wel with the oyle on the fyer that it may bee thycke, then take it from the fyer, and ſet it on the ground well couered the ſpace of three daies: And the braſſe that you ſhall gilt, ſhall take the colour of gold.
               
               
                  To make copper of a ſyluer colour.
                  TAke wine leeſe, alome and ſalt: bray well altogyther vpon a ſtone: and put vnto it a leafe or two of ſyluer, brayeng them alſo with the other foreſayd things. Put all in a pot wel leaded, putting to it ſome water: then caſt your copper into it, and after rubbe it with a rubber: and ſo ſhall you ſee when it is ynough.
               
               
                  To gylte yron or ſteele.
                  TAke one part of wine ſeeſe, halfe aſmuche of ſalte Armoniacke, and aſmuch ſpaniſhe grene, and a litle ſalt: Seeth all in white wine and anoynt your yron or ſteele, with it when you haue well poliſhed it: and ſo let it drye, and then gilt it with gold ground.
               
               
                  To make a water for to gylt vpon yron or ſteele.
                  TAke an vnce of the aſhes of wine leeſe burned, an vnce of white wine, an vnce of Alom, half an vnce of ſalt gemma, alumen plu
                           •••
                        
                      the weight of two grotes, Spaniſh greene the weight of two grotes, Coperous y• weight of a grote, baye ſalt, a pint of ruening: ſeeth this vnto the half, and than put it in a new pot▪ laying vpon it. vii. or. viii. new paper leaues, and a tile ouer that, to the ende it may take no ayre.
               
               
                  
                  To keepe all maner of yron, or ſteele cleane, and alſo all maner of inſtrumentes of warre.
                  TAke Lead fyled verye ſmall, and put it in a potte with oyle Olyue, vntill it couer it, leauing it ſo nine dayes together: Than anoynt with the ſame oyle, harneſſe, ſwordes, yron or ſteele, and it ſhal neuer ruſte. The greaſe of neates feete ſodden is alſo good for the ſame.
               
            
         
         
            
               THE ſeconde Booke containyng the maner howe to take oute quickly with water or Lye, without hurtinge any thynge, all maner of ſpottes of garmentes of clothe, veluet, ſilke, or other, whether they bee ſpottes of oyle, greaſe, wyne, or what ſo euer they be.
            
               To bryng a cloth that was ſtayned to his colour agayne.
               TAKE a pounde of earthen pots bruſed, and hauing powred vpon it about foure pintes of water, let it reſt a night. Than powre out the Lie, and put into the ſame two Oxe galles, & a handful of drie birchen leaues, and let them ſeeth together halfe an houre long, or vntil the leaues goe to the bottome. Than let it coole, and ſuche colour as you wil reſtore that was ſtained, take the ſhearings or flockes of the clothe of the ſame colour, and ſeeth it againe with the ſaide Lie, leauinge it ſo to reſte the ſpace of xiiii. dayes or more: for the Lie wil drawe vnto it ſelfe the colour of the ſhearings or flocks. Than powre it out, and waſhe the clothe with it, and it ſhall receyue his firſte colour againe.
            
            
               
               To take ſpottes out of cloth.
               TAke colde Lie made of the aſhes of Beeche, and put to it a litle wine Lies, and of the olde claye of ſome ouen, put the clothe into it where the ſpot is, for it wil take al the ſpot out, than waſhe your cloth with cleane water, and drie it in the Sunne. And yf the ſpots be not wel taken out do it againe as before.
            
            
               Another waye.
               TAke ſixe vnces of alumen fecis, foure vnces of rawe tartre, two vnces of alome, half a dragme of camphyre, halfe a dragme of Dragons blood: ſtampe them wel, and mingle them wel together. Than take sixe vnces of an Oxe galle, three pyntes of cleare water, put all together in a kettle; and ſeeth it vntil it be diminiſhed of the two thirde partes, than ſtraine it thorow a linnen clothe, and thoughe the galle nor the camphyre were not in it, yet the water wold be ſtrong inough: whan you wil occupie it, bath the peece of new cloth in the ſaide water, and rubbe wel the ſpot withall: and whan the cloth is no more weate wt rubbing, weate it againe, and rubbe the cloth with it vntill the ſpot be out. This done, take whole water, and waſhe the place where the ſpot was: but if the cloth be white take a litle Sope with the ſame water, and diſtille it, and occupie it as before.
            
            
               Another waye.
               TAke ſixe Oxe galles, and twyſe as muche raine water, halfe a pound of Tartre, an vnce of Alom, ſtampe them ſmall, and take a glaſſeful of Uinaigre, into the which you ſhal put ſixe dragmes of Uitrioll wel brayed, powre al together, and ſeeth it vntil it be diminiſhed of the two thirde partes, and than vſe it as is afore ſayde.
            
            
               A water to take ſpots out of whyte clothe.
               
                  TAke foure vnces of alumen fecis, a pint of water, and ſeeth them vntil thei be conſumed to the. iiii. part. Than take whyte Sope and cut it ſmall, an vnce of Alome: put al into the water, & let it ſtand the ſpace of two dayes, & vſe it for your whyte cloth as before.
            
            
               To take ſpots of greaſe or oyle out of whyte cloth.
               TAke whaye of wylke ſodden with flower, ſteepe your clothe in it ſo far as to the ſpot, the ſpace of a night: than waſh it with faire riuer water, and hang it in the moſt heate of the Sunne: but if the cloth be of a noble colour, you mai not let it be to whote leſt the Sunne hurt the colour: for the heate of the Sunne ſoone hurteth faire colours.
            
            
               To take ſpots of greaſe and oyle out of all ſortes of cloth whyte or other.
               TAke the water that peaſe hath bene ſodden in, and ſteepe your cloth where the ſpot is in it, and than waſhe it with cleane riuer water, and hang it in the Sunne.
            
            
               Another.
               TAke colde Lie, lyes of whyte wyne made a lytle whote, and mixe them well together. But you muſte take heede they be not to whote and waſhe your cloth as before.
            
            
               To take ſpots of wyne out of all maner of cloth.
               TAke Lie made we aſhes of beech, whyte wyne lees as much of the one as the other, laye your cloth in it a night, and waſh it afterwarde with colde water, and drie it in the Sunne.
            
            
               To take all maner of ſpots out of ſylke.
               TAke the iuyce of great and round muſherom
                     •
                   of a ſharpe taſte, weate the ſpots in it the ſpace of two houres, and than waſhe them with cleare water, and let them drye.
            
            
               
               To take all ſpots out of crymſen Veluet.
               TAke the aſhes made of Uine twigges, and make therewith good Lie, whereof you ſhall take but a pinte, and put into it half an vnce of alumen fecis, and let it ſtand a litle whyle, and than ſtrayne it.
               This done, take a dragme of Alome, half a dragme of Spaniſhe Sope, and half a dragme of ſoft Sope a quarter of a bragme of common ſalt, and a quarter of ſalt Armoniacke, halfe a quarter of the iuyce of Celandine, a quarter of the galle of a Ealfe. Put al together and ſtraine it thorow a linnen clothe. And whan you wil occupy of the ſayd water, take flocks▪ or ſhearings of Scarlate, and a litle Braſyl ſmal; ſeeth all that a litle in the ſaide water, and than ſtrained 
                     •
                   thorow a linen cloth▪ and you ſhal haue a fai
                     ••
                   water▪ which wyll take the ſpottes out of anye lyke crymſen colour. And what colour ſoeuer your clothe be that hath the ſpots, the ſame colour flockes or ſhearinges muſte you take. Not withſtanding if it be not red, you muſte leaue out your Braſyll.
            
            
               A water to take al ſpots out of cloth of gold and veluet.
               TAke rawe redde Arſnicke, martem crudum, as muche of the one as of the other, and whan they bee well brayed▪ powre ſome faire water vpon them, and putting the herbe Cinkfoyle to it, ſeeth it vnto halfe: and than let it coole, and ſet it in the S
                     •••
                  e two houres: than waſhe your clothe in it, and let it drye in the Sune.
            
            
               To make a ſope that taketh out all ſpottes.
               TAke a pound of roche Alome, beate it into pouder: the rootes of Iris of Florence made in pouder, halfe a pound of new layed egges, two pound and a halfe of Spaniſhe Sope, bray the ſayd pouders with the Egges and Sope, and make thereof round bals.



If one Egge be not inough, take as many as you ſhal thinke good. And whan you wil take oute any ſpot of greaſe, waſhe the place of the ſpot on both ſydes of the cloth with fayre water, than rubbe it with the ſayde balles and cloth vpon cloth. This done, waſhe out the odure with cleane water, and wring the cloth to make the greaſe or filth come out the better. Than waſhe it ſtill with cleane water, and it wil be cleane.
            
            
               To take ſpottes of blacke yncke or other thynges oute of wollen or lynnen cloth.
               TAKE greene Lemons or greene Orenges with their pilles, the which the Italians cal pomid, adam or which of the two you will: take but the liquide moyſture which you ſhal take out by preſſing it, wherwith you ſhal rubbe well the ſpots, and than let them drie. This done▪ take luke warme water, and waſhe the ſaide ſpots, and let them drie againe. And if you ſee that at the firſt tyme the ſpots be not well inough taken out, do it once againe, and the cloth wil returne to his colour againe.
            
            
               To take ſpots out of Scarlate or Veluet of colours, wythout hurtyng any thyng at all the colour.
               TAke the iuyce of Saponaria, called of the Apoticaries condi ſi or 
                     •
                  auaria▪ the which you ſhal lay vpon y• ſpot leauing it ſo an houre longe, if it be in Sommer, and foure houres if it be in 
                     〈…〉
                  ter: Than take luke warme water and waſhe the ſpot with it, & if it ſcoure not cleane, put more iuyce vpon it, or elles of the ſaid moiſture of the orenges or Lemons: but if it be Scarlate not died in graine, laye vpon halfe Sope, and halfe iuyce: and than waſhe it with whote water, and the ſpot wil go out.
            
            
               To take ſpots of oyle of from parchement or whyte paper.
               
                  TAke ſheepes bones and burne them, and make them into pouder: and rubbe the ſpot on both ſydes with the ſame pouder, and laye it ſo betwene two bourdes in a preſſe the ſpace of a nyghte and the ſpot ſhall awaye.
            
         
         
            
               THE thyrde Booke, for to dye threede, yarne, or linnen clothe, teaching howe to make the dying colours, and alſo to dye bones and hornes, and to make them ſofte, vnto what forme and faſhion a man wyll.
            
               To dye threede, yarne, or lynnen cloth into a ſad browne.
               
                  TAKE a pounde of baſtarde Saffron, the which you ſhal put into a litle bagge and hang it in riuer water a daye and a night. Than waſhe it ſo muche, that it geue no more yellow colour: this done, make a rancke of Saffron in a pot not to thicke, than a rewe of Saffron, and a rewe of aſhes, and couer it well, and let it ſtande ſeuen or eyght houres: than take eyght pottes of water, foure pottes of Uinaigre, and putting the Saffron with the aſhes in a long bagge and ſharpe pointed at the ende: ſtrayne xv. or. xvi. tymes the ſayde water and Uinaigre thorowe it whote. And this is the laſt dying or colour.
               Than take againe as much water and Uinaigre, and ſtraine it thorowe, and this ſhalbe the ſeconde dying. Do the lyke ye thyrd tyme, & it ſhalbe the thyrd dying.



This colour you ſhall heate, and laye your threede or linnen clothe in it the ſpace of a nyghte, than bang it vp without wringing or rubbing it. Do in like maner with the ſeconde colour and with the thyrde, but let it lye in it that ſeuen houres long.
            
            
               To dye threde or linnen clothe blewe.
               TAke the berries of Ebulus, very rype, and well dried in the Sunne, laye them in Uinaigre. xii. houres than rubbe them with your hande, and ſtrayne them thorowe a linnen clothe, putting to them ſome Uerdet bruſed & Alome alone. Yf the blewe ve to cleare put more Uerdet to it, and laye your threede or linnen clothe in it.
            
            
               A blewe colour to dye all thynges.
               TAke an vnce of the beating of copper, a dragme of ſalt three ſpones full of Uinaigre. Put all together in a laddel of copper: or ſome other ſtronge veſſell of copper: and whan you wyl dye, put the ſaide matter into the whote decoction of Braſyll, and die with it what you will.
            
            
               Another waye to dye blewe.
               TAke thre partes of aſhes of lees burned, one parte of vnſleket ſyine, and make therof lye, let it clarifie and than ſtrayne it thorowe a courſe linnen cloth take. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . pots of the ſame water, & powre it vpō a pound of Flaunders blew, ſuch as is taken of the diers 
                     •
                  awdrons, mingle them wel together with a ſtick. Than ſet it on the fyer vntill you can ſkante endure your hande in it. But before you dye anye thing, you muſt haue your linnen cloth boyled in Alome and dried agayne, and plunged afterwarde in the whote Lye twyſe or thryſe, according as you wyll haue the colour darke or cleare. The ſubſtaunce muſt be whote before you occupye it.
            
            
               
               To dye redde.
               TAke half an vnce of Braſyll ſcraped, halfe an vnce of Uermillion wel brayed. Boyle them together in raine water, and put into it the bigneſſe of a nut of Alome. Seeth all vnto the halfe, and dye with it. You maye ſeeth alſo the Braſylle twyſe or thriſe putting to it at eche time a lytle Uermillion. Alſo you may make of it as many dyings & colours as you wil.
            
            
               Another waye.
               TAke vnſleckt lyme, and put a litle water vpon it, and let it ſtand a night, and afterward ſtraine the cleareſt thorow a linnen cloth, and for euery pinte of water put in halfe an vnce of ſcraped Braſyl. Let it ſeeth vnto the halfe, and put to it halfe an vnce of Alome, ſet it vpon wodde, and let it heate but not ſeeth. Whan you wil, haue that you wil die readie prepared in ſuch ſort as here foloweth. Take lees of redde wine and put it in a bagge▪ that al the wine dreane out, and the lees waxe drie. Make thereof balles as bigge as a hennes egge drying them in the Sunne, and burnyng them after into aſhes, and of this aſhes make a ſtrong Lye, and make it verye whote, and than weate in it the thing that you will dye, drying it afterwarde, and than dye it with the foreſayde colour.
            
            
               To dye redde.
               TAKE for euerye pounde of clothe a quarterne of Alome, and ſeeth it, and put the clothe in it two houres long. Than▪ take the roſet of Braſyl with gomme Arabicke, and let them ſeeth a quarter of an houre. Than ſtraine it, and put into it your threede, clothe or any thing that you wyl.
            
            
               To make fayre roſet.
               
                  TAke a pottle of water, an vnce of braſil: ſeeth them vnto the halfe, than take them from the fier, and put as muche graine to them as you ſhall thynke good, and halfe a quarter of gomme. Yf you wyl haue but a ſleyght redde, powre it into another pot, or put to it a quarterne of Alome in pouder, and let it ſo ſtand a nyghte.
            
            
               To dye wodde, bones, and horne, into greene.
               TAke two partes of Spaniſhe greene, a thyrde part of ſalt Armoniacke bray them well together, and put them in Uinaigre. And put into it the thinge that you will die, coueryng it wel, and ſo let it ſtande vntil it be greene inoughe. But before you die anye thing, you muſt lay it halfe a day in Alome water, and than drie it well againe.
            
            
               Another greene.
               PUt your horne, or wodde, or that you wil die, in a verniſhed pot, and put to it ſtrong Uinaigre, mingling with if ſome Uerdegreaſe that is very thicke and not cleare. Couer it wel, and ſet it ſeuen dayes together in a dunghill, and if than it bee not greene inough, let it ſtande there longer. A man maye do the like with Spaniſhe greene or Uerdet.
            
            
               To die horne, bone, and wodde, into redde.
               TAke quicke lyme, and caſt ſome raine water vpon it, and let ſo ſtande a night: the nexte morning, ſtraine the cleareſt thorowe a lynnen clothe, putting to it for euerye pot of water, halfe an vnce of the ſcrapinges of Braſil, and 
                     •••
                   them ſeeth wel in it: but yet they muſte bee boyled in Alome firſte, as before is ſayde.
            
            
               To die yellowe.
               
                  TAke the barke of an apple tree, not the outwarde harde and roughe barke, but the inwarde, but it in ſmall loppins, and powre ſome water vpon them, and than put in your wodde, bone, or horne, to it with Alome. And let it ſeeth wel together.
            
            
               To dye blacke.
               TAke Galles broken or bruſed in peeces, and ſeeth them in ſtronge Uinaigre: and put your wodde, bone, or horne in it. And let all ſeeth well together. Take them than out, and put them in whytes of Egges, puttinge to it the iuyce of walnuttes, and let them ſeeth well together.
            
            
               To make horne ſo
                     •
                  e.
               TAke mannes pyſſe, that hath vene kept ſtopt, a moneth together, put into it a pounde of vnſleckt lyme, and halfe ſo muche of aſhes of burned wyne Lees, foure vnces of Tartre, and as muche ſalt. Mingle al wel together, and let it ſeeth wel, and than ſtraine it twiſe or thriſe thorowe a clothe. This done, keepe the ſayde Lie well couered: And when you will ſoften any borne, let it lye eyghte dayes in it, and the horne will be ſoft that you may cut it, and dreſſe it after what ſort you wyll.
               Or elles make a Lie of the aſhes of the heades and ſtalkes of Poppye, and in the ſame Lie ſeeth your hornes and other thynges.
            
            
               To mollifye or ſoften horne; ſo that you ſhall imprynte or make any fygures in it.
               TAKE a pounde of the aſhes wherewith Glaſſes be made, a pounde of quicke Lyme, and a pot of water, let them ſeeth ſo longe vntyll the two thyrde partes be conſumed.
               
                  Than put a feather into it, and plucke it out agayne, and pille it betwene your fingers: for if the feather do pille, it is a ſigne that it is ſodden inough. But if it pille not, let it ſeeth moore: and whan it is ſodden inough let it clarifie, and powre it out. Take than the fylinges of horne, laye them therein two dayes together: Than annoynt your hands with oyle, and worke the horne well betwene your handes as it were dowe or paſte; and than preſſe him into what forme or faſhion you wyll.
            
            
               Another waye.
               TAke the iuyce of whyte Marrubium, and of Alexanders, and of Milfoyle, the iuyce of Radiſhe rootes, the iuyce of Celandine, and ſtronge Uinaigre. Mire all together, and put your horne into it well couered ſeuen dayes together in a donghyll. And than knede it and worke it as you did before.
            
            
               To caſt hornes in a molde lyke leade.
               TAke aſhes of wyne lees burned, and vnſleckt lyme, and make thereof a ſtronge Lye, and put into it the fylinges or ſcrapings of horne, and let them ſeeth wel together, and they will be as it were pappe, and put into it ſuche colour as you will haue it of, and than caſt it into what moulde you will.
            
            
               To make cleare ſtones of Amber.
               SEeth Turpentine, in a panne leaded, with a lytle Cottō, ſtirring it vntil it be as thick as paſte: & than powre it into what you wil, and ſet it in the Sunne eyght dayes, and it will be cleare and harde inough. You may make of this litle balles, ha
                     ••
                  es for knyues, and many other thynges.
            
            
               Another.
               
                  TAke the yelkes of ſixtene egges, and beate them wel with a ſpone: than take two vnces of gomme Axabicke, an vnce of the gomme of Cherry trees: make thoſe gommes into pouder, and mixe them with the yelkes of the egges, let the gommes wel melt, and powre them into a pot wel leaded. This done ſet them ſire dayes in the Sunne, and they wil become harde, and ſhyne lyke glaſſe, and whan you rubbe them, they will take vp a ſtrawe vnto them, as other Amber ſtones doe.
            
            
               To poliſhe and to a gloſſe or luſtre vnto precious, ſtones.
               TAke pouder of Antimonium, and diſparſe it abrode vpon a table of lead that is very euen and ſmothe. Poliſhe vpon this table your ſtone, and it ſhall keepe and maintaine him in his luſtre and gloſſe.
            
            
               To make a ſtone that ſhall gyue gyue fyer and burne of it ſelfe yf you weate it with your fynger.
               TAke the Lode ſtone that hath vertue to drawe yron to him on the one ſyde, and to put it away on the other ſyde. Put it in a pot leaded, and put to it foure pounde of Pitche, and a pounde of Brimſtone, lute and claye wyl your pot, and ſet it in a Forneyſe, geuing it a ſmal fier the ſpace of a daye and a night augmenting the fier the ſeconde daye and the thyrde daye more, vntil the ſtone be on fyer.
               After you haue made this ſtone on fier, and haue in this maner burned it, as is before ſaide, you ſhal let it coole againe, and your ſtone is prepared and made to giue fier when you wil.
            
            
               To mollifie or ſoften chryſtall and precious ſtones ſo that you maye cut them lyke cheeſe, and that beyng put in a moulde they ſhalbe harde agayne.
               
                  TAk
                     •
                   in Auguſte the bloode of a Gooſe, and the blood of a he Goate, and let it drie vntil it be very harde: And whan you mollifie and ſoften Chriſtali or precious ſtones, take of the ſayde bloodes as much of the one as of the other, and make it into pouder: and than powre ſome Lie made with the aſhes of burned Lies of Wyne, and let them be intermingled together in a pot, putting to them a diſhe ful of ſtrong Uynaigre. And whan you wil ſoften your ſtone caſt it in the ſame, and heate it a lyttle and the ſtone will be ſoft ſo that you may cut and faſhion of what ſort you will: caſte him afterward in cold water, and he wil be as harde with in an houre as euer he was: And than geue him his gloſſe and luſtre as before is ſayde of the other.
            
            
               To counterfey
                     •
                  e perles which ſhalbe very fayre▪ and as they were naturall and 
                     •
                  rewe.
               TAke in Sommer the ſhelles of whyte Muſkles, and ſcraye them cleane with a knyfe: take lykewiſe one parte of Snayle ſhelles, of the cleaneſt you can fynde: and whan you haue waſhed them well, ſtampe them together in a morter of ſtone, as fyne as you can, and waſhe them cleane in the Sunne vpon a linnen cloth, and then put them into a newe cleane pot, the whiche 
                     •
                  ot you ſhall lute and claye rounde aboute with 
                     
                        •
                     utom ſapientiae. And beynge dryed in the Sunne, put it into a Forneyſe, or Kille of Lyme, and let it burne there as longe as men are wonte to let Lyme burne.
               Than take it out, and you ſhal fynde it tourned into pouder as whyte as Snowe. This done, take the yelkes of Egges made cleane and broken a ſunder with a Spone: Myngle the pouder with the yelke of the Egges in ſome cleane veſſell: Than waſhe youre handes cleane, and faſhion your Pearles of what bigneſſe you wyll, perſyng them with a Hogges bryſtell whyle they be whote. This done, ſet them in ſome



cleane thynge in the Sunne, and the whoter the better: yet take heede there come no rayne to them: and than polyſhe them in redde Wyne, and let them drye againe, and you ſhall haue fayre Pearles.
            
         
         
            
               THE fourth Booke▪ teachynge diuers wayes of giltyng, ſyluerynge, and diynge Copper, Iron, and other Metalles: Likewiſe to forme, melt, and to make certaine colours.
            
               To prepare Mercury, and ſo to harden it that you maye make it liquide, and worke it.
               
                  THE Emperour Frederick made many Images of this ſubſtaunce folowynge, which ſeemed to be of Siluer, as at Uienna and Nieuſtadt in Auſtriche, & this inuention was founde oute by mayſter William and maiſter Martyne his Alchemiſtes. To do this you muſt melt Saturne, that is to ſay, lead, & powre it in a rounde meltyng pot while it is whote. Preſſe into it litle rounde ſtones, that you maye haue
                     •
                  lytle rounde holes in it, vpō the which holes you ſhall laye a lynnen clothe, and powre ſome Mercury vpon it as muche as you wyll, ſettynge it ſo in whote embers vntyll the Mercury be harde.
               
                  And whan it is harde inough, breake it in litle peeces, and caſte them into ſtronge Uinaigre, and ſeeth them in it a quarter of an houre. Or els take the iuyce of the herbe called Longdebeffe, with a litle Uinaigre and oyle, and ſeeth in it ſome peeces of your Mercury broken as before, and by this meanes it ſhalbe mortified very wel, otherwiſe it woulde reuiue againe. This done, take two vnces of ſalt Armoniack, halfe a pot of Uinaigre, and powre it with your Mercury ſodden in a pot leaded, and luting and ſtopping it verye wel, let it ſtande. viii. or. x. dayes: for by this meanes the Uinaigre taketh away al the redneſſe of the Mercury. This done, put your Mercury in a pot wel luted and ſet it in a Forneyſe vntill it be wel burned, augmenting by litle and litle the fier, that it maye keepe the fier long in a like & temperate heate, vntil it make certaine choppes or cliftes, and than it is a ſigne that is inough. Than put the Mercury in a pot, in the bottome whereof there muſte be ſome Brimſtone: ſtoppe wel the pot, and ſet it in whote embers or aſhes, or vpon a fier of coales, that it maye heate by litle and litle, and that the Mercury maye receiue the ſmoke of the Brimſtone. Do ſo once a day. xxx. dayes together, and than take out the Mercury, for it is harde inough to beate and caſte. Take of this Mercury fiue vnces, and ten vnces of Uenus, that is to ſaie Copper, melte them together, and it ſhal ſeeme at all trialles, that it is trewe Siluer.
            
            
               A ſubſtaunce made of paper or other thynges, to expreſſe or ſet oute anye maner of fygure that you wyll, vpon whyte yron. &c.
               LAye your paper or parchement ouerthwarte the white yron, than weate it on the out ſide, and let it drie againe, than take it of, and you ſhal ſee the print of it vpon the whyte yron.
            
            
               To gylte vvell.
               
                  SEeth your Syluer in Tartre, make it very cleane rubbing it with bruſhes, and put it into the Tartre againe: than take two partes, one part of ſalte Armoniacke, one part of Uerdet or Spaniſhe greene, two partes of the beatyng of Copper: ſtampe all this ſmall and ſifte it, and put it into the Tartre with the Siluer, it wyll get a redde colour, vpon the which you ſhall gylte.
            
            
               Howe to braye golde for to gylte wyth.
               TAke a dragme of fyne golde, beate it well, and put to it two dragmes of Mercury mixt together: than ſet a melting pot on the fyre, and whan it is glowing whote, put the golde with the ſiluer into it, and whan the Mercury ſhalbe in parte vaniſhed awaye in vapour, powre it into a diſhe, wherein there is a lytle water, and waſhe it out, & it ſhalbe ground & braied.
            
            
               To gylt Copper.
               MAke a bottom or grounde of quickſiluer vpon the copper, than geue it one gylde ouer wt ground or brayed golde, than ſet it on the coales, and whan it ſmoketh take it awaye, and part or diſparſe it with the bruſhe of copper wyer, and than ſet it agayne on the fier vntill it be liquide and ſofte, or melte, or drye, and whan it hathe been ſo longe vpon the fier that it hath gotten a redde colour, take it of, and make it cleane with your bruſhe of copper wyer, and than burnyſhe it, and it is done.
            
            
               To gylte yron.
               YOu muſt boyle your yron in Uinaigre, Salte, and Uitriol, and if the yron be great, annoynt the yron aboute with it, being whote, vntil it make it ryſe, than laye on your grynded golde, as before.
            
            
               
               To take of the golde from ſyluer that i
                     •
                   gylte, ſo that the ſyluer ſhall remayne whole and ſounde.
               PUt about your gilded ſiluer ſome Brimſtone, than take natural Mercury in a Goldſmithes meltynge pot, or other veſſell according as it oughte to bee, and heate it, and put your gylt ſiluer into it, the Mercury wil drawe the ground vnto him, than rubbe your ſiluer with a bruſhe ouer the Mercurye wherein the golde is, than heate your ſiluer, and boyle it again in the water of Tartre, and it wyll be cleane.
               Whan you wyl take your Golde out of the Mercury, put it in a lytle bagge of leather, bindyng it and ſtopping it aboue, as men do Mercury, without ouer a baſyn, and that whiche remaineth in the leather, put it agayne in a meltynge pot vppon the fyer, and let the Mercurye vaniſhe in a vapour, and goe awaye in the ſmoke. Than take that whiche remaineth, and powre it in a meltyng pot, and you ſhall fynde your golde.
            
            
               To ſeperate Syluer from Copper, be it money or otherwyſe.
               TAke halfe an vnce of Uerdet or Spaniſhe greene, an vnce of whyte Uitrioll, as muche of Brimſtone, half an vnce of Alome: ſeeth al theſe things with a glaſſe full or as muche as you will of ſtronge Uinaigre; and put your ſiluer into it. Your ſiluer wyl remaine whole in the glaſſe, wherein you ſodde it, and the Copper conſumeth in the moyſt humour.
            
            
               A pouder whyche beynge layed vpon anye thynge ſyluered wyll take of the ſyluer from it.
               TAKE a pounde of 
                     •
                  yne lees, a pounde of Arſnicke▪ a pounde of common Salte, a pounde of quycke Lyme: 
                     •
                  ire theſe together, with the yelke▪


                  
of Egges, and put them in a pot, whiche you ſhall ſet in a Forney ſe to ſublyme, and whan it ſhall ſmoke ſome what yellowe it is inough.
            
            
               To conuert and tourne copper into braſſe.
               TAKE Copper what quantitie you wyll, and the thyrde parte as muche of Lapis calaminaris, made in pouder, and put them together in a meltyng pot, let them melt together the ſpace of an houre vpon the fyer, and then powre them out.
            
            
               To melte all metall perfytly.
               WHEN the metall is molten: you ſhal put the fourth parte of auxungia vitri beſyde it, and it wyll melte perfitly.
            
            
               For to geue a coloure of Golde vppon Copper.
               TAKE halfe an vnee of Copper, a Dragme of Tutia alexandrina, two partes of Dates, two partes of Figges, Grapes of a wylde Uine blacke, of the bygneſſe▪ of three Haſell Nuttes, Muſke the bygneſſe of a Haſell Nut. Stampe all the ſayde thynges together, and make it lyke Paſte, and beate your Copper verye thinne, and than cut it in peeces.
               Thys done, make one rowe of the ſayde mixion, and a lytle Tutia vppon it, and than youre Copper vppon that, than ſome of the ſayde mixtion, than agayne of Tutia, and than of Copper, alwayes bedde vpon bedde: Thys done, lute or claye vp the Croſet or meltynge pot that they are in, and ſet it on the fyer, lettynge all the ſayde thynges melte, and than powre them oute, and it wyll be lyke Golde.
               
                  Some take alſo Tartre, Beane flower, Tutia, as muche of the one as of the other, ſteepe them well in Uinaigre, and than drie them, and lay them bed vpon bed, for euery vnce of copper an vnce of the ſayde pouder, and it wil take colour as is afore ſayde.
            
            
               To make Verdet or Spaniſhe greene.
               TAke Braſſe or fyled Copper, ſprinckle it with old piſſe and ſalt Armoniack: laye the Copper vpon a bourde in the Sunne, and whan it is drie, ſprynkle it againe vntill it waxe greene. Thus is Uerdet made. Take Copper beaten lyke a plate, make it cleane, and braye ſome atramentum vpon a ſtone wyth pyſſe, and annoynt the copper plate on euery ſide, and let it drie in the Sunne: than put it in a pot leaded and ſet it on the coales, and let it heate the ſpace of two houres, and ſometyme open the pot aboue, and whan you ſee blacke ſmoke come out of it, take the pot from the fier, and let it coole, and open the pot for to take out the copper plate, rubbing it into pouder betwene your handes, and that whiche will not yet tourne to pouder: doe it againe in all thinges as you did before, vntil it maye be made into pouder: than waſhe it with whote water or pyſſe in a baſyn, and let it ſtand ſtyll, for the copper wil go to the bottome, and the atramentū
                   wyll ſwimme aboue: than powre it oute and drye the copper in the Sunne. This done, take of the ſayde pouder a pounde, of Tartre calcined two vnces, beate them together with childes piſſe, and let them drye. Than put them in your pot, and burne them as before with a greate fier vntill you ſee a greene ſmoke come out of it: and than let it coole againe, & open your pot and you ſhal fynde it faire and greene.
            
            
               To make a whyte colour of leade.
               TAke leade as much as you wyll, ſcrape it cleane on both ſydes and cut it into plates thre fynger brode,



and a handfull longe or more, making a hole at the ende of eche of them, hang them on a corde, and take a paile of oke or a pot of thre handfulls long that hath a cleane couer: Than hange your plates of lead round about the pot within ſide, & powre into it two pots of good Uinaigre, and a hande ful of ſalte, ſtirring them together vpōthe fyer vntil they be ready to ſeeth, than couer the pot well that nothing breath oute, and ſet it in a warme place, leauinge it there. x. dayes together: than open it, and take out the plates of lead, and you ſhal finde at eche ſyde of the plates a whyte colour of a finger thicke, take it of with a knife, and put it in a cleane glaſſe. This done, hang your plates of leade againe in the pot, as before, couerynge them well as is ſaide, and ſettinge it in a warme place, and at the. x. daye take of the whyte colour with a knife as before, and hang them againe in the pot vntill you haue gotten whyte colour inough. Than braye all well together in a morter putting to it a litle water the ſpace of halfe an houre, vntill it be thick like gruell. Than put the ſayde pouder in a pot or twaine: and ſet it in the Sunne, and let it drie and harden, and than ſhall you haue your whyte colour of lead. But you muſte note that you muſte alwayes hang the plates of lead in the pot again at euery time as long as they wil continue, and if the Uinaigre diminiſhe, you muſte renewe it agayne.
            
            
               To make Lutum ſapientiae.
               
                  LVtum ſapientiae is a morter or clay for to lute or plaiſter the Limbecks or pots that are ſet on the fier, becauſe they ſhall not breake or cleaue. To make this Lutum ſapientiae. Take the beſt Potters earth you can fynde, put in a diſhe or platter of earth, or in ſome other veſſell, and powre vppon it Wyne mixte with horſe dung, caſtynge awaye the longeſt heares of the dung, mingle it fyner all together vntill it be as thick as paſte, wherewith you maye paſte anye thynge: not



withſtanding put in it alwayes good Salte for keping it from cleauynge.
            
            
               To lute or dawbe pottes with a lynnen cloth that wyll not burne.
               PUt your linnen cloth in Salte water, and let it drye of it ſelfe, than weate it in yelkes of Egges wel beaten, and whan you wyll lute or plaiſter any pot with it, geue it one touche vpon it very thinne with the fore ſayde Lutum ſapientiae.
               
            
            
               For to ſoder glaſſes.
               TAke minium, and halfe as muche of quicke Lyme, and the mele or flower that hangeth on the mille ſydes or walles, and the yelke of an Egge, in all this let a linnen cloth be weate and holden before the fyer that it maye be clammie meete to cleaue or ſtycks faſt, and ſo lay it faire and ſoftly vpon the broken place of the glaſſe.
            
            
               Another lutum ſapientiae.
               TAke Potters earth very cleane two partes, horſe dong one part, a lytle pouder of a Bricke, and the fylyng of yron, and a plaiſter of quicke lyme: and mingle it with ſalte water, and the yelke of egges: and make thereof a paſte for to lute or clay pots withall. Or elles take drie earth, and ſtampe it ſmall, and ſifte, it & caſt vpon it ſome wheate flower rancke vpon rancke, and than the yelkes of Egges and Uinaigre, and mingle all together. Than plaiſter or lute glaſſes pottes or limbeckes with it, and drie them in the ſhadowe, and they wil neuer faile nor breake in the fyer. You maye alſo mingle it with Oxe bloode in ſtede of water, it is alſo good for that purpoſe.
            
         
         
            
            
               THE fyfte Booke
                     •
                   touchynge all ſeparations of gold, of ſiluer, of copper, and other metalls, and how a man may try them and to vſe them profitably. Which is a thing very gainefull for all goldſmithes, marchantes and 
                  •
               
               
               
                  •
               her that haue nede of it.
            
               To ſeparate gold from ſyluer.
               
                  BEate ſmall the ſyluer wherin you thinke there is any gold, then cut it in ſmal peces: than you ſhall put aqua fortis, in a glas of ſeparation vpon a litle fyer vntil it be hote, & caſt vp little bubbles like belles. Then powre the water out into a cuppe of copper and let it coole and by this meanes the ſiluer will ſticke about the cuppe, the which you muſt let dry in the cuppe: and whē you haue powred the water out melt the ſyluer in a hollowe ſharde, and then take alſo the gold oute of the glaſſe of ſeparation, and melte it in one.
            
            
               Another waye.
               TAke ſyluer that is gilte, 
                     •
                  ute it vpon a pot ſhard or a tile with leade, then turne it as thyn and as fine as you can vpon ſome thing, then cut it in croked and wr
                     •
                  thed peeces, and put it into the glaſſe of ſeparation, powre in vpon it aqua fortis a finger hight aboue it, ſtoppe the hole aboue that it breath not oute, then hold it vpon a ſlowe fier vntil the ſyluer be diſſolued in to the water, the gold remaineth in the bottom which is black: then caſt oute this water into a cup of copper as before, and powre vpon it ſome cleane water, and the ſyluer wyll beginne to gather into a curd and wil goe to the bottome.
               
                  Than powre oute the water againe, and drie the Siluer with a ſodayne heate. This done, put it in a croſet or earthen pot, and melt it, and being molten powre it out, and do the lyke with the golde, and whan you put it into the melting pot, put to it a litle Borax.
            
            
               Another waye.
               TAke antimonium, and put it in a melting pot that is with a ſharpe pointed bottom, and melt it. Take alſo the Siluer that the gold is in, and melt it and powre it into the antimonium, the golde will go to the bottom, and the ſiluer will tarye in the antimonium. Than take halfe an vnce of copper, and two vnces of lead, and the antimonium, let them melte together, and powre them into an earthen pot, the antimonium wyll burne the Copper, and the Syluer wyll abyde vpon the pot.
            
            
               For to ſeperate Golde or Syluer wythoute fyer or aqua fortis.
               TAke two partes of ſalt Armoniack, and one parte of Brimſtone, beate them into pouder, than annoynt your veſſel, diſhe, or any other thinge yt is gylded, fyrſt with oyle olyue, and than diſparſe the ſaid pouder vpon it, & whan it is ſo faſt vpon it, ſet it to the fyer, and beate it ouer a veſſell of water, and the Golde wyll fall out of it.
            
            
               To ſeparate golde from Syluer with a pouder.
               TAKE an. viii. parte of Brymſtone, a. xvi. parte of ſalte. iii. vnces of ſalte Armoniacke. ii. vnces of minium, and do as afore is ſayde.
            
            
               To make golde ſofter.
               TAke Mercury ſ
                     •
                  blimed, ſalte Armoniacke of eche alyke, make them into a pouder, than put your golde



into a melting pot, and whan it is molten, put to it a litle of this pouder and it wil be ſoft.
            
            
               Another waye.
               TAke half an vnce of Uitrioll, half an vnce of Uerdet, half an vnce of ſalt Armoniacke, half an vnce of burned Braſſe: al being mingled with aqua fortis, let it ſo repoſe in the heate two dayes, and than let it harden: doe this three times with aqua fortis, and let it drie: make it in pouder, and put alwayes vpon it half an vnce of gold, a dragme of pouder, and powre it thre tymes into it, and it wil be ſofter.
            
            
               To make golde and ſiluer ſofter.
               TAke Honny and Oyle of eche alyke, and quenche your golde and ſiluer, being whote and glowing, three or foure tymes in it, and it wilbe ſofter.
            
            
               To ſoften all mettalles, and other thinges that are not ſofte, ſo that they ſhalbe ſofte and gentle to bee wrought vpon or forged.
               TAke Maſticke, Frankenſence, Myrrhe, Borax, Uernix, of eche halfe an vnce, make all into a pouder together, and caſt the bigneſſe of two or three peaſen of it vpon y• harde things, and they wil be ſoft and tender. Take what metall you will, heate it vpon coales, and quenche it in the water of ſalt Armoniack and it will be ſofte.
            
            
               An oyle that maketh all metalles ſofte.
               IF your ſyluer be not ſoft, melt it, and powre into it this oyle that foloweth. Take Saltpeter, Tartre, Salte, Uerdet, boyle all together, vntill the water be conſumed, powre vpon it piſſe, and let it ſo conſume, and you ſhall haue an oyle of it, the which you ſhal



put into your ſiluer whyle it melteth, and you ſhall make it ſoft.
            
            
               To ſeparate golde from copper.
               MAke a Forneyſe with a hole, that you may put in a pegge or two, the whiche you maye take oute when you will, and vnderneth in the bottome of the Forneyſe a gutter or hole, that the king whiche is the golde maye remaine in it. Take twyſe or as much Lead as Copper, and put it vpon the hole or gutter of the Forneyſe, powring it alwayes vntill there be no more lead: Than take an y
                     •
                  on mete for the purpoſe to take away the ſkynne of it, that it maye be cleare and neat, for than ſhall the copper be well prepared. This done, take a quarterne of common ſalt, of brimſtone a quarter, of ſaltpeter a quarter, of orpiment a quarter: ſtampe theſe fower well in a morter, and powre the ſaid pouder vpon the copper, whan it beginneth to run and melte, the gold wil go to the bottome, plucke the pegge oute, and the king will remaine in the hole or gutter, take it out afterwarde with Lead or Antimonium, and you ſhall fynde the Golde.
            
            
               Another waye.
               TAke Antimonium, and melt it with your Copper and being molten you muſt ſkimme it well, than powre it into a diſhe of ſtone, adding to it quickly as much quick ſiluer, couer it wt another diſhe, & ſhake it well together, the pouder draweth the golde vnto it and when it is colde agayne, open it, take the Mercury out, and put it in another diſhe, the which you ſhall ſet vpon the fyer, that the Mercury maye go awaye in a ſmoke, and you ſhal fynde your Golde in the bottom.
            
            
               A pouder to ſeparate golde.
               TAke ſalt Armoniacke, Uerdet, of eche one parte, Saltpeter two partes, Antimonium as muche as all the r
                     •
                  ſt together, make them into pouder, and



do as before, and the Golde wyll go from the Copper.
            
            
               To waſhe Golde from Copper.
               TAke the Copper that is gilt, and weate it in water, and than put it in the fyer, and let it be who
                     •
                  e and than quenche it in colde water, and the golde wil come of: rubbe it of with a bruſhe of Copper wyer, and it wyll goe of.
            
            
               To got together the golde out of the threedes of cloth of golde.
               BUrne the golden threedes into pouder, and braye the ſayde pouder ſmall vppon a Marble ſtone, and put it in a Baſyn, than powre vppon this pouder ſome water of Tartre and quicke ſiluer, and do as before, and you ſhal haue fyne golde.
            
            
               To gylde ſo that it ſhall not out with no water that is.
               TAke two partes of Ocre, two partes of a Pommiſe ſtone burned vntill it be whyte, Tartre the bigneſſe of a good walnut, braye the ſayd colours together with oyle of Lyneſeede, and fiue droppes of Uernix, ſtraine them thorowe a linnen cloth, and you ſhal haue the ſubſtaunce to gylde withall.
            
            
               To gather togither into one the golde that is ſcraped of from letters and Images.
               TAke the ſcrapynges and put them in a glaſſe full of water, vntill the chawlke where vppon the Golde was layed, bee thorowe ſofte, waſhe it afterwarde betwene bothe your handes:
               
                  and ſeperate the beſt you can the chalke frō the gold: take the reſt, and grinde it vpon a grinding ſtone. This done, put it againe into a glaſſe: than put ſome well brayed and ſmal, in a cuppe of copper, and powre the water vpon it: let it ſeeth well: and than powre the ſame water agayne into the glaſſe vpon the ſubſtaunce ſcraped, puttinge into the water ſome quicke ſiluer, and ſhaking it and mouinge it together a good ſpace. The quicke ſiluer draweth to it ſelf al the gold: than powre out al the water, and put the quicke ſiluer in a peece of wylde Goates ſkinne, the which you ſhall bynde-well aboue: than make a hole with a needle, whereby you ſhall wrynge and make the quickeſiluer to come out, and that which ſhall remaine with in, ſhalbe fyne golde: and if the golde be not very faire, do vnto it as vnto the golde before.
            
            
               To take gylte from a cuppe that is gylded within.
               TAke Pyrethrum, and ſeeth it in ſtronge Uinaigre, ſo that there maye come no ſmoke nor breath out of it, than powre into a cuppe gylte within, and the golde will go of, and go to the bottome. For the proſe therof. Caſte a ſiluer ring gylte into it, and you ſhall fynde the experience.
            
            
               To make golde ſofte after the meltyng.
               TAke as manye wedges of gold, as you haue molten, & put them one night into a Forneyſe of morter in a pot: let them be thorowe whote, but yet not ſo that they melte, and they wil be afterward very faire and ſofte.
            
            
               For to giue a colour to the gold that it ſhalbe ſofte.
               TAke ſalte Armoniacke fired with quicke Lyme, for it is very good, worketh very handſomely and ſinely: but it is better to take of Viride aeris, prepared



and than melt the gold, & ſo may you colour your gold. The Viride aeris is thus prepared: delay it in Uinaigre, & ſtraine it thorowe a felte, and let it congele, and whan it beginneth to waxe thicke, put to it ſome ſalt Armoniacke, and let it harden a great whyle, or elles powre it vpō a cleane marble ſtone, and than melt your gold with it, and keepe it well: for it will ſerue you alſo for other thynges.
            
            
               To boyle golde or ſyluer to make it receyue a fayre coloure.
               TAke Tartre well brayed, and put to it ſome well water or raine water, and that whiche you ſhall boyle in it ſhalbe faire.
            
            
               To geue a colour to golde.
               TAke the beares of a man to y• bigneſſe of a fynger, and laye them vpon quicke coales, & holde youre golde ouer them with a paire of tongues.
            
            
               To giue a weygh 
                     •
                  vnto golde.
               TAke faire water, melte lead and put it into it diuers tymes, the oftner the better, yea and it were twentye tymes. 
                     〈…〉
                   whiche you woulde make heauye, & heate it ten or twelue tymes, and quenche it in the ſayde water, and you ſhall fynde it trewe.
            
            
               For to make ſyluer fyne.
               YOu ſhal put Siluer into a pot of earth, and to euery marke of Siluer put three vnces of Lead. Let it be molten together, vntill the flower of it ware red. That done, put it in another earthen pot, putting to it for euerye marke of ſiluer ſire vnces of Lead, and that powre it, or ſtraine it, and it will be fyne.
            
            
               
               To make ſyluer fayre and whyte.
               YOu ſhal put ſalt and Tatre made in pouder, in a pan of Copper: put ſome raine water to it, and let it ſeeth well, for it will become whyte: but before you ſeeth them, you muſte heate or enflame them, and beware there come no yron into the panne, for than the ſiluer woulde become redde.
            
            
               To knowe yf the ſyluer haue any golde 
                     〈…〉
                   no.
               DRaw a groſſe or great ſtreeke with your ſiluer vp on the touche ſtone, than take a dragme of Uerdet or Spaniſhe greene well made into pouder wyth ſalte Armoniacke, mixe them well with good Uinaigre, vntill they be all of one colour, weate the lyne or ſtryke made with your ſiluer with it, and yf the ſyluer haue any golde in it, the lyne or ſtreeke wil remaine a whyle faire, and if there be none, the ſtreeke wyll not remaine faire, but wil go out incontinent. Yf you wil haue a better profe and more ſure in ſtede of Uinaigre put aqua fortis: for that wil incontinent 
                     •
                  ut out the liue or ſtreeke if there be no golde in it.
            
            
               To mortifie or alay Mercury or quicke ſyluer.
               PUt it in a morte 
                     •
                  of yron, and put to it ſome oyle olyue or oyle of bayes; this done, ſet it on a ſmall fyer, and let it ſeeth therein, but take hede that the ſmoke of it hurte thee not, for it is vn wholeſome, put often times ſome oyle into it, and alſo ſtronge Uinaigre diſtilled that it maye boyle in it. And by this meanes it will be mortified and killed. Than take it oute, for it is harde and wyll endure the hammer.
            
            
               To gylte ſteele or yron.
               TAke one part of Tartre, halfe as much of ſalt Armonicke, as much Uerdet, and a litle Salt: ſeeth them in whyte wyne, and verniſhe with it a harneſſe made euen, and let it drie. And than gylt it with



golde brayed or grounde as Goldſmythes do.
            
            
               To ſeparat golde or ſyluer from metall or yron.
               PUt ſome Mercurye in a Goldſmithes melting pot, heating it vppon the fier, putting to it and mixing with it ſome Ueniſhe glaſſe bruſed ſmal mixing al together. Lay it vpon the ſiluer that is gylt, than laye it vpon the coales vntill it be whote, and rub it with a feather ouer ſome veſſell: ſtraine the Mercurye or quick ſiluer thorow a linnen cloth, the which you ſhal afterwarde bring againe with Saltpeter.
            
            
               Syluer of Tyn, to make veſſell or other thynges.
               TAKE cleare, fyne, and bright Tyn, put it wyth true and naturall Tyn in the fyer, that it maye purge and bee made cleane from all duſte, aſhes, and fylthe: and whan it is cleane inoughe and well ſkymmed, ſet it againe on the fyer. Yf there bee a marke of it, take halfe an vnce of Mercurye, or ſomewhat more: and whan it beginneth to ryſe in the firſt heate, take alſo the pouder of Cantarides, and caſt it into it, and a flocke of womans heare that it maye burne in it. Hauing had fier inough, and all beynge melted together: powre into it the pouder aforeſayde, ſprincklynge it firſte a lytle with water of Artemiſia, and than take it ſodaynelye from the fyer, and let it coole a great whyle.
            
            
               To whyte any veſſell of copper wythin and wythout with ſyluer colour very eaſely.
               TAKE two partes of Mercurye, three partes of Tynne: Melte fyrſte the Tynne in a meltynge potte, and than put the Mercurye to it. Styrre it well together, and than powre it out, and let it coole, and ſtampe it well in a morter vntyll all be broughte into a pouder.
               
                  Than take Alome & ſtampe it alſo in a morter, & it wil be lyke a whyte pouder, the which you ſhall laye vpon a marble ſtone, garniſhed on the ſydes with potters clay, in a moyſt caue or ſeller: ſetting vnder it a glaſſe. The Alome will tourne into a water vpon the ſtone, and wil runne into y• glaſſe. And whan you wyl ſyluer your veſſell of Copper, take the ſayde water of Alom, and annoynte your veſſell with it, and let it drye.
               Do thus three or foure tymes, and leaue it open that the bottome may be the better. Than take the pouder that you haue made, and rubbe it vppon it, and your veſſell wyll be whyte and ſeeme as it were ſyluer.
            
            
               To make veſſels of copper whyte lyke ſyluer, both within and without.
               TAke one parte of Azure, two partes of Mercurye, thre partes of whyte Arſnicke, mixe them together: than take greaſe and melte it in a panne, taking the fylth frō it, makyng it very clean. This done mixe them together, and make thereof as it were an oyntment: annoynt your veſſell with it, within and without very wel: y• done, put it in a new diſhe of oke, or elles in newe and freſhe oken leaues, couerynge it well. Digge a hole and laye it in the earth, in a place where the Sunne ſhyneth moſt whoteſt, leauing it ſo the ſpace of three monethes, and than take it out, and make it cleane with water and a bruſhe, and you ſhall fynde your experience.
            
            
               To make that tynne cracke not.
               TAke ſtronge common ſalt, and honnye, aſmuch of the one as of the other, according to the quantitie of your tyn, powre your tyn. xii. times in it, than ſtraine out your tyn, for by this meanes it will purge and leaue crackinge. Put that in a pot, the which you ſhall claye or lute aboute very well, and ſet it in a forneyſe a daye and a nyghte, and you ſhall fynde as it were a lyme of golde.
            
         
         
            
            
               THE ſyxte Booke▪ touchyng the makynge of certayne oyles and waters and other ſubſtaunces whiche are of a merueylous vertue and operation.
            
               To take Salamanders for to occupye or to ſerue a mans tourne.
               
                  WHan you ſee the Salamanders lye and ſleepe in the Sunne, put on a pa
                     •
                  er of Gloues, and ſo go take them fayre and ſoftlye before they caſte theyr Uenime (whiche is yellowe) than put it in ſome veſſell of glaſſe wherein there is mans bloode. Than it will ſerue your tourne very well.
            
            
               To fyne golde with Salamanders.
               TAke two pounde of fyled Braſſe or Copper, a pot Goates mylke nyne Salamanders, put all this in a pot, wyde and large beneth and narrowe aboue, couer it with his couer faſte and cloſſe, but let the couer haue a bole in the toppe: digge the ſayde pot into the moyſte of the earth ſo deepe that nothing appeare but onely the couer where y• hole is, ſo that the Salamanders may haue ayre and not die. Leaue it ſo vntil the ſeuenth daye after noone. Than take your pot out and you ſhall fynde that the Salamanders conſtrayned by hunger ſhall haue eaten the Copper, and the great force of the poyſon cauſeth the Copper to tourne into Golde. This done, make a bole as deepe as two fyngers into the which you ſhal put your pot with the Salamanders, than make aboute it a fyer of coales, whiche maye bourne aboue and beneth, yet leſſe bebeneth than aboue: and the pot is ſet in the grounde becauſe the copper ſhall not melte.
               
                  And whan you thincke that the Salamanders be burned to aſhes, take the pot from the fier, and let it coole well. This done, put the Copper and the pouder into ſome veſſell to waſhe it, and powre water vppon it, making cleane the Copper with the ſaid pouder: than hang it in the ſmoke, and let it drye well, and you ſhal haue good golde, and you ſhal let a Goldſmith fyne it, and make it cleane.
            
            
               The mother of all waters for to make all metalle
                     •
                   liquifiable.
               TAke a pounde of Sal nitrum, a pounde of Uitrioll, ſtampe eche of them by it ſelfe, and than mingle them together in a morter, diſtille the ſayde water, without addinge anye other water to it: Take an vnce of the ſayde water, an vnce of wyne not diſtilled, put them together in a glaſſe, and they wyll bourne o
                     •
                   them ſelues ſo that you maye light a candell at them: it is alſo the mother of all colours.
               Alſo take three vnces of the ſayde water, three vnces of Mercury, the fourth part of quicke Brimſtone, put them all together to diſſolue in a glaſſe. And whan they be diſſolued, let the ſmoke come out, and you ſhal fynde the Mercury fixed verye redde. And ſo maye you fixe all the Spiritus.
               
               Yf you wyll make this water all together ſtronge, adde to the ſeuen partes of all theſe thinges aforeſaid Uitrioll and Saltpeter, a pounde of eche, and diſtill them, puttinge the water into a glaſſe againe, and it will be ſo ſtronge that it wyll breake bothe yron and thinges made with forge.
            
            
               To prepare common ſalte.
               TAke whyte Salte, and powre vppon it ſome ſtale Pyſſe wherein hathe bene (a whole daye) ſteeped ſome quicke Lyme: mixe them well together ſixe tymes a daye, and let it repoſe the nighte, ſtraine the



piſſe thorowe a felte, and put all that is within into a panne leaded within, mingling it well together vntil it become water. Than ſeeth it vpon coales vntill it be harde, and make it into a pouder, and put it in a Oxe bladder bynding it well aboue, and than hang it in a caudron ful of whote water, leauing it there vntil the ſalt be tourned into water. Do this ten times, and at laſte tyme lot it burne ſo that it be a fyer and redde, than let it coole, and thus is common ſalt prepared.
            
            
               To prepare ſalte Armoniacke▪
               
               TAke ten pounde of prepared ſalt, and powre vpon it ſome warme piſſe of a man that is in health, and hath not dronke but wyne, and let the ſalte diſſolue in the ſaide piſſe, and go to the bottome, than ſtrain it thorowe a felte into a caudron, put to it ſome ſoute of a Bakers ouen, boyling it together: Whan this ſalte is drie: powre vpon it ſome mans piſſe, & do this ſo longe vntill the ten pots of vrine be conſumed in the ten pounde of ſalte.
               You muſte take heede, that the Caudron runne not ouer, whan the Uryne boyleth. Yf peraduenture it ryſe ſo that there is greate daunger of rynnyngs ouer: You ſhall powre ſome cleare water vppon it, and mixe all together vntyll all tourne into water, let it ſtande, and caſte the cleare oute, and ſeeth it ſo longe vntill it be drye, the whiche beyng drye, you ſhall take and put in a newe dyſhe, and drye it in the Sunne: And than ſublyme it in this wyſe.
               Take the ſayde two pounde, and two pounde of fyled yron, and myngle them well together, and putte them into a veſſell, that is called rotunda, lutynge it well with lutum ſapientiae: Than ſet it vppon a Tryue
                     •
                   in a Forneyſe of ſublimation, makynge a good fyer vnder it one daye, durynge vntyll the veſſel be thorow redde whote vnderneth.
               
                  Then let it coole againe in the nighte vntill the morning and then open it, and you ſhall finde vpō the veſſell white ſalte, the which you ſhal take awaye, and putting to it aſmuch common ſalt prepared, you ſhall bray them both well together the ſpace of half a longe ſomer day, making a ſmall and flowe fier vnder it, let it coole againe, and bray it againe, and ſublime as before. This do you thre times, and then keepe it for it is good.
            
            
               To make ſal alkali.
               TAke the aſhes of leeſe of wine burned, quick lime, of eche equall quantitie, and put them into three ſtillitorie glaſſes one ouer another, to the intent that that which falleth frō the one may diſtill into the other: then power the water of the lower moſt into the vppermoſt, hauing a pot leaded vnderneth. Put often tymes the ſame lye thorowe it vntyll the aſhes be no more bitter. Let the ſame lye ſtande a night, and ſeeth it in the morning in a pot leaded vntill the water conſume awaye and become harde. Then let it coole, you ſhall finde a ſtone in it called Alkali, the which you ſhall beate in pouder, and fyll a newe pot with it half full, and couer it not, & put it in a forneiſe of calcination, makinge at the firſte a little fier vntill it ſeeth: then a great fier vntill it begyn to melt like lead, then power it quickly into another pot, and let it coole, and it will be ſal Alkali, which you muſt kepe in a glaſſe.
            
            
               To make ſal boras.
               TAke tarter calcined in ſuch ſort as we wil declare afterwarde, the ſame beinge made in pouder, put ſome hote water vpon it vntill it diſſolue, ſtyryng it well with a ſticke, then ſtraine it thorowe a lynen cloth, & do as before, ſo long vntill the water be thicke and troubled, then ſtraine it thorowe a bagge vntill it ware cleere, and hath taken the bytternes oute of the



leeſe or tartre: which thinge you ſhall know when the leeſe pricketh no more vpon your tonge. Then take ſal commune praeparatum, & putting to it water of tartre, power them togyther into a pan of yron or frying panne ſeething them vntill they be thick, and then put them in a newe pot vntill they be harde. You ſhall turne often times the pot, & when the ſaide pot woulde cleaue or burne to let it coole, and open it, & you ſhall haue ſal boras philoſophorum, as good as the true boras.
            
            
               Water of Mercurye.
               TAke a quartren of ſublimed and fixed mercurie and aſmuch of the ſtone galitſenſtein: bray them togither vpō a marble ſtone: then hauīg put them in a linē bagge, make a hole in an horſe donghill, put them in a glaſſe into the ſame hole not touching the ſides of the hole in any wiſe, to thintent it fyle or ſoyle not, make two founells, and hang the bagge with mercurie and galitſenſtein ouer the glaſſe couerynge it with a good ſtronge linen cloth that nothinge fal into it: then laye donge ynough vpō it, and leaue it ſo a fortnight togyther vntill the mercury be ſtilled as water oute of the bagge. If the water be not whyte ynough, braye it againe with the galitſenſtein, and doe as before, continuing it vntill the water be good ad lunam faciendam.
               
            
            
               Water of ſalt armoniack.
               TAke ſalt armoniack aſmuch as you will, aſmuche of the yelkes of egges, mixe them well togyther, putting to them a lytle vynegre, that it may drop or ronne the better. Then hange it ouer a glaſſe in a dongehill as before is ſayde of the water of mercurye, or ells ſet it vpon an euen ſtone ſmooth & ſlypperye in a moyſt cellar, layenge the ſtone a litle at one ſide and ſettynge a glaſſe vnderneth with a founell, and morter at one ſide of the ſtone that it maye not ronne but into the fonnell. Then paſſe it thorow a feit, and kepe



it well. For it will ſerue your turne very aptly.
            
            
               A vvater called aqua lactis virginis.
               TAke Litarge made in pouder, and put it in a pan with good Uinaigre, ſeeth it with a litle fier, and paſſe it thorowe a whyte felt vntill it waxe cleare and whyle it diſtilleth, put it euer in againe vntil it be cleare and whyte. Than take axungia vitri, made in pouder, and ſifte it, and do with it, as with the Lytarge, and there wyll come alſo water out of it: Mire theſe two waters together, and they wyll be as whyte as mylke, and it is called lac virginis.
               
            
            
               Water of ſalt alkali.
               TAke ſalt Alkali, and yelkes of Egges, braye them with good Uinaigre, and do as is before ſayde, of the water of Mercurye.
            
            
               A vvater called aqua croci Martis.
               MAke of the greene Galitſenſtein ſtone into pouder: and fyll therewith a newe potte and ſteepe it well. Burne it euen in ſuche ſorte as is, ſayd afore of the Alome. Whan it is as redde as Uermilion it is inoughe.
               Than put ſome good Uinaigre into a Limbecke and diſtill it in a Forneyſe with a ſmall fyer. Do thus thre tymes. Afterwardes put into it as muche as into the redde Galitſenſtein ſtirringe them alwayes together with an yron three dayes longe. Put them agayne into a Limbecke, and ſtyll them as before. Yf the water bee not redde inoughe, put more of the ſayde pouder vnto it, ſtirring it well together, and diſtillynge it as before, it wyll be verye good Crocus Martis to make Golde.
            
            
               To calcyne Tartre.
               
                  TAke Tartre of whyte wyne, waſhe it with what
                     •
                   water, and let it drye. Than fyll a pot of a quarte with the ſayde Tartre, coueringe it well aboue, and ſet it in a Forneyſe of calcination, and let it burne vntill there come out no maner of ſmoke. Than let it coole, and make it in pouder, and put it into another pot, luting it well with Lutum ſaplentiae, than leaue it in a Forneyſe of Calcination, wherein there is a good fyer, the ſpace of three dayes or more, vntill the Tartre be as whyte as Salte, the whiche you ſhall keepe in ſome warme place.
            
            
               To calcine egge ſhelles.
               WAſhe Egge ſhelles in lixiuio colatitio and let them drie: take awaye before or after the lytle ſkinne that is in them. Than put them in a greate pot vpon the fyer, and burne them to aſhes ſtireinge them well. Than put them in a lytle pot, and doe as wyth the Tartre. Whan they bee burned as whyte as chaulke, they be calcined inough.
            
            
               To calcine or burne Turia.
               REd Tutia or yellowe is the beſt: put the ſame into a meltynge pot, and ſet it vpon the fyer, and let it burne whote. Quenche it then in good Uinaigre. Doe ſo nine tymes, and than braye it ſmall lyke vnto flower vpon a ſtone and keepe it.
            
            
               A vvater called aqua lunaris.
               TAke an hundred Henne egges, take out the yelke and beate the whyte, put it into a glaſſe, and ſtope it well aboue, & ſet it in Horſe dung. xiiii. dayes, go to it euerye daye, and take the dung from aboute it with a ſticke, leauinge it ſo a good houre that it maye haue the aire, than couer it agayne.
               
                  And whan it hath bene there a longe tyme, there wyll come out of it a water, the which you ſhal powre into another glaſſe and let it coole, & that which was congeled vpon the water caſt awaye, and put into it ſome lyme of egges, that the water maye be aboue it foure fingers brode: mingle them together, and powre them in againe ſtoppynge it well, and ſet it againe in the horſe dung, leauyng it ſo a long tyme as before, than take it oute, and put it in a meltynge pot, ſtirrynge it well, and ſet it vpon a whyte felte, and by the meaſure that it diſtilleth in, powre it againe vpon it, continuyng ſo vntill the water be cleare, caſt out the lees and the water is good ad Lunam or Solem.
               
            
            
               Aqua cauſata.
               TAke two pounde of the aſhes of lees of wyne burned, a pounde of aſhes of Walnut ſhelles burned, two pounde of the aſhes of burned beane ſtalkes; a pounde▪ of the aſhes of the ſlippes or twigges of Uines: Mingle all theſe together, and powre water vpon them, and adde to it ſome quicke Lyme, for eche pounde of the ſaide ſubſtaunce, you muſte haue two pounde of water, than let it ſeeth together one ſething and let it ſtande and repoſe a day and a night, ſtirring it ſire tymes a daye.
               This done, powre that whiche is cleare into a caudron, & put to it an vnce of Arſnicke, an vnce of Reagall, an vnce of calcined Tartre, and a quarterne of Salt armoniacke, make all into pouder, and put it into water, and let it ſeeth vnto the halfe, let it coole agayne: and than put it in a Limbeck, and diſtil it as is ſayde. And whan it wyll diſtill no more, let it coole, and open the limbecke, and powre it in agayne, and diſtill it thus fyue times, and kepe the water diffilled. Mercurye is hardened and fixed in the ſame water as we haue ſayde in another place: keepe alſo the lees, for it is good for to harden Mercury as thus. Take Mercurye, put it in a meltyng pot, and heate it,



powre the foreſayde Lees into it, and mingle them together, and it wyll kyll the Mercury and make it hard and blacke, ſo that being colde againe, it is as hard as a ſtone, the which you may ſublime.
            
            
               A water callad aqua cauſcica.
               TAke one parte of ſal Alkali, one parte of common Alome, one part of alumen plumae, one part of white Galitſenſtein ſtone, one part of ſalt Armoniacke, two partes of common ſalte prepared, braye all theſe verye ſmall and fyne vpon a gryndſtone, and weate them with Uinaigre, or verye whote water, and put them in a glaſſe, the which you ſhall digge and ſet in a dunghill, leauinge it there three weekes. All wyll be tourned into water, put the ſame water into a melting pot, & do as before you did wt the felte, diſtilling it thoro we the felt into another melting pot. Keepe it to in a glaſſe, for it is good to make ſiluer. The felt muſt be ſharpe at the neither ende and broade aboue.
            
            
               Aqua auri pigmenti.
               TAke foure pa
                     ••
                  es of orpiment, two partes of ſalt Armoniacke, one parte of calcined Egge ſhelles, and one part of common ſalt, braye theſe well vpon a marble ſtone, weate them with Uinaigre, and let them runne of from the ſtone into a glaſſe in a ſeller or ſet them vnder a dunghyll, vntill they be turned into water. Than diſtill it as you do aqua fortis. But in braying the orpiment, you muſte ſtopppe your mouth and your noſe, becauſe of the ſmoke or fume of the water, which is hurtfull.
            
            
               Water of common ſalte prepared.
               TAke a pound of common ſalt, a quarterne of alome braye them vppon a Marble ſtone with Uinaigre, and let it runne from the ſtone as before is ſayde, and



diſtill it thorowe a felte, and it is made.
            
            
               Water of yelkes of Egges.
               TAke yelkes of Egges ſodden verye harde, ſtampe them and put them in a Limbecke, the firſt water whiche cōmeth out is whyte, the other redde and thicke: but whan it is colde, it is thinner and liquide. All that you rubbe with the ſame water, getteth alwayes a good colour of golde.
            
            
               Oyle of Tartre.
               TAke whyte Tartre calcined, braye it well vpon a Marble ſtone, and let it runne into a glaſſe, as is afore ſayde of the ſalte Armoniack, and of the crocus martis. And whan all is runne into the glaſſe, paſſe it thorowe a felte ſo often vntyll it be cleare. And kepe it in a cleane glaſſe.
            
            
               An oyle called olcum Laterinum or Petroleum.
               TAke a newe tyle whereon there hath bene no maner of water, make it whote, and laye it in oyle of Walnuts, vntill it ſoke or drinke no more: Than make it into pouder, and put it in a Limbecke and diſtill it. And whan it wyll diſtill no more, caſte it oute, and put in other, and do as before three tymes, and you ſhall haue your oyle.
            
            
               Oleum benedictum.
               TAke oyle Olyue in ſteede of oyle of Walnuts, and doe as before.
            
            
               Oyle of Brymſtone.
               
                  TAke a pounde of Brimſtone well made in pouder, a pounde of oyle of Lyneſeede: put them in a pot leaded, and boyle them together vntill there riſe a redde frothe or ſkymme vpon them. Put Uinaigre into it, and the oyle wyll beginne to riſe vp, and taking of the frothe or ſkimme, keepe it, and keepe the oyle neate and cleane. Than waſhe pour Brymſtone verye cleane, and powre ſome oyle of Walnuts vpon it, and let it ſeeth as before, and whan it wareth redde as before, powre againe ſome Uinaigre vpon it, and ſkym of the oyle, and kepe it with the firſt. Do this ſo longe vntill the Brymſtone ſmoke no more, wheather it be ſet vpon whate coales or vpon a whole plate. Than waſhe it in whote water, & let it drie. Than put it into a thicke bagge, and hynde it ſo that the Brymſtone maye ſpreade abrode in it. Put into a pot ſome quicke lyme foure fingers thicke, and lay the bagge with the Brymſtone abroade vpon it: Than powre ſome good Uinaigre into it that it may be a handful high aboue the lyme, and let it ſeeth a whole daye. Than take the Brymſtone oute of the bagge, and waſhe it well in whote water, powre out the water and let it drye, and it wyll be Sulphur purgatum & praeparatum.
               
            
            
               A note.
               TAKE that whiche before you haue gathered together, and make a ſtronge Lie of it, with quycke Lyme and Aſhes of wyne Lees burned, take twyſe as muche of the ſawe Lie, and ſeeth them together vntill they be as it were Sope. Put the ſkymme or frothe of the ſame into a glaſſe, whiche you ſhall ſet in a dunghill ten dayes. Than braye it, and put it in a Limbecke, and diſtill it as before is ſaide, and that whiche remaineth in the Limbecke is oleum fixum ſulphuris, with this oyle you may fixe all thinges.
            
            
               
               To purge Brymſtone.
               TAke commom Brimſtone, ſtampe it verye ſmall, and ſift it: put it in a pot leaded with three feete, and powre into it ſome good Uinaigre, let it ſeeth ſlowly a daye and a night, ſkymme it with a wodden ſpone full of lytle holes lyke a ſkymmer. Whan the Uinaigre hath thus boyled with it a day and a night, put to it ſtale piſſe that is well ſodden and well ſkymmed and paſſed thorowe a felt. Let it ſo ſeeth with the piſſe two dayes and two nightes, and ſkimme it as before, and paſſe it ſo often thorowe the felte vntill the water be cleare. Than let it drye in the Sunne, and it is purged.
            
            
               To ſublyme Brymſtone.
               TAke purged Brimſtone, as I haue taught you before in the chapter of oyle of Brymſtone, of▪ the which you wyll: Take thereof a pounde of Brimſtone calcined, as is ſaide in the chapter before, a poūd of offall of yron, yron bruſed ſmall a quartene, braye them well and ſifte them, than put them into a Lymbecke, whiche hath a hole aboue, the whiche you ſhall ſtoppe with a peece of yron plate, lute well with claye the ſublimatorie that no breathe go oute, and ſet it in a Forneyſe to ſublime, makinge a litle fier vnderneth it, looke nowe and than vnder the peece of yron plate: the which whan it is no more moyſte, ſtop the hole we 
                  lutum ſapientiae, and make the fier a litle greater, and leaue it ſo ſixe houres. Than take it of, and that whiche ſticketh faſt aboue vpon i
                     •
                  , rubbe it of with an Hares foote. Styrre it againe with the lees that remaineth vnder, and ſet it in againe & ſublime it as before. Dee thus three tymes, and alwayes rubbe of that, whiche you fynde aboue vppon it, and keepe it, and braye the lees by it ſelfe, and do as before, vntyll they ſmoke no more vpon the fyer: Than caſte them oute, and take one parte of this ſublimed Brymſtone, two



partes of commom ſalt prepared, braye them well together, and ſublime them as before, laying firſt a plate vpon the hole. Hauinge done this fyue tymes, take of the Brymſtone before ſublimed, and braye it wyth twyſe as muche common ſalte prepared. And ſublime it ſo often that the Brymſtone be as whyte as Snow and than there wilbe inough. Keepe it.
            
            
               Oyle of Egges.
               TAke Egge ſhelles ſtamped, hauinge the litle ſkyn within taken away, keepe them. Than take the yelks of Egges, and beate them wel in a pot, and ſet a glaſſe of them vnder a dung hill of whote horſedung the ſpace of eyght dayes together. Than take it oute, and put the ſaide Egges into a Limbecke, and lute it well, and diſtill them thus three tymes, and there wyll come Oleum ouorum.
               
            
            
               Oleum auri pigmenti.
               TAke auri pigmentum, and bruſe it ſmall, and ſeeth it with oleum lunare in a litle pot leaded. And whan it is halfe conſumed, put it in a Limbecke and diſtill it: Than take the Lees, and bray them vpon a Marble ſtone, and put them again into ye Limbeck, and powre againe vpon it the ſame oyle: do thus three tymes and keepe it, for it is good ad fixationem.
               
            
            
               Oleum lunare.
               TAKE as muche of aqua lunaris deſcribed before, as you wyll, diſtill it in a Limbecke vntill it waxe drye, and you ſhall haue your Oyle, wherewith you may fixe all kyndes, and harden alſo Mercury.
            
            
               Oyle of Brymſtone.
               BRay Brymſtone with Tartre in maner of pappe, put it in a glaſſe vpō a fier of quick coales. iii. dates than bray it again, and diſtill it in a Limbecke, and that is called oleum ſulphuris.
               
            
            
               
               To ſublyme Mercurye.
               TAke a peunde of Mercury, a quarterne of ſalt armoniacke, powre vpon it good vinaigre, that thei maye be liquide: mingle them together, and let them ſo ſtande vntill the next morow. Bray them wel vpō a Marble ſtone, for al muſt be brought into pouder before you put the vinaigre to them. Whan you haue thus braied them that the Mercury apeareth no more, let it drie, and braye it well ſo drie withoute vinaigre, Than put it in a Limbeck, and ſublime it in a forneiſe of ſublimation, as before is ſayde of the y• Brymſtone: bynde faſt the felte about the Limbecke that nothinge breathe out. The firſt. ii. houres you ſhal make a ſ
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  e fier vnder it, vntill the moyſture come out aboue, whiche you ſhal know by the vapour that is vpō the peece of plate: than ſtoppe the hole, and make a greater fyer vnder it two houres long: than encreaſe the fyer foure houres longe: than let it coole by litle and litle, and than open it and you ſhal fynde the Mercury as whyte as a Lylly aboue, and that which ſticketh on the ſyde, and lyeth vppon the lees, rubbe it of with a feather, and braye it with the lees and ſtronge vinaigre as before, let it drie and ſublime it as before. This doe ſo long vntill the lees ſmoke no more vpon the coales. Than take the Mercury ſublimed, and twyſe as much common ſalte prepared, mingle them together, and ſublime them in a Limbecke as before. Do this three times. Sublime the lees as is ſayde vntill they ſmoke no more vpon the coales, than caſt them away. And yf the Mercury be not as whyte as Snowe, take other commom Salte prepared, and ſublyme it againe, vntyll it be whyte inoughe.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               A neceſſary Table conteynyng the ſummaries of all the receyptes, and medicines, treated of in this preſent volume.
            
               AGainſt euerye griefe or payne of the head, except the pockes. Fol. 1
               A preſeruatiue againſt the fallynge ſickeneſſe or epilepſia. Idem
               Againſt the falling ſickeneſſe. idem
               Another ſoueraigne remedy for the ſame. idem
               Againſt the palſey. idem
               Another waye. idem
               Againſt the Franſey. idem
               A tried remedie againſt the great paine ringynge and defneſſe of the eares. fol. 3
               Another remedy well knowen and tried. idem
               A remedy to ſtenche the bleeding at the noſe. idem
               Another for the ſame wel proued and of a merueylous ſtrength. idem
               Another ſoueraigne remedie. idem
               Another for the ſame. idem
               For the tooth ache a remedy proued. idem
               Another remedye, wheather the ache be by colde or by heate. idem
               Another for the ſame. idem
               Another remedy. idem
               A remedy for the ſtinking of the mouth & noſe. fol. 4
               Another for the ſame. idem
               A very good gargariſme or gargellinge for the throte againſt the Quinſey. idem
               For the ſame. idem
               Another for the ſame. idem
               An excellent plaiſter to ſoften or rype an impoſtume in the throte. idem
               Againſt ſpitting of bloode commyng of the Lunges or Lightes. idem
               For the ſame another remedie tried and proued. idem
               Another remedy founde very ſingular. idem
               
                  Another remedie of merueylous great vertue. idem
               Another ſecrete for the ſame, certaine and experimented and good at all houres. fol. 5
               For the ſame. idem
               Another for the ſame. idem
               Againſt the vlceration of the Lunges or Lightes, and Spittell full of matter and corruption. idem
               Another for the ſame. idem
               Another for the ſame. idem
               A remedie for ſhort winded men. idem
               A drinke for the ſame diſeaſe, to be taken euerye daye thryſe. fol. 6
               Another tried ſecrete good for poore folke. idem
               For the ſame and good alſo for the poore ſorte. idem
               A remedy againſt the plureſie. idem
               A decoction for the ſtomacke, verye good agaynſt the plureſie. idem
               Another remedy moſt certain againſt all plureſies, as proued as deuine, for to preſerue a man that he dye not of it. idem
               An oyntment to rot or ripe the plurcſie. fol. 7
               A plaiſter for the ſame. idem
               For the ſame. idem
               Againſt the whote cogh, that is to ſay, whan the pacient is ſovexed wt it that he can not wel ſleepe. idem
               Againſt the ſame, if his voyce be hoarſe with it. idem
               A tryed electuary for the ſame. idem
               Againe for the cogh. idem
               Pilles for the cogh. idem
               An oyntment for the ſame. idem
               Againſte the tremblinge and pantinge of the heart, this is very good, but eſpecially for women, whiche are ſubiect therevnto. fol. 8
               A remedye againſt the ſame, and very good to reſtore the ſtrength, beinge weakened with to great heate of agues. idem
               Another remedy where with I haue alwayes founde my ſelfe very well. idem
               An epitheme againſt the ſame paine. idem
               
                  An oyntment verye good for poore folke, that are not able to bye y• foreſayd medicine or nouriſhment. idē
               
               Another compo
                     ••
                  tiō very good in the time of a plague as well to preſe rue as to heale. fol. 9
               Another oyntme nt very good and principally for children that are troubled with wormes. idem
               A remedie againſt the wormes in yong children. idem
               A remedy againſt the paine of the ſtomack. idem
               Another remedy for the ſame, whan all other will not profit him. idem
               A vomentation or nouriſhment verye ſingular for the ſame. idem
               Another againſt the ſame. idem
               Another remedy. idem
               Another verye good. fol. 10
               Another remedy proued. idem
               A nouriſhment very good againſt y• ſame diſeaſe. idem
               a litle bag to cary about one agaiſt y• ſame diſeaſe. idē
               
               A drinke for the ſame. idem
               Another remedy to lay to the ſtomacke. idem
               Another remedy wel tryed & proued, and good chiefly for yonge children, vexed with the paine of the ſtomack, which is knowen if thei vomite or belche. idē
               
               A remedy againſt an impoſtume in the ſtomack. idem
               Againſt the ſame. fol. 11
               A plaiſter for the ſame. idem
               A nouriſhment or keeping of the ſtomack in his naturall heate, by waſhing or bathing it. idem
               A remedy againſt vomiting. idem
               An oyntmēt very good againſt cholerick vomitig. idē
               
               another remedy againſt flemetick vomiting. idem
               A remedy againſt the hicket or yexing. idem
               Another. idem
               Remedies againſt y• paine of the Lyuer come through ventoſitie. idem
               Another of very good effect. idem
               A remedie founde very good againſt the Lyuer that is appoſtumate or corrupted. fol. 12
               For the ſame. idem
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  Remedies againſt the dropſye. idem
               Againſt the ſame. idem
               A drinke of great vertue and ſtrength and againſt the windie dropſye. idem
               Another remedye verye good to take after a purgation. idem
               Remedies againſt the dropſye called aſcites, a drynke very good to take once a weeke. idem
               A ſingular good electuary for the ſame, whiche ought to be diſcloſed but to your ſpecial frendes. fol. 13
               An oyntment for the ſame. idem
               Another oyntment very good. idem
               A remedy againſt the yellow 
                     •
                  aunders. idem
               Remedies againſt the collicke. idem
               A remedy neuer to haue the collick more. idem
               Another remedy to take in the paine and tourment of the collicke. idem
               A verye good pouder that healeth quickelye the ſaide ſickennes. fol. 14
               A remedy which I haue founde to be very good for all griofe or paine of the guts or entrailes. idem
               A glyſter wherewith I haue cured many. idem
               Another againſt the ſame. idem
               Another for the ſame. idem
               An oyntment againſt the ſame. idem
               A verye good receipt which pope Element the ſeuenth tooke in his laſt sicknes. idem
               A remedy againſt the late or 
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  e come of choler. fol. 15
               An oyntment very good for the ſame. idem
               Remedies againſt the laxe diſentericke. idem
               Another drinke very good. fol. 16
               Another remedy. idem
               Another drinke verye good in cace the Pacient haue therewith any great dolour in his belly (as often tymes it happeneth) by reaſon of exulceration and knawing of the guttes. idem
               Another remedy when the paine is great. idem
               Suffamigations or ſmokings for the ſame. idem
               
                  The fyrſte. idem
               The ſeconde. idem
               Another remedy for the ſame. idem
               An oyntment very good for the bloody fi
                     •
                  e. idem
               Remedies againſt the ſwellyng and oppilation or ſ
                     ••
                  pping of the ſplene. fol. 17
               A fomentatiō or nouriſhing by waſh 
                     •••
                   for ye ſame 
                     •••
                   An oyntment againſt the ſame. idem
               Another fomentation or bathing for the ſame. idem
               Remedies againſt the paine; ſwelling, and ventoſitie of the matrice. idem
               Another 
                     ••••
                  d of ſome women. idem
               Another remedy very good & web knowes of womē 
                  
                     •
                   18
               Another. idem
               A fomentat
                     •
                  on or nouryſhyng. idem
               A very good oyntment. idem
               A playſter or clothe to laye vpon the matrice if griefe de olde or inueterate. idem
               Remedyes to make a womās tyme to come that is let or hyndered by ſome cauſe. idem
               Another remedy verye good alſo to cauſe a woman to bring forth the child before the tyme, yf the woman be in daunger of it. idem
               A waſhing very good for the ſame. idem
               Againſt to much abondaunce of flowers. idem
               An oyntment againſt the ſame. idem
               Againſt ye prefocatiō or ſtrangling of the matrice. idē
               
               Againſt the ſame of what cauſe ſo euer it come. idem
               Another againſt the ſame. idem
               Againſt the ſame. idem
               againſt the ſame. idem
               Remedies to be vſed whan the Matrice commeth oute of her naturall place or falleth. idem
               A plaiſter very good. idem
               Remedies for the Matrice corrupted or apoſtumated, a plaiſter for to diſſolue it. idem
               Another plaiſter for the ſame. idem
               A plaiſter. idem
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  Remedies againſt the vlcers or corrupte matter of the Matrice. idem
               A drinke for the ſame. idem
               Remedies againſt the white f
                     •
                  ire of women. idem
               Another againſt the ſame. fol. 21
               A drinke. idem
               A pouder againſt the ſame. idem
               Remedies againſt piſſing whote. idem
               A ſyrop. idem
               A drinke againſt the ſame, to take thre houres before dinner and at noone. idem
               Againſt gonothea, whiche is whan a mans ſeede goth from him vnwittingly. idem
               An oyntment againſt the ſame. idem
               Another remedie merueylous good. idem
               Remedies for them that piſſe blood. idem
               An oyntment for the ſame. fol. 22
               A plaiſter for the ſame. idem
               Remedies againſt the grauel. idem
               Another. idem
               Another remedy well tried where by I haue often tymes founde my ſelfe eaſed. idem
               Againſt the ſame. idem
               Another very good. idem
               Reteyptes to haſten the chyldbyrth, and to mitigate the paine of the trauayle and labour. idem
               Another. idem
               Another. fol. 23
               Another. idem
               Another remedy very good, but yet ſuch one that may not be geuen, but in great neceſſitie, or whan the childe is dead within her bellye. idem
               Remedies whan a man piſſeth againſt his will. idem
               Another for the ſame. idem
               Remedies againſt the ſtone in the bladder. idem
               A remedy & preſeruatiue againſt the ſame. idem
               Another for the ſame. idem
               Remedies for to heale the Emerhodes or Pyles, a very excellent oyntment. fol. 24.
               
                  A plaiſter againſt the ſame. idem
               An excellent & very good hote bathe for y• ſame. idem
               Another remedy of verye great vertue. idem
               Remedies againſt the ſwellyng of the coddes. idem
               Another againſt harde ſwellyng. idem
               A good plaiſter for the ſame. idem
               An oyntment againſt the ſame. idem
               A plaiſter. fol. 25
               Remedies againſt the ſciatica. idem
               Remedies againſt inflamations of blood whiche groweth into an impoſtume in ſome part of the body or membres, called phelgmone. idem
               A plaiſter to rype and to ret an impoſtume. idem
               Another for the ſame. idem
               Another to rot or rype incontinent. idem
               Againſt a ringworme or tettre that runneth all ouer a mans face, or againſt y• diſeaſe that is called Fry
                  
                     ••
                  pilas or Lichen, of ſome Mentagra, the Frenchmē call it feu volage, as it wer a running fier. fol. 26
               Another remedy very good to heale the ſame, whan it doth but beginne to encreaſe. idem
               Againſt flematicke ſwellyng. fol. 27
               Remedies for the ſcabbes. idem
               An oyntment very good for to annoynt yong children who becauſe of their tenderneſſe, can not endure a purgation. idem
               Another oyntment verye good for litle children & olde folke to vſe before and after a purgation. idem
               Another remedye. idem
               A baine or bathe for the ſame. idem
               againſt the ſcurfe or leprie called in latyn pſora. idem
               A remedy againſt puffes, bladders, blyſters, or wheles, and againſt the ſmall pockes. idem
               an oyntment. idem
               another remedy well tryed. idem
               againſt the ſtrong cogh of yong chyldren. fol. 28
               againſt the ſtinking ſweate. idem
               againſt the paine of the eyes. idem
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  For a whyte ſpotte in the eyes. idem
               Againſt the difficultie of bringing forth childe, and the retention of the ſhinne that the chylde is wrapped in, called in latyn ſecundina or ſecundae. idem
               A remedy whan the foundement commeth out. idem
               Againſt the paine of the guttes. idem
               againſt the difficultie in making water ſauing for that which commeth of the ſtone. idem
               For men. idem
               For women. idem
               Againſt Crabl
                     •
                  ce. fol. 29
               Againſt a Canker. idem
               Againſt the litle wormes and itching of the hande or bodye. idem
               Againſt the ſwellyng of the coddes. idem
               To make the wormes come out of ye hands or feete. idē
               
               A remedy for defnes of the eares. idem
               A remedie againſt fiſtuleys. fol. 30
               For the ſcabbes of the handes. idem
               A water of a great and merueylous effect for to keepe mans body frō many infirmities & diſeaſes. idem
               What operations come of ſuch diſtillations. idem
               Another water or Balſamum, almoſte for the ſame thinges. idem
               A pounder very good to conſerue the ſight. fol. 31
               Againſt the paine of the flanks or the plureſye. idem
               Againſt quartaine agues. idem
               To heale olde wounds and cankers of the legge. idem
               againſt the ſcurfe. idem
               Againſt al ventoſitie, collick or paine of ye matrice. idē
               
               For the hardnes or brawne of the feete. idem
               To make very perfite Uinaigre. idem
               Againſt the fallyng ſyckenneſſe. fol. 32
               For children that be broke. idem
               Againſt the paine of the ſplene. idem
               For to ſtench
                     •
                   bloode. idem
               For to heale in foure dayes the ſcaldyng wyth water, or any other thing, without oyntments or plaiſters it hath bane tryed and found trewe. idem
               
                  For to ſtenche bloode. idem
               Againſt the wormes in lytle children. idem
               To 
                     •
                  eale the Emerhodes or Pyles. idem
               Againſt all kindes of paine and griefe. idem
               Againſt ſtyfnes or ſhrinkinge of ſynowes, called the crampe or ſwellyng, commyng of the wound taken of ſome venimous beaſt in latin ſpaſmus or cōuulſio. 33
               For them that can not piſſe, by reaſon of certen grauel and carnoſitie which is abundaunce of fleſhe. idem
               Againſt defnes. idem
               Againſt opilation or ſtoppyng. idem
               Againſt the the gyddineſſe of the ſyght. idem
               For them yt can not broke their meate, but vomite it againe. idem
               Againſt the head ake by to much drinking. idem
               Againſt all the paine of the head. idem
               Againſt the pain of the head yt continueth always. idē
               
               Another waye. idem
               Another waye. fol. 34
               Againſt the megrame happening ſodenly. idem
               Againſt itching of the head. idem
               Againſt vlcers or ſcabbes of the head as well of men as of women. idem
               Againſt olde and putrified woundes. idem
               To kepe yt the fleſh grow not to much in a woūd. idem
               To heale and take away the ſcurfe. idem
               For to kyll Lyce. idem
               Agaynſt the diſtillation of the brayne and heauines of the head. idem
               Againſt murs or catars that beginne to growe. idem
               For to refraine the murre or catarre. idem
               A remedie for the diſeaſe whan the heare of the bearde or head falleth of, of it ſelfe. fol. 35
               To kepe that the heare ſhall not fall of. idem
               To make ye bear of a mās head or 
                     •
                  eard to grow. idem
               For to make heares growe. idem
               For to curle heare, a rare ſecrete. idem
               For to make heare blacke. idem
               To kepe yt the heares waxe not hoare or white. idem
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  For to make the heares blacke. idem
               Againſt the paine in the eyes. idem
               Againſt the dimneſſe or daſelyng of the ſight. fol. 36
               Another waye. idem
               Againſt a webbe or ſpot in the eye. idem
               To take away y• hurtful heares of the eye browes. idē
               
               Againſt all paine of the eares. idem
               Againſt the paine of the eares & defnes, & for to purge the apoſtumes or corruption of the eares. idem
               Againſt the paine of the eares. idem
               Againſt the noiſe or ringing of the eares. idem
               Againſt all infirmitie of the eares. idem
               Againſt defnes and hardnes of hearing. fol. 37
               Againſt the paine of the eares, defnes, durte or fylthe, wormes or water that is in them. idem
               For to ſtenche bleeding at the noſe. idem
               To heale the ſicknes called noli me tangere. idem
               Againſt ſtynking of the mouth. idem
               Againſt the tothe ache. idem
               Another waye. idem
               For to make teeth fall out. idem
               For to make teeth whyte that be blacke. idem
               For them that be hoarce. idem
               To heale the diſeaſe called the kinges euyll. idem
               Howe to knowe the kinges euill. idem
               Againſt the cegh and diſtillation of the breſt and lunges, and running of the eyes, paine of the bladder, and whan the pype of it is ſtopped, whiche cauſeth that a man can not piſſe, but with great difficultie, alſo for thoſe that ſpit blood at the mouthe, or pyſſe blood, and for the flire, and collicke paine, or beauynes of the bellye and choler, and alſo againſt a vomiting without an ague, alſo againſt all paine of the body, except of the head, and eſpeciallye againſt the vlce
                     •
                  ation of the lunges, if you giue the pacient an electuary or two of it. fol. 38
               Againſt all vehement coghes. idem
               Againſt the cogh be it neuer ſo great. idem
               For one y• hath ſwallowed down a blood ſucker. idem
               
                  Againſt an olde and inueterate cogh. idem
               Againſt the bloody flixe comming of the artere or ſynowe of the lunges or of the lyuer. idem
               For to reſtrain a great and vehement vomiting. fol. 39
               For them that can not kepe their meate in the ſtomack but vomite it vp agayne. idem
               To quenche and aſſwage thruſte. idem
               Another waye. idem
               To ſtoppe the hicket. idem
               For to ſtoppe the hicket that commeth often. idem
               A ſouerain remedy for them y• haue wry necks, by reaſon of ſhroken ſinowes: & for them y• haue y• gout. idē
               
               To take away ſwelling vnder the armeholes. idem
               Againſt apoſtumes & ſwelling at ye rote of y• nailes. idē
               
               To make a mās nailes grow which be fallen of. idem
               Againſt the diſeaſe called lychen, which is a foule breaking out of al ye face wt a ſcab, beginnīg at y• chin. idē
               
               To take away the ſcab of a running 
                     •
                  ettre &c. fol. 40
               Againſt burgeons & puſhes in the face. &c. idem
               Againſt all ſpots, pimples, puſhes, or vlcers. &c. idem
               To take away the blacknes of the neck. &c. idem
               Againſt the bruſing of the face by a fall or ſlip. idem
               Another very good. idem
               Againſt war
                     •
                  s and malanders. idem
               Againſt ſwelling of the ſtomacke, paine of the raines, grauel, fleame, collicke, the emerbodes, or pyles, alſo to ſtay the flowers of a woman, and for thoſe that haue an infected lyuer & ſplene, alſo for thoſe y• cogh and for them that haue the falling ſicknes. idem
               Againſt the paine of the ſplene. idem
               Another. fol. 41
               For the paine of the loynes or haunches. idem
               Againſt ſwelling or vlcers of the raines of the back. idē
               
               Againſt the paine of the grauell, and for to. &c. idem
               Againſt the paine of the raines. idem
               Againſt the grauell. idem
               Againſt the paine of the bladder and grauell. idem
               Againſt y• blody flixe, or fretting torment in. &c. fol. 42
               Againſt the ſtraining, fretting & griping of. &c. idem
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  For thoſe that haue fretting and gryping in the belly and the laxe. idem
               Againſt the collicke. idem
               Againſt the paine of the collick cōming ſodenly. idem
               Againſt the paine of the guttes or bowels. idem
               For to ſtoppe the laxe. idem
               Againſt the fretting of the belly or laxe. idem
               For to know a ſecret or hidden diſeaſe of any man, and to heale the ſame. fol. 43
               For them that voyde bloode at their foundement, and for thoſe that haue their blood broken. idem
               Againſt the wormes y• engender in mens bodies. idem
               Againſt the griping of the belly, & deſire to go to ſtole, and yet do nothing. idem
               Againſt the paine of the collicke. idem
               Againſt the vlcers & fiſtules in y• foundement. &c. idem
               To heale y• emerhodes or thoſe ye loſe their blood. idem
               Againſt the vlcers of the foundement, & againſt the diſeaſe called cōmonly S. Fiacres ſicknes. idem
               For to rype or breake an impoſtume or. &c. idem
               Another. idem
               Againſt hurting or flawing of the ſkyn by cha
                     •
                  ing and going either of the feete or betwene the thighes, id
                     •
                  
               
               Againſt ye ſwellyng & paine of the ſoles of the fete. 44
               To make wartes fall of. idem
               For to take away y• felons & cats heares which breake out we wheles in the fingers, & alſo knops. &c. idem
               For to aſſwage the paine of the gou
                     •
                  e. &c. idem
               Another waye. idem
               For to get out any thing y• ſticketh in a mans. &c. idem
               Certain receiptes againſt the plague. idem
               A comppoſition preſeruatiue againſt the peſtilence excellent as it were triacle or Mythridatum. fol. 45
               Another cōpoſition in pouder, or in other. &c. idem
               
               Cōmon pyles very good for the ſame. idem
               Antidotes or medicines preſeruatiues & cōfortable of ſmall coſt eaſie to finde & prepare for poore folke. idē
               
               Another medecine. fol. 46
               Thinges of fauour or ſwete ſmell, as pouder, balles,



waters, perfumes, and firſt a pouder for. &c. idem
               A parfume. idem
               A ſmellyng balle. idem
               Another ſwete balle meter for the ſommer. fol. 47
               Outward remedies to purge the ayre, the eaſyeſt, the preſenteſt, and thoſe that are of the ſmaleſt pryce for men of ſmal habilitie. idem
               A pouder againſt the wormes. idem
               The whole ſumme of the regiment and gouernyng of a mans lyfe. idem
               A ſoueraigne remedy againſt the venime of the plague for riche men and for princes. fol. 48
               A pouder for poore folke of no leſſe efficacie & ſtrength then the ſeconde. idem
               A drinke for poore folke, and in a place where there is none or very litle iuyce either of ſyrope, cytrons, lemons, or pomegrades. idem
               A drinke often times tried, profitable & wholeſome, yt which (as many men ſay) was neuer foūd vain. idem
               Opiate. idem
               A drinke mete after euery taking of the ſaid opiate, or to be mixt we the takinges of the ſame opiate, for the ſtrongeſt or meaneſt men, according. &c. 49
               A drinke for poore folke. idem
               A drinke to cauſe one to ſweate. idem
               Another drinke for poore folke. idem
               An epitheme or medecine to lay to the. &c. idem
               An epitheme for the heart good for poore folkes which may alſo ſerue for the lyuer. idem
               An epitheme or medecine for the lyuer. idem
               Locall medecines, & firſt a plaiſtor or. &c. fol. 50
               Another eaſy drawing medecine. idem
               Medecines of y• kindes yt burne ye ſkyn or fleſh. &c. idē
               
               Another plaiſter. idem
               Another ſtronger. idem
               A medecine that cleanſeth and purifieth. idem
               Another very good. idem
               A plaiſter incarnatife. idem
               A repercuſſife & reſolutiue oyntment againſt. &c. fol. 51.
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  A plaiſter for to ſtoppe the g
                     •
                  awinge or eating of the canker. idem
               An oyntment verye ſweete for cankers that haue corrupt matter in them, which alſo alayeth the paine of thoſe that haue no corrupt matter in them. idem
               An oyntment of meruelous vertue againſt the eating and running of the canker, and to take away all the griefe of the ſame. idem
               A plaiſter mitigatiue and verye gentle for cankers, ſpecially of the breſtes or pappes. fol. 52
               Fyrſt to harden yron. idem
               For to harden knyues and other ſuch lyke. idem
               For to harden a fyle or other inſtrument of yron. idem
               To harden any other ſubſtaunce materiall. idem
               To make any inſtrument of ſteele hard & ſharpe. idem
               Another. idem
               To kepe it frō cleauing whan it is a hardining. fol. 53
               To make yron or ſteele ſofte. idem
               Another. idem
               To ſoder all things and firſt yron. idem
               To ſoder any whote thyng. idem
               To ſoder Copper. fol. 55
               To ſoder yron. idem
               A pouder that will make all metall pliable & ſoft. idem
               Another vpon braſſe. idem
               To graue in yron or ſtele, kniues & harneſſe. idem
               To graue with water. idem
               Another ſtronger and more bytyng. fol. 56
               To make a colour of golde or ſiluer to laye vpon metal, and to make alſo a ground of gold or ſiluer, vpō yron, bells, ſtones, which ſhal not go of wt water. idē
               
               A colour of gold to ſet vpon bras or copper. idem
               A colour of golde vpon braſſe. fol. 57
               To make Copper of a ſyluer colour. idem
               To gylt yron or ſteele. idem
               To make a water for to gilt vpō yron or ſteele. idem
               To kepe all ma
                     •
                  er of yron or ſteele, and alſo al maner of inſtrumentes of warre. idem
               To bryng a cloth that was ſtained to his. &c. idem
               
                  To take ſpots out of cloth. fol. 58
               Another waye. idem
               A water to take ſpots out of whyte clothe. idem
               To take ſpots of greaſe or oyle out of whyte cloth. idē
               
               To take ſpots of greaſe or oyle out of all ſorts of cloth or other things. idem
               Another. idem
               To take ſpots of wyne out of all maner of cloth. idem
               To take all maner of ſpots out of ſilke. idem
               To take all ſpots out of crymſen veluet. fol. 59
               A water take all ſpots out of gold & veluet. idem
               To make a Sope that taketh out all ſpots. idem
               To take ſpots of black incke or other things. &c. idem
               To take ſpots out of ſcarlet or veluet of colours wt out vurting any thing at al the colour. idem
               To take ſpots of oyle frō parchment or white paper. 60
               To die threde, yarne or linen cloth into a. &c. idem
               To die threde or linnen cloth blew. idem
               A blewe colour to dye all thinges. idem
               Another way to dye blewe. idem
               To dye redde. fol. 61
               Another waye. idem
               To make fayre roſet. idem
               To die wodde, bones and horne into greene. idem
               Another greene. idem
               To die, horne, bone, and wodde into redd
                     •
                  . idem
               To dye yellowe. fol. 62
               To die blacke. idem
               To make horne ſofte. idem
               To mollifie or ſoften horne ſo that you ſhall imprynte or make any figures in it. idem
               Another waye. idem
               To caſt hornes in a m
                     ••
                  d
                     •
                   lyke leade. idem
               To make cleare ſtones of amber. idem
               Another fol. 63
               To poliſh & to giue a gloſſe vnto precious ſtones. idem
               To make a ſtone that ſhal giue fier and burne of it ſelf if you weate it with your finger. idem
               To 
                     •
                  ollifie or ſoften Chriſtall and precious ſtones 
                     •
                  o



                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  


                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  


                  
that you maye cut them lyke theeſe, and that beyng put in a mould they ſhalbe harde againe. idem
               To counterfeyt pearles which ſhalbe verye faire, and as they were naturall and trewe. idem
               To prepare Mercury, & ſo to harden it, that you maye make it liquide and worke it. fol. 64
               A ſubſtance made of paper or other things, to expreſſe or ſet out any manet of figure y• you wil vpō. &c▪ idem
               How to bray gold for to gilt with. fol. 65
               To g
                     •
                  lt copper. idem
               To gilt pro
                     •
                  . idem
               To take of the gold from ſiluer that is gilt, ſo that the ſiluer ſhal remaine whole and ſound. idem
               To ſeperat 
                     •
                  iluer frō copper, be it money or &c. idem
               A
                     •••
                  der which being la
                     ••
                  ng vpon any thing ſiluered wil take of the ſiluer from it. idem
               To conuert and turne copper into braſſe. fol. 66
               To melt al metall perfit
                     ••
                  . idem
               For to giue a colour of gold vpon copper. idem
               To make verdet or ſpaniſhe greene. idem
               To make a whyte colour of lead. idem
               To make Lutum ſapientie. fol. 67
               To l
                     •
                  te or dawde pottes with a linnen cloth that wil not bur
                     〈…〉
                   idem
               To ſoder glaſſes. idem
               Another lutum ſapientie. idem
               To ſeperat golde from ſiluer. fol. 68
               Another waye. idem
               To ſeperat gold or ſiluer wtout fier or aqua fortis. idē
               
               To ſeperat gold from ſiluer wt a pouder. idem
               To make golde ſofter. idem
               Another waye. fol. 69
               To make golde and ſiluer 
                     〈…〉
                   idem
               To ſoften all metalls, and other thinges that are not ſoft ſo that thei ſhalbe ſoft & gentle to be wroughts vpon or forged. idem
               A
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  yle that 
                     ••
                  aketh all metalles ſoft. idem
               T
                     •
                   ſeperat golde from copper. idem
               Another way. idem
               
                  A pouder to ſeperat golde. idem
               To waſhe golde from copper. fol. 70
               To get together the gold out of thredes of. &c. idem
               To gilde ſo that it ſhal not out wt no water y• is. idem
               To gather together into one, the gold that is ſcraped of from letters and images. idem
               To take gilt from a cup that is gilded within. idem
               To make gold ſoft after the melting. idem
               For to giue a colour to the gold that it ſhalbe ſoft. idē
               
               To boyle gold or ſiluer to make it receyue a. &c. fol. 71
               To geue a colour to golde. idem
               To geue 
                     〈…〉
                   idem
               For to make 
                     〈…〉
                  e. idem
               To make ſiluer faire and whyte. idem
               To know if ye ſiluer haue any gold in it or no. idem
               To mortifie and alay Mercury or quick ſiluer. idem
               To gylt ſteele or yron. idem
               To ſeperat gold or ſiluer from metal or yron. fol. 72
               Siluer of tyn, to make veſſel or other thinges. idem
               To white anye veſſell of copper within and without with ſiluer colour very eaſely. idem
               To make veſſel of Copper whyte lyke Syluer, bothe within and withoute. idem
               To make that tynne cracke not. idem
               To take Salamanders, for to occupye or to ſerue a mans tourne. fol. 73
               To fyne golde with Salamanders. idem
               The mother of all waters for to make all metalles liquiſyable. idem
               To prepare common ſalte. idem
               To prepare ſalte Armoniacke. fol. 74
               To make ſal Alkali. idem
               To make ſal Boras. idem
               Water of Mercury. fol. 75
               Water of ſalt Armoniacke. idem
               A water called aqua lactis virginis. idem
               Water of ſalt Alkali. idem
               A water called aqua croci martis. idem
               To calcine tartre. idem
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  
                  
                     〈…〉
                   egge ſhelles. fol. 
                     ••
                  
               
               To 
                     •••
                  cſne or 
                     ••
                  rne tutia. idem
               A water called aqua lunaris. idem
               Aqua 
                     •••
                  ſata▪ idem
               A water called aqua cauſc
                     •
                  c
                     ••
                   fol. 77
               Aqua auri pigmenti. idem
               Water of common ſalt prepared. idem
               Water of yelkes of egges. idem
               Oyl
                     •
                   
                  
                     ••
                   t
                     ••••
                  e. idem
               An oyle called oleum la
                     •
                  e
                     ••••
                  n
                     •
                   or petroleum. idem
               Oleum benedictum. idem
               Oy
                     •
                  e of Brymſtone. idem
               A note▪ 78
               To purge Brymſtone. idem
               To sublime Brymſtone▪ idem
               Oyle of Egges. fol. 79
               Oleum auri pigment
                     •
                  . idem
               Oleum lunare. idem
               Oyle of Brymſtone. idem
               To sublime Mercury. idem
            
            
               
                  〈…〉
                of Secrete
                  •
                and ſoueraigne 
                  •
               e
               
                  〈…〉
                good and approued Authours, 
                  〈…〉
                the French tongue, and nowe latelye 
                  〈…〉
               gly ſhe (to the profite of this 
                  〈…〉
               ) by W. Warde.
         
         
            
               
                  •
                Prynted at London by Rouland Hall dwel
               
                  •
               n
                  •
                
               
                  ••
                
               
                  〈…〉
               , at the ſigne of the hale Egle and the Kepe.
            1562.
            
         
      
   