
      
         
            
            Good Reader
read the
Preface, or
elſe reade
nothing.
         
         
            
            THE
TRAVELS OF
certaine Engliſhmen into Africa,
Aſia, Troy, Bythinia, Thracia,
and to the Blacke Sea.
            AND
into Syria, Cilicia, Piſidia, Meſopotamia,
Damaſcus, Canaan, Galile, Samaria,
Iudea, Paleſtina, Jeruſalem, Iericho,
and to the Red Sea: and to ſundry
other places.
            Begunne in the yeere of Iubile 1600. and by ſome of
them finiſhed this yeere 1608. The others not yet
returned.
            Very profitable for the helpe of Trauellers,
and no leſſe delightfull to all perſons who
take pleaſure to heare of the Manners,
Gouernement, Religion, and
Cuſtomes of Forraine and
Heathen Countries.
            LONDON.
Printed by Th. Haueland, for W. Aſpley, and
are to bee ſold at his ſhop in Paules
Church-yard, at the ſigne of the
Parrot. 1609.
         
         
            
            
            THE PREFACE TO
the READER.
            
               I Finde (gentle Reader) in Hiſtories
commended vnto vs▪
the painfull trauels of ſome
(both by Sea and by Land)
which viſited farre countries,
that they might bee made
more wiſe and learned. For
this purpoſe Pythagoras trauelled
into Egypt to heare the
M
                  •••
               phiticall Poets. plato leauing Athens, where hee
taught with great commendation 
                  〈◊〉
                into Italy to
Archit
                     ••
                  
                of 
                  
                     •
                  arentum, that he might learne ſomewhat of
that Philoſopher and Diſciple of Pythag
                     ••
                  as.) Apollonius
(with no leſſe labour than danger and coſt) paſſed and
iourneied to the furtheſt par
                  ••
                of 
                  〈◊〉
                to the Philoſophers
there, that he might heare Hierarchs, ſitting in a
throne of gold, and drinking of the Well of Tantalus,
diſputing amongſt a few Schollars, of Nature, of Manners,
of the courſe of 
                  〈◊〉
                and Statres▪ from thence,
returning by the Elamites, Babylonians, Chalda
                     •
                  ns, Medes,
Aſſyrians, Paleſtines; he came to Alexandria: and from
thence to Aethiopia, that he might ſee the Philoſophers
in India, which went alwaies naked, and the Table of the

Sunne, which was famous throughout the world. Solon
went from Graecia to Egypt for a like purpoſe. All theſe
trauelled to get wiſdome and learning.
            It is written of Hierome, that he went from Dalmatia
to Rome; from thence to Germanie; then to Conſtantinople;
then to Alexandria; then to Ierusalem; onely to ſee
and heare famous men, that he might alwaies goe forward
in wiſdome.
            
               Iacob in his old age trauelled into Egypt, partly conſtrained
by neceſſity, and partly for loue of Ioſeph. The
Queène of the South, a woman (whom Ariſtotle calleth
imperfect creatures) trauelled farre to heare the wiſdom
of Sol
                     •
                  mon.
            
            Amongſt vs there haue beene (and are ſtill) ſundrie
Trauellers of great name, which haue enterpriſed and
taken in hand great Voyages, and dangerous iournies;
Some to Venice, ſome to Rome, ſome to Constantinople,
ſome to Ieruſalem, ſome to Syria, ſome to Perſia, ſome to
the Turke, ſome to the Barbarians: And theſe haue trauelled
vpon diuers reſpects: Some for pleaſure, ſome for
profit, ſome to ſee their manners, ſome to learne their
languages, ſome to get experience, ſome to get wiſdome
and knowledge; not ſparing any coſt, fearing any danger,
nor refuſing any paines. Others would trauell, but
are loth to be at any charges. Others would bee at the
coſt, but feare to expoſe themſelues to dangers by Sea
and by Land. It is good (ſay they) to ſleepe in a whole
skinne. They cannot abide to bee toſſed and tumbled
like tennis-bals on the turbulent and tempeſtuous ſeas,
as Ouid in his exile complained he was, when hee ſaid,
Eleg. 2.
            
               
               Me miſerum, quanti montes voluuntur aquarum,
               Iamiam tacturos 
                     •
                  idera ſumma putes.
               Quanta diducto ſubſidunt a
                     •
                  quore valles,
               
                  
                     •
                  amiam tacturas Tartara nigra putes.
            
            That is,
            
               What boiſterous billowes now (O wretch!)
               Amidſt the waues we ſpie,
               As I foorthwith ſhould haue beene heau'd
               To touch the Azure skie?
               What vacant vallies be there ſet
               In ſwallowing Seas ſo wrought,
               As preſently thou look'ſt I ſhould
               To drery hell be brought?
            
            
               Aeneas was toſſed with a like tempeſt, as Virgil finely
deſcribeth it, Aeneid. 1. which place is well knowen to
all yoong ſcholars. And theſe freſh water ſouldiers diſcourage
themſelues from trauell, and ſay, It was one of
the three things which Cato repented, to trauell by Sea
when hee might haue gone by Land: And a charge
that Antigonus gaue his ſonnes (when they were toſſed
with a tempeſt) Remember (my ſonnes) and warne your poſterity
of it, that they neuer hazard themſelues vpon ſuch aduentures.
For Sailers and Aduenturers (as one ſaith very
well) are neither amongſt the liuing, nor amongſt the
dead: they hang betweene both, ready to offer vp their
ſoules to euery flaw of wind and billow of water wherewith
they are aſſaulted, eſpecially to euery ſtormy wind,
and huge ſea. And it is more ſafe (ſay they) to ſtand vpon

the ſhoare, and to ſee the raging of the waters from
the ſea bankes, than to be toſſed thereupon, and endangered
thereby.
            Wherefore (albeit I be no great traueller my ſelfe)
yet to ſet foorth the praiſe of the one, who haue beene
at the coſt, hazarded the danger, and returned with credit;
and to helpe the puſillanimitie of others who feare
to vndertake the trauell in regard of the danger; and to
releeue the miſerie of others, who are loth to bee at the
coſt though they delight to heare and ſee ſtrange countries,
people, and manners: I haue thought good to
publiſh the trauels of others, which lately (by good
chance) is come vnto my hands, after the death of Maſter
Bezaliell Biddulph a learned and religious gentleman,
to whom they were firſt written. In whoſe ſtudy (amongſt
his letters and looſe papers) was found firſt of all
a Copy of a voyage to Ieruſalem by Land, from Aleppo
in Syria Comagena, not long ſince vndertaken and performed
by fiue Engliſhmen there ſoiourning, viz Maſter
William Biddulph (Preacher to the Company of Engliſh
Merchants reſident in Aleppo) Maſter Ieffrey Kirbie
Merchant, Maſter Edward Abbot Merchant, Maſter Iohn
Elkin gentleman, and Iaſper Tyon Ieweller.
            This vo
                  •
               age was well penned, and generally well liked
of all that ſaw it, who craued copies thereof, by
which meanes at length it came to my hands: which I
thorowly peruſing; and finding therein mention made
of former Letters, concerning other voyages by one of
theſe fiue trauellers formerly performed, directed to the
ſaid Gentleman Bezaliel Biddulph: I could not ſatisfie my
ſelfe vntill (by the meanes of friends) I came to the ſight
of the reſt alſo, which were many in number, at leaſt

twenty letters, beſides the voyage to Ieruſalem, all directed
vnto one man: Some by the Preacher aboue named,
maiſter William Biddulph: and ſome by his brother
Peter Biddulph Lapidarie and Diamond cutter in thoſe
Countries. Out of all which Letters I haue gathered the
matter therein contained, (leauing out onely ſome ſalutations
and priuate matters) and haue thought good (for
the helpe of Trauellers and delight of others) to make
one body of them, and (without the conſent of either of
them) to put them in print. For the one of theſe two brethren
is yet beyond the Seas; the other (after ten yeeres
trauell) is lately arriued into England, and hath ſundrie
times beene requeſted (by diuers of his good friends) to
publiſh his trauels, but he could neuer be perſwaded ſo
to doe, but anſwered▪ that he knew how to ſpend his time
better, and that he was not ignorant of the incredulitie
of others in ſuch caſes, who wil hardly beleeue any thing
but that which they themſelues haue ſeene; and when
they heare any thing that ſeemeth ſtrange vnto them,
they reply, that trauellers may lie by authority: but they
are liers themſelues which ſay ſo; for trauellers haue no
more authority to lie than others, neither will they arrogate
vnto themſelues more liberty to lie than others, eſpecially
being men that feare God, as they (of all others)
ſhould be, who goe downe to the Sea in ſhips, and ſee
the workes of the Lord both by Sea and by Land, and
his wonders in the deepe.
            In regard whereof, hee hath beene ſo farre from printing
his trauels, that he (being a very modeſt man) taketh
no delight to ſpeake thereof, except it be vnto ſome familiar
friend. But for that old acquaintance which I
haue had with him (hauing beene his ſchollar) and that

mutuall loue betwixt vs of long continuance; I was ſo
bold to make knowen vnto him, that I had ſeene all the
letters which both he and his brother Peter Biddulph had
written to their friend Bezaliel Biddulph, (wherein they
diſcourſed of all their trauels) and what paines I had taken
to gather them together for mine owne delight, and
direction in my trauels, which I purpoſed ſhortly to vndertake.
Whereupon he requeſted mee to keepe them
ſecret to my ſelfe, which I told him I had done, foraſmuch
as I had read in one of his letters to Mr. Bezaliel
Biddulph, the like requeſt, which hee made vnto him in
theſe words: I pray you keepe my Letters to your ſelfe, lest
whiles to giue content vnto you in writing what you would, I
receiue diſcontent my ſelfe in hearing what I would not.
            
            Heereby I found him very affable, and willing to
conferre with me of his trauels, and to giue me direction
for mine, and to reſolue me in any thing I deſired, concealing
my purpoſe of imprinting them, when (by conference
with him and other trauellers into thoſe parts)
I had perfected them. Yet, foraſmuch as a publike good
is to be preferred before a priuate, I could not but impart
vnto others that which I my ſelfe had learned of others:
For that which Perſius ſpeaketh interrogatiuely,
in this caſe I vnderſtand poſitiuely:
            Scire tuum nihil eſt, niſi te ſcire hoc ſciat alter:
            That is,
            
               It is nothing for thee a good thing to know,
               Vnleſſe thou impart it toothers alſo.
            
            
               
And who knoweth what good may redounde vnto others,
by reading of this diſcourſe of other Countries?
For hereby all men may ſee how God hath bleſſed our
Countrie aboue others, and be ſtirred vp to thankefulneſſe.
            Hereby ſubiects may learne to loue, honour, and obey
their good and gratious King, when they ſhall reade of
the tyrannous gouernement of other Countries, and of
the mercifull gouernement of theirs.
            Heereby hearers may learne to loue and reuerence
their Paſtors, and to thank God for the ineſtimable benefit
of the preaching of the word amongſt them; when
they ſhall reade in what blindneſſe and palpable ignorance
other nations liue, not knowing the right hand
from the left in matters that concerne the kingdome of
Heauen, and yet reuerence and honour their blind guids
and ſuperſtitious Church-men like Angels, and prouide
for their maintenance roially.
            Heere wiues may learne to loue their husbands, when
they ſhal read in what ſlauery women liue in other Contries,
and in what awe and ſubiection to their husbands,
and what libertie and freedome they themſelues enioy.
            Heereby ſeruants may bee taught to be faithfull and
dutifull to their Maſters, when they ſhall read of the
brutiſh and barbarous immanitie in other Countries of
maſters towards their ſeruants; who not only beat them
like dogs, but ſell them at their pleaſure, and ſometimes
kill them for ſmall offences.
            Heere rich men may learne to be thankefull to God,
not onely for their libertie and freedome of their Conſcience
and perſons; but of their goods alſo: when they
ſhall read, how in other contries no man is maſter of his

owne, but as the fatteſt oxe is neereſt vnto the ſlaughter,
ſo the richeſt men are neereſt vnto death.
            Here poore men may learne to be thankefull to God
for their benefactors, and not to be repining and impatient
beggers (as many of them are) when they ſhal read
how in other countries the poore liue like brute beaſtes,
on graſſe and water, the rich hauing no more mercie on
them, then the rich glutton had of Lazarus.
            
            Heere they that trauell in England may learne what a
benefit it is to haue the refuge of Innes in their trauell,
and bee content to pay well for it, where they are well vſed:
wheras in other countries they lodge without dores
all night and carie their prouiſion with them.
            And the publiſhing hereof without the Authors conſent
may perhaps bee an inducement vnto him to enlarge
this diſcourſe, by adding thereunto the diuerſities
of Religions in thoſe countries, and what conference and
diſputation he hath had with Iewes, Ieſuites, and people
of ſundry other countries: and by perfiting any thing
which herein ſhall be thought imperfect.
            And yet I haue had conference with one of the Authors,
and ſhewed his Letters vnto many other trauellers
of good iudgement, who haue beene in thoſe parts, and
all of them ſubſcribe vnto the trueth of euery thing therin
contained. And of my ſelfe I haue ſet downe nothing
but what I either haue found in the Letters of theſe two
brethren (maſter William Biddulph, and Peter Biddulph)
or elſe (by conference with one of them and ſundry other
trauellers of credit) heard ſpoken and deliuered for truth.
            Onely in two things (I confeſſe) I haue beene ſomewhat
bold with mine Authors. Firſt, in the number of
their: letters for whereas they wrote very many letters,

and his companions went thither onely as trauellers to
ſee the Holy Land.
            Againe, if it were his owne doing, he being both wiſe
and Religious (as hee is accounted) would neuer bee ſo
ſimple to publiſh his owne diſgrace in Printe, in going
to Maſſe, and obſeruing many other ceremonies as are
mentioned in that booke which goeth foorth vnder his
name.
            In the voiage of the fiue Engliſhmen from Syria to Iudaea,
(which is the laſt letter) I haue written only of their
trauels thither, and ſuch things as they ſaw there, but nothing
of their returne, for I could not meet with any letter
wherein my Authour had written thereof, neither
could I learne it of him by conference with him, for
when I ſpake vnto him thereof, deſiring him to ſet it
downe in writing for my further direction, I could haue
no other anſwere of him but this which Aeneas ſpake to
Queene Dido, as Vigil. ſetteth it downe Aeneid. lib. 2.
            Infandum regina iubes renouare dolorem.
            that is,
            
               A dolefull worke me to renew
               (Deare friend) you craue, wherefore adew.
            
            Whereby I perceiued he tooke no pleaſure to talke of
it, and leſſe to write of it. The reaſon, I vnderſtood by
others; becauſe it was more dangerous, troubleſome,
and tedious to him then all the reſt of his voiage: for manie
nights they ſlept in the open fields, when it rained all
night exceeding faſt, and in the day time they were often

dangered by theeues, and oftentimes in the night they
were glad to hire a guard to watch whiles they ſlept, for
feare leſt their throats ſhould be cut whiles they were aſleepe:
and many other miſeries they were ſubiect vnto,
as hunger and thirſt, heate in the day, cold (being harborles)
in the night.
            And beſides many miſeries which hee hath indured
by land; he hath very narrowly eſcaped many extreame
dangers by Sea, whereof I will mention only one, which
I haue heard, not only from his owne mouth (with gratefull
memorie vnto God for his miraculous and vnexpected
preſeruation) but alſo from others who were in the
ſame danger with him. In relation whereof they all agree
in one, that it was on this manner.
            Ann. Dom. 1605 Febr. 9. He, with ſome other Engliſhmen,
viz. Sampſon Newport, and his brother Edward
Newport, Edward Concke, Martin Kentiſh, William Welch,
Thomas Mania
                     •
                  d, and others: hauing occaſion to trauell
from Conſtantinople to Zante (for want of an Engliſh ſhip)
imbarked thēſelues in a Raguzean ſhip which was bound
thither. Wherein they ſailed ſafely, vntill they came amongſt
the Cyclades, or the 53. Iles in the Arches, where
they were a while becalmed ouer againſt Milo, where
they were minded to touch.
            But ſuddenly this calme was turned to a ſtorme, which
ſpeedily droue them out of the ſight of Milo, and Amimilo,
and ſo confounded the Raguzean Mariners (being
no skilfull Nauigators) that they knew not where they
were, (an vncomfortable caſe in ſuch a dangerous place,
amongſt ſo many Ilands ſo thicke together.) Before them
they ſawe land in three places, yet none of them knew
whether it were the maine land, or ſome Iland, and therfore

were ignorant what courſe to take. The prouidence
of God ſo directed, that they paſſed ſo neere the Ile Serigotta,
as ſeldome or neuer any ſhip did, and not ruſh
vpon the rockes.
            When they were paſt this Iland, they were out of the
Arches or Cyclades, and had ſea-roome inough, which
was ſome comfort.
            But the ignorance of the Mariners, The violence of
the ſtorme, The weaknes of the ſhip, and the prophaneneſſe
of the company with whom he was ſhipped, were
great cauſes of diſcomfort.
            The Mariners were ignorant, not accuſtomed to ſaile
by compas or cunding of the ſhip, but by the eie and
view, and to be ſtill in ſight of land, The ſtorme ſtill increaſed
more vehemently, and continued three daies and
three nights together; during which time, they could neither
eate nor drinke, nor ſleepe. The ſhip was weake and
halfe full of water, ready to be ſplit in pieces with euery
blaſt of wind, or to bee deuoured by euery waue of the
Sea.
            The boat which the ſhip towed after her, was cut off,
and let goe at randome without hope of euer ſeeing it againe,
leſt it ſhould be full of water, and ſinke, and draw
the ſhip alſo vnder water. The companie as they were
of diuers nations, ſo of diuers natures: and as they differed
in religion, ſo likewiſe in their conuerſation and cariage,
during the continuance of this tempeſt. For the
ſtorme increaſed, the aire thundered, the winds bluſtered,
the Sea raged, and the waues thereof ariſing like
mightie mountaines, toſſed vp the ſhip (to vſe the Poets
Hyperbole) ſometimes as high as heauen, and by and by
tumbled her downe againe as low as hell; ſo that (as the

Pſalmiſt ſpeaketh, Pſal. 107. 27.) They were toſſed to and
fro, and ſtaggered like drunken men, and all their cunning being
gone, euery man called vpon his god (like the Mariners
in Ionas ſhip.) The Raguzeans and Italians called vpon
all the gods and goddeſſes, the Hee Saints, and She
Saints, and caſt Grand Benedicta into the ſea, to aſſwage
the madnes therof. Which nothing preuailing, the maſter
of the ſhip called maſter Samſon Newport (an Engliſh
Merchant) and told him in Italian that hee vnderſtood
that the Signior Reuerendo Dot
                     •
                  ore Ingleſe: that is, That the
reuerend Engliſh Doctor (who was in his ſhip) had bin
at Ieruſalem, and requeſted him to ſpeake vnto him, if he
had any holy reliques in his cheſt which hee brought
from Ieruſalem, to giue him ſome to throw into the Sea,
to pacifie the rage thereof. M. Newport made anſwer,
that he knew that their Engliſh Preacher had no ſuch
Reliques as he deſired.
            Then there was nothing amongſt the ſuperſtitious Papiſts,
but weeping and wringing of hands; ſome preparing
boards ready to caſt themſelues into the Sea, looking
at euery blaſt when the ſhip would bee diſiointed
and ſhaken aſunder: Others pattering on beads, and making
large vowes to Madonna de Lauretta, if ſhee would
deliuer them; and to this Saint and that Saint, if they
eſcaped.
            The Maſter of the ſhip, called Andrea, and his brother
Stephano, (being both owners of the ſhip) ſaid, that
ſurely the Engliſh Doctor was a Coniurer, for they neuer
ſaw him without a booke in his hand, but ſtill reading,
vntill (by his learning) he had raiſed a ſtorme vpon
them; and thought it beſt to make a Ionas of him, and
to caſt both him and his books into the Sea: which they

had done indeed, if God (in mercy towards him) had
not preuented them; for our Engliſhmen (like good
Chriſtians) hauing learned out of the Scriptures (Pſal.
46. 1.) That God is a pre
                     •
                  ent helpe in time of trouble, and hath
promiſed to deliuer them that call vpon him in time of
trouble, gaue themſelues both iointly and ſeuerally to
praier, and all the time of this tempeſt cried vnto the Lord
in their trouble, and he brought them out of their diſtreſſe.
He turned the ſtorme to calme, ſo that the waues thereof were
ſtill. And ſo (at length) by the prouidence of God, they
came all ſafely to their deſired Port, where they heard
of many ſhips (as ſome reported, fiftie) which were caſt
away in that ſtorme, out of which they were deliuered.
Many ſuch deſperate plunges hath he eſcaped in his ten
yeeres trauell, which I haue heard of, but forbeare (for
breuities ſake) to ſpeake of.
            Theſe things conſidered, I thought it not meet to preſſe
him any further therewith, leſt the remembrance of former
miſeries, ſhould be a cauſe of freſh ſorowes, knowing
that he hath indured much hardneſſe both by ſea and
by land, & ſo much as may ſeeme admirable, yea, almoſt
incredible that ſuch a ſpare leane man, and of ſuch a
weake body (as he ſeemed to be of) ſhould endure in ten
yeeres tedious trauell together. And yet notwithſtanding
his continuall dangers both by ſea and by land, hee
hath continued ſtill to preach the Goſpel conſtantly and
boldly (in Heathen countries) both by ſea and by land;
receiued great honour amongſt them; and is now at
length (by the prouidence of God) returned into his natiue
countrie in health and ſafety to preach the Goſpell
whereſoeuer it ſhall pleaſe God to call him: and is at this

day the greateſt traueller (of a man of his calling, that I
know) in all England both by ſea and land.
            By land, he hath trauelled further then Iacob, and the
ſame way that Iacob did from Hebron to Padan Aram,
and hath had as hard lodging in his trauell as Iacob had,
viz. the ground to his bed, a ſtone for his pillow, the skie
for his couering, and ſometimes the aire for his ſupper.
            By Sea, farther then S. Paul, then Aeneas, or Vlyſſes
haue done, and all the whole way that they all haue trauelled,
and further.
            Wherefore (gentle Reader) if thou take in good part
theſe his trauels, and my paines and labour in collecting
them together, it may perhaps encourage him to enlarge
them, and me to procure them, and to adde thereunto
his conference and diſputations with Iewes, Ieſuits,
and ſundry other nations (which I vnderſtand hee hath
had with them) and ſuch arguments as haue beene vſed
on both ſides, & letters in ſundry languages which haue
beene written on both ſides from one to another.
            In the meane time, I leaue him (with his foure fellow
trauellers) ſoiourning at the earthly Ieruſalem; and thee
(gentle Reader) trauelling towards the heauenly Ieruſalem:
where God grant at length we may all ariue, IESVS
CHRIST being our Pilot and Ieniſary to conduct vs
thereunto, AMEN.
            
               Thine euer in the Lord,
THEOPHILVS LAVENDER.
            
         
         
            
            The Trauels of certaine Engliſh-men
into Heathen Countries, ſet foorth by their Letters:
the Contents whereof are heere ſet
downe, as followeth.
(*⁎*)
            
               
                  THe first Letter was written from Conſtantinople,
the Primate and Metropolitan
Citie in all Thracia, wherein the Author
cert
                     •
                  fi
                     •
                  th his friend of his voyage from England
thither, and of ſuch famous places,
and memorable matters as he ſaw and obſerued
in the way thither. pag. 1.
               
                  II. The ſecond was ſeat from the ſame renowned Citie,
wherein he deſcribeth Conſtantinople from the beginning hitherto,
ſhewing the firſt building, deſtruction, reedifying, and
gouernment of the ſame vnto this preſent day, and what Antiquities
are to be ſeene therein pag. 17.
               
                  III. The third was written from Aleppo in Syria Comagena,
wherein the Author moſt iudiciouſly and learnedly
diſcourſeth of his voyage from Conſtantinople thither; and
deſcribeth both generally the whole Country of Syria, and particularly
the City of Aleppo, the chiefeſt City (for trafficke)
therein: and ſheweth, that Aleppo is inhabited by people of
ſundry Countries; with the Religion, Gouernment, Manners,
and Cuſtomes of euery Nation there dwelling or ſoiourning,
which is of all the reſt moſt pleaſant to read, for the varietie of
matters therein contained. pag. 31.
               
                  
                  IIII. The fourth and laſt letter was written from Ieruſalem,
wherein he maketh relation of his trauell by Land, together
with foure other Engliſhmen, from the City of Aleppo
in Syria Comagena, to Ieruſalem, by the Sea of Galile or
Tyberias, and Lake of Genezareth, and ſo thorow the whole
Land of Canaan, which way was neuer trauelled by any Engliſhman
before, neither poſſibly can be trauelled againe at this
day, in regard of the turbulent and troubleſome eſtate of thoſe
Countries, which is like euery day to grow worſe rather than
better. And this iourney may be called Iacobs iourney, becauſe
all the whole way which they trauelled thither, is the way
which Iacob trauelled from Bethel or Beerſhebah, to his vncle
Labans houſe at Padan Aram in Meſopotamia. pag. 86.
            
            And this may ſerue partly for a Confirmation of M. Henry
Tymberley his voyage from Grand Cayro in Egypt (formerly
called Memphis) to Ieruſalem, performed the ſelfe ſame
yeere, and at the ſelfe ſame time, for all of them met together
at Ieruſalem.
            
            And partly it may ſerue for a correction of ſome falſe things
therein contained, w
                  •
               erein (being printed without his conſent)
they haue done him wrong, as in the Preface to the Reader you
may ſee plainly.
            But chiefly it may ſerue for a direction to others who are minded
heereafter to trauell into thoſe Orientall Countries, or East
parts of the world, either to further them by the good directions
heerein contained, or to hinder them in regard of the imminent
dangers.
         
      
      
         
            
            A LETTER SENT
from Conſtantinople, to a learned Gentleman
in England, wherein the Author diſcourſeth of
his voiage from England thither, and of ſuch famous
places, and memorable matters as hee ſaw in the
way thither.
            
               WOrſhipfull, and my worthy good
friend, in moſt kind and curteous
manner I ſalute you: wiſhing vnto
you all ioyes internall, externall,
and Eternall. Being now (by the
prouidence of God) after long and
tedious trauell, arriued in ſafety at
Conſtantinople: and calling to mind
your continuall kindneſſe towards
me ſince our firſt acquaintance, and
your earneſt requeſt vnto me at my
departure out of England, which was, to acquaint you with ſuch
occurrences as in my voyage ſhould offer themſelues vnto my
viewe; I could not without ſome note of ingratitude (which I
would not willingly incur) refuſe to impart vnto you what memorable
matters and famous places I haue ſeene and obſerued in
my voyage.
            May it pleaſe you therefore to vnderſtand, that after our departure
from the coaſt of England, wee ſaw no land vntill wee came

neere vnto the coaſt of Spaine: and then appeared firſt of all in
ſight vnto vs a towne in Spaine called Territh or Tenerith, which
was diſcerned firſt by a red ſandy path on a mountaine neere vnto
it. And ſhortly after, wee ſaw lubraltore on Europe ſide, and
Abshi
                     •
                  
                (commonly called Ape hill) on Affrica ſide, betwixt which 2.
places we entred in at the ſtraights mouth, with a ſwift currant
and a good wind, commonly called the ſtraights of leubraltore, betwixt
which place and Porungal, wee ſaw many Whales in the
bay or G
                  •
               lph of Portingal. And in three dayes ſailing from the
ſtraights,Argier. we arriued at Argier in Barbary, where we ſtaied three
daies, and were kindly intreated both by Ally Baſhaw king of Argier,
               Rayſe, ſignifieth a Captaine.
and alſo by Amurath Rayſe, commonly called Morat Rayſe.
This citie is in forme like vnto a top-ſaile, broad below, and narrow
aboue. It is ſituated on the ſide of an hill, walled about, and
a ſtrong Caſtle neere vnto the water ſide. It was firſt called
Meſgana, ſecondly, Iol, the royall ſeate of IVBA, the noble king
of Mauritania. who in the time of the ciuil warre betwixt Caeſar and
Pompey, valiantly defended Pompeyes part. By the Moores and
Turkes at this day it is called Iezaier, but by the Spaniards it is
called Algier. The people of this place, and the Spaniards are
bitter enemies, and annoy one another oftentimes.
            About 300. leagues from Argier wee ſaw Teddel, a citie in
Affrica, and cape Bonne, which was formerly called Hyppo, where
S. Auguſtine was Biſhop, and Tunis, neere whereunto the ancient
citie Carthage ſtood, built by Queene Dido, whereof ſome rumes
are yet to bee ſeene.
            
               Tunis is in Libia, and Morocus and Feſſe in Numidia.
            
            About theſe parts we ſaw flying fiſhes,Flying Fiſhes. as big an Hearing,
with two great ſinnes like vnto wings before, and two leſſe behind;
who being chaſed by Dolphines and Bonitaes, fly as long as
their wings are wet, which is not farre, but oft agables length.
Porpiſces and many other ſtrange and deformed fiſhes we ſaw in
our voiage, the names whereof we knew not. We ſaw alſo ſword
fiſhes and threſhers: which two kind of fiſhes are deadly enemies
vnto the Whale. The ſword fiſh ſwimmeth vnder him and pricketh
him vp, and then the Threſher, when hee hath him vp, belaboureth

him with his flayle or extraordinary long taile, and maketh
him roare.
            On the other ſide, ouer againſt Barbary in the Spaniſh ſea,
we ſaw two Iles called Baleares, which are alſo called Ma
                     •
                  orque
Minorque, thirty miles diſtant the one from the other. And other
2. Iles in the Balearique ſea, called Ieuis & Ebuſus betweene
Sardinia and Africa, the earth whereof will ſuffer no venemous
thing to liue: we ſaw alſo an Ile called now Pantalarea, but of
old it was called Paconia. It is very full of hils and rockes:
there groweth great quantity of Cotton, Capers, Figs, Melons
and Reiſings. The Iland is full of ceſternes. They ſay, that
not onely the men of that Iland, but the women alſo are naturally
good ſwimmers, but whether they be all ſo or not, I know
not: but ſure I am, we ſaw one woman come ſwimming from
thence to our ſhip (being becalmed) with a baſket of fruite to
ſell. The Ile is but thirtie miles in length, and ten miles in
breadth.
            The day following, we ſaw Sicilia, a famous Iland in the
Tyrrhen ſea,Sicilia. 618. miles about. The Iland is moſt pleaſant,
and no leſſe fertile. In this Iland is Aetna, an high hill, burning
continnally with brimſtone: it is now called Mons Gibelli; out
of this hill riſeth moſt horrible ſmoake, and flames of fire, and
ſometimes burning ſtones in great number. I haue heard that
in this Ile there is a water whereinto if a dog be caſt, he will die
preſently, but being taken out and caſt into another water neere
vnto it, he liueth againe, but this I haue not ſeene, and therefore
referre it to others which haue ſeene it. Meſſana, commonly
called Miſſina, is the chiefeſt citie in Sicilie, neere the Promontory
Pelorus. In the ſea néere vnto this Iland, there is a dangerous
rocke called Scylla, and ouer againſt this dangerous
rocke, there is a gulfe of the ſea called Charibdis, commonly at
this day called the Kirbies. It is a very dangerous place, by reaſon
of ſtreames flowing contrary each to other. It is ouer againſt
Scylla: Marriners which ſaile betwixt theſe two, are
carefull to keepe an euen courſe, leſt, whiles they ſeeke to ſhun
the one, they ruſh vpon the other, according to that verſe,
            
               
               Incidit in Scyllam cupiens vitare Charib dim.
            
            that is,
            
               Seeking to auoid one danger, they fall into another.
            
            And in the Terrhen ſea by Sicilie there is another Ile called
Strongyle or Stromboly, which burneth in like ſort as Aetna
doeth, it is ouer againſt Naples. Sicilia is 50. leagues in length,
that is 150. miles, accounting three leagues to a mile.
            Ouer againſt cape Paſſera (which is a marke for Marriners
at the Eaſtward end of Sicilia) there is an Iland called Malta,
               Malta.
where (vpon ſome occaſion) we touched. It is that Iland mentioned
Act. 28. 1, 2. where the viper came on Pauls hand. It
was then called Melita, but now Malta. The inhabitants were
then Barbarians, yet ſhewed Paul no little kindneſſe, for they
kindled a fire, and receiued him and his companie, becauſe of the
preſent colde, &c. But now they are ſuch Barbarous people
which inhabit it, that rather then they will receiue Paul and
his companions (I mean Proteſtants or any good Chriſtians)
to the fire in kindnes to warme them, they will rather in crueltie
caſt them into the fire to burne them. Then a viper came
on Pauls hand, and hee ſhooke him off without hurt: but now
there are ſo manie viperous people there, who vſe ſo ſtrict Inquiſtion
when ſtrangers come, that it is impoſſible for a good
man to ſhake them off without harme either to his ſoule, if hee
diſſemble,
                  Renegadoes of denying the faith. or to his body, if he profeſſe the trueth. The inhabitants
are Renegadoes and Bandidoes of ſundry nations,
                  Bandidoes are baniſhed men eſpecially,
Greekes, Italians, Spaniards, Moores and Maltezes:
There are many Souldiers there, who are in pay vnder the
Spaniards, and their Captaines are called Knights of Malta.
The common ſort weare no other clothing (becauſe of the extreamitie
of the heat) then a linnen or white ſhirt girded vnder
their breſts, and ouer the ſame a fine white woollen mantle,
called by the Moores a Barnuſe. There are in this Iland 60.
Caſtles, & as many villages, all well inhabited. There groweth
great ſtore of Cottons, Pomegranates, Cytrons, Orenges,
Melons, and other exellent fruits; but for wheat & wine, they
doe furniſh themſelues out of Sicilia.
            
            
               
               Tripoly in Barbary is a City ſituated on the maine land, vpon
the coaſt of the Mediterranian Sea. It was builded by the
Romans, and afterward ſubdued by the Gothes, which poſſeſſed
the ſame vnto the time of Homer.
            
            The next places of any note, which wée ſaw,Zephalonia. were two
Ilands in Graecia, namely, Zephalonia and Zante, betwixt
which two our Ship paſſed. Both of them are inhabited by
Greekes, but gouerned by the Signiory of Venice, who every
third yéere ſend Prouidores with other Officers to rule there.
They are both very fruitfull Ilands, yéelding great ſtore of
currance, oliues, pomecitrons, oringes, and lemmons, but
ſmall ſtore of corne, which they continually fetch from other
Countries. If through extremity of wether, or danger of Pirates,
or curſares, corne be not duly brought vnto them, in
ſhort time they are ready to famiſh.
            
               Zephalonia was of old called Ithaca, where Vlyſſes the ſonne
of Laertes was King, who excelled all other Greeks in eloquence
and ſubtilty of wit. He is commended by ancient Writers, for
a famous Traueller: but if he were liuing in theſe daies, his
trauels would be counted nothing, in reſpect of the trauels of
many other now liuing: for he trauelled but betwixt Venice
and Egypt which is now a common voyage.
            
               Zante,
               Zante▪
                of old was called Zacynthus, it was ſomtimes a wooddy
Ile in the ſea Ionium, on the Weſt of Peloponeſus. But there
is now very little wood in it. It is hilly round about, but the
middle of it is a plaine and fruitfull valley, yéelding great ſtore
of Currance, which are brought from thence into England. The
Greekes wonder what we vſe to doe with ſo many Currance,
and aſke ſometimes whether we vſe to dye with them, or feed
Hogges with them. They were a very poore kind of people,
when our Engliſh Marchants vſed traffique there firſt: but
now they are growen rich and proud.
            There is alſo a citie in that Ile called Zante by the name of the
Iland, which citie was built by Zacynthus ſonne to Dardanus,
who raigned there. We ſtaied ten dayes in the rode of this city
before we could get Pratticke, that is: leaue to come amongſt

them, or to vſe traffique with them, for their cuſtome is not to
giue preſent Pratticke vnto any ſtrangers, vnleſſe they bring a
letter of health from the place whence they come, which we had
not. And therefore ſome of our companie who had buſineſſe
there, we ſent to the Lazaretta, which is a place like vnto the peſt
houſe in More-fields, where, though they be in health, yet there
they muſt ſtay ſo long as it pleaſeth the Signiors of health,
which is ſometime twenty, and ſometimes forty dayes: and
in the meane time, if any of their companie fall ſicke, though it
be at the end of fortie daies, yet muſt they ſtay forty daies longer.
So long as they are kept without Pratticke, they haue a
Guardian ſet to watch them that they come into no companie,
neither any man into theirs: yet may their friends come to viſit
them, and ſtanding farre off, may ſpeake with them, but if
they come too neere them, the Guardian will cry out vnto them,
Alargo, alargo, that is: Stand backe. And whoſoeuer cōmeth
ſo néere them as to touch them, looſeth his owne Pratticke, and
muſt kéepe them companie during their continuance there. If
they bring any letters for any Merchants in the Citie, the Guardiā
wil open them & aire them at the fice before he wil deliuer
them. But if the letter be ſowed (or if there bee any thread about
them) they muſt not be deliuered vntill they that brought
them haue Prattick. And this they doe vnder pretence of auoiding
ſickneſſe: but they haue a further meaning therein, viz.
partly to get money and bribes; and partly to bee acquainted
with the buſineſſe of all commers, and what commodities they
bring. And whoſoeuer preſumeth to come on ſhoare without
Pratticke, is in danger of hanging, or hauing the ſtrappado. And
though they haue a certificate that there is health in the place
from whence they came, yet muſt they not come on ſhoare before
they haue ſhewed their Fede, or Neate patent vnto three
officers, called Signiors of health.
            
               Zante is very much ſubiect vnto earthquakes. There is no
yeere paſſeth without many earthquakes, eſpecially in the moneths
of September and October, in which moneths I haue
knowen two or three earthquakes in one weeke. In regard

whereof they build houſes very lowe, leſt they ſhould bee
ouerthrowen by earthquakes. And when they feele the earthquakes
beginne (whether it be by day or by night) the Greekes
vſe preſently to ring their bels to ſtir vp the people unto Praier.
            In Zante there is a very ſtrong Caſtle ſtanding on an high
hill, it is alſo very large, halfe as big as the Citie of Zante, and
therein dwelleth the Prouidatore who gouerneth the Iland,
and many other: and there is the place of iudgement where all
cauſes both Criminall and Iudiciall are decided by the Prouidatore
& his Counſelliers: ouer which place theſe two Lattin
verſes are written on the walle in letters of gold.
            
               Hic locus odit, amat, punit, conſeruat, honorat:
               Nequitiam, pacem, crimina, iura, probos.
            
            which may be Engliſhed thus,
            
               This place doeth hate vnthrif
                     •
                  ines,
               Loue peace, and puniſh wickednes;
               Maintaineth right and equity,
               And honoureth good men worthily.
            
            Ouer againſt Zante is the maine land of Graecia, called now
Morea, but of old Peloponneſus, almoſt enuironed with the ſea,
hauing on the Weſt and South, the ſea Adriaticum; on the eaſt
the ſea of Creete: And in the middle of Peloponneſus is a Country
called Arcadia, ſo called of Arcas ſonne to Jupiter by Caliſtho,
who raigned there. Arcadia is famous for ſhepheards: There
are great ſtore of ſhéepe continually feeding, and good paſture
for them. In the narrow ſtrait, going into Peloponneſus, was
Corinth, that famous City in Achaia, ſituated, but now vtterly
deſtroied.
            From Zante wée ſet ſaile towards Venice, and touched by
the way at many places; and firſt of all, at a Port néere vnto
Corphu, called Madonn
                     •
                   de Gazopo, where there is a Church
dedicated vnto the Virgin Mary, whereunto there is great reſort
of ſuch as haue eſcaped dangers by ſea, or ſickneſſe, or other
dangers by land, to offer ſomething to Madonna de Gazopo,
for their deliuerance. And amongſt many others, it was told vs
by our conſort the maſter of a Venice ſhip in our company, that

an Italian ſhip being in great diſtreſſe by extremity of wether in
the gulfe of Venice, when all hope of helpe by worldly meanes
was paſt, euery man fell to praier (like the Mariners in Ionas
ſhip) and euery man called vpon his god, ſome to Neptune,
ſome to S. Nicolas, ſome to one Saint, ſome to another: But
the maſter of the ſhip praied to Madonna de Gazopo, in this
manner: O bleſſed Virgin, deliuer me out of this danger, and J
will offer vnto thee (if I come ſafely to Gazopo) a candle as bigge
as the maine maſte of my ſhip. One of his mates hearing him,
plucked him by the ſhoulders, and ſaid, O maſter, what doe
you meane to dally with our bleſſed Lady in this extremitie?
For it is impoſſible you ſhould performe it. Whereunto he replied,
Hold thy peace foole, it concerneth vs to ſpeake faire now
we are in danger, and to make large promiſes: but if ſhe deliuer
vs, I will make her content with a candle of ſeuen or eight in
the pound. Not much vnlike vnto another deſperate Mariner
whom I haue heard of, who in a dangerous ſtorme, ſéeing euery
man fall to his praiers, and prepare themſelues to die, he fell
on his knées, and praied in this manner: O Lord, I am no common
begger; I doe not trouble thee euery day; for I neuer praied
to thee before; and if it pleaſe thee to deliuer me this once, I will
neuer pray to thee againe as long as I liue. So true is that old
ſaying, Qui neſcit orare, diſcat nauigare: that is, He that knoweth
not how to pray, let him goe downe to ſea. For great dangers
by ſea do driue them to praier who neuer praied before, though
none pray effectually, but the faithfull who pray feruently.
            From Madonna de Gazopo we ſailed along by Albania, and
were driuen with a croſſe winde to Ottronto in Calabria, at the
entrance into the gulfe of Venice, where we ſtaied two daies.
And then we had a good winde, which brought vs to Ragouza,
an ancient City in Dalmatia, which is a part of Jllyrium, or
Illyricum (as others call it) bordering vpon Liburnia Eaſtward.
But at this day, that which of old was called Illyris or Illyricum,
is now called Sclauonia or Wendenlande; hauing on the North,
Pannonia; on the Weſt, Jſtria; on the Eaſt, Myſia ſuperior; on
the South, the Adriaticke Sea. It was ſo called of Illyrius ſon

to Polyphemus. From thence we ſailed along the Illyrian ſhoare
in the gulph of Venice, and came to an hauen towne in Iſtria
called Rauina ouer againſt Rauenna on the coaſt of Calabria:
which Rauenna is an ancient Citie in Italy, by the Adri
                     •
                  tticke
Sea. At Rauina we tooke in a Pilot to direct vs to Venice. Iſtria
is a part of Italy ioyning to Illyricum, and is now called Sclauonia.
            
            From Rauina in one dayes ſayling we arriued at Leo néere vnto
Venice,
               Venice. which is a moſt famous Citie, ſo well knowen vnto
all men by report, that I néed not to ſpend any time in deſcribing
it, leſt I ſhould rather obſcure it, then any way (by my
barren ſtile) illuſtrate the ſame, onely this I note, that there
is both a countrey called Venetia, and a Citie called alſo by the
ſame name.
            The countrey of Venice ioyneth to the Adriaticke Sea on
the one ſide, and hath the Alpes on the other ſide. Therein are
theſe Cities, Verona, Vincentia, Patauium, and Venice the head
citie of the reſt.
            
               Patauium is the Citie and Vniuerſitie of Padua by Padus.
This Padus is the riuer Po in Italy, which riſeth out of Veſulus,
the higheſt hill of the Alpes, and runneth by the marches of Liguria,
into the Adriaticke Sea. One arme of Padus called Paduſa
ſtretcheth to Rauenna.
            
            The Citie Venice ſtandeth in the Adriatticke ſea, not far from
the countrey of Venice. We ſtayed in Venice 17. daies, and hauing
ended our buſineſſe there, wee returned to Zante, where,
after we had ſtaied thrée daies, we ſet ſaile for Conſtantinople.
            
            The chiefeſt places of note which we ſaw betwixt Zante and
Conſtantinople, are theſe: Firſt, not farre from Zante, wée
paſſed by two Iles on the Weſt ſide of Peloponneſus, in the ſea
Jonium, called of old Strophades or Plotae, but vulgarly at this
day, Striuales, whereof one of them is vninhabited, the other
inhabited only by certaine of their religious men, whom they
call Coloires, about thirty in number, who weare long haire,
and neuer eat fleſh, and very ſeldome fiſh, but at certaine ſeaſons
of the yéere, but liue of hearbes, oliues, oile, and wine, and
ſuch like things. They neuer come out of that Ile, neither euer,

vpon any occaſion admit any women to come amongſt them:
for they may not marry, but liue ſingle and ſolitary al the daies
of their life. A Coloire hath his etymologie of 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               & 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               ▪ 
               calos
hiereus, that is, bonus Sacerdos, a good Prieſt.
            
            From thence wée ſailed along in ſight of the maine land of
Graecia, which amongſt all other Countries in Europe, hath
béene accounted the moſt noble and moſt famous. It was firſt
called Helles, of one of the ſonnes of Deucalion and Pyrrha, And
afterwards it was called Graecia, of a King whoſe name was
Graecus.
            
            
               Peloponneſus is a Prouince in Greece, now called Morea.
Macedonia is alſo a large Country in Europe, or Prouince in
Graecia, now called Romnelli: It hath on the Eaſt, the Sea
Aegaeum; on the Weſt, the Sea Ionium; on the South, Epirus;
on the North, Dalmatia. It was firſt called Emathia, of Emathias,
who was King thereof. Afterwards, Macedonia, of Macedon
the ſonne of Deucalion. The Macedonians deſcended of
Sethim, ſonne of Iaon. The Prouinces of Macedonia are theſe:
firſt, Theſſalia; ſecondly, Hellade; thirdly, Myrmidone: By
reaſon whereof, Homer gaue thrée ſundry names vnto the Theſſalians,
vz. Myrmadons, Helenes, and Achees. But at the laſt
it was called Theſſalia, of Theſſale which poſſeſſed that Kingdome.
The principal Citie in Macedonia is Theſſalonica, which
at this day is called Salonica by corruption. In this part of Graecia
is Parnaſſus, a mountaine hauing two tops, whereon the
nine Muſes did dwell.
            
               Athens is ſtill inhabited: it is ſituated betwéene Macedonia
and Achaia on the ſea coaſt; firſt built by Cecrops, and called
Cecropia; laſtly called Athens, of Minerua, who in Greece was
called Athene. This City was the mother and nurce of all liberall
Arts and Sciences: but now there is nothing but Atheiſme
and Barbariſme there: for it is gouerned by Turkes, and
inhabited by ignorant Greekes. Some ruines of ancient buildings
are there yet to be ſéene. Thebes was a famous Citie in
Macedonia; but now a ſmall Caſtle of little account.
            After we came as high as the Iland Creta, which is now called
Candie, we left the way towards Egypt, and entred into

the Arches (called Archipellago) betwixt Cerigo and Cerigotta.
Cerigo is an Iland at the entrance into the Arches, ſubiect to
the Venetians, but inhabited by Greekes. This Ile was firſt
called Scothera, and after (as Ariſtotle ſaith) Porpheris for the
beautifull marbles which are there. Plinie, and diuers others
doe call it Citherea, by the name of Cithere the ſonne of Phaenis,
and is now called Cerigo▪
                where Venus made her firſt habitation,
and therein is a Temple erected for her. The ruines of that
Temple of Venus are to bee ſéene there to this day. A little below
this Temple of Venus, vpon the ſame mountaine, was the
Caſtle of Menalaus huſband to Helene, who was king of Sparta.
and Lord of this Ile. Departing from Cerigo, we came amongſt
the Cyclades, which are 53. Iles in the ſea Aegaeum, called alſo
by ſome Sporades, but vulgerly, the Arches or Archipelago.
But more properly C
                     •
                  clade, and not vnfitly Sparades, althogh
Sporades are taken eſpecially for certaine ſcattered Ilands in
the Carpathian Sea, about Creete or Candia, which is not farre
from the Cyclades, or Iles in the Arches. Onely this is the
difference, that all the Ilands betwixt Cic
                     •••
                  , and Candia are
in the Ionian ſea. But Cerigo and all the Ilands in Archipellago
are in the Aegean ſea. On a cléere day a man may ſée twenty
Ilands at one time in theſe Arches. It is a dangerous place
for ſhipping in a ſtorme, by reaſon that the Ilands are ſo néere
together, whereof ſome are inhabited, and ſome not.
            About twenty leagues from Cerigo, we touched at an Iland
called at this day Milo,
               Milo. but of old, Miletum, mentioned in S.
Pauls voyage, Act. 20. 15. This Ile is inhabited by Greekes,
and yéeldeth great ſtore of milſtones and dymmety, which are
there both good and good cheape. Whiles our ſhip ſtaied at Milo,
we tooke boat to ſaile to ſée another Iland not farre from Milo,
called of old, Delos, where ſometimes was the famous
Temple aud Oracle of Apollo: But at this day it is called Sdiles,
and is a very ſmall and poore Iland.
            About twenty miles from Delos there is another Ile called
of old,Delos. 
               Seriphus, by an inhabitant whereof Themiſtocles was
vpbraided, that the commendation and fame he gat, was for
his Countries ſake, becauſe hée was borne an Atheman. But

               Themiſtocles anſwered the Seriphian, that neither had himſelfe
béene worſe, if hée had beene borne in Seirphus, nor the other
better, if he had béene borne at Athens. But this Iland commonly
is called Serigo.
            
            But the moſt famous and fruitfull Iland in all the Arches at
this day is Chios (as it was formerly called,Chios. 
               Act. 20. 15.) ſo called,
becauſe it reſembleth the Gréeke letter Chi in forme and faſhion:
As alſo Delta, an Ile by Nilus, not farre from Alexandria
is ſo called, becauſe it repreſenteth the figure of the letter
Delta. But Chios is now called commonly Syo. Chios is an
Iland in the ſea Aegeum, betwixt Lesbos and Samos. It is diſtant
from Delos an hundred miles: it is in circuit nine hundred
furlongs. It was firſt called Ethalie by Ephodore. But by
Methrodorus, Chio, of the Nymph Chione; and (as others ſay)
Macrine or Pythioſa; but at this day called Syo.
            
            This Iland is inhabited chiefly by Gréekes, but gouerned
by Turkes. It is full of gardens, oringes, lemmons, citrons,
figs, peares, apples, pruans, apricocks, dates, and oliues: and
likewiſe of all ſorts of hearbes, ſwéet flowers, good and holeſome
waters. There is alſo great ſtore of maſtick in this Iland, which
is gathered of certaine trées like vnto Lentiſcos trées, in this
manner: About the beginning of the moneths of Iuly and Auguſt,
the huſbandmen with a ſharpe pointed iron, doe rent and
cut the barke of the trées in diuers places, and out of theſe inciſions
and cuts procéedeth the maſticke by drops, as it were
gumme, which they gather in the moneth of September following.
            In this Iland are alſo great ſtore of Partriges, which both
in colour and quality doe much differ from ours. Their colour
is ſomewhat red, and they are as tame as though they were
chickens or hens. In certaine villages of this Iland, the country
people doe féed them by great flocks, driuing them in the day
time to graſe in the mountaines; and towards night, the boyes
or girles (which doe kéepe them) doe call them together by a
whiſtle or ſong. And theſe Partriges being accuſtomed to ſuch
calls, preſently euery flocke (which ſometimes are two or thrée
hundred) gather to their conducter, which bringeth them home

to their village and dwelling, as though they were hens, or
tame géeſe. They goe alſo a feeding by ſmall flocks in the ſtréets
of the City.
            This Iland is one of the ſeuen which contended for Homers
birth. And they ſay that Homer was buried in this Iland, and
that his ſepulcher is to be ſéene to this day vpon the Mount Helias,
within an old Caſtle in this Iland, but I haue not ſéene it.
            The maine land of Aſia is in ſight ouer againſt Chios, and
therein Smyrna, Epheſus, and Thyatira, called now Tyria, with
the reſt of the ſeuen Churches of Aſia, to whom S. Iohn wrote,
which are mentioned Reuel. 1. 11. And Pathmos the Ile where
Iohn was put into a hot tunne of oile, Reuel. 1. 9.
            After we had ſtaied ten daies in Chios, which (as I haue
ſaid) is now vulgarly called Sio or Scio, we ſailed towards
Conſtantinople, by Mitilene an Iland in the Aegean ſea. It was
firſt called, Lesbos; ſecondly, Iſſa; thirdly, Pelaſgie; fourthly,
Mitilene and Mytais; and laſtly, Metelyn, of Milet the ſonne of
Phoebus, which builded the City, and named it Mytelene. Of
this City was Pythagoras, Alceus the Poet, and his brother
Antimenides, Theophraſtus, and Phanius, and Arion that ſkilfull
plaier on the harpe, and Terſander that famous Muſitian.
Sapho a woman well learned in Poetry, was alſo a Lesbian,
being called the tenth Muſe. She inuented the verſes which
(after her name) were called Saphicke Verſes.
            This Mytilenes was formerly called Bythinia, which is a
Country in Aſia, oppoſite to Thracia, néere Troy. It was firſt
called Bebricia; after, Mygdonia; and then Bythinia: but at
this day it is called Lesbos, néere vnto Lemnos, from whence
commeth the terra ſigillata, otherwiſe called terra Lemnia, which
is ſaid to be a remedy againſt poiſon, the bloody flixe, and the
plague.
            From Mittelyn we ſailed by Tenedos,
               Tenedos. an Ile betwixt Lesbos
and Helleſpont, néere Troy, whereof Virgill ſpeaketh, Aeneid. 2.
            
               Est in conspectu Tenedos, notiſſima fama
               Inſula, &c.
            
            
               There is an Ile in ſight of Troy,
               And Tenedos it hight:
               
                  
A wealthy land while Priamus ſtate
               And kingdome ſtood vpright.
            
            The beſt and moſt excellent wines in all Graecia are made at
Chios and Tenedos. There is alſo a City in the ſame Ile called
Tenedos, built by Tenes. In this Iland was the Temple of
Neptune.
            
            Ouer againſt Tenedos is Troy, which is alſo called Troas or
Troada,
               Troy. whereof I can ſpeake no more but this that hath béene
long ſince written:
            
               Iam ſeges eſt vbi Troia fuit:
            
            That is,
            
               Waſte lie the wals that were ſo good,
               And corne now growes where Troy towne ſtood.
            
            And againe, as Virgill ſpeaketh:
            
               —fuit Ilium, & ingens
               Gloria Teucrorum.—
            
            That is,
            The City of Troy (called Ilium, of Ilus who enlarged the ſame)
did floriſh, and the glory of the Troians was great.
            And finally,
            
               O iam periere ruinae:
            
            
               The very ruines of it are come to ruine.
            
            The Sea betwéene Moeotis and Tenedos is called Pontus.
            
            A little beyond Troy, we entered the ſtrait of Helleſpont,
which is a narrow ſea, called Helleſpontus, of Helle. It lieth
betwéene the Aegean Sea and Propontis, and parteth Europe
from Aſia, It is not now called by the name of Helleſpont, but
it is called now The Caſtles; for there are ſtill two Caſtles,
which were of old called Seſtos and Abydos, one on the one ſide
of the Heliſpont, the other on the other ſide, erected in memory
of the loue of Leander and Hera, ouer which narrow ſea he often
ſwomme vnto her, and was in the end drowned. The riuer
Scamander runneth by the Caſtles.
            
               Mayto is ſtill a towne ouer againſt Abydos,
               Mayto. but on the ſame
ſide as Seſte. There is made great ſtore of good wine, which is
red in colour, & in taſte like claret wine and ſugar, and yet they
put no ſugar into it, for it is pleaſant of it ſelfe. Héere our Merchants
ſhips vſually take in wine for their prouiſion. There

are very many wind milles there, hauing ten wings a piece.
            The ſtrength of Conſtantinople conſiſtet chiefly in theſe
two Caſtles; for theſe Caſtles are well fortified with munition,
and are to examine all ſhippes that paſſe by, from whence
they came, and whither they would: and there they are to
pay a tribute to the King. If any Ships refuſe to ſtay from
the Caſtles, they will ſhoote them through. But if theſe Caſtles
were battered down, Conſtantinople and all the countrey thereabouts
might be eaſily wonne. Notwithſtanding, theſe Caſtles,
a ſmall flight to kéepe the narrow ſeas betwixt Chios and
the Caſtles, might in ſhort time famiſh all that countrey, for
the greateſt part of their prouiſion, for Rice and other Corne,
commeth from Alexandria, and thoſe parts, with the Gazenda
of the great Turk: but I leaue this to martiall men, and marriners.
            
               Gallipolis is a great & ancient Citie 20. miles diſtant from the
Caſtles (which are at this day called the Caſtles of Gallipoly,
in the way to Conſtantinople ſituated vpon Cherenes of Thracia,
at the point which looketh towards Propontis, which is all
the ſea from the ſtraites of Helleſpont to Boſphorus Thraicus.
Some hold opinion that it was built by Caius Caligula. And
others ſay that it was in times paſt inhabited by French men,
for that this word Gallipoly▪
                ſignifieth the Citie of the Gaules or
Frenchmen, and for that the French men do dwell in Gaule, as
Nicopolis and Phillipopolis ſignifie the City of Nicolas and
Philip.
            
            Not far from Gallipoly was that famous City Nice, where
the Generall Councell was held in Bythinia. And néere vnto
Conſtantinople is C
                     •
                  alcedon or Chalcedonia ouer againſt Byzantium,
which was a famous City in Bythinia, where another
Generall Councell was held. But it is now no City, but onely
a plaine field, hauing héere and there an houſe yet ſtanding. At
the point of Chalcedon we firſt beheld the proſpect of Conſtan
                     •
                  inople.
               Conſtantinople.
which is moſt pleaſant to behold, being like vnto a City
in a wood, or a wood in a City, hauing firre trées, Cyprus
trées, and other pleaſant trées in gardens adioining to their
houſes. It is alſo adorned with many ſtately Towers, Churches,

and high Stéeples. The forme of the City is like vnto a
Triangle, whereof two ſquares are by the water ſide, the other
adioineth to the Land. After our Ship had ſaluted the Port,
we went ouer to the other ſide, and anchored at Fundac
                     •
                  ee, and
went on ſhore at Gallata, to ſalute the honourable Sir Henrie
Lello, Lord Ambaſſadour for Quéene Elizabeth of famous memorie,
and to viſit our Engliſh Merchants reſident there.
            Our ſhip hauing diſcharged her goods at Fundacle, remoued
from thence, and anchored further from ſhoare, betwixt Tapanau
and Bezetaſh, expecting a good winde to depart. Conſtantiople
is on the other ſide the water in Thracia, which is alſo called
the countrey Romania in Europe, hauing on the weſt, Macedonia,
on the North, Iſther, on the Eaſt, Pontus, on the South,
the Sea Aegeum.
            
            As yet, I haue not beene farre in Conſtantinople, wherefore
I forbeare to write any thing thereof at this
time, purpoſing hereafter when I haue
thorowly viewed it, to deſcribe it vnto
you at large. In this Interim I
humbly take my leaue, and
leaue you to him, who
neuer leaueth
his.
            
               Your Worſhips euer in the Lord
wholly to bee commanded.
WILLIAM BIDDVLPH.
            
         
         
            
            A deſcription of the famous Citie of
Conſtantinople, as it is now vnder SVLTAN
ACHOMET, the 15. Grand-Chan of the
line of OTTOMAN.
            Salutem in Authore ſalutis, &c.
            
               SInce the writing of my former letters, I
hauing often beene at Conſtantinople, and
thorowly viewed the ſame, according to
promiſe, I haue thought good to write ſomthing
vnto you thereof.
            May it pleaſe you therefore to vnderſtand,
that Conſtantinopolis is a Citie in
Thracia, ſo called of Conſtantine the Emperour, becauſe hee enlarged
the ſame. It was before called Byzantium. Strabo entituled
it Illuſtre, and Plinie & Iuſtine called it moſt Noble, being
one of the moſt fertile in all Europe. It is ſituted in Thracia,
vpon the gulph Ponthus, which ſeparateth Aſia from Europe.
The forme thereof is thrée ſquare, whereof the two ſides are
waſhed by the ſea, & the third ioyneth vnto the firme land. The
ſoile thereof is very delectable, bringing foorth all kindes of good
fruites, neceſſarie for ſuſtenance of humane life. The ſituation
thereof is ſo well deuiſed and ordered, that no Ship can enter,
nor goe foorth but with leaue from the head Vizeir: for the
Turke is maſter of the Sea Pontike, which hauing 2. mouths,
the one comming from Propontidis, and the other from the Sea
Euxinum, (which is the Blacke ſea) is by Ouid called the Port
of two Seas, for the diſtance from Conſtantinople to Calcedon
is but 14. furlongs. And the place which by the ancients is called
Phane, ſituated in Aſia (whereas Jaſon returning from Calchos
               
ſacrificed vnto the 12. gods) hath in breadth but 10. furlongs.
But for as much as many great riuers of Aſia, & many
more of Europe, doe fall into the Euxine ſea, commonly called
the blacke ſea; it commeth to paſſe, that being full, ſhee guſheth
out through the mouth of her with great violence, into the ſea
Pontique, and from thence through the ſtraight of Helleſpont
(being not much broader then thrée furlongs) into the Aegean
Sea.
            This citie (according to the ſaying of many ancient Authors)The time of the building and repairing of Co
                        •
                     ſtantinople.
               
was firſt builded by the Lacedemonians vnder the conduct of
their Captaine Pauſanias, which was about the yeere of the
world 3292. and before the birth of Ieſus Chriſt 663. yeeres;
which, after they had conſulted with Apollo, where they ſhould
plant and ſettle their abode and dwelling place, they were by
an oracle anſwered, that they ſhould doe it, euen hard by the
blind,Why the Me garians are called blind. which were the Megarians, for that, after they were ſailed
into Thracia, leauing the good and fruitfull coaſt (where
ſince Byzantium was builded) vnaduiſedly went and planted
themſelues, (either for y• oppoſition) in the moſt fruitful ground
of Aſia, or for the vain hope they had for the fiſhing; they builded
there a Citie, which was called Calcedon. But they found
themſelues greatly deceiued.
                  Calcedon was builded by the Megarians.
                For, the fiſhes being caried by
the violence of the floud and tide of the Euxine Sea into Propontis,
approaching néere vnto the Banks of Calcedon, being
afraid, through the whiteneſſe of the rockes, doe retire ſtraight
waies to the ſide of Bizantium, which gaue occaſion vnto the
valiant Paulanias, to fortifie the Citie with good walles & rampiers,
changing the firſt name thereof, which as Plinie ſaith,
was Ligos, and called the ſame Bizantium.
            
            Notwithſtanding, Diodorus & Polybius doe contrarily ſay,
that it was called Byzantium, by the name of a Captaine, which
was the firſt founder thereof. Pauſanias (as Zonoras writeth)
poſſeſſed the ſame ſeuen yéeres: during which time, (Fortune
ſhewing her ſelfe an enemie vnto his magnificence) ſtuffed the
hearts of the Athenians with ſuch an inſatiable ambition, that
they hauing brought thither their forces, after a long ſiege, and
diuers aſſaults, did beare away the victorie, which the Lacede

monians ſeeing could not abide, but with their whole puiſſance
tooke their weapons in hand with ſuch pertinacy, that the aduenture
thereof on the one ſide and on the other, was very dangereous
and variable. And being ſometimes taken againe by
her firſt founders, and afterwards by her aggreſſors, became
in the end a pray vnto both the armies.
                  Byzanti
                        •
                     m ruined by Seuerus the Emperour. And after that, Seuerus
ſucceeding in the R
                     •
                  mane Empire, the tyrant Piſſininus, her
mortal enemie being in poſſeſſion, Byzantium ſuborned the Emperour
to lay ſiege vnto the ſame: who, not hauing ſufficient
power to ouercome the ſame by aſſaults, kept them beſieged
the ſpace of three whole yéeres, & in the end, through extreame
famine, conſtained them to yéeld themſelues vnto the mercy of
the Romanes, which was ſuch, that after they had put to the
ſword all the men of warre that were within it, and killed the
Maieſtrates thereof, ruined and caſt downe to the ground the
walles of the Citie: and Seuerus afterwards (to ſatiſfie his crueltie)
ſpoiled the Citizens of all their rights, franchiſes and liberties;
giuing moreouer the Land and poſſeſſions vnto the Perinthians.
And thus, this moſt famous Citie remained in miſerable
calamitie, vntill ſuch time as Conſtantine the great Emperour
remouing from Rome, did réedifie the ſame.
            But before I write any thing of the reedifyigns of Byzantium
               The cauſe wherefore Conſtantine remooued from Rome.
of Conſtantine the great: giue mee leaue to ſhew you the cauſe
wherefore Conſtantine remoued from Rome.
            
            2. Theſſal. 2. 7. S. Paul propheſying of the reuealing of Antichriſt,
ſaith thus: Yee know what withholdeth that he might be
reuealed in his time, &c. Which hinderance was the Romane
Emperous, which were firſt to depart from Rome, and giue
place to the Popes, becauſe, both Emperours and Popes could
not raigne together in one Citie. And that hinderance was taken
away long ſince, when Conſtantine the great tranſlated his
imperiall Seat to Conſtantinople, and indowed the Popes with
the Citie of Rome, and a great part of Italy lying about it.
            The Emperours then being farre off, and (by reaſon of continuall
warres with Saracens and enemies in the Eaſt) notable
to maintaine their own right in the Weſt, the Popes incroached
vpon them too far, and vſurped ſo much authoritie, that they

diſcarded them cleane in Italy, and at their pleaſure ſet vp other
Emperours in the Weſt, but ſuch as would take an oath to bée
ſubiect to the Apoſtolike Sée of Rome, and acknowledge the
Popes to be vniuerſall Biſhops. So the hinderance was taken
away when Conſtantine remooued to Conſtantinople, and
Antichriſt was manifeſtly diſcloſed not long after when Boniface
the third obtained the title of Vniuerſall Biſhop, which
was 900. yéeres agoe, for (as Gregorie ſaith) none but Antichriſt
would aſſume vnto him ſuch a title.
            But yet Conſtantine had no regard to any prophecie, when
hée remooued at firſt from Rome to Byzantium, and there ſetled
his Emperiall pallace: but he reſpected onely a more commodious
gouernement of thoſe matters and kingdomes of his
that lay Eaſtward, which at that time were miſerably diſquieted
by the Parthians and Perſians. For Conſtantinople did ſéem
to be ſo ſituated (whereas otherwiſe Conſtantine had once
thought to haue ſetled elſewhere) as that it was (as you would
ſay,) the nauel or middeſt vnto the whole Romane iuriſdiction,
which, as we know, ſpread it ſelfe farre and néere: and yet it
could not poſſibly otherwiſe fall out, becauſe that ſo the Romane
Empire might become double headed, & haue thoſe two horns
which God before had reuealed. So the prouidence of God guided
this whole enterpriſe of Conſtantine, and ſo fulfilled what
himſelfe had decréed.
            Hereby you may perceiue two cauſes wherefore Conſtantine
remoued from Rome.
            
            1. The firſt more ſecret in the prouidence of God, that the
prophecie of the Apoſtle Paul, 2. Theſſal. 2▪ 7. might be fulfilled.
            2. The ſecond more publike and better knowen to all, viz.
that Conſtantine the great Emperour of the Romanes, ſéeking to
reſiſt the courſes and robberies which the Parthes daily vſed towards
the Romanes, deliberated to tranſport the Empyre into
the Eaſt parts, and there to build a large Citie: which firſt hee
minded to haue builded in Sardique, and afterwards in Troyada
a countrey of high Pmygia néere vnto the cape Sige
                     •
                  , in the place
where ſometime ſtood the Citie of Troy, which he began to reedifie,
and to repaire the foundations thereof. But being by a

Reuelation in the night inſpired to change the place, cauſed to
be recommenced the workes of Calcedon, where certaine Eagles
(as Zo
                     •
                  arus writeth) being flowen thither, tooke in their
bils the maſons lines, and croſſing the ſtréete, let them fall neere
vnto Byzantium▪
                whereof the Emperour being aduertiſed, taking
the ſame for a good ſigne and diuine inſtruction, after hee
had taken view of the place, called backe the maſters of his
workes from Calcedon, cauſed the City to be repaired and amplifyed,
which, according to his name, he called Conſtantinople,
notwithſtanding that at the firſt he had called the ſame new
Rome. Whereupon it came to paſſe, that both in generall
Counſels, and in the decrées of Emperours, mention is made of
two Romes: one, the olde, which is the true Rome, built by
Romulus; the other, the new, which is Conſtantinople, which
alſo began to hold vp the head, by vertue of the priuiledges and
prerogatiues of old Rome.
               
                  Conſtantinople is called by the Turkes Stambolda.
               
            
            
               Conſtantinople was likewiſe called Ethuſe and Antonie, but
by the Grecians Stimboli, and of the Turks Stambolda, which in
their language ſignifieth a large City, and ſo it is called by them
at this day.
            The Emperour now ſeeing his Citie builded and ſufficiently
peopled, compaſſed the ſame with walles, towers and ditches,
building therein many ſumptuous Temples, adorning it with
many magnifique buildings, and neceſſary works as well publik
as priuate.
            And afterwards for the more beautifying thereof, cauſed to
be brought from Rome diuers Antiquities worthy of memorie,
and amongſt others the Palladium of ancient Troy, that is, the
image of P
                     •
                  llas in Troy, which he cauſed to be ſet in the place of
Placote the great columne of Porphyre which was ſet vp in the
ſame place. Neere vnto which he cauſed to be erected a Statue
of braſſe, to the likeneſſe of Apollo, of a maruailous bigneſſe, in
which place hee ordained his name to ve ſet vp. But in the time
of the Emperour Al
                     •
                  xis Comine this Statue, through a great
and impetuous tempeſt, was caſt down to the ground, and broken
all to pieces.
            This Emperour liued there many yéeres moſt proſperouſly

in happy eſtate, as likewiſe did many of his ſucceſſours, but not
altogether exempted from perſecutions, as well by wars, fires,
peſtilence, earth-quakes, as ſundry other calamities, vntill
ſuch time as God purpoſing to puniſh the people for their ſins,
through negligence of Emperours, ſtirred vp Mahomet the ſecond
of that name, and the eighth Emperour vnto the Turkes,
who being mooued with an earneſt deſire to bring the Chriſtians
vnto decay, and thereby to augment his Empire, being beyond
meaſure iealous to ſée this noble City ſo floriſh before his
eies, went with a maruellous power both by ſea and by land, to
giue a furious ſiege vnto the City: The end and iſſue whereof
was ſuch, that after a long ſiege, battery, and diuers aſſaults,
the Jnfidels hauing gotten the wals, with a great hurlyburly
and fury entred into the city: where at the firſt entry they made
The death of Conſtantine the Emperor. a maruellou ſlaughter of the poore aſſieged Chriſtians, without
ſparing any age or degrée. The Emperour Conſtantine they killed
in the preaſe, as he though to haue ſaued himſelfe; and after
that they had cut off his head, in deriſion and ignominy, they
carried the ſame vpon the point of a ſpeare, round about the
Campe and City. And afterwards Mahomet not contenting
himſelfe with the violating and deflouring of the Emperours
wife, daughters, and other Ladies of honour, by a ſauage cruelty,
cauſed them in his preſence to be diſmembred and cut in
péeces. During the time of the ſacking (which continued thrée
daies) there was no kinde of fornication, Sodometry, ſacrilege,
nor cruelty, by them left vnexecuted.
            They ſpoiled the incomparable Temple of S. Sophia (which
was built by the Emperour Iuſtinian) of all ornaments and hallowed
veſſels,The Temple of S. Sophia was made a ſtewes. and made thereof a ſtable, and a brodell for buggerers
and whores.
            This lamentable loſſe of Conſtantinople, being chiefe of the
Orientall Empire, and likewiſe of the City of Perah, by the
Turkes called Gallata, being the ſeat of trade of the Geneuoiſes,
lying hard by Conſtantinople, vpon the other ſide of the Chanell,
was in the yéere of our Sauiour 1453. March 29. (ſome
doe ſay of Aprill, and others of May) after it had remained vnder
the dominion of the Chriſtians 1198. yéeres.
            
               
But this is a maruellous thing, and worthy to be noted, that
Conſtantinople being reedified and new ſet vp by Conſtantine
the ſonne of S. Helene (whom ſome report to haue beene an Engliſhwoman
borne at Cholcheſter) after the proportion and likeneſſe
of Rome, was by another Conſtantine, ſonne of another
Helene, taken, ſacked, and brought into the hands of the
Turkes, which foreuer is like to be (in the iudgement of man)
an irreparable dammage vnto al Chriſtendome. Yet the Turks
haue a Prophecie, that as the Empire was gotten by Mahomet,
ſo by another of that name Mahomet it ſhall be loſt againe.
            
               Mahomet, after hée had thus taken the City,The policie of Mahomet. reſoluing to
kéepe there the ſeat of his Empire, cauſed (with all diligence)
the wals to be new made, and certaine other ruinated places to
be repaired. And in ſtead of the great number of the people that
were there ſlaine and carried away as priſoners, he cauſed to be
brought thither, out of all the Prouinces and Cities by him conquered,
a certaine number of men, women, and children, with
their faculties and riches, whom he permitted there to liue according
to the inſtitutions and precepts of ſuch Religion as it
pleaſed them to obſerue, and to exerciſe with all ſafety, their
handicrafts and merchandiſes; which miniſtred an occaſion
vnto an infinite multitude of Iewes and Marannes, driuen out
of Spaine, for to come and dwell there: By meanes whereof, in
very ſhort time the City began to increaſe in trafficke, riches,
and abundance of people.
            This Mahomet was the firſt founder of the great Seralia
(where the great Turke now vſually dwelleth) which he builded
at the entry of the channell, about one of the corners of the
City, vpon the Promontorie Chriſoſeras, which afterwards by
the great Turkes which ſucceſſiuely haue dwelled there, hath
béene greatly beautified and augmented.
            He sounded likewiſe vpon one of the Mounts of the ſame
City, a ſumptuous Muskia or Church, with an Amarathe and
College, enduing them all with great yéerely reuennues: which
is not to be maruelled at, for fortune was ſo fauourable vnto
him, that after he had ruinated the Empire of Conſtantinople
and Trapezonde, he tooke from the Chriſtians 12. Kingdomes,

and 200. Cities; ſo that, by reaſon of his great proweſſes and
Conqueſts, the name and title of [Great] was giuen vnto him,
and to this day remaineth vnto the houſe of the Ottomans: As
the Turke who died about foure yéeres ſince, was called Sultan
Mahomet, the Grand Chan of Turkey, and the fourtéenth of the
Line of Ottoman. And his ſonne which now raigneth (being
not yet aboue twenty yéeres of age) is called Sultan Achomet
the fifteenth Grand Chan of the Line of Ottoman: and writeth
himſelfe alſo (as his Predeceſſors haue done) King of the blacke
and white Seas, and of the holy Cities Mecha and Ieruſalem:
               
                  Proijcit ampullas & ſeſquipedalia verba:
               
               
                  Lofty words he caſteth out,
                  And arrogant titles ſends about.
               
            
            Ouer againſt Conſtantinople about the Seralia point,Perah or Gallata. on the
other ſide the water, there is another City called Gallata or Perah,
which (in ancient time) was called Cornubizantij. It is a
City of great antiquity, builded by the Genoezes. It is called
by the Greekes vulgarly Perah, which is a Gréeke word, ſignifying
beyond, becauſe it is ſituated beyond the Canall. But by
the Turkes it is called Gallata.
            
            
               Of fearfull fires and terrible Earth-quakes,
which haue happened within
Conſtantinople.
               
                  ZOnoras the Conſtantinopolitan Hiſtorian maketh mention
in his Hiſtories, of two fearfull fires which happened vnto
Conſtantinople, whereof the firſt was in the time and Empire
of Leon the great, ſpreading it ſelfe from the North vnto
the South, along by Boſphorus, to wit, the length of one of the
Seas to the other, and was ſo horrible and furious for the ſpace
of foure daies, that it deuoured and brought to aſhes the whole
beauty of the City, namely, the place where the Senate and
Citizens (choſen to deliberate vpon common affaires) did aſſemble.
There was alſo burned another princely houſe, and a

Pallace ioyning vnto the caue or den called Nymphee, and diuers
other Churches and priuate houſes.
               The ſecond fire which was in the time and raigne of the Emperour
Baſil, lightned in ſuch ſort, that it compaſſed the market
of Copper, and conſumed to aſhes the houſes and ſtréets thereabouts
with y• Pallace, within which was a Librarie of 120000.
volumes of Bookes, and the Stature of a Dragon of the length
of 120. foot, which was written in letters of gold; the Jlliads, and
the Odiſſe of Homer. And moreouer, burned the moſt renowned
ſimulachres of Juno, of Samos, of Minerua, of Lynde, of Venus,
and of Guide; and finally deuoured the moſt pleaſant places of
the Citie.
               Héereunto may I adde a third fire which befell the ſame Citie
Anno Dom. 1607. October 14. wherein were burned 3000.
houſes together vnder Sultan Achomet, the 15. Grand-Chan of
the line of Ottoman, who now raigneth.
            
            
               Of two fearefull Earth-quakes which happened
to CONSTANTINOPLE.
               THE ſaid Zonoras reciteth, that during the raigne of Anaſtaſius
choſen vnto the Empire of the Eaſt parts, there happened
ſuch a great earthquake, that it ruined euen to the foundations,
a great number of buildings, not onely at Conſtantinople,
but likewiſe in Bythinia, and other places thereabout.
               But the laſt (whereof diuers worthy Authors haue written,
namely Munſter in his Geographie) was ſo ſtrange & fearefull
for the ſpace of 18. dayes continually, that with horrible fearefulneſſe
& dammage, it caſt downe to the ground the walles of
the Citie, and all the buildings towards the ſea ſide, and ouerthrew
all the ditches. It did alſo caſt downe the Tower
where the Turk kept his munition, with fiue others more. The
houſe of Tribute which ſtoode néere vnto the walle, was ouerthrowen
euen to the foundation into the ſea, with the Leadings
of the waters and conduits, which, with incredible expences
had beene made to leade the waters out of the Danube into the

Citie, were for the moſt part broken and bruiſed. And the
chanell which is betwixt Conſtantinople and Perah was ſo moued,
that by great ſurges it caſt the water ouer the walles of
both the Cities.
               But the worſt of all was, that more then 13000. perſons
remained dead on an heape. This great Earthquake happened
in the moneth of September, in the yeere of grace 1509.
in the raigne of Baiazeth the ſecond of that name, and the 9.
Emperour vnto the Turkes (which ſuccéeded Mahomet the ſecond)
who, with all diligence cauſed the walles of the Citie to
be repaired.
               The reſt of the noble Antiquities which preſently are to be
found at Conſtantinople, are the Hippodrome, which the Turkes
doe call Atmaiden, which is the place where in times paſt the
Emperours made the horſes to run for the pleaſure and delectation
of the people, which beheld the ſame vpon a ſtage or
theater, which now is altogether ruined. In the middeſt of this
place, was ſet vp vpon foure bowles of fine marble, a faire Obeliſquie
of coloured ſtone, all of one piece, 50. cubits high, beſet
with letters Hieroglificke; and néere to it is a great columne, in
the which are carued by hiſtories the things memorable, which
haue béene done in this Hippodrome.
               
               There is alſo another great columne néere vnto it of marble,
and one of braſſe, made by ſingular arte, in forme of thrée ſerpents,
wroonge one within another. And diuers other Antiquities
which are diſperſed in diuers places of the Cities; as, the
Palace of Conſtantine the great, her firſt reſtorer, which ioyneth
vnto the walles néere vnto the corner which is towards
the Weſt.The Sepulcher of Conſtantine, of Porphyre. The Sepulcher of the ſame Conſtantine, which
is madeall of Porphyre, being in a corner of a ſtreete, the moſt
filthieſt in all the Citie.
               And going towards the gate of Seliuree, is to be ſéene a great
Columne of marble, hiſtoried after the manner of thoſe of Antonie
and Adrian which are at Rome.
               
               Moreouer, there are Conduit pipes, and diuers Ceſternes
vaulted, ſupported, ſome by vaults, and other ſome by a great
number of pillers, and diuers other fragments of Antiquities.
               
                  
There are alſo two places in Conſtantinople at this day,Bezeſtan. like
vnto the Exchange in London, called the Bezeſtan, diſtinguiſhed
by theſe names, The old Bezeſtan, and, The new Bezeſtan,
wherein all ſorts of commodities are to be bought, as in the
Royall Exchange in London, and greater variety, as veluets,
ſilkes, and ſattins, and waſte-coats ready made of all ſorts of
ſilke, finely quilted and curiouſly wrought, with curious handkerchiefes
of exquiſite worke, and many other commodities,
which were too long to ſet downe. But theſe Bezeſtans are not
open all the day, but at certaine houres, vz. from nine of the
clocke in the morning, to three or foure in the afternoone; and not
euery day neither, but on certaine daies in the wéeke.
               There is alſo a vſual market in Conſtantinople,
                  Markets of men. wherein they
ſell men and women of all ages as ordinarily as we doe cattle in
England, which are (for the moſt part) Chriſtians, ſuch as the
Turkes take captiues in Hungarie or other places where they
ouercome: Their cuſtome is to make ſlaues of all they can take
aliue, and (at their returne) to ſell them in the open market.
If Chriſtians be moued in compaſſion to buy them, becauſe they
are Chriſtians, the Turkes will ſell them excéeding deare to
them, but cheape to a Muſſlelman (as they call themſelues) that
is, true beleeuers. But if they cannot get their owne price for
them, they will enforce them to turne Turks, and to ſerue them
in all ſeruile labours as the Iſraelites did the Egyptians.
               
               
                  Ʋpon the corner of the Citie,Of the seuen Towers. which ſtretcheth towards Gall
                        •
                     poly,
neere vnto the ſea ſide, there is a very ſtrong Caſtle compaſſed
with 7. great towers, & enuironed with high and ſtrong
walles, well furniſhed with artillery; which Caſtle is by the
Turkes called Iadicule, but commonly, The ſeuen Towers. For
the kéeping whereof, there is a Captaine called Diſdaragla, a
man of great reuenewes and Authoritie, which ordinarily hath
vnder him 500. dead payes, called Aſſarelies, which haue all béen
Ieneſaries, and haue euery one of them for their wages 5000.
Aſpers by the yeere. And there the great Turke keepeth ſuch
Guard, for that he and other Emperours Turkes, his predeceſſours,
haue alwayes there kept the Treaſures, & yet the Grand-Sig
                        •
                     ior
commeth thither very ſeldome. This Caſtle alſo with

ſeuen Towers (commonly called The ſeuen Towers) is a Priſon
for great men, like vnto the Tower of London.
               
               There are alſo two other ſtrong Caſtles which I haue ſéene
towards the Blacke Sea (called Mare Euxinum) wherinto they
put priſoners of whom they make great account, and for whom
they expect great ranſome.
               At the Blacke ſea we ſaw Pompeis Piller of marble, erected
one a rocky Iland, neere vnto the ſhoare, whereon ſome of our
company wrote their names, viz. maſter Robert Yong, Gentleman
(who also there wrote the name of our noble Prince HENRY)

                     Nathaniel Perſiuall.
                     Iohn Milwarde.
                     
                        Thomas Marſon, and others.
                  
               
               And on the ſhoare néere vnto the Blacke Sea, there is a Lanthorne
as high as ſtéeple, and on the top thereof a great pan of
liquor, in darke nights continually burning to giue warning to
ſhips how néere they approach vnto the ſhoare. For it is a very
dangerous ſhoare, and it is therefore called the Blacke Sea, not
becauſe the waters thereof are any whit blacker then others,
but from the dangerous euents, becauſe in blacke and darke
nights many ſhips are caſt away, ruſhing either vpon rockes or
ſands: as the Red Sea alſo in Egypt is not therefore called the
Red Sea, becauſe the waters thereof are redder than others,
but (as ſome thinke) becauſe the waters were turned into blood
when Moſes wrought miracles before Pharaoh. But this reaſon
I doe not ſo well approue, becauſe we doe not reade that
the ſea was turned into blood, but the Riuers, ſo that they could
not drinke of the Riuers, nor the Fiſh liue therein. But I like
better of their iudgement who ſay it is called the Red Sea, becauſe
of the red grauell and red bull-ruſhes which ſtill grow in
great abundance by the ſhoare thereof.
               The Blacke ſea is not farre from Conſtantinople; for we tooke
boat from thence in the morning, and were at the Blacke Sea
before noone, & hauing ſéene Pompeis piller, we went on ſhoare,
and tooke wine and other victuals with vs vp into the Lanthorn
and there dined, and returned to Conſtantinople by Supper
time.
               
                  
My brother Peter Biddulph in right humble manner ſaluteth
you, and that vertuous Gentle-woman your wife. I vnderſtand
by a Letter which I lately receiued from him dated at Anchona,
that he had béene at Rome, in the yéere of Iubile: but at
this preſent he is either in Venice or in ſome other principal City
in Italy, where hée cutteth Diamonds, Rubies, Saphiers, Emrods,
and all other ſorts of precious ſtones. I wrote for him to come
vnto me to Aleppo in Syria, to bée factor for a worſhipfull Merchant
of our Company: but he anſwered me that he had learned
not to be another mans man ſo long as he could be his owne, according
to that verſicle.
               
                  Alterius non ſit, qui ſuus eſſe poteſt.
               
               that is:
               
                  Let not him a mans ſeruants be,
                  Who can liue well, and may be free.
               
               Whereby I perceiued that his purpoſe was to follow the trade
of a Lapidarie, and buying and ſelling precious ſtones, which he
buyeth rough and rouged: and when he hath ſmoothed them, and
curiouſly wrought them, then he ſelleth them againe. Yet I
expect his comming hither before many yéeres be expired: for I
vnderſtand he hath a purpoſe to trauell to Spahan in Perſia, and
to other of the chiefeſt Cities there to buy precious ſtones, which
are brought thither from India and other places. And his direct
way thither is to trauell thorow Siria, and from thence to Babylon
in Aſſyria; wherefore I make account he will viſit me in his
iourney thither. And I doubt not but hee will ſalute you with
many letters before his departure out of Chriſtendome; for he
writeth vnto mee that you by your kindneſſe haue bound him
vnto you in bond of perpetuall gratefulneſſe; which, though he
be vnable to requite, yet hée is not vnwilling to record. Hée
hath béene in moſt of the chiefeſt Cities in Italy, Germany, and
the low Countries, and in Geneua, Sauoy, Spaine, and in all
the chiefe Cities of France; and is better able to acquaint you
with the ſtate of thoſe Countries then I am; to whom I refer
you for ſatiſfaction of your expectation therein.
               Many other matters I haue to acquaint you withal, concerning
the manners, gouernement, Religion and diſcipline of the

Inhabitants in theſe Countries: but fearing to bée ouerfedious
vnto you by interrupting your ſerious affaires with ouer
prolire and ſuperfluous writings, I ſurceaſe (for preſent)
any further to ſillicite you. Of the reſt,
heereafter (if God permit.) If you write héereafter
vnto mee, direct your letters to
Aleppo in Syria, for there I hope
to bée before your letters can
come; and from thence
ſhall you heare
from mee.
               Interim vale.
Sum tuu
                     •
                  , eſto meus, ſaluet vtrum
                     •
                   Deus.
GVILIELMVS BIDDVLPHVS.
               
            
         
         
            
            A LETTER WRITTEN
from Aleppo in Syria Comagena, wherein
is diſcourſed of a voyage from Conſtantinople
to Syria, with ſuch memorable matters as were obſerued
in the way, and of the Religion, Gouernment, Manners,
Life, and Cuſtomes, of the Turkes, Moores,
Arabians, Greekes, and other Nations
there dwelling of ſoiourning.
(* * * *)
(⸪)
            Salutem in Chriſto, &c.
            
               ALbeit (deare friend) ſince my comming
into Syria (which is now
2. yeres fully expired) I haue not
as yet ſaluted you with any letters
(notwithſtanding your often
prouoking of mée by your letters
to more diligence in writing)
yet I pray you impute it
not vnto mée for vngratefulneſſe
or forgetfulneſſe: for no continuance
of time, or diſtance of place,
ſhall make mée forget you. For although I am now many
thouſand miles diſtant from you, yet I haue changed but the
aire, I remaine ſtill the ſame man, and of the ſame minde, according
to that old verſe, though ſpoken in another ſenſe,
            
               
               Coelum, non animos mutant qui trans mare currunt.
            
            That is,
            
               They that ouer the ſea from place to place doe paſſe,
               Change but the aire, their minde is as it was.
            
            And God forbid I ſhould forget you: for I haue learned,
that he who hath deſerued well, ought not to be forgotten, but
with all duties of loue and kindneſſe remembred and regarded.
And that foule vice of ingratitude I haue alwaies abhorred;
yea the very ſuſpicion thereof I haue euer deteſted, as a vice
moſt odious and deteſtable both to God and all good men.
Wherefore if all loue require loue againe, I were moſt vnkind
if I would not requite your loue towards me, with mutuall
loue and gratefull memorie. But the cauſe of my long ſilence
hath béene, rather a deſire to ſée you in preſence, than to ſalute
you in abſence: for I am weary of this vncomfortable Country,
and did thinke of haue repaired towards my natiue Country
long before this time, which I deſire as earneſtly to ſée, as
Vlyſſes did to ſée the ſmoake of his Country before he died; and
pray with the baniſhed man in his Exile,

                  Sedibus in patrijs det mihi poſſe mori.
               
               
                  God grant I may die in my owne Country.
               
Yet when I remember how the Heathen man could comfort
himſelfe in his calamities,Ouid. and ſay, Dabit Deus his quo
                     •
                   finem:
God will giue an end to theſe miſeries:Aeneas. And againe, Forſan &
haec olim meminiſſe tuuabit; Perhaps it will delight vs to remember
it heereafter: I, a poore Chriſtian, liuing amongſt Heathen men,
doe comfort my ſelfe with this confidence, that he which broght
Iacob from Padan Aram in Meſopotamia to his owne countrey
in ſafety, after twenty yéeres ſeruice; and Naomi after ten
yéers ſoiourning in idolatrous Moab, to Bethlehem Ephrata her
own Countrey; the ſame God, in his good time, will bring mée
from this Heatheniſh Babylon, to Iſrael his people, and Engliſh
Sion, where, with the true Iſraelites, the remembrance of
Babylon will make me ſing more ſwéetly in Sion. In the meane
time, though I want the ſwéet ſociety, comfort and conference
of you and other my kinde friends (whoſe remembrance is comfortable
vnto me) yet I will not ceaſe by writing to ſupply that

duty which I cannot performe by ſpeaking, hoping and expecting
the like from you; for nothing can be more comfortable to
me in this ſtrange countrey, than often to heare from my
friends, and by mutuall writing to be acquainted with the affaires
of each other.
            The dolefull and lamentable beginning of your laſt letter
made me excéeding ſorrowfull;Queene Elizabeth was famous throghout the whole world, & her death bewa
                     •
                  
                  led by heathen people. for therein you acquainted me
with the death of bleſſed Quéene Elizabeth, of late and famous
memorie; at the hearing whereof not onely I and our Engliſh
Nation mourned, but many other Chriſtians who were neuer
in Chriſtendome, but borne and brought vp in Heathen countries,
wept to heare of her death, and ſaid ſhe was the moſt famous
Quéene that euer they heard or read of ſince the world
began.
            But the ending of your letter comforted vs againe, and mitigated
our mourning, and gaue vs occaſion to vſe that verſe
of Sybill concerning the branch of the holy trée, Virg. Aenid li. 6.

                  Primo au
                        •
                     lſo non deficit alter
                  Aureus, & ſimila frondeſcit virga metallo:
               
               
                  When one bough broken is,
                  Another ſprings as freſh in ſight,
                  Of gold, and twigs are euer like,
                  With buds of metall bright.
               
            
            And (as my duty was) I appointed one day to be kept holy,
which we ſpent in praier, and preaching, and thankſgiuing vnto
God for the happy aduancement of ſo noble, wiſe, learned,
and religious a King ouer vs. And in ſigne of ioy, wée feaſted
and triumphed in ſuch ſort, that the very Heathen people were
partakers with vs of our ioy. And I beſéech God continue ſuch
ioyfull daies vnto our Land ſo long as the Sunne and Moone
endureth. Amen.
            
            Now, becauſe the nature of man is deſirous of newes, and
(as it is ſaid) the firſt queſtion of an Engliſhman, What newes?
I know you expect from me to heare of ſuch newes as this country
affoordeth. Wherefore (in ſome meaſure to ſatiſfie your
expectation) as in my former letters directed to you from Conſtantinople,
I acquainted you with my voyage thither, and

ſuch Antiquities and memorable matters as I ſaw and obſerued
there, ſo the Subiect of this preſent letter ſhal be my Voyage
from Thracia to Syria, with ſuch obſeruable circumſtances as
I haue noted there ſince my comming into this countrey.
            And firſt of all I giue you to vnderſtand, that after my departure
from Conſtantinople, the firſt place we touched at, was the
2. Caſtles at the Helleſpont, about 220. miles diſtant frō 
               Conſtantinople,
where the order is, for all ſhips to ſtay thrée daies,
to the end that if any ſlaues be run away from their maſters, or
théeues haue ſtollen away any thing, they may thither be purſued
in thrée daies, before the ſhips paſſe: And then at thrée
daies end,That is, good forbidden. the ſhip muſt be ſearched for goods contra bando, and
the Grand-ſigniors Paſſe ſhewed for all the paſſengers in the
ſhip; and then (their vſuall duties paied) they may ſet ſaile and
away. Yet if the maſter of the ſhip pay extraordinarily, they
may more ſpéedily be diſpatched: and many giue very liberally
(when they haue a good winde) rather than they will be ſtaied
many houres.
            From thence we ſailed betwéene Moeotis and Tenedos,
               Pontus. in
the ſea called Pontus. For although ſometime in the Poets, euery
ſea be called Pontus (as Ouid in his Booke De Triſtibus
ſpeaketh,
            
               Omnia Pontus erant, deerant quoque litt
                     •
                  ra Ponto:
            
            That is,
            
               All was ſea on euery ſide,
               And no firme land could be eſpide.
            
            And againe,
            
               Nil niſi Pontus & aer;
            
            
               I ſee nothing but the aire aboue, and the ſea beneath:)
            
            Yet in this place there is a proper ſea called Pontus, and a country
alſo ioining to the ſame ſea, called Pontus, mentioned Act. 2.
9. which country Pontus containeth theſe countries, C
                     •
                  ppadocia,
Cholchis, Arm
                     •
                  nia, with others: and eſpecially Cholchis
(whence laſon with the Argonautes, by the helpe of Medeas ſkil,
did fetch the golden fleece) is moſt conſpicuous on Aſi
                     •
                  
                ſide, to
them that ſaile thorow the ſea Pontus. From thence wee came
to Ch
                     •
                  os, where we ſtaied a few daies.
            
               
From Chios wée ſet ſaile with a very good winde, which
brought vs amongſt the 53. I
                     •
                  es in the Arches called Cy
                     •
                  l
                     •
                  des
or Sporades: And then, by a contrary winde, we we
                  •
               e driuen
to Samos, which is an Ile before Ionia, ouer againſt Ephe
                     •
                  us,
where we ancored vntill we had a good winde, and then ſailed
by Andros an He, one of the Cyclades, and had a very good
winde vntill wee came to Rhodos,
               Rhode. commonly called Rhodes,
which is an Ile in the Carpathian ſea, néere Caria, where wée
were becalmed. It is called the Carpathian ſea, of Carpathus,
an Ile in the middeſt betwixt Rhodes and Creet.
            
            From Rhodes we came to Cyprus,
               Cyprus. a famous and fruitfull
Iland in the ſea Carpathium. betwéene Cilicia and Syria, which
was once conquered by Richard the Firſt, King of England. In
this Ile Venus was greatly honoured. There is ſtill a Citie
therein called Paphia. built by Paphus, who dedicated it to Venus.
But the chiefeſt Cities in Cyprus are Famoguſta and Nicoſia.
There is great ſtore of cotten-woollgrowing in this Iland,
and exceeding good wine made héere, and the beſt dimetey, with
other good commodities. From hence a French Gentleman
(who came in our ſhip from Conſtantinople) imbarked himſelfe
for Ioppa,
               Ioppa with a purpoſe to goe to Ieruſalem. Ioppa is not two
daies ſailing from Cyprus with a good winde: and Ioppa is but
thirty miles from Ieruſalem by land. Cyprus was vnder the gouernment
of the Signiory of Venice; but now it is inhabited by
Greekes, and gouerned by Turkes.
            
            But our Ship from Cyprus went to Tripoly in Syria,
               Tripoly in Syria. a City
on the maine land of Syria, néere vnto Mount Lybanus, which
is a mountaine of thrée daies iourney in length, reaching from
Tripoly néere to Damaſcus. Whileſt our ſhip ſtaied in the rode
at Tripoly,
               Lybanus I and ſome others rode vp to Mount Lybanus to ſée
the Cedartrées there, and lodged the firſt night at the Biſhops
houſe of Eden, who vſed vs very kindly. It is but a little village,
and called by the Turkes, Anchora, but moſt vſually by
the Chriſtians there dwelling it is called Eden, not the garden
of Eden, (which place is vnknowen vnto this day) but becauſe
it is a pleaſant place, reſembling in ſome ſort the garden of Eden
(as the ſimple inhabitants thereof ſuppoſe) therefore it is called

               Eden. This Biſhop was borne in the ſame pariſh, but brought
vp at Rome: his name was Franciſcus Amyra, by whom I vnderſtood,
that the Pope of Rome many yéeres ſince ſent vnto
the Chriſtians inhabiting Mount Lybanus, to perſwade them
to embrace the Romiſh Religion, and yéeld themſelues to the
Church of Rome, making large promiſes vnto them if they
would ſo doe: whereof they deliberated long, but in the end
yéelded, vpon condition they might haue liberty to vſe their
owne Liturgie, and Ceremonies, and Lents (for they ſtrictly
obſerue foure Lents in the yéere) and other cuſtomes. Euer
ſince which time, the Pope hath and doth maintaine ſome of
their children at Rome. Theſe Chriſtians which dwell vpon
Mount Lybanus, are called Maronites: they are very ſimple and
ignorant people, yet ciuill, kinde, and curteous to ſtrangers.
There are alſo many Turkes dwelling on the ſame mountaine,
and an Emeer or great Lord, called Emeer Vſeph, who gouerneth
all the reſt, both Chriſtians and Turkes, being himſelfe a
Mahometan, yet one who holdeth the gouernment of Mount Lybanus
in deſpight of the great Turke, and hath done a long
time.
            From Eden we rode ten miles further vp the mountaine,Cedars were plentifull in Solomans time, but none very 
                     •
                  are. to
ſée certaine Cedar trees, where we ſaw 24. tall Cedar trées
growing together, as bigge as the greateſt oakes, with diuers
rowes of branches one ouer another, ſtretching ſtraight out, as
though they were kept by Art. Although we read of great ſtore of
Cedars which haue growen on Mount Lybanus, yet now there
are very few, for we ſaw none but theſe 24. neither heard of
any other but in one place more. At theſe Cedars many Noſtranes
met vs, and led vs to their villages.
            From theſe Cedars we returned towards Tripoly another
way, deſcending by the ſide of the Mount towards a village of
the Maroniticall Chriſtians, called Hatcheeth, where (as we were
deſcending downe the ſide of the Mountaine) all the men, women,
and children, came out of their houſes to behold vs: And
when we were yet farre off riding towards them, they gaue
a ioifull ſhout all together iointly, to expreſſe their ioy for our
comming. And when we came néere, their women with chaffingdiſhes

of coales burnt incenſe in our way, and their Caſſeeſes,
that is, their Churchmen (with blew ſhaſhes about their
heads) made croſſes with their fingers towards vs (as their
manner is in ſigne of welcome) and bleſſed vs, giuing God
thankes that he had brought Chriſtian Frankes (that is, freemen)
of ſuch farre countries as they vnderſtood we were of, to
come to viſit them.
            So ſoone as we were diſmounted from our horſes,Shch, ſignifieth an ancient man. the chiefe
Sheh, with all the reſt of their ancienteſt men, came and brought
vs to the chiefe houſe of the pariſh, called the Townehouſe or
Church-houſe, and there ſpread carpets and table-cloathes on
the ground (as their manner is) and made vs all ſit downe; and
euery one that was able, brought flaſkets of ſuch good chéere
as they had, to welcome vs, which was many bottles or ingeſters
of excéeding good wine, with oliues, ſallets, egges, and
ſuch like things, as on the ſudden they had ready, and ſet them
before vs; and both by the chéerefulneſſe of their countenances,
geſtures of their bodies, and preſents of ſuch preſent
things as they had, expreſſed their gladneſſe for our comming;
and would alſo haue prepared hens, kids, and other good chéere,
but we would not ſuffer them. This was about 11. or 12. of
the clocke. They would haue had vs continue with them all
night, and with great importunity craued it; but we vnderſtanding
that the Patriarch was but thrée miles off, at a village
called Sharry, we went to ſalute him, who hearing of our
comming (albeit he were at a feaſt amongſt all his neighbours)
came to méet vs, and ſaluted vs, and brought vs all in amongſt
his neighbours into a roome foureſquare, and round about beſet
with carpets and table-cloathes on the ground, and ſuch
chéere as the ſeaſon of the yéere did affoord, ſet thereon, and
made vs all ſit downe, and conferred with vs of our countrey,
and many other matters, ſauing matters of Religion, for the
poore man had no Latine, and little learning in any other Language;
only he had the Syriac (which was his naturall language)
with the Turkiſh and Arabian t
                  •
               ngue. After wée had
ſpent one houre with him, we left him with his neighbours at
Sharry, where wée found him, for hée could not conueniently

come from them: for their manner is, when they feaſt, to ſit
from midday vntill midnight, and ſometimes all night, neuer
all together riſing from their good chéere, but now and then one
by intercourſes, as occaſion requireth, returning againe ſpéedily.
Yet he ſent with vs three men to bring vs to his own houſe
neere vnto a village (foure miles diſtant from Sharry) called Boloza,
but vulga
                  •
               ly Blouza, from whence we deſcended downe
the ſide of another part of the mountaine, and in the middle of
the deſcending of this mountaine was the Patriarkes houſe,
called Kanobeen kadiſcha Mir-iam in the Syria
                  •
                tongue, but in
Latine, Coenobium ſanctae Mariae; that is, The Monaſterie of
Saint Mary. Ouer againſt the Patriarkes houſe is an high ſtéepy
mountaine, from whence the water runneth downe into a
déepe valley betwixt the Patriarkes houſe and the hill, and in
the fall, the water maketh an excéeding great noiſe, like vnto
that Catadupa in Aethiopia, where the fall of Nilus maketh ſuch
a noiſe, that the people are made deafe therewith that dwell
neere it. This place is ſomewhat like vnto it in fall, but not in
effect: for this water being not ſo great as Nilus, maketh not
the like noiſe, neither worketh the like effect. There is alſo an
extraordinary Eccho thereabout.
            One ſide of the Patriarkes houſe is a naturall rocke, the other
of hewen ſtones and ſquared timber: a very ſtrong houſe,
but not very large, nor ſpetious to behold. So are alſo many
of their houſes, in moſt of their villages, built againſt a rocke,
as a wall vnto one ſide of it,That is, Lord Ioseph. eſpecially Emeer Vſeph his houſe,
the greateſt part thereof being hewed out of the liuely rocke,
and the paſſage or deſcending vnto it ſo narrow and dangerous,
that it is counted inuincible, which maketh him to hold out
againſt the Turke, and to dominéere in this mountaine, will he,
nill he.
            It is a moſt intricate mountaine with hilles and valleyes,
woods and riuers, and fruitfull paſtures, oliues, vines, and
figtrees, goates, ſhéepe, and other cattle. It is alſo excéeding
high, hauing ſnow on the top all the yéere long.
            At this Monaſtery of S. Mary (which is the Patriarches
houſe) we lodged all night, and both on Saterday at Euening

Praier, and on Sunday of morning Praier, we both heard and
ſawe the manner of their Seruice in the Syriac tongue, both
read and ſung very reuerently, with Confeſſions, Praiers,
Thankeſgiuings, the Pſalmes of Dauid ſung, and Chapters
both out of the old Teſtament and the new diſtinctly read. It
reioyced me greatly to ſee their order: and I obſerued in theſe
ancient Chriſtians called Nazarites, the antiquitie of vſing ſet
formes of Praiers in Churches, and alſo the neceſſitie thereof,
that the people might haue ſomething to ſay Amen vnto, being
read in their mother tongue, that they may learne to pray priuately
by thoſe Praiers which they daily heare read publikely.
This is too much neglected in England, God grant reformation
thereof.
            There is no place in all the world but foure pariſhes or villages
on this mountaine where they ſpeake the Syriac tongue naturally
at this day.But 4. Pariſhes in all the world which ſpeake Syriac. And theſe are theſe foure villages, which
I named before; at all which places we had kind entertainement,
viz. 1. Eden, called by the Turkes Anchora. 2. Hatcheeth.
3, Sharry. 4. Boloza, called vulgerly Blouza. And theſe people
are called Noſtranes quaſi Nazaritans, as it were Nazarites,
and none but they. But more generally they are called Maronites,
but this name is common to them with others.
            There are dwelling on one ſide of mount Lybanus towards
the foote of the mountaine (and in ſome other places in that
Contrie) a kind of Chriſtians called Druſies,
               Druſies. who came into the
contrie with king Baldwyne and Godfrey of Bullin, when they
conquered that countrey, (whoſe predeceſſors or anceſtors are
thought to haue béene Frenchmen) and afterwards when the Sarac
n
                     •
                  
                recouered it againe, theſe men (whome they now call
Druſies) fled into the mountaines to ſaue themſelues; and there
dwelling long, in the end their poſteritie forgat all Chriſtianity,
yet vſed ſtill Baptiſme, and retained ſtill the names of Chriſtians,
whom the T
                     ••
                  rcomen call Rafties, that is, Infidels, becauſe
they eate ſwines fle
                  •
               h, which is forbidden by the Turk
                     •
                  s lawe.
            Theſe 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                are kind, and ſimple people,Turcomanny, dwelling alwas

                  〈◊〉
                in the fields, following thei
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               , borne and brought
vp, liuing and dying 
                  〈◊〉
                feats, and 
                  〈◊〉
                there 
                  ••
               ocks and heards

remooue, then all their men, women and children remooue with
their houſhold-ſtuffe, and houſes too, which are but tents made
to remoue, after the manner of the ancient Iſraelites: and where
they finde good paſture, there they pitch their tents; the men following
their flocks of ſheepe and heards of Cattle; the women
keepe their tents, and ſpend their time in ſpinning, or carding,
or knitting, or ſome houſhold huſwifery, not ſpending their
time in goſſipping and gadding abroade from place to place, and
from houſe to houſe, from ale-houſe to wine tauerne, as many
idle huſwies in England doe.
            Yet ſometimes are theſe ſimple ſoules abuſed by Ianiſaries,
               Ianiſaries, are ſouldiers.
who in trauailing by them take from them perforce victuals for
themſelues and for their horſes, and giue them nothing but
ſore ſtripes if they but murmure againſt them. But when
Chriſtian Merchants paſſe by them, they will (of their owne
accord) kindly preſent them.
            We returned from mount Lybanus to Tripoly by ſuch an intricate
way, that if we had not had a guide with vs, we ſhould
haue loſt our ſelues.
            Néere vnto Tripoly there is a plaine at leaſt one mile in length,
full of Oliue trées and Figge trées.
            At the foote of this mountaine, néere vnto Tripoly,
               A mountaine of ſand. there is a
ſandy mount which hath ariſen (in the memorie of ſome old men
there yet liuing) where there was none before; and it groweth
ſtill bigger and bigger, and there is a prophecy of it, that in
time it ſhall ouerwhelme the towne.
            
               Tripoly hath the Etimologie (as ſome ſay) of two Gréeke
wordes, viz. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                becauſe the Citie hath béene thriſe
built.
            Firſt, on a rocky Iland where it was ouerwhelmed with
water.
            Secondly, on the Marine néere vnto the ſea, where it was
often ſacked by Curſares.
            
            And now thirdly, a mile from the ſea, where it is annoyed
with ſande.
            Our ſhip being not ready to ſet ſaile at our returne from the
mount, but ſtaying partly to diſpatch their buſineſſe, and partly

for a good wind; we trauailed by land two daies iourney,Tyrus and Sidon. to ſee
Tyrus and Sidon, hard by the ſea. And at Sidon wée ſaw the
Tombe of Zabulon the ſonne of Iacob, held in great eſtimation,
and reuerent account at this preſent day.
            
               Tyrus is now called (by the Turkes) Sur, becauſe there beginneth
the land of Siria, which they call Sur; Tyrus is deſtroyed,
and no ſuch Citie now ſtanding, onely the name of the place
remaineth, and the place is ſtill knowen where it ſtood. Eight
miles from Tyrus towards the Eaſt is the Citie Sarepta▪
                of the
Sidonians, where the Prophet Elias raiſed the Widowes ſonne
from death to life.
            We ſaw alſo Baruta, where ſomtimes was a great trade for
Merchants, but from thence they remooued it to Damaſcus, and
from Damaſcus to Tripoly, and of late, from Tripoly to Sidon.
Ioppa is not farre from theſe parts, oftentimes Barkes come
from the one to the other.
            At our returne wee went aboard,Scanderon. and preſently ſet ſaile for
Scanderone, (as it is now called by Turks:) otherwiſe called Alexandretta
by the Chriſtians, which is the very bottome and
vtmoſt border of all the ſtraights. The ayre is very corrupt,
and infecteth the bodies, and corrupteth the blood of ſuch as continue
there many daies, partly by reaſon of the dregs of the ſea,
which are driuen thither: and partly by reaſon of two high
mountaines which keepe a way the ſunne from it a great part of
the day. And it is very dangerous for ſtrangers to come on
ſhoare before the ſunne be two houres high, and haue dried vp
the vapors of the ground, or to ſtay on ſhoare after ſunne ſetting.
The waters alſo néere vnto the towne are very vnholſome,
comming from a mooriſh ground; but at the fountaine, a
mile off, there is excéeding good water to drinke. It is far more
healthfull to ſléepe aboard then on the ſhoare.
            
               Scanderone is in Cilicia, and Cilicia is the countrie Caramonia,
(as it is now called) in the leſſer Aſia, and is diuided into
two parts, viz. Trocher and Campeſtris. It hath on the
Eaſt, the hill Amanus: on the North, Taurus: on the Weſt, Pamphila:
on the South, the Cilician ſea.
            
               Scanderone is the port for Aleppo, where all our Merchants

land their goods, and ſend them vp to Aleppo, vpon Cammels.
The Carauans vſually make thrée daies iourney betwixt Scanderone
and Aleppo. Whiles our Cammels were preparing,
we tooke boat and went to an ancient towne by the ſea ſide, called
at this day Byas,
               Tarſius in Cilicia. but of old, Tarſus, a Citie in Cilicia where
S. Paul was borne, mentioned Act. 22. 3. which towne is arched
about (as many of their Cities are) to keepe away the heat
of the ſun, which Arches they call Bazars.
            
            At the gardens neere Tarſus (and likewiſe at other gardens
within three miles of Scanderone) we ſaw great ſtore of Silkewormes,
which at the firſt bee but little graines like vnto Muſtardſeed:
but by the bearing of them in womens boſomes, they
doe gather an heat, whereby they come vnto life, and ſo proue
wormes; they kéepe them in tents made of réeds with one loft
ouer another full of them, and féed them with leaues of Mulbery
trées; theſe wormes (by naturall inſtinct) doe faſt often,
(as ſome report) euery third day.
            Heere we ſtaied certaine dayes to auoid the infection of Scanderone.
The mountaines which obſcure Scanderone, and make
it more vnhealthfull, I take to be a part of Taurus, which is a
great and famous Mountaine, beginning at the Indian Sea,
and riſing into the North, paſſeth by Aſia vnto Moeotis, bordering
vpon many Countries, and is called by many names.
Sometimes it is called Caucaſus, which is the higheſt hill in all
Aſia, which parteth Jndia from Scythia, and is part of the hill
Taurus. Sometimes it is called Amanus, which hill parteth Syria
from Cilicia. And ſometimes it is called by other names, according
vnto the ſea coaſts along which it extendeth.
            About Scanderone there are many rauenous beaſts about
the bigneſſe of a For, commonly called there Iackalles, engendered
(as they ſay) of a Fox and a Woolfe, which in the night
make a great crying, and come to the graues, and if there haue
béene any corſe buried the day before, (if the graue be not well
filled, with many great ſtones vpon it) many of them together,
with their feet, doe ſcrape vp the earth, and pull vp the corps
and eat it.
            At our returne from Tharſus, Edward Roſe our Factor marine

prouided vs horſes to ride to Aleppo, and a Ieneſary called
Parauan Baſhaw with two Iimmoglans to guard vs, with neceſſary
victuals for our ſelues to ſpend by the way, for there are
no Innes nor victualing houſes in that countrie, but trauellers
take victuals for themſelues, and prouender for their horſes
with them.
            Our Merchants and paſſengers making haſte to bee gone
from this contagious and peſtiferous place Scanderone (which
one very well called,Malims are chiefe Carriers. 
               The bane of Franks) left their goods with
the Factor Marine to be ſent after them, becauſe the Malims and
Muckremen (as they call the Carriers) were not yet come down
with their Cammels to carry them vp:Muckremen ſet horſes to hire. but we met them at
the fountaine of fiſhes néere vnto Scanderone.
            
            About eight miles from Scanderone, we came to a towne called
Bylan,
               Bylan. where there lieth buried an Engliſh Gentleman, named
Henry Moriſon, who died there comming downe from Aleppo
in companie with his brother maſter Phines Moriſon,
who left his Armes in that countrie with theſe verſes vnder
written.
            
               To thee deare HENRY MORISON,
               Thy brother PHINES here left alone:
               Hath left this fading memorie,
               For monuments, and all muſt die.
            
            From Bylan we came to the plaine of Antioch, and went ouer
the Riuer Orontes by boate,Orontes. which Riuer parteth Antiochia
and Syria. Antioch plaine is very long & large, at leaſt 10. miles
in length.Antiochia in Piſidia. Wee lodged the firſt night at Antiochia in Piſidia,
an ancient towne about 25. miles from Scanderone, mentioned
Act. 11. 26. where the Diſciples were firſt called Chriſtians.
Héere we lodged in an houſe, but on the bare ground, hauing
nothing to ſléepe on, or to couer vs, but what we brought with
vs, viz. a pillow, a
                  •
               d a quilt at the moſt, and that was lodging
for a Lord.
            This Antioch hath beene, as a famous, ſo an excéeding ſtrong
Towne, ſituated by the Sea, and almoſt compaſſed (at the leaſt
on both ſides) with excéeding high and ſtrong rockes. The Inhabitants
at this day are Gréekes, but vnder the gouernement

of the Turke, but for matters of Religion, ordered and ruled by
their Patriarchs, for the Gréeks haue foure Patriarchs to this
preſent day, viz. The Patriarch of Antioch, the Patriarch of
Ieruſalem, the Patriarch of Alexandria, the Patriarch of Conſtantinople,
who ruleth all the reſt. Yet as the Iewes, ſo alſo
the Greekes to this day are without a king, and both they, and
their Patriarks are but ſlaues to the great Turke.
            And although their Patriarch of Conſtantinople bee counted
their chiefe Patriarch: yet I haue knowen one Mileſius (a learned
man indéed) who was firſt Patriarch of Conſtantinople,
preferred to the place by maſter Edward Barton, an Engliſh
Gentleman, and Lord Ambaſſadour for Quéene Elizabeth, of
famous memorie, (and the mirror of all Ambaſſadours that euer
came to Conſtantinople) who for his wiſedome, good gouernment,
policie, and Chriſtian cariage hath left an immortal fame
behind him in thoſe Countries, to this preſent day, and lieth
buried at an Iland of the Gréeks,Bartons Iland. within twelue miles of Conſtantinople
called Bartons Iland to this day.
            After whoſe death, this good man Mileſius was by the Gréeks
diſplaced from being Patriarch of Conſtantinople: (which they
durſt not doe whiles maſter Barton was liuing) becauſe, being
a man of knowledge, he laboured to reforme the Greekes from
many of their ſuperſtitious cuſtomes. Whereupon (preſently
after the death of maſter Barton) they ſaid their Patriarch was
an Engliſhman, and no Gréeke, and therefore Manzulled him,
that is: diſplaced him. Yet bearing ſome reuerence towards
him for his learning, made him Patriarch of Alexandria. And
being there Patriarch, he excommunicated the Patriarch of Antiochia,
becauſe he accepted of reliefe at the Popes hand; and
made him come to Alexandria, to humble himſelfe vnto him,
and acknowledge his fault before he would ſuffer him to execute
his Patriarkes office.
            Maſter Henry Lello (a learned, wiſe, and religious Engliſh
gentleman, ſometime ſtudent in Oxford, and afterwards at
the Innes of the Court) ſuccéeded Maſter Barton in his place,
and in many things excéeded him, eſpecially in his religious
carriage and vnſpotted life: and had not the times béene more

troubleſome in his regiment, than in the time of his predeceſſor
Maſter Barton; he would euery way haue gone beyond him.
He firſt of all reformed his family, and afterwards ſo ordered
himſelfe in his whole carriage, that he credited our Countrey:
and after ten yéeres gouernment of the Engliſh Nation there,
he returned into his Countrey with the teares of many, & with
generall good report of al Nations there dwelling or ſoiourning;
& is worthily by his excellent Maieſty rewarded with Knighthood
for his good ſeruice.
            If Mileſius had liued, this good gentleman would haue reſtored
him to Conſtantinople, as he placed many other Archbiſhops
both at Salonica, (of old called Theſſalonica) and elſewhere.
            In the Mountaines betwixt Scanderone and Aleppo,
               Coords. there
are dwelling a certaine kind of people called at this day Coords,
comming of the race of the ancient Parthians, who worſhip the
Deuill, and allege for their reaſon in ſo doing, that God is a
good man, and will doe no man harme, but that the Deuill is
bad, and muſt be pleaſed leſt he hurt them. There was one of
our Carriers a Muccre man and Malim, named Abdell Phat,
who was ſaid to be of that Race and Religion.
            There is alſo,Archills
                     •
                  s. although not in the direct way, (yet for ſafety
and pleaſantneſſe of the way, it is ſometimes taken in the way
to Aleppo) an ancient City called Achilles, where one Aſan Baſhaw
ruleth like a King (paying duties to the Turkes) ſucceſſiuely
from his predeceſſors, comming of the houſe of Sanballat,
who hindred the building of the Temple of Ieruſalem, who is
called to this day,Nehe. 4. 1. 
               Eben Sumbolac, that is, the ſonne of Sanballat:
and all his kinred call one another, Ammiogli, that is,
Brother Ammonite; for they account themſelues of the race of
the Ammonites. This Aſan Baſhaw is now old, and (for the
moſt part) referreth all matters of gouernment to his kinſman
Vſeph Bege, that is, Lord Ioſeph.
            
            The ſecond night, in our trauell from Scanderone, we lodged
at a place called The gardens, in the open fields, hauing the
ground to our bed, a ſtone to our pillow (as Iacob in his trauell
had) and the ſkie to our couering. And many poore trauellers in

theſe parts (who come vnprouided) haue nothing els but the air
for their ſupper, except they can meet with the fruits of trées,
or hearbes of the fields. We met in ſome places with villages
of Tents, where our Ieneſarie Parauan Baſhaw (being partly
feared and partly loued amongſt them) brought vnto vs from
them, bread and water often times. Their bread is made all
in cakes, after the ancient manner, as Abraham entertained
Angels with hearth cakes. At one place we had alſo preſented
to vs very good ſweet goats milke, and alſo good ſowre milke,
turned by art, which is the moſt common diſh in thoſe hot
Countries.
            The day following,Hauadan. we came about noone to a village called
Hanadan, eight miles on this ſide Aleppo, ouer againſt which
village, on the right hand, on the top of the hill, there is (as the
Jewes report) the ſepulcher of the Prophet Ieremie. At this village
Hanadan there are many pigion houſes, whereof the poore
people make much profit, bringing them to Aleppo to ſell. At
this village we dined with Muſmelons,Sambouſes are little paſties. Sambouſes, and a
Muclebite. And after dinner we ſlept an houre or two (as the
cuſtome of the Country is) and then rode forwards towards
Aleppo,
               Muclebite, a diſh made of egs and hearbs. whither we came by fiue of the clocke, and were kindly
entertained at Cane Burgol by the worſhipfull Richard Colthurſt
Eſquire, Conſull for the Engliſh Nation there.
            Syria is in Aſia,
               A deſcription of Syria. hauing on the Eaſt, Euphrates: on the Weſt,
Aegypt; on the North, Cilicia; on the South, Arabia.
            
            
               Aſſyria ioineth vnto Syria, and hath on the Eaſt, Media; on
the Weſt, Meſopotamia; on the North, Armenia Minor; on the
South, Suſiana. About ſixty miles from Aleppo, the riuer Euphrates
and Tygris méet, at a place called vulgarly Beere or Birha,
but of old it was called Meſopotamia,
               Meſopotamia where Laban dwelt
at Padan Aram. And there is yet a heape of ſtones (within halfe
a daies iourny of Aleppo, néere vnto Taedith, inhabited by Iewes)
where Laban following after Iacob, made couenant with him,
which Laban called Iegar-ſahadutha, that is, An heape of Witneſſes.
But Iacob called it Galeed, that is, A Watch Tower,
as we reade, Gen. 31. 47.
            The City Niniue was in Aſſyria,
               Nineue. ſituated by Tygris, whereof

now there is no memoriall left. But in the place where Niniueh
ſtood, there is a little towne called Muſcla, from whence the
inhabitants of that place bring a kinde of linnen cloath called
Muſlina, to Aleppo, to ſell to Merchants there. At B
                     ••
                  ha, by
the Riuer Euphrates, they that goe Babylon, vſually take
boat, but ſtay vntill their boats be made, and then buy them,
and goe downe the Riuer Euphrates with a ſwift currant, but
cannot come backe againe by water.
            
               Babylon is now called by the Turkes,
               Babylon is called Badg
                     •
                  t 
               Bagdat. It is alſo gouerned
by Turkes. It bordereth vpon Perſia. A great part of
Meſopotamia and Aſſyria is alſo called Babylonia, of the Citie
Babylon. Alſo there is a City in Egypt called Babylon, not farre
from the Ile Delta, built by certaine Babylonians.
            
            Betwixt Aleppo and Babylon, Merchants trauell often ouer
the deſart of Arabia, and euery quarter of the yéere Carauans
come from thence with many hundred Camels laden with merchandiſe.
And their cuſtome hath béene,Pigions carrying letters. and is ſtill ſometimes,
when they haue occaſion to ſend ſome ſudden newes from Babylon
to faſten ſome briefe writing to one of the wings of a
Bagdat or Babylonian pigeon, or about her necke, in ſuch ſort
that it may not hinder her flying, and to ſend her therewith
to bring newes to Aleppo, which is at the leaſt ten daies iourney
off: which when I heard at the firſt, it ſéemed to me wonderfull
ſtrange, and almoſt incredible: but after I vnderſtood
how they traine them to it, the ſtrangeneſſe thereof was diminiſhed.
For when the hen doue ſitteth, or hath yoong ones, they
take the cocke pigeon and put him in a cage, and when the Carriers
goe with their camels, they ſet the pigeon in an open cage
on a camels backe, and when they are a daies iourney or two
from home, ſet her at liberty, who preſently mounteth vp aloft,
and beholding her way, neuer ceaſeth flying vntill ſhe come to
her mate; which any of the houſe perceiuing, looke for ſome paper
faſtned about her, and ſo in poſt haſte vnderſtand ſpeedie
newes. And ſo by degrees they traine them further & further
to the places of their trafficke. This I haue knowen put in practiſe,
and performed by an Engliſh Merchant of Aleppo, who
in ſuch ſort ſent a Bagdat pigeon to Scanderone, three daies

iourney from Aleppo, and by her returne, vnderſtood when
ſhips arriued thither, and departed from thence: which ſéemeth
not vnto me ſo ſtrange as that which we reade of, performed
by a Cobler of Rome, who taught a dawe to ſpeake, and to ſalute
the Emperour, as he paſſed by, with theſe words, Salue
Caeſar; which the Emperour hearing, gaue vnto the Cobler a
good reward, and bought his dawe: which another poore man
in Rome perceiuing, hoping to get the like reward, tooke vpon
him to teach another daw, the ſame leſſon; and day and night
as he ſate at his work vſed ſtill to prattle vnto his daw, and bid
him ſay, Salue Caeſar: and when he perceiued he could not make
his daw once frame himſelf to pronounce thoſe words, he chafing,
rapped him on the bill, and ſaid, Operam & oleum perdidi;
that is, I haue loſt my labour in vaine: yet ſtill continued his
diligent endeuour, and by often repeating both Salue Caeſar,
and Operam & oleum perdidi, in the end his daw had learned
both the one and the other, and when the Emperour paſſed by,
ſaid, Salue Caeſar; the Emperour anſwered, Tales habeo domi
ſalutatores; that is, J haue ſuch ſaluters inow at home: whereupon
the daw replied, Operam & oleum perdidi: which the Emperour
hearing, bought this daw alſo, becauſe he had one leſſon
more than the other, and rewarded the poore man well for his
labour.
            I am bold to write vnto you in abſence as pleaſantly as I
was wont to ſpeake vnto you in preſence, whereby you may
perceiue I am ſtill the ſame man, and of the ſame minde, and
as merry out of England as euer I was in England.
            But to procéed in my diſcourſe and deſcription of Syria:
               A deſcription of Syria. All
Syria of old was called Aram, and the Syrians, Aramites. But
eſpecially I doe read of thrée of the chiefeſt Cities in Syria called
by the name Aram: The firſt was Aram Naharaim, which was
Meſopotamia; for Nahar in Hebrue ſignifieth a Riuer, and Naharaim
is the duall number thereof, ſignifying two Riuers,
which were Euphrates and Tygris. Meſopotamia the Gréeke
word ſignifieth the ſame, comming of two Gréeke words, viz.
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , which ſignifieth the middle, and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , which ſignifieth a
Riuer: and therefore was it called Meſopotamia, becauſe it

was ſituated betwéene two Riuers, that is, Euphrates and
Tygris.
            
            The ſecond was Aram Damaſek, that is, Damaſcus, which
is ſtill the chiefeſt City in all Syria.
            
            The third was called Aram Sobah, which ſome thinke to
haue béene that City which is now called Aleppo. And of this
Aram Sobah I finde mention made, 2. Sam 8. 3. 4. 5. And alſo
in the title of the ſixty Pſalme, where mention is made of the
ſalt valley which is but halfe a daies iourney from Aleppo,
which is a very great plaine, without graſſe growing on it, the
very ſand whereof is good ſalt naturally: after raine, being dried
againe by the ſunne, they gather it. There is alſo a little
Iland or mountaine in the midſt thereof, plaine on the toppe,
which yéeldeth the beſt ſalt.
            Some Iewes there dwelling, doe alſo ſay, that Aleppo was
the City Sepheruaim: but I thinke it to be a latter City, which
ſome ſay was called Apollonius: but I know no reaſon for it,
except it were built by one of that name. Howſoeuer, it ſhould
ſéeme this City Aleppo hath often changed her name, and that,
if it were not Aram Sobah, yet to be built not farre from the
place where Aram Sobah ſtood. But the Turkes (changing the
names of all places where they come) call Aleppo at this day,
Halep, which ſignifieth Milke, becauſe it yéeldeth great ſtore
of milke.
            
               Aleppo is inhabited by Turkes, Moores, Arabians, Iewes,
Greekes, Armenians, Chelfalines, Noſtranes, and people of ſundry
other Nations.
            The Turkes come of Magog the ſonne 
                  〈◊〉
                
               Iapheth. For (as we
reade, Gen. 10. 1.) Noah had thrée ſonnes, Shem, Ham, and
Iapheth.
            
            
               Shem and his poſterity dwelt in Syria, in Chaldaea, and in
Perſia, being the Eaſt parts of the world, whence came the Syrians,
the Aramites, the Chaldeans, and the Perſians. The ſons
of Shem are named, Gen. 10. 22. to be theſe, Elam, Aſhur, Lud,
and Aram. Of Elam came the Elamites or Perſians; of Aſhur,
the Aſſyrians; of Lud, the Lydians; of Aram, the Aramites or
Syrians. Theſe ſonnes of Shem, with their poſteritie, are caſt

out of the holy Line, who were deadly enemies to their kindred,
Gen. 10. 22. 23.
            
               Ham with his ſéed went into Canaan, being the South part
of the world, of whom came the Cananites, the Egyptians, Ethiopians,
and the Arabians. The ſonnes of Ham are ſet downe,
Gen. 10. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. &c. to be theſe, Cuſh, Mizraim, Put, and
Canaan.
            
            Of Cuſh came Nimrod a mighty hunter, the builder of Babel.
            
            Of Mizraim came the Egyptians, who in Hebrew are called
Mizraims.
            
            Of Put came the Blacke-Moores.
            
            Of Canaan the Cananites: And ſo foorth, as you may reade,
Gen. 10.
            
               Iapheth went with his ſéed into the Weſterne and Northern
parts of the world: Of whom came the Greekes, the Medes, the
Simbrians, the Germanes, the Scythians, the Turkes, and the
Thratitians.
            
            The Iles of the Gentiles came of Iapheth and his ſonnes.
            The ſonnes of Iapheth are ſet downe, Gen. 10. 2. 5. to bée
theſe, Gomer, Magog, Madai, Iauan, Tuball, Meſech, Tiras, &c.
            
            Of Gomer came the Tartarians.
            
            Of Magog the Turkes and Scythians.
            
            Of Madai, the Medes.
            
            Of Iauan, the people of Aſia and Graecia.
            
            And what people procéeded of the reſt, you may reade Ezech.
27. 1. 13. Ezech. 38. 1. 2. &c. Ezech. 39. 2. vnto which places I
referre you for the reſt: for I deſire to be briefe, leſt by ouer
prolixneſſe in writing, I be ouer tedious to you in reading.
            I promiſed you in my laſt letters,Religion of the Turkes. to write vnto you by the
next, of the Religion, Gouernment, Manners, and Cuſtomes
of the Turkes, and other Nations there dwelling or ſoiourning.
Wherfore, that I may the better make knowen vnto you their
Religion, I will begin with the firſt Author thereof, which
was (no doubt) the Deuill, who vſed that falſe Prophet Mahomet
as his inſtrument to broach it abroad.
            
               Diuers Prophets haue foretold of the wickedneſſe and tyrannie
of the Turkes: but I will only recite the Prophecie of
               
Daniell, chap. 7. 7. which is very notable, and agréeth eſpecially
vnto the time when this impiety and tyranny did beginne.
After this (ſaith Daniel) I ſaw in the viſions by night, and behold,
the fourth beaſt was fearefull, and terrible, and very ſtrong. It
had great iron teeth; It deuoured, and brake in peeces, and ſtamped
the reſidue vnder his feet; and it was vnlike to the beaſts that
were before it, for it had ten hornes. Hitherto ſpake Daniel of
the fourth, that is, the Romane Empire, and of the crueltie of
the ſame, and of the ten Kings in ſubiection thereunto.
            
            
               Now followeth the Prophecie of the Turkiſh Kingdome, in
theſe words, Dan. 7. 8. As I conſidered the hornes, behold, there
came vp among them another little horne, before whom there
were three of the firſt hornes pluckt away. And behold, in this
horne were eies like the eies of a man, and a mouth ſpeaking preſumptuous
things.
            And afterwards, verſe 23. The fourth beaſt ſhall be the fourth
Kingdome in the earth, which ſhall bee vnlike to all the Kingdomes,
and ſhall deuoure the whole earth, and ſhall tread it
downe, and breake it in peeces. And the ten hornes out of this
Kingdome, are ten Kings that ſhall riſe; and another ſhall riſe after
them, and he ſhall be vnlike to the firſt, and he ſhall ſubdue
three Kings, and ſhall ſpeake words againſt the moſt high, and
thinke that he may change times and lawes. Hitherto Daniell,
whoſe Prophecie the euent hath prooued to be true.Mahomets birth and parentage. For Anno
Dom. 591. (Mauritius then Emperor of the Romanes & raining
in Conſtantinople) was Mahomet borne in Arabia, in a baſe village
called Itraripia. His parents were of diuers Nations, and
different in Religion. His father Abdallas was an Arabian:
His mother Cadige a Iew both by birth and profeſſion. His parentage
(according to moſt Hiſtories) was ſo meane and baſe,
that both his birth and infancie remained obſcure, and of no
reckoning, till that his riper yéeres (bewraying in him a moſt
ſubtill and crafty nature and diſpoſition) did argue ſome likelihood,
that the ſharpneſſe and dexterity of his wit would in time
aboliſh the baſeneſſe and obſcurity of his birth. And ſoone did
he make ſhew and proofe thereof: for being trained vp of a boy
in the ſeruice of a rich and wealthy Merchant, by his great induſtry

and diligence, he ſo inſinuated and wrought himſelfe into
the good fauour and liking both of his maſter and miſtreſſe,
that when his maſter died, and had leaft all his wealth and riches
vnto his wife, ſhe made choiſe of her ſeruant Mahomet
for her huſband, making him Lord and Maſter both of her perſon,
and of her ſubſtance. The man being thus raiſed from
baſe and low degrée, to great wealth and poſſeſſions, and hauing
a working and aſpiring head, did from thencefoorth plot
and imagine how he might raiſe himſelfe in honour and reputation;
preſuming that the greatneſſe of his wealth would bée
a fit meane to worke his higher fortunes. Neither was he deceiued
in the expectation of his hope: For conſorting himſelfe
with one Sergius a fugitiue Monke, a notable Heretike of the
Arrian Sect (whom he had made bounden vnto him by his
great liberalitie) there grew ſo ſtrict a league of amity and ſecret
familiarity betwéene them, that they had many times priuate
conference, how and by what meanes Mahomet might
make himſelfe way to riſe in honour and eſtimation. After
much conſulting and debating of the matter, the beſt courſe
which they conceiued to effect their purpoſe, was to coine a new
kinde of Doctrine and Religion, vnder colour whereof (the
times then being troubleſome, the people full of ſimplicitie and
ignorance, Religion alſo waring cold, and neglected) they
thought it an eaſie matter to draw many followers vnto them,
and by that meanes to grow great in the eie and opinion of the
world. Héereupon theſe two helhounds (one of them being an
Arch enemie vnto Chriſt and the truth of his Religion, and the
other ſéeming a méere Atheiſt or prophane perſon, neither perfect
Iew, nor perfect Chriſtian) patched vp a particular doctrine
vnto themſelues out of the old and new Teſtament, deprauing
the ſenſe of both of them, and framing their opinions according
to their owne corrupt and wicked affections; they brought
foorth a monſtrous and moſt diuelliſh Religion, ſauouring partly
of Judaiſme, partly of Chriſtianity, and partly of Arrianiſme,
as I will ſhew you more particularly in that which followeth:
But firſt marke (I pray you) how Daniels Prophecie (before
ſet downe) is prooued true.
            
               
               Anno Dom. 623. Herachius being Emperour, Mahomet mooued
ſedition, and forthwith the Saracens or Arabians ioyned together
theſe thrée dominions, Egypt, Syria and Aphrica, which
are the thrée hornes plucked from thoſe ten hornes of the fourth
beaſt: and Daniel aſcribeth to this little horne, that is: to the
Turkiſh Empire, thrée notes whereby it may be knowen.
            1. The firſt whereof is a new Law contrary to the Law of
God. For the eyes doe ſignifie a law ſubtilly inuented.
            2. The ſecond marke is, Blaſphemie againſt the moſt high,
which is Chriſt. For the mouth ſpeaking words againſt the true
God, ſignifieth blaſphemies againſt the Sonne of God.
            3. The third note is Crueltie towards the Church; And hee
ſhall conſume (ſaith he) the Saints of the moſt high.
            
            4. The fourth is, an endeauour to Aboliſh the Goſpell and
the Church. Hee ſhall thinke (ſaith hee) that hee may change
times and lawes.
            
            God would haue this prophecie to be extant for a ſtrengthening
of the godly againſt the crueltie of Turks, that when they
ſhould ſée the euent to anſweare to the prophecie, they might
not be offended at the ſtumbling blocke of ſo great perſecution,
and of ſuch reuolting from the true Church. And therefore being
thus forewarned by the Prophet, let vs take heart to our
ſelues againſt this Turkiſh tyranny and wickedneſſe, eſpeciallie
ſéeing how the euent hath anſwered to the prophecie. For
there haue foure Monarchies béene one after an other. And
now raigneth a people which are enemies to God, that openly
doeth aboliſh the Propheticall and Apoſtolicall Scriptures.
Thus you may ſee how fully Daniels prophecie is fulfilled.
            I will now procéed to ſhew more plainely how the Turkes
began,How the Turks began. multiplied, and encreaſed.
            
               Mahomet in his youth, by reaſon of his pouertie, liued by
theft and robberie. Afterward hauing heaped much riches together,
he was a ſouldier among his countrie men the Arabians,
vnder Heraclius. In the warre he found occaſion of principality
and power. For when the Arabians being offended with Heraclius
for denying them their pay, and for his religion had ſeuered
themſelues from him, Mahomet ioyned himſelfe to the angried

ſouldiers, and ſtirred vp their minds againſt their Emperour,
and encouraged them in their defection. Whereupon,
by a certaine company of Souldiers, he was choſen to bee their
Captaine (as they commonly are extolled in euery commotion,
which fauour the wicked enterpriſe of the rebellious people, and
ſet vpon the mightie, and gouernours.)
            In this new Captaine many could not abide the baſeneſſe of
his birth, nor the odiouſneſſe of his former life, eſpecially, they
loathed him for a diſeaſe he had, which was the falling ſicknes.
He therefore to redeeme himſelfe from this contempt (which is
an eaſie matter among the fooliſh common people) pretended a
diuinitie in his doings, faining himſelf to enter communication
with God, and ſo when he talked with him, to be rauiſhed out
of himſelfe, and ſéemed like vnto one afflicted with the falling
ſickeneſſe. And therefore he ſaid plainely (but vntruely) how
he was no more a Captaine, and Prince elected through the fauour
of Souldiers, but a Prophet, and a meſſenger of Almighty
God, that vnder the ſhew of Diuinitie, hee might haue all men
the more obedient vnto his words.
            But, for as much as he was rude altogether and vnlearned,
hee adioyned vnto himſelfe two maſters and counſellers that
were Chriſtians: the one whereof was Sergi
                     •
                  s an Arrian, and
the other John Neſtorius, to whom there came a third who was
a Iew, a Talmudiſt. Of which thrée, euery one of them defended
his ſeuerall ſect.
            Whereupon Mahomet ſuppoſing that hee ſhould not onely
gratifie his companions, but alſo the more eaſily allure all nations
vnto himſelfe, receiued all, that is: The pertinacie of Arius,
the errour of Neſtorius, and the vaine inuentions of the Thalmudiſt.
And therefore he receiued from the Iew Circumciſion;
from the Chriſtians ſundry waſhings, as it were Baptiſmes.
And with Sergius he denied the Diuinitie of Chriſt. Now ſome
worſhipped Idols, others were Baptiſed and ſomewhat inſtructed
in Chriſtianitie, who, as ſoone as they had left the Romane
Emperour for the hatred they bare againſt him, renounced
foorthwith the Religion which hee defended, euen after the
example of thoſe ten tribes of Iſrael, which reuolting from the

houſe of Dauid vnto Ieroboam,
               1. King. 12. deſpiſed the lawes of their Fathers,
and went from the ſeruice of the onely true God, vnto the
innocation of deuils.
            
               Mahomets manner to enlarge and eſtabliſh his kingdome
was this,How the Turks increaſed. (which alſo his maſters taught him.)
            Hee ſaid how God at the firſt, to mankind ſent Moſes; after
him, Ieſus Chriſt; who were indewed with the power to worke
miracles. But men gaue ſmall héed to them. Therefore he determined
to ſend Mahomet, a warrier without miracles, that
whom miracles had not mooued, weapons might compell.
            Hee ſaid, how he was the laſt meſſenger, and that after him
none ſhould come; how Chriſt in the Goſpell had prophecied of
him, and how tidings was of him through a wonderfull light,
which paſſed from Eua by ſucceſſion of kind through all women,
euen to his very mother.
            Sée the ſubtiltie of this diſſembler and deceiuer Mahomet,
who knowing that hee was deſtitue altogether of the heauenly
gift to worke miracles; hee fained that hee was ſent
with the ſword. But this Armed man at the length was vanquiſhed,
and receiued a ſoare wound in his mouth, whereby he
loſt ſome of his chéeke téeth, and was throwen into a ditch, and
pu
                  ••
               o a ſhamefull foyle, and that, the very day before hee had
(from the oracle of God) promiſed victorie to him and his. Yea,
and while he was yet a common thiefe, he was oftentimes beaten
ſore of the Drianites, whoſe Cammels he ſet vpon returning
from Mecha.
            
            And that Citie which hath him now in honour, ſometime adiudged
him vnto death, as a very hurtful théef, and appointed a
reward if any could bring him vnto them, either quicke or dead.
            This champion firſt a théefe, afterwards a ſeditious ſouldier,
then a runnagate, after that a Captaine of a rebellious hoſte,
perſwadeth light heads, enemies to the true Religion, how hée
is the meſſenger of God; whereby wee may gather how great
the power of Satan is in them, which imbrace not the truth.
Whereof it is, that at this day that aduerſarie of God defendeth
his blaſphemies againſt God, by Turkiſh and Mahometicall
force, according to the prophecie of Daniel.
            
            
               
               Of Mahomets lawes and eight Commandements.
               AND for the better broaching abroad of his deuiliſh religions
hee hath preſcribed certaine lawes or Commandements,
and fortified the ſame by Policie.
               His lawes are in number eight, which are partly Politicall
and party Ceremoniall.
               The firſt, concerning God: which is this.
               1. God is a great God, and one onely God, and Mahomet is
the Prophet of God.
               In this Commandement they acknowledge a God; and alſo
Chriſt they acknowledge to be a great Prophet: but deny him
to be the Sonne of God, for God (ſay they) had no wife, and
therefore could haue no ſonne. But Mahomet they hold to bee
a greater Prophet then Chriſt, and the laſt Prophet of all.
               For it is a common ſaying amongſt them, that Abraham was
the friend of God, Moſes the meſſenger of God, Chriſt the
breath of God, and that Mahomet was the Prophet of God.
They ſpeake reuerently of them all foure, and puniſh as well
thoſe that blaſpheme Chriſt, as thoſe that ſpeake euill of Mahomet.
Yea, they acknowledge Chriſt to be the Sonne of the
Virgine Mary, but not to haue beene borne according to the
common courſe of nature, but to haue procéeded from her
breaſts. And as for his conception by the holy Ghoſt, they
know not what it meaneth; neither doe they know whether
there be any holy Ghoſt or not. But in their praiers they often
reiterate theſe words together, hu, hu, hu, that is: he, he, he. In
deſpite of all the Chriſtians there is but one God; he, he, he, alone
is God. For they hold, becauſe we acknowledge thrée
perſons, that therefore wee worſhip thrée Gods, and they acknowledge
but one God, and are altogether ignorant of the
Trinitie in Ʋnitie, and Ʋnitie in Trinitie.
               The ſecond Commandement is, concerning their duety
toward their Parents, in theſe words.
               
                  
2. Obey thy parents, and doe nothing to diſpleaſe them, either
in word or deed.
               How badly this duty is performed among them, I know by
experience: for I did neuer read or heare of more diſobedient
children to their parents, either in word or déed.
               The third is concerning their Neighbours, which is this:
               3. Doe vnto others as thou wouldeſt be done vnto thy ſelfe.
               Some of them are iuſt in their dealings one with another:
but moſt of them vniuſt & deceitfull in their procéedings with
ſtrangers, ſome few ſhopkéepers only excepted.
               The fourth is concerning praier, wherein is required,
               4. That euery man fiue times a day repaire to their Churches, to
make publike praier vnto Mahomet.
               The Turkes haue no bels, but very faire Churches, and high
Steeples; and at the houres of their publike praier they are called
to Church by the voice of Criers, who goe vp into their ſtéeples,
and cry with a loud voice, Come now and worſhip the
great God. And ſometimes alſo thus: La Illa Eillala, Mahomet
Reſullala: that is, God is a great God, and Mahomet is his Prophet.
And ſometimes no more but thus: Ollah hethbar: that is,
God is alone: that is, There is but one God. And oftentimes
there is but one Crier in one ſtéeple. But on their Sabboth
day (which is friday) and at ſundry other times, there are many
men crying and bauling in euery ſtéeple, like a kennell of
hounds when they haue ſtarted their game.
               The firſt méeting at publike praier euery day, is before the
riſing of the ſunne.
               The ſecond is about noone or midday, and on their Sabboth
day two houres ſooner, and againe at noone, ſo that they pray
fiue times euery day, and on their Sabboth day, ſix times.
               The third time for publike praier euery day, is at the tenth
houre of the day, called by the Turkes, Kindi; by the Moores, Aſſera,
about thrée or foure of the clocke after noone.
               The fourth méeting is about ſunne ſetting.
               The fifth and laſt houre of praier, is two houres within
night, before they goe to ſléepe.
               Before they come to praier, they prepare themſelues thereunto

by outward waſhings of themſelues, in token of reuerence,
and ſuffer no women to come to their Churches, leſt the ſight
of them ſhould with-draw their mindes from praier. And
though they doe not come to Church, yet when they heare the
voice of the Criers, they will pray whereſoeuer they be, and fall
downe and kiſſe the ground thrée times.
               Oftentimes alſo theſe Criers walke about the ſtéeples in the
euenings, and ſing (after their rude manner) Dauids Pſalmes
in the Arabicke tongue. And when rich men heare them ſing
well, and with cléere voices, they are ſo delighted therewith,
that they vſe to ſend them money.
               Their fifth Commandement is concerning faſting, viz.
               
               5. That one Moone in the yeere, euery one (of any reaſonable
age) ſpend the whole time in faſting.
               They haue but one Lent in the yéere, and then they faſt generally
in this manner: When the new moone changeth, which
they call Romadan, then during all that moone, they faſt all the
day long betwixt ſunne riſing and ſunne ſetting, and neither
eat nor drinke any thing at all. But when the ſunne ſetteth,
then the crier calleth them to Church, and after they haue praied,
then they may eat what kinde of meat they will (ſauing
ſwines fleſh, which is forbidden by their Law) and as oft as
they will, vntill ſunne riſing: ſo that their Lent is but a changing
of day into night. During this moone Romadan, they obſerue
this kinde of abſtinence very ſtrictly. And ſo ſoone as the
next moone changeth, which they call Byram, then their Lent endeth,
and they hold a feaſt for thrée daies ſpace together. At
which time (they ſay) Mahomet deliuered vnto them their law.
               Their ſixth Commandement is concerning Almeſdéeds.
               6. Let euery man, out of his ſtore, giue vnto the poore, liberally,
freely, and voluntarily.
               Their Almes is either publike or priuate.
               Their publike Almes is a ſacrifice or offering of ſome beaſt
for a ſacrifice vnto Mahomet once euery yéere: which being killed,
it is cut into ſmall péeces, and giuen all to the poore.
               Their priuate Almes (notwithſtanding their Law) is much
neglected; for I haue heard of many poore people who haue died

amongſt them for want of reléefe: and in the way as I haue
trauelled, I haue found ſome dead for hunger and cold. And
though a man be neuer ſo poore, yet if he be not able to pay his
Head money to the King yéerely, they are beaten, and their women
and children ſold to pay it. I
                     •
                   our murmuring and impatient
poore were héere but a ſhort time, they would learne to bee
more thankfull to God and man, and how to eſtéeme of a benefit
beſtowed on them, and not curſe and reuile (as many of
them doe) if any one that paſſeth by them doe not giue vnto
them. The Turkes are more mercifull to birds, cats, and dogs,
than to the poore.
               Their ſeuenth Commandement is concerning Marriage.
               7. That euery man muſt of neceſſitie marry, to encreaſe and
multiply the Sect and Religion of Mahomet.
               Their cuſtome is to buy their wiues of their parents, and
neuer to ſée them vntil they come to be married: and their marriage
is nothing but enrolling in the Cadies booke. And it is
lawfull for them to take as many wiues as they will, or as many
as they are able to kéepe. And whenſoeuer he diſliketh any
one of them, it is their vſe to ſell them or giue them to any of
their men-ſlaues. And although they loue their women neuer ſo
well, yet they neuer ſit at table with men, no not with their
husbands, but wait at table and ſerue him, and when he hath
dined, they dine in ſecret by themſelues, admitting no man or
mankinde amongſt them, if he be aboue twelue yéeres of age.
And they neuer goe abroad without leaue of their husbands,
which is very ſeldome, except it be either to the Bannio or hot
Bath, or once a wéeke to wéepe at the graues of the dead, which
is vſually on Thurſday, being the Ene before their Sabboth,
which is Friday, and the Iewes Sabboth on Saturday, and the
Chriſtians on Sunday, thrée Sabboth daies together in one
Country. If their huſbands haue béene abroad, at his entrance
into the houſe, if any one of their women be ſitting on a
ſtoole, ſhe riſeth vp, and boweth herſelfe to her huſband, and
kiſſeth his hand, and ſetteth the ſame ſtoole for him, whereon
they ſate, and ſtand ſo long as he is in preſence.
               If the like order were in England, women would be more

dutifull and faithfull to their huſbands than many of them are:
and eſpecially, if there were the like puniſhment for whores,
there would be leſſe whoredome: for there, if a man haue an
hundred women, if any one of them proſtitute herſelfe to any
man but her owne huſband, he hath authoritie to binde her,
hands and feet, and caſt her into the riuer with a ſtone about
her necke, and drowne her. And this is a common puniſhment
amongſt them; but it is vſually done in the night. And the
man, if he be taken, is diſmembred.
               But the daughters and ſiſters of the great Turke are more
frée than all other men and women. For when their brethren
die, they liue: and when they come to yéeres of marriage, their
father (if he be liuing) or brother (if he be King) will giue vnto
them, for their huſbands, the greateſt Baſhawes or Viziers
whom they ſhall affect, and ſay vnto them, Daughter, or ſiſter,
I giue thée this man to be thy ſlaue and bedfellow: and if he be
not louing, dutifull, and obedient vnto thée, héere, I giue thée
a Canzhare (that is, a dagger) to cut off his head. And alwaies
after, thoſe daughters or ſiſters of the King weare a broad and
ſharpe dagger: and whenſoeuer their huſbands (which are giuen
vnto them by the King to be their ſlaues) diſpleaſe them,
they may and doe cut off their heads.
               They exempt no calling from marriage, but hold it a bleſſing
from God to haue many children: and the deſire of many children
maketh them take many wiues. The Great Turke hath
many hundred, yea (as I haue heard) a thouſand women only
for his owne vſe. And yet, as Auguſtus Caeſar ſpake of Herod,
when he killed his owne two ſonnes Alexander and Ariſtobulus,
with the infants of Bethlem, rather than he would faile of his
purpoſe in killing Chriſt, It is better to bee Herods hogge than
his ſonne; for his hogges liued, but his ſonnes died: So it is better
to be the Great Turkes hogge than his ſonne: for they (being
forbidden by their Law to eat ſwines fleſh, kill no hogges,
but all the ſonnes of the Great Turke are ſtrangled to death by
their eldeſt brother (after the death of their father) to auoid
treaſon.
               A diueliſh policie,Hatto. and like vnto that of Hatto a Biſhop of

                  Mentz or Magunce in Germanie, who (as the Cronicles mention)
500. yéeres agoe, in time of a great dearth, called all the
poore people in all the whole Country, into a great barne, pretending
to make a great dole: But hauing them ſure enough,
he fired the barne, and burnt them all vp, ſaying, Theſe be the
Rats and Mice which deuoure vp the corne. This was his policie
to make bread better cheape. But for this vnmercifull mercie,
God made him an example for all vnmercifull men, to the
worlds end. For a multitude of Rats came and deuoured him,
in ſuch terrible ſort, that where his name was written in windowes,
walles, or hangings, they neuer ceaſed till it were razed
out; and droue him from houſe to houſe to ſaue his life. And
where he had a ſtrong Tower in the middeſt of the great Riuer
of Rhene, which yet ſtandeth there to be ſéene in the midſt of the
Riuer, he thought himſelfe ſure if he could flie thither: Notwithſtanding,
the Rats ſwamme after him thither, and there
deuoured him: And it is called the Rats tower to this day, as
Trauellers know, and I my ſelfe haue ſéene this preſent yeere
1608. Iuly 7. It ſtandeth on a little Jland in the midſt of the
Riuer of Ryne, betwixt the Cities Mentz and Cullyn, or Colonia,
néere vnto a Towne called Bingam on the one ſide of the
Riuer, and another Towne called Baccara, on the other ſide
the Riuer, where is made the beſt Rheniſh wine in all Almania.
Not far from Sanquer, where there is a choller of iron faſtened
to a wall, whereinto all freſh Trauellers are enforced, by
their company, to put in their necks, to make them frée, and are
enhanſed at Bobar vſually, or at Sanquer, if they lodge there.
               
                  SVLTAN Mahomet (this great Turkes father) when he
came to the Crowne, put to death 19. of his brethren (according
to the cuſtome of his predeceſſors) as a wicked policie to preuent
treaſon.
               The Perſians are yet ſomewhat better, (although too bad)
where the eldeſt ſonne is king after the death of his father, and
all the reſt of their brethren haue their eyes put out, yet liue.
               Other Turkes haue thrée wiues, and haue as many womenſlaues
as they can kéepe, whom they vſe as wiues, and eſteeme
them equall with their wiues.
               
                  
The manner of their mariage is this. Firſt, if a man like
a yong woman, he buyeth her of her father, and giueth a great ſummne of money for her, and then enrolleth her in the Cadies
booke, that hee hath bought her of her Father for his wife, and
then the friends feaſt and banket together, and this is all they
performe in mariage. Onely the father of the yong woman giueth
great ſtore of houſhold-ſtuffe with her, and this is caried
openly by particulars through the ſtréetes of the citie on horſes
or Cammels, and ſometime by men and women, the parties
newly maried going before with muſicke playing before them.
               Their eight Commandement is the ſame with our ſixt.
               8. Thou ſhalt not kill.
               
               In their Alcoran it is written that God hateth murther. And
they ſay, that it is the ſecond ſinne which crept into the world
after the creation, being firſt committed by curſed Cain, who
killed his brother Abel. And their beliefe is, that this ſinne of
wilfull murther is impardonable. But if it be by méere chance,
or in their owne defence, or elſe in lawfull wars, or in caſes of
iuſtice by the Maieſtrate they hold it lawfull.
               Often haue I heard Turkes brawle one with another, and
in words moſt vilely reuile one another; but neuer did I ſée
or heare of two Turkes in their priuate quarrels ſtrike one
another, neither dare they ſtrike one another, for if they do, they
are preſently brought before the Maieſtrate, and ſeuerely puniſhed.
Yea, if one doe but lift vp his hand to ſtrike another, hée
is caſt into priſon, and kept in irons, vntill he haue payed ſome
great fine, or receiued ſome other puniſhment. But they will
ſtrike Iewes and Chriſtians oftentimes, who dare not ſtrike
them againe. If a man in ſecret be killed and found dead, either
openly in the ſtréete, or priuately in an houſe, the maſter of
the houſe, or the pariſh where hee dwelleth muſt find out the
murtherer, otherwiſe hee himſelfe ſhall be accuſed of murther,
and both he, and the whole Contrado where hee dwelleth muſt
pay vnto the Subbaſhaw ſo many hundred Dollers as ſhall be
required at their hands.
               And therefore the Subbaſhaws oftentimes being wicked men,
doe hire ſome deſperate perſon to kill a man in the night, that

thereby he may take occaſion to eat of the whole Contrado.
                  William Matrin. Anno Dom. 1603. Sept. 18. We
had an Engliſh man, not long ſince, who ſléeping on the Tarras,
(that is, on the top of the houſe) in the night, (as the cuſtome
of the contrie is in the heate of Sommer) who had his throat
cut being aſléepe in bed, by two or thrée wicked men, who came
from the ſtréete by a ladder to the top of the houſe; and after they
had committed this murther, being diſcried by the barking of a
dog, and ſéene alſo by the maſter of the houſe through his
chamber windowwhere he ſlept, (but not plainely diſcerned being
ſomewhat darke) they made haſte downe againe, and were
neuer knowen.leames Sapers. But on the morrow after, the maſter of the
houſe (an Engliſh man alſo) was in trouble himſelfe, becauſe he
could not find out the murtherers, and it coſt him an hundreth
Dollers at the leaſt before hee could bee fréed, and the whole
Contrado or Pariſh, was alſo fined.
               In like ſort, if an houſe be robbed, he who is robbed, muſt
either finde out the thiefe, or els he himſelfe ſhall be troubled for
it, and put to a great fine.
               If an houſe be but endangered by fire either by the burning
of a chimney, or any other ſmall part thereof without great
harme, yet they will lay to his charge, who dwelleth therein,
that he would haue burnt the whole Citie; and take from him
all that he hath, and impriſon him as long as they pleaſe. Such
ſecret murtherers, théeues, and violent oppreſſors are they;
though their lawes forbid murther and theft, and they themſelues
know thoſe to bée guiltleſſe whom theyTurks call that eating, which we call oppreſsion or extortion. eate vpon, and
impriſon.
               Yea, Mahomet himſelfe alloweth to his contrimen the Arabians,
that is, to poore men, accuſtomed to liue vpon the ſpoile,
he alloweth theft, and ſetteth a law of reuengement. Hurt him
(ſaith he) which hurts you. He saith alſo, Hee that either killeth
his enemie or is killed by his enemie, entreth into Paradiſe.
               
               And it is 
                     〈◊〉
                   vnuſuall thing amongſt them, ſpecially for leneſaries,
to kill their ſeruants as Butchers kill Calues, and throw
them into a ditch when they haue done: and oftentimes for
ſmall offences lay them down on their ha
                     •
                  ks and 
                     〈◊〉
                   vp their heeles, and bind their feete together and 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
a coul ſtaffe, and with a great cudgell giue them two or thrée
hundred blowes on the ſoles of their féete: after which puniſhment
they are not able to ſtand on their feete for the ſpace of manie
daies, and ſome of them goe lame alwaies after.
               Seruants there are as vſually bought and ſold in the market
with them, as bruite beaſts amongſt vs, whom they vſe as
ſlaues in all kind of drudgerie. It it better to be a ſeruant in
England, then a maſter ouer many ſeruants in Turkey.
               Theſe are the eight Commandements of Mahomet.
               
               But the two chiefeſt points forbidden in the Alcoran, are, the
eating of ſwines fleſh, and the drinking of wine. Yet many
of them drinke wine vntill they be drunken: but I neuer heard
of any Turkes would eate ſwines fleſh.
               The things conſidered, being ſo fond and rediculous, it
may ſéeme ſtrange, that men of courage in Turkey, doe not forſake
this deceiuer and deluder of mankind.
               But it is the leſſe ſtrange if we conſider how he hath fortified
his law with foure bulwarks or ſtrong defences.
               1. Firſt, hée commandeth to kill them which ſpeake againſt
the Alcoran. And therefore no man dare gaineſay or deny any
thing contained in their Alcoran: but whoſoeuer ſhall dare
either to diſpute againſt that booke, or to doubt of any Article
therein written, he ſhall be ſure, either to haue his tongue pulled
out of his head, or els his bodie to be burnt and conſumed
with fire.
               2. Secondly, he forbiddeth conference to be had with men of
a contrary ſect or religion.
               3. Thirdly, he forbiddeth credit to be giuen to any beſide the
Alcoran.
               
               4. Fourthly, hee commandeth them to ſeparate themſelues
altogether from other men, and to ſay, Let me haue my law, and
take you yours: ye are free from, that which I doe, and I likewiſe
from that which you doe. And herein I hold it better for Merchants
and other Chriſtians to ſoiourne and to vſe trade and
trafficke amongſt Turkes then Papiſts; for, the Turke giueth
libertie of conſcience to all men, and liketh well of euery man
that is forward and zealous in his owne religion.
               
                  
But among the Papiſts no man can buy and ſell, Vnleſſe
hée beare the markes of the beaſt as S. John foretold, Reuelation
13. 17.
               Moreouer, to driue away all feare of damnation from the
mindes of his Diſciples, Mahomet telleth them, that euery man
ſhall be ſaued by his owne Religion (he only excepted which reuolteth
from the Alchoran vnto another Law) The lewes by the
Law of Moſes; Chriſtians by the Law of the Goſpell; and the
Saracens by the Law of Mahomet. And they hold, that at the
day of iudgement all ſhall appeare vnder thrée banners; The
Iewes vnder the banner of Moſes, and Chriſtians vnder the banner
of Chriſt, and Turkes and other Mahometans vnder Mahomets
banner, and vnder their conduct enter into Paradiſe,
which they deſcribe after an earthly, ſenſuall, and brutiſh manner;
affirming,Mahomets paradiſe. 
                  That the ground of Paradiſe is of golD, which is
diſtinguiſhed with pretious ſtones, and ſweet flowers ſet thicke
together, planted with all fruitfull trees, the pleaſant riuers running
thorow the greene fields, whereof ſome powre out milke,
others white honey, others the pureſt wine; and that there they
ſhall be clothed with all ſorts of colours, except blacke. And
therefore the Turkes to this day weare no blacke; but when
they ſée a man clothed in blacke, many of them will goe backe,
and ſay they will fly from him who ſhall neuer enter into Paradiſe.
Yet whoſoeuer will liue in quiet amongſt them, muſtA note for trauellers.
neither meddle with their Law, their Women, nor their
ſlaues.
               
                  Mahomets comming to iudgement was expected 20. yéeres
ſince; for their beléefe was, that Mahomet would come againe
at the end of 1000. yéeres (as he promiſed them) and bring them
to Paradiſe: which time expiring, and he not comming, they
haue dealt more fauourably with him, and giuen him longer
time; for they ſay he was extremely ſicke when he was aſked
of the time of his comming, and that he anſwered them with
ſuch a low voice, that he could not well be vnderſtood: and that
they which reported that he would returne at the end of 1000.
yéeres, miſtooke him, for that he meant 2000. yéeres. At which
time, if he doe not come (according to promiſe) they will looke

for him no longer, nor belacute;eue in him any more, but become
Chriſtians.
               The Moores are more ancient dwellers in Aleppo than Turks,
and more forward and zealous in Mahometiſme than Turkes:
yea all the Churchmen amongſt the Turkes are Moores, whom
the Turkes count a baſe people (in regard of themſelues) and call
them Tots. Yet their Churchmen they haue in great reuerence;
and not only theirs, but they reuerence Churchmen of all nations,
and call them holy men, Saints, and men of God.
               I my ſelfe haue had great experience héereof both in the place
of my abode at Aleppo, and in my iourney towards Ieruſalem,
and in other places. In Aleppo as I haue walked in the ſtréets,
both Turkes, and Moores, and other Nations, would very reuerently
ſalute me after the manner of their Country: yea their
very ſouldiers, as I haue walked in the fields, with many other
of our Nation, without a Ieneſarie to guard vs, though they
haue béene many hundreds together, yet haue they not offered
either me or any of my company wrong, for my ſake, but haue
ſaid one to another, Hadah Caſſies; that is, This is a Churchman,
and therefore take heed what you doe vnto him, for hee is a
good man, &c.
               
               At Ieruſalem many ſtrangers of ſundry Nations vnderſtanding
that I was an Engliſh Preacher, came and kiſſed my
hand, and called me the Engliſh Patriarke. Yea in all my ten
yéeres trauels, I neuer receiued, neither was offered wrong by
any Nation but mine owne Countrimen, and by them chiefly
whom it chiefly concerned to protect me from wrongs: yet haue
I found them moſt forward to offer me wrong only for doing
my duty, and following the order of our Church of England:
knowing that I had none of the Reuerend Fathers of our
Church to defend me. So would it be in England, if we had
not the Reuerend Fathers in God the Lord Biſhops of our
Church to protect vs. All other Nations, both Heathen and
Chriſtian, goe before vs héerein, in reuerencing and prouiding
for their Churchmen. The Turkes honour their Muftie (which
is their chiefe Ruler in Eccleſiaſticall matters, next vnder the
Grand Signior) as an Angell: The Noſtranes, Greekes, Armenians,

Chelfalines, and Chriſtians of all other Nations, performe
double honour vnto them: only in England, where there
is a more learned Miniſtery (I ſpeake by experience) than in any
Nation in the world, they are leaſt of all regarded: Which
maketh our Aduerſaries, the Papiſts, ſay, (as I haue heard
ſome of them ſpeake in my hearing, many thouſand miles from
England) that if we our ſelues were perſwaded of the truth of
our Religion, we would reuerence our Churchmen as they do,
and not ſcorne them and contemne them as we doe.
               They alſo account fooles, dumbe men, and mad men, Santones,
that is, Saints. And whatſoeuer ſuch mad men ſay or do,
though they take any thing out of their houſe, or ſtricke them,
and wound them, yet they take it in good part, and ſay, that
they ſhall haue good lucke after it. And when ſuch madde men
die, they Canonize them for Saints, and erect ſtately Monuments
ouer their graues, as we haue héere many examples, eſpecially
of one who (being mad) went alwaies naked, whoſe
name was Sheh Boubac,
                  Sheh Boubac. at whoſe death they beſtowed great
coſt on his funerall, and erected an houſe ouer his graue, where
(to this day) there are Lampes burning night and day, and many
idle fellowes (whom they call Daruiſes) there maintained
to looke vnto his ſepulcher, and to receiue the offerings of ſuch
as come to offer to Sheh Boubac, which they take to themſelues,
and there is no wéeke but many come out of the City of Aleppo
and other places, to offer. For this ſepulcher is built on an hill,
thrée miles from Aleppo, betwéene the Kings garden and the
fountaine of fiſhes. If any be ſicke, or in danger, they vow
that if they recouer or eſcape, they will offer ſo much money, or
this or that good thing to Sneh Boubac.
               
               There is alſo ſuch another Bedlam Saint in Aleppo yet liuing,Sheh Mahammet a naked Santone.
whom they call Sheh Mahammet a Santone, who goeth
alwaies naked, with a ſpit on his ſhoulders; and as hee goeth
thorow the ſtréets, the ſhop-kéepers will offer him their rings;
and if he thruſt his ſpit thorow their rings, they take it for a fauour,
and ſigne of good ſucceſſe: The like account they make if
he take any thing from their ſhop boards, or bor them or any
of their houſe: yea they are yet more mad vpon this mad man

than ſo, for both men and women will come vnto him, and kiſſe
his hand, or any other part, ſometimes his thighs, and aſke
him counſell, for they hold that mad mens ſoules are in heauen
talking with God, and that he reuealeth ſecrets vnto them. In
regard whereof, the Baſhawes themſelues oftentimes, and
chiefe Captaines will come vnto him with ſome preſent, and
kiſſe ſome part of his naked body, and aſke him whether they
ſhall goe to battle or not, and what ſucceſſe they ſhall haue in
warre: And looke whatſoeuer he ſaith, they hold it for an
Oracle.
               Not long ſince, the Turkes had a victorie againſt the Chriſtians;
and at their returne, they reported that this naked Santone
Sheh Mahammet of Aleppo was ſéene naked in the field
fighting againſt their enemies, and that by his helpe they ouercame
them, although he were not néere them by many thouſand
miles. Whereby you may ſée how the Deuil doth delude them
ſtill, as he did their forefathers at the firſt by Mahomets Machiaucilian
deuices.
               Their Daruiſes alſo they haue in ſuch reputation,Daruiſes. that often
times great Baſhawes, when they are in diſſáuour with the
King, and feare either loſſe of life, or goods, or both, to auoid
danger, will turne Daruiſes, and then they account themſelues
priuileged perſons from the rigour of their Law.
               The witneſſe of a Daruiſe or of a Churchman, will paſſe better
than any mans witneſſe beſids, yea better than Shereffes
whom they account of Mahomets kindred, and they are knowen
from others by their greene Shaſhes, which no man elſe
may weare: for greene, they account Mahomets colour, and if
they ſeeany Chriſtian wearing a garment of that colour, they
will cut it from his backe, and beate him, and aſke him how he
dare preſume to weare Mahomets colour, and whether he bee
kine to God or not?. This I haue knowen put in practiſe vpon
Chriſtians (not acquainted with the cuſtomes of the countrey)
ſince my comming: one for hauing but greene ſhooeſtrings,
had his ſhooes taken away. Another wearing greene breeches
vnder his Gowne (being eſpied) had his breeches cut off, and
he reuiled and beaten.
               
                  
Wee of more knowledge come far behind them in reuerencing
the Preachers of the truth, and providing for them; and
it is to be feared that they ſhall riſe vp at the day of iudgement
and condemne vs heerein.
               The Turks haue no Printing amongſt them, but all their
Law and their Religion is written in the Moriſco tongue, that
is the Arabicke tongue. And hee is accounted a learned man amongſt
them, that can write and read. And as for the Latin
tonge, he is a rare man amongſt them that can ſpeake it. Some
few amongſt them haue the Italian tong: and many (eſpecally
in and about Conſtantinople) ſpeake the vulgar Greeke, that
is Romeica tongue. For in Conſtantinople there are as many
Grecians and Hebrues, as Turks.
               
               The poore, amongſt the Moores and Turks at Aleppo, beg oftentimesSyntana Fiſſa.
in the ſtreets in the name and for the ſake of Syntana
Fiſſa, who was (as they ſay) a whore of charity, and would
proſtitue her ſelfe to any man Bacſheſe (as they ſay in the Arabicke
tongue) that is gratis freely.
               The Diet of the Turks is not very ſumptuous,Diet of the Turkes. Pilawe. for the moſt
common diſh is Pilaw, which is good ſauory meat made of Riſe,
and ſmall morſels of Mutton boyled therein, and ſometimes
roſted Buckones, (that is, ſmall bits or morſels of fleſh.) Their
more coſtly fare is Sambouſes and Muclebites. Sambouſes
are made of paſte like a great round Paſtie with varietie of
hearbes and meates therein, not minced but in Buckones. A
Muclebite is a diſh made of Egs and hearbs. Their ſmaller
Sambouſes are more common, not ſo big as a mans hand, like
a ſquare Paſtie, with minſed meat therein. They haue alſo varietie
of Helloway, that is, ſwéet meats compounded in ſuch ſort
as are not to be ſéen elſwhere. The poorer ſort féed on hearbs and
fruites of the trées.Coffa. Their moſt common drinke is Coffa, which
is a blacke kind of drinke made of a kind of Pulſe like Peaſe,
called Coaua; which being grownd in the mill, and boiled in
water, they drinke it as hot as they can ſuffer it; which they
find to agrée very well with them againſt their crudities and
féeding on hearbs and rawemeates.
               Other compound drinkes they haue called Sherbet, made of

water and Sugar, or hony, with ſnow therein to make it coole;
for although the countrie bee hote, yet they kéepe ſnow all the
yeere long to coole their drinke.
               It is accounted a great curteſie amongſt them to giue vnto
their frends when they come to viſit them, a Fin-ion or Scudella
of Coffa, which is more holeſome than toothſome, for it cauſeth
good concoction, and driueth away drowſineſſe. Some
of them will alſo drinke Berſh or Opium, which maketh them
forget themſelues, and talke idly of Caſtles in the ayre, as
though they ſaw viſions, and heard Reuelations.
               Their Coffa houſes are more common than Ale-houſes in
England; but they vſe not ſo much to ſit in the houſes as on
benches on both ſides the ſtréets néere vnto a Coffa houſe, euery
man with his Fin-ion ful; which being ſmoking hot, they vſe to
put it to their noſes & eares, and then ſup it off by leaſure, being
full of idle and Ale-houſe talke whiles they are amongſt themſelues
drinking of it; if there be any news, it is talked of there.
They haue alſo excellent good fountaine waters in moſt places
of that countrie, which is a common drinke amongſt them, eſpecially
in Sommer time, and in their trauels at all times of the
yéere.
               Some of our Merchants haue weighed their water and ours
in England when they haue come home, and haue found their
water lighter then ours by foure ounces in the pound; and the
lighter the water is, the more pleaſant it is to drinke, and goeth
downe more delectably, as if it were milke rather than water.
               In great Cities where the fountaines are either farre off, or
not ſo plentifull, there are certaine poore men which goe about
the ſtréetes from morning to night with a Beares ſkinne full of
water, ſowed vp and faſtened about his ſtoulders like a Tinkers
budget, with a bole of braſſe in his hand, and offreth water
freely to them that paſſe by, except they giue them any thing in
curteſie, (ſome ſeldom times.)
               The greateſt part of them are very courteous people amongſtSalutations of the Turks.
themſelues, ſaluting one another at their méetingwith their
hand on their breſt (for they neuer vncouer their head) with
theſe words: Salam Alike Sultanum: that is, peace be vnto you

Sir. Whereunto the other replieth, Alekem Salam, that is:
Peace be to you alſo. And ſometime thus: Elph Marhabba ianum.
Or in Turkiſh thus: Hoſh Geldanos, Sophi Geldanos:
that is: Welcome my déere friend. And in the morning, Subalkier
Sultanum, that is, good morrow Sir: and in the euening
thus. Miſalker Sultanum, that is: good euen Sir.
               And when friends and acquaintance meet, who haue not ſéene
one another many dayes before, they ſalute one another in
Turkiſh, thus: Neder halen? that is: how doe you? In Arabick
thus, Iſh halac Seedi? that is: How doe you Sir? And Iſh babtac?
that is: how doth thy Gate? (meaning all within his gate)
And ſo procéed by particulers to aſke how doth thy Child, ſlaue,
horſe, cat, dog, aſſe, &c. and euery thing in the houſe, except his
wife; for that is held a very vnkind queſtion, and not vſuall amongſt
them. And if a man come to their houſes, and at the
doore enquire of the children for their father, they will anſwere
him: but if he enquire for the mother, they will throw ſtones
at him and reuile him.
               Their women (as hath béene ſhewed before) haue little liberty
to come abroad, except it be on the Eue before their Sabbath,
(which is Thurſday) to wéepe at the graues of the dead, or to the
Bannios or hot Bathes to waſh themſelues (as the vſe of the
contry is.) And when they come abroad, they are alwayes maſked;
for it is accounted a ſhame for a woman to be ſéene bare-faced:
yea, they are ſo iealous and ſuſpitious ouer them, that fathers
wil not ſuffer their owne ſonnes, after they come to fouretéene
yéeres of age, to ſée their mothers.
               Theſe be their common ſalutations one to another.
               Their more ſpeciall ſalutations to great perſonages are
theſe.
               When a man commeth to ſalute the great Turke, or Grand
Signior himſelfe (into whoſe preſence few are admitted except
Ambaſſadors and great Perſonages) they are led betwéene
two by the armes, for feare of a ſtab, by which meanes one of
their Grand Signiors was once killed, and when they returne,
they goe backwards; for it is accounted a diſgrace to turne their
back-parts to a great man. In like manner they ſalute their

                  Baſhawes and other great men, (but not led by the armes) but
with their hands on the breſt, bowing downe their heads to
kiſſe the ſkirt of his garment, pronouncing theſe words, Ollah
towal omrac Seedi. That is: God prolong your dayes Sir. And
ſo long as they talke with a Baſhaw they ſtand with their hands
on their breſt maiden-like, and bow low at their departure,
and goe backward. They neuer vncouer their heads vnto any
man, no not to the King himſelfe; yea, it is a word of reproach
amongſt them to ſay when they miſlike a matter, I had as liue
thou ſhewedſt me thy bare head.
               
               They call one another diuerſly, and not alwaies by their
names, but ſometimes by their fathers Calling, trade, or degrée:
as Eben Sultan, that is, The ſonne of a King: Eben Terzi,
The ſonne of a Tailor.
               
               And ſometimes by their father qualities, as Eben Sacran,
that is, The ſonne of a Drunkard.
               
               And ſometimes by their markes, as Colac cis, that is, A
man without eares: Cowſi Sepher, that is Sepher with the thinne
beard.
               
               And ſometimes by their Stature, as Tow-ill, that is, A tall
man: Sgire rugiall, that is, A little man.
               
               And ſometimes by their Offices, as I-aſgee, that is, A Secretarie:
Nibe, that is, A Clerke, &c.
               
               
                  And ſometimes by their humours, as Chiplac, that is, A
naked man; Or, One who was of a humour to weare no cloathes
but breeches.
               
               But their common word of curteſie either to ſtrangers, or
ſuch whoſe names they know not, or whom they purpoſe to reuerence,
is Chillabee, that is, Gentleman. And there is no man
amongſt them of any degrée, will refuſe to anſwer to any of
theſe names. But if nature haue marked them either with
gogle eies, bunch backes, lame legs, or any other infirmitie or
deformitie, as they are knowen by it, ſo they are content to bée
called by it.
               But they that haue gone on pilgrimage to their holy Citie
Mecha, where their Prophet Mahomet was buried, at their
returne are called Hogies, that is, Pilgrimes, as Hogie Tahar,

Hogie Mahammet, &c. which is counted a word of great grace
and credit amongſt them. And the witneſſe of an Hogie will be
taken before any other.
            
            
               Of the Arabians.
               TThere are alſo many Arabians in Aleppo, called vulgarly,
Arabs or Bedweens. They cal themſelues Saracens, of Sara;
but they are rather Iſhmalites, of Iſhmael Abrahams ſonne by
Hagar, and therefore alſo called Hagarens. But ſome take them
to be of the race of the Sabaeans, which were wilde and ſauage
people, of Sabaea, a Country in the middle of Arabia, towards
the Eaſt, enuironed with great Rocks, where is great ſtore of
Cynnomon and Caſia, Frankincenſe and Myrrh, which people
came of Sheba, nephew to Ketura and Abraham. Their natiue
Country was Arabia, a Country in Aſia, betwéene Iudaea and
Egypt, ſo called of Arabus the ſonne of Apollo. It is diuided
into thrée Regions, which are theſe, Arabia Petrea, Arabia Deſerta,
and Arabia Foelix. But at this day they haue no certaine
Country or place of abode, but wander vp and downe thorowout
all Syria, Aſſyria, Gallely, Iudaea, Paleſtina, and Egypt. And
as in Iobs tune they liued by theft and robberie and ſpoile of
men, ſo doe they alſo to this preſent day. They haue two Kings
at this day, viz. Dandan and Aboriſha; the one their lawfull
King, the other an Vſurper; and ſome follow the one, and ſome
the other, and are bitter enemies one to another; yet haue I ſeldome
heard of any great wars betwixt them, for they ſeldome
méet. They neuer come into any walled Townes or Cities, for
feare of treaſon: but liue in tents, and are héere to day, and many
hundred miles off within few daies after.
               They are a baſe, beggerly, and rogiſh people; wandering vp
and downe, and liuing by ſpoile, which they account no ſinne,
becauſe they are Mahomets Countrimen, and he allowed them
liberty to liue by theft. Yet their Kings doe no great harme, but
take toule or tribute of the Carauans as they paſſe by, which if
they pay willingly, they paſſe quietly, and are not robbed, but
a little exacted vpon.
               
                  
One of their Kings hath often times pitched his tents néere
vnto the City of Aleppo, and many Merchants being deſirous
to ſee them and their order, tooke occaſion to preſent him with
ſome ſmall preſent or other, which he tooke very kindly, and
admitted them to his table, and gaue them a tent to lodge in all
night: on the morrow for breakfaſt one of them made him a
minſed pie, and ſet it before him hot as it came out of the ouen:
But as Diogines accuſtomed to féed on roots, hauing a péece of a
tart giuen him to eat, and as he was eating it, being aſked what
it was, anſwered that it was bread; and when he was laughed
at for his anſwer, he ſaid again, Either it is bread of a very good
making, or bread very wel handled in the baking: So this Synicall
or Diogenicall King accuſtomed to féed groſly, hauing neuer
ſéene a pie or paſtie before, maruelled what it was: And
when he ſaw it cut vp and opened, and perceiued ſmoke to comè
out of it, ſhrunke backe, fearing it had béene ſome engine to deſtroy
him, and that the fire would follow after the ſmoke. But
when he perceiued no fire followed the ſmoke, he was content
to taſte of it, and highly commended it, as the daintieſt diſh that
euer he taſted of in his life.
               Theſe Arabian Kings neuer kéepe any money in their purſes,
but ſpend it as faſt as they finde it, and when they want, with
their ſword they ſéeke a new purchaſe. Some are ſouldiers,
fighting faithfully on any ſide that will giue them pay. Some
of this rogiſh Arabian race follow neither of their Kings, but
wander from place to place in caues and rocks, and liue by their
ſword, not only robbing, but killing ſuch as they can ouercome.
Others of them (of a better minde) ſoiourne in Cities of trade
and trafficke, and make themſelues ſeruants to any Nation
that will ſet them on worke, and well reward them. Some of
them are horſe-kéepers, ſome Baſtages, that is, Porters, and
ſome vnder-cookes in kitchins, and are very ſeruiceable. But
for the moſt part their lodgings are on ſome dunghill or other,
or odde corner of the City, with ſome ſilly tent ouer their heads.
Their wiues weare rings in their noſes, either of ſiluer or
braſſe, faſtned to the middle griſtle of their noſe, and colour
their lips blew with Indico, and goe alwaies bare legged and

                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , with 
                     〈◊〉
                   or rings of braſſe aboe their ancles and bracelets of braſſe abou
                     •
                   their hands. They are people which
can and doe 
                     〈◊〉
                   goe at 
                     〈◊〉
                   and miſerie, both for diet
and lodging. Their women are ſkilfull in mourning and crying
by art, and therefore they are hired to cry at the funerals of
Turkes and Moores oftentimes, tearing their haire, and making
all their face blew with Indico; The chiefeſt thing that I
haue obſerued in them, worth praiſe, is this, that they retaine
the vſe of ſpeaking their naturall tongue to this day, ſpeaking
the Arabicke naturally, which is a farre more learned language
than the Turkiſh: for as the Turkes Religion is a mixed Religion,
compounded of many Religions; ſo is their language alſo
a medly language, or (as I may iuſtly call it) a linke wolfie
Religion and language, compounded of many other languages,
wherein nothing is written. But the Arabian tongue is a learned
language, wherein Aui
                     •
                  en and many learned Phyſitians
haue written much, and to this day the Turkes Alcoran and all
their Law and Religion is written in the Arabicke tongue,
which is one of thoſe Orientall Languages which depend on
the Hebrue tongue, wherin becauſe you haue ſome knowledge,
and are ſtudious in the tongues, (according to your requeſt in
your laſt letters) I will àcquaint you what languages are héere
ſpoken, and which languages are moſt common and commendable
to trauellers to goe furtheſt withall. There are héere ſpoken
ſo many ſeuerall languages as there are ſeuerall Nations
héere dwelling or ſoiourning, euery Nation (amongſt themſelues)
ſpeaking their owne language. And héere are of moſt
Nations in the world ſome, who either come with their Merchandiſe
to ſell or by commodities, or ſoiourne héere as ſtrangers,
or elſe haue acceſſe, and receſſe to this City as trauellers.
But of all Chriſtian languages, the Italian tongue is moſt vſed,
and therewithall a man may trauell furtheſt. But of all the
Orientoll tongues, theſe foure are moſt ſpoken in theſe parts,
Arabicke, Turkiſh, Armenian, and Perſian, or Agimeſco: Of
euerie one of which languages (that you may ſée how they differ)
I will ſhew you how they number from one to twenty,
to ſatiſfie your expectation.
            
            
               
               The manner of numbring in foure
Orientall tongues
               
                  
                     Arabicke, or Moriſco.
                     
                        1
                        Wheheed.
                        One.
                        And ſo they proceede from twentie to a thouſand, as for example thus.
                         
                     
                     
                        2
                        Tenteene.
                        Two.
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        3
                        Telate.
                        Three.
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        4
                        Arbah.
                        Foure.
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        5
                        Camſe.
                        Fiue.
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        6
                        Site.
                        Sixe.
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        7
                        Sebbah.
                        Seuen.
                        Whehed Aſhrine.
                        21
                     
                     
                        8
                        Temene.
                        Eight.
                        Telatine.
                        30
                     
                     
                        9
                        Tiſſa.
                        Nine.
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        10
                        Aſhera.
                        Tenne.
                        Arbine.
                        40
                     
                     
                        11
                        Edaſh.
                        Eleuen.
                        Camſeen.
                        50
                     
                     
                        12
                        Tentaſh.
                        Twelue.
                        Se
                              •
                           teen.
                        60
                     
                     
                        13
                        Telataſh.
                        Thirteene.
                        Sebbain.
                        70
                     
                     
                        14
                        Arbataſh.
                        Fourteene.
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        15
                        Camſetaſh.
                        Fifteene.
                        Temenin.
                        80
                     
                     
                        16
                        Sittaſh.
                        Sixteene.
                        Tiſſaine.
                        90
                     
                     
                        17
                        Sebbataſh
                        Seuenteene.
                        Mee.
                        100
                     
                     
                        18
                        Tementaſh.
                        Eighteene.
                        Mee teene.
                        200
                     
                     
                        19
                        Tiſſataſh.
                        Nineteene.
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        20
                        Aſhreen.
                        Twentie.
                        Elph.
                        1000
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                         
                        Turkiſh
                         
                         
                        Armenian
                     
                     
                        1
                        Beer.
                        One.
                        1
                        Mecke.
                     
                     
                        2
                        Echee.
                        Two.
                        2
                        Ergucke.
                     
                     
                        3
                        Euch.
                        Three.
                        3
                        Ericke.
                     
                     
                        4
                        Durt.
                        Foure.
                        4
                        Chouers.
                     
                     
                        5
                        Beſch.
                        Fiue.
                        5
                        Hincke.
                     
                     
                        6
                        Altee.
                        Sixe.
                        6
                        Vites.
                     
                     
                        7
                        Yeadee.
                        Seuen.
                        7
                        Yeota.
                     
                     
                        8
                        Sechees.
                        Eight.
                        8
                        Outa.
                     
                     
                        9
                        Dochees.
                        Nine.
                        9
                        Vina.
                     
                     
                        10
                        Ontemaunt.
                        Tenne.
                        10
                        Danomecke.
                     
                     
                        11
                        Onbeer.
                        Eleuen.
                        11
                        Daſtegucke.
                     
                     
                        12
                        Onechee.
                        Twelue.
                        12
                        Daſwericke.
                     
                     
                        13
                        Onuch.
                        Thirteene.
                        13
                        Daſnochouers.
                     
                     
                        14
                        Ondurt.
                        Fourteene.
                        14
                        Daſwincke.
                     
                     
                        15
                        Onbeſh.
                        Fifteene.
                        15
                        Daſno
                              •
                           uites.
                     
                     
                        16
                        Onaltee.
                        Sixteene.
                        16
                        Daſnuota.
                     
                     
                        17
                        Onedee.
                        Seuenteene.
                        17
                        Daſnouta.
                     
                     
                        18
                        Onſechees.
                        Eighteene.
                        18
                        Daſuonine.
                     
                     
                        19
                        Ondocouz.
                        Nineteene.
                        19
                        Exan.
                     
                     
                        20
                        Egreme.
                        Twentie.
                        20
                        Exſan on mecke.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Perſian or Agimeſc
                           •
                        .
                     
                        1
                        Euck.
                        12
                        Couandeſdak.
                     
                     
                        2
                        Du.
                        13
                        Siſdah.
                     
                     
                        3
                        See.
                        14
                        Choucdah.
                     
                     
                        4
                        Chohac.
                        15
                        Pounſdah.
                     
                     
                        5
                        Panche.
                        16
                        Shemiſdah.
                     
                     
                        6
                        Sh
                              •
                           ch.
                        17
                        Heſktah.
                     
                     
                        7
                        Haſte.
                        18
                        H
                              •
                           ſhtittah.
                     
                     
                        8
                        Haſtit.
                        19
                        Noados
                     
                     
                        9
                        Nou.
                        20
                        Bist.
                     
                     
                        10
                        Dah.
                        21
                        Biſt Euck. &c.
                     
                     
                        11
                        Yeandeſdah.
                         
                         
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               Of the Jewes.
               BEſides all theſe Mahometans (which I haue already named)
there are many Iewes in Conſtantinople, Aleppo, Damaſcus,
Babylon, Grand Cayro, and euery great Citie and place of
Marchandiſe throughout all the Turkes dominions, who are
knowne by their hatts: for they were accuſtomed to weare red
hatts without br
                     ••
                  mes at my firſt comming: But lately (the
head Vizier being their enemy) they are conſtrained to weare
hatts of blewe cloth, becauſe red was accounted too ſtately
and princelike a colour for them to weare.
               They are called by three names, which were giuen to them of
old. Firſt, they are called Hebrewes, (as ſome ſuppoſe) of Heber
the fourth from Noah, in whom the hebrew tongue remained
at the confuſion of tongues, whence he had his name. But S.
Auguſtine and other fathers affirme, that they were firſt called
Hebreweof Abraham, with the alteration of a fewe letters, Hebraei
quaſi Abrahaei, that is, Hebrewes as it were Abrahites.
               
               Secondly they were called Iſraelites from Jacob ſurnamed Iſrael,
whoſe grandfathers Abraham was.
               Thirdly, they were called Iewes, after that Juda and Beniamin
(which for the vnity of minds were (as it were one Tribe)
following Rehoboam the ſonne of Solomon of the tribe of Iuda,
made the kingdome of Iuda. The other ten betaking them to
Ieroboam of the tribe of Ephraim, ſet vp the kingdome of the
Ephramites or Iſrael. And what became of thoſe ten tribes, the
Iewes acknowledge themſelues to be ignorant. Only ſome of
their Rabbies thinke them to bee in Tarracia: the onely reaſon
which I haue heard them alledge for their opinion is this, becauſe
they often vnderſtand by Tartarians who came from
thence to vſe marchandiſe in Aleppo and elſe where, that there
are many amongſt them called by Hebrew names to this day.
Of theſe thrée names whereby they are knowne, the moſt common
name whereby they are called at this day is, the name of
Iewes. One and the ſame people thrice changed their names, &
often the place of their abode: And to this day they haue no

king nor country proper to themſelues, but are diſperſed throughout
the whole world, and in euery place where they come, they
are contemptible and of baſe account,Matth. 27. 25. according to the cry of
thoſe crucifiers. His blood bee vpon vs and our children, which
is fulfilled this day in our eares and eies. They are of more
vile account in the ſight of Turkes then Chriſtians; in ſo much
that if a Iewe would turne Turke, he muſt firſt turne Chriſtian
before they will admit him to be a Turke. Yea, it is a word
of reproach amongſt the Turkes, & a vſuall proteſtation amongſt
them, when they are falſly accuſed of any crime, to cleare themſelues
they vſe to proteſt in this manner, If this be true; then
God graunt I may die a Iewe, And the Iewes in like caſes vſe
to ſay, If this be not a falſe accuſation, then God graunt I may
dye a Chriſtian, praying better for themſelues then they belieue,
and as all of them muſt be that ſhall bee ſaued. And the
poore Chriſtians ſoiourning and dwelling in theſe partes doe
hate them very vncharitably and irreligiouſly: (in that we read
Rom. 11. many arguments prouing that they ſhall bee conuerted
againe.) for on good fryday in many places (eſpecially
at Zante) they throw ſtones at them, inſomuch that they dare
not come out of their houſes all that day, and yet are ſcarſe in
ſafety in their houſes, for they vſe to throw ſtones at their windowes
and dores, and on the roofe of their houſes. On thruſday
about noone, the Iewes begin to kéepe within dores, and
continue there with their dores ſhut vntil ſaturday about noone,
for if they come forth before that time they are ſure to be ſtoned,
but after noone on Eaſter eue if they come abroad, they
may paſſe as quietly as euer they did. Theſe in their blinde
zeale thinke to be reuenged on them for whom Chriſt prayed
ſaying, Father forgiue them, for they know not what they
doe.
               
               And ſome ignorant Chriſtians refuſe to eat of their meat or
bread: their reaſon is, becauſe the Iewes refuſe to eat or drinke
with Chriſtians to this day, or to eat any meat that Chriſtians
kill. But it is not vnuſuall amongſt Chriſtians of better knowledge,
to eat of the Jewes meat, which ordinarily they buy of
them: for the Iewes to this day eat not of the hinderpart of any

beaſt, but only of the former parts, and ſell the hinder quarters
of their béefe, mutton, kids, goats, &c. to Chriſtians.
               They obſerue ſtill all their old Ceremonies and feaſts, Sacrifices
only excepted, which the Turkes will not ſuffer them to
doe: for they were wont amongſt them to ſacrifice children,
but dare not now for feare of the Turkes. Yet ſome of them
haue confeſſed, that their Phyſitians kill ſome Chriſtian patient
or other, whom they haue vnder their hands at that time,
in ſtead of a ſacrifice.
               If a man die without children, the next brother taketh his
wife, and raiſeth vp ſéed vnto his brother: and they ſtill marry
in their owne kindred. Many of them are rich Merchants:
ſome of them Drogomen, and ſome Brokers. Moſt of them
are very crafty and deceitfull people. They haue no beggers
amongſt them, but many théeues, and ſome who ſteale for neceſſity,
becauſe they dare not begge.
               They are alſo very great Vſurers, and therein the Turkes
ecell them: for although there be Vſurers amongſt them, yet
they allow it not: for if a Chriſtian or any man borrow money
of a Turke (though he promiſe him intereſt) yet if he pay the
principall, he dares not moleſt him for intereſt, nor complaine
of him, being againſt their law.
               The Iewes Sabboth is on Saturday, which they obſerue ſo
ſtrictly, that they will not trauell vpon any occaſion on that
day, nor receiue money, nor handle a pen to write, (as I haue
knowen by experience in a Doctor of Phyſicke:) but on the
morrow he would take double fées of his Patient.
               They read their law in the Hebrue tongue, written in Phylacteries
or long roles of parchment. And the Old Teſtament
is alſo read in the Hebrue. But their Cakams and Cohens
preach in the Spaniſh tongue. All matters of controuerſie betwixt
themſelues are brought before their Cakam to decide,
who is their chiefe Churchman. Cakam in Hebrue is as much
as Sapiens in Latine, that is, a wiſe man: and Cohen in Hebrue
is as much as Sacerdos in Latine, that is, a Prieſt.
               Moſt of the Iewes can read Hebrue, but few of them ſpeake
it, except it be in two places in Turkey, and that is at Salonica,
                  
formerly called Theſſalonica, a City in Macedonia by the gulfe
Thermaicus; and at Safetta in the Holy Land, néere vnto the ſea
of Galile: Which two places are as it were Vwerſities or
Schooles of learning amongſt them, and there (honoris grati
                        •
                     
                  )
they ſpeake Hebrue.
               I haue ſundry times had conference with many of them;
and ſome of them, yea the greateſt part of them, are blaſphemous
wretches, who (when they are preſſed with an argument
which they cannot anſwer) breake out into opprobrious ſpéeches,
and ſay Chriſt was a falſe Prophet, and that his Diſciples
ſtole him out of his graue whiles the ſouldiers (who watched
him) ſlept: and that their forefathers did deſeruedly crucifie
him; and that if he were now liuing, they would vſe him
worſe than euer then forefathers did.
            
            
               Of Chriſtians of ſundry ſorts ſoiourning
in Aleppo.
               Beſides theſe Turkes, Moores, and Arabians, (which are all
Mahometans) and Iewes (which are Talmudiſts) there are
alſo ſundry ſorts of Chriſtians in this Countrey, which are of
two ſorts, either ſuch as were borne, brought vp, and dwelled
in the Country, or ſuch as were borne in Chriſtendome, and
only ſoiourne héere for a time to exerciſe merchandiſes.
               The firſt ſort who were borne in this Heathen Countrey,
and dwell there, are either Armenians, Maronites, Iacobites,
Georgians, Chelfalines, or Greekes; which are all gouerned by
their Patriarkes for Eccleſiaſticall matters. But for ciuill gouernment,
both they and their Patriarkes are ſubiect to Turkiſh
Lawes, yea they are all ſlaues vnto the great Turk, whom
they call their Grand Signior.
               
            
            
               Of the Noſtranes or Nazaritans.
               Amongſt all theſe ſorts of Chriſtians, there is amongſt the
M
                        •
                     ronites an ancient / company of Chriſtians, called vulgarly

Noſtranes, quaſi Nazaritans, of the Sect of the Nazarites, more
ciuill and harmleſſe people than any of the reſt. Their Country
is Mount Lybanus (as I wrote vnto you héeretofore) but many
of them dwell at Aleppo, whereof ſome of them are Caſſiſes,
that is, Churchmen; ſome of them are Cookes, and ſeruants
vnto Engliſh Merchants and others; ſome Artificers: All of
them liue ſomewhat poorely, but they are more honeſt and true
in their conuerſation than any of the reſt, eſpecially at their firſt
comming from Mount Lybanus to dwell in Aleppo; and many
during their continuance there, if they be not corrupted by other
wicked Nations there dwelling: in whom I obſerued more
by experience than I heard of them, or noted in them when I
was amongſt them at Mount Lybanus. And eſpecially for the
manner of their marriage, and how they honour the ſame.
               They buy their wiues of their fathers (as others there dwelling,
doe) but neuer ſée them vntill they come to be married, nor
then neither vntill the mariage be ſolemnized betwixt them: for
there is a partition in the place where they méet to be married,
and the man and his friends ſtand on the one ſide, and the yoong
woman & her friends on the other ſide, where they may heare,
but not ſée one another, vntill the Caſſies bid the yoong man put
his hand thorow an hole in the wall, and take his wife by the
hand. And whiles they haue hand in hand, the mother of the
maid commeth with ſome ſharpe inſtrument made for the purpoſe,
and all to bepricketh the new married mans hand, and
maketh it bléed. And if he let her hand goe when he féeleth his
hand ſmart, they hold it for a ſigne that he will not loue her:
But if he hold faſt (notwithſtanding the ſmart) and wring her
hard by the hand vntill ſhe cry, rather than he will once ſhrinke,
then he is counted a louing man, and her friends are glad that
they haue beſtowed her on him.
               And how they honour marriage aboue others, I obſerued
by the naming of their firſt manchilde. For as amongſt vs the
women, when they are married, loſe their Surnames, and are
ſurnamed by the huſbands ſurname, and children likewiſe; ſo
amongſt them the father loſeth his name, and is called by the
name of his eldeſt ſonne, in this manner. I haue knowen a

                  Noſtrane whoſe name was Mou-ſe, that is, Moſes, who hauing
a manchilde, named him Vſeph, that is, Ioſeph, and then
was the father no more called Mou
                        •
                     e, Mo
                        •
                     es, but Abou Vſeph,
that is, the father of Ioſeph. Another whoſe name was Vſeph,
named his eldeſt ſonne Pher-iolla, after which he was no more
called V
                        •
                     eph, but Abou Ph
                        •
                     r-iolla, the father of Pher-iolla. Another
man called Iubraell, that is, Gabriell, his ſonne at the time
of Baptiſme being named Mouſe, he alwaies after was called
Abou Mouſe, that is, the father of Moſes: ſuch an honour doe
they account it to be father of a manchilde.
               Theſe Noſtranes reuerence their Caſſiſes greatly, and kiſſe
their hand whereſoeuer they méet them: yet are moſt of them
altogether vnlearned, hauing only the knowledge of the Syriac
tongue, wherein their Liturgie is read.
               They kéepe their Feaſts at the ſame time as we doe, viz.
Chriſtmaſſe, Eaſter, and Whitſuntide: and at Chriſtmaſſe on
the Twelfth day in the morning, called Epiphanie, their yoong
men haue a cuſtome (betimes in the morning) to leape naked
into the water: I could neuer heare any reaſon of their ſo doing,
but Vzanſa de preaſe, the Cuſtome of their Countrey. And
though it be then very cold, yet they perſwade themſelues and
others, that then it is hotter than at any other time, and that
the water then hath an extraordinarie vertue to waſh away
their ſinnes.
               On Munday in Eaſter wéeke and Whitſun wéeke, theſe Noſtranes
goe with their Caſſiſes to the graues of the dead, and
there knéele downe, and burne incenſe, and pray at euery
graue.
            
            
               Of the Chelfalines.
               THe Chelfalines are Chriſtians, dwelling vpon the borders
of Perſia, betwéene Meſopotamia and Perſia, at a place called
Chelſa. Theſe bring ſilke to Aleppo to ſell. They are plai
                     ••
                  
dealing people. If a man pay them money, and (by ouer-reckoning
himſelfe) giue them more than their due, though there

be but one peece ouer, ſo ſoone as they perceiue it, though it bée
many daies after, they will bring it backe againe, and reſtore
it, and thinke they ſhall neuer returne ſafely into their Country,
if they ſhould not make reſtitution thereof. Theſe people
perſwade themſelues, and report vnto others, that they dwell
in that place which was called Eden, whereinto Adam was put
to keepe it and dreſſe it. But ſome hold that this pleaſant garden
Eden did extend ouer all the earth. But by the ſecond chapter
of Geneſis it appeareth manifeſtly, that this garden wherein
man was placed, which we call Paradiſe, was a certaine
place on earth, not ſpreading ouer all, but only a part thereof,
containing a conuenient portion of the Countrey called Eden,
bounding vpon the Riuer Euphrates▪
                   which Riuer is deuided
into foure ſtreames, and runneth (or at leaſtwiſe did then flow)
in manner as it is deſcribed, Gen. 2. 10. &c. And Eden is the
name of a Country, ſo called for the pleaſantneſſe of it. For Hadan
in Hebrue, is in Engliſh to delight. From hence alſo the
Greekes call pleaſure, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               And howſoeuer it beſomewhat probable, that theſe Chelphalines
dwell now in that Country which was called Eden, yet
Plato, and Ariſto
                        •
                     le, and Lactantius, and others, doe conſtantly
affirme (as they haue receiued of ancient monuments) that
Mountaines, and Riuers, and Ilands, and Countries, haue
receiued much alteration in this kinde. Sicilia is ſaid to haue
beene diuided from Italy, Cyprus from Syria, England from
France, by the violence of the Sea, whereas before they were
ioined, as Pelo
                        •
                     onne
                        •
                     us is to the reſt of Grecia, or as the towne
of Rye (at an high water) ſéemeth to be to the reſt of England:
So that no certainty can be giuen either by reading, or trauelling,
of the place where Eden was, becauſe theſe Riuers run in
other ſtreames: foraſmuch as Cyrus, at the taking of Babylon,
is affirmed to haue reſtrained the maine chanell of this very riuer
Euphrates, vnto an vnwonted courſe; and to haue deuided
the riuer Gindes (which is next vnto it in greatneſſe) into 360.
ſtreames. Beſides, the Country of Meſopotamia, by which
theſe riuers paſſe, being partly dry and ſandy, and ſeldome watered
with the ſhowers of heauen; and on the other part, excéeding

fruitfull by the nature of the ſoile; is (by the induſtry of
the inhabitants) ſo nouriſhed with waters, by cutting out chanels
and ditches out of the maine ſtreames, as the ſame is amended,
where it is barren, of the ſame vnfruitfulneſſe; and
corrected againe of his ouerrich increaſe, where it is ouer fertile.
No maruell therefore if theſe riuers are not fully agreed vpon
by Writers, hauing loſt perhaps their ancient ſtreames, together
with their names, as Paradiſe, and the whole earth beſides
haſh loſt her ancient fruitfulneſſe.
               And theſe Chelphalines are ignorant people, and haue no
reaſon to prooue that they now dwell in the place which was
called Eden, whereinto Adam was put to kéepe it and to dreſſe
it, but that the riuer Euphrates, and other riuers (mentioned
Gen. 2. 10. 11. 12.) run by their Country.
               Others of them ſay, that they haue receiued it by Tradition
from their Elders, from time to time. But that which God
hath concealed, I will not ſearch out. But (notwithſtanding
all that I haue read, heard, or ſéene in my trauels) I reſolue my
ſelfe, that no man liuing can demonſtrate the place, which God
(for the ſinnes of Adam) accurſed; and euer ſince, the place is
vnknowen.
            
            
               Of the Greekes.
               THe Greekes are a very ſuperſtitious, ſubtle, and deceitfull
people, inſomuch that it is growen to a prouerbe amongſt
the Italians,
               
               Chi fida in Grego▪ ſara intrego:
               That is,
               
                  He that truſteth to a Greeke,
                  Shall be int
                        •
                     eaged, and ſtill to ſeeke.
               
               They hate the Papiſts, and yet in many things agrée with
them, as in Auricular Confeſſion, Tranſubſtantiation, and
ſome other opinions. But their Liturgie is read in the vulgar
Tongue.
               The Greeke in Aleppo are very poore, for they are there (for
the moſt p
                     •
                  rt) but Brokers or Baſtages, that is, Porters▪ and
many of their women as light as water, maintaining their huſbands,

themſelues and their families, by proſtituting their bodies
to others. And their owne huſbands are often times their
Pandars or procurers to bring them Cuſt
                     •
                  mers.
               But the Greekes that liue at Conſtantinople are many of
them great Merchants, and very rich; but excéeding proud,
and ſumptuous in apparell, euen the baſeſt of them, and eſpecially
their women, who though they be but Coblers wiues, or
poore Artificers wiues, yet they goe in gownes of ſattin, and
taffery, yea of cloth of ſiluer and gold, adorned with precious
ſtones, and many gemmes and iewels about their necks and
hands. They care not how they pinch their bellies, ſo that they
may haue fine apparell on their backs. And at the time of their
marriage, the women condition with their huſbands to finde
them decent apparell, and con
                     •
                  enient diet, and bring them before
their Patriarke of Conſtantinople to confirme it; which, if
it be not performed accordingly, if they complaine to their Patriarke,
they are diuorced preſently, and ſhee taketh an other
man to her huſband, better able to maintaine her: and he may
marry an other woman if he pleaſe.
               One onely inſtance hereof will I giue you in a matter notoriouſly
knowen to all nations ſoiourning or dwelling in or about
Conſtantinople.
               
               In Pera or Gallata (on the other fide the water) there is a
moſt famous (or rather infamous) Gréeke whore called Charatza
Sophia, that is, Miſtreſſe Sophia, (the daughter of a poore
Gréeke widow who liueth by laundry) who being maried v
                     •
                  to
a Géeke, becauſe he kept her not fine enough, ſhe complaned
of him to the Patriarke, and was diuorced from him; and preſently
thereupon tooke another man, who was a Chriſtian in
name, but no Gréeke, but one who was (as is reported of him)
borne in no land in the world, but by ſea, and brought vp in
Polonia vntill he were thirtéene or fourtéene néeres of age, and
then came to Conſtantinople, and ſerued many maſters there,
at the firſt in the baſeſt ſeruices, both in the ſtable, and in the
kitchin, and afterwards in better ſeruices than he deſerued, being
both vnlearned and irreligious.
               This man had many children by this infamous woman Sophia:
                  
yet after many yee
                     •
                  es (ariſing to higher fortunes) turned
her away, and married another woman: And (to dawbe vp
the matter ſomwhat ſmoothly) procured a Greeke Taylor to
marry with this Sophia and gaue many hundred Dolers with
her to her marriage. But this Charatza could not content her
ſelfe long with this Gréeke Taylor, but admitted dayly other
men into her companie, whereupon the poore Taylor ran away
with his money, and left this light huſwife to the mercie of her
former louers, hauing thrée huſbands liuing, yet ſhee her ſelfe
liuing with none of them. This is common in euery mans
mouth thereabouts, and talked of many thouſand miles off, to
the diſgrace of his Countrie, and ſlander of Chriſtianitie.
               And both at Conſtantinople, Aleppo, and other places of
Turkey where there is traffiking and trading of Merchants,
it is no rare matter for popiſh Chriſtians of ſundry other Countries,
to Cut Cabine, (as they call it) that is: to take any woman
of that contrie where they ſoiourne, (Turkiſh women onely excepted,
for it is death for a Chriſtian to meddle with them) and
when they haue bought them, and enroled them in the Cadies
booke, to vſe them as wiues ſo long as they ſoiourne in that
countrie, and maintaine them gallantly, to the conſuming of
their wealth, diminiſhing of their health, and endangering of
their owne ſoules. And when they depart out of that Country,
they ſhake off theſe their ſwéet-hearts, & leaue them to ſhift for
themſelues and their children. And this they account no ſinne,
or at leaſt wiſe ſuch a ſinne as may be waſhed away with a litle
holy water.
               And theſe are the vertues which many Chriſtians learne by
ſoiourning long in Heathen Countries: which is not to be maruelled
at; for if Ioſeph (a good man) liuing in Pharaoh his Court,
had learned to ſweare by the life of Pharaoh; and Peter (a great
Apoſtle) being in the high Prieſts hall but once, denied Chriſt
thrice; we may well thinke that they which dwell long in wicked
Countries, and conuerſe with wicked men, are ſomewhat
tainted with their ſinnes, if not altogether ſowred with the leauen
of their vngodlineſſe.
            
            
               
               Of thoſe whom they call Franks or Freemen,
ſoiourning in Aleppo.
               THE other ſortes of Chriſtians liuing in Aleppo are ſuch
as are borne in other parts of Chriſtendome, and onely ſoiourne
there for a time to vſe trafficke and trade in merchandiſe,
and theſe are Engliſhmen, Italians, Frenchmen, Dutchmen,
and others, whom they call by a generall name Frangi, that is,
Franks, or Fréemen. For all the reſt, euen from the greateſt
Baſhaw or Vizier vnto the pooreſt peaſant, are ſlaues vnto the
Grand Signiour, who onely is free; and all the 
                     •
                  eſt are borne,
brought vp, liue and die his ſlaues: for the Grand Signiour
can commaund the head of any one of them at his pleaſure.
               Yea, if ſome great Vizier or Baſhawe to whom he hath committed
the gouernement of ſome Citie or countrie, fall into
his diſfauour, if he ſend but a Cappagie, that is, a Pur
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  an
                     •
                   to
him with his writing, with a blacke ſeale in a blacke boxe, none
of them all dare withſtand him, but ſuffer this baſe C
                     ••
                  ppagie to
ſtrangle him: though it be in the houſe before his wiues, children
and ſeruants, yet none dare lift vp their hands againſt
him.
               There was a Baſhawe of Aleppo, who gouerned the Citie and
Countrie adioyning, who was in the diſfauour of the King, and
the King ſent a Cappagie to ſtrangle him, who inquiring for the
Baſhaws houſe at A
                        •
                     eppo. and vnderſtanding he was at his
Garden foure miles from the Citie, he rode and met him in the
way, and opened his black box and ſhewed him his commiſſion
to ſtrangle him, whereat his countenance changed, and he only
craued this fauour, that hee might haue libertie to ſay his Praiers
before he died: which performed, hee yéeldeth his head and
was ſtrangled, ſitting on his horſe before all his followers,
which were at the leaſt 10
                     •
                  . men, and no man durſt ſpeake one
worde againſt it, much leſſe offer to reſiſt him, but ſaid, it was
Gods will it ſhould be ſo.
               And not onely the great Turke doeth thus tyrannize ouer

his ſlaues, but euery Baſhaw who hath gouernment ouer others
in a Citie or Countrie, tyranniſe ouer thoſe which are
vnder their regiment, and ſometimes ſtrangled, ſometimes beheaded,
and ſometines put vnto terrible tortures thoſe who
offend. Yea, oftentimes without offenſe; onely becauſe they
are rich and haue faire houſes the Baſhaw will lay to their
charge ſuch things as he himſelfe knoweth to be vntrue, and
put them to death that he may ſeaze vpon his goods.
               There was a Sherife or a Green-headin Aleppo, whom they
account Mahomets kinred, who offending the Baſhaw and brauing
him in tearmes as thogh he durſt not puniſh him, he cauſed
one of his officers to goe with him home, and when hee came
before his owne doore, openly in the ſtreet to break both his legs
and armes, & there let him lie, and no man durſt finde fault, or
giue him food; or Phyſician, or Chirurgion come to him; or wife
or ſeruants take him into houſe, but there he lay all day, and
ſhould ſo haue continued vntill he had died for hunger, or dogs
eaten him, had not his friends giuen money to the Baſhaw to
haue his throat cut to rid him out of his paine. And this is a
common puniſhment amonſt them.
               And ſomtimes for ſmall offenſes, they will lay a man downe
on his backe, and hoyſe vp his féete, and with a cudgell giue
them 300. or 400. blowes on the ſoles of their féete, whereby manie
are lamed.
               And ſome they ſet on a ſharpe ſtake naked, which commeth
from his fundament vp to his mouth, if he find not fauour to
haue his throat cut ſooner.
               And ſome are ganched in this manner; they are drawen vp
by a rope faſtened about their armes to the top of a Gazouke or
Gibbet full of hookes, and let downwards againe, and on what
part ſoeuer any hooke taketh hold, by that they hang vntill they
die for hunger.
               And ſome in like ſort are drawen ouer a Gibbet, and they being
compaſſed about the naked waſte with a ſmall coard, the
coard is drawen by 2. men to make them draw vp their breath,
and ſtill pulled ſtraiter and ſtraiter, vntill they bee ſo narow
in the waſte, that they may eaſily be cut off by the middle at one

blow, and then the vpper part is let downe on a hot grid-iron
and there ſeared vp, to kéepe them in ſenſe and feeling of paine
ſo long as is poſſible, and the neather part is throwen to the
dogges, &c.
               Vnſpeakeable is their tyranny to thoſe that fall into their
hands, not vnlike the tyrannie of the Spaniards towards the
poore Indians who neuer offend them.
               They, whom they call Franks or Fréemen, liue in greater
ſecuritie amongſt them then their owne people, by reaſon that
they are gouerned by Conſuls of their owne nation, and thoſe
Conſuls alſo are backed by Ambaſſadours for the ſame nations
which are alwaies Leige
                     •
                  s at Conſtantinople: and when their
Conſuls abroad are offered wrong, they write vnto the Ambaſſadours,
how, and by whom they are wronged: and then the
Ambaſſadour procureth from the great Turk commandements
to the Baſhaw of Aleppo to redreſſe their wrongs, and puniſh
ſuch as offend them. Otherwiſe there were no dwelling for
Franks amongſt them, but they ſhould be vſed like ſlaues by euery
ſlaue.
               And notwithſtanding their Conſuls and Ambaſſadours too,
yet they are oftentimes abuſed by Turks both in words and
deeds.
               In words they reuile them as the Egyptians did the Iſraelites,
and call them Gours, that is, Infidels: and Cupec, that is, dog:
and Canzier, that is, Hogge: and by many other odious and reproachfull
names. And though they ſtrike them, yet dare they
not ſtrike againe leſt they looſe their hand, or be worſe vſed.
               They alſo oftentimes make Auenias of them, that is, falſe
accuſations; and ſuborne falſe witneſſes to confirme it to bee
true: and no Chriſtians word will bee take againſt a Turke,
for they account vs infidels, and call themſelues Muſſelmen,
that is, True beléeuers.
               This miſerie abroad will make bs loue our owne Contrie
the better when wee come thither. And that is the beſt leſſon
which I haue learned in my trauels, Mundi contemptum, that
is, The contempt of the world. And S. Pauls leſſon, Phil. 4. 11.
In whatſoeuer ſtate I am, therewith to be content.
               
               
                  
Oh how happie are you in England if you knew your own
happineſſe? But as the prodigall ſonne vntill he was pinched
with penurie abroad, neuer conſidered the plentie of his fathers
houſe: So many in England know not their own felicitie,
becauſe they doe not know the miſeries of others.
               But if they were here in this heathen Countrie, they would
know what it is to liue in a Chriſtian common wealth, vnder
the gouernement of a godly king, who ruleth by Law and not
by luſt; where there is plentie and peace, and preaching of the
Goſpell, and manie other godly bleſſings, which others want.
               And God long continue his mercies to our noble King Iames,
and his whole Realmes, and giue vs grace as farre to excell other
Nations in thankfulneſſe as we doe in happineſſe.
               And thus for preſent I commend you to the moſt gracious
protection of the Almightie IEHOVAH,
beſéeching him, (if it be his will) to ſend vs
a ioyfull méeting, both in this
world, and in the world
to come. Amen.
               
                  Tuus 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,
GVILIELMVS BIDDVLPHVS.
               
            
         
         
            
            
            A LETTER SENT
from Ieruſalem into England, wherein
relation is made of the voyage of fiue Engliſhmen
from Aleppo in Syria Comagena to Ieruſalem,
and what famous Places, and memorable
Matters they ſaw in the way thither,
and at Ieruſalem.
* * *
*
            Salutem (ex animo) in Authore ſalutis, &c.
            
               WOrſhipfull and my ſingular good
friend, I being now (by the prouidēce
of God) at Ieruſalem, Captus
amore tui, raptus honore loci,
for the loue I beare to you, and
delight I conceiue in this famous
place, where our ſwéet Sauiour
Chriſt vouchſafed once his bleſſed
bodily preſence; I could not
but remember you with ſome ſalutation
from hence, hauing ſuch
choice of meſſengers (by reaſon of the great concourſe of people
vnto this place at this preſent, from ſundry places of Chriſtendome)
to tranſport my Letters vnto you: Nothing doubting
but that as my former letters (which I haue héeretofore written
vnto you both from Aleppo and other places) concerning
my former voyages, and ſuch things as (by diligent obſeruation)

I noted in my trauels, were acceptable vnto you; ſo that
this ſhall be much more acceptable, both in regard of the Place
from whence it came, as alſo of the Matter ſubiect héerein contained;
being my voyage from Aleppo in Syria Comagena to
Ieruſalem, vndertaken this preſent yéere 1600. not mooued as
Pilgrimes with any ſuperſtitious deuotion to ſee Relikes, or
worſhip ſuch places as they account holy; but as Trauellers
and Merchants, occaſioned by dearth and ſickneſſe, peſtilence
and famine in the City where we ſoiourne: which two are ſuch
followlike companions, that the Graecians diſtinguiſh them
but by one letter, calling the peſtilence 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , and the famine 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               :
By reaſon whereof all trafficke was hindred, and thoſe Merchants
whom they call Frankes or Freemen, either remooued to
other places; or ſuch as ſtaied in the City, cauſed their gates to
be ſhut vp, and came not abroad vntill Sol entered into Leo,
which is vſually the twelfth or thirtéenth day of Iuly, at which
time the plague ſtill ceaſeth in this place, though it be neuer ſo
great, and all that are then ſicke, amend; and ſuch as then come
abroad, néed not feare any danger. The Turkes, Moores, Arabians,
and other Mahometans, neuer remooue for feare of any
ſickneſſe, nor refuſe any mans company infected therewith;
for they ſay euery mans fortune is written in his forehead, and
that they ſhall not die before their time; not knowing what it is
to tempt God, and to refuſe ordinarie meanes. But in this interim,
from the beginning of this ſickneſſe (which was in March)
vntill the expected and vndoubted end, when the Sunne entereth
into Leo, we whoſe names are ſubſcribed (for cauſes aboue
mentioned) tooke our voyage from Aleppo towards Ieruſalem,
hauing letters of commendation from Clariſſimo Imo the Venice
Conſul, and ſundry others of the chiefs Italian Merchants,
to their Padres at Ieruſalem, for our kinde vſage there, with liberty
of conſcience.
            
               Anno Dom. 1600. March 9. after dinner we ſet foorth, guarded
with Ieneſaries, and accompanied with ſundry Engliſh, Italian,
and French Merchants, who in kindneſſe rode with vs
ſeuen or eight miles, to bring vs on the way, and then returned
to Aleppo. But moſt of our Engliſh Merchants brought

vs to Cane Toman,
               Cane Toman. ten miles from Aleppo, where wée made
merry with ſuch good chéere as we brought with vs. For there
was nothing to be had for money but goats milke, whereof
we had as much as we would. Heere we purpoſed to haue ſlept
all night, but hauing no other beds but the hard ground, with
Iacobs pillow (a good hard ſtone) vnder our heads, vnaccuſtomed
to ſuch Downe beds, we could not ſléepe, but ſpent the
time in honeſt mirth vntill it was paſt midnight, and then our
friends tooke their leaue of vs, and returned towards Aleppo,
and we procéeded in our iourney towards Ieruſalem. The night
being darke, and the way dangerous and théeuiſh, our Ieneſarie,
Byram Baſhaw, willed vs euery one to take a match lighted
in our hands, and to whirle it about, that the fire might be
ſéene the further, to terrifie the théeues, leſt they ſhould ſurpriſe
vs on the ſudden. And when we came to ſuſpicious places (as
caues, rockes, barnes, or odde Cottages in the way) our Ieneſarie
vſed to ride before; and as fowlers beat vpon buſhes for
birds, ſo he (with his launce) would ſtrike and beat vpon ſuch
places, leſt wilde Arabs (which lie lurking in ſuch places) ſhould
ſteale vpon vs on the ſudden.
            When the day appeared,Saracoope. our way was pleaſant and comfortable
vnto vs, vntill we came to a village called Saracoope, whither
we came about noone, March. 10. And becauſe our Seiſenars
or ſumptor horſes (which caried prouiſion for man and
horſe, as the cuſtome of the Countrie is) were tyred, and wee
our ſelues alſo (for want of ſléepe the night paſt) wearied and
hungrie, wee were conſtrained to lodge there all night on the
hard ground by our horſe héeles, in an old Cane diſtant from
Cane Toman 28. miles.
            March. 11. betimes in the morning we departed frō 
               Saracoop,
and came betimes in the afternoone to a fine Village called Marrah,
               Marrah.
where there is a very faire new Cane builded by Amrath
(commonly called Morat) Chillabee, ſometimes Defterdare, that
is, Treaſurer of Aleppo, and afterwards of Damaſcus, who for
the refuge of trauellers, & their protection againſt théeues, built
a ſtately ſtrong Cane like vnto Leaden-Hall in London, or rather
the Exchance in London, where there are faire vpper

roomes for great men in their trauels, and the nether roomes
are for ordinary trauellers and their horſes, but in hot wether
the beſt make choiſe to ſleepe on the ground in lowe roomes, rather
then in their chambers. The founder hereof alſo ordained
that all Trauellers that way ſhould haue their entertainement
there of his coſt. He alloweth them Bread, Pilaw and Mutton,
which our Ieneſaries accepted off; but we ſcorning reliefe from
Tu
                  •
               kes without money, ſent vnto the village, where (beſides
our owne prouiſion which wee brought with vs) wee had alſo
other good things for money. Marrah is diſtant from Saracoope
24. miles.
            March 12.Lacmine. was a very rainy day, yet we trauelled all the
forenoone vntill wee came to a village called Lacmine, which a
farre off made ſhew of a very faire village; but when we came
thither, we found it ſo ruinous, that there was not one houſe able
to ſhroude vs from the extremitie of the ſhower: the inhabitants
thereof hauing forſaken it and fled into the mountaines
to dwell, for feare of the Ieneſaries of Damaſcus, who trauelling
that way vſed to take from them, not onely victuals for
themſelues, and prouender for their horſes without money,
but whatſoeuer things els they found in their houſes. Onely
there was a little Church or Chappel there in good preparation,
whereinto (for a little money) we obtained leaue to enter, our
ſelues with our horſes and carriage, and there we brought out
our victuals, and refreſhed our ſelues, and baited our horſes,
and reſted vntill it left raining. After the ſhower, while our
horſes were preparing, we walked into the fields néere vnto the
Church, and ſaw many poore people gathering Mallas and thrée
leafed graſſe, and aſked them what they did with it: and they
anſwered, that it was all their foode; and that they boiled it,
and did eate it: then we tooke pitie on them, & gaue them bread,
which they receiued very ioyfully, and bleſſed God that there
was bread in the world, and ſaid: they had not ſéene any bread
the ſpace of many moneths. We alſo gaue vnto them ſmall
pieces of ſiluer to relieue their neceſſitie, which they receiued
gratefully, and wiſhed that their Countrie were in the hands of
Chriſtians againe.
            
               
The ſhower ceaſing, we rode from this Chappell and village
of Lacke money (I ſhould haue ſaid Lacmin, but might ſay,
lacke men and money too) and rode forward vntill we came vnto
a village or towne called Tyaba, where (becauſe it was neere
night) we deſired to lodge, but could not be admitted into any
houſe for any money, whereupon our chiefe Ieneſarie Byram
B
                     •
                  ſhaw went into an houſe, and offred to pull man, woman,
and childe out of the houſe, that we might bring in our horſes,
and lodge there our ſelues. But when we ſaw what pitifull lamentation
they made, we intreated our Ieneſarie either to perſwade
them for money, or to let them alone. And vnderſtanding
that there w
                  •
               s a faire City in our way, ten miles off, we
fiue, with our Ieneſarie being well horſed, rode thither, and left
our carriage with the reſt of our company at Tyaba, to come to
vs betimes in the morning.
            This City is now commonly called Aman, but of old it was
called H
                     •
                  mat
                     •
                  , 2. King 17. Heere we lodged in a faire Cane,
but on the cold ground, and vpon the hard ſtones, and thought
our ſelues well prouided for, that we had an houſe ouer our
heads to keepe vs day. Héere we met with victuals for money,
and prouender for our horſes. On the morrow, the reſt of our
company came vnto vs from Tyaba, and one of our horſes being
lame, we ſtaied there all that day to buy another, and met
there that day another ſwaggering Ieneſarie of Damaſcus, of
our old acquaintance at Aleppo, called Mahomet Baſhaw, who
came from Ieruſalem with Italian Merchants, whom he had
guarded thither. Theſe gaue vs good directions for our voyage,
and told vs what dangers they had eſcaped. Hamath is from
Marrah about fiue and thirty miles.
            On the fourteenth of March we trauelled from Hamath,
               Hemſe. a
pleaſant way, and a ſhort daies iourney, to a fine towne called
vulgarly Hemſ
                     •
                  , but formerly Hus, diſtant from Hamath but
twenty miles. This is ſaid to haue béene the City where Iob
dwelt, and is to this day called by the Chriſtians 
                  〈◊〉
                biting in
thoſe borders, Iobs City. And there is a fruitfull valley neere
vnto it, called the v
                  •
               lley of H
                     •
                  s▪
                and a C
                  •
               ſtle not f
                  •
               rre off, in
the way to 
                  
                     •••
                  poly,
               H
                     •
                  s. called Hu
                     •
                  
                Caſtle to this day. But I make

ſome doubt whether Iob were euer at this place, for Iob is ſaid
to haue dwelt amongſt the Edomites or wicked Idumaeans: and
Idumae
                     •
                  
                bordered vpon Arabia Foelix, and not néere Syria, where
this City called Hus ſtandeth, whence the Sabaeans came, which
with violence tooke away Jobs Oxen and Aſſes. And Iob is ſaid
to come of the poſteritie of Eſay. And ſome thinke him to haue
béene the ſonne of Abram by Ketura. Yet might this City, now
called Hemſe or Hus, be the Land of one called by name Hus:
for I doe finde in the Genealogies of the holy Scripture, thrée
men of that name Hus:
            
            One was Arams ſonne, nephew to Noah, Gen. 10. 23.
            A ſecond was Nachors, Abrams brothers ſonne by Milchah,
Gen. 22. 21.
            The third was of the poſterity and kindred of Eſau, as appeareth
in his Genealogie, Gen. 3
                  •
               . 28. Whence ſome gather,
that Iob was an Idumaean, of the poſterity of Eſau. But others
affirme him to haue béene the ſonne of Abram by Ketura. And
not vnlikely that ſome one of theſe thrée might haue dwelt at
this place in Syria, called Hus, which by corruption of time was
called Hemſe.
            
            On the fiftéenth day of March we went from Hus towards
Damaſcus, which is foure daies iourney off, and all the way
(vntill we came within ten miles of Damaſcus) is a deſart, vninhabited,
and a théeuiſh way; onely there are erected in the
way certaine Canes to lodge in. But if they bring not prouiſion
with them both for man and horſe, and ſome quilt or pillow
to ſléepe on, the hard ſtones muſt be their bed, and the aire their
ſupper: for ſome of their Canes are nothing but ſtone wals to
kéepe out théeues. In Cities they haue very ſtately Canes, but
not for Trauellers, but for themſelues to dwell in; for euerie
rich man calleth his houſe a Cane. But the Canes that ſtand in
high waies, are in charity erected by great men, for the protection
of Trauellers; but moſt of them are very badly kept, and
are worſe than ſtables. Our firſt daies iourney from Hus was
a very vncomfortable and dangerous deſart: we ſaw no houſe
all the way vntill we came vnto a village called Haſſia, where
we lodged in an old Caſtle diſtant from Hus 22.Haſſia. miles.
            
               
March 16. From Haſſia, we rode to an ancient Chriſtian
Towne called Charrah,
               Cha
                     •
                  rah. where our prouiſion being ſpent, wée
made ſupply thereof, and bought bread and wine of the Chriſtians
there dwelling. It is inhabited by Greekes and Turkes,
but gouerned by Turks only. There is but one Church in the
Towne, which is dedicated to S. Nicolas, by the Chriſtians,
who firſt builded it. But both Chriſtians and Turkes pray
therein: the Chriſtians on the one ſide or Ile of the Church, and
the Turkes on the other. But the Chriſtians are ouer ruled
by the Turkes, and conſtrained to finde them oile to their lamps
in the Church. For the Turkes not only burne lamps in their
Churches euery night, but during the whole time of their Lent
they beſet the battlements of their ſteeples round about with
lampes. But when their Lent is ended, they burne lampes in
their ſtéeples onely once a wéeke, and that is on Thurſday at
night, which is the Eue before their Sabboth. After we had
refreſhed our ſelues héere, halfe the day being not yet ſpent, we
rode from hence to a poore village called Nebecke,
               Nebeck. or (as they
pronounce it) Nebhkeh, where we lodged in an old Cane, diſtant
from Haſſio 27. miles.
            And vnderſtanding at this place, that the way that we were
to paſſe on the morrow, was full of Arabs, and that two daies
before, many men were found in the way killed by them, wée
feared to goe any further. Yet meeting with company contrarie
to expectation (March 17.) we went forwards, and ſaw no
houſe nor company all the day long beſides our ſelues, vntil we
came to a village called Cotifey,
               Cotifey. where wee lodged in a very
ſtately new Cane, built by Synan Baſhaw; and not altogether
finiſhed. This Cane doth far exceed that at Marrah (before mentioned)
for herunto is adioyned a fair new Church and a Bazar,
that is a Market place where trauellers may buy many good
things. Heere is alſo meat for trauellers, and prouender for
their horſes to be had of the founders coſt. And in the middle of
this Cane, there is a faire large fountaine of water, of hewed
ſtones foure ſquare, wherein there is excéeding good water for
Trauellers to drinke, and chambers for their lodging: but if
they will haue any beds, they muſt bring them with them, or

ſléepe on the hard ground, as moſt men that trauell that way
are wont to doe.
            March 18. From Cotifey we had not much more than 20.
miles to Dama
                     •
                  cus. The firſt ten miles was a deſart and dangerous
way, and we hardly eſcaped danger; for an A
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  ian
horſman ſeeing vs come, ſtood as a ſpie in our way, to view our
ſtrength, and marked euery one of vs very narrowly, and what
weapons we had; and then rode vp an high mountaine as faſt
as if it had beene plaine ground, 
                  •
               o acquaint his companions
what a prey he had found for them. Whereupon our Ieneſarie
caſt aſide his vpper garment, being a gambe
                  •
               looke, and bad vs
all make ready our weapons, and he himſelfe rode before vs
with his launce on his ſhoulders, expecting there comming vpon
vs ſuddenly: but they hauing eſp
                  •
               ed (from the top of the
mountaine) fifty Ieneſarie, of Dama
                     •
                  cus at the leaſt, with their
I
                  •
               mmoglans comming after vs, came not, and ſo by the prouidence
of God we eſcaped their hands.
            The other part of our way to Damaſcus was a pleaſant plain
of ten miles in length, hauing many fruitfull oillages, fine riuers,
and pleaſant gardens thereon. At our entrance into this
plaine or valley, riding downe an hill, we beheld the proſpect
of Damaſcus ten miles off,Damaſcus. whither we came about two of the
clocke in the afternoone, and tooke vp our lodging in the middle
of the City, at a Cane called in Mou
                     •••
                  co, Cane Nebbe, that is,
the Cane of the Prophet; but by the Turkes, Cane Haramin,
where we hired three chambers for our mony, and our ſeruants
bought our meat, and dreſſed it themſelues, as they did alſo all
the reſt of the way where we could get any thing. To this end
we tooke a Cooke with vs, and other ſeruants from A
                     •
                  eppo, to
dreſſe our meat, and to looke to our horſes. Héere we met with
Frenchmen, and other Chriſtians, ſtaying for company to go
to Ieruſ
                     •
                  lem.
            
            At Damaſcus many Iewiſh Merchants, and Gréekes, and
others, knew ſome of vs, and came to ſalute vs, and preſent
vs with 
                  〈◊〉
                good things as they had, both wine, and bread,
and 
                  〈◊〉
               , 
                  •
               nd fruit, &c. and lent vs very good beds, with ſheets
and 
                  〈◊〉
                ſurm
                  •••
               e, 
                  〈…〉
                wellou
                  •
                w
                  ••
               rie
                  •
                bod
                  •
               es.
            
               
March 19. and 20. we ſtaied at Damaſcus to reſt our ſelues,
and ſee the City.
            
               Of Damaſcus.
               
                  DAmaſcus is a moſt ancient City, and as Eſay ſpake of it in
his time, The head of Aram is Damaſcus: Iſa. 7. 8. ſo Damaſcus
is the chiefeſt City of Syria to this day. The ſituation
thereof is moſt pleaſant, being built on a plaine ground, ſtrongly
walled about, and a ſtrong Caſtle therein, with many fine
riuers running on euery ſide of it, eſpecially Abanah and Pharpar,
mentioned 2. King. 5. which now are diuided into many
heads.
               The Turkes ſay, that their Prophet Mahomet was once at
Damaſcus, and that when he ſaw the pleaſant ſituation of it,
and beheld the ſtately proſpect of it, excelling all others that euer
he ſaw before; refuſed to enter into the City, leſt the pleaſantneſſe
thereof ſhould rauiſh him, and moue him there to ſettle
an earthly Paradiſe, and hinder his deſire of the heauenly
Paradiſe.
               It hath alſo many pleaſant Orchards and gardens round about
the Citie, and ſome waies for the ſpace of a mile and more
about the citie there are many Orchards, and great varietie of
fruites: ſome called Adam, apples, and Ad
                        •
                     ms figs, & ſundry other
ſtrange fruites. Damaſcus is called by the Turkes Sham,
and they call it the garden of Turkey, becauſe there is no place
in all the Turkes dominions (eſpecially in Syria, that yeeldeth
ſuch abundance of fruit. Heere we ſtated two daies and three
nights to reſt our ſelues, and ſee the Citie. And hauing a
Greeke to our guide, hee 
                     •
                   hewed vs firſt a ſtately Muſkia, or
Turkiſh Church erected in the place where the Temple of Ry
                        •
                     
                     mon
ſtoode, mentioned 2 King. 5. And two other memorable
matters, mentioned Act. 9. 25. viz. the place where the Diſciples
let downe 
                     〈◊〉
                   the night through the wall in a baſket,
whereof the Chriſt 
                     〈…〉
                   Keepe an eract memoriall;
taking vpon the 
                     ••
                  to demo: ſtrate the very place of the wal;
which we 
                     〈…〉
                   bek
                     •
                  ing, they confirmed it with this reaſon, that

                  Damaſcus was neuer ouercome; and that there haue béene
Chriſtians dwelling there euer ſince the time of Paul, and therefore
might keepe a memoriall of the very place: But to let the
place paſſe, the thing it ſelfe we know to be true.
               He ſhewed vs alſo the houſe of Ananias, which is vnder the
ground, whereinto we were led, downe a paire of ſtaires from
the ſtréete, as it were into a Celler; and the dore being vnlocked,
wee entred with candels into the place, where wee ſawe two
darke chambers, where a man cannot ſee to reade in the day
time without candels; here they ſay, he liued in ſecret for feare
of the Iewes. Many Chriſtians comming thither to ſée that
place, with a coale write their names on the wall, and there are
ſo many names there already, that there is ſcarce roome for any
other to ſet his name.
               Some of them report Damaſcus to be built in the place where
Kain killed his brother Abel. And ſome ſay it is néere it, and offered
to bring vs to the place; but we refuſed.
               They take vpon them alſo at Damaſcus to demonſtrate the
place where S. George was buried, ſo they do likewiſe at Aleppo,
but I thinke the one to be as true as the other.
               There is a fine towne néere vnto Damaſcus, about two or
thrée miles diſtant on the ſide of an hill,Salhia. called Salhia, from
whence a man may behold the proſpect of the Citie of Damaſcus
moſt pleaſantly, with the gardens and pleaſant places about it.
               At Damaſcus we met many thouſand Turkes going on Pilgrimage
towards Mecha in Arabia to viſit Mahomets ſepulchre,
as they vſually doe euery yéere about their Byram time; for
they hold that whoſoeuer once in his life time ſhall not goe on
Pilgrimage to Mecha, to ſée the ſepulcher of their Prophet, ſhall
neuer enter into Paradiſe. And therefore ſome of them goe
thither often in their life time, partly for deuotion, and partly
to buy merchandiſe. For there are brought thither at that time
of the yéere, great ſtore of commodities from India, Perſia, and other
places; and none may by or ſell there but Mahome
                        •
                     ans.
And it is forbidden to all Chriſtians vpon paine of death to
come néere Mecha within fiue miles: partly, leſt they ſhould
marre their markets; but chiefly, leſt they ſhould ſee their folly

or rather madneſſe in worſhipping an iron ſepulcher, after the
ſight whereof, many of their old men (which thinke neuer to
come thither againe) vſe to pull out both their eyes, after they
haue ſeene ſo holy a ſight (as they accout it) as their Prophets
ſepulcher, and thinke thereby to inherit heauen.
               
                  Tantum relligio potuit ſuadere malorum.
               
               that is:
               
                  In ſuch ſhamefull ſort themſelues to deface,
                  Their Religion mooues them for want of grace:
               
               And whoſoeuer (ſay they) dieth in his pilgrimage thither,
or returning from thence, is ſure to goe to Heauen preſently.
And they that haue béene there but once, are alwaies after called
Hogies,
                  Hogies. that is, Pilgrimes: and are called by that name in
this manner.
               If his name before were Mahomet, he is at his returne called
Hogie Mahomet. If before Muſtapha, he is alwaies after
called Hogie Muſtapha, &c. And they that haue béene often at
Mecha and returne againe, are called great Hogies. And euery
yéere when the Carauan of Pilgrimes returneth from Mecha,
he that hath béene there oftneſt is called The great Hogie: and
is greatly honoured of them all, for he rideth before them all in
more ſtately apparell then they, with flowers and garlands about
his horſe, and when they come néere any great Citie, the
chiefeſt men in the citie ride foorth to méet him, and bring him
into the Citie with great ſolemnitie.
               They falſly affirme that this their Temple at Mecha in Arabia
was built by Abraham, and they prepare themſelues with greater
care to goe to worſhip there, then many Chriſtians do when
they come to the Lords Supper; for they diſburden their hearts
of all hatred and malice, and reconcile themſelues one to another,
&c. Otherwiſe they hold that all their labour is loſt, and
that they ſhalbe neuer a whit the better for their Pilgrimage.
But if they forgiue one another, and repent them for their former
ſinnes, they thinke there to obtaine ful remiſſion of all their
ſinnes, and that at their returne they are pure and without
ſpot.
               March 21. We departed from the City of Damaſcus, and about

fiue or ſix miles from the City, paſſed by a village called
Daria,
                  Daria. néere vnto which we ſaw a great multitude of men, women,
and children on their knees in the high way: and by that
tune they had ended their deuotion, we drew ſo neere as to ſalute
them; and aſking what they were, it was told vs that they
were all Chriſtians of ſundry Nations, viz. Armenians, Greeks,
Chelfalmes, Noſtranes, and ſundry others, who went to Ieruſalem
to viſit and worſhip the holy places there. We aſked further,
what they meant to fall on their knées in that place: they
anſwered vs, that it was the place whereMucro, furor Sauh, liber eſt conue
                        •
                     ſio Pauli. 
                  Paul was conuerted,
and that it was their cuſtome when they trauelled that way, to
fall on their knees, and pray vnto God to conuert them. They
were in number at the leaſt foure or fiue hundred people. There
was a Greeke Patriarke, and an Armenian Biſhop in their
company. Many of them knew vs, (hauing ſéene vs in Alepp
                        •
                     
                  )
and ſaluted vs by our names. We rode a while in company
together, and lodged all together that night at a Cane called
Saſſa,
                  Saſſa. diſtant from Dama
                        •
                     cus 26. miles.
               March 22. We rode before the reſt of the company. Our
way that we trauelled all this day was exceeding bad, rocky,
watriſh,Arabia Petr
                        •
                     a. and barren, called Arabia Pet
                        •
                     ea, where our horſes
often times ſtucke faſt in the puddles and miry places, and
ſometimes ready to breake their owne legs, and their Riders
necks among rocks and ſtones. It was neither pleaſant going
on foot, nor riding this way, for there was no path nor euen
ground, but huge ſtones and rocks ſo néere together, that our
horſes could goe but a foot pace, and often times met with ſuch
mariſhes and quagmires, that we were conſtrained to goe
farre about before we could finde better waies to paſſe ouer.
It is alſo exceeding cold in this place alwaies (in reſpect of other
places in that Country) for there are neither trées, nor houſes,
nor high hils to keepe away the violence and force of the winds.
The Carauans that trauel vſually that way betwixt Damaſcus
and Egypt, ſay that this daies iourney troubleth them more
than all the reſt, and that they neuer paſſe by that way, but
they leaue two or three of their Cammels behinde them, ſome
miſfortune or other befalling vnto them. We ſaw alſo in ſundrie

places this way, the carcaſes of many dead cammels which
haue miſcarried amongſt the rocks. It is alſo a very théeuiſh
way, full of wilde Arabs: yet (by the prouidence of God) wee
came ſafely that day to Conetra, where we lodged in a good
Cane, diſtant from Saſſa 28. miles.
               After our tedious trauell to Conetra, finding the place pleaſant
at our comming thither, we walked about to ſolace our
ſelues in beholding the gréene paſtures and running riuers nere
vnto it, and in viewing the order of ſundry Nations there aſſembled
together from ſundry places. Some comming from
Egypt, and bound to Damaſcus, pitched their tents without the
Cane, néere vnto the riuer. Others comming from Damaſcus,
and bound to Ieruſalem, accommodated themſelues (in ſuch
ſort as they could) within the Cane. But eſpecially in a Bazar
(like vnto a cloiſter) adioining to the Cane, wee tooke pleaſure
to walke vp and downe ſome few turns, which the Turks
beholding, wondred at vs: (for it is not their cuſtome in thoſe
hot Countries to walke vp and downe as we doe in cold Countries,
but to ſit ſtill on the ground like brute beaſts) and one of
them came vnto vs, and aſked vs what we meant to walke vp
and downe in ſuch ſort, and whether we were out of our way,
or out of our wits. If your way (ſaid he) lieth toward the vpper
end of the cloiſter, why come you downwards? And if at
the netherend, why goe you backe againe? We anſwered him,
For our pleaſure. He replied, that it was greater pleaſure to
ſit ſtill, than to walke vp and downe when we néed not. But
their brutiſh ſitting ſtil on the ground was as ſtrange vnto vs,
as our walking vp and downe was to them.
               It ſéemed no leſſe ſtrange vnto them to ſée a Chriſtian with
a cut dublet: and they called him foole, and aſked him what hée
meant to make holes in his coat: for they neither cut nor pinke
any of their garments, but weare them all plaine, ſparing for
no coſt to guard them with lace of ſiluer and gold if they be able.
               And ſuch as weare long haire on their heads, the Turkes
call ſlouens, and account them ſauage beaſts; for they themſelues
weare no haire on their heads at all, but ſhaue them euery
wéeke once, and kéepe them warme with a Turbant of white

ſhaſh made of cotten woole, which they neuer vncouer in their
ſalutations to any man, but bow their heads, with their hands
on their breaſts.
               But if a man haue a faire long beard, they reuerence him,
and ſay he is a wiſe man, and an honourable perſonage. But
if they haue no beards at all, they call them (if they be yoong)
Bardaſſes, that is Sodomiticall boies. But if they be men growen,
and haue no beards, they call them fooles, and men of no
credit; and ſome of them refuſe to buy or ſell with ſuch, and
ſay they haue no wit, and that they will not beléeue them, &c.
               March 23. We had a more pleaſant way; for the firſt ten
miles wée rode thorow the fields and a very pleaſant Parke.
But when wée came out of this Parke or Foreſt, wee were
ſomewhat troubled, partly by reaſon of the bad way, and partlie
by bad people in the way. The way was ſtony and rockie
(as the former daies iourney was) but yet dry, and not long,
for it was but the deſcending downe a rockie hill, where though
the way were dangerous vnder our féet, yet it was pleaſant before
our faces, for wée beheld the proſpect of part of the holy
Land, viz. Galile.
               
               But at our deſending downe this mountaine, the people did
more trouble vs then the way; for there ſate amongſt the rocks
in our way many Turks and Arabs, with maces of Iron and other
weapons, who ſtaied vs and demanded Caphar or tole money;
we were glad to giue them content that wée might paſſe
ſafely by them, as Iacob was glad to ſend his brother Eſau gifts,
for a Ne noceat (as the Lawyers ſpeake) that is, for feare of danger.
               But the Carauan of Chriſtians, who came after vs, though
they were many hundreds, yet ſome of them being not able,
ſome not willing to pay ſo much mony as they demanded, were
ſhrewdly beaten with their iron maſes. There was a Ieſuite
in their company, who eſcaped not without ſtripes, whereat
(as I haue heard) he reioiced, and counted it meritorious, in
that he ſuffered ſuch miſery in ſo holy a voyage. And in my hearing,
at Ieruſalem one of his companions told him, that he merited
much to ſuſteine ſuch trauell and labour, and be at ſo great

coſt and charges, and ſuffer ſo many ſtripes for Chriſts ſake:
But I know, had it not béene more for loue of his purſe than for
loue of Chriſt, he might haue eſcaped without ſtripes, yea
with theſe kinde ſpeeches, Marhabbah Ianum, that is, Welcome
my friend or ſweet-heart.
               
               At another place in my trauels I heard a Friar bragging of
his good workes, and ſaying, that hée had done ſo many good
workes, that if he ſhould kill thrée men, his good works would
make ſatiſfaction, and merit remiſſion for them all. To whom
one in my company anſwered, that by his murder he might
merit indéed a double reward, viz. death in this life, and damnation
in the life to come, for blood will haue blood; For whoſoeuer
ſheddeth mans blood, by man ſhall his blood be ſhed. But
to let paſſe theſe Ieſuiticall Iebuſites, or Iebuſiticall Ieſuites: In
that theſe trauellers were thus beaten for ſparing their purſes,
and though they were many hundreds, durſt not ſtrike them
againe,An admonition for Trauellers. héere I may fitly take occaſion to teach thoſe that purpoſe
to trauell into Turkey, how to behaue themſelues. If
they be ſet vpon by théeues, they may defend themſelues in
their trauels, if they be ſtrong enough; but if they be poling officers
(as theſe were) they muſt not be contradicted. But neither
in their Cities, nor in their trauels, may they ſtrike againe
though they be abuſed and beaten by any man (except they be
théeues and robbers) for if they doe, they ſhall either be put to
death, or haue their hand cut off. Neither if a man receiue a
box on the eare at any of their hands, muſt he giue one bad
word, or looke frowningly vpon him that ſmote him: for then
he will ſtrike him againe, and ſay, What, Goure? Doeſt thou
curſe me, and wiſh that the Deuill had me? But he muſt kiſſe
his beard, or the ſkirt of his garment, and ſmile vpon him, and
then he will let him paſſe.
               Wherefore, trauellers into thoſe parts muſt looke vpon the
picture of a ſeruant as of old he was wont to be painted, that
thereby they may learne how to behaue themſelues in trauell.
               I read, that of old they were wont to paint the picture of a
ſeruant at the doores of their houſes, that their ſeruants might
ſée how they ſhould behaue themſelues. And he was painted on

this manner; With the ſnout of a Swine, the eares of an Aſſe,
the feet of an Hart, with hands open, with his garments cleanly,
and on his head a bonnet, hauing on his backe a couleſtaffe,
with two veſſels, the one hauing in it fire, the other water.
               This deſcription, though it be rude and homely, yet it teacheth
plainly ſeruants and trauellers their duties.
               The Swines ſnout declareth that they muſt not be daintie
mouthed, but muſt be content with any meat which God hath
prouided for man.
               The Aſſes eares, that they muſt patiently heare the ſharpe
ſpeeches of their Maſters, without anſwering againe.
               The Harts féet, that they muſt be ſwift in doing their buſineſſe.
               Their Hands wide open, that they muſt be faithfull, not
deceitfull: They muſt doe nothing cloſely or ſecretly: They
muſt haue their cheſts, their hands, their hearts open to their
Maſters eie and commandement, when it pleaſeth him to call
them to account.
               Their garments comely and honeſt, which their bonnet declares,
that they muſt not be ſlouenly, but handſome and ſéemly
apparelled, and yet not proudly aboue their degrées.
               The couleſtaffe on their ſhoulder, that they muſt not refuſe
to doe any worke, no not to carry water.
               And the fire and water, the one before them, and the other
behinde, ſheweth their diſcretion in their buſineſſe: They muſt
not mingle fire and water together.
               Moſt of theſe qualities are required in Trauellers. In diet
they muſt not be dainty, but eat what they can get. Their
eares muſt not be nice, for they ſhall heare ſpeeches enough to
offend them. Their féet muſt be ſwift to flie from dangers:
Their hands wide open to giue liberally: Their apparell alſo
muſt be neat in Cities where they ſoiourne, for their credit:
But when they trauell abroad, it muſt be ſimple, for their ſafety:
for the baſer their apparell is, the better ſhall they paſſe:
for if they weare good apparell, their throats will be cut for
their apparell, and hope of much money: for thoſe that go braue
they account rich. And whereas in ſeruants it is commendable

to haue aſſes eares; in trauellers it is néedfull to haue aſſes
backes alſo, to beare all abuſes in good part, and rather to beare
an hundreth abuſes then to offer one.
               Wherfore ſeruants and trauellers muſt alwaies remember
this Diſtichon, or couple of verſes following.
               
                  Nobile vincendi genus eſt patientia, vincit
                  Qui patitur: ſivis vincere, diſcepati:
               
               that is,
               
                  A noble kind of conquering
                  is patience to ſee and heare:
                  He which forbeareth, conquereth,
                  If thou wilt conquer, learne to beare.
               
               But to leaue theſe matters, and to procéede to my voiage.
At the foote of this mountaine there is an old Cane where vſually
trauellers lodge: but it béeing not yet noone, we reſolued
to trauell 18 miles further, to the Sea of Galile. At the foote of
this ſtony hill, hard by this Cane, there runneth a pleaſant riuer,
which diuideth Siria from Galile. And ouer this riuer
there is a fair bridge, the one end whereof is out of the holy land,
the other in it. This riuer is called Iordane,
                  Iordan. the head whereof
commeth from Mount Libanus, and maketh three Seas.
               The firſt is the waters of Maron which wee left on our right
hand, about ten miles off. The other on the left hand, which lay
in our waie as we ſhould trauell.
               The ſecond is the ſea of Galile, or Tiberias, or lake of Genezereth.
               
               The third is the Sea of Sodome, called Mare mortuum, where
the riuer Iordan endeth.
               The bridge that croſſeth this Riuer Iordan at the entrance
into the holy land, is called Iacobs bridge; for two cauſes.
               Firſt, it is ſaid that there Iacob met his brother Eſau.
               
               Secondly, that there Iacob wreſtled with an Angel.
            
            
               A deſcription of the Holy Land.
               THE whole Holy Land of old was called Chanaan, and it
was deuided into thrée parts, viz. Galile, Iudea & Pale
                        •
                     tina.
Later writers haue called all by the name of Paleſtina. The firſt

part of Canaan called Galile,
                  Iacobs bridge. beginneth at this bridge, and to
this day it is a very pleaſant and fruitful Countrie. After wee
were entred into Galile about 2. miles from the bridge, our Ieneſarie
aſked vs whether we would go vp to a mountaine, and
ſo to Saphetta neere vnto mount Carmel, which is a place of leaning
for Iewes; or keepe the lower way, and goe by the ſea of
Galile, which is the pleaſanter way: and thereof we made choiſe;
and tooke Saphetta in our way afterwards.
               About ſeuen miles from Iacobs bridge, our guide brought
vs to a well, adorned with marble pillers, and couered with
ſtone, which he ſaid to haue beene the pit whereinto Ioſeph was
put when his brethren ſold him to the Iſhmalites. But it ſeemed
to vs incredible: firſt, becauſe that was a dry pit, and this is ful
of ſweet water.
               Againe, Iacob dwelt at Hebron twelue miles beyond Ieruſalem,
and his ſonnes kept ſhéepe in Shechem. And that dry pit
whereinto they put Ioſeph was at Dothan (which we ſaw afterwards)
And this pit which they ſhewed vs with marble pillars,
was in Galile; not néere Dothan nor Shechem where Ioſephs
brethren kept their fathers ſheepe.
               But by others of better iudgement wee vnderſtood that
this alſo was called Ioſeps pit, or well, becauſe it was built by
one Ioſph, not Ioſeph the ſonne of Iacob, but ſome other. But
the ignorant people which trauell that way, are apt to beleeue
any things that is told them. About ten miles from this well,
we came to a Cane called by the Moores Minium, but by the
Turkes Miſſia, hard by the ſea of Galile, where we lodged all
night, hauing trauelled that day by computation 36. miles.
               The foure and twentieth of March we rode along by the Sea
of Galile, which, Iohn 6. 1. is called by two mames, viz. the Sea
of Galile or Tiberias. Galile,
                  Galile. becauſe it is in Galile: and Tiberias,
becauſe the City Tiberias was built by it, and Bethſaida
an other ancient City; of both which we ſaw ſome ruinous
Wals. And it is ſaid in that Chapter (Iohn 6. 1.) that Ieſus
went ouer the Sea of Galile: and in an other place that he went
beyond the Lake. And Luke 9. 10. It is ſaid, that hée went
into a ſlitary place, neere vnto a Citie called Bethſaida, which

place of Iohn I learned to vnderſtand better by ſeeing it, then euer
I could before by reading of it. For, ſéeing that Tiberias
and Bethſaida were both Cities on the ſame ſide of the Sea, and
Chriſt went from Tiberias too, or neere vnto Bethſaida; I gather
thereby that our Sauiour Chriſt went not ouer the length
or breadth of that Sea; but ouer ſome Arme, boſome or reach
thereof, viz. ſo farre as Tiberias was diſtant from Bethſaida;
which is alſo confirmed in that it is ſaid elſwhere, A great multitude
followed him on foot thither; which they could not haue
done if he had gone quite ouer the Sea, to the other ſide among
the Gergelens, which is out of the holy Land. And therfore this
Sea of Galile, is alſo called the Lake of Geneſereth, becauſe the
Countrey of the Cergeſens is on the other ſide the Lake, from
whence the Swine ran headlong into the Sea and were choaked
therein: and as that place was out of the holy Land; ſo the
people which then inhabited it, were as far from holines, when
they requeſted our ſauiour Chriſt to depart out of their Coaſts.
And ſuch like holy people inhabite there ſtill, viz. wild Arabs,
and Turks, &c. We ſawe alſo (neere vnto this Sea) the place
where that Towne (mentioned Iohn 2. 1. called Cana of Galile
ſtood, where our Sauiour Chriſt at a mariage turned water
into wine; in place whereof there ſtandeth now a poore village
inhabited by Turks.
               
               This ſea of Galile is (by computation) in length 8. leagues,
and in breadth 5. leagues, and euery league is thrée miles; and
then it encloſeth it ſelfe into a narrowe compaſſe, carrying but
the breadth of an ordinarie riuer vntill it come to Sodome,
where it endeth, which is called mare mortuum, that is, The
dead Sea.
               After we had rode about ſeuen miles by the ſea of Galile, we
left it on our left hand, and aſcended vp a mountaine on the
right hand.
               This mountaine was not very ſtéepie, but excéeding pleaſant
and fertile, for (being the ſpringtime) it was ſo beſet with
ſuch varietie of flowers among the greene graſſe, that they ſéemed
to flire in our faces, and to laugh and ſing (as the Pſalmiſt
ſpeaketh) as we went. Pſal. 65. 13.
               
                  
This is ſaid to bee that mountaine mentioned John 6. 9.
where our Sauiour Chriſt wrought a miracle in feeding 5000.
men with fiue Barley loaues, and two fiſhes.
               When we came to the top of the mountaine, we ſaw Saphetta
on the right hand, a Vniuerſitie of the Iewes where they
ſpeake Hebrew, and haue their Synagogues there. The Citie
Saphet
                        •
                     a is ſituated on a very high hill with thrée tops, and ſo
the Citie h
                     •
                  th three parts; one part is inhabited by Iewes, the
other two by Tu
                     •
                  kes. We aſked ſome Iewes whom we knew
formerly to haue béene Merchants of Aleppo, what they meant
to leaue their trade and to liue there: They anſwered, they
were now olde and came thither to die, that they might bée
néerer to heauen: wee told them, that howſoeuer they might
ſeeme there to bee néerer to heauen whiles they lined, becauſe
they dwelt on an high mountaine, yet that they ſhould not bee
néerer vnto heauen when they died, vnleſſe they repented and
beléeued in Chriſt, &c. The Iewes haue here more libertie then
in any part of the holy land. They dare not come to Ieruſalem
for feare leſt the Chriſtians there dwelling, ſtone them.
               Whiles wee were at Saphetta, many Turkes departed from
thence towards Mecha in Arabia. And the ſame morning they
went, we ſaw many women playing with Tymbrels as they
went along the ſtréete, and made a yelling or ſcriking noiſe as
though they cryed. We aſked what they meant in ſo doing?
It was anſwered vs, that they mourned for the departure of
their huſbands, who were gone that morning on 
                     •
                  ilgrimage
to Mecha, and they feared that they ſhould neuer ſée them again,
becauſe it was a long way and dangerous, and many died there
euery yéere. It ſéemed ſtrange to vs, that they ſhould mourne
with muſicke about the ſtréetes, for muſicke is vſed in other
places at times of mirth, and not at times of mourning. But
they did it but Paruae conſuetudmis cauſa. For a litle cuſtomes
ſake. And I doubt not but many of them were glad for their
departure, and would be glader if they would neuer come againe,
they vſe them ſo kindly.
               And vnder pretence of deuotion, many trauell to Mecha to
buy their Indian and Perſian commodities: for many of them

ſee their palpaple ignorance, and in ſecret ſpeake againſt it to
thoſe with whom they may be bold, and ſay, their religion is
naught, yet (being merchants) to auoid pouertie they trauell
thither amongſt the reſt. So true is that common and commendable
ſaying:
               
                  Impiger, ex tremos, currit mercator ad Indos:
                  Per mare, pauperiem fugiens, per ſaxa, per ignes.
               
               that is,
               
                  The Merchant man though ſlowe of ſoote,
                  To th'Indian ſhoare doeth runne:
                  By ſea, by land, by fire, by ſword,
                  That pouertie he may ſhunne.
               
               Yea there was one of their chiefe learned men in Conſtantinople,
Anno Dom. 1604. ſpake againſt their Alcoran, which is
the booke of all their religion, but he loſt his head for his labor,
which he willingly and chéerefully yeelded vnto them.
               All the way which we trauelled this day, was very pleaſant;
and all the ground both hils and dales very fruitfull, according
as it is deſcribed by Moſes. Deut. 8. 7. 8. and Deut. 11. 10 and, 11.
And we came that day, about two of the clock in the afternoone
to a village called in the Arabick tongue J-nel Tyger,
                  I-nel Tyger. that is (by
interpretation) The Marehants eye, wherein there are two very
faire Caſtles for trauellers to lodge in from danger of wilde
Arabs, which abound in thoſe parts: we tooke vp our lodging in
the néereſt caſtle which is the faireſt.
               After wee had refreſhed our ſelues,Tabor. and ſlept a while: beeing
hard by mount Tabor, we deſired to aſcend to the top of it, and ſo
much the rather becauſe I had read that the Papiſts to prooue
the primacie, or ſupremacie of Peter aboue the reſt of the Apoſtles,
alledge this for one argument, after that Chriſt was
tranſfigured vpon mount Tabor (as we read Matth. 17. 1. 2. &c.)
and there appeared to them, Moſes, and Elias, talking with him,
Peter ſaid to Ieſus, Maſter, It is good for vs to bee heere, Let vs
make heere three Tabernacles, one for thee, and one for Moſes, and
one for Elias. Which (ſay they,) at his requeſt was done, and
remaine there to this day: which to make triall of, wée tooke Ally
(one of our Ieneſaries,) and rode towards the mountaine. But

vnderſtanding that it was very dangerous by reaſon of wilde
Arabs which lodged in caues and rockes and buſhes about the
mountaine,Mount Tabor we hired ſome of the principall Arabs to goe with vs
and guard vs from the reſt. And as we went, we beheld the
proſpect of the mountaine to be very pleaſant, ſomewhat ſtéepy,
but not very high (in reſpect of ſome other mountaines thereabout)
nor very large, but a comely round mountaine, beſet
with trees and thicke buſhes, which at that time of the yéere
flouriſhed greene: we rode ſo farre as we could for ſteepineſſe
and then left ſome of our ſeruants at the foot of the mountaine
to keepe our horſes, and tooke vpon vs to clamber vp on foot,
which we ſhould neuer haue been able to haue done, had there
not beene very high graſſe, ſprigs, and buſhes to hold by.
               One of our Arabs went vp before vs, as faſt as if it had been
euen ground, but we came very ſlowly after, which he perceiuing,
would looke backe, and often vſe theſe words to chéere vs,
Gel, Gel, Gel, that is, come, come, come: And ſometimes theſe,
Iſh halac Seeach; How do you maſters. We were almoſt al out
of breath, and one of our company cried, For the loue of God
let vs returne, for I can goe no further, Oh I ſhall die, I ſhall
die. Whereupon one of vs being néerer the top than he himſelfe
ſuppoſed, (to chéere the reſt) ſaid, Come chéerefully; I am on
the top; which ſomewhat hartued the reſt: otherwiſe they had
all gone downe againe.
               Being on the top, we reſted a while to take breath; and then
we walked vp and downe the top of the Mount, and ſaw onely
one houſe, or rather low cottage, vninhabited, hauing onely
two darke roomes in it, méet for foxes or iackals to lodge in, and
ſaw no ſigne of any other tauerne or tabernacle. Only we vnderſtood
that (many yéeres ſince) there was a Monaſterie there
inhabited by Popiſh Friers, but being moleſted by the Arabs,
tooke away the holineſſe with them, and left the mountaine behind
them; yet ſtill they call this mount Tabor in Italian
Monte Santo, that is, the holy mountaine: as if there were ſome
inherent holineſſe in the mountaine.
               And two daies after we had béene there, came a Ieſuite and
two Friers with a yong Gentleman of Parris in France, who

was a Proteſtant; and ſome other company with them,Conference betwixt a Ieſuite and a Proteſtant. who
had a deſire to aſcend to the top of this holy mountaine, & went
all together vntill they were wearie which was at the foote of
the mountaine, and in the heat of the day: wherefore the
French Gentleman ſaid, he would ſtay for them there vntill
they returned, but was himſelfe already weary and would goe
no higher; the Ieſuite and Friers reproued him, and called him
foole, and told him he did not know what hee might merit by
going to the top of that holy mountaine.Merit-mongers. Merit, (ſaid the Gentleman)
what may I merit? Thou maieſt merit (ſaid they) 50.
yéeres pardon. The Gentleman, to breake a ieſt with them,
aſked them whether he might merit fiftie yeeres pardon for the
time paſt, or for the time to come: If (ſaid he) for the time paſt,
I am not ſo old (for he was but twenty two yeeres of age) if
for the time to come, hée did not thinke hée ſhould liue ſo long.
They anſwered him, if he did not liue ſo long, he might giue the
yéeres which remained to his friends. Yet could they not perſwade
him to goe vp any higher.
               The ſame Ieſuite called this French Gentleman, Heretike,
becauſe he did not profeſſe himſelfe a Romaniſt: He denied his
argument; and although he was not able to diſpute with him
Scholar-like, yet he anſwered him Chriſtian-like, and told him
that he did abhorre the name of Rome, and the nature more:
The Ieſuite ſaid, Thou ſcarce knoweſt the name, much leſſe
the nature of Rome. The Gentleman replied, I haue read of
both. And that Rome had a name according to her nature, hée
ſhewed by theſe verſes following:
               
                  Roma quid eſt? Quod te docuit praepoſterus ordo.
                  Quid docuit? Iung as verſa elementa, ſcies.
                  Roma amor eſt: Amor eſt? Qualis? Praeposterus. Vnde hoc?
                  Roma mares. Noli dicore plara: Scio.
               
               The ſame in Engliſh:
               
                  Rome what is? A Loue. A loue? What loue?
                  Contrary vnto kinde.
                  How ſo? Rome loueth men. No more.
                  Ceaſe ſpeech. I know thy minde.
               
               
                  
He further told him, that he had béene at Rome, and both
ſéene and heard there the manner of life which he and his fellow
Ieſuites lead, and that he was not ignorant how odious they
were euen vnto other Papiſts, amongſt whom one of them
gaue him a Hymne made (by a Papiſt at Rome) againſt Ieſuites,
a copy whereof he gaue vnto me, which I haue thought
good héere to ſet downe, that the world may ſee that vnity both
in Religion and Conuerſation amongſt them, whereof they
make ſuch boaſt, when as one ſect of Papiſts maketh Rythmes
and Hymnes to the diſgrace of another, in ſuch ridiculous maner
as followeth:
               
                  
                     Hymnus hic eſt modus vitae,
Quo vtuntur Ieſuitae.
                     
                        O Pulentes ciuitates,
                        Vbi ſunt commoditates,
                        Semper quaerunt iſti Patres.
                     
                     
                        Bonum panem, melius vinum,
                        Non recipiunt peregrinum,
                        Neque ſurgunt ad matutinum.
                     
                     
                        Carne pingui vitulina,
                        Per quam exul eſt vaccina,
                        Plena eſt horum coquina.
                     
                     
                        Indij Galli atque pauones,
                        Quorum cibus ſuntAn Italian word, ſignifying graine, wherewith they feede their Poultry ſat. macherones,
                        Horum patrum ſuntAn Italian word, ſignifying bits, or morſels. buccones.
                     
                     
                        Crocum, piper, cum amomo,
                        Et quae nullus ſanctus homo
                        Habuit, habent iſti in domo.
                     
                     
                        Quando vocant carcerati,
                        Bonis omnibus priuati,
                        Dicunt, Sumus occupati.
                     
                     
                        
                        Sed ſivocant potentes,
                        Diuitijs affluentes,
                        Rogant Deum & omnes gentes.
                     
                     
                        Diuitumque patrimonia,
                        Magnatumque matrimonia,
                        Ficta tractant ſanctimonia.
                     
                     
                        Si quis diues infirmatur,
                        Pro eius morte Deus rogatur,
                        Quando hareditas ſperatur.
                     
                     
                        O lupinam feritatem,
                        Praedicando charitatem,
                        Noſtram rapiunt haereditatem.
                     
                     
                        Habent opes Venetorum,
                        Grauitatem Hiſpanorum,
                        Et potenttam Romanorum.
                     
                     
                        Si quis quaerat regia officia,
                        Eccleſiaſtica beneficia,
                        Horum dantur amicitia.
                     
                     
                        Dominantur temporale,
                        Dominantur ſpirituale,
                        Dominantur omne: & vale.
                     
                  
               
               The ſame in Engliſh:
               
                  
                     This Hymne the vſuall forme doth giue,
In which the Ieſuites doe liue.
                     
                        TO wealthieſt Cities, where the rather
                        They moſt commodities may gather,
                        Flies euery Ieſuitiſh Father.
                     
                     
                        
                        Beſt wine they drinke, and eat good bread,
                        With which no ſtranger ſees them fed,
                        Nor notes how long they lie in bed.
                     
                     
                        With groſſe beefe they will neuer deale,
                        But (for it) fat and tender veale;
                        To their full kitchins ſtill they ſteale.
                     
                     
                        Jndian Cocks and Turkeies great,
                        Fed alwaies with the pureſt wheat,
                        Are thoſe bits that theſe Fathers eat.
                     
                     
                        Saffron, pepper, nouriſh them,
                        And roſes of Ieruſalem,
                        Of which no holy man doth dreame.
                     
                     
                        When priſoners for their charity call,
                        They ſay, We are depriu'd of all,
                        And muſt to our deuotion fall.
                     
                     
                        But when their mighty friends, and rich,
                        Require their helps, they God beſeech
                        For them, and thorow all Nations preach.
                     
                     
                        Th'inheritances of rich heires,
                        And Princes nuptiall affaires,
                        Diſpoſeth this fain'd zeale of theirs.
                     
                     
                        When rich lie ſicke, and theſe men gape,
                        To haue their riches feed their rape,
                        They pray God they may neuer ſcape.
                     
                     
                        O wilde and woluiſh Cheuiſance,
                        That when they charity aduance,
                        They rauiſh our inheritance.
                     
                     
                        
                        Venetian wealth they ſtill apply,
                        Affect the Spaniſh grauitie,
                        And build on Romes authoritie.
                     
                     
                        If princely offices be ſought,
                        By Ieſuites they muſt be wrought,
                        And with rich ſpirituall liuings bought.
                     
                     
                        In temporall ſtate they beare the bell,
                        In ſpirituall ſtate as much excell,
                        In all ſtates they command. Farewell.
                     
                  
               
               We our ſelues, when we had ſéene enough this Mount, returned
againe to the Caſtle with good ſtomacks to our ſupper,
and wearied bodies, deſiring reſt. Tabor is diſtant from Galile
not much aboue twenty miles.
               March 25. being the Feaſt of the Annunciation of the Virgin
Mary, and (according to the computation of our Church of
England) the firſt day of the yéere 1601. we trauelled ouer very
pleaſant fields all the way, the fields of Baſan, not farre from
the Mount Baſan,
                  Mount Baſan. where there was excéeding good paſture, and
fat cattell: only we wanted good water to drinke, and our wine
was ſpent, and the day excéeding hot.
               We ſaw in our way ſome remnants of that old Tower or
Fortreſſe mentioned 2. King. 5. 24. where Gehazi the ſeruant
of Eliſha ouertooke Naaman, and tooke of him two tallents of
ſiluer, and two change of garments. We ſaw alſo many other
places worthy obſeruation, but (for want of a good guide) we
knew not the names thereof, for the Turkes inhabiting thoſe
Countries, haue giuen new names to moſt places. This was
the pleaſanteſt daies iourney we had in our whole trauell. I
neuer ſaw more fertile ground and pleaſant fields, and ſo much
together, all the whole day from Mount Tabor to a village called
vulgarly Ienine, but of old En-gannim,
                  En-gannim. whereof we read
Ioſh. 15. 34. Néere vnto this village is the place where Ioel beheaded
Siſera, mentioned Iudg. 4. 21.
               
                  
                  En-gannim is diſtant from Mount Tabor twenty two miles.
It is a very pleaſant place,En gannim. hauing fine gardens, and orchards,
and waters about it. We ſtaied héere all the day (March 26,)
becauſe (the Turkes Romadan, which is their Lent, being ended)
on this day began their Feaſt called Byram; and our Jeneſarie
was loth to trauell on that day, being their Feaſt day, and
ſo much the rather, becauſe his name alſo was Byram.
               
               March 27. Riding from En-gannim, we were endangered
twice: Firſt, by certaine théeues dwelling néere vnto En-gannim,
who made vs pay Caphar or pole money twice, once at
En-gannim. And when we departed from thence, they purſued
vs with bowes and arrowes, and other weapons: we withſtood
them long in parley; at length euery man prepared his inſtruments
of death ready for battle. Our Ieneſaries kinſman
Fa
                        •
                     olla had his muſket ready, and being about to giue fire, was
ſtaied by our Ieneſarie, who ſaw not only theſe Arabs preſent
very deſperat, with their bowes and arrowes ready drawen,
but meſſengers alſo ſent to raiſe vp all the whole rabblement
thereabout vpon vs: he told vs we were beſt giue them content
or elſe we were all but dead men: wherefore to auoid further
danger, we gaue them their owne deſire, vpon condition, they
would purſue vs no further, nor ſuffer any of their company to
moleſt vs: the chiefeſt of them anſwered, Stopherlo, Stopherlo,
that is, God forbid, God forbid we ſhould do you any harme,
if you pay vs what wee demaund; which we did with all ſpéed,
and rode away from them being glad we were rid of them.
               About ten miles from them we rode through a wood, (a very
fit place to harbour theeues, who had killed certaine men trauelling
that way the day before, and tooke away both a man and
horſe from the Carauan which followed after; and a woman alſo
riding on an aſſe with their cariage) and (as our guide tolde
vs) he neuer trauelled that way but he ſawe ſome men killed:
and therefore bade vs all charge our pieces and ſhoot off when
he bade vs, though we ſaw no bodie, leſt the wild Arabs ſhould
ſet vpon vs on the ſuddain, lying in ambuſh, which wee alſo
did in a place moſt dangerous, to daunte the enemies before we
ſaw each other. But before we came vnto the moſt dangerous

place, there ouertooke vs many Turkes well armed, who dwelt
in Jeruſalem, and were glad of our company thither. And ſhortly
after we had diſcharged euery man his peece, we ſaw a great
company of Arabs on an high mountaine neere vnto our way,
yet out of the reach of our ſhot, who perceiuing vs to be too
ſtrong for them, durſt not ſet vpon vs.
               And ſo (by the prouidence of God) we came that night to an
ancient and famous City,Samaria. (ſituated in a fruitfull valley betwixt
two mountaines) called Sychar, a City in Samaria, mentioned
Iohn 4. Néere whereunto we ſaw Iacobs Well, where our Sauiour
Chriſt aſked water of the woman of Samaria.
                  Sychar. We came
thither in good time, for we were exceeding thirſty,Iacobs Well. and drunke
thereof liberally and freely. The water thereof goeth downe very
pleaſantly, like vnto milke.
               From Iacobs Well we went into the City, and lodged in a
very ancient & ſtately Cane, but very badly kept. It had béene
better for vs to haue ſlept by Iacobs Well, as others did; for here
we ſlept on the hard ſtones néere vnto a Chapel in the middle of
the Cane, vnder two or thrée great figge trees and mulberry
trées, where we were ſcarce ſafe from theeues; for we had ſome
things ſtollen from vs in the night, whiles we ſlept vnder the
trees on faire broad ſtones, whereunto we aſcended by a faire
ſtone paire of ſtaires, ſix or ſeuen ſteps from the ground. Sychar
is diſtant from En-gannim 27. miles.
               March 28. We ſtaied at this City in Samaria, called of old
Sychar,
                  Napolis. but at this day commonly, Napolis; for the Holy Land
hauing beene often conquered, hath had new names impoſed
vnto all the chiefe Cities, and moſt other townes and villages
alſo: partly by God
                        •
                     rey of Bullome, who conquered that contrey
in the yeere 1098. But chiefly by the Turkes, who conquering
the Holy Land and al the Countrie about it, haue changed
the names of places, to roote out all memoriall of reuenge
in the hearts of poſteritie (as they ſuppoſed.) Yet the chiefeſt
Cities are ſtill knowen by their ancient names, though other
names haue béene giuen thereunto. As for example, Dam
                        •
                     ſ
                        ••
                     s
which was ſo called of old, is ſtill knowen by that name, though
the Tucks call it Sha
                        •
                     . And Ieru
                        •
                     alem which they call Cu
                        •
                     ,
                  
or rather Kuds, comming (as I ſuppoſe) of the Hebrew word

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , Kadaſch▪
                   which ſignifieth to ſanctifie or to be holy: or of
Kadoſch, which ſignifieth holy. And (as they themſelues ſay)
the word Cuts or Kuds (whereby they call it) ſignifieth a holy
City in their language.
               The cauſe of our ſtaying this day at Sychar, was this, it was
told vs that 2. Emeers or great Lords in our way to Ieruſalem
were vp in armes one againſt an other, and therefore it ſéemed
good to our Ieneſary that wee ſhould ſtay for the Carauan, that
we might be the ſtronger and paſſe ſafer. But when the Carauan
came, they pitched their tents by Iacobs well, and purpoſed to
ſtay there two or three daies at the leaſt. Wee were loath to
ſtay ſo long being now but thirtie miles from Ieruſalem, and
therefore reſolued to procéed in our iourney without any longer
expectation for companie which was vncertaine.
               
                  March. 29. We departed from Samaria to Ieruſalem, and met
many ſouldiers in ſeuerall companies by the way, who knowing
our Ieneſary and other Turks in our company, let vs paſſe
by them quietly, and gaue vs the ſalam alick, that is peace be vnto
you.
               
               The firſt part of this daies iourney was ſomewhat pleaſant;
but, the néerer we came to Jeruſalem, the more barren and tedious
our way was. About ten of the clock wee came to a great
forreſt or wildernes full of trées and mountaines. When wée
were on the top of this mountaine, wée ſaw the maine ſea on
our right hand, and ſmall Ships ſayling towards Ioppa.
               
               About thrée or foure of the clocke, we came to a ruinous village
called Beere,
                  Beere, but of old (as it is reported) Beerſheba, which
in former times was a great Citie: And it is ſaid to be the place
where Joſeph and Mary comming from Jeruſalem (the feaſt being
ended) miſſed the child Ieſus, and ſought him ſorrowing; and
returning to Jeruſalem, found him in the Temple amidſt the
Doctors, hearing them and poſing them. Our purpoſe was to
lodge here all night, being all of vs weary and hungry, and all
our prouiſion ſpent. But finding nothing here to bee had for
money either for man or horſe; and vnderſtanding that Ieruſalem
was but ten miles off, we went on in our way ſomewhat

faintly fiue or ſixe miles,Ieruſalem. and then beholding the proſpect of the
Citie, wee were ſomewhat cheered and reuiued, and ſolaced our
ſelues with ſinging of Pſalmes, vntill we came neere vnto the
Citie.
               Many Gréekes dwelling in Ieruſalem, ſeeing vs a farre off,
came to meet vs, ſuppoſing their Patriarch had been in our
companie, who came two or thrée daies after vs.
               Wee diſmounted from our horſes at the weſt gate of the CitieIoppa gate.
called Ioppa gate, or the Caſtle gate; which is a very ſtrong
gate of iron, with thirteen pieces of braſſe ordinance planted on
the wall about the gate. Wee ſtaied in the porch of this gate,
and might not be admitted into the Citie, vntill we were ſearched
by an officer (as the maner is.) In the meane time there
came to vs two Italian Friers, viz. Padre Angelo, and Padre
Aurel
                        •
                     o and kiſſed our hands, and bade vs welcome, and told vs
that two other Engliſhmen were at their houſe, viz. maſter
Timberley, and maſter Borell.
               
               When we were ſearched without the gate by a Turkiſh officer,
and deliuered vp our weapons to the porter to kéepe for vs
in the gate-houſe vntill our returne (becauſe no Chriſtian may
enter into Ieruſalem with weapons) theſe two Padres led vs
to their Monaſterie; at the gate whereof wee were ſearched againe
by another Turkiſh officer before wee might enter into
the houſe. For the office of the former ſearcher at the gate of
the Citie was onely to receiue the weapons of all Chriſtians,
and deliuer them ſafe to them againe at their departure. But
this ſearcher went further and ſearched all our cariage which he
cauſed to be opened, to ſee whether we had any gun-powder or
any other engins there. For they are very ſuſpicious of all
Chriſtians, fearing, leſt for deuotion to the place, they ſhould
worke treaſon; therefore they ſuffer not Chriſtians to enter into
the City weaponed, leſt they make inſurrection againſt them
when they are many together, and conquer the Citie, as heretofore
they haue done,
               To this end alſo is the Citie walled about with ſtrong wals,
and fortified with foure ſtrong gates and a Caſtle, (built by
Sultan Soliman) and euery gate well planted with ordinance for

feare of Chriſtians. And partly for hope haue they enuironed
this City with ſuch ſtrong wals, that Chriſtians for deuotion to
the place, might come and build within the wals and be ſubiect to
the Turke. For though their walles bee large and ſtrong, yet
there is great roome within the wals to build more houſes then
are there, for there are fields of Corne within the walles of the
Citie; and the houſes ſtand very thin, ſcattered, and diſperſed,
héere one and there two or three together; there is not one
faire ſtréet in all Ieruſalem as it now is.
               After they had thus narrowly ſearched al our cariage, euen to
our Caſes of Bottles, we were admitted into the Monaſtery; at
the entrance whereinto, met vs maſter Timberley and maſter
Boreel, and then Signior Franciſcus Mannerba the Padre Guardian
of the monaſtery, and all the reſt in order, and bade vs welcome,
and led vs into a faire parler and ſet good chéere before vs,
and ſerued vs themſelues.
               After ſupper wee deliuered them our letters which wee had
brought from the Venice Conſull of Aleppo and other Italian
Merchants there in our behalfe. Which when they had read,
the Guardian ſaid, our cuſtome is, when ſtangers come to vs,
to call them the firſt night to Maſſe, and to Confeſſion, and to
giue euery man a candle to hold in his hand at Maſſe time; and
at night to waſh their feete and to bring them to bed, and to manie
other ceremonies during the whole time of their continuance
there.
               But as for vs, they vnderſtood by letters what we were; and
told vs that wee were ſo highly commended by their Patrones
and Benefactors, the Venice Conſul, and Merchants of Aleppo,
that if they ſhould ſhew vs halfe the fauour which was required
at their hands, they ſhould themſelues lie without doores, and
ſuffer vs to rule and dominier at our pleaſures. And that therfore
they would not vrge vs to any thing againſt our conſciences,
but giue frée libertie both of perſons and conſciences as if
we were in England, or in our own houſes elſewhere: & ſo much
the rather becauſe they vnderſtood our Merchants were rich, and
hoped to gaine by vs. In regard wherof, although it were Lent,
wherein they eate no fleſh, yet offered vs Hens, Egs, Milke:

any thing that was there to bee had for money, they requeſted
vs to command it.
               And during the time of our continuance there, he commaunded
one Padre Aurelio to attend vpon vs, and ſée that we wanted
nothing; and another of his brethren, one Padre Angelo, to
be our guide abroad and to ſhew vs al ancient Monuments and
places worth ſéeing either in the Citie or out of the Citie.
               Theſe kind ſpeeches being vſed, they brought vs to our chambers
where we ſhould lodge all night, & prouided for uery man
ſeuerally a good neate bed with faire ſhéetes and all things very
holeſome and handſome, where we ſlept ſwéetly, and refreſhed
our wearied bodies all that night very comfortably.
               But although they dealt thus kindly with vs (at the inſtance
of their benefactors) in giuing vs liberty of conſcience, yet they
deale not ſo with others. For ſome I doe know who haue béen
there, and made no conſcience to doe as they haue done, according
to thoſe verſes:
               
                  Cùm fueris Romae, Romano vi
                        •
                     ito more:
                  Cùm fueris alibi, viuito more loci.
               
               That is,
               
                  When they are at Rome, they doe what there is done:
                  When they are elſwhere, they doe as they doe there.
               
               But they ſhould rather remember that which Baptiſta Mantuanus
(an Italian) writeth of Rome:
               
               
                  Viuere qui ſanctè cupitis, diſcedite: Romae
                  Omnia quum liceant, non licet eſſe pium.
               
               The ſame in Engliſh:
               
                  Wouldſt thou liue well? depart from Rome:
                  All things there lawfull be,
                  Except to be a godly man,
                  Which thing is rare to ſee.
               
               The ſame Baptiſta Mantuanus writeth of them thus:
               
                  Venalia nobis
                  Templa, Sacerdotes, Altaria, Sacra, Coronae,
                  Ignes, Thura, Praeces, Coelum eſt venale, Deuſque
               
               The ſame in Engliſh;
               
                  Rome felleth Temples, Prieſts, and Altars,
                  
                     
Fires, Frankincenſe, and Praiers.
                  Yea Heauen, and God himſelfe, for gold,
                  At Rome is to be bought and ſold.
               
               Wherefore,An admonition to ſuch a
                        •
                      trauell to Ieruſalem. I admoniſh thoſe who haue a deſire to trauell
to Jeruſalem héereafter, to take héed to themſelues, that they
make not ſhipwracke of conſcience; for if they come not well
commended, or well monied, or both, there is no being for them,
except they partake with them in their idolatrous ſeruices.
               True it is, that the Turkes giue liberty of conſcience vnto
all that come thither; but they giue not entertainment vnto any
Chriſtians in their houſes. And the Gréeke Patriarkes are
poore, and not able to protect ſuch as come vnto them for refuge.
Theſe Padres, though they be Papiſts, yet haue they rich
benefactors, and want nothing, and (for the moſt part) very
kinde and curteous to ſtrangers in all things, liberty of conſcience
only excepted, wherein they ſéeke to make other like vnto
themſelues, and to ſeduce them from their faith, and to winne
them to the Church of Rome: and offer vnto them who haue
money in their purſes, to make them Knights of the Sepulcher;
but no good Engliſh Subiect will accept of that order of Knighthood;
for at the receiuing thereof, they ſweare to be true to the
Pope, and to the King of Spaine, and to other things, which no
man can doe with a good conſcience.
               And this kindneſſe and liberty of conſcience, which we found
amongſt them, we imputed not ſo much to the men, as to our
owne money; for it coſt vs charo, viz. 100. duccats for our entertainment:
for we knew them to be of the Court of Rome,
and were not ignorant that,
               
                  Curia Romana non captat ouem ſine lana.
               
               that is,
               
                  The Court of Rome no ſheepe doth receiue,
                  Vnleſſe to them her fleece ſhe leaue.
               
               And as one Iohn a Monke wrote of them,
               
                  Curia vult mar
                        •
                     as, burſas exhaurit & arcas;
                  Si burſae parcas, fuge Papas & Patriarchas.
                  Si dederis marcas, & eis impleueris arcas,
                  Culpa ſolueris, quaque ligatus eris,
                  
                     
Intus quis? Tu quis? Ego ſum. Quid quaeris? Vt intrem.
                  Fers aliquid? non. Sta foris. Fero quo
                        •
                      ſatis, Intra.
               
               The ſame in Engliſh:
               
                  The Court of Rome doth aime at markes;
                  It ſucks the purſe, and ſoakes the arkes.
                  If that you minde to ſpare your arkes,
                  Come not at Popes nor Patriarkes.
                  But if you frankly giue them markes,
                  And with good gold ſtuffe vp their Arkes,
                  I warrant then you ſhall be free
                  From any kind of penaltie.
                  Who's within? Whoſe there? I per ſe I.
                  Why, what would ye? Come in.
                  Bring you ought? No. Stand ſtill.
                  But I doe. Goe ye then in.
               
               The ſame Monke writeth, that Rome being founded by
théeues, retaineth ſtill ſomewhat of her old qualities. For (ſaith
he) ſhe is called Roma, quod rodat manum, of greaſing the hand:
               
                  Roma manus rodit; Quod rodere non valet, odit.
                  Dantes exaudit, non dantibus oſtia claudit.
                  Curia curarum genetrix, nutrixque malorum.
                  Ignotos notis, inhoneſtis in aequat honeſtos.
               
               The ſame in Engliſh:
               
                  Rome is a raker, and ſpightfull hater of the empty hand:
                  She heareth the giuer, but others neuer, but letteth them ſtand.
                  Her Court a cage of cares; of miſchiefes eke the mother;
                  She vſeth knaues like honeſt men, and ſtrangers like a brother.
               
               Wel, though we were fléeced amongſt them, yet had we libertie
of conſcience; and ſafety of perſons, and had no way any wrong
offered vs by them, either in word or déed; but by two or thrée
Ieſuiticall Iebuſites (who were ſtrangers there as well as wée)
ſome vnkindneſſe was offered vs behinde our backs (for they
durſt not any way deale with vs to our faces) in railing vpon
vs and our Religion, as it was told vs at our departure by one
who heard them: Eſpecially by a Ieſuite named (but vndeſeruedly)
Benedictus, and yet he could neither benedicere nor benefacere,
neither ſay well nor doe well, by any that were not of

their ſect and ſort: And therefore deſerued not to be called Benedictus,
(but per Antiphrafin.) but rather Maledictus, à maledicendo,
as one of our company wrote vnto him in this manner,
in méeter, although barbarouſly: truly, although not poetically:
               
                  Audi, tace, lege, benedic▪ benefac, Benedicte:
                  Aut haec peruerte, maledic, malefac, Maledicte.
               
               The ſame in Engliſh:
               
                  O Benedict, heare, hold thy peace,
                  Doe well, ſay well (O Scorner)
                  Elſe let thy name be Meledict,
                  Peruerting all the former.
               
               After we had reſted one night in Ieruſalem, the firſt day wée
walked about the City our ſelues without our guide, onely to
view the City, not inquiring of any place what it was, becauſe
on the morrow after, and euery day during our continuance,
(which was about fourtéene daies) our guide either walked on
foot,Reſolution of a doubt concerning Peters warming himſelfe in the high Prieſts hall. or rode with vs, to ſée all things worthy obſeruation. Only
one thing I obſerued and duly conſidered the firſt day I came,
which was this; that where as we read in the Goſpell, that
when our Sauiour Chriſt was betraied, and brought into the
High Prieſts Hall, Peter following him, ſtood by the fire, and
warmed himſelfe; the reaſon is there yéelded, becauſe it was
cold. And the memoriall néereof we obſerue in March or Aprill.
We being there at the ſame ſeaſon of the yéere, found it excéeding
hot, & hotter than it is vſually at midſommer in England:
It ſeemed ſtrange vnto me, how it ſhould then be ſo cold, that
Peter ſhould créepe to the fire, and now (at the ſame ſeaſon) ſo
hot that we could not endure the heat of the Sunne. And on
the ſudden I knew not whether the ſeaſon were altered, or the
paſſion of Chriſt might be referred to ſome colder ſeaſon of the
yéere. But after I had béene there a few daies, the very place
reſolued that doubt: For there fall great dewes, and before the
Sunne haue dried it vp, it is cold, and in the night ſeaſon (about
that time of the yéere) ſomewhat cold, as I felt by experience
when I ſlept in the fields all night. And Peter hauing
watched with Chriſt in the night, might well be cold in the
morning, before the heat of the Sunne had expelled cold.
               
                  
And yet another reaſon (in my iudgement) more effectuall
than the former,2. Reaſon. may be yéelded for this matter, taken à ſimili,
that as the ſame night that Chriſt was borne, there was great
light at midnight, in token of comfort; And at the time of his
death, great darkneſſe at noone day, in token of ſorrow (for
the Sunne put on his mourning garment, and was aſhamed
to looke vpon that cruelty which the ſonnes of men were
not afraid to commit) So at the time of his betraying there
might be extraordinary cold wether, in that an extraordinarie
perſon ſuffered, and an extraordinary worke was in hand. And
extraordinary things happened about the time of his paſſion, as
we read in the Goſpell, viz. How the graues did open: The dead
bodies of Saints (which ſlept) aroſe: The veile of the Temple
did rent in twaine from the top of the bottome: The earth did
tremble, and the ſtones did cleaue aſunder. Theſe things declared
that a notable perſon ſuffered. The like alteration might
be in the coldneſſe of the aire, and alteration of wether. And although
we read it not in expreſſe words, yet (ſince I haue
ſéene Ieruſalem) it ſéemeth to me, that it may be gathered from
that place of the Goſpell, where it is ſaid, Simon Peter warmed
himſelfe.
               For (if we truly calculate the time) the ſeaſon of the yéere
was hot ordinarily; and Simon Peter at that ſeaſon of the yéere
was ſo cold, that he was driuen to the fire, and therefore it
ſhould ſéeme to be vnſeaſonable wether, and extraordinarily
cold. Theſe conſiderations haue ſatiſfied my ſelfe (howeuer
they ſatiſfie others) vntill I heare or read ſome more ſufficient
reaſon.
               
                  Ieruſalem is in Paleſtina.
                  Antiquitie of Ieruſalem. It was the goodlieſt City that euer
was in the Eaſt parts of the world. It was firſt called Moria,
where Adam was created of the red earth of Moriah, a Mount
in Ieruſalem: which Moriah was one of the heads of Sion Hill,
where Iſaac was offered, as a figure of Chriſt, the holy of holieſt,
Gen. 22. 2. Which place was afterwards called Salem,
where Sem or Melchiſedech dwelt, where afterwards Iſaac
was offered, and vpon his offering it was called Ieruſalem,
Gen. 14. 18. where was the threſhing place of Araunah the

                  Iebuſite. and of old Ieruſalem was alſo called Iebus. 2. Sam. 24.
16. Where Salomon was commanded to build the Temple. 2.
Chron. 3. 1. And it was called Hieron Solomonis, that is to ſay,
Solomons Temple. And after by corruption Hieroſolyma.
               
            
            
               A particular declaration of ſuch thing as
we ſaw at Ieruſalem, diuided into
three parts.
               AFter we had reſted one day at Ieruſalem, or walked for our
pleaſure vp and downe: All the reſt of the daies of our continuance
there, wee had our guide with vs, who had dwelt
there fourteen yeeres, and ſhewed vs all ſuch places as are worthy
viewing or viſiting, both in Ieruſalem, and many miles
round about Ieruſalem: and we gaue him the hearing of all, but
did not beleeue all, for they ſeemed to me to be of three ſorts. viz.
               1 Either apparant Truths.
               2 Manifeſt Vntruths.
               3 Or things Doubtfull.
               Thoſe I account apparant Truths, which I could either confirme
by reading, orie
                     •
                  ſon. The ch
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  eſt whereof I wil briefly
ſet downe (for it were too tedicus to write 
                     •
                  ll) referring the reſt
to me next letters, or conference at our good méeting, which I
hope in good time God will grant vs.
            
            
               Apparant Truths.
               And firſt of al it ſéemeth to me a manifeſt truth, that Ieruſalem
(that now it) ſtandeth in the ſame place where the old
Ieruſalem did: not in euery reſpect for length b bredth, but with
ſome difference: for whereas we read in the Goſpell, that they
crucified our Sauiour Chriſt at Golgotha▪
                   without the Citie,
néere whereunto there was a new Sepulcher wherein neuer
man lay, and therein they laid his bleſſed body. Now both
Mount Caluari
                        •
                     
                   where Golgotha (that is, The place of dead
mens skuls was) and the Sepulcher (at leaſt wiſe the place
where the Sepulcher was) are all encloſed within the wals of

the City, which were built by Sultan Solyman, or Sultan Selim.
So that, although ſome difference there be; yet it is not ſo great
but that a man may boldly affirme, that part of this City is
now in the ſame place where the old Ieruſalem ſtood; and a part
thereof ſomewhat remooued.
               Yet ſome (who haue neuer béene there) haue preſumed to affirme,
that no man knoweth the place where old Jeruſalem
ſtood, and that no ſigne of the City is to be ſéene. But that the
place is ſtill the ſame, it is manifeſt by the ſituation thereof,
which is deſcribed in the Scripture to haue beene néere vnto
theſe mountaines, Moriah, Syon, Caluarie, Mount Oliuet, Bethan
                        •
                     a,
and Be
                        ••
                     p 
                        •
                     age; and not far
                     •
                  e from Bethl
                        •
                     hem: which
Mountaines and places are there ſtill to be ſéene, and called
ſtill by the ſame names.
               And whereas they ſay no ſigne of the City is to bée ſéene,
grounding their aſſertion upon a place of Scripture falſly applied,
and ſay that Chriſt promiſed to deſtroy Ieruſalem, and not
to leaue one 
                     〈◊〉
                   vpon another that ſhould not be ouerthrowen:
If they read the place Luke 21. 6. they ſhall finde that
ſpoken of the Temple which they apply vnto the City. And I
doe verily pe
                     •
                  ſwade nay ſelfe, that euen in Jeruſalem that now
is, there are ſtones vpon ſtones yet leaft, which we
                     •
                  e neuer ouerthrowen
ſince the firſt building of the City: for on the foundation
of the wals in many places (eſpecially towards Mount
Oliue
                        •
                     
                  ) there are yet ſtones to be ſeene, which both for quantity
and quality may be thought to haue beene there euer ſince the
beginning: for they are of huge length and bredth, and of a
blacke colour; like whereunto I neuer ſaw any in any other
place of all my trauels. And ouer theſe old ſtones, the vpper
part of the wals are a new building, differing both in colour and
quantity from the foundation ſtones.
               But of the Temple it is true which our ſauiour Chriſt ſpake
Luk. 21. 6. For when as the Prophets denounced Gods iudgements
vnto the Iewes, vnleſſe they repented, they flattered
themſelues in their ſinnes, and cried, Templum Domini, Templum
Domini, The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of thy Lord.
But through their prophanation, they made the Temple of the

Lord a Denne of Théeues. They cried, Lord, Lord, but they
did not his will on whom they cried. For ſwéet grapes, they
yeelded ſowre; for hearty and ſincere ſeruice, hypocriticall and
painted ſhewes of Religion. Their glory was in the externall
beauty of their materiall Temple: They wondred at the ſtones
and goodly buildings, at the gorgeous furniture and pretious
gifts, wherewith it was both outwardly and inwardly adorned
and enriched. Whereupon our Sauiour (to take away the
cauſe of this vaine hope, and fooliſh ioy) tooke occaſion thus to
Prophecie of that glorious Temple: Are theſe the things that
you looke vpon? The daies will come wherein there ſhall not be
left a ſtone vpon a ſtone, which ſhall not bee deſtroied. This
Prophecie was as euidently accompliſhed as it was made: for
thirty eight yéeres after they had crucified Chriſt, their promiſed
Meſſias, the Lord of glory; God raiſed vp the ſeruants of his
wr
                     •
                  th Veſpatian and Titus, Emperours of Rome, who beſeeged,
conquered, and razed their Ieruſalem, made hauocke of the
people as of dogges, murdered eleuen hundred thouſand, man,
woman, and childe, of that curſed Nation. Then was fulfilled
they cry of thoſe crucifiers, His blood be vpon our heads, and vpon
our children. It hath béene, and ſhall be for euer.
               Yea the violence of the Romans procéeded further, and pulled
downe the Temple, and laid it flat with the ground, inſomuch
that (according to the expreſſe words of our Sauiours Prophecie)
they left not one ſtone vpon another. The Iewes ſundry
times, hauing obtained leaue of Iulian the Apoſtata, attempted
to build it vp againe, but it would not be; for what their hand
builded in the day, the hand of the Lord (moſt miraculouſly)
hurled downe, and burnt with lightning by night, the foundation
thereof being ſhaken with earth-quakes. And at this preſent
day there is built in the place thereof a Muſkia or Turkiſh
Church, whereunto no Chriſtian may haue acceſſe. It is not
in the forme of Salomons Temple, but after the manner of their
Turkiſh buildings: Not for the ſeruice of the true God, but of
the falſe Prophet Mahomet.
               
               Vnto the truth alſo of ſundry other particulars (which they
                     
                        〈…〉
                     .
ſhewed vs) doe I ſubſcribe. And firſt of all, that at Beth-lehem,
                  
ſixe miles from Ieruſalem, is the very place where our Sauiour
Chriſt was borne: although now (honoris gratia) they haue
made it more beautifull, being built of marble, at the coſt of
Queene Helena the mother of Conſtantine, (whome ſome report
to haue béene an Engliſh woman, borne at Colecheſter) who
hath there alſo erected a ſtately Church, which to this day is very
well kept. They told vs alſo that S. Hierome dwelt there,
which cannot be denied.
               From Beth-lehem we rode ſeuen miles further,Ziph. to the deſart
of Ziph or wilderneſſe of Iudah, where Dauid hid himſelfe when
he was perſecuted be Saul. We went alſo to the hill Countrie of
Iudea, where the virgine Mary ſaluted Elizabeth the wife of
Zacharias,
                  Iudea. mother of Iohn Baptiſt being great with child, and
at her ſalutation the babe ſprung in her belly.
               From thence wee rode further to the wilderneſſe of Iudaea,
where Iohn Baptiſt preached; and in the middle of the deſcending
of a mountaine, they ſhewed vs a chamber hewen out
of a liuely rocke foure ſquare, with a dore and a window, and a
place for his bed and table, by which place there iſſueth a fine
ſpring of water out of the rocke, at which place we dranke of the
water.
               From thence returning to Ieruſalem, they ſhewed vs (in the
way to Gaza) the water where Philip Baptized the Eunuch,
Act. 8. 38.
               At our returne to Ieruſalem, they brought vs to mount Oliuet,
from whence our Sauiour Chriſt aſcended into Heauen,
being from Ieruſalem a Sabboth daies iourney, not two miles.
               From the mount of Oliues, we went to Bethania and Bethphage,
which are now ruinous villages. There are many figge
trées ſtill growing about theſe two villages, and many Oliue
trées about the mount of Oliues: wee cut off ſome of the branches
and carried ſome ſprigs with vs.
               Néerer Ieruſalem, they ſhewed vs mount Sion and the mount
Mo
                        •••
                     h, on which Abraham offered his ſonne Iſaac; we ſaw alſo
the valley of Iehoſaphat, and the valley of Iehinnom and the
brooke Cedron which is now in the Sommer time a drie channell.
Some part of the tower of Sylo and the poole Syloam, and

the potters field bought with the thirtie pieces of ſiluer which
Iudas had for betraying his maſter Chriſt; called Acheldama:
which to this day is a place to bury ſtrangers in.
               Aſcending vp Acheldama, we entred into a porch, and looked
downe into a vault, where wee ſaw many dead bodies; couered
onely with their winding ſheet knit at the head and foot, without
any coffin: and ſome of their ſhéets were ſo white, that they
ſéemed to vs to haue beene buried but few daies before we came.
               The valley betwixt Acheldama and mount Syon, is called
the vale of Iehinnom.
               
               The valley of Iehoſaphat is thrée miles in length, reaching
from the vale of Ieh
                        ••
                     nom to a place without the Citie; which
they call the Sepulcher of the Kings.
               Laſtly, they brought vs to mount Caluarie, to the place where
Chriſt was crucified, ouer which there is now erected a ſtately
building with many Iles, Chancels, or little Chapels, in it for
ſundry Nations, which were al there at that preſent time as we
were, and lodged there on Saterday at night before Palme
Sunday.
               We entred into this Temple to ſée the Sepulcher on Saturday
after dinner, and came not foorth vntill Monday about eleuen
of the clocke, for there are lodgings adioining vnto it, into
which we entred through the higheſt Chancell or Chappell.
               Before wee were admitted hereunto, euery man paied nine
Shekines to ſee the Sepulcher, which money the Syniacke:
or chiefe Ruler of the citie hath, who is a Turke. Into the Sepulcher
we went but one at a time with our guide; the entrance
thereinto is lowe and narrow. The place it ſelfe is but the
length of an ordinary Sepulcher, it is now as high as an Altar
or table, of faire marble ſtone, and there are lampes continually
burning night and day.
               That this Sepulcher ſtandeth in the ſame place as the Sepulcher
did wherein the bodie of our Sauiour Chriſt was laid, wée
made no doubt, becauſe it was agréeable to the circumſtances of
Scripture whereby the place is deſcribed.
               But I aſked our guide whether any part of the ſelfeſame ſepulcher
wherein the bleſſed bodie of our Sauiour was laid,

were to be ſéene there? Hee anſwered me, that ſome part of it
was at Rome, and ſome other part of it lay incloſed vnder that
Altar; but not to be ſeene.
               And further he told me, that at the firſt, after the reſurrection
of our Sauiour Chriſt, all the whole Sepulcher was to bee
ſeene for many yeeres ſpace, vntill ſtrangers (who came to viſite
it) began to breake off péeces and to cary them away: then
it was incloſed with barres, and to be ſéene through the barres,
but not to bée touched, as ſome Sepulchers in Saint Pauls
Church in London are.
               Yet they ſaw inconueniences héerein, in that many vſed to
caſt into it the firſt haire of their children, and ſome candles, and
other things as an offering thereunto; ſo that the place could
not be kéep neate. Wherefore Quéene Helena cauſed it to bée
incloſed in ſuch ſort as it now is, and couered it with Marble.
               But whether any part of the ſelfe ſame Sepulcher were vnderneath
the ſame or not; it gaue me content that I had ſeene
the ſelfe ſame place where the Sepulcher of our bleſſed Sauiour
was; as I in heart did then, and do ſtill perſwade my ſelfe it is.
               Many ſuperſtitious Papiſts exept on their knees to the Sepulcher,
mumbling vp their praiers vpon heads as they went,
according to the definition of Poperie, which is rightly defined
by Baptiſta Mantuanus, to be a Religion:

                     Quae filo inſertis numerat sua murmura baccis.
                  
                  
                     Poperie is a religion which vſeth to patter,
                     Aue Mar
                           •
                         vpon beads, and the Pater noſter.
                  
               
               Not far from thence is the Sepulcher of Godfroy of Bul
                        •
                     oyn
                        •
                     
                  
and King Baldewyn, who conquered that countrey in the yéere
1098. And both of them lie there buried, with the whole
proportion of their bodies in ſtone, with theſe Epitaphs about
them.
               An 
                     •
                  nſcription written about the Sepulcher
of Godfroy of Bulloyne at Ieruſalem.
               
               Hic iacet inclytus Godfridus de Bul'ion, qui totam hanc terram acquiſi
                     •
                  it
cultui diuino, cuius anima requieſcat in pace. Amen.
               
                  
That is,
               Heere lieth famous GOD
                     •
                  ROY of Bulloine, who got all this
Land to the worſhip of God, whoſe ſoule reſteth in peace.
Amen.
               And néere vnto it, about King Baldwines Tombe, theſe verſes
are written:
               
                  Rex Baldewinus Iudas alter Machabaeus,
                  Spes patriae, vigor Eccleſiae, virtus vtriusque,
                  Quem formidabant, cui dona, tributa ferebant,
                  Caeſar Aegypti Dan, ac homicida Damaſcus;
                  Proh dolor, in modico clauditur hoc Tumulo▪
                  
               
               The ſame in Engliſh:
               
                  Another Iudas Machabaeus
                  (King Baldwyn) heere doth reſt,
                  His Countries hope, the Churches ſtrength,
                  The vertue both poſſeſt:
                  Whom murtherous Damaſcus fear'd,
                  Egyptian Caeſar Dan,
                  
                  Brought gifts and tribute: yet (alas!)
                  This ſmall Tombe holds this man.
               
               This Godfrey of Bulloine was the firſt proclaimed Chriſtian
King of Ieruſalem, who refuſed to be crowned there, ſaying,
that it was vnfit that the ſeruants head ſhould there be crowned
with gold, where the Maſters head had béene crowned
with thornes.
               
                  Ieruſalem is gouerned by Turkes, but inhabited by Chriſtians
of ſundry Nations, whereof ſome come onely to viſit and
ſuperſtitiouſly to worſhip there, and ſo returne into their countries.
Others come thither to dwell, and exerciſe their manuall
arts, with a purpoſe there to die, thinking that they ſhall
ſooner goe to heauen if they die there, than in any other place.
               There were at Ieruſalem (when we were there) Chriſtians
of ſundry Nations, eſpecially Armenians, whereof ſome are
called Georgians, and ſome Iacobites. Their Patriarke was
not there, but leaſt ſicke, at Aleppo; but in his place he ſent an
Armenian Biſhop.
               There were alſo many Greekes, Chel
                        •
                     alines, Noſtranes o
                     •
                  
                  
                  Nazaritans, Cofties, and Abaſſens or Aethiopians of Preſtar Iohns
Country, whereof ſome of them dwelt néere vnto Catadupa,
which is a place in Aethiopia, where the fall of the riuer Nilus
maketh ſuch a noiſe, that the people are made deafe therewith
that dwell néere it: Beſides many Italians, Frenchmen, Dutchmen,
and vs fiue Engliſhmen.
               Many Turkes alſo viſited the Sepulcher of Chriſt; for they
both thinke and ſpeake very reuerently of Chriſt. And though
they doe not beleeue to be ſaued by Chriſt, yet they ſay hée was
a great Prophet, but that Mahomet was greater. And vſually
when they haue ended their Ceremonies at Meccha, at their
returne they viſit the Sepulcher of Chriſt at Ieruſalem. For
they haue an opinion, that vnleſſe they viſit the Sepulcher of
Chriſt, and the Holy Land, as well as the Sepulcher of Mahomet,
their pilgrimage to Mecha were to no purpoſe, nor acceptable
to God.
               But I ſaw not one Iew in all Ieruſalem; for they are ſo hatefull
to the Chriſtians there, that they ſeldome come thither.
            
            
               Manifeſt vntruths.
               BEſides theſe and many other matters which we there ſaw
and heard, which I account manifeſt truths, becauſe there
is Scripture or reaſon for them, or both; they ſhewed and told
vnto vs, and eſpecially vnto others who would beléeue them,
many things which were falſe and ridiculous, whereof (to auoid
tediouſneſſe) I will name onely ſome few, referring the
reſt to next Letters, or to our good méeting, which it may
pleaſe God in good time to grant vs.
               At Beth-lehem they brought vs into the place which at Chriſts
birth was a Stable for Oxen and Aſſes, but now a beautifull
place built of ſtone, and adorned with a manger of marble, and
a crach ouer it, with an Oxe and an Aſſe of marble ſtone, and
the bleſſed babe in the midſt, and the Virgin Mary ſitting by.
               And looking vp to the roofe of the houſe, they ſhewed vs a hole
made of purpoſe in the very top of the houſe, and told vs, that
thorow that hole the Starre fell downe, which directed the three

Kings of Collen of Chriſt: Wherein they deliuered thrée Vntruths.
               1 In ſaying that the ſtarre fell downe into the roome, whereas
the Scripture ſaith, not that it fell downe, but ſtood ouer the
place where the babe was, Matth. 2. 9.
               2. Secondly, they erre in ſaying that they were thrée Kings of
Colyn or Colonia Agrippina (as it is called) whereas the Text
ſaith, There came wiſe men from the Eaſt to Jeruſalem. Colonia
is not Eaſt from Ieruſalem.
               
               3. Thirdly, they erre in ſetting downe the number of them to
be thrée, becauſe they brought thrée gifts, which is not ſo to be
taken, but only that they which came, preſented vnto him the
chiefeſt commodities of their Country.
               Yet at Colonia they perſwade themſelues to this day, that
thrée Kings went from thence to Jeruſalem at the time of
Chriſts birth, to worſhip him. For I hauing occaſion to trauell
thorow Germany, ſtaied at Colonia Agrippina one day, and
went into the chiefe Church of the City, where I ſaw theſe verſes
written on the wall:
               
                  Tres Reges Regi Regum tria dona ferebant,
                  Myrrha homini, vncto Aurum, Thura dedere Dea.
                  Tu tria fac itidem dones pia munera Chriſto,
                  Muneribus gratus ſi cupis eſſe tuis.
                  Pro Myrrha, lachrymas; Auro cor porrige purum;
                  Pro Thure, humili pectore funde preces.
               
               The ſame in Engliſh:
               
                  Three Kings vnto the Kings of Kings
                  Three gifts at once preſented;
                  Which were Myrrh, Gold, and Frankincenſe,
                  Gold, as he was anointed;
                  Myrrh to him as he was a man.
                  And Frankincenſe as God:
                  So by thee in like ſort muſt be
                  Three zealous gifts beſtow'd.
                  
                     
For Gold, preſent a per
                        •
                     ect heart;
                  For Myrrh, admit him teares;
                  For Frankincenſe, power from thy breſt
                  A 
                        •
                     ume of humble praiers.
               
               I had conference there with ſome, who would bee counted
learned, and they vnderſtood that place, of three Kings who
went from their Citie Colonia to Beth-lehem, to worſhip Chriſt
at the time of his birth, and very obſtinately and abſurdly defended
it.
               In the way betwixt Jeruſalem & Beth-lehem, they take vpon
them to ſhew the place (to ignorant trauellers) where the Angel
tooke vp Abackuck the Prophet by the haire of the head, to carie
meat to Daniel in the Lions den: but they might doe well firſt
to prooue that there was ſuch a thing done, before they demonſtrate
the place where it was done.
               Another matters of like ſort they demonſtrate in the way betwixt
Ieruſalem & Beth-lehem, which is the Terebinth or Turpentine
trée, vnder which the Virgin Mary ſate when ſhee gaue
her child ſucke, trauelling on foote betwixt thoſe two Cities.
               And yet another in the ſame way as abſurd as the reſt, which
is this. In the high way or lane betwixt Ieruſalem and Beth-lehem,
they ſhew a great broad ſtone immoueable, and euenwith
the ground, (being a naturall rocke) where the Prophet Elias in
his trauels was wont to ſléepe: and ſhame not to ſay that hee
ſlept ſo often vpon that ſtone, that the very impreſſion of his bodie
remaineth in that ſtone to be ſéene to this day.
               Truth it is indéed that there are in a ſtone that way, ſome
hollow places, but no formall proportion of a man; and who is
ſo ſimple to thinke that it may not rather come by the often falling
of the raine vpon it, then by often ſléeping on it? according
to that verſe,
               
                  Gutta cauat lapidem, non vi, ſed ſaepe cadendo.
               
               that is,
               
                  The drops of raine make hollow the ſtone,
                  By often falling thereupon.
               
               Yea, they not onely told vs theſe falſe and friuolous matters,
but alſo reade vnto vs as vaine and fabulous matters as the
                     •
                  e.

For whiles we were at table at dinner in Beth-lehem in companie
with many Friers, one of them read a Chapter out of their
golden Legend in Latine, vntill the Guardian of Beth-lehem
(perceiuing that wee gaue no eare thereunto, but confounded
the parts of their meale) inioyned him ſilence.
               For it is their cuſtome to deuide their meales into thrée parts.
               The firſt is Altum ſilentium,
                  A method in 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   that is, Deepe ſilence; which is
not onely whiles they are ſaying grace, but whiles one of them
readeth a Chapter out of their Legend of Lies, which they call
Legendarium aureum, the golden Legende; and ſay, that it excelleth
all other bookes, (yea the Bible it ſelfe) as farre as gold
excelleth other mettals. But why that booke ſhould be called a
golden Legende (ſaith Viues) I doe not know, ſith it was written
by a man of an iron mouth and a leaden heart.
               The ſecond is Stridor dentium, that is, Chapping and Chewing;
grinding and grating their meat with their teeth.
               The third is Rumor gentium, that is, Chatting and Prating,
talking and telling of newes.
               But wee being wearie of walking foure miles on foote from
Beth-lehem to Solomons Fiſh-ponds, and the fountaine incloſed
vnder the earth: at our returne to Beth-lehem wee were
wearie and hungry, and were no ſooner ſet at table, but after
ſome ſhort Silentium, we fell to Stridor dentium. And whiles the
reſt of the Friers were at their Altum ſilentium, giuing eare to
the fables read out of their Legende; we were at the third part
of our meale, viz. Rumor gentium; talking both of forraine and
domeſticall matters.
               At Ieruſalem on mount Caluarie in the houſe erected ouer the
Sepulcher, they ſhew vnto ſtrangers a marble piller whereunto,
they ſay, our Sauiour was bound when hee was whipt
for our ſakes: but who is ſo ſimple to thinke that there was any
marble piller erected without the Citie for ſuch a purpoſe to puniſh
offendors (as they accounted our Sauiour Chriſt) at that
day?
               Or who knoweth the particular place where he was impriſoned
at this day? Yet, ſay they, this is the place where Chriſt
was impriſoned whiles they were making his Croſſe.
               
                  
And this is the place where (the Croſſe being laid a long) our
Sauiour was faſtened or nailed vnto it.
               And this is the place where the Croſſe ſtoode: and haue made
there two holes in ſigne of it, as though the nether parte of his
Croſſe conſiſted of two parts or pillers.
               And néere vnto the tower of Sylo they ſhew a water comming
from vnder a rocke, which they call the poole Syloam: and there
(ſay they) did the Virgine Mary waſh the childs clouts.
               And neere vnto the Sepulcher there is a great ſtone, clouen
with hammers, and ſet one piece a foot from another: and this
(ſay they) is the vayle of the Temple which rent in ſunder at
the time of Chriſts ſuffering, which is moſt rediculous.
               And although it be true (as we read Luke 19. 29. 30, &c.) that
Chriſt rode on that Aſſe which his two Diſciples brought from
the village ouer againſt mount Oliuet, called Bethania or Bethphage,
(for they are both together) and as hee rode from the
mount of Oliues to Ieruſalem, the people cried Hoſanna, and
ſpread their garments in the way, and cut down branches from
the trées, and ſtrawed them in the way.
               Yet it is a rediculous matter, and a ſuperſtitious cuſtome
for their chiefe Frier called Padre Guardian, euery Palme Sunday
in the morning to ſend two of his Friers from the mount of
Oliues to Betha
                        •
                     ia to fetch the Colt of an Aſſe, and from thence
(in an apiſh imitation of Chriſt) the great one rideth on the litle
one towards Ieruſalem, and the reſt ſpread their garment on the
Aſſe, and in the way; and cut downe branches from the trees,
and ſtraw them in the way.
               Wiſer are the Turkes herein then they, who although they
ſuffer them to come with their Aſſe to the gates of Ieruſalem; yet
admit them not to enter into the gates in ſuch manner.
               And that Turke was to be commended, who (when the Friers
followed their Guardian in ſuch ſort riding on an Aſſe) ſeeing
a ſimple Chriſtian woman ſtrip her ſelfe ſo farre, as in modeſty
ſhe might, and ſpread her garments in the way; tooke a cudgel
and all to belabored her therewith, ſaying, Thou foole, art thou
ſo mad to thinke that this is Chriſt?
               I, with the reſt of my companions was at Ieruſalem on

Palme Sunday, but neither ſaw this, no heard of it vntill it
was done; for it ſéemed that they were aſhamed that any man
of knowledge ſhould behold ſuch an abſurd ſight. But the
Frenchmen and Dutchmen, and many others of other nations
followed them, but not one Engliſhman, who could not patiently
endure to ſee their Sauiour Chriſt ſo diſhonoured.
               At Bethania and Bethphage are many fig-trées growing, and
on this fig trée (ſay they) Zacheus (being a man of worſhip in a
famous Citie) like a boy climed vp to ſee Chriſt as he paſſed by.
Luke 19. 2, 3.
               And at Ieruſalem they take vpon them to ſhewe the place
where Chriſt made the Pater noſter, & where the Apoſtles made
the Creed, and where S. Stephen was ſtoned, and where Iudas
hanged himſelfe. Pilats houſe. Peters priſon. The garden
where he was betrayed. Where the Virgine Mary was in an
agony. Where Chriſt ſaid to his mother, Ecce homo, and ſhee
ſaid vnto him, Ecce mulier.
               
               On mount Oliuet there is a litle Chappell, and therein a ſtone,
whereon (ſay they) our Sauiour Chriſt trode when he aſcended
into heauen; and the print of his toes remaine to be ſéene in that
ſtone to this day. There is indéed a dint in a ſtone, like vnto the
former part of a mans foote, but that it is the print or impreſſion
of our Sauiours féet, who will beléeue that he trode ſo hard
to leaue any impreſſion of his foot, or tipping of his toes behind?
               At the foot of mount Oliuet, they ſhewed vs the valley of Iehoſapha;
and there (ſay they) ſhall bee ſet a throne at the day
of Iudgement, wherein Chriſt ſhall ſit and kéepe his laſt iudgement,
and all nations ſhall appeare before him, euen in this very
place, ſay they: as though any man could demonſtrate the very
particular place.
               The ground of this opinion they fetch from Ioel 3. 2. where
God ſaith, I will g
                        •
                     ther all nations, and will bring them downe
into the valley of Iehoſaphat, &c. which place they doe not, or
will not vnderſtand. For it is to be vnderſtood, either by the
way of alluding, as hauing regard to the valley where God miraculouſly
ſlew the enemies of Jehoſaphat: and ſo it may ſignifie
the valley of deſtruction prepared for the wicked.
               
                  
Or the Lord hath reſpect vnto the word Iehoſaphat, which
ſignifieth pleading or iudgement: becauſe God would in the
day of Chriſt iudge the enemies of the Church, as then hee
did in the valley of Jehoſaphat. Wherefore, it is not to bee vnderſtood
of the materiall Joſaphat, but of Joſaphat ſo tearmed,
becauſe the iudgement which heere ſhall bee pronounced, ſhall
reſemble that which there was executed vpon the Moabites
and Amonites and the inhabitants of Seir.
               
               For what is Ioſaphat (if you interpret it) but the iudgement
of the Lord? And what is the valley, but the depth of that iudgement?
Into which Solomon doth aſſure the yoong man, that
God will bring him after all the iollity of his youth, after hée
hath chéered himſelfe in the daies of his youth, and walked in
the way of his heart, and in his ſight, Eccl. 11. 9.
               After conference had with their Padre Vicatio (who was accounted
the beſt learned amongſt them) hauing told him thus
much in effect as I haue héere written, he aſked me a reaſon
why the Prophet ſhould ſpecifie this place, if he meant not literally
to teach the Church, that héere this Iudge was to be expected?
               My anſwer was: Two reaſons had he to make choice of it,
by alluſion to which he might ſhadow to the Iewes the day of
Iudgement.
               One was the freſhneſſe of that famous deliuerances memorie
which the Lord had wrought in it for them.
               Another, the great reſemblance that will be betwéene the generall,
and that particular iudgement of his.
               For from the time of this Prophet, yet had there not a mans
age paſſed, ſince (without ſtroke of theirs) the Lord had in this
valley, within the ſight of this City, diſpatched thrée whole armies,
which had ioined forces to beleager them: And further,
in ſuch ſort, as in that generall iudgement he will diſpatch the
wicked. For as héere, though the Moabite, the Amonite, and
the inhabitant of Seir, bound themſelues againſt Iuda, and yet
could not preuaile; ſo there, though the Moabitiſh fleſh, the
Amonitiſh world, the ſauage inhabitant of Seir the Deuill, enter
a league againſt the elect, yet ſhall they haue no hand at

them. As theirs had, ſo ſhall theſe and their complices haue,
ſwords of their owne conſciences accuſing them, to turne into
their owne bowels.
               And as the ſame place was to them a valley of iudgement,
which to the Iewes was a valley of bleſſing; ſo ſhall that great
day be to the wicked a day of iudgement, for they ſhall receiue
that heauy doome, Goe you curſed; which to the godly ſhall be
a day of bleſſing, for they ſhall heare that ioifull voice, Come
you bleſſed, &c.
               
               This Frier was not ſatiſfied with this anſwer, but perſiſted
obſtinate in his errour, and therefore I leaft him as I found
him, referring him to the triall thereof at the day of iudgement.
               They ſay alſo, that the ſtaires of the High Prieſts Hall,
whereupon our Sauiour trod when he went to be iudged, are
at Rome, and the nailes which nailed him to his Croſſe. But
the Eccleſiaſticall Hiſtory reporteth, that Conſtantine made of
thoſe nailes, when his mother had found them in the Mount
where Chriſt was crucified, a bridle and an helmet for his
owne vſe. So bigge were the nailes, and ſuch wide wounds
they made in his bleſſed hands and féet, that they were rather
digged than pierced: which alſo Dauid foreſhewed by theſe
words, Pſal. 22. 16. Foderunt manus meas & pedes meos.
               
               And in the way from that which they call the High Prieſts
Hall, or the iudgement Hall, towards Mount Caluery, at the
end of the Lane, on the right hand: Héere (ſay they) they met
Simon of Cyren, and compelled him to helpe Chriſt to beare his
Croſſe when he fainted.
               And going downe another Lane on the left hand, they pointed
vnto an houſe, and ſaid, Héere the rich glutton dwelt,
who refuſed to reléeue Lazarus, which is a Parable, and not
an Hiſtory. And though it were a true Hiſtory, yet who can
point with the finger at the particular place where the houſe
ſtood, Ieruſalem hauing béene ſo often altered and tranſformed?
               From thence turning vp towards Mount Caluarie, on the
right hand,Veronica. they ſhew (vnto ſuch as they thinke will beléeue
them) the houſe where a woman called Veronica dwelt, who
ſéeing our Sauiour Chriſt paſſe by her doore towards Mount

                  Caluarie, and all in a ſweat, ſhe brought foorth a Sudarium, that
is, a napkin or handkerchiefe to wipe his face, which he receiued,
and hauing wipt his face therewith, gaue it to her againe:
and therein (ſay they) remained the print of his face, and is to
be ſéene at S. Peters houſe at Rome to this preſent day.
               There is alſo a City in Spaine which braggeth of the ſame
handkerchiefe: and the one is as like to be true as the other, but
both cannot be true. If they haue it at Rome, it cannot be at
Spaine: If at Spaine, not at Rome, if there were any ſuch matter.
For if both ſhould be true, to which of them ſhould that
praier be ſaid, which Iohn the 22. Pope of that name publiſhed?
and granted ten thouſand daies indulgence to them that
deuoutly ſay this praier following, beholding either the picture
of Veronica, or the handkerchiefe, which (as they ſay) Chriſt
gaue vnto her with the print of his face therein:
               
                  Salue ſancta facies nostri redemptoris,
                  In qua nitet ſpecies diuini ſplendoris,
                  Impreſſa panniculo niuei candoris,
                  Data
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Veronicae ſignum ob amoris.
                  Salue decus ſeculi, ſpeculum Sanctorum,
                  Quod videre cupiunt ſpiritus coelorum;
                  Nos ab omni macula purga vitiorum,
                  Atque nos conſortio iunge beatorum.
                  Salue vultus Domini imag
                        •
                      beata,
                  Ex aeterno munere mirè decorata:
                  Lumen funde cordibus ex vi tibi data,
                  Et à noſtris ſenſibus tolle colligata.
                  Salue robur fidei noſtra Chriſtiana,
                  Deſtruens haereticos qui ſunt mentis vanae▪
                  
                  Horum auge meritum qui te credunt ſanè,
                  Illius effigie qui Rex fit ex pane.
                  Salue noſtrum gandium in hac vita dura,
                  Labili, & fragili, citò peritura:
                  Nos deduc ad propria, ô FELIXFIGVRA,
                  
                  Ad videndam faciem quae eſt Christi pura.
               
               
                  
The ſame in Engliſh:
               
                  God ſaue thee HOLY FACE of our Sauiour,
                  Wherein the forme of diuine light doth ſhine,
                  Fixt in a little clout of ſnowy colour,
                  Left on the Vernicle as thy loues ſigne.
                  God ſaue thee WORLDS REPVTE, Mirror of Saints,
                  Which the celeſtiall ſpirits deſire to ſee:
                  Cleanſe vs from euery ſpot of vices taints,
                  And range vs in their Ranke that bleſſed be.
                  Of our Lords FACE God ſaue thee Image bleſt,
                  Deckt wonderouſly with the eternall bleſſe,
                  With power giuen to thee, lighten thou our breſt,
                  And free our ſenſes from in comberances.
                  God ſaue thee FORTRESSE of our Chriſtian Creed,
                  Who Heretikes deſtroiſt, with mindes miſled:
                  Of thoſe beleeuing thee, augment the meed,
                  By th'Image of thee made a King of Bread.
                  Preſerue our ioy in griefes life, which is this,
                  Sliding, and fraile, ſoone gone, and moſt vnſure:
                  O happy FIGVRE, lead vs to thy bliſſe,
                  To ſee thy face (O Chriſt) which is ſo pure.
               
               They take vpon them alſo to ſhew the place where Chriſt
appeared vnto Mary, and ſaid, Touch me not, for I am not yet
aſcended to my father, Ioh. 20. 15. which place (ſay they) is the
Center or middle part of the whole world. And the place where
Mary and Martha met Chriſt ſitting on a ſtone, and ſaid vnto
him, Maſter, if thou haddeſt beene heere, my brother had not
died. Alſo, the Caſtle of Lazarus, and many ſuch like things.
               
                  Sic perhibent qui de magnis maiora loquuntur.
               
               That is,
               
                  So they report which of mole-hils
                  Would make a mountaine by their wils.
               
               And with ſuch lying wonders doe theſe lazie Friers bring
ſilly ſtrangers into a wonder and admiration.
               
                  
And theſe are the men which euery third yéere are ſent from
Rome to ſoiourne in Ieruſalem, by fifty or ſixty at a time, & are
royally maintained by the Pope and other Catholikes. And
when their regiment of thrée yéeres is expired, then others ſuccéed
them, and they returne home, and are preferred, ſome to
be Biſhops, and ſome to other Offices, becauſe they haue béene
at the holy City of Ieruſalem, and returne from thence as holy
as they went thither, according to that old verſe (with a little
inuerſion:)
               
                  Iudeae multi veniunt, redeunt quo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſtulti:
               
               That is,
               
                  To Jury bad men haue recourſe;
                  And goe from thence as bad or worſe.
               
               Theſe and many other falſe and friuolous matters, do they
ſhew and perſwade ſimple trauellers to belieue. And too many
there are which giue credit thereunto, and publiſh the ſame to
others for truth. It were better for ſuch credulous perſons to
ſtay at home and learne the truth, then to come abroad and
beléeue vntruts as many doe.
            
            
               Doubtfull things.
               BEſides theſe things already ſet downe, whereof ſome are
true, ſome moſt vntrue: Other things there are which they
ſhall doth ſee and heare whereof a man may ſuſpend his iudgement
whether they be true or falſe, vntill he either ſée them, or
receiue further confirmation by reading, than he can by the affirmation
of ſome few ſuperſtitious perſons. Of which ſorte
are theſe following.
               About a mile diſtant from the Citie, they brought vs to a
rockey place, where there is a vault vnder the ground as it
were a large, porch, from whence we entred into other intricate
roomes as it were into a Laberinth, by a great doore of ſtone
hewen out of the ſame place, hauing neither iron worke or timber
worke about it; but in the ſame place where it grew, there
it is ſquared, and made to turne about by the ſkilful Arte of cunning
Maſons, and it is of a huge thickneſſe and greatneſſe. So

ſoone as we had paſſed that dore, we crept very lowe, as it were
into an Ouen mouth, euery man with a Candle in his hand; and
ſo came into a darke roome foure ſquare, with Benches round about
of ſtone, hollow, like vnto Mangers, and therin (they ſay)
ſome of the noble famely of the Kings and Quéenes of Iſrael and
Iudah were buried.
               From thence they brought vs into another roome of like ſort,
and for like vſe; & ſo from one to another, that (without a guide)
it was impoſſible to find the way out. How many ſuch roomes
there are, I know not: but wee were in ſix or ſeuen, and they
offered to bring vs into more, but being almoſt ſtifled for want
of light and aire, we deſired to returne.
               I make no quſtion, but they were places of buriall; for in the
hollow benches of ſtone wee ſawe bones of men: but whether
they were the ſepulchers of the kings of Iſrael and Judah or not,
is my doubt.
               At the entrance in the Temple where the Sepulcher is to bee
ſéene, the firſt thing which they ſhew vnto ſtrangers, is a faire
marble ſtone, euen with the ground; and there (ſay they) the
bodie of our Sauiour Chriſt was laid (when it was taken down
from the Croſſe) whiles it was preparing to be laid in the Sepulcher.
And heere I ſaw many ſimple people (both men and
women) knéeling round about that ſtone, wringing their hands
wéeping, and crying, as if they had ſéene the dead bodie of our
Sauiour Chriſt there preſent before their eies. And they all to
be-kiſſed that ſtone. Yea, more then kiſſed it, for ſome of them
rubbed their lips vp and downe vpon that ſtone very often, vntill
they had rubbed off the ſkin and made their lips bléed. And
ſome of them rubbed their beads vpon it, that ſome inherent holineſſe
might come out of that ſtone, and reſt vpon their beads.
I cenſure this ſuperſtition of theirs ouer fauourably, in numbring
this ſtone among doubtfull things, which I might rather
haue reckoned amongſt manifeſt vntruts. For if there had béen
any ſuch ſtone, it would haue béen either caried away by pieces,
or remoued whole to Rome as other reliques haue béene. But
this ſtone is too new to be of any ſuch Antiquitie.
               At Bethania they brought vs into a Celler vnder the ground,Bethania.
                  
ouer which there was no houſe, where Lazarus lay dead when
Chriſt raiſed him vp to life.
               And at Bethphage they ſhewed vs the ruines of Simon theBethphage.
Phariſeis houſe, where Chriſt ſitting at dinner, Mary Magdalene
came and powred ointment on his head, and waſhed his
féete with her teares, and dried them with the haire of her head.
For although no man denieth but that ſuch things were done,
yet a man may make doubt whether thoſe were the particular
places where they were done.
               In Ieruſalem they ſhewed vs Porta aurea,
                  Porta aurea. that is, The golden
gate; (or place where it ſtood) called in former times, The
beautifull gate of the Temple: which the Turkes haue walled
vp with ſtones, becauſe of a prophecie, viz. that the Citie was
once wonne there, and ſhall be againe wonne at the ſame place.
               Walking betwixt the valley of Gehinnom and the walles of
the Citie, our guide ſhewed vs a darke Chappell vnder the
ground without windowes, wherein (he told vs) the idolatrous
Iewes did offer & ſacrifice their children vnto a braſen Image,
called Moloch, which, being made hote, they incloſed them in
the hollowneſſe thereof, and ſo ſlew them. And leſt their crying
ſhould moue any to compaſſion towards them, they made a hideous
noiſe with Tabrets and Drums. Whereupon the place
was called Tophet. Iere. 7. 31.
               On the top of mount Oliuet,Sodome. they ſhewed vs thirtie miles off
the lake of Sodom, which vnto vs appeared to bee very neere.
And they told vs thereof many ſtrange matters. Not onely that
which the wiſeman Solomon reported of it in his daies. Wiſd.
10. 7. that it ſmoaketh, (as if hell had there found a chinmey
whereout to vent his ſmoake) and that the trées beare fruit that
neuer commeth to ripeneſſe: but further, that it neither bréedeth
nor preſerueth any liuing creature. It is commonly called
Mare mortuum, that is, The dead ſea; being ſo contagious, as
if a bird but flie ouer it, ſhe is preſently dampt, and falleth down
dead into it. And as S. Ierome ſaith: If by the ſwelling of Iordan,
the fiſhes but flow ouer into it, they die ſtraight and flote aboue
the waters.
               
               Yea, they further reported vnto vs of their owne knowledge,

hauing (as ſhey ſaid) ſéene the ſame, that it caſteth out continual
filthy vapours, by whoſe ſtinches and breath the mountaines
and valleys many miles about, are (as it were) ſcorched, blaſted,
and made vtterly barren: beſides many vgly ſhapes and
ſhewes of terrour in it: beſides apples of goodly colour growing
by it, which being touched turne all to ſmoake and aſhes.
               They alſo tolde vs that the piller of ſalt whereinto Lots wif
                     •
                  
was turned is yet ſtanding.
               But of theſe and many other things which they ſhewed vs,
and told vs, I make doubt; either becauſe I haue not ſéene them
my ſelfe, or hauing ſéene them, doe not beléeue them.
               When I ſhall with mine eyes behold them, I will more
boldly make report of them, and of other matters which offer
themſelues vnto my ſight in my returne, but which way to returne
we haue not yet determined.
               And thus being loth to interrupt your ſerious domeſticall
affaires with forraigne and friuolous matters,
I humbly take my leaue: and
leaue you to him, who neuer leaueth
his.
            
            
               From Ieruſalem.
Anno Dom. 160
                        •
                     .
April 7.
               
               Dominationi
                     •
                   tuae
obſeruantiſsimus,
GVILI
                     •
                  LMVS BIDDVLPHVS.
            
            
               Witneſſes hereof our companions
in trauell,

                     William Biddulph.
                     Ieffrey Kirbie.
                     Edward Abbot.
                     Iohn Elkin.
                     Iaſper Tyon.
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            LECTOR I.
            Miraris (Lector) doctus cùm dormit Homerus,
            Conni
                  •
               ere aliquo tempore Chaleograph
                  •
               s?
            Quae ſunt maiores naui, mea penna notauit;
            Ipſe tua lima corrige (quaeſo) leues.
         
         
            To the Reader.
            Doeſt thou maruell (gentle Reader)
            That ſome errors paſſe in printing:
            When as ſometimes learned Homer
            Slips and ſleepes for all his learning?
            My pen hath mended greateſt faults,
            Which heerein are neglected:
            Good Reader, let the leſſer faults
            With thy pen be corrected.
         
         
            Faults eſcaped in printing.
            PAg. 6. lin. 5. for we, read were. Pag. 14. lin. 1. for Priamus, read Priam's.
Pag. 38. lin. 30. for Domineere read Dominier. Pag. 39. lin. 35. for Theſe
read They. Pag. 65. lin. 20. for 
                  〈◊〉
                read rice. Pag. 72. lin. 27. for Tarrcia
read Tartaria. Pag. 84. lin. 7. for offende read offended. Pag. 103. lin. 5.
for leaning read learning. Pag. 104. lin. 13. for Cergeſens read Gergeſens.
         
      
   