
      
         
            
               
                  
                     
                     
A SATYRE, Written to the KINGS moſt Excellent Maieſtie, BY GEORGE WITHER, When hee was Priſoner in the Marſhallſey, for his firſt BOOKE.
                  
                  
                     LONDON: Printed by T.S. for Iohn Budge, dwelling in Pauls-Church-yard, at the ſigne of the Greene Dragon, 1622.
               
               
                  
                  
                  The Satyre to the meere Courtiers.
                  
                     SIrs; I doe know your mindes; You looke for fees,
                  For more reſpect then needes, for caps and knees.
                  But be content, I haue not for you now;
                  Nor will I haue at all to doe with you.
                  For, though I ſeeme oppreſt, and you ſuppoſe
                  I muſt be faine to crouch to Vertues foes;
                  Yet know, your fauours I doe ſleight them more
                  In this diſtreſſe, then ere I did before.
                  
                     
Here to my Liege a meſſage I muſt tell;
                  If you will let me paſſe, you ſhall doe well;
                  If you denie admittance, why then know,
                  I meane to haue it where you will or no,
                  Your formall wiſedome which hath neuer beene
                  In ought but in ſome fond inuention ſeene,
                  And you that thinke men borne to no intent,
                  But to be train'd in Apiſh complement;
                  Doth now (perhaps) ſuppoſe mee indiſcreet,
                  And ſuch vnuſed meſſages vnmeet.
                  But what of that? Shall I goe ſute my matter
                  Vnto your wits, that haue but wit to flatter?
                  Shall I, of your opinions ſo much prize
                  To loſe my will that you may thinke me wiſe,
                  Who neuer yet to any liking had,
                  Vnleſſe he were a Knaue, a Foole, or mad?
                  
                  You Muſhroms know, ſo much I weigh your powers,
                  I neither value you, nor what is yours.
                  Nay, though my croſſes had me quite out-worne,
                  Spirit enough I'de finde your ſpight to ſcorne:
                  Of which reſolu'd, to further my aduenture,
                  Vnto my King, without your leaues I enter.
               
               
                  
                  To the Honeſt Courtiers.
                  
                     BVt You, whoſe onely worth doth colour giue.
                  To Them, that they doe worthy ſeeme to liue,
                  Kinde Gentlemen, your ayde I craue, to bring
                  A Satyre to the preſence of his King:
                  A ſhow of rudeneſſe doth my fore-head arme,
                  Yet you may truſt him; he intends no harme.
                  He that hath ſent him, loyall is, and true,
                  And one, whoſe loue (I know) is much to you:
                  But now, he lyes bound to a narrow ſcope;
                  Almoſt beyond the Cape of all good Hope.
                  
                  Long hath he ſought to free himſelfe, but failes:
                  And therefore ſeeing nothing elſe preuailes,
                  
                     
                     Me, to acquaint his Soueraigne, here he ſends,
                  As one deſpairing of all other friends.
                  I doe preſume that you will fauour ſhew him,
                  Now that a Meſſenger from thence you know him.
                  For many thouſands that his face ne're knew,
                  Blame his Accuſers, and his Fortune rue:
                  And by the helpe which your good word may doe,
                  He hopes for pitty from his Soueraigne to.
                  Then in his preſence with your fauours grace him,
                  And there's no Vice ſo great, ſhall dare out-face him.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  To the Kings moſt Excellent MAIESTIE. A SATYRE.
                  Quid tu, ſi pereo?
                  
                     
                        WHat once the Poet ſaid, I may auow,
                     
                        'Tis a hard thing not to write Satyrs, now,
                     Since, what we ſpeake (abuſe raigns ſo in all)
                     Spight of our hearts, will be Satyricall.
                     
                     Let it not therefore now be deemed ſtrange,
                     My vnſmooth'd lines their rudeneſſe do not change;
                     Nor be diſtaſtefull to my gracious King,
                     
                     That in the Cage, my old harſh notes I ſing:
                     And rudely, make a Satyre here vnfold,
                     What others would in neater tearmes haue told.
                     And why? my friends and meanes in Court are ſcant,
                     Knowledge of curious phraſe, and forme I want.
                     I cannot bear't to runne my ſelfe in debt,
                     To hire the Groome, to bid the Page entreat,
                     Some fauourd Follower to vouchſafe his word
                     To get me a cold comfort from his Lord.
                     
                     I cannot ſooth, (though it my life might ſaue,)
                     Each Fauourite, nor crouch to eu'ry Knaue.
                     
                     I cannot brooke delayes as ſome men do,
                     With ſcoffes, and ſcornes, and tak't in kindneſſe to.
                     For ere I'de binde my ſelfe for ſome ſlight grace,
                     To one that hath no more worth then his place.
                     
                     
                        
Or, by a baſe meane free my ſelfe from trouble,
                     I rather would endure my penance double:
                     Cauſe to be forc'd to what my mind diſdaines,
                     Is worſe to me then tortures, rackes, and chaines.
                     
                     And therefore vnto thee I onely flye,
                     To whom there needs no meane but Honeſty.
                     
                     To thee, that lou'ſt nor Paraſite or Minion,
                     
                     Should ere I ſpeake poſſeſſe thee with opinion.
                     To thee, that do'ſt what thou wilt vndertake,
                     For loue of Iuſtice, not the perſons ſake.
                     To thee, that know'ſt how vaine all faire ſhewes be,
                     That flow not from the hearts ſinceritie;
                     And canſt, though ſhadowed in the ſimpleſt vaile,
                     Diſcerne both Loue and Truth, and where they faile.
                     To thee doe I appeale; in whom Heau'n knowes,
                     I next to God my confidence repoſe.
                     For, can it be thy Grace ſhould euer ſhine,
                     And not enlighten ſuch a Cauſe as mine?
                     Can my hopes (fixt in thee great King) be dead;
                     Or thou thoſe Satyrs hate thy Forreſts bred?
                     Where ſhall my ſecond hopes be founded then,
                     If euer I haue heart to hope agen?
                     Can I ſuppoſe a fauour may be got
                     In any place, when thy Court yeelds it not?
                     Or that I may obtaine it in the land,
                     When I ſhall be deni'd it at thy hand?
                     And if I might, could I delighted be,
                     To tak't of others, when I miſt of thee?
                     
                        
Or if I were, could I haue comfort by it,
                     When I ſhould thinke my Soueraigne did deny it?
                     No; were I ſure, I to thy hate were borne,
                     To ſeeke for others fauours, I would ſcorne.
                     For, if the beft-worth-loues I could not gaine,
                     To labour for the reſt I would diſdaine.
                  
                  
                     But why ſhould I thy fauour here diſtruſt,
                     That haue a cauſe ſo knowne, and knowne ſo iuſt?
                     Which not alone my inward comfort doubles,
                     But all ſuppoſe me wrong'd that heare my troubles.
                     Nay, though my fault were Reall, I beleeue
                     Thou art ſo Royall, that thou wouldſt forgiue.
                  
                  
                     For, well I know, thy ſacred Maieſty
                     
                     Hath euer beene admir'd for Clemency,
                     And at thy gentleneſſe the world hath wondred,
                     For making Sun-ſhine, where thou mightſt haue thundred.
                     Yea, thou in mercy, life to them didſt giue
                     That could not be content to ſee thee liue.
                     And can I thinke that thou wilt make me, then,
                     The moſt vnhappy of all other men?
                     Or let thy loyall Subiect, againſt reaſon,
                     Be puniſht more for Loue, then ſome for Treaſon?
                     
                     No, thou didſt neuer yet thy glory ſtaine
                     With an iniuſtice to the meaneſt Swaine.
                     
                     'Tis not thy will I'me wrong'd, nor doſt thou know,
                     If I haue ſuffred iniuries or no.
                     For if I haue not heard falfe Rumours flie,
                     Th'aſt grac'ſt me with the ſtile of Honeſty,
                     
                     
                        
And if it were ſo (as ſome thinke it was)
                     I cannot ſee how it ſhould come to paſſe
                     That thou, from whoſe free tongue proceedeth nought
                     Which is not correſpondent with thy thought.
                     Thoſe thoughts to, being fram'd in Reaſons mould,
                     Should ſpeake that once, which ſhould not euer hold.
                  
                  
                     But paſſing it as an vncertainety,
                     I humbly beggethee, by that Maieſty,
                     
                     Whoſe ſacred Glory ſtrikes a louing-feare
                     Into the hearts of all, to whom 'tis deare:
                     To deigne me ſo much fauour, without merit,
                     As read this plaint of a diſtempered ſpirit:
                     And thinke, vnleſſe I ſaw ſome hideous ſtorme,
                     Too great to be endur'd by ſuch a worme,
                     
                     I had not thus preſum'd vnto a King,
                     
                     With Aeſops Fly, to ſeeke an Eagles wing:
                  
                  
                     Know I am he, that entred once the liſt,
                     Gainſt all the world to play the Satyriſt:
                     
                     T was I, that made my meaſures rough and rude,
                     Dance arm'd with whips amidſt the multitude,
                     And vnappalled with my charmed Scrowles,
                     
                     Teaz'd angry Monſters in their lurking holes.
                     I'ue plaid with Waſpes and Hornets without feares,
                     Till mad they grew, and ſwarm'd about my eares.
                     I'ue done it, and me thinkes tis ſuch braue ſport,
                     I may be ſtung, but nere be ſorry for't.
                     For, all my griefe is, that I was ſo ſparing,
                     And had no more in't, worth the name of daring.
                     
                        
He that will taxe theſe times muſt be more bitter,
                     Tart lines of Vinegar and Gall are fitter.
                     My fingers and my ſpirits were benum'd,
                     My inck ran forth too ſmooth, twas two much gum'd;
                     I'de haue my Pen ſo paint it, where it traces,
                     Each accent, ſhould draw blood into their faces.
                     And make them, when their Villanies are blazed,
                     
                        Shudder and ſtartle, as men halfe amazed,
                     For feare my Verſe ſhould make ſo loud a din,
                     Heauen hearing might raine vengeance on their ſin.
                     Oh now, for ſuch a ſtraine! would Art could teach it.
                     Though halfe my ſpirits I conſum'd to reach it.
                     I de learne my Muſe ſo braue a courſe to flie,
                     Men ſhould admire the power of Pooſie.
                     
                     And thoſe that dar'd her greatneſſe to reſiſt,
                     Quake euen at naming of a Satyriſt.
                     
                     But when his ſcourging numbers flow'd with wonder,
                     Should cry, God bleſſe vs, as they did at thunder.
                  
                  
                     Alas! my lines came from me too-too dully,
                     They did not fill a Satyrs mouth vp fully.
                     Hot blood, and youth, enrag'd with paſſions ſtore,
                     Taught me to reach a ſtraine nere touch'd before.
                     But it was coldly done, I throughly 
                           〈◊〉
                         not:
                     And ſomewhat there is yet to doe, I did not.
                     More ſoundly could my ſcourge haue yerked many,
                     Which I omitted not for feare of any.
                     For want of action, diſcontentments rage,
                     
                     Baſe diſ-reſpect of Vertue (in this age)
                     
                        
With other things which were to Goodneſſe wrong,
                     Made me ſo feareleſſe in my careleſſe Song:
                     That, had not reaſon within compaſſe won me,
                     I had told Truth enough to haue vndone me.
                     (Nay, haue already, if that her Diuine
                     And vnſeene power, can doe no more then mine.)
                     For though fore-ſeeing warineſſe was good,
                     I fram'd my ſtile vnto a milder mood;
                     And clogging her high-towring wings with mire,
                     Made her halfe earth, that was before all fire.
                     Though (as you ſaw) in a diſguiſed ſhew
                     I brought my Satyres to the open view:
                     Hoping (their out-ſides, being miſ-eſteem'd)
                     They might haue paſſed, but for what they ſeem'd:
                     Yet ſome whoſe Comments iumpe not with my minde,
                     In that low phraſe, a higher reach would finde,
                     And out of their deepe iudgements ſeeme to know,
                     What 'tis vncertaine if I meant or no:
                     Ayming thereby, out of ſome priuate hate,
                     To worke my ſhame, or ouer-throw my ſtate.
                     For, amongſt many wrongs my foe doth doe me,
                     And diuers imputations laide vnto me,
                     (Deceiued in his ayme) he doth miſ-conſter
                     That which I haue enſtil'd a Man-like Monſter,
                     
                     To meane ſome priuate perſon in the State,
                     Whoſe worth I ſought to wrong out of my hate;
                     Vpbraiding me, I from my word doe ſtart,
                     Either for want of better Ground, or Heart.
                     
                     
                        
Cauſe from his expectation I did vary
                     In the denying of his Commentary,
                     
                     Whereas tis knowne I meant Abuſe the while,
                     Not thinking any one could be ſo vile
                     To merit all thoſe Epithites of ſhame,
                     How euer many doe deſerue much blame.
                  
                  
                     But ſay, (I grant) that I had an intent
                     To haue it ſo (as he interprets) meant,
                     And let my gracious Liege ſuppoſe there were
                     One whom the State may haue iuſt cauſe to feare;
                     Or thinke there were a man (and great in Court)
                     
                     That had more faults then I could well report;
                     Suppoſe I knew him, and had gone about
                     By ſome particular markes to paint him out,
                     That he beſt knowing his owne faults, might ſee,
                     He was the Man I would ſhould noted be:
                     Imagine now ſuch doings in this Age,
                     
                     And that this man ſo pointed at, ſhould rage,
                     Call me in queſtion, and by his much threatning,
                     By long impriſonment, and ill-intreating
                     Vrge a Confeſſion, wert not a mad part
                     For me to tell him, what lay in my heart?
                     Doe not I know a great mans Power and Might;
                     
                     In ſpight of Innocence, can ſmother Right,
                     
                     Colour his Villanies, to get eſteeme,
                     And make the honeſt man the Villaine ſeeme?
                     And that the truth I told ſhould in concluſion,
                     For want of Power and Friends be my confuſion?
                     
                        
I know it, and the world doth know tis true,
                     Yet, I proteſt, if ſuch a man I knew,
                     That might my Country preiudice, or Thee,
                     
                     Were he the greateſt or the proudeſt Hee
                     
                     That breathes this day: (if ſo it might be found,
                     That any good to either might redound.)
                     So far Ile be (though Fate againſt me run)
                     From ſtarting off from that I haue begun,
                     I vn-appalled dare in ſuch a caſe
                     Rip vp his fouleſt Crimes before his face,
                     Though for my labour I were ſure to drop
                     Into the mouth of Ruine without hope.
                  
                  
                     But ſuch ſtrange farre-fetcht meanings they haue ſought,
                     As I was neuer priuie to in thought;
                     And that vnto particulars would tie
                     Which I intended vniuerſally.
                     Whereat ſome with diſpleaſure ouer-gone,
                     (Thoſe I ſcarce dream'd of, ſaw, or thought vpon)
                     Maugre thoſe caueats on my Satyrs brow,
                     Their honeſt and iuſt paſſage diſallow.
                     And on their heads ſo many cenſures rake,
                     That ſpight of me, themſelues they'le guilty make.
                  
                  
                     Nor is't enough, to ſwage their diſcontent,
                     To ſay I am (or to be) innocent.
                     
                     For as, when once the Lyon made decree,
                     No horned beaſt ſhould nigh his preſence be,
                     That, on whoſe fore-head onely did appeare
                     A bunch of fleſh, or but ſome tuft of haire,
                     
                     
                        
Was euen as farre in danger as the reſt,
                     If he but ſaid, it was a horned beaſt:
                     
                     So, there be now, who thinke in that their power
                     Is of much force, or greater farre then our;
                     It is enough to proue a guilt in me,
                     Becauſe (miſtaking) they ſo think't to be.
                  
                  
                     Yet 'tis my comfort, they are not ſo high,
                     But they muſt ſtoope to Thee and Equitie.
                     
                     And this I know, though prickt; they ſtorme agen,
                     The world doth deeme them ne're the better men.
                     
                        To ſtirre in filth, makes not the ſtench the leſſe,
                     
                     
                        Nor doth Truth feare the frowne of Mightineſſe.
                     Becauſe thoſe numbers ſhe doth daigne to grace,
                     Men may ſuppreſſe a while, but ne're deface.
                  
                  
                     I wonder, and 'tis wondred at by many,
                     My harmeleſſe lines ſhould breed diſtaſte in any:
                     And ſo, that (whereas moſt good men approue
                     My labour to be worthy thankes, and loue)
                     I as a Villaine, and my Countries foe,
                     
                     Should be impriſon'd, and ſo ſtrictly to,
                     That not alone my liberty is barr'd.
                     But the reſort of friends (which is more hard.)
                     And whilſt each wanton, or looſe Rimers Pen,
                     With oyly words, ſleekes o're the ſinnes of men,
                     Vayling his wits to euery Puppets becke,
                     Which ere I'le doe, I'le ioy to breake my necke.
                     (I ſay) while ſuch as they in euery place
                     Can finde protection, patronage and grace;
                     
                        
If any looke on me, 'tis but a skaunce
                     Or if I get a fauour, 'tis by chance.
                     I muſt protect my ſelfe: poore Truth and I
                     
                     Can haue ſcarce one ſpeake for our honeſty.
                     
                     Then whereas they can gold and gifts attaine,
                     Malitious Hate, and Enuy is my gaine,
                     And not alone haue here my Freedome loſt,
                     Whereby my beſt hope's likely to be croſt:
                     But haue beene put to more charge in one day.
                     Then all my Patrons bounties yet will pay.
                     What I haue done, was not for thirſt of gaine,
                     
                     Or out of hope preferments to attaine.
                     Since to contemne them, would more profit me,
                     Then all the glories in the world that be:
                     Yet they are helpes to Vertue, vs'd aright,
                     And when they wanting be, ſhe wants her might.
                     
                        For Eagles mindes ne're fit a Rauens feather,
                     
                     
                        To dare, and to be able, ſute together.
                     
                  
                  
                     But what is't I haue done ſo worthy blame,
                     That ſome ſo eagerly purſue my fame?
                     Vouchſafe to view't with thine owne eyes, and trie
                     (Saue want of Art) what fault thou canſt eſpie.
                     
                        I haue not ſought to ſcandalize the State,
                     
                     
                        Nor ſowne ſedition, nor made publike bate:
                     
                     
                        I haue not aym'd at any good mans fame,
                     
                     
                        Nor taxt (directly) any one by name.
                     
                     
                        I am not he that am growne diſcontent
                     
                     
                        With the Religion; or the Gouernement.
                     
                     
                        
                        I meant no Ceremonies to protect,
                     
                     
                        Nor doe I fauour any new-ſprung Sect;
                     
                     
                        But to my Satyres gaue this onely warrant,
                     
                     
                        To apprehend and puniſh Vice apparant.
                     
                     Who aiming in particular at none,
                     In generall vpbraided euery one:
                     That each (vnſhamed of himſelfe) might view
                     That in himſelfe, which no man dares to ſhew.
                  
                  
                     And hath this Age bred vp neat Vice ſo tenderly,
                     She cannot brooke it to be touch'd ſo ſlenderly?
                     Will ſhe not bide my gentle Satyres bites?
                     
                        Harme take her then, what makes ſhe in their ſights?
                     If with impatience ſhe my Whip-cord feele,
                     How had ſhe raged at my laſh of Steele?
                     
                     But am I call'd in queſtion for her cauſe?
                     Is't Vice that theſe afflictions on me drawes?
                     And need I now thus to Apologize,
                     Onely becauſe I ſcourged Villanies?
                     
                     Muſt I be faine to giue a reaſon why,
                     And how I dare allow of Honeſty?
                     
                     Whilſt that each fleering Paraſite is bold
                     Thy Royall brow vndaunted to hehold:
                     And euery Temporizer ſtrikes a ſtring,
                     That's Muſicke for the hearing of a King?
                     Shall not he reach out to obtaine as much,
                     Who dares more for thee then a hundred ſuch?
                     
                        Heauen grant her patience, my Muſe takes't ſo badly,
                     
                     
                        I feare ſhee'le loſe her wits, for ſhe raues madly.
                     
                     
                        
Yet let not my dread Soueraigne too much blame her,
                     Whoſe awfull preſence, now hath made her tamer.
                     For if there be no Fly but hath her ſpleene,
                     Nor a poore Piſmire, but will wreake her teene;
                     How ſhall I then, that haue both ſpleene and gall,
                     Being vniuſtly dealt with, beare with all?
                     I yet with patience take what I haue borne,
                     And all the worlds enſuing hate can ſcorne:
                     
                     But 't were in me as much ſtupiditie,
                     Not to haue feeling of an iniurie,
                     As it were weakeneſſe not to brooke it well:
                     What others therefore thinke I cannot tell;
                     But he that's leſſe then mad, is more then Man,
                     
                     Who ſees when he hath done the beſt he can,
                     To keepe within the bounds of Innocence:
                     
                     Sought to diſcharge his due to God and Prince.
                     
                     That he, whilſt Villanies vnreproued goe,
                     Scoffing, to ſee him ouer-taken ſo,
                     Should haue his good endeauours miſconceiu'd,
                     Be of his dearest liberty bereau'd;
                     And which is worſe, without reaſon why,
                     Be frown'd on by Authorities grim eye.
                     
                        By that great Power my ſoule ſo much doth feare,
                     
                     
                        She ſcornes the ſtearn'ſt frownes of a mortall Peere,
                     But that I Vertue loue, for her owne ſake,
                     It were enough to make me vndertake
                     To ſpeake as much in praiſe of Vice agen.
                     And practiſe ſome to plague theſe ſhames of men.
                     
                     
                        
I meane thoſe my Accuſers, who miſtaking
                     My aymes, doe frame conceits of their owne making.
                     But if I liſt, I need not buy ſo deere
                     The iuſt reuenge might be inflicted here.
                     Now could I meaſures frame in this iuſt fury,
                     Should ſooner finde ſome guilty then a Iury:
                     
                     The words, like ſwords (temper'd with Art) ſhould pierce
                     And hang, and draw, and quarter them in verſe.
                     Or I could racke them on the wings of Fame,
                     
                     
                        (And he's halfe hang'd (they ſay) hath an ill name)
                     
                     Yea, l'de goe neere to make thoſe guilty Elues,
                     
                        Lycambes-like, be glad to hang themſelues:
                     And though this Age will not abide to heare
                     The faults reprou'd, that Custome hath made deare;
                     Yet, if I pleaſed, I could write their crimes,
                     
                     And pile them vp in wals for after-times:
                     For they'le be glad (perhaps) that ſhall enſue,
                     To ſee ſome ſtory of their Fathers true.
                     Or ſhould I ſmother'd be in darkneſſe ſtill,
                     I might not vſe the freedome of a quill:
                     'T would raiſe vp brauer ſpirits then mine owne,
                     To make my cauſe, and this their guilt more knowne.
                     Who by that ſubiect ſhould get Loue and Fame,
                     Vnto my foes diſgrace, and endleſſe ſhame:
                     Thoſe I doe meane, whoſe Comments haue miſ-us'd me:
                     And to thoſe Peeres I honour, haue accus'd me:
                     Making againſt my Innocence their batteries,
                     And wronging them by their baſe flatteries:
                     
                        
But of reuenge I am not yet ſo faine,
                     To put my ſelfe vnto that needleſſe paine:
                     Becauſe I know a greater Power there is,
                     That noteth ſmaller iniuries then this;
                     And being ſtill as iuſt as it is ſtrong,
                     Apportions due reuenge for euery wrong.
                  
                  
                     But why (ſome ſay) ſhould his too fancy Rimes
                     Thus taxe the wiſe and great ones of our times?
                     It ſuites not with his yeeres to be ſo bold,
                     Nor fits it vs by him to be controld.
                     I muſt confeſſe ('tis very true indeed)
                     Such ſhould not of my cenſure ſtand in need.
                     But blame me not, I ſaw good Vertue poore,
                     
                        Deſert, among the moſt, thruſt out of doore,
                     
                        Honeſtie hated, Curteſie baniſhed,
                     
                        Rich men exceſſiue, poore men famiſhed:
                     Coldneſſe in Zeale, in Lawes partialitie,
                     
                        Friendſhip but Complement, and vaine Formalitie,
                     
                     
                        Art I perceiue contem'd, while moſt aduance
                     (To offices of worth) Rich Ignorance:
                     
                     And thoſe that ſhould our Lights and Teachers be
                     Liue (if not worſe) as wantonly as we.
                     Yea, I ſaw Nature from her courſe runne backe,
                     
                        Diſorders grow, Good Orders goe to wracke.
                     So to encreaſe what all the reſt beganne,
                     I to this current of confuſion ranne.
                     And ſeeing Age, left off the place of guiding,
                     Thus plaid the fancy wagge, and fell to chiding.
                  
                  
                     
                     Wherein, how euer ſome (perhaps) may deeme,
                     I am not ſo much faulty as I ſeeme:
                     For when the Elders wrong'd Suſanna's honer,
                     And none withſtood the Shame they laid vpon her;
                     A Childe roſe vp to ſtand in her defence,
                     And ſpight of wrong confirm'd her Innocence:
                     
                     To ſhew, thoſe muſt not, that good vndertake,
                     
                     
                        Straine curt'ſie, who ſhall do'
                              •
                           , for manners ſake.
                     
                     Nor doe I know, whether to me God gaue
                     A boldneſſe more then many others haue,
                     That I might ſhew the world what ſhamefull blot
                     
                        Vertue by her laſciurous Elders got.
                     Nor is't a wonder, as ſome doe ſuppoſe,
                     My Youth ſo much corruption can diſcloſe;
                     Since euery day the Sunne doth light mine eyes,
                     I am informed of new villanies:
                     
                        But it is rather to be wondred how
                     
                     
                        I either can, or dare be honeſt now.
                     
                  
                  
                     And though againe there be ſome others rage
                     That I ſhould dare (ſo much aboue mine age)
                     Thus cenſure each degree, both young and old,
                     I ſee not wherein I am ouer-bold.
                     For if I haue beene plaine with Vice, I care not,
                     There's nought that I know good, and can, and dare not.
                     Onely this one thing doth my minde deterre,
                     Euen a feare (through ignorance) to erre.
                  
                  
                     But oh knew I, what thou would'ſt well approue,
                     Or might the ſmall'ſt reſpect within thee moue;
                     
                        
So in the ſight of God it might be good,
                     And with the quiet of my conſcience ſtood:
                     (As well I know thy true integrity
                     Would command nothing againſt Piety:)
                     There's nought ſo dangerous, or full of feare,
                     That for my Soueraignes ſake I would not dare.
                     Which good beliefe, would it did not poſſeſſe thee;
                     Prouided ſome iuſt triall might rebleſſe me:
                     Yea, though a while I did endure the gall
                     Of thy diſpleaſure in this loathſome thrall.
                     For notwithſtanding in this place I lye
                     By the command of that Authoritie,
                     
                     Of which I haue ſo much reſpectiue care.
                     That in mine owne (and iuſt) defence I feare
                     To vſe the free ſpeech that I doe intend,
                     Leſt Ignorance, or Raſhneſſe ſhould offend.
                     Yet is my meaning and my thought as free
                     From wilfull wronging of thy Lawes or Thee,
                     
                     As he 
                           •
                        o whom thy Place and Perſons deareſt,
                     Or to himſelfe that finds his conſcience cle aeſt.
                     If there be wrong, 'tis not my making it,
                     All the offence is ſome's miſtaking it.
                     
                        And is there any Iuſtice borne of late,
                     
                     
                        Makes thoſe faults mine, which others perpetrate?
                     
                     What man could euer any Age yet finde,
                     That ſpent his ſpirits in this thankeleſſe kinde,
                     Shewing his meaning, to ſuch words could tye it,
                     That none could either wrong, or miſ-apply it.
                  
                  
                     
                     Nay, your owne Lawes, which (as you doe intend)
                     In plain'ſt and moſt effectuall words are penn'd,
                     Cannot be fram'd ſo well to your intent,
                     But ſome there be will erre from what you meant.
                     And yet (alas) I muſt be ty'de vnto
                     What neuer any man before could doe?
                     Muſt all I ſpeake, or write, ſo well be done
                     That none may pick more meanings thence then one?
                     Then all the world (I hope) will leaue diſ-vnion,
                     And euery man become of one opinion.
                     But ſince ſome may, what care ſoe're we take,
                     Diuers conſtructions of our Writings make,
                     The honeſt Readers euer will conceaue
                     The beſt intention's, and all others leaue:
                     Chiefly in that, where I fore-hand proteſt
                     My meaning euer was the honeſteſt,
                     And if I ſay ſo, what is he may know
                     So much as to affirme it was not ſo?
                     Sit other men ſo neare my thoughts to ſhow it,
                     Or is my heart ſo open that all know it?
                     Sure if it were, they would no ſuch things ſee,
                     As thoſe whereof ſome haue accuſed mee.
                     But I care leſſe how it be vnderſtood,
                     Becauſe the heauens know my intent was good.
                     And if it be ſo, that my too-free Rimes
                     
                     Doe much diſpleaſe the world, and theſe bad times;
                     'Tis not my fault, for had I been imploy'd
                     In ſomething elſe, all this had now been voyd.
                     
                        
Or if the world would but haue granted me
                     Wealth, or Affaires, whereon to buſie me,
                     I now vnheard of, peraduenture than,
                     Had been as mute as ſome rich Clergie-man.
                     
                  
                  
                     But they are much deceiu'd that thinke my minde
                     Will ere be ſtill, while it can doing find;
                     Or that vnto the world ſo much it leanes,
                     As to be curtold for default of meanes.
                     No, though moſt be, all Spirits are not earth,
                     Nor ſuting with the fortunes of their birth,
                     My body's ſubiect vnto many Powers:
                     But my ſoule's as free, as is the Emperours:
                     
                     And though to curbe her in, I oft aſſay,
                     She'le breake int' action ſpite of durt and clay.
                     And is't not better then to take this courſe,
                     Then fall to ſtudy miſchiefes and doe worſe?
                     I ſay ſhe muſt haue action, and ſhe ſhall:
                     For if ſhe will, how can I doe withall?
                     
                        And let thoſe that o're-buſie thinke me, know,
                     
                     
                        He made me, that knew, why he made me ſo.
                     
                     And though there's ſome that ſay my thoughts doe flie
                     A pitch beyond my ſtates ſufficiency;
                     My humble minde, I giue my Sauiour thanke
                     Aſpires nought yet, aboue my fortunes ranke.
                     But ſay it did, wil't not befit a man
                     To raiſe his thoughts as neere Heau'n as he can?
                     Muſt the free ſpirit ty'd and curbed be
                     According to the bodies pouerty?
                     
                        
Or can it euer be ſo ſubiect to
                     Baſe Change, to riſe, and fall, as fortunes doe?
                  
                  
                     Men borne to noble meanes, and vulgar mindes
                     Enioy their wealth; and there's no Law that bindes
                     Such to abate their ſubſtance, though their Pates
                     Want Braines, and they worth, to poſſeſſe ſuch ſtates.
                     So God to ſome, doth onely great mindes giue,
                     And little other meanes, whereon to liue.
                     What law or conſcience then ſhall make them ſmother
                     Their Spirit, which is their life, more then other
                     To bate their ſubſtance? ſince if 'twere confeſt,
                     That a braue minde could euer be ſuppreſt,
                     Were't reaſon any ſhould himſelfe depriue
                     Of what the whole world hath not power to giue?
                     For wealth is comon, and fooles get it to,
                     When to giue ſpirit's more then Kings can do.
                  
                  
                     I ſpeake not this, becauſe I thinke there be
                     More then the ordinareſt gifts in me;
                     But againſt thoſe, who thinke I doe preſume
                     On more then doth befit me to aſſume:
                     Or would haue all, whom Fortune barres from ſtore,
                     Make themſelues wretched, as ſhe makes them poore.
                     And' cauſe in other things ſhe is vnkind,
                     Smother the matchleſſe bleſſings of their minde:
                     Whereas (although her fauours doe forſake them)
                     Their minds are richer then the world can make them.
                     Why ſhould a good attempt diſgraced ſeeme,
                     Becauſe the perſon is of meane eſteeme?
                     
                        
Vertue's a chaſte Queene, and yet doth not ſcorne
                     To be embrac'd by him that's meaneſt borne,
                     Shee is the prop, that Maieſties ſupport,
                     Yet one whom Slaues as well as Kings may court.
                     She loueth all that beare affection to her,
                     And yeelds to any that hath heart to wooe her.
                     
                        So Vice, how high ſo e're ſhe be in place,
                     
                     
                        Is that which Groomes may ſpit at in diſgrace:
                     
                     She is a ſtrumpet, and may be abhorr'd,
                     Yea, ſpurn'd at in the boſome of a Lord.
                     
                     Yet had I ſpoke her faire, I had beene free,
                     As many others of her Louers be.
                     If her eſcapes I had not chanc'd to tell,
                     I might haue beene a villaine, and done well:
                     Gotten ſome ſpeciall fauour, and not ſate
                     As now I doe, ſhut vp within a grate.
                     
                     Or if I could haue hap't on ſome looſe ſtraine,
                     That might haue pleas'd the wanton Readers vaine:
                     Or but claw'd Pride, I now had been vnblam'd,
                     (Or elſe at leaſt there's ſome would not haue ſham'd
                     To plead my cauſe:) but ſee my fatall curſe,
                     Sure I was either mad, or ſomewhat worſe:
                     For I ſaw Vices followers brauely kept,
                     In Silkes they walkt, on beds of Downe they ſlept,
                     Richly they fed on dainties euermore,
                     They had their pleaſure, they had all things ſtore,
                     (Whil'ſt Vertue begg'd) yea, fauours had ſo many,
                     I knew they brook't not to be touch'd of any:
                     
                        
Yet could not I, like other men, be wiſe,
                     Nor learne (for all this) how to temporize;
                     But muſt (with too much honeſty made blind)
                     Vpbraid this loued darling of mankind:
                     Whereas I might haue better thriu'd by fayning:
                     Or if I could not chuſe, but be complaining,
                     More ſafe I might haue rail'd on Vertue ſure,
                     Becauſe her louers and her friends are fewer.
                     I might haue brought ſome other things to paſſe,
                     Made Fidlers Songs, or Ballads, like an Aſſe,
                     Or any thing almoſt indeed but this.
                     Yet ſince 'tis thus, l'me glad 'tis ſo amiſſe;
                     Becauſe if I am guilty of a crime,
                     'Tis that, wherein the beſt of euery time,
                     Hath beene found faulty (if they faulty be)
                     That doe reproue Abuſe and villany.
                     
                  
                  
                     For what I'me taxt, I can examples ſhow,
                     In ſuch old Authors as this State allow:
                     And I would faine once learne a reaſon why
                     They can haue kinder vſage here then I?
                     I muſe men doe not now in queſtion call
                     
                        Seneca, Horace, Perſius, Inuenall,
                     
                     And ſuch as they? Or why did not that Age
                     In which they liued, put them in a Cage?
                     
                     If I ſhould ſay, that men were iuſter then,
                     I ſhould neere hand be made vnſay't agen:
                     And therefore ſure I thinke I were as good
                     Leaue it to others to be vnderſtood.
                     
                        
Yet I as well may ſpeake, as deeme amiſſe,
                     For ſuch this Ages curious cunning is,
                     I ſcarcely dare to let mine heart thinke ought,
                     For there be ſome will ſeeme to know my thought,
                     Who may out-face me that I thinke awry,
                     When there's no witneſſe, but my Conſcience by:
                     And then I likely am as ill to ſpeed,
                     As if I ſpake, or did amiſſe indeed.
                  
                  
                     Yet leſt thoſe who (perhaps) may malice this,
                     Interpret alſo theſe few lines amiſſe,
                     Let them that after thee, ſhall reade or heare,
                     From a raſh cenſure of my thoughts forbeare.
                     Let them not mold the ſenſe that this containes
                     According to the forming of their braines,
                     Or thinke I dare, or can, here taxe thoſe Peeres,
                     
                     Whoſe Worths, their Honours, to my ſoule endeares,
                     (Thoſe by whoſe loued-fear'd Authority)
                     
                     I am reſtrained of my liberty:
                     For leſt there yet may be a man ſo ill,
                     To haunt my lines with his blacke Coment ſtill,
                     (In hope my lucke againe may be ſo good,
                     To haue my words once rightly vnderſtood)
                     This I proteſt, that I doe not condemne
                     
                     
                        Ought as vniuſt, that hath been done by them;
                     
                     For though my honeſt heart not guilty be
                     Of the leaſt thought, that may diſparage me;
                     Yet when ſuch men as I, ſhall haue ſuch foes,
                     
                     Accuſe me of ſuch crimes, to ſuch as thoſe,
                     
                     
                        
Till I had meanes my Innocence to ſhow,
                     Their Iuſtice could haue done no leſſe then ſo.
                  
                  
                     Nor haue I ſuch a proud conceited wit,
                     Or ſelfe-opinion of my knowledge yet,
                     To thinke it may not be that I haue run
                     Vpon ſome Errors in what I haue done,
                     Worthy this puniſhment which I endure;
                     (I ſay I cannot ſo my ſelfe aſſure)
                     For 'tis no wonder if their Wiſedomes can
                     Diſcouer Imperfections in a man
                     So weake as I, (more then himſelfe doth ſee)
                     Since my ſight dull with inſufficiencie,
                     
                     In men more graue, and wiſer farre then I,
                     Innumerable Errors doth eſpye,
                     Which they with all their knowledge I'le be bold,
                     Cannot (or will not) in themſelues behold.
                     But ere I will my ſelfe accuſe my Song,
                     
                     Or keepe a Tongue ſhall doe my Heart that wrong,
                     To ſay I willingly in what I penn'd,
                     Did ought that might a Goodmans ſight offend;
                     Or with my knowledge did inſert one word,
                     That might diſparage a true Honour'd Lord;
                     
                     
                        Let it be in my mouth a helpeleſſe ſore,
                     
                     
                        And neuer ſpeake to be beleeued more.
                     
                  
                  
                     Yet man irreſolute is, vnconſtant, weake,
                     And doth his purpoſe oft through frallty breake,
                     Leſt therefore I by force hereafter may
                     Be brought from this minde, and theſe words vnſay,
                     
                        
Here to the World I doe proclaime before,
                     If e're my reſolution be ſo poore,
                     T'is not the Right, but Might that makes me doe it;
                     Yea, nought but fearefull baſeueſſe brings me to it;
                     Which if I ſtill hate, as I now deteſt,
                     Neuer can come to harbor in my breſt.
                  
                  
                     Thus my fault then (if they a fault imply)
                     Is not alone an ill vnwillingly,
                     But alſo, might I know it, I entend,
                     Not onely to acknowledge, but amend:
                     Hoping that thou wilt not be ſo ſeuere,
                     To puniſh me aboue all other here.
                     But for m'intents ſake, and my loue to Truth,
                     
                     Impute my Errors to the heate of Youth,
                     
                     Or rather Ignorance; then to my Will,
                     
                     Which ſure I am was good, what e're be ill,
                     
                     And like to him now, in whoſe place thou art,
                     What e're the reſidue be, accept the Heart.
                     
                     But I grow tedious, and my loue abusd,
                     Diſturbs my thoughts, and makes my lines confus'd,
                     Yet pardon me, and daigne a gracious eye
                     On this my rude, vnfil'd Apologie.
                     
                     Let not the bluntneſſe of my phraſe offend,
                     Weight but the matter, and not how 'tis penn'd,
                     
                     By theſe abrupt lines in my iuſt defence,
                     Iudge what I might ſay for my innocence.
                     
                        And thinke, I more could ſpeake, that here I ſpare,
                     
                     
                        Becauſe my power ſuites not to what I dare.
                     
                     
                        
My vnaffected ſtile retaines (you ſee)
                     Her old Frize-Cloake of young Ruſticitiê:
                     
                     If others will vſe neater tearmes, they may,
                     Ruder I am, yet loue as well as they:
                     And (though if I would ſmooth't I cannot doo't)
                     
                     My humbel heart I bend beneath thy foot:
                     While here my Muſe her diſcontent doth ſing
                     To thee her great Apollo, and my King:
                     
                     Emploring thee by that high ſacred Name,
                     
                     By Iuſtice, by thoſe Powers that I could name:
                     By whatſoe're may moue, entreate I thee,
                     
                     
                        To be what thou art vnto all, to mee;
                     
                     I feare it not, yet giue me leaue to pray,
                     I may haue foes, whoſe power doth beare ſuch ſway;
                     If they but ſay I'me guilty of offence,
                     'Twere vaine for me to pleade my innocence.
                  
                  
                     But as the Name of God thou bear'ſt, I truſt
                     Thou imitat'ſt him to, in being iuſt:
                     That when the right of Truth thou comm'ſt to ſcan,
                     Thoul't not reſpect the perſon of the man:
                     For if thou doe, then is my hope vndone;
                     The head-long-way to ruine I muſt runne.
                     For whil'ſt that they haue all the helpes which may
                     Procure their pleaſure with my ſoone decay:
                     
                        How is it like that I my peace can win me,
                     
                     
                        When all the ayde I haue, comes from within me?
                     
                     Therefore (good King) that makſt thy bounty ſhine
                     Sometime on thoſe whoſe worths are ſmall as mine;
                     
                        
                        Oh ſaue me now from Enuies dangerous ſhelfe,
                     
                     
                        Or make me able, and I'le ſaue my ſelfe.
                     
                     Let not the want of that make me a ſcorne,
                     To which there are more Fooles then Wiſe-men borne.
                     Let me not for my Meanneſſe be diſpiſ'd,
                     Nor others greatneſſe make their words more priz'd,
                     For whatſoe're my outward Fate appeares,
                     My Soule's as good, my Heart as great as theirs.
                     My loue vnto my Country and to thee,
                     
                     As much as his that more would ſeeme to be.
                     And would this Age allow but meanes to ſhow it,
                     Thoſe that miſdoubt it, ſhould ere long time know it.
                  
                  
                     
                        Pitty my youth then, and let me not lie
                     
                     
                        Waſting my time in fruitleſſe miſerie.
                     
                     Though I am meane, I may be borne vnto
                     That ſeruice, which another cannot doe.
                     
                        In vaine the little Mouſe the Lyon ſpar'd not,
                     
                     
                        She did him pleaſure, when a greater dar'd not.
                     
                     If ought that I haue done, doe thee diſpleaſe,
                     Thy miſconceiued wrath I will appeaſe,
                     Or ſacrifice my heart; but why ſhould I
                     Suffer for God knowes whom, I know not why?
                     If that my words through ſome miſtake offends,
                     Let them conceiue them right and make amends.
                     Or were I guilty of offence indeed,
                     
                        One fault (they ſay) doth but one pardon need:
                     
                     Yet one I had, and now I want one more;
                     For once I ſtood accus'd for this before.
                     
                        
As I remember I ſo long agon,
                     Sung Thame, and Rhynes Epithalamion:
                     
                     When SHE that from thy Royall ſelfe deriues
                     Thoſe gracious vertues that beſt Title giues:
                     
                        She that makes Rhine proud of her excellence,
                     And me oft minde her reuerence;
                     Daign'd in her great good-nature to encline
                     Her gentle care to ſuch a cauſe as mine;
                     And which is more, vouchſaf'd her word, to cleare
                     Me from all dangers (if there any were,)
                     So that I doe not now intreate, or ſue
                     For any great boone, or requeſt that's new:
                     But onely this (though abſent from the Land)
                     
                        Her former fauour ſtill in force might ſtand:
                     
                     
                        And that her word (who preſent was ſo deere)
                     
                     
                        Might be as powerfull, as when ſhe was here.
                     
                     Which if I finde, and with thy fauour may
                     Haue leaue to ſhake my loathed bands away,
                     (As I doe hope I ſhall) and be ſet free
                     From all the troubles, this hath brought on me,
                     Ple make her Name giue life vnto a Song,
                     
                     Whoſe neuer-dying note ſhall laſt as long
                     As there is either Riuer, Groue or Spring,
                     
                     Or Downe for Sheepe, or Shepheards Lad to ſing.
                     Yea, I will teach my Muſe to touch a ſtraine,
                     That was ne're reach't to yet by any Swaine.
                     
                     For though that many deeme my yeeres vnripe,
                     Yet I haue learn'd to tune an Oaten Pipe,
                     
                        
Whereon I'le try what muſicke I can make me,
                     (Vntill Bellona with her Trumpe awake me.)
                     And ſince the world will not haue Vice thus ſhowne,
                     By blazing Vertue I will make it knowne.
                     Then if the Court will not my lines approue
                     I'le goe vnto ſome Mountaine, or thicke Groue:
                     
                     There to my fellow Shepheards will I ſing,
                     Tuning my Reede vnto ſome dancing Spring,
                     
                     In ſuch a note, that none ſhould dare to trouble it,
                     Till the Hils anſwere, and the Woods redouble it.
                     And peraduenture I may then goe neare
                     To ſpeake of ſomething thoul't be pleas'd to heare:
                     And that which thoſe who now my tunes abhorre,
                     Shall reade, and like, and daigne to loue me for:
                     But the meane while, oh paſſe not this ſuite by,
                     Let thy free hand ſigne me my liberty:
                     
                     And if my loue may moue thee more to do,
                     
                        Good King conſider this my trouble to.
                     Others haue found thy fauour in diſtreſſe,
                     Whoſe loue to thee and thine I thinke was leſſe.
                     And I might fitter for thy ſeruice liue
                     
                     On what would not be much for thee to giue.
                  
                  
                     And yet I aske it not for that I feare
                     The outward meanes of life ſhould faile me here:
                     For though I want to compaſſe thoſe good ends
                     
                     Iaime at for my Countrie and my Friends,
                     
                     In this poore ſtate I can as well content me,
                     As if that I had Wealth and Honours lent me,
                     
                        
Nor for my owne ſake doe I ſeeke to ſhunne
                     This thraldome, wherein now I ſeeme vndone:
                     For though I prize my Freedome more then Gold,
                     
                     And vſe the meanes to free my ſelfe from hold,
                     
                        Yet with a minde (I hope) vnchang'd and free,
                     
                     
                        Here can I liue, and play with miſerie:
                     
                     
                        Yea, in deſpight of want and ſlauerie,
                     
                     
                        Laugh at the world in all her brauerie.
                     
                     
                        Here haue I learn'd to make my greateſt Wrongs
                     
                        Matter of Mirth, and ſubiects but for Songs:
                     
                        Here can I ſmile to ſee my ſelfe neglected,
                     
                     
                        And how the meane mans ſuite is diſ-reſpected;
                     
                     
                        Whil'ſt thoſe that are more rich, and better friended,
                     
                     
                        Can haue twice greater faults thrice ſooner ended.
                     
                  
                  
                     All this, yea more, I ſee and ſuffer to,
                     Yet liue content midſt diſcontents I do.
                     Which whil'ſt I can, it is all one to me,
                     Whether in Priſon or abroad it be.
                     For ſhould I ſtill lye here diſtreſt and poore,
                     
                     
                        It ſhall not make me breathe a ſigh the more;
                     
                     Since to my ſelfe it is indifferent,
                     Where the ſmall remnant of my daies be ſpent,
                     But for Thy ſake, my Countries, and my Friends,
                     
                     For whom, more then my ſelfe, God this life lends,
                     
                        I would not, could I helpe it, be a ſcorne,
                     
                     
                        But (if I might) liue free, as I was borne:
                     
                     Or rather for my Miſtris vertues ſake,
                     
                        Faire Vertue, of whom moſt account I make,
                     
                        
                        If I can chuſe, I will not be debas'd
                     
                     
                        In this laſt action, leſt She be diſgrac'd:
                     
                     For 'twas the loue of her that brought me to,
                     What Spleene nor Enuie could not make me do.
                     And if her ſeruants be no more regarded;
                     If enemies of Vice be thus rewarded,
                     And I ſhould alſo Vertues wrongs conceale,
                     And if none liu'd to whom ſhe dar'd appeale:
                     Will they that doe not yet her worth approue,
                     Be euer drawne to entertaine her loue,
                     
                     When they ſhall ſee him plagu'd as an Offender,
                     
                     Who for the loue he beares her, doth commend her?
                  
                  
                     This may to others more offenſiue be,
                     Then preiudiciall any way to me:
                     For who will his endeauours euer bend
                     To follow her, whom there is none will friend?
                     Some I doe hope there be that nothing may
                     From loue of Truth and Honeſty diſmay.
                     But who will (that ſhall ſee my euill Fortune)
                     
                     The remedy of Times Abuſe importune?
                     Who will againe, when they haue ſmother'd me,
                     Dare to oppoſe the face of Villany?
                     
                     Whereas he muſt be faine to vndertake
                     A Combat with a ſecond Lernean Snake;
                     Whoſe euer-growing heads when as he crops,
                     Not onely two ſprings, for each one he lops,
                     But alſo he ſhall ſee in midſt of dangers,
                     Thoſe he thought friends turne foes, at leaſt-wiſe ſtranger:
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     More I could ſpeake, but ſure if this doe faile me,
                     I neuer ſhall doe ought that will auaile me;
                     Nor care to ſpeake againe, vnleſſe it be
                     To him that knowes how heart and tongue agree;
                     
                     No, nor to liue, when none dares vndertake
                     To ſpeake one word for honeſt Vertues ſake.
                     But let his will be done, that beſt knowes what
                     Will be my future good, and what will not.
                     Hap well or ill, my ſpotleſſe meaning's faire,
                     And for thee, this ſhall euer be my prayer,
                     
                        That thou maiſt here enioy a long-bleſt Raigne,
                     
                     
                        And dying, be in Heauen re-crown'd againe.
                     
                  
                  
                     SO now, if thou haſt daign'd my Lines to heare,
                     There's nothing can befall me that I feare:
                     For if thou haſt compaſſion on my trouble,
                     The Ioy I ſhall receiue will be made double;
                     And if I fall, it may ſome Glory be,
                     
                        That none but IOVE himſelfe did ruine me.
                     
                  
                  
                     Your Maieſties moſt loyall Subiect, and yet Priſoner in the Marſhalſey, GEORGE WITHER.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Epithalamia: OR NVPTIALL POEMS VPON THE MOST BLESSED AND HAPPY MARRIAGE betweene the High and Mighty Prince Frederick the fifth, Count Palatine of the Rhine, Duke of Bauier, &c. AND THE MOST VERTVOVS, Gracious, and thrice Excellent Princeſſe, Elizabeth, Sole Daughter to our dread Soueraigne, Iames, by the grace of God King of Great Britaine, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c. Celebrated at White-Hall the fourteenth of February. 1612.
                  Written by George Wither.
                  
                  
                     LONDON, Printed by T. S. for Iohn Budge, dwelling in Pauls-Church-yard, at the ſigne of the Greene Dragon, 1622.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE ALL-VERTVOVS AND THRICE EXCELLENT PRINCESSE Elizabeth, ſole daughter to our dread Soueraigne, Iames by the grace of God, King of Great Britaine, France and Ireland, &c. AND WIFE TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, FREDERICK the fifth, Count Palatine of the Rheine, Duke of Bauier, &c. Elector, and Arch-ſ
                        •
                     w er to the ſacred Roman Empire, during the vacancy Vicar of the ſame, and Knight of the moſt honorable Order of the Garter.
                  
                  
                     George Wither wiſheth all the Health; Ioyes, Honours, and Felicities of this World, in this life, and the perfections of eternity in the World to come.
               
               
                  
                  
                  To the Chriſtian Readers.
                  
                     REaders; for that in my booke of Satyricall Eſſayes, I haue been deemed ouer Cynicall; to ſhew, that I am not wholly inclined to that Vaine: But indeede eſpecially, out of the loue which in duty I owe to thoſe incomparable Princes, I haue in honour of their Royall Solemnities, publiſhed theſe ſhort Epithalamiaes. By which you may perceiue (how euer the world thinke of me) I am not of ſuch a Churliſh Conſtitution, but I can afford Vertue her deſerued honour; and haue as well an

affable looke to encourage Honeſty; as a ſterne frowne to cast on Villanie: If the Times would ſuffer me, I could be as pleaſing as others; and perhaps ere long I will make you amends for my former rigor; Meane while I commit this vnto your cenſures; and bid you farewell.
                  
                     G. W.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  Epithalamion.
                  
                     BRight Northerne Starre, and great Mineruaes peere,
                  Sweete Lady of this Day: Great Britaines deere.
                  Loe thy poore Vaſſall, that was erſt ſo rude,
                  With his moſt Ruſticke Satyrs to intrude,
                  Once more like a poore Siluan now drawes neare;
                  And in thy ſacred Preſence dares appeare.
                  Oh let not that ſweete Bowe thy Brow be bent,
                  To ſcarre him with a Shaft of diſcontent:
                  One looke with Anger, nay thy gentleſt Frowne,
                  
                  Is twice enough to caſt a Greater downe.
                  My Will is euer, neuer to offend,
                  Theſe that are good; and what I here intend,
                  Your Worth compels me to. For lately greeu'd,
                  More then can be expreſt, or well beleeu'd;
                  Minding for euer to abandon ſport,
                  And liue exilde from places of reſort;
                  Careleſſe of all, I yeelding to ſecuritie,
                  Thought to ſhut vp my Muſe in darke obſcuritie:
                  
                     
And in content, the better to repoſe,
                  A lonely Groue vpon a Mountaine choſe.
                  Eaſt from Caer Winn, mid-way twixt Arle and Dis,
                  
                  True Springs, where Britains true Arcadia is.
                  But ere I entred my entended courſe,
                  
                     Great Aeolus began to offer force.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ere re
                        
                           •
                        ers and 
                           •
                        ibes the Winter, 
                           〈◊〉
                         was ſo 
                           •…
                        ing 
                           〈…〉
                        
                      The boiſterous King was growne ſo mad with rage,
                  That all the Earth, was but his furies ſtage.
                  
                     Fire, Ayre, Earth, Sea, were intermixt in one:
                  Yet Fire, through Water, Earth and Ayre ſhone.
                  The Sea, as if ſhe ment to whelme them vnder,
                  Beat on the Cliffes, and rag'd more loud then thunder:
                  And whil'ſt the vales ſhe with ſalt waues did fill,
                  The Aire ſhowr'd flouds, that drencht our higheſt hill;
                  And the proud trees, that would no dutie know;
                  Lay ouer-turned, twenties in a Row.
                  Yea, euery Man for feare, fell to Deuotion;
                  
                  Leſt the whole Ile ſhould haue bin drencht in th'Ocean.
                  Which I perceiuing, coniur'd vp my Muſe,
                  
                  The Spirit, whoſe good helpe I ſometime vſe:
                  And though I ment to breake her reſt no more,
                  I was then faine her aide for to implore.
                  And by her helpe indeed, I came to know,
                  Why, both the Ayre and Seas were troubled ſo.
                  For hauing vrg'd her, that ſhe would vnfold
                  What cauſe ſhe knew: Thus much at laſt ſhe told.
                  
                     Of late (quoth ſhe) there is by powers Diuine;
                  
                  
                     A match concluded, twixt Great Thame and Rhine.
                  
                     
                     Two famous Riuers, equall both to Nile:
                  
                     The one, the pride of Europes greateſt Ile.
                  
                  
                     Th'other diſdaining to be cloſely pent;
                  
                  
                     Waſhes a great part of the Continent.
                  
                     Yet with abundance, doth the Wants ſupply,
                  
                  
                     Of the ſtill-thirſting Sea, that's neuer dry.
                  
                  
                     And now, theſe, being not alone endear'd,
                  
                  
                     To mightie Neptune, and his watrie Heard:
                  
                     But alſo to the great and dreadfull Ioue,
                  
                     With all his ſacred Companies aboue,
                  
                  
                     Both haue aſſented by their Loues inuiting:
                  
                  
                     To grace (with their owne preſence) this Vniting.
                  Ioue call'd a Summons to the Worlds great wonder,
                  
                  
                     'Twas that we heard of late, which we thought thunder. 
                     The reaſon of the 
                           〈◊〉
                         Winter.
                  
                  
                     A thouſand Legions he intends to ſend them,
                  
                  
                     Of Cherubins and Angels to attend them:
                  
                  
                     And thoſe ſtrong Windes, that did ſuch bluſtring keepe,
                  
                  
                     Were but the Tritons, ſounding in the Deepe;
                  
                     To warne each Riuer, petty Streame and Spring,
                  
                     Their aide vnto their Soueraigne to bring.
                  
                  
                     The Floods and Showres that came ſo plenteous downe,
                  
                  
                     And lay entrencht in euery Field and Towne,
                  
                     Were but retainers to the Nobler ſort,
                  
                  
                     That owe their Homage at the Watrie Court:
                  
                     Or elſe the Streames not pleaſ'd with their owne ſtore,
                  
                  
                     To grace the Thames, their Miſtris, borrowed more.
                  
                  
                     Exacting from their neighbouring Dales and Hills,
                  
                     But by conſent all (nought againſt their wills.)
                  
                  
                     
                     Yet now, ſince in this ſtirre are brought to ground
                  
                  
                     Many faire buildings, many hundreds drown'd,
                  
                  
                     And daily found of broken Ships great ſtore,
                  
                  
                     That lie diſmembred vpon euery ſhore:
                  
                  
                     With diuers other miſchiefes knowne to all,
                  
                  
                     This is the cauſe that thoſe great harmes befall.
                  
                  
                     Whilſt other, things in readineſſe, did make,
                  
                  Hells hatefull Hags from out their priſons brake: 
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         cauſe of all 
                           〈◊〉
                         dangers as 
                           〈◊〉
                         during 
                           〈◊〉
                         diſtempera
                        
                           •…
                         of the ayre.
                  
                  
                     And ſpighting at this hopefull match, began
                  
                  
                     To wreake their wrath on Ayre, Earth, Sea, and Man.
                  
                     Some hauing ſhapes of Romiſh ſhauelings got,
                  
                  
                     Spew'd out their venome; and began to plot
                  
                  
                     Which way to thwart it: others made their way
                  
                  
                     With much diffraction thorough Land and Sea
                  
                     Extreamely raging. But Almightie Ioue
                  
                     Perceiues their Hate and Enuie from aboue:
                  
                  
                     He'le checke their furie, and in yrons chain'd,
                  
                  
                     Their libertie abus'd, ſhall be reſtrain'd:
                  
                  
                     Hee'le ſhut them vp, from comming to moleſt
                  
                  
                     The Meriments of Hymens holy feaſt.
                  
                  
                     Where ſhall be knit that ſacred Gordian knot,
                  
                  
                     Which in no age to come ſhall be forgot.
                  
                  
                     Which Policie nor Force ſhall nere vntie,
                  
                  
                     But muſt continue to eternitie:
                  
                  
                     Which for the whole Worlds good was fore-decree'd,
                  
                  
                     With Hope expected long; now come indeed.
                  
                  
                     And of whoſe future glory, worth, and merit
                  
                     Much I could ſpeake with a prophetike ſpirit.
                  
                     
Thus by my Muſes deare aſſiſtance, finding
                  The cauſe of this diſturbance, with more minding 
                  
                     
                        •
                     y Countries welfare, then my owne content, He noteth the moſt 
                           〈◊〉
                         alteration of 
                           〈◊〉
                         weather a 
                           〈◊〉
                         before theſe Nuptials.
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd longing to behold this Tales euent:
                  My lonely life I ſuddenly forſooke,
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd to the Court againe my lourney tooke.
                  Meane-while I ſaw the furious Windes were laid;
                  The riſings of the ſwelling Waters ſtaid.
                  The Winter gan to change in euery thing.
                  And ſeem'd to borrow mildneſſe of the Spring.
                  
                  The Violet and Primroſe freſh did grow;
                  And as in Aprill, trim'd both Cops and rowe.
                  
                  The Citie, that I left in mourning clad,
                  
                     
                        •
                     rouping, as if it would haue ſtill beene ſad.
                  
                     
                        •
                      found deckt vp in roabes ſo neat and trimme,
                  
                     
                        •
                     aire Iris would haue look't but ſtale and dimme
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      her beſt colours, had ſhe there appear'd,
                  The Sorrowes of the Court I found well cleer'd,
                  Their wofull habits quite caſt off, and ty'rd
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      ſuch a glorious faſhion: I admir'd. The 
                           〈…〉
                         preparation 
                           〈◊〉
                         this 
                           〈◊〉
                         the ſtate wh
                           ••…
                         of 
                           •
                        is here 
                           ••…
                        gorically 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                     
                  
                  All her chiefe Peeres and choiſeſt beauties to,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      greater pompe, then Mortals vſe to doe,
                  Wait as attendants. Iuno's come to ſee;
                  
                     
                        •
                     ecauſe ſhe heares that this ſolemnitie
                  
                     
                        •
                     xceeds faire Hippodamia's (where the ſtrife
                  Twixt her, Minerua, and lame Vulcans wife
                  
                     
                        •
                     id firſt ariſe,) and with her leades along
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      noble, ſtately, and a mighty throng.
                  
                     
                     Venus, (attended with her rareſt features,
                  Sweet louely-ſmiling, and heart-mouing creatures,
                  The very faireſt Iewels of her treaſure,
                  Able to moue the ſenceles ſtones to pleaſure.)
                  Of all her ſweeteſt Saints, hath robd their ſhrines;
                  And brings them for the Courtiers Valentines.
                  
                  Nor doth Dame Pallas, from theſe triumphs lurke;
                  Her nobleſt wits, ſhe freely ſets on worke.
                  Of late ſhe ſummond them vnto this place,
                  To doe your maskes and Reuels better grace.
                  Here Meaning the 
                           〈…〉
                        , and 
                           〈…〉
                          of  
                           〈…〉
                         on 
                           〈◊〉
                         water, which 
                           〈◊〉
                         moſt 
                           〈…〉
                        . 
                     Mars himſelfe to, clad in Armour bright,
                  Hath ſhowne his furie in a bloudleſſe fight;
                  And both on land and water, ſternely dreſt,
                  Acted his bloudy Stratagems in ieſt:
                  Which (to the people, frighted by their error,)
                  With ſeeming wounds and death did ad more terror,
                  Beſides, to giue the greater cauſe of wonder,
                  
                     Ioue did vouchſafe a ratling peale of thunder:
                  
                     Comets and Meteors by the ſtarres exhald. 
                        
                           〈…〉
                         workes 
                           〈…〉
                        .
                  
                  Were from the Middle-Region lately cald;
                  And to a place appointed made repaire,
                  To ſhow their fierie Friſcols in the aire,
                  People innumerable doe reſort,
                  As if all Europe here would keepe one Court:
                  Yea, Hymen in his Safferon-coloured weed,
                  To celebrate his rites is full agreed.
                  All this I ſee: which ſeeing, makes me borrow
                  Some of their mirth a while, and lay downe ſorrow.
                  
                     
And yet not this: but rather the delight
                  My heart doth taken in the much hoped ſight
                  Of theſe thy glories, long already due;
                  And this ſweet comfort, that my eyes doe view
                  Thy happy Bridegroome, Prince Count Palatine,
                  
                  Now thy beſt friend and trueſt Valentine.
                  
                  Vpon whoſe brow, my minde doth reade the ſtorie
                  Of mightie fame, and a true future glorie.
                  Me thinkes I doe foreſee already, how
                  
                     Princes and Monarchs at his ſtirrop how:
                  I ſee him ſhine in ſteele; the bloudy fields
                  Already won, and how his proud foe yeelds.
                  God hath ordaind him happineſſe great ſtore:
                  And yet in nothing is he happy more,
                  Then in thy loue (faire Princeſſe:) For (vnleſſe Heauen, like to Man, be prone to fickleneſſe)
                  Thy Fortunes muſt be greater in effect,
                  Then time makes ſhow of, or men can expect.
                  Yet, notwithſtanding all thoſe goods of fate,
                  
                  Thy Minde ſhall euer be aboue thy ſtate:
                  
                  For ouer and beſide thy proper merit,
                  Our laſt Eliza grants her Noble ſpirit
                  To be re-doubled on thee; and your names
                  
                  Being both one, ſhall giue you both one fames.
                  Oh bleſſed thou! and they to whom thou giu'ſt
                  The leaue for to be attendants where thou liu'ſt:
                  And hapleſſe we, that muſt of force let goe,
                  The matchleſſe treaſure we eſteeme of ſo.
                  
                     
But yet we truſt 'tis for our good and thine;
                  Or elſe thou ſhouldſt not change thy Thame for Rhyne.
                  
                  We hope that this will the vniting proue
                  Of Countries and of Nations by your loue:
                  
                  And that from out your bleſſed loynes, ſhall come
                  Another terror to the Whore of Rome:
                  
                  And ſuch a ſtout Achilles, as ſhall make
                  Her tottering Walls and weake foundation ſhake:
                  For Thetis-like, thy fortunes doe require,
                  Thy Iſſue ſhould be greater then his fire.
                  
                  But (Gracious Princeſſe) now ſince thus it fares,
                  And God ſo well for you and vs prepares:
                  Since he hath daign'd ſuch honours for to doe you,
                  And ſhowne himſelfe ſo fauourable to you:
                  Since he hath chang'd your ſorrowes, and your ſadnes,
                  Into ſuch great and vnexpected gladneſſe:
                  Oh now remember you to be at leaſure,
                  Sometime to thinke on him amidſt your pleaſure:
                  Let not theſe glories of the world deceaue you,
                  Nor her vaine fauours of yourſelfe bereaue you.
                  Conſider yet for all this Iollitie,
                  Y'are mortall, and muſt feele mortalitie:
                  And that God can in midſt of all your Ioyes,
                  Quite daſh this pompe, and fill you with annoyes.
                  
                     Triumphes are fit for Princes; yet we finde
                  They ought not wholly to take vp the minde,
                  Nor yet to be let paſſe; as things in vaine:
                  For out of all things, wit will knowledge gaine.
                  
                     
                     Muſique may teach of difference in degree,
                  The beſt tun'd Common-Weales will framed bee:
                  And that he moues, and liues with greateſt grace,
                  That vnto Time and Meaſure ties his pace.
                  Then let theſe things be He declares what vſ
                           •
                         is to be made of theſe ſhowes and triumphes, and wha
                           •
                         meditations the minde may be occupied about, when 
                           〈◊〉
                         behold them. 
                     Emblemes, to preſent
                  Your minde with a more laſting true content.
                  When you behold the infinite reſort,
                  The glory and the ſplendor of the Court;
                  What wondrous fauours God doth here bequeath you,
                  How many hundred thouſands are beneath you;
                  And view with admiration your great bliſſe,
                  Then with your ſelfe you may imagine this.
                  
                     'Tis but a blaſt, or tranſitory ſhade,
                  
                  
                     Which in the turning of a hand may fade.
                  
                  
                     Honours, which you your ſelfe did neuer winne,
                  
                  
                     And might (had God been pleas'd) anothers binne.
                  
                  
                     And thinke, if ſhadowes haue ſuch maieſtie,
                  
                  
                     What are the glories of eternitie;
                  
                  Then by this image of a fight on Sea,
                  
                  Wherein you heard the thundring Canons plea;
                  And ſaw flames breaking from their murthering throts,
                  Which in true skirmiſh, fling reſiſtleſſe ſhots;
                  Your wiſedome may (and will no doubt) begin,
                  To caſt what perill a poore Souldiers in:
                  You will conceaue his miſeries and cares,
                  How many dangers, deaths, and wounds he ſhares:
                  Then though the moſt paſs't ouer, and neglect them,
                  That Rethoricke will moue you to reſpect them.
                  
                     
And if hereafter, you ſhould hap to ſee
                  Such Mimick Apes (that Courts diſgraces be:)
                  I meane ſuch Chamber-combatants; who neuer
                  Weare other Helmet, then a Hat of Beuer:
                  
                  Or nere board Pinnace but in ſilken ſaile;
                  And in the ſteed of boyſterous ſhirts of maile,
                  Goe arm'd in Cambrick: If that ſuch a Kite
                  
                  (I ſay) ſhould ſcorne an Eagle in your ſight;
                  Your wiſedome iudge (by this experience) can,
                  Which hath moſt worth, Hermaphrodite, or Man.
                  
                  The nights ſtrange Fireworkes. proſpects, made to feed the eies,
                  With Artfull fiers, mounted in the skies:
                  Graced with horred claps of ſulphury thunders;
                  May make you minde th' Almighties greater wonders.
                  Nor is there any thing, but you may thence
                  Reape inward gaine; as well as pleaſe the Senſe.
                  
                  But pardon me (oh faireſt) that am bold,
                  My heart thus freely, plainely, to vnfold.
                  What though I know, you knew all this before:
                  My loue this ſhowes, and that is ſomething more.
                  Doe not my honeſt ſeruice here diſdaine,
                  I am a faithfull, though an humble Swaine.
                  I'me none of thoſe that haue the meanes or place,
                  With ſhowes of coſt to doe your Nuptials grace:
                  But onely maſter of mine owne deſire,
                  Am hither come with others to admire.
                  I am not of thoſe Heliconian wits;
                  Whoſe pleaſing ſtraines the Courts knowne humour fits.
                  
                     
But a poore rurall Shepheard, that for need,
                  Can make ſheepe Muſique on an Oaten reed:
                  Yet for my loue (Ile this be bold to boaſt)
                  It is as much to you, as his that's moſt.
                  Which, ſince I no way elſe can now explaine,
                  If you'l in midſt of all theſe glories daigne,
                  To lend your eares vnto my Muſe ſo long,
                  She ſhall declare it in a Wedding ſong.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Epithalamion.
                  
                     
                        The Marriage being on S. Valentines day, the Author ſhowes it by beginning with the ſalutation of a ſuppoſed Valentine.
                        VAlentine, good morrow to thee, 
                     Loue and ſeruice both I owe thee:
                     And would waite vpon thy pleaſure;
                     But I cannot be at leaſure:
                     For, I owe this day as debter,
                     To (a thouſand times) thy better.
                  
                  
                     
                        Hymen now will haue effected
                     What hath been ſo long expected:
                     
                        Thame thy Miſtris, now vnwedded;
                     Soone, muſt with a Prince be bedded.
                     If thou'lt ſee her Virgin euer,
                     Come, and doe it now, or neuer.
                  
                  
                     Where art thou, oh faire Aurora?
                     
                     Call in Ver and Lady Flora:
                     
                     And you daughters of the Morning,
                     
                     In your near'ſt, and fear'ſt adorning:
                     Cleare your fore-heads, and be ſprightfull,
                     That this day may ſeeme delightfull.
                  
                  
                     
                     All you Nimphs that vſe the Mountaines,
                     Or delight in groues and fountaines;
                     
                        Shepheardeſſes, you that dally,
                     Either vpon Hill or Valley:
                     And you daughters of the Bower,
                     
                     That acknowledge Veſtaes power.
                  
                  
                     Oh you ſleepe too long; awake yee,
                     See how Time doth ouertake yee.
                     Harke, the Larke is vp and ſingeth,
                     And the houſe with ecchoes ringeth.
                     Pretious howers, why neglect yee,
                     Whil'ſt affaires thus expect yee?
                  
                  
                     Come away vpon my bleſſing,
                     The Bride-chamber lies to dreſſing:
                     Strow the wayes with leaues of Roſes,
                     
                     Some make garlands, ſome make poſes:
                     
                     'Tis a fauour, and't may ioy you,
                     That your Miſtris vvill employ you.
                  
                  
                     Where's 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           
                         
                        Sabrina, with her daughters,
                     That doe ſport about her waters:
                     Thoſe that with their lockes of Amber,
                     
                     Haunt the fruitfull hills of Wales, Camber:
                     We muſt haue to fill the number.
                     All the Nimphs of Trent and Humber.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Fie, your haſte is ſcarce ſufficing,
                     For the Bride's awake and riſing.
                     Enter beauties, and attend her;
                     All your helpes and ſeruice lend her:
                     With your quaintſt and new'ſt deuiſes,
                     Trim your Lady, faire Thamiſis.
                     
                  
                  
                     See; ſhee's ready: with Ioyes greet her,
                     Lads, goe bid the Bride-groome meet her:
                     But from raſh approach aduiſe him,
                     Leſt a too much Ioy ſurprize him,
                     None I ere knew yet, that dared,
                     View an Angell vnprepared.
                  
                  
                     Now vnto the Church ſhe hies her;
                     
                        Enuie burſts, if ſhe eſpies her:
                     In her geſtures as ſhe paces,
                     Are vnited all the Graces:
                     
                     Which who ſees and hath his ſenſes,
                     Loues in ſpight of all defences.
                  
                  
                     O moſt true maieſtick creature!
                     
                        Nobles did you note her feature?
                     Felt you not an inward motion,
                     Tempting Loue to yeeld deuotion;
                     And as you were euen deſiring,
                     Something check you for aſpiring?
                  
                  
                     
                     That's her Vertue which ſtill tameth
                     Looſe deſires, and bad thoughts blameth:
                     For whil'ſt others were vnruly,
                     She obſeru'd Diana truly:
                     And hath by that meanes obtained
                     Gifts of her that none haue gained.
                  
                  
                     Yon's the Bride-groome, d'yee not ſpie him?
                     See how all the Ladies eye him.
                     
                        Venus his perfection findeth,
                     And no more Adonis mindeth.
                     Much of him my heart diuineth:
                     On whoſe brow all Vertue ſhineth.
                  
                  
                     Two ſuch Creatures Nature would not
                     Let one place long keepe: ſhe ſhould not:
                     One ſhee'l haue (ſhe cares not whether,)
                     But our Loues can ſpare her neither.
                     Therefore ere we'le ſo be ſpighted,
                     They in one ſhall be vnited.
                  
                  
                     
                        Natures ſelfe is well contented,
                     By that meanes to be preuented.
                     And behold they are retired,
                     So conioyn'd, as we deſired:
                     Hand in hand, not onely fixed,
                     But their hearts, are intermixed.
                  
                  
                     
                     Happy they and we that ſee it,
                     For the good of Europe be it.
                     And heare Heauen my deuotion,
                     Make this Rhyne and Thame an Ocean:
                     
                     That it may with might and wonder,
                     Whelme the pride of Tyber 
                              〈◊〉
                            the Ri
                           
                              •
                           er which 
                              〈…〉
                            Rome. 
                        Tyber vnder.
                  
                  
                     Now yon  White
                           
                              •
                           all. 
                        Hall their perſons ſhroudeth,
                     Whither all this people croudeth:
                     There they feaſted are with plenty,
                     Sweet Ambroſia is no deinty.
                     Groomes quaffe Nectar; for theres meeter,
                     Yea, more coſtly wines and ſweeter.
                  
                  
                     
                        Young men all, for ioy goe ring yee,
                     And your merrieſt Carols ſing yee.
                     Here's of Damzels many choices,
                     Let them tune their ſweeteſt voyces.
                     Fet the Muſes to, to cheare them;
                     They can rauiſh all that heare them.
                  
                  
                     
                        Ladies, 'tis their Highneſſe pleaſures,
                     To behold you foot the Meaſures:
                     
                     Louely geſtures addeth graces,
                     To your bright and Angell faces.
                     Giue your actiue mindes the bridle:
                     Nothing worſe then to be idle.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Worthies, your affaires forbeare yee,
                     For the State a while may ſpare yee:
                     
                        Time was, that you loued ſporting,
                     Haue you quite forgot your Courting? 
                     
                        Ioy the heart of Cares beguileth:
                     
                        Once a yeere Apollo ſmileth.
                        Semel in anno ridet Apol.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Follow Shepheards, how I pray you,
                     Can your flocks at this time ſtay you?
                     Let vs alſo hie vs thither,
                     Let's lay all our wits together,
                     And ſome Paſtorall inuent them,
                     That may ſhow the loue we ment them.
                  
                  
                     
                        I my ſelfe though meaneſt ſtated,
                     And in Court now almoſt hated,
                     Will knit vp my Abuſes ſtript and whipt. He noteth the mildneſſe of the winter which, excepting that the beginning was very windy, was as temperate as the ſpring, 
                        Scourge, and venter
                     In the midſt of them to enter;
                     For I know, there's no diſdaining,
                     Where I looke for entertaining.
                  
                  
                     See, me thinkes the very ſeaſon,
                     
                     As if capable of Reaſon,
                     Hath laine by her natiue rigor,
                     The faire Sun-beames haue more vigor.
                     They are Aeols moſt endeared:
                     For the Ayre's ſtill'd and cleared.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Fawnes, and Lambs and Kidds doe play,
                     In the honour of this day:
                     
                     The ſhrill Black-Bird, and the Thruſh
                     
                     Hops about in euery buſh:
                     And among the tender twigs,
                     Chaunt their ſweet harmonious ijgs.
                  
                  
                     
                        Moft men 
                              〈◊〉
                            of opinion, 
                              •
                           hat this 
                              •
                           ay euery 
                              •
                           ird doth 
                              •
                           huſe her 
                              •
                           ate for 
                              〈◊〉
                            yeer.Yea, and mou'd by this example,
                     They doe make each Groue a temple:
                     
                     Where their time the beſt way vſing,
                     They their Summer loues are chuſing.
                     And vnleſſe ſome Churle do wrong them,
                     There's not an od bird among them.
                  
                  
                     Yet I heard as I was walking,
                     Groues and hills by Ecchoes talking:
                     Reeds vnto the ſmall brooks whiſtling,
                     Whil'ſt they danc't with pretty ruſhling.
                     Then for vs to ſleepe 'twere pitty;
                     Since dumb creatures are ſo witty.
                  
                  
                     But oh Titan, thou doſt dally,
                     Hie thee to thy Weſterne Valley:
                     
                     Let this night one hower borrow:
                     She ſhall pay't againe to morrow:
                     And if thou'ſt that fauor do them,
                     Send thy ſiſter Phabe to them.
                  
                  
                     
                     But ſhee's come her ſelfe vnasked,
                     And brings By theſe he means the two Maſques, one of them being preſented by the Lords, the other by the Gentry. 
                        Gods and Heroes masked.
                     None yet ſaw, or heard in ſtorie,
                     Such immortall, mortall glorie.
                     View not, without preparation;
                     
                     Leſt you faint in admiration.
                     
                  
                  
                     Say my Lords, and ſpeake truth barely,
                     Mou'd they not exceeding rarely?
                     Did they not ſuch praiſes merit,
                     As if fleſh had all beene ſpirit?
                     
                     True indeed, yet I muſt tell them,
                     There was One did farre excell them.
                  
                  
                     But (alas) this is ill dealing,
                     
                        Night vnawares away is ſtealing:
                     Their delay the poore bed wrongeth,
                     That for Bride with Bride-groome longeth:
                     And aboue all other places,
                     Muſt be bleſt with their embraces.
                  
                  
                     
                        Reuellers, then now forbeare yee,
                     And vnto your reſts prepare yee:
                     Let's a while your abſence borrow,
                     
                        Sleep to night, and dance to morrow.
                     We could well allow your Courting:
                     But 'twill hinder better ſporting.
                  
                  
                     
                     They are gone, and Night all lonely,
                     Leaues the Bride with Bridegroome onely.
                     
                        Muſe now tell; (for thou haſt power
                     To flie thorough wall or tower:)
                     
                        What contentments their hearts cheareth;
                     
                     
                        And how louely ſhe appeareth.
                     
                  
                  
                     And yet doe not; tell it no man,
                     
                        Rare conceits may ſo grow common:
                     Doe not to the Vulgar ſhow them,
                     ('Tis enough that thou doſt know them.)
                     Their ill hearts are but the Center,
                     
                     Where all miſconceiuings enter.
                  
                  
                     But thou Luna that doſt lightly,
                     Haunt our downes and forreſts nightly:
                     Thou that fauourſt generation,
                     And art helpe to procreation:
                     See their iſſue thou ſo cheriſh,
                     I may liue to ſee it flouriſh.
                  
                  
                     And you Planets, in whoſe power
                     Doth conſiſt theſe liues of our;
                     You that teach vs Diuinations.
                     
                     Helpe with all your Conſtellations,
                     
                     How to frame in Her, a creature,
                     Bleſt in Fortune, Wit, and Feature.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Laſtly, oh you Angels ward them,
                     Set your ſacred Spels to gard them;
                     Chaſe away ſuch feares or terrors,
                     As not being, ſeeme through errors:
                     Yea, let not a dreames moleſting,
                     Make them ſtart when they are reſting.
                  
                  
                     But THOV chiefly, moſt adored,
                     That ſhouldſt onely be implored:
                     
                        Thou to whom my meaning tendeth,
                     Whether er'e in ſhow it bendeth:
                     
                        Let them reſt to night from ſorrow,
                     
                     
                        And awake with ioy to morrow.
                     
                  
                  
                     Oh, to my requeſt be heedfull,
                     Grant them that, and all things needfull.
                     Let not theſe my ſtraines of Folly,
                     
                     Make true prayer be vnholy:
                     But if I haue here offended:
                     Helpe, forgiue, and Ice it mended.
                  
                  
                     Daigne me this. And if my Muſes
                     
                     Haſtie iſſue; ſhe peruſes;
                     Make it vnto her ſeeme gratefull,
                     Though to all the World elſe hatefull.
                     But how er'e, yet Soule perſeuer
                     Thus to wiſh her good for euer.
                  
               
               
                  
                  THus ends the Day, together with my Song;
                  Oh may the Ioyes there of continue long!
                  Let Heauens iuſt, all-ſeeing, ſacred power,
                  Fauour this happy marriage day of your;
                  And bleſſe you in your chaſt embraces ſo,
                  We Britains may behold before you goe
                  The hopefull Iſſue we ſhall count ſo deare,
                  And whom (vnborne) his foes already feare.
                  Yea, I deſire, that all your ſorrowes may
                  Neuer be more, then they haue been to day.
                  Which hoping; for acceptance now I ſue,
                  And humbly bid your Grace and Court adue.
                  I ſaw the ſight I came for; which I know
                  Was more then all, the world beſide could ſhow.
                  But if amongſt Apolloes Layes, you can
                  Be pleas'd to lend a gentle eare to Pan;
                  
                  Or thinke your Country Shepheard loues as deare,
                  As if he were a Courtier, or a Peere:
                  
                  Then I, that elſe muſt to my Cell of paine,
                  Will ioyfull turne vnto my flocke againe:
                  And there vnto my fellow ſhepheards tell,
                  Why you are lou'd; wherein you doe excell.
                  And when we driue our flocks a field to graze them,
                  So chaunt your praiſes, that it ſhall amaze them.
                  And thinke that Fate hath new recald from death
                  Their ſtill-lamented, ſweete Elizabeth.
                  
                  For though they ſee the Court but now and then,
                  They know deſert as well as Greater men:
                  
                     
And honord Fame in them doth liue or die,
                  As well as in the mouth of Maieſtie.
                  
                  But taking granted what I here intreat;
                  At heauen for you my deuotions beat:
                  And though I feare, fate will not ſuffer me
                  To doe you ſeruice, where your Fortunes be:
                  How ere my skill hath yet deſpiſed ſeem'd,
                  (And my vnripened wit been miſeſteem'd:)
                  When all this coſtly Showe away ſhall flit,
                  And not one liue that doth remember it;
                  If Enuies trouble let not to perſeuer;
                  I'le find a meanes to make it knowne for euer.
               
               
                  
                  CERTAINE EPIGRAMS CONCERNING MARRIAGE.
                  
                     Epigram 1.
                     
                        TIs ſaid; in Marriage aboue all the reſt
                     The children of a King finde comforts leaſt,
                     Becauſe without reſpect of Loue or Hate
                     They muſt, and oft be, ruled by the State:
                     But if contented Loue, Religions care,
                     
                     
                        Equalitie in State, and yeares declare
                     A happie Match (as I ſuppoſe no leſſe)
                     Then rare and great's Elizaes Happineſſe.
                  
                  
                     
                     Epigram. 2.
                     GOd was the firſt that Marriage did ordaine,
                     By making One, Two; and Two, One againe,
                  
                  
                     Epigram. 3.
                     
                        SOuldier; of thee I aske, for thou canſt beſt,
                     
                     
                        Hauing knowne ſorrow, iudge of Ioy and Reſt:
                     
                     What greater bliſſe, then after all thy harmes,
                     To haue a wife that's faire, and lawfull thine;
                     And lying priſon'd 'twixt her Iuory armes,
                     There tell what thou haſt ſcapt by powers diuine?
                     How many round thee thou haſt murthered ſeene;
                     How oft thy ſoule hath beene neere hand expiring,
                     How many times thy fleſh hath wounded been:
                     Whil'ſt ſhe thy fortune, and thy worth admiring,
                     With ioy of health, and pitty of thy paine;
                     Doth weepe and kiſſe, and kiſſe and weepe againe.
                  
                  
                     Epigram. 4.
                     FAire Helen hauing ſtain'd her husbands bed,
                     And mortall hatred 'twixt two Kingdomes bred;
                     Had ſtill remaining in her ſo much good,
                     That Heroes for her loſt their deareſt blood:
                     
                        
Then if with all that ill, ſuch worth may laſt,
                     Oh what is ſhe worth, that's as faire, and chaſt!
                  
                  
                     Epigram. 5.
                     OLd Orpheus know a good wiues worth ſo well,
                     That when his dy'd, he followed her to hell,
                     And for her loſſe, at the Elizean Groue,
                     He did not onely Ghoſts to pitty moue,
                     But the ſad Poet breath'd his ſighes ſo deepe;
                     'Tis ſaid, the Diuels could not chuſe but weepe.
                  
                  
                     Epigram. 6.
                     LOng did I wonder, and I wonder much,
                     Romes Church ſhould from her Clergie take that due:
                     Thought I, why ſhould ſhe that contentment grutch?
                     What, doth ſhe all with continence indue?
                     No: But why then are they debar'd that ſtate?
                     Is ſhe become a foe vnto her owne?
                     Doth ſhe the members of her body hate?
                     Or is it for ſome other cauſe vnſhowne?
                     Oh yes: they find a womans lips ſo dainty:
                     
                     
                        They tye themſelues from one, cauſe they'l haue twenty.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Epigram. 7.
                     VVOmen, as ſome men ſay▪ vnconſtant be;
                     'Tis like enough, and ſo no doubt are men:
                     Nay, if their ſcapes we could ſo plainely ſee,
                     I feare that ſcarce there will be one for ten.
                     Men haue but their owne luſts that tempt to ill:
                     Women haue luſts, and mens allurements to:
                     Alas, if their ſtrengths cannot curbe their will;
                     What ſhould poore women that are weaker do?
                     Oh they had need be chaſt and looke about them,
                     That ſtriue 'gainſt luſt within, and knaues without them.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE SHEPHEARDS HVNTING: Being certaine Eglogues written during the time of the Authors Impriſonment in the Marſhalſey.
                  By George Wither, Gentleman.
                  
                  
                     LONDON, Printed by T. S. for Iohn Budge, dwelling in Pauls-Church-yard, at the ſigne of the Greene Dragon, 1622.
               
               
                  
                  
                  To thoſe Honoured, Noble, and right Vertuous Friends, my Viſitants in the Marſhalſey: And to all other my vnknowne Fauourers, who either priuately, or publikely wiſhed me well in my impriſonment.
                  
                     NOble Friends; you whoſe vertues made me firſt in loue with Vertue; and whoſe worths made mee be thought worthy of your loues: I haue now at laſt (you ſee) by Gods aſsiſtance, and your encouragement, run through the Purgatorie of impriſonment; and by the worthy

fauour of a iuſt Prince, ſtand free againe, without the leaſt touch of deiected baſeneſſe. Seeing therefore I was growne beyond my Hope ſo fortunate (after acknowledgement of my Creators loue, together with the vnequall'd Clemencie of ſo gracious a Soueraigne) I was troubled to thinke, by what meanes I might expreſſe my thankefulnes to ſo many well-deſeruing friends: No way I found to my deſire, neither yet ability to performe when I found it. But at length conſidering with my ſelfe what you were (that is) ſuch, who fauour honeſty for no ſecond reaſon, but becauſe you your ſelues are good; and ayme at no other reward, but the witneſſe of a ſound conſcience that you doe well, I found, that thankfulneſſe would proue the acceptableſt preſent to ſute with your diſpoſitions; and that I imagined could be no way better expreſſed, then in manifeſting your courteſies, and giuing conſent to your reaſonable demaunds. For the firſt, I

confeſſe (with thankes to the diſpoſer of all things, and a true gratefull heart towards you) ſo many were the vnexpected Viſitations, and vnhoped kindneſſes receyued, both from ſome among you of my Acquaintance, and many other vnknowne Well-willers of my Cauſe, that I was perſwaded to entertaine a much better conceit of the Times, then I lately conceyued, and aſſured my ſelfe, that Vertue had far more followers then I ſuppoſed.
                  Somewhat it diſturbed me to behold our ages Fauourites, whilſt they frowned on my honest enterpriſes, to take vnto their protections the egregiouſts fopperies: yet much more was my contentment, in that I was reſpected by ſo many of You, amongst whō there are ſome, who can and may as much diſ-eſteeme theſe, as they neglect me: nor could I feare their Malice or Contempt, whilst I enioyed your fauours, who (howſoeuer you are vnder-valued by Fooles for a time)

ſhall leaue vnto your poſterity ſo noble a memory, that your names ſhall be reuerenced by Kings, when many of theſe who now flouriſh with a ſhew of vſurped Greatneſſe, ſhall eyther weare out of being, or diſpoyled of all their patched reputation, grow contemptible in the eyes of their beloued Miſtris the World. Your Loue it is that (enabling me with patience to endure what is already paſt) hath made me alſo carefull better to prepare my ſelfe for all future miſaduentures, by bringing to my conſideration, what the paſsion of my iust diſcontentments had almost quite baniſhed from my remembrance.
                  Further, to declare my thankefulneſſe, in making apparant my willing minde to be commanded in any ſeruices of loue, which you ſhal thinke fit (though I want abilitie to performe great matters) yet I haue according to ſome of your requeſts, been contented to giue way to the printing of theſe Eglogues; which though it to many

ſeeme a ſleight matter, yet being well conſidered of, may proue a ſtrong argument of my readineſſe to giue you content in a greater matter: for they being (as you well know) begotten with little care, and preſerued with leſſe reſpect, gaue ſufficient euidence, that I meant (rather then any way to deceiue your truſt) to giue the world occaſion of calling my diſcretion in queſtion, as I now aſſure my ſelfe this will: and the ſooner, becauſe ſuch expectations (I perceiue) there are (of I know not what Inuentions) as would have been fruſtrated, though I had employed the vtmost and very best of my endeauours.
                  Notwithſtanding for your ſakes, I haue heere aduentured once againe to make tryall of the Worlds cenſures: and what hath receyued beeing from your Loues, I here re-dedicated to your Worths, which if your noble diſpoſitions will like well of; or if you will but reaſonably reſpect what your ſelues drew mee vnto, I ſhall

be nothing diſpleaſed at others cauils, but reſting my ſelfe contented with your good opinions, ſcorne all the rabble of vncharitable detractors: For none, I know, will maligne it, except thoſe, who eyther particularly malice my perſon, or profeſſe themſelues enemies to my former Bookes; who (ſauing thoſe that were incenſed on others ſpeeches) as diuers of you (according to your proteſtations) haue obſerued, are eyther open enemies of our Church; men notoriouſly guilty of ſome particular Abuſes therein taxt, ſuch malicious Critickes who haue the repute of being iudicious, by detracting from others; or at beſt, ſuch Guls, as neuer approue any thing good, or learned, but eyther that which their ſhallow apprehenſions can apply to the ſoothing of their owne opinions, or what (indeed rather) they vnderſtand not.
                  Truſt me, how ill ſoeuer it hath been rewarded, my loue to my Country is inuiolate: my

thankefulneſſe to you vnfained, my endeauour to doe euery man good; all my ayme, content with honeſtie: and this my paines (if it may be ſo tearmed) more to auoid idleneſſe, then for affectation of praiſe: and if notwithstanding all this, I muſt yet not onely reſt my ſelfe content that my innocencie hath eſcaped with ſtrict impriſonment (to the impayring of my ſtate, and hinderance of my fortunes) but alſo be conſtrayned to ſee my guiltleſſe lines, ſuffer the deſpight of ill tongues: yet for my further encouragement, let mee intreate the continuance of your firſt reſpect, wherein I ſhall find that comfort as will be ſufficient to make mee ſet light, and ſo much contemne all the malice of my aduerſaries, that readie to burſt with the venome of their owne hearts, they ſhall ſee
                  
                     My Minde enamoured on faire Vertues light,
                     Tranſcends the limits of their bleared ſight,
                     And plac'd aboue their Enuy doth contemne,
                     Nay, ſit and laugh at, their diſdaine, and them.
                  
                  
                     
But Noble Friends, I make queſtion neyther of yours, nor any honeſt mans reſpect, and therefore will no further vrge it, nor trouble your patience: onely this Ile ſay, that you may not think me too well conceited of my ſelfe; though the Time were to blame, in ill requiting my honest endeauours, which in the eyes of the World deſerued better; yet ſome what I am aſſured there was in me worthy that puniſhment, which when God ſhall giue me grace to ſee and amend, I doubt not but to finde that regard as will be fitting for ſo much merit as my endeauors may iuſtly challenge. Meane while, the better to hold my ſelfe in eſteeme with you, and amend the worlds opinion of Vertue, I will ſtudy to amend my ſelfe, that I may be yet more worthy to be called
                  
                     Your Friend, GEO: WITHER.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  The Shepheards Hunting.
                  
                     The firſt Eglogue.
                     
                        THE ARGVMENT.
                        
                           Willy leaues his Flocke a while,
                        To lament his Friends exile;
                        Where, though priſon'd, he doth finde,
                        Hee's ſtill free that's free in Minde:
                        And that there is no defence
                        Halfe ſo firme as Innocence.
                     
                     PHILARETE. WILLIE.
                     
                        Philarete.
                        
                           
                              WIlly, thou now full iolly tun'ſt thy Reedes,
                        
                        Making the Nymphs enamor'd on thy ſtraine,
                        And whilſt thy harmles flock vnſcarred feeds,
                        Haſt the contentment, of hils, groues, & plains:
                        
                           
Truſt me, I ioy thou and thy Muſe ſo ſpeedes
                        In ſuch an Age, where ſo much miſchiefe raignes:
                        And to my Care it ſome redreſſe will be,
                        
                           Fortune hath ſo much grace to ſmile on thee.
                     
                     
                        Willy.
                        To ſmile on me? I nere yet knew her ſmile,
                        Vnleſſe 'twere when ſhe purpos'd to deceiue me;
                        Many a Traine, and many a painted Wile
                        
                        She caſts, in hope of Freedome to bereaue me:
                        Yet now, becauſe ſhe ſees I ſcorne her guile
                        To fawne on ſooles, ſhe for my Muſe doth leaue me.
                        And here of late, her wonted Spite doth tend,
                        To worke me Care, by frowning on my friend.
                        
                     
                     
                        Philarete.
                        Why then I ſee her Copper-coyne's no ſtarling,
                        'Twill not be currant ſtill, for all the guilding)
                        A Knaue, or Foole, muſt euer be her Darling,
                        
                        For they haue minds to all occaſions yeelding:
                        If we get any thing by all our parling.
                        It ſeemes an Apple, but it proues a Weilding:
                        
                        But let that paſſe: ſweet Shepheard tell me this,
                        For what beloued Friend thy ſorrow is.
                     
                     
                        Willy.
                        Art thou, Philarete, in durance heere,
                        And doſt thou aske me for what Friend I grieue?
                        Can I ſuppoſe thy loue to me is deere,
                        Or this thy ioy for my content belieue?
                        
                           
When thou think'ſt thy cares touch not me as neere:
                        Or that I pinne thy Sorrowes at my ſleeue?
                        I haue in thee repoſed ſo much truſt,
                        I neuer thought, to find thee ſo vniuſt.
                     
                     
                        Philarete.
                        WIL, why Willy? Prethee doe not aske me why?
                        Doth it diminiſh any of thy care,
                        
                        That I in freedome maken melody;
                        
                        And think'ſt I cannot as well ſomewhat ſpare
                        From my delight, to mone thy miſery?
                        
                        'Tis time our Loues ſhould theſe ſuſpects forbeare:
                        Thou art that friend, which thou vnnam'd ſhold'ſt know,
                        And not haue drawne my loue in queſtion ſo.
                     
                     
                        Philarete.
                        
                           Forgiue me, and I'le pardon thy miſtake,
                           And ſo let this thy gentle-anger ceaſe,
                           (I neuer of thy loue will queſtion make)
                           Whilſt that the number of our dayes encreaſe,
                           Yet to my ſelfe I much might ſeeme to take,
                           And ſomething neere vnto preſumption preaſe:
                           To thinke me worthy loue from ſuch a ſpirit,
                           
                           But that I know thy kindneſſe paſt my merit.
                        
                        
                           Beſides; me thought thou ſpak'ſt now of a friend,
                           That ſeem'd more grieuous diſcontents to beare,
                           Some things I find that doe in ſhew offend,
                           Which to my Patience little trouble are,
                           
                              
And they ere long I hope will haue an end;
                           Or though they haue not, much I doe not care:
                           So this it was, made me that queſtion moue,
                           And not ſuſpect of honeſt Willies loue.
                        
                     
                     
                        Willie.
                        Alas, thou art exiled from thy Flocke,
                        And quite beyond the Deſarts here confin'd,
                        Haſt nothing to conuerſe with but a Rocke:
                        
                        Or at leaſt Out lawes in their Caues halfe pin'd:
                        And do'ſt thou at thy owne miſ-fortune mocke,
                        Making thy ſelfe to, to thy ſelfe vnkinde?
                        When heretofore we talk't we did imbrace:
                        But now I ſcarce can come to ſee thy face.
                     
                     
                        Philarete.
                        Yet all that Willy, is not worth thy ſorrow,
                        For I haue Mirth here thou would'ſt not beleeue,
                        From deepeſt cares the higheſt ioyes I borrow.
                        If ought chance out this day, may make me grieue
                        I'le lcarne to mend, or ſcorne it by to morrow.
                        This barren place yeelds ſomewhat to relieue:
                        For, I haue found ſufficient to content me,
                        And more true bliſſe then euer freedome lent me.
                     
                     
                        Willie.
                        Are Priſons then growne places of delight?
                     
                     
                        
                        Philarete.
                        'Tis as the conſcience of the Priſoner is,
                        Thevery Grates are able to affright
                        The guilty Man, that knowes his deedes amiſſe;
                        All outward Pleaſures are exiled quite,
                        And it is nothing (of it ſelfe) but this:
                        
                           Abhorred loaneneſſe, darkeneſſe, ſadneſſe, paines,
                        
                        
                           Num'n-cold, ſharpe-hunger, ſchorcning thirſt and chaines.
                        
                     
                     
                        Willie.
                        And theſe are nothing?—
                     
                     
                        Philarete.
                        —Nothing yet to mee.
                        Onely my friends reſtraint is all my paine.
                        
                        And ſince I truely find my conſcience free
                        From that my loaneneſſe to, I reape ſome gaine.
                     
                     
                        Willie.
                        But grant in this no diſcontentment be▪
                        
                        It doth thy wiſhed liberty reſtraine:
                        And to thy ſoule I thinke there's nothing nearer,
                        For I could neuer heare thee prize ought dearer.
                     
                     
                        Philarete.
                        
                           True, I did euer ſet it at a Rate
                           Too deare for any Mortals worth to buy,
                           'Tis not our greateſt Shepheards whole eſtate,
                           Shall purchaſe from me, my leaſt liberty:
                           
                           
                              
But I am ſubiect to the powers of Fate,
                           
                           And to obey them is no ſlauery:
                           
                           They may doe much, but when they haue done all,
                           Onely my body they may bring in thrall.
                           
                        
                        
                           And 'tis not that (my Willy) 'tis my mind,
                           
                           My mind's more precious, freedome I ſo weigh
                           A thouſand wayes they may my body bind,
                           In thouſand thrals, but ne're my mind betray:
                           And thence it is that I contentment find,
                           And beare with Patience this my loade away:
                           
                              I'me ſtill my ſelfe, and that I'de rather bee,
                           Then to be Lord of all theſe Downes in fee.
                        
                     
                     
                        Willie.
                        
                           Nobly reſolu'd, and I doe ioy to hear't,
                        For 'tis the minde of Man indeed that's all.
                        There's nought ſo hard but a braue heart will bear't,
                        The guiltleſſe men count great afflictions ſmall,
                        They'le looke on Death and Torment, yet not fear't,
                        Becauſe they know 'tis riſing ſo to fall:
                        
                        
                           Tyrants may boaſt they to much power are borne,
                        Yet he hath more that Tyranies can ſcorne.
                     
                     
                        Philarete.
                        
                           
                              •
                           is right, but I no Tyranies endure,
                        
                           
                              •
                           or haue I ſuffered ought worth name of care
                     
                     
                        
                        Willie.
                        What e're thou'lt call't, thou may'ſt, but I am ſure,
                        Many more pine that much leſſe pained are:
                        Thy looke me thinkes doth ſay thy meaning's pure
                        And by this paſt I find what thou do'ſt dare:
                        But I could neuer yet the reaſon know,
                        Why thou art lodged in this houſe of wo.
                     
                     
                        Philarete.
                        Nor I by Pan, nor neuer hope to doe,
                        But thus it pleaſes ſome; and I doe gueſſe
                        Partly a cauſe that moues them thereunto,
                        Which neither will auaile me to expreſſe,
                        Nor thee to heare, and therefore let it goe,
                        We muſt not ſay, they doe ſo that oppreſſe:
                        Yet I ſhall ne're to ſooth them or the times,
                        
                        Iniure my ſelfe, by bearing others crimes.
                        
                     
                     
                        Willie.
                        Then now thou maiſt ſpeake freely, there's none heares,
                        But he, whom I doe hope thou do'ſt not doubt.
                     
                     
                        Philarete.
                        True: but if doores and walles haue gotten eares,
                        
                        And Cloſet-whiſperings may be ſpread about:
                        Doe not blame him that in ſuch cauſes feares
                        What in his Paſſion he may blunder out:
                        In ſuch a place, and ſuch ſtrict times as theſe,
                        Where what we ſpeake is tooke as others pleaſe.
                        
                           
But yet to morrow, if thou come this way,
                        I'le tell thee all my ſtory to the end,
                        'Tis long, and now I feare thou canſt not ſtay,
                        Becauſe thy Flocke muſt watred be and pend,
                        And Night begins to muffle vp the day,
                        Which to informe thee how alone I ſpend,
                        I'le onely ſing a ſorry Priſoners Lay,
                        
                        I fram'd this Morne, which though it ſuits no fields,
                        Is ſuch as fits me, and ſad Thraldome yeelds.
                     
                     
                        Willie.
                        Well, I will ſet my Kit another ſtring,
                        And play vnto it whil'ſt that thou do'ſt ſing.
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Sonnet.
                              
                                 
                                    Philarete.
                                    
                                       
                                          NOw that my body dead aliue,
                                       Bereau'd of comfort, lies in thrall.
                                       Doe thou my ſoule begin to thriue,
                                       And vnto Hony, turne this Gall:
                                       So ſhall we both through outward we,
                                       The way to inward comfort know.
                                    
                                    
                                       As to the Fleſh we food do giue;
                                       To keepe in vs this Mortall breath:
                                       So Seules on Meditations liue,
                                       And ſhunne thereby immortall death:
                                       
                                          
Nor art thou euer neerer reſt,
                                       Then when thou find'ſt me moſt oppreſt.
                                    
                                    
                                       Firſt thinke my Soule; If I haue Foes
                                       That take a pleaſure in my care,
                                       And to procure theſe outward woes,
                                       Haue thus entrapt me vnaware:
                                       Thou ſhould'ſt by much more carefull bee,
                                       Since greater foes lay waite for thee.
                                    
                                    
                                       Then when Mew'd vp in grates of ſteele,
                                       Minding thoſe ioyes mine eyes doe miſſe,
                                       Thou find'ſt no torment thou do'ſt feele,
                                       So grieuous as Priuation is:
                                       Muſe how the Damn'd in flames that glow,
                                       Pine in the loſſe of bliſſe they know.
                                    
                                    
                                       Thou ſeeſt there's giuen ſo great might
                                       To ſome that are but clay as I,
                                       Their very anger can affright,
                                       Which, if in any thou eſpie.
                                       Thus thinke; If Mortals frownes ſtrike feare,
                                       How dreadfull will Gods wrath appeare?
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          By my late hopes that now are croſt,
                                       
                                       Conſider thoſe that firmer be:
                                       And make the freedome I haue loſt,
                                       A meanes that may remember thee:
                                       
                                          
Had Chriſt, not thy Redeemer bin,
                                       What horrid thrall thou had'ſt been in.
                                    
                                    
                                       Theſe yron chaines, theſe bolts of ſteele,
                                       Which other poore offenders grind,
                                       The wants and cares which they doe feele,
                                       May bring ſome greater thing to mind:
                                       For by their griefe thou ſhalt doe well,
                                       To thinke vpon the paines of Hell.
                                    
                                    
                                       Or, when through me thou ſeeſt a Man
                                       Condemn'd vnto a mortall death,
                                       How ſad he lookes, how pale, how wan,
                                       Drawing with feare his panting breath:
                                       Thinke, if in that ſuch griefe thou ſee,
                                       How ſad will, Goe yee curſed be.
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       Againe, when he that fear'd to Dye
                                       (Paſt hope) doth ſee his Pardon brought,
                                       Reade but the ioy that's in his eye,
                                       And then conuey it to thy thought:
                                       There thinke, betwixt thy heart and thee,
                                       How ſweet will, Come yee bleſſed, bee.
                                    
                                    
                                       Thus if thou doe, though cloſed here,
                                       My bondage I ſhall deeme the leſſe,
                                       I neither ſhall haue cauſe to feare,
                                       Nor yet bewaile my ſad diſtreſſe:
                                       
                                          
For whether liue, or pine, or dye,
                                       We ſhall haue bliſſe eternally.
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Willy.
                        
                           Truſt me I ſee the Cage doth ſome Birds good,
                           And if they doe not ſuffer too much wrong,
                           Will teach them ſweeter deſcants then the wood:
                           Beleeue't, I like the ſubiect of thy Song,
                           
                           It ſhewes thou art in no diſtempred mood:
                           But cauſe to heare the reſidue I long,
                           My Sheepe to morrow I will neerer bring,
                           And ſpend the day to heare thee talk and ſing.
                        
                        
                           Yet e're we part, Philarete, areed,
                           Of whom thou learnd'ſt to make ſuch ſongs as theſe,
                           I neuer yet heard any Shepheards reede
                           Tune in miſhap, a ſtraine that more could pleaſe;
                           Surely, Thou do'ſt inuoke at this thy neede
                           Some power, that we neglect in other layes:
                           For heer's a Name, and words, that but few ſwaines
                           Haue mention'd at their meeting on the Plaines.
                        
                     
                     
                        Philarete.
                        
                           Indeed 'tis true; and they are ſore to blame,
                           They doe ſo much neglect it in their Songs,
                           For, thence proceedeth ſuch a worthy fame,
                           As is not ſubiect vnto Enuies wrongs:
                           That, is the moſt to be reſpected name
                           
                           Of our true Pan, whoſe worth ſits on all tongues:
                           
                              
And what the ancient Shepheards vſe to prayſe
                           In ſacred Anthemes, vpon Holy-dayes.
                        
                        
                           Hee that firſt taught his Muſicke ſuch a ſtraine
                           Was that ſweet Shepheard, who (vntill a King)
                           Kept Sheepe vpon the hony-milky Plaine,
                           That is inrich't by Iordans watering;
                           He in his troubles eas'd the bodies paines,
                           By meaſures rais'd to the Soules rauiſhing:
                           And his ſweet numbers onely moſt diuine,
                           Gaue firſt the being to this Song of mine.
                        
                     
                     
                        Willy.
                        Let his good ſpirit euer with thee dwell,
                        That I might heare ſuch Muſicke euery day.
                     
                     
                        Philarete.
                        Thankes, Swaine: but harke, thy Weather rings his Bell.
                        And Swaines to fold, or homeward driue away.
                     
                     
                        Willy.
                        And you goes Cuddy, therefore fare thou well:
                        I'le make his Sheepe for mee a little ſtay;
                        And, if thou thinke it fit, I'le bring him to,
                        Next morning hither.—
                     
                     
                        Philarete.
                        —Prethee, Willy, do.
                     
                     FINIS.
                  
                  
                     
                     The Shepheards Hunting.
                     The ſecond Eglogue.
                     
                        THE ARGVMENT.
                        
                           Cuddy here relates, how all
                        Pitty Philarete's thrall.
                        Who requeſted, doth relate
                        The true cauſe of his eſtate;
                        Which broke off, becauſe 'twas long,
                        They begin, a three man Song.
                     
                     WILLY. CVDDY. PHILARETE.
                     
                        Willy.
                        LO, Philaret, thy old friend heere, and I,
                        Are come to viſit thee in theſe thy Bands,
                        Whil'ſt both our Flocks in an Incloſure by,
                        Doe picke the thin graſſe from the fallowed lands.
                        He tels me thy reſtraint of liberty,
                        Each one throughout the Country vnderſtands:
                        And there is not a gentle-natur'd Lad
                        
                        On all theſe Downes, but for thy ſake is ſad.
                     
                     
                        
                        Cuddy.
                        Not thy acquaintance, and thy friends alone,
                        Pitty thy cloſe reſtraint, as friends ſhould doe:
                        But ſome that haue but ſeene thee, for thee moane:
                        Yea, many that did neuer ſee thee to.
                        Some deeme thee in a fault, and moſt in none;
                        So diuers wayes doe diuers Rumors goe
                        And at all meetings where our Shepheards bee,
                        Now the maine Newes that's extant, is of thee.
                     
                     
                        Philarete.
                        Why, this is ſomewhat yet: had I but kept
                        Sheepe on the Mountaines, till the day of doome,
                        My name ſhould in obſcuritie haue ſlept
                        In Brakes, in Briars, ſhrubbed Furze and Broome.
                        
                        Into the Worlds wide eare it had not crept,
                        Nor in ſo many mens thoughts found a roome:
                        But what cauſe of my ſufferings doe they know?
                        Good Cuddy, tell me, how doth rumour goe?
                     
                     
                        Cuddy.
                        Faith 'tis vncertaine; ſome ſpeake this, ſome that:
                        Some dare ſay nought, yet ſeeme to thinke a cauſe,
                        And many a one prating he knowes not what;
                        Comes out with Prouerbes and old ancient ſawes,
                        
                        As if he thought thee guiltleſſe, and yet not:
                        Then doth he ſpeake halfe Sentences, then pawſe:
                        That what the moſt would ſay, we may ſuppoſe;
                        But, what to ſay, the Rumour is, none knowes.
                     
                     
                        
                        Philarete.
                        Nor care I greatly; for, it skils not much,
                        What the vnſteady common-people deemes,
                        His Conſcience doth not alwaies feele leaſt touch,
                        That blameleſſe in the ſight of others ſeemes:
                        My cauſe is honeſt, and becauſe 'tis ſuch,
                        I hold it ſo, and not for mens eſteemes:
                        If they ſpeake iuſtly well of mee, I'me glad;
                        If falſely euill, it ne're makes me ſad.
                     
                     
                        Willy.
                        I like that mind: but, Shepheard, you are quite
                        Beſide the matter that I long to heare:
                        Remember what you promis'd yeſter-night,
                        Youl'd put vs off with other talke, I feare;
                        Thou know'ſt that honeſt Cuddies heart's vpright;
                        And none but he, except my ſelfe, is neere:
                        Come therefore, and betwixt vs two relate,
                        The true occaſion of thy preſent ſtate.
                     
                     
                        Philarete.
                        My Friends I will: You know I am a Swaine,
                        
                        The kept a poore Flocke on a barren Plaine:
                        
                        Who though it ſeemes, I could doe nothing leſſe,
                        Can make a Song, and woe a Shepheardeſſe.
                        
                        And not alone the faireſt where I liue,
                        Haue heard me ſing, and fauours daign'd to giue:
                        But, though I ſay't, the nobleſt Nymph of Thame,
                        
                        Hath grac'd my Verſe, vnto my greater fame.
                        
                           
Yet, being young, and not much ſeeking prayſe,
                        I was not noted out for Shepheards layes:
                        
                        Nor feeding Flocks, as, you know, others be:
                        For the delight that moſt poſſeſſed me
                        Was hunting Foxes, Wolues, and Beaſts of Prey:
                        
                        That ſpoyle our Foulds, and beare our Lambs away.
                        For this, as alſo for the loue I beare
                        Vnto my Country, I laid by all care
                        
                        Of gaine, or of preferment, with deſire
                        
                        Onely to keepe that ſtate I had entire.
                        And like a true growne Huntſman ſought to ſpeed
                        My ſelfe with Hounds of rare and choyſeſt breed,
                        Whoſe Names and Natures ere I further goe,
                        Becauſe you are my friends I'le let you know.
                        My firſt eſteemed Dogge that I did finde,
                        Was by deſcent of olde Acteons kinde;
                        A Brache, which if I doe not aime amiſſe,
                        For all the world is iuſt like one of his:
                        She's named Loue, and ſcarce yet knowes her duty;
                        Her Damme's my Ladies pretty Beagle, Beauty.
                        
                        I bred her vp my ſelfe with wondrous charge,
                        Vntill ſhe grew to be exceeding large,
                        And waxt ſo wanton, that I did abhorre it,
                        And put her out amongſt my neighbours for it.
                        The next is Luſt, a Hound that's kept abroad
                        Mongſt ſome of mine acquaintance, but a Toad
                        Is not more loathſome: 'tis a Curre will range
                        Extreamely, and is euer full of mange:
                        
                           
And cauſe it is infectious, ſhe's not wunt
                        To come among the reſt, but when they hunt.
                        
                           Hate is the third, a Hound both deepe and long:
                        His Sire is True, or elſe ſuppoſed Wrong.
                        
                        He'le haue a ſnap at all that paſſe him by,
                        And yet purſues his game moſt eagerly.
                        With him goes Enuie coupled, a leane Curre,
                        And yet ſhe'le hold out, hunt we ne're ſo farre:
                        She pineth much, and feedeth little to,
                        Yet ſtands and ſnarleth at the reſt that doe.
                        Then there's Reuenge, a wondrous deep-mouth'd dog,
                        So fleet, I'me faine to hunt him with a clog,
                        Yet many times he'le much out-ſtrip his bounds,
                        And hunts not cloſely with the other Hounds:
                        He'le venter on a Lyon in his ire;
                        
                        Curſt Choller was his Damme, and Wrong his Sire.
                        
                        This Choller, is a Brache, that's very old,
                        And ſpends her mouth too-much to haue it hold:
                        She's very teaſty; an vnpleaſing Curre.
                        That bites the very Stones, if they but ſturre:
                        Or when that ought but her diſpleaſure moues,
                        She'le bite and ſnap at any one ſhe loues.
                        But my quicke ſcented'ſt Dogge is Iaelouſie,
                        
                        The trueſt of this breede's in Italie.
                        
                        The Damme of mine would hardly fill a Gloue,
                        It was a Ladies little Dogge, cal'd Loue:
                        
                        The Sire a poore deformed Curre, nam'd Feare;
                        
                        As ſhagged and as rough as is a Beare:
                        
                        
                           
And yet the Whelpe turn'd after neither kinde,
                        For he is very large, and nere-hand blinde,
                        Farre off, hee ſeemeth of a pretty culler,
                        But doth not proue ſo, when you view him fuller.
                        A vile ſuſpitious Beaſt; whoſe lookes are bad,
                        And I doe feare in time he will grow mad.
                        To him I couple Auarice, ſtill poore;
                        Yet ſhee deuoures as much as twenty more:
                        A thouſand Horſe ſhee in her paunch can put,
                        Yet whine, as if ſhe had an emptie gut;
                        And hauing gorg'd what might a Land haue found,
                        Shee'le catch for more, and, hide it in the ground.
                        
                           Ambition is a Hound as greedy full;
                        But hee for all the daintieſt bits doth cull:
                        Hee ſcornes to licke vp Crumbs beneath the Table,
                        Hee'le fetch't from boards and ſhelues, if he be able:
                        Nay, hee can climbe, if neede be; and for that
                        With him I hunt the Martine, and the Cat:
                        
                        And yet ſometimes in mounting, hee's ſo quicke,
                        I ſee fetches falls, are like to breake his necke.
                        
                           Feare is wel-mouth'd, but ſubiect to Diſtrust;
                        
                        A Stranger cannot make him take a Cruſt:
                        A little thing will ſoone his courage quaile,
                        And 'twixt his legges hee euer claps his Taile.
                        With him, Deſpaire, now, often coupled goes,
                        Which by his roring mouth each hunts man knowes.
                        None hath a better minde vnto the game;
                        But hee giues off, and alwaies ſeemeth lame.
                        
                           
My bloud-hound Cruelty, as ſwift as wind,
                        Hunts to the death, and neuer comes behind;
                        Who, but ſhe's ſtrapt, and muſled to, withall,
                        Would eate her fellowes and the prey and all.
                        And yet, ſhe cares not much for any food;
                        Vnleſſe it be the pureſt harmeleſſe blood.
                        All theſe are kept abroad at charge of meny,
                        They doe not coſt me in a yeare a penny.
                        But there's two couple of a midling ſize,
                        That ſeldome paſſe the ſight of my owne eyes.
                        
                           Hope, on whoſe head I'ue laid my life to pawne;
                        
                           Compaſſion, that on euery one will fawne.
                        This would, when 'twas a whelpe, with Rabets play
                        Or Lambes, and let them goe vnhurt away:
                        Nay, now ſhe is of growth, ſhee'le now and then
                        Catch you a Hare, and let her goe agen.
                        The two laſt, Ioy, and Sorrow; make me wonder,
                        For they can ne're agree, nor bide aſunder.
                        
                           Ioy's euer wanton and no order knowes,
                        She'le run at Larkes, or ſtand and barke at Crowes.
                        
                        
                           Sorrow goes by her, and ne're moues his eye:
                        Yet both doe ſerue to helpe make vp the cry:
                        Then comes behinde all theſe to beare the baſe,
                        Two couple more of a farre larger Race,
                        Such wide-mouth'd Trollops, that 'twould doe you good,
                        To heare their loud-loud Ecchoes teare the Wood:
                        There's Vanity, who by her gaudy Hide,
                        
                        May farre away from all the reſt be ſpide,
                        
                           
Though huge, yet quicke, for ſhe's now here, now there;
                        Nay, looke about you, and ſhe's euery where:
                        Yet euer with the reſt, and ſtill in chace,
                        Right ſo, Inconſtancie fils euery place;
                        And yet ſo ſtrange a fickle natur'd Hound,
                        Looke for her, and ſhe's no where to be found.
                        
                           Weakeneſſe is no faire Dogge vnto the eye,
                        And yet ſhe hath her proper qualitie.
                        But there's Preſumption, when he heat hath got,
                        He drownes the Thunder, and the Cannon-ſhot:
                        
                        And when at Start, he his full roaring makes,
                        The Earth doth tremble, and the Heauen ſhakes:
                        Theſe were my Dogs, ten couple iuſt in all,
                        Whom by the name of Satyres I doe call:
                        Mad Curs they be, and I can ne're come nigh them,
                        But I'me in danger to be bitten by them.
                        Much paines I tooke, and ſpent dayes not a few,
                        To make them keept together, and hunt true:
                        Which yet I doe ſuppoſe had neuer bin,
                        But that I had a Scourge to keepe them in.
                        Now when that I this Kennell firſt had got,
                        Out of mine owne Demeanes I hunted not,
                        Saue on theſe Downes, or among yonder Rocks,
                        
                        After thoſe beaſts that ſpoyl'd our Pariſh Flockes:
                        Nor during that time, was I euer wont,
                        With all my Kennell in one day to hunt:
                        Nor had done yet, but that this other yeere,
                        Some Beaſts of Prey that haunt the Deſerts heere,
                        
                           
Did not alone for many Nights together
                        Deuoure, ſometime a Lambe, ſometime a Weather:
                        
                        And ſo diſquiet many a poore mans Heard,
                        But thereof looſing all were much afeard.
                        Yea, I among the reſt, did fare as bad,
                        Or rather worſe; for the beſt Hopes. 
                           Ewes I had,
                        (Whoſe breed ſhould be my meanes of life and gaine,
                        Were in one Euening by theſe Monſters ſlaine:
                        Which miſchiefe I reſolued to repay,
                        Or elſe grow deſperate and hunt all away.
                        For in a furie ſuch as you ſhall ſee
                        
                           Hunts-men, in miſſing of their ſport will be)
                        I vow'd a Monſter ſhould not lurke about
                        In all this Prouince, but I'de finde him out.
                        And thereupon without reſpect or care,
                        
                        How lame, how full, or how vnfit they were,
                        In haſt vnkennell'd all my roaring crew,
                        Who were as mad, as if my mind they knew;
                        And e're they trail'd a flight-ſhot, the fierce Curres,
                        Had rous'd a Hart, and through Brakes, Bryars, and Furres
                        
                        Follow'd at gaze ſo cloſe, that Loue and Feare
                        
                        Got in together, and had ſurely, there
                        Quite ouerthrowne him, but that Hope thruſt in
                        'Twixt both, and ſau'd the pinching of his skin.
                        Whereby he ſcap't, till courſing ouerth wart,
                        
                           Deſpaire came in, and grip't him to the hart.
                        I hallowed in the reſdue to the fall,
                        And for an entrance, there I fleſh't them all:
                        
                           
Which hauing done, I dip'd my ſtaffe in blood
                        And onward led my Thunder to the Wood;
                        Where what they did, I'le tell you out anon,
                        My keeper calles me, and I muſt be gon.
                        Goe, if you pleaſe a while, attend your Flocks,
                        And when the Sunne is ouer yonder Rocks,
                        Come to this Caue againe, where I will be,
                        If that my Gardian, ſo much fauour me.
                        Yet if you pleaſe, let vs three ſing a ſtraine,
                        Before you turne your ſheepe into the Plaine.
                     
                     
                        Willie.
                        Iam content.—
                     
                     
                        Cuddy.
                        —As well content am I.
                     
                     
                        Philarete.
                        Then Will begin, and wee'le the reſt ſupply.
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 Song.
                                 
                                    Willie.
                                    SHepheard, would theſe Gates were ope,
                                    Thou might'ſt take with vs thy fortunes.
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    Philarete.
                                    No, I'le make this narrow ſcope,
                                    (Since my Fate doth ſo importune)
                                    Meanes vnto a wider Hope.
                                 
                                 
                                    Cuddy.
                                    Would thy Shepheardeſſe were here,
                                    Who belou'd, loues ſo dearely?
                                 
                                 
                                    Philarete.
                                    
                                       Not for both your Flocks, Iſweare,
                                       And the gaine they yeeld you yeerely,
                                       Would I ſo much wrong my Deare.
                                    
                                    
                                       Yet, to me, nor to this Place,
                                       Would ſhe now be long a ſtranger:
                                       She would hold it in diſgrace,
                                       (If ſhe fear'd not more my danger)
                                       Where I am to ſhew her face.
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    Willie.
                                    Shepheard, we would wiſh no harmes,
                                    But ſomething that might content thee.
                                 
                                 
                                    Philarete.
                                    Wiſh me then within her armes;
                                    And that wiſh will ne're repent me,
                                    If your miſhes might proue charmes.
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    Willie.
                                    Be thy Priſon her embrace,
                                    Be thy ayre her ſweeteſt breathing.
                                 
                                 
                                    Cuddy.
                                    Be thy proſpect her ſweet Face,
                                    For each looke a kiſſe bequeathing,
                                    And appoint thy ſelfe the place.
                                 
                                 
                                    Philarete.
                                    Nay pray, hold there, for I ſhould ſcantly then,
                                    Come meete you here this afternoone agen:
                                    But fare you well ſince wiſhes haue no power,
                                    Let vs depart and keepe the pointed houre.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     The Shepheards Hunting.
                     The third Eglogue.
                     
                        THE ARGVMENT.
                        
                           Philarete with his three Friends,
                        Heare his hunting ſtorie ends.
                        Kinde Alexis with much ruth,
                        Wailes the baniſh't Shepheards youth:
                        But he ſlighteth Fortunes ſtings,
                        And in ſpight of Thraldom
                              •
                            ſings.
                     
                     PHILARETE. CVDDY. ALEXIS. WILLY.
                     
                        Philarete.
                        SO, now I ſee y'are Shepheards of your word,
                        Thus were you wont to promiſe, and to doe.
                     
                     
                        Cuddy.
                        More then our promiſe is, we can afford,
                        We come our ſelues, and bring another to:
                        
                           Alexis, whom thou know'ſt well is no foe:
                        
                           
Who loues thee much: and I doe know that he
                        Would faine a hearer of thy Hunting be.
                     
                     
                        Philarete.
                        
                           Alexis you are welcome, for you know
                        You cannot be but welcome where I am;
                        You euer were a friend of mine in ſhow,
                        And I haue found you are indeed the ſame:
                        Vpon my firſt reſtraint you hither came,
                        And proffered me more tokens of your loue,
                        Then it were fit my ſmall deſerts ſhould proue.
                     
                     
                        Alexis.
                        'Tis ſtill your vſe to vnderpriſe your merit;
                        Be not ſo coy to take my proffered loue,
                        'Twill neither vnbeſeeme your worth nor ſpirit.
                        
                        To offer court'ſie doth thy friend behoue:
                        And which are ſo, this is a place to proue.
                        Then once againe I ſay, if cauſe there be.
                        Firſt makea tryall, if thou pleaſe, of me.
                     
                     
                        Philarete.
                        Thankes good Alexis; ſit downe by me heere,
                        I haue a taske, theſe Shepheards know, to doe;
                        A Tale already told this Morne well neere,
                        With which I very faine would forward goe,
                        And am as willing thou ſhould'ſt heare it to:
                        But thou canſt neuer vnderſtand this laſt,
                        Till I haue alſo told thee what is paſt.
                     
                     
                        
                        Willy.
                        It ſhall not neede, for I ſo much preſum'd,
                        I on your mutuall friendſhips, might be bold,
                        That I a freedome to my ſelfe aſſum'd,
                        To make him know, what is already told.
                        If I haue done amiſſe, then you may ſcold.
                        But in my telling I preuiſed this,
                        He knew not whoſe, nor to what end it is.
                     
                     
                        Philarete.
                        Well, now he may, for heere my Tale goes on:
                        My eager Dogges and I to Wood are gon.
                        Where, beating through the Conuerts, euery Hound
                        A ſeuerall Game had in a moment found:
                        I rated them, but they purſu'd their pray,
                        And as it fell (by hap) tooke all one way.
                        Then I began with quicker ſpeed to follow,
                        And teaz'd them on, with a more chearefull hallow:
                        That ſoone we paſſed many weary miles,
                        Tracing the ſubtile game through all their wiles.
                        Theſe doubl'd, thoſe re-doubled on the ſcent,
                        Still keeping in full chaſe where ere they went.
                        Vp Hils, downe Cliffes, through Bogs, and ouer Plaines,
                        
                        Stretching their Muſicke to the higheſt ſtraines.
                        That when ſome Thicket hid them from mine eye,
                        My eare was rauiſh'd with their melodie.
                        Nor croſt we onely Ditches, Hedges, Furrowes,
                        But Hamlets, Tithings, Pariſhes, and Burrowes:
                        
                           
They followed where ſo eu'r the game did go,
                        Through Kitchin, Parlor, Hall, and Chamber to.
                        And, as they paſſ'd the City, and the Court,
                        
                        My Prince look'd out, and daign'd to view my ſport.
                        Which then (although I ſuffer for it now)
                        (If ſome ſay true) he liking did allow;
                        And ſo much (had I had but wit to ſtay)
                        I might my ſelfe (perhaps) haue heard him ſay.
                        But I, that time, as much as any daring,
                        More for my pleaſure then my ſafetie caring;
                        Seeing freſh game from euery couert riſe,
                        (Croſſing by thouſands ſtill before their eyes)
                        Ruſh'd in, and then following cloſe my Hounds,
                        
                        Some beaſts I found lie dead, ſome full of wounds,
                        Among the willows, ſcarce with ſtrength to moue,
                        One I found heere, another there, whom Loue
                        
                        Had grip'd to death: and, in the ſelfe-ſame ſtate,
                        Lay one deuour'd by Enuy, one by Hate;
                        
                        
                           Luſt had bit ſome, but I ſoone paſt beſide them,
                        Their feſtr'd wounds ſo ſtuncke, none could abide them.
                        
                           Choller hurt diuers, but Reuenge kild more:
                        
                           Feare frighted all, behinde him and before.
                        
                           Deſpaire draue on a huge and mighty heape,
                        Forcing ſome downe from Rocks and Hils to leape:
                        Some into water, ſome into the fire,
                        So on themſelues he made them wreake his ire.
                        
                        But I remember, as I paſſ'd that way,
                        Where the great King and Prince of Shepheards lay,
                        
                        
                           
About the wals were hid, ſome (once more knowne)
                        That my fell Curre Ambition had o'rethrowne:
                        Many I heard, purſu'd by Pitty, cry;
                        And oft I ſaw my Bloud-Hound, Cruelty,
                        
                        Eating her paſſage euen to the hart,
                        Whither once gotten, ſhe is loath to part.
                        All pli'd it well, and made ſo loud a cry,
                        'Twas heard beyond the Shores of Britany.
                        
                        Some rated them, ſome ſtorm'd, ſome lik'd the game,
                        
                        Some thought me worthy praiſe, ſome worthy blame.
                        
                        But I, not fearing th'one, miſ-ſteeming t'other,
                        Both, in ſhrill hallowes and loud yernings ſmother.
                        Yea, the ſtrong mettled, and my long-breath'd crew,
                        Seeing the game increaſing in their view,
                        Grew the more frolicke, and the courſes length
                        Gaue better breath, and added to their ſtrength.
                        Which Ioue perceiuing, for Ioue heard their cries
                        Rumbling amongſt the Spheares concauities:
                        
                        Hee mark'd their courſe, and courages increaſe,
                        Saying, 'twere pitty ſuch a chaſe ſhould ceaſe.
                        And therewith ſwore their mouthes ſhould neuer waſt,
                        But hunt as long's mortality did laſt.
                        Soone did they feele the power of his great gift,
                        And I began to finde their pace more ſwift:
                        I follow'd, and I rated, but in vaine
                        Striu'd to o'retake, or take them vp againe.
                        They neuer ſtayed ſince, nor nights nor dayes,
                        But to and fro ſtill run a thouſand wayest
                        
                           
Yea, often to this place where now I lie,
                        They'l wheele about to cheare me with their cry;
                        And one day in good time will vengeance take
                        On ſome offenders, for their Maſters ſake:
                        For know, my Friends, my freedome in this ſort
                        For them I loſe, and making my ſelfe ſport.
                     
                     
                        Willy.
                        Why? was there any harme at all in this?
                     
                     
                        Philarete.
                        No, Willy, and I hope yet none there is.
                     
                     
                        Willy.
                        How comes it then?—
                     
                     
                        Philarete.
                        —Note, and I'le tell thee how?
                        Thou know'ſt that Truth and Innocency now,
                        If plac'd with meanneſſe, ſuffers more deſpight
                        Then Villainies, accompan'ed with might.
                        But thus it fell, while that my Hounds purſu'd
                        Their noyſome prey, and euery field lay ſtrew'd
                        With Monsters, hurt and ſlaine; vpon a beaſt,
                        More ſubtile, and more noyſome then the reſt,
                        My leane-flanckt Bitch, cald Enuy, hapt to light:
                        And, as her wont is, did ſo ſurely bite,
                        That, though ſhee left behinde ſmall outward ſmart,
                        The wounds were deepe, and rankled to the hart.
                        This, joyning to ſome other, that of late,
                        Were very eagerly purſu'd by Hate,
                        
                        
                           
(To fit their purpoſe hauing taken leaſure)
                        Did thus conſpire to worke me a diſpleaſure.
                        For imitation, farreſurpaſſing Apes,
                        
                        They laide aſide their Foxe and Woluiſh ſhapes,
                        
                        And ſhrowded in the skinnes of harmleſſe Sheepe
                        Into by-wayes, and open paths did creepe;
                        Where, they (as hardly drawing breath) didly,
                        Shewing their wounds to euery paſſer by;
                        To make them thinke that they were ſheepe ſo foyl'd,
                        And by my Dogges, in their late hunting, ſpoyl'd.
                        Beſide, ſome other that enuy'd my game,
                        And, for their paſtime, kept ſuch Monſters tame:
                        As, you doe know, there's many for their pleaſure
                        Keepe Foxes, Beares, & Wolues, as ſome great treaſure:
                        Yea, many get their liuing by them to,
                        And ſo did ſtore of theſe, I ſpeake of, do.
                        Who, ſeeing that my Kennell had affrighted,
                        Or hurt ſome Vermine wherein they delighted;
                        And finding their owne power by much to weake,
                        Their Malice on my Innocence to wreake,
                        Swolne with the deepeſt rancour of deſpight,
                        Some of our greateſt Shepheards Folds by night
                        They cloſely entred; and there hauing ſtain'd
                        Their hands in villany, of mee they plain'd,
                        Affirming, (without ſhame, or honeſty,)
                        
                        I, and my Dogges, had done it purpoſely.
                        Whereat they ſtorm'd, and cald mee to a tryall,
                        
                        Where Innocence preuailes not, nor denyall:
                        
                        
                           
But for that cauſe, heere in this place I lie,
                        Where none ſo merry as my dogges, and I.
                     
                     
                        Cuddy.
                        Beleeue it, heere's a Tale will ſuten well,
                        For Shepheards in another Age to tell.
                     
                     
                        Willy.
                        And thou ſhalt be remembred with delight,
                        By this, hereafter, many a Winters night.
                        
                        For, of this ſport another Age will ring;
                        Yea, Nymphes that are vnborne thereof ſhall ſing,
                        And not a Beauty on our Greenes ſhall play,
                        That hath not heard of this thy hunting day.
                     
                     
                        Philarete.
                        It may be ſo, for if that gentle Swaine,
                        
                        Who wonnes by Tauy, on the Weſterne plaine,
                        
                        Would make the Song, ſuch life his Verſe can giue,
                        Then I doe know my Name might euer liue.
                     
                     
                        Alexis.
                        But tell me; are our Plaines and Nymphs forgot,
                        And canſt thou frolicke in thy trouble be?
                     
                     
                        Philarete.
                        Can I, Alexis, ſayſt thou? Can I not,
                        That am reſolu'd to ſcorne more miſery?
                     
                     
                        
                        Alexis.
                        
                           Oh, but that youth's yet greene, and young bloud hot,
                           And liberty muſt needs be ſweet to thee.
                           But, now moſt ſweet whil'ſt euery buſhy Vale,
                           
                           And Groue, and Hill, rings of the Nightingale.
                           
                        
                        
                           Me thinkes, when thou remembreſt thoſe ſweet layes
                           
                           Which thou would'ſt leade thy Shepheardeſſe to heare,
                           Each Euening tyde among the Leauy ſprayes,
                           
                           The thought of that ſhould make thy freedome deare:
                           For now, whil'ſt euery Nymph on Holy-dayes
                           
                           Sports with ſome iolly Lad, and maketh cheere,
                           Thine, ſighes for thee, and mew'd vp from reſort,
                           Will neither play her ſelfe, nor ſee their ſport.
                        
                        
                           Thoſe Shepheards that were many a Morning wont,
                           Vnto their Boyes to leaue the tender Heard;
                           
                           And beare thee company when thou didſt hunt;
                           Me thinkes the ſport thou haſt ſo gladly ſhar'd
                           Among thoſe Swaynes ſhould make thee thinke vpon't,
                           For't ſeemes all vaine, now, that was once indear'd.
                           It cannot be: ſince I could make relation,
                           How for leſſe cauſe thou haſt beene deepe in paſſion.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Philarete.
                        
                           'Tis true: my tender heart was euer yet
                           Too capable of ſuch conceits as theſe;
                           I neuer ſaw that Obiect, but from it,
                           The Paſſions of my Loue I could encreaſe.
                           
                              
Thoſe things which moue not other men a whit,
                           I can, and doe make vſe of, if I pleaſe:
                           When I am ſad, to ſadneſſe I apply,
                           Each Bird, and Tree, and Flowre that I paſſe by.
                        
                        
                           So, when I will be merry, I aſwell
                           Something for mirth from euery thing can draw,
                           From Miſerie, from Priſons, nay from Hell:
                           
                           And as when to my minde, griefe giues a flaw,
                           Beſt comforts doe but make my woes more fell:
                           So when I'me bent to Mirth, from miſchiefes paw.
                           (Though ceas'd vpon me) I would ſomething cull,
                           That ſpight of care, ſhould make my ioyes more full.
                        
                        
                           I feele thoſe wants, Alexis, thou doeſt name,
                           Which ſpight of youths affections I ſuſtaine;
                           Or elſe, for what is't I haue gotten Fame,
                           
                           And am more knowne then many an elder Swaine?
                           
                           I
                                 •
                               ſuch deſires I had not learn'd to tame,
                           (Since many pipe much better on this Plaine:)
                           
                           But tune your Reedes, and I will in a Song,
                           
                           Expreſſe my Care, and how I take this Wrong.
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Sonnet.
                                    
                                       I That ere'ſt-while the worlds ſweet Ayre did draw,
                                       (Grac'd by the faireſt euer Mortall ſaw;)
                                       
                                          
Now cloſely pent, with walles of Ruth-leſſe ſtone.
                                       Conſume my Dayes, and Nights and all alone.
                                    
                                    
                                       When I was wont to ſing of Shepheards loues,
                                       My walkes were Fields, and Downes, and Hils, and Groues:
                                       But now (alas) ſo ſtrict is my hard doome,
                                       Fields, Downes, Hils, Groues, and al's but one pooreroome.
                                    
                                    
                                       Each Morne, as ſoone as Day-light did appeare,
                                       With Natures Muſicke Birds would charme mine eare:
                                       Which now (inſtead) of their melodious ſtraines,
                                       Heare, ratling Shackles, Gyues, and Boults, and Chaines.
                                    
                                    
                                       But, though that all the world's delight forſake me,
                                       I haue a Muſe, and ſhe ſhall Muſicke make me:
                                       Whoſe ayrie Notes, in ſpight of cloſeſt cages,
                                       Shall giue content to me, and after ages.
                                    
                                    
                                       Nor doe I paſſe for all this outward ill.
                                       My hearts the ſame, and undeiected ſtill;
                                       And which is more then ſome in freedome winne,
                                       I haue truereſt, and peace, and ioy within.
                                    
                                    
                                       And then my Mind, that ſpight of priſon's free,
                                       When ere ſhe pleaſes any where can be;
                                       Shee's in an houre, in France, Rome, Turky, Spaine,
                                       
                                       In Earth, in Hell, in Heauen, and here againe.
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                       Yet there's another comfort in my woe,
                                       My cauſe is ſpread, and all the world may know,
                                       My fault's no more, but ſpeaking Truth, and Reaſon;
                                       No Debt, nor Theft, nor Murther, Rape, or Treaſon.
                                    
                                    
                                       Nor ſhall my foes with all their Might and Power,
                                       Wipe out their ſhame, nor yet this fame of our:
                                       Which when they finde, they ſhall my fate enuie,
                                       Till they grow leane, and ſicke, and mad, and die.
                                    
                                    
                                       Then though my Body here in Priſon rot,
                                       And my wrong'd Satyres ſeeme a while forgot:
                                       Yet, when both Fame, and life hath left thoſe men,
                                       My Verſe and I'le reuiue, and liue agen.
                                    
                                    
                                       So thus enclos'd, I beare afflictions load,
                                       But with more true content then ſome abroad;
                                       For whilſt their thoughts, doe feele my Scourges ſting,
                                       In bands I'le leape, and dance, and laugh, and ſing.
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Alexis.
                        Why now I ſee thou droup'ſt not with thy care,
                        Neither exclaim'ſt thou on thy hunting day;
                        But doſt with vnchang'd reſolution beare,
                        The heauy burthen of exile away.
                        All that did truely know thee, did conceaue,
                        Thy actions with thy ſpirit ſtill agree'd;
                        Their good conceit thou doeſt no whit bereaue,
                        But ſheweſt that thou art ſtill thy ſelfe indeed.
                        
                           
If that thy mind to baſeneſſe now deſcends,
                        Thou'lt iniure Vertue, and deceiue thy friends.
                     
                     
                        Willie.
                        
                           Alexis, he will iniure Vertue much,
                        But more his friends, and moſt of all himſelfe,
                        If on that common barre his minde but touch,
                        It wrackes his fame vpon diſgraces ſhelfe.
                        Whereas if thou ſteere on that happy courſe,
                        Which in thy iuſt aduenture is begun;
                        No thwarting Tide, nor aduerſe blaſt ſhall force
                        Thy Barke without the Channels bounds to run.
                        Thou art the ſame thou wert, for ought I ſee,
                        When thou didſt freely on the Mountaines hunt,
                        In nothing changed yet, vnleſſe it be
                        More merrily diſpos'd then thou wert wont.
                        Still keepe thee thus, ſo other ſhall know,
                        
                           Vertue can giue content in midſt of woe.
                        And ſhe (though mightines with frownes doth threat)
                        That, to be Innocent, is to be great.
                        
                        Thriue and farewell.—
                     
                     
                        Alexis.
                        —In this thy trouble flouriſh.
                     
                     
                        Cuddy.
                        While thoſe that wiſh thee ill, fret, pine, and periſh.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     The Shepheards Hunting.
                     The fourth Eglogue.
                     
                        THE ARGVMENT.
                        
                           Philaret on Willy calls,
                        To ſing out his Paſtorals:
                        Warrants Fame ſhall grace his Rimes,
                        Spight of Enuy and the Times;
                        And ſhewes how in care he vſes,
                        To take comfort from his Muſes.
                     
                     PHILARETE. WILLIE.
                     
                        Philarete.
                        PRethee, Willy tell me this,
                        What new accident there is,
                        That thou (once the blytheſt Lad)
                        Art become ſo wondrous ſad?
                        And ſo careleſſe of thy quill,
                        As if thou had'ſt loſt thy skill?
                        Thou wert wont to charme thy flocks,
                        And among the maſſy rocks
                        
                           
Haſt ſo chear'd me with thy Song,
                        That I haue forgot my wrong.
                        Something hath thee ſurely croſt,
                        That thy old wont thou haſt loſt.
                        Tell me: Haue I ought miſ-ſaid
                        That hath made thee ill-apaid?
                        Hath ſome Churle done thee a ſpight?
                        Doſt thou miſſe a Lambe to night?
                        Frowns thy faireſt Shepheards Laſſe?
                        Or how comes this ill to paſſe?
                        Is there any diſcontent
                        Worſe then this my baniſhment?
                     
                     
                        Willie.
                        Why, doth that ſo euill ſeeme
                        That thou nothing worſt doſt deeme?
                        Shepheards, there full many be,
                        That will change Contents with thee.
                        Thoſe that chooſe their Walkes at will,
                        On the Valley or the Hill.
                        Or thoſe pleaſures boaſt of can,
                        Groues or Fields may yeeld to man:
                        Neuer come to know the reſt,
                        Wherewithall thy minde is bleſt.
                        Many a one that oft reſorts
                        To make vp the troope at ſports.
                        And in company ſome while,
                        Happens to ſtraine forth a ſmile:
                        
                           
Feeles more want, and outward ſmart,
                        And more inward griefe of hart
                        Then this place can bring to thee,
                        While thy mind remaineth free.
                        Thou bewail'ſt my want of mirth,
                        But what find'ſt thou in this earth,
                        Wherein ought may be beleeu'd
                        Worth to make me Ioy'd; or grieu'd?
                        And yet feele I (naitheleſſe)
                        Part of both I muſt confeſſe.
                        Sometime, I of mirth doe borrow,
                        Otherwhile as much of ſorrow;
                        But, my preſent ſtate is ſuch,
                        As, nor Ioy, nor grieue I much.
                     
                     
                        Philarete.
                        Why, hath Willy then ſo long
                        Thus forborne his wonted Song?
                        Wherefore doth he now let fall,
                        His well tuned Paſtorall?
                        
                        And my eares that muſike barre,
                        Which I more long after farre,
                        Then the liberty I want.
                     
                     
                        Willy.
                        That, were very much to grant,
                        But, doth this hold alway lad,
                        Thoſe that ſing not, muſt be ſad?
                        
                           
Did'ſt thou euer that Bird heare
                        Sing well; that ſings all the yeare?
                        
                           Tom the Piper doth not play
                        Till he weares his Pipe away:
                        There's a time to ſlacke the ſtring,
                        And a time to leaue to ſing.
                     
                     
                        Philarete.
                        Yea; but no man now is ſtill,
                        That can ſing, or tune a quill.
                        Now to chant it, were but reaſon;
                        
                           Song and Muſicke are in ſeaſon.
                        Now in this ſweet iolly tide,
                        Is the earth in all her pride:
                        The faire Lady of the May
                        
                        Trim'd vp in her beſt array;
                        Hath inuited all the Swaines,
                        With the Laſſes of the Plaines,
                        To attend vpon her ſport
                        At the places of reſort.
                        
                           Coridon (with his bould Rout)
                        Hath alredy been about
                        For the elder Shepheards dole,
                        And fetch'd in the Summer-Pole:
                        
                        Whil'ſt the reſt haue built a Bower,
                        
                        To defend them from a ſhower;
                        Seil'd ſo cloſe, with boughes all greene,
                        
                           Tytan cannot pry betweene.
                        
                           
Now the Dayrie-Wenches dreame
                        Of their Strawberries and Creame:
                        And each doth her ſelfe aduance
                        To be taken in, to dance:
                        Euery one that knowes to ſing,
                        Fits him for his Carrolling:
                        So do thoſe that hope for meede,
                        Either by the Pipe or Reede:
                        And though I am kept away,
                        I doe heare (this very day)
                        Many learned Groomes doe wend,
                        For the Garlands to contend.
                        Which a Nimph that hight Deſart,
                        
                        (Long a ſtranger in this part)
                        With her own faire hand hath wrought
                        A rare worke (they ſay) paſt thought,
                        As appeareth by the name,
                        For ſhe cals them Wreathes of Fame.
                        
                        She hath ſet in their due place
                        Eu'ry flowre that may grace;
                        And among a thouſand moe,
                        (Whereof ſome but ſerue for ſhew)
                        She hath woue in Daphnes tree,
                        That they may not blaſted be.
                        Which with Time ſhe edg'd about,
                        Leaſt the worke ſhould rauell out.
                        And that it might wither neuer,
                        I intermixt it with Liue-euer.
                        
                        
                           
Theſe are to be ſhar'd among,
                        Thoſe that doe excell for ſong:
                        Or their paſſions can rehearſe
                        In the ſmooth'ſt and ſweeteſt verſe.
                        Then, for thoſe among the reſt,
                        That can play and pipe the beſt.
                        There's a Kidling with the Damme,
                        A fat Weather, and a Lambe.
                        And for thoſe that leapen far,
                        Wraſtle, Runne, and throw the Barre,
                        There's appointed guerdons to.
                        He, that beſt, the firſt can doe,
                        Shall, for his reward, be paid,
                        With a Sheep-hooke, faire in-laid
                        With fine Bone, of a ſtrange Beaſt
                        That men bring out of the Weſt.
                        For the next, a Scrip of red,
                        Taſſel'd with fine coloured Thred,
                        There's prepared for their meed,
                        That in running make moſt ſpeede,
                        (Or the cunning Meaſures foote)
                        
                           Cups of turned Maple-roote:
                        
                        Whereupon the skilfull man
                        Hath ingrau'd the Loues of Pan:
                        
                        And the laſt hath for his due,
                        A fine Napkin wrought with blew.
                        Then, my Willy, why art thou
                        Careleſſe of thy merit now?
                        
                           
What doſt thou heere, with a wight
                        That is ſhut vp from delight,
                        In a ſolitary den,
                        As not fit to liue with men?
                        Goe, my Willy, get thee gone,
                        Leaue mee in exile alone.
                        Hye thee to that merry throng,
                        And amaze them with thy Song.
                        
                        Thou art young, yet ſuch a Lay
                        
                        Neuer grac'd the month of May,
                        As (if they prouoke thy skill)
                        Thou canſt fit vnto thy Quill,
                        
                        I with wonder heard thee ſing,
                        At our laſt yeeres Reuelling.
                        Then I with the reſt was free,
                        When vnknowne I noted thee:
                        And perceiu'd the ruder Swaines,
                        Enuy thy farre ſweeter ſtraines.
                        Yea, I ſaw the Laſſes cling
                        Round about thee in a Ring:
                        As if each one iealous were,
                        Any but her ſelfe ſhould heare.
                        And I know they yet do long
                        For the res'due of thy ſong.
                        Haſt thee then to ſing it forth;
                        Take the benefit of worth.
                        And Deſert will ſure bequeath
                        
                           Fames faire Garland for thy wreath,
                        Hye thee, Willy, hye away.
                     
                     
                        
                        Willy.
                        
                           Phila, rather let mee ſtay,
                        And be deſolate with thee,
                        Then at thoſe their Reuels bee,
                        Nought ſuch is my skill I wis,
                        As indeed thou deem'ſt it is.
                        But what ere it be, I muſt
                        Be content, and ſhall I truſt.
                        For a Song I doe not paſſe,
                        Mong'ſt my friends, but what (alas)
                        Should I haue to doe with them
                        That my Muſicke doe contemne?
                        Some there are, as well I wot,
                        That the ſame yet fauour not:
                        Yet I cannot well auow,
                        They my Carrols diſalow:
                        But ſuch malice I haue ſpid,
                        'Tis as much as if they did.
                     
                     
                        Philarete.
                        
                           Willy, What may thoſe men be,
                        Are ſo ill, to malice thee?
                     
                     
                        Willy.
                        Some are worthy-well eſteem'd,
                        Some without worth are ſo deem'd.
                        Others of ſo baſe a ſpirit,
                        They haue nor eſteeme, nor merit.
                     
                     
                        
                        Philarete.
                        What's the wrong?—
                     
                     
                        Willy.
                        —A ſlight offence,
                        Wherewithall I can diſpence;
                        But hereafter for their ſake.
                        To my ſelfe I'le muſicke make.
                     
                     
                        Philarete.
                        What, becauſe ſome Clowne offends,
                        Wilt thou puniſh all thy friends?
                     
                     
                        Willy.
                        Do not, Phill, miſ-vnderſtand mee,
                        Thoſe that loue mee may command mee,
                        But, thou know'ſt, I am but yong,
                        And the Paſtorall I ſung,
                        Is by ſome ſuppos'd to be,
                        (By a ſtraine) too high for me:
                        So they kindly let me gaine,
                        Not my labour for my paine.
                        Truſt me, I doe wonder why
                        They ſhould me my owne deny.
                        Though I'me young, I ſcorne to flit
                        On the wings of borrowed wit.
                        I'le make my owne feathers reare me,
                        Whither others cannot beare me.
                        
                           
Yet I'le keepe my skill in ſtore,
                        Till I'ue ſeene ſome Winters more
                     
                     
                        Pillarete.
                        But, in earneſt, mean'ſt thou ſo?
                        Then thou art not wiſe, I trow:
                        Better ſhall aduiſe thee Pan,
                        
                        For thou doſt not rightly than:
                        That's the ready way to blot
                        All the credit thou haſt got.
                        Rather in thy Ages prime,
                        Get another ſtart of Time:
                        And make thoſe that ſo fond be,
                        (Spight of their owne dulneſſe) ſee,
                        That the ſacred Muſes can
                        Make a childe in yeeres, a man.
                        It is knowne what thou canſt doe,
                        For it is not long agoe,
                        When that Cuddy, Thou, and I,
                        
                        Each the others skill to try,
                        At Saint Dunſtanes charmed well,
                        (As ſome preſent there can tell)
                        Sang vpon a ſudden Theame,
                        Sitting by the Crimſon ſtreame.
                        Where, if thou didſt well or no,
                        Yet remaines the Song to ſhow,
                        Much experience more I'ue had,
                        Of thy skill (thou happy Lad)
                        
                           
And would make the world to know it;
                        But that time will further ſhow it.
                        
                           Enuy makes their tongues now runne
                        More then doubt of what is done.
                        For that needs muſt be thy owne,
                        Or to be ſome others knowne:
                        But how then wil't ſuit vnto
                        What thou ſhalt hereafter do?
                        Or I wonder where is hee,
                        Would with that ſong part to thee.
                        Nay, were there ſo mad a Swaine,
                        Could ſuch glory ſell for gaine;
                        
                           Phoebus would not haue combin'd,
                        That gift with ſo baſe a minde.
                        Neuer did the Nine impart
                        The ſweet ſecrets of their Art,
                        Vnto any that did ſcorne,
                        We ſhould ſee their fauours worne.
                        Therefore vnto thoſe that ſay,
                        Where they pleas'd to ſing a Lay.
                        They could doo't, and will not tho;
                        This I ſpeake, for this I know:
                        None ere drunke the Theſpian ſpring,
                        
                        And knew how, but he did ſing.
                        For, that once infus'd in man.
                        Makes him ſhew't doe what he can.
                        Nay, thoſe that doe onely ſip,
                        Or, but eu'n their fingers dip
                        
                           
In that ſacred Fount (poore Elues)
                        Of that brood will ſhew themſelues.
                        Yea, in hope to get them fame,
                        They will ſpeake, though to their ſhame.
                        Let thoſe then at thee repine,
                        That by their wits meaſure thine;
                        Needs thoſe Songs muſt be thine owne,
                        And that one day will be knowne.
                        That poore imputation to,
                        I my ſelfe do vndergoe:
                        But it will appeare ere long,
                        That 'twas Enuy ſought our wrong.
                        Who at twice-ten haue ſung more,
                        Then ſome will doe, at foureſcore,
                        Cheere thee (honeſt Willy) then,
                        And begin thy Song agen.
                     
                     
                        Willy.
                        Faine I would, but I doe feare
                        When againe my Lines they heare,
                        If they yeeld they are my Rimes,
                        They will faine ſome other Crimes;
                        And 'tis no ſafe ventring-by
                        Where we ſee Detraction ly.
                        For doe what I can, I doubt,
                        She will picke ſome quarrell out;
                        And I oft haue heard defended,
                        
                           Little ſaid, is ſoone amended.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        Philarete.
                        See'ſt thou not in cleareſt dayes,
                        Oft thicke fogs cloud Heau'ns rayes.
                        And that vapours which doe breath
                        From the earths groſſe wombe beneath,
                        Seeme not to vs with black ſteames,
                        To pollute the Sunnes bright beames,
                        And yet vaniſh into ayre,
                        Leauing it (vnblemiſht) faire?
                        So (my Willy) ſhall it bee
                        With Detractions breath on thee.
                        It ſhall neuer riſe ſo hie,
                        As to ſtaine thy Poeſie.
                        As that Sunne doth oft exhale
                        Vapours from each rotten Vale;
                        Poeſie ſo ſometime draines,
                        Groſſe conceits from muddy braines;
                        Miſts of Enuy, fogs of ſpight,
                        Twixt mens judgements and her light:
                        But ſo much her power may do,
                        That ſhee can diſſolue them to.
                        If thy Verſe doe brauely tower,
                        As ſhee makes wing, ſhe gets power:
                        Yet the higher ſhe doth ſore,
                        Shee's affronted ſtill the more:
                        Till ſhee to the high'ſt hath paſt,
                        Then ſhe reſts with fame at laſt,
                        
                           
Let nought therefore, thee affright:
                        But make forward in thy flight:
                        For if I could match thy Rime,
                        To the very Starres I'de clime.
                        There begin again, and flye,
                        Till I reach'd Aeternity.
                        But (alaſſe) my Muſe is ſlow:
                        For thy place ſhee flags too low:
                        Yea, the more's her hapleſſe fate,
                        Her ſhort wings were clipt of late.
                        And poore I, her fortune ruing,
                        Am my ſelfe put vp a muing.
                        But if I my Cage can rid,
                        I'le flye where I neuer did.
                        And though for her ſake I'me croſt,
                        Though my beſt hopes I haue loſt,
                        And knew ſhe would make my trouble
                        Ten times more then ten times double:
                        I ſhould loue and keepe her to,
                        Spight of all the world could doe.
                        For though baniſh't from my flockes,
                        And confin'd within theſe rockes,
                        Here I waſte away the light,
                        And conſume the ſullen Night,
                        She doth for my comfort ſtay,
                        And keepes many cares away.
                        Though I miſle the flowry Fields,
                        With thoſe ſweets the Spring-tyde yeelds,
                        
                           
Though I may not ſee thoſe Groues,
                        Where the Shepheards chant their Loues,
                        (And the Laſſes more excell,
                        Then the ſweet voyc'd Philomel)
                        
                        Though of all thoſe pleaſures paſt,
                        Nothing now remaines at laſt,
                        But Remembrance (poore reliefe)
                        That more makes, then mends my griefe:
                        Shee's my mindes companion ſtill,
                        Maugre Enuies euill will.
                        (Whence ſhe ſhould be driuen to,
                        Wer't in mortals power to do.)
                        She doth tell me where to borrow
                        Comfort in the midſt of ſorrow;
                        Makes the deſolateſt place
                        To her preſence be a grace;
                        And the blackeſt diſcontents
                        To be pleaſing ornaments.
                        In my former dayes of bliſſe,
                        Her diuine skill taught me this,
                        That from euery thing I ſaw,
                        I could ſome inuention draw:
                        And raiſe pleaſure to her height,
                        Through the meaneſt obiects ſight.
                        By the murmure of a ſpring,
                        Or the leaſt boughes ruſteling.
                        By a Dazie whoſe leaues ſpred,
                        Shut when Tytan goes to bed;
                        
                           
Or a ſhady buſh or tree,
                        She could more infuſe in mee,
                        Then all Natures beauties can,
                        In ſome other wiſer man.
                        By her helpe I alſo now,
                        Make this churliſh place allow
                        Some things that may ſweeten gladnes,
                        In the very gall of ſadnes.
                        The dull loanneſſe, the blacke ſhade,
                        That theſe hanging vaults haue made,
                        The ſtrange Muſicke of the waues,
                        Beating on theſe hollow Caues,
                        This blacke Den which Rocks emboſſe
                        Ouer-growne with eldeſt Moſſe.
                        The rude Portals that giue light,
                        More to Terror then Delight.
                        
                        This my Chamber of Neglect,
                        
                        Wall'd about with Diſreſpect,
                        
                        From all theſe and this dull ayre,
                        A fit obiect for Deſpaire,
                        
                        She hath taught me by her might
                        To draw comfort and delight.
                        Therefore thou beſt earthly bliſſe,
                        
                        I will cheriſh thee for this.
                        
                           Poeſie; thou ſweeteſt content
                        That e're Heau'n to mortals lent:
                        Though they as a trifle leaue thee
                        Whoſe dull thoughts cannot conceiue thee,
                        
                           
Though thou be to them a ſcorne,
                        That to nought but earth are borne:
                        Let my life no longer be
                        Then I am in loue with thee.
                        Though our wiſe ones call thee madneſſe
                        Let me neuer taſte of gladneſſe.
                        If I loue not thy mad'ſt fits,
                        More then all their greateſt wits.
                        And though ſome too ſeeming holy,
                        Doe account thy raptures folly:
                        Thou doſt teach me to contemne,
                        What make Knaues and Fooles of them.
                        Oh high power! that oft doth carry
                        Men aboue—
                     
                     
                        Willie.
                        —Good Philarete tarry,
                        I doe feare thou wilt be gon,
                        Quite aboue my reach anon.
                        The kinde flames of Poeſie
                        Haue now borne thy thoughts ſo high,
                        That they vp in Heauen be,
                        And haue quite forgotten me.
                        Call thy ſelfe to minde againe,
                        Are theſe Raptures for a Swaine,
                        That attends on lowly Sheepe,
                        And with ſimple Heards doth keepe?
                     
                     
                        
                        Philarete.
                        Thankes my Willie; I had runne
                        Till that Time had lodg'd the Sunne,
                        If thou had'ſt not made me ſtay;
                        But thy pardon here I pray.
                        Lou'd Apolo's ſacred ſire
                        Had rais'd vp my ſpirits higher
                        Through the loue of Poeſie,
                        Then indeed they vſe to flye.
                        But as I ſaid, I ſay ſtill,
                        If that I had Willi's skill,
                        Enuie nor Detractions tongue,
                        Should ere make me leaue my ſong:
                        But I'de ſing it euery day
                        Till they pin'd themſelues away.
                        Be thou then aduis'd in this,
                        Which both iuſt and ſitting is:
                        Finiſh what thou haſt begun,
                        Or at leaſt ſtill forward run.
                        Haile and Thunder ill hee 'l beare
                        That a blaſt of winde doth feare:
                        And if words will thus afray thee,
                        Prethee how will deeds diſmay thee?
                        Doe not thinke ſo rathe a Song
                        
                        Can paſſe through the vulgar throng,
                        And eſcape without a touch,
                        Or that they can hurt it much:
                        
                           
Froſts we ſee doe nip that thing
                        Which is forward'ſt in the Spring:
                        Yet at laſt for all ſuch lets
                        Somewhat of the reſt it gets.
                        And l'me ſure that ſo maiſt thou,
                        Therefore my kind Willie now.
                        Since thy folding time drawes on
                        And I ſee thou muſt be gon,
                        Thee I earneſtly beſeech
                        To remember this my ſpeech
                        And ſome little counſell take,
                        For Philarete his ſake:
                        And I more of this will ſay,
                        If thou come next Holy-day.
                     
                     FINIS.
                  
                  
                     
                     The Shepheards Hunting.
                     The fifth Eglogue.
                     
                        THE ARGVMENT.
                        
                           Philaret Alexis moues,
                        To embrace the Muſes loues;
                        Bids him neuer carefull ſeeme,
                        Of anothers diſ-eſteeme:
                        Since to them it may ſuffice,
                        They themſelues can iuſtly prize.
                     
                     PHILARETE. ALEXIS.
                     
                        Philarete.
                        
                           ALexis, if thy worth doe not diſdaine
                        The humble friendſhip of a meaner Swaine,
                        Or ſome more needfull buſineſſe of the day,
                        Vrge thee to be too haſty on thy way;
                        Come (gentle Shepheard) reſt thee here by mee,
                        Beneath the ſhadow of this broad leau'd tree:
                        For though I ſeeme a ſtranger, yet mine eye
                        Obſerues in thee the markes of courteſie:
                        
                           
And if my iudgement erre not, noted to,
                        More then in thoſe that more would ſeeme to doe.
                        Such Vertues thy rare modeſty doth hide.
                        Which by their proper luſter I eſpy'd;
                        And though long maskt in ſilence they haue beene,
                        I haue a Wiſedome through that ſilence ſeene,
                        Yea, I haue learned knowledge from thy tongue,
                        And heard when thou haſt in concealement ſung.
                        Which me the bolder and more willing made
                        Thus to inuite thee to this homely ſhade.
                        And though (it may be) thou couldſt neuer ſpie,
                        Such worth in me, I might be knowne thereby:
                        In thee I doe; for here my neighbouring Sheepe
                        Vpon the border of theſe Downes I keepe:
                        Where often thou at Paſtorals and Playes,
                        Haſt grac'd our Wakes on Summer Holy-dayes:
                        And many a time with thee at this cold ſpring
                        Met I, to heare your learned ſhepheards ſing,
                        Saw them diſporting in the ſhady Groues,
                        And in chaſte Sonnets wooe their chaſter Loues:
                        When I, endued with the meaneſt skill,
                        Mongſt others haue been vrg'd to tune my quill.
                        But, (cauſe but little cunning I had got)
                        Perhaps thou ſaw'ſt me, though thou knew'ſt me not.
                     
                     
                        Alexis.
                        Yes Philaret, I know thee, and thy name.
                        Nor is my knowledge grounded all on fame.
                        
                           
Art thou not he, that but this other yeere,
                        Seard'ſt all the Wolues and Foxes in the Sheere?
                        And in a match at Foot-ball lately tride
                        (Hauing ſcarce twenty Satyrs on thy ſide)
                        Held'ſt play: and though aſſailed kept'ſt thy ſtand
                        Gainſt all the beſt-tride Ruffians in the Land?
                        Did'ſt thou not then in dolefull Sonnets mone,
                        When the beloued of great Pan was gone?
                        And at the wedding of faire Thame and Rhine,
                        
                        Sing of their glories to thy Valentine?
                        I know it, and I muſt confeſſe that long
                        In one thing I did doe thy nature wrong:
                        For, till I mark'd the ayme thy Satyrs had,
                        I thought them ouer-bold, and thee halfe mad.
                        But, ſince I did more neerely on thee looke,
                        I ſoone perceiu'd that I all had miſtooke;
                        I ſaw that of a Cynicke thou mad'ſt ſhow,
                        Where ſince, I finde, that thou wert nothing ſo;
                        And that of many thou much blame had'ſt got,
                        When as thy Innocency deſeru'd it not.
                        But that too good opinion thou haſt ſeem'd
                        To haue of me (not ſo to be eſteem'd,)
                        Preuailes not ought to ſtay him who doth feare,
                        He rather ſhould reproofes then prayſes heare.
                        'Tis true, I found thee plaine and honeſt to,
                        Which made mee like, then loue, as now I do;
                        And, Phila, though a ſtranger, this to the Ile ſay,
                        Where I doe loue, I am not coy to ſtay.
                     
                     
                        
                        Philarete.
                        Thankes, gentle Swaine, that doſt ſo ſoone vnfold
                        What I to thee as gladly would haue told▪
                        
                        And thus thy wonted curteſie expreſt
                        In kindly entertaining this requeſt.
                        Sure, I ſhould iniure much my owne content,
                        Or wrong thy loue to ſtand on complement:
                        Who haſt acquaintance in one word begun,
                        As well as I could in an age haue done.
                        Or by an ouer-weaning ſlowneſſe marre
                        What thy more wiſdome hath brought on ſo farre.
                        Then ſit thou downe, and Ile my minde declare,
                        As freely, as if we familiars were:
                        And if thou wilt but daigne to giue me eare,
                        Something thou mayſt for thy more profit heare.
                     
                     
                        Alexis.
                        
                           Philarete, I willingly obey.
                     
                     
                        Philarete.
                        Then know, Alexis, from that very day,
                        When as I ſaw thee at thy Shepheards Coate,
                        Where each (I thinke) of other tooke firſt note;
                        I meane that Paſtor who by Tauies ſprings,
                        Chaſte Shepheards loues in ſweeteſt numbers ſings,
                        And with his Muſicke (to his greater fame)
                        Hath late made proud the faireſt Nymphs of Thame.
                        
                           
E'ne then (me thought) I did eſpy in thee
                        Some vnperceiu'd and hidden worth to bee:
                        Which, in thy more apparant vertues, ſhin'd;
                        And, among many, I (in thought) deuin'd,
                        By ſomething my conceit had vnderſtood,
                        That thou wert markt one of the Muſes brood,
                        That, made me loue thee: and that Loue I beare
                        Begat a Pitty, and that Pitty, Care:
                        Pitty I had to ſee good parts conceal'd,
                        Care I had how to haue that good reueal'd,
                        Since 'tis a fault admitteth no excuſe,
                        To poſſeſſe much, and yet put nought in vſe.
                        Hereon I vow'd (if wee two euer met)
                        The firſt requeſt that I would ſtriue to get,
                        Should be but this, that thou would'ſt ſhew thy skill,
                        How thou could'ſt tune thy Verſes to thy quill:
                        And teach thy Muſe in ſome well-framed Song,
                        To ſhew the Art thou haſt ſuppreſt ſo long:
                        Which if my new-acquaintance may obtaine,
                        I will for euer honour this daies gaine.
                     
                     
                        Alexis.
                        Alas! my ſmall experience ſcarce can tell,
                        So much as where thoſe Nymphs, the Muſes, dwell;
                        Nor (though my 
                              •
                           low conceit ſtill trauels on)
                        Shall I ere reach to drinke of Hellicon.
                        
                        Or, if I might ſo fauour'd be to taſte
                        What thoſe ſweet ſtreames but ouer-flow in waſte,
                        
                           
And touch Parnaſſus, where 
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              •
                           ow'ſt doth lie,
                        I feare my skill would hardly flag ſo hie.
                     
                     
                        Philarete.
                        Deſpaire not Man, the Gods haue prized nought
                        So deere, that may not be with labour bought:
                        Nor need thy paine be great, ſince Fate and Heauen,
                        
                        That (as a bleſſing) at thy birth haue giuen.
                     
                     
                        Alexis.
                        Why, ſay they had?—
                     
                     
                        Philarete.
                        —Then vſe their gifts thou muſt.
                        Or be vngratefull, and ſo be vnjuſt:
                        For if it cannot truely be deni'd,
                        Ingratitude mens benefits doe hide;
                        Then more vngratefull muſt he be by ods,
                        Who doth conceale the bounty of the Gods.
                     
                     
                        Alexis.
                        That's true indeed, but Enuy haunteth thoſe
                        Who ſeeking Fame, their hidden skill diſcloſe:
                        Where elſe they might (obſcur'd) from her eſpying,
                        Eſcape the blaſts and danger of enuying:
                        
                           Cryticks will cenſure our beſt ſtraines of Wit,
                        And pur-blind Ignorance miſconſter it.
                        
                           
And which is bad, (yet worſe then this doth follow)
                        Moſt hate the Muſes, and contemne Apollo.
                        
                     
                     
                        Philarete.
                        So let them: why ſhould wee their hate eſteeme?
                        Is't not enough we of our ſelues can deeme?
                        'Tis more to their diſgrace that we ſcorne them,
                        Then vnto vs that they our Art contemne.
                        Can we haue better paſtime then to ſee
                        Their groſſe heads may ſo much deceiued bee,
                        As to allow thoſe doings beſt, where wholly
                        We ſcoffe them to their face, and flout their folly?
                        Or to behold blacke Enuy in her prime,
                        
                           
                              ••
                           e ſelfe-conſum'd, whilſt we vie liues with time:
                        And, in deſpight of her, more ſame attaine,
                        Then all her malice can wipe out againe?
                     
                     
                        Alexis.
                        Yea, but if I appli'd mee to thoſe ſtraines,
                        Who ſhould driue forth my Flocks vnto the plaines,
                        Which, whil'ſt the Muſes reſt, and leaſure craue,
                        Muſt watering, folding, and attendance haue?
                        For if I leaue with wonted care to cheriſh
                        Thoſe tender heards, both I and they ſhould periſh.
                     
                     
                        Philarete.
                        
                           Alexis, now I ſee thou doſt miſtake,
                        There is no meaning thou thy Charge forſake;
                        
                           
Nor would I wiſh thee ſo thy ſelfe abuſe,
                        As to neglect thy calling for thy Muſe.
                        
                        But, let theſe two, ſo each of other borrow,
                        That they may ſeaſon mirth, and leſſen ſorrow.
                        Thy Flocke will helpe thy charges to defray,
                        Thy Muſe to paſſe the long and teadious day:
                        Or whilſt thou tun'ſt ſweet meaſures to thy Reed,
                        
                        Thy Sheepe, to liſten, will more neere thee feed;
                        The Wolues will ſhun them, birds aboue thee ſing,
                        And Lamkins dance about thee in a Ring.
                        Nay, which is more; in this thy low eſtate,
                        Thou in contentment ſhalt with Monarks mate:
                        For mighty Pan, and Ceres, to vs grants,
                        Our Fields and Flocks ſhall helpe our outward wants:
                        The Muſes teach vs Songs to put off cares,
                        Grac'd with as rare and ſweet conceits as theirs:
                        And we can thinke our Laſſes on the Greenes
                        As faire, or fairer, then the faireſt Queenes:
                        Or, what is more then moſt of them ſhall doe,
                        Wee'le make their iuſter fames laſt longer to,
                        And haue our Lines by greateſt Princes grac'd
                        When both their name and memori's defac'd.
                        Therefore, Alexis, though that ſome diſdaine
                        The heauenly Muſicke of the Rurall plaine,
                        What is't to vs, if they (o'reſeene) contemne
                        The dainties which were nere ordain'd for them?
                        And though that there be other-ſome enuy
                        The prayſes due to ſacred Poeſie,
                        
                           
Let them diſdaine, and fret till they are weary,
                        Wee in our ſelues haue that ſhall make vs merry:
                        Which, he that wants, and had the power to know it,
                        Would giue his life that he might die a Poet.
                     
                     
                        Alexis:
                        A braue perſwaſion.—
                     
                     
                        Philarete.
                        —Here thou ſee'ſt mee pent
                        Within the jawes of ſtrict impriſonment;
                        A fore-lorne Shepheard, voyd of all the meanes.
                        Whereon Mans common hope in danger leanes,
                        Weake in my ſelfe, expoſed to the Hate
                        
                        Of thoſe whoſe Enuies are inſatiate:
                        Shut from my friends, baniſh'd from all delights;
                        Nay worſe, excluded from the ſacred Rites.
                        
                        Here I doe liue mongſt out-lawes markt for death.
                        As one vnfit to draw the common breath,
                        Where thoſe who to be good did neuer know,
                        Are barred from the meanes ſhould make them ſo▪
                        
                        I ſuffer, cauſe I wiſh'd my Country well,
                        And what I more muſt beare I cannot tell.
                        I'me ſure they giue my Body little ſcope,
                        And would allow my Minde as little Hope:
                        
                        I waſte my Meanes, which of it ſelfe is ſlender,
                        Conſume my Time (perhaps my fortunes hinder)
                        
                           
And many Croſſes haue, which thoſe that can
                        Conceiue no wrong that hurts another man,
                        Will not take note of; though if halfe ſo much
                        Should light on them, or their owne perſon touch,
                        Some that themſelues (I feare) moſt worthy thinke,
                        With all their helpes would into baſeneſſe ſhrinke.
                        But, ſpight of Hate, and all that Spight can do,
                        I can be patient yet, and merry to.
                        That ſlender Muſe of mine, by which my Name,
                        
                        Though ſcarſe deſeru'd, hath gain'd a little fame,
                        Hath made mee vnto ſuch a Fortune borne,
                        That all misfortunes I know how to ſcorne;
                        Yea, midſt theſe bands can ſleight the Great'st that bee,
                        As much as their diſdaine miſteemes of mee.
                        This Caue, whoſe very preſence ſome affrights,
                        I haue oft made to Eccho forth delights,
                        And hope to turne, if any Iuſtice be,
                        Both ſhame and care on thoſe that wiſh'd it me.
                        For while the World rancke villanies affords,
                        I will not ſpare to paint them out in words;
                        Although I ſtill ſhould into troubles runne,
                        I knew what man could act, ere I begun;
                        And I'le fulfill what my Muſe drawes mee to,
                        Maugre all Iayles, and Purgatories to.
                        For whil'ſt ſhee ſets mee honeſt task's about,
                        
                           Vertue, or ſhee, (I know) will beare mee out:
                        And if, by Fate, th'abuſed power of ſome
                        Muſt, in the worlds-eye, leaue mee ouercome,
                        
                           
They ſhall find one Fort yet. ſo fenc'd I trow,
                        It cannot feare a Mortals ouer-throw.
                        This Hope, and Truſt, that great power did infuſe,
                        That firſt inſpir'd into my breſt a Muſe,
                        
                        By whom I doe, and euer will contemne
                        All thoſe ill haps, my foes deſpight, and them.
                     
                     
                        Alexis.
                        Th'haſt ſo well (yong Philaret) plaid thy part,
                        I am almoſt in loue with that ſweet Art:
                        And if ſome power will but inſpire my ſong,
                        
                           Alexis will not be obſcured long.
                     
                     
                        Philarete.
                        Enough kinde Paſtor: But oh! yonder ſee
                        Two honeſt Shepheards walking hither, bee
                        
                           Cuddy and Willy, that ſo dearely loue,
                        Who are repairing vnto yonder Groue:
                        Let's follow them: for neuer brauer Swaines
                        Made muſicke to their flocks vpon theſe Plaines.
                        They are more worthy, and can better tell
                        What rare contents doe with a Poet dwell.
                        Then whiles our ſheepe the ſhort ſweet graſſe do ſheare
                        And till the long ſhade of the hils appeare,
                        Wee'le heare them ſing: for though the one be young,
                        Neuer was any that more ſweetly ſung.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  A Poſtſcript.
                  To the Reader.
                  
                     IF you haue read this, and receiued any content, I am glad, (though it bee not ſo much as I could wiſh you) if you thinke it idle, why then I ſee wee are not likely to fall out; for I am iuſt of your minds; yet weigh it well before you runne too farre in your cenſures, leſt this proue leſſe barren of Wit, then you of courteſie. It is very true (I know not by what chance) that I haue of late been ſo highly beholding to Opinion, that I wonder how I crept ſo much into her fauour, and if I did thinke it worthie the fearing) I ſhould be afraid that ſhe

hauing ſo vndeſeruedly befriended mee beyond my Hope or expectation, will, vpon as little cauſe, ere long, againe picke ſome quarrell againſt mee; and it may bee, meanes to make vſe of this, which I know muſt needes come farre ſhort of their expectation, who by their earneſt deſire of it, ſeem'd to be fore-poſſeſt with a farre better conceite, then I can beleeue it prooues worthy of. So much at leaſt I doubted, and therefore loth to deceiue the world (though it often beguile me) I kept it to my ſelfe, indeed, not dreaming euer to ſee it publiſhed: But now, by the ouermuch perſwaſion of ſome friends, I haue been conſtrained to expoſe it to the generall view. Which ſeeing I haue done, ſomethings I deſire thee to take notice of. Firſt, that I am Hee, who to pleaſure my friend,

haue fram'd my ſelfe a content out of that which would otherwiſe diſcontent mee. Secondly, that I haue coueted more to effect what I thinke truely honeſt in it ſelfe, then by a ſeeming ſhew of Art, to catch the vaine blaſtes of vncertaine Opinion. This that I haue here written, was no part of my ſtudie, but onely a recreation in impriſonment: and a trifle, neither in my conceit fitting, nor by me intended to bee made common; yet ſome, who it ſhould ſeeme eſteemed it worthy more reſpect then I did, tooke paines to coppy it out, vnknowne to mee, and in my abſence got it both Authorized and prepared for the Preſſe; ſo that if I had not hindred it, laſt Michaelmas-Tearme had beene troubled with it. I was much blamed by ſome Friends for withſtanding

it, to whoſe requeſt I ſhould more eaſily haue conſented, but that I thought (as indeed I yet doe) I ſhould thereby more diſparage my ſelfe, then content them. For I doubt J ſhall bee ſuppoſed one of thoſe, who out of their arrogant deſire of a little prepoſterous Fame, thruſt into the world euery vnſeaſoned trifle that drops out of their vnſetled braines; whoſe baſeneſſe how much I hate, thoſe that know mee can witneſſe, for if I were ſo affected, I might perhaps preſent the World with as many ſeuerall Poems, as I haue ſeene yeeres; and iuſtly make my ſelfe appeare to bee the Author of ſome things that others haue ſhamefully vſurped and made vſe of as their owne. But I will be content other men ſhould owne ſome of thoſe Iſſues of the Braine, for J

would be loath to confeſſe all that might in that kinde call me Father. Neither ſhall any more of them, by my conſent, in haſt againe trouble the world, vnleſſe I know which way to benefit it with leſſe preiudice to my owne eſtate. And therefore if any of thoſe leſſe ſerious Poems which are already diſperſt into my friends hands, come amongst you, let not their publication be imputed to me, nor their lightneſſe be any diſparagement to what hath been ſince more ſerious written, ſeeing it is but ſuch ſtuffe as riper iudgements haue in their farre elder yeeres been much more guilty of.
                  I know an indifferent Crittick may finde many faults, as well in the ſlightneſſe of this preſent Subiect, as in the erring from the true nature of an Eglogue: moreouer, it altogether concernes

my ſelf, which diuers may diſlike. But neither can bee done on iuſt cauſe: The firſt hath bin anſwered already: The laſt might conſider that I was there where my owne estate was chiefly to bee looked vnto, and all the comfort I could miniſter vnto my ſelfe, little enough.
                  If any man deeme it worthy his reading I ſhall bee glad: if hee thinke his paines ill beſtow'd, let him blame himſelfe for medling with that concerned him not: I neither commended it to him, neither cared whether he read it or no; becauſe I know thoſe that were deſirous of it, will eſteeme the ſame as much as I expect they ſhould.
                  But it is not vnlikely, ſome wil thinke I haue in diuers places been more wanton (as they take it) then befitting a Satirict; yet their ſeuerity I feare not, becauſe

J am aſſured all that I euer yet did, was free from Obſcaenity: neyther am I ſo Cynical, but that I thinke a modeſt expreſsion of ſuch amorous conceits as ſute with Reaſon, will yet very well become my yeeres; in which not to haue feeling of the power of Loue, were as great an argument of much ſtupidity, as an ouerſottiſh affection were of extreame folly. Laſtly, if you thinke it hath not well anſwered the Title of the Shepheards Hunting, goe quarrell with the Stationer, who bid himſelfe God-Father, and impoſed the Name according to his owne liking; and if you, or hee, finde any faults, pray mend them.
                  Valete.
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  FIDELIA: BY GEORGE WITHER. GENT:
                  
                  
                     LONDON, Printed by T. S. for Iohn Budge, dwelling in Pauls-Church-yard, at the ſigne of the Greene Dragon, 1622.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  An Elegiacall Epiſtle of Fidelia, to her vnconſtant Friend.
                  
                     THE ARGVMENT.
                     This Elegiacall Epiſtle, being a fragment of ſome greater Poeme, diſcouers the modeſt affections of a diſcreet and conſtant Woman, ſhadowed vnder the name of Fidelia; wherein you may perceiue the height of their Paſſions, ſo farre as they ſeeme to agree with reaſon, and keepe within ſuch decent bounds as beſeemeth their Sex, but further it meddles not. The occaſion ſeemes to proceed from ſome mutability in her friend, whoſe obiections ſhee heere preſuppoſing, confuteth, and in the perſon of him iuſtly vpbraideth all that are ſubiect to the like change, or ſickleneſſe in minde. Among the reſt, ſome more weightie Arguments then are (perhaps) expected in ſuch a ſubiect, are briefly, and yet ſomewhat ſeriouſly handled.
                  
                  
                     
                        OFt I haue heard tel, and now for truth I finde,
                     
                        Once out of ſight, and quickly out of minde.
                     
                     And that it hath been rightly ſaid of old,
                     
                        Loue that's ſoon'ſt hot, is euer ſooneſt cold.
                     
                     
                        
Or elſe my teares at this time had not ſtain'd
                     The ſpotleſſe paper, nor my lines complain'd.
                     I had not now, been forced to haue ſent
                     Theſe lines for Nuncio's of my diſcontent;
                     Nor thus, exchanged, ſo vnhappily,
                     My ſongs of Mirth, to write an Elegie.
                     But, now I muſt; and, ſince I muſt doe ſo,
                     Let mee but craue, thou wilt not flout my woe:
                     Nor entertaine my ſorrowes with a ſcoffe,
                     But, reade (at leaſt) before thou caſt them off.
                     And, though thy heart's too hard to haue compaſſion,
                     Oh blame not, if thou pitty not my Paſſion,
                     
                     For well thou know'ſt (alas, that er'e 'twas knowne)
                     There was a time (although that time be gone)
                     I, that for this, ſcarce dare a beggar bee,
                     Preſum'd for more to haue commanded thee.
                     Yea, the Day was, (but ſee how things may change)
                     When thou, and I, haue not been halfe ſo ſtrange;
                     But oft embrac'd each other, gently greeting,
                     With ſuch kinde words, as Turtle, Doue, or Sweeting.
                     
                     Yea, had thy meaning, and thoſe vowes of thine,
                     Prou'd but as faithfull, and as true as mine,
                     It ſtill had been ſo: for (I doe not faine)
                     I ſhould rejoyce it might be ſo againe.
                     But, ſith thy Loue growes cold, and thou vnkinde,
                     Be not diſpleas'd I ſomewhat breath my minde;
                     I am in hope, my words may proue a mirrour,
                     Whereon thou looking, may'ſt behold thine error.
                     
                        
And yet, the Heauen, and my ſad heart doth know,
                     How griu'd I am, and with what feeling woe
                     My minde is tortured, to thinke that I
                     Should be the brand of thy diſloyalty:
                     Or, liue to be the Author of a line
                     That ſhall be printed with a fault of thine;
                     (Since if that thou but ſlightly touched be,
                     Deepe wounds of griefe, and ſhame, it ſtrikes in me:)
                     And yet I muſt; ill hap compels me to
                     What I nere thought to haue had cauſe to do.
                     And therefore, ſeeing that ſome angry Fate
                     
                     Impoſes on mee, what I ſo much hate:
                     Or, ſince it is ſo, that the Powers diuine
                     Mee (miſerable) to ſuch cares aſſigne;
                     Oh that Loues patron, or ſome ſacred Muſe,
                     
                     Amongſt my Paſſions, would ſuch Art infuſe,
                     My well-fram'd words, and aiery ſighs might proue
                     The happy blaſts to re-inflame thy loue.
                     Or, at leaſt, touch thee with thy fault ſo neere,
                     That thou might'ſt ſee thou wrong'ſt, who held thee deere:
                     Seeing, confeſſe the ſame, and ſo abhorre it,
                     Abhorring, pitty, and repent thee for it.
                     But (Deare) I hope that I may call thee ſo,
                     (For thou art deare to mee, although a foe)
                     Tell mee, is't true, that I doe heare of thee,
                     And, by thy abſence, true appeares to bee?
                     Can ſuch abuſe be in the Court of Loue,
                     
                     Falſe and inconſtant now, thou Hee ſhould'ſt proue?
                     
                        
He, that ſo wofull, and ſo penſiue ſate,
                     Vowing his ſeruice at my feete of late?
                     Art thou that quondam louer, whoſe ſad eye
                     I ſeldome ſaw yet, in my preſence dry?
                     And from whoſe gentle-ſeeming tongue I know
                     So many pitty-mouing words could flow?
                     Was't thou, ſo ſoughtſt my loue, ſo ſeeking that
                     As if it had been all th'hadſt aymed at?
                     Making me think thy Paſſion without ſtaine,
                     And gently quite thee with my loue againe?
                     With this perſwaſion I ſo fairely plac'd it,
                     Nor Time, nor Enuy, ſhould haue ere defac'd it?
                     Is't ſo? haue I done thus much? and art thou
                     So ouer-cloyed with my fauours now?
                     Art wearſed ſince with louing, and eſtranged
                     So far? Is thy affection ſo much changed,
                     That I of all my hopes muſt be deceyued,
                     And all good thoughts of thee be quite bereaued?
                  
                  
                     Then true I finde, which long before this day
                     I fear'd my ſelfe, and heard ſome wiſer ſay;
                     
                        That there is nought on earth ſo ſweet, that can
                     
                     
                        Long reliſh with the curious taſte of Man.
                     
                  
                  
                     Happy was I; yea, well it was with mee,
                     Before I came to be bewitch'd by thee.
                     I ioy'd the ſweet'ſt content that euer Maid
                     
                     Poſſeſſed yet; and truely well-a-paid,
                     Made to my ſelfe (alone) as pleaſant mirth
                     As euer any Virgine did on earth.
                     
                        
The melody I vſ'd was free, and ſuch
                     As that Bird makes, whom neuer hand did touch;
                     But, vn-allur'd, (with Fowlers whiſtling) flies
                     Aboue the reach of humane treacheries.
                  
                  
                     And (well I doe remember) often then
                     Could I reade o're the pollicies of men;
                     Diſcouer what vncertainties they were;
                     How they would ſigh, looke ſad, proteſt, and ſweare;
                     Nay, faigne to die, when they did neuer proue
                     The ſlendreſt touch of a right-worthy loue:
                     But had chil'd hearts, whoſe dulneſſe vnderſtood
                     No more of Paſſion, then they did of good.
                     All which I noted well, and in my minde
                     (A generall humour amongſt women-kinde)
                     This vow I made; (thinking to keepe it than)
                     That neuer the faire tongue of any man,
                     Nor his complaint, though neuer ſo much grieu'd,
                     Should moue my heart to liking whil'ſt I liu'd.
                  
                  
                     But, who can ſay, what ſhe ſhall liue to do?
                     I haue beleeu'd, and let in liking to,
                     And that ſo farre, I cannot yet ſee how
                     I may ſo much as hope, to helpe it now;
                     Which makes mee thinke, what e're we women ſay,
                     Another minde will come another day.
                     And that men may to things vnhop'd for clime,
                     Who watch but Opportunity and Time.
                     
                     For 'tis well knowne, we were not made of clay,
                     Or ſuch courſe, and ill-temper'd ſtuffe as they.
                     
                        
For he that fram'd vs of their fleſh, did daigne
                     When 'twas at beſt, to new refine't againe.
                     Which makes vs euer ſince the kinder Creatures,
                     
                     Of farre more flexible, and yeelding Natures.
                     
                     And as wee oft excell in outward parts,
                     So wee haue nobler and more gentle hearts.
                     Which, you well knowing, daily doe deuiſe
                     How to imprint on them your Cruelties.
                     
                     But doe I ſinde my cauſe thus bad indeed?
                     Or elſe on things imaginary feed?
                     Am I the laſſe that late ſo truly iolly,
                     Made my ſelfe merry oft, at others folly?
                     Am I the Nymph that Cupids fancies blam'd,
                     That was ſo cold, ſo hard to be inflam'd?
                     Am I my ſelfe? or is my ſelfe that Shee
                     
                     Who from this Thraldome, or ſuch falſhoods free,
                     Late own'd mine owne heart, and full merry then,
                     Did fore-warne others to beware of Men?
                     And could not, hauing taught them what to doe,
                     Now learne my ſelfe, to take heede of you to?
                     
                        Foole that I am, I feare my guerdon's iuſt,
                     In that I knew this, and preſum'd to truſt.
                     And yet (alas) for ought that I could tell,
                     One ſparke of goodneſſe in the world might dwell:
                     And then, I thought, If ſuch a thing might be,
                     Why might not that one ſparke remaine in thee?
                     For thy faire out-ſide, and thy fayrer tongue,
                     Did promiſe much, although thy yeares were young.
                     
                        
And Vertue (whereſoeuer ſhe be now)
                     Seem'd then, to ſit enthron'd vpon thy brow.
                     Yea, ſure it was: but, whether 'twere or no,
                     Certaine I am, and was perſwaded ſo.
                     Which made me loth to thinke, that words of faſhion,
                     Could be ſo fram'd, ſo ouer-laid with Paſſion;
                     
                     Or ſighes ſo feeling, fain'd from any breſt.
                     Nay, ſay thou hadſt been falſe in all the reſt;
                     Yet from thy eye, my heart ſuch notice tooke,
                     Me thought, guile could not faine ſo ſad a looke.
                     But now I'ue try'd, my bought experience knowes,
                     
                        They oft are worſt that make the faireſt ſhowes.
                     
                     
                        And howſoe're men faine an outward grieuing,
                     
                     
                        'Tis neither worth reſpecting, nor belieuing:
                     
                     For, ſhe that doth one to her mercy take,
                     Warmes in her boſome but a frozen ſnake:
                     Which heated with her fauours, gather ſence,
                     And ſtings her to the heart in recompence.
                  
                  
                     But tell me why, and for what ſecret ſpight
                     You in poore womens miſeries delight?
                     For ſo it ſeemes; elſe why d'yee labour for
                     That, which when 'tis obtained, you abhor?
                     Or to what end doe you endure ſuch paine
                     To win our loue, and caſt it off againe?
                     Oh that we either your hard hearts could borrow,
                     Or elſe your ſtrengths, to helpe vs beare our ſorrow:
                  
                  
                     But we are cauſe of all this griefe and ſhame,
                     And we haue none but our owne ſelues to blame:
                     
                        
For ſtill we ſee your falſhood for our learning.
                     Yet neuer can haue power to tak't for warning;
                     But (as if borne to be deluded by you)
                     We know you truſtleſſe, and yet ſtill we try you.
                  
                  
                     (Alas) what wrong was in my power to doe thee?
                     Or what deſpight haue I er'e done vnto thee?
                     That thou ſhouldſt chuſe Me, aboue all the reſt,
                     To bethy ſcorne, and thus be made a ieſt?
                     Muſt mens il natures ſuch true villaines proue them,
                     To make thē wrong thoſe moſt that moſt do loue them;
                     Couldſt thou finde none in Countrey, Towne or Court,
                     
                     But onely Me, to make thy Foole, thy ſport?
                     Thou knowſt I haue no wanton courſes runne,
                     Nor ſeemed eaſie vnto lewdneſſe wonne.
                     And (though I cannot boaſt me of much wit,)
                     Thou ſaw'ſt no ſigne of fondneſſe in me yet.
                     Nor did ill nature euer ſo ore-ſway me,
                     To flout at any that did woe or pray me,
                     But grant I had been guilty of abuſage,
                     Of thee I'me ſure I ne're deſeru'd ſuch vſage.
                     But thou wert grieued to behold my ſmilings.
                     When I was free from loue, and thy beguilings.
                     Or to what purpoſe elſe didſt thou beſtow
                     Thy time, and ſtudy to delude me ſo?
                     Haſt thou good parts? and doſt thou bend them all
                     To bring thoſe that ne're hated thee in thrall?
                     Prethee take heed, although thou yet inioy'ſt them
                     They'l be tooke from thee, if thou ſo imploy'ſt them.
                     
                        
For though I wiſh not the leaſt harme to thee,
                     I feare, the iuſt Heauens will reuenged be.
                     Oh! what of Mee by this time had become,
                     If my deſires with thine had hapt to rome,
                     Or I, vnwiſely, had conſented to
                     What (ſhameleſſe) once thou didſt attempt to doe?
                     I might haue falne, by thoſe immodeſt trickes,
                     Had not ſome power beene ſtronger then my Sex.
                     And if I ſhould haue ſo been drawne to folly,
                     I ſaw thee apt enough to be vnholy.
                     Or if my weakeneſſe had beene prone to ſinne,
                     I poorely by thy ſtrength had ſuccour'd bin.
                     You Men make vs belieue you doe but try,
                     And that's your part, (you ſay) ours to deny.
                     Yet I much feare, if we through frailty ſtray,
                     There's few of you within your bounds will ſtay;
                     But, maugre all your ſeeming Vertue, be
                     As ready to forget your ſelues, as we.
                  
                  
                     I might haue fear'd thy part of loue not ſtrong,
                     When thou didſt offer me ſo baſe a wrong:
                     And that I after loath'd thee not, did proue
                     In mee ſome extraordinary Loue.
                     
                     For ſure had any other but in thought,
                     Preſum'd vnworthily what thou haſt ſought,
                     Might it appeare, I ſhould doe thus much for him,
                     
                        With a ſcarce reconciled hate abhorre him.
                     
                  
                  
                     My young experience neuer yet did know
                     Whether deſire might range ſo farre, or no,
                     
                        
To make true Louers careleſly requeſt,
                     What raſh enioyning makes them moſt vnbleſt,
                     Or blindly thorow frailty giue conſenting
                     To that, which done brings nothing but repenting.
                     But in my iudgement it doth rather proue
                     That they are fir'd with luſt, then warm'd with loue.
                     And if it be for proofe men ſo proceed,
                     It ſhewes a doubt, elſe what doe tryals neede?
                     And where is that man liuing euer knew
                     That falſe diſtruſt, could be with loue that's true?
                     Since the meere cauſe of that vnblam'd effect,
                     
                        Such an opinion is, that hates ſuſpect.
                     
                  
                  
                     And yet, thee and thy loue I will excuſe,
                     If thou wilt neither me, nor mine abuſe.
                     For, Ile ſuppoſe thy paſſion made thee proffer
                     That vnto me, thou to none elſe wouldſt offer,
                     And ſo, thinke thou, if I haue thee deni'd,
                     Whom I more lou'd then all men elſe beſide;
                     What hope haue they ſuch fauour to obtaine,
                     That neuer halfe ſo much reſpect could gaine?
                  
                  
                     Such was my loue, that I did value thee
                     Aboue all things below eternity.
                     Nothing on Earth vnto my heart was nearer
                     No Ioy ſo prized, nor no Iewell dearer.
                     Nay: I doe feare I did Idolatrize;
                     
                     For which Heauens wrath inflicts theſe miſeries,
                     And makes the things which were for bleſſings lent,
                     To be renewers of my diſcontent.
                     
                        
Where was there any of the Naiades,
                     
                     The Dryad's, or the Hamadryades?
                     
                     Which of the Brittiſh ſhires can yeeld againe,
                     A miſtreſſe of the Springs, or Wood, or Plaine?
                     Whoſe eye enioy'd more ſweet contents then mine,
                     Till I receiu'd my ouerthrow by thine?
                     Where's ſhe did more delight in Springs and Rils?
                     Where's ſhe that walk'd more Groues, or Downs, or Hils?
                     Or could by ſuch faire artleſſe proſpect, more
                     Adde by conceit, to her contentments ſtore
                     Then I; whilſt thou wert true, and with thy Graces
                     Didſt giue a pleaſing preſence to thoſe places?
                     But now What is? What was hath ouerthrowne,
                     My Roſe deckt allies, now with Rue are ſtrowne;
                     And from thoſe flowers that honyed vſe to be,
                     I ſucke nought now but iuyce to poyſon mee.
                  
                  
                     For eu'n as ſhe, whoſe gentle ſpirit can raiſe,
                     To apprehend Loues noble myſteries,
                     Spying a precious Iewell richly ſet,
                     Shine in ſome corner of her Cabenet,
                     
                     Taketh delight at firſt to gaze vpon
                     The pretty luſtre of the ſparkling ſtone,
                     (And pleas'd in mind, by that doth ſeeme to ſee
                     How vertue ſhines through baſe obſcurity;)
                     But prying neerer, ſeeing it doth proue
                     Some relique of her deere deceaſed Loue,
                     
                     Which to her ſad remembrance doth lay ope,
                     What ſhe moſt ſought, and ſees moſt far from hope:
                     
                        
Fainting almoſt beneath her Paſſions weight,
                     And quite forgetfull of her firſt conceit:
                     Looking vpon't againe, from thence ſhe borrowes
                     Sad melancholy thoughts to feed her ſorrowes.
                  
                  
                     So I beholding Natures curious bowers,
                     Seel'd, ſtrow'd, and trim'd vp with leaues, hearbes, and flowers.
                     Walke pleaſed on a while, and doe deuize,
                     How on each obiect I may moralize.
                     But er'e I pace on many ſteps, I ſee
                     There ſtands a Hawthorne that was trim'd by thee:
                     Here thou didſt once ſlip off the virgin ſprayes,
                     To crowne me with a wreath of liuing Bayes.
                     On ſuch a Banke I ſee how thou didſt lye,
                     When viewing of a ſhady Muthery,
                     
                     The hard miſhap thou didſt to me diſcuſſe
                     Of louing Thysbe, and young Piramus:
                     
                     And oh (thinke I) how pleaſing was it then,
                     Or would be yet, might he returne agen.
                     But if ſome neighbouring Row doe draw me to
                     Thoſe Arbors, where the ſhadowes ſeeme to wooe
                     The weary loue-ſicke Paſſenger, to ſit
                     And view the beauties Nature ſtrowes on it;
                     How faire (thinke I) would this ſweet place appeare,
                     If he I loue, were preſent with me heere.
                     Nay, euery ſeuerall obiect that I ſee,
                     Doth ſeuerally (me thinkes) remember thee.
                     But the delight I vſ'd from thence to gather,
                     I now exchange for eares, and ſeeke them rather.
                  
                  
                     
                     But thoſe whoſe dull and groſſe affections can
                     Extend but onely to deſire a Man,
                     
                     Cannot the depth of theſe rare Paſſions know:
                     For their imaginations flagge too low.
                     And cauſe their baſe Conceits doe apprehend
                     Nothing but that whereto the fleſh doth tend;
                     In Loues embraces they neere reach vnto
                     More of content than the brute Creatures do.
                     Neither can any iudge of this, but ſuch
                     Whoſe brauer mindes for brauer thoughts doe touch.
                     And hauing ſpirits of a nobler frame,
                     Feele the true heate of Loues vnquenched flame.
                  
                  
                     They may conceiue aright what ſmarting ſting
                     To their Remembrances the place will bring,
                     Where they did once enioy, and then doe miſſe,
                     What to their ſoules moſt deere and precious is.
                     With mee 'tis ſo; for thoſe walkes that once ſeem'd
                     Pleaſing, when I of thee was more eſteem'd,
                     To me appeare moſt deſolate and lonely,
                     And are the places now of torment onely.
                     Where I the higheſt of contents did borrow,
                     There am I paid it home with deepeſt ſorrow.
                  
                  
                     Vnto one place, I doe remember well,
                     We walkt the eu'nings to heare Phylomel:
                     
                     And that ſeemes now to want the light it had,
                     The ſhadow of the Groue's more dull and ſad,
                     As if it were a place but fit for Fowles,
                     That ſcreech ill-lucke; as melancholy Owles,
                     
                     
                        
Or fatall Rauens, that ſeld' boding good,
                     
                        
                           •••
                        ke their blacke Auguries from ſome darke wood.
                  
                  
                     Then if from thence I halfe deſpairing goe,
                     Another place begins another wo:
                     For thus vnto my thought it ſemes to ſay,
                     Hither thou ſaw'ſt him riding once that way:
                     Thither to meete him thou didſt nimbly haſt thee,
                     You he alighted, and eu'n there embrac'd thee:
                     Which whilſt I ſighing wiſh to doe againe,
                     Another obiect brings another paine.
                     For paſſing by that Greene, which (could it ſpeake)
                     Would tell it ſaw vs run at Barly-breake;
                     
                     There I beheld, what on a thin rin'd tree
                     Thou hadſt engrauen for the loue of me;
                     When we two, all one in heate of day,
                     With chaſte imbraces draue ſwift houres away.
                     Then I remember to (vnto my ſmart)
                     How loath we were, when time compel'd to part;
                     How cunningly thy Paſſions thou couldſt faine,
                     In taking leaue, and comming backe againe:
                     So oft, vntill (as ſeeming to forget
                     We were departing) downe againe we ſet?
                     And freſhly in that ſweet diſcourſe went on,
                     Which now I almoſt faint to thinke vpon.
                  
                  
                     Viewing againe thoſe other walkes and Groues
                     That haue beene witneſſes of our chaſte loues;
                     When I beheld thoſe Trees whoſe tender skin
                     Hath that cut out, which ſtill cuts me within.
                     
                        
Or come, by chance, vnto that pretty Rill
                     Where thou wouldſt fit, and teach the neighbouring hill
                     To anſwere, in an Eccho, vnto thoſe
                     Rare Problems which thou often didſt propoſe.
                     When I come there (thinke I) if theſe could take
                     That vſe of words and ſpeech which we partake,
                     They might vnfold a thouſand pleaſures then
                     Which I ſhall neuer liue to taſte agen.
                     And thereupon, Remembrance doth ſo racke
                     My thoughts, with repreſenting what I lacke,
                     That in my minde thoſe Clerkes doe argue well,
                     Which hold Priuation the great'ſt plague of hell.
                     For there's no torment gripes mee halfe ſo bad,
                     As the Remembrance of thoſe joyes I had.
                  
                  
                     Oh haſt thou quite forgot, when ſitting by
                     The bankes of Thame, beholding how the Fry
                     
                     Play'd on the ſiluer-waues? There where I firſt
                     Granted to make my Fortune thus accurſt;
                     There where thy too-too earneſt ſuit compeld
                     My ouer-ſoone beleeuing heart to yeeld
                     One fauour firſt, which then another drew
                     To get another, till (alas) I rue
                     That day and houre, thinking I nere ſhould need
                     (As now) to grieue for doing ſuch a deed.
                     So freely I my curteſies beſtow'd,
                     That whoſe I was vnwarily I ſhow'd:
                     And to my heart ſuch paſſage made for thee,
                     Thou canſt not to this day remoued be,
                     
                        
And what breaſt could reſiſt it, hauing ſeene
                     How true thy loue had in appearance beene?
                     For (I ſhall ne're forget) when thou hadſt there
                     Laid open euery diſcontent and care,
                     Wherewith thou deeply ſeem'dſt to me oppreſt,
                     When thou (as much as any could proteſt)
                     Had'ſt vow'd and ſworne, and yet perceiu'dſt no ſigne
                     Of pitty-mouing in this breſt of mine:
                     Well Loue (ſald'ſt thou) ſince neither ſigh nor vow,
                     Nor any ſeruice may auaile me now:
                     Since neither the recitall of my ſmart,
                     Nor thoſe ſtrong Paſſions that aſſaile my heart;
                     Nor any thing may moue thee to beliefe
                     Of theſe my ſufferings, or to grant reliefe:
                     Since there's no comfort, nor deſert, that may
                     Get mee ſo much as Hope of what I pray;
                     Sweet Loue farewell; farewell faire beauties light,
                     And euery pleaſing obiect of the ſight:
                     My poore deſpayring heart heere biddeth you,
                     And all Content, for euermore, adue.
                  
                  
                     Then eu'n as thou ſeemd'ſt ready to depart;
                     Reaching that hand, which after gaue my hart,
                     (And thinking this ſad Farewell did proceed
                     From a ſound breaſt, but truely mou'd indeed)
                     I ſtayed thy departing from mee ſo,
                     Whilſt I ſtood mute with ſorrow, thou for ſhow.
                     And the meane while as I beheld thy looke,
                     My eye th'impreſſion of ſuch Pitty tooke,
                     
                        
That, with the ſtrength of Paſſion ouercome,
                     A deep-fetcht ſigh my heart came breathing from:
                     Whereat thou (euer wiſely vſing this
                     To take aduantage when it offered is)
                     Renewd'ſt thy ſute to mee, who did afford
                     Conſent, in ſilence firſt, and then in word.
                  
                  
                     So that for yeelding thou maiſt thanke thy wit,
                     And yet when euer I remember it,
                     Truſt me, I muſe, and often (wondring) thinke,
                     Thorough what craney, or what ſecret chinke
                     That Loue, vnwares ſo like a ſlye cloſe Elſe,
                     Did to my heart inſinuate it ſelfe.
                     Gallants I had, before thou cam'ſt to woo,
                     Could as much loue, and as well court me to;
                     And, though they had not learned ſo the faſhion,
                     Of acting ſuch well counterfeited Paſſion;
                     
                     In wit, and perſon, they did equall thee,
                     And worthier ſeem'd, vnleſſe thoul't faithfull be.
                     Yet ſtill vnmou'd, vnconquer'd I remain'd:
                     No, not one thought of loue was entertain'd:
                     Nor could they brag of the leaſt fauour to them,
                     Saue what meere curteſie enioyn'd to doe them.
                     Hard was my heart: But would't had harder bin,
                     And then, perhaps, I had not let thee in;
                     Thou, Tyrant, that art ſo imperious there,
                     And onely tak'ſt delight to Dominere.
                     
                     But held I out ſuch ſtrong, ſuch oft aſſailing,
                     And euer kept the honour of preuailing?
                     
                        
Was this poore breaſt from loues allurings free,
                     Cruell to all, and gentle vnto thee?
                     Did I vnlocke that ſtrong affections dore,
                     That neuer could be broken ope before,
                     Onely to thee? and, at thy interceſſion,
                     So freely giue vp all my hearts poſſeſſion:
                     That to my ſelfe I left not one poore veine,
                     Nor power, nor will, to put thee from't againe?
                     Did I doe this, (and all on thy bare vow)
                     And wilt thou thus requite my kindneſſe now?
                     Oh that thou eyther hadſt not learn'd to faine,
                     Or I had power to caſt thee off againe!
                     How is it that thou art become ſo rude,
                     And ouer-blinded by Ingratitude?
                     
                     Swar'ſt thou ſo deeply that thou wouldſt perſeuer.
                     That I might thus be caſt away for euer?
                     Well, then 'as true, that Louers periuries,
                     Among ſome men, are thought no iniuries:
                     And that ſhe onely hath leaſt cauſe of griefe,
                     Who of your words hath ſmal'ſt, or no beliefe.
                  
                  
                     Had I the wooer bin, or fondly won,
                     This had bin more tho, then thou couldſt haue don;
                     But, neither being ſo, what Reaſon is
                     On thy ſide, that ſhould make thee offer this?
                  
                  
                     I know, had I beene falſe, or my faith fail'd,
                     Thou wouldſt at womens fickleneſſe haue rail'd;
                     And if in mee it had an error bin,
                     In thee ſhall the ſame fault be thought no ſin?
                     
                        
Rather I hold that which is bad in mee,
                     Will be a greater blemiſh vnto thee:
                     Becauſe, by Nature, thou art made more ſtrong,
                     And therefore abler to endure a wrong.
                     But 'tis our Fortune, you'le haue all the power,
                     Onely the Care and Burden muſt be our.
                     Nor can you be content a wrong to do,
                     Vnleſſe you ſay the blame vpon vs to.
                     Oh that there were ſome gentle minded Poet
                     
                     That knew my heart, as well as now I know it;
                     And would endeare me to his loue ſo much,
                     To giue the world (though but) a ſlender touch
                     Of that ſad Paſſion which now clogs my heart,
                     And ſhew my truth, and thee how falſe thou art:
                     That all might know, what is beleeu'd by no man,
                     There's fickleneſſe in men, and faith in woman.
                  
                  
                     Thou ſaw'ſt I firſt let Pitty in, then liking,
                     And laſtly, that which was thy onely ſeeking:
                     And, when I might haue ſcorn'd that loue of thine,
                     (As now vngently thou deſpiſeſt mine,)
                     Among the inmoſt Angles of my breſt,
                     To lodge it by my heart I thought it beſt:
                     Which thou haſt ſtolne to, like a thankeleſſe Mate,
                     And left mee nothing but a blacke ſelfe hate.
                     What canſt thou ſay for this, to ſtand contending?
                     What colour haſt thou left for thy offending?
                     Thy wit, perhaps, can ſome excuſe deuiſe,
                     And faine a colour for thoſe iniuries;
                     
                        
But well I know, if thou excuſe this treaſon,
                     It muſt be by ſome greater thing then reaſon.
                  
                  
                     Are any of thoſe vertues yet defac'd,
                     On which thy firſt affection ſeemed plac'd?
                     Hath any ſecret foe my true faith wronged,
                     To rob the bliſſe that to my heart belonged?
                     What then? ſhall I condemned be vnheard,
                     Before thou knoweſt how I may be clear'd?
                     Thou art acquainted with the times condition,
                     Know'ſt it is full of enuy, and ſuſpition,
                     So that the war'eſt in thought, word, and action,
                     Shall oft be iniur'd, by foule-mouth'd datraction:
                     And therefore thou (me-thinkes) ſhould'ſt wiſely pauſe
                     Before thou credit rumors without cauſe.
                     But I haue gotten ſuch a confidence
                     In thy opinion, of my innocence:
                     It is not that, I know, with-holds thee now,
                     
                        Sweet, tell mee then; is it ſome ſacred vow?
                     Haſt thou reſolued, not to ioyne thy hand
                     With any one in Hymens holy band?
                     Thou ſhouldſt haue done it then, when thou wert free,
                     Before thou hadſt bequeath'd thy ſelfe to mee.
                     What vow doſt deeme more pleaſing vnto Heauen,
                     
                     Then what is by vnfained louers giuen?
                     If any be, yet ſure it frowneth at
                     Thoſe that are made for contradicting that.
                     But, if thou wouldſt liue chaſtely all thy life,
                     That thou maiſt do, though we be man and wife:
                     
                     
                        
Or, if thou long'ſt a Virgin-death to die,
                     Why (if it be thy pleaſure) ſo doe I.
                     Make mee but thine, and I'le (contented) be
                     A Virgin ſtill, yet liue and lie with thee.
                     Then let not thy inuenting braine aſſay
                     To mocke, and ſtill delude mee euery way;
                     But call to minde, how thou haſt deepely ſworne
                     Nor to neglect, nor leaue mee thus forlorne.
                     And if thou wilt not be to mee as when
                     Wee firſt did loue, doe but come ſee mee then.
                     Vouchſafe that I may ſometime with thee walke,
                     Or ſit and looke on thee, or heare thee talke;
                     And I that moſt content once aymed at,
                     Will thinke there is a world of bliſſe in that.
                  
                  
                     Doſt thou ſuppoſe that my Deſires denies
                     With thy affections well to ſympathize?
                     Or ſuch peruerſneſſe haſt thou found in me,
                     May make our Natures diſagreeing be?
                     Thou knowſt when thou didſt wake I could not ſleepe;
                     And if thou wert but ſad, that I ſhould weepe.
                     Yet (euen when the teares my cheeke did ſtaine)
                     If thou didſt ſmile, why I could ſmile againe:
                     I neuer did contrary thee in ought:
                     Nay, thou canſt tell, I oft haue ſpake thy thought.
                     Waking; the ſelfe-ſame courſe with thee I runne,
                     And ſleeping, oftentimes our dreames were one.
                  
                  
                     The Dyall-needle, though it ſence doth want,
                     Still bends to the beloued Adamant;
                     
                     
                        
Lift the one vp, the other vpward tends;
                     If this fall downe, that preſently deſcends:
                     Turne but about the ſtone, the ſteele turnes to;
                     Then ſtraight returnes, if ſo the other do;
                     And, if it ſtay, with trembling keepes one place,
                     As if it (panting) long'd for an imbrace.
                     So was't with mee: for, if thou merry wert,
                     That mirth of thine, mou'd ioy within my heart:
                     I ſighed to, when thou didſt ſigh or frowne:
                     When thou wert ſicke, thou haſt perceiu'd me ſwoone;
                     And being ſad, haue oft, with forc'd delight,
                     Striu'd to giue thee content beyond my might.
                     When thou wouldſt talke, then haue I talk'd with thee,
                     And ſilent been, when thou wouldſt ſilent be.
                     If thou abroad didſt goe, with ioy I went;
                     If home thou lou'dſt, at home was my content:
                     Yea, what did to my Nature diſagree,
                     I could make pleaſing, cauſe it pleaſed thee.
                  
                  
                     But, if't be either my weake Sex, or youth,
                     Makes thee miſdoubt my vndiſtained truth,
                     Know this; as none (till that vnhappy hower,
                     When I was firſt madethine,) had euer power
                     To moue my heart, by vowes, or teares expence;
                     No more (I ſweare) could any Creature ſince.
                     No lookes but thine, though aim'd with Paſſions Art,
                     Could pierce ſo deepe to penetrate my hart.
                     No name but thine, was welcome to my care;
                     No word did I ſo ſoone, ſo gladly heare:
                     
                        
Nor euer could my eyes behold or ſee,
                     What I was ſince delighted in, but thee.
                  
                  
                     And ſure thou wouldſt beleeue it to be ſo,
                     If I could tell, or words might make thee know,
                     How many a weary night my tumbled bed
                     Hath knowne me ſleepeleſſe: what ſalt-teares I'ue ſhed;
                     What ſcalding-ſighes, the markes of ſoules oppreſt,
                     Haue hourely breathed from my carefull breſt.
                     Nor wouldſt thou deeme thoſe waking ſorrowes 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                     
                     If thou mightſt ſee how ſleeping I am paind.
                     For if ſometimes I chance to take a ſlumber,
                     Vnwelcome dreames my broken reſt doth cumber.
                     Which dreaming makes me ſtart, ſtarting with feares
                     Wakes; and ſo by waking I renew my cares:
                     Vntill my eyes ore-tir'd with watch and weeping,
                     Drownd in their owne flouds fall againe to ſleeping.
                     Oh! that thou couldſt but thinke, when laſt wee parted,
                     How much I, grieuing for thy abſence, ſmarted:
                     My very ſoule fell ſicke, my heart to aking,
                     As if they had their laſt Farewels beene taking;
                     Or feared by ſome ſecret Diuination,
                     This thy reuolt, and cauſeleſſe alteration.
                     Didſt thou not feele how loth that hand of mine,
                     Was to let goe the hold it had of thine?
                     And with what heauy, what vnwilling looke
                     I leaue of thee, and then of comfort tooke?
                     I know thou didſt; and though now thus thou doe,
                     I am deceiu'd, but then it grieu'd thee to.
                  
                  
                     
                     Then, if I ſo with Loues fell paſſion vext
                     For thy departure onely was perplext,
                     When I had left to ſtrengthen me ſome truſt;
                     And hope, that thou wouldſt nere haue prou'd vniuſt:
                     What was my torture then, and hard endurance,
                     When of thy falſhood I receiu'd aſſurance.
                  
                  
                     Alas, my Tongue, a-while, with griefe was dumbe,
                     And a cold ſhuddering did my ioynts benumme,
                     Amazement ſeiz'd my thought, and ſo preuailed,
                     I found me ill, but knew not what I ailed.
                     Nor can I yet tell, ſince my ſuffering then
                     Was more then could be ſhowne by Poets Pen;
                     Or well conceiu'd by any other hart
                     Then that which in ſuch care hath borne a part.
                  
                  
                     Oh me; how loth was I to haue beleeu'd
                     That to be true, for which ſo much I grieu'd?
                     How gladly would I haue perſwaded bin,
                     There had bin no ſuch matter, no ſuch ſin.
                     I would haue had my heart thinke that (I knew
                     To be the very truth) not to be true.
                     Why may not this, thought I, ſome viſion be,
                     Some ſleeping dreame, or waking phantaſie,
                     Begotten by my ouer-blinded folly,
                     Or elſe engendred through my Melancholy?
                     
                     But finding it ſo reall (thought I) then
                     Muſt I be caſt from all my hopes agen?
                     What are become of all thoſe fading bliſſes,
                     Which late my hope had, and now ſo much miſſes?
                     
                        
Where is that future fickle happineſſe
                     Which I ſo long expected to poſſeſſe?
                     And, thought I to; where are his dying Paſſions,
                     
                     His honied words, his bitter lamentations?
                     To what end were his Sonnets, Epigrams,
                     
                     His pretty Poſies, witty Anagrams?
                     
                     I could not thinke, all that might haue been fain'd,
                     Nor any faith, I thought ſo firme, bin ſtain'd.
                     Nay, I doe ſure and confidently know,
                     It is not poſſible it ſhould be ſo:
                     If that rare Art and Paſſion was thine owne,
                     Which in my preſence thou haſt often ſhowne.
                     But, ſince thy change, my much-preſaging heart
                     Is halfe afraid, thou ſome impoſtor wert:
                     Or that thou didſt but (Player-like addreſt)
                     Act that which flow'd from ſome more gentle breſt.
                     Thy puft inuention, with worſe matter ſwolne,
                     Thoſe thy conceits from better wits hath ſtolne:
                     Or elſe (I know) it could not be, that thou
                     Shouldſt be ſo ouer-cold as thou art now;
                     Since thoſe, who haue that, feelingly, their owne,
                     Euer poſſeſſe more worth conceal'd, then knowne.
                     And if Loue euer any Mortals touch,
                     To make a braue impreſſion, 'tis in ſuch,
                     Who ſworne loues Chaplaines, will not violate
                     That, whereunto themſelues they conſecrate.
                  
                  
                     But oh you noble brood, on whom the World
                     The ſlighted burthen of neglect hath hurl'd,
                     
                        
(Becauſe your thoughts for higher obiects borne,
                     Their groueling humors and affection ſcorne)
                     You, whom the Gods, to heare your ſtraines, will follow,
                     Whilſt you doe court the ſiſters of Apollo.
                     
                     You, whom there's none that's worthy, can neglect,
                     Or any that vnworthy is, affect.
                     Oh let not thoſe that ſeeke to doe you ſhame,
                     Bewitch vs with thoſe ſongs they cannot frame:
                     The nobleſt of our Sexe, and faireſt to,
                     Doe euer loue and honour ſuch as you.
                     Then wrong vs not ſo much to giue your Paſſion
                     
                     To thoſe that haue it but in imitation:
                     And in their dull breaſts neuer feele the power
                     Of ſuch deepe thoughts as ſweetly moue in your.
                     As well as you, they vs thereby abuſe,
                     For (many times) when we our Louers chuſe,
                     Where we thinke Nature, that rich Iewell, ſets
                     Which ſhines in you, we light on counterfets.
                  
                  
                     But ſee, ſee whither diſcontentment beares me,
                     And to what vncoth ſtraines my Paſſion reares me:
                     Yet pardon me, I here, againe repent,
                     If I haue erred through that diſcontent.
                     Be what thou wilt, be counterfeit or right,
                     Be conſtant, ſerious, or be vaine, or light,
                     My loue remaines inuiolate the ſame,
                     Thou canſt be nothing that can quench this flame,
                     But it will burne as long as thou haſt breath
                     To keepe it kindled (if not after death)
                     
                        
Nere was there one more true, then I to thee,
                     And though my faith muſt now deſpiſed be,
                     Vnpriz'd, vnualued at the loweſt rate,
                     Yet this Ile tell thee, 'tis not all thy ſtate,
                     Nor all that better-ſeeming worth of thine,
                     Can buy thee ſuch another Loue as mine:
                     Liking it may, but oh there's as much oddes,
                     Twixt loue and that, as betweene men and Gods.
                     It is a purchaſe not procur'd with treaſure,
                     As ſome fooles thinke, nor to be gaind at pleaſure:
                     For were it ſo, and any could aſſure it,
                     What would not ſome men part with, to procure it?
                     But though thou weigh't not, as thou ought'ſt to do,
                     Thou knowſt I loue; and once didſt loue mee to.
                     Then where's the cauſe of this diſlike in thee?
                     Suruey thy ſelfe, I hope there's none in mee.
                     Yet looke on her from whom thou art eſtranged?
                     See, is my perſon, or my beauty changed?
                     Once thou didſt praiſe it, prethee view't agen,
                     And marke ift be not ſtill the ſame twas then:
                     No falſe Vermilion-dye my cheeke diſtaines,
                     'Tis the poore bloud diſperſt through pores and vaines,
                     Which thou haſt oft ſeen through my fore-head fluſhing,
                     To ſhew no dawby-colour hid my bluſhing:
                     Nor neuer ſhall: Vertue, I hope, will ſaue mee,
                     Contented with that beauty Nature gaue mee.
                     Or, ift ſeeme leſſe, for that griefes-vaile had hid it,
                     Thou threwſt it on mee, 'twas not I that did it,
                  
                  
                     
                     And canſt againe reſtore, what may repaire
                     All that's decay'd, and make me far more faire.
                     Which if thou doe, I'le be more wary than
                     To keep't for thee vnblemiſht, what I can:
                     And cauſe at beſt 'twill want much of perfection,
                     The reſt ſhall be ſupply'd with true affection.
                  
                  
                     But I doe feare, it is ſome others riches,
                     Whoſe more abundance that thy minde bewitches,
                     That baſer obiect, that too generall aime,
                     Makes thee my leſſer Fortune to diſclaime.
                     Fie, canſt thou ſo degenerate in ſpirit,
                     As to prefer the meanes before the merit?
                     (A though I cannot ſay it is in mee)
                     Such worth ſometimes with pouerty may be
                     To equalize the match ſhe takes vpon her;
                     Tho th'other vaunt of Birth, Wealth, Beauty, Honour:
                     
                     And many a one that did for greatneſſe wed,
                     Would gladly change it for a meaner bed.
                     Yet are my Fortunes knowne indifferent,
                     Not baſely meane, but ſuch as may content:
                     And though I yeeld the better to be thine,
                     I may be bold to ſay thus much, for mine;
                     That if thou couldſt of them and me eſteeme,
                     Neither thy ſtate, nor birth, would miſ-beſeeme:
                     Or if it did; how can I help't (alas)
                     Thou, not alone, before knew'ſt what it was.
                     But I (although not fearing ſo to ſpeed)
                     Did alſo diſinable't more than need,
                     
                        
And yet thou woo'dſt, and wooing didſt perſeuer,
                     As if thou hadſt intended Loue for euer:
                     Yea, thy account of wealth thou mad'ſt ſo ſmall,
                     Thou had'ſt not any queſtion of't at all;
                     But hating much that peaſant-like condition,
                     Did'ſt ſeeme diſpleas'd I held it in ſuſpition.
                     Whereby I thinke, if nothing elſe doe thwart vs,
                     It cannot be the want of that will part vs.
                     Yea, I doe rather doubt indeed, that this
                     The needleſſe feare of friends diſpleaſure is.
                     Yes, that's the barre which ſtops out my delight,
                     And all my hope and ioy confoundeth quite,
                     But beares there any in thy heart ſuch ſway
                     To ſhut mee thence, and wipe thy loue away?
                     Can there be any friend that hath the power,
                     To diſvnite hearts ſo conioyn'd as our?
                     E're I would haue ſo done by thee; I'de rather
                     Haue parted with one deerer then my father.
                     For though the will of our Creator bindes
                     Each Childe to learne and know his Parents mindes;
                     Yet ſure I am, ſo iuſt a Deitie,
                     
                     Commandeth nothing againſt Pietie.
                     
                     Nor doth that band of duty giue them leaue,
                     To violate their faith, or to deceiue.
                     And though that Parents haue authority,
                     To rule their children in minority:
                     Yet they are neuer granted ſuch power on them,
                     That will allow to tyrannize vpon them;
                     
                        
Or vſe them vnder their command ſo ill,
                     To force them, without reaſon, to their will.
                  
                  
                     For who hath read in all the Sacred-writ,
                     Of any one compeld to marriage (yet?)
                     What father ſo vnkinde (thereto requir'd)
                     Denide his Childe the match that he deſir'd,
                     So that he found the Lawes did not forbid it?
                     I thinke thoſe gentler ages no men did it.
                     In thoſe daies therefore for them to haue bin
                     Contracted without licence had been ſin?
                     Since there was more good Nature among men,
                     And euery one more truly louing then.
                     But now (although we ſtand obliged ſtill
                     To labour for their liking, and good-will)
                     There is no duty whereby they may tie vs
                     From ought which without reaſon they deny vs:
                     For I do thinke, it is not onely meant,
                     Children ſhould aske, but Parents ſhould conſent:
                     And that they erre, their duty as much breaking,
                     For not conſenting, as we not for ſpeaking.
                     "It is no maruell many matches be
                     "Concluded now without their priuity;
                     "Since they, through greedy Auarice miſled,
                     "Their intereſt in that haue forfeited.
                     For, ſome reſpectleſſe of all care, doe marry
                     Hot youthfull-May, to cold old-Ianuary.
                     
                     Some, for a greedy end, doe baſely tie
                     The ſweeteſt-faire, to ſoule-deformitie.
                     
                        
Forcing a loue from where 'twas placed late,
                     To re-ingraffe it where it turnes to hate.
                     It ſeemes no cauſe of hindrance in their eyes,
                     Though manners nor affections ſympathize.
                     And two Religions by their rules of ſtate,
                     They may in one made body tolerate;
                     As if they did deſire that double ſtemme,
                     Should fruitfull beare but Neuters like to them.
                     Alas, how many numbers of both kindes
                     By that haue euer diſcontented mindes:
                     And liue (though ſeeming vnto others well)
                     In the next torments vnto thoſe of hell?
                     How many, deſprate growne by this their ſinne,
                     Haue both vndone themſelues and all their kinne?
                     Many a one, we ſee, it makes to fall
                     With the too-late repenting Prodigall.
                     
                     Thouſands (though elſe by nature gentler giuen,)
                     To act the horridſt murthers oft are driuen.
                     And (which is worſe) there's many a careleſſe elſe,
                     (Vnleſſe Heauen pitty) kils and damnes his ſelfe.
                     Oh what hard heart, or what vnpittying eyes,
                     Could hold from teares to ſee thoſe Tragedies,
                     
                        Parents, by their neglect in this, haue hurld
                     Vpon the Stage of this reſpectleſſe World?
                     'Tis not one Man, one Family, one Kinne,
                     
                     No nor one Countrey that hath ruin'd bin
                     By ſuch their folly, which the cauſe hath prou'd,
                     That forraine oft, and ciuill warres were mou'd
                     
                        
By ſuch beginnings many a City lies
                     Now in the duſt, whoſe Turrets brau'd the skies:
                     And diuers Monarchs by ſuch fortunes croſt,
                     Haue ſeene their Kingdomes fir'd, and ſpoil'd, and loſt▪
                     
                  
                  
                     Yet all this while, thou ſeeſt, I mention not,
                     The ruine, ſhame, and chaſtity hath got;
                     For 'tis a taske too infinite to tell
                     How many thouſands that would haue done well,
                     Doe, by the meanes of this, ſuffer deſires
                     To kindle in their hearts vnlawfull fires:
                     Nay ſome, in whoſe could breaſt nere flame had bin,
                     Haue onely for meere vengeance falne to ſin.
                  
                  
                     My ſelfe haue ſeene, and my heart bled to ſee't,
                     A wit-leſſe Clowne enioy a match vnmeet.
                     She was a Laſſe that had a looke to moue
                     The heart of cold Diogenes to loue:
                     Her eye was ſuch, whoſe euery glance did know
                     To kindle flames vpon the hils of Snow;
                     And by her powerfull piercings could imprint,
                     Or ſparkle fire into a heart of flint:
                     And yet (vnleſſe I much deceiued be)
                     In very thought did hate immodeſtie.
                     And (had ſh'enioyd the man ſhe could haue lou'd)
                     Might, to this day, haue liued vn-reprou'd:
                     But, being forc'd, perforce, by ſeeming▪ friends,
                     With her conſent, ſhe her contentment ends.
                     In that, compel'd, her-ſelfe to him ſhee gaue,
                     Whoſe Bed, ſhee rather could haue with
                           •
                         her Graue;
                     
                        
And ſince, I heare, what I much feare is true,
                     
                        That ſhee hath hidden ſhame and fame adue.
                     
                  
                  
                     Such are the cauſes now that Parents quite
                     Are put beſide much of their ancient right:
                     Their feare of this, makes children to with-hold
                     From giuing them thoſe dues which elſe they would:
                     And theſe thou ſee'ſt are the too-fruitfull ils,
                     Which daily ſpring from their vnbridled wils.
                     Yet they, forſooth, will haue it vnderſtood,
                     That all their ſtudy, is their childrens good.
                     A ſeeming-Loue ſhall couer all they do:
                     When, if the matter were well look't into,
                     Their carefull reach is chiefly to fulfill
                     Their owne foule, greedy, and inſatiate will:
                     Who, quite forgetting they were euer young,
                     Would haue the Children dote, with them, on dung.
                     Grant, betwixt two, there be true loue, content,
                     Birth not miſ ſeeming, wealth ſufficient,
                     Equality in yeares, an honeſt fame,
                     In euery-ſide the perſon without blame,
                     And they obedient too: What can you gather
                     Of Loue, or of affection, in that father,
                     That but a little to augment his treaſure,
                     (Perhaps, no more but onely for his pleaſure,)
                     Shall force his Childe to one he doth abhor,
                     From her he loues, and juſtly ſeeketh for;
                     Compelling him (for ſuch miſ-fortune grieu'd)
                     To die with care, that might with ioy haue liu'd?
                     
                        
This you may ſay is Loue, and ſweare as well,
                     There's paines in Heauen, and delights in Hell:
                     
                     Or, that the Diuels fury and auſterity
                     Proceeds out of his care of our poſterity.
                     Would Parents (in this age) haue vs begin
                     To take by their eyes, our affections in?
                     Or doe they thinke we beare them in our fiſt,
                     That we may ſtill remoue them as wee liſt?
                     It is impoſſible it ſhould be thus,
                     For we are rul'd by Loue, not Loue by vs:
                     And ſo our power ſo much ner'e reached to,
                     To know where we ſhall loue, vntill we doe.
                     And when it comes, hide it awhile wee may,
                     But 'tis not in our ſtrengths to driu't away.
                  
                  
                     Either mine owne eye ſhould my chuſer be,
                     Or I would ner'e weare Hymens Liuery.
                     For who is he ſo neare my heart doth reſt,
                     To know what 'tis, that mine approued beſt?
                     I haue my ſelfe beheld thoſe men, whoſe frame
                     And outward perſonages had nought of blame:
                     They had (what might their good proportion grace)
                     The much more mouing part, a comely face,
                     With many of thoſe complements, which we
                     In common men, of the beſt breeding ſee.
                     They had diſcourſe, and wit enough to carry
                     Themſelues in faſhion, at an Ordinary;
                     
                     Gallants they were, lou'd company and ſport,
                     Wore fauours, and had Miſtreſſes in Court.
                     
                     
                        
And euery way were ſuch as well might ſeeme
                     Worthy of note, reſpect, and much eſteeme;
                     Yet hath my eye more cauſe of liking ſeene,
                     Where nought perhaps by ſome hath noted beene:
                     And I haue there found more content, by farre,
                     Where ſome of thoſe perfections wanting are;
                     Yea ſo much, that their beauties were a blot
                     To them (me thought) becauſe he had them not.
                  
                  
                     There ſome peculiar thing innated,
                     That beares an vncontrouled ſway in this;
                     And nothing but itſelfe knowes how to fit
                     The minde with that which beſt ſhall ſuit with it.
                  
                  
                     Then why ſhould Parents thruſt themſelues into
                     What they want warrant for, and power to doe?
                     How is it they are ſo forgetfull growne,
                     Of thoſe conditions, that were once their owne?
                     Doe they ſo dote amidſt their wits perfection,
                     To thinke that age and youth hath like affection?
                     (When they doe ſee 'mong thoſe of equall yeares,
                     One hateth what another moſt endeares.)
                     Or doe they thinke their wiſedomes can inuent
                     A thing to giue, that's greater than Content?
                     No, neither ſhall they wrap vs in ſuch blindneſſe,
                     To make vs thinke the ſpight they doe, is kindneſſe.
                     For as I would aduiſe no childe to ſtray
                     From the leaſt duty that he ought to pay:
                     So would I alſo haue him wiſely know,
                     How much that duty is which he doth owe:
                     
                        
That knowing what doth vnto both belong,
                     He may doe them their right, himſelfe no wrong.
                     For if my Parents him I lothe ſhould chuſe,
                     Tis lawfull, yea my duty to refuſe:
                     Elſe, how ſhall I leade ſo vpright a life,
                     As is enioyned to the Man and Wife?
                     
                     Since that we ſee ſometime there are repentings,
                     Eu'n where there are the moſt, and beſt contentings.
                     What, though that by our Parents firſt we liue?
                     Is not life miſery enough to giue;
                     Which at their births the children doth vndo,
                     Vnleſſe they adde ſome other miſchiefe to?
                     Cauſe they gaue being to this fleſh of our,
                     Muſt we be therefore ſlaues vnto their power?
                     We nere deſir'd it, for how could we tell,
                     Not being, but that not to be was well:
                     Nor know they whom they profit by it, ſeeing
                     Happy were ſome, if they had had no being.
                     Indeed, had they produc'd vs without ſin,
                     Had all our duty to haue pleas'd them bin:
                     Of the next life, could they aſſure the ſtate,
                     And both beget vs and regenerate;
                     There were no reaſon then we ſhould withſtand
                     To vndergoe their tyrannou'ſt command:
                     In hope that either for our hard endurance,
                     We ſhould, at laſt, haue comfort in aſſurance:
                     Or, if in our endeauours we miſ-ſped,
                     At leaſt feele nothing when we ſhould be dead.
                  
                  
                     
                     But what's the Reaſon for't that we ſhall be
                     Inthral'd ſo much vnto Mortality?
                     Our ſoules on will of any Men to tye
                     Vnto an euerlaſting miſery.
                     So farre, perhaps to, from the good of either,
                     We ruine them, our ſelues, and altogether.
                  
                  
                     Children owe much, I muſt confeſſe 'tis true,
                     And a great debt is to the Parents due:
                     Yet if they haue not ſo much power to craue
                     But in their owne defence the liues they gaue:
                     How much leſſe then, ſhould they become ſo cruell
                     As to take from them the high-prized Iewell
                     Of liberty in choyce, whereon depends
                     The maine contentment that the heauen here lends?
                     Worth life, or wealth, nay far more worth then either
                     Or twenty thouſand liues put all together.
                     Then howſoeuer ſome, ſeuerer bent,
                     May deeme of my opinion, or intent,
                     With that which followes thus conclude I doe:
                     (And I haue Reaſon for't, and Conſcience to)
                     
                        No Parent may his Childes iuſt ſute deny
                     
                     
                        On his bare will, without a reaſon why:
                     
                     
                        Nor he ſo vs'd, be diſobedient thought,
                     
                     
                        If vnapprou'd, he take the match he ſought.
                     
                  
                  
                     So then if that thy faith vncrazed be,
                     Thy friends diſlike ſhall be no ſtop to me:
                     For, if their will be not of force to doe it,
                     They ſhall haue no cauſe elſe to driue them to it.
                     
                        
What is it they againſt vs can alleage?
                     Both young we are, and of the fitteſt age,
                     If thou diſſembledſt not, both loue; and both
                     To admit hinderance in our loues are loth.
                     'Tis prejudiciall vnto none that liues;
                     And Gods, and humane Law our warrant giues.
                     Nor are we much vnequall in degree,
                     Perhaps our Fortunes ſomewhat different be.
                     But ſay that little meanes, which is, were not,
                     The want of wealth may not diſſolue this knot.
                     For though ſome ſuch prepoſterous courſes wend,
                     Preſcribing to themſelues no other end,
                     Marr'age was not ordain'd t'enrich men by,
                     Vnleſſe it were in their poſterity.
                     And he that doth for other cauſes wed,
                     Nere knowes the true ſweetes of a marriage bed:
                     Nor ſhall he by my will, for 'tis vnfit
                     He ſhould haue bliſſe that neuer aym'd at it.
                  
                  
                     Though that bewitching gold the Rabble blindes,
                     And is the obiect of all Vulgar mindes:
                     Yet thoſe, me-thinkes, that graced ſeeme to bee,
                     With ſo much good as doth appeare in thee,
                     Should ſcorne their better-taught deſires to tye
                     To that, which fooles doe get their honour by.
                     I can like of the wealth (I muſt confeſſe)
                     Yet more I prize the man, though mony-leſſe.
                     I am not of their humour yet, that can
                     For Title, or Eſtate, affect a Man;
                     
                     
                        
Or of my ſelfe, one body, deigne to make
                     With him I lothe, for his poſſeſſions ſake.
                     Nor wiſh I euer to haue that minde bred
                     In me, that is in thoſe; who, when they wed,
                     Thinke it enough, they doe attaine the grace
                     Of ſome new honour, to fare well, take place,
                     Weare coſtly cloathes, in others ſights agree,
                     Or happy in opinion ſeeme to bee.
                  
                  
                     I weigh not this: for were I ſure before
                     Of Spencers wealth, or our rich Suttons ſtore;
                     Had I therewith a man, whom Nature lent,
                     
                        Perſon enough to giue the eye content:
                     If I no outward due, nor right did want,
                     Which the beſt Husbands in appearance grant:
                     Nay, though alone we had no priuate iarres
                     But merry liu'd from all domeſticke cares;
                     Vnleſſe I thought his Nature ſo incline,
                     That it might alſo ſympathize with mine,
                     (And yeeld ſuch correſpondence with my mind
                           •
                        
                     
                     Our ſoules might mutually contentment find,
                     By adding vnto theſe which went before,
                     Some certaine vnexpreſſed pleaſures more,
                     Such as exceed the ſtreight and curb'd dimenſions
                     Of common mindes, and vulgar apprehenſions)
                     I would not care for ſuch a match, but tarry
                     In this eſtate I am, and neuer marry.
                  
                  
                     Such were the ſweets I hop'd to haue poſſeſt,
                     When Fortune ſhould with thee haue made me bleſ
                           •…
                        
                     
                     My heart could hardly thinke of that content,
                     To apprehend it without rauiſhment.
                     
                        
Each word of thine (me-thought) was to my eares
                     More pleaſing then that muſicke, which the Spheares
                     
                     (They ſay) doe make the gods, when in their chime,
                     Their motions Diapaſon with the time,
                     In my conceit, the opening of thine eye.
                     Seem'd to giue light to euery obiect by,
                     And ſhed a kinde of life vnto my ſhew,
                     On euery thing that was within it view.
                     More ioy I'ue felt to haue thee but in place,
                     Then many doe in the moſt cloſe embrace
                     Of their beloued'ſt friend, which well doth proue,
                     Not to thy body onely tends my loue:
                     But mounting a true height, growes ſo diuine,
                     It makes my ſoule to fall in loue with thine.
                     And ſure now whatſoe're thy body doe,
                     Thy ſoule loues mine, and oft they viſit too.
                     For late I dream'd they went I know not whither,
                     Vnleſſe to Heauen, and there play'd together;
                     And to this day I nere could know or ſee,
                     'Twixt them or vs the leaſt Antipathy,
                     
                     Then what ſhould make thee keepe thy perſon hence,
                     Or leaue to loue, or hold it in ſuſpence?
                     If to offend thee I vnawares was driuen,
                     Is't ſuch a fault as may not be forgiuen?
                     Or if by frownes of Fate, I haue beene checkt,
                     So that I ſeeme not worth thy firſt reſpect,
                     Shall I be therefore blamed and vpbraided,
                     With what could not be holpen, or auoyded?
                     Tis not my fault: yet cauſe my Fortunes doe,
                     Wilt thou be ſo vnkinde to wrong me too?
                     
                        
Not vnto Thine, but thee I ſet my heart,
                     So nought can wipe my loue out while thou art:
                     Though thou wert poorer both of houſe and meat,
                     Then he that knowes not where to ſleepe or eat:
                     Though thou wert ſunke into obſcurity.
                     Become an abiect in the worlds proud eye,
                     Though by peruerſeneſſe of thy Fortune croſt,
                     Thou wert deformed or ſome limbe had'ſt loſt,
                     That loue which Admiration firſt begot,
                     
                        Pitty would ſtrengthen, that it failed not:
                     Yea, I ſhould loue thee ſtill, and without blame,
                     As long as thou couldſt keepe thy minde the ſame;
                     Which is of Vertues ſo compact (I take it)
                     No mortall change ſhall haue the power to ſhake it.
                     This may, and will (I know) ſeeme ſtrange to thoſe
                     That cannot the Abyſs of loue diſcloſe,
                     Nor muſt they thinke, whom but the out-ſide moues
                     Euer to apprehend ſuch noble Loues;
                     
                     Or more coniecture their vnſounded meaſure,
                     Then can we mortals of immortall pleaſure.
                  
                  
                     Then let not thoſe dull vnconceiuing braines,
                     Who ſhall hereafter come to reade theſe ſtraines,
                     Suppoſe that no loues fire can be ſo great,
                     Becauſe it giues not their cold Clime ſuch heate;
                     Or thinke m'inuention could haue reached here
                     Vnto ſuch thoughts, vnleſſe ſuch loue there were:
                     For then they ſhall but ſhew their knowledge weake,
                     And iniure me, that feele of what I ſpeake.
                  
                  
                     But now my lines grow tedious, like my wrong,
                     And as I thought that, thou think'ſt this too long.
                     
                        
Or ſome may deeme, I thruſt my ſelfe into
                     More then beſeemeth modeſty to do.
                     But of the difference I am not vnwitting,
                     Betwixt a peeuiſh coyneſſe, and things fitting:
                     Nothing reſpect I, who pries ore my doing:
                     For here's no vaine allurements, nor ſond wooing,
                     To traine ſome wanton ſtranger to my lure;
                     But with a thought that's honeſt, chaſte, and pure,
                     I make my cauſe vnto thy conſcience knowne,
                     Suing for that which is by right my owne.
                     In which complaint, if thou doe hap to finde
                     Any ſuch word, as ſeemes to be vnkind:
                     Miſtake me not, it but from Paſſion ſprung,
                     And not from an intent to doe thee wrong.
                     Or if among theſe doubts my ſad thoughts breed,
                     Some (peraduenture) may be more then need
                     They are to let thee know, might we diſpute,
                     Theres no obiections but I could refute;
                     And ſpight of Enuy ſuch defences make,
                     Thou ſhouldſt embrace that loue thou doſt forſake.
                  
                  
                     Then do not (oh forgetfull man) now deeme,
                     That 'tis ought leſſe then I haue made it ſeeme.
                     Or that I am vnto this Paſſion mou'd,
                     Becauſe I cannot elſe-where be belou'd:
                     Or that it is thy ſtate, whoſe greatneſſe knowne,
                     Makes me become a ſuter for my owne:
                     Suppoſe not ſo; for know this day there be
                     Some that wooe hard for what I offer thee:
                     And I haue euer yet contented bin
                     With that eſtate I firſt was placed in.
                     
                        
Baniſh thoſe thoughts, and turne thee to my heart;
                     Come once againe, and be what once thou wert.
                     Reuiue me by thoſe wonted ioyes repairing,
                     That am nigh dead with ſorrowes and deſpairing:
                     So ſhall the memory of this annoy,
                     But adde more ſweetneſſe to my future ioy;
                     Yea, make me thinke thou meantſt not to deny me,
                     But onely wert eſtranged thus, to try me.
                     And laſtly, for that loues ſake thou once bar'ſt me,
                     By that right hand thou gau'ſt, that oath thouſwar'ſt me,
                     By all the Paſſions, and (if any be)
                     For her deare ſake that makes thee iniure me;
                     I here coniure thee; no intreat and ſue,
                     That if theſe lines doe ouer-reach thy view,
                     Thou wouldſt afford me ſo much fauour for them,
                     As to accept, or at leaſt not abhorre them.
                     So though thou wholly cloake not thy diſdaine,
                     I ſhall haue ſomewhat the leſſe cauſe to plaine:
                     Or if thou needs muſt ſcoffe at this, or me,
                     Do't by thy ſelfe, that none may witneſſe be.
                     Not that I feare 'twill bring me any blame,
                     Onely I am loth the world ſhould know my ſhame.
                     For all that ſhall this plaint with reaſon view,
                     Will iudge me faithfull, and thee moſt vntrue.
                     But if Obliuion, that thy loue bereft,
                     Hath not ſo much good nature in thee left,
                     But that thou muſt, as moſt of you men doe,
                     When you haue conquer'd, tyrannize it too:
                     Know this before, that it is praiſe to no man
                     To wrong ſo fraile a Creature as a woman.
                     
                        
And to inſult or'e one, ſo much made thine,
                     Will more be thy diſparagement then mine.
                  
                  
                     But oh (I pray that it portend no harmes)
                     A chearing heate my chilled ſenſes warmes:
                     Iuſt now I flaſhing feele into my breſt,
                     A ſudden comfort, not to be expreſt;
                     Which to my thinking, doth againe begin
                     To warne my heart, to let ſome hope come in;
                     It tels me 'tis impoſſible that thou
                     Shouldſt liue not to be mine, it whiſpers how
                     My former feares and doubts haue, beene in vaine,
                     And that thou mean'ſt yet to returne againe.
                     It ſaies thy abſence from ſome cauſe did grow,
                     Which, or I ſhould not, or I could not know.
                     It tels me now, that all thoſe proofes, whereby
                     I ſeem'd aſſur'd of thy diſloyalty,
                     May be but treacherous plots of ſome baſe foes,
                     That in thy abſence ſought our ouerthrowes.
                  
                  
                     Which if it proue; as yet me thinkes it may,
                     Oh, what a burden ſhall I caſt away?
                     What cares ſhall I ſay by? and to what height
                     Towre in my new aſcenſion to delight?
                     Sure er'e the full of it I come to try,
                     I ſhall eu'n ſurfet in my ioy and die.
                     But ſuch a loſſe might well be call'd a thriuing
                     Since more is got by dying ſo, then liuing.
                  
                  
                     Come kill me then, my deare, if thou thinke fit,
                     With that which neuer killed woman yet:
                     Or write to me before, ſo ſhalt thou giue
                     Content more moderate that I may liue:
                     
                        
And when I ſee my ſtaffe of truſt vnbroken,
                     I will vnſpeake againe what is miſ-ſpoken.
                     What I haue written in diſpraiſe of Men,
                     
                     I will recant, and praife as much agen;
                     In recompence Ile adde vnto their Stories,
                     
                        Encomiaſticke lines to ymp their glories.
                     And for thoſe wrongs my loue to thee hath done,
                     Both I and it vnto thy Pitty runne:
                     In whom, if the leaſt guilt thou finde to be,
                     For euer let thine armes impriſon me.
                  
                  
                     Meane while I'le try if miſery will ſpare
                     Me ſo much reſpite, to take truce with care.
                     And patiently await the doubtfull doome,
                     Which I expect from thee ſhould ſhortly come
                     Much longing that I one way may be ſped,
                     And not ſtill linger 'twixt aliue and dead.
                     For I can neither liue yet as I ſhould,
                     Becauſe I leaſt enioy of that I would;
                     Nor quiet die, becauſe (indeed) I firſt
                     Would ſee ſome better daies, or know the worſt.
                  
                  
                     Then haſten Deare, if to my end it be,
                     It ſhall be welcome, cauſe it comes from thee.
                     If to renew my Comfort ought be ſent,
                     Let me not looſe a minute of Content.
                     
                     The precious Time is ſhort, and will away,
                     Let vs enioy each other while we may.
                     
                        Cares thriue, Age creepeth on, Men are but ſhades,
                     
                        Ioyes leſſen, Youth decaies, and Beauty fades;
                     New turnes come on, the old returneth neuer,
                     If we let our goe paſt, 'tis paſt for euer.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
               
                  
                     
                     A Metricall Paraphraſe vpon the CREEDE.
                     
                        SInce it befits, that I account ſhould giue
                     What way vnto ſaluation I beleeue;
                     
                     Of my profeſſion here the ſumme I gather.
                     Firſt, I confeſſe a Faith in God the Father:
                     
                     In God, who (without Helper or Pertaker)
                     Was of himſelfe the Worlds Almighty Maker,
                     
                     And firſt gaue Time his being: who gaue birth
                     To all the Creatures, both of Heauen and Earth.
                     
                     Our euerlaſting wel-fare doth conſiſt
                     In his great mercies, and in Ieſus Chriſt:
                     
                     (The ſecond perſon of that Three in one)
                     The Father's equall, and his onely Sonne;
                     
                     That euer-bleſſed, and incarnate Word,
                     Which our Redeemer is, our life, Our Lord.
                     
                     For when by Sathans guile we were deceiued,
                     Chriſt was that meanes of helpe, which was conceiued;
                     
                     Yea, (when we were in danger to be loſt)
                     Conceiued for Vs, by the Holy Ghoſt.
                     
                     And that we might not euer be for-lorne,
                     For our eternall ſafety he was Borne;
                     
                     Borne as a Man (that Man might not miſeary)
                     Euen of the ſubſtance of the Virgin Mary,
                     
                     And loe, a greater mercy, and a wonder;
                     He that can make All, ſuffer, ſuffered vnder
                     
                     
                        
The Iewiſh ſpite (which all the world reuile at)
                     And Romiſh tyrannies of Pontius Pilate.
                     
                     In him doe I beleeue, who was enuied,
                     Who with extreameſt hate was Crucified:
                     
                     Who being Life it ſelfe (to make aſſured
                     Our ſoules of ſafety) was both dead, and buried;
                     
                     And that no ſeruile feare in vs might dwell,
                     To conquere, Hee deſcended into Hell:
                     
                     Where no infernall Power had power to lay
                     Command vpon him; but on the third day
                     
                     The force of Death and Hell he did conſtraine,
                     And ſo in Triumph, He aroſe againe.
                     
                     Yea, the Almighty power aduanc'd his head,
                     Aſwell aboue all things, as from the dead.
                     
                     Then, that from thence gifts might to men be giuen,
                     With glory, Hee aſcended into Heauen:
                     
                     Where, that ſupreame and euerlaſting throne,
                     Which was prepar'd, he climb'd; and ſitteth on
                     
                     That bleſſed ſeate, where he ſhall make abode
                     To plead for vs, at the right hand of God.
                     
                     And no where ſhould he be enthroned rather,
                     Then there: for, he is God, as is the Father.
                     
                     And therefore, with an equall loue delight I
                     To praiſe and ſerue them both, as one Almighty:
                     
                     
                        
                           •
                        et in their office there's a difference.
                     And I beleeue, that Ieſus Chriſt, from thence,
                     
                     Shall in the great and vniuerſall doome,
                     Returne; and that with Angels He ſhall come,
                     
                     To queſtion ſuch as at his Empire grudge;
                     Euen thoſe who haue preſumed him to iudge.
                     
                     
                        
And that blacke day ſhall be ſo Catholicke,
                     As I beleeue not onely that the quicke
                     
                     To that aſſiſe ſhall all be ſummoned;
                     But, he will both adiudge them, and the dead.
                     
                     Moreouer, in the Godhead I conceiue
                     Another Perſon, in whom I beleeue:
                     
                     For all my hope of bleſſedneſſe were loſt,
                     If I beleeu'd not in the holy Ghoſt.
                     
                     And though vaine Schiſmatickes through pride & folly
                     Contemne her power, I doe beleeue the holy
                     
                     Chaſt Spouſe of Chriſt (for whom ſo many ſearch
                     By markes vncertaine) the true Cath'like Church.
                     
                     I doe beleeue (God keepe vs in this vnion,)
                     That there ſhall be for euer the Communion
                     
                     Of Gods Elect: and that he ſtill acquaints
                     His Children in the fellowſhip of Saints.
                     
                     Though damned be Mans naturall condition,
                     By grace in Chriſt I looke for the remiſſion
                     
                     Of all my foule miſdeeds; for, there begins
                     Deaths end, which is the puniſhment of ſinnes.
                     
                     Moreouer, I the Sadduces infection
                     Abhorre, and doe beleeue the Reſurrection:
                     
                     Yea, though I turne to duſt; yet through God, I
                     Expect a glorious riſing of the body;
                     
                     And that, exempted from the cares here riſe,
                     I ſhall enioy perfection and the life
                     
                     That is not ſubiect vnto change or waſting;
                     But euer bleſſed, and for euerlaſting.
                     
                     This is my Faith, which that it faile not when
                     It moſt ſhould ſteed me, let God ſay, Amen.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     A Metricall Paraphaſe vpon the Lords Prayer
                     
                        
                           To whom, that he ſo much vouchſafe me may,
                        
                        
                           Thus as a member of his Church, I pray:
                        
                     
                     
                        LOrd, at thy Mercy-ſeat, ourſelues we gather,
                     To doe our duties vnto thee, Our Father.
                     
                     To whom all praiſe, al honor, ſhould be giuen:
                     For, thou art that great God which art in heauē.
                     
                     Thou by thy wiſdome rul'ſt the worlds whole frame,
                     For euer, therefore, Hallowed be thy Name.
                     
                     Let neuer more delayes diuide vs from
                     Thy glories view, but let Thy Kingdome come.
                     
                     Let thy commands oppoſed be by none,
                     But thy good pleaſure, and Thy will be done.
                     
                     And let our promptneſſe to obey, be euen
                     The very ſame in earth, as 'tis in heauen.
                     
                     Then, for our ſelues, O Lord, we alſo pray,
                     Thou wouldſt be pleaſed to Giue vs this day,
                     
                     That food of life wherewith our ſoules are fed,
                     Contented raiment, and our daily bread.
                     
                     With eu'ry needfull thing doe thou relieue vs:
                     And, of thy mercy, pitty And forgiue vs
                     
                     All our miſdeeds, in him whom thou didſt pleaſe,
                     To take in offering for our treſpaſſes.
                     
                     And for as much, O Lord, as we beleeue,
                     Thou ſo wilt pardon vs, as we forgiue;
                     
                     Let that loue teach vs, wherewith thou acquaints vs,
                     To pardon all them, that treſpaſſe againſt vs.
                     
                     
                        
And though ſometime thou findſt we haue forgot
                     This Loue, or thee; yet helpe, And leade vs not
                     
                     Through Soule or bodies want, to deſperation
                     Nor let abundance driue, into temptation.
                        See Pro. 30. 8. 9.
                     
                     Let not the ſoule of any true Beleeuer,
                     Fall in the time of tryall: But deliuer
                     
                     Yea, ſaue him from the malice of the Diuell;
                     And both in life and death keepe vs from euill.
                     
                     Thus pray we Lord: And but of thee, from whom
                     Can this be had? For thine is the Kingdome.
                     
                     The world is of thy workes the grauen ſtory,
                     To thee belongs the power, and the glory.
                     
                     And this thy happineſſe hath ending neuer:
                     But ſhall remaine for euer, and for euer.
                     
                     This we confeſſe; and will confeſſe agen,
                     Till we ſhall ſay eternally, Amen.
                     
                  
                  
                     Thou ſhalt write them vpon the poſtes of thy houſe, and vpon thy Gates. Deut. 6. 9.
                     
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   