
      
         
            
            
            The taking of the Royall Galley of Naunts in Brittaine, from the Spanyards and Leaguers, with the releaſement of 153. Galley ſlaues, that were in her: by Iohn Bilbrough, Prentice of London, in Nouember last.
            
            Jmprinted at London for Richard Oliffe, and are to bee ſould at his ſhop, in Paules Churchyard at the ſigne of the Crane.
            1591.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The taking of the Royall Galley of Naunts in Brittaine, from the Spanyards and Leaguers, with the releaſement of 153.
            Galley ſlaues, that were in her: by Iohn Bilbrough, Prentice of London. 1590.
            
            
               ABout a ſeauen yeares ſince, I Iohn Bilbrough the ſon of Richard Bilbrough, Citizen and Marchant Taylor of London, toke my aduenture to the ſeas, where in ſhort ſpace afterwards I was betrayed into the enemies hands by the treacherie of a renegat Engliſh, not worthy the name of my Countreyman; which villanie of his extended not to mee alone, but to ſeauē other of my companions; amongſt whom, my ſelfe and a Skot, remaining aliue, were carried captiues to the towne of New-hauen in Normandie:
               
where being condemned into the Galleyes in the moneth of September, 1584. and there hauing remained the ſpace of ſixe yeares, enduring exceeding miſerie, as hunger, colde, ſtripes, with many violent torments; bereft of all hope for euer to behold my parents, friends, or natiue countrey againe; by reaſon that hauing foure times in my captiuitie attempted the breaking of my chaines, I was foure times croſt with contrarie fortune, my purpoſe diſcouered, and being taken, my ſorrowfull wretchednes aggrauated.
            Thus increaſing cares with dayes, euery daye being ſharper than the ſharpeſt ſting of death; it chanced that Duke Mercurie the gouernour of Naunts in Britaine cauſed the Galley Royall of that Citie to be rigged and victualled to the ſeas, with commiſsion to take all thoſe that held with the League, aſwell Engliſh. Scots, Flemmings as their owne nation on the Kings part. Thus floating on the ſeas, and rowing on the ſeas, now hether, now thether, expecting ſome prize worthy the attempting, it chaunced that the firſt daye of October 1590. being at anker in the Iſle of Vſe attending ſome ſhips paſsing either from Rochel, Burwage, or Burdeaux, we diſcouered early in the morning a great hulke of Flanders, which tooke her courſe for the Bay of Bornefe, on the coaſt of Poytours, not far from the riuer of Naunts, whervpon rowing to the windward of the ſaid hulk,

wee did beare after her: againſt whome our Gunner made diuers ſhootes, but could neuer hit her.
            Then I aſhamed at the vntowardnes of the ſaide Gunner, ſaide openlie, hee was vnworthie of his office, and that I durſt lay my life to hit her the firſt ſhot, which the Captaine hearing, demaunded if I would vndertake to ſhoote at her, I anſwered him, that albeit I was a ſtranger, and had long continued in miſerable captiuitie, yet if hee would accept of my ſeruice, I would performe the beſt that in mee lay. The Captaine vpon my anſwer, commanded my chaines to bee taken off, promiſing if I did hit her, to giue mee my libertie.
            Being in hope of freedome from this wretched ſeruitude, I tooke the Gonners charge in hand, and did my endenour ſo well (through Gods aſsiſtance) that of eleuen ſhots, which I did make at her, I hit her with nine, but the hulke by the greatnes of the winde, eſcaped from out our danger.
            The next day the Captaine called mee vnto him, ſaying, if I would willinglie ſerue as a Gunner, for the ſpace of one whole yeare in the Galley, I ſhoulde, vpon his credit, haue libertie: which (ſeeing no remedie) I condiſcended vnto.
            Being thus at libertie, I was by the Captaine

vrged often to goe to Maſſe, of whome I requeſted pradon; proteſting that if I might bee perſwaded by ſufficient reaſon, and proofe from the Word of GOD, that the Romiſh religion were the true doctrine of Chriſt, I would gladlie embrace it: in the meane time (ſeeing I was yet vtterlie of another opinion) I beſought him to haue patience, for that a ſettled Religion, could not ſo ſlightlie bee remoued; which hee in hope of my conuerſion (as hee termed it) in the ende granted.
            Within three dayes after, wee met three Engliſh ſhips to the ſea-boord of Bel-yle, hauing in our companie a Man of Warre, ſo wee bare both of vs after theſe three ſhips, where I was commanded to make a ſhot, but perceiuing, that I went vnwillinglie to worke, they came about mee with their ſwords drawne, threatning if I would not ſhoote, they would kill me preſentlie; ſo I ſhot at them, but neuer hit them, and the Engliſh ſhips diſcharged ſo couragiouſlie at vs, that they compelled vs to recoyle.
            After that time, abhorring to bee made the butcher of my natiue countreymen, I attempted all poſsible meanes of eſcape, either to the Kings ſide, or into England, but fearing to bee taken, I diſcouered my intent to a Captine, being before his thraldome a Captaine, called Le pine, deſiring him to lend mee his boy for my

conduct to the Caſtle of Blyn, ſeauen leagues diſtant from Naunts: but Le Pyne anſwered, that his father would ſhortlie bring his ranſome, and then promiſed to conuey mee with him: otherwiſe (ſaith hee) if you ſhould eſcape by the conduction of my boy, my mizerie ſhould be encreaſed, and my ranſome doubled; with whoſe perſwaſions, for that time ſatiſfied, I waited fitter opportunitie.
            Within foure dayes after, there arriued at the Riuer of Naunts two & thirtie ſhips, and foure Gallyaſſes, which brought three thouſand and fiue hundred Spanyards vnto the Duke of Mercurie; amongſt whome manie (being ſick) were ſent vp to Naunts to be relieued, we alſo thinking to haue wintered there with the Galley: but there came preſentlie commandement ſhee ſhould be rigged, to carrie munition and money to the armie. So departing from Naunts, we came to the harbor of Morbien, thinking to haue founde the armie, but wee vnderſtood the whole fleete were returned to Spaine, foure Fly-boates, and two Gallyaſſes onelie excepted, which were gone to Blewet, to take the towne of Hensbon.
            
            Our Captaine hearing theſe newes, went aſhore the next morning, taking all the munition, and two hundred Spaniſh ſouldiers

with him, whom he conducted to the towne of Vannes. When they were departed, the Lieutenant being left to keepe the Galley, with no more than ſeauen and twentie, or thirtie ſouldiers, I came vnto the captiued Captaine Le Pyne, and aſſured him, if he could finde meanes to breake or widen his manacles, there was now great likely-hoode of his eſcape, with the reſt of the ſlaues. Le Pyne hearing my words, askt counſell of a ſouldier in the Galley, who affected him dearely, and for his ſake willingly conſented to our enterpriſe, appointing in his watch to put tallow into the touch-holes of all the Calyuers, and after prime them; and I in my watch ſhould widen Le Pynes manacles, which accordingly I did, purpoſing that wedneſday morning, being the ſeauenth of Nouember laſt, to put our pretence in execution; but the wind being contrarie, wee referred it, till the next night: which ſorted (through Gods ſufferauce) to an happy end.
            Vpon thurſday morning, at three of the clock, I aroſe and called my other companion; being the Prouanſal, with whome hauing counſelled of the matter, I came to a Marriner, which was in the watch, ſaying, I could not ſleepe, being ſhaken with an ague, therefore, if he pleaſed, I would watch for him till

day; to which he gladly conſented, the Prouanſall did the like by the ſouldier which watched in the poope, ſo ſtaying till wee thought euery man was a ſleepe, I came vnto Le Pyne bidding him diſpatch, and perceiuing there was but one rapier for vs, I fained my ſelfe to be verie ſick, and came to a chamber in the middeſt of the Galley, and demaunded a little Aqua Vitae; from whence I ſecretly conueyed the Carpenters axe, and hid it in the poope, and comming to Le Pyne ſaid, now diſpatch come away or neuer, hee followed preſently, and I going before, blew out all the Lampes in the Galley, that none might perceiue him pace: ſo comming to a Scotſhman, who was appoynted to aduertize the other ſlaues his companions, they ſhould ſuffer no ſouldiers that were in the prowe to paſſe into the poope. But as we paſſed into the poope, Le pine not being perfect in the way, ſtumbled at an Italian called Nicolau, who ſodainely waking, demaunded who was there? It is your friend ſaid I. And being further queſtioned, whether I did watch, I anſwered yea, and that I came to ſee, if it were faire weather. So comming into the poope, Le Pyne tooke the rapier, and I the axe, the Prouanſall hauing nothing, and ſo I ſtept vnto the Lieutenant and killed him: Nicolau the Italian

awaking, and ſeeing how I ſtroke at his fellowes, caught me in his armes; ſaying, Engliſh traytor yeeld, or thou ſhalt dye, I called Le Pyne to help; who thruſt at him: which he ſeeing, left me, thinking to haue caught Le Pyne, but I followed him ſo hard, that at two blowes wee feld him ouer bord. Then wee ſet vpon the reſt, and ſlew thirteene of them; ſome lept into the water, and foure or fiue getting into a boate, called aboord a ſhip which was at an ancker before vs, ſaying, ſhoote, ſhoote, the ſlaues rebell againſt vs.
            But I perceiuing their purpoſe, and fearing that the ſhip would haue ſhot at vs, I got the yrons wherewith they binde and vnbinde the poore ſlaues, and gaue them to the Skot, ſaying, vnlooſe thy ſelfe, and light mee two Lynt-ſtocks and bring them forward; ſo making the ſlaues haile forward the great cannon, and priming the reſt of the peeces, I hallid to the ſhip, and ſwore, if they in any wiſe attempted to hinder our libertie, I would preſentlie ſinke her, and with that ſhewed them my lynt-ſtockes light.
            They of the ſhip hearing this, and the terrible noyſe that the ſlaues made in breaking off their chaines, anſwered they woulde not hinder vs: ſo I cutting one of our cables, and weying another ancher, made the ſlaues

rowe out of the hauen, and being at ſea vnlooſed them all: and that night by the help of God came to Bel-Ile, where hauing but 24. loaues of bread, and ſmall ſtore of other vittailes, being 153. ſlaues beſides the Prouanſall, Le Pyne, and my ſelfe, wee paſſed the time as well as wee could. The next morning wee ſet ſayle, and on Sunday the xi. of Nouember brought her into the towne of Rochel: where ſhee dooth remaine for the Kings vſe.
            Captaine Le Pyne, being at Rochel, was perſwaded to goe to the King for a recompence, and in going was taken by the Leaguers of Poyters, and my ſelfe being ſore hurt returned to Rochel, and afterwards came into England, hauing the Maior and gouernors hands to their great Seale.
            Thus did I, by the help of God, eſcape the Spaniſh ſlauerie, the very Frenchmen themſelues bearing no rule where the Spaniard is in preſence: they vſe them as Dogges, the Captaines of the galley haue beene Italians, and other officers Spaniards, the moſt of their galley-ſlaues haue beene Frenchmen, Flemmings, Scots, and Engliſh. Thus wiſhing vnto my countri-men, to be warned by other mens harmes, I end.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            VVitneſſes of the truth of this matter.
            
               John VVilkes of London.
               John Harley.
               VVilliam VVard.
               Richard Bauance.
               Richard Taylor.
               Laurence Adams.
               George Oliuer.
            
            And vnder the great ſeale of Rochell.
            
         
      
   