
      
         
            
            
            HVMBLE
MOTIVES
FOR ASSOCIATION
TO MAINTAINE RELIGION
ESTABLISHED.
            Publiſhed as an antidote againſt the peſtilent
treatiſes of ſecular Prieſts.
            
               Ʋirtus vnita valet.
            IMPRINTED 1601.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               A petition to the Queene, for
aſsotiation in religion.
               There be as ſeemeth vnto me (Moſt gratious
Soueraigne) by the law of God, by
the law of nature, and by the law of nations,
3 thinges in duety to be exhibited by the ſubiectes
to the magiſtrat, viz. Honor, Obedience,
and Defence. For the magiſtrats, (as
they are rightly termed by Homer) the Guides
Leaders, and Noriſhers of the people. The are, as
Plato calleth them) Sauiours Keepers & Preſeruers
of the people, They are as Ariſtotle ſaith
aliuyugc law, and the law▪
                   without them a 
                        •
                     
dumbe and dead magiſtracy. So that the magiſtrat
beinge the life of the law, & the law the
life of the common wealth, in the ſafetie of
the magiſtrat muſt needes conſiſt the ſafetie
of the common wealth. This ſeemes to me
to haue bene the cauſe, that the comon lawes
of this realme, haue ordained greiuous puniſhments
for ſuch as ſhould indaunger the
liues of principall magiſtrats. A
                     •
                   25. Fdw. 3.
It is layed downe, that if a man ſlaye the L.
Chauncellor, L. Treaſerer, Iuſtices of either
bench, Iuſtices in Oyer, Iuſtices of aſſiſe, or
Iuſtices aſſigned to heere and determine, beinge
in there place doinge their, office, that
ſuch offence is Treaſon. If then theire hath

bene and ought to be ſo great care and prouidene
for the preſeruation and ſafetie of
theſe inferiour magiſtrates in reſpect, how
much more ſhould their be in the eſtabliſhing
of the ſafetie and ſecuritie of the ſuperiour
power and moſt ſupreame magiſtracie,
from whoſe throne and eſtat all other authorities
are deriued, and by whoſe priuatiō
they be all extinguiſhed. Such is the cauſe
we now deale with, even the defence, preſeruation,
and ſafetie, of your moſt excellent
maieſtie: A princes of ſuch pereleſnes and
ſingularity, as meriteth no leſſe to be regarded
of all men for priuat ſingularitye, than
honored for publike function. For if the
force and ſtrength of vertue be ſuch, that
the onlye ſhewe and ſhadow of it hath that
meruelous and magneticall attraction, that
it draweth vnto it the hartes and mindes of
infinite people, as plainlye appeareth in the
auntient nobles both Greekes & Romaines
who wantinge the true knowledge of God
from whoſe divine maieſtie all vertues doe
proceed as from the fountaine and to whoſe
glory they ought all to be directed as to the

                     •
                  mall ſcope, and had in them rather forme
and figure then any matter of ſubſtance of
true vertue: what in explicable effects doth

pure, perfect, and ſincere vertue bringe to
paſſe, beinge adorned with the true knowledge
of God, ſetled in a ſeat moſt royall in
the eyes and ſight of all nations to the wonder
and admiration of the world, to the ſingular
benefite of ſundrie countryes, to the
ioye of the godly, and to the prayſe▪ honor,
and glory of God. Theſe thinges appearing
moſt plainlye in your Maieſties moſt royall
perſon, cannot but draw vnto it moſt effectually,
the hartes and mindes of all good and
vertuous, who to their ineſtimable ioye, doe
confeſſe and acknowledge your highnes▪ for
the rareſt Princeſſe in the world: for the life
and light of your land, and for the ſacred
fountaine (next vnder God,) of all thir felicity:
ſo farr exceedinge the auncient princes
before mentioned, as true vertue doth the
counterfeite, and as farr as endleſſe glorye
perpetuated by eternitie, ſurpaſſeth perriſhing
fame, conſumed by time. They trauelled
for there owne glorie which was falſe, fading
and momentary, your Maieſtie ſeeking the
glorie of God, ſhall aſſuredly be crowned
with eternall glory. But to enter into rehearſal
of your highnes moſt ſingular ornaments
of mynde and body, of arte and nature, of
grace & fortune, I meane not, nor may not.

It is too deepe a ſea for me to wade in: too
large a feild for me to walke in. Theirfore,
ſyth therof ſpeake as I ought I cannot: as I
can, I will not. As in the one I acknowledge
it my weaknes and imbecillitie, ſo in the other
I am lead by diſcretion and iudgment.
For in the reſplendeny of your excellency,
vaine were it in me, & friuelous (in vttering
my ſlēder conceipt,) to light as it were a candle
to diſcouer the Sunne. But whatſoeuer
we can, let vs doe it in your ſeruice: whatſoeuer
we may, let vs deuiſe for your ſafetye.
               The ſafetye of your Maieſtie doth moſt
conſiſt in preſeruation of your moſt royall
perſon, and of your eſtat. Your perſon
and eſtate are beſt preſerued by cuttinge off
the perils that would moſt annoy them. The
eſtate of your highnes is a free monarchy, a
ſoueraigne and abſolute power, and authority
inſtituted and ordained of God: for the
defence of the good, and puniſhment of the
euell, and for the gouerment of all in pietie
and Iuſtice.
               This your ſoueraigne eſtat is dangerouſly
impeached with the perill of your perſon
by the indeuour to bringe in the tiranny,
ſuperiority, and ſupremacye of a forraigne
Prelat: whoſe riches in times paſt, hath bene

our pouertie: whoſe puiſaunce, our terror:
whoſe doctrine, our deſtruction. Theſe are
are they that loath manna, and long for the
fleſhpots of Egeipt: that loue the tongue of
the Caldies, better then the language of Canaan:
that madded with mallice, or blinded
with error, take Sedom for Sion, and Babell
for Ieruſalem. Of theſe people we are to obſerue
two thinges, They end whereat they
ſhoote, and the meane they vſe to attaine to
that end.
               The end for which they would advaunce
their tyranny, is, that theirby they might enioye
their groues and hill altars, that therby
they might honor againe the wholl hoſt of
heauen, and that therby they might returne
againe to their ſuperſtious Idolatrie & blaſphemous
religion.
               The meanes wherby they would accompliſh
it, is, the death of your maieſtie, and the
erecting of a fauouring ſucceſſor, whervnto
tend all their deuiſes. This is their drift and
practiſe while there remaineth in them any
ſparke of hope to attaine to this end, or any
conceipt (I will not ſay of probabillitie) but
of poſſibilitie to atchiue it. what law ſoeuer
we make to puniſh them they will ſtill perſiſt
in theire pernitious practiſſes, and your

maieſties moſt ſacred perſon ſhall ſtill remaine
in perill. But if your maieſtie cutt off
their hope, and make it apparently impoſſible
for theire religion euer to take place in
this realme, their indeuour will forthwith ſurceaſe,
the ſtate wilbe clere from theire deuiſes,
and your maieſtie freed from danger.
               The onlye way in mine oppinion to extinguiſh
their hopes, and theirby theire practiſes,
and ſo conſequently the perill of your
moſt ſacred perſon, is, to eſtabliſh a firme
continuance & perpetuatiō of the ſubſtance
and ſinceritie of doctrine now profeſſed in
this realme, which me thinkes is ſenſible, and
is to be donne by generall lawes▪ by generall
league, and by generall oth. To which end it
it would be enacted, that all gentlemen, magiſtrats,
and poſſeſſioners within this realme
ſhall take the oth of aſſociation, for the defence
and perpetuation of religion now publiquelye
profeſſed within this realme. And
that the oth of ſupremacy be miniſtred with
like addition to all men generally within this
realme, from the age of 16▪ yeares vpwards,
twice everie yeare, by the maiors and gouerners
of citties, townes, and corporations, &
by ſtewardes and other officers in mannors
and lordſhips in their countries, and theire

leetes & 
                     •
                  aw dayes. And if they refuſe to enter
into ſuch league or oth, that euery ſuch
perſon ſhalbe holden and reputed as ſuſpected,
and ſhalbe theirby diſabled to beare any
office or authoritie in this common wealth,
and ſhall alſo be bound to his good behauiour,
ſequeſtred from all his armour and weapons,
and (if he be poſſeſſed of landes within
this realme) ſhall yearely pay vnto your maieſtie
the fourth part theirof. This payne &
ſuch others as your maieſtie ſhall like of to
indure, during his obſtanacie, and vpon his
conformitie to ceaſe.
               By this meanes, their hope being taken a
way, I make no doubt but their practiſe will
end. But ſo longe as theire hope endureth,
they will neuer giue ouer their deuelliſh attempts.
If Brutus had not hoped to ſet Rome
at libertie, he had neuer conſpired the death
of Cesar. If Phocas had not hoped to obtaine
the imperiall dignitie, he had not ſlayne his
maſter M
                        •
                     uritius. If the papiſts hoped not
to eſtabliſh heere their religion, they would
not practiſe the death of your maieſtie▪ then
let vs put them out of all hope, leſt they put
vs out of all helpe. For moſt true is that ſaying
of Plutarch, In 
                        •
                     acinoroſes lenitas eſt in bonos
cradelitas.
               
               
                  
But it wilbe perhapes obiected, that this
courſe is dangerous: and that vnder pretēce
of remedying a future perill, it draweth vpō
vs a preſent miſcheife. The harme that there
by is to be doubted, is, from the papiſts▪ If
from them, it is either by exaſperating their
will, or by increaſing of their power, theire
will cannot be worſe in this theire extreame
diſcontentment. Nothinge can be added to
their mallice whether your maieſtie beholdeth
the head or the members (if ſo gratious
an eye may beholde ſo vile an obiect): yow
ſhall eaſilie diſcouer theire ſpite & rancor to
be alreadie in the higheſt degree. The Pope
hath ſent out againſt your highnes his flame
and thunderboltes of excommunication full
of falſhood and furie, of bitternes and ignominie.
His will therin hath bene to depriue
your maieſtie of your eſtate, gouerment,
life, crowne, and dignitie. He hath practiſed
to drawe vnto himſelfe fauorers & followers
within our realme: to diſcharg your ſubiects
of dutie and aleadgeance they owe vnto
yow: to withdraw them from your obeidience,
and to draw them vnto his.
               To this end he ſent, firſt his Agnus Dei,
then his grana benidicta, and ſuch other trecherous
baites, the wayes of his trade. then

next his buls. threats, and excommunications,
as the fire of his furie. And now laſt of
all (if euer his practiſes will haue end) theire
Ieſuits and Seminary Preiſtes▪
                   the moſt fine &
ſubtle Brokers of Babilon. By this meanes
he hath ſturred tumultes in your land▪ He
hath allured your ſubeictes to diſloialtie, &
induced ſome to actuall rebellion, & ſome
partes he hath inuaded with his forces: the
members following the directiō of the head
haue aſſiſted his attempts both at home
and abroad: ſome by words, ſome by wrighting▪
and ſome by action: and all by will ſeeke
to aduance his authoritie & tirannie againſt
your maieſties moſt royall titles. They haue
touched (though with inualiditie) your moſt
ſacreed perſon▪ they haue conſpired with treacherie,
againſt your pure and ſincere religion.
they haue charged vs with bloudines &
tirannie: they haue ſpoken it, they haue written
it they haue publiſhed it, they haue dyed
in it and can their will be worſe? yea▪ but
ſome of them acknowledge yow to be for
their lawfull ſoueraigne, and haue both ſpoken
& written very honorablie of your moſt
rare & ſingular excellencies. what then? ſhall
we thinke that theire mallice is the leſſe, becauſe
your vertue is the more: we may as

well thinke, that the Diuels did not generally
hate Chriſt, becauſe ſome of them did confeſſe
him to be the ſonne of God.
               Great is the force of truth, and often driueth
the aduerſarie to acknowledge it. And
great is the ſubtiltie of ſathan, who ſomtims
ſpeaketh that that is true, becauſe he would
be beleeued in that that is falſe. The papiſtes
as vngratious herein as theire grandfather,
doe ſometimes acknowledge your moſt ſinguler
vertues, but then effectually whē they
perſwade ſome point of their religion, or inueigh
againſt ſome noblemen that are about
yow, mixinge theire gall with honie that it
may the rather be receaued▪ and minglinge
theire faſhood with that veritie, that it may
the ſooner be beleeued. A tricke intruth of
their treacherie, and no ſigne at all of theire
loyaltie. So leauinge their euell will at the
worſe, not poſſible to be augmented, we will
conſider of theire power, whether that may
be increaſed.
               The power and ſtrength of any people
or multitud, is to be augmented by one of
thes 4. wayes. 1 By addition or number. 2.
by ſupplie of neceſſaries. 3 by advantage of
place. 4. by order of gouerment. And as by
theſe meanes it is increaſed, ſo by the contratraries

it is 
                     ••••
                  niſhed. Now if I ſhew your
Maieſtie 
                     〈…〉
                   theire power ſhalbe increaſed
by no one of thes waies, but ſhalbe leſēed by
all their contraries: I hope I ſhall ſufficiently
double this point, & ſo procure clere paſſage
to my perſwaſion. that this may more manifeſly
appeare, let me preſent vnto your Maieſtie,
the whole number of your ſubiectes diuided
into 4 bands.
               
                  1. Proteſtants of religion.
                  2. Proteſtants of ſtate.
                  3. Papiſts of ſtate.
                  4. Papiſts of religim.
               
               The firſt are conſtant and faithfull vnto
your highnes: the 2. waueringe: the 3. perilous▪
the 4. pernitious. the firſt ſerue yow
for loue, the 2. for hope, the 3. for faſhion,
the 4. for feare. the corruption of the 1. bredeth
the 2 the corruption of the 2 breedeth
the 3. the corruption of the 3. bredeth the 4.
than the which nothinge canne be more corrupt:
they beinge altogether poſſeſſed with
the dregs of poperie, wherin the more groſe
the more vngratious. the haue their conuerſion
alſo in aſſent. For of the ſubtileſt part
of the 4. is ingendered the 3. of the ſubtileſt
part of the the 3. is ingendered the 2. of the
pureſt & beſt part of the 2. is ingendered the

firſt. The 1 & 4. are meere oppoſits, hauing
their centers moſt contrarie, even heauen &
hell, light and darknes, truth and falſhood,
Chriſt & antichriſt. the 2 and 3 are intermidie▪
the 2. in part inclining to the 1, in part
declining to the 3 the 3 in part declining to
the 4: in part aſſendinge to the 2. the more
the 1. and 2. are increaſed, the more is your
ſafetie. the more the 3 & 4. are augmented,
the more is your perill. Out of theſ 2. and 3.
the increaſe of the 1▪ and 4 muſt grow. for
they are as it were two heapes of ſtones that
muſt goe to the buildinge either of Sion or
Babell. Their progreſſes, or diſpoſitions are
wrought or ſtaid, haſtened or ſlowed by certaine
motiues or motiones: & they are of 2.
ſorts, externall or internall. the externall motiues
on the on ſid be doctrine & diſcipline
the on the word of life, the other the worke
of law: the on the ſheepards voice, the other
the ſheepards hooke▪ the on in the mouth of
the miniſter, the other in the hand of the
magiſtrat: in the one is contained the preaching
of the truth, in the other all good lawes
for the eſtabliſhment and maintenance their
of. The externall motiues on the other ſide,
is the doctrine of error and ſuperſtition: the
pollicies and practiſes of impietie.
               
                  
The internall motiues are of two ſortes,
naturall, and ſupernaturall. the ſupernaturall
motiues on the one ſide, is the operation of
the holy ghoſt: on the other ſide, the ſuggeſtions
& ſubtilties of ſathan. the naturall motiue
is appetitio boni. How the 2 and 3 band,
that is to ſay, the proteſtants of eſtat and papiſts
of eſtat, eſtabliſh their ſummum bonum
in this world▪ and define it to be a life lead in
wealth: pleaſure reputation and authoritie.
In the appetition hereof they both agree. In
the acquiſition they varie. For, the papiſts of
eſtat: conceiuing great brittlement and vncertaintie
in the courſe of this preſent gouernment
which he ſuppoſeth cannot longe laſt,
for that he deſireth to haue his ſummum bonum
perdurable, he will not haſſard it in this
preſent, but will now laye his foundation
long before, to inioye it in the future. to that
end he will now be a fauourer to papiſtes of
religion: he will retaine ſome of them that be
moſt famous or rather moſt infamous on
this ſide and beyond the ſeaes: he will giue
ſome token of preſent diſcontentment: he
will incur the diſpleaſure of ſome great man
of the eſtate that fauoureth the contrarie,
and he will doe whatſoeuer els may make
him a man of note, whereby he may notably

be accepted off in the future.
               The proteſtant of eſtate (thinkinge it
teadious to tarrie, and frutleſſe to truſt to
dead mens ſhooes,) reſolueth to taſt of the
preſent ſweete, offereth his ſeruice in moſt
dutifull ſorte vnto your maieſtie, frameth
himſelfe vnto the time, aſſocyateth himſelfe
with ſuch as are proteſtantes of religion, in
ſinuateth himſelfe into the fauour of ſome
great man that is fauourer thereof, hopeth
to attaine wealth, reputation and authoritie
therby, & herewith becometh a ſeruiceable
member of the eſtat, though as yet no true
member of the church. But for that he ſubmitteth
himſelfe vnto the externall motiues
it is to be hoped that in time he wilbe inwardly
and effectually called, and ſo made
a member of the miſticall body of Chriſt: for
out of theſe gentiles is gathered the Iſraell
of God▪ and as the diſpare of the future and
hope of the preſent produceth proteſtants
of eſtat, ſo diſpayre of the preſent & hope of
the future producerh papiſts of eſtate, now
if the hope of the future be taken away, and
all meanes vſed for the perpetuation of the
preſent, there is no doubt but all papiſts of
eſtate will become proteſtants of eſtate.
               For ſyth they eſtabliſh their ſummum bonum
                  
in this world, thether their inward motiue
of appetitio boni muſt needes bringe them.
               It is not vnprobable, that of the papiſts in
this land, the 4 part are not papiſts of religion.
The reſt then (being papiſts of eſtate) beinge
by this law taken from them, theire power
muſt needes remaine much weakened
by this leſſeninge of their number. Moreouer,
for that the papiſtes of religion at this
preſent ſtand furniſhed with I credict and
authoritie, 2 wealth and abilitie, 3 weapons
and furniture, ſo that they may draw followers
by the one, wage them by the other, &
arme them by the 3: we by this law ſhall be
reaue them of the 1, impayre the 2 with the
increaſe of your maieſties treaſurie, & take
cleane from them the 3. Further, whereas
ſome of them at this preſent, publiquelye
ſtand in offices of credit and comoditie as it
were in ſorts and places of advantage, ſome
others lye hid as it were in the ambuſh of
their diſſimulatiō and trenches of treachery
readye through all loope holes of oportunitie
to annoy vs: we by this law ſhall remoue
the 1, diſcouer the 2, and drawe out both
vnto the open view, where being warned of
them we may be armed for them.
               Laſtly, wheras heeretofore they haue caſt

vp their accoumpt, booked their catholicke
gentlemen, meaſured their forces, had intelligence
with our enimies, ſounded our hauens
marſhalled by their practiſes, and (like Catilynes)
aſſigned euery of vs, your faithfull ſubiects
to the ſlaughter: we ſhal by this mean
                     •
                  
take from them their maine battel, vnfurniſh
and diſarme the reſidue, diſplant them from
their places of advantage, breake their route
& diſorder them in their arrayes. Thus farr
are we from increaſing hereby their power.
Syth then it plainly appeareth that they ſhal
euery way be weakened herewith, It reſteth
that I proue vnto your maieſtie, that theire
weakening ſhalbe your ſtrengthening▪ and
that this law ſhalbe your ſafety. VVhat
harme ſoeuer may grow vnto your highnes
muſt ſpringe out of one or moe of theſe 3
cauſes, either from the practiſes of aduerſaries
abroad, or from the ſpite of your ſubiectes
at home, or from the might of your
ſucceſſor either abroad or at home. The for
traine enimyes of your Maieſtie are the Romaine
Prelates and their faction, whoſe perpetual
practiſes haue bene to compaſſe their
deathes, whoſe liues did withſtand their purpoſes.
The examples hereof are infinite, whether
your highnes way the acts of their publique

hoſtility, or of their priuate trechery
For by either of both thoſe meanes haue.
they wrought the ruine of many renowned
perſonages, againſt whoſe liues they would
neuer haue attempted ought, had they not
hoped to haue bene gainers by their deaths.
Now when it ſhall appeare vnto them, that
by your Maieſties deceaſe, no priuate or
publique vtilitie to them or to their church
ſhall accrew, (by meanes of this law) it ſhalbe
a repercuſſiue to all their practiſes: which▪
being but an effect of their hope, by this fruſtrating
theirof, will cleane be extinguiſhed.
               The ſpite of your ſubiects, muſt growe by
diſcontentment. The moſt diſcontented mē
of your realme, are papiſts of religion, and
papiſts of eſtate. The one ſolaceth his ſoule,
theother comforeth his mind in your ruine.
the one accounpteth that hereby he ſhall enioye
the libertie of his conſcience, aduancement
of his fa
                     ••
                  ion, eſtabliſhing of his faith,
theother hopeth thereby to poſſeſſe his ſo
much expected good, and his worldly longe
looked for felicitie.
               Of which expectation beinge by this law
bereaued, the one of them will cleane giue
over his courſe: the other will ſee that he

hath no cauſe to wiſh the ſhortinge of your
dayes, ſyth it will not be auailable for the attayning
of his deſire.
               The mightieſt in ſucceſſion (as your Maieſtie
knoweth) are they whoſe alliance, kind
red, and confederacies are for the moſt part
with papiſtes: whoſe faction beinge great,
ſtrong, and mighty abroad, it ſtandeth your
excellency vpon, ſomuch the more to wraken
it at home, and thereby to prouide an inwarde
ſtrength againſt an outwarde force.
whereas otherwiſe your ſtate ſhall ſeeme to
depend vpon the will of your ſucceſſor, amoſt
vnſure foundation, & perilous, ſyth ſo
eaſily it may be altered with ambition, and
the deſire of a kingdome which knoweth no
kindred, with the which, whenſoeuer it ſhall
be enflamed, theire forraine forces ſhall not
be ſo dangerous vnto your maieſtie, as the
partie they haue within the realme, if it be of
ſtrength, whom, the feruent deſire of a third
thinge will ioyne to the forraine, in ſuch a
knot of indiſſoluble ſociety, as in all probabilitie
will proue perilous and dangerous to
your highnes. But this lawe eſtabliſhed,
your ſucceſſors ſhall perceaue themſelues
ſo cut off, from all ſtronge partye within
your land, that they ſhall thereby be greatly

diſcouraged from any ſuch ambitious attempts.
For taking view of your whole ſubiects
they ſhall finde either proteſtants of
religion their moſt mortall enimies, if they
attempt any thinge againſt your maieſtie: or
els proteſtants of eſtate, men that will not alter
theire preſent contentment for an vncertaine
innouation: or els papiſts of religion,
who, being but few in number, diſcontented,
and diſarmed, without either followers or
furniture, will rather daunt their ſpirits with
theire nakednes, then encourage them with
their power.
               The eſtat of your ſubiects being brought
to this paſſe, it is in your maieſtie, by a better
learned and more painfull miniſtery, and
by ſeuere diſcipline, as it were by motiues
more effectual, mightily to increaſe the firſt,
dayly to diminiſh the ſecond & third, and to
propulſe the relapſſes of either, to the great
increaſinge of the church of God, the great
ſtrengthing and ſafegard of your eſtate, and
to the ſaluation of infinite ſoules. Syth then
this law can breede no perill to your highnes
at home, but wilbe the ground & cauſe
of much ſtrength and ſecurities vnto your
Maieſtie: it remaineth to be conſidered how
that mightie faction of papiſts will diſgeſt it

abroad.
               Theire power aſſuredly, it can no way increaſe,
and their will (I perſwade my ſelte) it
cannot exaſperate, being already at the very
worſt and extremeſt poynt of diſcontentment.
But if it did, I knowe right well that
the fortitude and magnanimitie of your
kingly minde would little eſteeme it, and vtterly
deſpiſe it. And if it ſhould come to paſe
in your Maieſties dayes, that the princes of
Meſhech and Tuball, the forces of Gomer &
the houſe of Toggarmah out of the north,
ſhould confederate togeather (as it is reherſed
in Ezekiell chapter 38. and recapitulated
by S. Iohn) and ſhould ſay one to the other,
we will goe vp to the land of vnwalled villages
to them that be at reſt, which dwell ſafely
dwellinge without wals, and hauinge neither
barres nor gates, even to the land which
bath bene toſt with the ſword, and is now gathered
togeather of many nationes, which
haue gotten cattell and goods & dwell ſafe:
we will goe, togeather to ſpoyle a praye, to
gett a booty to take away ſiluer and gold,
to carry away cattell and goods, and to haue
a great pray: yet, whenſoeuer they ſhall put
the ſame in execution, it is propheſied and
promiſed, that the ſword of the Lord ſhalbe

vpon them in all the mountaines of Iſraell.
               By this lawe lett vs make our ſelues an vn
mouable mountaine of Iſraell, for the ſword
of the Lord wilbe vpon his enimies▪ not in
the ſandes, nor in the ſeaes, but in the mountaynes
of Iſraell. If we be neither hott nor
cold, but luke warme, and ſo rather frozen
then feruent: when the Lord ſhall taſt vs in
to his iudgment, he will voyd vs out of the
mouth of his maieſtie. But if we be a mountayne
of Iſraell, the ſword of the Lord wilbe
with vs againſt our enimies: with peſtilence
& blood will he plead againſt them: ſtormes
rayne, and hayleſtones: and vpon all that great people that is
with them. Thus will he be magnified, ſanctified,
and knowne in the eyes of many nations,
& they ſhall knowe that he is the Lord.
This cōſtancy, this zeale in the Lords cauſe,
this perpetuation of hi: truth to our poſteritie,
is a part of duty acceptable to God: it is
a meane (as it were) that draweth vpon vs
his great, ſingular, and manifold bleſſinges:
which notablye appeareth in that excellent
teſtimony that God giueth of the integritie
of Abraham gen. 18. 19▪ 
                  knowe this alſo (ſaith
the Lord) that Abraham will commaund his

children and his houſhould after him, that they
keepe the way of the Lord, that they may doe Iuſtice
and Iudgment: that the Lord may brings
vpon Abraham the bleſſings that he hath promiſed.
               
               I doubt not, but what the divine maieſtie
knewe herein of Abraham the father of the
faithfull, he knoweth the ſame likewiſe of
your highnes a mother in Iſſraell, a motherly
eſtate that excludeth not perpetuall virginity:
and an heauenly eſtate, that includeth
eternall felicity; I doubt not (I ſay) but the
Lord knoweth this alſo, that Queene Elizabeth
will commaund her ſubiects and her ſeruants
after her to keepe the way of the lord,
to do Iuſtice and Iudgment: that the Lord
may bring vpon Queene Elizabeth the bleſſings
that he hath purpoſed.
               This law and commaundement of God,
(to keepe the way of the lord, to maintayne
and perpetuate his truth and doctrine to
our poſteritie,) is that which we moſt humly
and feruently deſire at the hands of God,
and of your Maieſtie. It ſtan deth with his
glorie; we craue it of his goodnes: It ſtandeth
with your ſafety: we craue
it of your wiſdome.
               FINIS.
By Thomas Diggs Gentleman.
            
            
               
               To the moſt Reuerend Archbiſhops, and right
reuerend Lord Biſhops of both prouinces.
               I am occaſioned (right reuerend Fathers) or rather
prouoked to publiſh this petition (longe
ſince penned▪ but whether deliuered accordings
to the pretence I know not) by the Papiſts their
packing to make Burgiſſes for this Parliament,
by their earneſtnes againſt the former Bill for
xi
                     •
                  d to be had of ſuch, as without convenient
cauſe ſhould not be preſent (at leaſt on Sundayes)
at divine ſervice or preaching of Gods word, in
ſome Church or Chappell, & by their publiſhing
beokes (mo than a good many) pretending a controuerſy
betwene ſecular Prieſts and Ieſuits, but
intending to make way (at leaſt) for a toler-ation
of popery which they hoped (and ſo gaue out
throughout the realme) to obtaine by this parliament.
               I call them papiſts who were ſo earneſt againſt
that bill: For, who but papiſts would pronounce
that penaltie to be extreame, plead that people
are not to be compelled, but perſwaded to come
to Church: & doubt whether lay men may meddle
in any Church matter. But their popiſh and
dangerous ende (diſcouered hereafter) 
                     •
                  oth manifeſſe
them to be papiſts though ſome of them diſclaymed
that name, and yet are not therby Iuſtified.
For Dolman ſaith that papiſts and puritans
would not be ſo called, But did they deny themſelues

to be Romiſh Catholiques? Whatſoeuer
they pretend, I freely confeſſe that the end of my
publiſhing this petition is, by putting this motiō
for Aſſociation to preſerue religion eſtabliſhed,
into the heades of wiſe and religious men, to occaſion
something to be thought of, whereby the
hope of the Papiſts might be vtterly fruſtrated.
               I preſent it to your Lordſhips by name, as to them
who haue will and power to prevent the purpoſe
of the Papiſts, and to further ſo good a motion as
this. I will not diſcourſe againſt toleration, ſith
I wright to your Fatherhoods, who (out of your
profeſſion) can beſt tell, that it is a principall
clauſe of the new couenaunt, that there ſhould be
but one Shepheard, and one ſheepfould, one God,
& one way. So that, they are no ſound goſpellers,
that harken to a toleration of Antichriſtianity
vnder a moſt chriſtian Queene, who hath ſuffered
for the goſpell both ſubiect & ſoueraigne.
               But good my Lords giue me leaue to ſay ſomwhat
for Aſſociatiō
                   in this petition perſwaded:
and the rather, becauſe, in theſe printed babbles
and brabbles, the Papiſts indeuour to make ciuill
warre betwene the beſt chriſtians, that is (as
Dolman diuids and diſcribes them) Proteſtants,
viz. ſuch as depend vpon eccleſiaſtical dignities,
and Puritans, viz. ſuch as pretend perfection
in religion. Call to minde (right reuerend)
the courſe of times, & remember, that when the

                  Earle of Leiceſter liued, it went for currant,
that all Papiſts were Traitors in action, or affection.
He was no ſooner dead, But Sir Chriſtopher
Hatton (noted by Philopater, for publique,
and bitter invectiues, againſt papiſts, being
one himſelfe) he bearing ſwaye. Puritans
were trounced, and traduced as troublers of the
ſtate: Preſently after his death, there comes forth
(by meanes of the late Lord Treaſurer) a proclamation,
and commiſſions throughout the land
to inquire for Prieſts, for their receiuers, recuſants:
and ſuch like, leaſt if they were not looked
vnto betime, the informations which were ſent
to Rome, and Spaine of the number, and readines
of prepared papiſts, ſhould proue too true, at
the ſpaniſh ſecond inuaſion then intended.
               But now that that Lord Treaſurer is gone,
and the Earle of Eſſex, through his fatall error,
taken away, the cry is: Preiſts be tolerable
men, but Puritans may not be abidden. Remember
(I ſay: and pray) theſe thinges: And
conſider, Whether a Snake lurkes not vnder the
graſſe, and whether there be not ſome crafty Sinon
of Sir Chriſtopher Hattons stampe, (as
it is imprinted by Philopater) who maketh
way to theſe Troian horſſes, the popiſh Bookes. If
this may be ſuppoſed, I beſeech your Lordſhips
enter into this further conſideration, that if diuiſion

betwene proteſtants and puritans be avialable
for Popery, the contrary muſt needs be good
for the preſeruation of religion eſtabliſhed▪ But
if it may pleaſe your Lordſhips to giue me leaue,
to ſignifie the cauſe, why they thus peſwade the
oppreſſion of puritans, I doubt not, but that yee
will feare his feare, who ſaid: Timeo Danaos
vel dona ferentes, and ſuſpect the perſwaſion
of ſuch enimies, as with whom it is a ground of
policie (as well in peace as in warr) Dolus an
virtus, quis in hoſte requirit, and a Conſtant
Canō: that faith is not to be keept with here
tiques. The cauſe is ſufficiently bewrayed in
the wardword, and anſwer to a Ieſuited gentleman,
to witt: that wheras they take the puritans
to be their grateſt oppoſits, they would haue thē
(eſpecially knowne profeſſors) to be kept downe.
Quouſque? while the catholike parttie (to vſe
their owne words) may haue ſome ſwaye in
the ballance with them. In which cauſe, let vs
obſerue three things.
               Firſt they pretend to hold only the puritans
for their oppoſits, As if your Lordſhips could be
content to giue way to their toleration, and yet
they cannot but take knowledge (and that with
ſome ſignification of their feeling) of that worthy
Prelate the Lord Biſhop of Dureſme his godly
exhortation at Pauls croſſe againſt toleration,

they cannot but (in their Quodlibets) ſcornefully
terme the godly ſermon of that reuerend
father the Biſhop of Cheſter a preachmēt, &
report him to be a pvritans for inueighinge againſt
thē at Pauls croſſe, equallyas againſt the
Ieſuits. and they cannot but ioyne (even in theſe
Bookes) Caluiniſts with Puritans, Now this
word Caluiniſts comprehendeth Proteſtants
as well as Puritans, So that we may gather,
that (when their time ſerueth) they will ſpeake
out that, which Briſtow in his motiues writeth,
viz. That we are all puritans in hart. But
your Lordſhips are wiſe to conclude, that if the
Admirant of Arragon ſpared the papiſts no
more then other in the borders of Germany, &
if it be true (which the prieſts now report) That
the Duke of Medina ſaid, that if he had preuailed
againſt England with his invincible Armado.
He would haue ſpared papiſts no more
than proteſtants, but make way for his maiſter.
Then they will not ſpare your Lordſhips, in their
golden or bloudy day; though ye ſhould plead neuer
ſo earneſtly, that ye are L. Biſhops, and no
puritans.
               To this end is the ſecond note to be obſerued.
to wit, that knowne profeſſors are ſpecially aimed
at. And here I pray yow remember, that Edward
Squyre was ſent to poyſon her Maieſtie

(whom God preſerue) as well as the Earle of
Eſſex: Is our gratious Queene a puritan? Nay
was the Earle a puritan, who was lead by Papiſts
in his ſinnfull attempt, and at his arraignment
miſliked puritans opinion touching Church
gouernment. No no, it is evident, that all be puritans
with them, which stand for the goſpell. And
therefore Dolman in his epiſtle, doth cunningly
inſinuate, & aduiſe to make the Earle away:
as if he had written to this effect. If her Maieſtie
were dead, wee were not a whit the nearer
our purpoſe, ſo long as Eſſex is in place▪ But if
we could be rid of him, there were none of like policy,
valor, reſolution, authority, and ſauor with
the people, to hold the proteſtāts together againſt
the Infanta▪
                   and popery. According to which in
ſinuation (for a ſigne is as good as a ſentence to
prepared mindes) frendes of Spayne (when Squiers
poyſon fayled) working vpon the Earles impatiency,
by meanes and deuiſes drew him to
that attempt of making a forcible way to preſēt
his ereifes to her Maieſtie. This is held for truth
S. Robert Cicill avouching as much at Cuffes
arraignment) howſoeuer the anſwerer to the Ieſuited
gentleman dare ſware (contrary to that
which is publiſhed by authority and commonly
knowne) that papiſts partakers in the Earles deſaſtrous
action, were drawne they knew not wher

vnto, and yet none but papiſts were appointed toward
the vtter court gate, the hall, and preſence,
and to kepe the Honorable perſonages, whom her
Maieſtie ſent to the Earle, and none but ſuch cryed,
kill them, kill them, caſt the great Seale
out of the window &c. Well the Lord of Lords
preſerue the L. Mountioy, from the like diuliſh
practiſes of the frends of Spayne.
               
               The third thing to be conſidered (as a moſt dāgerous
mater) is, that the papiſts diſcouer amīde to
make thēſelues ſtrōg enough, to incoūter the Puritās,
that is, all that stand in their way as hath
bene ſhewed, to which end, their deſignes haue
reſpect, as ſhall be ſome what ſhewed hereafter.
               But it may be obiected, that this contention between
ſecular Prieſts and Ieſuits, cannot but
cauſe a diſ-vnion amongſt the lay Papiſts, and
therefore weaken their party. I would graūt the
concluſion, if I could beleue the premiſes, viz.
that there were ſuch a contention indeed, & that
therby the lay Papiſts were diuided. It may be,
there was ſome hart burning (at the firſt) occaſioned
by the Ieſuits ambition, and deſire of authority
ouer the Prieſts, But now advantage is
made of this pretended continuance by diſpenſation,
that: our fearefull eyes, & troubled thoughts
being ſet vpō the Ieſuits: the Preiſts may be leſſe
feared, and more fauoured, as I am perſwaded
by theſe probabilities.
               
                  
                  Firſt if the Pope can diſpence with Papiſts
their being miniſters in our Churches, prouided
they maintaīe ſome one poynt of popery or other,
with theire being Magiſtrats in our common
wealth, prouided they (vnder hand) hinder proceedings
againſt papiſts: and (at the motion of
Parſons and Campion) with their being (in
ſhew) obedient ſubiects not withſtanding the Bul
of Pius▪ Quintus to the contrary, prouided they
be ready to rebell, when time ſhall ſerue, Is it
vnlikely that he will diſpence with this pretended
contention, wher by he may hope to advance
his popery more than by forcible meanes: and
the rather if the Ieſuits aduiſe the ſame, which
(it may be) they haue done. For they be knowne
macheuilliſts, and therfore carcles what they do,
ſo they may bring their prīcipall deſire to paſſe:
they are few in England, and not eaſilie found
out: they know that any thing wilbe receiued againſt
them, & yet impaire their credii no more
than it was before, becauſe of the generall preiudice
againſt them, and if their credit were hereby
ſomewhat wounded, they can heale themſelues
when they will, and (perhaps) by the Scorpions
tale that woūded them. But if the Infanta
prevaile, they may make accompt to be glorified
for their practiſes againſt this ſtate, as Thomas
Becket was, for his treacherous dealing againſt

                  King Henry the ſecond.
               
               Againe I cannot ſee how it can be poſſible,
that Prieſts ſhould be faithfull to the ſinagogue
of Rom, and continue in fauour with the Pope,
and yet (without diſpenſation) publiſh (& that
amongſt vs) theſe volems, wherin their holy Father
is ſomewbat touched, his darlings the Ieſuits
ſhamefully traduced, and all the treaſonable
practiſes of papiſts againſt our state, (in ſundry
Popiſh diſcourſes heretofore refuted as fictions
and deuiſes be now graunted de facto, but laif
(forſooth) vpon Ieſuits: and there Ieſuited complices,
that is (as time will manifeſt) all Prieſts &
papiſts. For the prieſts themſelues complaine (even
in theſe Bookes) if ye will beleeue them) that lay
papiſts (in a manner) faile them, for the Ieſuits
ſake, and it is ſtrange, that Seminary prieſts, who
in their ſupplication to her Maieſtie, printed An
no. 1595. doe glory that Cardinall Allen (that
perſwader & iuſtifier of the spaniſh invaſion in
88) was their 
                     •
                  oūder: & that they were brought
vp vnder the Ieſuits, ſhould be now at deadly
feud with them? No no, their exceſſiue writing
(as if they did not beleue themſelues) will ever 
be thought but counterfeite quarreiting, except
by their meanes, the Archpriſt, or ſome of the Ieſuits
be brought to their triall. And the rather:
becauſe the Ieſuits, who want nether ſtomach

nor meanes, play mum budget though they be ſo
notoriouſly provoked▪
               
               Thirdly it is to be obſerued, that this deuiſe to
lay all treaſonable practiſes vpon the Ieſuits
was never put in execution before now. Indeede▪
a follower of S. Chriſtopher Hatton conceiued
ſuch a matter long ſince, Which, with like deuiſes,
may (perhaps) be diſplayed, when all theſe
Popiſh Bookes be abroad, In meane while, may
it pleaſe your Lordſhips to remember: that the Ieſuits
(and Father Parſons by name) be iuſtified
as by the wardword not long ſince publiſhed by
H. H. and not by Parſons as I haue credibly
heard: and by ſundry treatizes of particular perſons,
ſo by the generall commendation of Prieſts
in their ſupplication before mentiōed. Wherfore
then (at the fartheſt) it may be vnderſtood, that
the Prieſts (as is confeſſed in the preface to the
Quodlibets) were willing not onely to couler
& conceale but alſo to make the Ieſuits their
attempts, and practiſes their owne in euery
thing. Which being ſo, It cannot be true▪ That
the prieſts diſcarded Ieſuits & their practiſes:
when they were equally entangled by penal lawes,
as in the ſaid preface it is inſinuated, but
without prayſe to the prieſts, who ſtucke to the Ieſuits
ſo long at leaſt. For all thoſe penall lawes
were in execution before the imprinting of that

ſupplication. Nay, ſith by the proclamatiō, which
they would refute by that ſupplication, they are
charged with treaſonable practiſes, why did not
they then lay loade on the Ieſuits, to eaſe their
owne ſhoulders? So that it ſeemeth to me more
than evident that this deuiſe is but a new point
of popiſh policy.
               Moreover, It is not to be forgotten. That Squire
confeſſed, that VValpoole the Ieſuit remitted
him to Doctor Bagſhaw (one of theſe Prieſts)
for direction in his poyſonfull affaire, and that
Prieſts (who dare ſware as is aforeſaid) can contrary
themſelues when they will for a purpoſe.
               For when the Scotiſh Queene lived, then her title
was the cleareſt, but after her death none but
the Infanta hath right to this crowne, and Allen
(founder of the Seminaries) found fault with
Saunders and Briſtow for iuſtifiyng the rebellion
in the North, by Pope Pius his Bull, and yet
the ſame Allen iuſtified S. VV. Stanly his betraying
Deuenter, by the ſame Bull.
               Laſtly if this contention be hearty and not politique,
I maruell there ſhould be ſo great an agrement
amonge the laye Papiſts, conſidering the
pretended contention hath bene longe, and (in
ſhew) is to too vehement, the Ieſuits be few, and
the Prieſts many, & well maintained in priſon,
and abroad (notwithſtanding the ſaid pretēded
complaining) the Ieſuits are knowne to be for

the Infanta, and the aide of 30000. Papiſts, is
ſaid to haue bene offered the Scottiſh King, (whō
they would gull by theſe pamphlets) if he would
promis toleration.
               If I be demaunded, what ende beyond the forbeareing
of Prieſts (a matter of no great momēt)
may be ſuppoſed worthy a ſtrategeme ſo ſtrange,
myne anſwere is ready, to wit. The Prieſts (not
maintained by the Pope, & ſpaniſh King in Seminaries
for nought) haue promiſed to aide forraigne
forces (when they ſhalbe landed) with forty
thowſands: as S. Robert Cicill reported this
Parliament. That this may be made good, The
worke of reconciling to the Pope muſt needs be
applied, and theirfore all hands muſt be ſett on
worke, that prieſts therefore, (who are moſt in nō
                  ber)
may ply their buſines, and be leſſe looked vnto,
it ſeemeth good in policy, to turne the eyes of
the magiſtrate, and edge of the ſword vpon ſome,
and none ſo fitt as the Ieſuite & Puritan already
in diſgrace with the state. Here (by the way)
it may be inquired, why they ioyne puritās with
Ieſuits: I anſwere, to fill our heads & hands the
fuller of feare and worke, and peradventure, to
trump in the puritans way, leaſt they be likewiſe
tolerated (as reaſon is) if the papiſts hap (as the
prieſts hope) to obtaine toleration. But to returne
to the matter, I remember a diſtinction in a certen
poſicon maintained before the late Earle of

Huntiugdon: That howſoever Prieſts are executed
(indeed) for affirming the Pops primacy, and
reconciling to the Church of Rome (which are
parts of their prieſtly function) yet they are not
executed for theſe parts as they are religious, but
as they be dangerous to the state, in ciuill conſideration.
The reaſon is evident, For if Dolman
make accompt of country people as of papiſts &
partizās, though they be not abſolute papiſts, but
onely (for wāt of that teaching which is in good
townes) profeſſe to beleeue, as their Fathers beleeued:
what accompt is to be made of reconciled
Papiſts? What? let the rebellion of the North &
bloudy ſturres in Ireland make it more than manifeſt
to our state, that the Pops Bull can quickly
beget rebels and traitors, where the goſpell is
not effectually preached▪ much more where popery
is tolerated, but moſt of all where reconciling
is lookt to but through the fingers. And if papiſts
remēbring (belike) Dolmans opinion, that they
by reaſon of ſuch country people, be moſt likely
to diſpoſe of the crowne, were ſo earneſt againſt
the ſaid Bill for comming to Church before mentioned,
knowing, that by due execution of the penalty
of xijd. the common ſort would be drawne
to the Church much more than by the penaltie of
xxl. and thereby the popiſh partie greatly diminiſhed,
no marvile though this stratagem be vſed
that prieſts may more frely with leſſe feare, reconcile,

theirby to increaſe the Popiſh partie. That
England (to vſe their owne words) may worke it
ſelfe catholiquie againe, by the proceeding practiſes
of the Seminaries, the Proteſtāt being now
no more vnlikely to be avoided (ergo toleration
is not their vttermoſt end) thā the catholique was
in the begining of her Maieſties raigne.
               Wherein if they proceede, and preuaile, and if
forraigne forces ſhould arriue and invade vs,
(though in her Maieſties dayes) it would ſoone
be ſeene, that theſe prieſts which now flatter her
Maieſtie, and speake their pleaſure of Ieſuits dealing
for the Infanta, would (no leſſe diligently
thā the Ieſuits) proclaime Bellum Dei, as Iohn
de Aquala doth in Ireland, & that her Maieſtie
is but an vſurper, and excomunicated: To ſay nothing
of that which the Ward word already intimateth,
by affirming Catherine of Spaine, to
to haue bene K. Henries wife, by Gods law, and
mans, thē would they vrge the Infanta her title,
confirmed by the Pope, by her father, and by her
brother, as alſo the iudgment of Cardinall Allē
                  
(as his laſt will, & teſtament) that they are Machiauelliſts
& not catholiques, (who vnder any
pretence whatſoever) doe not adhere to the In
                     •
                  anta,
and then they will preemptorily adiure their
popiſh creatures to ſhew themſelues, vnder paine
of pope pius his excomunication, confirmed by
this pope Clement, as Don Iohn de Aquala
                  
ſaith. In the meane while it is to be noted, that even
in theſe bookes Religion eſtabliſhed is coūted
hereſy: The more than eaſy execution of neceſſary
lawes (and thoſe not rigorous) is called tir ā
                  ny
and cruell perſecution: prieſts are avouched to
haue bene executed only for religion and not for
treaſon as they were indited & convicted. Allen
the principall procurer of the spaniſh armado
Anno. 1588. is highly commended, and it is
held lawfull, but yet not expedient for the Pope
to excomunicate, our gratious Soueraigne, all
which, whether it doth not draw the authors and
fautors or abettors of theſe bookes within the cō
                  paſſe
of treaſon, felony, or premunire, I referr it to
the iudgment of learned lawiers, & to a further
diſcourſe, In the meane while I wiſh that theſe of
fenders and namely this VVatſon prieſt (as he
calleth himſelfe) find not more favour than Iohn
Vdall preacher of the goſpell who leſſe offended.
               But it is ſaid that ſome of the prieſts be gon to
procure abſolution for her Maieſtie, or the cancelling
of that Bull. If this be ſo, vnſpeakable iniury
(if it proue not flat treaſon) is offered to her Maieſtie.
For be it 
                     •
                  arr from vs to admitt, that her
Maieſtie who profeſſeth her ſelfe to be ſemper eadam:
who (not long ſince) wrote an excelent letter
to the French Kings Siſter to perſwade her to
be conſtant in religion: and who hath ever bene of
that heroic all magnanimity, that ſhe hath diſpiſed

dangerous attempts, to provoke her to graunt
the papiſts toleration: ſhould now faint for feare,
and betray the goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt. If then her
Maieſtie be not arquanted with their meſſage:
It muſt needs be that the honor of her Maieſtie
moſt chriſtian reſolution is treacherouſly vnderminded,
and theirby the Pope and spaniard incouraged
to follow their deſignes. Yea it is to be
feared, that ſome in authority haue concurrence
with Prieſts & Ieſuits, and preſuming on their
their credit with her Maieſtie, hope, partly by
feares procured, and partly by conditionall abſolution,
indulgence or diſpenſation obtained, to
draw her Maieſtie to toleration: and then acōpt
is made (in the anſwer to the Ieſuited gentlemā)
The Lion being taken out of the way, papiſts
would ſwarme infinitly, and ſo the ſtrengthening
of their party, and withall the execution
of their long deſired purpoſe, more speedily
haſtened. And the rather this feare may be conceived,
if it be true, that the prieſts are gone to
Rome to ſue an appeale with the privity & conſent,
of ſome in authority, as in the ſaid anſwer
it is ſignified with hop
                     •
                   as of toleration, ſo of the
conuerſion of Qther ſaid frends in authority. For if
they dare aventurea premunire by favouring,
comforting, counſelling, or abetting an appeale
to Rome contrary to the ſtatute of 24. H. 8.
cap. 22. what dare they not doe?
               
                  
Now your LL. may iudge, whether I may not be
probably perſwaded, that this contention betweene
Prieſts and Ieſuits is diſpenſed with, & tendeth to
the increaſing & not diminiſhing of the popiſh partty.
And therfore the due conſideration therof may
draw (rather then divert) your LL. to this perſwaſion:
That by incitting the Proteſtāt agaiuſt the Puritā,
they would weaken the party againſt them, &
ſtrengthen their owne: and the rather your LL. may
be thus perſwaded ſith they cannot but intimate
in theſe books that the papiſts haue multiplied, ever
ſince ſome of your LL. haue curbed the Puritans.
               Wherfore (as ye haue a faithfull eye to the meaine
chaunce, & loue the goſpell from your harts) take
heed how any of yow hearten the Papiſts, and diſcourag
the Puritan (nay every ſound Proteſttant)
by toleratīg points of popery to be broached iu pulpit
or print, & yet ſilence Puritan preachers only
for preachīg without licence or not subſcribing further
than law requireth though they offer to ſubſcribe
ſo farr by inforcīg mans cerimonies in Gods
ſervice, & ſtāding for croſſes in high wayes, which
in the begining of her Maieſties raigne were defaced
(in moſt places) as monuments of Idolatry, & ſuperſtitiō,
accordiīg to the 23. Iniunctiō, & doctrīe
of the homiles againſt the perill of Idolatry. And
is it good policy to reſtore thē in this declining time
whē (God wot) the papiſts haue no need of helpe or
hope? what (my Lords) is there ſo great difference

betwene you & the papiſts, whoſe doctrine is poyſon
in the roote, and treaſon in the fruite? Wheras
the bone which the Divill hath caſt betwene yow
and the puritans, is but of the off alls of the whore
of Babilons peace offrings. I hope I may thus
ſpeake without offence, For I know, that ſome of
your LL. (& I doubt not but moſt of yow, be of
the ſame mind) doe iudg, as I doe, of ceremonies:
about which all this wrangling is. O my Lords?
doth the 50. Iniunction stratly forbid (for peace
ſake) the vſing of theſe termes, papiſts and heretique?
and is there not gieater reaſon, that ſome
courſe be taken, that Proteſtants may no longer
(without rebuke) reproch one another (to the reioycing
of Papiſts) with Puritan, and Formaliſt,
Preciſian and Timeſeruer?
               
               Here I imagine ſome enemy of the Puritan, &
frend of the papiſt (who often meete in one coate)
will readily anſwer, & ſay: that it was policy not
to provoke the papiſts in the begining of her Maieſtie
raigne, ſith then: they were many & mightie.
I reply, & affirme: That for the ſame reaſon, it
is not good in policy to provoke the puritās, in the
declining of her Maieſties age, & raigne: when
it is more than high time, that proteſtants ſhould
vſe their helpe againſt the common aduerſary,
who moſt feareth them: As appeareth by that
which is already ſaid out of the Wardword: And
by that which Dolman (one, who throughly conſidered

the ſtate of things) affirmeth to wit, that puritans
be a ſtrong party, for London & good towns,
moſt Lords, gentlemen, & Captaines (that be of the
religiō) incline that way, and be men of action &
reſolution. But to leaue the laity, Conſider the clergy,
(whom ye are eſpecially to vſe againſt the papiſts)
& (ſetting by nonreſidents & dumb dogs)
ye ſhall finde tenne puritans for one formaliſt, and
that one puritan doth more advance the goſpell, &
ſuppreſſe popery, than tenne formaliſts. For he attends
his miniſtery, & not multiplying or exchanging
of benefices. he preacheth, not once a moneth,
or leſſe, but every ſaboth day, & that, not to pleaſe
the eare, but to moue the hart. How can ye want
the miniſtery of ſuch men? but (bleſſed be God) I
heare, that of late, the mouthes of ſome long ſilenced
be in ſome ſorte opened, continue your favour to
wards them, and incourage others that be ſetled, if
ye deſire (bona fide) to prevent toleration, and the
multiplying of papiſts.
               Laſtly. I pray yee to marke and (in your godly
wiſdoms) to make vſe of that which is writtē in the
booke, which is called, Newes from Spaīe, and
Holland. where, after one (in a ſuppoſed cōference)
avoucheth, that Puritans would certaīly be extinguiſhed,
If the Queenes Maieſtie liue any
nomber of yeares, for that the coūſell ſeemeth
bent therevnto: It is thus anſwered. Tuſh you
are deceaued, Nay much more poſſible and likly

it is, that the Puritan ſhall overcome the
Proteſtant, thā the contrary: For that the puritan
buildeth directly vpō the proteſtants firſt
grounds in religion, and deduceth thereof
clearely, and by ordinary conſequence, all his
concluſions: which the proteſtant cannot deny
by divinity, but only by policy, and humaine
ordination, or by turning to Catholique anſweres,
contrary to their owne principles. And
theirefore it is hard for any man, ſincerely to
be a Proteſtant, but that he wil eaſily paſſe on
alſo (more or leſſe) to be a Puritan. And onely
they (in effect) wilbe againſt them, who are intereſted
in the other ſide (As Archbiſhops, Biſhops,
Archdeacons, Cannons, Notaries, Regiſters,
Ciuil-Lawers and the like) for not leeſing
their commodities: And ſome few Counſellors
alſo perhaps, for not offending the
Queene etc.
               In conſideration of the premiſſes, wiſhing (from my
hart) that your LL: would uſe the puritans (eſpecially
their preachers) as brethren: & that they woold
reuerence your LL: as fathers, and proteſting, that
I haue writeth theſe motiues out of my beſt conſideration,
without all partialitie I humbly craue
your favours and take my leaue.
               
                  From my chamber
this Inſtant 
                        December. 1601.
                  
               
            
            
         
      
   