
      
         
            
            
            THE
ACTIONS
OF
The Lowe Countries. WRITTEN
By Sr. Roger Williams
KNIGHT.
            LONDON,
Printed by Humfrey Lownes, for
Mathew Lownes. 1618.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
HONOVRABLE, SIR
Francis Bacon Knight, Lord
Chancellor of ENGLAND.
            
               Right Honourable:
            
            
               THis part of Historie, hauing
lyen a long time by mee, I
haue thought good to publish
to the world; and that
especially for these reasons.
First to incite other men of
Armes to imitate in like sort their great Master
Iulius Caesar, who wrote exact Commentaries
(adorned of late with obseruations of a worthy
man of our Nation) of such militarie actions
as happened vnder his commaund. Secondly,
to preuent least such worthy paines

should either perish, or hereafter be set forth by
others as their own: a thing too much practised
by some, not of meanest note. Lastly, to make
this a meane of drawing the residue into light,
which happely sleepeth in the custodie of some
other man. This doe I presume to present to
your Honour; as well in regard of the honourable
estimation which still remaineth of the
Authour, as for the worthinesse which I conceiue
to be in the Worke. For all of vs doe well
discerne both the lustre of many excellent perfections
in your own noble spirit, and how you
fauour men of valour, learning, or honest endeauour:
which vertues, as they haue aduanced
you to this height of honour, so will they
make your memorie eternally to flourish.
            
               S. Stephens. 1 Ian:
1618.
                
               Your Honours in all seruice,
PE: MANVVOODE.
               
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               ALbeit in all Histories three things
are especially required, Order,
Poyse and Truth: yet for diuers
causes it hapneth that in many,
one of these doth faile.
            For some haue written of
times so anciently past, that no
means are extant, either to direct
or to correct them. Many of these liuing in Artlesse
ages, haue stuffed their Stories with most senselesse fictions;
nothing better then country womens tales. Of this sort was
Hunibaldus, who fableth that the French tooke their originall
from Francio a Troian: and is followed in his sotteries
by Gregorie of Tours, Rheginus, Sigebert, and diuers others
of the same suite. After this example Geoffry of
Munmouth about 400 yeares since, did first (as some affirme)
draw the originall of the Britans from Brutus the
Troian: forging such races, names, reignes and passages of
affaires, as may more easily be conuinced to be false, then supplied
with any certaine truth. Of the same streine is Wittikind;
who by his counterfeit Saxo, hath drawen the Saxons
               
and first Inhabitants of Germanie, from the olde Macedonian
Souldiers of Alexander the great. So the Scots set
vp Scota daughter to Pharao King of Aegypt, for foundresse
of their Nation. Likewise the Irish hatched their
Hiberus, the Danes their Danus, the Brabants their Brabo,
the Gothes their Gothus, as founders both of their
Nation and name: a subiect wherein forgeries may range
at large; because the first times of Nations for the most part
are, as very small, so altogether obscure. Of this sort among
the ancients were Herodotus, Diodorus Siculus, and
Theopompus: in whose Bookes Cicero saith, many idle
vntruthes are found; euen so farre as the vaine veine of
the Graecians durst aduenture to aduowe for truthes. In
how many places (saith Iosephus) is Hellanicus charged
with falsities by Agesilaus, and by Ephorus? they by Timaeus?
Timaeus by many who followed? Herodotus
by all?
            Others haue written of Countries farre distant, either altogether
vnknowen, or by them neuer seene: who writing
vpon vulgar reports, things either imagined, or erroneously
obserued, are easily entangled with vntruthes. Of this fault
Era
                     •
                  osthenes, Possidonius and Patrocles the Geographer
are branded by Strabo. Hence also did rise the fables of the
Arimaspes, Gryphons, Troglodites, Amazons, Satyrs,
Pigmies, and of their cruell warres with Cranes: of Nations
of men with dogs heads, with horse feete, without heads,
without mouthes, with one foote wherewith they couer themselues
against Sun and raine, and of diuers other monstrous
kinds of men, beasts & fowles, which now are discouered for
vtopicall Aperies. With these may Stephanus & Arianus be
ioyned; of whom the one writeth, that the French are a people
of Italie; the other placeth the Germanes neere to the

               Ionick sea. So Strabo choppeth, that the riuer Is
                     •
                  et
or Danowe, hath his spring neere to the Adriaticke
sea: and that the riuers Lapus and Vezer, discharge
themselues into the riuer Enis; whereas the one runneth
into the Rhine, the other into the Ocean. So are Tacitus,
Marcellus, Orosius, Blondus, in diuers places of
Germanie much mistaken. And so Sabellicus, Volaterrane,
and Conrade, doe much confound the Alans
and Almans; the Hungarians and Hunnes; the
Danes and the Dace; Austerane, and Austrich; placing
the mount Saint Ottoly in Bauaria, and the Riphaean
mountaines in Polonia, or Muscouia.
            
            Others haue written of their owne countries and
times: but these againe are of diuers sorts. For some
busie themselues much in those things which the popular
multitude doe applaud: making wordie (I cannot say
worthy) reports of Beare baitings, lanching of shippes,
fleas, mice, owles, maskes, mayings, &c. And if they
speake of any publicke affaires, they discerne nothing but
the out-side: not vnlike to beggars, who trauerse ouer
many Countries, from dore to dore, and touch as many
faire buildings; but obserue nothing either of the persons,
or furniture, or order within. Such Historians doe daily
and duely attend certaine Kings in India: And whatsoeuer
they doe, whether eate, drinke, sleepe, disport,
ease nature, retyre to any woman; In a word, All, they
barely wright downe, and nothing else.
            Some others better furnished with iudgement, doe
strongly biasse in their affections: and that chiesty by two
meanes, leuitie and partiality.
            
            Of the first sort are they who affecting to write rather

pleasingly then truely, doe enterlace many ieasts,
conceits, tales, and other pleasing passages; either omitting
or defacing the solide truth. Of this fault Trebellius is
reprooued by Laberian and Vopiscus, Tacitus by Tertullian
and Orosius, Orosius by Blondus. To these also
wee may adioyne Danudes, Philostratus, Guidius,
C
                     •
                  esias, Heca
                     •
                  aeus, and diuers others; who haue transformed
the truth of many things into fabulous inuentions
of their owne.
            Of the second sort are they who vpon hate, feare, or
fauour, either to some persons, or to their natiue countrey,
or to the religion which they professe, or for some other partiall
respect, doe write Panegyrickes or Inuectiues, rather
then Histories. So Salust writeth, that the acts of the
Graecians are much admired: not because they exceede
the Atchieuements of other men, but because their writers
hauing wit at will, did much enlarge them aboue the
truth. Of this fault Blondus and Sabellicus are noted
in their Histories of Venice: Paulus Aemilius and Gaguine
in their Histories of France: and most others
in the Histories of their owne Countries. Who extoll,
depresse, depraue immoderately; making things seeme
not as they are, but as they would haue them; no otherwise
almost then Comedies and Tragedies are fashioned by
their Authours.
            Amongst those fewe who haue written with knowledge,
iudgement, and sincerity, the Authour of this Historie
is worthy to be ranged: who doubtlesse was of endlesse
industry; alwaies in action, either with his sword,
or with his penne. He was well knowen to be a man, who
both knew and durst: his courage no lesse free from indiscretion,

then from feare. Yet hath hee wrote so modestly
of himselfe, that some may happelie esteeme him rather
a looker on, then a medler, in the hot medlies whereof
he doth write: but his attributing so little to himselfe,
will make others attribute the more vnto him. In writing
of others hee expresseth a most generous disposition;
neither forbearing the errours of his friends, nor forgetting
the vigilancy and valoure of his enemies; but carrying
himselfe with an euen hand betweene them.
            Touching the Historie it selfe, it is faithfull and
free; wherein are found sieges, assaults, surprizes, ambushes,
skirmishes, battailes, liuely described. Great varietie
both of persons and of actions; much mutability
of fortune, many changes in affaires. Admirable aduices,
vnexpected euents, ponderous iudgements; a
phraze in a Souldiers stile, sinowie and sweet; full both
of perspicuitie and grace. In a word, I esteeme it a
compleate Historie, if it were compleate. I meane, if it
extended to all the actions wherein the Authour did
serue. But whether the residue was neuer written,
or whether it bee perished, or whether it resteth in
any other hand, I remaine doubtfull. This piece
beeing shewed to mee, by a person, of whose vertues
I had rather speake nothing, then not enough,
I did much esteeme; for that it comprizeth some
actions of the time wherein I haue liued: Of
which time I endeauour to leaue a large memoriall
to posteritie. But comming to mee in a ragged
hand, much maimed, both in sense, and in phrase:

I haue restored it so neere as I could, both to the
stile and meaning of the Authour. This is all the
paines that I haue taken. This is all the thankes
which I doe either challenge or deserue.
            
               Io: HAYVVARDE.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE
OCCASIONS OF
THE FIRST STIRRES IN
the Lowe Countreys, the Duke
D' Aluaes first comming thither, and his surprizing
of the principall of the Nobilitie, the Prince
of Orange escapeth into Germanie, and
Charles Mansfelt into France.
            
               THe state of Spaine, as I said in my
discourse of their discipline, is gouerned
by two sorts of people;
Captaines and Clergie. The Captaines
animate the King to warres,
to maintaine their wealth and greatnesse;
so doth the Clergie to maintaine
their estate against them of the
religion.The Spanish counsaile touching the Lowe Countries.
                By these meanes, the ambition of the Duke
D'Alua, of Cardinall Granuill, and their seconds, perswaded
the king to vndertake to subdue the Netherlanders to
his pleasure; to lay vpon them such gables, taxes, and
all manner of tributes as should please the King to demand.
But this they could neuer effect without making
away their warlike and politike Nobilitie; namely, the
Prince of Orange, the Counts of Egmond, of Horne, of

               Battenburgh, the Lord of Brederode, the Marquesse of
Bergues, with diuers others of good qualitie. Besides,
they had a great number of strong Townes, innumerable
treasure and riches; the seate of the most of their Prouinces
being meruailous strong by nature, by reason of
their great riuers and streights, furnished plentifully with
Artillerie, munition, and other necessaries for warres.
Also t
                  •
               eir liberties were such, that no stranger might gouerne
either their Prouinces, or any of their Townes.
And this grieued the Spanish not a little, that such base
people as they esteemed the Netherlanders to be, should
possesse peaceably such a braue and rich Countrie, and
their King carrie no other title than Duke, Count, and
Lord ouer their seuenteen Prouinces.Duke D' Aluaes commission. Herevpon the king
resolued to send his great Captaine Duke D' Alua with a
mightie army, giuing him commission to alter place and
displace whome, and as many as pleased him, as well in
their prouinces in generall, as in any particular Towne.
Also giuing him authority to execute as many as pleased
him, without respect of persons. This being discouered
vnto the Prince of Orange,
               The intelligence of the Prince of Orange.
                from a Gentleman Burgundian
of the Kings Chamber (who was greater with
one of the Kings Secretaries wiues, than with her husband)
by reason of the Spanish long counsailes in their resolutions,
it came in good time to the Prince, long before
the Dukes troupes marched from Spaine into Italie. In
the meane time the Prince animated the people all hee
could against the Spanish, making diuers of his assured
friends acquainted with his intelligences;His policie, but durst not
trust Count Egmond, fearing his ambition and choler
would marre all. Notwithstanding considering his vogue
and greatnesse with the men of warre, hee durst attempt

nothing without him. Wherefore politickely the Prince
fed both parties, assured the Gouernesse the Dutchesse of
Parma, of his loyalty towards the King and his religion:
but in troth he was of the Protestant religion, fauouring
them what he could vnder hand; so much, that hee and
his instruments procured the people in great numbers to
present supplications openly to the Gouernesse, for the
libertie of their consciences. Likewise diuers Papists and
Martinists presented her with supplications, to perswade
the king to stay his Duke D' Alua and his armies: shewing
her plainly that it was against their liberty and customes,
that strangers should gouerne them. In this time the
Prince and his instruments animated a quarrell betwixt
Count Egmond, and Card. Granuill; so as after a banquet
at Brussels, vpon a dispute with multiplying of words, the
Count tooke the Cardinall a boxe on the eare,Cardinall Granuill taketh a boxe vpon the eare. to the
Prince and his parties great ioy. This Count (as I said before)
was so ambitious, that hee thought it his due to bee
chiefe ouer all warlike actions,Count Egmonds nature. which either King or his
Country would vndertake (I meane among the Netherlanders)
without comparison he deserued it. He was most
valiant, most liberall, and greatly fortunate in all his actions.
Amongst the rest of his actiōs, the chiefe praise of the
battaile of S Quintins, and of Grauelin belonged to this
Count.The Prince of Oranges fauour, popular. Notwithstanding the Prince of Orange carried
all the vogue amongst the popular, by his fine and politicke
gouernment; and wanne a number of men of qualitie
with great courtesies & affable discourses: Insomuch
that these two Chiefes being ioyned, would haue carried
all the Countrey in general to haue done what they had
listed. After this disgrace, the Cardinall very politickly
shewed neither choler nor minde to reuenge, but rather

sought all meanes vnder-hand to stay the Count from
proceeding further with the Prince; and both hee and
the Gouernesse procured lotters from the King, with
great speed to that end. In which letters were contained,
that nothing should be done in the Netherlands, as wel by
Duke D' Alua, as by his base sister the Gouernesse,The Kings letters. without
the Counts consent; and to repose all trust in the
Count onely for martiall affaires. The King wrote also
vnto the Count, assuring him, that nothing should bee
too deare for him; and that his great seruice should not
be forgotten, but recompenced to the highest degree:
Shewing him, how all these stirres proceeded from the
Prince of Orange, and his instruments, to ouerthrow religion,
and to maintaine his estate and greatnesse. Besides,
they sent counterfeit letters vnto the Count, as
though the Prince or his faction had certified the King
often aginst the Count to his disgrace. Before these posts
arriued, the Prince or his instruments had procured the
Count, and all or most of the Nobility with a great number
of quality, to meet at Tilmount in Brabant: where,
after a great banquet, most of them signed a letter to the
King, rather to dye than to suffer the gouernment to alter.
This letter was written very humbly to perswade
his Maiestie to stay his Duke D' Alua, assuring him to be
loyall in all poynts: desiring his Maiesty to remember
their liberties and customes, which his Maiesty was
sworne to maintaine in as ample manner as his ancestors
before. At this banquet all signed these letters, sauing
the Count Peter Ernest of Maunsfelt, gouernour of Luxenburgh,
and the Lord of Barlemount,
               
                  Peter Maunsfelt, and the Lord Barlemount will not signe. who politickly
promised to doe the like the next morning: excusing
themselues, that at that instant the wine was their master.

But at midnight they stole post towards Luxenburgh,
excusing themselues by letters vnto the Prince of Orange,
that Count Egmond would be deboshed from them by
the Spanish instruments; and that they would not belieue
the contray, vntill they heard that his person and
men of warre were in battaile against the Spanish. It
seemes Peter Ernest was willing to second them, for hee
left his sonne Count Charles as deepe as the best. They
had reason to feare the Count, for the next day he began
to repent him of his bargaine;Count Egmond repenteth. taking occasions to murmure,
and to stirre factions against the Prince. But the
Prince politickly courtesied him with all fauours, in such
sort,Is pacified. that all fell in a banquet the next dinner; at which
feast, according to their custome, there was great carowsing:
where the basest sort came in great multitudes with
glasses in their hands, crying to the Prince, Count, & Nobility,
Viue les gueses, viue les gueses, le diable emporte les
espanioles:
               Combination of the Nobility, with the Prince 
               God saue the beggers, and the diuell take the Spaniards.
After ending the banquet, the Prince procured
many of the Nobility and of the best sort, to promise to
second him in the action he would vndertake against the
Spanish.
                  Egmond offended. This being discouered vnto Count Egmond, he
commanded his horses & coaches to be made ready; seeming
to bee much offended with the Prince of Orange
and his faction, and withall departed toward Louaine.
            
            True it is, all murthers are villanous;Charles Maunsfelts councell concerning Egmond. but had the
Prince credited Count Charles Mansfelt, Count Egmond
had beene dead. I heard the Prince relate his counsaile,
which was; Let vs kill Count Egmond, then are we sure all
the men of warre will follow you and yours. Also his countenance
is such amongst them, as at his reconcilement vnto the
Spanish, they will al follow him. But for feare of him my father

and all the rest would ioyne with you. True it is, this young
Gentleman was the wilfullest amongst them, but spake
the grearest reason to maintaine the Prince of Orange,
as it fel out afterwards: for without doubt the reconcilement
of Count Egmond, lost himselfe and all his friends.
Long afterwards in Fraunce I heard Count Charles speak
this, & also how he would haue wished the Prince afterwards
to haue marched with all his forces vnto the edge
of Louain,
               To take the streights against Duke D' Alua.
                there to haue kept the streights betwixt Louain
& Luxenburgh, where Duke D' Alua must pass without all
doubt. With the fauour of God, had the Prince & Count
Egmond marched thither with their forces, by all reason
they might haue fought with twice Duke D' Aluaes numbers.
For there were foure thousand braue Lanciers and
light horsemen vnder their charge, ready alwayes entertained;
besides as many more who would haue mounted
themselues most willingly,The forces of the Lowe Countries.
                with at least twenty thousand
footemen against the Spanish and the Prince, had
they made away the obstinate Count. Besides, the nature
of the Neatherlanders is to be very willing to second
any nouelties; much more against a people they hated so
much as the Spanish, whose forces and policies were vnknowen
to them at their beginning. Being as high as
Lovaine, they had bin sure all the Countries and Townes
behinde them, would haue seconded them with all necessaries.
For the humour of the Nation is to bee vnreasonable
prowde with the least victorie,The disposition of the Neatherlanders.
                or aduancement
with a reasonable armie; and deadly fearefull with the
least ouerthrow, or at the retreit of their men of warre
from their enemie. The posts being arriued with the Gouernesse
and Cardinall (who receiued expresse commandement
from the King to dissemble his disgrace

with the Count, assuring him Duke D' Alua should redresse
all) Count Egmond hauing receiued the Kings letters,
fell cleane from the Prince vnto the Gouernesse,
and beganne to make all the faire weather he could vnto
the Cardinall;
                  Egmond draweth all to the Spaniard. thinking himselfe sure. This poore Count
perswaded all the rest to forsake their Prince, assuring
them that hee would vndertake to make all well againe
with the King; in such sort, that most of the Nobilitie
quited the Prince.The Prince of Orange seeketh conference with Egmond.
                Who fearing that the variable popular
would doe the like, resolued to acquaint Count
Egmond what the King had passed against them in his
Spanish councell; and opening his minde vnto diuers
of the best sort, the Prince procured Count Egmond, with
most of the rest to giue him audience: whose words I
heard the Prince himselfe report, as followeth.
            
               Cousins and deare Countrimen,His aduertisement. it greiues mee to see
you so blinded with the Spanish dissimulation, which is
to no other end but to lull you asleepe, vntill their tyrant
D' Alua arriues amongst vs, who hath so large a commission.
And this he will not faile to execute to the vttermost;
which he can neuer doe, and suffer vs to liue, especially
you Count Egmond. And resolue your selfe that
they who send him with such directions, know your
courage to be too great to endure your Countrimen to
bee made slaues, and to suffer him to wash his hands in
your kinsmens bloud. Beleeue my words, it is true what
I tell you; for there you see his hand, whom diuers of
you know to be in good credite with the King, especially
with his principall Secretary. And herewith hee cast his
letter with other testimonials amongst them, telling the
Count. Cousin resolue on it, if you take armes, I wil ioyne
with you; if not, I must leaue you and quite the Country.
               
                  
After pawsing a while, the Count answered. Cousin, I
know the King hath not Spaniards enow to employ in
all his Dominions:
                     Egmonds answere. wherfore you must think he must be
serued by others more then Spaniards. You are deceiued
to iudge the King a tyrant, without proofe of cruelty;
he cannot be so vngratefull to recompence our seruices
with such payments. Touching Duke D' Alua, if it
be the Kings pleasure to make him Gouernour of these
Countries, we must obay him as we did the Duke of Sauoy,
and others. Touching our gouernment, resolue your
selfe, he will not, neither shall alter it more than the rest
of his predecessors before him haue done. For your selfe,
if it please you to stay, I dare aduēture my credit to make
all wel with the King. And assure you, doth Duke D' Alua
lay hands on you, I will not endure it.The Kings dissembling letters. Withall he hurled
before the Prince and the rest the Kings letters;
wherein was no want of dissimulation, nor of promise
of forgiuenesse, onely to be assured to bring them sound
asleepe, vntill Duke D' Alua should awake them. Herewith
the Count told the Prince resolutely, that he would
not quite the King. If he would not stay, it would grieue
him to see his house ouerthrowne.
               The Prince answered.The Princes reply. Cousin, I haue been too long
by his Fathers chamber, and doe know the Kings humors
too well, and their Spanish gouernement, to conceiue
that they will pardō such persons as a number of vs
here be, after entring into such actions as we haue done
against them. Good Cousin, doe you forget how Duke
D' Alua was wont to say vnto Charles the fift: Hombres
muertos no hazen guerra: Dead men make no warre. For
these reasons, and diuers other, farewell: I will not stay
their iustice, nor trust to their courtesies.For house it

makes no matter; I had rather be a Prince without houses,
then a Count without a head.
            
            
               The Protestants at Antwerpe.
                During these treaties
and delayes, diuers brawles and bickerings fell out in
Antwerpe, betwixt them of the religion, the Martinists,
and Papists. Twice or thrice a weeke great numbers
would bee in armes, sometimes before the Gouernesse
Court, sometimes before the Prince of Oranges house,
but often or continually in places of greatest note. Although
the Prince was most politicke; yet his courage
was nothing cōparable to a number of others: if it had,
without doubt hee might haue hazarded to haue surprized
Antwerpe: Hauing done it, he might haue engaged
the rest of the Country. For in Gant and in the great
Townes was faction for Religion, especially throughout
the most of the Villages and Countries, where was preaching
& defacing of Images in many places; Insomuch,
that the Papists and Martinists drew them of the Religion
out of Antwerpe. Notwithstanding, they gathered
together at a Village hard by Antwerpe,
               Their ouerthrow at Osterwell.
                called Osterwell;
where they preached in great numbers: in such sort, that
the Gouernesse and all hers stood in doubt, whether it
were best to hazard their defeate there, or to stay for
more forces. Being cōsidered how they encreased daily,
resolution was taken to charge them where they were;
Intelligence being brought them, that the Papists and
Martinists, with a number of Souldiers did salie to defeat
them. Notwithstanding they were voyde of any
men of conduct, or souldiers gaged vnder ensignes, or
Cornets; and all or the most Craftesmen, Mechanicks,
or poore peasants; yet they resolued to fight,The Prince of Orange his Ouersight. making
head with good courage against their enemies. But for
want of heads to direct them, default of armes and munition,

they were defeated in plaine field. Iudge you what
they would haue done being in the Towne of Antwerpe,
hauing with them a Prince of Orange, who had with him
continually two or three hundred Gentlemen, diuers of
charge and conduct. Besides, he was Gouernour of the
Towne, neuer without a good partie, so as the Gouernesse
and hers durst not lay hands on him; although they
knew him an enemy and a fauourer of the Religion.Hee openly taketh part with the Papists. To
say truth, he cloaked it what he could; Insomuch, as all
their parties being often in armes in the great places, himselfe
went to the strongest, which were the Papists and
Martinists: protesting to them to liue and dye with the
Gouerness & religion. Without doubt his meaning was,
touching the Gouernesse, to be true to his Country, and
to liue and dye with the Religion. For amongst them of
the religion hee had diuers instruments, some of his best
Gentlemen and Captaines, who (God knowes) at that
time had but little skill in warres; notwithstanding they
were assured by them of his good will, in such sort that
they would haue marched often against the others,Perswadeth the Protestants to quietnesse. but
for the Princes perswasions to the contrary. Sometimes
he would tell them their enemies were more in number,
and in charging them they should ingage their Towne,
wiues, children, and goods: assuring them, if they
would goe forward, the basest sort would ransacke their
houses. Since I heard the Prince say, that if hee had
knowne the warres then so well, as he did since, he would
haue ranged on their sides: wishing then his valiant brother
Count Lodowicke in his place. Pitie or feare ouerthrew
the Prince often, as I will shew hereafter. Great
warriers account the pitifull Captaine a foole in warres,A pitifull Captaine.
and neuer cruell vntill hee masters his enemie; then hee

must bee bloudy to execute, if hee cannot liue in safetie.
This order continued vntill the newes came that Duke
D' Alua was marching: Then it was high time for the
Prince to shift for himselfe.The Prince of Orange into Germany.
                Before he arriued, the Prince
was in Germanie. After, moouing the whole state of the
Empire, except the house of Austria, hee found little
comfort at their hands; sauing the Count Palatine of the
Rheine, and his owne house of Nassau. Not without meruaile;
for those flegmatique people will second no body
without money before hand, & assurance to be payd monethly,
especially being gaged to serue the weakest partie.
When they come into the field, they will endure neither
hardnes nor wants without their due guilt. When they
haue ioyned battaile, they haue often cryed guilt, hurled
their weapons from them, and suffered their enemies
to cut them in pieces. I doe perswade my selfe all Potentates
and estates hyre them, onely fearing their enemies
would haue them. Without doubt, if one side hath them,
and not the other, likely it is master of the field; they
come in such multitudes of Horsemen, as no Christian
Nation besides is able to furnish. Else perswade your
selfe 500. hundred of either English, Scottish, Burgundians,
Wallones, French, Italians, Albaneses, Hungarians,
Poles, or Spanish, is worth 1500. Almaines.
            
            Duke D' Alua being arriued in Loraine,
               Duke D' Alua arriueth in Loraine.
                Count Peter
Ernest Gouernour of Luxenburgh feared him; but like a
wise politicke man, sent vnto him to offer him all seruice.Count Maunsfelt vpon his guarde.
Notwithstanding hee kept himselfe in his strong
Townes of Luxenburgh, and Tyonuill, hauing garrisons
at his deuotion: the Gouernours and Captaines either
his kinsmen or assured friends. Neither would hee suffer
Duke D' Alua to enter those Townes, or any other vnder

his gouernment of any strength; except onely his owne
person,Duke D' Alua courteth him. with so many more as the Gouernours could
dispose of at their pleasures. Duke D' Alua knowing this
man to be a very expert valiant Captaine, would not offend
him, but rather pleased him all that hee might. Insomuch
as hee procured diuers fauourable letters from
the King, to encourage him of their good meaning towards
him; fearing otherwise that it lay in him to giue
the Dutchie of Luxenburgh to whom hee listed: which
might haue beene a good present to the French King,
being joyn'd with Mets in Loreine. Duke D' alua remained
quiet in the Kings state at Brussels, with some tyrannous
Spaniards about him, who from the highest to the lowest
gaped for the spoyles and confusion of the poore Netherlanders.
These (God knows) at that instant were better
fed then taught in marshall discipline, (except a few of
their Nobility & men of war, who were all at the deuotion
of Duke d' Alua, by means of the ignorance & obstinacy
of Count Egmond, who was deceiued & lulled asleep
in his vaine glory, by certaine treacherous, tyrannous and
vngrateful Spaniards.) Insomuch as they refused neither
the tenth pennie,Duke D' Alua surpriseth the chiefe of the Nobility. nor any other demaunds that pleased
Duke d' Alua to charge vpon them. Duke d' Alua hauing
intrapt the Counts of Egmond, and Horne, with diuers
others of great qualitie, sent for them to counsaile. At
their entrie into a chamber where he was, the great Prouost
arrested them of high treason, taking from them
their Rapiers and armes. You may easily iudge their
sentences, when they were to be tryed by the Cardinall
Granuill and his friends. So for the boxe on the care
and other follies, Count Egmond lost his head, with diuers
others, and principally the men of best quality;

whom they feared and mistrusted to haue any vogue
with the popular, or meanes to annoy them either with
forces or Councell.
                  Count Charles Maunsfelt flyeth.
                At this instant Count Charles Maunsfelt
had with him a vigilant politicke companion, which
his father (the olde Foxe) had foysted into the seruice of
Duke D' Alua, onely to aduertise him and his sonne of
their proceedings. This espy-all ranne to Charles into a
tennis-Court, and brought him presently into his lodging,
where they mounted themselues speedily to recouer
Luxenburgh: which they did,Duke D' Alua pursueth him. although Duke D' Alua
sent diuers others on the spurre to bring them to him
dead or aliue. These mist them narowly. For they had
not passed the bridge of Namurs, but the others were in
the place within one houre.Duke D' Aluaes trechery against Count Maunsfelt.
                Returning to Duke d' Alua,
he was in great choler for not intrapping Count Charles,
and not without reason. For hauing him, he might haue
held him prisoner for the better assurance of his father.
Duke d' Alua dispatched present posts to the great Prouost
of Arden, who was altogether at his deuotion;The Prouost of Arden the instrument. by
reason of a Picke betwixt Count Maunsfelt and him. By
good espy-all Count Maunsfelt was aduertized of their
practise; which was, that the Prouost should vse all diligence
and meanes to intrappe the father or the sonne. If
both, hee should doe the King and him great seruice.
Count Charles being aduertized of the match, vsed all
meanes possible to meet the Prouost at equall handes.
This Count was rather desperate then valiant in all his
quarrels; but politicke and full of wit in all his affaires.
By good espy-alls he met this Prouost,
                  Charles Maunsfelt meets the Prouost. hauing with him
about twenty horsemen; all or the most his owne seruants.
The Count had about twelue, the most or all
Captaines and Souldiers. This encounter (God knows)

was farre against the Prouosts wil, considering the match.
For most men of iudgement in those affaires value sixe
chosen men well mounted, worth twenty ramassets, as
the brench tearme them. The Count (as of greatest courage)
beganne to speake as followeth. Master Prouost,
I doe vnderstand Duke d' Alua commands you to bring
my father or my selfe vnto him, and that you gaue your
word you would doe it. All honest men ought to maintaine
their words and promises, especially great Officers
of qualitie like your selfe. I must confesse you ought to
obey the Kings Lieuetenant, but not to make promise of
more than you are able to performe. You know my father,
my selfe, and you, are neighbours children; and
kinsmen a farre of. Wherefore for all your small picke,
you might haue vsed the Duke with lesse assurance. But
to giue him and all his proude Spaniards to vnderstand
that a Netherlander carrieth as good resolution as any
Spaniard, and to terrifie such base fellowes as thou art
from the like attempt,Killeth him. there is for thee. And withall
strooke him with a pistoll in his bosome, downe from his
horse. Himselfe and his company mastering the rest, executed
no more; all yeelding to his mercy. The Count
told them, vpon condition that some of you will tell
Duke d' Alua that I wished him here with his Prouost, I
giue you all your liues, and leaue to goe where you list.
Tell him also I am gone to the French King, and from
him to the Turke, rather then to yeeld to his mercie. The
Count being in France,
               Goeth into Fraunce.
                was greatly fauoured & well vsed
by the French King, and remained there vntill Don Iohn
d' Austria came into the Lowe Countries, to be Gouernour
and Captaine Generall. As I sayd before, Count Peter
Ernest would neuer hazard himselfe at the mercy of Duke

               d' Alua; notwithstanding there passed courteous letters
of dissimulation betwixt them. Duke d' Alua all
this while plaied gloria patri, as pleased him; thinking
his worke at an end in the Lowe Countries; sauing the
finishing of two Citadels, the one at Antwerpe, and the
other at Flushing. In the meane time, he, the Cardinal,
& others perswaded the King all they might, to vndertake
the conquest of England: thinking thereby to oppresse
religion in all other places. Being resolued both
in Spaine and Flanders, he dispatched his great Captain
and Marshall Chiapine Vitelly vnto her Maiesty, with
some fained message: but by all likelyhood they had
intelligence of our discountents. For immediately after
Vitellies retreit out of England, the Earles of Northumberland,
and Westmerland were in armes in the
North-countrie; And the Duke of Norfolke was charged
as faulty presently after. At which time Duke d'
Alua had ready in Zeland some ten regiments to embarke
for England. But by Gods prouidence our stirs
were quieted before they could embarke. Also God
blinded his affaires in such sort, that hee vndertooke to
finish the Citadell of Antwerpe, before that of Flushing,
to his vndoing; as I will shew in this discourse.
         
         
            
            Count Lodowicks entry into Frizeland, and the defeat
of the Count of Arenbergue.
            
               I Can speake little touching the first
iourny Count Lodowick made into
Frizeland;
               
                  Count Lodowicke into Frizeland. but I heard the Prince
report, that Count Lodowick marched
into Frizeland with some
two thousand and fiue hundred
horsemen, and seauen thousand
footemen, all Germanes. And hauing
intelligence with the Counts of Schowenburgh,
and his brother in law the Count Vanderbergue, hee
tooke the Castle of Wedle, with diuers other places
in Frizeland, hauing ingaged Groining.
               Count Arenburge and Count Meguen sent against him. The Counts of
Arenbergue and Meguen were dispatched from Duke
d' Alua to stop his courses, hauing with them the master
of the Campe Don Gonsalvo de Bracamount, with his
Tertia of Sardinia, and some companies of Wallons, Geldrois
and Almans;
               
                  Bracamount master of the Campe. with the two bands of Ordinance
of the Counts, & about fiue other Cornets, Launciers,
and Hergoletters, Albaneseis, and Wallons. Count Arenbergue
carried the Commission, and marched before
with Bracamount and other bands of footmen; giuing
charge to Count Meguen to follow him speedily with
the rest. Count Arenbergue being arriued within two
leagues of Count Lodowick,
               The pride and insolency of certaine spaniards.
                and vnderstanding his forces,
would haue staid from Count Meguen; who would
haue been with him that night. The pride of Bracamount
and diuers of his Spaniards was such, as valuing

               Lodowicke and his forces as nothing, they vrged Count
Arenbergue with hainous words; Insomuch that a number
of the basest sort of the Spaniards began to call him
cowardly traitour: although Count Arenbergue was a
valiant expert Captaine, and onely would haue staied for
more forces. For he knew, and all the world with him,
that Lodowicke was a most valiant obstinate executioner,
                  Lodowicke a braue commander.
who alwaies directed his troupes to fight in good order;
and so resolutely, that at an encounter with the French,
he and Count Maunsfelt made a discreet valiant retreit.
The Admirall and his Frenchmen being defeated, Bracamount
and his Spaniards vrged the Count to approach
Lodowicke, who was lodged in a Village by Groning, hauing
on both sides broad high waies, both towards Groning
and his enemies. At the end of the lane towards
the enemie there was a great heath, with three high waies
entring vnto it. True it is, Lodowickes companions were
Germans, but of the best sort; for fiue hundred of his
horsemen were Gentlemen that accompanied him and
his brother Count Adolfe of Nassau, for good will:Lodowicke
                     •
                   
                  forces.
                All
his rest were a thousand horsemen, which he led himselfe.
Count Arenbergue being approached Count Lodowickes
quarters diuided his horsemen on both sides of his footmen,
which marched in one squadron, conducted by
Bracamount.
               The order of the Spaniards.
                Hee placed some fiue hundred shot before
his squadron, the rest on both his sides. Count Arembergue
himselfe led the right wing of the horsemen, his
Lieutenant of Frizeland the left wing. He commanded
the Herguleters to march before the forlorne shot of his
battell on foote, and with some fiftie Herguleters to keep
as nigh Lodowickes quarters as they could, and to keepe
centinell at the entrie of the lane into the plaine. Count

               Lodowicks Curriers hauing discouered them at the Nuse,
Lodowicke aduanced out of the Village, commanding
two hundred reysters to displace Arenbergues Curriers,
                  Lodowickes order to traine out the enemy.
and to stand in the mouth of the streight. Lodowick came
with all his forces, placed his Lieuetenant Henrick Vausican
with a squadron of Pikes, some thirtie score in the
plaine, halfe of his shot on both sides of his squadron,
aduanced the two hundred reysters thirty score before
his battaile, placed his brother Count Adolfe with 600.
Reysters on the right wing of his battaile, and so many
more with one of his best Captaines on the left wing; the
rest hee hid in two squadrons in both the out-lanes, leauing
in the middle lane a good squadron of pikes, with
some three hundred shot in the hedges on both sides. He
gaue charge to the two hundred Reysters to skirmish
with all courage; gaue directions to his brother to retire
softly as the enemie approached, himselfe standing with
some seuen hundred of the best horsemen, hidden in the
right lane from the enemie; and gaue order to the other
wing to run through the pikes which stood in the middle
mostlane, who had directiōs to shift themselues ouer
the hedge as though they were defeated. His directions
were no sooner giuen, but Arenbergues Curriers and his
were together by the eares, and the Nassauians forced to
retire vnder their battels of pikes. Arenbergue aduanced
with all speed both horse and foote. Being neere Bracamount
and his Spanish cryed to Count Arenbergue to
charge: withall Arenbergue and his Lieuetenant charged
at once. According to direction Count Adolfe retyred,
bringing Count Arenbergue (who had by far the greatest
wing) on Count Lodowicke. So did the other bring Arenbergues
Lieuetenant through the lane where the pikes

were. Lodowicke giuing signe to his Reysters in the third
lane to charge, withall chargeth himselfe, and found
Count Arenbergue and his Lieutenant good cheape;
by reason they were out of order in running after Adolfes
troupes. His Lieuetenant Henrick Vausichan was broken
by the Spanish and Wallons: but at the sight of
their horsemen which were in route, their courage quailed;
in such sort, that valiant Lodowicke ranne thorow
them cheape. In this place the Count of Arenbergue
was slaine, all or most of the Tertia de Sardinia
slaine or taken prisoners; with a number of Wallons and
Geldreis. Diuers Spanish Captaines escaped by recouering
their horses, which were led not farre from them.
So did diuers Wallons, and many of their horsemen,The Spanish discipline.
by reason Lodowicke executed the most of his furie on
the Spanish footemen. At the returne of the Spanish
Captaines that escaped, Duke D' alua executed them, as
I shewed in my discourse of their discipline, for vrging
their Generall to their ouerthrow.
         
         
            
            Count Lodowicke assayes Groning, and the Duke
D' Alua ouerthrowes him at Dam in Frizeland.
            
               AFter this,Lodowicke besiegeth Groning. Count Lodowicke ransacked
Frizeland at his pleasure, insomuch
that he besieged the faire and
rich Towne of Groning. Duke
D' Alua hearing this, dispatched his
Martiall, otherwise called Master
of the Campe,Vitelli in ayde of Groning. generall Chiapin Vitelli
with sufficient troupes of horsmen
and footmen, being ioyned with Count de Meguen,
to stop Lodowickes course. Duke d' Alua vsed all diligence
to gather his whole forces; who marched with all speed
after Vitelly. Vitelly being arriued by Groning, Lodowicke
retired his siege into one quarter, resoluing to giue Vitelly
battaile; to which end he sent his Trumpets to Vitelly
to dare him,Is dared to battaile by Lodowicke.
                a small riuer being betwixt both. Vitelly
kept the passages, brake the bridges, answered Count
Lodowicke hee had no order to giue battaile, but to discharge
the Towne of Groning; delaying the Count politickely,Refuseth, and yet giueth hope thereof. D' Alua approcheth.
and telling his messengers: I will send vnto my
Generall to obtaine his good will; your Master may be assured,
hauing leaue, a battaile will be my first businesse. Duke d' Alua
being arriued with his faire armie within a daies iourney
of Vitelli, Count Lodowicke retyred into Iemming,
a Village by Nuse-heile towards Emden,
               Lodowicke retyreth.
                breaking the
bridges after him. At the end of the Village towards
the enemie, he left Henrick Vausichan his Lieuetenant,
with all his infanterie, being some eight thousand; which
were encreased by reason of his good successe at the last
battaile. This Iemming was a place enuironed with waters,

sauing two or three large wayes which came into it
from Groning.
               Fortifieth himselfe at Iemming.
                On euery way Count Lodowick made
trenches, placed strong guards, ranged his horsemen in
foure squadrons; making what meanes he could to fill
ditches, to enlarge grounds, to make waies for his horse
to fight out of the high wayes in diuers of the meadowes
towards Nuse-heile. By reason of the streights, his horsemen
stood behinde the footmen in the great wayes. Henrick
Vausichan hauing intrenched himselfe reasonably
strong, with fiue thousand men to defend the place against
the enemie;Seeketh to stop the enemy. planted diuers field peeces which flanked
the quarter where the enemie must attempt. Hearing
Duke D' Aluaes Curriers aduanced within the sight
of the Nassawians guardes, Lodowicke sent two hundred
Reysters to re-encounter them, giuing them charge to
stoppe their course what they could; to winne time to
strengthen his trenches, wth were in working with all his
hands. Being re-encountred, both these Curriers fell into
a hot skirmish. Iulian Romero hauing the vantguarde
with Robelos, seconded their Curriers with some foure
or fiue hundred Horguleters,Relieueth his Curriers. in such sort, that the Nassauians
were forced to retyre on the spurre. At the sight
whereof Lodowicke passed some foure hundred Reysters,
commanded by a valiant man, who charged the Spaniards
into the squadrons which Iulian and the other led,
beeing foure regiments of Spaniards and Wallons.
The grand Prior Duke D' Aluaes sonne commanded the
battaile, hauing with him don Iohn de Mendosa, Generall
of the horsemen with Vitelly. They passed with all speed
through the vaunt-guarde some seuen hundred Lanciers,
which chaced the Nassawians into their infantrie. And
withall Iulian and Robelos aduanced with all speed: so did

the grand prior with his battaile; and Duke D' Alua with
his sonne Don Frederico accompained with diuers others
of great quality, seconded the battaile in great march. Lodowicke
giuing courage to his infantry, the base villaines
(as I shew'd you before) cryd gilt, gilt, according to their
simple and olde base customes. Iulian and Robelos being
Pell mell with them,His Germans cryed for guilt, and are payed by the Spaniards.
                they hurled downe their weapons,
crying, Liue Spaniard, bone Papists moy. Notwithstanding
Lodowicke recouered his horsemen, who beganne also
to shake and to crye for money. True it is, at the first approach
of Duke D' Alua in Frizeland, foure dayes before
the horsemen beganne to murmure, and to counsaile Lodowicke
to returne to Emden.
               His braue resolution in greatest distresse. 
               Lodowicke seeing this disaster,
pulled off his caske, desiring his horsemen to follow
him, or to stand to beare witnesse how honestly his brother
stoode with some fiue hundred horsemen; desiring
him to charge those Launces which aduanced hard before
them.The valour of Count Adolfe.
                Count Adolfe did it with great courage,
although halfe his squadron quitted him. At which instant
Lodowicke cryed to his horsemen, All you that haue
a humor to liue follow mee. Withall he gaue the spurres.
Some three hundred horsemen followed him, the rest
ranne away. Notithstanding, his brother and himselfe
with lesse then sixe hundred Reysters draue aboue eight
hundred Launciers besides Herguleters into their vanguarde
of foote.Count Lodowicke defeated. By that time the Spanish Generall of
horsemen was arriued with great troupes, which soone
mastered the Nassawians; in which place Lodowicke was
hurt very sore in two or three places, and his horse also.
Notwithstanding hee escaped with wonderfull hazard
by swimming a riuer,
                  Adolfe slaine. and recouered Emden. His brother
Count Adolfe with the most or all the Gentlemen

that followed him were slaine, or taken; so that scarce
fortie escaped of both their troupes. All or the most of
his infantrie were taken and slaine, sauing a troupe which
made a composition, being strongly entrenched with
Henrick Vausichan. Notwithstanding the Spanish vsed
them cruelly, according to their cowardly deserts; putting
all or the most to the sword, & winning all their artillerie
munition & baggage. This ouerthrow recōpenced
double Lodowicks victorie: But without doubt had
the base people fought & followed Lodowickes directiōs,
the losse had bin the Spaniards, the seate of the Nassauians
was such. Besides, I forget to speake of a ditch which
Lodowicke commanded to bee cut, in such sort, that the
water could haue assured their quarter within lesse then
tenne howers.The cause of Lodowickes dating Vitells.
                This valiant Count had reason to draw
Vitelli to battaile; knowing, in retyring before greater
forces, the courage of his base souldiers would quaile.
But hauing intelligence of Duke D' Aluaes approach, and
finding the mindes of his men failing, hee had greater
reason either to retire without ingaging a fight, or to
haue fortified a strong passage where hee might haue
made head safely, vntill the Prince his brother would
haue succoured him with more supplies. This hee
might haue done, considering the time and warning
hee had since the arriuall of Vitelli, vntill the comming
of Duke D' Alua; principally since the ouerthrow
of Arenbergue; finding Groning not to bee
taken, and seeing forces encreasing daily against him.
But giue him his worthy right, to correct his deedes
I may bee compared vnto a counterfeit Alexander
on a Stage, better then to the valiant and discreete
Count.
         
         
            
            The Prince of Oranges first iourney into Brabant.
            
               TOuching the Prince of Oranges
iourney into Brabant,
               The Prince of Orange towards Brabant.
                I can speake
no more than this. By the ayde of
the Count Palatine of the Rhyne,
and his own house of Nassau, which
ingaging the greatest part of his
owne Countrey of Nassau, he leauied
some tenne thousand Reisters, and
twelue thousand Launce-Knights. With those, and some
two thousand Ramassees, of Watlons, French, and Flemmings,
fugitiues; but a number of them braue Gentlemen
of good quality, especially the Count of Holdestocke,
being entred Cleueland, the Prince bent his course towards
the riuer of Mase: resoluing to passe the said riuer
by the great and rich Towne of Leige, making account
to finde some good partie in that Towne. Besides,
diuers of the other Townes of Brabant, Flaunders, and
other Prouinces promised him assistance, in case hee
would encounter D. D' Alua in the field.Commeth to Liege.
                Hauing passed
the Mase, & being encamped by Liege, D. d' Alua vnderstanding
his meaning by good espy-alls before his arriuall,
sent some Captaines of quality who were expert in
those affaires, both to the Bishops and to the Clergie; to
aduertise and direct them to defend themselues;
                  D' Alua sendeth to Liege.
                assuring
them (if neede required) hee would hazard battaile for
them. This Towne being Neuter, and of the Empire,
onely gouerned by Priests and such men, with the assistance
and counsaile of Duke D' Aluaes instruments, beganne

to shew themselues rather enemies then well-willers
vnto the Prince;
                  Liege enemy to the Prince. Insomuch that diuers sacked and
spoyled some baggage and victuals loosely guarded,
which passed vnder their fauours. The poore Prince seeing
himselfe so vsed by the Liegrois, was vncertaine what
to imagine, fearing the rest of the Townes would doe
the like; hauing but small store of munition of his owne,
and little hope to procure from others. Also Duke d' Alua
fronted him with a faire armie, but not comparable to
his, especially in horsemen: for the Prince had more
then double his numbers. Notwithstanding, Duke d' Alua
was on the surest hand, by reason all the Townes and
passages were at his deuotion. Diuers skirmishes passed
betwixt both parties; but the Prince could neuer ingage
Duke d' Alua to battaile, by reason he would bee sure to
be strongly entrenched (especially being in the field) and
lodged often vnder the fauour of his Townes. Hauing
intelligence that the Prince meant to enter Louaine,
               Sendeth forces to affront the Prince. to
front him in his passage; he sent his great Captaine Robelos
and Mondragon, with some twentie ensignes of footemen
Spanish and Wallons, and fiue Cornets of horsemen
into Tylmount. This Tylmount is within three leagues of
Louaine; a place of no strength, but sufficient to withstand
the Princes forces, hauing an armie hard by to
countenance them. For D. d' Alua was encamped within
three leagues.The garrison there annoyeth the Prince. In the Princes march the garrison of Tylmount
annoyed him greatly: so that all his forces were
constrained to stand in battaile before Tylmount, vntill
his reregard and baggage were past.
                  Louaine refuseth a Spanish garrison. Insomuch that Duke
d' Alua had the better meanes to looke to Louaine: but
offering them garrison, they refused it; assuring him
they would be loyall vnto the King, and him. Duke d' Alua
politickely contented himselfe, fearing by despaire to

enforce them to reuolt to the Prince. Notwithstanding,
he vsed them with threatnings, that he would looke vnto
to their doings; assuring them that hee would account
them rebells, if they would assist the Prince with any necessaries.
But he doubted not their loyalties in defending
the Towne.
            To be the better assured, he sent diuers of good iudgement
to assist & counsaile them, as he did to Liege. Himselfe
retired with his armie neere vnto Brussels; to assure
both Brussels and Monts in Henault. The Prince being encamped
vnder Louaine, found not them so angrie as the
Priests of Liege. For Louaine was an Vniuersity gouerned
by good natured people, and a number of Nobilitie
(as strangers tearme all Gentlemen) were allyed to the
Prince, or to diuers of his followers. Besides, at that
time the people in generall hated the Spanish deadly; in
such sort, that for all Duke d' Aluaes instruments (but for
their buttered hearts and flegmatique liuers) they would
haue opened their gates. The Prince perceiuing
their peeuishnesse, seeing his Orators could not preuaile
to make him enter, he burnt their barriers, and terrified
them in such sort,But yet yeeld him money & victuals. that either feare or loue made them to
giue a great piece of money, with much victuals. Perceiuing
his fortune that no place would accept him, and
that Duke d' Alua would aduenture no battel;The Prince retyreth. he thought
it his best to retire. But politickly he and his instruments
perswaded their armie, that the Admirall Chastilion was
arriued in the frontiers of Artois with a mighty armie
of Frenchmen;His policy to keepe his army from mutinie. and that they would ioyne with them.
They gaue out also, that the Queene of England had sent
a great treasure vnto the Admirall to pay both their forces.
Hereby they encouraged the Mechanick mercenary

Reysters to march; Hauing intelligence at Valentia a
Towne in Henault, neere vnto the frontiers.He commeth to Valentia.
                Being arriued
there, the Prince and his armie beganne to take courage,
partly because they knew Duke d' Alua would follow
them no further, but chiefly because they might bee
presently in France.
               Auoydeth the danger of his mutinous souldiers. And although the army should mutinie,
according to their custome, as I said before, the
Prince and his commanders might easily escape and shift
for themselues; who otherwise should be in great danger.
For being engaged amongst their enemies, they might
haue beene deliuered by their owne souldiers to Duke
d' Alua, either for passage or for money. In this place
the Prince finding his rutters alert, (as the Italians say)
with aduise of his valiant brother,Biddeth d' Alua battaile. hee sent his Trumpets
to D. d' Alua to tell him: that he would bee the next day
fower leagues towards him, with fewer in number then
himselfe did lead, where hee would stay his answere and
dare him battaile. The Duke lay entrenched within six
leagues of the Prince, hauing with him some twenty
thousand. True it is, his horsemen did not amount to
fower thousand. But they were Italians, Wallons, and
Albaneses, who in troth were to be valued with thrice as
many Reisters: yea, in my iudgemēt with six times so many,
being not accompanied wth such Chiefs as Count Lodowicke.
The trumpets being arriued,Hee hanged one of the Trumpetters. D. d' Alua hanged
one, & answered the other: Well,
               Refuseth to fight. 
               tell thy Master, my Master
will maintaine his armie continually; and thy Master (I am
assured) will breake his within few dayes vpon wants. Therefore
I haue no reason to fight, were I sure to winne the battaile.
And although I know the valure of my men farre surmounting
his, yet notwithstanding no battaile can be fought without
some losses on both sides. For these causes I will not fight.

Vitelly perswaded him all he could to accept the offer,
                  Vitelly persuadeth to fight. and
to fight: alleaging the danger not to be great, considering
the difference betwixt the men. Alleaging also that in defeating
the Prince, & leauing his person dead in the field,
their warres would be ended by all reason. For my part
I am of Vitellyes mind; but the wisest and of best iudgement
will be of Duke d' Aluaes. For all battailes end as
pleaseth the great God.The danger of the losse of the battaile to the Spaniards. Had Duke d' Alua beene defeated,
he had not onely lost his forces, but all his Masters
countries. The next day the Prince rose from Valentia
according to promise,The Prince marcheth to the place assigned. leauing all his baggage and worst
disposed souldiers in safety by Valentia. Hee marched
with all or the most of his horsemen and footemen triumphing
with drums and trumpets towards Duke d' Alua,
to the place his trumpets did assigne. Duke d' Alua
was also in order of battaile, but kept all his footemen in
trenches with his horsemen; sauing the guards which
were beaten in by the valiant Count Lodowicke,
               Count Lodowicke hath the vantgard and beats in the Dukes guards. who led
the vant-guarde with three thousand of the best sort of
Reisters. But the Prince and Manderslo his Marshall, with
diuers others, would not march so fast as Lodowicke,
with the battaile and rereguard. Wherefore Lodowicke
was forced to retyre, being within sight of Duke d' Aluaes
trenches;Counselleth to force his tents. raging with the Prince and the rest, for
not marching to force the trenches. Alleaging vnto thē,
as it was very true, it were better to bee defeated in fighting,
then for wants; as they were sure in a short time to
be. Being retyred, they resolued to follow their first determination,
the sooner the better; seeing Valentia would
doe nothing for them.
                  D' Alua followeth. Duke d' Alua hauing news of their
retreit and resolution, rose also, following them a farre
off like a fox; in such sort that he would be surely lodged,

and march safely from hazarding battaile, by Peronne on
the French frontiers.
                  Vitelly cutteth off straglers. 
               Vitelly ouertooke diuers baggages
and straglers, in such sort, that he put a number of them
to the sword: who were not guarded by reason of their
owne negligence, in stragling behinde and aside the
rereguarde,Is forced to run, by Lodowicke.
                vnknowne to Count Lodowicke who made
the retreit. But so soone as Lodowicke had knowledge
hereof, he returned in such sort, that Vitelly and his vant-guarde
of horsemen were forced to runne till hee met
Duke d' Alua, to his disgrace; considering his speeches
fower dayes before.
                  D' Alua retyreth. After this the Duke pursued no
further, and the Prince and his armie entred France, hauing
no meanes to content his armie but with spoyles of
the French:
               The Prince in Fraunce.
                which they did not spare (as the Prouinces
of Champaine and Picardy can witnesse) in their retreit
to Germanie.
            
            THis was the fortune of the poore Prince, for want of
meanes to nourish his men of warre: and will bee of
all others,The causes of the Princes bad successe. vnlesse their Chiefes prouide in time either
money or spoyles. To say troth, the Princes fortune
might easily haue beene iudged when he feared to enter
Liege. For all voluntary armes, I meane that are not
payed, are gone and defeated in short time; in case they
misse rich spoyles at their first entry into the enemies
Countries. In my time I remember fower came to ruine
with those fortunes. Besides this, they did some other
matters about Zutphen, Ruremond, and those parts, by
meanes of the Princes brother in law the Count of Bergues:
But it proued to small effect. For alwaies the Masters
of the field commaund all weake places in a short
time. Wherefore (as I said before) a voluntary armie

must either be enriched presently with spoyles, or else assured
by strong seats. But let the seate be neuer so strong,
the master of the field will command it in time, vnlesse it
be some strong port like Flushing,
               What townes are defensible. 
               Rochell, Callice, Marsillis,
Brouage, Graueling: or at the least some frontier
strong place, that a State or Potentate dares not assiege,
hauing no hope to despaire the Gouernour to deliuer it
into their enemies hands. For example, Goorden of Callice
being wooed and desired by his Master the French
King, to deliuer Callice vnto his fauourite Espernon; for
all his faire words and large offers hee would bee Gouernour
still. So likewise S. Luke held Brouage; also Lamote
kept Graueling; making his peace as pleased him with
the Spanish King, and after offending to the highest degree.
Wherefore in a troubled estate, there can bee no
surety comparable to a strong gouernment.
         
         
            Duke D'Alua abuseth his masters seruice in not finishing
the Cittadle of Flushing before that of Antwerpe,
and in neglecting to place sure garrisons in the sea
ports.
            
               AFter this, the poore Prince remained
in Germanie (God knowes) almost
despairing to doe any more
good against the Spanish; but that
the Almighty stirred new instruments
to maintaine his cause, and
blinded the Spanish in their affaires.
As I said before, they left the Cittadle
of Flushing, being the onely port and key of the Neatherlands
vnfinished, and ended that of Antwerpe: All

men of warre of any iudgement may easily conceiue,The Duke D'Aluaes error in not building & fortifying the the Cittadle of Flushing.
               
had they finished first the Cittadle of Flushing, Zealand
had neuer reuolted. Yea, had they placed some 2000.
souldiers in garrison in their ports of Brill, Medenblike,
and Harlem; with some fiue hundred in the Cittadle of
Flushing; Holland and Frizeland, with the rest of the Prouince
had beene sure. For the Spanish with their infinite
Indian treasure, beside the rich Netherlands and other
places, were sure to be master of the field; hauing none
to feare or to annoy them, but England, Scotland, Germanie,
and France.
               England. Touching England, we had neither reason
nor surety to haue meddled with their actions; without
being assured of some of their best ports; the mutability
of the people is such.Scotland. Touching Scotland, I perswade my
selfe they would not haue meddled with thē, in case they
had not bin ioyned with England.
               Fraunce. Touching France, you
saw the Spaniards meanes so great in those parts, that his
faction was to be compared to the Kings, or any other;
and would haue beene farre greater if the Guyse had liued.
Touching Germany,
               Germany. their house of Austria compassed
the contrary of the best sort in those parts.Mercenaries. As for Mercenaries,
we know it by good experience, commonly they
follow the best purse; and by that reason the multitude
of that Nation and Swizers had beene theirs.Italie. Touching
the state of Italy, either it is his, or dare not offend him.
For the Venecians are no body without Mercenaries;Venice. The
Geneuois are all or the most part at his deuotion:Genua. the great
houses of Mantua,
               The great houses. 
               Ferrara, Parma, Vrbin, Graftino, with
all the rest of any qualitie of those stirring spirits, are either
his seruants or Pensioners.Clergy. Touching the Clergie,
either his loue or feare makes Popes and Cardinals as
pleaseth him. Portugall
               Portugall. is his. Touching Denmarke,
               Denmarke.
               
               Sweden,
               Sweden. The Hauns
               The Hauns townes. townes. Poland.
               Poland. and such like; they are
either mercenaries too farre off to annoy them, or the
most of them Mechanicks, without Chiefes of any conduct.
Being assured (as they thought) of the Neatherlanders
affaires,D'Aluaes pride.
                Duke d'Alua made his statue in brasse, placed
it in the middest of the Castle of Antwerpe, treading
on the Counts of Egmond and Horne; with the Prince
of Orange looking vnder him for wayes to escape. Hee
made also peeces of Arras, wherein were represented his
sieges, battailes, and actions of armes in one peece: his
owne portraiture standing like the picture of the Sunne,
with all the ensignes and Cornets which euer he wanne,
placed round about him.
         
         
            Count Lodowicke surprizeth Mounts in Henault,
which is besieged and taken by Duke d'Alua.
            
               AT this time the French King and they
of the religion were at peace, so that
the Admirall Chastilion thought himselfe
assured of the King: but poore
Lord, himselfe & many others were
treacherously handled, as the massacre
of Paris can witnesse.The massacre of Paris.
                At this
time Count Lodowicke was in Paris: and finding accesse
to the King by the Admirals meanes,
                  Lodowicke craueth ayde in France.
                procured diuers
principals of the religion to promise, to succour the
Prince his brother, & him against the Spanish. To whose
demaunds the King agreed most willingly, by his Machiauell
mothers counsaile;Obtayneth the Kings consent. who neuer cared what became
of any estate or world to come, so shee might serue the
present purpose, and maintaine her owne greatnesse.

Considering her Machiauell humors, she was much too
blame in this;The French humors. knowing the French disposition, rather
then to liue long in peace, to fall into fight one with another.
In going with Count Lodowicke shee was assured,
that most or all which would goe with him, would bee
of the religion: If they prospered, Lodowicke promised
some frontier townes to the French for the Kings vse; if
not, they might be glad to lose so many enemies. By
reason of the Kings and his mothers distembling leaue,
and master Secretarie Walsinghams true and honest meaning
to the cause in generall,M Secretary Walsingham.
                and to Count Lodowicke in
particular, the Count esteemed his affaires in good estate.
Master Secretarie then beeing Embassadour for the
Queenes Maiestie in Paris, furnished the Count all hee
could with countenance and crownes; in such sort, that
the Count resolued to depart into the Lowe Countries:
hauing the Admirals assurance to second him, if his iourny
prospered. But presently there went with him Mounsieur
De la Noue, Mounsieur de Poiet, Mounsieur de Roueres,
Sir William Morgan, Mounsieur Ianlis, Mounsieur
de Mouie, with diuers other French Gentlemen of qualitie.
                  Lodowicke dispatcheth his instruments to Mounts.
               
These by the Admirals meanes were to second him
presently with sixe thousand footemen, and some foure
hundred horse, all Frenchmen. Count Lodowicke sent
sundry Gentlemen Netherlanders, some known in Mounts
in Henault, some strangers vnknowne, appareled like
Merchants. Who with their practise and meanes vsed
the matter well with diuers of the Religion, which were
well knowne vnto them: Besides a number of Papists
honest patriots, who loued the Prince of Orange, principally
because they knew that he and his hated the Spaniards.
And although the Prince were of the religion, his

promise was to grant liberty of conscience being victorious:
for which cause he carried many thousand hearts
more then he should haue done otherwise. In those daies
few of the popular were of the religion, but all in generall
hated the Spanish deadly. Count Lodowickes instruments
behaued themselues so well, that promise was
made vnto them; when they would deuise any meanes,
they should be seconded to doe the Prince seruice, or any
of his. This message being declared to the Prince,
hee returned the one partie presently to their fellowes,
whom they had left behinde them in the towne; giuing
them charge in the breake of morning the third day, to
vse the matter so, that the porter should let them out at
the Ports of Hauery. That being out,The stratagem for gaining the towne. they should giue
the watch some bribe, and shoote off a Peece; appoynting
that hee would be in person hard by ready to enter.
According to promise, the parties executed his commandement:
acquainting therewith an honest Inne-keeper
of the religion. The Count giuing order vnto some
seuen hundred footmen to march with all speed possible
towards Mounts,
               The surprizing of Mounts.
                departed with the chiefs named before,
accompanied with some foure hundred braue horsemen;
all or the most Gentlemen and officers who had commanded
before. The worst of these three, either la Noue,
Poiet, or Roueres deserued to command twenty thousand
men. The worthy Count hauing made a great Caualcadoe
(as they tearm it) from his last lodging, arriued three
howers before day at the place appointed: After, leauing
Mesieurs de Poiet, and Roueres in ambush within
foure hundred pases of the port, himselfe, Mounsieur
de la Noue, Sir William Morgan, and some fiftie horsemen
approached as neere vnto the port as they could bee couert.

According vnto promise the Merchants were let
out, and withall a Peece went off; at which noyse the
Count and his troupe rushed in,
                  Lodowicke entreth the town. diuers peeces and pettronels
going off. The watchmen ranne away at the
noyse, Mesieurs de Poiet, and Roweres dislodged on the
spurre,Assembleth the Magistrates. and entred also. The Count entring the Marketplace,
and there setting his men in order, caused all the
Magistrates to be assembled. Being together hee vsed
these speeches.
            Deare Countrimen, my comming is not against you,He speaketh to them.
but against the tyrannous Spaniards; who haue vndone
the Prince my brother, and all his house, and will make
you slaues if you doe not resolue to preuent them; which
you may if it please you. Ioyne with mee, and I assure
you, I come not hither of my selfe, but am promised by
the French King, and other Potentates to bee seconded
presently. In the meane time you shall see Lodowicke and
his troupes sufficient to answere the furie of Duke d'Alua.
Assure your selues without the ayde of mighty strangers,
& assurance that my brother the Prince will march
with all speed to our succours with a puissant army, and
these Gentlemen had neuer engaged our selues vpon any
land towne as this is. Although wee neede not to feare,
knowing the strength of the place to be sufficiēt to withstand
any forces that shall present themselues before it,
being manned with a reasonable troupe; much more hauing
so many Chiefes as you see here; naming vnto him
the great Captains that accompanyed him, whose names
were well knowne vnto most of the Burgesses.
            His speeches gaue great courage vnto the Burgesses,
who were soone perswaded to depart peaceably to their
houses, and to deliuer the keyes of their gates to the

Count. Although the people hated the Spanish deadly,
they knew not what to make of this surprize; whereat
great murmuring was in corners.The Papists perplexed. Some feared Lodowick
would alter their masse, which they most esteemed (for
all or the most part were Romane Catholickes) others
feared Duke d'Aluaes furie, in such sort, that many presented
supplications to the Count, that hee would permit
them to depart the towne, with their wealth and
baggage. Some had leaue; especially such as were known
to be obstinately spaniolized;The spaniolized Mount
                        •
                     is depart with good leau
                     •
                  . who eased the rest greatly
that stayed. For in their houses the Count lodged diuers
of his troupes, and were for the most part the wealthiest
of the towne. Duke d'Alua bearing this,The King of France his aduertisement to Duke D'Alua.
                was greatly amazed;
although the French King aduertised him how
all promises passed in Fraunce; and that he had made a
draught for his master and himselfe, to be quit of a great
number of enemies; thinking indeed that Lodowicke and
all his followers should fall into his hands. But the Count
himselfe and his vigilant followers deceiued both King
and Duke: who (as you heard) surprized Mounts sodainly
and vnlooked for at both their hands.
                  D'Alua distrusteth the Frēch. This made
Duke d'Alua amazed, thinking the French King doubled
with him and his Maister; as King Henrie and his Constable
Mountmorency did for Mets in Loraine, with Charles
the fift. Count Lodowickes footemen (named before) being
arriued, and the Count perceiuing the murmure of
the greatest part of the townesmen, who were very well
armed, strong, and in good order (in such sort that Duke
d'Alua vsing before all the policie hee could, neuer could
place garrison in this towne, by reason of their strong
seate well fortified, and aboue three thousand men bearing
armes; besides as many or more able to carrie

armes; all obstinate, mutinous Wallons, wanting neither
victuals, artillery, nor munition) hee sought to make his
partie and himselfe as strong as he could. And hearing
how Duke d'Alua gathered all the forces he could, with
great speed and preparations to besiege him presently;
he acquainted therewith them of the religion, and such
burgesses as he thought assured vnto him. After placing
his men in order in the market-place,
                  Lodo wicke disarmeth such as he distrusted. and seising on the
best in Mounts, hee made proclamation vpon paine of
death, that all townesmen should bring their armes into
the Towne-house within sixe howers, which was obayed
with all possible speed. This done, he gaue armes vnto
some fiue hundred of the religion, and assured vnto
him; the rest he fed with faire words; assuring them on
his honour, that neither himselfe nor any of his companies
should abuse them. But what he did was for the suretie
of himselfe and his companie; assuring them, if the
siege presented not, to deliuer them their armes againe:
If it presented, & it pleased the Almighty to fauour him,
at the enemies retreit he would leaue them as hee found
them; Conditionally, to accept a small garrison during
the Spanish gouernement.Hee giueth thē leaue to depart. As for such (said hee) as will
not endure my gouernement and orders, let them
come vnto me, they shall haue free leaue to depart with
all their goods: leauing behinde them victuals and such
necessaries as may pleasure their besieged friends.They choose to stay, and for what causes. They
seeing their fellowes houses who departed before vsed
with hauocke, which happened (as they thought) for
want of masters to keepe them, and to complaine of
their guests abuses: seeing also they could not carrie away
the one quarter of their goods; the most part resolued
to stay. Desiring the Counts leaue to signifie vnto

their friends in Antwerpe aud Brussels, how they were
constrained to stay perforce in the towne; meaning by
that meanes to excuse themselues vnto Duke d'Alua,
whom they feared aboue all the world. Euery day some
of Lodowickes horsemen ranne vnto the ports of Brussels,
               
                  Lodowicks horsmen spoyle the Country.
and vp and downe the Countries as pleased them; spoiling
and wasting what they listed. Often they had great
skirmishes, but alwaies they defeated their enemies with
halfe their numbers, in such sort that d'Aluaes Captaines
made ambushes for them, fiue hundred at a time, and
the others would passe through them being scarse halfe
their numbers. This continued some time: but d'Alua
hauing gathered his forces,Chiapine Vitelly encloseth Mounts. dispatched Chiapin Vitelly
with the most of his Caualrie, and certaine regiments of
footmen; giuing him charge to inclose the towne in
such sort, as the garrison could not sally forth. Being approached
Mounts, Lodowicke sallied,
                  Lodowicke sallieth, and in what order. accompanied with
the Lord of la Noue, and Poyet, Sir William Morgan, and
diuers other aduenturers of good qualitie, with all his
horsmen, & halfe his footmen; leauing Mounsieur de Roueres
in the towne, well accōpanied with the rest. Being
past his Counter scarfe, he left Mounsieur de la Noue, who
gaue order vnto fiue hundred Harquebusiers to hide
themselues close in the high wayes, some hundred score
from the gates;
                  Poyet and la Noue in ambush. 
               Poyet and la Noue stood with two squadrons
of horses a little before them, either squadron being
of an hundred and fiftie; the rest the Count commanded
to go to ingage the enemy to skirmish. Mounsieur de
Roueres
               
                  Roueres left in the towne. caused diuers pieces of artillerie to be transported
from other Mounts, vnto the Mounts that commanded
the field towards the enemie. The enemie aduanced
brauely both horse and foote; at which sight Lodowickes
               
Curriers encountred theirs with sundry Cornets.The first medley.
But they forced the Nassawians to retire, and double
their pases towards la Noue and Poyet. At this sight la
Noue aduanced, desiring the Count to giue order to Poiet
to stand, and the Harquebusiers to keepe close,La Noue chargeth.
                telling
him; I know the enemy will repulse mee, notwithstanding I
will charge with your leaue; in my retreit, let the ambush of
shot discharge their voles; then Poyet may charge the better
cheap. The Curriers being hard at hand, la Noue aduāced,
crying to his company, Courage, turne bridle. And withall
charging some 400. Launciers, & Herguleters, gaue thē
the retreit into our squadrons,Retyreth to draw the enemy to the ambush. which aduanced to re-encounter
la Noue. At whose sight la None retired, bringing
the enemies full vpon the ambush of shot: which gaue
them such a salue of Harquebushes,The ambush sheweth it selfe. Poiet chargeth. that happie was hee
that retyred first. Withall Poyet charged very couragiously,
in such sort, that the enemies doubled their pases
towards their battell.
                  Lodowicke retyreth his footemen into the Towne. At whose retreite, the Count wisely
retyred his footmen into the towne, with his horsemen
in good order. In the meane time Mounsieur de Roueres
forgot not to plague them with his artillery. The
Generall of the horsemen and Vitelly aduanced, their battaile
remained halfe of horse & foot in armes, vntill their
quarters were entrenched;The enemies order for entrenchments. which they did in a short
time: For they were furnished with a great number of
pioners, and all necessaries, in such sort, that in lesse then
fortie howers they assured the one halfe of the towne
from salying forth. Notwithstanding, the ports towards
Valentia and Hauery were cleare.The holding of an Abbey without the towne. There stood an Abbey
or Cloyster some halfe an English mile from the towne,
on a little riuer which ran frō the towne to the Cloister.
The place was not strong, nor able to abide the Cannon.

Neuerthelesse, it was necessarie to be kept;For what cause. for betwixt
it and the Towne there was good store of grasse and
corne, with other necessaries to feed horses and cattel:
Besides, they were assured the enemie would attempt this
place first. Therfore to winne time, it was most necessarie
to be kept. Into this Cloister Mounsieur de Poyet desired
to goe with some eight hundred Harquebusiers: Although
the Count and the rest were loath to hazard his
person. Notwithstanding the other alleaging himselfe to
be but the third person in the towne, desired and perswaded
them, that halfe their footemen should not goe to
keepe any place, without the company of a principall
Chiefe. To fulfill his desire it was granted him, referring
all vnto himselfe: being entreated not to engage
himselfe further then he might well retyre; and assured
that Lodowick & the rest would quite the towne and all to
follow him, although they were sure to perish. Mounsieur
de Poyet hauing possest the place,Fortifieth the place. and furnished with
about tenne dayes victuals, vsed all meanes to strengthen
himselfe. By this time Vitelly had made the quarters towards
Brussels very strong;
                  Vitelly finisheth his worke begunne. in such sort, that two thousand
were sufficient to guarde it against tenne thousand.
For he made there good forts about a quarter of a league
one from another, with strong trenches that ranne from
fort to fort, that no horsemen could sally ouer them; And
their footemen durst not passe those guardes, for feare of
the Counts horsemen. Vitelly dislodged with all his horse
and foote, sauing the guards which he left in his forts;
and remained in battaile betwixt the ports of Valentia
and Hauery,
               Maketh a new fort. vntill he erected a large fort like vnto the others.
Hauing left two regiments of footmen in it, hee
retyred with his Caualrie and the rest of his footemen

vnto the next Village, some halfe a league off, leauing
neere halfe his troupes in guard, that they might be sure
vntill the arriuall of Duke d'Alua:
               
                  D'Alua setteth forth. Who beganne to set
out from Brussels with the rest of his armie, artillerie, munition
and baggage that night, about two howers before
day. The towne and cloyster hauing intelligence, sallied
out from both quarters some eight hundred footemen,
with all their horsemen; to giue a camisado vnder the
conduct of Mounsieur de Roueres. Being met in one place,
                  Roueres salyeth vpon Vitellyes quarter.
they gaue furiously into Vitellies quarter, and forced his
guardes into their place of armes.Mendoza succoureth the quarter. 
               Mendoza being lodged
apart with most of the Caualrie, gathered presently
his horsemen in order, and gaue resolutely into Vitellies
quarter: which was in danger to be runne through with
this Camizado.
                  Roueres order for retreit. Mounsieur Roueres like a discreete
souldier had left one of his best Captaines short of the
enemies quarter, with some three hundred of his best
shot, and a hundred and fiftie horsemen for his retreit;
which saued him and the most of his troupes. Mendoza
charged Roueres in such sort, that happie was he who
could returne first. Comming vnto his ambush, they peppered
Mendoza and his horsemen with a salue of Harquebushes,
that turned them backe vpon the other: At
which instant the hundred and fiftie horsemen charged
them on their backes. By that time, Vitelly and the most
of his troupes were in order; aduancing with all speed
towards Roueres.
               
                  Roueres retyreth. Notwithstanding Roueres and his
braue Captaines (especially his Caualerie) retyred with
small losse into the Cloyster, where Poyet was readie to
receiue them in order without; in such sort, that Vitelly
pursued no further. At this Camisado the enemie lost six
for one of the Nassawians; by reason Roueres had forced
their guardes before the rest were in armes. The next

day toward night Duke d'Aluaes vantguard was in sight
of the Towne; but before his rereguard came to their
quarter it was nine of the clocke the next morning, by
reason they marched very slowly: and not without
reason. For they haled with them two and twentie
pieces of batterie, besides some other field pieces, with
all the munition belonging vnto them. Duke d'Alua being
arriued,Duke D'Alua arriueth. incamped on the riuer side betwixt the meadowes
and the hills, from the wayes towards Valentia
downe to the Cloyster. Along this riuer he made strong
trenches,Entrencheth himselfe. which assured his armie towards the fields; towards
the towne he made large deepe trenches, impossible
to be entred. This man would commonly assure himselfe
with trenches, although the enemies were lodged
three dayes iourney from him. Now before Mounts hee
entrenched all his quarters, as though hee meant to bee
besieged; and not without reason, hauing intelligence
how Mounsieur Ianlis marched for their succours with
seauen thousand Frenchmen, and the Prince of Orange
making ready a mighty armie in Germany. After his arriuall,Battereth the Cloyster.
the next day hee prepared to beate the Cloyster;
vnto which place hee brought sixe pieces of Cannon.
Mounsieur de Poiet resolued before not to keep the place,
but to winne time in forcing them to place the Cannon.
This Cloyster was so neere the towne, that none could
encampe betwixt it and the towne, by reason of the
townes artillerie, and of wet meadow grounds which
could not be entrenched.Payet abydeth one dayes battery, and retyreth by night. Wherefore Mounsieur de Poyet
did most brauely abide this whole dayes batterie, and in
the night set the Cloyster on fire with a traine: and so retired
himselfe and his troupes safely into the towne, leauing
nothing behinde. Within few dayes Duke d'Alua
beganne to make his approaches, in such sort that hee

assured the towne from sallying (sauing their secret sallies
through the rampier & bul-workes) before he mounted
his pieces to beate the forts and defences. The towne
plagued him greatly with their counter-battery: and besides
they often sallyed, and annoyed them with sundry
attempts on their artillery and trenches. With much ado,
after receiuing great losses, he made three platformes.
The middest did batter the port of Hauery;
               Battereth the towne. the two others
the flanks and parts of the Curtaines on both sides.
On these three platformes hee placed two and twentie
Cannons, with which, and with his Culuerins that did
beate the defences, he discharged during his siege aboue
24000. shot.The furie of the batterie. The furie of all batteries are past at the
first, I meane within two dayes: yea, commonly in one.
For the defendants knowing the place, and the successe
of the furie, will re-enforce their breaches & re-entrench
themselues in such sort, that the assailants can doe small
hurt with their approaches.A breach made. The second day they battered:
and hauing made their breach reasonable (as they
thought) they prepared to the assault.Preparation to the assault. The poynt fell by
lot to the Tertia of Lumbardy, led by the valiant Mounsieur
of the Campe Iulian Romero:
               
                  Iulian Romero hath the poynt. who was seconded
by the master of the Campe Don Francisco de Baldesso and
his Tertia de la Ligue; after him the regiments of Wallons,
of the Marquesse of Hauery, Count Barlemount, Messieurs
de Ligues, and of Capers. So were all the rest of the
armie in battaile ready to second one another, according
to their direction; with their whole Caualery in order
of battaile, some quarter of a league from their trenches.
Diuers had leaue to dismount themselues, who accompanied
Iulian at the poynt.Preparation of the defendants. The Count re-entrenched
himselfe ouerthwart the breach with a halfe moone.

Himselfe and some two hundred horsemen stoode at the
mouth of the great lane towards the breach; the rest of
his horsemen were in three troupes, making Patroiles
(rounds we call it) from place to place round about the
towne. As one troupe came vnto him, hee sent another
out. Mounsieur de la Noue stood with the armed men in
the midst of the halfe moone. Mounsieur de Poyet stood
on the one quarter of the moone, with halfe the shot.
Mounsieur de Roueres on the other with the rest. At euery
corner of the moone they placed diuers pieces of
Ordinance, laden with nayles, small bullets, and stones;
which flanked the mouth of tbe breach. Iulians Captaines
would not giue place one to another, more then
the Collonells, but by lot. After knowing who should
lead,The assault. and the breach discouered saultable, Iulian commanded
the poynt to the assault: which were suffered to enter.
But being in the middest of the moone, they were
murdered like dogs; in such sort, that happie was hee
that could retyre first. Notwithstanding Iulian aduanced
with all courage with his seconds: but being on the
breach, and hauing discouered their trenches and workes
within,The retreit. he caused his troupes to retire, not without losse.
For all their small shot playd incessantly vpon his troups.
At this assault the Spaniards courge was quailed from
assaulting any more. Iulian escaped with great danger,Iulian Romerees danger & losse.
               
hauing sundry Harquebushes on his armes. His Lieutenant
Collonell was slaine, with fiue of his principall
Captaines, and the brauest part of his souldiers; besides
many aduenturers as well horsemen as footemen,The Counts losse.
which were not of his regiment. The Count escaped not
freely, for diuers of his best men were slaine; especially
Mounsieur de Roueres shot in the head with a musket.Roueres slaine.
               
Duke d'Alua perceiuing the valure and conduct of Lodowicke
and his men, resolued not to force his breach,
                  D'Alua will no more assault. but
cunningly attempted them often with alarmes and counterfeit
assaults; in such sort that hee spoyled many of
the defendants with his artillerie, in presenting themselues
on the breach.
            At this instant Mounsieur Ianlis was marching withThe ouerthrow of Ianlis.
               
his succours, in number (as I said before) seauen thousand
French, all footemen; sauing some foure hundred
horsemen. Being arriued hard by Valentia,
               Duke D'Aluaes forces. Duke d'Alua
sent don Frederico with his Martiall Chiapine Vitelly, accompanied
with one thousand fiue hundred horsemen, and
foure thousand footemen; himselfe remained in strong
trenches with all the rest in armes, who being all together
were about one and twenty thousand footemen, and
three thousand horsemen. Mounsieur Ianlis, although he
was a most gallant souldier, at this re-encounter shewed
small discipline: Vitelly hauing intelligence of his march
and order.
            
               Don Frederico being arriued at Saint Gellane,
               
                  Chiapine Vitellies ambush to entrap Ianlis.
                some two
leagues from Mounts, hearing Ianlis was in march, and
that he meant to passe that way within tenne howers; Vitelly
desired him to leaue all his men in ambush in that
place in troupes, on both sides of the high waies. Hauing
finished his orders,His order to traine him to it. he commanded his nephew Iohn Battisto
del Mounte, Lieutenant generall of the horsemen, to
march with fiue hundred horsemen halfe Launciers, the
rest Herguleters, giuing him in charge to march in three
troupes softly, vntill his Curriers should meete his enemies:
then to returne one troupe after another without
ingaging himselfe to fight, vnlesse the enemie would enforce
him; but to vse all meanes to bring them engaged

vnto the ambush; then to run with his troupes as though
hee were afraid,The order put in execution. aside of the ambush. Hee was not two
leagues from Vitelly, but his Curriers met the French:
who according to their accustomed furie charged the
Spanish Curriers, and they according to their direction
retyred before them; so did their second, and Battisto
himselfe with the third; bringing them in his taile vnto
the place directed. By this time all or the most of the
French horsemen were arriued, charging Battisto his
troupes who could first; perswading themselues all to
be theirs.The French fall into the ambush. 
               Vitelly like a discreet Captaine, desired don Frederico
to suffer them to runne vntill they were entred into
the ambush of fiue hundred musketiers, which stood
vnder a hedge where they must passe; and being entred,
to charge them with halfe the horsemen, which stood equally
diuided on both sides of the way. By that time
the French were entred the ambush of Musketiers; and
perceiuing the squadrons of Launciers aduancing towards
them, they beganne to retyre and to double their
pases backe; but withall don Frederico charged. Iohn
Battisto being on the other side turned also; so did Vitelly
second with the rest; in such sort, that presently their
few horsemen were forced to runne through their owne
footemen,The disorder of the French march. which brake in a short time; for they marched
farre a sunder (as they said) two leagues from their
first troupes vnto their last Besides, they had no companies
of pikes to make any stand; especially their horsemen
being broken.
                  Mouy escapeth. Mounsieur de Mouie escaped into
Mounts by reason of the woodland Countries. Few returned
into France, because the Peasants murdred them
in cold bloud. After the ouerthrow, the greatest part of
them were executed. M. Ianlis with diuers Gentlemē resisted

valiantly: but at the last he was mastered,
                  I anlis prisoner. & carried
prisoner into the Castle of Antwerpe.
               Executed at Antwerpe.
                Where himselfe
and an English Gentleman taken with him, named master
Iohn Winkfield were executed long afterwards. Duke
d'Alua hearing that the Prince of Orange was readie to
march with tenne thousand Reysters, and twelue thousand
Launce-Knights, besides diuers fugitiue Netherlanders,
commanded his Officers to strengthen his trenches
with all speed,
                  D'Aluaes order against his arriuall. as well towards to towne as the field: giuing
order that all the munition and victuals that might
be gotten should be brought into his Campe, and that his
horsemen should bring in all the forage they could, and
spoyle the rest. For he resolued to stay in the field, and at
least to amish either the Prince or the Towne; giuing
charge vnto all men not to ingage any skirmish or fight,
but to make the town frō sallying forth. The Prince arriued
wth his armie mentioned before, without any let to
speake of, vntill he encamped on the top of the hils toward
Valentia, within halfe a league of Duke d'Aluaes
trenches. At whose sight the Duke gaue straight charge,
that none should sally out of his trenches; giuing the
Prince leaue to encampe quietly without skirmishing.
That night the Prince sent often diuers troupes vnto the
Dukes trenches, thinking to keepe his army in armes;
but none seemed to stirre, or to take an alarme. The next
morning the Prince sent great troupes of horse and foot
to procure the enemy to sally; standing himselfe with
the rest in order of battaile in sight of the towne and of
Duke d'Alua;
               Attempt to Duke d'Aluaes trenches. but none would sally out of the trenches:
In such sort, that the Prince dislodged with his whole
forces, resoluing to force their trenches, or to lose not a
fewe of his best men. Being in order of battaile neere

vnto Duke d'Alua, hee sent his Martiall Manderslo with
three thousand Launce-Knights, and three thousand
Reysters; giuing them order to charge the trenches with
all resolution. Being approached within musket shot of
the Spanish and Wallons,
               The Almans forced to retire. the poore Almans courage beganne
to quaile, not without reason; finding better shot
then themselues within the trenches, and their horsemen
not seruiceable, vpon whom all their glory did rest. Notwithstanding
that Manderslo and his troupes beganne to
retire,A second attempt with great losse. the Lord of Drume the Princes Lieutenant, and
Count Holhocke, with diuers others of quality, accompanied
with many troupes of horse and foote, marched resolutely
and attempted the trenches against reason. For
receiuing hot salues of musketadoes, they were forced
to retyre. At which attempt the Lord of Drume was
slaine, with diuers others of quality, and a great number
of their souldiers both horse and foote.
            THe Prince being retyred into his Campe,A Camisado on the Princes army by Iulian Romero.
                
               Iulian Romero
with earnest perswasions procured licence of
Duke d'Alua, to hazard a Camisado that night vpon the
Prince. At midnight Iulian sallyed out of the trenches
with a thousand musketiers, and two thousand armed
men, most pikes; all the rest stood in armes in the trenches,
their horsemen ready without the trenches to second
Iulian,
               
                  Iulian Romeroes order for the Camisado. principally for his retreite if need were. Iulian
diuided his forces into three troupes. The first two
hundred olde shot, which could keepe their matches
close, led by a desperate Captaine named Munchecho. The
second one thousand armed men and shot, led by Iulian
himselfe. The third led by his Lieutenant Collonell and
Sergeant Maior; whom he commanded to stand fast in

the midst of their way betwixt the two Campes for his
retreite, and not to stir vnlesse some of credit came from
him to command the contrarie. Presently after his directions,
he commanded Muncheco to charge;He chargeth. who resolutely
forced two guards, being at the least a regiment of
Almaines. Iulian seconded with all resolution, in such
sort, that hee forced all the guards that he found in his
way into the place of armes be
                  •
               ore the Princes tent.
Here he entred diuers tents; amongst the rest his men
killed two of the Princes secretaries hard by the Princes
tent,Only not seizeth vpon the princes person. and the Prince himselfe escaped very narrowly.
            FOr I heard the Prince say often, that as hee thought,A dog saueth the Prince.
but for a dog he had beene taken. The Camisado was
giuen with such resolution, that the place of armes tooke
no alarme, vntill their fellowes were running in with the
enemies in their tailes. Whereupon this dogge hearing
a great noyse, fell to scratching and crying, and withall
leapt on the Princes face, awaking him being asleepe, before
any of his men.The princes care of himselfe. And albeit the Prince lay in his
armes, with a lackey alwaies holding one of his horse
ready bridled; yet at the going out of his tent, with much
adoe hee recouered his horse before the enemie arriued.He recouereth his bo
                     •
                  se hardly.
Neuerthelesse one of his Quiries was slaine taking horse
presently after him; and diuers of his seruants were forced
to escape amongst the guards of foote, which could
not recouer their horses. For troth, euer since, vntill the
Princes dying day, he kept one of that dogs race; so did
many of his friends and followers. The most or all of
these dogs were white little hounds, with crooked noses,
called Camuses. The Campe being in armes and in

some order, made head towards Iulian in such sort, that
he commanded the retreit,
                  Iulian retireth. Before he could recouer his
stand with his Lieutenant, the armie beganne to charge
him in great troupes; in such sort, that with much adoe
he could arriue with his troupes;As hardly bestead. and for all his good
order, hee lost many of his men, as well taken as slaine.
Hauing recouered his stand,Yet he saued himselfe & his roupes. with the presence of the two
thousand horsemen, which came for his retreit, the Nassawians
followed no further.
            Without doubt had Duke d' Alua followed Iulians
councell,
                  Iulians councell to defeat the Princes army. the Prince had beene defeated in that place. Iulian
aduised that all their horsemen and halfe their footemen
should haue beene in a stand, where he left his Lieutenant,
and himselfe with his three thousand to enter the
Princes Campe: that hauing good successe, the stand
should haue entred also. For my part I am of Iulians
minde; but the wisest sort are of Duke d'Aluaes. Although
Iulians courage assured him victorie,The danger of following it. Duke d' Alua
had reason not to hazard his forces in battaile; being
assured the Prince would be forced to retire with wants.
For if the Prince and his armie had been in armes and in
order, it must haue sorted to a battaile, hauing made halfe
his armie to runne: and perhaps by that meanes the
Prince might haue succoured the Towne. For without
doubt let two armies incampe one hard by another, the
first that discountenanceth his fellow, is in great hope of
victorie;The retreite of the Prince of Orange, and his fine stratageme and speeches to escape from his mutinous army. or at least by all reasons to make his aduersarie
to retire. This Camisado quailed the poore Almaines in
such sort, that the Prince was glad to vse all the policie he
could to retire; thinking the sooner the better, for feare
least his Reisters would grow to their olde custome, to
cry for gilt, which he had not. To preuentall mutinies, he

caused his officers & many of his best instruments to giue
forth, that his brother Count Iohn was arriued with fiue
hundred Reisters by Ruremount; and with great treasure
(sufficient to pay all his forces for three moneths) from
the Queenes Maiestie, the King of Denmarke, and the
Germane Princes of the religion.His retreit. His Campe being
throughly furnished with these speeches, he dislodged the
next day; making all the haste he could to recouer the
Mase. Withall he aduertized his brother of his fortune,
desiring him to make the best shift for himselfe that hee
could.
            The Prince being arriued by Ruremount, hauing intelligence
with diuers townes in Holland, fed his armie with
good speeches: assuring them that his brother Count
Iohn was at Serenbarke, with his brother in law the Count
of Bergue; and that hee would send for them to make
his passage ouer the Mase, where his brother Count Lodowick
would arriue; whom he looked for daily to come
from Mounts.
            
            After the Princes retreit,Count Lodowickes composition for Mounts.
                Count Lodowicke finding no
remedie, beganne to parle; but stood on most honourable
tearmes. Duke d' alua knowing him to bee a most
honourable resolute man, and the towne not to be taken
by furie, fearing delayes would grow to disaduantage,
accepted his parle, agreeng to such conditions as pleased
the Count: In such sort, that Lodowicke and his garrison
was to passe ouer the riuer of Mase,
               He commeth to his brother the Prince. where his brother
the Prince was staying for him. Being met, resolution
was taken that Lodowicke should passe into Germanie,
and the Prince into Holland.
               The Prince departeth from his army by night. The Prince fearing the
worst, passed the riuer by night, with a few Gentlemen:
Amongst others Sir William Morgan was one. The

Princes sodaine departure gaue a great murmuring amongst
the Reisters. Notwithstanding, he wrote a letter
to his brother, to assure him that he would content them
with all speed possible, and that his going into Holland
was principally to seeke meanes to pay them; giuing to
his brother leaue and authority to sell all that hee had in
Germany, rather then hee should bee disgraced with false
promises. This letter being read openly gaue some contentment
vnto the armie; but principally the person of
Count Lodowick stayed them, whom they much honoured
and respected, knowing no fault to be in him.
            I forgot to write how Malins accepted a garrison of
the Prince,Malins receiueth the Princes garrison. as some of his forces passed by it in going
to Mounts; which after wards retyred with the Prince.
Duke d'Alua for their reward after the taking of Mounts,
sent his master of the Campe Iulian Romero, with his Tertia
of Lumbardy and others,Is sacked by the Duke d' Aluaes appointment. who entred the towne, and
sacked it to the vttermost.
            THe beginning and ending of this siege was most honourable,
although vnfortunate. Sometimes great
Captaines wrong themselues. Had the Count left either
Mounsieur de la Noue,
               Lodowickes errour. or Mounsieur de Roueres, or Mounsieur
de Poyet gouernour in Mounts. and retyred himselfe
with the other to prepare their succours, by all reason it
had beene farre beter. For the least of the three had been
sufficient to command the towne, and the two others
would haue stood the succours in good stead: I meane
the Prince and Mounsieur Ianlis. The onely way for the
Prince had been to haue encamped before Brussels,
               The Princes errour. which
was a weake rich towne, vnfortified; where hee must
haue forced Duke d'Alua either to leaue his siege to fight

with him, or else to lose the towne: and not to attempt
treanches which wanted no defence that could be desired.
Touching Mounsieur Ianlis, the world may iudge there
might haue beene better order at his defeate.
         
         
            The reuolt of Flushing, the braue resolution of Vorst the
Sea-man; and of the Baily, Mounsieur de Barland,
in seizing on the Towne, and in executing Signiour
Pacheco.
            
               DVring the siege of Mounts, one Seigniour
Pacheco came from Duke
d'Alua,
               
                  Pacheco appointed Gouernor of Flushing.
                with a Commission to be
Gouernour of Flushing and of the
Ramkins. Pacheco had also authoritie
to execute diuers of the Inhabitants
in Flushing, principally
the Baily Mounsieur de Berland,
and Vorst the famous Sea-man. At this instant they beganne
the Cittadle of Flushing.
               The Cittadle begunne. 
               Pacheco being let in with
some of his fellowes, and the restat the gates; hauing intelligence
with Mounsieur de Beauoir Gouernour of
Middleburgh, thought within three dayes to haue placed
a garrison of Spaniards and Wallons in Flushing,
               A garrison to be brought in. and
then to haue finished the rest of his purposes at pleasure.
Vorst beganne to mistrust the matter: Whereupon hee
went to Mounsieur de Berland, telling him resolutely that
he would not stand to the Spanish gouernment, nor trust
to their courtesies. Mounsieur de Berland beganne to
leane to his opinion and to apprehend some feare; because
he had receiued diuers letters from his friends in

               Brabant, that Pacheco would come to bee gouernour of
Flushing, and that Duke d'Alua was informed of some
matters against Barland,
               Barland. and the said Vorst, with diuers
others. Hereupon Mounsieur de Barland and Vorst resolued
to lay hands on Pacheco,
               Conspire against the Spaniards.
                and to seize vpon the towne.
Being respected, and greatly beloued of the popular, they
made diuers acquainted with Duke d' Aluaes practises;
and how Pacheco was the man that should execute his determination.
Presently they gaue order to make good
watch at the water-port, to preuent the entry of the
Spaniards; who were hard by it with their armes in their
hands, ready to enter. Withall they assembled all the Magistrates
and Burgesses into their Towne-house: whether
they sent for Pacheco, making him belieue they
would obey all his directions, conditionally that hee
would shew them his authority. Pacheco being arriued
amongst them, Mounsieur de Barland asked him for his
Commission. Pacheco shewed it. Withall Vorst layed
hands on him,Seize vpō him. saying, Shellum Spaniard, thou hast more
directions then these. Pacheco striuing with Vorst, Vorst
and his companions threw him downe, giuing him and
his followers store of good blowes. Rifling Pacheco, they
found about him all his directions; whereby diuers of
them were to be executed. Presently they carried Seignior
Pacheco to the gallowes;Hang him with Duke D' Aluaes Commssion about his necke. where they hung Duke
d' Aluaes Scutchion, at which they hanged Pacheco, with
his Commission about his necke; although Pacheco offered
them assurance of tenne thousand Duckets to haue
his head strucke off.And 25. of his followers. They hanged also some fiue and
twenty of his followers; beating them with stones and
cudgels all the way as they passed to the gallowes. Mounsieur
de Beauoir arriued at the gates towards Middleburgh
               
with some foure hundred Wallons, within two howers after
the executing of Pacheco. The Flushingers resolued
to resist his entry.Beauoir retyred to Middleburgh 
               Beauoir being a white-liuered souldier
retyred into Middleburgh.
            
            Without doubt had he shewed any valour,
                  Beauoir want of resolution. Flushing vnfortified. he might
haue entred. For at that instant Flushing was nothing
fortified to speake of, sauing towards the water; The
rest was a lowe greene rampier, without Flankes, Parepet,
or Ditch (but such as men of any resolution might
haue entred) or any pieces mounted towards the land;
vnlesse it were some paultry rusty olde Clinkes, which a
man would as readily choose in a maner to stand before,
as behinde, at their going off. Presently the Flushingers
fell to working night and day on their rampier;The Burgesses fortifie. and
drew diuers pieces of Ordinance out of their ships, and
mounted them thereon. They dispatched also letters
into England and France for succors, with a few crownes.
Flushing was in those daies (God knowes) a poore beggerly
Towne of Fishing, in respect of that it is now:
without Towne, fort, fortresse, or Village to friend in all
that Countrey.
            As God would, there were diuers followers of the
Prince of Orange,
               Succours into Flushing.
                and of his brother Count Lodowicke.
Some were Sea-men, named by the enemies Freebotters;
but some of them were resolute gallant Gentlemen:
namely Mounsieur de Lambres, de Skonuall, Batelentia
Ruchable, &c. These were Sea-Captaines, rouing out of
their Countries where fortune serued them best, in the
Prince of Oranges name. There were also diuers Wallons
and Flemmings which kept the woodes of Flaunders,
not knowing how to escape; namely the Captaines
Barnard, Ely, Ambrose Duke, and others. Hearing of

the reuolt of Flushing, they marched directly thither;
and at a place named Meerchauen they made a strong
trench: In which place they remained not three dayes
hut the Flushingers sent their boates to fetch them. The
Captaines Barnard, Ely, and Ambrose Duke being entred
Flushing,
               Wallons & Flemmings 400. with some foure hundred Wallons and
Flemmings well armed, did something assure the towne.
Some of these had good vnderstanding in the warres:
principally in fortificatiō, they did helpe the townsmen
greatly; in such sort that they mounted their pieces in
good order, and mended their fortifications.
         
         
            Captaine Thomas Morgan comes to Flushing, which
was the first English band that serued the Neatherders
against the Spanish King.
            
               AT this time there was a faire muster
of Londoners before the Queenes
Maiestie at Greenewich.
               A muster before the Queene at Greenewich. Amongst
the Londoners were diuers Captaines
and souldiers, who had serued
some in Scotland, some in Ireland,
others in France. And hauing
nothing to doe, with the countenance
of some great men who fauoured the cause, and
the small helpes of the deputies of Flushing, Captaine
Thomas Morgan leuied a faire company of three hundred
strong; amongst whom were diuers Officers which
had commanded before, with many Gentlemen, at the
least aboue one hundred, amongst which my selfe was
one. This band was the first that serued the Neatherlanders;
               
I meane since Duke d'Alua came to be Gouernor
and Captaine generall of the Neatherlands.
               Duke d'Alua sendeth forces against Flushing.
                Captaine
Morgan and his Company arriued in good time: For at
his arriuall Flushing was in distresse. For Duke d'Alua
had sent forces of Wallones and Spaniards vnder the
conduct of Don Ruffello, to second Mounsieur de Beauoir;
who had commaund to entrench themselues on
the Dike towards the Rampkins. Had they done it, the
towne could not haue cut the ditch, as they did afterwards;
and Duke d'Alua was to second them with
all his whole forces.He pauseth vpon the arriuall of the English.
                But hearing how the English were
arriued in greater numbers then we were indeed, Duke
d'Alua staid, to march in good order, and with great
meanes: For he wanted a number of sea prouisions. Also
Beauoir and Ruffello hearing of our arriuall, made no
haste to march. In the meane time there arriued from
Rochell three faire Companies, ledde by the Captaines
Henry, Tristan and Vtiran: of which one was leuied
for Mounsieur de Saras, who was appointed Gouernour
of Flushing by letters from the Prince of Orange.
These troupes beeing arriued, wee thought our
selues assured in the towne.Beauoirs & Ruffelloes faintnes.
                Belike Duke d' Alua was offended
with Beauoir and Ruffello, not without reason;
For no two Captaines could doe their Generall worle
seruice then they did. For without doubt they might
haue lodged on the ditch before the arriuall of Captaine
Morgan; besides the cowardliness of Beauoir, for not forcing
the towne when Pacheco arriued.They endeauour to amend their faults. Perceiuing Duke
d' Alua to be in choler, they (to repaire their fault) resolued
to attempt the ditch. And to doe it the better, they
thought good to mount certaine Culuerings on a forced
hill (I meane made with mens hands) which stoodBy attempting the dike.
               
some halfe a mile from the towne, betwixt the way of
Middleburgh and the dike; I meane the fourth dike from
Flushing to Middleburgh. Beauoir kept some 200 Wallones
in a strong house, halfe way betwixt Middleburgh
and Flushing. This place was guardable without batterie.
Into this place Beauoir and Ruffello brought their
forces, which might be some 2500 Spaniards and Wallones.
               They lay in ambush.
Out of that place they aduanced at midnight; leauing
their great troupe hidden out of the high-way,
within a quarter of a mile of the said hill. At the break
of day, they sent some 100 shot towards the hill. The
garrison perceiuing their meaning, sailed with about
700. English French and Wallones; who were desired &
commanded by Saras to digge downe the hill.The garrison fallieth. According
to direction the garrison aduanced; and beeing approached,
the enemy retired. Our men beeing at work,
the enemy aduanced some 400 shot, which entered into
hot skirmish. Ours followed them so fast, that their
ambush was faine to discouer themselues for their safeguard;Beateth back the shot of the Spaniards.
               
at whose sight ours retired in good order, by
reason halfe our men made a stand, for the retreit of those
which charged. After this skirmish, Saras discouering
the number of enemies, retired the garrison into the
towne; not without reason. For hee thought hee marched
to besiege vs; and knew no other, but that the most
of their army might be at Middleburgh or there abouts.
Our men so behaued themselues at this skirmish, that
the enemy lost three for one;The losse of the Spaniard.
                notwithstanding the enemy
tarried in the place, and after dinner made as though
they would take the hill. The morning skirmish liked our
Captaines so well,Another sally to dislodge the enemy. as they desired the Gouernours leaue
to sally. Which earnest request was granted, vpon condition,

not to engage themselues too farre. Whereupon
the Gouernour and the Captaines mounted on the Rampier,
to direct their fight. Hauing resolued, Captaine
Morgan and our Englishmen had the vantguard.The English haue the vantguard. To
make the skirmish the more honourable, we sallied with
our Ensignes; the French-men were to second vs; the
Wallones and Flemmings last; The whole were in number
some 800. Captaine Morgan beeing arriued within
a great musket shot from the enemy,Captain Morgans order for the skirmish. made a stand, and
aduanced his shot forwards: giuing them commandement
to stand also, vntill hee commanded them, or the
enemy forced them. Hee placed his armed men on both
sides of the bridge, leauing a ditch betwixt them and the
enemy: and stood himselfe with a troupe of gentlemen
on the Causway before the bridge. The two troupes of
French-men and Wallons placed themselues in meadowes,
on both sides of the causeway; leauing their few armed
men right against Captaine Morgan. They placed their
shotte in ditches, a little before their armed men; sauing
some 100. whom they directed to enter into skirmish
when the English began. Our order was scarce directed,
but the enemy charged our men very hotly;The enemy chargeth the English very hotly. in
such sort, that all or the most part of both parties shotte
were by the eares.Who acquit themselues valiantly. The retire. Notwithstanding that theirs were
twice so many, ours quit thēselues very valiantly; vntill
a great squadron of their armed men aduanced, which
forced our English shot to retire: by reason that most of
the English shot skirmished on the causeway, & hard by
it on both sides, where the enemies could ioyne with
them.Captaine Morgan at the push of the pike. At this sight Captaine Morgan and his armed men
aduanced resolutely to the push of the pike: and so did
the French and Wallones shot flank amongst them their

vollies,The enemie retireth. that they plagued them greatly; in such sort that
the enemy aduanced no further. To say t
                  •
               oth, they
could not ioyne with ours, by reason ours kept the ditches
and bridge. Perceiuing they could not force our
quarter, the enemy retired; but stood fast, within a great
musket shot of the place. Saras perceiuing the enemies
minde, thinking they would charge againe, and fearing
wee had lost more then we did, sent vnto ours to retire;
which they did with good order into the towne, with
small losse in respect of the skirmish; which endured
very hot and almost the space of two houres; In which
time our men came twice to the push of the pike. Once
the enemy had holde on Captaine Morgans Ancient;Captaine Morgans ensigne rescued.
which was rescued brauely by George Browne and diuerse
other young gentlemen. Master Mackwilliams,
Bostock,
               The losse of the garrison. with other gentlemen were slaine, with some
fifty English souldiers: and as many or more hurt of
the French and Wallones. So they killed and hurt some
100. of which were many gentlemen and officers. Some
prisoners were taken on both sides. By the enemies own
confession they had slaine and hurt aboue 400.The enemies losse. whereof
some were of good account.
         
         
            
            The surprize of the Brill in Holland, by Mounsieur de
Lumay Count de la Marke.
            
               AT this instant Mounsieur de Lumay
otherwise called the Count De la
Marke, being on the coast of England
with the Prince of Oranges directions,
finding the Sea-men named before;
I meane Lambert, Batelentia, Rouchable,
and Skonall; they made a partie
betwixt them to take the Brill in Holland.
               Count Dela Marke attempteth the Brill.
                True it is, the
Prince of Orange had intelligence with most townes
in Holland; but not with the Brill, that euer I could
learne. At this time there were but few Spaniards in Holland;
in the Brill some hundred; in diuers other places
so many or fewer. Hereupon this Count de la Marke
and these Captaines gathered into some eight sayles (the
most Fly-boats) seauen hundred Wallons, Dutch, some
English and Scots; all Mariners.Landeth his men. Arriuing at the Brill,
they landed; hauing Drummes, Trumpets, and Ensignes
with them, sufficient to haue furnished thrice their numbers.
At their sight, the simple Spanish Gouernour
thought himselfe betrayed; iudging that these troupes
would neuer haue come thither without intelligence
with the townesmen.The Spanish countenance, The rest of the Spanish made
proude faces, as though they meant to abide their furie
and siege: Notwithstanding, they signified a feare vnto
the Burgesses, in sending their baggage and women towards
Roterdam. The Count and his Captaines approched
with courage; and withall landed three Pieces out
of their ships, with straw, pitch, and wood. He approched

the gate,The Count fiercth the gate. and put the same soone on fire. In the
meane time the Spaniards escaped towards Reterdam.
Thus was the Brill wonne without blowes;The towne entred. in such sort,
that all Holland reuolted, sauing Amsterdam: but diuers
townes would accept no garrison.The Princes courtesie to the Hollanders.
                Notwithstanding, the
Prince politickely wrote vnto the Count, to vse them
withall courtesie agreeing with their humors; suffering
them to doe what they listed, as well for religion as for
gouernement; whereby he gained all their hearts. For
at that instant the most of the popular were Papists.The Counts disorder. The
Count De la Marke had almost marred all with his gouernement.
For albeit hee was valiant and liberall, yet
was hee lasciuious, wilfull and obstinate; in such sort,
that he would enioy and wench or woman that pleased
him.Towards women. Also hee called an Abbot and his Fryers into a
Chamber,Towards the Papists. where hee forced them to denie their Masse
and to preach against it, in case they would not be hanged.
Besides these, he committed many other disorders:
So as his insolency had almost thrust the Prince and his
faction out of Holland.
            
         
         
            
            The Flushingers growe in iealousie against Saras their
Gouernour, offering his place vnto Captaine Morgan;
who refused it for loue hee bare vnto Saras: otherwise
he had small reason in doing it.
            
               THe French, Wallons and Dutch which
were in Flushing, had beene for the
most part in the warres before: and
diuers of the basest sort would take
any thing they could carry away, and
liued at farre greater charges to the
Burgesses then the English did. For
indeed the English at that time were rawe,The ciuill behauiour of the English.
                and looked for
no more then bare victuals, lodging, and promise of pay.
Hereupon the Burgesses grew in great liking with our
Nation: Insomuch that for a small suspect, they would
haue made Capt.The Flushingers affection towards them. 
               Morgan their Gouernor, & haue cashered
Saras; hauing no occasion, but that he had a brother
that dwelt amongst the enemies, whom the enemies forced
to write vnto the Gouernor, to perswade him,They suspect Saras, & would make Captaine Morgan Gouernour. to run
a course on their sides. Without doubt, Saras was honest
vnto the cause: For his brothers message and letters
came no sooner vnto him, but he shewed them vnto
his Captaines and the principall Burgesses. Also this
was hee that commanded afterward chiefly in Harlem.
Captaine Morgan, finding this man honest vnto him,
friended him also vnto the popular; refused their offer,
and maintained Saras what hee could in his place.Who maintaineth Saras.
               
Notwithstanding, fewe men of warre would haue done
it, vnlesse a man had beene greatly beholding vnto him;
I meane farre more then hee was to Saras; considering

what a rich strong gouernement Flushing was. To say
troth,Is not ambitious. this Captaine had neuer any great ambition in
him; although fortune presented faire vnto him often,
beside this time. Also immediately he wrote letters into
England, which shewed the strength and goodnesse of
the place.Sir Humphrey Gilbert the first English Colonel in the Lowe Countries.
                Withall he procured Sir Humphrey Gilbert to
come ouer, to bee Colonell ouer the English souldiers:
which hee might haue easily obtained himselfe. Hereupon
Sir Humphrey contracted with the Flushingers, to
come vnto them with one thousand fiue hundred English;
besides those who were with them before. In the
meane time, the Count De la Marke assured the most
part of Holland.
            
         
         
            
            Roterdam surprized by the Count of Bossue, by
the meere simplicity of the Burgesses; where
the Count sheweth great cruelty vpon the
poore people: which was the occasion that
all or the most of the Townes in Holand receiued
either Garrisons or Gouernours; principally
Dort, which was resolued before to
the contrarie. But after this cruelty, they suffered
themselues easily to bee surprized by the
Count De la Marke.
            
               
                  ROterdam being without garrison, the
Count Bossue
               Count Bossue towards Roterdam.
                approached it with
some troupes of Spaniards and Wallons
from Vtricke. Being arriued within
a quarter of a league, he placed his
troupes in ambush,Lyeth in ambush. at a little Castle in
a small woode on the riuer side towards
Dordrecht; leauing with them his Lieutenant gouernour,
and giuing him charge at the shooting of Pieces
to dislodge with all speed towards the towne. The
Count being Gouernour of Holland and off Vtricke
came to the gates,Commeth to the gates. with some two hundred Wallons and
Flemmings; and leauing them within tenne score of
the port, went himselfe vnto the port with some tenne
or twelue Gentlemen, offering to enter. They shut the
wicket against them.Is refused. He shewed them, bow hee was
their Gouernour and Country-man; aduised them
not to deale so, and to looke vnto themselues; else he

would make them know him:Desiteth to speak
                     •
                   with the Burgomasters. Withall he desired some
of the Burgesses to goe fetch the Burgomasters vnto
the port, that hee might speake with them. In this
T
                  •••
               e there was no garrison, but Burgesses; poore
men of warre, as you may iudge by their gouernement.
The Burgomasters being arriued, the Count vsed fine
speeches to perswade them to let him enter with those
men, to saue them from the Heretickes, as hee tearmed
the Prince of Oranges faction.
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   answere. They answered,
that they durst doe nothing without the consent of
their Burgesses in generall; and that they would assemble
themselues presently in their Towne-house,
and vse their best meanes to perswade them to follow
his directions; promising to returne presently
vnto him. Being departed, this Count, who was a
good souldier and of good vnderstanding, knew the
multitude would cry against the Spanish: wherefore he
thought the sooner hee beganne his play, the better.
And first hee did deliuer some pieces of gould vnto
the Guarde;The Count shareth the Guarde with wine. desiring them to fetch him good store
of Wine and Beere: the which was brought, presently.
Hee and his company beganne to carowse one with
another, and with the Guarde; in such sort that they
opened the little Wicket to speake with the Count.They open the wicket.
Beeing armed vnder his Coate, and valiant, hee gaue
signall vnto his troupes,Hee rusheth in. and therewith rushed in with
some fiue or sixe Gentlemen, giuing blowes of Pistols
and Swords on the poore Guarde; In such sort,
that his two hundred entred,Seizeth the port. and kept the port vntill
the ambush named before entred.Taketh the Market-place. Then hee marched
vnto the Market-place, executing all hee could

finde in his way; thence through the towne as pleased
him: where hee slue a great number,Sacketh the Towne. and sacked
what he listed. In this sort (God knowes) he soone
mastered the towne. The Prince of Orange hearing
this,The Prince perswadeth other townes to garrisons. acquainted many of his friends with this action
of Count Bossue; shewing, that hee knew he would
doe the like in other places, vnlesse good guardes were
kept; which could neuer bee without some garrison,
or at the least Gouernours that vnderstood the warres.
In those dayes the names of Souldiers were odious
vnto them. Notwithstanding, they feared the Spaniards
so much, that rather then to accompanie with
them, they would accept Diuels. Whereupon diuers
agreed to accept garrisons: and the most of all
to receiue Gouernours,They accept them. except Dort. But finally the
Prince so vsed the matter with them, that all were
content that Dort should bee surprized; but not with
murder and sacke, as the Spanish did at Roterdam.
After this resolution, the Prince wrote vnto the Count
of Marke, and his Captaines, to doe the best they
could to surprize Dort.
               The Prince promiseth reformation of Count De la Marke.
                Withall hee wrote vnto him,
both to desire and to command him, to vse the Burgesses
with all courtesie; assuring them of Holland, to
redresse all the Counts abuses at their next meeting,
which should be before long; sending them the Copie
of his letters to the Count. In the meane time hee
vndertooke the Count should leaue his insolency, and
bee guided by the Princes directions. The Count
made ready a great number of skutes, hauing placed
some thousand Souldiers among them, with a great
number of Trumpets and Ensignes; leauing the Brill
               
notwithstanding in good order of defence: for his victory
encreased his forces.The Count takes Strinland.
                He tooke Strineland, right
against Dort. The next morning before day hee landed
his men at the head, before the faire, strong and
rich Towne of Dort,
               Entreth Dort. inuincible without famine or
treason; hauing in it a garrison and munition, with a
good Gouernour. This fortunate wilfull Count with
his shews and lookes entred the towne without blowes.
By this time the Counts deputies had sent him three
English companies,Three more English companies. vnder the conduct of the Captaines
Moris, Drise, and Read.
            
         
         
            
            The arriuall of Sir Humfrey Gilbert: which was the
first Regiment of English-men that serued the Neatherlanders
against the Spanish King; with our
follies before Bruges and Sluce.
            
               ALSO Collonell Gilbert arriued at
Flushing with ten English bands:Collonell Gilbert at Flushing.
                at
whose arriuall Flushing was most
assured. Hearing that the towne of
Mounts was in great distresse, & of
the Prince of Oranges retreit, with
his successe; Saras and Collonell
Gilbert deuised their best meanes to relieue Count Lodowicke;
Hauing a little intelligence with some Burgesses
of Bruges. Saras
               
                  Saras and he entred Flanders.
                and Sir Humfrey resolued to enter
Flanders: And so leauing a good garrison in Flushing,
they landed at New-hauen, right against Flushing, some
1400 Englishmen, 400 Wallones and Flemmings, with
some 600 braue Frenchmen, newly arriued from Rochell
vnder the conduct of the Captaines,With 2400 men. 
               Lariuere, Gentane
and others. Presently we tooke our march towards
Sluce: & beeing arriued at a village called Ardenburgh,
we resolued there to stay; both to prooue if wee could
doe any good on Sluce, and to haue further intelligence
from Bruges. This place was a league from Sluce, and
three leagues from Bruges.
               They attempt Sluce with ambush. The next night Saras and Sir
Humfrey sent some eight hundred English, French and
Wallones; giuing them charge to keep themselues close
as neare Sluce as they could, vntill they heard further
from them. Before day wee placed our ambush neere

the ports, in such sort, that at the opening of the gates
(had our men knowne the warres then as diuers of them
did since) wee might haue easily entred the towne.Knew not how to take the aduantage. To
say troth, those that sent vs were as ignorant as our selues:
In such sort, that we did no more than we were commanded,
which was to ly close. Notwithstanding diuers
people came amongst vs; some wee tooke, and some
we suffered to goe back againe. The enemie hauing discouered
our numbers & lodging,The garrison sallieth. sallied some 200 shot,
where wee fell to hot skirmish. But all we were lodged
in three places, not able to succour one another sodainly.
Neuerthelesse, halfe our troupes charging them resolutely,Is beaten into the towne.
forced them to run one after another into the ports.
At this alarum, Saras and Sir Humfrey hearing the artillery
going off, marched with the rest. Beeing arriued,
the Gouernour like an olde souldier, politickly to win
time to aduertise Duke d' Alua, held Sir Humfrey & Saras
in a parley:The Gouernor ouerreacheth the chiefs of the Flushingers.
                as though hee meant to deliuer both towne
and castle vnto them. Withall hee requested them to
retire vnto their lodgings, where they were before; or
else to lodge nearer where pleased them. Hereupon
they retired to Ardenburgh,
               Dallieth with them. leauing their first troupes
in a village hard by the towne. The next day our Gouernours
were desirous to haue the Captaine of Sluce
his resolution; Who seeing he could not deferre them
longer, requested them to take patience that day, and
the next morning hee would keep promise with them.
The next morning,They approach the towne. ours marched with great glory to
receiue the towne, as wee thought. Beeing hard by the
port,He plagueth them with his ordinance. the Gouernour welcommed vs with a good volley
of shot; making vs to retire faster than wee came;

by discharging their artillery against vs. Hauing receiued
some losse, Saras and Sir Humphrey retired into
Ardenburgh,
               Aduertiseth Duke d' Alua with his purpose. to their griefe. With this stratageme the
Gouernour of Sluce wan foure dayes; in which time
hee aduertised his Generall of our meaning: who sent
the Count of Reux with certain horsemen into Bruges,
               He strengtheneth Bruges.
               
and a good troupe of footmen marching after him.
Notwithstanding, Saras and Sir Humfrey dislodged
with our forces, and marched vnto Bruges. At the
breake of day,They summon Bruges.
                Sir Humfrey sent his trumpet to summon
the towne. The trumpeters horse was kild with
a shot from the Rampier: and they made answere vtto
diuers gentlemen, who were approached neare the
walls, that the Count de Reux desired all our troupes
to stay where wee were; assuring vs, either within
foure and twenty houres the Count would deliuer vs
the towne,Count de Reux answer. or finde meanes to hang vs all, at the least
our confederates in the towne.Sir Humfrey in a chafe. Sir Humfrey was in
great choler; swearing diuers oathes, that hee would
put all to the sword, vnlesse they would yeeld. After
staying some sixe or eight houres, Saras vnderstanding
the warrs better then Sir Humfrey,
               The Flushingers retire. perswaded him
to retire: withall assuring him, vnlesse hee would doe
it quickly and in good order, hee and his troupes
would repent it. For the peasants aduertised him, there
were diuers troupes of horsemen entred the towne, &
a great number of footmen marched towardes it,
which would arriue within foure houres. Beeing in a
march, wee doubled our pases in such sort, that wee
recouered Ardenburgh that night.Come to Ardenburgh.
                To say troth, the
Count Reux was either a white liuered souldier, or an

ignorant Captaine; else hee and his horsemen might
haue slaine a great number of our men; our march
was so disorderly. Insomuch, as had the Count beene
a braue Captaine, with three hundred horsemen hee
might haue defeated our troupes. After our retreit, the
Count executed many Burgesses, who had intelligence
with vs.He executeth the Burgesses. The Flushingers stand at Ardenburgh.
                
               Saras being arriued at Ardenburgh, we resolued
to remaine there certaine daies. This place was
such, that it might haue been kept against double our
numbers. Besides, betwixt vs and Flushing wee had
meadowes and wood-land countries: In such wise,
that horsemen could not hurt vs marching in any good
order.Heare of a conuoy. Resting in Ardenburgh two dayes, wee had intelligence
that there was marching from Gaunt to Bruges
sixteen peeces of artillery, with some munition,
conducted with one of the Counts Captaines like himselfe.Send to surprise it a certaine number of souldiers.
Whereupon Saras and Sir Humfrey sent 300 English,
French and Wallones, of the best sort; giuing the
charge vnto Rowland Yorke, Lieutenant to Captaine
Morgan, and vnto Tristan, and Ambrose Duke, ouer the
French and Wallones. Hauing receiued direction, wee
marched foure leagues off;Who laid an ambush. and placed our ambush by
the breake of day, in the high way, where the conuoy
was to passe. We had not staied eight houres, but
wee might discouer the conuoy, which marched as
followeth.The order of conuoy. Before, they had some fifty horsemen; behinde,
as many, with a good band of footmen, Wallones;
the artillery and munition in the midst. At their
sight commandement was giuen vnto vs, to lie very
close, vntill they were entred our ambush; which was
on both sides of a great way, that passed through a

small groue of wood. We had gotten some twenty
or thirty iades or mares, which wee trimmed vp with
olde saddles, cushings and halters, that wee got in
Boores houses as wee passed. Those wee placed behinde
the ambush; who had commandement to lie
close, vntill the ambush discharged their volley: then
to charge with all resolution. These iades were
in the charge of Ambrose Duke the Wallone, an expert
souldier; who had seene seruice on horsebacke often
before.It entreth the ambush. The conuoy beeing entered the ambush, our
volley went off in good order;Which breaketh vpon it. in such sort that their
first fifty horsemen ranne on their foootmen Withall,
Ambrose Duke charged with the mares and iades: So
did our footmen enter the high-waies against theirs;And defeateth the Spaniards.
               
in such sort, that their horsemen ranne away, leauing
their footmen & conuoy to be executed by vs: which
were for the most part, with small losse, or none at all
to our selues. Out of this place we arriued at Ardenburgh
the next day,Conueying away the munition. with all the artillery and munition,
in like order as wee found them. By a bridge we staid,
and tooke a great number of boates laden with wolsackes
and marchandize, which wee returned all into
our quarter. To say troth, these three leaders named
before, were the minions at all attempts of our troups
in those daies.The Flushingers retire to Flushing.
                The next day after our arriuall at Ardenburgh,
intelligence was brought, that Mounts was deliuered,
and Mallins taken and sacked; and that Iulian Romero
was marching into Flanders to as sist the Count of
Reux, with 20 ensignes of footmen & some cornets of
horsemen. This newes made vs not to take counsell
twice for our retrait. Whereupon we marched with all
speed towards Flushing.
            
         
         
            
            Our first offer to assiege Tergoose, with our sodaine
retr
                  •
               it.
            
               BEing arriued right against Flushing
at Newhauen, wee made stand;They resolue to assiege Tergoose.
               
where Saras & Sir Humfrey tooke
resolution to assiege Tergoose;
which stands in an Iland of Leland,
bordering on Brabant, and Flanders.
Our shipping being arriued
from Flushing, wee embarked and arriued the next
day at night, by Beereland, a village of the said Iland.
After, anchoring and giuing directions, Rowland York,
Vtran,
               Land their men and Ambrose Duke, landed with their accustomed
troupes or more; albeit diuers were slaine at the
exploit of Sluce and the conuoy. The brauest youthes
desired to goe alwaies with the first; in such sort, that
these were alwaies well accompanied. Beeing landed
vpon the ditch which inuirons the Iland, the enemy
perceiuing (as it is like) our nauy long before wee
anchored, sallied the most of the souldiers out of the
towne;The Tergoosians in ambush. and placed themselues in ambush, in a village
hard by the place wee landed at, through which we
must passe to goe to the towne. After Saras and Sir
Humfrey were landed, the vantguard was giuen to Captaine
Morgan: and commandement to York, Vtran, &
Ambrose Duke, to enter the village. The enemies hauing
with them their Gouernour, a braue Captaine,
                  Pacheco Gouernor of Tergoose. The ambush breaketh vpon the English.
               
named Pedro Pacheco, kept themselues close in the village,
vntill Yorke and we entred the ambush. Then they
deliuered a hotte volley of shot vpon vs, and withall

charged with some 100 pikes; in such sort, that with
much adoe the one halfe of our troupes could recouer
the place where Captaine Morgan stood with our seconds.
True it is, the enemy stood in the village round
about the way where wee marched, and receiued vs at
the entry of some 100 of ours into the village, out
of the narrow way where wee passed,Forced to retire. and could not
march about fiue in a rank; wherefore they found vs
good cheape. Our retrait was so fast, that the enemy
followed vs vpon the heeles, into the troupes which
Captaine Morgan led: who charged them resolutely
with his armed men, in such sort,Captaine Morgan chargeth them. that the enemies ran
back. But wisely hee had placed halfe his men in the
village, for his retreit; who deliuered their volley on
Captaine Morgan;
               They retire. In such sort, that hee staied for Saras
and Sir Humfrey, who were not within a mile, by
reason they stood at the first alarum, and not without
maruell: For I perswade my selfe, the most of them
were afraid. I am to blame to iudge their minds; but
let mee speake troth. I doe assure you, it was not without
reason;The losse of the English.
                for the most of vs who entred with Yorke
were slaine: such as escaped, swam, and struggled thorough
muddy ditches. Amongst other gentlemen, Edward
Argoll was slain by Sir Humfrey his standard. The
enemy recouered their towne; and all our troupes entred
Barland, some two houres after their retreit.The Flushingers enter Barland.
                The
next morning wee dislodged towards Tergoose.
               Before Tergoose
                Our
vantguard beeing arriued within halfe a mile of the
towne, wee made a stand, vntill the rest arriued. In
the meane time,The enemy sallieth. the enemies sallied, and gaue suriously
into our guards; forced our first guards to runne

amongst our battels of pikes: which stood in a large
place, by the house of the Count Egmond, hauing a
a bridge betwixt them and the enemy. Notwithstanding,
Captaine Morgan with his braue shot entered an
orchard, and flanked the enemy which stood on the
high ditch, beating on our pikes with volleyes of shot.
Withall, Sir Humfrey and his armed men passed the
bridge, and charged the enemy with great resolution;
In such sort,Is repulsed. that the enemy fell to running. Notwithstanding,
our men executed a great number; and amongst
others, three Spanish Captaines, with diuerse
other officers. We lost also diuerse of our men. You
must think that in those daies few of vs, or of the enemy,
knew the warres so well as since.The order of Pacheco.
                For this Pacheco
and his men quited Ziricksea, some seuen daies before;
as a place not guardable. Also being Gouernour of a
towne, hee was to blame to sally with his garrison
so farre as Barland, especially himselfe: for without
doubt, had Saras and Sir Humfrey knowne of his being
there with most of his troupes, and therewith giuen
a right direction, it had cost him his towne, besides
his defeat. Sir Humfrey should haue directed at
least halfe his troupes,Sir Humfrey Gilberts order. to cut betwixt them and the
towne, at the first allarum. Some may say perhappes,
there were no waies, or he knew of none. There were
other waies, although not so neer. Besides, a Cōmander
that enters the enemies countries, ought to know the
places that he doth attempt: If not, he ought to be furnished
with guides; especially in cōming to besiege a
towne. But we were so ignorant, that we knew not our
owne estate; much lesse the enemies. For the next day

after our arriuall and skirmish, we marched to imbarke
our troupes;The Flushingers retire to their ships. alleaging we wanted artillery & munition,
with all other necessaries that belonged to a siege. Before
our imbarking, the olde souldiers Captain Gentoine
and Henrie the French-man vsed a fine stratageme.
They requested Saras and Sir Humphrey to cause all
their ensignes to imbarke,The ambush by the French Captaines. with the baggage, and a good
number of souldiers; and to leaue in a Church, and in
a Church-yard, and in a great Close adioyning, the
most of their ablest men: and they to keepe close that
day, to see if the enemie would sally, to cut off their
rere-guard and straglers. As they directed, Saras and
Sir Humphrey placed one thousand two hundred of
their best men in that place; which was halfe wayes betwixt
our quarter and the imbarking place, about a
great league from the towne. Our ensignes were not
all aboard, but Pacheco salied with the most of his garrison;
which might be some foure hundred.Disappoynted by a foolish Officer. Being approached
our first ambush, who were Wallons; a foolish
Officer contrary to direction discharged a volley of
shot on the enemies, who were some quarter of a mile
before their troupes, whereby all was marred. Belike
our armed men gaue them such sound blowes in the
last re-encounter, that they desired no more. So vpon
this volley the enemie retired into their towne: and we
embarked presently, not vnwilling for any thing I
could perceiue.The Flushingers embarke. To say troth, our losses might bee in a
manner cōpared equal, from our landing to our embarking.
Let mee not wrong our Gouernours too much.
They said they were aduertized that Tergoose was voyd
of garrison, sauing some hundred: and that they knew

nothing of Pachecoes arriuall.Land vnder their towne. Being embarked, we arriued
at our towne of Flushing, where we landed vnder
our towne,March to Southland.
                and marched to a Village named Southland;
three leagues from Flushing, in the same Island. Before
this time,
                  Camfier reuolt
                     •
                  th. 
               Camfier reuolted also vnto the Prince of Orange,
by reason of their Gouernour Mounsieur de
Rouse.
            
         
         
            The Camisado giuen, our troupes being lodged in Southland,
by Mounsieur de Beauoir and Don Rufello:
where our men defended themselues and ouerthrew
the enemie most valiantly: with our second
siege of Tergoose, where we were defeated
shamefully by the negligence and ignorance of our
Gouernour.
            
               MOunsieur de Beauoir Gouernour
of Middleburgh, and don Rufello
hearing of our arriuall in Southland,
(belike Pacheco aduertized
them that we had receiued greater
losse then we did before Tergoose)
thinking our courage qualified,
prepared all their forces to defeat
vs with a Camisado. To doe it the more terribly, they
prepared a great number of haulters; giuing them to
their souldiers with a commandement, to hang all the
prisoners they should take. The olde saying is true, It
is no surety to reckon without an host. Being ready, after
directions giuen, they salied out of Middleburgh,
               
some two thousand Spaniards and Wallons, at the shutting
of their gates; and tooke the next way towards
the sandy hils, betwixt Flushing and Southland. As God
would,The Victualers giue aduertisement. certaine of the victualers discouering their
march, cut their Mares out of their Waggons, by
wch meanes they recouered Southland an hower before
the enemie arriued; which, next vnto the Almighties
will, saued all our troupes. Hauing the alarme, the enemies
vanguarde was in sight; which presently chargeth
our guards,
                  Beauoir chargeth the guards making them to run into the Campe,
and to quite the sandy hils. All their forces seconded
with all speede very resolutely; forcing our first and second
troupes to runne into our place of armes,Forceth them to runne. which
was neere vnto the other side of the towne in a church-yard,
and a large streete before it;Winneth the Artillery. so as they wanne our
artillery, turning the same towards vs. But resolutely
our Officers gathered a sufficient number of armed
men into the Market-place: who being ledde valiantly
with braue Captains,Is beaten backe charged the enemy, giuing them
a retreit and defeat beyond our field-pieces.Rechargeth. Here they
came againe with a fresh charge; but our armed men
re-encountred them at the push of Pike most valiantly;
in such sort that the Ensigne-bearers Philip Watkins,
Thomas Louet, Iohn Hamon, with diuers others, brake
their Ensigne-staues at the push of Pike: So our men
gaue the enemie a full ouerthrow, driuing them cleane
out of the Campe,Is ouerthrowne and following them in defeate halfe
way to Middleburgh. After, our men hung a number
of them with their owne haulters. This piece of seruice
was one of the best and worthiest encounters that
our men had from that time to this hower, in all their

warres of the Lowe Countries.
               The losse of the enemie. The enemies were all ouerthrowne:
notwithstanding many escaped, by reason
of the ditches and narrow wayes; especially the most
of their Officers and leaders, by reason of their horses
and Tades.And of the Flushingers.
                Ours scaped not scot-free: for wee had
slaine and hurt about two hundred and fifty; many of
them Officers, and amongst others the Captaines Bouser,
Bedes, and Bostocke English; besides Wallons and
French which serued most valiantly.The English commended for their seruice But the chiefe
praise next vnto God, ought to bee giuen to the English
Ensignes and armed men. Captaine Walter Morgan
serued very well; who was ouerthrowne with a Musket
shot in the head of the armed men. All the rest did
most valiantly. Some will blame me for the naming of
our owne losses: but it is a shame for a souldier to write
lesse then truth. There can bee no braue encounter
without men slaine on both sides. True it is, the fewer
the better conduct; but the more dyes, the more honour
to the fight. This encounter so encouraged our
men,The second attempt of Tergeose.
                that Saras and Sir Humphrey resolued to returne
to Tergoose. After finishing their preparations and orders,
we landed at the same Village we did before: in
number aboue three thousand English, French and Wallons:
for our troupes were encreased with Rowley and
his garrison of Camfier.
               Their landing Our second landing was in better
order then the first, by reason our ships attempted
the Island in two places;In two places. but all or the most part that
carried souldiers, were at the landing place. The other
being so many vessels in number, approached the shore;
in such sort that the enemy durst not separate their forces
to attempt both: fearing that the other would cut

betwixt them and the towne. Being all on the shore, we
marched vnto a faire Village named Bifling,
               Come to Bifling.
                some
league from Tergoose; where we lodged that night and
the next day. The second night at midnight we marched
towards Tergoose; before sixe of the clocke in
the morning we were all within an English mile of the
towne. Finding the inconuenience of our last skirmish
in the one place, order was giuen to the companies of
the Captaines,Direction to take the fort. 
               Morgan, Henrie Barnard and Vtran, to
march with all speed to attempt the fort which stoode
on the head of the Hauen which entred into Tergoose.
And if the enemie would not quite their fort, then to
lodge on the one ditch betwixt them and the Towne;
where they stoode in battaile on the other ditch, to see
the effect of our attempting the fort. Being hot in skirmish
with the fort,The fort assaulted. according to our direction; a company
of our men began to seek means to pass ouer the ditches,
to cut betwixt the fort and the towne. There was
also a way that passed throgh the medows, frō the ditch
where our battell stood; whither Sir Humfrey and Saras
sent many to second vs. The enemy perceiuing our resolution
to lodge betwixt the fort & the towne,Quitted by the enemie. quitted
the fort. Notwithstanding York, with most of C. Morgans
cōpany, re-encountred thē on the ditch; in such sort, that
halfe of those who were in the fort were cut off, before
they could recouer the towne. True it is, the enemie
had reason to quit the fort, by reason they were not
victualed but from hand to mouth; neither was it worthy
of any great munition, because it could not endure
any battery. Being entred the suburbs,The Flushingers enter the Suburbs. 
               Pacheco salied
with great courage, and skirmished in such sort, that
our first troupes were forced to stand for their fellows;
                  Pacheco salieth.
               
at which instant the enemy fired all or the most of the
Salt-houses.Fired the salt-houses. Our men being arriued close together, we
charged Pacheco,
               Is forced to retire. forced their troupes to double their
pases into their gates; and withall lodged and placed
our first guardes at a Chappell within eight score of
the towne: where we stayed and made good, vntill all
our troupes were lodged. By reason of our small army,
we could not assure the one halfe of the towne: for the
garrison were eight hundred strong,The number of the garrison. all naturall Spaniards,
commaunded by more expert leaders then our
selues. Yet hauing made our trenches and approaches,
wee landed sixe Pieces of battery within sixe score of
the walles;Ordinance planted. which did beate on the port towards the
hauen. Perceiuing those Pieces could not make any
breach to content our Gouernors, we dislodged them,
to beate on the bulwarkes which flanked that curtaine.
Hauing battered this parapat,A breach made. and made it fit as wee
thought, to be attempted with a small scalado; resolution
was taken to assault it the next night. In the
meane time so great a picke and iealousie grew betwixt
Sir Humfrey and Saras,
               The Pieke betweene the thiefe of the Flushingers.
                that each would faine disgrace
his fellow. Notwithstanding both agreed to attempt
the scalado. After midnight, we dislodged from our
quarter some two thousand of our best men, all in Camisadoes
with scaling ladders, God knows like ignorant
souldiers: else we would neuer haue attempted a scalado
on such a troupe. For lightly a scalado neuer
takes place, vnlesse it bee on a simple troupe, or a
negligent guarde, hauing a rampier or fort to defend.
Notwithstanding ambition and courage so pushed vs
on,The scalado giuen. that Sir Humfrey and Saras being approached,

aduanced vp their ladders: so did a great number of
Gentlemen and souldiers on sundry ladders. The enemie
politickely kept close vntill many were ready to enter.
Then they discharged a voley of shot full in our
faces, killing many. And withall, their armed men aduanced
to the push of the Pike; In such sort, that they
dismounted the most without ladders.The Flushingers repulsed. At which terror
we retyred without commandement, vntill wee came
vnder the dike where the enemies shot could not hurt
vs. And not without reason. For being on the bulwarke,
it was flanked from the curtain in such sort, that
none could abide it. Neither could we ioyne with the
enemie, vnlesse he listed; by reason of a dike betwixt
both, one which they had a draw-bridge at their commandement.
At this scalado Sir Humfrey and Saras
serued very valiantly: he that escaped best of both, had
sundry Hagabushadoes on their armours and Camisadoes.
I meane their shirts that couered their armours.
Many young Gentlemen and Officers performed also
couragious seruice. Diuers were slaine and hurt: among
others one Bourege was taken by the enemy, whom
they commended greatly for his valour: but hee dyed
afterwards of his hurts in their hands. This attempt
so quailed our courage, that we despaired of the towne:
Notwithstanding resolution was taken to continue the
siege,The Prince aduertized of all. vntill the Prince of Orange were aduertized how
the world went. Hereupon Saras, Sir Humfrey and
Rowland dispatched posts to the Prince; both to aduertize
him, and to procure more meanes. The Prince
vnderstanding our case,Writeth for succours. dispatched letters to the towns
of Holland, and to the Count De la Marke, to desire them

to doe their best endeauour to assist vs before Tergoose.
The Count sent his Lieutenant Bartelencie with some
2000 Neatherlanders and Almaines. Being ioyned with
vs, they gaue some courage at the first; but when their
discipline and valour was tried,Their ignorance in seruice. we found them simpler
men then our selues: yea, so rawe, that they brought
vs euery day into more disorders. Neuerthelesse, the
sight of our numbers caused vs to besiege the towne
round about.The Tergoosians iu want. Belike the enemie feared vs, or wanted
some necessaries. And finding meanes to acquaint D.
d' Alua with their wants;Certifieth D. d' Alua. Who sendeth them Mondragon with 3000. strong. he sent wth all speed his Colonell
Mondragon with his regiment of Wallons, and about
seauen companies more of Wallons & Spaniards: who
might be in all some 3000 strong. This Colonell was
expert, valiant and vigilant. Being arriued at Bergham
vp Zoone, and finding our forces masters of the seas, &
making good guarde round about the Island where we
were; he was in great paine, and knew not how to passe
the water.Hee entreth the Iland at a lowe water. By good espy-alls and guides, he found the
Island easie to be entred at a low water, from the banke
of Brabant; where the passage in the deepest place was
not aboue fower foote, and for more then halfe the
way dry lands; But at quarter floud all was couered
with seas; at the least sixe English miles. So as
his troupes must recouer the dike of the Iland from the
place where they entred,The hazard of his entrance. in lesse then three howers; or
else be ouerflown with the sea. Also being ready to enter
on our dike, had our gouernour kept good guards
with any valour, his troups must needs haue bin defeated.
Also he could not bring many hands to fight in order;
the narrownes of the place where he marched was

such. But this Collonell remembring the streight commandement
of his Generall, fearing the towne to be in
greater wants, then indeed it was; resolued to passe,
and landed without resistance. Notwithstanding, he
lost in his passage neere two hundred. Besides, he and
his troupes were so wet and weary, that they remained
all that night in the place where they landed:
which was about two great leagues from our Camp.The error of the chiefes of the Flushingers.
               
Then iudge you what would haue become of his
troups, had we been cōmanded by expert Gouernors,
& charg'd them at their landing with half our numbers.
In reason we had defeated them. The next morning
Mondragon tooke his march towards Tergoose,
               
                  Mondragon in sight of the towne. hauing
intelligence with the towne:Who sallieth. And beeing in sight, the
towne sallied and entred into hotte skirmish with our
guardes, on the side from their succours: In such sort,
that the most of our Campe made head towards them.
While wee were in hot skirmish with the garrison,
Mondragon passed his men through the towne pel mel
with ours:
                  Mondragon commeth vpon the Flushingers.
                In such sort, that they forced our guardes
to runne, and quite all our trenches, euen to the fort,
at the head of the water towards the sea.Forceth them to the fort. This fort
was so little, that it could not hould 300 of our men.
Wherefore our disorder was great, in seeking meanes
to escape into our nauy;Thence to their ships. which anchored within a harquebush
shot of the fort. A great number were drowned,
besides those that were slain; & some yeelded vnto
the enemy: especially those who were in the fort. Diuers
officers were carried prisoners into the castle of
Antwerp: & amongst others Cap. Tristan, & Vtran. Thus
ended our ignorant poore siege. And but for the skuts

and small boats which came hard by the shore to receiue
vs in,Sir Humfrey Gilberts discouragement and desire to return into England.
                all had been lost. Our blowe was so great,
that Sir Humfrey and the most of our men not being
acquainted with such disasters, sought all meanes
to returne into England. Notwithstanding, before we
embarked, Sir William Morgan arriued from the Prince,
with authority frō the Prince & the States in Holland,
to make large offers to stay Sir Humfrey and his regiment
for their seruice. But all would not serue to stay
either Sir Humfrey,
               
                  Ziricksee taken by Vorst.
                or any of his troupes. Whilst our
siege of Tergoose endured, Vorst the Admirall and his
seamen wan Ziricksee without blowes. By that you
may perceiue, that Pacheco and his were not exceeding
expert, in quiting such a place in such manner as they
did.
            I Did heare also,Sir William Pelham vieweth Flushing.
                that Sir William Pelham was sent
from England, to view the seat of Flushing. Being returned,
they said his report was,His iudgement that it was a place not
worthy to be kept; meaning not sufficient to withstand
so great an enemy any long time. If that bee true,
we were not very great Captains at that time; for then
without fellowe, hee was accounted our chiefest souldier.
By this time the Prince had gotten a sure footing
in Holland,
               The Prince Lord of all Holland.
                so as all places of any importance were his.
         
         
            
            Duke d' Alua assieges Harlem; where many disasters
fell on both sides: which siege may be called the tediousest,
dearest, and painfullest of any in those
daies.
            
               DVke d' Alua seeing the people generally
ready to reuolt, with the
lest shew the Prince could make;
resolued to gather his forces, and
to charge the Hollanders with all
fury:Dnke d' Alua against Holland
                swearing to his Captaines
and souldiers, that the spoile of
Holland shold be theirs, vpon condition they would execute
all they found. Hauing prepared a mighty army
with all necessaries, hee dislodged out of Brussels towards
Holland. Beeing arriued at Newmegen, hee passed
the riuers of Wale and Rhyne in the dead of winter;In winter.
and against all reason marched from Arnam towards
Vtrick. His high Marshall or Master of his Campe generall
was Chiapine Vitelly;
               His Chieftains. 
               Don Iohn de Mandosa was
Generall of his horsemen; his Generall of the artillery,
Mounsieur d' Cressoneir; his masters del Campe
were Baptista de Mounte, Dorkus Iulian, Romero, Iohn
Francisco d' Baldeso, Lanchio, Auila and Mondragon.
There were with him also many other of Nobility
and Gentlemen of quality; as well Italians, Almaines,
Burgonians, and Netherlanders, as also of Spanish. Being
arriued at Amsterdam, he commanded his sonne Don
Frederick, Chiapine Vitelly, and Mandosa, to march with
the vanguard, and to engage the towne of Harlem;
               
In such sort, that nothing could passe from it to Leyden,
or to any other place by land. Hauing placed foure regiments
of Almaines and Wallons, well entrenched in
the wood hard by the towne, and in the waies towards
Leiden; Don Fredrick placed himselfe with a Spanish Tertio
or Regiment well intrenched,Don Fredricks quarter.
                in a village and a
strong house betwene the towne and the sea; and so
lodged the rest of his companies, that the towne sallies
were cutte off; sauing on the one quarter, which was
meadowes & marish towards the Meere.The forces of the towne. In the towne
were the most of the Princes best Captaines; namely,
Mounsieur d' Saras, Steuen, Butch, Balford, Smith, with
diuerse others of the Scots, French, Almaines and Wallons.
Amongst whom were some 200 English, in sundry
Companies; without any Ensigne of their owne.
The garrison in the whole might be some three thousand
souldiers.The order of the siege. They caused also about sixe hundred
Burgesses to carry armes; besides two thousand and
more of all sorts of people, sufficient to supply the
place of pioners: of which were some three hundred
women, all vnder one Ensigne. The womens Captain
was a most stout dame, named Captaine Margaret Kenalt.
Hauing diuided the towne into quarters, and giuing
charge of euery quarter vnto a principall chiefe,
they fell to working in great numbers on the weakest
parts of the Citie, and mended continually some part
of the fortifications; In such sort that within one
month their towne was three times stronger, then
the first houre the enemy encamped before it.Two skonces at the mouth of the water. They
kept also two small sconces on the mouth of the water
that ranne from the towne into the meere, which assured

the passage that waies; by which meanes they receiued
daily all manner of commodities, that pleased
the Prince & the States of Holland to send them. The
Prince kept at Delfe in Holland. He chose for his Lieutenant
of the wars the Baron of Battenburgh;
               The Princes care of the towne. for Generall
of his horsemen and Marshall, Mounsieur de
Carlon; for Admirall of the Meere for that seruice, one
Noris Brand. By reason of the Spanish long delaies in
their resolutions about their martiall affaires,He dispatcheth an army to the Cage. the
Prince dispatched away his chiefes with some fiue
thousand souldiers, and about sixty boyes and cromsters;
of which, sixe were galliots and friggats. This
army arriued at the Cage within three leagues of Harlem,
a place inuironed with waters; where because
the Spanish could not attempt, by reason the Prince
was master vpon the waters, the Baron Battenburgh
furnished Harlem at his pleasure with all necessaries.
There stood in the mayne right against it on the Meere
side, a village named the Sase;
               Which landeth at, and entrencheth the Sase.
                where hee landed and
entrenched very strongly. In that place he encamped
with some six hundred horsemen, and the most of
his foote-men. At the Cage there was no danger,
wherefore he anchored his shipping hard by the shore;
leauing for their guard six hundred souldiers, with the
Admirall and one Ashilers. By this time Duke d' Alua
arriued before the towne with his whole forces,Duke d' Alua before Harlem with 30000. artillery
and munition; amounting in the whole neere to
thirty thousand; of which might be some thousand &
fiue hundred horsemen. He needed no great cauallery,
by reason he was assured there would bee but few against
him. Also those grounds did not serue for great

troupes of horsemen to fight in. After viewing the
strong seate of the Baron of Battenburgh,
               Vieweth the seat of Battenb.
                and perceiuing
no good could be done vpon his troupes; to affront
him,Affronteth him with forces. hee aduanced Iohn Battisto del Mounte with
fiue Cornets Italians; who entrenched strongly with
sixteen Companies of footmen in a village called Hellingham,
halfe the way betwixt both our companies.
Afterwards,Makes his approaches. he began to make his approaches carefully;
sparing neither pioners nor cost, to spare his souldiers.The towne sallieth with good successe.
Before hee planted his battry, the towne made
many braue sallies, killed a great number with small
losse to themselues. Once they carried diuers Ensignes
out of their enemies trenches, & nayled sundry peeces
of battery.The battry. After, placing his battry and playing furiously,
he gaue two sharp assaults: which were defended
worthily by the besieged, to the enemies great losse;
of whom a great number of quality were slaine and
hurt; and amongst others, the braue master of the
Campe Iulian Romero lost his eye with a hargabushado.
The enemy often possest the breach: but beeing
entred their halfe moone, I meane the trench which
the defendants made ouerthwart the breach within,The towne receiued the assa
                     •
                  ants.
they were murdered like dogges. The defendants had
diuers fowlers and other peeces loaden with nailes and
small shot, which they placed on the corners of their
halfe moone. Those were discharged full against the
enemies, being entred vpon the breach. Also they had
placed a great number of small shot in houses both
high and lowe, full of Cannoners who flanked the
halfe moone; and besides, the halfe moone was double
manned with Musketiers & Calliuers. Duke d' Alua
               
his losses were so great,To their losse that perceiuing the braue
resolution of the defendants,Who retire. hee gaue ouer his assaults,
and began to myne and to approach carefully
with sape and other stratagems.D' Aluaes stratagems.
                Sometimes he would
mount Cages on masts,Cages erected. made with plankes and such
deuices, of musket proofe. In those hee would place
diuers musketiers, who by reason of their height did
beate into the trenches of the halfe moone. The defendants
good Cannoniers plagued those Cages inWhich are beaten downe.
such sort, that often the Cages, birds and all fell downe
and brake their necks in their owne trenches. So, at
last no birds could be found to sing in Cages, where
fire-worke and Cannon-shot could annoy them. His
mynes tooke little effect. Some the defendants found
with counter-myne.Mynes. One myne beeing passed vnder
a bulwarke before it was found, and then discouered,
the defendants made such trenches round about it,
that the myne being fired, and the enemies entered,
the trench plagued them like the halfe moone; so
as they were driuen to quitte their myne, as before
they had done their breach. Another time they battered
a new bulwarke: and the defendants perceiuing
they would lodge in it, left rampiring against their
battery, and fell to myning their owne bulwark. After,
making many trenches round about it, and placing
diuers barrells of powder in their myne, the enemies
offered to enter. The defendants quitted the bulwark,
sufferd the enemies to enter in great numbers; and
beeing at the push of pike at a barrier of their trench,
they fired the myne,Blow it vp and sally vpon the enemy. blew, slew, and toke at least
1600: and withall sallied into their trenches, and

recouered their owne ground where their bulwarke
stood,And recouer their ground. which they entrenched & kept. Duke d' Alua his
losses were so great, that albeit his choler encreased,
yet the courage of his souldiers much quailed; so that
the wisest sort requested him to saue his men from such
furious terrors, and rather to spend a long time either
to famish the towne, or to procure the Princes forces
to fight; which he could not doe without meanes
to fight by water. Beeing in Amsterdam, with the resolution
of his Admirall Count Bossue,
               Duke d' Alua giueth order to force the towne. and good intelligence
with the principall Burgesses of the saide
towne, hee resolued to cut a passage from the Southerne
sea into Harlem Meere;He maketh a cut in Harlem Meere. Passeth 45 ships into it. which they did, and
passed some forty fiue sailes, whereof most were greater
then those of the Princes. These they armed and
double manned, with the best sort of souldiers out
of their Campe, besides their mariners. Anchoring
close vnder a fort of theirs, not farre from ours,
they resolued to besiege the two forts at the mouth
of the water,Besiegeth the two forts. that came from the towne to the Meere.
Hauing those, they were sure to stop that passage, and
to famish the town without giuing battel. In short time
they made a platform to beat th
                  •
               se forts, which would
hold good if their shipping could stay where they were.
The Prince hearing their intent, commanded the Baron
of Battenburgh to prepare all his Nauie to attempt
the Spanish fleete.Preparation for a sea fight. Collonell Morgan ariueth out of England.
                By this time Colonell Morgan
was arriued with tenne English companies: who, by
reason he was but newly landed, stood on some poynts
of contract with the Prince. But the seruice required
haste; and the Prince commanded the Baron

of Battenburgh to aduance his Nauie with all speede,
and to vse all diligence to succor the distressed skonces.
And albeit the English regiment stood on tearmes, Colonell
Morgan (his owne band commanded by Rowland
Yorke, being arriued some moneth before their fellowes)
offered himselfe, and so did his Lieutenant
Captaine Bingham, with diuers others,The English refuse to march without money to serue where
the Prince would command them. But their regiment
refused to march without money. To say troth, they
were promised to bee mustered and payd at their landing.
                  Battenburgh wanteth men to man his Nauie.
The Baron of Battenburgh wanting souldiers to
man both his Nauie and his trenches at the Sase, was
forced to depart with the Nauie before towards Harlem;
God knoweth, nothing well manned, in respect
of the Spanish. The Spanish Admirall hauing intelligence,
was ready with his Nauie double manned, wanting
no necessaries: For the faire and rich towne of
Amsterdam had furnished them with all wants, especially
with store of Marriners.The Nauies approached each other. Being approached within
sight one of another, we found the Spanish in good
order of battaile, keeping close together. They aduanced
towards vs triumphing with Drummes,The brauery of the Spaniards.
                Trumpets
and glistering armours, with great courage; so as
the sight quailed the courage of our white-liuered Generall
and cowardly Admirall. In such sort, that being
approached neere ready to board each other,The Princes Generall and Admirall flie. our Generall
and our Admirall shranke out of our first ranke
backewards; and aduancing their fellowes forwards,
both themselues and diuers others of our best vessels
made all the sailes they could to fly; leauing their poore
companies engaged to the mercie of their enemies, by

whom (God knowes) they were soone discountenanced.The rest discō
                  sited.
Our Admirall and Generall with our best 
                  •
               a
                  •
               les escaped
to the Cage, as I said before; a place of ours,
where we kept garrison: the rest of our Nauie made
to the contrarie shore from Harlem. Diuers escaped by
reason they drew farre lesser water then the Spanish; diuers
were boarded and burned; among others two
Hoyes, where Yorke and Captaine Morgans companie
was. Notwithstanding, halfe our men escaped with leaping
into the water, and recouered the shoare. Thus
lost we our Sea-battaile; principally for want of souldiers
to man throughly our ships; but partly with ill
directions and cowardly executions of the Baron of
Battenburgh, and Admirall Norris Brand. For no Generall
or Chiefe can excuse himselfe escaping out of an
ouerthrow, without staying with the last troupes that
fight.The two skonces lost. After this our two skonces were lost, and Harlem
engaged to be lost without succours by land; which
could not be without battaile. Shortly after, the towne
beganne to fall to distresses; hauing in it at the least
one thousand sixe hundred mouths,The town seeks to passe away their vnprofitable people. with no meanes to
be rid of any of them, but through the enemies Campe:
which they offered to passe often, but alwaies they were
returned into the towne, or massacred in the Campe.The Prince attempteth to relieue the towne by land.
The poore Prince perceiuing the distresse of the town,
sought all meanes to relieue it. Hauing no other means,
he went to Cublick Banquets; where he encouraged the
Hollanders to take armes, and aduenture themselues
with his men of warre, rather then suffer their distressed
Countrimen to perish. These poore Hollanders hauing
ingaged themselues with promise, resolued to

meete on a day in the Campe of Sase. Being arriued,
the Baron of Battenburgh and Mounsieur de Carlo Generall
of his horsemen, tooke resolution to try the fortune
of warres with the enemie, rather then to suffer
the world to cry out, that the towne was lost without
blowes on their sides: and thinking his name to be infamous
(as indeed it was) for the Sea-fight, he thought
it better to be buried dead then aliue.
                  Battenburgh leadeth toward Harlem.
                Hereupon hee
dislodged from his trenches of Sase, accompanied with
some sixe thousand footemen and sixe hundred horsemen;
and hauing with him some thousand Mares.
Vpon most of the which he placed two shot a peece:
the rest were led with Boures loaden with pouder and
other necessaries, which the towne wanted greatly. Resoluing
to put those necessaries into the towne, hee aduanced
his forces. Being arriued hard by Hellingham,
               Commeth to Hellingham.
                a
place (as I said before) which the enemie kept; at the
breake of day, the enemy taking the alarum, the Baron
made a stand. After, conferring with his Captaines,
hee tooke resolution to deferre their dessigne,Retyreth.
and returned with our Campe to Sase. The besieged
being in great distresse for victuals, especially for munition,
and finding the ill conduct of our Generall and
Chiefes;
                  Saras sent to the Princes Campe. dispatched out of town their Captaine Mounsieur
de Saras, and Hauton his Lieutenant; who passed
with great danger, and were forced to swimme many
ditches, hard by the enemies guardes. Being arriued at
the Sase, bearing with them the townes resolution;
which was, at the first sight of our Campe to sallie on
the enemies trenches; and so either to receiue their
wants into the towne, or to escape how they could. Saras
               
hauing conferred with the Prince and Baron at Leyden,
returned to the Sase; where they tooke a full resolution
either to dye, or succour the towne. Hereupon
they dislodged from the Sase,
               The Princes power towards Har
                        •
                     em.
                with our armie named
before, hauing with them some sixe hundred waggons
loaden with victuals and munition; with skonces
made of boards of the proofe of Muskets which ranne
on wheeles,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   moueable skonces. hauing in them places to play with sundry
field-pieces; which skonces were to ioyne and to open
as pleased our Enginer, euery fiue and tenne pases. Being
all ioyned together, I meane in one, it might couer
at the least three hundred men. This skonce was to be
drawen with horses on both sides, and in the middest,
vntill we were ingaged with the enemies smal shot; then
to be pushed vvith poales by the force of men. Being
parted vvith all necessaries, and arriued betvvixt their
Campe at Hellingham and the sea, the enemies tooke
the alarum in all their quarters. Arriuing vvithin sight
of their Campe,The Spaniards keepe close. they kept their men very close, vvithin
their trenches, and on the side of the vvood; so that vve
could not see them. Our men vvithin the tovvne had
made a great salie through the Curtaine;The townsmen make a sallie. in such sort,
that they might issue out, where there was neither
guard nor trench of the enemy. But a traytour leaping
ouer the walls in the night discouered all their
intent.Are hindred by wet straw fired. Whereupon the enemy prepared great quantity
of straw, which beeing made wet, they set on fire
in sundry places, at such time as their Curriers gaue the
alarum of the approach of our army, when the townsemen
were ready to sally out; by which meanes the
townesmen could neither see the approaching of our

armie, nor knew what time they ought to sally.D
                     •
                   
                  d' Aluaes order against the Towne. So the
enemie directed fiue thousand of his best footemen,
and three hundred horsemen to charge the townesmen
if they sallied, and the rest to charge our Campe,
if it were possible vnknowne to the townesmen;
And so they did, by their gouernement and fine stratagem.
For at the sight of our armie (being within
two Musket-shot of their trenches) Duke d' Alua caused
the 5000 footemen,Sendeth forces of the retreit of the Princes power. and 3 hundred horsemen, to
discouer themselues before the breach which our men
had made in the curtaine: withall he commanded the
braue Baron Chiffero, and Iohn Battisto del Mounto, (who
had quited Hellingham with all his horsemen, and was
newly arriued in their Campe) with others, to march
on the sea-sands, vntill his artillery went off in vollies;
then to cut into the high wayes, betwixt Harlem and
our Campe at Sase;
               Appointeth foots to charge them. hauing with them some fiue hundred
horsemen, and about fiue thousand footemen. Also
he commanded his master of the Campe Iulian Romero,
Del Mount, Donkus, the Barons of Likes, of Capers,
of Frunsberke, and Poule Viler to leape ouer the
trenches with their regiments, and charge our army
at the discharging of his artillerie.And horse against their horse. Also Don Iohn de
Mendosa generall of his horsemen, who was hidden, as
I said before, was commanded to charge our horsmen
at the going off of the artillery. The Duke with the rest
of his army stood in battell within the trenches. Our
Generall and Chiefes placed our Waggons to frontierThe order of the Princes armie.
the fairest places where their horsemen could charge
vs: our Wallons, Dutch and Flemmish, stood within the
Waggons in good order of battaile, all in one squadron,

with our horsemen on both the sides towards the enemies,
our English, French, and Scots stood, some twenty
score before the front of our battaile.The battaile. As we were basie
in placing our engines, I meane our skonces and waggons,
their artillery went off; and withall the enemies
presented in all quarters, as they were directed. At
this sight (God knowes) our courage much abated.
Notwithstanding,The horsemen charge. the Baron of Battenburgh and Mounsieur
de Carlo charged Mendosa, he hauing better then
eight hundred horsemen, and ours not sixe hundred:
At which charge Mounsieur de Carlo generall of our
horsemen was slaine,
                  Carlo slaine. with many others of our best
men. At that instant the Baron Chiffero, and Iohn Battisto
came on the spurre towards the Baron of Battenburgh,
leauing their footemen marching with all speede
on the side of ours. Vpon their approach, the Baron and
our horsemen ranne into our Waggons, with all the enemies
horsemen in their tailes.The footemen defeated. Then Iulian and the
rest named before, draue in the English and French shot,
winning our skonces and Waggons; and our battell
brake and ranne towards the Meere. By reason of meadowes
& ditches diuers escaped into our Nauie, which
anchored not farre off, vnder a strong skonce; whose
boats rowing from our ships saued many. But the Baron
our Generall was slaine after he had recouered our
battaile, with the most part of our men. All or the most
part of our Cornets, ensignes, artillery, munition, waggons,
engines and baggage were lost. Thus were wee
ouerthrowen with ill directions and ignorant gouernement.The errour of the Prince.
What Prince or estate would direct their men
of warre, especially being more then halfe their owne

Countrimen, to attempt aboue 26000 good souldiers
well intrenched, gouerned with great Captaines; not
being in the whole 6500 footemen, and of those halfe
poore spirited Burgesses? Or what Generall or Captaine
would vndertake it, vnlesse he were ignorant and
without iudgement in martiall affaires? Some will say,
had our friends perished in the towne without blowes,
it had beene our shame. I doe confesse it, hauing any
reason to fight. But being sure to perish both, it was
our greatest shame to attempt it. If wee had kept our
selues vndefeated, and giuen order to the towne to haue
compounded with the enemie, their composition had
beene the better. But being defeated, the townesmen
were faine to yeeld to the mercy of Duke d' Alua.
               The Towne yeeldeth. For
the sight of our Ensignes and Cornets so quailed their
courage, that hauing no other remedy, they yeelded to
his mercy within foure dayes after our ouerthrow. But
he executed the most part of them most cruelly,The cruelty of Duke d' Alua.
                sauing
the Almaines of Stinbaghs regiment (who compounded
for the most part to serue the King) and Balfort with
a few Scottish men;Balford. who to escape Duke d' Aluaes cruelty,
promised to kill the Prince of Orange: but being arriued
with the Prince, he confessed his promise, and serued
him faithfully long after.
         
         
            
            The Spanish mutinies, Mounsieur de Herges repulseth
them at their scalado on Vtricke, Duke d' Alua
assiegeth Alkmer, where he receiueth the greatest
disgrace that euer hee did since hee carried
armes.
            
               DVke d' Alua hauing wonne Harlem,
and as he thought broken the
courage of the Hollanders; thinking
the Prince of Orange and
them not able to furnish any place
like vnto Harlem, and that his
crueltie on that Towne would
terrifie any garrison from hazarding
themselues to be besieged: hee resolued with his
counsaile of warre to attempt one of the other strongest
townes, as Alkmer or Leyden; which being wonne,
the rest or most of the others would yeeld.Duke d' Alua against Alkmer.
                To that end
he dispatched his Sonne Don Fredericke, accompanied
with the master of his Campe generall Chiapine Vitelly,
giuing them halfe his armie, and charge with all diligence
to enclose the strong towne of Alkmer, situated
in North-Holland himselfe with the rest of his armie, officers,
Nobility, artillery, munition, with all other necessaries,
was to second them with all speede. His orders
being set downe, and his armie dislodged, hauing
passed their fort of Sparendam,
               A mutienie amongst the spaniards. the Spanish Tertias began
to mutinie; partly discontented for want of pay, but
chiefly fearing to bee troubled with a more miserable
lodging then they had before Harlem. This proceeded

chiefely from a few of the Neatherlanders which serued
amongst their bands, and knew the seat of Alkmer
to bee an ill fauoured ma
                  •
               sh, farre more vnholsome
then Harlem; and knew it also to be a seat thrice stronger
then Harlem. To say troth (if it were lawfull
for men of warre to finde fault with any enterprise that
their Generall vndertakes) they had reason to fear Alkmer,
considering how their misery endured before
Harlem aboue ten monthes: in the which time they
lost aboue twenty thousand liues, the most with sicknesse
and misery. Whereupon beeing past the fort of
Sparendam, and lodged on the firme land, hauing neither
riuer nor marsh betwixt them and the faire towne
of Vtrick; the Spanish Tertias chose and forced one to
bee their chiefe, named in their language an Electo,
               They chuse an Electo.
               
who is lightly one of the finest stirring spirits amongst
them,His quality and gouernment. well knowne to bee stout and valiant.
Sometimes they forced a person to be their Electo against
his will; But whether hee bee willing or not,
they will be sure to giue him a strong guard of the chiefest
mutiners; with such articles as if they finde him
faulty in the least point, they will murder him, had
hee a hundred liues. Especially he must neither signe
nor write any thing, but in publicke places before them
all. Likewise, he must neither receiue writings nor speeches
but in open audience; nor doe any thing without
their generall consent. Obseruing their articles and orders,
the multitude will respect and obey him during
his gouernment;His authority. in as ample sort as the Kings Lieutenant;
and all are sworne not to doe any thing without
his consent. And with their Generall and officers they

promise to free him from all matters that can be laid
vnto his charge; which they haue obserued firmely
at sundry times, as I will shew hereafter. And to say
troth, if there can bee any good orders in mutinies,
the Spanish doe theirs in good order; and keepe as
good and as streight discipline during the time of their
Electo, as when their officers are amongst them. As
I said in my little discourse of the Spanish discipline,
there can be no dangerous mutinie without a Chiefe;Chiefes appointed by States.
which must be authorised by a Prince, or Estate. If any
of them mutineth, there must bee present meanes to
cut them off, as Alexander did his Parmenio, or some
other meanes to be assured of their persons; else ambitious
Chiefes will often employ armies against their
owne States and Masters, and will not faile to vse their
meanes and credits to deceiue the multitude, to serue
their owne turnes. Being stirred in armes, by all reason
they are irreconciliable to their Princes or Estates;
the multitude and followers may bee pardoned and
forgiuen, but in no reason their principall instruments
can looke for any sure reconcilement.A Chiefe appointed by the mutiners. But a popular
multitude either in armes, or otherwise mutined, may
bee appeased and reconciled easily in respect of the others,
hauing no other instruments then were made by
themselues; especially forced Electoes like vnto the Spanish.
               The Spanish mutiny against Vtricke.
               
As I said before, the Spanish Tertias and some six
regiments of Wallons resolued to enter the City of Vtrick,
and to sack it rather then to misse their due
paie. Whereupon they marched with all speed towards
Vtrick; and in their way they carried with them
all the ladders they could finde in villages & Churches,

which they thought would serue their turnes. Beeing
approached hard by the towne, they found the wals
well manned and in good order;The towne defended by Mounsieur de Hierges.
                by reason Mounsieur
de Hierges Gouernour of Gelderland and of Vtrick, was
arriued there vpon intelligence of their determinations;
who commanded the Captaine of the Castle vpon
his allegeance to the King, to vse all endeauours
for the defence of the towne. The Castillian assured
him of his loyalty, to the vttermost of his power.
            To bee the better assured of his Spanish garrison,
Mounsieur de Hierges caused halfe the garrison of the
Castle to sally; and to manne the Curtaine, where the
mutiners attempted. Before they offered any attempt,
Hierges sent a Spanish drum vnto them; assuring them,
rather then they should enter the towne, Hee and as
many as loued the Kings seruice would dy in the place.
Notwithstanding, the mutiners resolued, and aduanced
the scale; giuing their fury on the Curtaine next
vnto the Citadell; thinking belike, that their fellowes
within would not be cruell against them. But being in
the ditch, and hauing placed their ladders to the Rampier,
both Hierges and the Captaine of the Castle and
all the rest, plagued them with volleyes of shot both
great and small;The mutiners retire. In such sort, that happy was he that
could returne first, leauing behinde them all or the
most part of their ladders, with many of their men
slaine or hurt. Afterwards the mutiners returned into
the countrie, so greatly discontented, as they did not
onely raile on Mounsieur de Hierges,
               Rayle on their King. the Captaine, and
garrison, but on their King, Generall, and Officers:
In such sort, that most of them sware they would bee

paid, and better vsed, or else they would serue the enemy
against their King.Are pacified by D' Alua.
                Duke d' Alua hearing their
resolutions, dispatched Commissioners to appease
them: and in the ende was forced to content them,
both with fiue moneths pay, and assurance to be forgiuen.
Hauing pacified them and reconciled all, they
accepted their Officers, and agreed to march whither
they should be ledde.Send away their Electo.
                But first, according to their custome,
euery man gaue a crowne vnto the Electo, who
was to depart with all speed out of the Kings dominions;
but with good assurance and pasport not to
be molested. This mutinie hindred Duke d' Aluaes intent
some month. Notwithstanding, according to his
first resolution,Don Fredricke. 
               Don Fredrick and Vitelly marched with
all speed to enclose Alkmer.
               
                  D' Alua followeth. So did the Duke followe
with the rest in all speed. In the meane time, the Prince
and States of Holland had sent into the towne, fiue or
sixe expert Captains;
                  Alkmer strengthened by the Prince. especially the Scottish men Smith
and Cornelleys, who entered the towne with some
foure hundred souldiers. The most of these Captaines
had been in Harlem, and saued the towne for a long
time, next vnto the Almighties will. The vanguard
being arriued,The towne ingaged. they soone ingaged the towne; so as
none could either sally or enter. Duke d' Alua being arriued
with the rest,Pontones for the ordinance. prepared great pontons or bridges,
with other necessaries to plant his battry: which
hee could hardly doe, by reason of the marish and wet
rotten grounds, whereon the towne stood. Notwithstanding,
with his expert Captaines & cunning Enginers
he mounted eighteen peeces of Cannon,The Cannon planted. with som
six Culuerings in a marshie ground against reason; impossible

to be done, as the defendants thought. These
peeces did bea
                  •
               e crosse, on two platformes,The battry. a weak bulwarke,
and a Curtaine, some eight score off. Hauing
no other flanke, by reason the ground serued not,
they could not bring the battry within lesse then eight
score:The distance of the battry. wherefore their fury was the lesse. To say troth,
all batteries ought to be placed within lesse then eight
score; if it be full seauen score, it is very farre to doe
any great hurt: In case the defendants be in any great
numbers within, hauing store of earth to rampier and
entrench themselues. Notwithstanding, I heard some
of the best defendants in that towne say,The feare of the towne. in their
iudgements, the feare of the people and of most of
the souldiers within was such; that had not the enemies
enuironed the towne round about as they did,
but left any place voide, the best of the defendants
would haue quitted the place, and shifted for
themselues.No way to flee. But beeing streightly enuironed and no
waies to escape, remembring their cruelty at Harlem,
they resolued to fight; by reason the souldiers which
had been in Harlem, did importune the rest; especially
the Captaines, who were assured to perish comming
into their enemies hands. After some 7000 shot,The breach. the
breach was reasonable, as the assailants thought. But
in troth it was not;Not assaultable for aboue foure foot of the ground
of the rampier was nothing battered, but falsely couered
with the ruine of the parapet and the earth that
fell from the highest parts of the breach. Also they were
faine to giue their assaults on Pontons & such Engines;
                  Pontons for assaults.
which they had made against reason, to aduenture men
against a place defended with any valour. For a breach

(be it made neuer so assaultable) hauing many hands
to defend it with any valour, lightly is neuer entred;
In case they within be of any iudgement, as I said before,
and hauing earth to entrench themselues. But the
fury of Duke d' Alua and his Commanders was such,The assault.
that they aduanced to the assault, & attempted it with
great courage. Being twice repulsed, notwithstanding
they aduanced the third time, to their folly and deare
costs. For at those assaults they lost diuers of their best
Captaines,The Spaniards repulsed. and at the least 1600 of their brauest souldiers.
            The next day the raine fell in great aboundance,The siege leauied. in
such sort, that they raised their siege in few daies; and
lost diuers peeces of battry which they could not hale
out of the marish. At this towne did the famous Duke
d' Alua lose the greatest credite,D' Aluaes disgrace.
                that hee did in any
place since hee carried armes; which he had done sixty
yeares.His experience for warre. For fifty yeares, the least commandment hee
had, was Generall of the horsemen: which place hee
had in Germany, when Charles the fift ouercame Duke
Iohn Frederick of Saxony and his confederates. But had
the Duke marched streight to Delfs hauen and taken it,His error.
& Mayston-sluce, when he marched to Alkmer (which
places were vnfortified to any purpose) by all reason
he had carried all Holland in a short time. I am sure, the
most men of warre who knowe the seate of the Countrie,
will confesse no lesse then my selfe.
         
         
            
            Mounsieur de Poyet surpriseth Gertrudenberg.
            
               WHilest Duke d' Alua was busie about
his enterprise of Alkmer,
Mounsieur de Poyet, who had bin
with Count Lodowick in Mounts,
being newly arriued out of France,
was chosen Lieutenant of the
warre to the Prince of Orange.
Hauing conferrred with the Prince, they gathered
certaine Companies of English, Scottish, French & Flemings,
at Dort in Holland: which they embarked with
petardes,Mounsieur de Poyet landeth his troupes in the night. ladders, and such Engines of warre. Mounsieur
de Poyet vsing great diligence, landed his troupes
in the night, on the dike towards Seauenbrooke; some
halfe a league from the strong towne of Gertrudenberg
in Brabant, situated on the water side next vnto Dort.
After, placing his troupes in order, hee sent before him
a valiant French Captaine, named Malion,
               His order for the surprise. accompanied
with a dozen resolute souldiers; amongst whom
were two or three of the countrie souldiers, who had
been often in the towne, and knew all the rampiers as
well as the inhabitants thēselues. Whilest Malion spent
som howr in discouering the place they meant to scale,
Mounsieur de Poyet aduanced his troupes towards the
towne. Beeing within a quarter of a league of the
towne, hee staied vntill about an houre before day.
Hauing conferred with Malion, he deliuered vnto him
some two hundred of his best souldiers, giuing him
charge to scale with all courage; assuring him to second

him with the rest. Malion and his troupes entred
the ditch of a small raueling, ioyning vnto the rampier,
where hee placed his ladders. After the passing
of the round (notwithstanding that the sentinels gaue
the allarum) Malion and his troupes recouered both
raueling and rampier,Malion e
                     •
                  treth before any great troupe came
to encounter him. The garrison being gathered together
in reasonable numbers, charged Malion resolutely
at the push of the pike;
                  Poyet secondeth him. but being seconded by Mounsieur
de Poyet and his troupes, they were quickly content
to quitte the fury, and also forced to runne into
the market place, whither the assailants followed them
in the taile. Notwithstanding, being entred the market
place,Resistance in the market place. the Gouernour with his fresh troupes turned
vpon vs, and gaue a hot charge at the push of the pike;
but our many hands soone ouercame them, giuing
them the retreit in rout.The garrison defeated. Some took themselues into the
towne-house, which they kept a little while, and then
yeelded to haue their liues saued. Diuers ran ouer the
rampier towards Breda; More then halfe were slaine.
The Gouernour with a few recouered his house,The Gouernour escapeth. which
stood on the rampier; out of which hee escaped ouer
the wall vnto Breda; leauing behinde him all that hee
had, sauing what hee carried vpon him. Thus was the
strong towne of Gertrudenberg surprised, with lesse
then 1200 men; hauing in it at the least 600 souldiers,
besides Burgesses, with the losse of foure and fifty persons
of our side; to the great griefe of Duke d' Alua,
not without reason. For considering his losse and disgrace
at Alkmer, it did equall at the least his victory
at Harlem.
            
         
         
            
            Baldeso, sent by Duke d' Alua into Holland, entreth
the Hague, attempteth Delfe, and other places
without successe.
            
               WHen Duke d' Alua aduanced
to besiege Alkmer, hee sent
the Master of his Campe
Don Francisco de Baldeso,
               
                  Baldeso sent into Holland.
                with
his Tertia De la Ligue, with
fiue Corners of horsemen,
and some twelue companies of Wallons out of sundry
regiments; commanding him to aduance into the bowels
of Holland, to relieue his troupes in the rich Villages
(where he thought best) betwixt Leyden, Delfe, and
the Sea-co
                  •
               st, as farre as the riuer of Mase, and the town
of Brill: Charging him to attempt nothing without his
aduice and consent; vnlesse it were with sure intelligence
with some of the townes. Baldeso being entred
the faire and rich Village of Hague,
               Entreth the Hague.
                without any resistance,
found it a place sufficient to lodge double his
troupes; all in couert,The seat thereof. and most in beds. This Hague is
counted the fairest Village in Europe, and the place of
the generall assembly of all the Neatherlands, next vnto
Brussels (I meane the seauenteene Prouinces since they
were vnited vnder the house of Burgundy) where the
King hath a faire Palace, and diuers of the Nobility
houses, with a great multitude of Lawyers. This
Hague is such a Village, that Charles the fift being requested
to fortifie it, answered; hee had rather it should remaine
the fairest Village, then a reasonable faire towne.
            
               
But I perswade my selfe, both hee and the Countrey
would haue fortified it, but that it standeth more then
halfe on sandie grounds: which can neuer bee made
strong by the earth it selfe, by reason of the loosenesse
of the sand. The Prince of Orange tryed to doe it, but
could not to any purpose; so as it might be kept with
any garrison against an army, without a reasonable army
to defend it. Baldeso after lodging a fewe dayes in
the Hague, caused all the Villages to bring him such necessaries
as pleased him. Then he aduanced certaine of
his companies to a Village called Riswike,
               Baldeso fortifieth Riswicke. in the way
towards Leyden from Delfe; which he entrenched and
baricaded.Placed his first guardes at the bridge towards Delfe.
                Likewise he entrenched his first guardes at
the bridge, halfe the way betwixt Delfe and the Hague;
where often our troupes and theirs had many a hot skirmish,
both neere vnto the guardes, and sometimes hard
by the ports of Delfe.
               The States garrisons. Colonell Morgans regiment and
diuers companies of French men were lodged in the
Villages, betwixt Delfe and Roterdam, safely from the
enemie; by reason both the townes couered them behinde
and before with great ditches on both sides, not
to be passed with troupes, hauing any guards to defend
them. These troupes serued alwaies ready to thrust into
Delfe, Roterdam, Delfe- hauen, or Mayston sluce; where
the enemy would haue attempted first.In Leyden.
                In Leyden was
Mounsieur de Lorges, sonne to that braue Count of
Mongomery, with a faire French regiment; and other
companies of Scots, and of the Countrimen and Burgesses
well armed.Captaine Chester in Delfe.
                In Delfe was Captaine Chester with
two hundred English-men; whome afterwards the
Prince aduanced to be Colonell of those troupes, by

reason of some sting against Colonell Morgan. There
were in it also three faire companies of French-men, besides
the Burgesses well armed.
                  In Roterdam. In Roterdam were some
bands of Scots, and of the Countrimen, besides the
Burgesses.
                  In Delfs hauen. At Delfs-hauen was Mounsieur de Maysonflure,
with sundry bands of French, Scots, and of the
Countrey.
                  In Mayston-sluce. In Mayston-sluce was Mounsieur de Saint
Alagondy, and Terlon, with some 1200, most of them
Countrimen; a great number of Peasants and Burgesses.
Besides, the garrisons wrought continually to
fortifie both Delfs-hauen and Mayston-sluce; in such sort
that both the places were strong and guardeable, with
reasonable defences.Delfs-hauen fortfied.
                Especially Delfs-hauen was verie
strong; not to be wonne easily, hauing necessaries that
belong to a fortresse. The garrison of Delfs-hauen had
fortified the Village of Ouerskie, halfe the way betwixt
Delfe and Roterdam; where they kept a strong guarde.
Mounsieur de Poyet, for the better assurance of Leyden,
               
                  Mounsieur de Poyet in Leyden
being the neerest place engaged and enuironed with enemies,
thrust himselfe into it. Baldeso practised all he
could with Leyden and Delfe; once by treacherie of
some, who kept the towne-port towards Vtricke.
               
                  Baldesoes attempts vpon Delfe.
                
               Baldeso
prepared sundry Turfe-boates, in which hee lodged
good troupes of souldiers. Once being entred the
ports, with the resolution of the garrison, and the good
conduct of Poyet, they were repulsed; where Baldeso
lost many of his men. Another time hee had intelligence
with some in Delfe: but being discouered to the
Townesmen and garrison, diuers of our bands which
lodged hard by entred in the night; but either some
of the Townesmen or Baldesoes guardes discouered

our arming: so as he gaue ouer his enterprize, when he
was ready to attempt, in the like order as he did at Leyden.
But had he come, we were ready at the least 1000
souldiers, besides the Burgesses, at the water-port where
he should haue entred; and 
                  •
               ad bent sundry pieces of
artillery, loaden with nayles, haile-shot, and such deuices.
Had hee presented himselfe, his troupes could
not escape without great murther among them, with
no danger to our selues.Aduertisemēts to d'Alua.
                After these attempts, Baldeso
aduertized Duke d'Alua of his affaires; shewing him
that no good could bee done, without an armie and
the furie of artillery. To that end hee requested more
troupes or meanes, or leaue to retyre himselfe with
those troupes he had.
         
         
            Duke d'Alua retyreth out of Holland, sendeth Iulian
Romero, Mounsieur de Capers and Fronsperge
to assist Baldeso, Verdugo Gouernour of Harlem.
            
               THe Duke remembring his disgrace
at Alkmer,
               
                  D'Alua retyreth to Brussels.
                fearing his armie would
mutine if hee would ouercharge
them with paines and trauel, hauing
no treasure to content them; resolued
to retire to Brussels. But before
he departed, he sent the master of his Campe Iulian
Romero to his armie,
                  Sendeth Iulian Romero to assist Baldeso. which was lodged in the Country
by Vtricke and Amsterdam; giuing him charge, if hee
could, to procure his Tertia of Lumbardy (of which

               Iulian was Colonell) to march into Holland,
               With Mounsieur de Capers.
                to ioyne
with Baldeso. He sent also Mounsieur de Capers; commanding
him to procure his regiments of Wallons to do
the like.Fronsberke. Also the regiment of Fronsberke the Almaine.
These Colonels were directed to the Campe, to procure
their regiments to march willingly, and not perforce.
He commanded Mendoza generall of his horse-men
to send with them sixe of the best Cornets.Six Cornets of horse.
                After
that these Regiments and Cauallery were contented to
enter Holland, and had sworne to obey their Colonells
in all manner of seruice;
                  Iulian General. Duke d' Alua gaue the chiefe
charge vnto Iulian, and the next vnto him was Baldeso.
He placed Colonell Verdugo Gouernor in Harlem;
               Verdugo. with
his regiment of Wallons, and one Cornet of horsemen,
with three ensignes of Almaines out of Frunsbergs regiment.
Himselfe departed out of Amsterdam,
               
                  D'Aluaes retire, and to what end. with his
sonne Don Fredericke, Chiapin Vitelly, Mendosa and all
the rest of his armie towards Brabant; resoluing not to
attempt any great siege or seruice, before hee had acquainted
the King how the world went. To that end
being arriued at Brussels, he dispatched two of qualitie
vnto the King; either to send him treasure and meanes
more plentifully, and in better order; or to giue him
leaue to retire himselfe, and to send another Gouernor.
         
         
            
            Iulian Romero winneth Mayston-sluce, but dareth
not attempt Delfes-hauen.
            
               
                  IVlian and his succours being arriued,Iulian Romero attempteth Mayston sluce.
and hauing conferred with Baldeso,
resolued to attempt Mayston-sluce;
and dislodged from the Hague with
their forces named before, haling
with them sixe pieces of battery. Being
arriued at the great Village called Florden, within a
small league of Mayston-sluce, they quartred their horse-men,
with a regiment of footemen for their guardes;His order.
and departed with the rest to approach the Sluce. They
carried with thē all the skutes and boats that might be
found, in Waggons; with plankes, ladders, and all other
necessaries that they thought fit, to scale and to make
bridges ouer the dikes. Being before the Sluce, with
their bridges and meanes they had made to passe the
ditches, they tooke the great ditch on both sides of the
Sluce;
               Taketh the dyke the Sluce stands vpon, dismounteth the artillery of the forte. I meane the dyke the Sluce stands vpon, and
which keeps the sea from drowning the land. Hauing
mounted their artillery on both sides of the dyke, they
dismounted ours within, which did beate on the dyke.
After, turning their artillerie towards the seas, I meane
the riuer of Mase, which is aboue a league broad in that
place, they beat away such vessels as the defendants had
anchoring before their fort.Mounsieur de Terlon departeth. Mounsieur de Terlon being
Admirall and Gouernour of Brill, perceiuing their successe,
departed out of the fort in a skute, with great hazard,
to recouer the Brill; presently the enemies passed

their boates ouer the dyke into the Mase. Being passed,
                  Iulians boats in the Mase.
               
it much abated the courage of S. Aldegoundy & his garrison,
not without reason.The w
                     •
                  aknesse of the fort towards the water For betwixt the fort and the
water their Rampier was worth nothing; so as at a high
water it couered the dyke of the fort, as high as the parapet.
The enemy perceiuing their successe,
                  Iulian placed his artillerie vpon a Ponton.
                prepared
a Ponton: which they builded artificially vpon their
boates, and placed on it three of their pieces. The garrison
perceiuing their stratageme, hauing no meanes to
auoyde it, nor hope of succours; compounded for their
fort,The forte yeeldeth. deliuering the enemies their chiefe prisoners with
their ensignes and armes. Thus was the fort of Mayston-sluce
lost, partly by reason our ships of warre durst
not hazard to dismount the enemies artillery (which
they might haue done, shewing their accustomed valour,
as they did since and before in diuers places) but
chiefly by reason our men did not cut the dyke on both
sides of the fort, to haue drowned the Countrey; hauing
done that, the enemie would neuer haue attempted
the place. By reason of the strength of Delfes-hauen,
the enemy refused to attempt it.Delfes-hauen vnattempted.
                To say troth,
they had no reason to doe it; hauing no meanes to approach
but on such a dyke; and the enemy being so
well fortified and manned, as their approaches had
beene vaine.
         
         
            
            The King of Spaine calleth home the Duke d'Alua, and
in his roome establisheth Don Lewis de Requesence
Gouernour of the Lowe Countries.
            
               IN this time order came from the
King, to retire Duke d'Alua into
Spaine, and to resigne his place
vnto Don Lewis de Requesence,
Commendador Maior de Castillia;
a souldier of great reputation
for counsaile, but no body for execution;
as the battaile of Lapanta could witnesse. For
this Commendador being chiefe Counceller to Don
Iohn de Austria, did what he could to procure the Christian
armie, not to hazard battaile with the Turkes. Also
being in the fight, he aduanced so slowly with a rereguarde
of Gallies, that he nor his came to any blowes;
so as both there and in other places, alwaies the Commendador
was reputed a coward. But belike in respect
of his wit and mildnesse, the King sent him into the
Lowe Countries; perhaps perswaded, that a milde Captaine
would winne the hearts of the people, farre better
with faire meanes, then Duke d'Alua with his cruelty.
But in troth, both King and Councell deceiued themselues;
in calling away Duke d'Alua, and in making
choyce of such a Generall as the Commendador Maior.
For by all reason, if the Duke had beene royally
maintained as he ought; he had made his master absolute
King ouer all the seauenteene Prouinces. To say
troth, furie and resolution well vsed or executed, had

been the onely waies to supprsse that nation; the Spanish
being resolued to subdue them, as they were. For
all other since, the witty politicke Neatherlanders did
alwaies ouer-reach the Spanish; especially hauing such
a head to direct them as the Prince of Orange, and being
so strongly situated; wanting no meanes to maintaine
warres, and resolued to withstand the Spanish to
the vttermost, rather then to yeeld to any composition.
For whether the people bee strongly situated or
not; wealthie or poore; few, or great in multitudes;
being resolued to be mutinous and discontented,The error of the Spaniard in remoouing D'Alua.
                and
not willing (as I said before) to be brought vnto any
composition, but such as pleaseth themselues: God
helpe that Prince or State, that must be forced to compound
with such a a people, by any meanes but by the
sword; which had beene farre more easie in the
hands of Duke d'Alua, then of the poore Commendador.
But the emulation amongst Councellers for greatnesse
ouerthrew that seruice, with many others; as I
will shew hereafter. The Spanish Priests, namely Cardinall
Granuill, the Bishop of Toledo, with the aide of
Rigomus did perswade the King, that Duke d'Alua
was too great a subiect. By such means rather then any
other, Duke d'Alua was called home, and questioned
for many disorders; committed aswell in other places,
as in the Lowe Countries.
         
         
            
            Walkheren besieged with the Princes shipping, Middleburgh
releeued by the Spaniards, diuers skirmishes
betwixt the forces of either side; Mondragon
entreth Middleburgh, the Spanish Nauie at
their returne toward Antwerpe defeated.
            
               WHilest Iulian was busie in Holland,
               
                  Walkheren besieged with ships by the States.
Mounsieur de Poyet, and Boiset Gouernour
of Walkheren, with his
brother, the Admirall of Zeland,
had besieged the Iland, with a
great number of shippes of warre;
In such sort, that nothing could
enter into Middleburgh, Armue, and Ramkins, which
the enemies held. Messieurs de Beuoir, and Don Ruffello
being distressed for want of victualls in the said places,
found means to acquaint the Commendador with their
estate.Iulian Romero out of Holland. Whereupon the Commendador sent for Iulian
to come with most of his forces, and to leaue Baldeso
with the rest in Holland. Hauing prepared a Nauy of
some hundred saile of ships,The Cōmendador sendeth a Nauy towards Walkheren.
                hoyes, and crumsters,
giuing them in charge vnto the Masters of the Campe,
Sanio, d'Auila, Castillan of Antwerpe, and Mondragon:
After, furnishing them with all necessaries, both double
manned with souldiers, and appointed with great
store of victuals, as wel to relieue the distressed places, as
the army abroad; he commanded them to vse all diligence,
first to enter Middleburgh, and to relieue Mondragon
Gouernour of the Iland (with his regiment of
Wallons, and some soure Companies of Spaniards)

both with victualls and munition; then, to returne
with the Nauy for Antwerpe, and to carry with them
Mounsieur de Beauoir with his troupes. Before this
Nauie passed Lillo,
               The Ramkins attempted by the States. From the ships. Messieurs de Poyet and Boiset had
attempted the Ramkins, and anchored with ships vnder
the fort, which did dismount diuers peeces within;
hauing their tops of Musket proofe, out of which
our Musketiers did command the parapet next vnto
them.By the myne. Also a myne was made in the dike towardes
Middleburgh; which being fired, rased a corner of the
fort to little purpose; but that there was but a few souldiers
within, not halfe to man the walls, with a cowardly
Ensigne bearer which commanded. By these
meanes the Ramkins was deliuered to Mounsieur de
Poyet some foure daies before the succours arriued.Yeelded vp.
Also there arriued from Holland,
               Collonel Morgan arriueth. Collonell Morgan
and his Regiment, with other Companies of Wallons
and Flemings. The Spanish succours beeing in-sight,The Spanish in sight.
our men planted the Spanish Ensignes on the Ramkins,
and discharged a volley of artillery as if it were for ioy;
only to bring their Nauie to anchor vnder the commandement
of our artillery.Trained into danger of the shot. Beeing approached and
anchored, they soone perceiued what friends did welcome
them: In steed of safe anchoring, they were
faine to dislodge vnder the muck of the dike a league
off,Retire into safety. Defended by the Cannon from land. to be safe from our artillery. Being anchored, Beauoir
and Ruffello marched with the most of their men
of warre to that place, haled with them foure peeces
of battry, which stood their Nauie in great steed; for
they commanded all the road where the Nauie lay;
In such sort, that albeit our Nauy anchored within

halfe a league of theirs, betwixt them and Flushing, we
durst not attempt them in that road, by reason of
their artillery mounted on the shoare. Perceiuing no
hope to succour their distressed places by water, they
tooke resolution to saile about the Iland, and to land
their men at a place named the Hague,
               Saile toward Hague.
                which stands
on the neck of the Iland, to the East-ward from
Camfier; a league from the said towne, & some league
and a halfe from Middleburgh. Whilest their Nauy
was doubling about the Iland,Are affronted by land from Flushing.
                our men of warre marched
right against them alwaies, not knowing their intent,
nor where they meant to land; but had they
known our directions, they might haue easily entred
and seised on the towne of Flushing,
               The danger of Flushing.
                in sayling by it.
Of two thousand souldiers which wee had in the Iland,
we had not in the towne two hundred. In passing
by Flushing, had their Nauy bent their course into
the hauen, there was nothing to defend them, but
a paultery bome; which God knowes, could neuer
haue endured one push of the smallest vessell. For the
towne artillery, it vexed them onely in sailing by it. Being
entred the hauen, the souldiers had nothing to do,
but to haue leaped out of their shippes to shoare on
both sides of the hauen: which might haue been done
easily; hauing nothing to let them but the men of
warre, which were at their passing by a great league
off. For then (God knowes) the Burgesses were nothing
trained either with armes, or any policy of defence.
Also at this instant the bulwarke that flanked
the hauen was nothing furnished to any purpose.
Therefore often true intelligence is the best part of an

enterprise, and worth alwaies halfe an army.The Spaniards land at the Hague.
                Beeing
anchored at the Hague named before, they landed their
men and placed on that dike certaine peeces of artillery;
in like sort as they did at their last anchoring, for
defence of the Nauy. Hauing landed their victualls, &
such necessaries as they had to furnish their distressed
places; they sent to Beauoir and Ruffello, to send them
all the meanes they could to transport their necessaries.
Beeing arriued,Relieue Middleburgh.
                
               Mondragons men with victualls and
munition departed towards Middleburgh: where bebeing
arriued, Mounsieur de Beauoir & Don Ruffello returned
with the olde garrison to the Hague. In this time
all our men of warre were arriued at Camfier, the next
place to front them;Are affronted by the Princes souldiers. so was our Nauie anchored within
halfe a league of theirs, halfe the way betwixt the
Hague and Camfier. Mounsieur de Roule Gouernour
of the said towne, hauing set good order in his towne,
Mounsieur de Boiset Gouernour of the whole Iland and
Roule, sallied with the rest, to front the enemies at the
Hague. Being arriued right against our Nauie, we being
in number two thousand English, Scots, French, Wallons,
               Who intrench themseues.
and Flemings, entrenched our mayne in that place;
then wee aduanced some three hundred, twelue score
further, and entrenched there two hundred; and aduanced
six score further, one hundred. Our guard
was narrowe, by reason we were entrenched on a dike
of sixteen pases broad, the seas on the one side, on
the other side meadowes inuironed with ditches, not
passable with armed men, without meanes to make
bridges. The enemies perceiuing our lodgings, belike
thought it was to cut off their passage betwixt the

               Hague and Middleburgh. Whereupon not hauing passed
halfe their necessaries, presently to intercept vs,Are charged by the Spaniards.
               
they marched full against vs vpon the dike: a thousand
or more aduanced into the meadowes right against vs;
some fiue hundred on our side towards Middleburgh,
followed with all their troupes. Those on the dike forced
our first troupe to runne, following them in rout
vnto our second. Being on the trench of our two hundred,Who are forced to retire.
we plagued them with a volley of shot, so as they
were driuen to retire aboue twelue score; where they
stood vntill their shot in the meadowes approached
neere vnto vs. Collonell Morgan perceiuing the heate
of their skirmish,The English aduance. aduanced his Lieutenant Collonell,
Captaine Bingham, with two hundred shot and armed
men: So did Boiset and Roule aduance with them, and
many of the other nations. Withall, the enemies aduanced
with great resolution vpon the dike:The Spaniards second charge so did
the others in the meadowes passe ouer the ditches with
planks and hurdles; In such manner that those troups
annoyed vs greatly. For they flanked vs with volleyes
on our sides so cruelly, that being at the push of the
pike with the troupes on the dike,The Princes souldiers flee. The Spaniards enter the trench our men behinde
made away. The enemies perceiuing their retreit, passed
ouer the trench, where they executed and hurt many:
by reason wee fought and knew not of our fellowes
retreit, vntill our backs were towards the enemies.
Who followed vs so close and with such fury,Giueth chase to the Princes souldiers.
that our great stand ranne aboue halfe a league; vntill
we came to a strong trench at a winde-mill, where we
kept a good guard, which was commanded by the
towne artillerie.Retireth. The enemy perceiuing the place too

hot to attempt; and not guardeable being possest, by
reason of the towne arttillery, retired. Wee perceiuing
their retreit, began to take such courage that wee
resolued to charge them;Is pursued aduancing with a cry and
fresh resolution; charging their rereguard, their vanguard
doubled their pases. Perceiuing their countenances,
it gaue further courage; wherupon our charge
began to bee resolute and furious:Put to flight and executed. so as all their
troupes ranne; where we executed of them a farre greater
number, then they did of ours in our first retreit.
Wee followed them through their lost trenches, close
to their trench and village of Hague. By reason of the
nights approach wee quitted our skirmish, and kept
guard at our trenches: which we mended all the night,
keeping good guard and farre better order then we did
before. All the night both towne and succours transported
their necessaries into the towne; so that by
their great number of skutes and waggons, all their
victuals and necessaries were entred the towne before
two of the clock the next day in the afternoone; And
as I said before, Mondragon with his,Mondragon in Middleburgh. entred Middleburgh;
and Beauoir with Don Ruffello and their followers
arriued at the Hague. By reason of our equall
losses and wearinesse, neither of both parties were eager
to procure any skirmish:The Spaniards returne to Antwerp.
                So that according to the
Commendadors directions, their troupes embarked.
Our fleete perceiuing their meaning to saile for Antwerpe,
belike to discharge an honest reporte to the
world; our Chiefes resolued to fight with them by
sea.Are charged by the Prince his fleet. Hauing taken resolution aud imbarked the most
of our souldiers, wee made towards them with good

courage,
                  Capt. Yorke. as they sailed by Camfier; Captaine Yorke
being aboard the vice-Admirall of Flushing, with a
great number of young English gentlemen and souldiers,
the most of Collonell Morgans Company, procured
our vice-Admirall to board their vice-Admirall:
which he easily yeelded vnto, for the man was valiant
and eager of himselfe to charge. So was valiant Mounsieur
de Boiset our Admirall,Boiset. with the most or all his
Nauie very eager to charge their fleet; beeing well
manned with good store of gallant souldiers, of the
nations of English, Scots, and French. Being close together,
with great courage ours cried Amain. According
to direction,The Spanish borded. our vice-Admirall boarded theirs:
So did valiant Robinson a Scottish Captaine, beeing in
one of the best Flushioners, board their rere Admirall.
Mounsieur Boiset charged their Admirall through their
Nauie, who escaped with good sailing. Captaine Harry
& Ambrose Duke, the valiant Frenchmen & Wallons, being
aboard of some of our best sailes, boarded also
two of their best sorts of vessels. The enemy perceiuing
our resolution,Flee. fell in rout before the winde, with
all the sailes they could make, to recouer the riuer of
Antwerpe. Notwithstanding, wee tooke, burnt, and
forced to runne on the sands, aboue two and thirty
sailes;32 sailes of theirs taken & returned victorious, with their vice-Admirall,
rere-Admirall, and diuers others into our towne of
Camfier: where we filled our prisons with Spaniards,
Wallons, and great numbers of their marriners. This
victory recompensed in honour double theirs; although
not so profitable as their victualling of Midbleburgh
and Armu; which by that meanes held out

many a moneth the longer, and would haue done still,
but for the defeat of Rumers wall. Notwithstanding
that Middleburgh was victualled and farre better manned,
principally by the person of braue Colonell Mondragon;
the Prince gaue not ouer his determined purpose,
but charged both the Besoits,
               The Prince againe besiegeth the Iland. I meane the Gouernour
and his brother the Admirall, to vse all diligence
to make sure guarde round about the Iland with their
ships, as they did before; and to cut off all succours
from entring any more.His preparation To that end they prepared a
farre greater number both of ships and souldiers; on
which enterprise the Prince did set his rest, with good
reason. For he was assured to winne the Iland in time,
being master on the Seas.
                  Mondragon
                        •
                     
                   distresse. Within few moneths, Mondragon
and his beganne to fall into distresse, for want of
victuals.Mounsieur de Poyet sent into Walkheren.
                To terrifie them the more, the Prince sent his
Lieutenant Generall Mounsieur de Poyet into Walkheren,
with the most of his men of warre, sauing Colonell
Morgans regiment; which remained in Strinland,
standing on tearmes for pay, and leaue to returne for
England,
               The English malecontent. by reason of some discourtesies that fell out
betwixt the Prince and the Officers of the said regiment.
Notwithstanding diuers Gentlemen of that regiment
accompanied Mounsieur de Poyet; amongst others
Captaine Walter Morgan, Master Christopher Carlell,
and Master Anthonie Fant. Mondragon fearing
Poyet would attempt Armu, sent his Lieutenant Colonell
into the said towne with a strong guarde; by reason
the place was but newly fortified, but very strong,
without many hands to defend it. Also he kept a strong
guarde at the head of Middleburgh, a mile out of the

towne, to defend the hauen. Poyet aduanced his forces
on the Ramkins dyke, towards Middleburgh. Being arriued
right against the enemies guards at the head, ours
intrenched themselues in that place; lodging our forces
on the dyke, from the Ramkins to the said first
guarde: hauing betwixt vs and the enemie the hauen,
which might bee some threescore broad; where wee
had diuers good skirmishes, as well by those that sallied
from Middleburgh, as by them that lodged at the head.
         
         
            The occasion of Sir Roger Williams seruing the Spaniard.
            
               COlonell Morgan being arriued in
England, with his regiment in
good order, to the number of
seauen hundred, who being
mustered before her Maiestie
neere to S. Iames, the Colonell
and some foure hundred of his
best men were sent into Ireland;
which in truth were the first
perfect Harguebushiers that were of our Nation, and
the first troupes that taught our Nation to like the Musket,
as I said in my little discourse of the Spanish discipline:
There also I touch how Philip de Commines
speaks much of Lewis the eleuenth, but nothing how he
quitted his Duke of Burgundy. Most true it is, at Colonell
Morgans going into Ireland, hearing how the
young Prince of Condy was newly escaped from France
               
into Germany, meaning (as it was told me) to leauie an
armie, and to march with all speede into France: this
bruit, and my greedy desires to trauaile to see strange
warres, made me to quite the voyage into Ireland, and
to goe with all speed towards the said Prince. Being arriued
in Germanie, I found the Prince nothing ready to
march, nor any speech of his sodaine leauie. Hauing
spent there all the time I could, want of crownes forced
me to returne for England. Passing from Colen towards
Antwerpe, and entring Lire in Brabant, I was brought
before the Master of the Campe Iulian Romero; who amongst
many questions enquired of me, what Noblemen
in England I knew best. I answered, the Earle of
Pembroke; whom I serued a Page. He replyed, what?
he that was Generall of the English before S. Quintin? I
neuer honoured any man more: and withall requested
me earnestly to trye his courtesie in the Spanish armie;
assuring me to depart when pleased me. Hauing spent
all my crownes, and being loth to returne into England
without seeing something; I promised to stay. Also in
those dayes there was no dispute betwixt her Maiestie
and the Spanish King, to my knowledge. This was the
manner, and the first hower that I entred into the Spanish
seruice.
         
         
            
            Middleburgh in distresse, the Spanish prepare a Nauie
to relieue it, which is beaten and ouerthrowne
by the Nassawians in a furious conflict.
            
               
                  MOndragon feeling his wants, aduertized
the Commendador; who perceiuing
no meanes to succour
him, but by sea, which could not
bee without forcing the Princes
ships, prepared all the sailes and
meanes he could. In time he made
ready some 120 saile:The Spanish preparation to relieue Middleburgh.
                of which
were foure-score of warre, as well ships as Crumsters
and Hoyes, the rest victuallers, laden with all necessaries
to furnish the distressed places. Being in readinesse,
some at Antwerpe, some at Bargen vp Some, the rest at
Tergoose, hee gaue them in charge to his masters of
Campe,Iulian Romero & Santio d'Auila Generalls.
                
               Iulian Romero and Santio d'Auila, desiring them
for fashion sake to accept Mounsieur de Beuoyr for Admirall,
and to giue him some grace, in respect of his
disabling for the commandement of Zealand. This he
did onely to flatter the Wallons: by reason Mounsieur
de Beuoyr was descended from one of their principall
houses.The Princes Nauie. The Prince hearing their intent, prepared for
his Nauie all or the most of the ships of warre, that Holland
and Zeland could make at that time, to the number
of some two hundred: a few ships, the rest Crumsters
and Hoyes. These are the best ships to fight in those
waters, by reason the most of them draw but little water,
and carry for the most part principal good artillery;

some demy Cannons, and many whole Culuerings. For
those waters are full of sands and many dangers,The nature of the sea. although
it be broad in some places tenne of our myles,
all couered with seas; notwithstanding not nauigable
in the most places, but in narrow streames: Insomuch
as in many places you may discouer steeples and
bankes, which in time past were Ilands like vnto the
rest. For this cause I suppose those Countries doe carrie
the name of Sealand.
               The best ships for that sea. Also those small sailes turne
farre shorter and readier, then other ships in those narrow
passages; and keepe farre better by a winde. Hauing
this Nauie in a readinesse well manned, especially
with great store of good Marriners, besides a good
number of souldiers of Scots, French, and Neatherlanders;
he commanded his Admirall Mounsieur de Boiset,
to aduance with his Nauie betwixt Siricksey and
Tergoose,
               The Princes Nauie at Siricksey.
                where the enemies must passe; there to trye
the fortune of warre, rather then they should succour
Mondragon. After finishing all preparations, the Commendador
diuided his Nauie named before into three
squadrons.3 Squadrons of Spaniards.
                The greatest vessels and the farre more in
number,Santio d'Auila at Tergoose. he commanded Santio d'Auila to aduance vnder
the Iland of Tergoose; there to anchor vnder the fauour
of some artillery mounted on the shore, and to stay
in readinesse vntill he receiued further direction. Himselfe
with the rest of his Councell and army marched
to Bargen-vp-some; where he found Iulian Romero and
his Admirall Beuoyr, ready to set out with the rest of his
Nauie, staying but for his directions. He diuided their
vessels into two squadrons; giuing them equally to the
Admirall and Iulian.
               Iulian Romero and Boiset. All his Nauie being furnished to

the vttermost he could,Want of Marriners among the Spaniards.
                they wanted Marriners, especially
of the same Countrimen, that were well acquainted
with those sands and shallow waters; but they were
very well manned with braue land souldiers:But not of souldiers. for they
had in them some 90. ensignes of souldiers, Spanish, Burgundians
and Wallons. The Commendador, after placing
himselfe with his Nobility and a great troupe of men
of warre on the high banke of Brabant, within halfe a
league of Bergen, where hee might see very easily the
place where the battaile was fought: hauing giuen a
signall to Santio d'Auila from a hill on Brabant side,The Commendador giueth a Signall. Santio de Auila aduanceth.
which he might easily perceiue; Santio de Auila aduanced
his squadron with all the sailes hee could towards
Romers wall, where the Nassawians lay in good
order of battaile, hauing diuided their battell into foure
squadrons.The order of the Nassawians.
                Mounsieur de Boiset the Admirall of Zealand,
commanded the greatest; the Admirall of Holland,
the second, which was his right wing; the Admirall
of Sirickesey the third, which was the left wing;
Boisets Vice-admirall Boenire commanded the fourth;
whom Boyset commanded to make all the sailes hee
could towards Santio d'Auila. Being arriued within
culuering shot, he cōmanded Boenire to lead Santio d'Auila
ouer the shallow waters, if he would follow him; if
not, to keepe in the wind as neere vnto him as he could;
without fighting, vnlesse the enemie would force him,
vntill Boyset began. Iulian and Beuoyr hauing not two
leagues to saile vnto the Nassawians, who were ready
vnder the head of Bergen in good order; and perceiuing
that Santio d'Auila could not saile vnto them, by
reason that most of his vessels drew too deepe water,

and that his smallest vessels were in fight with Boenire:
they aduanced with great courage in good order,Iulian & Beuoir aduance.
                thinking
to haue sailed betwixt the Nassawians and Brabant
side, and to haue ioyned with Santio d'Auila. By this
time Santio d'Auilaes smallest vessels were in hot skirmish
with Boisets Vice-admirall; but many of his greatest
vessels were runne on ground, with very ambition
to come to fight before their fellowes; Iulian and Beuoyr
being right against the Nassawians.
               The ioyning of the fight. 
               Boiset hauing
the wind, made with all resolution towards the enemy;
so did they abide them with no lesse courage: In such
sort, that the valiant Admirall Mounsieur de Boiset,
               
                  Boiset & Iulian boardeth each other. and
the resolute braue Master of the Campe Iulian Romero,
boarded each other: so did the Admirall of Sirickesey,
               So Beuoyr & the Admirall of Sirickesey.
               
and the Admirall Beuoyr board each other, with no lesse
courage; so did Boenire, Boisets Vice-admiral, board the
Vice-admirall of Santio d' Auila. Being in wonderfull
hot fight a long time, the most part of the vessels, especially
the squadrons of Iulian & Boiset, had bin on aboard
each other neere two howers;The length of the fight. the most part of which
time they were at the push of the pike, and blowes of
swords. Boiset and his fellowes were more expert seamen
then the Spanish Commanders,The Nassawians better seamen then the Spaniards.
                and farre better
furnished with all manner of prouisions that belong to
a sea-fight; especially fireworkes: which they employed
to the Spaniards great losse. So that Iulians Alfere
being aboard of Boiset, was blowen vp with powder;
and with him threescore at the least of his brauest souldiers.
And had they not done it at that instant, Iulian
himselfe had beene gone; for he was entring with the
rest. The Spaniards were cruelly plagued in all quarters,

especially by reason Santio d'Auilaes great vessels
could not come to succour their fellows, among which
he was in person; being a most valiant man, accompanied
with a great number of their best souldiers.
                  Iulian flyeth. 
               Iulian
perceiuing his fellowes distressed without remedie, and
himselfe most of all; with wonderfull hazard, he and
diuers of his Gentlemen and souldiers did leape into
their skuts, which carried them to the shoare where the
Commendador stood; so did many others escape by the
like meanes. Likewise diuers of their smallest vessels
ranne themselues on the shoare where the Commendador
stoode; many were fast on the sands; diuers were
burnt; the rest made all the sailes they could to recouer
the riuer of Antwerpe.
               
                  And Santio d'Auila. Amongst these was Santio d'Auila;
notwithstanding he had grounded his own vessell,
in seeking to come to fight. The Nassawians followed
them into the riuer of Antwerpe, defeating and taking
many as they ranne away.The Spanish losse. By the Spaniards owne reports,
they lost in this battaile aboue threescore saile of
all sorts; forty seauen ensignes; aboue sixe hundred
brasse pieces, of which aboue 200. were taken out
of the Cittadle of Antwerpe; slaine and taken aboue
six thousand souldiers and mariners. Few were saued
that came to their hands, but all or the most that were
taken were slaine or drowned. Amongst many of
their Commanders and men of good account, their
Admirall Beauoir was slaine valiantly, at the push of
pike:The Nassawians losse. So was Santio Dauilaes vice Admirall. The victorious
escaped not scotfree. For their Admirall Boiset
lost his right eye with the blowe of a pike, the Admirall
of Holland sore hurt with a shot in the thigh;

               Boenyre, Boisets vice Admirall was slaine, with many
other of good marke, besides at the least sixteene hundred
souldiers and mariners. Thus was tke battell of
Romers-wall begunne and ended. Perhaps some will
say, because there was no greater slaughter and confusion,
it may not be tearmed worthy and comparable
vnto diuers others. But in troth I heard diuers report,
besides the Commendador, who had been at Lapanta
and heer; that the fury there was nothing comparable
vnto this;The furie of the fight. number to number. For my part, I neuer
saw any thing so furious. I may well speake it, for there
are some of good quality yet aliue, can testifie the
same. But for Iulian Romero himselfe, I had bin blown
vp with his Alfere; yet I escaped with as great hazard
as any other of his followers. But I will dispute against
any souldier, that no fight hath been comparable vnto
it by sea, these fiue hundred yeares; sauing that before
Sluce, fought by our famous King Edward the
third, against the French King and the Earle of Flanders,
and that of Lapanta.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   